Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Products 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Airiti 1 language 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Digital content provider in Taiwan This article relies excessively on references to primary sources .

Please improve this article by adding secondary or tertiary sources .

Find sources: "Airiti" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( January 2010 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Airiti Incorporation Company type Private company Industry Information Technology & Service, Publishing, Database, Indexing Founded 2000 Headquarters Taipei , Taiwan Chinese name Traditional Chinese 華藝數位 Simplified Chinese 华艺数位 Transcriptions Standard Mandarin Hanyu Pinyin Huáyì shùwèi Website www .airiti .com /en /One-Page /index .html Airiti Incorporation ( Chinese : 華藝數位 ) headquartered in Taipei , Taiwan , is a Chinese e-content provider of Chinese academic e-journals , Taiwanese academic e-journals , classical art images to more than 450 libraries in 2006 and has extended to more than 72,000 libraries in 112 countries and territories around the world.

History [ edit ] Airiti Inc.

established in 2000, started from Art Image Indexing Service on the Internet, and gradually developed into professional database of Art works and academic journals . The company has been providing solutions [ buzzword ] to the Mainland Chinese and Taiwanese academic communities by offering copyright consultation services, digital archive mechanisms, academic research analysis systems, and calibre academic publications. It is the only company in the world to provide Taiwanese academic e-journals .

[ 1 ] In  2006, an alliance was formed with OCLC in providing Asian eContent to libraries worldwide.

[ 2 ] Product such as, Taiwan Electronic Periodical Services and National Palace Museum Online were project by Airiti supported and Named the Best Subsidized Digital Publication by the Executive Yuan .

[ 3 ] Products [ edit ] ABC (AiritiBooks.Com) An online ebooks platform servicing libraries with a collection of Chinese eBooks, in collaboration with publishers.

ACI (Academic Citation Index) a Chinese Humanity citation index covering both Taiwan Humanities Citation Index and Taiwan Social Science Citation Index.

ARTS (World Fine Arts Database) Collections of more than 70,000 art pieces from 900 artists from Taiwan, China, Japan and Western world.

CEPS (Chinese Electronic Periodical Services) is one of the leading Chinese language collection of full-text periodicals in the global Chinese speaking language in the world.

CETD (Chinese Electronic Theses & Dissertations Service) is the source of thesis and dissertations from major universities in the Asian region. They include National Taiwan University , Taiwan National Tsing Hua University , National Chung Hsing University , Tamkang University , Chung Yuan Christian University , Chung Sang Medical University, Taipei National University of Technology, Yuan Ze University , Kaohsiung Medical University , China Medical University , Taipei National University of the Arts , Chang Jung Christian University , Kaohsiung Hospitality College, National Chi Nana University, and National Taiwan Normal University , Hong Kong University .

TEPS (Taiwan Electronic Periodical Services) is the largest and only collection of full-text Taiwanese periodicals in the world.

National Palace Museum Online database is the world’s most complete and feature-rich eContent offering for world largest ancient Chinese art treasures museum.

See also [ edit ] List of companies of Taiwan OCLC List of academic databases and search engines References [ edit ] ^ Airiti Inc, 2007, About Airiti Archived 2008-06-12 at the Wayback Machine ^ OCLC , 2006, NetLibrary teams with Airiti to offer Chinese-language eContent ^ Central News Agency 2006, Taiwan’s academic journals go online , available from NSC International Cooperation Sci-Tech Newsbrief Archived 2011-08-29 at the Wayback Machine Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Airiti&oldid=1296138563 " Categories : 2000 establishments in Taiwan Taiwanese companies established in 2000 Companies based in Taipei Publishing companies of Taiwan Taiwanese brands Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles lacking reliable references from January 2010 All articles lacking reliable references Articles containing Chinese-language text Wikipedia articles containing buzzwords from May 2020 This page was last edited on 18 June 2025, at 02:22 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Airiti 1 language Add topic

