Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Meaning of 'science' 2 History Toggle History subsection 2.1 Early development 2.2 Later development 3 Objective vs. subjective experiences 4 Human science in universities 5 See also 6 References 7 Bibliography 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Human science 29 languages العربية Asturianu Cymraeg Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Frysk Galego 한국어 Latina Lëtzebuergesch Lombard Македонски Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Picard Português Shqip සිංහල Simple English Српски / srpski Suomi Tagalog தமிழ் Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Study of the aspects of human life Not to be confused with Anthropology .

"Moral science" redirects here. For the ethical concept, see Science of morality .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Human science" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( February 2011 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Human science (or human sciences in the plural) studies the philosophical, biological , social, justice, and cultural aspects of human life.

[ 1 ] Human science aims to expand the understanding of the human world through a broad interdisciplinary approach. It encompasses a wide range of fields - including history , philosophy , sociology , psychology , justice studies, evolutionary biology , biochemistry , neurosciences , folkloristics , and anthropology .

[ citation needed ] It is the study and interpretation of the experiences, activities, constructs, and artifacts associated with human beings.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] The study of human sciences attempts to expand and enlighten the human being's knowledge of its existence, its interrelationship with other species and systems, and the development of artifacts to perpetuate the human expression and thought . It is the study of human phenomena . The study of the human experience is historical and current in nature. It requires the evaluation and interpretation of the historic human experience and the analysis of current human activity to gain an understanding of human phenomena and to project the outlines of human evolution . Human science is an objective , informed critique of human existence and how it relates to reality .Underlying human science is the relationship between various humanistic modes of inquiry within fields such as history , sociology , folkloristics , anthropology , and economics and advances in such things as genetics , evolutionary biology , and the social sciences for the purpose of understanding our lives in a rapidly changing world. Its use of an empirical methodology that encompasses psychological experience in contrasts with the purely positivistic approach typical of the natural scien ces which exceeds all methods not based solely on sensory observations. Modern approaches in the human sciences integrate an understanding of human structure, function on and adaptation with a broader exploration of what it means to be human.  The term is also used to distinguish not only the content of a field of study from that of the natural science, but also its methodology.

[ 4 ] Meaning of 'science' [ edit ] Ambiguity and confusion regarding the usage of the terms ' science ', ' empirical science ', and ' scientific method ' have complicated the usage of the term 'human science' with respect to human activities. The term 'science' is derived from the Latin scientia, meaning 'knowledge'. 'Science' may be appropriately used to refer to any branch of knowledge or study dealing with a body of facts or truths systematically arranged to show the operation of general laws.

[ citation needed ] However, according to positivists , the only authentic knowledge is scientific knowledge, which comes from the positive affirmation of theories through strict scientific methods the application of knowledge, or mathematics. As a result of the positivist influence, the term science is frequently employed as a synonym for empirical science . Empirical science is knowledge based on the scientific method , a systematic approach to verification of knowledge first developed for dealing with natural physical phenomena and emphasizing the importance of experience based on sensory observation. However, even with regard to the natural sciences , significant differences exist among scientists and philosophers of science with regard to what constitutes valid scientific method [ 5 ] —for example, evolutionary biology , geology and astronomy , studying events that cannot be repeated, can use the method of historical narratives.

[ 6 ] More recently, usage of the term has been extended to the study of human social phenomena. Thus, natural and social sciences are commonly classified as science, whereas the study of classics, languages, literature, music, philosophy, history, religion, and the visual and performing arts are referred to as the humanities . Ambiguity with respect to the meaning of the term science is aggravated by the widespread use of the term formal science with reference to any one of several sciences that is predominantly concerned with abstract form that cannot be validated by physical experience through the senses, such as logic, mathematics, and the theoretical branches of computer science, information theory, and statistics.

[ citation needed ] History [ edit ] The phrase 'human science' in English was used during the 17th-century scientific revolution, for example by Theophilus Gale , [ 7 ] to draw a distinction between supernatural knowledge (divine science) and study by humans (human science).

John Locke also uses 'human science' to mean knowledge produced by people, but without the distinction.

[ 8 ] By the 20th century, this latter meaning was used at the same time [ 9 ] as 'sciences that make human beings the topic of research'.

[ 10 ] Early development [ edit ] The term "moral science" was used by David Hume (1711–1776) in his Enquiry concerning the Principles of Morals to refer to the systematic study of human nature and relationships. Hume wished to establish a "science of human nature" based upon empirical phenomena, and excluding all that does not arise from observation . Rejecting teleological , theological and metaphysical explanations, Hume sought to develop an essentially descriptive methodology; phenomena were to be precisely characterized. He emphasized the necessity of carefully explicating the cognitive content of ideas and vocabulary, relating these to their empirical roots and real-world significance.

[ 11 ] A variety of early thinkers in the humanistic sciences took up Hume's direction.

Adam Smith , for example, conceived of economics as a moral science in the Humean sense.

[ 12 ] Later development [ edit ] Partly in reaction to the establishment of positivist philosophy and the latter's Comtean intrusions into traditionally humanistic areas such as sociology, non-positivistic researchers in the humanistic sciences began to carefully but emphatically distinguish the methodological approach appropriate to these areas of study, for which the unique and distinguishing characteristics of phenomena are in the forefront (e.g., for the biographer), from that appropriate to the natural sciences , for which the ability to link phenomena into generalized groups is foremost. In this sense, Johann Gustav Droysen contrasted the humanistic science's need to comprehend the phenomena under consideration with natural science's need to explain phenomena, while Windelband coined the terms idiographic for a descriptive study of the individual nature of phenomena, and nomothetic for sciences that aim to defthe generalizing laws.

[ 4 ] Wilhelm Dilthey brought nineteenth-century attempts to formulate a methodology appropriate to the humanistic sciences together with Hume's term "moral science", which he translated as Geisteswissenschaft - a term with no exact English equivalent. Dilthey attempted to articulate the entire range of the moral sciences in a comprehensive and systematic way.

[ 13 ] : Chap. I Meanwhile, his conception of “Geisteswissenschaften” encompasses also the abovementioned study of classics, languages, literature, music, philosophy, history, religion, and the visual and performing arts. He characterized the scientific nature of a study as depending upon: [ 13 ] : Chapter XI The conviction that perception gives access to reality The self-evident nature of logical reasoning The principle of sufficient reason But the specific nature of the Geisteswissenschaften is based on the "inner" experience ( Erleben ), the "comprehension" ( Verstehen ) of the meaning of expressions and "understanding" in terms of the relations of the part and the whole – in contrast to the Naturwissenschaften , the " explanation " of phenomena by hypothetical laws in the " natural sciences ".

[ 14 ] : p. 86 Edmund Husserl , a student of Franz Brentano , articulated his phenomenological philosophy in a way that could be thought as a bthesis of Dilthey's attempt. Dilthey appreciated Husserl's Logische Untersuchungen [ 15 ] (1900/1901, the first draft of Husserl's Phenomenology ) as an “ep"epoch-making"istemological foundation of fors conception of Geisteswissenschaften.

[ 14 ] : p. 14 In recent years, 'human science' has been used to refer to "a philosophy and approach to science that seeks to understand human experience in deeply subjective, personal, historical, contextual, cross-cultural, political, and spiritual terms. Human science is the science of qualities rather than of quantities and closes the subject-object split in science. In particular, it addresses the ways in which self-reflection, art, music, poetry, drama, language and imagery reveal the human condition. By being interpretive, reflective, and appreciative, human science re-opens the conversation among science, art, and philosophy." [ 16 ] Objective vs. subjective experiences [ edit ] Since Auguste Comte , the positivistic social sciences have sought to imitate the approach of the natural sciences by emphasizing the importance of objective external observations and searching for universal laws whose operation is predicated on external initial conditions that do not take into account differences in subjective human perception and attitude. Critics argue that subjective human experience and intention plays such a central role in determining human social behavior that an objective approach to the social sciences is too confining. Rejecting the positivist influence, they argue that the scientific method can rightly be applied to subjective, as well as objective, experience. The term subjective is used in this context to refer to inner psychological experience rather than outer sensory experience. It is not used in the sense of being prejudiced by personal motives or beliefs.

Human science in universities [ edit ] Since 1878, the University of Cambridge has been home to the Moral Sciences Club , with strong ties to analytic philosophy .

[ 17 ] The Human Science degree is relatively young. It has been a degree subject at Oxford since 1969. At University College London , it was proposed in 1973 by Professor J. Z. Young and implemented two years later. His aim was to train general science graduates who would be scientifically literate, numerate and easily able to communicate across a wide range of disciplines, replacing the traditional classical training for higher-level government and management careers. Central topics include the evolution of humans , their behavior, molecular and population genetics , population growth and aging, ethnic and cultural diversity, and human interaction with the environment , including conservation, disease, and nutrition . The study of both biological and social disciplines, integrated within a framework of human diversity and sustainability, should enable the human scientist to develop professional competencies suited to address such multidimensional human problems.

In the United Kingdom , Human Science is offered at the degree level at several institutions which include: University of Oxford [ 18 ] University College London (as Human Sciences and as Human Sciences and Evolution) [ 19 ] King's College London (as Anatomy, Developmental & Human Biology) University of Exeter [ 20 ] Durham University (as Health and Human Sciences) Cardiff University (as Human and Social Sciences) In other countries: Osaka University [ 21 ] Waseda University [ 22 ] Tokiwa University [ 23 ] Senshu University [ 24 ] Aoyama Gakuin University (As College of Community Studies) [ 25 ] Kobe University [ 26 ] Kanagawa University [ 27 ] Bunkyo University [ 28 ] Sophia University [ 29 ] Ghent University (in the narrow sense, as Moral sciences, "an integrated empirical and philosophical study of values, norms and world views") [ 30 ] See also [ edit ] History of the Human Sciences (journal) Social science Humanism Humanities References [ edit ] ^ "Human Sciences" . University of Oxford.

Archived from the original on 4 March 2017 . Retrieved 3 March 2017 .

^ Smith, R. (2001). "Human Sciences: History and Sociology".

International Encyclopedia of the Social & Behavioral Sciences . pp.

7027– 7031.

doi : 10.1016/B0-08-043076-7/03140-5 .

ISBN 978-0-08-043076-8 .

^ Turner, Stephen P. (2015). "Human Sciences, History of".

International Encyclopedia of the Social & Behavioral Sciences . pp.

380– 385.

doi : 10.1016/B978-0-08-097086-8.85011-4 .

ISBN 978-0-08-097087-5 .

^ a b Georg Henrik von Wright, Explanation and Understanding , ISBN 0-8014-0644-7 , pp. 4–7 ^ Popper, Karl (2005).

The Logic of Scientific Discovery .

doi : 10.4324/9780203994627 .

ISBN 978-1-134-47002-0 .

[ page needed ] ^ Mayr, Ernst (July 2000). "Darwin's Influence on Modern Thought".

Scientific American .

283 (1): 78– 83.

Bibcode : 2000SciAm.283a..78M .

doi : 10.1038/scientificamerican0700-78 .

JSTOR 26058792 .

PMID 10881312 .

^ Theophilus Gale (1677).

The Court of the Gentiles, Or, A Discourse Touching the Original of Human Literature: Both Philologie and Philosophie, from the Scriptures & Jewish Church : in Order of a Demonstration Of, I. The Perfection of Gods Word, and Church-light. II. The Imperfection of Natures Light ... III. The Right Use of Human Learning ...

H. Hall. pp.

3 –.

^ John Locke (1753).

An Essay Concerning Human Understanding . S. Birt. pp. 170–.

Archived from the original on 2021-01-27 . Retrieved 2018-09-17 .

^ Herbert Spencer Jennings (1930).

The Biological Basis of Human Nature . W.W. Norton, Incorporated.

ISBN 9780841454071 .

Archived from the original on 2021-01-27 . Retrieved 2018-09-17 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ United States. Congress. House. Committee on Education (1928).

Proposed department of education: Hearing[s] before the Committee on education, House of Representatives, Seventieth Congress, first session on H. R. 7, a bill to create a department of education and for other purposes. April 25, 26, 27,28 and May 2, 1928 . U.S. Govt. print. off.

Archived from the original on January 27, 2021 . Retrieved September 17, 2018 .

^ "David Hume" Archived 2020-07-31 at the Wayback Machine , Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy ^ Book Review Archived 2006-09-27 at the Wayback Machine of Jeffrey T. Young's Economics As a Moral Science: The Political Economy of Adam Smith ^ a b Wilhelm Dilthey, An Introduction to the Human Sciences , Princeton Press ^ a b Wilhelm Dilthey, Gesammelte Schriften , vol. VII ^ Edmund Husserl, Logical Investigations , 1973 [1913], Findlay, J. N., trans. London: Routledge ^ "Saybrook Graduate School" . Saybrook.edu.

Archived from the original on 2013-01-16 . Retrieved 2019-03-19 .

^ "The Moral Sciences Club (A Short History)" .

Cambridge Faculty of Philosophy . 6 September 2013.

Archived from the original on 2020-07-24 . Retrieved 2020-07-24 .

^ "Human Sciences | University of Oxford" . Ox.ac.uk. 2019-03-07.

Archived from the original on 2019-03-21 . Retrieved 2019-03-19 .

^ "Subject areas | UCL London's Global University" . Ucl.ac.uk.

Archived from the original on 2018-09-11 . Retrieved 2019-03-19 .

^ "Human Sciences | Undergraduate Study | University of Exeter" . Exeter.ac.uk.

Archived from the original on 2019-03-31 . Retrieved 2019-03-19 .

^ "Graduate School of Human Sciences / School of Human Sciences Osaka University" . Hus.osaka-u.ac.jp.

Archived from the original on 2019-03-14 . Retrieved 2019-03-19 .

^ "School of Human Sciences, Waseda University" . waseda.jp . Retrieved 2023-12-02 .

^ "Faculty of Human Sciences | Undergraduate Studies | Tokiwa University" . tokiwa.ac.jp . Retrieved 2023-12-02 .

^ "School of Human Sciences" . senshu-u.ac.jp . Retrieved 2023-12-02 .

^ "Department of Community Studies | Aoyama Gakuin University" . aoyama.ac.jp. 14 June 2023 . Retrieved 2023-12-02 .

^ "Faculty of Global Human Sciences" . fgh.kobe-u.ac.jp . Retrieved 2023-12-02 .

^ "Faculty of Human Sciences, Kanagawa University" . hs.kanagawa-u.ac.jp . Retrieved 2023-12-02 .

^ "Faculty of Human Sciences | Undergraduate Programs | Academics | Bunkyo University International Exchange Center" . bunkyo.ac.jp . Retrieved 2023-12-02 .

^ "Faculty of Human Sciences | Sophia University" . sophia.ac.jp. 19 December 2022 . Retrieved 2023-12-02 .

^ "Moral sciences | Department of Philosophy and Moral Sciences | Ghent University" . ugent.be . Retrieved 2024-05-17 .

Bibliography [ edit ] Flew, A. (1986).

David Hume: Philosopher of Moral Science , Basil Blackwell, Oxford Hume, David, An Enquiry Concerning the Principles of Morals External links [ edit ] Institute for Comparative Research in Human and Social Sciences (ICR) -Japan Human Science Lab -London Human Science(s) across Global Academies Marxism philosophy v t e Humanities Disciplines Anthropology Archaeology Classical studies History Language arts Literature Poetry Rhetoric Law Performing arts Dance Music Theatre Philosophy Religious studies Visual arts Filmmaking Painting Sculpture Interdisciplinary fields Digital Environmental Health Medical Public Themes Abductive reasoning Aesthetics Antipositivism The arts Beauty Belles-lettres Bildung Creativity Critical theory Criticism Cultural literacy Culture High Pop General knowledge Hermeneutics Historicism Historism Human condition Humanitas Liberal arts education Trivium Quadrivium Metaphysics Ontology Moral character Self-realization Self-reflection Wisdom Work of art Journals American Journal of Archaeology Daedalus History of Humanities Humanitas Humanities and Social Sciences Communications Journal of Controversial Ideas Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society Leonardo Nova Religio Revue des Études Arméniennes Teaching Philosophy more...

Academia Arts and Humanities Research Council Human science Geisteswissenschaft Humanities, arts, and social sciences Master of Humanities Moscow University for the Humanities National Endowment for the Humanities National Humanities Medal Related Antihumanism Philistinism Criticism of mass culture Educational essentialism Humanities in the United States List of people considered a founder in a humanities field Outline of the humanities Renaissance humanism Studia Humanitatis v t e Social sciences Outline History Index Primary Anthropology archaeology cultural social physical Economics microeconomics macroeconomics econometrics mathematical Geography physical human technical integrated History cultural auxiliary sciences economic human military political social Law jurisprudence legal history legal systems public law private law Linguistics semiotics Political science international relations comparative philosophy public policy public administration Psychology abnormal cognitive developmental personality social Sociology criminology demography internet rural urban Interdisciplinary Administration business public Anthrozoology Area studies Business studies Cognitive science Communication studies Community studies Criminology Critical animal studies Cultural studies Development studies Education Environmental social science studies Food studies Gender studies Global studies Historical sociology History of technology Human ecology Information science International studies Linguistics Management Media studies Philosophies science economics history psychology social science Planning land use regional urban Political ecology Political economy Political sociology Public health Regional science Science and technology studies Science studies historical Quantum social science Social work Vegan studies List List of social science journals Other categorizations Behavioural sciences Geisteswissenschaft Human science Humanities Category Authority control databases : National Germany Japan Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Human_science&oldid=1298701596 " Category : Human sciences Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from October 2012 CS1 errors: ISBN date Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from February 2011 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2025 This page was last edited on 4 July 2025, at 03:25 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Human science 29 languages Add topic

