Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Origins 2 Key principles 3 Late-19th-century spread 4 Early-20th-century development 5 Variation within the tradition 6 See also 7 References 8 Further reading 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Neo-scholasticism 18 languages العربية Català Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Кыргызча Latina Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Русский Slovenčina Svenska Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Revival of scholasticism Part of a series on Thomas Aquinas Thomism Scholasticism Apophatic theology Aseity Divine simplicity Analogia entis Quinque viae Beatific vision Actus purus Actus essendi Primum Movens Correspondence theory Hylomorphism Substance theory ( ousia ) Substantial form Quiddity ( essence / accident nature ) Peripatetic axiom Principle of double effect Transcendentals Aristotelian ethics Cardinal / Theological Natural law Determinatio Just war Satisfaction theory of the atonement Thomistic sacramental theology Just price Concupiscence Intrinsic finality Thomistic theology of merit Compatibilism Theological intellectualism Works Summa Theologica Treatise on Law Summa contra Gentiles Contra Errores Graecorum Commentaries on Aristotle De regno, ad regem Cypri De regimine Judaeorum De principiis naturae, ad fratrem Sylvestrum De aeternitate mundi, contra murmurantes De motu cordis, ad Magistrum Philippum Quaestiones Disputatae de Veritate Commentary on the Book of Causes De iudiciis astrorum Compendium Theologiae Catena aurea Hymns and prayers Adoro te devote Creator ineffabilis Lauda Sion O sacrum convivium Pange lingua gloriosi corporis mysterium Tantum ergo Sacris solemniis Panis angelicus Verbum supernum prodiens O salutaris hostia Influences Aristotle St. Paul Pseudo-Dionysius St. Augustine St. Boethius Avicenna Peter Lombard Averroes Maimonides St. Albertus Magnus Classical Thomists Cantimpré Saint-Cher Beauvais Penyafort Innocent V Lessines Piperno Moerbeke Martí Trilia Houghton Apolda Sutton Auvergne Benedict XI Fontaines Winterburn Colonna Ymbert di Bologna Fiadoni Guidonis Nédellec Paludanus Holkott Regina Bromyard Kydones Eymerich Calecas Ferrer Dominici Gerson Gorkum Sabunde Capreolus Pierozzi de Flandria Torquemada de Rupe Niger Almadura Mirabilibus Savonarola Fabri Gostynin Głogów Tetzel Deza Mazzolini di Ferrara Gaetanus Koellin Pagnino Faber Vitoria Catherinus Ory Soto (Domingo) Cano Pelargus Soto (Pedro) Senensis Mercado Medina de Granada Fernandes Báñez Zumel Porrecta Duperron Medices Lessius Malvenda Lemos Álvarez Oliva Rispoli Riccardi Gravina Poinsot Ripada Molinier Torres Vallgornera Pallavicino Nicolaï Lynch Ferre Gonet Bancel Quétif Massoulié Alexandre Échard Benedict XIII Serry Plessis Gotti Leocata Concina Benedict XIV De Rubeis Burke de Boxadors Mamachi Gazzaniga Neo-Thomism Aertsen Anquín Anscombe Arintero Ashley Barron Bocheński Bouquillon Bourke Canals Coffey Copleston Coreth Cornoldi Daujat De Wulf Fabro Fairweather Farrer Feser Franca Gardet Garrigou-Lagrange Gauthier Geach George Grenier Hawkins von Donnersmarck Henle Hugon Inagaki Jolivet Kleutgen Knasas Komar Koninck Krąpiec Leo XIII Lira Lonergan MacIntyre Maréchal Maritain Marshall Mascall McInerny Meinvielle Millán-Puelles Newman Pace Pecci Pegis Piolanti Pirotta Pius X Ramírez Régis Ripperger Russo Ryan Sanseverino Sertillanges Simon Smith Stein Tanaka Taparelli Torre Ušeničnik White Wilhelmsen Wippel Woodbury Zigliara History Medieval philosophy Condemnations of 1210–1277 Canonization of Thomas Aquinas Second scholasticism Pontifical University of Saint Thomas Aquinas School of Salamanca Physical premotion Congregatio de Auxiliis Salmanticenses and Complutenses Neo-scholasticism Æterni Patris Editio Leonina Neo-Thomism in Brazil Analytical Thomism ICUSTA Scholarship Aquinas Index Thomisticus Nova et Vetera Revue thomiste The Cambridge Companion to Aquinas The Oxford Handbook of Aquinas The Thomist Thomas Aquinas Dictionary Art 1476 Altarpiece Carafa Chapel Charles Bridge statue Cortona Triptych Enthroned Madonna and Child with Saints Fiesole Altarpiece Madonna and Child with St Dominic and St Thomas Aquinas San Pietro Martire Triptych The Apotheosis of Saint Thomas Aquinas The Vision of Fray Lauterio The Vision of Saint Thomas Aquinas Temptation of St. Thomas Triumph of Saint Thomas Aquinas Related topics Aristotelianism Actus primus Catholic theology Doctor of the Church Dominican Order Empiricism List of institutions named after Aquinas Saint Thomas Aquinas Church Catholic Church portal Philosophy portal v t e Part of a series on Catholic philosophy Aquinas , Scotus and Ockham Ethics Cardinal virtues Just price Just war Principle of Double Effect Casuistry Probabilism Natural law Personalism Social teaching Liberation theology Christian humanism Virtue ethics Works of mercy Metaphysics Conceptualism Realism Moderate realism Nominalism Quiddity ( essence / nature ) Haecceity Quinque Viae Predestination Theological determinism Compatibilism Divine Attributes Schools Augustinianism Victorines Lullism Cartesianism Christian Neoplatonism Friends of God Molinism Ressourcement Occamism Scholasticism Second scholasticism Neo Scotism Thomism Analytic Salamanca Philosophers Ancient Ambrose Athenagoras Athanasius Augustine Benedict Boethius Clement Cyprian Cyril Gregory (of Nazianzus) Gregory (of Nyssa) Irenaeus Jerome Cassian Chrysostom Climacus John of Damascus Justin Maximus Dionysius Origen Paul Tertullian Medieval Abelard Albert Alcuin Alexander Anselm Autrecourt Aquinas Bacon Bede Berengar Bernard Bonaventure Buridan Catherine Cusa Eckhart Eriugena Giles Gregory I Grosseteste Gundissalinus Hildegard Hugh Isidore Llull Lombard Martin Ockham Oresme Paschasius Roscellinus Scotus Siger Symeon Thierry Modern Arnauld Ávila Azpilcueta Bellarmine Bonald Bossuet Brentano Botero Cajetan Chateaubriand Cortés Descartes Erasmus Fénelon Gracián Kołłątaj Krasicki La Mennais Liguori Maistre Malebranche Mariana Meinong Mercado Molina More Newman Pascal Rosmini Sales Soto Suárez Vico Vitoria Caramuel Contemporary Adler Anscombe Balthasar Barron Benedict XVI Blondel Chesterton Congar Copleston Finnis Garrigou-Lagrange Geach Gilson Girard Gutiérrez Dávila Guardini Haldane Hildebrand John Paul II Lonergan Lubac MacIntyre Marcel Marion Maritain McLuhan Mounier Pieper Rahner Stein Taylor Catholic Church portal Philosophy portal v t e Neo-scholasticism (also known as neo-scholastic Thomism [ 1 ] or neo-Thomism because of the great influence of the writings of Thomas Aquinas on the movement) is a revival and development of medieval scholasticism in Catholic theology and philosophy which began in the second half of the 19th century.

Origins [ edit ] During the medieval period, scholasticism became the standard accepted method of philosophy and theology. The Scholastic method declined with the advent of humanism in the 15th and 16th centuries, after which time it came to be viewed by some [ who?

] as rigid and formalistic. "Scholastic philosophy did not, however, completely disappear.  An important movement of Scholastic revival took place during the 16th and 17th centuries and enriched Scholastic literature with many eminent contributions, in addition to adapting scholastic thought to modern problems and synthesizing the currents of thought of various authors of medieval scholasticism, such as Thomism, Scotism or nominalism.

Francisco de Vitoria (1483-1546), Thomas de Vio Cajetan (1469–1534), Gabriel Vásquez (1551–1604), Toletus (1532–1596), Fonseca (1528–1599), and especially Francisco Suárez (1548–1617) were profound thinkers, worthy of the great masters whose principles they had adopted." [ 2 ] Moreover, as J. A. Weisheipl emphasizes, within the Dominican Order Thomistic scholasticism has been continuous since the time of Aquinas: "Thomism was always alive in the Dominican Order, small as it was after the ravages of the Reformation, the French Revolution, and the Napoleonic occupation. Repeated legislation of the General Chapters, beginning after the death of St. Thomas, as well as the Constitutions of the Order, required all Dominicans to teach the doctrine of St. Thomas both in philosophy and in theology." [ 3 ] A further idea of the longstanding historic continuity of Dominican scholasticism and neo-scholasticism may be derived from the list of people associated with the Pontifical University of St. Thomas Aquinas .

In the mid-19th century, interest in scholastic thought began once again to flourish, in large part in reaction against the Modernist current inspired by thinkers such as René Descartes , Immanuel Kant and Georg Hegel , whose principles were perceived to conflict with Christian dogma.

[ 4 ] Theological Modernism never coalesced into an authoritative doctrine; perhaps it was most clearly defined by Pius X in 1907 , when he condemned it as ‘the sum of all heresies’. However, the most consistent threads of Modernist thought include: (1) the belief that revelation continues up to the present day and did not stop after the apostles; (2) the belief that dogmas are not immutable, and their formulas could change both in interpretation and content; (3) the use of the historical-critical method in biblical exegesis.

[ 5 ] For many thinkers, the dangers of Modernism could only be overcome by a complete restoration of scholastic theology which culminated in Aquinas. His writings were increasingly viewed as the ultimate expression of orthodox philosophy and theology, to which all Catholic thought must remain faithful.

[ 6 ] This was particularly vigorous at first in Italy. "The direct initiator of the neo-Scholastic movement in Italy was Gaetano Sanseverino (1811–1865), a canon at Naples." [ 7 ] The influential German Jesuit Joseph Kleutgen (1811–83), who taught at Rome, argued that post-Cartesian philosophy undermined Catholic theology, and that its remedy was the Aristotelian scientific method of Aquinas.

[ 8 ] From 1874 to 1891, the Accademia di San Tommaso published the review La Scienza Italiana . Numerous works were produced by Giovanni Maria Cornoldi (1822–92), Giuseppe Pecci , Tommaso Maria Zigliara (1833–93), Satolli (1839–1909), Liberatore (1810–92), Barberis (1847–96), Schiffini (1841–1906), de Maria, Talamo, Lorenzelli, Ballerini, Mattiussi and others. The Italian writers at first laid special emphasis on the metaphysics of Scholasticism, and less on the empirical sciences or the history of philosophy.

Papal support for such trends began under Pope Pius IX , who praised the movement in various letters. The dogma of the Immaculate Conception (1854), the Syllabus of Errors (1864) and the proclamation of papal infallibility (1870) all heralded a move away from Modernist ideas.

[ 9 ] The most decisive impetus was  Pope Leo XIII 's encyclical Aeterni Patris of 4 August 1879, which set out and strongly endorsed the principles of neo-scholasticism, calling for "Christian philosophy to be restored according to the spirit of St Thomas".

Key principles [ edit ] Thomas Aquinas This article possibly contains original research .

Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations . Statements consisting only of original research should be removed.

( February 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) "Neo-Scholasticism is characterized by systematic investigation, analytical rigor, clear terminology, and argumentation that proceeds from first principles, chief among them that objective truth is both real and knowable." [ 10 ] Neo-scholasticism sought to restore the fundamental doctrines embodied in the scholasticism of the 13th century, which may be summarized as follows: 1.

God is pure actuality and absolute perfection, substantially distinct from every finite thing. He alone can create and preserve all beings other than Himself. His infinite knowledge includes all that was, is, or shall be, and all that is possible.

2. As to our knowledge of the material world: whatever exists is itself, an incommunicable, individual substance. To the core of self-sustaining reality, in the oak -tree for instance, other realities (accidents) are added—size, form, roughness, and so on. All oak-trees are identical in respect of certain constituent elements. Considering this likeness and even identity, our human intelligence groups them into one species and again, in view of their common characteristics, it ranges various species under one genus. Such is the Aristotelean solution of the problem of universals . Each substance is in its nature fixed and determined; and Scholasticism excludes a theory of evolution which would regard even the essences of things as products of change.

But this static conception requires as its complement a moderate dynamism, supplied by the central concepts of act and potency. Whatsoever changes is, just for that reason, limited. The oak-tree passes through a process of growth, of becoming: whatever is actually in it now was potentially in it from the beginning. Its vital functions go on unceasingly (accidental change); but the tree itself will die, and out of its decayed trunk other substances will come forth (substantial change). The theory of matter and form is simply an interpretation of the substantial changes which bodies undergo. The union of matter and form constitutes the essence of concrete being, and this essence is endowed with existence. Throughout all change and becoming there runs a rhythm of finality; the activities of the countless substances of the universe converge towards an end which is known to God; finality involves optimism.

3.  Man, a compound of body (matter) and of soul (form), puts forth activities of a higher order—knowledge and volition. Through his senses he perceives concrete objects, e.g. this oak; through his intellect he knows the abstract and universal (the oak). All our intellectual activity rests on sensory function; but through the active intellect (intellectus agens) an abstract representation of the sensible object is provided for the intellectual possibility. Hence the characteristic of the idea, its non-materiality, and on this is based the principal argument for the spirituality and immortality of the soul. Here, too, is the foundation of logic and of the theory of knowledge, the justification of our judgments and syllogisms .

Upon knowledge follows the appetitive process, sensory or intellectual according to the sort of knowledge. The will ( appetitus intellectualis ) in certain conditions is free , and thanks to this liberty man is the master of his destiny. Like all other beings, we have an end to attain and we are morally obliged, though not compelled, to attain it.

Natural happiness would result from the full development of our powers of knowing and loving. We should find and possess God in this world since the corporeal world is the proper object of our intelligence. But above nature is the order of grace and our supernatural happiness will consist in the direct intuition of God, the beatific vision. Here philosophy ends and theology begins.

Late-19th-century spread [ edit ] In the period from the publication of Aeterni Patris in 1879 until the 1920s, neo-scholasticism gradually established itself as exclusive and all-pervading.

[ 11 ] On October 15, 1879, Leo XIII created the Pontifical Academy of St. Thomas Aquinas , and ordered the publication of the critical "Leonine Edition", of Aquinas' complete works.

[ 12 ] The pope expanded Thomist studies in the Collegium Divi Thomae de Urbe (the future Pontifical University of Saint Thomas Aquinas, Angelicum ), founding its Faculty of Philosophy in 1882 and its Faculty of Canon Law in 1896.

The thought of Thomas Aquinas gained papal ascendency over all other ‘modern’ systems of thought. In particular, the Aristotelianism of Thomas preferred to the thought of Kant .

[ 13 ] Other ‘modern’ forms of thought, including ontologism , traditionalism , the dualism of Anton Günther , and the thought of Descartes , were also seen as flawed in comparison to Thomism.

The movement spread outside Italy, finding supporters in Germany, [ 14 ] Spain, [ 15 ] the Netherlands, [ 16 ] Belgium, [ 17 ] England, [ 18 ] Switzerland, [ 19 ] France, [ 20 ] Hungary, [ 21 ] the United States, [ 22 ] Argentina, [ 23 ] Mexico, [ 24 ] Brazil [ 25 ] and Australia.

[ 26 ] At Louvain in Belgium (then still a francophone university), Leo XIII  in 1891 established the Institut de philosophie to teach the doctrine of Aquinas together with history and the natural sciences.

[ 27 ] It was endorsed by four Catholic Congresses : Paris (1891), Brussels (1895), Freiburg (1897), and Munich (1900).

Early-20th-century development [ edit ] In the early 20th century, neo-Thomism became official Catholic doctrine, and became increasingly defined in opposition to Modernism.

In July 1907, Pope Pius X issued the decree Lamentabili sane exitu , which condemned 65 Modernist propositions. Two months later, he issued the encyclical Pascendi Dominici Gregis , in which he unequivocally condemned the agnosticism, immanentism, and relativism of Modernism as the 'synthesis of all heresies'.

[ 28 ] The anti-Modernist oath of 1910 was very important; this remained in force until 1966.

[ 28 ] In 1914, Pius X issued a list of 24 philosophical propositions summarising the central tenets of neo-scholasticism to be taught in all colleges as fundamental elements of philosophy; and in 1916, these 24 propositions were confirmed as normative. In 1917, the Church's new Code of Canon Law ( Codex Iuris Canonici ) insisted that the doctrine, methods, and principles of Thomas should be used in teaching philosophy and theology.

[ 29 ] Thomist thought therefore became the basis of the manuals and textbooks in Catholic colleges and seminaries before Vatican II , and was promoted also to the laity.

[ 30 ] Variation within the tradition [ edit ] Writers such as Edouard Hugon , Réginald Garrigou-Lagrange , and Henri Grenier maintained the tradition of the manuals. Others varied in their interpretation, including Martin Grabmann (1875–1949), Amato Masnovo (1880–1955), Francesco Olgiati (1886–1962), and Antonin-Dalmace Sertillanges (1863–1948).

[ 31 ] Authors such as Étienne Gilson , Jacques Maritain , and Joseph Maréchal investigated alternative interpretations of Aquinas from the 1920s until the 1950s. Gilson and Maritain in particular taught and lectured throughout Europe and North America, influencing a generation of English-speaking Catholic philosophers.

Historical investigation into Thomas's thought led some to believe that neo-Thomism did not always reflect the thought of Thomas Aquinas himself, as argued by writers such as Étienne Gilson , Marie-Dominique Chenu , and Henri de Lubac . At Vatican II , traditional neo-Thomist thought was opposed by exponents of this nouvelle théologie .

Many Thomists, however, continue in the neo-scholastic tradition. Some relatively recent proponents are treated in Battista Mondin's Metafisica di san Tommaso d'Aquino e i suoi interpreti (2002), which treats Carlo Giacon (1900–1984), Sofia Vanni Rovighi (1908–1990), Cornelio Fabro (1911–1995), Carlo Giacon (1900–1984), [ 32 ] Tomáš Týn (1950–1990), Abelardo Lobato (1925–2012), Leo Elders (1926–2019), and Enrico Berti (1935–2022), among others.  Due to its suspicion of attempts to harmonize Aquinas with non-Thomistic categories and assumptions, neo-scholastic Thomism has sometimes been called strict observance Thomism .

[ 1 ] Anglophone theologians such as Edward Feser , Ralph McInerny , Brian Davies have defended a contemporary revival of traditional neo-scholastic Thomistic metaphysics in response to modern philosophy.

[ 33 ] [ 34 ] See also [ edit ] Mortimer J. Adler Anthony Kenny Analytical thomism References [ edit ] ^ a b Edward Feser (15 October 2009).

"The Thomistic tradition, Part I (archived copy)" .

Archived from the original on 29 November 2010 . Retrieved 2 January 2011 .

Accessed 27 March 2013 ^ Joseph Louis Perrier, The Revival of Scholastic Philosophy in the Nineteenth Century , "Chapter VIII: "Chapter VIII: Forerunners of the Neo-Scholastic Revival," Accessed 1 August 2013 ^ "The Dominican Friars of the Province of St. Albert the Great » "The Revival of Thomism: An Historical Survey" (James Weisheipl)" . Archived from the original on 2013-09-27 . Retrieved 2013-08-21 .

"The Revival of Thomism: An Historical Survey", James Weisheipl, 1962.

^ Fergus Kerr, Twentieth-century Catholic theologians , (Blackwell, 2007), p1.

^ See Jürgen Mettepenningen, Nouvelle Théologie - New Theology: Inheritor of Modernism, Precursor of Vatican II , (London: T&T Clark, 2010), p20.

^ This way of approaching Thomas was itself scholastic in inspiration. The scholastics used a book by a renowned scholar, called auctor , as basic course literature. By reading this book thoroughly and critically, the disciples learned to appreciate the theories of the auctor and, thus, of the problems studied in the whole discipline, in a critical and self-confident way. Scholastic works therefore have a tendency to take the form of a long list of "footnotes" to the works studied, not being able to take a stand as theories on their own.

^ Joseph Louis Perrier, The Revival of Scholastic Philosophy in the Nineteenth Century , "Chapter IX: The Neo-Scholastic Revival in Italy", "Jacques Maritain Center: Revival 9" . Archived from the original on 2015-10-09 . Retrieved 2013-08-01 .

Accessed 1 August 2013 ^ Fergus Kerr, ‘Thomism’, in The Cambridge Dictionary of Christian Theology (Cambridge, 2011), p507.

^ Jürgen Mettepenningen, Nouvelle Théologie - New Theology: Inheritor of Modernism, Precursor of Vatican II , (London: T&T Clark, 2010), p. 19.

^ Iovino, James. "Can Neo-Scholasticism Make a Comeback?", New Oxford Review , January-February 2018 ^ Jürgen Mettepenningen, Nouvelle Théologie - New Theology: Inheritor of Modernism, Precursor of Vatican II , (London: T&T Clark, 2010), p20.

^ Previous critical editions of Thomas’s work had been published before, at Parma in 1852-73, and in Paris in 1871-80, but the Leonine edition, produced under the guidance of Tommaso Maria Zigliara , professor of theology at the Collegium Divi Thomae de Urbe (the future Pontifical University of Saint Thomas Aquinas, Angelicum ), superseded both of these.

^ For example, Boutroux thought that Aristotle's system might well serve as an offset to Kantism and evolution.

Aristote, Etudes d'histoire et de philosophie , (Paris, 1901, 202). Moreover, Paulsen , ‘Kant der Philosoph des Protestantismus’, Kantstudien , (1899) and Eucken , Thomas von Aquino u. Kant, Ein Kampf zweier Welten , loc. cit., 1901 declared neo-Thomism the rival of Kantism, and the conflict between them the "clash of two worlds".

Adolf Harnack , Lehrbuch d. Dogmengesch , III, 3rd. ed., 327, Seeberg , Realencyklopädie f. Prot. Theol.

5. v. "Scholastik" and others argued against underrating the value of scholastic doctrine.

^ Such as Kleutgen (1811–83) and Stöckl (1823–95), and the authors of the "Philosophia Lacensis" published at Maria Laach by the Jesuits (Pesch, Hontheim, Cathrein), Gutberlet, Commer, Willmann, Kaufmann, Glossner, Grabmann and Schneid.

^ Such as Gonzalez (1831–92), Orti y Lara, Urráburu, and Gómez Izquierdo ^ Such as de Groot ^ Such as de San (1832–1904), Dupont and Lepidi ^ Clarke, Maher, John Rickaby, Joseph Rickaby , Boedder (Stonyhurst Series) ^ Such as Mandonnet at Freiburg.

^ Such as Farges, Dormet de Vorges (1910), Vallet, Gardair, Fonsegrive and Piat ^ Kiss and Pécsi.

^ Such as Coppens, Poland, Brother Chrysostom, and the professors at the Catholic University (Shanahan, Turner, and Pace).

^ Julio Meinvielle and Nimio de Anquín ^ Garcia ^ Santroul ^ "Toongabbie's Thomist philosopher" .

Catholic Outlook . 2018-07-16 . Retrieved 2022-10-02 .

^ The Institute was placed in charge of Désiré-Joseph Mercier whose "Cours de philosophie" was translated into many major European languages.

^ a b Hans Boersma , Nouvelle Theologie and Sacramental Ontology: A Return to Mystery , (Oxford: OUP, 2009), p18.

^ Jürgen Mettepenningen, Nouvelle Théologie - New Theology: Inheritor of Modernism, Precursor of Vatican II , (London: T&T Clark, 2010), p25.

^ Ryan, P.J.

(17 May 1934).

"The fundamental tenets of scholasticism: old and new" .

Catholic Press . Sydney . Retrieved 30 June 2021 .

^ Battista Mondin's Metafisica di san Tommaso d'Aquino e i suoi interpreti (2002) ^ "GIACON, Carlo in "Dizionario Biografico" " .

www.treccani.it . Retrieved 9 April 2013 .

^ "Edward Feser: A Neo-Scholastic revival?" . 30 November 2008.

^ Feser, Edward (15 October 2009).

"The Thomistic tradition (Part 1)" . Retrieved 2011-01-02 .

This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Herbermann, Charles, ed. (1913). " Neo-Scholasticism ".

Catholic Encyclopedia . New York: Robert Appleton Company.

Further reading [ edit ] Boersma, Hans , Nouvelle Theologie and Sacramental Ontology: A Return to Mystery , (Oxford: OUP, 2009) Cessario, R, A Short History of Thomism , (2005) Kerr, Fergus, After Aquinas: Versions of Thomism , (2002) Kerr, Fergus, Twentieth-century Catholic theologians , (Blackwell, 2007), Kerr, Fergus, ‘Thomism’, in The Cambridge Dictionary of Christian Theology , (Cambridge, 2011) Mettepenningen, Jürgen, Nouvelle Théologie - New Theology: Inheritor of Modernism, Precursor of Vatican II , (London: T&T Clark, 2010) Aveling, F.

"The Neo-Scholastic Movement," The American Catholic Quarterly Review, Vol. XXXI, 1906.

Herbermann, Charles, ed. (1913).

"Neo-Scholasticism" .

Catholic Encyclopedia . New York: Robert Appleton Company.

Many philosophical and theological journals focus on neo-Scholasticism: Divus Thomas (since 1879); Rivista di Filosofia Neo-Scolastica (Milan, since 1909); Annales de Philosophie Chrétienne (Paris, 1830-1913); Revue néo-scolastique de Philosophie (Louvain, since 1894); Revue de Philosophie (Paris, since 1900); Revue des Sciences philosophiques et théologiques (Kain, Belgium, since 1907); Revue thomiste (Paris, since 1893); Philosophisches Jahrbuch für Philosophie und spekulative Theologie (Paderborn, since 1887); St. Thomas Blätter (Ratisbon, since 1888); Bölcseleti-Folyóirat (Budapest, since 1886); Revista Lulliana (Barcelona, since 1901); Ciencia Tomista (Madrid, since 1910).

Angelicum , since 1924; The Modern Schoolman since 1925, New Scholasticism since 1927 which became American Catholic Philosophical Quarterly in 1989, The Thomist since 1939.

External links [ edit ] Scholasticon by Jacob Schmutz Online Resources for the study of early-modern scholasticism (1500–1800): authors, sources, institutions (in French) v t e Thomas Aquinas Thomism Scholasticism Apophatic theology Aseity Divine simplicity Analogia entis Quinque viae Beatific vision Actus purus Actus essendi Primum Movens Correspondence theory Hylomorphism Substance theory ( ousia ) Substantial form Quiddity ( essence / accident nature ) Peripatetic axiom Principle of double effect Transcendentals Aristotelian ethics Cardinal / Theological Natural law Determinatio Just war Satisfaction theory of the atonement Thomistic sacramental theology Just price Concupiscence Intrinsic finality Thomistic theology of merit Compatibilism Theological intellectualism Works Summa Theologica Treatise on Law Summa contra Gentiles Contra Errores Graecorum Commentaries on Aristotle De regno, ad regem Cypri De regimine Judaeorum, ad Ducissam Brabantiae De principiis naturae, ad fratrem Sylvestrum De aeternitate mundi, contra murmurantes De motu cordis, ad Magistrum Philippum Quaestiones Disputatae de Veritate Commentary on the Book of Causes De iudiciis astrorum Compendium Theologiae Catena aurea Hymns and prayers Adoro te devote Creator ineffabilis Lauda Sion O sacrum convivium Pange lingua gloriosi corporis mysterium Tantum ergo Sacris solemniis Panis angelicus Verbum supernum prodiens O salutaris hostia Influences Aristotle St. Paul Pseudo-Dionysius St. Augustine St. Boethius Avicenna Peter Lombard Averroes Maimonides St. Albertus Magnus Classical Thomists Cantimpré Saint-Cher Beauvais Penyafort Innocent V Lessines Piperno Moerbeke Martí Trilia Houghton Apolda Sutton Auvergne Benedict XI Fontaines Winterburn Colonna Ymbert di Bologna Fiadoni Guidonis Nédellec Paludanus Holkott Regina Bromyard Kydones Eymerich Calecas Ferrer Dominici Gerson Gorkum Sabunde Capreolus Pierozzi de Flandria Torquemada de Rupe Niger Almadura Mirabilibus Savonarola Fabri Gostynin Głogów Tetzel Deza Mazzolini di Ferrara Gaetanus Koellin Pagnino Faber Vitoria Catherinus Ory Soto (Domingo) Cano Pelargus Soto (Pedro) Senensis Mercado Medina de Granada Fernandes Báñez Zumel Porrecta Duperron Medices Lessius Malvenda Lemos Álvarez Oliva Rispoli Riccardi Gravina Poinsot Ripada Molinier Torres Vallgornera Pallavicino Nicolaï Lynch Ferre Gonet Bancel Quétif Massoulié Alexandre Échard Benedict XIII Serry Plessis Gotti Leocata Concina Benedict XIV De Rubeis Burke de Boxadors Mamachi Gazzaniga Neo-Thomism Aertsen Anquín Anscombe Arintero Ashley Barron Bocheński Bouquillon Bourke Canals Coffey Copleston Coreth Cornoldi Daujat De Wulf Fabro Fairweather Farrer Feser Franca Gardet Garrigou-Lagrange Gauthier Geach George Grenier Hawkins von Donnersmarck Henle Hugon Inagaki Jolivet Kleutgen Knasas Komar Koninck Krąpiec Leo XIII Lira Lonergan MacIntyre Maréchal Maritain Marshall Mascall McInerny Meinvielle Millán-Puelles Newman Pace Pecci Pegis Piolanti Pirotta Pius X Ramírez Régis Ripperger Russo Ryan Sanseverino Sertillanges Simon Smith Stein Tanaka Taparelli Torre Ušeničnik White Wilhelmsen Wippel Woodbury Zigliara History Medieval philosophy Condemnations of 1210–1277 Canonization of Thomas Aquinas Second scholasticism Pontifical University of Saint Thomas Aquinas School of Salamanca Physical premotion Congregatio de Auxiliis Salmanticenses and Complutenses Neo-scholasticism Æterni Patris Editio Leonina Neo-Thomism in Brazil Analytical Thomism ICUSTA Scholarship Aquinas Index Thomisticus Nova et Vetera Revue thomiste The Cambridge Companion to Aquinas The Oxford Handbook of Aquinas The Thomist Thomas Aquinas Dictionary Art 1476 Altarpiece Carafa Chapel Charles Bridge statue Cortona Triptych Enthroned Madonna and Child with Saints Fiesole Altarpiece Madonna and Child with St Dominic and St Thomas Aquinas San Pietro Martire Triptych The Apotheosis of Saint Thomas Aquinas The Vision of Fray Lauterio The Vision of Saint Thomas Aquinas Temptation of St. Thomas Triumph of Saint Thomas Aquinas Related topics Aristotelianism Actus primus Catholic theology Doctor of the Church Dominican Order Empiricism List of institutions named after Aquinas Saint Thomas Aquinas Church Catholicism portal v t e Catholic philosophy Ethics Cardinal virtues Divine command Just price Just war Probabilism Natural law Personalism Seven virtues Social teaching Option for the poor Social mortgage Theological virtues Virtue ethics Schools Medieval Augustinianism Scholasticism Thomism Scotism Occamism Modern Salamanca Christian humanism Cartesianism Molinism Neo-scholasticism Analytical Thomism Universals Augustinian realism Nominalism Conceptualism Moderate realism Scotistic realism Other Theological intellectualism Theological voluntarism Foundationalism Philosophers Abelard Adler Albertus Alcuin Anscombe Anselm Aquinas Augustine Bacon Boethius Bonaventure Chateaubriand Chesterton Clement Cusa Descartes Dionysius Erasmus Eriugena Ficino Gassendi Isidore Krasicki Llull Lombard MacIntyre Maistre Malebranche Maritain Montaigne More Newman Occam Pascal Pico Rahner Ratzinger Scheler Scotus Stein Suárez Wojtyła Concepts Actus Essendi Actus primus Actus purus Aevum Augustinian values Cardinal virtues Cartesian dualism Cogito, ergo sum Dehellenization Differentia Disputation Divine illumination Double truth Evil demon Formal distinction Guardian angel Haecceity Head of a pin Homo unius libri Infused righteousness Memento mori Occam's razor Ontological argument Pascal's wager Peripatetic axiom Principle of double effect Quiddity Quinque viae Rota Fortunae Seven deadly sins Theodicy Augustinian Irenaean Trademark argument Univocity Utopia Related Catholic theology Platonism Aristotelianism Neoplatonism Islamic philosophy Doctor of the Church Renaissance Rationalism Empiricism Phenomenology Catholicism portal Philosophy portal Authority control databases National Germany Czech Republic Latvia Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Neo-scholasticism&oldid=1295569736 " Categories : Christian theological movements Thomism Philosophical schools and traditions Christian democracy Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Pages using sidebar with the child parameter All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from October 2021 Articles that may contain original research from February 2023 All articles that may contain original research Articles incorporating a citation from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference Articles incorporating text from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference Articles incorporating a citation from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia without Wikisource reference Articles with French-language sources (fr) This page was last edited on 14 June 2025, at 15:28 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Neo-scholasticism 18 languages Add topic

