Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Education 3 Sub-disciplines 4 Organizations 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Biological engineering 41 languages Afrikaans العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা Български Català Deutsch Español Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge 한국어 Հայերեն Ido Bahasa Indonesia IsiZulu עברית ქართული Қазақша Latviešu Македонски मराठी Bahasa Melayu Монгол Polski Português Română Русский Simple English سنڌي Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Tagalog Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt Winaray 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Bioengineering ) Application of biology and engineering to create useful products For Bioengineered food, see Genetically modified food .

This article may be confusing or unclear to readers .

Please help clarify the article . There might be a discussion about this on the talk page .

( November 2017 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) A ribosome is a biological machine that utilizes protein domain dynamics , leading Richard Feynman to suggest a medical use for biological engineering.  Such motions can only now be seen by neutron spin echo spectroscopy Biological engineering or bioengineering is the application of principles of biology and the tools of engineering to create usable, tangible, economically viable products.

[ 1 ] Biological engineering employs knowledge and expertise from a number of pure and applied sciences, [ 2 ] such as mass and heat transfer , kinetics , biocatalysts , biomechanics , bioinformatics , separation and purification processes , bioreactor design, surface science , fluid mechanics , thermodynamics , and polymer science . It is used in the design of medical devices , diagnostic equipment , biocompatible materials , renewable energy , ecological engineering , agricultural engineering , process engineering and catalysis , and other areas that improve the living standards of societies.

[ citation needed ] Examples of bioengineering research include bacteria engineered to produce chemicals, new medical imaging technology, portable and rapid disease diagnostic devices, prosthetics , biopharmaceuticals , and tissue-engineered organs .

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] Bioengineering overlaps substantially with biotechnology and the biomedical sciences in a way analogous to how various other forms of engineering and technology relate to various other sciences (such as aerospace engineering and other space technology to kinetics and astrophysics ).

[ citation needed ] Generally, biological engineers attempt to mimic biological systems to create products or modify and control biological systems.  Working with doctors, clinicians, and researchers, bioengineers use traditional engineering principles and techniques to address biological processes, including ways to replace, augment, sustain, or predict chemical and mechanical processes.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] History [ edit ] Some biological machines Biological engineering is a science-based discipline founded upon the biological sciences in the same way that chemical engineering , electrical engineering , and mechanical engineering [ 7 ] can be based upon chemistry, electricity and magnetism, and classical mechanics , respectively.

[ 8 ] Before WWII, biological engineering had begun being recognized as a branch of engineering and was a new concept to people. Post-WWII, it grew more rapidly, and the term "bioengineering" was coined by British scientist and broadcaster Heinz Wolff in 1954 at the National Institute for Medical Research . Wolff graduated that year and became the Division of Biological Engineering director at Oxford . This was the first time Bioengineering was recognized as its own branch at a university. The early focus of this discipline was electrical engineering due to the work with medical devices and machinery during this time.

[ 9 ] When engineers and life scientists started working together, they recognized that the engineers did not know enough about the actual biology behind their work. To resolve this problem, engineers who wanted to get into biological engineering devoted more time to studying the processes of biology, psychology, and medicine.

[ 10 ] More recently, the term biological engineering has been applied to environmental modifications such as surface soil protection , slope stabilization , watercourse and shoreline protection, windbreaks , vegetation barriers including noise barriers and visual screens, and the ecological enhancement of an area. Because other engineering disciplines also address living organisms , the term biological engineering can be applied more broadly to include agricultural engineering .

[ citation needed ] The first biological engineering program in the United States was started at University of California, San Diego in 1966.

[ 11 ] More recent programs have been launched at MIT [ 12 ] and Utah State University .

[ 13 ] Many old agricultural engineering departments in universities over the world have re-branded themselves as agricultural and biological engineering or agricultural and biosystems engineering . According to Professor Doug Lauffenburger of MIT, [ 12 ] [ 14 ] biological engineering has a broad base which applies engineering principles to an enormous range of size and complexities of systems, ranging from the molecular level ( molecular biology , biochemistry , microbiology , pharmacology , protein chemistry , cytology , immunology , neurobiology and, neuroscience ) to cellular and tissue-based systems (including devices and sensors), to whole macroscopic organisms (plants, animals), and even to biomes and ecosystems.

[ citation needed ] Education [ edit ] The average length of study is three to five years, and the completed degree is signified as a bachelor of engineering ( B.S.

in engineering).

[ citation needed ] Fundamental courses include thermodynamics, biomechanics, biology, genetic engineering, fluid and mechanical dynamics, chemical and enzyme kinetics, electronics, and materials properties.

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] Sub-disciplines [ edit ] Modeling of the spread of disease using Cellular Automata and Nearest Neighbor Interactions Depending on the institution and particular definitional boundaries employed, some major branches of bioengineering may be categorized as (note these may overlap): Biomedical engineering : application of engineering principles and design concepts to medicine and biology for healthcare purposes.

[ 17 ] Tissue engineering Neural engineering Pharmaceutical engineering Clinical engineering Biomechanics Biochemical engineering : fermentation engineering, application of engineering principles to microscopic biological systems that are used to create new products by synthesis, including the production of protein from suitable raw materials.

[ 17 ] Biological systems engineering : application of engineering principles and design concepts to agriculture, food sciences, and ecosystems.

[ 7 ] Bioprocess engineering : develop technology to monitor the conditions of where a particular process takes place, [ 17 ] (Ex: bioprocess design, biocatalysis , bioseparation, bioenergy ) Environmental health engineering : application of engineering principles to control the environment for the health, comfort, and safety of human beings. It includes the field of life-support systems for the exploration of outer space and the ocean.

[ 17 ] Human factors and ergonomics engineering: application of engineering, physiology, and psychology to the optimization of the human-machine relationship.

[ 17 ] (Ex: physical ergonomics , cognitive ergonomics , human–computer interaction ) Biotechnology : the use of living systems and organisms to develop or make products.

[ 18 ] (Ex: pharmaceuticals, Bioinformatics , Genetic engineering .) [ 17 ] Biomimetics : the imitation of models, systems, and elements of nature to solve complex human problems. (Ex: velcro, designed after George de Mestral noticed how easily burs stuck to a dog's hair.) [ 19 ] Bioelectrical engineering Biomechanical engineering : is the application of mechanical engineering principles and biology to determine how these areas relate and how they can be integrated to potentially improve human health.

[ 20 ] Bionics : an integration of Biomedical, focused more on the robotics and assisted technologies. (Ex: prosthetics) [ 17 ] Bioprinting : utilizing biomaterials to print cells, tissues and organs.

[ 21 ] Biorobotics : utilizing advanced electronics and sensors to make prosthetics or biohybrid robots.

Systems biology : Molecules, cells, organs, and organisms are all investigated in terms of their interactions and behaviors.

[ 22 ] Organizations [ edit ] Accreditation Board for Engineering and Technology (ABET), [ 23 ] the U.S.-based accreditation board for engineering B.S. programs, makes a distinction between biomedical engineering and biological engineering, though there is much overlap (see above).

American Institute for Medical and Biological Engineering (AIMBE) is made up of 1,500 members. Their main goal is to educate the public about the value biological engineering has in our world, as well as invest in research and other programs to advance the field. They give out awards to those dedicated to innovation in the field, and awards of achievement in the field. (They do not have a direct contribution to biological engineering; they recognize those who do and encourage the public to continue that forward movement).

[ 24 ] Institute of Biological Engineering (IBE) is a non-profit organization that runs on donations alone. They aim to encourage the public to learn and to continue advancements in biological engineering. (Like AIMBE, they do not perform research directly; however, they offer scholarships to students who show promise in the field).

[ 25 ] Society for Biological Engineering (SBE) is a technological community associated with the American Institute of Chemical Engineers (AIChE). SBE hosts international conferences, and is a global organization of leading engineers and scientists dedicated to advancing the integration of biology with engineering.

[ 26 ] MediUnite Journal is a medical awareness campaign and newspaper that has often published biomedical findings and has cited biomedicine in various research papers.

[ 27 ] References [ edit ] ^ Abramovitz, Melissa (2015).

Biological engineering . ABDO Publishing Company. p. 10.

ISBN 978-1-62968-526-7 .

^ Herold, Keith; Bentley, William E.; Vossoughi, Jafar (2010).

The Basics of Bioengineering Education . 26th Southern Biomedical Engineering Conference. College Park, Maryland: Springer. p. 65.

ISBN 9783642149979 .

^ "What is Bioengineering?" .

bioeng.berkeley.edu . Retrieved 2018-07-21 .

^ "MSB: About the Munich School of BioEngineering" .

www.bioengineering.tum.de . Archived from the original on 2020-02-03 . Retrieved 2020-02-03 .

^ Pasotti, Lorenzo; Zucca, Susanna (2014-08-03).

"Advances and Computational Tools towards Predictable Design in Biological Engineering" .

Computational and Mathematical Methods in Medicine .

2014 : 369681.

doi : 10.1155/2014/369681 .

PMC 4137594 .

PMID 25161694 .

^ Sheffield, University of.

"What is bioengineering? - Bioengineering - The University of Sheffield" .

www.sheffield.ac.uk . Retrieved 2018-07-21 .

^ a b Abramovitz, Melissa (2015).

Biological Engineering . Gale Virtual Reference Library. p. 18.

ISBN 978-1-62968-526-7 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ Cuello JC, Engineering to biology and biology to engineering, The bi-directional connection between engineering and biology in biological engineering design, Int J Engng Ed 2005, 21, 1-7 ^ Medical & biological engineering . Oxford; New York: Pergamon Press. 1966–1976.

^ Naik, Ganesh R., ed. (2012).

Applied biological engineering : principles and practice . Rijeka: InTech.

ISBN 9789535104124 .

^ "Founder of UCSD Bioengineering Program" . jacobsschool.ucsd.edu. 1 Mar 2004 . Retrieved 22 May 2018 .

^ a b "MIT, Department of Biological Engineering" . Retrieved 16 April 2015 .

^ "Utah State University, Department of Biological Engineering" . be.usu.edu . Retrieved 2011-11-13 .

^ "MIT Directory, Doug Lauffenburger" . Retrieved 15 April 2015 .

^ Linsenmeier RA, Defining the Undergraduate Biomedical Engineering Curriculum ^ Johnson AT, Phillips WM (1995).

"Philosophical foundations of biological engineering" .

Journal of Engineering Education .

1995 (84): 311– 318.

doi : 10.1002/j.2168-9830.1995.tb00185.x .

^ a b c d e f g "Bioengineering" .

Encyclopedia Britannica .

^ "Convention on Biological Diversity" . 13 May 2016 . Retrieved 27 April 2018 .

^ Vincent, Julian F.V; Bogatyreva, Olga A.; Bogatyrev, Nikolaj R.; Bowyer, Adrian; Pahl, Anja-Karina (2006).

"Biomimetics: its practice and theory" .

Journal of the Royal Society Interface .

3 (9): 471– 482.

doi : 10.1098/rsif.2006.0127 .

PMC 1664643 .

PMID 16849244 .

^ "Biomechanical Engineering FAQ | Mechanical Engineering" .

me.stanford.edu . Retrieved 2023-02-15 .

^ "Bioprinting" . Retrieved 1 May 2018 .

^ "Systems biology | Britannica" .

www.britannica.com . Retrieved 2023-02-15 .

^ ABET Accreditation , accessed 9/8/2010.

^ "AIMBE About Page" .

^ "Institute of Biological Engineering" . Retrieved 20 April 2018 .

^ "The Society for Biological Engineering" . 28 February 2012 . Retrieved 21 August 2019 .

^ "MediUnite" .

www.mediunite.ca . Retrieved 2023-09-07 .

External links [ edit ] Bioengineering Society Biomedical Engineering Society Institute of Biological Engineering Benjoe Institute of Systems Biological Engineering American Institute of Medical and Biological Engineering American Society of Agricultural and Biological Engineers Society for Biological Engineering part of AIChE Journal of Biological Engineering, JBE Biological Engineering Transactions Munich School of BioEngineering v t e Biotechnology History History of biotechnology Timeline of biotechnology Competitions and prizes in biotechnology Branches Colors of biotechnology Industrial biotechnology Biological concepts Allele Cell DNA / RNA Fermentation Gene Plasmid Protein Selective breeding General concepts Biotechnology industrial park Biotechnology products Biotechnology law Green Revolution Human Genome Project Pharmaceutical company Basic techniques and tools Biology field Bioreactor Cell culture Cultured meat Flow cytometry Hybridoma technology HPLC NMR Spectroscopy Chemical field Centrifugation CSTR Crystallization Chromatography Kidney dialysis Electrophoresis Extraction Fed Batch Filtration PFR Sedimentation Applications Animal cell culture Biofabrication Bioinformatics Biosynthesis Bionic architecture Cell immunity Cloning Reproductive cloning Therapeutic cloning Embryology Environmental biotechnology Genetic engineering Genetically modified organism Molecular genetics Gene therapy Microbial biodegradation Omics Pharmacogenomics Stem cells Telomere Tissue culture Interdisciplinary fields Bioeconomy Bioelectronics Bioengineering Biology Biopharmacology Biomedical engineering Biomedicine Biomimetics Biochemicals Biorobotics Chemical engineering Microbiology Mining Molecular biology Nanobiotechnology Virology Lists Index of biotechnology articles List of biotechnology articles List of largest biomedical companies by market capitalization Category Commons v t e Topics related to biology Index People and history Biologist Notable biologists History of biology Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine Timeline of biology and organic chemistry List of geneticists and biochemists Institutions, publications Bachelor of Science Publications Terms and phrases Omne vivum ex ovo In vivo In vitro In utero In silico Related disciplines Medicine ( Physician ) Physical anthropology Environmental science Life Sciences Biotechnology Other List of conservation topics Altricial and Precocial development strategies v t e Engineering History Outline List of engineering branches Specialties and interdisciplinarity Civil Architectural Coastal Construction Earthquake Ecological Environmental Sanitary Geological Geotechnical Hydraulic Mining Municipal/urban Offshore River Structural Transportation Traffic Railway Mechanical Acoustic Aerospace Automotive Biomechanical Energy Manufacturing Marine Naval architecture Railway Sports Thermal Tribology Electrical Broadcast outline Control Electromechanics Electronics Microwaves Optical Power Radio-frequency Signal processing Telecommunications Chemical Biochemical/bioprocess Biological Bioresource Genetic Tissue Chemical reaction Electrochemical Food Molecular Paper Petroleum Process Reaction Materials Biomaterial Ceramics Corrosion Metallurgy Molecular Nanotechnology Polymers Semiconductors Surfaces Computer AI Computer Cybersecurity Data Networks Robotics Software Engineering education Bachelor of Engineering Bachelor of Science Master's degree Doctorate Graduate certificate Engineer's degree Licensed engineer Related topics Engineer Glossaries Engineering A–L M–Z Aerospace engineering Civil engineering Electrical and electronics engineering Mechanical engineering Structural engineering Other Agricultural Audio Automation Biomedical Bioinformatics Clinical Health technology Pharmaceutical Rehabilitation Building services MEP Design Explosives Facilities Fire Forensic Climate Geomatics Graphics Industrial Information Instrumentation Instrumentation and control Logistics Management Mathematics Mechatronics Military Nuclear Ontology Packaging Physics Privacy Safety Security Survey Sustainability Systems Textile Category Commons Wikiproject Portal v t e Branches of biology Abiogenesis Aerobiology Agronomy Agrostology Anatomy Anthropogeny Anthropology Astrobiology Bacteriology Biochemistry Biogeography Biogeology Bioinformatics Biological engineering Biomathematics Biomechanics Biophysics Biosemiotics Biostatistics Biotechnology Botany Cell biology Cellular microbiology Chemical biology Chronobiology Cognitive biology Computational biology Conservation biology Cryobiology Cytogenetics Dendrology Developmental biology Ecological genetics Ecology Embryology Epidemiology Epigenetics Evolutionary biology Freshwater biology Generative biology Genetics Genomics Geobiology Gerontology Herpetology Histology Human biology Ichthyology Immunology Lipidology Mammalogy Marine biology Microbiology Molecular biology Mycology Neontology Neuroscience Nutrition Ornithology Osteology Paleontology Parasitology Pathology Pharmacology Photobiology Phycology Phylogenetics Physiology Pomology Primatology Proteomics Protistology Quantum biology Relational biology Reproductive biology Sociobiology Structural biology Synthetic biology Systematics Systems biology Taxonomy Teratology Toxicology Virology Virophysics Welfare biology Xenobiology Zoology See also History of biology Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine Timeline of biology and organic chemistry Authority control databases National United States Czech Republic Israel Other NARA Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Biological_engineering&oldid=1298780653 " Category : Biological engineering Hidden categories: CS1 maint: location missing publisher Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Wikipedia articles needing clarification from November 2017 All Wikipedia articles needing clarification All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2025 Articles with unsourced statements from May 2025 Articles with unsourced statements from April 2023 Articles with unsourced statements from April 2025 This page was last edited on 4 July 2025, at 16:58 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Biological engineering 41 languages Add topic

