Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Name 2 In the limbic system 3 Anatomy 4 Neuroanatomy Toggle Neuroanatomy subsection 4.1 Circuitry 4.2 Subfields 5 Function Toggle Function subsection 5.1 Theories 5.2 Role in memory 5.2.1 Between systems model 5.3 Role in spatial memory and navigation 5.4 Role in approach-avoidance conflict processing 5.5 Role in social memory 6 Physiology Toggle Physiology subsection 6.1 Hippocampal theta rhythm 6.2 Sharp waves 6.3 Long-term potentiation 7 Research 8 Clinical significance Toggle Clinical significance subsection 8.1 Aging 8.2 Dementia 8.3 Stress 8.3.1 PTSD 8.3.2 Transient global amnesia 8.4 Epilepsy 8.5 Schizophrenia 8.6 Microcephaly 9 Other animals Toggle Other animals subsection 9.1 Other vertebrates 9.1.1 Fish 9.1.2 Birds 9.2 Insects and molluscs 10 See also 11 Additional images 12 References 13 External links Toggle the table of contents Hippocampus 58 languages العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা Български Bosanski Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Кыргызча Latina Lietuvių Magyar Македонски മലയാളം مصرى Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Tagalog తెలుగు ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt Winaray 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Vertebrate brain region This article is about the section in the brain. For the fish genus, see Seahorse . For the mythological creature, see Hippocampus (mythology) . For other uses, see Hippocampus (disambiguation) .

Hippocampus Humans have two hippocampi, one in each hemisphere of the brain . They are located in the medial temporal lobe of the brain. In this lateral view of the human brain , the frontal lobe is at the left, the occipital lobe at the right, and the temporal and parietal lobes have largely been removed to reveal one of the hippocampi underneath.

Hippocampus (lowest pink region) as part of the limbic system Details Part of Temporal lobe Identifiers Latin hippocampus MeSH D006624 NeuroNames 3157 NeuroLex ID birnlex_721 TA98 A14.1.09.321 TA2 5518 FMA 275020 Anatomical terms of neuroanatomy [ edit on Wikidata ] The hippocampus ( pl.

: hippocampi ; via Latin from Greek ἱππόκαμπος , ' seahorse '), also hippocampus proper ,  is a major component of the brain of humans and many other vertebrates . In the human brain the hippocampus, the dentate gyrus , and the subiculum are components of the hippocampal formation located in the limbic system . 
The hippocampus plays important roles in the consolidation of information from short-term memory to long-term memory , and in spatial memory that enables navigation . In humans and other primates the hippocampus is located in the archicortex , one of the three regions of allocortex , in each hemisphere with direct neural projections to,  and reciprocal indirect projections from the neocortex . The hippocampus, as the medial pallium , is a structure found in all vertebrates.

In Alzheimer's disease (and other forms of dementia ), the hippocampus is one of the first regions of the brain to be damaged; short-term memory loss and disorientation are included among the early symptoms. Damage to the hippocampus can also result from oxygen starvation ( hypoxia ), encephalitis , or medial temporal lobe epilepsy . People with extensive, bilateral hippocampal damage may experience anterograde amnesia : the inability to form and retain new memories .

Since different neuronal cell types are neatly organized into layers in the hippocampus, it has frequently been used as a model system for studying neurophysiology . The form of neural plasticity known as long-term potentiation (LTP) was initially discovered to occur in the hippocampus and has often been studied in this structure. LTP is widely believed to be one of the main neural mechanisms by which memories are stored in the brain.

Using rodents as model organisms , the hippocampus has been studied extensively as part of a brain system responsible for spatial memory and navigation. Many neurons in the rat and mouse hippocampi respond as place cells : that is, they fire bursts of action potentials when the animal passes through a specific part of its environment. Hippocampal place cells interact extensively with head direction cells , whose activity acts as an inertial compass, and conjecturally with grid cells in the neighboring entorhinal cortex .

Name [ edit ] The human hippocampus and fornix (left) compared with a seahorse (right) [ 1 ] The earliest description of the ridge running along the floor of the inferior horn of the lateral ventricle comes from the Venetian anatomist Julius Caesar Aranzi (1587), who likened it first to a silkworm and then to a seahorse ( Latin hippocampus , from Greek ἱππόκαμπος (latinised: ìppókampos ) from ἵππος ( ippos ), 'horse' + κάμπος ( kámpos ), 'sea monster').

[ 2 ] The German anatomist Johann Georg Duvernoy (1729), the first to illustrate the structure, also wavered between "seahorse" and "silkworm". "Ram's horn" was proposed by the Danish anatomist Jacob Winsløw in 1732; and a decade later his fellow Parisian, the surgeon de Garengeot, used cornu Ammonis – horn of Amun , [ 3 ] after the ancient Egyptian god who was often represented as having a ram's head.

[ 4 ] Ammon is the Greek name for Amun.

[ 5 ] The head region of the hippocampus is enlarged, and presents two or three rounded elevations or foot-like digitations, and hence it was named the pes hippocampi ( pes meaning foot ).

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] Later this part was described as pes hippocampi major , with an adjacent bulge in the occipital horn of the lateral ventricle , described as pes hippocampi minor later renamed as the calcar avis .

[ 3 ] [ 8 ] In 1786 Félix Vicq-d'Azyr published an authoritative description naming just the hippocampus but the term remained largely unused with no description of any function proposed until in the middle of the 20th century it was associated with memory.

[ 2 ] Mayer mistakenly used the term hippopotamus in 1779, and was followed by some other authors until Karl Friedrich Burdach resolved this error in 1829. In 1861 the hippocampus minor became the center of a dispute over human evolution between Thomas Henry Huxley and Richard Owen , satirized as the Great Hippocampus Question . The term hippocampus minor fell from use in anatomy textbooks and was officially removed in the Nomina Anatomica of 1895.

[ 9 ] Today, the structure is just called the hippocampus, with the term cornu Ammonis (that is, 'Ammon's horn')  surviving in the names of the hippocampal subfields CA1–CA4.

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] [ 12 ] In the limbic system [ edit ] Hippocampus in the limbic system The hippocampus is one of the structures of the limbic lobe , first described by Broca in 1878, as the cortical areas that line the deep edge of the cerebral cortex .

[ 13 ] The limbic lobe is the main component of the limbic system .

[ 14 ] The cingulate gyrus , and the parahippocampal gyrus are the two main parts of the described lobe, which had been largely associated with olfaction .

[ 13 ] Many studies later culminating in work by Papez , and MacLean , the involvement of other interacting brain regions associated with emotion was recognized.

[ 14 ] The hippocampus is anatomically connected to parts of the brain that are involved with emotional behavior, including the septal area , the hypothalamic mammillary bodies , and the anterior nuclear complex in the thalamus . MacLean proposed that the associated structures of the limbic lobe be included in what he termed as the limbic system .

[ 14 ] Anatomy [ edit ] Main article: Hippocampus anatomy Cross-section of cerebral hemisphere showing structure and location of hippocampus Coronal section of the brain of a macaque monkey, showing hippocampal formation  (circled) The hippocampus is a five centimeter long ridge of gray matter tissue within the parahippocampal gyrus that can only be seen when the gyrus is opened.

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] The hippocampus is an inward fold of three-layered archicortex (one of three regions of the allocortex ) into the medial temporal lobe of the brain, where it elevates into the floor of each lateral ventricle inferior horn .

[ 17 ] [ 18 ] [ 19 ] [ 20 ] The hippocampus stretches along its anterior-posterior axis, from the amygdala to the splenium of the corpus callosum , with the head, body, and tail regions as subdivisions of this axis.

[ 21 ] [ 15 ] The dentate gyrus , CA subfields, fimbria , and subiculum are divisions across the short axis, the proximal-distal axis.

[ 21 ] The hippocampal formation refers to the hippocampus, and its related adjoining parts to include the dentate gyrus, the subiculum, the presubiculum , parasubiculum , and the entorhinal cortex .

[ 17 ] Sometimes the subiculum, presubiculum, and parasubiculum are grouped together as the subicular complex , but the regions are neuroanatomically distinct. Some sources may only include the hippocampus, dentate gyrus, and subiculum, being regions of the hippocampal three-layered archicortex.

[ 17 ] But the six regions are linked together serially by almost unidirectional neural pathways.

[ 17 ] Other sources include the indusium griseum , gyrus fasciolaris , the medial and longitudinal striae , and uncus , and exclude subicular regions.

[ 22 ] [ 23 ] The neural layout and pathways within the hippocampal formation are very similar in all mammals.

[ 19 ] The hippocampus has a generally similar appearance across the range of mammals, from egg-laying mammals such as the echidna , to humans and other primates .

[ 24 ] The hippocampal-size-to-body-size ratio broadly increases, being about twice as large for primates as for the echidna. It does not, however, increase at anywhere close to the rate of the neocortex -to-body-size ratio. Therefore, the hippocampus takes up a much larger fraction of the cortical mantle in rodents than in primates. In adult humans the volume of the hippocampus on each side of the brain is about 3.0 to 3.5 cm 3 as compared to 320 to 420 cm 3 for the volume of the neocortex.

[ 25 ] There is also a general relationship between the size of the hippocampus and spatial memory. When comparisons are made between similar species, those that have a greater capacity for spatial memory tend to have larger hippocampal volumes.

[ 26 ] Neuroanatomy [ edit ] The hippocampus, and dentate gyrus that is folded into the hippocampal archicortex have the shape of a curved, rolled-up tube. The curve of the hippocampus  (known as cornu Ammonis ) uses the initial letters CA to name the hippocampal subfields CA1-CA4 . CA4 is in fact the polymorphic layer or hilus of the dentate gyrus, but CA4 is still sometimes in use to describe the part of CA3 that inserts between the dentate gyrus regions or blades .

[ 17 ] [ 27 ] It can be distinguished as an area where the cortex narrows into a single layer of densely packed pyramidal neurons , which curl into a tight U shape. One edge of the "U" is CA4, the hilus of the dentate gyrus. This is embedded into the backward-facing, flexed dentate gyrus. In humans the hippocampus is described as having an anterior and posterior part; in other primates they are termed rostral and caudal , and in rodent literature they are the ventral and dorsal part.

[ 28 ] Both parts are of similar composition but belong to different neural circuits .

[ 29 ] The dentate gyrus combined with other hippocampal regions form a banana-like structure, with the two hippocampi joined at the stems by the commissure of fornix (also called the hippocampal commissure).

[ 19 ] [ 30 ] In primates, the part of the hippocampus at the bottom, near the base of the temporal lobe , is much broader than the part at the top. This means that in cross-section the hippocampus can show a number of different shapes, depending on the angle and location of the cut.

[ 31 ] In a cross-section of the hippocampus, including the dentate gyrus, several layers will be shown. The dentate gyrus has three layers of cells – the outer molecular layer , the middle granular layer , and the inner polymorphic layer also known as the hilus .

[ 32 ] The CA3 subfield has the following cell layers known as strata: lacunosum-moleculare, radiatum, lucidum, pyramidal, and oriens. CA2 and CA1 also have these layers except the lucidum stratum .

[ 33 ] The input to the hippocampus (from varying cortical and subcortical structures) comes from the entorhinal cortex via the perforant path .

[ 34 ] The entorhinal cortex (EC) is strongly and reciprocally connected with many cortical and subcortical structures as well as with the brainstem. Different thalamic nuclei , (from the anterior and midline groups), the medial septal nucleus , [ 35 ] the supramammillary nucleus of the hypothalamus, and the raphe nuclei and locus coeruleus of the brainstem all send axons to the EC, so that it serves as the interface between the neocortex and the other connections, and the hippocampus.

[ 34 ] The EC is located in the parahippocampal gyrus , a cortical region adjacent to the hippocampus.

[ 36 ] This gyrus conceals the hippocampus. The parahippocampal gyrus is adjacent to the perirhinal cortex , which plays an important role in the visual recognition of complex objects. There is also substantial evidence that it makes a contribution to memory, which can be distinguished from the contribution of the hippocampus. It is apparent that complete amnesia occurs only when both the hippocampus and the parahippocampus are damaged.

[ 36 ] Circuitry [ edit ] Basic circuit of the hippocampus, as drawn by Ramón y Cajal . DG: dentate gyrus . Sub: subiculum . EC: entorhinal cortex The major input to the hippocampus is through the entorhinal cortex (EC), whereas its major output is via CA1 to the subiculum.

[ 37 ] Information reaches CA1 via two main pathways, direct and indirect. Axons from the EC that originate in layer III are the origin of the direct perforant pathway and form synapses on the very distal apical dendrites of CA1 neurons. Conversely, axons originating from layer II are the origin of the indirect pathway, and information reaches CA1 via the trisynaptic circuit . In the initial part of this pathway, the axons project through the perforant pathway to the granule cells of the dentate gyrus (first synapse). From then, the information follows via the mossy cell fibers to CA3 (second synapse). From there, CA3 axons called Schaffer collaterals leave the deep part of the cell body and loop up to the apical dendrites and then extend to CA1 (third synapse).

[ 37 ] Axons from CA1 then project back to the entorhinal cortex, completing the circuit.

[ 38 ] Basket cells in CA3 receive excitatory input from the pyramidal cells and then give an inhibitory feedback to the pyramidal cells. This recurrent inhibition is a simple feedback circuit that can dampen excitatory responses in the hippocampus. The pyramidal cells give a recurrent excitation which is an important mechanism found in some memory processing microcircuits.

[ 39 ] Several other connections play important roles in hippocampal function.

[ 19 ] Beyond the output to the EC, additional output pathways go to other cortical areas including the prefrontal cortex . A major output goes via the fornix to the lateral septal area and to the mammillary body of the hypothalamus (which the fornix interconnects with the hippocampus).

[ 16 ] The hippocampus receives modulatory input from the serotonin , norepinephrine , and dopamine systems, and from the nucleus reuniens of the thalamus to field CA1. A very important projection comes from the medial septal nucleus, which sends cholinergic , and gamma amino butyric acid (GABA) stimulating fibers (GABAergic fibers) to all parts of the hippocampus. The inputs from the medial septal nucleus play a key role in controlling the physiological state of the hippocampus; destruction of this nucleus abolishes the hippocampal theta rhythm and severely impairs certain types of memory.

[ 40 ] Subfields [ edit ] Hippocampal subregions, and subfields Drawing by Italian pathologist Camillo Golgi of a hippocampus stained using silver nitrate Hippocampal subfields , and subregions, head, body, and tail, are functionally and anatomically differentiated, and connect differently to other brain regions.

[ 41 ] [ 42 ] Their cells are morphologically different.

[ 43 ] They also have different levels of vulnerability to disease.

[ 41 ] In humans the head of the hippocampus is termed the anterior hippocampus, the body is the intermediate hippocampus, and the tail the posterior hippocampus. The subregions all serve different functions, project with different neural pathways , and have varying numbers of place cells .

[ 44 ] (In other primates the terms used are rostral and caudal, and in rodents they are termed ventral and dorsal).

[ 28 ] The posterior hippocampus serves for spatial memory, verbal memory , and learning of conceptual information. Using the radial arm maze in rats, lesions in the dorsal hippocampus were shown to cause spatial memory impairment. Its projecting pathways include the medial septal nucleus , and supramammillary nucleus .

[ 45 ] In the rat the dorsal hippocampus also has more place cells than both the ventral and intermediate hippocampal regions.

[ 46 ] In the early 20th century, the widely held view was that olfaction was a major hippocampal function.

[ 47 ] This view was argued against, pointing out that the hippocampus was present in some animals such as dolphins and whales , that did not have a sense of smell; and further that lesions in the temporal lobe in dogs had been shown to have no effect on their sense of smell.

[ 47 ] These arguments were concluded in 1947 and held for a few more decades. In 1984, and 1987, studies in the rat showed that the entorhinal cortex receives substantial input from the olfactory bulb, with part of the EC being directly innervated by the lateral olfactory tract .

[ 47 ] Secondary inputs to the EC were also shown to include some from the periamygdaloid and piriform cortices, and CA1 in the ventral hippocampus was shown to sends axons to the main olfactory bulb.

[ 48 ] [ 47 ] It is evident that the hippocampus does have an involvement in memory for odors.

[ 49 ] [ 50 ] The intermediate hippocampus has overlapping characteristics with both the ventral and dorsal hippocampus.

[ 44 ] Studies in 2002, showed that alterations to the ventral hippocampus reduced the amount of information sent to the amygdala by the dorsal and ventral hippocampus, consequently altering fear conditioning in rats.

[ 51 ] In 2007, studies using anterograde tracing methods, located the moderate projections to two primary olfactory cortical areas and prelimbic areas of the medial prefrontal cortex . This region has the smallest number of place cells. The ventral hippocampus functions in fear conditioning and affective processes.

[ 52 ] Function [ edit ] Theories [ edit ] Three main theories of hippocampal function have been in dominance: response inhibition , episodic memory , and spatial cognition . The response inhibition theory (caricatured by John O'Keefe and Lynn Nadel as "slam on the brakes!") was very popular up to the 1960s.

[ 53 ] It was based largely on two observations: first, that animals with hippocampal damage tend to be hyperactive ; second, that animals with hippocampal damage often have difficulty learning to inhibit previously learnt responses, especially if the response requires remaining quiet as in a passive avoidance test. British psychologist Jeffrey Gray developed this line of thought into a complete theory of the role of the hippocampus in anxiety , called the behavioral inhibition system .

[ 54 ] [ 55 ] The second major line of thought relates the hippocampus to memory. Although it had historical precursors, this idea derived its main impetus from a famous report by American neurosurgeon William Beecher Scoville and British-Canadian neuropsychologist Brenda Milner .

[ 56 ] It described the results of surgical destruction of the hippocampi when trying to relieve epileptic seizures in an American man Henry Molaison , known until his death in 2008 as "Patient H.M." [ 57 ] [ 58 ] The unexpected outcome of the surgery was severe anterograde , and partial retrograde amnesia ; Molaison was unable to form new episodic memories after his surgery and could not remember any events that occurred just before his surgery, but he did retain memories of events that occurred many years earlier extending back into his childhood. This case attracted such widespread professional interest that Molaison became the most intensively studied subject in medical history.

[ 57 ] Rats and cognitive maps The third important theory of hippocampal function relates the hippocampus to space, and spatial memory , with the idea of a cognitive map first proposed by American psychologist E.C. Tolman . This theory was followed further by O'Keefe, and in 1971, he and his student Dostrovsky discovered neurons, in the rat hippocampus that seemed to show activity related to the rat's location within its environment. The neurons were described as place cells .

[ 59 ] A book was later produced in 1978, The Hippocampus as a Cognitive Map written by O'Keefe and Nadel.

[ 60 ] It has been generally agreed that the hippocampus plays a key role in spatial coding but the details are widely debated.

[ 61 ] Research has focused on trying to bridge the disconnect between the two main views of hippocampal function as being split between memory and spatial cognition. In some studies, these areas have been expanded to the point of near convergence. In an attempt to reconcile the two disparate views, it is suggested that a broader view of the hippocampal function is taken and seen to have a role that encompasses both the organization of experience ( mental mapping , as per Tolman's original concept in 1948) and the directional behavior seen as being involved in all areas of cognition, so that the function of the hippocampus can be viewed as a broader system that incorporates both the memory and the spatial perspectives in its role that involves the use of a wide scope of cognitive maps.

[ 62 ] [ 63 ] [ 64 ] [ 65 ] This relates to the purposive behaviorism born of Tolman's original goal of identifying the complex cognitive mechanisms and purposes that guided behavior.

[ 66 ] It has also been proposed that the spiking activity of hippocampal neurons is associated spatially, and it was suggested that the mechanisms of memory and planning both evolved from mechanisms of navigation and that their neuronal algorithms were basically the same.

[ 67 ] Many studies have made use of neuroimaging techniques such as functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), and a functional role in approach-avoidance conflict has been noted. The anterior hippocampus is seen to be involved in decision-making under approach-avoidance conflict processing. It is suggested that the memory, spatial cognition, and conflict processing functions may be seen as working together and not mutually exclusive.

[ 68 ] Role in memory [ edit ] See also: Amnesia and Epigenetics in learning and memory The hippocampus is essential for the formation of explicit memory , also known as declarative memory.

Episodic memory , and semantic memory are the two components of explicit memory.

[ 69 ] The hippocampus also encodes emotional context from the amygdala . This is partly why returning to a location where an emotional event occurred may evoke that emotion. There is a deep emotional connection between episodic memories and places.

[ 70 ] Due to bilateral symmetry the brain has a hippocampus in each cerebral hemisphere . If damage to the hippocampus occurs in only one hemisphere, leaving the structure intact in the other hemisphere, the brain can retain near-normal memory functioning.

[ 71 ] Severe damage to the hippocampi in both hemispheres results in profound difficulties in forming new memories ( anterograde amnesia ) and often also affects memories formed before the damage occurred ( retrograde amnesia ). Although the retrograde effect normally extends many years back before the brain damage, in some cases older memories remain. This retention of older memories leads to the idea that consolidation over time involves the transfer of memories out of the hippocampus to other parts of the brain.

[ 72 ] : Ch. 1 Experiments using intrahippocampal transplantation of hippocampal cells in primates with neurotoxic lesions of the hippocampus have shown that the hippocampus is required for the formation and recall, but not the storage, of memories.

[ 73 ] It has been shown that a decrease in the volume of various parts of the hippocampus leads to specific memory impairments. In particular, efficiency of verbal memory retention is related to the anterior parts of the right and left hippocampus. The right head of the hippocampus is more involved in executive functions and regulation during verbal memory recall. The tail of the left hippocampus tends to be closely related to verbal memory capacity.

[ 74 ] Damage to the hippocampus does not affect some types of memory, such as the ability to learn new skills (playing a musical instrument or solving certain types of puzzles, for example). This fact suggests that such abilities depend on different types of memory such as procedural memory in implicit memory function, implicating different brain regions. Furthermore, amnesic patients frequently show implicit memory for experiences even in the absence of conscious knowledge. For example, patients asked to guess which of two faces they have seen most recently may give the correct answer most of the time in spite of stating that they have never seen either of the faces before. Some researchers distinguish between conscious recollection , which depends on the hippocampus, and familiarity , which depends on portions of the medial temporal lobe.

[ 75 ] A study claims to have confirmed that the hippocampus is not associated with implicit memory.

[ 76 ] But other sources say the question is still up for debate (as of 2024).

[ 77 ] When rats are exposed to an intense learning event, they may retain a life-long memory of the event even after a single training session. The memory of such an event appears to be first stored in the hippocampus, but this storage is transient. Much of the long-term storage of the memory seems to take place in the anterior cingulate cortex .

[ 78 ] When such an intense learning event was experimentally applied, more than 5,000 differently methylated DNA regions appeared in the hippocampus neuronal genome of the rats at one hour and at 24 hours after training.

[ 79 ] These alterations in methylation pattern occurred at many genes that were down-regulated , often due to the formation of new 5-methylcytosine sites in CpG rich regions of the genome. Furthermore, many other genes were upregulated , likely often due to the removal of methyl groups from previously existing 5-methylcytosines (5mCs) in DNA. Demethylation of 5mC can be carried out by several proteins acting in concert, including TET enzymes [ 80 ] [ 81 ] as well as enzymes of the DNA base excision repair pathway.

[ 82 ] Between systems model [ edit ] The between-systems memory interference model describes the inhibition of non-hippocampal systems of memory during concurrent hippocampal activity.

[ 83 ] Specifically it was found that when the hippocampus was inactive, non-hippocampal systems located elsewhere in the brain were found to consolidate memory in its place. However, when the hippocampus was reactivated, memory traces consolidated by non-hippocampal systems were not recalled, suggesting that the hippocampus interferes with long-term memory consolidation in other memory-related systems.

[ 84 ] One of the major implications that this model illustrates is the dominant effects of the hippocampus on non-hippocampal networks when information is incongruent. With this information in mind, future directions could lead towards the study of these non-hippocampal memory systems through hippocampal inactivation, further expanding the labile constructs of memory. Additionally, many theories of memory are holistically based around the hippocampus. This model could add beneficial information to hippocampal research and memory theories such as the multiple trace theory .

[ 85 ] [ 86 ] Lastly, the between-system memory interference model allows researchers to evaluate their results on a multiple-systems model , suggesting that some effects may not be simply mediated by one portion of the brain.

[ 87 ] Role in spatial memory and navigation [ edit ] Main article: Place cell Spatial firing patterns of eight place cells recorded from the CA1 layer of a rat. The rat ran back and forth along an elevated track, stopping at each end to eat a small food reward. Dots indicate positions where action potentials were recorded, with color indicating which neuron emitted that action potential.

Hippocampal connections in spatial cognition There are several types of navigational cells in the brain that are either in the hippocampus itself or are strongly connected to it. They include the place cells , speed cells present in the medial entorhinal cortex , head direction cells , grid cells , and boundary cells .

[ 61 ] [ 88 ] Together these cells form a network that serves as spatial memory .

The first of these types of cell discovered in the 1970s were the place cells, which led to the idea of the hippocampus acting to give a neural representation of the environment in a cognitive map .

[ 60 ] When the hippocampus is dysfunctional, orientation is affected; people may have difficulty in remembering how they arrived at a location and how to proceed further. Getting lost is a common symptom of amnesia.

[ 89 ] Studies with animals have shown that an intact hippocampus is required for initial learning and long-term retention of some spatial memory tasks, in particular ones that require finding the way to a hidden goal.

[ 90 ] [ 91 ] [ 92 ] [ 93 ] Studies on freely moving rats and mice have shown many hippocampal neurons to act as place cells that cluster in place fields , and these fire bursts of action potentials when the animal passes through a particular location.

[ 94 ] Hippocampal place cells interact extensively with head direction cells, whose activity acts as an inertial compass, and conjecturally with grid cells in the neighboring entorhinal cortex.

[ 95 ] Speed cells are thought to provide input to the hippocampal grid cells.

[ 96 ] This place-related neural activity in the hippocampus has also been reported in monkeys that were moved around a room whilst in a restraint chair.

[ 97 ] However, the place cells may have fired in relation to where the monkey was looking rather than to its actual location in the room.

[ 98 ] Over many years, many studies have been carried out on place-responses in rodents, which have given a large amount of information.

[ 61 ] Place cell responses are shown by pyramidal cells in the hippocampus and by granule cells in the dentate gyrus . Other cells in smaller proportion are inhibitory interneurons , and these often show place-related variations in their firing rate that are much weaker. There is little, if any, spatial topography in the representation; in general, cells lying next to each other in the hippocampus have uncorrelated spatial firing patterns . Place cells are typically almost silent when a rat is moving around outside the place field but reach sustained rates as high as 40 Hz when the rat is near the center. Neural activity sampled from 30 to 40 randomly chosen place cells carries enough information to allow a rat's location to be reconstructed with high confidence. The size of place fields varies in a gradient along the length of the hippocampus, with cells at the dorsal end showing the smallest fields, cells near the center showing larger fields, and cells at the ventral tip showing fields that cover the entire environment.

[ 61 ] In some cases, the firing rate of hippocampal cells depends not only on place but also the direction a rat is moving, the destination toward which it is traveling, or other task-related variables.

[ 99 ] The firing of place cells is timed in relation to local theta waves , a spatiotemporal process termed phase precession .

[ 100 ] [ 101 ] Cells with location-specific firing patterns have been reported during a study of people with drug-resistant epilepsy . They were undergoing an invasive procedure to localize the source of their seizures , with a view to surgical resection. They had diagnostic electrodes implanted in their hippocampi and then used a computer to move around in a virtual reality town.

[ 102 ] Similar brain imaging studies in navigation have shown the hippocampus to be active.

[ 103 ] A study was carried out on taxi drivers. London's black cab drivers need to learn the locations of a large number of places and the fastest routes between them in order to pass a strict test known as The Knowledge in order to gain a license to operate. A study showed that the posterior part of the hippocampus is larger in these drivers than in the general public, and that a positive correlation exists between the length of time served as a driver and the increase in the volume of this part. It was also found the total volume of the hippocampus was unchanged, as the increase seen in the posterior part was made at the expense of the anterior part, which showed a relative decrease in size. There have been no reported adverse effects from this disparity in hippocampal proportions.

[ 104 ] Another study showed opposite findings in blind individuals. The anterior part of the right hippocampus was larger and the posterior part was smaller, compared with sighted individuals.

[ 105 ] Role in approach-avoidance conflict processing [ edit ] Further information: Reward system Approach-avoidance conflict happens when a situation is presented that can either be rewarding or punishing, and the ensuing decision-making has been associated with anxiety .

[ 106 ] fMRI findings from studies in approach-avoidance decision-making found evidence for a functional role that is not explained by either long-term memory or spatial cognition. Overall findings showed that the anterior hippocampus is sensitive to conflict, and that it may be part of a larger cortical and subcortical network seen to be important in decision-making in uncertain conditions.

[ 106 ] A review makes reference to a number of studies that show the involvement of the hippocampus in conflict tasks. The authors suggest that one challenge is to understand how conflict processing relates to the functions of spatial navigation and memory and how all of these functions need not be mutually exclusive.

[ 68 ] Role in social memory [ edit ] Further information: Collective memory The hippocampus has received renewed attention for its role in social memory . Epileptic human subjects with depth electrodes in the left posterior, left anterior or right anterior hippocampus demonstrate distinct, individual cell responses when presented with faces of presumably recognizable famous people.

[ 107 ] Associations among facial and vocal identity were similarly mapped to the hippocampus of rhesus monkeys. Single neurons in the CA1 and CA3 responded strongly to social stimulus recognition by MRI. The CA2 was not distinguished, and may likely comprise a proportion of the claimed CA1 cells in the study.

[ 108 ] The dorsal CA2 and ventral CA1 subregions of the hippocampus have been implicated in social memory processing. Genetic inactivation of CA2 pyramidal neurons leads to pronounced loss of social memory, while maintaining intact sociability in mice.

[ 109 ] Similarly, ventral CA1 pyramidal neurons have also been demonstrated as critical for social memory under optogenetic control in mice.

[ 110 ] [ 111 ] Physiology [ edit ] Examples of rat hippocampal EEG and CA1 neural activity in the theta (awake/behaving) and LIA ( slow-wave sleep ) modes. Each plot shows 20 seconds of data, with a hippocampal EEG trace at the top, spike rasters from 40 simultaneously recorded CA1 pyramidal cells in the middle (each raster line represents a different cell), and a plot of running speed at the bottom. The top plot represents a time period during which the rat was actively searching for scattered food pellets. For the bottom plot the rat was asleep.

The hippocampus shows two major modes of activity, each associated with a distinct pattern of neural population activity and waves of electrical activity as measured by an electroencephalogram (EEG). These modes are named after the EEG patterns associated with them: theta and large irregular activity (LIA). The main characteristics described below are for the rat, which is the animal most extensively studied.

[ 112 ] The theta mode appears during states of active, alert behavior (especially locomotion), and also during REM sleep (dreaming).

[ 113 ] In the theta mode, the EEG is dominated by large regular waves with a frequency range of 6 to 9 Hz , and the main groups of hippocampal neurons ( pyramidal cells and granule cells ) show sparse population activity, which means that in any short time interval, the great majority of cells are silent, while the small remaining fraction fire at relatively high rates, up to 50 spikes in one second for the most active of them.

[ 114 ] [ 115 ] An active cell typically stays active for half a second to a few seconds. As the rat behaves, the active cells fall silent and new cells become active, but the overall percentage of active cells remains more or less constant. In many situations, cell activity is determined largely by the spatial location of the animal, [ 116 ] but other behavioral variables also clearly influence it.

The LIA mode appears during slow-wave sleep (non-dreaming), and also during states of waking immobility such as resting or eating.

[ 113 ] In the LIA mode, the EEG is dominated by sharp waves that are randomly timed large deflections of the EEG signal lasting for 25–50 milliseconds. Sharp waves are frequently generated in sets, with sets containing up to 5 or more individual sharp waves and lasting up to 500 ms. The spiking activity of neurons within the hippocampus is highly correlated with sharp wave activity. Most neurons decrease their firing rate between sharp waves; however, during a sharp wave, there is a dramatic increase in firing rate in up to 10% of the hippocampal population.

[ 117 ] These two hippocampal activity modes can be seen in primates as well as rats, with the exception that it has been difficult to see robust theta rhythmicity in the primate hippocampus. There are, however, qualitatively similar sharp waves and similar state-dependent changes in neural population activity.

[ 118 ] Hippocampal theta rhythm [ edit ] Main article: Theta wave Example of a one-second EEG theta wave The underlying currents producing the theta wave are generated mainly by densely packed neural layers of the entorhinal cortex, CA3, and the dendrites of pyramidal cells. The theta wave is one of the largest signals seen on EEG, and is known as the hippocampal theta rhythm.

[ 119 ] In some situations the EEG is dominated by regular waves at 3 to 10 Hz, often continuing for many seconds. These reflect subthreshold membrane potentials and strongly modulate the spiking of hippocampal neurons and synchronize across the hippocampus in a travelling wave pattern.

[ 120 ] The trisynaptic circuit is a relay of neurotransmission in the hippocampus that interacts with many brain regions. From rodent studies it has been proposed that the trisynaptic circuit generates the hippocampal theta rhythm.

[ 121 ] Theta rhythmicity previously clearly shown in rabbits and rodents has also been shown in humans.

[ 122 ] In rats (the animals that have been the most extensively studied), theta is seen mainly in two conditions: first, when an animal is walking or in some other way actively interacting with its surroundings; second, during REM sleep .

[ 123 ] The function of theta has not yet been convincingly explained although numerous theories have been proposed.

[ 112 ] The most popular hypothesis has been to relate it to learning and memory. An example would be the phase with which theta rhythms, at the time of stimulation of a neuron, shape the effect of that stimulation upon its synapses. What is meant here is that theta rhythms may affect those aspects of learning and memory that are dependent upon synaptic plasticity .

[ 124 ] It is well established that lesions of the medial septum – the central node of the theta system – cause severe disruptions of memory.

[ 125 ] However, the medial septum is more than just the controller of theta; it is also the main source of cholinergic projections to the hippocampus.

[ 19 ] It has not been established that septal lesions exert their effects specifically by eliminating the theta rhythm.

[ 126 ] Sharp waves [ edit ] Main article: Sharp waves and ripples During sleep or during resting, when an animal is not engaged with its surroundings, the hippocampal EEG shows a pattern of irregular slow waves, somewhat larger in amplitude than theta waves. This pattern is occasionally interrupted by large surges called sharp waves .

[ 127 ] These events are associated with bursts of spike activity lasting 50 to 100 milliseconds in pyramidal cells of CA3 and CA1. They are also associated with short-lived high-frequency EEG oscillations called "ripples", with frequencies in the range 150 to 200 Hz in rats, and together they are known as sharp waves and ripples . Sharp waves are most frequent during sleep when they occur at an average rate of around 1 per second (in rats) but in a very irregular temporal pattern. Sharp waves are less frequent during inactive waking states and are usually smaller. Sharp waves have also been observed in humans and monkeys. In macaques, sharp waves are robust but do not occur as frequently as in rats.

[ 118 ] Sharp waves appear to be associated with memory.

[ 128 ] Numerous later studies, have reported that when hippocampal place cells have overlapping spatial firing fields (and therefore often fire in near-simultaneity), they tend to show correlated activity during sleep following the behavioral session. This enhancement of correlation, commonly known as reactivation , has been found to occur mainly during sharp waves.

[ 129 ] It has been proposed that sharp waves are, in fact, reactivations of neural activity patterns that were memorized during behavior, driven by strengthening of synaptic connections within the hippocampus.

[ 130 ] This idea forms a key component of the "two-stage memory" theory, [ 131 ] advocated by Buzsáki and others, which proposes that memories are stored within the hippocampus during behavior and then later transferred to the neocortex during sleep. Sharp waves in Hebbian theory are seen as persistently repeated stimulations by presynaptic cells, of postsynaptic cells that are suggested to drive synaptic changes in the cortical targets of hippocampal output pathways.

[ 131 ] Suppression of sharp waves and ripples in sleep or during immobility can interfere with memories expressed at the level of the behavior, [ 132 ] [ 133 ] nonetheless, the newly formed CA1 place cell code can re-emerge even after a sleep with abolished sharp waves and ripples, in spatially non-demanding tasks.

[ 134 ] Long-term potentiation [ edit ] See also: Long-term potentiation and Sleep and learning Since at least the time of Ramon y Cajal (1852–1934), psychologists have speculated that the brain stores memory by altering the strength of connections between neurons that are simultaneously active.

[ 135 ] This idea was formalized by Donald Hebb in 1949, [ 136 ] but for many years remained unexplained. In 1973, Tim Bliss and Terje Lømo described a phenomenon in the rabbit hippocampus that appeared to meet Hebb's specifications: a change in synaptic responsiveness induced by brief strong activation and lasting for hours or days or longer.

[ 137 ] This phenomenon was soon referred to as long-term potentiation (LTP). As a candidate mechanism for long-term memory , LTP has since been studied intensively, and a great deal has been learned about it. However, the complexity and variety of the intracellular signaling cascades that can trigger LTP is acknowledged as preventing a more complete understanding.

[ 138 ] The hippocampus is a particularly favorable site for studying LTP because of its densely packed and sharply defined layers of neurons, but similar types of activity-dependent synaptic change have also been observed in many other brain areas.

[ 139 ] The best-studied form of LTP has been seen in CA1 of the hippocampus and occurs at synapses that terminate on dendritic spines and use the neurotransmitter glutamate .

[ 138 ] The synaptic changes depend on a special type of glutamate receptor , the N -methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor , a cell surface receptor which has the special property of allowing calcium to enter the postsynaptic spine only when presynaptic activation and postsynaptic depolarization occur at the same time.

[ 140 ] Drugs that interfere with NMDA receptors block LTP and have major effects on some types of memory, especially spatial memory.

Genetically modified mice that are modified to disable the LTP mechanism, also generally show severe memory deficits.

[ 140 ] Research [ edit ] A brain implant for use as a hippocampal prosthesis has been the subject of research since the early 2000s.

[ 141 ] It was reported in 2018 that a nonlinear multi-input multi-output model (MIMO) had been developed that in some studies, had been shown to restore and improve memory function.

[ 142 ] This has been followed by a modified version known as the memory decoding model (MDM).

[ 143 ] This model has been shown to have the potential use in significant modification of memory. A study concluded that further research could be pointed towards an evaluation of both models, in particular focusing on the hippocampal theta wave input.

[ 144 ] Clinical significance [ edit ] Aging [ edit ] See also: Neurobiological effects of physical exercise § Structural growth , Aging brain , and Memory and aging Normal aging is associated with a gradual decline in some types of memory, including episodic memory and working memory (or short-term memory ). Because the hippocampus is thought to play a central role in memory, there has been considerable interest in the possibility that age-related declines could be caused by hippocampal deterioration.

[ 145 ] Some early studies reported substantial loss of neurons in the hippocampus of elderly people , but later studies using more precise techniques found only minimal differences.

[ 145 ] Similarly, some MRI studies have reported shrinkage of the hippocampus in elderly people, but other studies have failed to reproduce this finding. There is, however, a reliable relationship between the size of the hippocampus and memory performance; so that where there is age-related shrinkage, memory performance will be impaired.

[ 145 ] There are also reports that memory tasks tend to produce less hippocampal activation in the elderly than in the young.

[ 145 ] Furthermore, a randomized control trial published in 2011 found that aerobic exercise could increase the size of the hippocampus in adults aged 55 to 80 and also improve spatial memory.

[ 146 ] Dementia [ edit ] In Alzheimer's disease (and other forms of dementia ), the hippocampus is one of the first regions of the brain to be damaged; [ 147 ] short-term memory loss and disorientation are included among the early symptoms.

Amyloid beta deposits begin in the frontal lobes before the signs of neurofibrillary tangles are seen in the hippocampus.

[ 148 ] Damage to the hippocampus can also result from oxygen starvation ( hypoxia ), encephalitis , or medial temporal lobe epilepsy . Extensive, bilateral hippocampal damage may cause anterograde amnesia : the inability to form and retain new memories .

Dementia is very often caused by cerebral ischemia that is believed to trigger changes in the hippocampus. Changes in CA1 , the hippocampal area that underlies episodic memory , cause episodic memory impairment, the earliest symptom of post-ischemic dementia.

[ 149 ] Stress [ edit ] The hippocampus contains high levels of glucocorticoid receptors , which make it more vulnerable to long-term stress than most other brain areas .

[ 150 ] There is evidence that humans having experienced severe, long-lasting traumatic stress show atrophy of the hippocampus more than of other parts of the brain.

[ 151 ] These effects show up in post-traumatic stress disorder , [ 152 ] and they may contribute to the hippocampal atrophy reported in schizophrenia [ 153 ] and severe depression .

[ 154 ] Anterior hippocampal volume in children is positively correlated with parental family income and this correlation is thought to be mediated by income-related stress.

[ 155 ] A study has revealed atrophy as a result of depression, but this can be stopped with anti-depressants even if they are not effective in relieving other symptoms.

[ 156 ] Chronic stress resulting in elevated levels of glucocorticoids , notably of cortisol , is seen to be a cause of neuronal atrophy in the hippocampus. This atrophy results in a smaller hippocampal volume which is also seen in Cushing's syndrome . The higher levels of cortisol in Cushing's syndrome is usually the result of medications taken for other conditions.

[ 157 ] [ 158 ] Neuronal loss also occurs as a result of impaired neurogenesis. Another factor that contributes to a smaller hippocampal volume is that of dendritic retraction where dendrites are shortened in length and reduced in number, in response to increased glucocorticoids. This dendritic retraction is reversible.

[ 158 ] After treatment with medication to reduce cortisol in Cushing's syndrome, the hippocampal volume is seen to be restored by as much as 10%.

[ 157 ] This change is seen to be due to the reforming of the dendrites.

[ 158 ] This dendritic restoration can also happen when stress is removed. There is, however, evidence derived mainly from studies using rats that stress occurring shortly after birth can affect hippocampal function in ways that persist throughout life.

[ 159 ] Sex-specific responses to stress have also been demonstrated in the rat to have an effect on the hippocampus. Chronic stress in the male rat showed dendritic retraction and cell loss in the CA3 region but this was not shown in the female. This was thought to be due to neuroprotective ovarian hormones.

[ 160 ] [ 161 ] In rats, DNA damage increases in the hippocampus under conditions of stress.

[ 162 ] PTSD [ edit ] Some studies shows correlation of reduced hippocampus volume and post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD).

[ 163 ] [ 164 ] A study of Vietnam War combat veterans with PTSD showed a 20% reduction in the volume of their hippocampus compared with veterans with no such symptoms.

[ 165 ] This finding was not replicated in those with chronic PTSD, traumatized at an air show plane crash in 1988 (Ramstein, Germany).

[ 166 ] It is also the case that non-combat twin brothers of Vietnam veterans with PTSD also had smaller hippocampi than other controls, raising questions about the nature of the correlation.

[ 167 ] A 2016 study strengthened the theory that a smaller hippocampus increases the risk for post-traumatic stress disorder, and a larger hippocampus increases the likelihood of efficacious treatment.

[ 168 ] Transient global amnesia [ edit ] Transient global amnesia is a syndrome of unknown cause that results in a sudden and temporary anterograde amnesia and variable past memory loss. An attack usually lasts for up to 24 hours during which time the memory loss is experienced. The only diagnostic evidence of TGA is given by DWI-MRI that shows lesions as small dots in the CA1 subfield.

[ 169 ] [ 170 ] The lesions are detectable from around 24 to 96 hours after symptoms onset, and can be seen to have been resolved at  a six-month follow-up.

[ 171 ] The lesions are between 1 and 5 mm, and can be single or multiple and may be confined to either  hemisphere.

[ 169 ] [ 170 ] Lesions in the dominant hemisphere affect episodic verbal memory and those in the non-dominant hemisphere affect visuospatial memory.

[ 171 ] CA1 lesions shows selective affect over other CA subfields.

[ 172 ] The selective vulnerability of CA1 neurons suggests a cause of metabolic stress that could result from emotional or behavioral stress.

[ 172 ] [ 173 ] Other possible causes have been debated including cerebral venous reflex, arterial ischema, epilepsy, and migraine.

[ 170 ] TGA as a network disease has also been put forward; DTI studies show a decreased connectivity between brain regions that may impact the hippocampus.

[ 170 ] Epilepsy [ edit ] An EEG showing epilepsy right-hippocampal seizure onset An EEG showing epilepsy left-hippocampal seizure onset The hippocampus is one of the few brain regions where new neurons are generated. This process of neurogenesis is confined to the dentate gyrus.

[ 174 ] Neurogenesis can be positively affected by exercise or negatively affected by epileptic seizures .

[ 174 ] Seizures in temporal lobe epilepsy can affect the normal development of new neurons and can cause tissue damage.

Hippocampal sclerosis specific to the mesial temporal lobe, is the most common type of such tissue damage.

[ 175 ] [ 176 ] It is not yet clear, however, whether the epilepsy is usually caused by hippocampal abnormalities or whether the hippocampus is damaged by cumulative effects of seizures.

[ 177 ] However, in experimental settings where repetitive seizures are artificially induced in animals, hippocampal damage is a frequent result. This may be a consequence of the concentration of excitable glutamate receptors in the hippocampus. Hyperexcitability can lead to cytotoxicity and cell death.

[ 158 ] It may also have something to do with the hippocampus being a site of continuous neurogenesis, and to abnormalities in this process.

[ 174 ] [ 158 ] Schizophrenia [ edit ] A reduction in hippocampal volume is well reported in those with schizophrenia.

[ 178 ] [ 179 ] The left hippocampus seems to be affected more than the right.

[ 180 ] The volume reduction is modest but consistent, and can be first seen in the prodromal stage with modest progression shown as the disease advances.

[ 179 ] The reduced volume has been shown to be independent of treatment with antipsychotics. Some studies suggest that hippocampal alterations play a role in causing the psychotic symptoms of schizophrenia.

[ 181 ] [ 182 ] It has been suggested that hippocampal dysfunction might produce an alteration of dopamine release in the basal ganglia , thereby indirectly affecting the integration of information in the prefrontal cortex .

[ 183 ] In those with psychosis the greatest reduction is seen to be in CA3 and CA2 subfields, and a correlation has been made between the reduced volume and memory dysfunction.

[ 179 ] A reduced hippocampal volume has been shown to result in a decreased connectivity between the hippocampus and the prefrontal cortex , with the declarative memory characteristic of hippocampal function becoming selectively impaired.

[ 178 ] The impaired connectivity is evident both at rest and during task-activity .

[ 179 ] Evidence of dysfunctional GABA transmission  has been shown in studies of the whole hippocampus.

[ 179 ] Another noted change in the hippocampus in schizophrenia is a reduced M4 muscarinic cholinergic receptor , but an unaffected M1 receptor .

[ 179 ] Reduced neurogenesis has been shown in the dentate gyrus with a noted reduction in the density of neurons and oligodendrocytes in the dentate gyrus and hilus.

[ 179 ] Hyperactivity in the hippocampus has been suggested to be implicated in schizophrenic psychosis .

[ 179 ] The CA1 subfield is mostly indicated to be affected, and hyperactivity almost exclusively found in the anterior hippocampus.

[ 179 ] It has been suggested that hippocampal dysfunction might produce an alteration of dopamine release in the basal ganglia , thereby indirectly affecting the integration of information in the prefrontal cortex .

[ 184 ] Many post-mortem studies have assessed the hippocampal subfield proteins. Evidence of hyperactivity was a consistent finding.

[ 179 ] In CA1 BDNF (an indication of hyperactivity) was notably increased, but the synaptic protein changes seen in the other subfields were not affected.

[ 179 ] The strongest change was seen in CA3 synaptic anatomy with an increase in the dendritic spines on the apical dendrites of CA3 pyramidal neurons. This was most evident at the site of the entrance of the mossy fiber pathway to CA3 neurons. All three subfields have distinct molecular changes associated with schizophrenia.

[ 179 ] Microcephaly [ edit ] Hippocampus atrophy has been characterized in those with microcephaly .

[ 185 ] Mouse models with Wdr62 mutations which recapitulate human point mutations show a deficiency in hippocampal development, and neurogenesis .

[ 186 ] Other animals [ edit ] Other vertebrates [ edit ] Non-mammalian vertebrates lack a brain structure that looks like the mammalian hippocampus, but they have one that is considered homologous to it. The hippocampus is in essence part of the allocortex. Only mammals have a fully developed cortex, but the structure it evolved from, called the pallium , is present in all vertebrates, even the most primitive ones such as the lamprey or hagfish .

[ 187 ] [ 188 ] The pallium is usually divided into three zones: medial, lateral and dorsal. The medial pallium forms the precursor of the hippocampus. It does not resemble the hippocampus visually because the layers are not warped into an S shape or enfolded by the dentate gyrus, but the homology is indicated by strong chemical and functional affinities. There is evidence that these hippocampal-like structures are involved in spatial cognition in reptiles , and in fish .

[ 189 ] Fish [ edit ] In teleost fish, the forebrain is everted (like an inside-out sock) with structures that lie on the outside, as contrasted with other vertebrate structures that lie in the interior, next to the ventricles.

[ 190 ] One of the consequences of this is that the medial pallium, the hippocampal zone of a typical vertebrate, is thought to correspond to the lateral pallium of a typical fish.

[ 191 ] Several types of fish (particularly goldfish) have been shown experimentally to have strong spatial memory abilities, even forming cognitive maps of the areas they inhabit.

[ 26 ] Studies in goldfish show that damage to both the lateral pallium, and the medial pallium impairs spatial memory coding.

[ 192 ] [ 193 ] It is not clear if the medial pallium plays a similar role in basal vertebrates, such as sharks and rays , or even lampreys and hagfish .

[ 194 ] The dorsolateral pallium of the teleost is considered as homologous to the hippocampus in terrestrial vertebrates.

[ 195 ] In 2023, the goldfish brain was mapped by molecular parcellization showing that its telencephalon subregions were homogeneous to the hippocampal subfields in the mouse.

[ 192 ] Birds [ edit ] See also: Avian pallium In birds, the correspondence is sufficiently well established that most anatomists refer to the medial pallial zone as the "avian hippocampus".

[ 196 ] Numerous species of birds have strong spatial skills, in particular those that cache (store) food. There is evidence that food-caching birds have a larger hippocampus than other types of birds and that damage to the hippocampus causes impairments in spatial memory.

[ 197 ] Insects and molluscs [ edit ] Some types of insects such as cockroaches , and molluscs such as the octopus , also have strong spatial learning and navigation abilities, but these appear to work differently from the mammalian spatial system, suggesting that there is no common evolutionary origin.

Mushroom bodies in insect brains are associated with learning and memory carried out in the mammalian hippocampus.

[ 198 ] The brain of the octopus is arranged in a circle of lobes around the esophagus. The vertical lobe has been shown to be involved in forming long term memory, and is seen to be analogous to the mammalian hippocampus and cerebellum , and also to share some functional features of the mushroom bodies in insects.

[ 199 ] [ 200 ] See also [ edit ] Visual short-term memory Additional images [ edit ] Hippocampus highlighted in green on coronal T1 MRI images Hippocampus highlighted in green on sagittal T1 MRI images Hippocampus highlighted in green on transversal T1 MRI images References [ edit ] This article was submitted to WikiJournal of Medicine for external academic peer review in 2016 ( reviewer reports ). The updated content was reintegrated into the Wikipedia page under a CC-BY-SA-3.0 license ( 2017 ). The version of record as reviewed is: Marion Wright, et al. (11 March 2017).

"The Hippocampus" (PDF) .

WikiJournal of Medicine .

4 (1).

doi : 10.15347/WJM/2017.003 .

ISSN 2002-4436 .

Wikidata Q43997714 .

^ Preparation by László Seress in 1980.

^ a b Tatu L, Bogousslavsky J (December 2022).

"Beasts and Gods: Hippocampal quarrels before memory" .

Rev Neurol (Paris) .

178 (10): 991– 995.

doi : 10.1016/j.neurol.2022.03.022 .

PMID 35927101 .

^ a b Duvernoy HM (2005).

"Introduction" .

The Human Hippocampus (3rd ed.). Berlin: Springer-Verlag. p. 1.

ISBN 978-3-540-23191-2 .

Archived from the original on 2016-08-28 . Retrieved 2016-03-05 .

^ Iniesta I (October 2014). "On the origin of Ammon's horn".

Neurología (English Edition) .

29 (8): 490– 496.

doi : 10.1016/j.nrleng.2012.03.024 .

PMID 22770681 .

^ Pearce JM (September 2001).

"Ammon's horn and the hippocampus" . Historical Note.

Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery, and Psychiatry .

71 (3): 351.

doi : 10.1136/jnnp.71.3.351 .

PMC 1737533 .

PMID 11511709 .

^ "BrainInfo" .

braininfo.rprc.washington.edu .

^ Anand KS, Dhikav V (October 2012).

"Hippocampus in health and disease: An overview" .

Ann Indian Acad Neurol .

15 (4): 239– 46.

doi : 10.4103/0972-2327.104323 .

PMC 3548359 .

PMID 23349586 .

^ Owen CM, Howard A, Binder DK (December 2009). "Hippocampus minor, calcar avis, and the Huxley-Owen debate".

Neurosurgery .

65 (6): 1098– 1104, discussion 1104–1105.

doi : 10.1227/01.neu.0000359535.84445.0b .

PMID 19934969 .

S2CID 19663125 .

^ Gross CG (October 1993). "Hippocampus minor and man's place in nature: a case study in the social construction of neuroanatomy".

Hippocampus .

3 (4): 403– 415.

doi : 10.1002/hipo.450030403 .

PMID 8269033 .

S2CID 15172043 .

^ Pang CC, Kiecker C, O'Brien JT, Noble W, Chang RC (April 2019).

"Ammon's Horn 2 (CA2) of the Hippocampus: A Long-Known Region with a New Potential Role in Neurodegeneration" .

The Neuroscientist .

25 (2): 167– 180.

doi : 10.1177/1073858418778747 .

PMID 29865938 .

S2CID 46929253 .

^ "Search Results for ammon's horn" .

Oxford Reference . Retrieved 9 December 2021 .

^ Colman AM (21 May 2015).

"dentate gyrus" .

A Dictionary of Psychology . Oxford University Press.

doi : 10.1093/acref/9780199657681.001.0001 .

ISBN 978-0-19-965768-1 . Retrieved 10 December 2021 .

^ a b Purves D (2012).

Neuroscience (5th ed.). Sunderland, MA: Sinauer. p. 652.

ISBN 978-0-87893-695-3 .

^ a b c Roxo MR, Franceschini PR, Zubaran C, Kleber FD, Sander JW (2011).

"The limbic system conception and its historical evolution" .

TheScientificWorldJournal .

11 : 2428– 2441.

doi : 10.1100/2011/157150 .

PMC 3236374 .

PMID 22194673 .

^ a b Fogwe LA, Reddy V, Mesfin FB (2025).

"Neuroanatomy, Hippocampus" .

StatPearls . StatPearls Publishing.

PMID 29489273 .

^ a b Purves D (2011).

Neuroscience (5th ed.). Sunderland, MA: Sinauer. pp.

730– 735.

ISBN 978-0-87893-695-3 .

^ a b c d e Morris R, Amaral D (2024).

The Hippocampus Book (2nd ed.). Oxford: Oxford University Press, Incorporated. pp.

49– 50.

ISBN 9780190065324 .

^ Creutzfeldt O (27 April 1995). "The allocortex and limbic system".

Cortex Cerebri: Performance, Structural and Functional Organisation of the Cortex : 486– 540.

doi : 10.1093/acprof:oso/9780198523246.003.0009 .

ISBN 978-0-19-852324-6 .

^ a b c d e Anderson P, Morris R, Amaral, Bliss T, O'Keefe J (2007).

"The hippocampal formation" . In Anderson P, Morris R, Amaral, Bliss T, O'Keefe J (eds.).

The hippocampus book (first ed.). New York: Oxford University Press. pp.

3– 77.

ISBN 978-0195100273 .

Archived from the original on 2020-03-15 . Retrieved 2016-12-15 .

^ Bachevalier J (December 2019).

"Nonhuman primate models of hippocampal development and dysfunction" .

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America .

116 (52): 26210– 26216.

Bibcode : 2019PNAS..11626210B .

doi : 10.1073/pnas.1902278116 .

PMC 6936345 .

PMID 31871159 .

^ a b Sun F, Shuai Y, Wang J, Yan J, Lin B, Li X, et al. (February 2025).

"Hippocampal gray matter volume alterations in patients with first-episode and recurrent major depressive disorder and their associations with gene profiles" .

BMC Psychiatry .

25 (1) 134.

doi : 10.1186/s12888-025-06562-4 .

PMC 11829352 .

PMID 39955494 .

^ Singh V (2017).

Textbook. of Anatomy Vol III . Elsevier. p. 402.

ISBN 9788131237274 .

^ Chauhan P, Jethwa K, Rathawa A, Chauhan G, Mehra S (2021).

"The Anatomy of the Hippocampus" .

Cerebral Ischemia . Exon Publications.

PMID 34905307 . Retrieved 19 March 2025 .

^ West MJ (1990). "Chapter 2 Stereological studies of the hippocampus: A comparison of the hippocampal subdivisions of diverse species including hedgehogs, laboratory rodents, wild mice and men".

Stereological studies of the hippocampus: a comparison of the hippocampal subdivisions of diverse species including hedgehogs, laboratory rodents, wild mice and men . Progress in Brain Research. Vol. 83. pp.

13– 36.

doi : 10.1016/S0079-6123(08)61238-8 .

ISBN 978-0-444-81149-3 .

PMID 2203095 .

^ * Suzuki M, Hagino H, Nohara S, Zhou SY, Kawasaki Y, Takahashi T, et al. (February 2005).

"Male-specific volume expansion of the human hippocampus during adolescence" .

Cerebral Cortex .

15 (2): 187– 193.

doi : 10.1093/cercor/bhh121 .

PMID 15238436 .

^ a b Jacobs LF (2003). "The evolution of the cognitive map".

Brain, Behavior and Evolution .

62 (2): 128– 139.

doi : 10.1159/000072443 .

PMID 12937351 .

S2CID 16102408 .

^ Chen HJ, Qiu J, Qi Y, Fu L, Fu Q, Wu W, et al. (March 2023).

"Hippocampal subfield morphology in regular hemodialysis patients" .

Nephrol Dial Transplant .

38 (4): 992– 1001.

doi : 10.1093/ndt/gfac263 .

PMC 10064839 .

PMID 36124763 .

^ a b Dalton MA, D'Souza A, Lv J, Calamante F (November 2022).

"New insights into anatomical connectivity along the anterior-posterior axis of the human hippocampus using in vivo quantitative fibre tracking" .

eLife .

11 e76143.

doi : 10.7554/eLife.76143 .

PMC 9643002 .

PMID 36345716 .

^ Moser MB, Moser EI (1998). "Functional differentiation in the hippocampus".

Hippocampus .

8 (6): 608– 619.

doi : 10.1002/(SICI)1098-1063(1998)8:6<608::AID-HIPO3>3.0.CO;2-7 .

PMID 9882018 .

S2CID 32384692 .

^ Amaral DG, Scharfman HE, Lavenex P (2007). "The dentate gyrus: Fundamental neuroanatomical organization (Dentate gyrus for dummies)".

The Dentate Gyrus: A Comprehensive Guide to Structure, Function, and Clinical Implications . Progress in Brain Research. Vol. 163. pp.

3– 22.

doi : 10.1016/S0079-6123(07)63001-5 .

ISBN 978-0-444-53015-8 .

PMC 2492885 .

PMID 17765709 .

^ Duvernoy H, Cattin F, Risold PY (June 2005). "Vascularization". In Duvernoy HM, Cattin F, Risold PY (eds.).

The human hippocampus: functional anatomy, vascularization and serial sections with MRI . Berlin: Springer. pp.

69– 105.

doi : 10.1007/978-3-642-33603-4_5 .

ISBN 978-3-642-33603-4 .

^ Jinde S, Zsiros V, Nakazawa K (2013).

"Hilar mossy cell circuitry controlling dentate granule cell excitability" .

Front Neural Circuits .

7 : 14.

doi : 10.3389/fncir.2013.00014 .

PMC 3569840 .

PMID 23407806 .

^ Murakami G, Tsurugizawa T, Hatanaka Y, Komatsuzaki Y, Tanabe N, Mukai H, et al. (December 2006). "Comparison between basal and apical dendritic spines in estrogen-induced rapid spinogenesis of CA1 principal neurons in the adult hippocampus".

Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communications .

351 (2): 553– 558.

Bibcode : 2006BBRC..351..553M .

doi : 10.1016/j.bbrc.2006.10.066 .

PMID 17070772 .

CA1 neurons consist of four regions, i.e., the stratum oriens, the cell body, the stratum radiatum, and the stratum lacunosum-moleculare ^ a b Witter M (October 2011).

"Entorhinal cortex" .

Scholarpedia .

6 (10): 4380.

Bibcode : 2011SchpJ...6.4380W .

doi : 10.4249/scholarpedia.4380 .

^ Takeuchi Y, Nagy AJ, Barcsai L, Li Q, Ohsawa M, Mizuseki K, et al. (2021).

"The Medial Septum as a Potential Target for Treating Brain Disorders Associated With Oscillopathies" .

Frontiers in Neural Circuits .

15 701080.

doi : 10.3389/fncir.2021.701080 .

PMC 8297467 .

PMID 34305537 .

^ a b Eichenbaum H, Yonelinas AP, Ranganath C (2007).

"The medial temporal lobe and recognition memory" .

Annual Review of Neuroscience .

30 : 123– 152.

doi : 10.1146/annurev.neuro.30.051606.094328 .

PMC 2064941 .

PMID 17417939 .

^ a b Kandel ER, Schwartz JH, Jessell TM, Siegelbaum SA, Hudspeth AJ (2012).

Principles of Neural Science (5th ed.). New York: McGraw-Hill Medical. pp.

1490– 1491.

ISBN 978-0-07-139011-8 .

OCLC 820110349 .

^ Purves D (2011).

Neuroscience (5th ed.). Sunderland, Mass.: Sinauer. p. 171.

ISBN 978-0-87893-695-3 .

^ Byrne JH.

"Section 1, Intro Chapter" .

Introduction to Neurons and Neuronal Networks . Neuroscience Online: An Electronic Textbook for the Neurosciences. Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy – The University of Texas Medical School at Houston. Archived from the original on 2013-12-03.

^ Winson J (July 1978). "Loss of hippocampal theta rhythm results in spatial memory deficit in the rat".

Science .

201 (4351): 160– 163.

Bibcode : 1978Sci...201..160W .

doi : 10.1126/science.663646 .

PMID 663646 .

^ a b Xiao Y, Hu Y, Huang K (2023).

"Atrophy of hippocampal subfields relates to memory decline during the pathological progression of Alzheimer's disease" .

Front Aging Neurosci .

15 1287122.

doi : 10.3389/fnagi.2023.1287122 .

PMC 10749921 .

PMID 38149170 .

^ Canada KL, Botdorf M, Riggins T (October 2020).

"Longitudinal development of hippocampal subregions from early- to mid-childhood" .

Hippocampus .

30 (10): 1098– 1111.

doi : 10.1002/hipo.23218 .

PMC 8500647 .

PMID 32497411 .

^ Ezama L, Hernández-Cabrera JA, Seoane S, Pereda E, Janssen N (May 2021).

"Functional connectivity of the hippocampus and its subfields in resting-state networks" .

Eur J Neurosci .

53 (10): 3378– 3393.

doi : 10.1111/ejn.15213 .

PMC 8252772 .

PMID 33786931 .

^ a b Fanselow MS, Dong HW (January 2010).

"Are the dorsal and ventral hippocampus functionally distinct structures?" .

Neuron .

65 (1): 7– 19.

doi : 10.1016/j.neuron.2009.11.031 .

PMC 2822727 .

PMID 20152109 .

^ Pothuizen HH, Zhang WN, Jongen-Rêlo AL, Feldon J, Yee BK (February 2004). "Dissociation of function between the dorsal and the ventral hippocampus in spatial learning abilities of the rat: a within-subject, within-task comparison of reference and working spatial memory".

The European Journal of Neuroscience .

19 (3): 705– 712.

doi : 10.1111/j.0953-816X.2004.03170.x .

PMID 14984421 .

S2CID 33385275 .

^ Jung MW, Wiener SI, McNaughton BL (December 1994).

"Comparison of spatial firing characteristics of units in dorsal and ventral hippocampus of the rat" .

The Journal of Neuroscience .

14 (12): 7347– 7356.

doi : 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.14-12-07347.1994 .

PMC 6576902 .

PMID 7996180 .

^ a b c d Morris R, Amaral D (2024).

The Hippocampus Book (2nd ed.). Oxford: Oxford University Press, Incorporated. pp.

8– 9.

ISBN 9780190065324 .

^ van Groen T, Wyss JM (December 1990). "Extrinsic projections from area CA1 of the rat hippocampus: olfactory, cortical, subcortical, and bilateral hippocampal formation projections".

The Journal of Comparative Neurology .

302 (3): 515– 528.

doi : 10.1002/cne.903020308 .

PMID 1702115 .

S2CID 7175722 .

^ Eichenbaum H, Otto TA, Wible CG, Piper JM (1991). "Ch 7. Building a model of the hippocampus in olfaction and memory". In Davis JL, Eichenbaum H (eds.).

Olfaction . MIT Press.

ISBN 978-0-262-04124-9 .

^ Eichenbaum H, Cohen NJ (1993).

Memory, Amnesia, and the Hippocampal System . MIT Press.

^ Anagnostaras SG, Gale GD, Fanselow MS (2002).

"The hippocampus and Pavlovian fear conditioning: reply to Bast et al" (PDF) .

Hippocampus .

12 (4): 561– 565.

doi : 10.1002/hipo.10071 .

PMID 12201641 .

S2CID 733197 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2005-02-16.

^ Cenquizca LA, Swanson LW (November 2007).

"Spatial organization of direct hippocampal field CA1 axonal projections to the rest of the cerebral cortex" .

Brain Research Reviews .

56 (1): 1– 26.

doi : 10.1016/j.brainresrev.2007.05.002 .

PMC 2171036 .

PMID 17559940 .

^ Nadel L, O'Keefe J, Black A (June 1975). "Slam on the brakes: a critique of Altman, Brunner, and Bayer's response-inhibition model of hippocampal function".

Behavioral Biology .

14 (2): 151– 162.

doi : 10.1016/S0091-6773(75)90148-0 .

PMID 1137539 .

^ Gray JA, McNaughton N (2000).

The Neuropsychology of Anxiety: An Enquiry into the Functions of the Septo-Hippocampal System . Oxford University Press.

^ Bosecke C, Ng M, Dastgheib Z, Lithgow BJ (January 2025).

"Perspective: Hippocampal theta rhythm as a potential vestibuloacoustic biomarker of anxiety" .

Eur J Neurosci .

61 (1) e16641.

doi : 10.1111/ejn.16641 .

PMC 11664906 .

PMID 39662900 .

^ Scoville WB, Milner B (February 1957).

"Loss of recent memory after bilateral hippocampal lesions" .

Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery, and Psychiatry .

20 (1): 11– 21.

doi : 10.1136/jnnp.20.1.11 .

PMC 497229 .

PMID 13406589 .

^ a b Squire LR (January 2009).

"The legacy of patient H.M. for neuroscience" .

Neuron .

61 (1): 6– 9.

doi : 10.1016/j.neuron.2008.12.023 .

PMC 2649674 .

PMID 19146808 .

^ Carey B (2008-12-04).

"H. M., an Unforgettable Amnesiac, Dies at 82" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on 2018-06-13 . Retrieved 2009-04-27 .

^ O'Keefe J, Dostrovsky J (November 1971). "The hippocampus as a spatial map. Preliminary evidence from unit activity in the freely-moving rat".

Brain Research .

34 (1): 171– 175.

doi : 10.1016/0006-8993(71)90358-1 .

PMID 5124915 .

^ a b O'Keefe J, Nadel L (1978).

The Hippocampus as a Cognitive Map . Oxford University Press.

Archived from the original on 2011-03-24 . Retrieved 2008-10-23 .

^ a b c d Moser EI, Kropff E, Moser MB (2008). "Place cells, grid cells, and the brain's spatial representation system".

Annual Review of Neuroscience .

31 : 69– 89.

doi : 10.1146/annurev.neuro.31.061307.090723 .

PMID 18284371 .

S2CID 16036900 .

^ Schiller D, Eichenbaum H, Buffalo EA, Davachi L, Foster DJ, Leutgeb S, et al. (October 2015).

"Memory and Space: Towards an Understanding of the Cognitive Map" .

The Journal of Neuroscience .

35 (41): 13904– 13911.

doi : 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2618-15.2015 .

PMC 6608181 .

PMID 26468191 .

^ Tse D, Langston RF, Kakeyama M, Bethus I, Spooner PA, Wood ER, et al. (2007-04-06).

"Schemas and Memory Consolidation" .

Science .

316 (5821): 76– 82.

Bibcode : 2007Sci...316...76T .

doi : 10.1126/science.1135935 .

PMID 17412951 .

^ Tse D, Takeuchi T, Kakeyama M, Kajii Y, Okuno H, Tohyama C, et al. (2011-08-12). "Schema-dependent gene activation and memory encoding in neocortex".

Science .

333 (6044): 891– 895.

Bibcode : 2011Sci...333..891T .

doi : 10.1126/science.1205274 .

ISSN 1095-9203 .

PMID 21737703 .

^ Miller AM, Jacob AD, Ramsaran AI, De Snoo ML, Josselyn SA, Frankland PW (2023-06-21).

"Emergence of a predictive model in the hippocampus" .

Neuron .

111 (12): 1952–1965.e5.

doi : 10.1016/j.neuron.2023.03.011 .

ISSN 0896-6273 .

PMC 10293047 .

PMID 37015224 .

^ Eichenbaum H (December 2001). "The hippocampus and declarative memory: Cognitive mechanisms and neural codes".

Behavioural Brain Research .

127 ( 1– 2): 199– 207.

doi : 10.1016/s0166-4328(01)00365-5 .

PMID 11718892 .

S2CID 20843130 .

^ Buzsáki G, Moser EI (February 2013).

"Memory, navigation and theta rhythm in the hippocampal-entorhinal system" .

Nature Neuroscience .

16 (2): 130– 138.

doi : 10.1038/nn.3304 .

PMC 4079500 .

PMID 23354386 .

^ a b Ito R, Lee AC (October 2016).

"The role of the hippocampus in approach-avoidance conflict decision-making: Evidence from rodent and human studies" .

Behavioural Brain Research .

313 : 345– 357.

doi : 10.1016/j.bbr.2016.07.039 .

PMID 27457133 .

^ Huang CC, Rolls ET, Hsu CH, Feng J, Lin CP (August 2021).

"Extensive Cortical Connectivity of the Human Hippocampal Memory System: Beyond the "What" and "Where" Dual Stream Model" .

Cereb Cortex .

31 (10): 4652– 4669.

doi : 10.1093/cercor/bhab113 .

PMC 8866812 .

PMID 34013342 .

^ Gluck M, Mercado E, Myers C (2014).

Learning and Memory From Brain to Behavior (Second ed.). New York: Kevin Feyen. p. 416.

ISBN 978-1-4292-4014-7 .

^ Di Gennaro G, Grammaldo LG, Quarato PP, Esposito V, Mascia A, Sparano A, et al. (June 2006). "Severe amnesia following bilateral medial temporal lobe damage occurring on two distinct occasions".

Neurological Sciences .

27 (2): 129– 133.

doi : 10.1007/s10072-006-0614-y .

PMID 16816912 .

S2CID 7741607 .

^ Squire LR, Schacter DL (2002).

The Neuropsychology of Memory . Guilford Press.

^ Virley D, Ridley RM, Sinden JD, Kershaw TR, Harland S, Rashid T, et al. (December 1999).

"Primary CA1 and conditionally immortal MHP36 cell grafts restore conditional discrimination learning and recall in marmosets after excitotoxic lesions of the hippocampal CA1 field" .

Brain: A Journal of Neurology .

122 (12): 2321– 2335.

doi : 10.1093/brain/122.12.2321 .

PMID 10581225 .

^ Sozinova EV, Kozlovskiy SA, Vartanov AV, Skvortsova VB, Pirogov YA, Anisimov NV, et al. (September 2008). "The role of hippocampal parts in verbal memory and activation processes".

International Journal of Psychophysiology .

69 (3): 312.

doi : 10.1016/j.ijpsycho.2008.05.328 .

^ Diana RA, Yonelinas AP, Ranganath C (September 2007). "Imaging recollection and familiarity in the medial temporal lobe: a three-component model".

Trends in Cognitive Sciences .

11 (9): 379– 386.

doi : 10.1016/j.tics.2007.08.001 .

PMID 17707683 .

S2CID 1443998 .

^ Steinkrauss AC, Slotnick SD (April 2024). "Is implicit memory associated with the hippocampus?".

Cogn Neurosci .

15 (2): 56– 70.

doi : 10.1080/17588928.2024.2315816 .

PMID 38368598 .

^ Slotnick SD (April 2024). "The hippocampus and implicit memory".

Cogn Neurosci .

15 (2): 25– 26.

doi : 10.1080/17588928.2024.2354706 .

PMID 38767113 .

^ Frankland PW, Bontempi B, Talton LE, Kaczmarek L, Silva AJ (May 2004). "The involvement of the anterior cingulate cortex in remote contextual fear memory".

Science .

304 (5672): 881– 883.

Bibcode : 2004Sci...304..881F .

doi : 10.1126/science.1094804 .

PMID 15131309 .

S2CID 15893863 .

^ Duke CG, Kennedy AJ, Gavin CF, Day JJ, Sweatt JD (July 2017).

"Experience-dependent epigenomic reorganization in the hippocampus" .

Learning & Memory .

24 (7): 278– 288.

doi : 10.1101/lm.045112.117 .

PMC 5473107 .

PMID 28620075 .

^ Rasmussen KD, Helin K (April 2016).

"Role of TET enzymes in DNA methylation, development, and cancer" .

Genes & Development .

30 (7): 733– 750.

doi : 10.1101/gad.276568.115 .

PMC 4826392 .

PMID 27036965 .

^ Melamed P, Yosefzon Y, David C, Tsukerman A, Pnueli L (2018).

"Tet Enzymes, Variants, and Differential Effects on Function" .

Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology .

6 22.

doi : 10.3389/fcell.2018.00022 .

PMC 5844914 .

PMID 29556496 .

^ Drohat AC, Coey CT (October 2016).

"Role of Base Excision "Repair" Enzymes in Erasing Epigenetic Marks from DNA" .

Chemical Reviews .

116 (20): 12711– 12729.

doi : 10.1021/acs.chemrev.6b00191 .

PMC 5299066 .

PMID 27501078 .

^ Packard MG, Goodman J (November 2013). "Factors that influence the relative use of multiple memory systems".

Hippocampus .

23 (11): 1044– 1052.

doi : 10.1002/hipo.22178 .

PMID 23929809 .

^ Sparks FT, Lehmann H, Sutherland RJ (September 2011). "Between-systems memory interference during retrieval".

The European Journal of Neuroscience .

34 (5): 780– 786.

doi : 10.1111/j.1460-9568.2011.07796.x .

PMID 21896061 .

S2CID 25745773 .

^ Moscovitch M, Rosenbaum RS, Gilboa A, Addis DR, Westmacott R, Grady C, et al. (July 2005).

"Functional neuroanatomy of remote episodic, semantic and spatial memory: a unified account based on multiple trace theory" . Review.

Journal of Anatomy .

207 (1): 35– 66.

doi : 10.1111/j.1469-7580.2005.00421.x .

PMC 1571502 .

PMID 16011544 .

^ Moscovitch M, Gilboa A (June 2024). "Systems consolidation, transformation and reorganization: Multiple trace theory, trace transformation theory and their competitors.". In Kahana MJ, Wagner AD (eds.).

The Oxford Handbook of Human Memory, Two Volume Pack: Foundations and Applications . Review. Oxford University Press.

doi : 10.1093/oxfordhb/9780190917982.013.43 .

ISBN 978-0-19-091798-2 .

^ Ferbinteanu J (January 2019).

"Memory systems 2018 - Towards a new paradigm" . Review.

Neurobiology of Learning and Memory .

157 : 61– 78.

doi : 10.1016/j.nlm.2018.11.005 .

PMC 6389412 .

PMID 30439565 .

^ Solstad T, Boccara CN, Kropff E, Moser MB, Moser EI (December 2008). "Representation of geometric borders in the entorhinal cortex".

Science .

322 (5909): 1865– 1868.

Bibcode : 2008Sci...322.1865S .

doi : 10.1126/science.1166466 .

PMID 19095945 .

S2CID 260976755 .

^ Chiu YC, Algase D, Whall A, Liang J, Liu HC, Lin KN, et al. (2004). "Getting lost: directed attention and executive functions in early Alzheimer's disease patients".

Dementia and Geriatric Cognitive Disorders .

17 (3): 174– 180.

doi : 10.1159/000076353 .

PMID 14739541 .

S2CID 20454273 .

^ Morris RG, Garrud P, Rawlins JN, O'Keefe J (June 1982). "Place navigation impaired in rats with hippocampal lesions".

Nature .

297 (5868): 681– 683.

Bibcode : 1982Natur.297..681M .

doi : 10.1038/297681a0 .

PMID 7088155 .

S2CID 4242147 .

^ Sutherland RJ, Kolb B, Whishaw IQ (August 1982). "Spatial mapping: definitive disruption by hippocampal or medial frontal cortical damage in the rat".

Neuroscience Letters .

31 (3): 271– 276.

doi : 10.1016/0304-3940(82)90032-5 .

PMID 7133562 .

S2CID 20203374 .

^ Sutherland RJ, Weisend MP, Mumby D, Astur RS, Hanlon FM, Koerner A, et al. (2001). "Retrograde amnesia after hippocampal damage: recent vs. remote memories in two tasks".

Hippocampus .

11 (1): 27– 42.

doi : 10.1002/1098-1063(2001)11:1<27::AID-HIPO1017>3.0.CO;2-4 .

PMID 11261770 .

S2CID 142515 .

^ Clark RE, Broadbent NJ, Squire LR (2005).

"Hippocampus and remote spatial memory in rats" .

Hippocampus .

15 (2): 260– 272.

doi : 10.1002/hipo.20056 .

PMC 2754168 .

PMID 15523608 .

^ Eichenbaum H (April 2017).

"The role of the hippocampus in navigation is memory" .

Journal of Neurophysiology .

117 (4): 1785– 1796.

doi : 10.1152/jn.00005.2017 .

PMC 5384971 .

PMID 28148640 .

^ Taube JS, Yoder RM (2020). "The impact of vestibular signals on cells responsible for orientation and navigation.". In Fritzsch B (ed.).

The Senses; Volume 6: Vestibular System and Balance (2nd ed.). San Diego: Elsevier Science & Technology. pp.

496– 511.

doi : 10.1016/B978-0-12-809324-5.23894-7 .

ISBN 978-0-12-805409-3 .

^ Moser MB (7 December 2014).

"Grid cells, place cells and memory" (PDF) .

Nobel Lecture . Stockholm, Sweden: The Nobel Foundation.

^ Matsumura N, Nishijo H, Tamura R, Eifuku S, Endo S, Ono T (March 1999).

"Spatial- and task-dependent neuronal responses during real and virtual translocation in the monkey hippocampal formation" .

The Journal of Neuroscience .

19 (6): 2381– 2393.

doi : 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.19-06-02381.1999 .

PMC 6782547 .

PMID 10066288 .

^ Rolls ET, Xiang JZ (2006). "Spatial view cells in the primate hippocampus and memory recall".

Reviews in the Neurosciences .

17 ( 1– 2): 175– 200.

doi : 10.1515/REVNEURO.2006.17.1-2.175 .

PMID 16703951 .

S2CID 147636287 .

^ Smith DM, Mizumori SJ (2006). "Hippocampal place cells, context, and episodic memory".

Hippocampus .

16 (9): 716– 729.

CiteSeerX 10.1.1.141.1450 .

doi : 10.1002/hipo.20208 .

PMID 16897724 .

S2CID 720574 .

^ Lian Y, Burkitt AN (2022).

"Learning Spatiotemporal Properties of Hippocampal Place Cells" .

eNeuro .

9 (4).

doi : 10.1523/ENEURO.0519-21.2022 .

PMC 9282168 .

PMID 35760526 .

^ O'Keefe J, Recce ML (July 1993). "Phase relationship between hippocampal place units and the EEG theta rhythm".

Hippocampus .

3 (3): 317– 330.

doi : 10.1002/hipo.450030307 .

PMID 8353611 .

S2CID 6539236 .

^ Ekstrom AD, Kahana MJ, Caplan JB, Fields TA, Isham EA, Newman EL, et al. (September 2003).

"Cellular networks underlying human spatial navigation" (PDF) .

Nature .

425 (6954): 184– 188.

Bibcode : 2003Natur.425..184E .

CiteSeerX 10.1.1.408.4443 .

doi : 10.1038/nature01964 .

PMID 12968182 .

S2CID 1673654 .

Archived from the original on 2021-10-20 . Retrieved 2013-01-24 .

^ Duarte IC, Ferreira C, Marques J, Castelo-Branco M (2014-01-27).

"Anterior/posterior competitive deactivation/activation dichotomy in the human hippocampus as revealed by a 3D navigation task" .

PLOS ONE .

9 (1): e86213.

Bibcode : 2014PLoSO...986213D .

doi : 10.1371/journal.pone.0086213 .

PMC 3903506 .

PMID 24475088 .

^ Maguire EA, Gadian DG, Johnsrude IS, Good CD, Ashburner J, Frackowiak RS, et al. (April 2000).

"Navigation-related structural change in the hippocampi of taxi drivers" .

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America .

97 (8): 4398– 4403.

Bibcode : 2000PNAS...97.4398M .

doi : 10.1073/pnas.070039597 .

PMC 18253 .

PMID 10716738 .

^ Leporé N, Shi Y, Lepore F, Fortin M, Voss P, Chou YY, et al. (July 2009).

"Pattern of hippocampal shape and volume differences in blind subjects" .

NeuroImage .

46 (4): 949– 957.

doi : 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2009.01.071 .

PMC 2736880 .

PMID 19285559 .

^ a b O'Neil EB, Newsome RN, Li IH, Thavabalasingam S, Ito R, Lee AC (November 2015).

"Examining the Role of the Human Hippocampus in Approach-Avoidance Decision Making Using a Novel Conflict Paradigm and Multivariate Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging" .

The Journal of Neuroscience .

35 (45): 15039– 15049.

doi : 10.1523/jneurosci.1915-15.2015 .

PMC 6605357 .

PMID 26558775 .

^ Quiroga RQ, Reddy L, Kreiman G, Koch C, Fried I (June 2005).

"Invariant visual representation by single neurons in the human brain" .

Nature .

435 (7045): 1102– 1107.

Bibcode : 2005Natur.435.1102Q .

doi : 10.1038/nature03687 .

PMID 15973409 .

S2CID 1234637 .

^ Sliwa J, Planté A, Duhamel JR, Wirth S (March 2016). "Independent Neuronal Representation of Facial and Vocal Identity in the Monkey Hippocampus and Inferotemporal Cortex".

Cerebral Cortex .

26 (3): 950– 966.

doi : 10.1093/cercor/bhu257 .

PMID 25405945 .

^ Hitti FL, Siegelbaum SA (April 2014).

"The hippocampal CA2 region is essential for social memory" .

Nature .

508 (7494): 88– 92.

Bibcode : 2014Natur.508...88H .

doi : 10.1038/nature13028 .

PMC 4000264 .

PMID 24572357 .

^ Okuyama T, Kitamura T, Roy DS, Itohara S, Tonegawa S (September 2016).

"Ventral CA1 neurons store social memory" .

Science .

353 (6307): 1536– 1541.

Bibcode : 2016Sci...353.1536O .

doi : 10.1126/science.aaf7003 .

PMC 5493325 .

PMID 27708103 .

^ Meira T, Leroy F, Buss EW, Oliva A, Park J, Siegelbaum SA (October 2018).

"A hippocampal circuit linking dorsal CA2 to ventral CA1 critical for social memory dynamics" .

Nature Communications .

9 (1) 4163.

Bibcode : 2018NatCo...9.4163M .

doi : 10.1038/s41467-018-06501-w .

PMC 6178349 .

PMID 30301899 .

^ a b Buzsáki G (2006).

Rhythms of the Brain . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-530106-9 .

^ a b Buzsáki G, Chen LS, Gage FH (1990). "Chapter 19 Chapter Spatial organization of physiological activity in the hippocampal region: Relevance to memory formation".

Spatial organization of physiological activity in the hippocampal region: relevance to memory formation . Progress in Brain Research. Vol. 83. pp.

257– 268.

doi : 10.1016/S0079-6123(08)61255-8 .

ISBN 978-0-444-81149-3 .

PMID 2203100 .

^ Squire LR (17 December 2012). "Learning and Memory: Brain Systems". In Ghosh A, Berg D, Bloom FE, Squire L, Spitzer NC, du Lac S (eds.).

Fundamental Neuroscience (4th ed.). Amsterdam: Elsevier/Academic Press. p. 1038.

ISBN 978-0-12-385871-9 .

OCLC 830351091 .

^ Colgin LL (April 2016).

"Rhythms of the hippocampal network" .

Nature Reviews. Neuroscience .

17 (4): 239– 249.

doi : 10.1038/nrn.2016.21 .

PMC 4890574 .

PMID 26961163 .

^ Radvansky BA, Oh JY, Climer JR, Dombeck DA (August 2021).

"Behavior determines the hippocampal spatial mapping of a multisensory environment" .

Cell Reports .

36 (5) 109444.

doi : 10.1016/j.celrep.2021.109444 .

PMC 8382043 .

PMID 34293330 .

^ Buzsáki G (October 2015).

"Hippocampal sharp wave-ripple: A cognitive biomarker for episodic memory and planning" .

Hippocampus .

25 (10): 1073– 188.

doi : 10.1002/hipo.22488 .

PMC 4648295 .

PMID 26135716 .

^ a b Skaggs WE, McNaughton BL, Permenter M, Archibeque M, Vogt J, Amaral DG, et al. (August 2007). "EEG sharp waves and sparse ensemble unit activity in the macaque hippocampus".

Journal of Neurophysiology .

98 (2): 898– 910.

doi : 10.1152/jn.00401.2007 .

PMID 17522177 .

S2CID 941428 .

^ Buzsáki G (January 2002).

"Theta oscillations in the hippocampus" .

Neuron .

33 (3): 325– 340.

doi : 10.1016/S0896-6273(02)00586-X .

PMID 11832222 .

S2CID 15410690 .

^ Lubenov EV, Siapas AG (May 2009).

"Hippocampal theta oscillations are travelling waves" (PDF) .

Nature .

459 (7246): 534– 539.

Bibcode : 2009Natur.459..534L .

doi : 10.1038/nature08010 .

PMID 19489117 .

S2CID 4429491 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 2018-07-23 . Retrieved 2019-07-13 .

^ Komisaruk BR (March 1970). "Synchrony between limbic system theta activity and rhythmical behavior in rats".

Journal of Comparative and Physiological Psychology .

70 (3): 482– 492.

doi : 10.1037/h0028709 .

PMID 5418472 .

^ Cantero JL, Atienza M, Stickgold R, Kahana MJ, Madsen JR, Kocsis B (November 2003).

"Sleep-dependent theta oscillations in the human hippocampus and neocortex" .

The Journal of Neuroscience .

23 (34): 10897– 10903.

doi : 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.23-34-10897.2003 .

PMC 6740994 .

PMID 14645485 .

^ Vanderwolf CH (April 1969). "Hippocampal electrical activity and voluntary movement in the rat".

Electroencephalography and Clinical Neurophysiology .

26 (4): 407– 418.

doi : 10.1016/0013-4694(69)90092-3 .

PMID 4183562 .

^ Huerta PT, Lisman JE (August 1993). "Heightened synaptic plasticity of hippocampal CA1 neurons during a cholinergically induced rhythmic state".

Nature .

364 (6439): 723– 725.

Bibcode : 1993Natur.364..723H .

doi : 10.1038/364723a0 .

PMID 8355787 .

S2CID 4358000 .

^ Numan R, Feloney MP, Pham KH, Tieber LM (December 1995).

"Effects of medial septal lesions on an operant go/no-go delayed response alternation task in rats" .

Physiology & Behavior .

58 (6): 1263– 1271.

doi : 10.1016/0031-9384(95)02044-6 .

PMID 8623030 .

S2CID 876694 .

Archived from the original on 2021-04-27 . Retrieved 2020-03-09 .

^ Kahana MJ, Seelig D, Madsen JR (December 2001). "Theta returns".

Current Opinion in Neurobiology .

11 (6): 739– 744.

doi : 10.1016/S0959-4388(01)00278-1 .

PMID 11741027 .

S2CID 43829235 .

^ Buzsáki G (November 1986). "Hippocampal sharp waves: their origin and significance".

Brain Research .

398 (2): 242– 252.

doi : 10.1016/0006-8993(86)91483-6 .

PMID 3026567 .

S2CID 37242634 .

^ Wilson MA, McNaughton BL (July 1994). "Reactivation of hippocampal ensemble memories during sleep".

Science .

265 (5172): 676– 679.

Bibcode : 1994Sci...265..676W .

doi : 10.1126/science.8036517 .

PMID 8036517 .

S2CID 890257 .

^ Jackson JC, Johnson A, Redish AD (November 2006).

"Hippocampal sharp waves and reactivation during awake states depend on repeated sequential experience" .

The Journal of Neuroscience .

26 (48): 12415– 12426.

doi : 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4118-06.2006 .

PMC 6674885 .

PMID 17135403 .

^ Sutherland GR , McNaughton B (April 2000). "Memory trace reactivation in hippocampal and neocortical neuronal ensembles".

Current Opinion in Neurobiology .

10 (2): 180– 186.

doi : 10.1016/S0959-4388(00)00079-9 .

PMID 10753801 .

S2CID 146539 .

^ a b Buzsáki G (January 1989). "Two-stage model of memory trace formation: a role for "noisy" brain states".

Neuroscience .

31 (3): 551– 570.

doi : 10.1016/0306-4522(89)90423-5 .

PMID 2687720 .

S2CID 23957660 .

^ Girardeau G, Benchenane K, Wiener SI, Buzsáki G, Zugaro MB (October 2009). "Selective suppression of hippocampal ripples impairs spatial memory".

Nature Neuroscience .

12 (10): 1222– 1223.

doi : 10.1038/nn.2384 .

PMID 19749750 .

S2CID 23637142 .

^ Ego-Stengel V, Wilson MA (January 2010).

"Disruption of ripple-associated hippocampal activity during rest impairs spatial learning in the rat" .

Hippocampus .

20 (1): 1– 10.

doi : 10.1002/hipo.20707 .

PMC 2801761 .

PMID 19816984 .

^ Kovács KA, O'Neill J, Schoenenberger P, Penttonen M, Ranguel Guerrero DK, Csicsvari J (19 Nov 2016).

"Optogenetically Blocking Sharp Wave Ripple Events in Sleep Does Not Interfere with the Formation of Stable Spatial Representation in the CA1 Area of the Hippocampus" .

PLOS ONE .

11 (10): e0164675.

Bibcode : 2016PLoSO..1164675K .

doi : 10.1371/journal.pone.0164675 .

PMC 5070819 .

PMID 27760158 .

^ Ramón y Cajal S (1894).

"The Croonian Lecture: La Fine Structure des Centres Nerveux" .

Proceedings of the Royal Society .

55 ( 331– 335): 444– 468.

Bibcode : 1894RSPS...55..444C .

doi : 10.1098/rspl.1894.0063 .

^ Hebb DO (1974).

The organization of behavior: a neuropsychological theory (11. [print.] ed.). New York: Wiley.

ISBN 0-471-36727-3 .

^ Bliss TV, Lomo T (July 1973).

"Long-lasting potentiation of synaptic transmission in the dentate area of the anaesthetized rabbit following stimulation of the perforant path" .

The Journal of Physiology .

232 (2): 331– 356.

doi : 10.1113/jphysiol.1973.sp010273 .

PMC 1350458 .

PMID 4727084 .

^ a b Malenka RC, Bear MF (September 2004).

"LTP and LTD: an embarrassment of riches" .

Neuron .

44 (1): 5– 21.

doi : 10.1016/j.neuron.2004.09.012 .

PMID 15450156 .

S2CID 79844 .

^ Cooke SF, Bliss TV (July 2006).

"Plasticity in the human central nervous system" .

Brain .

129 (Pt 7): 1659– 1673.

doi : 10.1093/brain/awl082 .

PMID 16672292 .

^ a b Nakazawa K, McHugh TJ, Wilson MA, Tonegawa S (May 2004). "NMDA receptors, place cells and hippocampal spatial memory".

Nature Reviews. Neuroscience .

5 (5): 361– 372.

doi : 10.1038/nrn1385 .

PMID 15100719 .

S2CID 7728258 .

^ Berger TW, Brinton RD, Marmarelis VZ, Sheu BJ, Tanguay AR (2005).

"Brain-implantable biomimetic electronics as a neural prosthesis for hippocampal memory function." .

Toward replacement parts for the brain: implantable biomimetic electronics as neural prostheses . Cambridge: MIT Press.

ISBN 978-0-262-02577-5 .

^ Hampson RE, Song D, Robinson BS, Fetterhoff D, Dakos AS, Roeder BM, et al. (June 2018).

"Developing a hippocampal neural prosthetic to facilitate human memory encoding and recall" .

J Neural Eng .

15 (3): 036014.

Bibcode : 2018JNEng..15c6014H .

doi : 10.1088/1741-2552/aaaed7 .

PMC 6576290 .

PMID 29589592 .

^ Roeder BM, She X, Dakos AS, Moore B, Wicks RT, Witcher MR, et al. (2024).

"Developing a hippocampal neural prosthetic to facilitate human memory encoding and recall of stimulus features and categories" .

Front Comput Neurosci .

18 1263311.

doi : 10.3389/fncom.2024.1263311 .

PMC 10881797 .

PMID 38390007 .

^ Roeder BM, Riley MR, She X, Dakos AS, Robinson BS, Moore BJ, et al. (2022).

"Patterned Hippocampal Stimulation Facilitates Memory in Patients With a History of Head Impact and/or Brain Injury" .

Front Hum Neurosci .

16 933401.

doi : 10.3389/fnhum.2022.933401 .

PMC 9358788 .

PMID 35959242 .

^ a b c d Prull MW, Gabrieli JD, Bunge SA (2000). "Ch 2. Age-related changes in memory: A cognitive neuroscience perspective". In Craik FI, Salthouse TA (eds.).

The handbook of aging and cognition . Erlbaum. pp.

105– 107.

ISBN 978-0-8058-2966-2 .

^ Erickson KI, Voss MW, Prakash RS, Basak C, Szabo A, Chaddock L, et al. (February 2011).

"Exercise training increases size of hippocampus and improves memory" .

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America .

108 (7): 3017– 3022.

Bibcode : 2011PNAS..108.3017E .

doi : 10.1073/pnas.1015950108 .

PMC 3041121 .

PMID 21282661 .

^ Dubois B, Hampel H, Feldman HH, Scheltens P, Aisen P, Andrieu S, et al. (March 2016).

"Preclinical Alzheimer's disease: Definition, natural history, and diagnostic criteria" .

Alzheimer's & Dementia .

12 (3): 292– 323.

doi : 10.1016/j.jalz.2016.02.002 .

PMC 6417794 .

PMID 27012484 .

^ Hayat M, Syed RA, Qaiser H, Uzair M, Al-Regaiey K, Khallaf R, et al. (August 2025).

"Decoding molecular mechanisms: brain aging and Alzheimer's disease" .

Neural Regen Res .

20 (8): 2279– 2299.

doi : 10.4103/NRR.NRR-D-23-01403 .

PMC 11759015 .

PMID 39104174 .

^ "Cerebral Ischemia" . Exon Publications. 2021 . Retrieved 6 January 2025 .

^ Joëls M (April 2008). "Functional actions of corticosteroids in the hippocampus".

European Journal of Pharmacology .

583 ( 2– 3): 312– 321.

doi : 10.1016/j.ejphar.2007.11.064 .

PMID 18275953 .

^ Woon FL, Sood S, Hedges DW (October 2010). "Hippocampal volume deficits associated with exposure to psychological trauma and posttraumatic stress disorder in adults: a meta-analysis".

Progress in Neuro-Psychopharmacology & Biological Psychiatry .

34 (7): 1181– 1188.

doi : 10.1016/j.pnpbp.2010.06.016 .

PMID 20600466 .

S2CID 34575365 .

^ Karl A, Schaefer M, Malta LS, Dörfel D, Rohleder N, Werner A (2006). "A meta-analysis of structural brain abnormalities in PTSD".

Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews .

30 (7): 1004– 1031.

doi : 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2006.03.004 .

PMID 16730374 .

S2CID 15511760 .

^ Wright IC, Rabe-Hesketh S , Woodruff PW, David AS, Murray RM, Bullmore ET (January 2000). "Meta-analysis of regional brain volumes in schizophrenia".

The American Journal of Psychiatry .

157 (1): 16– 25.

doi : 10.1176/ajp.157.1.16 .

PMID 10618008 .

S2CID 22522434 .

^ Kempton MJ, Salvador Z, Munafò MR, Geddes JR, Simmons A, Frangou S, et al. (July 2011).

"Structural neuroimaging studies in major depressive disorder. Meta-analysis and comparison with bipolar disorder" .

Archives of General Psychiatry .

68 (7): 675– 690.

doi : 10.1001/archgenpsychiatry.2011.60 .

PMID 21727252 .

see also MRI database at www.depressiondatabase.org Archived 2011-09-29 at the Wayback Machine ^ Decker AL, Duncan K, Finn AS, Mabbott DJ (August 2020).

"Children's family income is associated with cognitive function and volume of anterior not posterior hippocampus" .

Nature Communications .

11 (1) 4040.

Bibcode : 2020NatCo..11.4040D .

doi : 10.1038/s41467-020-17854-6 .

PMC 7423938 .

PMID 32788583 .

^ Campbell S, Macqueen G (November 2004).

"The role of the hippocampus in the pathophysiology of major depression" .

Journal of Psychiatry & Neuroscience .

29 (6): 417– 426.

PMC 524959 .

PMID 15644983 .

^ a b Starkman MN, Giordani B, Gebarski SS, Berent S, Schork MA, Schteingart DE (December 1999). "Decrease in cortisol reverses human hippocampal atrophy following treatment of Cushing's disease".

Biological Psychiatry .

46 (12): 1595– 1602.

doi : 10.1016/s0006-3223(99)00203-6 .

PMID 10624540 .

S2CID 7294913 .

^ a b c d e Institute of Medicine (US) Forum on Neuroscience and Nervous System Disorders (2011).

Overview of the Glutamatergic System . National Academies Press (US).

Archived from the original on 1 September 2018 . Retrieved 5 February 2017 .

^ Garcia-Segura LM (2009).

Hormones and Brain Plasticity . Oxford University Press US. pp.

170– 171.

ISBN 978-0-19-532661-1 .

^ Conrad CD (2008).

"Chronic stress-induced hippocampal vulnerability: the glucocorticoid vulnerability hypothesis" .

Reviews in the Neurosciences .

19 (6): 395– 411.

doi : 10.1515/revneuro.2008.19.6.395 .

PMC 2746750 .

PMID 19317179 .

^ Ortiz JB, McLaughlin KJ, Hamilton GF, Baran SE, Campbell AN, Conrad CD (August 2013).

"Cholesterol and perhaps estradiol protect against corticosterone-induced hippocampal CA3 dendritic retraction in gonadectomized female and male rats" .

Neuroscience .

246 : 409– 421.

doi : 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2013.04.027 .

PMC 3703463 .

PMID 23618757 .

^ Consiglio AR, Ramos AL, Henriques JA, Picada JN (May 2010).

"DNA brain damage after stress in rats" .

Progress in Neuro-Psychopharmacology & Biological Psychiatry .

34 (4): 652– 656.

doi : 10.1016/j.pnpbp.2010.03.004 .

PMID 20226828 .

S2CID 38959073 .

^ Bonne O, Vythilingam M, Inagaki M, Wood S, Neumeister A, Nugent AC, et al. (July 2008).

"Reduced posterior hippocampal volume in posttraumatic stress disorder" .

The Journal of Clinical Psychiatry .

69 (7): 1087– 1091.

doi : 10.4088/jcp.v69n0707 .

PMC 2684983 .

PMID 18572983 .

^ Apfel BA, Ross J, Hlavin J, Meyerhoff DJ, Metzler TJ, Marmar CR, et al. (March 2011).

"Hippocampal volume differences in Gulf War veterans with current versus lifetime posttraumatic stress disorder symptoms" .

Biological Psychiatry .

69 (6): 541– 548.

doi : 10.1016/j.biopsych.2010.09.044 .

PMC 3259803 .

PMID 21094937 .

Archived from the original on 2019-12-04 . Retrieved 2017-08-14 .

^ Carlson NR (2014).

Physiology of Behavior (11 ed.). Pearson Education. p. 624.

ISBN 978-1-292-02320-5 .

^ Jatzko A, Rothenhöfer S, Schmitt A, Gaser C, Demirakca T, Weber-Fahr W, et al. (August 2006).

"Hippocampal volume in chronic posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD): MRI study using two different evaluation methods" (PDF) .

Journal of Affective Disorders .

94 ( 1– 3): 121– 126.

doi : 10.1016/j.jad.2006.03.010 .

PMID 16701903 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 2013-10-19 . Retrieved 2017-08-14 .

^ Stern R (September–October 2019).

"The New Phrenology" .

Skeptical Inquirer . Vol. 43, no. 5.

Center for Inquiry . pp.

52– 56.

Archived from the original on 2020-04-29 . Retrieved 2020-03-20 .

^ Rubin M, Shvil E, Papini S, Chhetry BT, Helpman L, Markowitz JC, et al. (June 2016).

"Greater hippocampal volume is associated with PTSD treatment response" .

Psychiatry Research: Neuroimaging .

252 : 36– 39.

doi : 10.1016/j.pscychresns.2016.05.001 .

PMC 4896219 .

PMID 27179314 .

^ a b Sparaco M, Pascarella R, Muccio CF, Zedde M (July 2022).

"Forgetting the Unforgettable: Transient Global Amnesia Part II: A Clinical Road Map" .

J Clin Med .

11 (14): 3940.

doi : 10.3390/jcm11143940 .

PMC 9319625 .

PMID 35887703 .

^ a b c d Sparaco M, Pascarella R, Muccio CF, Zedde M (June 2022).

"Forgetting the Unforgettable: Transient Global Amnesia Part I: Pathophysiology and Etiology" .

J Clin Med .

11 (12): 3373.

doi : 10.3390/jcm11123373 .

PMC 9225344 .

PMID 35743444 .

^ a b Bartsch T, Alfke K, Stingele R, Rohr A, Freitag-Wolf S, Jansen O, et al. (November 2006). "Selective affection of hippocampal CA-1 neurons in patients with transient global amnesia without long-term sequelae".

Brain .

129 (Pt 11): 2874– 84.

doi : 10.1093/brain/awl248 .

PMID 17003071 .

^ a b Bartsch T, Döhring J, Reuter S, Finke C, Rohr A, Brauer H, et al. (November 2015).

"Selective neuronal vulnerability of human hippocampal CA1 neurons: lesion evolution, temporal course, and pattern of hippocampal damage in diffusion-weighted MR imaging" .

J Cereb Blood Flow Metab .

35 (11): 1836– 45.

doi : 10.1038/jcbfm.2015.137 .

PMC 4635239 .

PMID 26082014 .

^ Szabo K (2014).

"Transient global amnesia" .

The Hippocampus in Clinical Neuroscience . Frontiers of Neurology and Neuroscience. Vol. 34. pp.

143– 149.

doi : 10.1159/000356431 .

ISBN 978-3-318-02567-5 .

PMID 24777137 .

Archived from the original on 2021-09-23 . Retrieved 2018-08-15 .

^ a b c Kuruba R, Hattiangady B, Shetty AK (January 2009).

"Hippocampal neurogenesis and neural stem cells in temporal lobe epilepsy" .

Epilepsy & Behavior .

14 (Suppl 1): 65– 73.

doi : 10.1016/j.yebeh.2008.08.020 .

PMC 2654382 .

PMID 18796338 .

^ Thom M (August 2014).

"Review: Hippocampal sclerosis in epilepsy: a neuropathology review" .

Neuropathology and Applied Neurobiology .

40 (5): 520– 543.

doi : 10.1111/nan.12150 .

PMC 4265206 .

PMID 24762203 .

^ Chang BS, Lowenstein DH (September 2003). "Epilepsy".

The New England Journal of Medicine .

349 (13): 1257– 1266.

doi : 10.1056/NEJMra022308 .

PMID 14507951 .

^ Sloviter RS (February 2005).

"The neurobiology of temporal lobe epilepsy: too much information, not enough knowledge" .

Comptes Rendus Biologies .

328 (2): 143– 153.

doi : 10.1016/j.crvi.2004.10.010 .

PMID 15771000 .

^ a b Antoniades M, Schoeler T, Radua J, Valli I, Allen P, Kempton MJ, et al. (March 2018).

"Verbal learning and hippocampal dysfunction in schizophrenia: A meta-analysis" (PDF) .

Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews .

86 : 166– 175.

doi : 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2017.12.001 .

PMC 5818020 .

PMID 29223768 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 2018-07-25 . Retrieved 2018-11-23 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l Morris R, Amaral D (2024).

The Hippocampus Book (Second ed.). New York: Oxford University Press. pp.

923– 925.

ISBN 9780190065324 .

^ Harrison PJ (June 2004). "The hippocampus in schizophrenia: a review of the neuropathological evidence and its pathophysiological implications".

Psychopharmacology .

174 (1): 151– 162.

doi : 10.1007/s00213-003-1761-y .

PMID 15205886 .

S2CID 12388920 .

^ Duncan LE, Li T, Salem M, Li W, Mortazavi L, Senturk H, et al. (February 2025).

"Mapping the cellular etiology of schizophrenia and complex brain phenotypes" .

Nature Neuroscience .

28 (2): 248– 258.

doi : 10.1038/s41593-024-01834-w .

PMC 11802450 .

PMID 39833308 .

^ Pines AR, Frandsen SB, Drew W, Meyer GM, Howard C, Palm ST, et al. (February 2025). "Mapping Lesions That Cause Psychosis to a Human Brain Circuit and Proposed Stimulation Target".

JAMA Psychiatry .

82 (4): 368– 378.

doi : 10.1001/jamapsychiatry.2024.4534 .

PMC 11822627.

PMID 39937525 .

^ Goto Y, Grace AA (November 2008).

"Limbic and cortical information processing in the nucleus accumbens" .

Trends in Neurosciences .

31 (11): 552– 558.

doi : 10.1016/j.tins.2008.08.002 .

PMC 2884964 .

PMID 18786735 .

^ Goto Y, Grace AA (November 2008).

"Limbic and cortical information processing in the nucleus accumbens" .

Trends in Neurosciences .

31 (11): 552– 558.

doi : 10.1016/j.tins.2008.08.002 .

PMC 2884964 .

PMID 18786735 .

^ Bilgüvar K, Oztürk AK, Louvi A, Kwan KY, Choi M, Tatli B, et al. (September 2010).

"Whole-exome sequencing identifies recessive WDR62 mutations in severe brain malformations" .

Nature .

467 (7312): 207– 210.

Bibcode : 2010Natur.467..207B .

doi : 10.1038/nature09327 .

PMC 3129007 .

PMID 20729831 .

^ Shohayeb B, Ho UY, Hassan H, Piper M, Ng DC (2020).

"The Spindle-Associated Microcephaly Protein, WDR62, Is Required for Neurogenesis and Development of the Hippocampus" .

Frontiers in Cell and Developmental Biology .

8 549353.

doi : 10.3389/fcell.2020.549353 .

PMC 7517699 .

PMID 33042990 .

^ Aboitiz F, Morales D, Montiel J (October 2003). "The evolutionary origin of the mammalian isocortex: towards an integrated developmental and functional approach".

The Behavioral and Brain Sciences .

26 (5): 535– 552.

doi : 10.1017/S0140525X03000128 .

PMID 15179935 .

S2CID 6599761 .

^ Bingman VP, Salas C, Rodriguez F (2009). "Evolution of the Hippocampus". In Binder MD, Hirokawa N, Windhorst U (eds.).

Encyclopedia of Neuroscience . Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer. pp.

1356– 1360.

doi : 10.1007/978-3-540-29678-2_3158 .

ISBN 978-3-540-29678-2 .

^ Rodríguez F, López JC, Vargas JP, Broglio C, Gómez Y, Salas C (2002). "Spatial memory and hippocampal pallium through vertebrate evolution: insights from reptiles and teleost fish".

Brain Research Bulletin .

57 ( 3– 4): 499– 503.

doi : 10.1016/S0361-9230(01)00682-7 .

PMID 11923018 .

S2CID 40858078 .

^ Hegarty BE, Gruenhagen GW, Johnson ZV, Baker CM, Streelman JT (May 2024).

"Spatially resolved cell atlas of the teleost telencephalon and deep homology of the vertebrate forebrain" .

Commun Biol .

7 (1) 612.

doi : 10.1038/s42003-024-06315-1 .

PMC 11109250 .

PMID 38773256 .

^ Broglio C, Gómez A, Durán E, Ocaña FM, Jiménez-Moya F, Rodríguez F, et al. (September 2005). "Hallmarks of a common forebrain vertebrate plan: specialized pallial areas for spatial, temporal and emotional memory in actinopterygian fish".

Brain Res Bull .

66 ( 4– 6): 277– 81.

doi : 10.1016/j.brainresbull.2005.03.021 .

PMID 16144602 .

^ a b Givon S, Altsuler-Nagar R, Oring N, Vinepinsky E, Segev R (October 2023).

"Lateral and medial telencephalic pallium lesions impair spatial memory in goldfish" .

Brain Res Bull .

204 110802.

doi : 10.1016/j.brainresbull.2023.110802 .

PMID 39492553 .

^ Vargas JP, Bingman VP, Portavella M, López JC (November 2006). "Telencephalon and geometric space in goldfish".

The European Journal of Neuroscience .

24 (10): 2870– 2878.

doi : 10.1111/j.1460-9568.2006.05174.x .

PMID 17156211 .

S2CID 23884328 .

^ Docampo-Seara A, Lagadec R, Mazan S, Rodríguez MA, Quintana-Urzainqui I, Candal E (November 2018).

"Study of pallial neurogenesis in shark embryos and the evolutionary origin of the subventricular zone" .

Brain Structure & Function .

223 (8): 3593– 3612.

doi : 10.1007/s00429-018-1705-2 .

hdl : 10347/17636 .

PMID 29980930 .

^ Rodríguez F, Quintero B, Amores L, Madrid D, Salas-Peña C, Salas C (July 2021).

"Spatial Cognition in Teleost Fish: Strategies and Mechanisms" .

Animals .

11 (8): 2271.

doi : 10.3390/ani11082271 .

PMC 8388456 .

PMID 34438729 .

^ Colombo M, Broadbent N (June 2000). "Is the avian hippocampus a functional homologue of the mammalian hippocampus?".

Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews .

24 (4): 465– 484.

doi : 10.1016/S0149-7634(00)00016-6 .

PMID 10817844 .

S2CID 22686204 .

^ Shettleworth SJ (2003). "Memory and hippocampal specialization in food-storing birds: challenges for research on comparative cognition".

Brain, Behavior and Evolution .

62 (2): 108– 116.

doi : 10.1159/000072441 .

PMID 12937349 .

S2CID 23546600 .

^ Mizunami M, Weibrecht JM, Strausfeld NJ (December 1998). "Mushroom bodies of the cockroach: their participation in place memory".

The Journal of Comparative Neurology .

402 (4): 520– 537.

doi : 10.1002/(SICI)1096-9861(19981228)402:4<520::AID-CNE6>3.0.CO;2-K .

PMID 9862324 .

S2CID 44384958 .

^ Jacobs RE (February 2022).

"Diffusion MRI Connections in the Octopus Brain" .

Exp Neurobiol .

31 (1): 17– 28.

doi : 10.5607/en21047 .

PMC 8907252 .

PMID 35256541 .

^ Richter JN, Hochner B, Kuba MJ (2016).

"Pull or Push? Octopuses Solve a Puzzle Problem" .

PLOS ONE .

11 (3): e0152048.

Bibcode : 2016PLoSO..1152048R .

doi : 10.1371/journal.pone.0152048 .

PMC 4803207 .

PMID 27003439 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Hippocampus .

Stained brain slice images which include the "hippocampus" at the BrainMaps project Diagram of a Hippocampal Brain Slice Hippocampus – Cell Centered Database Temporal-lobe.com An interactive diagram of the rat parahippocampal-hippocampal region "Search Hippocampus on BrainNavigator" .

via BrainNavigator . Archived from the original on 2012-03-09.

Hippocampome.org Wheeler DW, Kopsick JD, Sutton N, Tecuatl C, Komendantov AO, Nadella K, et al. (February 2024).

"Hippocampome.org 2.0 is a knowledge base enabling data-driven spiking neural network simulations of rodent hippocampal circuits" .

eLife .

12 RP90597.

doi : 10.7554/eLife.90597 .

PMC 10942544 .

PMID 38345923 .

https://web.archive.org/web/20110722072202/http://web.sc.itc.keio.ac.jp/anatomy/Rauber-Kopsch/web/abb2/png144/440.png v t e Rostral basal ganglia of the human brain and associated structures Basal ganglia Grey matter Striatum Dorsal striatum Putamen Caudate nucleus Ventral striatum Nucleus accumbens Olfactory tubercle Globus pallidus GPe GPi Other Amygdala Claustrum White matter Centrum semiovale Internal capsule Anterior limb Genu Posterior limb Optic radiation Corona radiata External capsule Extreme capsule Pallidothalamic tracts : Thalamic fasciculus Ansa lenticularis Lenticular fasciculus Subthalamic fasciculus Rhinencephalon Grey matter Anterior olfactory nucleus Anterior perforated substance Olfactory bulb White matter Olfactory tract Medial olfactory stria Lateral olfactory stria Olfactory trigone Other basal forebrain Grey matter Substantia innominata Nucleus basalis Nucleus of diagonal band White matter Diagonal band of Broca Stria terminalis Archicortex : Hippocampal formation / Hippocampus anatomy Grey matter Hippocampus CA1 CA2 CA3 CA4 Dentate gyrus Fascia dentata Subiculum White matter Alveus Fimbria Perforant path Schaffer collateral v t e Neurotransmitter systems Acetylcholine Nucleus basalis of Meynert → Neocortex Septal nuclei ( Medial septal nucleus ) → Fornix → Hippocampus Striatum BA / M Dopaminergic pathways Mesocortical pathway : Ventral tegmental area → Prefrontal cortices Mesolimbic pathway : Ventral tegmental area → Nucleus accumbens and olfactory tubercle Nigrostriatal pathway : Substantia nigra pars compacta → Caudate nucleus and putamen Tuberoinfundibular pathway : Hypothalamus ( Infundibular nucleus ) → Pituitary gland ( Median eminence ) Norepinephrine Locus coeruleus Lateral tegmental field Serotonin pathways Raphe nuclei Anterior raphespinal tract Lateral raphespinal tract AA Aspartate Climbing fibers GABA Globus pallidus Rostromedial tegmental nucleus Glycine Renshaw cells Glutamate Thalamus Subthalamic nucleus Globus pallidus v t e Papez circuit pathway Diencephalon Mammillary body → Mammillothalamic tract → Anterior nuclei of thalamus → Telencephalon Anterior limb of internal capsule → Cingulate gyrus → Cingulum → Parahippocampal gyrus → Entorhinal cortex → Perforant path → Hippocampus / Hippocampal formation ( CA3 → CA1 → Subiculum ) → Fornix → Procedure templates v t e Tests and procedures involving the central nervous system Neurosurgery Skull Craniotomy Decompressive craniectomy Cranioplasty Brain Thalamus and globus pallidus Thalamotomy Thalamic stimulator Pallidotomy Ventricular system Cerebral shunt Ventriculostomy Suboccipital puncture Intracranial pressure monitoring Cerebrum Psychosurgery Lobotomy Bilateral cingulotomy Multiple subpial transection Hemispherectomy Corpus callosotomy Anterior temporal lobectomy Other Pituitary gland Hypophysectomy Hippocampus Amygdalohippocampectomy Brain biopsy Meninges Meningeal biopsy Spinal cord and spinal canal Spinal decompression Discectomy Intervertebral disc annuloplasty Cordotomy Rhizotomy Imaging Neuroimaging Head CT Cerebral angiography Pneumoencephalography Echoencephalography / Transcranial Doppler Brain MRI Brain PET Magnetoencephalography Myelography Wada test Microneurography Diagnostic Electroencephalography Lumbar puncture CSF tap test Polysomnography Clinical prediction rules Glasgow Coma Scale Mini–mental state examination National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale CHADS2 score v t e Test and procedures involving the endocrine system Pancreas Islet cell transplantation see also digestive system procedures Pituitary Hypophysectomy Transsphenoidal surgery Combined rapid anterior pituitary evaluation panel Thyroid Thyroidectomy Parathyroidectomy Tests Radioactive iodine uptake test Sestamibi parathyroid scan TRH stimulation test Adrenal gland Adrenalectomy Tests Dexamethasone suppression test ACTH stimulation test Captopril suppression test Fluid deprivation test Pineal gland Pinealectomy v t e Tests and procedures involving the eyes Anesthesia for eye surgery Eye surgery Oculoplastics Eye examination Adnexa Eyelids Blepharoplasty East Asian blepharoplasty Epicanthoplasty Eyelid revision Hughes procedure Tarsorrhaphy Lacrimal system Dacryocystorhinostomy Punctoplasty Globe Refractive surgery Alpins method Automated lamellar keratoplasty Conductive keratoplasty Corneal inlay Epikeratophakia Epi-LASIK Intrastromal corneal ring segment Keratomileusis Laser blended vision Laser eye surgery Laser thermal keratoplasty LASIK Contoura Vision Limbal relaxing incisions Phakic intraocular lens implantation Photorefractive keratectomy Radial keratotomy SMILE Cataract surgery Capsulorhexis Capsulotomy Glued intraocular lens Hydrodelineation Hydrodissection Intraocular lens scaffold Manual small incision cataract surgery Phacoemulsification Prechop Retinal surgery Ignipuncture Laser photocoagulation Scleral buckle Glaucoma surgery Cyclodestruction Excimer laser trabeculostomy Minimally invasive glaucoma surgery Trabeculectomy Trabeculoplasty Transplantation Whole eye transplantation Corneal transplantation Corneal button Descemet membrane endothelial keratoplasty Pre-Descemet's endothelial keratoplasty Retinal regeneration Other Anterior chamber paracentesis Boston keratoprosthesis Corneal collagen cross-linking Enucleation Conformer Evisceration Gundersen flap Intravitreal injection Iridectomy Peritomy Photodisruption Phototherapeutic keratectomy Pterygium Sclerotomy Vitrectomy Extraocular muscles Harada–Ito procedure Strabismus surgery Minimally invasive strabismus surgery Botulinum toxin therapy of strabismus Medical imaging Corneal topography Electrodiagnosis Electronystagmography Electrooculography Electroretinography Fluorescein angiography Fundus photography Heidelberg Retinal Tomography Indocyanine green angiography Optical coherence tomography Optical coherence tomography angiography Eye examination A-scan ultrasound biometry Amsler grid Bagolini Striated Glasses Test Color perception test Dilated fundus examination Funduscopy Gonioscopy Ocular tonometry Ophthalmoscopy Retinoscopy Slit-lamp examination Visual field test Radiation therapy Plaque radiotherapy History Couching Cryoextraction v t e Tests and procedures on the ear Outer ear Otoplasty Middle ear Myringotomy Stapedectomy Tympanoplasty Tympanocentesis Myringoplasty Inner ear Mastoidectomy Tests Epley maneuver Caloric reflex test Auditory brainstem response Electronystagmography v t e Procedures relating to the mouth and pharynx Mouth lip : Labial frenectomy Lip lift Lip augmentation Cheiloplasty tongue : Lingual frenectomy Genioglossus advancement Glossectomy teeth : see Template:Endodontology gingiva : see Template:Periodontology Oropharynx palate : Palatoplasty Pharyngeal flap surgery tonsil : Tonsillectomy Adenoidectomy uvula : Uvulotomy Uvulopalatoplasty Uvulopalatopharyngoplasty v t e Tests and procedures involving the respiratory system Surgery Upper RT nose Rhinoplasty Septoplasty Somnoplasty Alarplasty Rhinectomy Rhinomanometry Acoustic rhinometry sinus Sinusotomy larynx Laryngoscopy Laryngectomy Laryngotomy Thyrotomy Laryngotracheal reconstruction Lower RT trachea Cricothyrotomy Tracheoesophageal puncture Tracheotomy bronchus Bronchoscopy lung Pneumonectomy Lobectomy Wedge resection Transplantation Decortication Heart–lung transplant Chest wall , pleura , mediastinum , and diaphragm pleura / pleural cavity Thoracentesis Pleurodesis Thoracoscopy Thoracotomy Chest tube mediastinum Mediastinoscopy Nuss procedure Tests Medical imaging Bronchography CT pulmonary angiogram High-resolution computed tomography Spiral CT Ventilation/perfusion scan Clinical prediction rule Pneumonia severity index CURB-65 Lung function test Body plethysmography Spirometry Bronchial challenge test Capnography Diffusion capacity Impulse oscillometry Cytology Bronchoalveolar lavage Nasopharyngeal swab Sputum culture Other Blood gas test Pneumography Other procedures Oxygen therapy Intubation Surgical airway management Mechanical ventilation Negative pressure ventilator Positive pressure ventilation Respiratory therapy Artificial respiration CPR Hyperbaric medicine Decompression chamber Heliox Nebulizer Postural drainage Hyperinflation therapy Pulmonary hygiene Pulmonary rehabilitation v t e Tests and procedures involving the heart Cardiac surgery Interventional cardiology Cardiology diagnostic tests and procedures Cardiac imaging Surgery Heart valves and septa Valve repair Valvulotomy Mitral valve repair Valvuloplasty aortic mitral Valve replacement Aortic valve repair Aortic valve replacement Ross procedure Transcatheter Mitral valve replacement Transcatheter pulmonary valve replacement production of septal defect in heart enlargement of existing septal defect Atrial septostomy Balloon septostomy creation of septal defect in heart Blalock–Hanlon procedure shunt from heart chamber to blood vessel atrium to pulmonary artery Fontan procedure left ventricle to aorta Rastelli procedure right ventricle to pulmonary artery Sano shunt compound procedures for transposition of the great vessels Arterial switch operation Mustard procedure Senning procedure for univentricular defect Norwood procedure Kawashima procedure shunt from blood vessel to blood vessel systemic circulation to pulmonary artery shunt Blalock–Taussig shunt SVC to the right PA Glenn procedure Cardiac vessels CHD Angioplasty Bypass / Coronary artery bypass MIDCAB Off-pump CAB TECAB Coronary stent Bare-metal stent Drug-eluting stent Obstacle removal Endarterectomy Atherectomy Bentall procedure Valve-sparing aortic root replacement LeCompte maneuver Other Pericardium Pericardiocentesis Pericardial window Pericardiectomy Myocardium Cardiomyoplasty Dor procedure Septal myectomy Ventricular reduction Alcohol septal ablation Conduction system Maze procedure ( Cox maze and minimaze ) Catheter ablation Cryoablation Radiofrequency ablation Pacemaker insertion S-ICD implantation ICD implantation Cardiac resynchronization therapy Left atrial appendage occlusion Cardiotomy Heart transplantation Tests Electrophysiology Electrocardiography Vectorcardiography Magnetocardiography Holter monitor Implantable loop recorder Cardiac stress test Bruce protocol Electrophysiology study Wireless ambulatory ECG Cardiac imaging Angiocardiography Echocardiography TTE TEE Myocardial perfusion imaging Cardiovascular MRI Ventriculography Radionuclide ventriculography Cardiac catheterization / Coronary catheterization Cardiac CT Cardiac PET sound Phonocardiogram Function tests Impedance cardiography Ballistocardiography Cardiotocography Pacing Cardioversion Transcutaneous pacing Category v t e Vascular surgery Vascular and endovascular surgery Arterial disease Angioplasty Atherectomy Endarterectomy Carotid endarterectomy Stent Carotid stenting Vascular bypass Venous disease Laser surgery Phlebectomy Ambulatory Sclerotherapy Arterial and venous access Arteriotomy Phlebotomy Venous cutdown Aortic aneurysm / dissection Endovascular aneurysm repair Open aortic surgery Other Cardioplegia Cardiopulmonary bypass First rib resection Isolated organ perfusion technique Extracorporeal membrane oxygenation Revascularization Seldinger technique Vascular access Vascular snare Medical imaging Angiography Digital subtraction angiography Aortography Cerebral angiography Fluorescein angiography Magnetic resonance angiography Radionuclide angiography Venography Impedance cardiography Portography Ultrasound Carotid ultrasonography Intravascular ultrasound Other diagnostic Angioscopy Ankle–brachial pressure index Toe pressure v t e Procedures relating to the haematopoetic and lymphatic systems Bone marrow Stem cell transplantation Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation Thymus Removal Transplantation Spleen Removal Transplantation Lymph nodes Lymphadenectomy Neck dissection Retroperitoneal lymph node dissection Lymph node biopsy Tonsils see Template:Procedures on the mouth and pharynx Imaging Lymphogram v t e Tests and procedures involving the human digestive system Digestive system surgery Digestive tract Upper GI tract SGs / Esophagus Esophagectomy Heller myotomy Sialography Impedance–pH monitoring Esophageal pH monitoring Esophageal motility study Functional Lumen Imaging Probe High resolution manometry Stomach Sengstaken–Blakemore tube ) Nasogastric tube Gastric lavage Bariatric surgery Adjustable gastric band Endoscopic sleeve gastroplasty Gastric bypass surgery Sleeve gastrectomy Vertical banded gastroplasty surgery Collis gastroplasty Gastrectomy Billroth I Billroth II Roux-en-Y Gastroenterostomy Gastropexy Gastrostomy Percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy Esophagogastric dissociation Hill repair Nissen fundoplication Pyloromyotomy Schilling test Medical imaging Endoscopy Esophagogastroduodenoscopy Transnasal esophagoscopy Barium swallow Upper gastrointestinal series Lower GI tract Small bowel Bariatric surgery Duodenal switch Jejunoileal bypass Bowel resection Ileostomy Intestine transplantation Jejunostomy Partial ileal bypass surgery Strictureplasty Large bowel Appendectomy Colectomy Colonic polypectomy Colostomy Hartmann's operation Rectum Abdominoperineal resection Lower anterior resection Total mesorectal excision Ventral rectopexy Anal canal Anal sphincterotomy Anorectal manometry Lateral internal sphincterotomy Rubber band ligation Transanal hemorrhoidal dearterialization Medical imaging Endoscopy : Colonoscopy Anoscopy Capsule endoscopy Enteroscopy Proctoscopy Sigmoidoscopy Abdominal ultrasonography Defecography Double-contrast barium enema Endoanal ultrasound Enteroclysis Lower gastrointestinal series Small-bowel follow-through Transrectal ultrasonography Virtual colonoscopy Stool tests Fecal fat test Fecal pH test Stool guaiac test Accessory Liver Artificial extracorporeal liver support Bioartificial liver devices Liver dialysis Hepatectomy Liver biopsy Liver transplantation Portal hypertension Transjugular intrahepatic portosystemic shunt (TIPS) Distal splenorenal shunt procedure Gallbladder , bile duct Cholecystectomy Cholecystostomy Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) Hepatoportoenterostomy Medical imaging : Cholangiography Intravenous cholangiography (IVC) Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) Percutaneous transhepatic cholangiography (PTC) Cholecystography Cholescintigraphy Pancreas Frey's procedure Pancreas transplantation Pancreatectomy Pancreaticoduodenectomy Puestow procedure Abdominopelvic Peritoneum Diagnostic peritoneal lavage Intraperitoneal injection Laparoscopy Omentopexy Paracentesis Peritoneal dialysis Hernia Hernia repair Inguinal hernia surgery Femoral hernia repair Other Laparotomy Exploratory laparotomy Rapid urease test / Urea breath test Clinical prediction rules Model for End-Stage Liver Disease (MELD) Pediatric end-stage liver disease (PELD) United Kingdom Model for End-Stage Liver Disease (UKELD) Child–Pugh score Ranson criteria Milan criteria v t e Tests and procedures involving the urinary system Kidney Dialysis Hemofiltration Peritoneal dialysis Endoscopy Nephroscopy Extracorporeal shockwave therapy Kidney transplantation Lithotripsy Laser lithotripsy Nephrectomy Nephropexy Nephrostomy Nephrotomy Percutaneous nephrolithotomy Renal biopsy Ureter Ureterolysis Ureteroscopy Ureterosigmoidostomy Ureterostomy Urinary diversion Bladder Cystectomy Cystoscopy Suprapubic cystostomy Urethra Artificial urinary sphincter Cystourethrography Urethral bulking injections Urethral sounding Urethropexy Urethroplasty Urethrotomy General Imaging Abdominal x-ray Computed tomography urography Cystography Pyelogram Radioisotope renography Retrograde urethrogram Urinary tract ultrasound Urodynamic testing Cystometry Voiding cystourethrography Other Urinalysis Urinary catheterization v t e Tests and procedures involving the female reproductive system Gynecological surgery Ovaries Oophorectomy Salpingoophorectomy Fallopian tubes Falloposcopy Salpingectomy Tubal ligation Essure Tubal reversal Uterus General: Genitoplasty Hysterectomy Hysterotomy Pelvic exenteration Uterine artery embolization Transplantation Uterine cavity : Hysteroscopy Vacuum aspiration Endometrium : Endometrial biopsy Endometrial ablation Myometrium : Uterine myomectomy Cervix : Colposcopy Cervical conization LEEP Cervical cerclage Cervical screening ( Pap test ) Cervicectomy Pessary insertion Vagina Vaginectomy Culdoscopy Culdocentesis Episiotomy husband stitch Hymenotomy Colpocleisis Hymenorrhaphy Vaginal wet mount Vaginal transplantation Vulva Vulvectomy Female genital mutilation Labiaplasty Clitoral hood reduction Vestibulectomy Medical imaging Gynecologic ultrasonography Hysterosalpingography v t e Tests and procedures relating to pregnancy and childbirth Maternal tests Pregnancy test Leopold's maneuvers Prenatal testing Fetal tests Imaging Obstetric ultrasonography Nuchal scan Anomaly scan Crown-rump length Fetal movement counting Contraction stress test Nonstress test Vibroacoustic stimulation Biophysical profile Amniotic fluid index Sampling Chorionic villus sampling Amniocentesis Triple test Quad test Fetoscopy Fetal scalp blood testing Fetal scalp stimulation test Percutaneous umbilical cord blood sampling Apt test Kleihauer–Betke test Lung maturity Lecithin–sphingomyelin ratio Lamellar body count Fetal fibronectin test Other Cardiotocography Interventions Fetal surgery Fetendo Podalic version External cephalic version Amnioinfusion Delivery Vaginal delivery Induction Assisted vaginal delivery Artificial rupture of membranes Episiotomy Symphysiotomy Obstetrical forceps Vacuum extraction Odon device Dystocia management McRoberts maneuver Wood's screw maneuver Zavanelli maneuver Third stage of labor Manual placenta removal Caesarean section Elective On maternal request EXIT procedure Resuscitative hysterotomy Postpartum bleeding Hysterectomy B-Lynch suture v t e Procedures involving bones and joints Orthopedic surgery Bones Face Jaw reduction Orthognathic surgery Chin augmentation Spine Coccygectomy Laminotomy Laminectomy Laminoplasty Corpectomy Facetectomy Foraminotomy Vertebral fixation Vertebral augmentation Arm Acromioplasty Leg Femoral head ostectomy Astragalectomy Distraction osteogenesis Ilizarov apparatus Phemister graft General Ostectomy Bone grafting Osteotomy Epiphysiodesis Reduction Internal fixation External fixation Tension band wiring Cartilage Articular cartilage repair Microfracture surgery Knee cartilage replacement therapy Autologous chondrocyte implantation Joints Spine Arthrodesis Spinal fusion Intervertebral discs Discectomy Annuloplasty Arthroplasty Arm Shoulder surgery Shoulder replacement Bankart repair Weaver–Dunn procedure Ulnar collateral ligament reconstruction Hand surgery Brunelli procedure Finger joint replacement Leg Hip resurfacing Hip replacement Rotationplasty Anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction Knee replacement / Unicompartmental knee arthroplasty Ankle fusion Ankle replacement Broström procedure Triple arthrodesis General Arthrotomy Arthroplasty Synovectomy Arthroscopy Joint replacement imaging: Arthrogram Arthrocentesis Arthroscopic lavage v t e Tests and procedures on muscle and soft tissue Muscle Myotomy Heller myotomy Muscle biopsy Electromyography Magnetomyography Tendon Tenotomy Tendon transfer Fascia Fasciotomy Bursa Bursectomy Other Amputation Hemipelvectomy Hemicorporectomy Replantation v t e Tests and procedures involving the breast Breast surgery Breast-conserving surgery Lumpectomy Segmental resection Wide local excision Quadrantectomy Mastectomy Radical mastectomy Breast augmentation Trans-umbilical breast augmentation Mammaplasty Breast implant Breast reduction SPAIR Mastopexy Breast reconstruction Interventions on the Lactiferous ducts Ductal lavage Ductoscopy Microdochectomy Central duct excision Breast imaging Mammography Positron emission mammography Tomosynthesis Xeromammography Galactography Breast MRI Breast ultrasound Automated whole-breast ultrasound Scintimammography Elastography Other Breast biopsy Fine-needle aspiration Breast cancer screening Breast self-examination Ductal lavage Breast duct endoscopy v t e Tests and procedures on the skin and subcutaneous tissue Skin Escharotomy Suture Skin grafting Mohs surgery Free flap Rotation flap TRAM flap Electrodesiccation and curettage Cryosurgery Skin biopsy Excision Rhytidectomy Liposuction Z-plasty Medical imaging Wood's lamp Hair Hair transplantation v t e Surgery involving the chest and lungs Mediastinoscopy Video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery (VATS) Lobectomy Bullectomy Lung transplantation Nuss procedure v t e Tests and procedures involving the male reproductive system Prostate Transurethral incision of the prostate Prostate biopsy Transrectal biopsy Transurethral biopsy Prostatectomy Transurethral resection of the prostate Radical retropubic prostatectomy Transurethral microwave thermotherapy Transurethral needle ablation of the prostate Brachytherapy Prostate brachytherapy Prostate massage Seminal vesicles Spermatocelectomy Vas deferens Vasectomy Vasectomy reversal Vasovasostomy Vasoepididymostomy Testes Orchiectomy Castration Orchiopexy Penis Circumcision Penectomy Penile implant Preputioplasty Foreskin restoration Frenuloplasty of prepuce of penis Penile frenulectomy Penile plethysmography Postage stamp test Other tests Semen analysis Scrotal ultrasound Portals : Medicine Anatomy Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Israel Other Terminologia Anatomica Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐cdqmm
Cached time: 20250817043802
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 2.981 seconds
Real time usage: 3.339 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 16516/1000000
Revision size: 143242/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 1223824/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 176173/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 19/100
Expensive parser function count: 22/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 1028847/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.838/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 18325392/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 3/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 2684.873      1 -total
 53.79% 1444.175      1 Template:Reflist
 38.55% 1035.102    160 Template:Cite_journal
 11.67%  313.419     54 Template:Navbox
  9.21%  247.195      1 Template:Academic_peer_reviewed
  8.26%  221.838      1 Template:Talk_other
  8.19%  219.871      1 Template:Academic_peer_reviewed/other
  7.38%  198.128     33 Template:Cite_book
  6.64%  178.239      1 Template:Procedure_templates
  6.56%  176.232      1 Template:Navboxes Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:53948:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817043802 and revision id 1303810029. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Hippocampus&oldid=1303810029 " Categories : Wikipedia articles published in peer-reviewed literature Wikipedia articles published in WikiJournal of Medicine Externally peer reviewed articles Wikipedia articles published in peer-reviewed literature (W2J) Limbic system Hippocampus (brain) Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Featured articles Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Wikipedia articles incorporating text from open access publications Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 2 August 2025, at 05:09 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Hippocampus 58 languages Add topic

