Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Senior research staff 2 History 3 Building 4 Artwork 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Sainsbury Laboratory Cambridge University Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 52°11′41″N 0°07′40″E ﻿ / ﻿ 52.19475°N 0.12777°E ﻿ / 52.19475; 0.12777 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Research institute at the University of Cambridge The Sainsbury Laboratory, Cambridge Exterior of the Sainsbury Laboratory from the Cambridge University Botanic Garden Academic affiliation University of Cambridge Endowment Gatsby Charitable Foundation Director Henrik Jönsson Location Cambridge , United Kingdom Architect Stanton Williams Website www .slcu .cam .ac .uk The Sainsbury Laboratory Cambridge University (or SLCU ) [ 1 ] is an independently funded British research institute based at the Cambridge University Botanic Garden . Its aim is to elucidate the regulatory systems underlying plant growth and plant development .

Senior research staff [ edit ] As of 2022, senior research staff include: Professor Henrik Jönsson, Director since 2020 [ 2 ] Dr James Locke, Associate Director and Royal Society University Research Fellow Professor Ottoline Leyser , Research Group Leader, [ 3 ] Director from 2013 to 2020 [ 2 ] Professor Yrjö Helariutta, Research Group Leader Professor Elliot Meyerowitz , Inaugural Director and Distinguished Associate Professor Giles Oldroyd , Research Group Leader Dr Alexander Jones, Research Group Leader Dr Edwige Moyroud, Research Group Leader Dr François Nédélec, Research Group Leader Dr Sebastian Schornack, Research Group Leader and Royal Society University Research Fellow Dr Chris Whitewoods, Career Development Fellow Dr Sarah Robinson, Career Development Fellow Dr Renske Vroomans, Career Development Fellow History [ edit ] The Sainsbury Laboratory houses 120 plant scientists studying plant development and diversity in state-of-the-art laboratory facilities. The building was made possible by the award of an £82 million grant [ citation needed ] from the Gatsby Charitable Foundation , one of the Sainsbury family charitable trusts.

[ 4 ] The work of the laboratory complements that of the Sainsbury Laboratory at Norwich.

[ 5 ] Construction of the 11,000-square metre building, [ 4 ] led by Kier Group , began in the private working and research area of the Botanic Garden in February 2008 and was completed in December 2010. The building was opened on 27 April 2011 by Elizabeth II .

[ 6 ] The laboratory building also provides plant growth facilities and a home for the University Herbarium , which contains over one million pressed and dried plant specimens from around the world, including the great majority of those collected by Charles Darwin on the Beagle Voyage , and scientific research material relating to newly discovered plants from the 18th and 19th centuries.

[ citation needed ] Building [ edit ] The Laboratory meets Cambridge City Council’s planning requirement for 10% renewable on-site energy generation through use of photovoltaic panels, [ 7 ] and has been awarded a BREEAM 'Excellent' rating. The Gilmour Suite, in a wing of the Sainsbury Laboratory, provides a public café and terrace for Botanic Garden visitors and is open all year during the garden's public opening hours. The building was awarded the Stirling Prize for architecture in 2012.

[ 8 ] Architect: Stanton Williams Furniture consultant: Luke Hughes [ 9 ] Construction Start date: February 2008 Completion Date: December 2010 Date of Occupation: January 2011 Number of Occupants: 150 Gross Internal Area: 11,000 m 2 (120,000 sq ft) Stairs Auditorium Cubicles Artwork [ edit ] The laboratory has several artworks, including: Artist Name Work Norman Ackroyd Galapagos Susanna Heron Henslow’s Walk William Pye Starburst References [ edit ] ^ "Sainsbury Laboratory Cambridge University" . Retrieved 1 May 2011 .

^ a b "Ottoline Leyser" .

National Academy of Sciences . Retrieved 9 March 2024 .

^ Sedwick, Caitlin (2014).

"Ottoline Leyser: The beauty of plant genetics" .

The Journal of Cell Biology .

204 (3): 284– 285.

doi : 10.1083/jcb.2043pi .

ISSN 0021-9525 .

PMC 3912528 .

PMID 24493584 .

^ a b "What we do" .

www.slcu.cam.ac.uk . 2013 . Retrieved 9 March 2024 .

^ Amsen, Eva (15 November 2011).

"An interview with Ottoline Leyser" .

Development .

138 (22): 4815– 17.

doi : 10.1242/dev.075333 .

PMID 22028022 .

^ "Opening of Sainsbury Laboratory" .

www.globalfood.cam.ac.uk . 4 May 2011 . Retrieved 9 March 2024 .

^ "The Sainsbury Laboratory, University of Cambridge" . ARUP.

^ "Stanton Williams' Sainsbury Laboratory wins the 2012 RIBA Stirling Prize!" .

ArchDaily . 13 October 2012 . Retrieved 19 April 2021 .

^ "Sainsbury Laboratory" .

www.stantonwilliams.com .

External links [ edit ] Official website v t e University of Cambridge People Chancellor David Sainsbury, Baron Sainsbury of Turville Vice-Chancellor Deborah Prentice List of University of Cambridge people Colleges Christ's Churchill Clare Clare Hall Corpus Christi Darwin Downing Emmanuel Fitzwilliam Girton Gonville and Caius Homerton Hughes Hall Jesus King’s Lucy Cavendish Magdalene Murray Edwards Newnham Pembroke Peterhouse Queens’ Robinson St Catharine’s St Edmund’s St John’s Selwyn Sidney Sussex Trinity Trinity Hall Wolfson Faculties and departments, by school Arts and Humanities English Anglo-Saxon Norse and Celtic Architecture CRASSH Existential Risk Classics Divinity Music Philosophy Biological sciences Genetics Gurdon Institute Pathology Physiology, Development and Neuroscience Plant Sciences Botanic Garden Sainsbury Laboratory Stem Cell Institute Clinical Medicine Autism Research Centre Cancer Unit Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit Mitochondrial Biology Unit Oncology Wolfson Brain Imaging Centre Humanities and Social sciences Economics Education History History and Philosophy of Science Human, Social, and Political Science Archaeological Research Politics and International Studies Law Criminology Physical sciences Astronomy Chemistry Earth Sciences Palaeoclimate Research Geography Scott Polar Research Institute Mathematical Sciences Mathematics Theoretical Cosmology Materials Science and Metallurgy Physics Technology Business School Alternative Finance Chemical Engineering and Biotechnology Computer Science and Technology Engineering Manufacturing Others ADC Theatre Institute of Continuing Education Library Press ( journals ) Student life Students' Union Graduate Union Air Squadron Amateur Dramatic Club Apostles BlueSci Cam FM Christian Union Conservatives Footlights May Week May Ball Labour Club Liberal Democrats Light Entertainment Society Moral Sciences Club Musical Society Philosophical Society Railway Club SCA Spaceflight Union Society Cambridge University Wine Society Varsity (student newspaper) The Mays Sport Association football Rules Aussie Rules Boxing Cricket Cross Country Dancing Golf Handball Ice Hockey Real Tennis Rifle shooting Rowing Openweight Men (CUBC) Lightweight Men (CULRC) Women (CUWBC) Rugby union Tennis Competitions Cuppers The Boat Race Women's Boat Race Henley Boat Races The Varsity Polo Match Rugby League Varsity Match Rugby Union Varsity Match University Cricket Match University Golf Match Affiliates Alan Turing Institute Cambridge Theological Federation Cambridge University Health Partners Cambridge University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust Cambridgeshire and Peterborough NHS Foundation Trust Royal Papworth Hospital NHS Foundation Trust Partner institutions Animal Health Trust Babraham Institute British Antarctic Survey CCDC EMBL-EBI Laboratory of Molecular Biology NIAB Wellcome Sanger Institute Museums Fitzwilliam Museum Hamilton Kerr Institute Kettle's Yard Museum of Archaeology and Anthropology Museum of Classical Archaeology Museum of Zoology Sedgwick Museum of Earth Sciences Polar Museum Whipple Museum of the History of Science Related Awards and prizes Cambridge Zero Regent House Senate House Cambridge University Council Fictional Cambridge colleges Cambridge University Reporter Category 52°11′41″N 0°07′40″E ﻿ / ﻿ 52.19475°N 0.12777°E ﻿ / 52.19475; 0.12777 Authority control databases International ISNI Other IdRef Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Sainsbury_Laboratory_Cambridge_University&oldid=1260792542 " Categories : Research institutes in Cambridge Biological research institutes in the United Kingdom Botanical research institutes Institutions in the School of the Biological Sciences, University of Cambridge Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from April 2022 Infobox mapframe without OSM relation ID on Wikidata Articles using infobox university All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2024 Coordinates on Wikidata Pages using the Kartographer extension This page was last edited on 2 December 2024, at 17:21 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Sainsbury Laboratory Cambridge University Add languages Add topic

