Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Eloquence in antiquity 2 Renaissance eloquence 3 Modern politicians and eloquence 4 See also 5 References 6 Further reading 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Eloquence 23 languages العربية Brezhoneg Català Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Kiswahili 閩東語 / Mìng-dĕ̤ng-ngṳ̄ 日本語 Norsk bokmål Português Română سنڌي کوردی Suomi Svenska اردو Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Rhetoric For other uses, see Eloquence (disambiguation) .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Eloquence" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( January 2009 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Statue of Eloquence at the Palais du parlement de Bretagne, Rennes Eloquence (from French eloquence from Latin eloquentia ) is the quality of speech or writing that is marked by  fluency, elegancy, and persuasiveness.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] It is also defined as one of the aims of formal oratory and, in this context, refers to the artistic expression of the speech as opposed to its argumentation.

[ 4 ] Eloquence is both a natural talent and improved by knowledge of language, study of a specific subject to be addressed, philosophy, rationale and ability to form a persuasive set of tenets within a presentation.

Part of a series on Rhetoric History Ancient Greece Asianism Atticism Attic orators Calliope Sophists Ancient India Ancient Rome The age of Cicero Second Sophistic Middle Ages Byzantine rhetoric Trivium Renaissance Studia humanitatis Modern period Concepts Captatio benevolentiae Chironomia Decorum Delectare Docere Device Eloquence Eloquentia perfecta Eunoia Enthymeme Facilitas Fallacy Informal Figure of speech Scheme Trope Five canons Inventio Dispositio Elocutio Memoria Pronuntiatio Hypsos Imitatio Kairos Method of loci Modes Operations Persuasion Ethos Pathos Logos Situation Style Grand Sotto voce Topos Genres Apologetics Debate Declamation Controversia Deliberative Demagogy Dialectic Socratic method Dissoi logoi Elocution Epideictic Encomium Panegyric Eulogy Farewell speech Forensic Funeral oration Homiletics‎ Sermon Invitational Lecture Public Lightning talk Maiden speech Oratory Polemic Diatribe Eristic Philippic Progymnasmata Suasoria Propaganda Spin Resignation speech Stump speech War-mongering Criticism Cluster Dramatic Pentadic Frame Genre Ideological Metaphoric Mimesis Narrative Neo-Aristotelian Rhetoricians Aeschines Aelius Aristides Antiphon Aristotle Aspasia Augustine Bakhtin Booth Brueggemann Burke Cicero de Man Demosthenes Derrida Dio Chrysostom Erasmus Gorgias Hobbes Hypereides Isocrates Lucian Lysias McLuhan Ong Perelman Pizan Protagoras Quintilian Ramus Richards Seneca the Elder Smith Toulmin Vico Weaver Works Gorgias (380 BC) Phaedrus (c. 370 BC) Rhetoric (c. 350 BC) Rhetoric to Alexander (c. 350 BC) De Sophisticis Elenchis (c. 350 BC) Topics (c. 350 BC) De Inventione (84 BC) Rhetorica ad Herennium (80 BC) De Oratore (55 BC) A Dialogue Concerning Oratorical Partitions (c. 50 BC) De Optimo Genere Oratorum (46 BC) Orator (46 BC) On the Sublime (c. 50) Institutio Oratoria (95) Panegyrici Latini (100–400) Dialogus de oratoribus (102) De doctrina Christiana (426) De vulgari eloquentia (1305) Copia: Foundations of the Abundant Style (1521) Language as Symbolic Action (1966) A General Rhetoric (1970) Subfields Argumentation Cognitive Contrastive Constitutive Digital Feminist Native American New Health and medicine Pedagogy Procedural Science Technology Therapy Visual Composition Related Ars dictaminis Communication studies Composition studies Doxa Glossary of rhetorical terms Glossophobia List of feminist rhetoricians List of speeches Oral skills Orator Pistis Public rhetoric Rhetoric of social intervention model Rhetrickery Rogerian argument Seduction Speechwriting Talking point TED Terministic screen Toulmin model Wooden iron v t e "True eloquence," Oliver Goldsmith says, "Does not consist ... in saying great things in a sublime style, but in a simple style; for there is, properly speaking, no such thing as a sublime style, the sublimity lies only in the things; and when they are not so, the language may be turgid, affected, metaphorical , but not affecting." [ 5 ] Eloquence in antiquity [ edit ] The word eloquence itself derives from the Latin roots: ē (a shortened form of the preposition ex ), meaning "out (of)", and loqui , a deponent verb meaning "to speak". Thus, eloquence is to speak fluently and understand and master language so as to employ a graceful style with persuasiveness, or gracefulness in interpretation and communication .

The concept of eloquence could date back to the rhetoric of the ancient Greeks, Calliope (one of the nine daughters of Zeus and Mnemosyne ) being the Muse of epic poetry and eloquence.

Hermes , the Greek God, was a patron of eloquence.

Cicero , a rhetorician and prolific author, was well-regarded in Ancient Rome as an orator of excellent eloquence.

Renaissance eloquence [ edit ] "The Effects of Trim's Eloquence".

George Cruikshank 's illustration to Laurence Sterne 's The Life and Opinions of Tristram Shandy, Gentleman The Renaissance humanists focused on the correlation of speech and political principles as a powerful tool to present and persuade others to particular concepts.  At the core of presentations was the use of graceful style, clear concise grammar and usage, and over time the insertion of rational and emotional arguments.

Petrarch (Fracesco Petrarca), in his study program of the classics and antiquity (Italian Renaissance) focused attention on language and communication. After mastering language, the goal was to reach a "level of eloquence", to be able to present gracefully, combine thought and reason in a powerful way, so as to persuade others to a point of view.  Petrarch encouraged students to imitate the ancient writers, from a language perspective, combining clear and correct speech with moral thought.

Later, Fr.

Louis Bourdaloue is regarded as one of the founders of French eloquence.

Modern politicians and eloquence [ edit ] Many famous political leaders, like Winston Churchill and Martin Luther King Jr.

and dictators such as Adolf Hitler and Benito Mussolini rose to prominence in large part due to their eloquence. In the Iranian Revolution , Ruhollah Khomeini came to power in part through the eloquence of his speeches, smuggled into the country on audio cassettes while he was still in exile.

[ 6 ] See also [ edit ] Audience response Crowd manipulation Declamation Debate Eulogy Glossophobia List of speeches Public orator Persuasion Rhetoric Speechwriter Speakers' bureau Thematic interpretation Toastmasters International Category:Speeches by type References [ edit ] ^ eloquence Merriam-Webster ^ eloquence Cambridge Dictionary ^ (2010). eloquence. In Stevenson, A. (Ed.), Oxford Dictionary of English. : Oxford University Press. Retrieved 3 Mar. 2025.

^ Fantham, E. (2001). Eloquence. In Encyclopedia of Rhetoric. : Oxford University Press. Retrieved 3 Mar. 2025.

^ Goldsmith, Oliver (1759).

Of Eloquence .

^ Stephen Zunes (April 2009).

"The Iranian Revolution (1977-1979)" . ICNC.

Further reading [ edit ] Mark Forsyth (2013), The Elements of Eloquence : How to Turn the Perfect English Phrase.

External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Eloquence .

Figures of Speech Abraham Lincoln's Lost Speech Modern parliamentary eloquence; the Rede lecture, delivered before the University of Cambridge, 6 November 1913 by George Curzon, 1st Marquess Curzon of Kedleston Authority control databases : National Germany Latvia Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Eloquence&oldid=1296360153 " Category : Public speaking Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from January 2009 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 19 June 2025, at 14:26 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Eloquence 23 languages Add topic

