Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Controversy Toggle Controversy subsection 1.1 Effect on sales 2 Media reports 3 Subsequently 4 Previous cases 5 See also 6 References and sources Toggle References and sources subsection 6.1 References 6.2 Sources 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Alms for Jihad Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 2006 book by J. Millard Burr and Robert O. Collins Alms for Jihad: Charity and Terrorism in the Islamic World Cover of the first edition of Alms for Jihad Author J. Millard Burr and Robert O. Collins Language English Genre Current affairs Publisher Cambridge University Press Publication date April 2006 Publication place United States Pages 368 ISBN 978-0-521-85730-7 OCLC 94948942 Dewey Decimal 361.7/5/091767 22 LC Class HV435 .B87 2006 Alms for Jihad: Charity and Terrorism in the Islamic World is a 2006 book co-written by American authors J. Millard Burr, a former USAID relief coordinator in Sudan , and historian Robert O. Collins which discusses the role of Islamic charities in financing terrorism .

Controversy [ edit ] In August 2007, the UK publisher Cambridge University Press ("CUP"), attempted to have the work removed from circulation due to libel action against them under the English legal system by Saudi businessman Khalid Salim A. Bin Mahfouz because the book accused him of funding al-Qaeda .

Kevin Taylor, intellectual property director at Cambridge University Press, stated that the book cited sources "whose falsity had been established to the satisfaction of the English courts" and "the evidence produced by the authors of Alms for Jihad, repeated from earlier sources, has not stood up to the requisite tests." [ 1 ] However, the authors of the book opposed CUP's action; instead, they urged Cambridge to contest the lawsuit. CUP was criticized by some [ who?

] who claimed that its action was incompatible with US freedom of speech laws and with freedom of the press, and also claimed English libel laws were excessively strict.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] In The New York Times Book Review (7 October 2007), United States Congressman Frank R. Wolf described CUP's settlement as "basically a book burning".

[ 4 ] Effect on sales [ edit ] Within hours, Alms for Jihad became one of the hundred most popular titles on Amazon.com and eBay in the United States. CUP wrote to libraries asking them to remove copies from circulation. CUP subsequently sent out copies of an errata sheet. The American Library Association issued a recommendation to libraries still holding Alms for Jihad : "Given the intense interest in the book, and the desire of readers to learn about the controversy first hand, we recommend that U.S. libraries keep the book available for their users." [ 5 ] Media reports [ edit ] Nathan Vardi published an article in Forbes magazine titled "Sins of the Father?" on March 18, 2002, with the heading: "Khalid bin Mahfouz, a Saudi billionaire, spent the 1990s engaged in financial folly and funding what the U.S. government calls a front for Al-Qaeda. Now a new generation tries to escape the shadow." [ 6 ] Subsequently [ edit ] The case led to the passing of the Libel Terrorism Protection Act (also known as " Rachel's Law ") by the state of New York on April 29, 2008.

[ citation needed ] Previous cases [ edit ] Mahfouz had previously also sued over claims in four other books: June 2006: La Vérité Interdite ( The Forbidden Truth ) by Jean-Charles Brisard and Guillaume Dasquié April 2006: Funding Evil: How Terrorism is Financed and How to Stop It , by Rachel Ehrenfeld July 2004: Terrorism financing: roots and trends of Saudi terrorism financing , prepared by JCB Consulting See also [ edit ] List of charities accused of ties to terrorism References and sources [ edit ] References [ edit ] ^ Kevin Taylor, "Why CUP acted responsibly" , theBookseller.com, September 8, 2007.

^ "Bonus Books criticises CUP" , The Bookseller , March 8, 2007 ^ "A University Press Stands Up – and Wins" , Inside Higher Ed , August 16, 2007 ^ Rachel Donadio (7 October 2007).

"Libel Without Borders" .

The New York Times .

^ { Cambridge contacts US libraries over Alms for Jihad" , American Libraries Magazine , August 17, 2007.

Archived 2016-11-04 at the Wayback Machine ^ Nathan Vardi, "Sins of the Father?" Forbes , March 18, 2002.

Sources [ edit ] Burr, J. Millard; Collins, Robert O. (2006).

Alms for Jihad: Charity and Terrorism in the Islamic World . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 0-521-85730-9 .

External links [ edit ] Official page at Cambridge University Press Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Alms_for_Jihad&oldid=1230473667 " Categories : 2006 non-fiction books Books about the Middle East Non-fiction books about jihadism Books critical of Islam Cambridge University Press books Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from April 2022 All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from January 2022 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from December 2023 This page was last edited on 22 June 2024, at 22:47 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Alms for Jihad Add languages Add topic

