Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life and education 2 Career 3 Influences 4 Recognition 5 Selected publications 6 See also 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Aaron Sloman 4 languages Afrikaans Català Français Italiano Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This biography of a living person needs additional citations for verification .

Please help by adding reliable sources .

Contentious material about living persons that is unsourced or poorly sourced must be removed immediately from the article and its talk page, especially if potentially libelous .

Find sources: "Aaron Sloman" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( November 2013 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Aaron Sloman Aaron Sloman in 2020 Born 1936 (age 88–89) Zimbabwe Philosophical work Institutions University of Sussex University of Birmingham Website www .cs .bham .ac .uk /~axs / Aaron Sloman (born 1936) is a philosopher and researcher on artificial intelligence and cognitive science . He held the Chair in Artificial Intelligence and Cognitive Science at the School of Computer Science at the University of Birmingham , and before that a chair with the same title at the University of Sussex . Since retiring he is Honorary Professor of Artificial Intelligence and Cognitive Science at Birmingham.

[ 1 ] He has published widely on philosophy of mathematics, epistemology, cognitive science, and artificial intelligence; he also collaborated widely, e.g. with biologist Jackie Chappell on the evolution of intelligence .

Early life and education [ edit ] Sloman was born in 1936, in the town of Que Que (now called Kwe Kwe ), in what was then Southern Rhodesia (now Zimbabwe ). His parents were Lithuanian Jews who emigrated to Southern Rhodesia around the turn of the century. Sloman describes himself as an atheist .

[ 2 ] He went to school in Cape Town between 1948 and 1953, then earned a degree in Mathematics and Physics at the University of Cape Town in 1956, after which a Rhodes Scholarship (from South African College School) took him to the University of Oxford (first Balliol College , and then St Antony's College ). In Oxford, he became interested in philosophy after a brief period studying mathematical logic supervised by Hao Wang , eventually writing a DPhil in philosophy, defending the ideas of Immanuel Kant about the nature of mathematical knowledge as non- empirical and non-analytic ('Knowing and Understanding', 1962).

Career [ edit ] His first job was teaching philosophy at the University of Hull (1962–64), after which he moved to Sussex University where he worked on philosophy of mind , philosophy of science , meta-ethics , and various topics in epistemology . In 1969, he learned about artificial intelligence (AI) from Max Clowes, then a leading UK AI researcher in vision. As a result of this, he published a paper distinguishing analogical representations' from Fregean representations and criticising the logicist approach to AI as too narrow. It was presented at IJCAI in 1971, then reprinted in Artificial Intelligence .

Subsequently, he was invited by Bernard Meltzer to spend a year (1972–1973) in Edinburgh University where he met and worked with many leading AI researchers. When he went back to Sussex he helped to found what eventually grew into COGS, the School of Cognitive and Computing Sciences. He managed the Poplog development team between 1980 and 1991.

While at Sussex University he published "The Computer Revolution in Philosophy: Philosophy science and models of mind" [ 3 ] (which emphasised the importance of architectures) in 1978, and other papers on various aspects of philosophy and AI, including work on the analysis of 'ought' and 'better', on vision on emotions in robots, on forms of representation and other topics. Much of his energy was devoted to developing new kinds of teaching materials based on POP-11 and Poplog for students learning AI and cognitive science.

In 1991, after 27 years at Sussex, he was offered a research chair in the School of Computer Science at the University of Birmingham , where he started a cognition and affect project (later on the Free Open Source Poplog Portal) and is still on it. He retired in 2001, but continues working full-time.

Influences [ edit ] His philosophical ideas were deeply influenced by the writings of Immanuel Kant , Gottlob Frege and Karl Popper , and to a lesser extent by John Austin , Gilbert Ryle , R. M. Hare (who, as his 'personal tutor' at Balliol College discussed meta-ethics with him), Imre Lakatos and Ludwig Wittgenstein . What he could learn from philosophers left large gaps, which he decided around 1970 research in artificial intelligence might fill. E.g.

philosophy of mind could be transformed by testing ideas in working fragments of minds, and philosophy of mathematics could be illuminated by trying to understand how a working robot could develop into a mathematician.

Much of his thinking about AI was influenced by Marvin Minsky and despite his critique of logicism he also learnt much from John McCarthy . His work on emotions can be seen as an elaboration of a paper on "Motivational and emotional controls of cognition", written in the 1960s by Herbert A. Simon . He disagrees with all of these on some topics, while agreeing on others.

[ citation needed ] Recognition [ edit ] He is a Fellow of Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence , [ 4 ] Society for the Study of Artificial Intelligence and the Simulation of Behaviour and European Coordinating Committee for Artificial Intelligence . In 2018, he became a Fellow of the Alan Turing Institute.

[ 5 ] Sussex University awarded him an honorary Doctorate of Science in July 2006.

[ 6 ] The Sloman Lounge in the School of Computer Science at the University of Birmingham is named in his honour.

[ 7 ] In 2020 the American Philosophical Association (APA) awarded him the K.Jon Barwise Prize "for significant and sustained contributions to areas relevant to philosophy and computing".

[ 8 ] Selected publications [ edit ] A.Sloman, Knowing and Understanding: Relations between meaning and truth, meaning and necessary truth, meaning and synthetic necessary truth , Oxford University DPhil Thesis, 1962 (digitised 2007, Oxford Research Archive), also available with detailed table of contents in html here .

A. Sloman, How to derive "Better" from "is" , American Phil. Quarterly , 6, pp. 43–52, 1969.

A.Sloman, Interactions between philosophy and AI: The role of intuition and non-logical reasoning in intelligence , Proc 2nd IJCAI , 1971, London. (Reprinted in 'Artificial Intelligence', vol 2, 3–4, pp 209–225, 1971, and in J.M. Nicholas, ed.

Images, Perception, and knowledge , Dordrecht-Holland: Reidel. 1977.) A.Sloman, The Computer Revolution in Philosophy: Philosophy, science and models of mind , Harvester press and Humanities press, 1978. (Out of print but now online) A. Sloman and M. Croucher, 'Why robots will have emotions' , Proc 7th IJCAI , 1981, pp. 197–202, Vancouver.

A. Sloman, The structure of the space of possible minds, in The Mind and the Machine: philosophical aspects of Artificial Intelligence , Ed. S. Torrance, Ellis Horwood, 1984, Chichester, Sloman-possible-minds A. Sloman, What enables a machine to understand?

, in Proc 9th IJCAI , Los Angeles, pp. 995–1001, 1985 Online presentations A. Sloman, Reference without causal links , Eds. J.B.H. du Boulay, D.Hogg and L.Steels, Advances in Artificial Intelligence – II , Dordrecht, North Holland, pp. 369–381, 1987 A. Sloman, Did Searle attack strong strong or weak strong AI , Eds. A.G. Cohn and J.R. Thomas, Artificial Intelligence and Its Applications , John Wiley and Sons, 1986 A. Sloman, On designing a visual system: Towards a Gibsonian computational model of vision , in Journal of Experimental and Theoretical AI , 1, 4, pp. 289–337, 1989 A. Sloman and R.L. Chrisley, Virtual machines and consciousness , in Journal of Consciousness Studies , 10, 4–5, pp. 113–172, 2003.

A. Sloman and J. Chappell, The Altricial-Precocial Spectrum for Robots , in Proceedings IJCAI'05, Edinburgh, pp. 1187–1192, 2005.

J.Chappell and A.Sloman, Natural and artificial meta-configured altricial information-processing systems , in Int. Journal of Unconventional Computing , 3,3, pp. 211–239, 2007.

See also [ edit ] Cognitive architecture References [ edit ] ^ "Thinking about Maths and Science: Speakers" . University of Liverpool. Archived from the original on 17 May 2008 . Retrieved 11 May 2008 .

^ Sloman, Aaron.

"Why scientists and philosophers of science should teach intelligent design alongside the theory of evolution" .

Archived from the original on 3 May 2008 . Retrieved 11 May 2008 .

^ "A.Sloman: THE COMPUTER REVOLUTION IN PHILOSOPHY (1978)" .

www.cs.bham.ac.uk . Retrieved 8 January 2018 .

^ "Elected AAAI Fellows" . Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence.

Archived from the original on 12 May 2008 . Retrieved 11 May 2008 .

^ "Fellows of the Alan Turing Insntitute" . Retrieved 30 March 2022 .

^ "Summer graduation celebrations for University of Sussex students" (Press release). Sussex University. 18 July 2006 . Retrieved 11 May 2008 .

^ "Scho... - School of Computer Science, University of Birmingham" .

www.facebook.com . Retrieved 30 March 2022 .

^ "2020 APA Prizes: Spring Edition - the American Philosophical Association" .

apaonline.org . Retrieved 19 September 2024 .

External links [ edit ] Sloman's web page Sloman's "Turing-inspired" Meta-Morphogenesis project Sloman's 1962 DPhil Thesis, Knowing and Understanding,  Relations between meaning and truth, meaning and necessary truth,  meaning and synthetic necessary truth Transcribed 2016, available as HTML, PDF, and plain text (without diagrams).

Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National United States Netherlands Norway Israel Academics CiNii ORCID Mathematics Genealogy Project MathSciNet Other SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Aaron_Sloman&oldid=1246517988 " Categories : 1936 births South African Jews South African people of Lithuanian-Jewish descent South African Rhodes Scholars Alumni of Balliol College, Oxford Alumni of St Antony's College, Oxford Alumni of the University of Edinburgh Academics of the University of Hull Academics of the University of Sussex Academics of the University of Birmingham Artificial intelligence researchers Fellows of the Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence Fellows of the SSAISB Living people University of Cape Town alumni White Rhodesian people Rhodesian Jews People from Kwekwe Rhodesian emigrants to the United Kingdom Hidden categories: BLP articles lacking sources from November 2013 All BLP articles lacking sources Use British English from May 2013 Use dmy dates from September 2020 Articles with hCards All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2008 This page was last edited on 19 September 2024, at 12:41 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Aaron Sloman 4 languages Add topic

