Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Description 2 Bark canoes 3 Carved trees 4 Other culturally modified trees 5 Shields 6 Locations 7 See also 8 References 9 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Scarred tree 2 languages Français Norsk bokmål Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Trees carved by Aboriginal Australians Canoe scarring on trees, Waikerie by the Murray River A scarred tree or scar tree , also known as a canoe tree and shield tree , is a tree which has had bark removed by Aboriginal Australians for the creation of bark canoes , shelters , weapons such as shields , tools, traps, containers (such as coolamons ), or other artefacts . Carved trees may also be created as a form of artistic and spiritual expression by some Aboriginal peoples, to mark sites of significance such as burial sites. Trees in some areas are culturally modified in other ways that change their form, including "trees-in-trees".

Description [ edit ] Aboriginal men in a bark canoe, South Australia ( c.

1870 ) Bark was removed by making deep cuts in a tree with a stone pickaxe or other similar tool.  The area of bark removed is typically regular in shape, often with parallel sides and slightly pointed or rounded ends, and the scar usually stops above ground level. Australian native Eucalypt species such as box and red gum (especially in Victoria ), swamp mahogany , river box , or whichever species are native in the area. Scars remain in trees that are often over 200 years old. Sometimes there is exposed sapwood at the base or at the top of the scar, showing axe cuts.

[ 1 ] Aboriginal people removed bark from trees to make things like canoes, axes, tools, containers and shields, as well as to build temporary shelters. Sometimes they cut toe holds for ease of climbing, with the trees used as lookouts or to hunt for bush foods .

[ 1 ] Wrapping meat or seafood in layers of moistened paperbark ( melaleuca ) and nestling it into the hot coals is one of traditional aboriginal way of cooking.

[ 2 ] Bark canoes were mainly used for fishing or crossing rivers or lakes rather than long journeys. They were usually propelled by punting with a long stick.

[ 3 ] To remove bark, the Aboriginal people cut an outline of the shape they wanted using stone axes or, once Europeans had arrived, steel axes. The bark was then levered off. Sometimes the axe marks made by Aboriginal people are still visible on the sapwood of the tree, but usually the marks will be hidden because the bark has grown back. The amount of bark regrowth may help you tell the age of the scar. Sometimes, if the scar is very old, it will be completely covered by regrowth Bark canoes [ edit ] Bark canoe in process of construction, South Australia c. 1862 Bark canoe from New South Wales , c. 1842 Aboriginal people made several kinds of bark canoes. Bark canoes were made from the bark of certain trees, notably red gum , stringybark , swamp mahogany and river box and were made during summer.

Bark canoes were made from massive single piece of bark. They were softened over fire, tied at both ends to make a canoe shape and used sticks or spars to keep it open. The resin from Xanthorrhoea (grass tree) was used to waterproof the base and were also used to repair any leaks or small holes. This bark canoe is called Nawi . A small fire was kept alight in the bark canoe on a bed of wet clay or seaweed. This kept people warm in the winter and also allowed them to cook the fish they had caught.

[ 4 ] Yuki is another form of bark canoe, the bark on the tree was cut-out in a shape of a canoe, it was then propped up all round the edge with the help of sticks and weighted in the middle with stones and logs of wood, then a fire is made inside and under the bark to heat the sap and make it pliable and soft. It is then left to dry in the canoe shape.

[ 5 ] Bark strips could also be sewn together to make larger canoes, known as Gumung derrka and Na-riyarrku or sewn bark canoes.

[ 6 ] Non- Indigenous Australians called the trees thus marked as scarred trees, scar trees, canoe trees [ 7 ] or shield trees.

[ 8 ] In the 17th century, dugout canoe technology appeared in northern Australia coastline, to supplement the bark canoe, causing many changes to both the hunting practices and the society of the northern coastline Aboriginal peoples.

Carved trees [ edit ] Carved tree in New South Wales , photographed by Henry King c.

1889–1894 Carved trees are known across Australia in various forms. Most remarkable example of carved trees are found in New South Wales , and are the work specifically of Gamilaroi and Wiradjuri peoples. They were created to  mark sites of particular ceremonial significance, such as initiation or burial sites . They are also known as arborglyphs , dendroglyphs and teleteglyphs.

[ 9 ] In Western Australia , a form of tree carving also occurred in the southwest where trees near the burial sites were sometimes carved. Notches and figures daubed red are known for the Harvey River area. Circles and other carved ornamentations are reported for Perth , circles for the 'Southwest. Notches are cut on two trees for each grave, an even number of notches for a man, an uneven for a woman, by the tribes from Esperance .

[ 10 ] In Northwest, trees were carved with figures of emu and kangaroo but an overwhelming majority of the engravings were of snakes, some of which undulated across the tree while others coiled onto themselves.

[ 11 ] In Queensland , carved trees with zoomorphs and anthropomorphs in a form of snakes, lizards and humans are known.

[ 12 ] Many carved trees were destroyed by land clearing, bush fires, farming and natural decay.

[ 13 ] During the 19th century, sections of these carved trees from New South Wales were removed and placed in museums, but there is now a move not only to return these trees to the land of origin, but also to revive the practice of carved trees.

[ 9 ] Other culturally modified trees [ edit ] In inland northern New South Wales and over the border into Queensland ,  around 1000 culturally modified trees have been recorded. The term is used to describe trees modified in some way by local Indigenous people, including trees planted within trees ("trees-in-trees"), trees that have been shaped into rings or arrows, or cut out to make bowls to hold water. A group of people including academics and local Indigenous and non-Indigenous people are working to improve knowledge about modified trees, and to bring about both scientific and legislative recognition and protection of trees-in-trees.

[ 14 ] Shields [ edit ] Further information: Australian Aboriginal artefacts Left: Aboriginal men making bark shields, c. 1905. Right: Bark shield painted with bright colors, c. 1905.

Shields were made from bark or wood and usually had carved markings or painted designs. Shields were mainly used by Aboriginal warriors to defend themselves in dispute battles, often for commodities such as territory. A shield which had not lost a battle was thought to be inherently powerful and was a prized possession. They could also be used in many ceremonial traditions.

[ 15 ] Aboriginal shields come in two main types, broad shields, and parrying shields. Parrying shields parry blows from a club whereas broad shields block spears. Shields for parrying are thick, strong and narrow, whereas broad shields are wide but thin. Aboriginal shields were made from different materials in different areas, they were made from buttress root, mulga wood, and bark. A handle is attached or carved on the back and the shield was often painted with red and white patterns. Arragong and Tawarrang shields were carved of wood often with an outer layer of bark. Tawarrang shields were notably narrow and long and had patterns carved into the sides. This particular category of shield could also be used as a musical instrument when struck with a club, in addition to its use as a weapon.

[ 16 ] [ 17 ] Locations [ edit ] Scarred trees are found among mature native trees, especially box gum and red gum trees, along rivers and lakes and at sacred sites . They are protected by legislation.

[ 9 ] Canoe trees have been photographed along the Murray River at Waikerie and Kroehns Landing at Nildottie in South Australia, and on the Murrumbidgee River near Hay, New South Wales .

[ 18 ] RMIT Bundoora, Victoria has six scarred trees on their campus. They have developed a self-guided tour trail or information can be found on their website.

[ 19 ] Canoe scarring on a tree at Waikerie on the River Murray Wiradjuri carved tree, Grave of Yuranigh . c. 1850 Canoe scarring, Victoria Scar tree stump protected by shelter, Newell Highway , south of Dubbo Carved tree created in 2012 See also [ edit ] Australian Aboriginal artefacts Leaf scar — naturally occurring scar References [ edit ] ^ a b "Fact sheet: Aboriginal Scar Trees" .

Aboriginal Victoria . 27 October 2019 . Retrieved 20 July 2020 .

^ "6 Native Australian Ingredients And What They Taste Like" .

MICHELIN Guide .

^ "Did you know?: Canoe trees" .

SA Memory . 26 November 2009 . Retrieved 18 March 2020 .

^ "Bark canoe from New South Wales" .

The Australian Museum .

^ "Aboriginal Canoe Building" .

State Library of South Australia .

^ "Canoes" .

Australian National Maritime Museum .

^ "Aboriginal canoe trees around found along the Murray River" .

Discover Murray River . Retrieved 18 March 2020 .

^ Paton, Neil (2004).

Sydney and Blue Mountains Bushwalks . Kangaroo Press. pp. 132, 137– 139.

^ a b c Korff, Jens; Spirits, Creative (6 July 2019).

"Aboriginal scarred trees" .

Creative Spirits . Retrieved 18 March 2020 .

^ F. Oxenham, Marc; Knight, Tom; Westaway, Michael (2008).

"Identification of Australian Aboriginal Mortuary Remains" .

Forensic Approaches to Death, Disaster and Abuse . Australian Academic Press: 37– 54.

^ "Carvings on Australia's boab trees reveal a generation's lost history" . 18 November 2022.

^ Grimwade, Gordon (1 January 1995).

"Moulding and Casting Aboriginal Carved Trees" .

Australian Archaeology .

^ "Carved trees bring indigenous history to life" .

Australian Geographic . 6 June 2011.

^ Hambrett, Micaela (9 November 2024).

"Culturally modified trees 'a national treasure' in outback NSW" .

ABC News . Retrieved 9 November 2024 .

^ "Australian Aboriginal Shields" .

Joy of Museums Virtual Tours . Australian Museum. Archived from the original on 6 April 2019 . Retrieved 11 May 2021 .

^ Attenbrow, V; Cartwright, C (2014).

"An Aboriginal shield collected in 1770 at Kamay Botany Bay: an indicator of pre-colonial exchange systems in south-eastern Australia" .

Antiquity .

88 (341): 833– 895.

doi : 10.1017/S0003598X00050754 .

S2CID 162933814 .

^ Nugent, M; Sculthorpe, G (2018).

"A Shield Loaded with History: Encounters, Objects and Exhibitions" .

Australian Historical Studies .

1 : 28– 43.

doi : 10.1080/1031461X.2017.1408663 .

S2CID 149036662 . Retrieved 11 May 2021 .

^ "Photographs of canoe trees of the Murray River region" .

State Library of South Australia: Collections . Retrieved 18 March 2020 .

^ "Indigenous markings at RMIT" .

RMIT . 2021 . Retrieved 10 February 2021 .

Further reading [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Scarred trees .

Aboriginal scarred trees in NSW - a field manual (PDF) . New South Wales National Parks and Wildlife Service. 2005.

ISBN 1-74137-316-6 .

"The Currency Creek Canoe Tree" .

Bloke on BIke . 18 March 2020.

– Canoe tree at Currency Creek, South Australia "Did you know?: Canoe trees" .

SA Memory . 26 November 2009.

"Scar Trees" .

Scar trees . 20 August 2016.

– Gallery of photos of scar trees in New South Wales Scarred Trees: An Identification and recording manual v t e Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islanders Peoples Aboriginal Australians Communities Aboriginal groups Tasmanians Torres Strait Islanders Victorians Western Australians Individuals Activists Musicians People from politics and public service Performing artists Sportspeople Visual artists Writers Culture Astronomy Bora Corroboree Country Deadly Awards Deities The Dreaming Enumeration Elders Flags Aboriginal Torres Strait Islander Kinship Kurdaitcha Literature of Indigenous Australians Marn Grook Message stick NAIDOC Week National Indigenous Human Rights Awards Outstation movement Religion and mythology Riji Seasons Sacred sites Smoking ceremony Songlines Traditional custodianship Tjurunga Torres Strait Islands Language(s) Avoidance speech Australian Aboriginal English Macro-Gunwinyguan languages Australian Creole Language groups Loanwords into English Palawa Pama–Nyungan languages Placenames Sign languages Taboo on the dead Torres Strait English Torres Strait Island languages Organisations ATSIC Aboriginal Medical Service Aborigines Advancement League Aborigines Progressive Association AIATSIS Australian Aboriginal Progressive Association Australian Aborigines' League Mass media National Congress of Australia's First Peoples National Indigenous Council Office of the Registrar of Indigenous Corporations Politics Registered Aboriginal Party Reconciliation Australia National Reconciliation Week Sorry Day TSRA Land councils Central Land Council Kimberley Land Council Maralinga Tjarutja Metropolitan Local Aboriginal Land Council NSW Aboriginal Land Council Northern Land Council South West Aboriginal Land and Sea Council Tiwi Land Council Bushcraft Boomerang Buka Bush bread Bush tucker Bush medicine Coolamon Dugout canoe Fibrecraft Fire-stick farming Food groups Humpy Possum-skin cloak Scarred tree Soaks Spinifex resin Sweets Waddy Woomera Arts Artefacts Bark painting Contemporary visual art Dance Didgeridoo Dreaming Music Music groups Rock NATSIA Award Papunya Tula Sandpainting Vibe Visual art Yininmadyemi History Aboriginal Land Rights Act 1976 Australian Frontier Wars Bathurst War Hawkesbury and Nepean Wars Caledon Bay crisis Cummeragunja walk-off Day of Mourning Gurindji Strike Historical figures History Prehistory Australian history wars King plates Massacres Black War Missions Native police Native Title Act 1993 New Deal for Aborigines Pilbara strike Pintupi Nine Stolen Generations Apology Tent embassy Western Australia Issues 1967 Referendum Constitutional recognition Crime Health Land rights Native title Protected Area Media portrayal Northern Territory National Emergency Response Self-determination Reconciliation Stolen Generations Half-Caste Act Uluru Statement from the Heart Treaty Truth Voice Voting rights Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Scarred_tree&oldid=1292698199 " Categories : Australian Aboriginal bushcraft History of Indigenous Australians Hidden categories: CS1: unfit URL Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use Australian English from August 2018 All Wikipedia articles written in Australian English Use dmy dates from August 2018 Pages using multiple image with auto scaled images Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 28 May 2025, at 09:48 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Scarred tree 2 languages Add topic

