Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Application 2 Color scheme 3 In physics 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Monochrome 24 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Български Bosanski Català Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto فارسی 한국어 Հայերեն Italiano 日本語 Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Română Русский Svenska ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Monochromatic colors ) Composed of one color For monovalent chromium, see oxidation state § List of oxidation states of the elements .

For other uses, see Monochrome (disambiguation) .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Monochrome" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( May 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Multiple examples of monochrome artworks throughout history: an Ancient Egyptian faience statuette of Isis and Horus , 332–30 BC; a gold Tairona pendant, 10th–16th century; a Chinese carved red lacquer, late 14th century; and the Neoclassical Petit Trianon in Versailles , France, by Ange-Jacques Gabriel , 1764 Black-and-white monochrome: the Eiffel Tower during the 1889 Exposition Universelle Color monochrome: night-vision devices usually produce monochrome images, typically in shades of green.

A photograph of a macaw rendered with a monochrome palette of a limited number of shades A Philips branded digital audio player with a monochrome display and green backlight, common on older devices including mobile phones and handheld game systems A monochrome [ 1 ] or monochromatic image, object or palette is composed of one color (or values of one color).

[ 2 ] Images using only shades of grey are called grayscale (typically digital) or black-and-white (typically analog). In physics, monochromatic light refers to electromagnetic radiation that contains a narrow band of wavelengths, which is a distinct concept.

Application [ edit ] Of an image , the term monochrome is usually taken to mean the same as black and white or, more likely, grayscale , but may also be used to refer to other combinations containing only tones of a single color, such as green -and-white or green-and-red. It may also refer to sepia displaying tones from light tan to dark brown or cyanotype ("blueprint") images, and early photographic methods such as daguerreotypes , ambrotypes , and tintypes , each of which may be used to produce a monochromatic image.

In computing, monochrome has two meanings: it may mean having only one color which is either on or off (also known as a binary image ), allowing shades of that color.

A monochrome computer display is able to display only a single color, often green, amber , red or white, and often also shades of that color.

In film photography, monochrome is typically the use of black-and-white film . Originally, all photography was done in monochrome . Although color photography was possible even in the late 19th century, easily used color films, such as Kodachrome , were not available until the mid-1930s.

In digital photography , monochrome is the capture of only shades of black by the sensor, or by post-processing a color image to present only the perceived brightness by combining the values of multiple channels (usually red, blue, and green). The weighting of individual channels may be selected to achieve a desired artistic effect; if only the red channel is selected by the weighting then the effect will be similar to that of using a red filter on panchromatic film . If the red channel is eliminated and the green and blue combined then the effect will be similar to that of orthochromatic film or the use of a cyan filter on panchromatic film. The selection of weighting so provides a wide variety of artistic expression in the final monochrome image.

For production of an anaglyph image the original color stereogram source may first be reduced to monochrome in order to simplify the rendering of the image. This is sometimes required in cases where a color image would render in a confusing manner given the colors and patterns present in the source image and the selection filters used (typically red and its complement , cyan ).

[ 3 ] Color scheme [ edit ] See also: Color scheme Example of a monochromatic color scheme Monochromatic color gradient on color wheel A monochromatic color scheme comprises ( tones, tints, and shades ) of a single hue . Tints are achieved by adding white, thereby increasing lightness ; Shades are achieved by adding black, thereby decreasing lightness; Tones are achieved by adding gray, thereby decreasing colorfulness .

Monochromatic color schemes provide opportunities in art and visual communications design as they allow for a greater range of contrasting tones that can be used to attract attention, create focus and support legibility.

The use of a monochromatic color provides a strong sense of visual cohesion and can help support communication objectives through the use of connotative color. The relative absence of hue contrast can be offset by variations in tone and the addition of texture.

[ 4 ] Monochromatic in science means consisting of a single wavelength of light or other radiation (lasers, for example, usually produce monochromatic light), or having or appearing to have only one color (in comparison to polychromatic). That means according to science the true monochromatic images can be strictly created only of shades of one color fading to black.

[ 5 ] However, monochromatic also has another meaning similar to “boring” or “colorless” which sometimes leads to creating a design composed from true monochromatic color shades (one hue fading to black), and the colors created from the one hue but faded to all wavelengths (to white). This is not monochromatic in the strictly scientific meaning of the word. In fact, monochrome in the art world can be as complicated or even more complicated than other polychromatic art.

[ 6 ] In physics [ edit ] Main article: Monochromatic radiation In physics, monochromatic light is electromagnetic radiation of a single wavelength . While no source of electromagnetic radiation is purely monochromatic, in practice, it is usually used to describe very narrowband sources such as monochromated or laser light. The degree of monochromaticity can be defined by the spectral linewidth ). A device which isolates a narrow band of light from a broadband source is called a monochromator .

See also [ edit ] Duotone , the use of two ink colors in printing Halftone , the use of black and white in a pattern that is perceived as shades of grey (may be extended also to color images) Monochromacy , a type of color vision deficiency Monochromatic color Monochrome monitor , used with computers Monochrome photography , also known as black-and-white photography Monochrome painting , a style of painting that uses a single color (excluding shades thereof) Monochrome printmaking , printing styles that generate black-and-white images Polychrome , of multiple colors, the opposite of monochrome References [ edit ] ^ from Ancient Greek μονόχρωμος ( monókhrōmos ) ' having one color ' ; from μόνος ( mónos ) ' one ' and χρῶμα ( khrôma ) ' color ' ^ "monochrome" .

Merriam-Webster.com Dictionary . Merriam-Webster . Retrieved October 16, 2009 .

^ "Monochromatic" .

Dictionary.com Unabridged . Random House, Inc . Retrieved March 23, 2013 .

^ O'Connor, Z. (2014).

Colour Combination Techniques . Sydney AUS: Design Research Associates.

^ "the definition of monochromatic" .

Dictionary.com . Retrieved January 17, 2016 .

^ "The Absence of Color Symbolism of Black and White" .

External links [ edit ] The dictionary definition of monochrome at Wiktionary v t e Color topics Color science Color physics Electromagnetic spectrum Light Rainbow Visible Spectral colors Chromophore Structural coloration Animal coloration Color of chemicals Water Spectral power distribution Colorimetry Color perception Chromesthesia Sonochromatism Color blindness Achromatopsia Dichromacy Color calibration Color constancy Color task Color code Color temperature Color vision test Evolution of color vision Impossible colors Metamerism Opponent process Afterimage Unique hues Tetrachromacy The dress Color psychology Color symbolism Color preferences Lüscher color test Kruithof curve Political color National colors Chromophobia Chromotherapy Color reproduction Color photography Color balance Color cast Digital image processing Color management Color printing Multi-primary color display Quattron Color model additive RGB subtractive CMYK Color space Color mapping Color philosophy Color scheme Color tool Monochromatic colors Black-and-white Grisaille Complementary colors Analogous colors Achromatic colors (Neutral) Polychromatic colors Light-on-dark Web colors Tinctures in heraldry Color theory Color mixing Primary color Secondary color Chromaticity Color solid Color wheel Color triangle Color analysis (fashion) Color realism (art style) On Vision and Colours (Schopenhauer) Theory of Colours (Goethe) Color terms Basic English terms Red Orange Yellow Green Blue Purple Pink Brown White Gray Black Cultural differences Linguistic relativity and the color naming debate Blue–green distinction in language Color history Black-and-white dualism Blue in culture Color in Chinese culture Traditional colors of Japan Human skin color Color dimensions Hue Dichromatism Colorfulness Pastel colors Luminance Lightness Darkness Brightness Iridescence Fluorescence Grayscale Tint, shade and tone Color organizations Pantone Color Marketing Group Color Association of the United States International Colour Authority International Commission on Illumination (CIE) International Color Consortium International Colour Association Names Lists List of colors: A–F List of colors: G–M List of colors: N–Z List of colors (compact) List of colors by shade List of color palettes List of color spaces List of Crayola crayon colors history Color chart List of RAL colors List of web colors Shades of: Red Orange Yellow Green Cyan Blue Violet Purple Magenta Pink Brown White Gray Black Related Vision Contrast Qualia Lighting Category Index NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐nm4kn
Cached time: 20250817223106
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.460 seconds
Real time usage: 0.619 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1571/1000000
Revision size: 9318/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 67975/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 2257/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 11/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 31120/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.311/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 22690854/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  529.988      1 -total
 44.57%  236.198      1 Template:Reflist
 25.25%  133.814      2 Template:Etymology
 18.90%  100.151      3 Template:Wikt-lang
 18.87%   99.992      5 Template:Navbox
 17.95%   95.138      1 Template:Color_topics
 15.35%   81.350      4 Template:Cite_web
 13.27%   70.336      1 Template:Cite_Merriam-Webster
 12.46%   66.035      1 Template:Short_description
 10.51%   55.692      1 Template:More_citations_needed Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:261993:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817223106 and revision id 1262238981. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Monochrome&oldid=1262238981#Color_scheme " Categories : Color Color depths Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from May 2023 All articles needing additional references Use mdy dates from March 2013 Pages using multiple image with auto scaled images This page was last edited on 10 December 2024, at 10:23 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Monochrome 24 languages Add topic

