Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Doctrine Toggle Doctrine subsection 2.1 Molinism 2.2 Contract law 2.3 Economy 3 Works 4 Notes 5 References 6 Further reading 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Luis de Molina 22 languages العربية Català Čeština Deutsch Español Esperanto Français Italiano Magyar مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Svenska Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Spanish priest For other people named Luis Molina, see Luis Molina (disambiguation) .

The Reverend Luis de Molina SJ Portrait of Luis de Molina Born ( 1535-09-29 ) 29 September 1535 Cuenca , Crown of Castile Died 12 October 1600 (1600-10-12) (aged 65) Madrid , Kingdom of Castile , Crown of Castile Education Alma mater University of Salamanca Philosophical work Era 16th-century philosophy Second scholasticism Region Western philosophy Spanish philosophy School Molinism School of Salamanca Main interests Contract law Economics Mercantilism Notable ideas Introducing Molinism Part of a series on Catholic philosophy Aquinas , Scotus and Ockham Ethics Cardinal virtues Just price Just war Principle of Double Effect Casuistry Probabilism Natural law Personalism Social teaching Liberation theology Christian humanism Virtue ethics Works of mercy Metaphysics Conceptualism Realism Moderate realism Nominalism Quiddity ( essence / nature ) Haecceity Quinque Viae Predestination Theological determinism Compatibilism Divine Attributes Schools Augustinianism Victorines Lullism Cartesianism Christian Neoplatonism Friends of God Molinism Ressourcement Occamism Scholasticism Second scholasticism Neo Scotism Thomism Analytic Salamanca Philosophers Ancient Ambrose Athenagoras Athanasius Augustine Benedict Boethius Clement Cyprian Cyril Gregory (of Nazianzus) Gregory (of Nyssa) Irenaeus Jerome Cassian Chrysostom Climacus John of Damascus Justin Maximus Dionysius Origen Paul Tertullian Medieval Abelard Albert Alcuin Alexander Anselm Autrecourt Aquinas Bacon Bede Berengar Bernard Bonaventure Buridan Catherine Cusa Eckhart Eriugena Giles Gregory I Grosseteste Gundissalinus Hildegard Hugh Isidore Llull Lombard Martin Ockham Oresme Paschasius Roscellinus Scotus Siger Symeon Thierry Modern Arnauld Ávila Azpilcueta Bellarmine Bonald Bossuet Brentano Botero Cajetan Chateaubriand Cortés Descartes Erasmus Fénelon Gracián Kołłątaj Krasicki La Mennais Liguori Maistre Malebranche Mariana Meinong Mercado Molina More Newman Pascal Rosmini Sales Soto Suárez Vico Vitoria Caramuel Contemporary Adler Anscombe Balthasar Barron Benedict XVI Blondel Chesterton Congar Copleston Finnis Garrigou-Lagrange Geach Gilson Girard Gutiérrez Dávila Guardini Haldane Hildebrand John Paul II Lonergan Lubac MacIntyre Marcel Marion Maritain McLuhan Mounier Pieper Rahner Stein Taylor Catholic Church portal Philosophy portal v t e Luis de Molina SJ (29 September 1535 – 12 October 1600) was a Spanish Jesuit priest, jurist, economist and theologian renowned for his contributions to philosophy and economics within the framework of the second scholasticism .

A prominent member of the School of Salamanca , pioneered a distinctive theory of divine grace and human freedom known as Molinism , which defends human autonomy in the face of divine omniscience.

[ 1 ] His pro-liberty perspectives influenced not only theological debates on free will but also extended to economic and political thought, making him an intellectual precursor to individual rights and market dynamics. His work in developing early economic principles, particularly regarding human action , voluntarism , and property rights , laid a foundation that later contributed to Austrian economic theory and the evolution of modern libertarian thought.

[ 2 ] Life [ edit ] Born into a noble and wealthy family in Castile, Luis de Molina followed the aspirations of his parents who wanted him to become a jurist. After learning Latin and literature at the Cathedral School of Cuenca, he enrolled at the University of Salamanca .

[ 3 ] During his studies, Molina discovered the Spiritual Exercises of Ignatius of Loyola , which led him to join the Society of Jesus and abandon his law studies.

[ 3 ] In 1553, he became a novice in Alcalá de Henares , where he showed a taste and talent for Christian philosophy. In 1554, he was sent by his superiors to study philosophy at the university of Coimbra .

[ 3 ] Following the advice of Pedro da Fonseca , he continued his studies after obtaining his master's degree in 1558 in order to become a priest and obtain a doctorate in theology. Between 1563 and 1567, he was a professor of philosophy and theology in Coimbra.

[ 4 ] At the request of their superiors, Molina and Fonseca then left to teach at the University of the Holy Spirit in Évora.

[ 4 ] After expounding his theological views in his work Liberi Arbitrii cum Gratiae Donis, Divina Praescientia, Providentia, Praedestinatione et Reprobatione Concordia , better known simply as Concordia and which was a commentary on the first part of the Summa Theologiae of Thomas Aquinas , he was violently attacked by Tomas de Lemos and Domingo Báñez. The latter went so far as to denounce Molina to the Spanish Inquisition .

[ 5 ] As a result, he returned to his village of Cuenca to serve as a parish priest and write his major work, De iure et iustitia .

[ 5 ] In 1597, Pope Clement VIII asked Cardinal Michele Bonelli to gather theologians to verify the conformity of Molinism with the Catholic faith. Taking the name of Congregatio de Auxiliis , this assembly would sit until 1607, when Paul V declared this doctrine acceptable.

[ 6 ] Sent to Madrid in 1600 by his superiors to teach moral theology at the university of Alcalá . He died in that city on October 12, 1600.

[ 7 ] Doctrine [ edit ] Molinism [ edit ] Main article: Molinism Molinism was an attempt to reconcile the Augustinian doctrines of predestination and efficacious grace with the new ideals of the Renaissance concerning free will . Assuming that man is free to perform or not to perform any act whatever, Molina maintains that this circumstance renders the grace of God neither unnecessary nor impossible: not impossible, for God never fails to bestow grace upon those who ask it with sincerity; and not unnecessary, for grace, although not an efficient , is still a sufficient cause of salvation ( gratia mere sufficiens , "merely sufficient grace"). Nor, in Molina's view, does his doctrine of free will exclude predestination. The omniscient God, by means of His scientia media ("middle knowledge", a phrase of Molina's invention, though the idea is also to be found in his older contemporary Fonseca ), i.e. his power of knowing future contingent events, foresees how we shall employ our own free-will and treat his proffered grace, and upon this foreknowledge he can found his predestinating decrees.

These doctrines, which opposed both traditional understanding of Augustinism and Thomism concerning the respective roles of free will and efficacious grace, and the teachings of Martin Luther and John Calvin , excited violent controversy in some quarters, especially on the part of the Dominican Order and of the Jansenists , and at last rendered it necessary for the Pope ( Clement VIII ) to intervene. At first (1594) he simply enjoined silence on both parties so far as Spain was concerned; but ultimately, in 1598, he appointed the Congregatio de auxiliis Gratiae for the settlement of the dispute, which became more and more a party one. After holding very numerous sessions, the congregation was able to decide nothing, and in 1607 its meetings were suspended by Paul V , who in 1611 prohibited all further discussion of the question de auxiliis and of discussions about efficacious grace, and studious efforts were made to control the publication even of commentaries on Aquinas.

[ citation needed ] Several regent Masters of the Dominican College of St. Thomas, the future Pontifical University of Saint Thomas Aquinas ( Angelicum ) , were involved in the Molinist controversy. The Dominicans Diego Álvarez (c. 1550–1635), author of the De auxiliis divinae gratiae et humani arbitrii viribus , [ 8 ] and Tomás de Lemos (1540–1629) were given the responsibility of representing the Dominican Order in debates before Pope Clement VIII and Pope Paul V .

[ 9 ] Contract law [ edit ] Although he is a convinced supporter of contractual consensualism, [ 10 ] Molina remains aware of the differences that still exist between civil law and canon law, but calls for their disappearance.

[ 11 ] With his opinions, he also prepares the emergence of a theory of the autonomy of the will, later formulated by Pedro de Oñate .

[ 12 ] Like most members of the School of Salamanca, he discusses the respect of the principles of equity and commutative justice in contractual exchanges, which he considers fundamental.

[ 13 ] But what is introduced for the common good must not be to the detriment of one person rather than another, by excoriating what natural law prescribes, so that you do not do to another what you do not reasonably wish to be done to you. but it would be to the detriment of one rather than the other, if you did not preserve equality — Luis de Molina, De iustitia et iure , tract.2, disp.350, col.405, n°6 Discussing the “ diamond-water paradox ”, Molina cogitated a theory of just price where the utility wasn't take into account. Thus, in his De jure et Justitia he said, “the just price of a pearl, which can be used only to decorate, is higher than the just price of grain, bread, or horses, even if the utility of these things is superior.” Furthermore, he discusses the effect of defects of consent on the validity of contractual commitments [ 14 ] and allows, with Lessius, to distinctly separate the matters of contract law and testamentary law.

[ 15 ] Economy [ edit ] In his writings on economics, Molina helped further develop a theory of price inflation proposed by Juan de Medina and Martín de Azpilcueta in Salamanca, writing that "[i]n equal circumstances, the more abundant money is in one place, so much less is its value to buy things or to acquire things that are not money." [ 16 ] Works [ edit ] De liberi arbitrii cum gratiae donis, divina praescientia, praedestinatione et reprobatione concordia , 4 vols., Lisbona, 1588; 2nd ed. Antwerp, 1595.

De Hispanorum primogeniorum origine ac natura (in Latin). Lugduni: Pedro Landri. 1588.

De jure et justitia , 6 vols., 1593–1609.

De iustitia et iure (in Latin). Vol. 1. Coloniae Allobrogum: Marc Michel & C Bousquet. 1733.

De iustitia et iure (in Latin). Vol. 2. Coloniae Allobrogum: Marc Michel & C Bousquet. 1733.

De iustitia et iure (in Latin). Vol. 3. Coloniae Allobrogum: Marc Michel & C Bousquet. 1733.

De iustitia et iure (in Latin). Vol. 4. Coloniae Allobrogum: Marc Michel & C Bousquet. 1733.

De iustitia et iure (in Latin). Vol. 5. Coloniae Allobrogum: Marc Michel & C Bousquet. 1733.

Commentaria in primam partem divi Thomae (in Latin) (2 vols., fol. ed.). Cuenca. 1593.

Commentaria in primam divi Thomae partem (in Latin). Venetiis: Compagnia Minima. 1594.

De Hispanorum primogeniorum origine ac natura , 1588 De iustitia et iure , 1733 Notes [ edit ] ^ "Molinism" .

www3.nd.edu . Retrieved 2024-10-30 .

^ Grice-Hutchinson, Marjorie (11 June 1952).

The School of Salamanca: Readings in Spanish Monetary Theory, 1544–1605 . Mises Institute . Retrieved 30 October 2024 .

^ a b c MacGregor 2018 , p. 192.

^ a b MacGregor 2018 , p. 193.

^ a b MacGregor 2018 , p. 194.

^ MacGregor 2018 , p. 194-195.

^ MacGregor 2018 , p. 195.

^ "Diego Alvarez" .

The Original Catholic Encyclopedia . 21 July 2010. Archived from the original on 2012-03-16 . Retrieved 9 March 2013 .

^ "Lemos "lé-", Tomás de" .

Enciclopedia Treccani (in Italian) . Retrieved 9 March 2013 .

^ Decock 2013 , p. 142 and 160-161.

^ Decock 2013 , p. 135-142.

^ Decock 2013 , p. 168.

^ Decock 2013 , p. 510.

^ Decock 2013 , p. 231-234 and 297-302.

^ Decock 2013 , p. 399-406.

^ Luis de Molina, A Treatise on Money Archived 2018-03-03 at the Wayback Machine . CLP Academic, 2015, p.96.

References [ edit ] MacGregor, Kirk R. (2018). "Luis de Molina". In R. Domingo; J. Martínez-Torrón (eds.).

Great Christian Jurists in Spanish History . Law and Christianity. Cambridge University Press. pp.

191– 209.

ISBN 978-1-108-44873-4 .

Decock, Wim (2013).

Theologians and Contract Law : The Moral Transformation of the Ius commune (ca. 1500-1650) . Leiden/Boston: Martinus Nijhoff Publishers. p. 723.

ISBN 978-90-04-23285-3 .

An article by Alfred J. Freddoso on Luis Molina's thoughts.

Article on Molina from Catholic Encyclopedia (1911) Article on Molinism from Catholic Encyclopedia (1911) Ulrich L. Lehner (ed.), Die scholastische Theologie im Zeitalter der Gnadenstreitigkeiten (monograph series, first volume: 2007) https://web.archive.org/web/20070812004619/http://www.bautz.de/rfn.html Luis de Molina, A Treatise on Money . CLP Academic, 2015.

Further reading [ edit ] A full account of Molina's theology will be found in Gerhard Schneeman 's Entstehung der thomistisch-molinistischen Controverse , published in the Appendices (Nos. 9, 13, 14) to the Jesuit periodical, Stimmen aus Maria-Laach .

Ernest Renan 's article, Les congregations de auxiliis in his Nouvelles études d'histoire religieuse.

Alonso-Lasheras, Diego. " Luis de Molina's De Iustitia et Iure . Justice as Virtue in an Economic Context ", Leiden: Brill 2011.

Matthias Kaufmann, Alexander Aichele (eds.), A Companion to Luis de Molina , Leiden: Brill 2014.

MacGregor, Kirk.

Luis de Molina: The Life and Theology of the Founder of Middle Knowledge . Grand Rapids: Zondervan 2015. [the first full book on Molina] Smith, Gerard (ed.) Jesuit thinkers of the Renaissance , Milwaukee (USA) 1939, pp. 75–132.

A critical edition of Treatise on Money was translated and published by Christian's Library Press as A Treatise on Money (2015): Luis de Molina, A Treatise on Money Archived 2018-03-03 at the Wayback Machine . CLP Academic, 2015.

Translations Luis de Molina (translated by Daniel Schwartz and Joerg Tellkamp), On Slavery and the Slave Trade (De Iustitia et Iure, Book 1, treatise 2, Disputations 32-40), Washington DC Catholic University of America Press , 2024.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Luis de Molina .

Griffin, Michael V. (2006).

"Molina, Luis De (1535–1600)" . In M. Borchert, Donald (ed.).

The Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Vol. 6. pp.

321– 323 . Retrieved 16 September 2023 .

Luis de Molina in the Historical Archives of the Pontifical Gregorian University On Divine Foreknowledge: Part IV of the Concordia at the Internet Archive (registration required) v t e Jesuits History Protestant Reformation Counter-Reformation Spiritual Exercises of Ignatius of Loyola Ad maiorem Dei gloriam Magis Regimini militantis Ecclesiae Exposcit debitum Ratio Studiorum Suppression of the Society of Jesus List of Jesuits Saints José de Anchieta Modeste Andlauer Edmund Arrowsmith Inácio de Azevedo Robert Bellarmine John Berchmans Jacques Berthieu Andrew Bobola Francis Borgia Jean de Brébeuf Alexander Briant John de Britto Edmund Campion Peter Canisius Juan del Castillo Noël Chabanel Peter Claver Claude de la Colombière Antoine Daniel Paul Denn Philip Evans Peter Faber Thomas Garnet Charles Garnier Aloysius Gonzaga Roque González de Santa Cruz John Soan de Goto René Goupil Melchior Grodziecki Alberto Hurtado Rémy Isoré Ignatius of Loyola Francis de Geronimo Isaac Jogues James Kisai Stanislaus Kostka Jean de Lalande Gabriel Lalemant David Lewis Lèon-Ignance Mangin Paul Miki Henry Morse John Ogilvie Nicholas Owen Joseph Pignatelli Stephen Pongracz Bernardino Realino John Francis Regis Alphonsus Rodriguez José María Rubio Robert Southwell André de Soveral Henry Walpole Francis Xavier Alfonso Rodríguez Olmedo Popes Francis Theology Diego Laynez Luis de Molina Francisco Suárez Jean Daniélou Karl Rahner Pierre Teilhard de Chardin Henri de Lubac John Courtney Murray Joseph Fitzmyer Alonso Rodriguez List of Jesuit theologians General Bollandist La Civiltà Cattolica General Congregation Superior General of the Society of Jesus Pontifical Gregorian University Pontifical Biblical Institute Pontifical Oriental Institute Jesuit China missions Jesuit missions in North America List of Jesuit educational institutions International Association of Jesuit Universities Ignatian Pedagogical Paradigm Related Church of the Gesù Madonna Della Strada Saint-Pierre de Montmartre Claudio Acquaviva Category Catholicism portal v t e History of Catholic theology Key figures General History of the Catholic Church Timeline History of the papacy Papal primacy Ecumenical councils Catholic Bible Vulgate Biblical canon History of Christian theology Early Church Paul Clement of Rome First Epistle of Clement Didache Ignatius of Antioch Polycarp Epistle of Barnabas The Shepherd of Hermas Aristides of Athens Justin Martyr Epistle to Diognetus Irenaeus Montanism Tertullian Origen Antipope Novatian Cyprian Constantine to Pope Gregory I Eusebius Athanasius of Alexandria Arianism Pelagianism Nestorianism Monophysitism Ephrem the Syrian Hilary of Poitiers Cyril of Jerusalem Basil of Caesarea Gregory of Nazianzus Gregory of Nyssa Ambrose John Chrysostom Jerome Augustine of Hippo John Cassian Orosius Cyril of Alexandria Peter Chrysologus Pope Leo I Boethius Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite Pope Gregory I Early Middle Ages Isidore of Seville John Climacus Maximus the Confessor Monothelitism Ecthesis Bede John of Damascus Iconoclasm Transubstantiation dispute Predestination disputes Paulinus II of Aquileia Alcuin Benedict of Aniane Rabanus Maurus Paschasius Radbertus John Scotus Eriugena High Middle Ages Roscellinus Gregory of Narek Berengar of Tours Peter Damian Anselm of Canterbury Joachim of Fiore Peter Abelard Decretum Gratiani Bernard of Clairvaux Peter Lombard Anselm of Laon Hildegard of Bingen Hugh of Saint Victor Dominic de Guzmán Robert Grosseteste Francis of Assisi Anthony of Padua Beatrice of Nazareth Bonaventure Albertus Magnus Boetius of Dacia Henry of Ghent Thomas Aquinas Siger of Brabant Thomism Roger Bacon Mysticism and reforms Ramon Llull Duns Scotus Dante Alighieri William of Ockham Richard Rolle John of Ruusbroec Catherine of Siena Bridget of Sweden Meister Eckhart Johannes Tauler Walter Hilton The Cloud of Unknowing Heinrich Seuse Geert Groote Devotio Moderna Julian of Norwich Thomas à Kempis Nicholas of Cusa Marsilio Ficino Girolamo Savonarola Giovanni Pico della Mirandola Reformation Counter-Reformation Erasmus Thomas Cajetan Thomas More John Fisher Johann Eck Francisco de Vitoria Thomas of Villanova Ignatius of Loyola Francisco de Osuna John of Ávila Francis Xavier Teresa of Ávila Luis de León John of the Cross Peter Canisius Luis de Molina ( Molinism ) Robert Bellarmine Francisco Suárez Lawrence of Brindisi Francis de Sales Baroque period to French Revolution Tommaso Campanella Pierre de Bérulle Pierre Gassendi René Descartes Mary of Jesus of Ágreda António Vieira Jean-Jacques Olier Louis Thomassin Jacques-Bénigne Bossuet François Fénelon Cornelius Jansen ( Jansenism ) Blaise Pascal Nicolas Malebranche Giambattista Vico Alphonsus Liguori Louis de Montfort Maria Gaetana Agnesi Alfonso Muzzarelli Johann Michael Sailer Clement Mary Hofbauer Bruno Lanteri 19th century Joseph Görres Félicité de La Mennais Luigi Taparelli Antonio Rosmini Ignaz von Döllinger John Henry Newman Henri Lacordaire Jaime Balmes Gaetano Sanseverino Giovanni Maria Cornoldi Wilhelm Emmanuel Freiherr von Ketteler Giuseppe Pecci Joseph Hergenröther Tommaso Maria Zigliara Matthias Joseph Scheeben Émile Boutroux Modernism Neo-scholasticism Léon Bloy Désiré-Joseph Mercier Friedrich von Hügel Vladimir Solovyov Marie-Joseph Lagrange George Tyrrell Maurice Blondel Thérèse of Lisieux 20th century G. K. Chesterton Reginald Garrigou-Lagrange Joseph Maréchal Pierre Teilhard de Chardin Jacques Maritain Étienne Gilson Ronald Knox Georges Bernanos Dietrich von Hildebrand Gabriel Marcel Marie-Dominique Chenu Romano Guardini Edith Stein Fulton Sheen Henri de Lubac Dorothy Day Henri Daniel-Rops Jean Guitton Josemaría Escrivá Nouvelle théologie Karl Rahner Yves Congar Bernard Lonergan Emmanuel Mounier Jean Daniélou Hans Urs von Balthasar Marcel Lefebvre Frederick Copleston Alfred Delp Edward Schillebeeckx Thomas Merton René Girard Hans Küng Johann Baptist Metz Jean Vanier Henri Nouwen 21st century Pope John Paul II Alice von Hildebrand Carlo Maria Martini Pope Benedict XVI Gustavo Gutiérrez Alasdair MacIntyre Walter Kasper Raniero Cantalamessa Michał Heller Peter Kreeft Jean-Luc Marion Tomáš Halík Aidan Nichols Scott Hahn Catholicism portal v t e Catholic philosophy Ethics Cardinal virtues Divine command Just price Just war Probabilism Natural law Personalism Seven virtues Social teaching Option for the poor Social mortgage Theological virtues Virtue ethics Schools Medieval Augustinianism Scholasticism Thomism Scotism Occamism Modern Salamanca Christian humanism Cartesianism Molinism Neo-scholasticism Analytical Thomism Universals Augustinian realism Nominalism Conceptualism Moderate realism Scotistic realism Other Theological intellectualism Theological voluntarism Foundationalism Philosophers Abelard Adler Albertus Alcuin Anscombe Anselm Aquinas Augustine Bacon Boethius Bonaventure Chateaubriand Chesterton Clement Cusa Descartes Dionysius Erasmus Eriugena Ficino Gassendi Isidore Krasicki Llull Lombard MacIntyre Maistre Malebranche Maritain Montaigne More Newman Occam Pascal Pico Rahner Ratzinger Scheler Scotus Stein Suárez Wojtyła Concepts Actus Essendi Actus primus Actus purus Aevum Augustinian values Cardinal virtues Cartesian dualism Cogito, ergo sum Dehellenization Differentia Disputation Divine illumination Double truth Evil demon Formal distinction Guardian angel Haecceity Head of a pin Homo unius libri Infused righteousness Memento mori Occam's razor Ontological argument Pascal's wager Peripatetic axiom Principle of double effect Quiddity Quinque viae Rota Fortunae Seven deadly sins Theodicy Augustinian Irenaean Trademark argument Univocity Utopia Related Catholic theology Platonism Aristotelianism Neoplatonism Islamic philosophy Doctor of the Church Renaissance Rationalism Empiricism Phenomenology Catholicism portal Philosophy portal Portals : Biography Christianity Spain Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Catalonia Belgium People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Luis_de_Molina&oldid=1299092483 " Categories : 1535 births 1600 deaths 16th-century Spanish Jesuits 16th-century Spanish jurists 16th-century Spanish male writers 16th-century Spanish philosophers 16th-century Spanish Roman Catholic theologians Academic staff of the University of Évora Catholic philosophers Jesuit philosophers Jesuit theologians People from Cuenca, Spain School of Salamanca Spanish male non-fiction writers Spanish Roman Catholic writers University of Coimbra alumni University of Salamanca alumni Hidden categories: CS1 Italian-language sources (it) Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Pages using Template:Post-nominals with customized linking Articles with hCards Pages using infobox philosopher with unknown parameters Pages using sidebar with the child parameter All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from November 2007 CS1 Latin-language sources (la) Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 6 July 2025, at 14:33 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Luis de Molina 22 languages Add topic

