Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Honors and awards 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Indiana University Press 15 languages العربية বাংলা Català Español فارسی Français Hausa Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Polski Română Русский Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Academic publisher at Indiana University Indiana University Press Parent company Indiana University Founded 1950 Country of origin United States Headquarters location Bloomington, Indiana Distribution Hopkins Fulfillment Services (North America) Combined Academic Publishers Ltd (Europe, Asia, Middle East, Africa, Asia Pacific, Australia and New Zealand) [ 1 ] Publication types Books , academic journals Imprints Quarry Books, Red Lightning Books Official website iupress .org Indiana University Press , also known as IU Press , is an academic publisher founded in 1950 at Indiana University that specializes in the humanities and social sciences . Its headquarters are located in Bloomington, Indiana . IU Press publishes approximately 100 new books annually, in addition to 38 academic journals , and maintains a current catalog comprising some 2,000 titles.

[ 2 ] Indiana University Press primarily publishes in the following areas: African , African American , Asian , cultural , Jewish , Holocaust , Middle Eastern studies , Russian and Eastern European , and women's and gender studies; anthropology , film studies , folklore , history , bioethics , music , paleontology , philanthropy , philosophy , and religion . IU Press undertakes extensive regional publishing under its Quarry Books imprint.

History [ edit ] IU Press began in 1950 as part of Indiana University's post-war growth under President Herman B Wells . Bernard Perry, son of Harvard philosophy professor Ralph Barton Perry , served as the first director. IU Press's first book was a translation of Edouard de Montulé's Travels in America, 1816–1817 , published in March 1951. A total of six books were published the first year.

[ 3 ] In 1952, IU Press earned full membership with the Association of American University Presses (now known as the "Association of University Presses"). During its first decade in operation, IU Press published more than 200 books. That same decade, in 1955, it published Rolfe Humphries 's translation of the Metamorphoses of Ovid, IU Press's all-time bestseller, having sold more than 500,000 copies to date.

[ 3 ] Bernard Perry retired as director in 1976 and was replaced by John Gallman who focused on the academic strengths of Indiana University. The IU Press Journals Division, launched in 1987 with three journals, now carries 38 in its 2023 portfolio. By the end of John Gallman's tenure as director in 2000, IU Press published 150 books annually and in 2022, the press maintains an annual output of approximately 100–120 scholarly books per year.

In 2004 IU Press launched Quarry Books , an imprint dedicated to regional topics. It launched Red Lighting Books, another imprint, that focuses on food and drink, lifestyle, travel, sports, the Midwest, and true crime.

Honors and awards [ edit ] In 1965, IU Press received the Centennial Medal, the highest prize of the U.S. Civil War Centennial Commission, for its role in preserving Civil War history. IU Press's 1967 translation of volume 1 of Kierkegaard's Journals and Papers won a National Book Award . It was followed by a second National Book Award in 1970 for a translation of Bertolt Brecht's Saint Joan of the Stockyards .

[ 3 ] In 2009 Indiana University Press publication The United States Holocaust Memorial Museum Encyclopedia of Camps and Ghettos, 1933–1945 , Volume I was selected as the winner of the 2009 National Jewish Book Award in the Holocaust category.

[ 4 ] In a ranking of scholarly publishers in political science, IUP ranked 28th among all scholarly publishers by respondent preferences for publishers whose books they read or rely upon for the best research in political science.

[ 5 ] See also [ edit ] Literature portal Indiana portal List of English-language book publishing companies List of university presses References [ edit ] ^ "Indiana University Press - Resources For" .

Indiana University Press . Retrieved January 4, 2023 .

^ "About IU Press" .

Indiana University . Retrieved January 5, 2023 .

^ a b c "IU Press turns 60" .

IU News Room . Indiana University . Retrieved February 20, 2018 .

^ "IU Press encyclopedia wins a 2009 National Jewish Book Award: IU News Room: Indiana University" .

newsinfo.iu.edu . Retrieved March 19, 2018 .

^ Garand and Giles, James C. and Michael W. (April 2011).

"Ranking Scholarly Publishers in Political Science: An Alternative Approach" (PDF) .

PS: Political Science and Politics .

44 (2): 6 . Retrieved February 22, 2018 .

External links [ edit ] Official website IU Press Journals on JSTOR Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National Germany United States France BnF data Poland Israel Other SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Indiana_University_Press&oldid=1230278479 " Categories : 1950 establishments in Indiana Companies based in Bloomington, Indiana Book publishing companies based in Indiana Indiana University Publishing companies established in 1950 University presses of the United States Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use American English from February 2023 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use mdy dates from February 2023 This page was last edited on 21 June 2024, at 19:45 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Indiana University Press 15 languages Add topic

