Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography Toggle Biography subsection 1.1 Early life 1.2 Foundation and spread of Bayrami Order 2 See also 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Haji Bayram Veli 6 languages العربية Català Čeština Deutsch Türkçe اردو Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Grand Sheikh of Bayramiyya Haji Bayram Veli The cenotaph of Haji Bayram Veli Personal life Born 1352 CE Solfasol Village, Ankara Died 1430 (aged 77–78) Ulus , Ottoman Empire Resting place Hacı Bayram Mosque , Ulus, Ankara , Turkey Era Medieval Region Anatolia Religious life Religion Islam Denomination Sunni [ 1 ] Jurisprudence Hanafi [ 1 ] Tariqa Bayrami [ 2 ] Creed Maturidi [ 3 ] Muslim leader Influenced by Somuncu Baba Influenced Akshamsaddin Part of a series on Islam Sufism Ideas Abdal Al-Insān al-Kāmil Baqaa Dervish Dhawq Fakir Fana Hal Haqiqa Ihsan Irfan Ishq Karamat Kashf Lataif Manzil Ma'rifa Maqam Murid Murshid Nafs Nūr Qalandar Qayyum Qutb Silsila Sufi cosmology Sufi metaphysics Sufi philosophy Sufi poetry Sufi psychology Salik Tazkiah Wali Yaqeen Practices Anasheed Dhikr Haḍra Muraqabah Qawwali Sama Whirling Ziyarat Sufi orders Alians Ba 'Alawi Bektashi Qadiri Chishti Naqshbandi Shadhili Suhrawardi Rifaʽi Khalwati Rahmani Badawi Burhani Tijani Darqawi Idrisi Senusi Bayrami Jelveti Maizbhandari Malamati Mouridi Sülaymaniyya Salihiyya Azeemia Kubrawi Mevlevi Shattari Uwaisi Hurufi Ni'matullāhī Nuqtavi Qalandari Safavi Zahabiya Akbari Galibi Haqqani Anjuman Inayati Issawiyya Jerrahi Madari Mahdavi Noorbakshi Zahedi Zikri List of sufis Notable early Notable modern Singers Topics in Sufism Tawhid Sharia Tariqa Haqiqa Ma'rifa Art History Sufi music Persecution Ziyarat Islam portal v t e Haji Bayram Veli ( Turkish : Haci Bayram-ı Veli ) (1352–1430) was an Ottoman poet, Sufi saint , and the founder of the Bayrami Order .

[ 4 ] He also composed a number of hymns .

[ 4 ] He was a follower of the Hanafi Madhhab in jurisprudence [ 1 ] and a follower of the Maturidi Aqidah in theology .

[ 3 ] Biography [ edit ] Early life [ edit ] He lived between 1352 and 1430. His original name was Numan, he changed it to Bayram after he met his spiritual leader Somuncu Baba during the festival of Eid ul-Adha (called Kurban Bayramı in Turkish) .

Foundation and spread of Bayrami Order [ edit ] The two mystics, Shāikh Hāmeed’ūd-Dīn-ee Wālī (Somunju Baba) and Haji Bayram, were living in the city of Bursa when they made the Hajj (pilgrimage to Mecca ) together. During this holy journey Hāmeed’ūd-Dīn-ee Wālī (Somuncu Baba) continued to teach Sufism .

Shāikh Hāmeed’ūd-Dīn died in 1412 passing his authority to Haji Bayram Wali, who returned to Ankara as the sheikh (leader) of a Sufi Tariqa called Bayrami .

[ 2 ] He built a Dervish lodge on the site in Ankara where his tomb and mosque stand today. People came to stay there and learn about Sufism . The Bayramiye order grew popular with Bayram's successful teaching.

The growth of the order perturbed some local authorities; they shared their worries with the Ottoman Sultan Murad II , who called Haji Bayram to Edirne (the capital of the Ottoman Empire at that time). The Sultan wanted to test the opinions, doctrine and the patriotism of the order. At this time in Anatolia there were many independent Turkish clans with little unity among them.

Haji Bayram took another scholar, his murid Akshemsaddin (Aqq-Shams’ūd-Dīn) (“Ak” means “The Pure White” in Turkish ), with him to Edirne to meet the Sultan. Murad soon understood that the complaints against Bayram were merely rumours and Haji Bayram and Akshemseddin stayed for a while in Edirne, lecturing and preaching to the Ottoman court. He had more private consultations with the Sultan in which they discussed matters of the world, life and the future.

In particular the Sultan was concerned with the conquest of Constantinople , the Byzantine capital that the previous armies of Islam had struggled to conquer without success. The Sultan asked Bayram directly, "Who will conquer the city?" The reply came: "You will not. But this baby shall. You and I will not be alive at the time of that conquest. But my student Akshemseddin will be there." The baby was the Sultan's son, the future Mehmed II , who would conquer the city (which later became known as Istanbul ) in 1453 and receive the title Fatih (meaning the conqueror ) becoming known as Mehmed the Conqueror .

Haji Bayram requested that his student Akshemseddin be the teacher of the baby Mehmed, and Sultan Murad agreed. Haji Bayram made a few more trips to Edirne until he died in 1430 in Ankara , passing the leadership of his order to Akshemseddin. His tomb [ 2 ] and the mosque dedicated to him are in Ankara .

[ 5 ] Haji Bayram Veli is considered by all Sufi tariqa to be a Qutb or Ghous, which is the greatest rank a Wali (saint) can achieve.

[ 6 ] See also [ edit ] List of Sufis Bayramiyya Khalwatiyya Zahediyya References [ edit ] ^ a b c Balcıoğlu, Tahir Harimî, Türk Tarihinde Mezhep Cereyanları - The course of madhhab events in Turkish history , (Preface and notes by Hilmi Ziya Ülken),  Ahmet Sait Press, 271 pages,  Kanaat Publications, Istanbul, 1940.

(in Turkish) ^ a b c Taji-Farouki, Suha (2007) Beshara and Ibn 'Arabi: a movement of Sufi spirituality in the modern world , Anqa, Oxford, England, page 158 , ISBN 978-1-905937-00-4 ^ a b Alpyağıl, Recep (28 November 2016). " Māturīdī ".

Oxford Bibliographies – Islamic Studies .

Oxford : Oxford University Press .

doi : 10.1093/obo/9780195390155-0232 . Archived from the original on 18 March 2017.

^ a b Levine, Lynn A. (editor) (2006) "Hacı Bayram Mosque (Hacı Bayram Camii)" Frommer's Turkey (4th edition) Wiley, Hoboken, New Jersey, page 371 , ISBN 0-471-78556-3 ^ Davis, Ben (editor) (2003) Let's Go Turkey St. Martin's Press, New York, page 398 , ISBN 0-312-30597-4 ^ "ŞÂBÂN-ı VELÎ - TDV İslâm Ansiklopedisi" .

TDV İslam Ansiklopedisi (in Turkish) . Retrieved 2022-04-28 .

Portals : Biography Islam Poetry Turkey v t e Sufism Sufi orders Qadiriyya ( 'Abd al-Qadir al-Gilani ) Chishtiyya ( Mu'in al-Din Chishti ) Naqshbandiyya ( Baha' al-Din Naqshband ) Suhrawardiyya ( Shihab al-Din 'Umar al-Suhrawardi ) Rifa'iyya ( Ahmad al-Rifa'i ) Badawiyya ( Ahmad al-Badawi ) Desuqiyya ( Ibrahim al-Desuqi ) Shadhiliyya ( Abu al-Hasan al-Shadhili ) Akbariyya ( Ibn Arabi ) Khalwatiyya ('Umar al-Khalwati) Rahmaniyya ( Muhammad b. 'Abd al-Rahman al-Azhari ) Bayramiyya ( Bayram Wali ) Ba 'Alawiyya ( Muhammad ibn 'Ali Ba 'Alawi ) Tijaniyya ( Ahmad al-Tijani ) Idrisiyya ( Ahmad ibn Idris al-Fasi ) Practices Dhikr Haḍra Zuhd Ziyarat Mawlid Muraqabah Taqwa Tazkiyah Tawassul Tabarruk Tawakkul Ideas Ihsan Wajd Kashf Karamat Nūr Dhawq Ishq Murid Salik Sufi studies Sufi poetry Sufi philosophy Sufi literature Al-Risala al-Qushayriyya Hilyat al-Awliya' Kashf al-Mahjub The Alchemy of Happiness The Revival of the Religious Sciences Al-Burda Dala'il al-Khayrat Fadha'il al-'Amal Notable Sufis 2nd AH/8th AD Al-Hasan al-Basri (d. 110 AH) Malik ibn Dinar (d. 128 AH) Ibrahim ibn Adham (d. 160 AH) Sufyan al-Thawri (d. 161 AH) Dawud al-Ta'i (d. 165 AH) 'Abd al-Wahid ibn Zaid (d. 177 AH) Rabi'a al-'Adawiyya (d. 180 AH) Ibn al-Mubarak (d. 181 AH) Al-Fudayl ibn 'Iyad (d. 188 AH) Shaqiq al-Balkhi (d. 194 AH) Ma'ruf al-Karkhi (d. 200 AH) 3rd AH/9th AD Al-Darani (d. 205 or 215 AH) Bishr al-Hafi (d. 227 AH) Al-Harith al-Muhasibi (d. 243 AH) Dhul-Nun al-Misri (d. 245 AH) Sari al-Saqati (d. 253 AH) Yahya ibn Mu'adh al-Razi (d. 258 AH) Abu Sa'id al-Kharraz (d. 277 or 286 AH) Sahl al-Tustari (d. 283 AH) Al-Hakim al-Tirmidhi (d. 295 or 320 AH) Abu al-Husain al-Nuri (d. 295 AH) 4th AH/10th AD Ruwaym (d. 303 AH) Abu Bakr al-Shibli (d. 334 AH) Abu Talib al-Makki (d. 386 AH) Abu Bakr al-Kalabadhi (d. 380 AH) Sufi leaders Salah al-Din al-Ayyubi (d. 589 AH) Muzaffar al-Din Gökböri (d. 630 AH) Yusuf Abu al-Haggag (d. 642 AH) Muhammad al-Fateh (d. 886 AH) Aurangzeb (d. 1118 AH) Fazl-e-Haq Khairabadi (d. 1277 AH) Bahadur Shah Zafar (d. 1278 AH) Imam Shamil (d. 1287 AH) Emir Abdel-Kader (d. 1300 AH) Muhammad Ahmad (d. 1302/1885) Omar al-Mukhtar (d. 1350 AH) 'Izz al-Din al-Qassam (d. 1354 AH) Portal Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States Artists MusicBrainz Other IdRef İslâm Ansiklopedisi External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Hacı Bayram-ı Veli .

Pictures of the Ankara mosque and the mausoleum of the saint Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Haji_Bayram_Veli&oldid=1286846423 " Categories : People from Ankara Sunni Sufis Sunni Muslim scholars of Islam Founders of Sufi orders Hanbalis Maturidis Bayramiye order Muslims from the Ottoman Empire 14th-century poets from the Ottoman Empire 15th-century poets from the Ottoman Empire Sufi saints from the Ottoman Empire Turkish Sufis Poets from the Ottoman Empire Turkish poets 1352 births 1430 deaths Islamic scholars from the Ottoman Empire Hidden categories: Articles with Turkish-language sources (tr) CS1 Turkish-language sources (tr) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Arabic-language text Articles containing Turkish-language text Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 22 April 2025, at 10:39 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Haji Bayram Veli 6 languages Add topic

