Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Introduction 2 Main features 3 Strands 4 Current work Toggle Current work subsection 4.1 Journals 4.2 United Kingdom 4.3 United States 4.4 Netherlands 4.5 France 4.6 Canada 4.7 Germany 4.8 Australia 4.8.1 University of Newcastle 5 Major post-Keynesian economists 6 See also 7 Notes 8 References 9 Further reading 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Post-Keynesian economics 24 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Български Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Español فارسی Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Magyar Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Suomi Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia School of economic thought Part of the behavioral sciences Economics Outline Index Glossary Economists Principles of Economics Tools and methodology Economic theory Mathematical modeling Game theory Rational choice Cognitive science ( Behavioral ) Economic equilibrium Empirical methods Experimental National accounts Econometrics Time series Spatial Prescriptive and policy Welfare analysis Social choice theory Rational choice theory Cost–benefit analysis Branches and subfields Applied Econometrics International Heterodox Micro Macro Mainstream Mathematical Mech. design Methodology Political Industrial org.

Market design Applications Agriculture Business Cultural Demographic Development Ecological Education Engineering Environmental Evolutionary Financial Geographic Happiness Health History Information Infrastructure Institutions Labour Law Management Non-monetary Organization Participation Personnel Planning Policy Public sector Public choice Social choice Regional Regulatory Resources Rural Service Transport Urban Welfare Economics portal Society portal v t e Part of a series on Macroeconomics Basic concepts Aggregate demand Aggregate supply Business cycle CAGR Deflation Demand shock Disinflation Effective demand Expectations Adaptive Rational Financial crisis Growth Inflation Demand-pull Cost-push Interest rate Investment Liquidity trap Measures of national income and output GDP GNI NNI Microfoundations Money Endogenous Money creation Demand for money Liquidity preference Money supply National accounts SNA Nominal rigidity Price level Recession Shrinkflation Stagflation Supply shock Saving Unemployment Policies Fiscal Monetary Commercial Central bank Universal basic income Models IS–LM AD–AS Keynesian cross Multiplier Accelerator Phillips curve Arrow–Debreu Harrod–Domar Solow–Swan Ramsey–Cass–Koopmans Overlapping generations General equilibrium DSGE Endogenous growth Matching theory Mundell–Fleming Overshooting NAIRU Related fields Econometrics Economic statistics Monetary economics Development economics Evolutionary economics International economics Schools Mainstream Keynesian Neo- New Monetarism New classical Real business-cycle theory Stockholm New neoclassical synthesis Saltwater and freshwater Heterodox Austrian Chartalism Modern monetary theory Ecological Post-Keynesian Circuitism Disequilibrium Marxian Market monetarism Supply-side People François Quesnay Adam Smith Thomas Robert Malthus Karl Marx Léon Walras Knut Wicksell Irving Fisher Wesley Clair Mitchell John Maynard Keynes Alvin Hansen Michał Kalecki Gunnar Myrdal Simon Kuznets Joan Robinson Friedrich Hayek John Hicks Richard Stone Hyman Minsky Milton Friedman Paul Samuelson Lawrence Klein Edmund Phelps Robert Lucas Jr.

Edward C. Prescott Peter Diamond William Nordhaus Joseph Stiglitz Thomas J. Sargent Paul Krugman N. Gregory Mankiw See also Macroeconomic model Publications in macroeconomics Economics Applied Microeconomics Political economy Mathematical economics Money portal Business portal v t e Part of a series on Capitalism Concepts Austerity Business Business cycle Businessperson Capital Capital accumulation Capital markets Company Corporation Competition Competition law Definitions Economic interventionism Economic liberalism Economic surplus Entrepreneurship Fictitious capital Financial market Free price system Free market Goods and services Investor Invisible hand Visible hand Liberalization Marginalism Money Private property Privatization Profit Rent seeking Supply and demand Surplus value Value Wage labour Economic systems Anglo-Saxon Authoritarian Corporate Dirigist Free-market Humanistic Laissez-faire Liberal Libertarian Market Mercantilist Mixed Monopoly National Neoliberal Nordic Private Raw Regulated market Regulatory Rhine Social Political State State-sponsored Welfare Economic theories American Austrian Chartalism MMT Chicago Classical Institutional Keynesian Neo- New Post- Market monetarism Critique of political economy Critique of work Marxist Monetarist Neoclassical New institutional Supply-side Ideologies Anarcho Authoritarian Classical liberalism Democratic Dirigisme Eco Gladstonian Humanistic Inclusive Liberal Liberalism Libertarian Neo Neoliberalism Objectivism Ordoliberalism Privatism Right-libertarianism Third Way Origins Age of Enlightenment Capitalism and Islam Commercial Revolution Feudalism Industrial Revolution Mercantilism Primitive accumulation Physiocracy Simple commodity production Development Advanced Consumer Community Corporate Crony Finance Global Illiberal Late Marxist Merchant Progressive Rentier State monopoly Technological Intellectuals Smith Bentham Malthus Say Ricardo Mill (James) Bastiat Mill (John Stuart) Marx Walras Marshall Pareto Veblen Weber von Mises Schumpeter Keynes Hayek Rand Weaver Coase Friedman Rothbard Sowell Becker Hoppe Related topics Anti-capitalism Capitalist propaganda Capitalist realism Capitalist state Consumerism Crisis theory Criticism of capitalism Critique of political economy Critique of work Cronyism Culture of capitalism Evergreening Exploitation of labour Globalization History History of theory Market economy Periodizations of capitalism Perspectives on capitalism Post-capitalism Speculation Spontaneous order Venture philanthropy Wage slavery Capitalism portal Business portal Economics portal v t e Post-Keynesian economics is a school of economic thought with its origins in The General Theory of John Maynard Keynes , with subsequent development influenced to a large degree by Michał Kalecki , Joan Robinson , Nicholas Kaldor , Sidney Weintraub , Paul Davidson , Piero Sraffa , Jan Kregel and Marc Lavoie . Historian Robert Skidelsky argues that the post-Keynesian school has remained closest to the spirit of Keynes' original work.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] It is a heterodox approach to economics [ 3 ] [ 4 ] based on a non-equilibrium approach .

[ 5 ] Introduction [ edit ] The term "post-Keynesian" was first used to refer to a distinct school of economic thought by Eichner and Kregel (1975) [ 6 ] and by the establishment of the Journal of Post Keynesian Economics in 1978. Prior to 1975, and occasionally in more recent work, post-Keynesian could simply mean economics carried out after 1936, the date of Keynes's General Theory .

[ 7 ] Post-Keynesian economists are united in maintaining that Keynes' theory is seriously misrepresented by the two other principal Keynesian schools: neo-Keynesian economics , which was orthodox in the 1950s and 60s, and new Keynesian economics , which together with various strands of neoclassical economics has been dominant in mainstream macroeconomics since the 1980s. Post-Keynesian economics can be seen as an attempt to rebuild economic theory in the light of Keynes' ideas and insights. However, even in the early years, post-Keynesians such as Joan Robinson sought to distance themselves from Keynes, and much current post-Keynesian thought cannot be found in Keynes. Some post-Keynesians took a more progressive view than Keynes himself, with greater emphases on worker-friendly policies and redistribution. Robinson, Paul Davidson and Hyman Minsky emphasized the effects on the economy of practical differences between different types of investments, in contrast to Keynes' more abstract treatment.

[ 8 ] The theoretical foundation of post-Keynesian economics is the principle of effective demand that demand matters in the long as well as the short run, so that a competitive market economy has no natural or automatic tendency towards full employment .

[ 9 ] Contrary to the views of new Keynesian economists working in the neoclassical tradition, post-Keynesians do not accept that the theoretical basis of the market's failure to provide full employment is rigid or sticky prices or wages. Post-Keynesians typically reject the IS–LM model of John Hicks , which is very influential in neo-Keynesian economics, because they argue endogenous bank lending to be more significant than central banks' money supply for the interest rate.

[ 10 ] The contribution of post-Keynesian economics [ 11 ] has extended beyond the theory of aggregate employment to theories of income distribution , growth, trade and development in which money demand plays a key role, whereas in neoclassical economics these are determined by the forces of technology, preferences and endowment. In the field of monetary theory, post-Keynesian economists were among the first to emphasise that money supply responds to the demand for bank credit, [ 12 ] so that a central bank cannot control the quantity of money, but only manage the interest rate by managing the quantity of monetary reserves.

This view has largely been incorporated into mainstream economics and monetary policy , which now targets the interest rate as an instrument, rather than attempting to accurately control the quantity of money.

[ 13 ] In the field of finance, Hyman Minsky put forward a theory of financial crisis based on financial fragility , which has received renewed attention.

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] Main features [ edit ] In 2009 Marc Lavoie listed the main features of post-Keynesian economics: [ 16 ] Effective demand Historical and dynamic time He also lists 5 auxiliary features: The possible negative impact of flexible prices The monetary production of the economy Fundamental uncertainty Relevant and contemporary microeconomics Pluralism of theories and methods Strands [ edit ] There are a number of strands to post-Keynesian theory with different emphases. Joan Robinson regarded Michał Kalecki 's theory of effective demand to be superior to Keynes' theories. Kalecki's theory is based on a class division between workers and capitalists and imperfect competition .

[ 17 ] Robinson also led the critique of the use of aggregate production functions based on homogeneous capital – the Cambridge capital controversy – winning the argument but not the battle.

[ 18 ] The writings of Piero Sraffa were a significant influence on the post-Keynesian position in this debate, though Sraffa and his neo-Ricardian followers drew more inspiration from David Ricardo than Keynes. Much of Nicholas Kaldor 's work was based on the ideas of increasing returns to scale , path dependence , and the key differences between the primary and industrial sectors.

[ 19 ] Paul Davidson [ 20 ] follows Keynes closely in placing time and uncertainty at the centre of theory, from which flow the nature of money and of a monetary economy.

Monetary circuit theory , originally developed in continental Europe, places particular emphasis on the distinctive role of money as means of payment. Each of these strands continues to see further development by later generations of economists. An important method is stock-flow consistent models , which enable a consistent description of receivables and liabilities as well as cash flows.

[ 21 ] [ 22 ] [ 23 ] [ 24 ] Modern Monetary Theory is a relatively recent offshoot independently pioneered by Warren Mosler that models the currency itself as a public monopoly as the micro foundation of macro economics, thereby augmenting the theory of effective demand, recognizing that coercive taxation drives the currency (the tax credit) and that the price level is necessarily a function of prices paid by the state. Subsequent MMT associated academics have used macroeconomic modelling of Wynne Godley and incorporated some of Hyman Minsky 's ideas on the labour market, as well as chartalism and functional finance .

Recent [ when?

] work in post-Keynesian economics has attempted to provide micro-foundations for capacity underutilization as a coordination failure , justifying government intervention in the form of aggregate demand stimulus.

[ 25 ] [ 26 ] Current work [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( April 2015 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Journals [ edit ] Much post-Keynesian research is published in the Review of Keynesian Economics (ROKE), the Journal of Post Keynesian Economics (founded by Sidney Weintraub and Paul Davidson ), the Cambridge Journal of Economics , the Review of Political Economy , and the Journal of Economic Issues (JEI).

United Kingdom [ edit ] There is also a United Kingdom academic association, the Post-Keynesian Economics Society (PKES). It was founded by Philip Arestis and Victoria Chick in 1988 as the Post-Keynesian Economics Study Group (PKSG) [ 27 ] and changed its name in 2018. In the UK, post-Keynesian economists can be found in: SOAS University of London University of Greenwich University of Leeds Kingston University King's College London , International Political Economy Goldsmiths, University of London University of the West of England, Bristol University of Hertfordshire Cambridge University , Land Economy Birmingham City University University College London , Institute for Innovation and Public Purpose Open University University of Winchester Working on post-Keynesian economic foundations, the UK-based global economics consultancy , Cambridge Econometrics, [ 28 ] developed a computer-based Energy - Environment - Economy Model for Europe (E3ME) [ 29 ] economic model . It is used by European Commission to analyse medium and long-term effects of its environmental and economic policies .

[ 30 ] United States [ edit ] In the United States, there are several universities with a post-Keynesian bent: [ further explanation needed ] The New School , New York City The University of Massachusetts Amherst The University of Utah , Salt Lake City Bucknell University , Lewisburg, Pennsylvania Denison University , Granville, Ohio Levy Economics Institute at Bard College , Annandale-on-Hudson, New York University of Missouri–Kansas City University of Denver Colorado State University , Fort Collins The University of Massachusetts Boston John Jay College of Criminal Justice at City University of New York , New York City Netherlands [ edit ] Erasmus University , Rotterdam International Institute of Social Studies , The Hague Maastricht University , Maastricht University of Groningen , Groningen France [ edit ] Sorbonne Paris North University Canada [ edit ] In Canada, post-Keynesians can be found at the University of Ottawa and Laurentian University .

Germany [ edit ] In Germany, post-Keynesianism is very strong at the Berlin School of Economics and Law [ 31 ] and its master's degree courses: International Economics [M.A.] and Political Economy of European Integration [M.A.]. Many German Post-Keynesians are organized in the Forum Macroeconomics and Macroeconomic Policies.

[ 32 ] Australia [ edit ] University of Newcastle [ edit ] The University of Newcastle in New South Wales, Australia, houses the post-Keynesian think-tank the Centre of Full Employment and Equity (CofFEE).

Major post-Keynesian economists [ edit ] Main article: List of Post-Keynesian economists See also: Category:Post-Keynesian economists Major post-Keynesian economists of the first and second generations after Keynes include: Marc Lavoie Philip Arestis Victoria Chick Alfred Eichner James Crotty Paul Davidson Wynne Godley Geoff Harcourt Donald J. Harris Michael Hudson Nicholas Kaldor Michał Kalecki Frederic S. Lee Augusto Graziani Steve Keen Jan Kregel Paolo Leon Abba P. Lerner Hyman Minsky Basil Moore Edward J. Nell Luigi Pasinetti Joan Robinson George Shackle Anthony Thirlwall Fernando Vianello William Vickrey L. Randall Wray Dimitri B. Papadimitriou Sidney Weintraub See also [ edit ] Disequilibrium macroeconomics Endogenous money Job guarantee Keynesian economics Neo-Keynesian economics New Keynesian economics Keynes' Treatise on Probability Notes [ edit ] ^ Skidelsky 2009 , p. 42 ^ Financial markets, money and the real world, by Paul Davidson, pp. 88–89 ^ Lavoie, Marc (2006), "Post-Keynesian Heterodoxy", Introduction to Post-Keynesian Economics , Palgrave Macmillan UK, pp.

1– 24, doi : 10.1057/9780230626300_1 , ISBN 9781349283378 ^ Dequech, David (2012). "Post Keynesianism, Heterodoxy and Mainstream Economics".

Review of Political Economy .

24 (2): 353– 368.

doi : 10.1080/09538259.2012.664364 .

ISSN 0953-8259 .

S2CID 154188135 .

^ Katzner, Donald W. (2003). "Equilibrium and Non-equilibrium". In King, J.E. (ed.).

The Elgar Companion to Post Keynesian Economics . Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar. pp.

126– 131.

^ Eichner and Kregel 1975 ^ King 2002 , p. 10 harvnb error: no target: CITEREFKing2002 ( help ) ^ Hayes 2008 harvnb error: no target: CITEREFHayes2008 ( help ) [ page needed ] ^ Arestis 1996 ^ Palley, Thomas (1 January 2008).

"Macroeconomics without the LM: A Post-Keynesian Perspective" .

PERI Working Papers .

doi : 10.7275/1284545 .

^ For a general introduction see Holt 2001 ^ Kaldor 1980 ^ "Only the ignorant live in fear of hyperinflation" .

Financial Times . 10 April 2014 . Retrieved 6 April 2023 .

^ Palley, Thomas (April 2010).

"The Limits of Minsky's Financial Instability Hypothesis as an Explanation of the Crisis" .

Monthly Review .

61 (11): 28.

doi : 10.14452/MR-061-11-2010-04_2 .

^ Minsky 1975 [ page needed ] ^ Lavoie, Marc (2009), "Post-Keynesian Heterodoxy" , Introduction to Post-Keynesian Economics , London: Palgrave Macmillan UK, pp.

1– 24, doi : 10.1057/9780230235489_1 , ISBN 978-0-230-22921-1 , retrieved 4 April 2022 ^ Robinson 1974 ^ Pasinetti 2007 ^ Harcourt 2006 , Pasinetti 2007 ^ Davidson 2007 ^ Godley, Wynne; Lavoie, Marc (2012).

Monetary Economics. An Integrated Approach to Credit, Money, Income, Production and Wealth . New York: Palgrave Macmillan.

ISBN 978-0-230-30184-9 .

^ Richters, Oliver; Glötzl, Erhard (2020). "Modeling economic forces, power relations, and stock-flow consistency: a general constrained dynamics approach".

Journal of Post Keynesian Economics .

43 (2).

doi : 10.1080/01603477.2020.1713008 .

hdl : 10419/178651 .

^ Caverzasi, Eugenio; Godin, Antoine (2015). "Post-Keynesian stock-flow-consistent modelling: a survey".

Cambridge Journal of Economics .

39 (1): 157– 187.

doi : 10.1093/cje/beu021 .

^ Lavoie, Marc (2022). "Stock-flow consistent macroeconomic modeling and Post-Keynesian Institutionalism". In Whalen, Charles J. (ed.).

A Modern Guide to Post-Keynesian Institutional Economics .

doi : 10.4337/9781800885752.00020 .

^ Luke Petach; Daniele Tavani (September 2019).

"No one is alone: Strategic complementarities, capacity utilization, growth, and distribution" .

Structural Change and Economic Dynamics .

50 . Elsevier: 203– 215.

doi : 10.1016/j.strueco.2019.07.001 .

hdl : 10419/181477 . Retrieved 8 June 2021 .

^ Daniele Tavani; Luke Petach (April 2021).

"Firm beliefs and long-run demand effects in a labor-constrained model of growth and distribution" .

Journal of Evolutionary Economics .

31 (2). Springer: 353– 377.

doi : 10.1007/s00191-020-00680-w .

S2CID 253723600 . Retrieved 8 June 2021 .

^ "Victoria Chick (1936–2023) | PKES" .

www.postkeynesian.net . Retrieved 18 January 2023 .

^ "Cambridge Econometrics" .

Cambridge Econometrics . Retrieved 31 August 2024 .

^ "E3ME by Cambridge Econometrics" .

E3ME . Retrieved 31 August 2024 .

^ "model E3ME - Energy - Environment - Economy Model for Europe" .

Modelling Inventory and Knowledge Management System of the European Commission (MIDAS) . Retrieved 31 August 2024 .

^ "HWR Berlin - Campus4U" .

campus4u.hwr-berlin.de .

^ Hein, Eckhard; Priewe, Jan (2009).

"Forum: The Research Network Macroeconomics and Macroeconomic Policies (FMM) – Past, present and future" .

European Journal of Economics and Economic Policies: Intervention .

6 (2): 166– 173.

doi : 10.4337/ejeep.2009.02.04 .

References [ edit ] Arestis, Philip (1996). "Post-Keynesian economics: towards coherence".

Cambridge Journal of Economics .

20 : 111– 135.

doi : 10.1093/oxfordjournals.cje.a013604 .

Davidson, Paul (2007).

John Maynard Keynes .

Palgrave Macmillan .

Eichner and Kregel (1975). "An Essay on Post-Keynesian Theory: A New Paradigm in Economics".

Journal of Economic Literature .

13 : 1293– 1314.

Harcourt, Geoff (2006).

The Structure of Post-Keynesian Economics .

Columbia University Press .

Hayes, M.G. (2008).

The Economics of Keynes: A New Guide to the General Theory . Edward Elgar Publishing.

ISBN 978-1-84844-056-2 .

Kaldor, Nicholas (1980). "Monetarism and UK economic policy".

Cambridge Journal of Economics .

4 (3): 271– 292.

doi : 10.1093/oxfordjournals.cje.a035457 .

King, J.E. (2002).

A history of post Keynesian economics since 1936 . Edward Elgar Publishing.

ISBN 978-1-84064-420-3 .

Minsky, Hyman (1975).

John Maynard Keynes .

Columbia University Press .

Pasinetti, Luigi (2007).

Keynes and the Cambridge Keynesians .

Columbia University Press .

Robinson, Joan ; Eatwell, John (1974).

An Introduction to Modern Economics (2 ed.).

McGraw Hill .

Skidelsky, Robert (2009).

Keynes: The Return of the Master . Allen Lane. p.

42 .

ISBN 978-1-84614-258-1 .

Further reading [ edit ] Holt, Ric; Pressman, Steven (2001).

A New Guide to Post Keynesian Economics .

Routledge .

Holt, Ric; Pressman, Steven (2006).

Empirical Post Keynesian Economics: Looking at the Real World.

M.E. Sharpe.

External links [ edit ] Structure of Post Keynesian Economics-Geoff Harcourt William Vickrey -----Fifteen Fatal Fallacies of Financial Fundamentalism: A Disquisition on Demand Side Economics Presentation of post Keynesian economics Marc Lavoie Archived 30 December 2019 at the Wayback Machine Samuelson and the Keynes/Post Keynesian Revolution:by Paul Davidson Professor L. Randall Wray:Why The Federal Budget Is Not Like a Household Budget Post-Keynesian economics: towards coherence Cambridge Journal of Economics v t e Macroeconomics Basic concepts Aggregate demand Aggregate supply Business cycle CAGR Deflation Demand shock Disinflation Effective demand Expectations Adaptive Rational Financial crisis Growth Inflation Demand-pull Cost-push Interest rate Investment Liquidity trap Measures of national income and output GDP GNI NNI Microfoundations Money Endogenous Money creation Demand for money Liquidity preference Money supply National accounts SNA Nominal rigidity Price level Recession Shrinkflation Stagflation Supply shock Saving Unemployment Policies Fiscal Monetary Commercial Central bank Universal basic income Models IS–LM AD–AS Keynesian cross Multiplier Accelerator Phillips curve Arrow–Debreu Harrod–Domar Solow–Swan Ramsey–Cass–Koopmans Overlapping generations General equilibrium DSGE Endogenous growth Matching theory Mundell–Fleming Overshooting NAIRU Related fields Econometrics Economic statistics Monetary economics Development economics Evolutionary economics International economics Schools Mainstream Keynesian Neo- New Monetarism New classical Real business-cycle theory Stockholm New neoclassical synthesis Saltwater and freshwater Heterodox Austrian Chartalism Modern monetary theory Ecological Post-Keynesian Circuitism Disequilibrium Marxian Market monetarism Supply-side Notable macroeconomists François Quesnay Adam Smith Thomas Robert Malthus Karl Marx Léon Walras Knut Wicksell Irving Fisher Wesley Clair Mitchell John Maynard Keynes Alvin Hansen Michał Kalecki Gunnar Myrdal Simon Kuznets Joan Robinson Friedrich Hayek John Hicks Richard Stone Hyman Minsky Milton Friedman Paul Samuelson Lawrence Klein Edmund Phelps Robert Lucas Jr.

Edward C. Prescott Peter Diamond William Nordhaus Joseph Stiglitz Thomas J. Sargent Paul Krugman N. Gregory Mankiw Critique Critique of political economy See also Macroeconomic model Publications in macroeconomics Economics Applied Microeconomics Political economy Mathematical economics Category v t e Keynesians Founder John Maynard Keynes Neo-Keynesians Gardner Ackley William Baumol James Duesenberry Robert Eisner Trygve Haavelmo Alvin Hansen Roy Harrod Walter Heller John Hicks Lawrence Klein James Meade Lloyd Metzler Franco Modigliani Robert Mundell Arthur Melvin Okun Don Patinkin Bill Phillips William Poole Paul Samuelson Robert Solow James Tobin Post-Keynesians Victoria Chick Paul Davidson Evsey Domar James K. Galbraith John Kenneth Galbraith Wynne Godley Myron J. Gordon Geoff Harcourt Michael Hudson Richard Kahn Nicholas Kaldor Michał Kalecki Steve Keen Jan Kregel Marc Lavoie Abba P. Lerner Hyman Minsky Bill Mitchell Basil Moore Steven Pressman Joan Robinson G. L. S. Shackle Pavlina R. Tcherneva Anthony Thirlwall William Vickrey Sidney Weintraub L. Randall Wray New Keynesians George Akerlof Ben Bernanke Olivier Blanchard Alan Blinder Guillermo Calvo Richard Clarida Brad DeLong Huw Dixon Stanley Fischer Jordi Galí Mark Gertler Robert J. Gordon Stephany Griffith-Jones Nobuhiro Kiyotaki Paul Krugman Greg Mankiw Marc Melitz Maurice Obstfeld Edmund Phelps Ricardo Reis Kenneth Rogoff David Romer Julio Rotemberg Robert Shiller Andrei Shleifer Joseph Stiglitz Lawrence Summers John B. Taylor Michael Woodford Janet Yellen Related Keynesian economics Portal : Business and economics Authority control databases : National Czech Republic Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Post-Keynesian_economics&oldid=1292037060 " Categories : Post-Keynesian economics Keynesian economics Hidden categories: Harv and Sfn no-target errors Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from January 2018 Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from August 2021 All articles with vague or ambiguous time Vague or ambiguous time from August 2022 Articles needing additional references from April 2015 All articles needing additional references Wikipedia articles needing clarification from September 2020 Webarchive template wayback links Articles with excerpts This page was last edited on 24 May 2025, at 21:11 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Post-Keynesian economics 24 languages Add topic

