Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Types 2 Mechanical properties 3 Transport 4 Explosion risk 5 Comparison with other substances 6 See also 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Powder 36 languages العربية Български Чӑвашла Dansk Eesti Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska עברית Jawa Kreyòl ayisyen Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 吴语 ייִדיש 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Powder (substance) ) Dry, bulk solid composed of fine, free-flowing particles This article is about the substance. For other uses, see Powder (disambiguation) .

"Powders" redirects here. For the Eartheater album, see Powders (album) .

This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .

Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( April 2010 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Iron powder A powder is a dry solid composed of many very fine particles that may flow freely when shaken or tilted. Powders are a special sub-class of granular materials , although the terms powder and granular are sometimes used to distinguish separate classes of material. In particular, powders refer to those granular materials that have the finer grain sizes , and that therefore have a greater tendency to form clumps when flowing.

Granulars refer to the coarser granular materials that do not tend to form clumps except when wet.

[ citation needed ] Types [ edit ] Many manufactured goods come in powder form, such as flour , sugar , ground coffee , powdered milk , copy machine toner , gunpowder , cosmetic powders, and some pharmaceuticals . In nature, dust , fine sand and snow , volcanic ash , and the top layer of the lunar regolith are also examples.

Because of their importance to industry, medicine and earth science, powders have been studied in great detail by chemical engineers , mechanical engineers , chemists , physicists , geologists , and researchers in other disciplines.

Mechanical properties [ edit ] Microstructure of a steel powder particle (image 0.15 mm wide) Typically, a powder can be compacted or loosened into a vastly larger range of bulk densities than can a coarser granular material. When deposited by sprinkling, a powder may be very light and fluffy. When vibrated or compressed it may become very dense and even lose its ability to flow. The bulk density of coarse sand, on the other hand, does not vary over an appreciable range.

The clumping behavior of a powder arises because of the molecular Van der Waals force that causes individual grains to cling to one another. This force is present not just in powders, but in sand and gravel, too. However, in such coarse granular materials the weight and the inertia of the individual grains are much larger than the very weak Van der Waals forces, and therefore the tiny clinging between grains does not have a dominant effect on the bulk behavior of the material. Only when the grains are very small and lightweight does the Van der Waals force become predominant, causing the material to clump like a powder. The cross-oversize between flow conditions and stick conditions can be determined by simple experimentation.

[ 1 ] Many other powder behaviors are common to all granular materials. These include segregation, stratification, jamming and unjamming, fragility , loss of kinetic energy , frictional shearing, compaction and Reynolds' dilatancy .

Transport [ edit ] Powders are transported in the atmosphere differently from a coarse granular material. For one thing, tiny particles have little inertia compared to the drag force of the gas that surrounds them, and so they tend to go with the flow instead of traveling in straight lines. For this reason, powders may be an inhalation hazard. Larger particles cannot weave through the body's defenses in the nose and sinus, but will strike and stick to the mucous membranes. The body then moves the mucus out of the body to expel the particles. The smaller particles on the other hand can travel all the way to the lungs from which they cannot be expelled. Serious and sometimes fatal diseases such as silicosis are a result from working with certain powders without adequate respiratory protection.

Also, if powder particles are sufficiently small, they may become suspended in the atmosphere for a very long time. Random motion of the air molecules and turbulence provide upward forces that may counteract the downward force of gravity. Coarse granulars, on the other hand, are so heavy that they fall immediately back to the ground. Once disturbed, dust may form huge dust storms that cross continents and oceans before settling back to the surface. This explains why there is relatively little hazardous dust in the natural environment. Once aloft, the dust is very likely to stay aloft until it meets water in the form of rain or a body of water. Then it sticks and is washed downstream to settle as mud deposits in a quiet lake or sea. When geological changes later re-expose these deposits to the atmosphere, they may have already cemented together to become mudstone , a type of rock. For comparison, the Moon has neither wind nor water, and so its regolith contains dust but no mudstone.

The cohesive forces between the particles tend to resist their becoming airborne, and the motion of wind across the surface is less likely to disturb a low-lying dust particle than a larger sand grain that protrudes higher into the wind. Mechanical agitation such as vehicle traffic, digging or passing herds of animals is more effective than a steady wind at stirring up a powder.

The aerodynamic properties of powders are often used to transport them in industrial applications.

Pneumatic conveying is the transport of powders or grains through a pipe by blowing gas. A gas fluidized bed is a container filled with a powder or granular substance that is fluffed up by blowing gas upwardly through it. This is used for fluidized bed combustion , chemically reacting the gas with the powder.

Some powders may be dustier than others. The tendency of a powder to generate particles in the air under a given energy input is called " dustiness ". It is an important powder property which is relevant to powder aerosolization. It also has implications for human exposure to aerosolized particles and the associated health risks (via skin contact or inhalation) in workplaces.

Explosion risk [ edit ] Main article: Dust explosion Many common powders made in industry are combustible; particularly metals or organic materials such as flour . Since powders have a very high surface area, they can combust with explosive force once ignited. Facilities such as flour mills can be vulnerable to such explosions without proper dust mitigation efforts.

Some metals become especially dangerous in powdered form, notably titanium .

Comparison with other substances [ edit ] A paste or gel might become a powder after it has been thoroughly dried, but is not considered a powder when it is wet because it does not flow freely. Substances like dried clay , although dry bulk solids composed of very fine particles, are not powders unless they are crushed because they have too much cohesion between the grains, and therefore they do not flow freely like a powder. A liquid flows differently than a powder, because a liquid cannot resist any shear stress and therefore it cannot reside at a tilted angle without flowing (that is, it has zero angle of repose .

) A powder on the other hand is a solid, not a liquid, because it may support shear stresses and therefore may display an angle of repose.

[ citation needed ] See also [ edit ] Fragile matter Granular material Liquefaction Grain size Paste (rheology) Powder mixture References [ edit ] ^ Smalley, I.J. 1964. Flow-stick transition on powders. Nature 201, 173–174. doi:10.1038/201173a0 Duran, J., Reisinger A., Sands, Powders, and Grains: An Introduction to the Physics of Granular Materials. November 1999, Springer-Verlag New York, Inc., New York, ISBN 0-387-98656-1 .

Rodhes, M (editor),Principles of powder technology, John Wiley & Sons, 1997 ISBN 0-471-92422-9 Fayed, M.E., Otten L. (editor), Handbook of powder science & technology, second edition, Chapman & Hall, ISBN 0-412-99621-9 Bagnold, R.A.

, Physics of Blown Sand and Desert Dunes , First Springer edition, 1971, ISBN 0-412-10270-6 .

Fundamentals of Particle Technology – free book External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Powder .

v t e Routes of administration , dosage forms Oral Digestive tract ( enteral ) Solids Tablet Capsule Pastille Time release technology Osmotic delivery system Liquids Decoction Elixir Electuary Emulsion Effervescent powder or tablet Herbal tea Hydrogel Molecular encapsulation Powder Softgel Solution Suspension Syrup Tincture Oral mucosa ( buccal , sublabial , sublingual , supralingual ) Solids Orally disintegrating tablet Film Lollipop Sublingual drops Lozenges Effervescent tablet Chewing gum Liquids Mouthwash Toothpaste Ointment Spray Respiratory tract ( inhalation ) Solids Dry-powder inhaler Smoking 0 0 Liquids Anesthetic vaporizer Heated humidified high-flow therapy Medical inhalants Metered-dose inhaler (MDI) Nebulizer Vaporizer Gas Oxygen mask and Nasal cannula Oxygen concentrator Anaesthetic machine Medical inhalants Relative analgesia machine Ophthalmic , otic , nasal Nasal spray Ear drops Eye drops Ointment Hydrogel Insufflation Mucoadhesive microdisc Urogenital Ointment Pessary Vaginal ring Douche Intrauterine device (IUD) Extra-amniotic infusion Intravesical infusion Rectal ( enteral ) Ointment Suppository Enema Solution Hydrogel Murphy drip Nutrient enema Dermal ( topical ) Ointment Topical cream Topical gel Liniment Paste Film DMSO solution Iontophoresis Hydrogel Liposomes Transfersome vesicles Cream Lotion Lip balm Medicated shampoo Dermal patch Transdermal patch Transdermal spray Jet injector Parenterals Injections infusions (into tissue/blood) Skin ( transdermal ) Intradermal Subcutaneous Injector pen Transdermal implant Organs Intracavernous Intravitreal Intra-articular Central nervous system Intracerebral Intrathecal Epidural Circulatory , musculoskeletal Intravenous Intracardiac Intramuscular Intraosseous Intraperitoneal Nanocell injection Patient-controlled analgesia pump PIC line Authority control databases : National Latvia NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐api‐ext.codfw.main‐5cf8f5fb49‐nkxml
Cached time: 20250812023544
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.323 seconds
Real time usage: 0.438 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1407/1000000
Revision size: 8719/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 70270/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 3301/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 7/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 0/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 28039/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.196/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 5292169/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  360.688      1 -total
 25.36%   91.472      6 Template:Navbox
 22.66%   81.734      1 Template:Dosage_forms
 16.98%   61.243      1 Template:Short_description
 13.72%   49.481      4 Template:ISBN
 11.92%   42.981      1 Template:Commons_category
 11.46%   41.342      1 Template:Sister_project
 11.44%   41.258      1 Template:More_footnotes
 11.12%   40.100      1 Template:Side_box
 10.55%   38.041      2 Template:Pagetype Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:47863549:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812023544 and revision id 1301432850. Rendering was triggered because: unknown Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Powder&oldid=1301432850 " Categories : Granularity of materials Dosage forms Powders Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles lacking in-text citations from April 2010 All articles lacking in-text citations All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from May 2024 Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 19 July 2025, at 20:34 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Powder 36 languages Add topic

