Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Work 2 Notes 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Meton of Athens 29 languages Afrikaans Català Čeština Deutsch Ελληνικά Español فارسی Français Galego Hrvatski Italiano עברית ქართული Magyar Malagasy Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Slovenčina Slovenščina Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Svenska Türkçe Українська Winaray 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 5th century BC Greek astronomer "Meton" redirects here. For the insect genus, see Meton (beetle) . For the lunar formation, see Meton (crater) .

Meton of Athens Born Greece Died Greece Nationality Greek Occupations Mathematician , astronomer , geometer , engineer Meton of Athens ( Greek : Μέτων ὁ Ἀθηναῖος ; gen .: Μέτωνος) was a Greek mathematician , astronomer , geometer , and engineer who lived in Athens in the 5th century BC.  He is best known for calculations involving the eponymous 19-year Metonic cycle , which he introduced in 432 BC into the lunisolar Attic calendar . Euphronios says that Colonus was Meton's deme .

[ 1 ] Work [ edit ] The Metonic calendar incorporates knowledge that 19 solar years and 235 lunar months are very nearly of the same duration. Consequently, a given day of a lunar month will often occur on the same day of the solar year as it did 19 years previously. Meton's observations were made in collaboration with Euctemon , about whom nothing else is known.  The Greek astronomer Callippus expanded on the work of Meton, proposing what is now called the Callippic cycle . A Callippic cycle runs for 76 years, or four Metonic cycles.  Callippus refined the lunisolar calendar, deducting one day from the fourth Metonic cycle in each Callippic cycle (i.e., after 940 synodic lunar periods had elapsed), so as to better keep the lunisolar calendar synchronized with the seasons of the solar year.

The world's oldest known astronomical calculator, the Antikythera Mechanism (2nd century BC), performs calculations based on both the Metonic and Callipic calendar cycles, with separate dials for each.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] The foundations of Meton's observatory in Athens are still visible just behind the podium of the Pnyx , the ancient parliament. Meton found the dates of equinoxes and solstices by observing sunrise from his observatory. From that point of observation, during the summer solstice , sunrise was in line with the local hill of Mount Lycabetus, while six months later, during the winter solstice , sunrise occurs over the high brow of Mount Hymettos in the southeast. So from Meton's observatory the Sun appears to move along a 60° arc between these two points on the horizon every six months. The bisector of the observatory's solstitial arc lies in line with the Acropolis. These topological features are important because the summer solstice was the point in time from which the Athenians measured the start of their calendar years. The first month of the new year, Hekatombaion, began with the first new moon after the summer solstice.

[ 4 ] Meton appears briefly as a character in Aristophanes ' play The Birds (414 BC).  He comes on stage carrying surveying instruments and is described as a geometer .

What little is known about Meton is related by ancient historians. According to Ptolemy , a stela or table erected in Athens contained a record of Meton's observations, and a description of the Metonic cycle.

[ 5 ] None of Meton's works survive.

Notes [ edit ] ^ Suda Encyclopedia, §mu.801 ^ Wright, M.T. (2005). "Counting Months and Years: the Upper Back Dial of the Antikythera Mechanism".

Bulletin of the Scientific Instrument Society .

87 (December): 8– 13.

^ Freeth, Tony; Bitsakis, Y.; Moussas, X.; et al. (November 30, 2006). "Decoding the ancient Greek astronomical calculator known as the Antikythera Mechanism".

Nature .

444 (7119): 587– 591.

Bibcode : 2006Natur.444..587F .

doi : 10.1038/nature05357 .

PMID 17136087 .

S2CID 4424998 .

^ Hannah, R. 'Greek and Roman Calendars'. London: Duckworth, pages 52-55.

^ Smith, William (1867).

"Meton (second) by A. De M." .

Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography and Mythology . Vol. 2.

Little, Brown and Company . p. 1069 – via Archive.org .

References [ edit ] Toomer, G. J.

(1981).

"Meton" .

Dictionary of Scientific Biography . Vol. 9. pp.

337– 40 – via Archive.org .

Pannekoek, A.  "Planetary Theories – the Planetary Theory of Kidinnu." Popular Astronomy 55, 10/1947, p 422 External links [ edit ] Meton of Athens [ usurped ] Greek Astronomy v t e Ancient Greek astronomy Astronomers Aglaonice Agrippa Anaximander Andronicus Apollonius Aratus Aristarchus Aristyllus Attalus Autolycus Bion Callippus Cleomedes Cleostratus Conon Eratosthenes Euctemon Eudoxus Geminus Heraclides Hicetas Hipparchus Hippocrates of Chios Hypsicles Menelaus Meton Oenopides Philip of Opus Philolaus Posidonius Ptolemy Pytheas Seleucus Sosigenes of Alexandria Sosigenes the Peripatetic Strabo Thales Theodosius Theon of Alexandria Theon of Smyrna Timocharis Works Almagest (Ptolemy) Catasterismi (Eratosthenes) Little Astronomy On Sizes and Distances (Hipparchus) On the Sizes and Distances (Aristarchus) On the Heavens (Aristotle) Instruments Antikythera mechanism Armillary sphere Astrolabe Dioptra Equatorial ring Gnomon Mural instrument Triquetrum Concepts Callippic cycle Celestial spheres Circle of latitude Counter-Earth Deferent and epicycle Equant Geocentrism Heliocentrism Hipparchic cycle Inferior and superior planets Metonic cycle Octaeteris Solstice Spherical Earth Sublunary sphere Zodiac Influences Babylonian astronomy Egyptian astronomy Influenced Medieval European science Indian astronomy Medieval Islamic astronomy Authority control databases International VIAF WorldCat National Germany Academics zbMATH People Deutsche Biographie Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Meton_of_Athens&oldid=1288768364 " Categories : 5th-century BC Athenians Ancient Greek astronomers Ancient Greek engineers 5th-century BC Greek mathematicians 5th-century BC astronomers Summer solstice Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles with hCards Articles containing Greek-language text This page was last edited on 4 May 2025, at 17:35 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Meton of Athens 29 languages Add topic

