Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Origin 2 Applications Toggle Applications subsection 2.1 Release and dissolution 2.2 Absorption and drug action 2.3 Physical stability 2.4 Dose uniformity 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Micromeritics 5 languages العربية Italiano 日本語 Português ไทย Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Science and technology of small particles Micromeritics is the science of the behavior of particulate materials smaller than 75 μm.

[ 1 ] It is thus the study of the fundamental and derived properties of individual as well as a collection of particles. Micromeritics involves materials with larger particles than nanoparticles where they are smaller than 0.1 μm.

The knowledge and control of the size of particles has importance in pharmacy and materials science . The size, and hence the surface area of a particle , can be related to the physical, chemical and pharmacological properties of drugs. Clinically, the particle size of a drug can affect its release from dosage forms that are administered orally, parenterally , rectally and topically . The successful formulation of suspensions , emulsions and tablets ; both physical stability and pharmacological response also depends on the particle size achieved in the product.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] Origin [ edit ] The term was coined by Joseph Marius DallaValle in his book Micromeritics: The Technology of Fine Particles (1948).

[ 6 ] It was derived from the Greek words Greek : μικρο , romanized : micro meaning "small" and Greek : μέρος , romanized : méros meaning "part".

[ 7 ] The size range which he covered in the book was from 100 nm to 100 mm. Anything smaller than this but bigger than a molecule was referred to at the time as a colloid but is now often referred to as a nanoparticle .

Applications included soil physics , mineral physics , chemical engineering , geology , and hydrology . Characteristics discussed included particle size and shape, packing , electrical , optical , chemical and surface science .

Applications [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

Find sources: "Micromeritics" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( January 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Release and dissolution [ edit ] Particle size and surface area influence the release of a drug from a dosage form that is administered orally , rectally, parenterally , and topically . Higher surface area brings about intimate contact of the drug with the dissolution fluids in vivo and increases the drug solubility and dissolution.

Absorption and drug action [ edit ] Particle size and surface area influence the drug absorption and subsequently the therapeutic action. The higher the dissolution, the faster the absorption and hence the quicker and greater the drug action.

Physical stability [ edit ] Micromeritic properties of a particle , i.e. the particle size in a formulation , influence the physical stability of the suspensions and emulsions . The smaller the size of the particle , the better the physical stability of the dosage form owing to the Brownian motion of the particles in the dispersion .

Dose uniformity [ edit ] Good flow properties of granules and powders are important in the manufacturing of tablets and capsules . The distribution of particles should be uniform in terms of number and weight . Very small particle size causes attraction, which in turn destabilises the suspension by coagulating.

See also [ edit ] Micro-encapsulation Microbeads Microparticle Nanoparticle References [ edit ] ^ Singh, Amarjit; Dhami, Harish Singh; Sinha, Manoj Kumar; Kumar, Ravi (2022).

"Evaluation and comparison of mineralogical, micromeritics and rheological properties of waste machining chips, coal fly ash particulates with metal and ceramic powders" .

Powder Technology .

408 : 117696.

doi : 10.1016/j.powtec.2022.117696 .

^ Brittain, H. G. (1995).

Physical characterization of pharmaceutical solids . Vol. 08. New York: M. Dekker. pp.

963– 73.

doi : 10.1023/a:1015888520352 .

ISBN 0-8247-9372-2 .

PMID 1924166 .

S2CID 38179603 .

{{ cite book }} : |journal= ignored ( help ) ^ Carstensen, Jens Thurø (1993).

Pharmaceutical principles of solid dosage forms . Lancaster, Pa: Technomic Pub. p.

211 .

ISBN 0-87762-955-2 .

^ Martin, Alfred N.; Sinko, Patrick J. (2006).

Martin's physical pharmacy and pharmaceutical sciences: physical chemical and biopharmaceutical principles in the pharmaceutical sciences . Phila: Lippincott Williams and Wilkins. pp.

533– 560.

ISBN 0-7817-5027-X .

^ Orr, Clyde; Webb, Paul W. (1997).

Analytical methods in fine particle technology . Norcross, Ga: Micromeritics Instrument Corp.

ISBN 0-9656783-0-X .

^ Valle, Joseph Marius Dalla (1948).

Micromeritics: The Technology of Fine Particles . Pitman Publishing Corporation.

ISBN 9780598902719 .

OCLC 1016195333 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ "Definition of MICROMERITICS" .

www.merriam-webster.com . Retrieved 2023-01-15 .

v t e Branches of chemistry Glossary of chemical formulae List of biomolecules List of inorganic compounds Periodic table Analytical Calorimetry Characterization Chromatography GC HPLC Crystallography Electroanalytical methods Elemental analysis Instrumental chemistry Mass spectrometry EI ICP MALDI Separation process Spectroscopy IR Raman UV-Vis NMR Titration Wet chemistry Theoretical Computational chemistry Mathematical chemistry Molecular modelling Molecular mechanics Molecular dynamics Molecular geometry VSEPR theory Quantum chemistry Physical Chemical kinetics Chemical physics Molecular physics Chemical thermodynamics Cryochemistry Electrochemistry Spectroelectrochemistry Photoelectrochemistry Equilibrium chemistry Femtochemistry Interface and colloid science Micromeritics Mechanochemistry Microwave chemistry Photochemistry Sonochemistry Spectroscopy Spin chemistry Structural chemistry Surface science Thermochemistry Inorganic Ceramic chemistry Cluster chemistry Coordination chemistry Magnetochemistry Organometallic chemistry Organolanthanide chemistry Solid-state chemistry Organic Dynamic covalent chemistry Enantioselective synthesis Fullerene chemistry Organic reactions Organic synthesis Petrochemistry Physical organic chemistry Polymer chemistry Retrosynthetic analysis Stereochemistry Alkane stereochemistry Total synthesis / Semisynthesis Biological Biochemistry Molecular biology Cell biology Bioinorganic chemistry Bioorganic chemistry Bioorganometallic chemistry Biophysical chemistry Chemical biology Bioorthogonal chemistry Clinical chemistry Medicinal chemistry Pharmacology Neurochemistry Interdisciplinarity Nuclear chemistry Radiochemistry Radiation chemistry Actinide chemistry Cosmochemistry / Astrochemistry / Stellar chemistry Geochemistry Biogeochemistry Photogeochemistry Environmental chemistry Atmospheric chemistry Ocean chemistry Clay chemistry Carbochemistry Food chemistry Carbohydrate chemistry Food physical chemistry Agricultural chemistry Soil chemistry Chemistry education Amateur chemistry General chemistry Clandestine chemistry Forensic chemistry Forensic toxicology Post-mortem chemistry Nanochemistry Supramolecular chemistry Chemical synthesis Green chemistry Click chemistry Combinatorial chemistry Biosynthesis Chemical engineering Stoichiometry Materials science Metallurgy Ceramic engineering Polymer science See also History of chemistry Nobel Prize in Chemistry Timeline of chemistry of element discoveries " The central science " Chemical reaction Catalysis Chemical element Chemical compound Atom Molecule Ion Chemical substance Chemical bond Alchemy Quantum mechanics Category Commons Portal WikiProject Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Micromeritics&oldid=1292061339 " Categories : Materials science Physical chemistry Hidden categories: CS1 errors: periodical ignored CS1 errors: ISBN date Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Greek-language text Articles needing additional references from January 2025 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 25 May 2025, at 00:24 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Micromeritics 5 languages Add topic

