Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Budget 3 Goals 4 Cooperation Toggle Cooperation subsection 4.1 Cooperation with the Eurasian Economic Union 4.2 Cooperation with the European Space Agency 5 Recent developments 6 See also 7 References Toggle the table of contents ArmCosmos 2 languages Azərbaycanca Հայերեն Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Armenian space agency ArmCosmos Հայկական տիեզերական գործակալություն Agency overview Formed 31 May 2013 ; 12 years ago ( 2013-05-31 ) Jurisdiction Armenia Headquarters Yerevan , Armenia Parent department Ministry of Transport and Communication [ 1 ] ArmCosmos , commonly known as the Armenian Space Agency ( Armenian : Հայկական տիեզերական գործակալություն ), is an Armenian private agency responsible for the development of Armenia's commercial space industry , coordinating domestic activities, identifying opportunities and facilitating international space engagement, on behalf of the Government of Armenia . Its headquarters are located in Yerevan, Armenia.

History [ edit ] In 2013, Gagik Grigorian, head of the Ministry of Transport and Communication announced the creation of ArmCosmos, a company to facilitate launching Armenia's first commercial satellite , named ArmSat, [ 2 ] into Earth 's orbit .

[ 1 ] The government first announced plans to launch an Armenian satellite in April 2012 when senior officials from Russia's Federal Space Agency, also known as Roscosmos , visited Yerevan and met with Prime Minister Tigran Sargsyan . A government statement announced that the two sides expressed readiness “to take necessary measures to put the project into practice.” [ 1 ] Currently, six of the 15 Post-Soviet republics have launched their own satellites since the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991.

[ 3 ] Budget [ edit ] See also: Satellite § Planned first satellites The initial cost for Armenia's space program was US$250 million, with part of the sum to come from private investors, as announced by government officials.

[ 3 ] Goals [ edit ] See also: List of government space agencies § Expected and proposed future space agencies Armenia currently has the right for two orbital positions for telecom satellites in the Geostationary orbit allocated to Armenia.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] Since 2013, ArmCosmos has been conducting negotiations with the UN 's International Telecommunication Union (ITU) to plan for the prospective launch of Armenia's first satellite. Once negotiations are completed with the ITU, talks will be conducted with respect to the designing and construction of the satellite.

[ 4 ] Cooperation [ edit ] Artistic rendition of the ArmCosmos satellite, ArmSat.

Armenia is a member of the United Nations Committee on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space , the International Telecommunications Satellite Organization , the European Telecommunications Satellite Organization , and has ratified the Convention Relating to the Distribution of Programme-Carrying Signals Transmitted by Satellite .

In July 2013, Armenian Transport Minister Gagik Beglaryan , visited Canada and met with the president of the Canadian Space Agency , Gilles Leclerc, and senior official from the Canadian Export Development Agency , John Miller, to discuss the possibility of Canadian participation in Armenia's space program.

[ 5 ] Beglaryan also met with representatives from MacDonald, Dettwiler and Associates Ltd.

(MDA), a Canadian aerospace technology company. MDA President Mag Iskander advised Beglaryan that the MDA will help Armenia launch its first communications satellite.

In September 2013, Armenian government officials met with German Ambassador Rainer Morel. The Ambassador stated that, "We are ready to cooperate not only in communications but also other fields related with the project" and expressed hope that German companies will also show interest in the satellite program.

[ 6 ] In 2014, China announced its interest in developing the ArmSat satellite. Transport Minister Gagik Beglaryan met with representatives of the China Great Wall Industry Corporation and the China Academy of Space Technology . The vice president of the China Great Wall Industry Corporation, Zhao Chun Chao, stated that the Chinese side is ready to engage in the design of ArmSat, construction, launching and servicing, as well as training of Armenian specialists.

[ 7 ] The American University of Armenia announced its interest in the program and launched the Armenian Student Aerospace Team (ArmSat) student club. The ArmSat student club is working on developing both hardware and software systems.

[ 8 ] In 2017, India announced its intentions to build an Earth observation satellite for Armenia, as well as train Armenian scientists in the use of the system and handling and interpreting its data. An agreement was finalized following former Indian Vice-President Hamid Ansari 's meeting with former President of Armenia Serzh Sargsyan .

[ 9 ] In October 2019, government ministers from Armenia and Georgia met to discuss a range of economic and technical cooperation proposals, among them satellite communications. Both Caucasus countries acknowledged that there is “untapped potential” and pledged to collaborate on ambitious projects.

[ 10 ] On 12 June 2024, Armenia signed the Artemis Accords .

[ 11 ] Cooperation with the Eurasian Economic Union [ edit ] The Eurasian Economic Union announced plans to create a joint remote earth sensing system by integrating space and ground-based capabilities of its member states, to include Russia, Kyrgyzstan, Armenia, Belarus and Kazakhstan. The project involves the creation of a commercial company that will integrate both space and ground-based systems and provide satellite imaging to global customers by 2019.

[ 9 ] Cooperation with the European Space Agency [ edit ] See also: Enlargement of the European Space Agency § Possible future cooperation Armenia also cooperates and participates in certain programs of the European Space Agency (ESA). In 2016, Armenia joined the ESA's Earth Observation for Eastern Partnership initiative . This move brought new perspectives to develop cooperation opportunities between the ESA and the EU 's Eastern Partnership countries. The project aims to achieve an increase in the uptake of satellite-based environmental information and promotes regional cooperation and knowledge exchange. The project is further endorsed by the World Bank and the European Investment Bank .

[ 12 ] Other project members include Georgia, Moldova and Poland.

[ 13 ] Recent developments [ edit ] In October 2019, the Government of Armenia approved a bill on creating a national law on space activities. The bill will provide companies with tax privileges until 2030, will encourage space activities to be developed in Armenia and will enable Armenia to carry out its own space programs, including launching Armenian spacecraft and satellites into space.

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] On 26 March 2020, the Government of Armenia signed into law a package of space activity legislation called "Advanced Tomorrow", or ATOM, which will promote educational and economic development and will expand both state and commercial space activities.

[ 16 ] In August 2020, the President of Armenia, Armen Sarksyan , announced that Armenia will host the sixth Starmus Festival from September 5 to 10, 2022. The event was sponsored by the President himself, as well as, the Ministry of Education and Science . The event brought together world-class scientists, artists, astronauts, and the general public to celebrate science communication and to share latest discoveries in a number of scientific fields. The main focus of the sixth Starmus Festival was on the exploration of Mars .

[ 17 ] On 27 April 2021, the Secretary of the Security Council of Armenia , Armen Grigoryan met with the General Director of Roscosmos , Dmitry Rogozin in Moscow. The parties discussed the prospects for the development of space activities in Armenia. Rogozin praised Armenian-Russian cooperation in the field of space monitoring. He proposed to expand cooperation between Russia and Armenia in the framework of space technology, design and development. The parties also agreed to set up a space activities working group between Armenia and Russia.

[ 18 ] On 15 June 2021, the Minister of High-Tech Industry, Hayk Chobanyan , participated in the Global Space Exploration Conference (GLEX 2021) in Saint Petersburg . He attached importance to cooperation with key players in the field and participation in international events and stated that Armenia is a country with great ambitions and potential in the field of space research. Chobanyan stressed that taking into account that space exploration is accompanied by technological progress, the Armenian government is investing in the development of this direction. “We strive to work with the world’s leading countries to use space for peaceful purposes and to engage in other global projects,” the Minister said.

[ 19 ] On 25 May 2022, Armenia launched an observation satellite in cooperation with SpaceX . The Prime Minister of Armenia, Nikol Pashinyan stated, "On May 25, 2022, at 22:35 Yerevan time, the first satellite of Armenia was launched into orbit from the space station at Cape Canaveral , USA." [ 20 ] See also [ edit ] Companies portal Telecommunications portal Spaceflight portal List of companies of Armenia List of government space agencies Soviet space program Science and technology in Armenia Telecommunications in Armenia References [ edit ] ^ a b c "Armenia Plans Satellite Launch" .

«Ազատ Եվրոպա/Ազատություն» ռադիոկայան .

^ "Satnews Publishers: Daily Satellite News" .

www.satnews.com .

^ a b c "Armenia to Launch Its First Satellite" .

www.spacedaily.com .

^ a b "Armenia to send satellite to space" .

news.am .

^ "Canada's MDA Ready to Help Armenia Launch First Comsat" .

Asbarez News . 9 August 2013.

^ "German companies are interested in Armenian telecommunications sphere" .

armenpress.am .

^ "China keen on Armenian satellite launch project" .

arka.am .

^ "ArmSAT Launches 'Rockets' into the 'Space' of Science" . March 12, 2020.

^ a b "India to Build Earth Observation Satellite for Armenia, Build Human Capacity" . 28 April 2017.

^ Sheldon, John (October 29, 2019).

"Armenia And Georgia Discuss Satellite Communications Collaboration" .

SpaceWatch.Global .

^ "NASA Welcomes Armenia as 43rd Artemis Accords Signatory" .

NASA . 2024-06-12.

^ "Expanding EO4SD scope to EU eastern neighbourhood | earth observation for sustainable development" .

^ "Welcome to earth observation for eastern partnership | earth observation for eastern partnership" .

^ "Armenian Government aims BEYOND sky-high, announces future space program plans and creates new law" .

armenpress.am .

^ "Armenia President signs law on space activity" .

news.am .

^ "Get ready for Starmus VI" .

astronomy.com .

^ "2021 STARMUS festival expected to boost Armenia tourism" .

armenpress.am .

^ "Roscosmos head offers to expand Russia-Armenia cooperation in space technologies" .

armenpress.am .

^ "Hayk Chobanyan participates in the GLEX-2021 international conference" .

1lurer.am .

^ "Launched in secret: Armenia's first satellite joins Earth orbit" .

jam-news.net/ . 26 May 2022.

v t e Armenia articles History ( timeline ) Early Origins Name Shulaveri–Shomu culture Kura–Araxes culture Hayk Hayasa-Azzi Mitanni Nairi Mushki Urumeans Diauehi Etiuni Kingdom of Urartu Median kingdom Orontid dynasty Achaemenid Empire Satrapy of Armenia Kingdom of Armenia Roman Armenia Parthian Empire Byzantine Armenia Sasanian Armenia Middle Arminiya Sajids Bagratid Armenia Armenian Kingdom of Cilicia Sallarids Ilkhanate Chobanids Aq Qoyunlu Kara Koyunlu Ottoman Armenia 1508–1828 Iranian Armenia Safavid Iran Afsharid Iran Qajar Iran Erivan Khanate Karabakh Khanate Treaty of Turkmenchay Russian Armenia Modern First Republic of Armenia Soviet Armenia Independent Armenia By topic Armenian genocide Nagorno-Karabakh conflict Armenian national movement more...

Geography Ararat Plain Armenian highlands Cities Climate Earthquakes Extreme points Lake Sevan Mountains Municipalities Rivers Lakes Shikahogh State Reserve Shirak Plain more...

Politics Administrative divisions Constitution Corruption Elections Foreign relations Government Human rights LGBT rights Judiciary Military National Assembly National Security Service Police Political parties President Prime Minister President of the National Assembly more on government on politics Economy Agriculture AMX (stock exchange) Central Bank Central Depository Dram (currency) Energy Mining Pension reform Taxation Telecommunications Tourism Waste management Transport South Caucasus Railway Culture Alphabet Architecture Art Cinema Cuisine ( wine ) Dance Dress Language Eastern Western Literature Music Sport Theatre more...

Demographics Census Crime Education Ethnic minorities Health People diaspora Social issues Women more...

Religion Armenian Apostolic Church Armenian Catholic Church Armenian Evangelical Church Armenian Brotherhood Church Judaism Islam more...

Symbols Armenian Cross Armenian eternity sign Coat of arms Flag Mount Ararat National anthem Apricot Grape Pomegranate Outline Index Category v t e Public-sector space agencies Africa Pan-African and pan-Arab RASCOM Arabsat National ASAL EgSA NARSS ESSTI GSSTC KSA NASRDA SANSA Americas North America CSA NASA NESDIS OSC FAA/AST FCC USSF USSPACECOM NRO Latin America and the Caribbean ALCE AEM CONAE ABE AEB DCTA INPE ITA CCE ABAE IVIC Asia Pan-Asian APSCO Central Asia KazCosmos 1 Roscosmos 1 SRI VK TNSA 1 East Asia CNSA SASTIND CASC CALT CAST CCF CGWIC PLAASF CASIC JAXA ISAS JSS NICT NATA KASA KARI KASI SaTReC TASA South Asia SPARRSO ISRO 2 Antrix Corp DoS NRSC DSA SUPARCO Southeast Asia BRIN ORPA INASA MYSA PhilSA SSTL GISTDA VNSC West Asia ArmCosmos 1 MAKA 1 NSSA NEHSA ISA ISRC ISA NCSR SSA KACST-SRI SSA 2 GORS TUA TÜBİTAK UZAY UAESA ( MBRSC ) Europe Pan-European CEN / CENELEC CEPT ETSI Eurocontrol ECAC ESA ECSS ESTEC EAC ESRIN ECSAT ESAC ESOC ESTRACK Guiana Space Centre EUMETSAT EUTELSAT IGO ESO EU and EEA DG DEFIS EUSPA EU SatCen EASA BEREC ALR 2 BELSPO BIRA-IASB SRTI 2 CSO 2 DTU Space ESO 1 CNES 2 AAE CdE DLR 2 HSA HSO 2 ASI LSA LSO 1 SRON NSO NOSA POLSA 2 CBK PAN UKE KRRiT ORO ULC PTSPACE ROSA 2 INTA AEC EAE AEE SNSA Other ArmCosmos 1 MAKA 1 BSA 1 KazCosmos 1 Roscosmos 1 SRI VVKO SSO TUA TÜBİTAK UZAY SSAU 1 UKSA 2 Oceania ASA CSIRO NZSA World CCSDS CEOS COSPAR IPDA Cospas-Sarsat GEO GSC IADC ICSMD IMSO ISECG ISS MCB ITSO Intersputnik ODCWG ITU-R UNCOPUOS UNOOSA UNOSAT Former BNSC KCST LAPAN NAL NASDA SSP MOM Interkosmos See also: Timeline of first orbital launches by country 1 Preceded by the Soviet space program 2 Preceded by Interkosmos participation NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7889cf5cc‐tv7wn
Cached time: 20250818100224
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.863 seconds
Real time usage: 1.090 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 9893/1000000
Revision size: 14826/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 231661/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 20352/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 20/100
Expensive parser function count: 97/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 87593/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.431/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 19726366/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  845.038      1 -total
 40.95%  346.006      6 Template:Navbox
 23.50%  198.600      1 Template:Reflist
 22.42%  189.441      1 Template:Public-sector_space_agencies
 21.16%  178.852     20 Template:Cite_web
 18.69%  157.973      1 Template:Armenia_topics
 18.38%  155.341      1 Template:Country_topics
 18.37%  155.265    105 Template:Flag_decoration
 12.67%  107.036      1 Template:Langx
  8.65%   73.086      1 Template:Infobox_government_agency Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:63708593:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818100224 and revision id 1288024928. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=ArmCosmos&oldid=1288024928 " Categories : Companies of Armenia Space agencies Economy of Armenia Science and technology in Europe Government agencies established in 2013 Armenian companies established in 2013 Technology companies established in 2013 Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Armenian-language text This page was last edited on 29 April 2025, at 22:55 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents ArmCosmos 2 languages Add topic

