Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Ontological arguments Toggle Ontological arguments subsection 1.1 First argument 1.2 Second argument 1.3 Formal Reconstruction in a set theoretic form (by Gyorgy Gereby) 1.3.1 Vocabulary for the argument in a set logical form 1.3.2 The Argument of Anselm 1.4 Supplement 2 Chapters 3 Translations Toggle Translations subsection 3.1 Chapter I 4 Editions 5 References Toggle the table of contents Proslogion 13 languages Afrikaans Català Deutsch Español فارسی Français 한국어 Italiano Қазақша Nederlands Português Русский Suomi Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Prayer by Saint Anselm of Canterbury Proslogion Illuminated initial from the beginning of the prologue to Anselm's Monologion, late 11th century Author Anselm of Canterbury Original title Fides quaerens intellectum Language Medieval Latin Publication date 1078 Text Proslogion at Wikisource The Proslogion ( Latin : Proslogium , lit.

'Discourse') is a prayer (or meditation ) written by the medieval cleric Saint Anselm of Canterbury between 1077 and 1078. In each chapter, Anselm juxtaposes contrasting attributes of God to resolve apparent contradictions in Christian theology . This meditation is considered the first-known philosophical formulation that sets out an ontological argument for the existence of God .

The original title for this discourse was to be Faith Seeking Understanding .

[ 1 ] Ontological arguments [ edit ] The Proslogion marked what would be the beginning of Saint Anselm 's famous and highly controversial ontological arguments for the existence of God . Anselm's first and most famous argument is found at the end of Chapter II, and it is followed by his second argument. Opinions concerning Anselm's twin ontological arguments widely differ, and have differed since the Proslogion was first conceived.

First argument [ edit ] There are various reconstructions of Anselm's first argument. Scott H. Moore's analysis is as follows: [ 2 ] Proposition 1 : God is a being than which none greater can be conceived.

Proposition 2 : If existence in reality is greater than existence in the mind alone, an imagined being who exists only in our mind is not a "being than which none greater can be conceived." A being than which none greater can be conceived must also exist in reality, where failure to do so would be a failure to be such.

Conclusion : Thus a being than which none greater can be conceived must exist, and we call this being God.

Because it is greater to exist in reality than in the mind only, the being that nothing greater than can be thought of will exist both in the mind and in reality.

Second argument [ edit ] Donald Viney renders Anselm's second argument as follows: [ 3 ] "God" means "that than which nothing greater can be conceived." The idea of God is not contradictory.

That which can be thought of as not existing (a contingent being) is not as great as that which cannot be thought of as not existing (a necessary being).

Therefore, to think of God as possibly not existing (as contingent) is not to think of the greatest conceivable being. It is a contradiction to think of the greatest conceivable being as nonexistent.

Therefore, God exists.

Formal Reconstruction in a set theoretic form (by Gyorgy Gereby) [ edit ] Source: [ 4 ] Vocabulary for the argument in a set logical form [ edit ] R – not empty set of mind-independent real things S – not empty set of (individual) people P – set of sentences or propositions I – set of mental contents (represent the meaning of sentences of P) T = S XP --> I – is the function of “thinking of”, which assigns to sentences uttered by persons an intelligible element i of I C = I --> R correspondence-function, which assigns to certain elements of I certain elements of R V = { i | i ∈ I, ∃ r. r ∈ R, r = C (i)} – Set of mental things that have a counterpart in R U = I \ V – set of things that do not have a counterpart in R b ∈ S – individual name of the fool g – individual name for god The Argument of Anselm [ edit ] T (b, ‘ ~ ∃r. r = C (g) ‘) The Fool says in his heart that there is no God.

Existential premiss g = def !

x. ~ ∃ y. y ≥ x God is the only one thing greater than which cannot be conceived.

Definition, stipulating uniqueness ∀x. x ∈ P & ∃y. T(y, ‘x’) ⊇ x ∈ I What is said and understood is in the mind.

Assumption, on T def., g ∈ I What is understood by the Fool of the definition is in his intellect.

∀ i. ∀i*. i* ∈ U, i ∈ V, i > i* Whatever is in the intellect and also in reality is greater than that which is solely in the intellect.

def.

g ∈ V lemma g ∉ V g is only in the intellect. (‘God is only a concept’ – however, there is a god-concept ) Assumption for the reductio ad absurdum g ∉ V → g ∈ U ∀x. x ∈ V V x ∈ U V ≠ Ø V is not empty.

Assumption ∃ g*. g* ∈ V > g ∈ U The God which is an element of V is a greater thing than God in the mind.

~ ∃x. x ≥ g & ∃x. x > g God is the greater-than-which-can-not-be-conceived and God is not the greater-than-which-can-not-be-conceived.

Contradiction. Conclusion of the reduction.

g ∈ V Lemma Q.E.D Conclusion of lemma ∀v. ∃r. r = C (v) Applying the character of V Definition ∃r. r = C (g) Q.E.D.: God is in the intellect in such a way that he has a counterpart in reality.

‘C(g)’ ∈ R Lemma: God exists in reality.

Rule of detachment Supplement [ edit ] Anselm writes in Chapter XI that "you [God] are not only that than which a greater cannot be conceived, but you are a being greater than can be conceived." Chapters [ edit ] Chapter I: Exhortation of the mind to the contemplation of God.

Chapter II: That God Truly Exists Chapter III: That God Cannot be Thought Not to Exist Chapter IV: How the Fool Managed to Say in His Heart That Which Cannot be Thought Chapter V: That God is whatever it is better to be than not to be, and that existing through Himself alone He makes all other beings from nothing Chapter VI: How He is perceptive although He is not a body Chapter VII: How He is omnipotent although He cannot do many things Chapter VIII: How He is both merciful and impassible Chapter IX: How the all-just and supremely just One spares the wicked and justly has mercy on the wicked Chapter X: How He justly punishes and justly spares the wicked Chapter XI: How 'all the ways of the Lord are mercy and truth', and yet how 'the Lord is just in all His ways' Chapter XII: That God is the very life by which He lives and that the same holds for like attributes Chapter XIII: How He alone is limitless and eternal, although other spirits are also limitless and eternal Chapter XIV: How and why God is both seen and not seen by those seeking Him Chapter XV: How He is greater than can be thought Chapter XVI: That this is the 'inaccessible light' in which He 'dwells' Chapter XVII: That harmony, fragrance, sweetness, softness, and beauty are in God according to His own ineffable manner Chapter XVIII: That there are no parts in God or in His eternity which He is Chapter XIX: That He is not in place or time but all things are in Him Chapter XX: That He is before and beyond even all eternal things Chapter XXI: Whether this is the 'age of the age' or the 'ages of the ages' Chapter XXII: That He alone is what He is and who He is Chapter XXIII: That this good is equally Father and Son and Holy Spirit, and that this is the one necessary being which is altogether and wholly and solely good Chapter XXIV: A speculation as to what kind and how great this good is Chapter XXV: Which goods belong to those who enjoy this good and how great they are Chapter XXVI: Whether this is the 'fullness of joy' which the Lord promises Translations [ edit ] There are different translations of the Proslogion.

Chapter I [ edit ] Excerpt: Psalms 27:8 Original translation, from Latin Up now, slight man! flee, for a little while, your occupations; hide yourself, for a time, from your disturbing thoughts. Cast aside, now, your burdensome cares, and put away your toilsome business. Yield room for some little time to God; and rest for a little time in him. Enter the inner chamber of your mind; shut out all thoughts save that of God, and such as can aid you in seeking him; close your door and seek him. Speak now, my whole heart! speak now to God, saying, I seek your face; your face, Lord, will I seek (Psalms xxvii. 8).

[ 7 ] And come you now, O Lord my God, teach my heart where and how it may seek you, where and how it may find you.

Modern translation Come on now little man, get away from your worldly occupations for a while, escape from your tumultuous thoughts. Lay aside your burdensome cares and put off your laborious exertions. Give yourself over to God for a little while, and rest for a while in Him. Enter into the cell of your mind, shut out everything except God and whatever helps you to seek Him once the door is shut. Speak now, my heart, and say to God, "I seek your face; your face, Lord, I seek.

—translated by Sidney Norton Deane, 1903 [ 5 ] —translated by David Burr, 1996 [ 6 ] Editions [ edit ] " Proslogion " (in English), St. Anselm: Basic Writings, edited and translated by S. N. Deane. 1962. Chicago: Open Court .

ISBN 0-87548-109-4 .

" Anselmus Cantuariensis Proslogion " (in Latin).

The Latin Library . Retrieved July 25, 2006.

References [ edit ] English Wikisource has original text related to this article: Proslogion ^ Logan, Ian. 2009.

Reading Anselm’s Proslogion: The History of Anselm’s Arguments and its Significance Today . Burlington, VT: Ashgate Publishing . p. 85.

^ Moore, Scott H. " Proslogion ." Scott Moore . Waco, TX: Bayler University . Archived 12 May 1997. Retrieved 21 May 2020.

^ Dowbrowski, Daniel . 2006.

Rethinking the Ontological Argument: A Neoclassical Theistic Response . Ch. 1. p. 14. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press .

ISBN 978-0-521-86369-8 .

^ Gereby, Gyorgy (George) (2009). "What Anselm and Gaunilo told each other".

Prze glad Tomistyczny (15): 1– 22.

^ St. Anselm. 1078 [1903]. " Exhortation of the mind to the contemplation of God ." Ch. 1 in Proslogium (1926 reprint ed.), translated by S. N. Deane. Chicago: The Open Court Publishing Company.

^ Burr, David. 1996.

Anselm On God's Existence .

The Internet Medieval Sourcebook . New York: Fordham University . ch. 1.

^ Psalms 27:8 Authority control databases International VIAF National Germany France BnF data Czech Republic Israel Other IdRef Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Proslogion&oldid=1286392694 " Categories : 11th-century books in Latin 1070s books Prose texts in Latin 11th-century Christian texts Scholasticism Philosophy of religion literature Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Latin-language text Articles that link to Wikisource Wikisource templates with missing id This page was last edited on 19 April 2025, at 17:04 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Proslogion 13 languages Add topic

