Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Origins 1.2 Galileo 1.3 Modern and contemporary times 2 Architecture 3 References 4 Bibliography Toggle the table of contents Villa Il Gioiello 2 languages Italiano 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 43°44′51.25″N 11°15′27.23″E ﻿ / ﻿ 43.7475694°N 11.2575639°E ﻿ / 43.7475694; 11.2575639 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Building in Florence, Italy 43°44′51.25″N 11°15′27.23″E ﻿ / ﻿ 43.7475694°N 11.2575639°E ﻿ / 43.7475694; 11.2575639 Villa Il Gioiello.

Villa il Gioiello ("The Jewel") is a villa in Florence , central Italy , famous for being one of the residences of Galileo Galilei , which he lived in from 1631 until his death in 1642. It is also known as Villa Galileo (not to be confused with the other homes of Galileo found in Florence, which are in Costa San Giorgio, as well as a villa in Bellosguardo).

History [ edit ] Origins [ edit ] The name Gioiello was given due to its favorable position in the hills of Arcetri, near the Torre del Gallo. It was an elegant home, surrounded by many acres of farmland with a separate house for workers. It is recorded in the cadastre of 1427 to have been owned by Tommaso di Cristofano Masi and his brothers, who later passed it on to the Calderini family in 1525, where it is first mentioned as "The Jewel". The villa and its estate suffered damages during the siege of Florence in the years 1529 and 1530, whilst the entire area of Arcetri and Pian dei Giullari were occupied by Imperial troops. Calderini I sold it shortly thereafter to the Cavalcanti family, who rebuilt the home with its original simple lines, preserving its elegant look to the present day.

Galileo [ edit ] Bust of Galileo.

This rented residence with its fields, adjoined the monastery where his daughter, Sister Maria Celeste (born Virginia) was a nun. There are 124 remaining letters from Celeste to Galileo (the replies of the scientist were probably destroyed) which were filed after his death (at the State Archive of Florence) in the inventory of property owned by Galileo. Galileo's books are now held in the Biblioteca Nazionale Centrale di Firenze and are the subject of a celebratory exhibit: Galileiana 2009 .

Galileo lived there from 1631; in 1633 the inquisition sentenced him to lifelong house arrest which he served in Il Gioiello from early 1634.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Despite becoming blind in 1638, he continued to write some of his most significant works. In 1634 he suffered the loss of his favorite daughter, Celeste, but continued to work on Discourses and Mathematical Demonstrations Relating to Two New Sciences ( Discorsi e Dimostrazioni Matematiche, intorno a due nuove scienze ), in which he presented his theories on the strength and resistance of materials and on motion.

Shortly after Galileo moved to Arcetri, he received visits from Ferdinando II de' Medici as well as the painter Giusto Sustermans , who painted a portrait of the scientist. Other guests were the Ambassador of the Netherlands (Galileo had printed many of his books in Leiden ) and the English poet John Milton . He made frequent visits to the students of Villa Castelli, and the young Vincenzo Viviani and Evangelista Torricelli assisted Galileo until his death.

Modern and contemporary times [ edit ] In the centuries thereafter, the house has had various owners: the Del Soldato Family, whose coat of arms is on the façade, and even the nuns of St. Matthew, for which the "Signori Otto" (an ancient Florentine magistracy) adorned a plaque on the façade prohibiting “any card or ball game, ruzzola, or any other kind of game" with severe penalties if caught. In 1788 Senator Clemente Nelli had affixed a plaque dedicated to Galileo on the façade, and in 1843 a bust of the scientist was placed in a niche by the owners. In the 19th century, the building underwent further changes, especially on the upper floor.

Villa il Goiello has been a national monument since 1920 and was in private hands until 1942, when it was purchased by the state. It  underwent a long restoration from 1986 to 2008, and today it is used for scientific workshops by the Osservatorio Astrofisico di Arcetri and the University of Florence . Visits are possible and are managed by the Museo di Storia Naturale di Firenze .

Architecture [ edit ] The villa is in the form of a "U", which encompasses the central courtyard, enclosed by a wall on the street side, facing the farmhouse. The courtyard has a loggia, supported by arch-less Tuscan columns. The façade on the street is very simple, with some rectangular windows with stone frames. Here you will find the bust of the astronomer, with an inscription of 1843, and another plaque, placed in 1942.

References [ edit ] ^ Galilei, Galileo at encyclopedia.com, section The Trial of Galileo ^ Florence - Following in Galileo's tracks Archived May 6, 2015, at the Wayback Machine at IMSS , section Villa Il Gioiello Bibliography [ edit ] Giovanni Spadolini , La mia Firenze, frammenti dell'età favolosa , Firenze, Le Monnier, 1995 Quella "casa chiusa" di Galileo , articolo sul Corriere Fiorentino , 23 dicembre 2008, pag. 12.

Bettino Gerini, Vivere Firenze... Il Quartiere 3 , Aster Italia, Firenze 2005.

v t e Tourism in Florence Museums , galleries and palaces Bargello Casa Buonarroti Casa Guidi Galleria dell'Accademia David Garden of Archimedes Loggia del Bigallo Loggia dei Lanzi Loggia del Mercato Nuovo Loggia del Pesce Loggia Rucellai Museo dell'Opera del Duomo Museo Galileo Museo Nazionale Alinari della Fotografia Museo Nazionale di San Marco Museo di Storia Naturale di Firenze La Specola National Archaeological Museum Orsanmichele Ospedale degli Innocenti Palazzo dell'Arte dei Beccai Palazzo Davanzati Palazzo Della Stufa Palazzo Gondi Palazzo Medici Riccardi Magi Chapel Palazzo Pitti Museo delle Porcellane Palazzo Spini Feroni Palazzo Strozzi Palazzo Vecchio Studiolo of Francesco I Stibbert Museum Uffizi Vasari Corridor Religious sites Basilicas Cathedral of Santa Maria del Fiore S Croce Baroncelli Chapel Pazzi Chapel S Lorenzo Medici Chapels S Maria Novella Tornabuoni Chapel SS Annunziata S Marco S Maria del Carmine Brancacci Chapel S Miniato al Monte S Spirito S Trinita Bartolini Salimbeni Chapel Sassetti Chapel Churches Badia Fiorentina Battistero di San Giovanni Certosa del Galluzzo Ognissanti Oratorio dei Vanchetoni Oratory of Gesù Pellegrino Oratory of S Thomas Aquinas Orsanmichele S Ambrogio Ss Apostoli S Felicita S Frediano in Cestello S Gaetano S Giovannino degli Scolopi S Giovannino dei Cavalieri S Jacopo sopr'Arno S Maria degli Angeli S Maria Maddalena dei Pazzi S Maria Maggiore S Martino del Vescovo S Pancrazio S Salvatore al Vescovo S Salvi Ss Simone e Giuda S Stefano al Ponte Other Great Synagogue Towers (Torri) degli Amidei degli Alberti dei Belfredelli dei Della Bella dei Gianfigliazzi dei Mannelli dei Pulci Giotto's Campanile Library Biblioteca Riccardiana ( Palazzo Medici Riccardi ) British Institute of Florence Gabinetto Vieusseux ( Palazzo Strozzi ) Kunsthistorisches Institut Laurentian Library National Central Library Landmarks Fountain of Neptune Giotto's Campanile Monument to Dante Ponte Vecchio Theatres Teatro Comunale Teatro della Pergola Teatro Verdi Squares Piazza del Duomo Piazza della Repubblica Piazza della Signoria Piazza Santa Croce Piazza San Lorenzo Piazzale Michelangelo Streets Via Cavour Via de' Tornabuoni Forts Belvedere Fortezza da Basso Gardens and parks Bardini Gardens Boboli Gardens Giardino dell'Iris Giardino delle Rose Orto Botanico di Firenze Parco delle Cascine Villas Medici villas di Castello La Petraia di Careggi Medicea L'Ambrogiana del Poggio Imperiale Gamberaia I Tatti Il Gioiello La Pietra Rusciano Events and traditions Buchette del vino Calcio storico fiorentino Maggio Musicale Fiorentino Scoppio del carro Districts of Florence Trams in Florence v t e Galileo Galilei Scientific career Observational astronomy Galileo affair Galileo's escapement Galilean invariance Galilean moons Galilean transformation Leaning Tower of Pisa experiment Phases of Venus Celatone Thermoscope Works De motu antiquiora (1589–1592) Sidereus Nuncius (1610) Letters on Sunspots (1613) Letter to Benedetto Castelli (1613) " Letter to the Grand Duchess Christina " (1615) " Discourse on the Tides " (1616) Discourse on Comets (1619) The Assayer (1623) Dialogue Concerning the Two Chief World Systems (1632) Two New Sciences (1638) Family Vincenzo Galilei (father) Michelagnolo Galilei (brother) Vincenzo Gamba (son) Maria Celeste (daughter) Marina Gamba (mistress) Related " And yet it moves " Villa Il Gioiello Galileo's paradox Galileo's ship Sector Museo Galileo Galileo's telescopes Galileo's objective lens Tribune of Galileo Galileo thermometer Galileo project spacecraft Galileo Galilei Airport Galileo National Telescope Astronomers Monument In popular culture Life of Galileo (1943 play) Lamp At Midnight (1947 play) Galileo (1968 film) Galileo (1975 film) Starry Messenger (1996 book) Galileo's Daughter: A Historical Memoir of Science, Faith, and Love (1999 book) Galileo Galilei (2002 opera) Galileo's Dream (2009 novel) Authority control databases International VIAF National United States Israel Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Villa_Il_Gioiello&oldid=1300951497 " Categories : Villas in Florence Museo di Storia Naturale di Firenze Galileo Galilei Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Coordinates on Wikidata This page was last edited on 17 July 2025, at 08:29 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Villa Il Gioiello 2 languages Add topic

