Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Works Toggle Works subsection 2.1 Firdaws al-Hikmah 3 Legacy 4 See also 5 References 6 Sources 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Ali ibn Sahl Rabban al-Tabari 16 languages العربية বাংলা Deutsch فارسی Français Bahasa Indonesia Italiano مصرى مازِرونی Bahasa Melayu پنجابی Română Русский کوردی Тоҷикӣ اردو Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Persian scholar and physician Ali ibn Sahl Rabban al-Tabari علي بن سهل ربَّن طبري Born Amol , Iran Died Samarra , Iraq Philosophical work Era Islamic Golden Age Notable students Abu Bakr al-Razi Main interests Medicine, philosophy, calligraphy, astronomy Notable works Firdaws al-Hikmah , first Islamic encyclopedic work on medicine Notable ideas Discovery of the contagious nature of pulmonary tuberculosis Ali ibn Sahl Rabban al-Tabari ( Persian : علی ابن سهل ربن طبری آملی ; c. 838 – c. 870 CE ; also given as 810–855 [ 1 ] or 808–864 [ 2 ] also 783–858 [ 3 ] ), was a Persian [ 4 ] [ 5 ] Muslim scholar , physician and psychologist , who produced one of the first Islamic encyclopedia of medicine titled Firdaws al-Hikmah ("Paradise of Wisdom"). Ali ibn Sahl spoke Syriac and Greek , the two sources of the medical tradition of Antiquity which had been lost by medieval Europe, and transcribed in meticulous calligraphy. His most famous student was the physician and alchemist Abu Bakr al-Razi ( c.

865–925 ). Al-Tabari wrote the first encyclopedic work on medicine. He lived for over 70 years and interacted with important figures of the time, such as Muslim caliphs, governors, and eminent scholars. Because of his family's religious history, as well as his religious work, al-Tabarī was one of the most controversial scholars. He first discovered that pulmonary tuberculosis is contagious.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] Outside the rational sciences, as a convert from Christianity to Islam he was also involved in interreligious polemics, writing two works critical of his former religion, al-Radd ´alā l-Nasārā (The Refutation of the Christians) and Kitāb al-dīn wa-l-dawla (The Book of Religion and Empire), both of which having been published by Brill in 2016 in a single book, The Polemical Works of ʿAlī al-Ṭabarī .

Life [ edit ] Ali came from a Persian [ 8 ] or Syriac [ 3 ] family of Tabaristan Amol (hence al-Tabari – "from Tabaristan").

Hossein Nasr states that he was a convert to Islam from Zoroastrianism , [ 8 ] however Sami K. Hamarneh and Franz Rosenthal state he was a convert from Christianity .

[ 3 ] [ 9 ] His father Sahl ibn Bishr was a state official, highly educated and well respected member of the Syriac community.

[ 3 ] Rabbān received his educational bases in the medical field, natural sciences, calligraphy, mathematics, philosophy and literature from his father Sahl.

[ 10 ] The Abbasid caliph al-Mu'tasim (833–842) took him into the service of the court, which he continued under al-Mutawakkil (847–861). Ali ibn Sahl was fluent in Syriac and Greek , the two sources for the medical tradition of antiquity , and versed in fine calligraphy.

Works [ edit ] Although few of his works are extant, al-Tabarī wrote twelve books. Most of them were about medicine. In addition to medicine, he was known as a scholar of philosophy, mathematics and astronomy.

[ 11 ] His Firdaws al-Hikmah ( "Paradise of Wisdom" ), which he wrote in Arabic called also al-Kunnash was a system of medicine in seven parts. He also translated it into Syriac, to give it wider usefulness. The information in Firdaws al-Hikmah has never entered common circulation in the West because it was not edited until the 20th century, when Mohammed Zubair Siddiqui assembled an edition using the five surviving partial manuscripts. There is still no English translation.  A German translation by Alfred Siggel of the chapters on Indian medicine was published in 1951.

[ 12 ] Tuhfat al-Muluk ( "The King's Present" ) a work on the proper use of food, drink, and medicines.

Hafzh al-Sihhah ( "The Proper Care of Health" ), following Greek and Indian authorities.

Kitab al-Ruqa ( "Book of Magic or Amulets" ) Kitab fi al-hijamah ( "Treatise on Cupping" ) Kitab fi Tartib al-'Ardhiyah ( "Treatise on the Preparation of Food" ) Firdaws al-Hikmah [ edit ] Main article: Paradise of Wisdom Firdaws al-Hikmah or Paradise of Wisdom is one of the oldest encyclopedias of Islamic medicine , based on Syriac translations of Greek and Indian sources (Hippocrates, Galen, Dioscorides, and others).It is divided into 7 sections and 30 parts, with 360 chapters in total.

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] [ 15 ] Part I. general philosophical ideas, the categories, natures, elements, metamorphosis, genesis and decay.subdivided into I2 chapters, treats of general philosophical ideas, mostly following Aristotle .

On the Name of the Book and its Composition. The author mentions among his sources Hippocrates , Galen and Aristotle Hunayn ibn Ishaq On Matter Shape, Quantity and Quality On simple and compound Temperaments On the Antagonism of these Temperaments and the Refutation of the Opinion of those who allege that the Air is cold (of temper.). diagram of the four temperaments and their antagonistic action.

On the Genesis of Temperaments one from another.

On Metamorphosis Plato is quoted.

On Genesis and Decay.

On Activity and Passivity On the Genesis of Things from the Elements, the Action of the Celestial Sphere and the Luminous Bodies therein.

On the Effects of the Action of the Elements on the Air and subterranean Conditions On shooting Stars and the Colors which are generated in the Air. (rainbows) Part II embryology, pregnancy, the functions and morphology of different organs, ages and seasons, psychology, the external and internal senses, the temperaments and emotions, personal idiosyncrasies, nervous affections, tetanus, torpor, palpitation, nightmare, the evil eye, hygiene and dietetics.

Book I Book II Book III Book IV Book V Part III. Treats of nutrition and dietetics. 3 chapters Part IV. (The longest, 107 out of 276 folios and 152 chapters. Each chapter is short, often less than one page and seldom more than two. There is little beyond the signs and symptoms of each disease and the treatment recommended there are no references to actual cases, or clinical notes. ) general and special pathology, from the head to the feet, and concludes with an account of the number of muscles, nerves and veins, and dissertations on phlebotomy, the pulse and urinoscopy.

Book 1 (9 chapters) on general pathology, the signs and symptoms of internal disorders, and the principles of therapeutics.

Book 2 (14 chapters) on diseases and injuries of the head; and diseases of the brain, including epilepsy, various kinds of headache, tinnitus, vertigo, amnesia, and nightmare.

Book 3 (12 chapters) on diseases of the eyes and eyelids, the ear and the nose (including epistaxis and catarrh), the face, mouth and teeth.

Book 4 (7 chapters) on nervous diseases, including spasm, tetanus, paralysis, facial palsy, etc.

Book 5 (7 chapters) on diseases of the throat, chest and vocal organs, including asthma.

Book 6 (6 chapters) on diseases of the stomach, including hiccup.

Book 7 (5 chapters) on diseases of the liver, including dropsy.

Book 8 (14 chapters) on diseases of the heart, lungs, gall-bladder and spleen.

Book 9 (19 chapters) on diseases of the intestines (especially colic), and of the urinary and genital organs.

Book 10 (26 chapters) on fevers, ephemeral, hectic, continuous, tertian, quartan and semi-quartan; on pleurisy, erysipelas, and smallpox; on crises, prognosis, favorable and unfavorable symptoms, and the signs of death.

Book 11 (13 chapters) on rheumatism, gout, sciatica, leprosy, elephantiasis, scrofula, lupus, cancer, tumours, gangrene, wounds and bruises, shock, and plague. The last four chapters deal with anatomical matters, including the numbers of the muscles, nerves and blood-vessels.

Book 12 (20 chapters) on phlebotomy, cupping, baths and the indications of the pulse and urine.

Part V. of tastes, scents and colors. 1 book, 9 chapters Part VI materia medica and toxicology.

Part VII. climate, waters and seasons in their relation to health, outlines of cosmography and astronomy, and the utility of the science of medicine: and a summary of Indian Medicine in 36 chapters.

[ 16 ] Legacy [ edit ] In 2013 a statue of al-Tabari was revealed at the Mazandaran University of Medical Sciences .

[ 17 ] [ 18 ] See also [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Ali ibn Sahl Rabban al-Tabari .

List of Islamic studies scholars List of Iranian scientists and scholars References [ edit ] ^ Prioreschi, Plinio (2001).

A History of Medicine: Byzantine and Islamic medicine . Horatius Press. p. 223.

ISBN 9781888456042 .

^ "Greece x. Greek Medicine in Persia – Encyclopaedia Iranica" . Retrieved 14 December 2013 .

^ a b c d Selin, Helaine (1997).

Encyclopaedia of the history of science, technology, and medicine in non-western cultures . Springer. p. 930.

ISBN 978-0-7923-4066-9 .

^ Frye, R.N., ed. (1975).

The Cambridge history of Iran (Repr. ed.). London: Cambridge U.P. pp.

415– 416.

ISBN 978-0-521-20093-6 .

The greatest of these figures, who ushered in the golden age of Islamic medicine and who are discussed separately by E. G. Browne in his Arabian Medicine, are four Persian physicians: 'All b. Rabban al-Tabarl, Muhammad b. Zakariyya' al-Razl, 'All b. al-'Abbas al-Majusi and Ibn Sina.

^ Selin, Helaine (2008).

Encyclopaedia of the history of science, technology, and medicine in non-western cultures . Berlin New York: Springer. p.

2179 .

Bibcode : 2008ehst.book.....S .

ISBN 9781402049606 .

The work is quoted in the Firdaws al-Hikma or "Paradise of Wisdom" composed in AD 850 by the Persian physician 'Alī Ibn Sahl Rabban at-Tabarī who gives a very complete summary of the āyurvedic doctrines.

^ Adang, Camilla, Muslim Writers on Judaism and the Hebrew Bible: From Ibn Rabbān to Ibn Hazm, Leiden: 1996, pp. 23-30.

^ Arnaldez, R., Le Paradis de la sagesse du medecin 'Ali b. Rabbān al-Tabarī," Documenti e studi sulla tradizione filosofica médiévale, 8 (1997), pp. 389-402.

^ a b Frye, Richard Nelson (27 June 1975).

The Cambridge History of Iran: The period from the Arab invasion to the Saljuqs . Cambridge University Press. pp.

415– 416.

ISBN 978-0-521-20093-6 . Retrieved 23 May 2011 .

^ Ṭabarī (1989).

The History of Al-Tabari . Vol. 1. SUNY Press. p. 50.

ISBN 978-0-88706-563-7 .

^ Flügel, G. L., Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft, Leipzig/Wiesbaden, 1846, XIII, 559.

^ Reddy, D. V. Subba, "Indian Medicine in Firdausu'l-hikmat of Ali Raban-al-Tabarī," Bulletin of the Department of History of Medicine, I (1963), pp. 26-49.

^ Siggel, Alfred (1951).

Die indischen Bücher aus dem Paradies der Weisheit über die Medizin des' Alī ibn Sahl Rabban al-Ṭabarī. Übersetzt und erläutert . Wiesbaden: Akademie der Wissenschaften und der Literatur.

^ Meyerhof, Max (1931). " 'Alî at-Tabarî's Paradise of Wisdom , one of the oldest Arabic Compendiums of Medicine".

Isis .

16 (1): 6– 54.

doi : 10.1086/346582 .

JSTOR 224348 .

S2CID 70718474 .

He extracted his summary from the books of CHARAKA (Arabic: Jarak), SUSHRUTA (Arabic: Susrud), the Nidana (Arabic: Niddin), and the Ashtafigahradaya (Arabic Ashtdnqahrada).

^ "Meyerhof Ali Tabari Paradise Wisdom" .

Scribd . Retrieved 16 September 2014 .

^ Browne, E. G. (2011).

Arabian Medicine: The FitzPatrick Lectures Delivered at the College of Physicians in November 1919 and November 1920 . Cambridge University Press. p. 38.

ISBN 9781108013970 .

^ Meyerhof, Max (1931). " 'Alî at-Tabarî's Paradise of Wisdom , one of the oldest Arabic Compendiums of Medicine".

Isis .

16 (1): 6– 54.

doi : 10.1086/346582 .

JSTOR 224348 .

S2CID 70718474 .

^ The statue of Hakim Tabari was unveiled at Mazandaran University of Medical Sciences ^ Conference on medical education and honoring Rabban Tabari Sources [ edit ] H. Suter: Die Mathematiker und Astronomen der Araber (10, 1900) M. Steinschneider: Die arabische Literatur der Juden (23–34, Frankfurt, 1902).

Edward G. Browne , Islamic Medicine: Fitzpatrick Lectures Delivered at the Royal College of Physicians in 1919-1920 2002, p. 37–38, ISBN 81-87570-19-9 Tibi, Selma (2006).

The Medicinal Use of Opium in Ninth-Century Baghdad . BRILL. pp.

68– 90.

ISBN 9789004146969 .

Ṭabarī, ʻAlī ibn Sahl Rabbān (1922).

The Book of Religion and Empire: a Semi-official Defence and Exposition of Islam Written by Order at the Court and with the Assistance of the Caliph Mutawakkil (A.D. 847-861) . University Press.

Ṭabarī, ʻAlī ibn Sahl Rabbān; Siddiqi, Muḥammad Zubair (1975).

فردوس الحكمة في الطب . مكتبة المتنبي،.

Adang, Camilla, Muslim Writers on Judaism and the Hebrew Bible: From Ibn Rabbān to Ibn Hazm, Leiden: 1996, pp. 23-30.

Ali b. Husayin al-Mas'ūdī, Murūj al-zahab wa ma'ādīn al-Jawhar. Ed. M. Muhyiddin Abdulhamīd, Kahire 1948, Beirut 1964-5, IV, 239.

Ali b. Muhammad b. al-Athīr, al-Kāmil fi al-Tārīkh, ed.C. J. Tornberg, Leiden 1851, 76, VI, pp. 75- 76, 191-192.

Ali b. Rabbān al-Tabarī, al-Dīn wa al-dawla, ed. ādil Nuwayhiz, Beyrut 1973, pp. 35, 36, 98, 210.

Ar-Radd ‘alā-n-Nāsārā de ‘Ali at-Tabarī, ed. I. A. Khalifa - W. Kutsch, Beyrouth: Imprimerie Catholique, 1959.

Firdaws al-hikma fī al-tibb, ed. by M. Z. Al-Siddiqī, Gibb Memorial, Berlin: Matba' āftāb, 1928, pp. 1-2, 8, 518, 519.

External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Ali ibn Sahl Rabban al-Tabari .

[1] Archived 25 November 2018 at the Wayback Machine v t e Islamic medicine Physicians 7th century Abu Hafsa Yazid Al-Harith ibn Kalada Bukhtishu Ibn Abi Ramtha al-Tamimi Ibn Uthal Masarjawaih Nafi ibn al-Harith Rufaida Al-Aslamia Zaynab al-Awadiya 8th century Bukhtishu Ja'ar al-Sadiq 9th century Al-Kindi Al-Ruhawi Albubather Ali al-Ridha Ali ibn Sahl Rabban al-Tabari Bukhtishu Hunayn ibn Ishaq Ishaq ibn Hunayn Jabir ibn Hayyan Jabril ibn Bukhtishu Masawaiyh Salmawaih ibn Bunan Shapur ibn Sahl Yahya ibn Sarafyun Yuhanna ibn Bukhtishu Yusuf al-Khuri 10th century 'Ali ibn al-'Abbas al-Majusi Aayon Ibn Aayon Abu Bakr Rabee Ibn Ahmad Al-Akhawyni Bokhari Abu Bakr al-Razi Abu Sahl 'Isa ibn Yahya al-Masihi Abu Zayd al-Balkhi Abu al-Hasan al-Tabari Abu al-Qasim Muqane'i Abu al-Qasim al-Zahrawi Abu ul-Ala Shirazi Al-Kaŝkarī Al-Natili Al-Tamimi, the physician Eutychius of Alexandria Ibn Abi al-Ashʿath Ibn Juljul Ibn al-Jazzar Ibrahim ibn Baks Isaac Israeli ben Solomon Mohammed ibn Abdun al-Jabali Muvaffak Qumri Qusta ibn Luqa 11th century Abdollah ibn Bukhtishu Abu 'Ubayd al-Juzjani Abu al-Hakam al-Kirmani Al-Biruni Ali ibn Isa al-Kahhal Ali ibn Ridwan Ali ibn Yusuf al-Ilaqi Ammar ibn Ali al-Mawsili Avicenna Badi' al-Asturlabi Ibn Abi Sadiq Ibn Al-Thahabi Ibn Butlan Ibn Hindu Ibn Jazla Ibn al-Haytham Ibn al-Kattani Ibn al-Wafid Jonah ibn Janah Masawaih 12th century Abu Jafar ibn Harun al-Turjali Abu al-Bayan ibn al-Mudawwar Abu al-Majd ibn Abi al-Hakam Abu'l-Barakāt al-Baghdādī Ahmad ibn Farrokh Al-Samawal al-Maghribi Avempace Averroes Ibn Habal Ibn Jumay‘ Ibn Tufayl Ibn Zuhr Ibn al-Tilmīdh Moshe ben Maimon Muhammad ibn Aslam Al-Ghafiqi Serapion the Younger Ya'qub ibn Ishaq al-Israili Zayn al-Din Gorgani 13th century Abd al-Latif al-Baghdadi Abraham ben Moses ben Maimon Al-Dakhwar Al-Shahrazuri Amin al-Din Rashid al-Din Vatvat As-Suwaydi Da'ud Abu al-Fadl Hussam al-Din al-Jarrahi Ibn Abi Usaibia Ibn Tumlus Ibn al-Baitar Ibn al-Nafis Ibn al-Quff Ibn al‐Raqqam Joseph ben Judah of Ceuta Najib ad-Din Samarqandi Qutb al-Din al-Shirazi Rashidun al-Suri Sa'ad al-Dawla Zakariya al-Qazwini 14th century Al-Nagawri Aqsara'i Ibn Shuayb Ibn al-Akfani Ibn al-Khatib Jaghmini Mansur ibn Ilyas Mas‘ud ibn Muhammad Sijzi Muhammad ibn Mahmud Amuli Najm al-Din Mahmud ibn Ilyas al-Shirazi Nakhshabi Rashid-al-Din Hamadani Sadid al-Din al-Kazaruni Yusuf ibn Ismail al-Kutubi Zayn-e-Attar 15th century Abu Sa'id al-Afif Burhan-ud-din Kermani Husayni Isfahani Muhammad Ali Astarabadi Muhammad ibn Yusuf al-Harawi Nurbakhshi Shaykh Muhammad ibn Thaleb Şerafeddin Kadir 16th century Rostam Gorgani ʽImad Shirazi Abul Qasim ibn Mohammed al-Ghassani Dawud al-Antaki Hakim-e-Gilani Sultan Ali Khorasani Taqi al-Din Muhammad ibn Ma'ruf 17th century Qiwam al-Din Muhammad al-Hasani Abd El Razzaq Al-Jazaïri Qurayshi al-Shirazi Tunakabuni Maqsud-Ali Tabrizi 18th century Al-Khurasani al-Shirazi Concepts Ophthalmology Psychology Works Al-Risalah al-Dhahabiah The Canon of Medicine Tacuinum Sanitatis Anatomy Charts of the Arabs The Book of Healing Book of the Ten Treatises of the Eye De Gradibus Al-Tasrif Zakhireye Khwarazmshahi Adab al-Tabib Kamel al-Sanaat al-Tibbyya Al-Hawi Commentary on Anatomy in Avicenna's Canon Lives of the Physicians Centers Al-'Adudi Hospital Bimarestan Nur al-Din Bimaristan Influences Ancient Greek medicine Ancient Iranian medicine Ayurveda Influenced Ibn Sina Academy Learned medicine Medical Renaissance Medieval medicine v t e Islamic philosophy Fields Alchemy Aqidah (theology) ' Aql (intellect) Cosmology astrology medieval astronomy Eschatology Ethics Kalam (dialectic) Fiqh (jurisprudence) Logic Metaphysics Natural philosophy (physics) Peace Madrasah (education) Medieval science Medieval psychology Sufism (mysticism) Schools Early Farabism Avicennism Averroism Illuminationism Sufi cosmology metaphysics psychology Transcendent theosophy Traditionalist Contemporary Concepts ʻAṣabīya Ḥāl Iʻjaz ʼIjtihād ʻIlm ʻIrfān Ijmāʿ Maslaha Nafs Qadar Qalb Qiyās Shūrā Tawḥīd Ummah Philosophers by century ( CE ) 9th–10th Al-Kindi Ali ibn Sahl Rabban al-Tabari Abu al-Abbas Iranshahri Abu Bakr al-Razi Apharabius Abu Hatim al-Razi Al Amiri Ikhwan al-Safa Abu Sulayman Sijistani Ibn Masarrah Abu Ya'qub al-Sijistani 11th Al-Ghazali Ibn Miskawayh Avicenna Ibn Hazm Bahmanyār Mu'ayyad fi'l-Din al-Shirazi Nasir Khusraw Hamid al-Din al-Kirmani 12th Abu'l-Barakāt al-Baghdādī Afdal al-Din Kashani Ahi Evren Ahmad Yasavi Ayn-al-Quzat Averroes Ibn Tufail Omar Khayyám Suhrawardi Shams Tabrizi 13th Hajji Bektash Wali Jalal ad-Din Muhammad Rumi Ibn Sab’in Ibn Arabi al-Abharī Nasir al-Din Tusi Fakhr al-Din al-Razi Qutb al-Din al-Shirazi Sadr al-Din al-Qunawi Ibn Taymiyya 14th–16th Ibn Khaldun Yunus Emre Hajji Bayram Jalaladdin Davani Sadr ad-Din Dashtaki Aziz Mahmud Hudayi Qadi Mir Husayn al-Maybudi Mahmud Shabistari Sayyid Haydar Amuli Dawūd al-Qayṣarī Jami 17th–19th Mir Damad Mir Fendereski Mulla Sadra Mohsen Fayz Kashani Abd al-Razzaq Lahiji Mujaddid Alf-i-Sani Rajab Ali Tabrizi Qazi Sa’id Qumi Shah Waliullah Dehlawi Hādī Sabzavārī 20th– present Muhammad Husayn Tabatabaei Muhammad Iqbal Gohar Shahi Mohammad Baqir al-Sadr René Guénon Frithjof Schuon Martin Lings Fazlur Rahman Ismail al-Faruqi Seyyed Hossein Nasr Syed Muhammad Naquib al-Attas Abdolkarim Soroush Gholamhossein Ebrahimi Dinani Taha Abdurrahman Mohammed Abed al-Jabri Mohammed Arkoun Fouad Zakariyya Reza Davari Ardakani Ahmad Fardid Mostafa Malekian Hasanzadeh Amoli Javadi Amoli Partawi Shah Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Netherlands Israel Academics CiNii zbMATH People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ali_ibn_Sahl_Rabban_al-Tabari&oldid=1305039782 " Categories : 9th-century Iranian philosophers 830s births 870 deaths 9th-century Iranian physicians 9th-century people from the Abbasid Caliphate Scholars from the Abbasid Caliphate Converts to Islam from Christianity Iranian Muslims Iranian psychologists Tabaristan People from Amol Psychology in the medieval Islamic world Iranian critics of Christianity Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from June 2020 Articles with hCards Articles containing Persian-language text Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 9 August 2025, at 18:05 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Ali ibn Sahl Rabban al-Tabari 16 languages Add topic

