Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Origins 2 Valuation of knowledge 3 Creativity culture 4 Criticism Toggle Criticism subsection 4.1 Neologism 4.2 Social critique 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Post-industrial society 37 languages Afrikaans العربية Azərbaycanca Беларуская Български Català Čeština Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 हिन्दी Hrvatski Italiano עברית Қазақша Latina Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Română Русский Slovenčina Suomi Svenska ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Society whose service sector provides more economic value than manufacturing This article is about a shift from a manufacturing to a services economy. For societal effects of the Industrial Revolution, see Industrial Revolution . For offshoots of industrial music, see List of industrial music genres .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Post-industrial society" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( February 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Clark's sector model for US economy 1850–2009.

[ 1 ] The graph illustrates the predominance of primary , secondary and tertiary industries (as a share of all jobs) over time, as a society develops.

History of technology By technological eras Premodern / Pre-industrial Prehistoric Stone Age ( lithic ) First Agricultural Revolution Copper Age Urban revolution Bronze Age Iron Age Ancient Modern Proto-industrialization Second Agricultural Revolution First Industrial Revolution Standardization Second Industrial Revolution Machine Age Jet Age Third Agricultural Revolution Atomic Age Space Age Third Industrial Revolution Digital transformation Information Age Fourth Industrial Revolution Imagination Age Future Post-industrial Singularity Emerging technologies By historical regions Ancient Africa Ancient Egypt Indian subcontinent Ancient China Maya civilization Hellenistic world Roman Empire Byzantine Empire Medieval Islamic world Arab Agricultural Revolution Medieval Europe Renaissance Europe By type of technology History of agriculture History of biotechnology History of communication History of computer hardware History of electrical engineering History of manufacturing History of maritime History of materials science History of measurement History of medicine History of simple machine History of nuclear technology History of transport Technology timelines Timeline of historic inventions Technological revolution Complete list by category Article indices Outline of technology Outline of prehistoric technology v t e In sociology, the post-industrial society is the stage of society's development when the service sector generates more wealth than the manufacturing sector of the economy.

The term was originated by Alain Touraine and is closely related to similar sociological theoretical concepts such as post-Fordism , information society , knowledge economy , post-industrial economy , liquid modernity , and network society . They all can be used in economics or social science disciplines as a general theoretical backdrop in research design .

As the term has been used, a few common themes, including the ones below have begun to emerge.

The economy undergoes a transition from the production of goods to the provision of services.

Knowledge becomes a valued form of capital; see Human capital .

Producing ideas is the main way to grow the economy.

Through processes of globalization and automation , the value and importance to the economy of blue-collar , unionized work, including manual labor (e.g., assembly-line work) decline, and those of professional workers (e.g., scientists, creative-industry professionals, and IT professionals) grow in value and prevalence.

Behavioral and information sciences and technologies are developed and implemented (e.g., behavioral economics , information architecture , cybernetics , game theory and information theory ).

Origins [ edit ] Daniel Bell popularized the term through his 1974 work The Coming of Post-Industrial Society .

[ 2 ] Although some have credited Bell with coining the term, [ 3 ] French sociologist Alain Touraine published in 1969 the first major work [ citation needed ] on the post-industrial society. The term was also used extensively by social philosopher Ivan Illich in his 1973 paper Tools for Conviviality and appears occasionally in Leftist texts throughout the mid-to-late 1960s.

[ 4 ] The term has grown and changed as it became mainstream. The term is now used by marketers such as Seth Godin , [ 5 ] public policy PhDs such as Keith Boeckelman, [ 6 ] and sociologists such as Neil Fligstein and Ofer Sharone.

[ 7 ] U.S. President Bill Clinton used the term to describe Chinese growth in a round-table discussion in Shanghai in 1998.

[ 8 ] Valuation of knowledge [ edit ] The post-industrialized society is marked by an increased valuation of knowledge. This itself is unsurprising, having been foreshadowed in Daniel Bell 's presumption as to how economic employment patterns will evolve in such societies. He asserts employment will grow faster in the tertiary (and quaternary) sector relative to employment in the primary and secondary sector and that the tertiary (and quaternary) sectors will take precedence in the economy. This will continue to occur such that the "impact of the expert" will expand and power will be monopolized by knowledge.

[ 9 ] As tertiary and quaternary sector positions are essentially knowledge-oriented, this will result in a restructuring of education, at least in its nuances.  The "new power… of the expert" consequently gives rise to the growing role of universities and research institutes in post-industrial societies.

[ 9 ] Post-industrial societies themselves become oriented around these places of knowledge production and production of experts as their new foci. Consequently, the greatest beneficiaries in the post-industrial society are young urban professionals. As a new, educated, and politicized generation, more impassioned by liberalism, social justice, and environmentalism, comes into being; the shift of power into their hands, as a result of their knowledge endowments, is often cited as a good thing.

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] The increasing importance of knowledge in post-industrial societies results in a general increase in expertise through the economy and throughout society. In this manner, it eliminates what Alan Banks and Jim Foster identify as "undesirable work as well as the grosser forms of poverty and inequality". This effect is supplemented by the aforementioned movement of power into the hands of young educated people concerned with social justice.

[ 11 ] Economists at Berkeley have studied the value of knowledge as a form of capital , adding value to material capital, such as a factory or a truck. Speaking along the same lines of their argument, the addition or 'production' of knowledge, could become the basis of what would undoubtedly be considered 'post-industrial' policies meant to deliver economic growth.

[ 12 ] The valuation of specifically scientific knowledge and technology can paradoxically be devalued by individuals in a post-industrial society as they still expect its benefits but are more sensitized to moral trade-offs and risks.

[ 13 ] Creativity culture [ edit ] Similarly, post-industrial society has serviced the creative culture. Many of those most well-equipped to thrive in an increasingly technological society are young adults with tertiary education. As education itself becomes more and more oriented towards producing people capable of answering the need for self-actualization, creativity, and self-expression, successive generations become more endowed with the ability to contribute to and perpetuate such industries. This change in education, as well among the emerging class of young professionals, is initiated by what James D Wright identifies as an "unprecedented economic affluence and the satiation of basic material needs".

[ 10 ] Ellen Dunham-Jones as well observes this feature of post-industrial society where "abundant goods [are] equitably distributed [in order that] laborless leisure and self-determination " can be consumed.

[ 14 ] The post-industrial society is stressed to be one where knowledge is power and technology is the instrument.

[ 9 ] Naturally, where one is creatively inclined, they are advantaged by such a society. The doctrine of "speed, mobility, and malleability" is well suited to a dynamic creative industry and as industries of good production decrease in precedence, the way is paved for artists, musicians, and other such types, whose skills are better used by the tertiary and quaternary sector.

[ 14 ] Urban geographer Trevor Barnes, in his work outlining the Vancouver experience in post-war development, evokes the post-industrial condition, citing the emergence and consolidation of a significant video games industry as a constituent of the elite service sector.

[ 15 ] This increased faculty of the post-industrialist society with respects to the creative industry is reflected by the economic history of post-industrial societies. As economic activities shift from primarily primary and secondary sector-based to tertiary, and later quaternary, sector-based, cities in which this shift occurs become more open to exchanges of information.

[ 16 ] This is necessitated by the demands of a tertiary and quaternary sector: in order to better service an industry focused on finance, education, communication, management, training, engineering, and aesthetic design, the city must become points of exchange capable of providing the most updated information from across the globe. Conversely, as cities become a convergence of international ideas, the tertiary and quaternary sector can be expected to grow.

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] A cult of 'creatives' have sprung up [ when?

] embodying and often describing and defending the post-industrial ethos. They argue that businesses that create intangibles have taken a more prominent role in the wake of manufacturing's decline.

Actor and then-artistic director of the Old Vic Theatre , Kevin Spacey , has argued the economic case for the arts in terms of providing jobs and being of greater importance in exports than manufacturing (as well as an educational role) in a guest column he wrote for The Times .

[ 17 ] Criticism [ edit ] Post-industrialism is criticized for the amount of real fundamental change it produces in society, if any at all. A mild view held by Alan Banks and Jim Foster contends that representations of post-industrial society by advocates assume professional, educated elites were previously less relevant than they have become in the new social order , and that changes that have occurred are minor but greatly embellished.

[ 11 ] More critical views see the entire process as the highest evolution of capitalism , wherein the system produces commodities as opposed to practical goods and is determined privately instead of socially. This view is complemented by the assertion that "the characteristic feature of a modern [that is, post-industrial] society is that it is a technocracy ".

[ 9 ] Such societies then become notable for their ability to subvert social consciousness through powers of manipulation rather than powers of coercion , reflective of the "ideology of the ruling class [as] … predominantly managerial".

[ 9 ] Pope Francis has suggested that "the post-industrial period may well be remembered as one of the most irresponsible in history", although he follows this comment with "the hope that humanity at the dawn of the twenty-first century will be remembered for having generously shouldered its grave responsibilities".

[ 18 ] In line with the view that nothing fundamental has changed in the transition from industrial societies to post-industrial societies is the insistence of lingering problems from past development periods.

Neo-Malthusian in essence, this outlook focuses on post-industrial society's continuing struggle with issues of resource scarcity , overpopulation , and environmental degradation , all of which are remnants from its industrial history.

[ 19 ] This is exacerbated by a " corporate liberalism " that seeks to continue economic growth through "the creation and satisfaction of false needs ", or as Christopher Lasch more derisively refers to it, "subsidized waste".

[ 9 ] Urban development (UD) in the context of post-industrialism is also a point of contention. In opposition to the view that the new leaders of post-industrial society are increasingly environmentally aware, this critique asserts that UD rather leads to environmental degradation, which is rooted in the patterns of development.

Urban sprawl , characterised behaviourally by cities "expanding at the periphery in even lower densities" and physically by " office parks , malls, strips, condo clusters, corporate campuses, and gated communities", is singled out as the main issue.

[ 14 ] Resulting from a post-industrialist culture of " mobile capital , the service economy , post-Fordist disposable consumerism and banking deregulation ", urban sprawl has caused post-industrialism to become environmentally and socially regressive.

[ 14 ] Of the former, environmental degradation results from encroachment as cities meet demands on low-density habitation; the wider spread of population consumes more of the environment while necessitating more energy consumption to facilitate travel within the ever-growing city, incurring greater pollution.

[ 14 ] This process evokes the neo-Malthusian concerns of overpopulation and resource scarcity that inevitably lead to environmental deterioration.

[ 19 ] Of the latter, "post-industrialism's doctrine of … mobility and malleability" encourage a disconnect between communities where social belonging falls into the category of things considered by the "post-Fordist disposable consumer[ist]" attitude as interchangeable, expendable, and replaceable.

[ 14 ] Post-industrialism as a concept is highly Western -centric. Theoretically and effectively, it is only possible in the Global West, which its proponents assume to be solely capable of fully realizing industrialization and then post-industrialization.

Herman Kahn optimistically predicted the "economic growth, expanded production and growing efficiency" of post-industrial societies and the resultant "material abundance and… high quality of life " to extend to "almost all people in Western societies" and only "some in Eastern societies".

[ 19 ] This prediction is treated elsewhere by contentions that the post-industrial society merely perpetuates capitalism.

[ 9 ] [ 14 ] Recalling the critical assertion that all modern societies are technocracies, T. Roszak completes the analysis by stating that "all societies are moving in the direction of technocracies".

[ 9 ] From this, the foremost "suave technocracies" reside in the West, whereas all others are successively graded in descending order: "vulgar technocracies", " teratoid technocracies", and finally "comic opera technocracies".

[ 9 ] This view importantly presumes one transition and furthermore one path of transition for societies to undergo, i.e. the one that Western societies are slated to complete. Much like the demographic transition model, this prediction does not entertain the idea of an Eastern or other alternative models of transitional development.

Neologism [ edit ] When historians and sociologists considered the revolution that followed the agricultural society they did not call it a "post-agricultural society". "Post-industrial society" signifies only a departure, not a positive description.

[ 20 ] [ 21 ] One of the word's early users, Ivan Illich , prefigured this criticism and invented the term Conviviality, or the Convivial Society , to stand as a positive description of his version of a post-industrial society.

Social critique [ edit ] A group of scholars (including Allen Scott and Edward Soja ) argue that industry remains at the center of the whole process of capitalist accumulation, with services not only becoming increasingly industrialized and automated but also remaining highly dependent on industrial growth.

Some observers, including Soja (building on the theories of the French philosopher of urbanism Henri Lefebvre ), suggest that although industry may be based outside of a "post-industrial" nation, that nation cannot ignore industry's necessary sociological importance.

Further concerns can be raised regarding the difference in mindset and objectives between those in an industrial society, and those in a post-industrial one. For instance, if the industrial society (producing the raw materials and goods consumed by its peer) were for some reason to cut off supply to the post-industrial nation, there would be little recourse for the latter to ensure that supply chains were not disrupted. Since the society based on ideas would have diminished real product output, the industrial society would be in a position to dictate terms to its counterpart. The response from the "more advanced" nation might be eventually effective or damaging, however it would be hard pressed to bridge the gap until domestic industry could makeup for the lack of imported manufactured goods.

See also [ edit ] Deindustrialization Late modernity Late capitalism Industrial society Information society Information revolution Knowledge economy Network society Post-capitalism Post-democracy Post-Marxism Post-modernity Post-scarcity economy Sleepers, Wake!

Sociocultural evolution Technological unemployment Urban decay Future Shock People Heinz von Foerster Alvin Toffler Alain Touraine References [ edit ] ^ "Who Makes It? Clark's Sector Model for US Economy 1850–2009" . Retrieved 29 December 2011 .

^ Bell, Daniel. The Coming of Post-Industrial Society. New York: Harper Colophon Books, 1974.

^ Ahead of the curve , Schumpeter, The Economist , Feb 3rd, 2011 ^ For example, James Weinstein, 'Studies on the Left: R.I.P.', Radical America: An SDS Magazine , vol.1, no.3 (Nov–Dec, 1967), p.2.

^ Godin, Seth.

Linchpin (2010) ^ Boeckelman, Keith (1995). "The American States in the Postindustrial Economy".

State & Local Government Review .

27 (3): 182– 187.

JSTOR 4355128 .

^ Work in the Postindustrial Economy of California. (2002) On the web, http://www.russellsage.org/publications/workingpapers/workpostindcalif/document Archived 2011-07-27 at the Wayback Machine ^ 1999 Forward to "The Coming of the Post-Industrial Society" by Daniel Bell ^ a b c d e f g h i Targ, Harry R. (September 1976). "Global Dominance and Dependence, Post-Industrialism, and International Relations Theory: A Review".

International Studies Quarterly .

20 (3): 461– 482.

doi : 10.2307/2600095 .

JSTOR 2600095 .

^ a b Wright, James D."The Political Consciousness of Post-Industrialism." Contemporary Sociology. 7. 3 (1978): 270–273.

^ a b c Banks, Alan and Jim Foster."The Mystifications of Post-Industrialism. Appalachian Journal . 10. 4 (1983): 372–378.

^ Czarnitzki, Dirk; Hall Bronwyn H. (Berkeley); Oriani Raffaele; The Market Valuation of Knowledge Assets in US and European Firms.

On the web at http://elsa.berkeley.edu/~bhhall/papers/CHO05_mktval.pdf ^ Nisbet, Matthew C. (2019).

"Science and Society Beliefs across the Globe" .

Skeptical Inquirer . Vol. 43, no. 5.

Center for Inquiry . pp.

25– 27. Archived from the original on 6 December 2019 . Retrieved 6 December 2019 .

^ a b c d e f g Dunham-Jones, Ellen. "New Urbanism as a Counter-Project to Post-Industrialism [The Promise of New Urbanism]." Places. 13. 2 (2000): 26–31.

^ a b Barnes, T et al. "Vancouver: Restructuring narratives in the transnational metropolis.” Canadian urban regions: trajectories of growth and change. Eds. L Bourne et al. (2011): 291–327.

^ a b Golden, Miriam & Michael Wallerstein. “Domestic and International Causes for the Rise of Pay Inequality: Post-Industrialism, Globalization, and Labor Market Institutions.” The Institute for Research on Labor and Employment, UCLA (2006).

^ The Times Kevin Spacey makes an economic case for the arts (subscription required) ^ Pope Francis, Laudato si' , paragraph 165, published 24 May 2015, accessed 20 April 2024 ^ a b c Gibson, Donald E. "Post-Industrialism: Prosperity or Decline?” Sociological Focus. 26. 2 (1993): 147–163.

^ Veneris, Yannis. The Informational Revolution, Cybernetics and Urban Modelling, PhD Thesis, the University of Newcastle upon Tyne, UK, 1984. This thesis explored trends and theories (general economic and regional), and developed a large scale dynamic simulation model of the transition from an industrial to an informational economy.

^ Veneris, Yannis. Modeling the transition from the Industrial to the Informational Revolution, Environment and Planning A 22(3):399–416, 1990.

[1] External links [ edit ] Post Industrial Society Essay Criticism of Bell's analysis of the role of information and knowledge in relation to contemporary social change and the extent of these changes. Technology essays, 2005.

v t e Types of societies Pre-industrial Hunter-gatherer Montane Circumpolar Subarctic Nomadic Pastoral Horticultural Agricultural/Agrarian Feudal Complex Proto-Industrial Industrial Post-industrial Authority control databases : National Germany Czech Republic Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Post-industrial_society&oldid=1303800602 " Categories : Postindustrial society Postmodernism Social philosophy Stages of history Information economy Social model Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Pages containing links to subscription-only content Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from February 2023 All articles needing additional references Use American English from March 2019 All Wikipedia articles written in American English All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from May 2019 All articles with vague or ambiguous time Vague or ambiguous time from September 2023 This page was last edited on 2 August 2025, at 03:46 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Post-industrial society 37 languages Add topic

