Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Materials 2 Measurement types and labeling Toggle Measurement types and labeling subsection 2.1 Thread gauges 2.1.1 Weight (Wt.) and Gunze count 2.1.2 Denier 2.1.3 Tex 2.1.4 Silk machine twist 2.1.5 Commercial 2.2 Conversion information 2.3 Labeling 2.3.1 Examples 2.3.2 Cotton count 2.3.3 Hong Kong ticket 2.3.4 Single's equivalent 3 High-temperature sewing threads 4 See also 5 Notes Toggle the table of contents Thread (yarn) 42 languages Afrikaans العربية Беларуская Bikol Central Català Чӑвашла Čeština ChiShona Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Euskara Gaeilge 한국어 Hawaiʻi Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski ಕನ್ನಡ Кыргызча Latina Limburgs Lingua Franca Nova مصرى Bahasa Melayu 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Polski Русский ᱥᱟᱱᱛᱟᱲᱤ Slovenčina Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Tagalog தமிழ் Türkçe Українська اردو Winaray 粵語 Jaku Iban Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Type of yarn used for sewing "🧵" redirects here. For the use on forums and social media, see Thread (online communication) . For the symbol, see Supplemental Symbols and Pictographs .

This article's lead section may be too short to adequately summarize the key points .

Please consider expanding the lead to provide an accessible overview of all important aspects of the article.

( December 2015 ) An assortment of different colors of thread Red thread bobbin Multi-colored stranded embroidery floss Ask for Merrick's thread, ca. 1870–1900; from the 19th Century American Trade Cards collection of the Boston Public Library A thread is a long strand of material, often composed of several filaments or fibres, used for joining, creating or decorating textiles.

Ancient Egyptians were known for creating thread using plant fibers, wool and hair .

[ 1 ] Today, thread can also be made of many different materials including but not limited to cotton , wool , flax , nylon , silk , polyester etc. There are also metal threads (sometimes used in decorative textiles), which can be made of fine wire .

Thread is similar to yarn , cord, twine , or string , and there is some overlap between the way these terms are used. However, thread is most often used to mean materials fine and smooth enough for sewing , embroidery , weaving , or making lace or net . Yarn is often used to mean a thicker and softer material, suitable for knitting and crochet. Cords, twines or strings are usually stronger materials, suitable for tying and fastening.

Materials [ edit ] Thread is made from a wide variety of materials. Where a thread is stronger than the material that it is being used to join, if seams are placed under strain the material may tear before the thread breaks. Garments are usually sewn with threads of lesser strength than the fabric so that if stressed the seam will break before the garment. Heavy goods that must withstand considerable stresses such as upholstery , car seating , tarpaulins , tents , and saddlery require very strong threads. Attempting repairs with light weight thread will usually result in rapid failure, though again, using a thread that is stronger than the material being sewn can end up causing rips in that material before the thread itself gives way.

Thread material [ 2 ] Material Description Purpose Cotton Spun traditional thread general Cotton/ polyester A cotton thread with a polyester core which is slightly stretchy but retains the traditional look of cotton strength without sheen Fusible Fuses sewn fabrics together when ironed binding and appliqué Linen A spun thread, typically in a thicker gauge than that used for fabric garments. It may be waxed for durability and resistance to mildew.

Traditional leather saddlery ; leather luggage, handbags, and accessories; and beadwork .

Metallics A delicate metallic coating protected by an outer coating providing extremely vibrant color/glitter and/or texture.

decoration Nylon A transparent monofillament which can be melted by an iron. Nylon is usually stronger than polyester.

strength with transparency Polyester A synthetic blend which is stronger and stretchier than cotton with little or no lint (may be texturized) strength Rayon Made from cellulose , but not considered to be a natural fibre because it is highly processed. Useful for obtaining bright colors, though not always color-fast.

high sheen, soft texture Silk A very fine, strong and hard-to-see thread; tends to degrade over time, however.

high strength and often high sheen, used for attaching beads Wool A thicker thread.

homespun look, rougher texture, highly insulating, water absorbent Water-soluble Dissolves when washed temporary basting Polyester/polyester core spun thread is made by wrapping staple polyester around a continuous polyester filament during spinning and plying these yarns into a sewing thread.

[ 3 ] Measurement types and labeling [ edit ] Thread gauges [ edit ] Yarns are measured by the density of the yarn, which is described by various units of textile measurement relating to a standardized length per weight. These units do not directly correspond to thread diameter.

Weight (Wt.) and Gunze count [ edit ] The most common weight system for thread specifies the length of the thread in kilometres required to weigh 1 kilogram. Therefore, a greater weight number (indicated in the American standard by the abbreviation wt ) indicates a thinner, finer thread. The American standard of thread weight was adopted from the Gunze Count standard of Japan, which uses two numbers separated by a forward slash. The first number corresponds to the wt number of the thread and the second number indicates how many strands of fiber were used to compose the finished thread. It is common to wrap three strands of the same weight to make one thread, though this is not a formal requirement in the US standard (which is therefore less informative).

Thread Weight Table Weight Gunze Count Common Use [ 4 ] Light 60 wt #60/3 bobbin or appliqué Thin 50 wt #50/3 bobbin or appliqué Regular 40 wt #40/3 Quilting Upholstery 30 wt #30/3 Decorative Heavy 20 wt #20/3 Decorative Denier [ edit ] A denier weight specification states how many grams 9,000 metres of the thread weighs. Unlike the common thread weight system, the greater the denier number, the thicker the thread. The denier weight system, like the common weight system, also specifies the number of strands of the specified weight which were wrapped together to make the finished thread.  Only embroidery threads have their weights given in denier.

Tex [ edit ] Tex is the mass in grams of 1,000 metres of thread. If 1,000 m weighs 25 g, it is a tex 25. Larger tex numbers are heavier threads. Tex is used throughout North America and Europe.

Silk machine twist [ edit ] Manufacturers producing fine silk threads, apply their own scales of thread measurement using "aughts" or zeroes at the finest end and FFF at the other, thus scaling 000, 00, 0, A, B, C, D, E, F, FF, FFF.  The three finest threads are described as having "three aughts", "two aughts", and "one aught" respectively, and as having different "aught counts".  Within a given manufacturer's spectrum, a higher "aught count" indicates a finer thread: this may be given as a single digit followed by a forward slash and a zero— for example, 3/0 indicates a three-aught thread or a thread size "000", but this number only has significance when compared to other threads produced by the same manufacturer: one manufacturer's 3/0 will always be more fine than that same manufacturer's 2/0, but may not be comparable to the 3/0 of another manufacturer.  Very roughly, however, size A is 900 yards per pound of thread, and every 100 yards difference is one letter size different.  The size is always given for the overall thread, not its individual silk plies.

Commercial [ edit ] Some heavier duty threads are given "commercial" size designations in set sizes of 30, 46, 69, 92, 138, 207, 277, 346, 415 and 554 only.  Each of these numbers is merely the thread's denier size divided by 10.  A commercial size 138 thread has a denier of 1380.

Conversion information [ edit ] Thread weight conversion table Conversion From To Method Weight Denier 9000 / weight Weight Tex 1000 / weight Denier Weight 9000 / Denier Denier Tex Denier / 9 Tex Denier Tex x 9 Tex Weight 1000 / Tex Commercial Denier Commercial x 10 Denier Commercial Denier / 10 Commercial Tex Commercial / 9 x 10 Tex Commercial Tex / 10 x 9 For example: 40 weight = 225 denier = tex 25 = [theoretical] commercial 27.8 . A common tex number for general sewing thread is tex 25 or tex 30. A slightly heavier silk buttonhole thread suitable for bartacking, small leather items, and decorative seams might be tex 40. A strong, durable upholstery thread, tex 75. A heavy-duty topstitching thread for coats, bags, and shoes, tex 100. A very strong topstitching thread suitable for luggage and tarpaulins, tex 265–tex 290. But a fine serging thread is only tex 13. And blindstitching and felling machines, an even finer tex 8.

Labeling [ edit ] Threads of different composition and construction may be labeled in a variety of ways.  Most threads are composed of 2 or more "plies" of fiber, and this information is often provided on thread packaging along with the finalized thread's weight, according to a particular scale of measurement. The actual physical diameter of a thread is not recorded and is unhelpful.

Spools may have codes that indicate their fiber content as well such a "P" for polyester.  If a fiber content is given in the label code, it will be the first piece if information located there.

Examples [ edit ] Code Meaning 120D/2 Spool is 120 denier thread composed of 2 plies (each of 60 denier) 50S/3 Spool has a weight of 50 and is composed of 3 plies whose individual weights are not indicated P60/3 This is a spool of polyester thread of weight 60 and is made up of 3 plies Den 75/2 Spool of 75 denier thread made of 2 plies #60/2 This is the spool's Gunze count: the spool has thread of 2 plies of 60 weight thread each Sometimes a manufacturer does not provide any weight specification at all on its spools and instead provides only the fiber content and spool length such as "100% Silk 250 m".  This means only that the spool has 250 meters of pure silk, but does not indicate how many plies make up that thread nor what the plies' or the combined thread's weight is.

Cotton count [ edit ] The cotton count system is based on the number of 840 yard hanks that will result from a single pound of a particular finished thread.  This is the non-metric equivalent of the Gunze count, and is given with two numbers separated by a slash: the first is the size of the thread and the second is the number of plies of that size used in the finished thread.  The cotton count was developed for the cotton industry, but cotton counts are also frequently given for polyester and polyester/ cotton blends as well.

Hong Kong ticket [ edit ] A Hong Kong ticket number, when present, is a cotton count number without the slash and with the final number always indicating the number of plies if more than one.  A Hong Kong ticket number of  1002 is made of two plies of size 100 thread; a number of 100 is made of a single ply of size 100 thread; a size 503 is made of three plies of size 50 thread.

Single's equivalent [ edit ] A spool of thread may be described in terms of its "single's equivalent".  This is the cotton count size of the thread divided by the number of plies which make it up.  A spool of 30/3 thread has a single's equivalent of 10, because a single strand or ply of that thread has a cotton count size of 10.  A 20/2 spool has the same single's equivalent as a 30/3, but a 30/2 spool has a single's equivalent of 15, which means it is composed of individually heavier plies than a 30/3.

High-temperature sewing threads [ edit ] High temperature sewing threads provide durability and resistance to extreme temperatures . Some threads can be used for applications up to 800 °C (1472 °F). There are a variety of different sewing threads available which have different applications and benefits.

Kevlar -coated stainless steel sewing threads have a high-temperature and flame-resistant steel core combined with Kevlar coating designed to facilitate easier machine sewing. The stainless steel core has a temperature resistance of up to 800 °C (1472 °F) and the Kevlar coating is heat-resistant up to 220 °C (428 °F).

PTFE coated glass sewing threads have an excellent temperature resistance combined with a PTFE coating to provide easier machine sewing. The glass core has a temperature resistance of up to 550 °C (1022 °F) and the PTFE coating is heat-resistant up to 230 °C (446 °F).

Nomex sewing threads are inherently flame-retardant and heat-resistant with a tough protective coating that resists abrasion during the sewing operation. It is temperature resistant up to 370 °C (698 °F).

Bonded nylon sewing threads are tough, coated with abrasion resistance, rot proofing, and have good tensile strength for lower temperature applications. They are temperature-resistant up to 120 °C (248 °F).

Bonded polyester sewing threads are tough, coated with abrasion resistance, rot proofing, and have exceptional tensile strength for lower temperatures but heavier-duty sewing operations. They are temperature-resistant up to 120 °C (248 °F).

See also [ edit ] Look up thread in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Eisengarn ('iron yarn') Hank (textile) Sewing needle Staple (textiles) Stitch (textile arts) Notes [ edit ] ^ "Thread | Encyclopedia.com" .

www.encyclopedia.com .

^ "Thread Tips - Threads for Quilters" . Quilting.about.com. 2011-10-16 . Retrieved 2011-11-30 .

^ "Corespun Versus SpunPoly Threads" (PDF) .

www.amefird.com .

^ "How to choose the right thread for your project and your sewing machine" . Phoebemoon.com . Retrieved 2019-11-30 .

v t e Sewing Techniques Basting Cut Darning Ease Embellishment Fabric tube turning Floating canvas Gather Godet Gore Gusset Heirloom sewing Pleat Shirring Stitches ( list ) Backstitch Bar tack Blanket Blind stitch Buttonhole Catch stitch Chain stitch Coverstitch Cross-stitch Embroidery stitch Hemstitch Lockstitch Overlock Pad stitch Pick stitch Rantering Running Sashiko Stoating Tack Topstitch Zigzag Seams Neckline Felled seam Princess seams Seam allowance Style line Notions Trim Bias tape Collar stay Elastic Galloon Grommet/eyelet Interfacing Passementerie Piping Ruffle Rickrack Self-fabric Soutache Twill tape Wrights Closures Buckle Button Buttonhole Frog Hook-and-eye Hook-and-loop fastener Shank Snap Zipper Materials Grain/bias Selvage Textile/fabric Thread Yarn Tools Bobbin Dress form Needlecase Needle threader Pattern notcher Pin Pincushion Pinking shears Scissors Seam ripper Sewing gauge Sewing needle Stitching awl Tailor's ham Tape measure Thimble Tracing paper Tracing wheel Trades Suppliers Cloth merchant Draper Dressmaker Haberdasher Mercer Silkwoman Tailor Manufacturers Patterns Butterick Burda Clothkits McCall's Simplicity Machines ( list ) Barthélemy Thimonnier Bernina Brother Elias Howe Elna Feiyue Frister & Rossmann Janome Jones Juki Merrow New Home Pfaff Sewmor Singer Tape edge machine Viking/Husqvarna White Media related to Sewing at Wikimedia Commons Clothing portal Glossary of terms Authority control databases International FAST National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Thread_(yarn)&oldid=1302775741 " Categories : Yarn Textiles Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia introduction cleanup from December 2015 All pages needing cleanup Articles covered by WikiProject Wikify from December 2015 All articles covered by WikiProject Wikify This page was last edited on 27 July 2025, at 11:30 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Thread (yarn) 42 languages Add topic

