Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Pre-digital era Toggle Pre-digital era subsection 1.1 Manual typesetting 1.2 Hot metal typesetting 1.3 Phototypesetting 2 Digital era Toggle Digital era subsection 2.1 SCRIPT variants 2.2 SGML and XML systems 2.3 Troff and successors 2.4 TeX and LaTeX 3 Other text formatters 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Typesetting 33 languages العربية Čeština Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto فارسی Français Gaeilge 한국어 Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Kiswahili Latina Magyar मराठी Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Русский Simple English سنڌي Suomi தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Composition of text by means of arranging physical types or digital equivalents "Typesetter" redirects here. For the desktop publishing software, see Typesetter!

"Text formatting" redirects here. For other uses, see Formatted text .

"Booksetting" redirects here. For a multi-volume work, see Bookset .

For broader coverage of this topic, see Typography .

Movable type on a composing stick on a type case A specimen sheet issued by William Caslon , letter founder, from the 1728 edition of Cyclopaedia Diagram of a cast metal sort Typesetting is the composition of text for publication, display, or distribution by means of arranging physical type (or sort ) in mechanical systems or glyphs in digital systems representing characters (letters and other symbols).

[ 1 ] Stored types are retrieved and ordered according to a language's orthography for visual display. Typesetting requires one or more fonts (which are widely but erroneously confused with and substituted for typefaces ). 
One significant effect of typesetting was that authorship of works could be spotted more easily, making it difficult for copiers who have not gained permission.

[ 2 ] Pre-digital era [ edit ] Manual typesetting [ edit ] Main article: Movable type During much of the letterpress era , movable type was composed by hand for each page by workers called compositors . A tray with many dividers, called a case, contained cast metal sorts , each with a single letter or symbol, but backwards (so they would print correctly). The compositor assembled these sorts into words, then lines, then pages of text, which were then bound tightly together by a frame, making up a form or page. If done correctly, all letters were of the same height, and a flat surface of type was created. The form was placed in a press and inked, and then printed (an impression made) on paper.

[ 3 ] Metal type read backwards, from right to left, and a key skill of the compositor was their ability to read this backwards text.

Before computers were invented, and thus becoming computerized (or digital) typesetting, font sizes were changed by replacing the characters with a different size of type. In letterpress printing, individual letters and punctuation marks were cast on small metal blocks, known as "sorts," and then arranged to form the text for a page. The size of the type was determined by the size of the character on the face of the sort. A compositor would need to physically swap out the sorts for a different size to change the font size.

During typesetting, individual sorts are picked from a type case with the right hand, and set from left to right into a composing stick held in the left hand, appearing to the typesetter as upside down. As seen in the photo of the composing stick, a lower case 'q' looks like a 'd', a lower case 'b' looks like a 'p', a lower case 'p' looks like a 'b' and a lower case 'd' looks like a 'q'. This is reputed to be the origin of the expression "mind your p's and q's". It might just as easily have been "mind your b's and d's".

[ 3 ] A forgotten but important part of the process took place after the printing: after cleaning with a solvent the expensive sorts had to be redistributed into the typecase - called sorting or dissing - so they would be ready for reuse. Errors in sorting could later produce misprints if, say, a p was put into the b compartment.

The diagram at right illustrates a cast metal sort: a face, b body or shank, c point size, 1 shoulder, 2 nick, 3 groove, 4 foot.

Wooden printing sorts were used for centuries in combination with metal type. Not shown, and more the concern of the casterman, is the "set", or width of each sort. Set width, like body size, is measured in points.

In order to extend the working life of type, and to account for the finite sorts in a case of type, copies of forms were cast when anticipating subsequent printings of a text, freeing the costly type for other work. This was particularly prevalent in book and newspaper work where rotary presses required type forms to wrap an impression cylinder rather than set in the bed of a press. In this process, called stereotyping , the entire form is pressed into a fine matrix such as plaster of Paris or papier mâché to create a flong , from which a positive form is cast in type metal .

Advances such as the typewriter and computer would push the state of the art even farther ahead. Still, hand composition and letterpress printing have not fallen completely out of use, and since the introduction of digital typesetting, it has seen a revival as an artisanal pursuit. However, it is a small niche within the larger typesetting market.

Hot metal typesetting [ edit ] Main article: Hot metal typesetting The time and effort required to manually compose the text led to several efforts in the 19th century to produce mechanical typesetting. While some, such as the Paige compositor , met with limited success, by the end of the 19th century, several methods had been devised whereby an operator working a keyboard or other devices could produce the desired text. Most of the successful systems involved the in-house casting of the type to be used, hence are termed "hot metal" typesetting. The Linotype machine , invented in 1884, used a keyboard to assemble the casting matrices, and cast an entire line of type at a time (hence its name). In the Monotype System , a keyboard was used to punch a paper tape , which was then fed to control a casting machine. The Ludlow Typograph involved hand-set matrices, but otherwise used hot metal. By the early 20th century, the various systems were nearly universal in large newspapers and publishing houses.

Phototypesetting [ edit ] Main article: Phototypesetting Linotype CRTronic 360 photosetter, a direct entry machine Phototypesetting or "cold type" systems first appeared in the early 1960s and rapidly displaced continuous casting machines. These devices consisted of glass or film disks or strips (one per font ) that spun in front of a light source to selectively expose characters onto light-sensitive paper. Originally they were driven by pre-punched paper tapes . Later they were connected to computer front ends.

One of the earliest electronic photocomposition systems was introduced by Fairchild Semiconductor . The typesetter typed a line of text on a Fairchild keyboard that had no display. To verify correct content of the line it was typed a second time. If the two lines were identical a bell rang and the machine produced a punched paper tape corresponding to the text. With the completion of a block of lines the typesetter fed the corresponding paper tapes into a phototypesetting device that mechanically set type outlines printed on glass sheets into place for exposure onto a negative film . Photosensitive paper was exposed to light through the negative film, resulting in a column of black type on white paper, or a galley .  The galley was then cut up and used to create a mechanical drawing or paste up of a whole page.  A large film negative of the page is shot and used to make plates for offset printing .

Digital era [ edit ] Dutch newsreel from 1977 about the transition to computer typesetting The next generation of phototypesetting machines to emerge were those that generated characters on a cathode-ray tube display. Typical of the type were the Alphanumeric APS2 (1963), [ 4 ] IBM 2680 (1967), I.I.I.

VideoComp (1973?), Autologic APS5 (1975), [ 5 ] and Linotron 202 (1978).

[ 6 ] These machines were the mainstay of phototypesetting for much of the 1970s and 1980s. Such machines could be "driven online" by a computer front-end system or took their data from magnetic tape. Type fonts were stored digitally on conventional magnetic disk drives.

Computers excel at automatically typesetting and correcting documents.

[ 7 ] Character-by-character, computer-aided phototypesetting was, in turn, rapidly rendered obsolete in the 1980s by fully digital systems employing a raster image processor to render an entire page to a single high-resolution digital image , now known as imagesetting.

The first commercially successful laser imagesetter, able to make use of a raster image processor, was the Monotype Lasercomp. ECRM, Compugraphic (later purchased by Agfa ) and others rapidly followed suit with machines of their own.

Early minicomputer -based typesetting software introduced in the 1970s and early 1980s, such as Datalogics Pager, Penta, Atex , Miles 33, Xyvision, troff from Bell Labs , and IBM's Script product with CRT terminals, were better able to drive these electromechanical devices, and used text markup languages to describe type and other page formatting information. The descendants of these text markup languages include SGML , XML and HTML .

The minicomputer systems output columns of text on film for paste-up and eventually produced entire pages and signatures of 4, 8, 16 or more pages using imposition software on devices such as the Israeli-made Scitex Dolev. The data stream used by these systems to drive page layout on printers and imagesetters, often proprietary or specific to a manufacturer or device, drove development of generalized printer control languages, such as Adobe Systems ' PostScript and Hewlett-Packard 's PCL .

Text sample (an extract of the essay The Renaissance of English Art by Oscar Wilde ) typeset in Iowan Old Style roman, italics and small caps, adjusted to approximately 10 words per line , with the typeface sized at 14 points on 1.4 x leading , with 0.2 points extra tracking Computerized typesetting was so rare that BYTE magazine (comparing itself to "the proverbial shoemaker's children who went barefoot") did not use any computers in production until its August 1979 issue used a Compugraphics system for typesetting and page layout. The magazine did not yet accept articles on floppy disks, but hoped to do so "as matters progress".

[ 8 ] Before the 1980s, practically all typesetting for publishers and advertisers was performed by specialist typesetting companies. These companies performed keyboarding, editing and production of paper or film output, and formed a large component of the graphic arts industry. In the United States, these companies were located in rural Pennsylvania, New England or the Midwest, where labor was cheap and paper was produced nearby, but still within a few hours' travel time of the major publishing centers.

In 1985, with the new concept of WYSIWYG (for What You See Is What You Get) in text editing and word processing on personal computers, desktop publishing became available, starting with the Apple Macintosh , Aldus PageMaker (and later QuarkXPress ) and PostScript and on the PC platform with Xerox Ventura Publisher under DOS as well as Pagemaker under Windows. Improvements in software and hardware, and rapidly lowering costs, popularized desktop publishing and enabled very fine control of typeset results much less expensively than the minicomputer dedicated systems. At the same time, word processing systems, such as Wang , WordPerfect and Microsoft Word , revolutionized office documents. They did not, however, have the typographic ability or flexibility required for complicated book layout, graphics, mathematics, or advanced hyphenation and justification rules ( H and J ).

By 2000, this industry segment had shrunk because publishers were now capable of integrating typesetting and graphic design on their own in-house computers. Many found the cost of maintaining high standards of typographic design and technical skill made it more economical to outsource to freelancers and graphic design specialists.

The availability of cheap or free fonts made the conversion to do-it-yourself easier, but also opened up a gap between skilled designers and amateurs. The advent of PostScript, supplemented by the PDF file format, provided a universal method of proofing designs and layouts, readable on major computers and operating systems.

QuarkXPress had enjoyed a market share of 95% in the 1990s, but lost its dominance to Adobe InDesign from the mid-2000s onward.

[ 9 ] SCRIPT variants [ edit ] Main article: SCRIPT (markup) Mural mosaic "Typesetter" at John A. Prior Health Sciences Library in Ohio IBM created and inspired a family of typesetting languages with names that were derivatives of the word "SCRIPT". Later versions of SCRIPT included advanced features, such as automatic generation of a table of contents and index, multicolumn page layout, footnotes, boxes, automatic hyphenation and spelling verification.

[ 10 ] NSCRIPT was a port of SCRIPT to OS and TSO from CP-67/CMS SCRIPT.

[ 11 ] Waterloo Script was created at the University of Waterloo (UW) later.

[ 11 ] One version of SCRIPT was created at MIT and the AA/CS at UW took over project development in 1974. The program was first used at UW in 1975. In the 1970s, SCRIPT was the only practical way to word process and format documents using a computer. By the late 1980s, the SCRIPT system had been extended to incorporate various upgrades.

[ 12 ] The initial implementation of SCRIPT at UW was documented in the May 1975 issue of the Computing Centre Newsletter, which noted some the advantages of using SCRIPT: It easily handles footnotes.

Page numbers can be in Arabic or Roman numerals, and can appear at the top or bottom of the page, in the centre, on the left or on the right, or on the left for even-numbered pages and on the right for odd-numbered pages.

Underscoring or overstriking can be made a function of SCRIPT, thus uncomplicating editor functions.

SCRIPT files are regular OS datasets or CMS files.

Output can be obtained on the printer, or at the terminal… The article also pointed out SCRIPT had over 100 commands to assist in formatting documents, though 8 to 10 of these commands were sufficient to complete most formatting jobs.  Thus, SCRIPT had many of the capabilities computer users generally associate with contemporary word processors.

[ 13 ] SCRIPT/VS was a SCRIPT variant developed at IBM in the 1980s.

DWScript is a version of SCRIPT for MS-DOS, named after its author, D. D. Williams, [ 14 ] but was never released to the public and only used internally by IBM.

Script is still available from IBM as part of the Document Composition Facility for the z/OS operating system.

[ 15 ] SGML and XML systems [ edit ] The standard generalized markup language ( SGML ) was based upon IBM Generalized Markup Language (GML). GML was a set of macros on top of IBM Script.

DSSSL is an international standard developed to provide a stylesheets for SGML documents.

XML is a successor of SGML.

XSL-FO is most often used to generate PDF files from XML files.

The arrival of SGML/XML as the document model made other typesetting engines popular.
Such engines include Datalogics Pager, Penta, Miles 33's OASYS, Xyvision's XML Professional Publisher , FrameMaker , and Arbortext . XSL-FO compatible engines include Apache FOP , Antenna House Formatter , and RenderX 's XEP .
These products allow users to program their SGML/XML typesetting process with the help of scripting languages.

YesLogic's Prince is another one, which is based on CSS Paged Media.

Troff and successors [ edit ] Main article: Troff During the mid-1970s, Joe Ossanna , working at Bell Laboratories , wrote the troff typesetting program to drive a Wang C/A/T phototypesetter owned by the Labs; it was later enhanced by Brian Kernighan to support output to different equipment, such as laser printers . While its use has fallen off, it is still included with a number of Unix and Unix-like systems, and has been used to typeset a number of high-profile technical and computer books. Some versions, as well as a GNU work-alike called groff , are now open source .

TeX and LaTeX [ edit ] Mathematical text typeset using TeX and the AMS Euler font Main article: TeX The TeX system, developed by Donald E. Knuth at the end of the 1970s, is another widespread and powerful automated typesetting system that has set high standards, especially for typesetting mathematics.

LuaTeX and LuaLaTeX are variants of TeX and of LaTeX scriptable in Lua .  TeX is considered fairly difficult to learn on its own, and deals more with appearance than structure. The LaTeX macro package, written by Leslie Lamport at the beginning of the 1980s, offered a simpler interface and an easier way to systematically encode the structure of a document. LaTeX markup is widely used in academic circles for published papers and books. Although standard TeX does not provide an interface of any sort, there are programs that do. These programs include Scientific Workplace and LyX , which are graphical/interactive editors; TeXmacs , while being an independent typesetting system, can also aid the preparation of TeX documents through its export capability.

Other text formatters [ edit ] GNU TeXmacs (whose name is a combination of TeX and Emacs , although it is independent from both of these programs) is a typesetting system which is at the same time a WYSIWYG word processor .

SILE borrows some algorithms from TeX and relies on other libraries such as HarfBuzz and ICU , with an extensible core engine developed in Lua .

[ 16 ] [ 17 ] By default, SILE's input documents can be composed in a custom LaTeX-inspired markup (SIL) or in XML. Via the adjunction of 3rd-party modules, composition in Markdown or Djot is also possible.

[ 18 ] See also [ edit ] Dingbat Formula editor History of Western typography Ligature (typography) The Long Short Cut Point (typography) Prepress Printing Printing press Sort (typesetting) Strut (typesetting) Symbols – Comprehensive list of typographical symbols Technical writing References [ edit ] ^ Dictionary.com Unabridged. Random House, Inc. 23 December 2009.

Dictionary.reference.com ^ Murray, Stuart A., The Library: An Illustrated History , ALA edition, Skyhorse, 2009, page 131 ^ a b Lyons, M. (2001).

Books: A Living History. (pp. 59–61).

^ Encyclopedia of Computer Science and Technology , 1976 ^ Encyclopedia of Computer Science and Technology ^ Linotype History ^ Petru-Ioan Becheru (Oct 2011).

"Correcting Romanian typesetting mistakes by using regular expressions" .

An. Univ. Spiru Haret—ser. matemat.-inform.

7 (2): 31– 36.

ISSN 1841-7833 . 83. Archived from the original on 2020-04-15 . Retrieved 2012-04-09 .

(webpage has a translation button) ^ Helmers, Carl (August 1979).

"Notes on the Appearance of BYTE..." BYTE . pp.

158– 159.

^ "How QuarkXPress became a mere afterthought in publishing" .

Ars Technica . 2014-01-14 . Retrieved 2022-08-07 .

^ U01-0547, "Introduction to SCRIPT," Archived 2009-06-06 at the Wayback Machine is available through PRTDOC.

^ a b SCRIPT 90.1 Implementation Guide , June 6, 1990 ^ A Chronology of Computing at The University of Waterloo ^ Glossary of University of Waterloo Computing Chronology ^ DWScript – Document Composition Facility for the IBM Personal Computer Version 4.6 Updates, DW-04167, Nov 8th, 1985 ^ IBM Document Composition Facility (DCF) ^ "SILE Website" . Retrieved 2023-08-01 .

^ Simon Cozens (2017).

"SILE, A new typesetting system" (PDF) .

TUGboat, Volume 38 (2017), No. 1 . Retrieved 2023-08-01 .

^ "Markdown and Djot to PDF with SILE" .

GitHub . Retrieved 2023-07-14 .

External links [ edit ] Look up typesetting in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Metal Type – For Those who Remember Hot Metal Typesetting TeX Users Group Fundamentals of typesetting Archived 2021-06-10 at the Wayback Machine The Lout Document Formatting System XML page at www.W3C.org SGML page at www.xml.org Archived 2019-02-19 at the Wayback Machine TYPESET-8, the first low cost computerized type setting system v t e Books Production Binding Covers dust jackets Design Editing Illustration Illuminated manuscripts Printing edition history incunabula instant book limited edition Publishing advance copy hardcover paperback Size Typesetting Volume (bibliography) Collection (publishing) Book series Consumption Awards Bestsellers list Bibliography Bibliomania ( tsundoku ) Bibliophilia Bibliotherapy Bookmarks Bookselling blurbs book towns history used Censorship Clubs Collecting Digitizing Bookworm (insect) Furniture bookcases bookends Library Print culture Reading literacy Reviews By country Brazil China France Germany Italy Japan Netherlands Pakistan Spain United Kingdom United States Other Genres non-fiction novel imaginary miniature pop-up textbook Grimoire Formats audiobooks Ebooks Folio Coffee table book Related Banned books Book burning incidents Nazi Book curses Book packaging Book swapping Book tour Conservation and restoration Dog ears History of books scroll codex Intellectual property ISBN Outline Preservation The Philobiblon World Book Day World Book Capital Outline Category Portal v t e Book publishing process Copy preparation Submission Literary agent Publisher's reader Contract negotiation intellectual property rights royalty rates, format, etc.

Editing Literary editor Commissioning editor Developmental editor Authors' editor Book editor Copy editing Prepress Design Indexing Typesetting Proof-reading List of proofreader's marks Book production Printing Folding Binding Trimming Imprint v t e Typography Page Canons of page construction Column Even working Margin Page numbering Paper size Pagination Pull quote Recto and verso Intentionally blank page Paragraph Alignment Leading Line length River Runaround Widows and orphans runt Character Typeface anatomy Counter Diacritics Dingbat Glyph Ink trap Ligature Rotation Subscript and superscript Swash Text figures Tittle Capitalization All caps Camel case Initial Letter case Small caps Snake case Title case Visual distinction Blackboard bold Bold Color printing Italics Oblique Underline Whitespace Horizontal aspects Figure space Kerning Letter spacing Pitch Sentence spacing Thin space Word spacing Vertical aspects Ascender Baseline Body height Cap height Descender Mean line Overshoot x-height Typeface classifications Roman type Serif Antiqua Didone slab serif Sans-serif Blackletter type Fraktur Rotunda Schwabacher Gaelic type Insular Uncial Specialist Record type Display typeface script fat face reverse-contrast Punctuation ( List ) Bullet Dash Hanging punctuation Hyphen minus sign Interpunct Space Vertical bar Typesetting Etaoin shrdlu Font computer monospaced Font catalog For position only Letterpress Lorem ipsum Microprinting Microtypography Movable type Pangram Phototypesetting Punchcutting Reversing type Sort Type color Type design Typeface list Typographic units Agate Cicero Em En Metric units Pica Point traditional point-size names Twip Digital typography Character encoding Hinting Text shaping Rasterization Typographic features Web typography Bézier curves Desktop publishing Typography in other writing systems Arabic Cyrillic PT Fonts East Asian Thai National Fonts Related articles Penmanship Handwriting Handwriting script Calligraphy Style guide Type design Type foundry History of Western typography Intellectual property protection of typefaces Technical lettering Vox-ATypI classification Related template Punctuation and other typographic symbols Category v t e Letterpress printing History of printing Printer Ways to make impressions Movable type Type casting Type metal Punchcutter Matrix Wood type Blocks and plates Stereotype Flong Logographic printing Wood engraving Electrotype Zinc etching Typesetting Manual typesetting Type case Composing stick Sort Slug Strut Reglet Furniture Leading Quoin Chase Forme Hellbox Hot metal typesetting Linotype machine Monotype system Ludlow Typograph Intertype Machine Paige Compositor Printing press Parts of a press Platen Frisket Tympan Bed Inking Offset ink Ink ball Composition roller Types of presses Hand press Stanhope Columbian Albion Jobbing press Golding & Company Chandler & Price Colt's Armory Cylinder press Rotary press Other equipment Folding machine Paper cutter Addressograph Related arts Typography Bookbinding Printmaking Papermaking Authority control databases National Germany United States Japan Czech Republic Latvia Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐lqpcc
Cached time: 20250816022301
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.450 seconds
Real time usage: 0.610 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1856/1000000
Revision size: 24032/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 101187/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 1409/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 14/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 71122/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.277/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 18869630/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  463.993      1 -total
 55.84%  259.098      9 Template:Navbox
 24.02%  111.455      1 Template:Reflist
 20.19%   93.675      1 Template:Typography_terms
 17.91%   83.085      1 Template:Lang
 15.65%   72.601      1 Template:Books
 14.49%   67.217      1 Template:Cite_journal
 12.41%   57.584      1 Template:Short_description
  7.44%   34.505      2 Template:Pagetype
  7.05%   32.720      1 Template:Authority_control Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:169180:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250816022301 and revision id 1303565387. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Typesetting&oldid=1303565387 " Categories : Printing technology Typesetting Typography Textual scholarship Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing video clips This page was last edited on 31 July 2025, at 19:07 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Typesetting 33 languages Add topic

