Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Game 2 References 3 Further reading 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Ostomachion 14 languages العربية Čeština Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Français Italiano Magyar Nederlands Polski Português Русский Suomi Svenska Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Treatise on geometry attributed to Archimedes Ostomachion (after Suter) Ostomachion (after Suter): square reformed with some pieces turned over Ostomachion figures mentioned by Ausonius and others (Bibliotheca Augustana) In ancient Greek geometry , the Ostomachion , also known as loculus Archimedius (from Latin ' Archimedes' box ' ) or syntomachion , is a mathematical treatise attributed to Archimedes . This work has survived fragmentarily in an Arabic version and a copy, the Archimedes Palimpsest , of the original ancient Greek text made in Byzantine times.

[ 1 ] The word Ostomachion ( Ὀστομάχιον ) [ 2 ] comes from Greek ὀστέον (osteon) ' bone ' and μάχη (mache) ' fight, battle, combat ' .

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] The manuscripts refer to the word as " Stomachion ", an apparent corruption of the original Greek.

Ausonius gives us the correct name "Ostomachion" ( quod Graeci ostomachion vocavere , "which the Greeks called ostomachion").

The Ostomachion which he describes was a puzzle similar to tangrams and was played perhaps by several persons with pieces made of bone.

[ 5 ] It is not known which is older, Archimedes' geometrical investigation of the figure, or the game.

Victorinus , [ 6 ] Bassus [ 7 ] Ennodius [ 8 ] and Lucretius [ 9 ] have also discussed the game.

Game [ edit ] The game is a 14-piece dissection puzzle forming a square. One form of play to which classical texts attest is the creation of different objects, animals, plants etc. by rearranging the pieces: an elephant, a tree, a barking dog, a ship, a sword, a tower etc. Another suggestion is that it exercised and developed memory skills in the young. James Gow, in his Short History of Greek Mathematics (1884), footnotes that the purpose was to put the pieces back in their box, [ 10 ] and this was also a view expressed by W. W. Rouse Ball in some intermediate editions of Mathematical Essays and Recreations .

[ 11 ] A reconstruction of Archimedes' ostomachion in Kotsanas Museum of Ancient Greek Technology, Athens.

The number of different ways to arrange the parts of the Stomachions within a square were determined to be 17,152 by Fan Chung , Persi Diaconis , Susan P. Holmes , and Ronald Graham , and confirmed by a computer search by William H. Cutler.

[ 12 ] However, this count has been disputed because surviving images of the puzzle show it in a rectangle, not a square, and rotations or reflections of pieces may not have been allowed.

[ 13 ] References [ edit ] ^ Darling, David (2004).

The universal book of mathematics: from Abracadabra to Zeno's paradoxes . John Wiley and Sons, p. 188.

ISBN 0-471-27047-4 ^ ὀστομάχιον , 
Henry George Liddell, Robert Scott, A Greek-English Lexicon , on Perseus Digital Library ^ ὀστέον , Henry George Liddell, Robert Scott, A Greek-English Lexicon , on Perseus Digital Library ^ μάχη , Henry George Liddell, Robert Scott, A Greek-English Lexicon , on Perseus Digital Library ^ Ausonii Cento nuptialis in Monumenta Germaniae Historica , auctores antiquissimi, vol. 5, part 2: D. Magni Ausonii opuscola, Berolini apud Weidmannos, 1883, pagg. 140-41 Archived 2015-09-23 at the Wayback Machine .

^ Ars grammatica, III, 1 in Grammatici latini , Lipsiae in aedibus R. G. Teubneri, 1857, vol. 6, part 1, pagg. 100-01 .

^ De metris, 9 in Grammatici latini cit., pagg. 271-72 , ^ Carmen CCCXL (2, 133) in Monumenta Germaniae Historica , auctores antiquissimi, vol. 7, Magni Felicis Ennodi opera, Berolini apud Weidmannos, 1885, pag. 249 Archived 2016-03-06 at the Wayback Machine ^ De rerum natura , II, 776-787 cited in Netz, Reviel ; Acerbi, Fabio; Wilson, Nigel (2004).

"Towards a reconstruction of Archimedes' Stomachion" (PDF) .

Sciamvs .

5 : 67– 99. Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 October 2013 . Retrieved 3 October 2013 .

^ Gow, James (1884).

A Short History of Greek Mathematics . Cambridge University Press. p.

243 .

^ Rouse Ball, W. W. (1920).

Mathematical Recreations And Essays (9th ed.). p.

54 .

^ Kolata, Gina (December 14, 2003).

"In Archimedes' Puzzle, a New Eureka Moment" .

The New York Times .

^ Huxley, G. L. (Winter 2009). "Review of Ludic Proof: Greek Mathematics and the Alexandrian Aesthetic ".

Hermathena .

187 : 116– 121.

JSTOR 23317530 .

Further reading [ edit ] J. L. Heiberg, Archimedis opera omnia, vol. 2, pp. 420 ff., Leipzig: Teubner 1881 Reviel Netz & William Noel, The Archimedes Codex (Weidenfeld & Nicolson, 2007) J. Väterlein, Roma ludens (Heuremata - Studien zu Literatur, Sprachen und Kultur der Antike, Bd. 5), Amsterdam: Verlag B. R. Grüner bv 1976 External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Stomachion .

Heinrich Suter, Loculus James Gow, Short History W. W. R. Ball, Recreations and Essays The Ostomachion at the Bibliotheca Augustana Ostomachion, a Graeco-Roman puzzle Professor Chris Rorres Kolata, Gina. "In Archimedes' Puzzle, a New Eureka Moment." The New York Times . December 14, 2003 A tour of Archimedes' Stomachion , by Fan Chung and Ronald Graham .

Ostomachion and others tangram Play with 38 Tangram games online: more than 7,300 shapes proposed by the program.

v t e Archimedes Written works Measurement of a Circle The Sand Reckoner On the Equilibrium of Planes Quadrature of the Parabola On the Sphere and Cylinder On Spirals On Conoids and Spheroids On Floating Bodies Ostomachion The Method of Mechanical Theorems Book of Lemmas (apocryphal) Discoveries and inventions Archimedean solid Archimedes's cattle problem Archimedes' principle Archimedes's screw Claw of Archimedes Miscellaneous Archimedes' heat ray Archimedes Palimpsest List of things named after Archimedes Pseudo-Archimedes Related people Euclid Eudoxus of Cnidus Apollonius of Perga Hero of Alexandria Eutocius of Ascalon Category v t e Ancient Greek mathematics Mathematicians (timeline) Anaxagoras Anthemius Apollonius Archimedes Archytas Aristaeus the Elder Aristarchus Autolycus Bion Bryson Callippus Carpus Chrysippus Cleomedes Conon Ctesibius Democritus Dicaearchus Dinostratus Diocles Dionysodorus of Caunus Dionysodorus of Amisene Diophantus Domninus Eratosthenes Euclid Eudemus Eudoxus Eutocius Geminus Heliodorus Heron Hipparchus Hippasus Hippias Hippocrates Hypatia Hypsicles Isidore of Miletus Leon Marinus Menaechmus Menelaus Metrodorus Nicomachus Nicomedes Nicoteles Oenopides Pandrosion Pappus Perseus Philolaus Philon Philonides Porphyry of Tyre Posidonius Proclus Ptolemy Pythagoras Serenus Sosigenes Sporus Thales Theaetetus Theodorus Theodosius Theon of Alexandria Theon of Smyrna Thymaridas Xenocrates Zeno of Elea Zeno of Sidon Zenodorus Treatises Almagest Arithmetica Conics (Apollonius) Catoptrics Data (Euclid) Elements (Euclid) Little Astronomy Measurement of a Circle On Conoids and Spheroids On the Sizes and Distances (Aristarchus) On Sizes and Distances (Hipparchus) On the Moving Sphere (Autolycus) Optics (Euclid) On Spirals On the Sphere and Cylinder Ostomachion Phaenomena (Euclid) Planisphaerium Spherics (Theodosius) Spherics (Menelaus) The Quadrature of the Parabola The Sand Reckoner Concepts and definitions Chord Circles of Apollonius Apollonian circles Apollonian gasket Problem of Apollonius Commensurability Diophantine equation Euclidean geometry Golden ratio Lune of Hippocrates Method of exhaustion Parallel postulate Platonic solid Regular polygon Straightedge and compass construction Angle trisection Doubling the cube Squaring the circle Quadratrix of Hippias Neusis construction Results In Elements Angle bisector theorem Exterior angle theorem Euclidean algorithm Euclid's theorem Geometric mean theorem Hinge theorem Inscribed angle theorem Intercept theorem Intersecting chords theorem Intersecting secants theorem Law of cosines Pons asinorum Pythagorean theorem Tangent-secant theorem Thales's theorem Theorem of the gnomon Apollonius's theorem Aristarchus's inequality Heron's formula Law of sines Menelaus's theorem Pappus's area theorem Problem II.8 of Arithmetica Ptolemy's inequality Ptolemy's table of chords Ptolemy's theorem Spiral of Theodorus Centers/Schools Cyrene Platonic Academy Pythagoreanism School of Chios Related Ancient Greek astronomy Attic numerals Greek numerals History of A History of Greek Mathematics by Thomas Heath Archimedes Palimpsest algebra timeline arithmetic timeline calculus timeline geometry timeline logic timeline mathematics timeline numbers prehistoric counting numeral systems list Other cultures Arabian/Islamic Babylonian Chinese Egyptian Incan Indian Japanese Ancient Greece portal • Mathematics portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ostomachion&oldid=1305271008 " Categories : Puzzles Tiling puzzles Works by Archimedes Geometric dissection Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Latin-language text Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 11 August 2025, at 02:31 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Ostomachion 14 languages Add topic

