Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview 2 See also 3 References Toggle the table of contents Mega Rice Project 5 languages العربية فارسی Hausa Igbo Bahasa Indonesia Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 2°30′S 114°21′E ﻿ / ﻿ 2.5°S 114.35°E ﻿ / -2.5; 114.35 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Mega Rice Project (Kalimantan) ) Abandoned agricultural project in Indonesian Borneo Fires on Borneo in 2006. Fires in peat—thick layers of dead, but un-decayed vegetation—are extremely smoky and difficult to put out.

Southeast Asian haze series Haze in Borneo , 2019 History 1990s 1997 Southeast Asian haze 1997 Indonesian forest fires 2000s 2005 Malaysian haze 2006 Southeast Asian haze 2009 Southeast Asian haze 2010s 2010 Southeast Asian haze 2013 Southeast Asian haze 2015 Southeast Asian haze 2016 Malaysian haze 2016 Southeast Asian haze 2017 Southeast Asian haze 2019 Southeast Asian haze Key topics Chemical equator Deforestation in Borneo in Indonesia Mega Rice Project Peat swamp forest Borneo Responses ASEAN Agreement on Transboundary Haze Pollution Operation Haze Transboundary Haze Pollution Act 2014 People's Movement to Stop Haze See also Air pollution in Malaysia API Singapore PSI Social and environmental impact of palm oil Category v t e The Mega Rice Project was initiated in 1996 in the southern sections of Kalimantan , the Indonesian section of Borneo . The goal was to turn one million hectares of unproductive and sparsely populated peat swamp forest into rice paddies in an effort to alleviate Indonesia's growing food shortage. The government made a large investment in constructing irrigation canals and removing trees. The project did not succeed, and was eventually abandoned after causing considerable damage to the environment.

Overview [ edit ] The peat swamp forest in the south of Kalimantan is an unusual ecoregion that is home to many unique or rare species such as orangutans , as well as to slow-growing but valuable trees. The peat swamp forest is a dual ecosystem, with diverse tropical trees standing on a 10m - 12m layer of peat - partly decayed and waterlogged plant material - which in turn covers relatively infertile soil. Peat is a major store of carbon.  If broken down and burned it contributes to CO 2 emissions, a source of global warming .

[ 1 ] Unlike northern forests, which regenerate in 10–30 years even after clear-cut felling, the peat swamp forest may take several centuries to regenerate.

[ citation needed ] The peat swamp forests of Kalimantan were being slowly cleared for small scale farming and plantations before 1997, but most of the original cover remained. In 1996 the Indonesian government initiated the Mega Rice Project (MRP), which aimed to convert one million hectares of peat swamp forest to rice paddies . Between 1996 and 1998, more than 4,000 km of drainage and irrigation channels were dug, and deforestation started in part through legal forestry and in part through burning. The water channels, and the roads and railways built for legal forestry, opened up the region to illegal forestry. In the MRP area, forest cover dropped from 64.8% in 1991 to 45.7% in 2000, and clearance has continued since then. It appears that almost all the marketable trees have now been removed from the areas covered by the MRP.

[ citation needed ] Where the forests had often flooded up to 2m deep in the rainy season, now their surface is dry at all times of the year. The government has therefore abandoned the MRP, but the drying peat is vulnerable to fires which continue to break out on a massive scale.

[ 2 ] Peat forest destruction is causing sulphuric acid pollution of the rivers. In the rainy seasons, the canals are discharging acidic water with a high ratio of pyritic sulphate into rivers up to 150 km upstream from the river mouth. This may be a factor contributing to lower fish catches.

[ 3 ] See also [ edit ] Deforestation in Borneo Borneo peat swamp forests – Ecoregion in Borneo References [ edit ] ^ Sabangau Forest Archived July 15, 2011, at the Wayback Machine ^ Ecological Impact of the One Million Hectare Rice Project in Cantral Kalimantan, Indonesia, Using Remote Sensing and GIS. Boehm, H-D.V. and Siegert, F.

^ Effect of sulfuric acid discharge on river water chemistry in peat swamp forests in central Kalimantan,  Indonesia. Akira Haraguchi v t e Borneo Political divisions Brunei Darussalam Brunei-Muara Belait Tutong Temburong Kalimantan ( Indonesia ) West Kalimantan Central Kalimantan South Kalimantan East Kalimantan Nusantara North Kalimantan East Malaysia ( Malaysia ) Labuan Sabah Sarawak Eco-regions Borneo lowland rain forests Borneo montane rain forests Borneo peat swamp forests Kinabalu montane alpine meadows Southwest Borneo freshwater swamp forests Sundaland heath forests Sunda Shelf mangroves Environment Biodiversity Flora Fauna Mammals Geological history of Borneo Sundaland Deforestation Deforestation in Borneo Deforestation in Malaysia Deforestation in Indonesia Mega Rice Project Southeast Asian haze Conservation Betung Kerihun National Park Bornean Sun Bear Conservation Centre Borneo Orangutan Survival Bukit Perai Protection Forest Bukit Baka Bukit Raya National Park Danum Valley Conservation Area Gunung Berau Nature Reserve Heart of Borneo Kayan Mentarang National Park Kutai National Park Kinabalu Park Kulamba Wildlife Reserve Lamandau Nature Reserve Lake Sentarum National Park Lanjak Entimau Wildlife Sanctuary Mount Palung National Park Sepilok Orangutan Rehabilitation Centre Silabukan Protection Forest Reserve Sabangau National Park Tanjung Puting National Park Usun Apau National Park History History of Brunei History of Sabah History of Sarawak British Borneo Sultanate of Banjar Sultanate of Bulungan Kutai Lanfang Republic Mempawah Kingdom Negara Dipa Negara Daha Pontianak Sultanate Sultanate of Sambas Sintang Tanjungpura Kingdom People Ethnic groups Banjar Bisaya Dayak Bahau Bidayuh Iban Kayan Kenyah Ma'anyan Ngaju Lawangan Ot Danum Punan Indigenous peoples of Brunei Belait Bisaya (Borneo) Bruneian Malays Dusun (Brunei) Kedayan Murut (Brunei) Tutong Kadazan-Dusun Kadazan Dusun Melanau Orang Ulu Malay Brunei Berau Kutei Sarawak West Kalimantan Murut Lun Bawang/Lundayeh Rungus Tidung Festivities Aruh Bawanang Erau Gawai Dayak Kaamatan Kaul Magahau Manyanggar Mecaq Undat Nahunan Iraw Tengkayu Kalimaran Pakanan Batu Pakanan Sahur Lewu Languages Greater North Borneo languages Barito languages Malayic languages Languages of Kalimantan Category Commons 2°30′S 114°21′E ﻿ / ﻿ 2.5°S 114.35°E ﻿ / -2.5; 114.35 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Mega_Rice_Project&oldid=1167954637 " Categories : Central Kalimantan Deforestation Forestry in Indonesia Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2023 Coordinates on Wikidata This page was last edited on 30 July 2023, at 21:50 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Mega Rice Project 5 languages Add topic

