Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Works 3 See also 4 References 5 Bibliography 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Benedict of Aniane 22 languages Català Čeština Deutsch Español Euskara Français Italiano עברית Kiswahili Latina Magyar مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 8th/9th-century Frankish saint Saint Benedict of Aniane Born 747 Kingdom of the Franks Died ( 821-02-12 ) 12 February 821 Venerated in Eastern Orthodox Church [ 1 ] [ 2 ] Catholic Church Feast 12 February Benedict of Aniane ( Latin : Benedictus Anianensis ; German : Benedikt von Aniane ; c.

747 – 12 February 821 AD), born Witiza and called the Second Benedict , was a Benedictine monk and monastic reformer who had a substantial impact on the religious practice of the Carolingian Empire . His feast day is either February 11 or 12, depending on the liturgical calendar .

Life [ edit ] According to Ardo , Benedict's biographer, he was the son of a Visigoth , Aigulf , Count of Maguelonne ( Magalonensis comes ). Originally given the Gothic name Witiza , he was educated at the Frankish court of Pippin the Younger , and entered the royal service as a page. He served at the court of Charlemagne and took part in his Italian campaign of 773, where he almost drowned in the Ticino River near Pavia while attempting to save his brother. The experience led him to act on a resolve which had been slowly forming in him, to renounce the world and live the monastic life. He later left the court and was received into the monastery of Saint Sequanus, the Abbey of Saint-Seine .

[ 3 ] At Saint-Seine, Benedict was made cellarer and then elected abbot, but realizing the monks would never conform to his strict practices he left and returned to his father's estates in Languedoc, where he built a hermitage.

[ 4 ] Around 780, he founded a monastic community based on Eastern asceticism at Aniane in Languedoc. This community did not develop as he had intended. In 782, he founded another monastery based on Benedictine Rule , at the same location. His success there gave him considerable influence, which he used to found and reform a number of other monasteries, eventually becoming the effective abbot of all the monasteries of Charlemagne's empire.

[ 5 ] In 781 Louis the Pious became King of Aquitaine and asked Benedict to reform the monasteries in his territory. Later, as Emperor, he  entrusted him with the coordination of practices and communication among the monasteries within his domains.

[ 4 ] He had a wide knowledge of patristic literature, and churchmen such as Alcuin sought his counsel.

In 814, Louis, now Emperor, had Benedict found a monastery on the river Inde near the court at Aachen . The monastery was at first called the "Monastery of the Redeemer on the Inde", but came to be known as Kornelimünster Abbey .

[ 6 ] He was the head of a council of abbots which in 817 at Aachen created a code of regulations, or "Codex regularum", which would be binding on all their houses.

[ 3 ] Benedict sought to restore the primitive strictness of the monastic observance wherever it had been relaxed or exchanged for the less exacting canonical life. Shortly thereafter, he compiled a "Concordia regularum". Sections of the Benedictine rule (except ix-xvi) are given in their order, with parallel passages from the other rules included in the Liber regularum, so as to show the agreement of principles and thus to enhance the respect due to the Benedictine. He was primarily an ecclesiastic, who zealously placed his considerable theological learning at the service of orthodoxy and the cause of Benedictine monasticism.

[ 7 ] Although these new codes fell into disuse shortly after the deaths of Benedict and his patron , Emperor Louis the Pious , they did have lasting effects on Western monasticism.

Benedict died at Kornelimünster Abbey on February 11, 821, in the monastery Louis had built for him to serve as the base for Benedict's supervisory work. He was buried the next day on February 12, hence why some list his feast day as the 11th [ 8 ] and some the 12th.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] Works [ edit ] For Benedict's writings, see Codex regularum monasticarum et canonicarum in Patrologia Latina , CIII, 393-702.

Concordia regularum , ed. Pierre Bonnerue, Corpus Christianorum Continuatio Medaevalis , vol. 168/168A, Turnhout: Brepols 1999.

Letters, PL 103:703-1380.

Other treatises (PL103:1381ff) ascribed to him are probably not authentic.

See also [ edit ] Abbey of Aniane References [ edit ] ^ Phillips, Fr Andrew.

"Latin Saints of the Orthodox Patriarchate of Rome" .

www.orthodoxengland.org.uk . Retrieved 2017-12-30 .

^ February 24 / February 11.

https://www.holytrinityorthodox.com/htc/orthodox-calendar/ ^ a b Kirsch, Johann Peter. "St. Benedict of Aniane." The Catholic Encyclopedia. Vol. 2. New York: Robert Appleton Company, 1907. 11 Feb. 2015 ^ a b "Benedict of Aniane", Cistercian Studies, No. 220, Kalamazoo, Michigan, Cistercian Publications, 1979 ISBN 978-0-87907-320-6 ^ Attwater, Donald and Catherine Rachel John.

The Penguin Dictionary of Saints . 3rd edition. New York: Penguin Books, 1993.

ISBN 0-14-051312-4 .

^ Ghezzi, Bert.

Voices of the Saints , Loyola Press.

ISBN 978-0-8294-2806-3 ^ Seebass, Otto. "Benedict of Aniane", The New Schaff-Herzog Encyclopedia of Religious Knowledge , Vol. II, (Philip Schaff, ed.) ^ Proper Masses for the Use of the Benedictine Confederation . Collegeville, Minnesota: The Liturgical Press. 1975. p. 9.

^ Martyrologium Romanum (in Latin) (2 ed.). Administrationem Patrimonii Sedis Apostolicae in Civitate Vaticana. 2004. p. 147.

^ " "St. Benedict of Aniane" " .

New Advent .

Bibliography [ edit ] Ardo Smaragdus , Life , op. cit., CIII, 353 sqq.; Monumenta Germaniae Historica : Script., XV, I, 200-220; Acta Sanctorum , Feb., II, 606 sqq.; NICOLAI, Der hl. Benedict, Gründer von Aniane und Cornelimünster (Cologne, 1865); PAULINIER, S.

Benoit d'Aniane et la fondation du monastere de ce nom (Montpellier, 1871); FOSS, B enedikt von Aniane (Berlin, 1884); PUCKERT, Aniane und Gellone (Leipzig, 1899); External links [ edit ] Media related to Benedict of Aniane at Wikimedia Commons Opera Omnia by Migne Patrologia Latina with analytical indexes (in Latin) v t e History of Catholic theology Key figures General History of the Catholic Church Timeline History of the papacy Papal primacy Ecumenical councils Catholic Bible Vulgate Biblical canon History of Christian theology Early Church Paul Clement of Rome First Epistle of Clement Didache Ignatius of Antioch Polycarp Epistle of Barnabas The Shepherd of Hermas Aristides of Athens Justin Martyr Epistle to Diognetus Irenaeus Montanism Tertullian Origen Antipope Novatian Cyprian Constantine to Pope Gregory I Eusebius Athanasius of Alexandria Arianism Pelagianism Nestorianism Monophysitism Ephrem the Syrian Hilary of Poitiers Cyril of Jerusalem Basil of Caesarea Gregory of Nazianzus Gregory of Nyssa Ambrose John Chrysostom Jerome Augustine of Hippo John Cassian Orosius Cyril of Alexandria Peter Chrysologus Pope Leo I Boethius Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite Pope Gregory I Early Middle Ages Isidore of Seville John Climacus Maximus the Confessor Monothelitism Ecthesis Bede John of Damascus Iconoclasm Transubstantiation dispute Predestination disputes Paulinus II of Aquileia Alcuin Benedict of Aniane Rabanus Maurus Paschasius Radbertus John Scotus Eriugena High Middle Ages Roscellinus Gregory of Narek Berengar of Tours Peter Damian Anselm of Canterbury Joachim of Fiore Peter Abelard Decretum Gratiani Bernard of Clairvaux Peter Lombard Anselm of Laon Hildegard of Bingen Hugh of Saint Victor Dominic de Guzmán Robert Grosseteste Francis of Assisi Anthony of Padua Beatrice of Nazareth Bonaventure Albertus Magnus Boetius of Dacia Henry of Ghent Thomas Aquinas Siger of Brabant Thomism Roger Bacon Mysticism and reforms Ramon Llull Duns Scotus Dante Alighieri William of Ockham Richard Rolle John of Ruusbroec Catherine of Siena Bridget of Sweden Meister Eckhart Johannes Tauler Walter Hilton The Cloud of Unknowing Heinrich Seuse Geert Groote Devotio Moderna Julian of Norwich Thomas à Kempis Nicholas of Cusa Marsilio Ficino Girolamo Savonarola Giovanni Pico della Mirandola Reformation Counter-Reformation Erasmus Thomas Cajetan Thomas More John Fisher Johann Eck Francisco de Vitoria Thomas of Villanova Ignatius of Loyola Francisco de Osuna John of Ávila Francis Xavier Teresa of Ávila Luis de León John of the Cross Peter Canisius Luis de Molina ( Molinism ) Robert Bellarmine Francisco Suárez Lawrence of Brindisi Francis de Sales Baroque period to French Revolution Tommaso Campanella Pierre de Bérulle Pierre Gassendi René Descartes Mary of Jesus of Ágreda António Vieira Jean-Jacques Olier Louis Thomassin Jacques-Bénigne Bossuet François Fénelon Cornelius Jansen ( Jansenism ) Blaise Pascal Nicolas Malebranche Giambattista Vico Alphonsus Liguori Louis de Montfort Maria Gaetana Agnesi Alfonso Muzzarelli Johann Michael Sailer Clement Mary Hofbauer Bruno Lanteri 19th century Joseph Görres Félicité de La Mennais Luigi Taparelli Antonio Rosmini Ignaz von Döllinger John Henry Newman Henri Lacordaire Jaime Balmes Gaetano Sanseverino Giovanni Maria Cornoldi Wilhelm Emmanuel Freiherr von Ketteler Giuseppe Pecci Joseph Hergenröther Tommaso Maria Zigliara Matthias Joseph Scheeben Émile Boutroux Modernism Neo-scholasticism Léon Bloy Désiré-Joseph Mercier Friedrich von Hügel Vladimir Solovyov Marie-Joseph Lagrange George Tyrrell Maurice Blondel Thérèse of Lisieux 20th century G. K. Chesterton Reginald Garrigou-Lagrange Joseph Maréchal Pierre Teilhard de Chardin Jacques Maritain Étienne Gilson Ronald Knox Georges Bernanos Dietrich von Hildebrand Gabriel Marcel Marie-Dominique Chenu Romano Guardini Edith Stein Fulton Sheen Henri de Lubac Dorothy Day Henri Daniel-Rops Jean Guitton Josemaría Escrivá Nouvelle théologie Karl Rahner Yves Congar Bernard Lonergan Emmanuel Mounier Jean Daniélou Hans Urs von Balthasar Marcel Lefebvre Frederick Copleston Alfred Delp Edward Schillebeeckx Thomas Merton René Girard Hans Küng Johann Baptist Metz Jean Vanier Henri Nouwen 21st century Pope John Paul II Alice von Hildebrand Carlo Maria Martini Pope Benedict XVI Gustavo Gutiérrez Alasdair MacIntyre Walter Kasper Raniero Cantalamessa Michał Heller Peter Kreeft Jean-Luc Marion Tomáš Halík Aidan Nichols Scott Hahn Catholicism portal Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Netherlands Norway Poland Vatican 2 Israel Belgium People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Benedict_of_Aniane&oldid=1283711139 " Categories : 740s births 821 deaths French Benedictines 8th-century Visigothic people 8th-century Christian theologians 9th-century Christian theologians Saints from the Carolingian Empire 8th-century Frankish writers Writers from the Carolingian Empire 8th-century writers in Latin 9th-century writers in Latin Hidden categories: CS1 Latin-language sources (la) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Latin-language text Articles containing German-language text Commons category link from Wikidata Articles with Latin-language sources (la) This page was last edited on 3 April 2025, at 05:31 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Benedict of Aniane 22 languages Add topic

