Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Nomenclature 2 Description Toggle Description subsection 2.1 North Pole chert 2.2 Middle basalt member 2.3 Upper chert member 3 Contacts 4 Paleobiology 5 Age 6 Depositional environment 7 Metamorphism 8 See also 9 References Toggle the table of contents Dresser Formation 1 language Deutsch Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Geologic formation in Western Australia Dresser Formation Stratigraphic range : Paleoarchaen 3483–3479 Ma Pha.

Proterozoic Archean Had.

↓ [ 1 ] Type Geological formation Unit of Warrawoona Group Sub-units two bedded chert horizons separated by pillow basalt Underlies Mount Ada Basalt Overlies North Star Basalt Area limited to Panorama greenstone belt surrounding North Pole Dome of Pilbara Craton Lithology Primary bedded chert , volcaniclastic sandstone , felsic tuff , conglomerate, breccia, and jaspilitic chert Other basalt Location Coordinates 21°09′06″S 119°26′14″E ﻿ / ﻿ 21.151759°S 119.437252°E ﻿ / -21.151759; 119.437252 Region Western Australia Country Australia Extent 25 km 2 (9.7 sq mi) [ 2 ] Type section Named for Dresser Mine Named by M. J. Van Kranendonk [ 3 ] Location Dresser Mine Year defined 2000 [ 3 ] Region Western Australia Country Australia The Dresser Formation is a Paleoarchean geologic formation that outcrops as a generally circular ring of hills in the North Pole Dome area of the East Pilbara Terrane of the Pilbara Craton of Western Australia . This formation is one of many formations that comprise the Warrawoona Group , which is the lowermost of four groups that comprise the Pilbara Supergroup. The Dresser Formation is part of the Panorama greenstone belt that surrounds and outcrops around the intrusive North Pole Monzogranite. Dresser Formation consists of metamorphosed , blue, black, and white bedded chert ; pillow basalt ; carbonate rocks ; minor felsic volcaniclastic sandstone and conglomerate ; hydrothermal barite ; evaporites ; and stromatolites . The lowermost of three stratigraphic units that comprise the Dresser Formation contains some of the Earth's earliest commonly accepted evidence of life such as morphologically diverse stromatolites, microbially induced sedimentary structures , putative organic microfossils , and biologically fractionated carbon and sulfur isotopic data.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] Nomenclature [ edit ] Initially, the three major stratigraphic units containing bedded chert found within the Warrawoona Group were correlated as one stratigraphic unit across the various greenstone belts that occur in the East Pilbara Terrane. This formation was named the Towers Formation after the type of area near the town of Marble Bar.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] With subsequent and more detailed geological mapping and geochronologic studies , geologists found that the major bedded cherts of the Towers formation belonged to one of three different and distinct stratigraphic units.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] The oldest of these bedded cherts are the stromatolitic bedded chert-barites of the Dresser Formation in the Panorama greenstone belt. The second oldest are the slightly younger Marble Bar Chert Member of the Towers Formation in the Marble Bar greenstone belt. The youngest of these three bedded cherts is the Strelley Pool Chert, a stromatolitic unit that occurs in several of the greenstone belts of the East Pilbara. With time and additional research, the assigned stratigraphic position of these and other stratigraphic units within the Pilbara Supergroup have changed and been rearranged numerous times [ 7 ] [ 8 ] Description [ edit ] The Dresser Formation consists primarily of komatiitic basalt transected by silica -rich veins ; fossiliferous , interbedded chert and barite; and pillow basalt with interbedded chert and diabase. These lithologies are three mappable, member-scale stratigraphic units . The lowermost member, often informally called the North Pole chert , consists of hydrothermally altered, bedded chert, stromatolites, and volcanoclastic sedimentary rocks, with abundant barite. The middle member consists of metamorphosed pillow and massive basalt. The upper member, which lacks barite, consists of unfossiliferous, bedded gray and white chert and local interbeds of volcanoclastic sedimentary rocks.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 9 ] Previously, the unnamed upper member was subdivided into as many as three individual subunits separated by interbedded basalt. However, detailed mapping has shown that these chert subunits all belong to a single member that has been separated by younger, dolerite, and felsic sills at significant period of time after deep burial.

[ 1 ] North Pole chert [ edit ] The thickness and lithology of the North Pole chert, the basal member of the Dresser Formation, vary greatly over short distances. Rapid lateral facies variations and sedimentary thickness changes take place over short distances (50 to 1,000 m (160 to 3,280 ft)), along-strike due to growth faults filled by hydrothermal chert-barite veins. The thickness of the North Pole chert varies from a minimum of 1–2 m (3.3–6.6 ft) to a maximum of 208 m (682 ft). The North Pole chert is the only fossil -bearing unit of the Dresser Formation [ 1 ] [ 4 ] The North Pole chert consists of four main facies . Facies 1 typically forms the base of the North Pole chert and varies from 0 to 20 meters (0 to 66 ft) thick. It consists of mixture of cross-bedded sandstones, massive sandstone, silicified mudstone , and volcaniclastic conglomerate, and breccia . The volcaniclastic conglomerates locally contain gravel -size clasts of bedded jaspilitic chert , coarse crystalline barite, and stromatolitic laminates. These gravels are surrounded by felsic tuffaceous matrix .

[ 1 ] Facies 2, which overlies facies 1, contains widespread stromatolite layers, putative hot spring deposits, and a variety of other distinctive rock types. For example, a widespread layer, up to 1 m (3.3 ft) thick, of rhythmically bedded carbonate-chert, called zebra rock , occurs near the base of facies 2. The bed of zebra rock often grades upward into a 20 cm (7.9 in) thick bed of rippled and cross-laminated carbonate sandstone that exhibits well-defined linear, to bifurcating, ripple crests . This cross-laminated sandstone also contains evaporative aragonite crystal splays. This cross-laminated sandstone is, in turn, overlain by a thick laterally extensive bed of wrinkly laminated microbial mats with domical and coniform stromatolites. A variety of lithologies, including local, channel-shaped beds of cobble conglomerate and edgewise conglomerate, overlie the stromatolite bed. Finally, facies 2 contains thick sections of interlayered gray and white chert. Beds of coarse breccia up to 3 m (9.8 ft) thick and with clasts up to 30 cm (12 in) in diameter, occur locally interbedded with the cherts. Angular to subrounded cobbles and boulders of wrinkly stromatolitic laminates , barite, and bedded chert occur in these breccias. Discontinuous, thin beds of well-rounded, unlaminated white chert cobble conglomerate occur interbedded with the gray and white chert.

[ 1 ] Facies 3, which overlies facies 2, consists largely of centimeter-layered chert. The layered chert consists of white-gray layered chert and hematitic chert or jaspilite. Barite veins locally cut across the layered cherts. The jaspilitic chert is typically laminated and lacks any evidence of being reworked by currents. Drill cores from beneath the zone of surficial weathering demonstrate that some of the gray and white layered chert of this assemblage are the silicified equivalents of laminated carbonate, a mixture of ankerite , siderite , and calcite . The thickness of facies 3 is not published.

[ 1 ] [ 4 ] Facies 4 is a 0–100 m (0–328 ft) thick, fining-up sequence of green volcaniclastic conglomerate, sandstone, and chert that unconformably overlies the lower facies. It consists mainly of clasts of komatiitic basalt and basalt. Facies 4 is preserved in sedimentary wedges that thicken southward against bounding growth faults.

[ 1 ] [ 4 ] Middle basalt member [ edit ] The basaltic rocks of the middle basalt member overlie the deposits of facies 4 of the North Pole chert. A basal layer of pillow basalt directly overlies the North Pole chert throughout the northern part of the North Pole Dome and is absent in the south. A homogeneous, massive, fine-to-medium-grained basalt overlies the pillow basalts with an apparently conformable contact. This homogeneous basalt pinches out against listric growth faults that bound either side of the Dresser Mine. It locally contains large blocks of barite and jaspilitic-bearing sedimentary strata.

[ 1 ] Upper chert member [ edit ] The upper chert member, which is the uppermost member of the Dresser Formation, consists of centimeter-layered white-and-blue to black layered chert. It lacks the heterogeneity of the underlying North Pole chert, remains the same relative thickness along strike, and is not offset by the growth faults that affect the underlying members. The upper chert member is up to 35 m (115 ft) thick. This layered chert lacks any current indicators and is sandwiched between pillow basalts. The upper chert member also has been split apart by younger dolerite and felsic sills .

[ 1 ] Contacts [ edit ] The Dresser Formation lies conformably on the North Star Basalt. In the North Pole Dome region (Panorama greenstone belt) this formation is at least 2 km (1.2 mi) and composed of weakly metamorphosed massive and pillow basalt, komatiitic basalt, basaltic hyaloclastite, gabbro, and dolerite.

[ 10 ] A dense network of large chert-barite-pyrite-epithermal quartz hydrothermal veins that cut through the North Star Basalt immediately underlying the Dresser Formation. These veins extend up to the base of and terminate within facies 1 and 2; to a lesser degree in facies 3; and not in facies 4 of the North Pole chert. The largest veins occupy major, long-lived listric growth faults. The main veins extend as much as 2 km (1.2 mi) into the North Star Basalt beneath the base of the Dresser Formation and form swarms as much as 300 m (980 ft) wide. Typically, these veins are only 1 km (0.62 mi) deep and 2–10 m (6.6–32.8 ft) wide.

[ 1 ] [ 10 ] The Dresser Formation is overlain disconformably by the Mount Ada Basalt. This formation is about 2 km (1.2 mi) thick. Morphologically diverse (spheroids and filamentous) carbonaceous microstructures have been reported from a layer of bedded chert within Mount Ada Basalt. However, they have not been confirmed by additional sampling.

[ 1 ] [ 11 ] Paleobiology [ edit ] As reviewed by Buntin and Noffke (2021) [ 9 ] and VanKranendonk (2019), [ 1 ] the Dresser Formation contains an abundance of well-preserved evidence for the existence of microbial life during the Paleoarchean about 3480 Ma. This evidence consists of biolamites and domical, stratiform, and coniform stromatolites ; microbially induced sedimentary structures (MISS); microfossils; microbial mat fabrics; and biosignatures. These fossils and biosignatures are preserved within hydrothermal dikes , barite mounds, siliciclastic sediments, and siliceous and ferruginous carbonates of the North Pole chert. The close spatial association between stromatolites and biogenic carbon and sulfur isotopic biosignatures suggest the former presence of hyperthermophilic microbes .

[ 2 ] [ 9 ] [ 12 ] Age [ edit ] The estimated depositional age of the Dresser Formation is inferred to be between 3483 and 3479 Ma . It is older than the ~3470 Ma Mount Ada Basalt and younger than the ~3490 Ma North Star Basalt.

[ 1 ] [ 13 ] Syngenetic galena from barite in the Dresser Formation was dated at about ~3490 Ma.

[ 14 ] An interpretation of U–Pb dates of detrital zircons from volcanoclastic sediments of the Dresser Formation concluded that they accumulated between 3481 and 3470 Ma.

[ 4 ] Depositional environment [ edit ] Initially, the Dresser Formation was interpreted as having accumulated in an enclosed, evaporitic marine setting influenced by syndepositional hydrothermal circulation .

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] Later re-evaluations of the Dresser Formation's depositional environments proposed that it accumulated in shallow-water, low-eruptive, caldera lagoon influenced by syndepositional magma -driven, hydrothermal circulation.

[ 17 ] [ 18 ] Both models propose the presence of marine influence during the deposition of the North Pole chert. They both infer that seawater routinely intermixed with hydrothermal fluids within an enclosed body of shallow water, e.g., a lagoon or flooded volcanic caldera, by way of connections with the open ocean.

[ 15 ] [ 19 ] [ 20 ] The Dresser Formation stromatolites apparently formed predominantly within these hydrothermally influenced shallow-marine lagoonal conditions, with geological and geochemical evidence indicating that some also formed in close proximity to subaerial (land-based) hot springs.

[ 2 ] [ 9 ] [ 19 ] [ 21 ] [ 22 ] [ 20 ] [ 23 ] [ 24 ] [ 25 ] [ 26 ] Metamorphism [ edit ] The Dresser Formation is weakly metamorphosed having been subjected only to peak temperatures in the greenschist facies range (~150–350 °C).

[ 18 ] At first, regional mapping studies suggested that this low metamorphic grade was the result of regional prehnite – pumpellyite to greenschist metamorphism caused by the widespread emplacement of granitic rocks such as the intrusive North Pole Monzogranite ~3300 Ma.

[ 5 ] [ 4 ] More recently, it was proposed that the prehnite–pumpellyite to greenschist metamorphism resulted from repeated episodes of hydrothermal circulation within volcanic packages. These volcanic packages were bound above and below by silicified sediments that acted as aquicludes and confined fluid circulation to within the volcanic packages.

[ 18 ] The effects of hydrothermal alteration in the Dresser Formation and other stratigraphic units throughout the Warrawoona Group and the local preservation of low-temperature hydrothermal products such as hydrothermal kaolinite are well-documented.

[ 8 ] [ 4 ] An amphibolite-facies metamorphic aureole surrounds the North Pole Monzogranite in the core of the dome.

[ 4 ] [ 3 ] See also [ edit ] Geology of Australia References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o Van Kranendonk, M.J., Djokic, T., Poole, G., Tadbiri, S., Steller, L. and Baumgartner, R., 2019.

Depositional setting of the fossiliferous, c. 3480 Ma Dresser Formation, Pilbara Craton: A review.

In Van Kranendonk, M.J., Bennett, V.C., and Hoffmann, J.E., ed., pp. 985-100, Earth's Oldest Rocks , 2nd ed. Amsterdam, Netherlands, Elsevier. 1112 pp.

^ a b c d e Noffke, N., Christian, D., Wacey, D. and Hazen, R.M., 2013.

Microbially induced sedimentary structures recording an ancient ecosystem in the ca. 3.48 billion-year-old Dresser Formation, Pilbara, Western Australia .

Astrobiology , 13(12), pp.1103-1124.

^ a b c d e Van Kranendonk, M. J., 2000.

Geology of the North Shaw 1:100 000 sheet 275.

East Perth, Western Australia, Geological Survey of Western Australia. scale 1:100,000, one sheet and explanatory notes.

^ a b c d e f g h i Van Kranendonk, M.J., Philippot, P., Lepot, K., Bodorkos, S. and Pirajno, F., 2008.

Geological setting of Earth's oldest fossils in the ca. 3.5 Ga Dresser formation, Pilbara Craton, Western Australia.

Precambrian Research , 167(1-2), pp.93-124.

^ a b Hickman, A.H., 1983.

Geology of the Pilbara Block and its environs.

Western Australia Geological Survey Bulletin no. 127, 268p ^ Hickman, A.H., 1990.

Geology of the Pilbara craton.

In: Ho, S.E., Glover, J.E., Myers, J. S., and Muhling, J. R., eds., pp. 1-13, Third International Archaean Symposium, Excursion Guidebook. Publication no. 21 . Australia, University of Western Australia, Geology Department and University Extension. 113 pp.

^ Kranendonk, M.J.V., Hickman, A.H., Smithies, R.H., Nelson, D.R. and Pike, G., 2002.

Geology and tectonicevolution of the Archean North Pilbara terrain, Pilbara Craton, Western Australia.

Economic Geology . 97(4), pp. 695-732.

^ a b VanKranendonk, M.J. and Pirajno, F., 2004.

Geochemistry of metabasalts and hydrothermal alteration zones associated with c. 3.45 Ga chert and barite deposits: implications for the geological setting of the Warrawoona Group, Pilbara Craton, Australia .

Geochemistry: Exploration, Environment, Analysis . 4(3), pp.253-278.

^ a b c d Buntin, R.C.C., and Noffke, N., 2021.

Dresser Formation, Traces of Life.

In Gargaud, M., and others, eds., 8 pp., Encyclopedia of Astrobiology.

Berlin, Heidelberg, Germany, Springer. 1853 pp., 978-3-642-27833-4 ^ a b Caruso, S., Van Kranendonk, M.J., Baumgartner, R.J., Fiorentini, M.L. and Forster, M.A., 2021. "The role of magmatic fluids in the~ 3.48 Ga Dresser Caldera, Pilbara Craton: New insights from the geochemical investigation of hydrothermal alteration". "Precambrian Research", 362, no.106299.

^ Sugitani, K., 2019.

Early Archean (Pre-3.0 Ga) cellularly preserved microfossils and microfossil-like structures from the Pilbara Craton, Western Australia—a review . In Van Kranendonk, M., Bennett, V., and Hoffmann, E., eds., pp. 1007–1028, Earth's Oldest Rocks.

Amsterdam, Netherlands, Elsevier Science. 1,112 pp. 978-0-444-639028 ^ Duda J-P., Thiel V, Bauersachs, T., Mißbach, H., Reinhardt, M., Schäfer, N., Van Kranendonk, M.J., and Reitner, J., 2018.

Ideas and perspectives: hydrothermally driven redistribution and sequestration of early Archaean Biomass – the "hydrothermal pump hypothesis".

Biogeosciences.

15, pp. 1535–1548.

^ Caruso, S., Van Kranendonk, M.J., Baumgartner, R.J., Fiorentini, M.L. and Forster, M.A., 2021.

The role of magmatic fluids in the ~3.48 Ga Dresser Caldera, Pilbara Craton: New insights from the geochemical investigation of hydrothermal alteration .

Precambrian Research , 362, no. 106299. 19 pp.

^ Thopre, R.I., Hickman, A.H., Davis, D.W., Mortensen, J.K., and Trendall, A.F., 1992.

Constraints to models for Archaean lead evolution from precise U–Pb geochronology from the Marble Bar region, Pilbara Craton, Western Australia.

In Glover, J.E., and Ho, S.E., eds., pp. 395–408.

The Archaean: Terrains, processes and metallogeny. The University of Western Australia, Geology Department and University Extension , Publication no. 22.

^ a b Dunlop, J.S.R., Milne, V.A., Groves, D.I., and Muir, M.D., 1978.

A new microfossil assemblage from the Archaean of Western Australia .

Nature.

274(5672), pp. 676-678.

^ Walter, M.R., Buick, R. and Dunlop, J.S.R., 1980.

Stromatolites 3,400–3,500 Myr old from the North pole area, Western Australia .

Nature , 284(5755), pp. 443-445.

^ Nijman, W. and Valkering, M.E., 1998.

Growth fault control of Early Archaean cherts, barite mounds and chert-barite veins, North Pole Dome, Eastern Pilbara, Western Australia .

Precambrian Research , 88(1-4), pp. 25-52.

^ a b c Van Kranendonk, M.J., 2006.

Volcanic degassing, hydrothermal circulation and the flourishing of early life on Earth: A review of the evidence from c. 3490-3240 Ma rocks of the Pilbara Supergroup, Pilbara Craton, Western Australia .

Earth-Science Reviews , 74(3-4), pp. 197-240.

^ a b Van Kranendonk, M.J., Webb, G.E. and Kamber, B.S., 2003.

Geological and trace element evidence for a marine sedimentary environment of deposition and biogenicity of 3.45 Ga stromatolitic carbonates in the Pilbara Craton, and support for a reducing Archaean ocean .

Geobiology , 1(2), pp. 91-108.

^ a b Djokic, T.; Bolhar, R.; Brengman, L. A.; Havig, J. R.; Van Kranendonk, M. J. (2024). "Trace elements (REE + Y) reveal marine, subaerial, and hydrothermal controls on an early Archean habitat for life: The 3.48 Ga volcanic-caldera system of the dresser formation, Pilbara Craton".

Chemical Geology .

644 : 121865.

doi : 10.1016/j.chemgeo.2023.121865 .

ISSN 0009-2541 .

^ Djokic, Tara; Van Kranendonk, Martin J.; Campbell, Kathleen A.; Walter, Malcolm R.; Ward, Colin R. (2017).

"Earliest signs of life on land preserved in ca. 3.5 Ga hot spring deposits" .

Nature Communications .

8 (1): 15263.

Bibcode : 2017NatCo...815263D .

doi : 10.1038/ncomms15263 .

ISSN 2041-1723 .

PMC 5436104 .

PMID 28486437 .

^ Djokic, Tara; Van Kranendonk, Martin J.; Campbell, Kathleen A.; Havig, Jeff R.; Walter, Malcolm R.; Guido, Diego M. (2021).

"A Reconstructed Subaerial Hot Spring Field in the ∼3.5 Billion-Year-Old Dresser Formation, North Pole Dome, Pilbara Craton, Western Australia" .

Astrobiology .

21 (1): 1– 38.

Bibcode : 2021AsBio..21....1D .

doi : 10.1089/ast.2019.2072 .

ISSN 1531-1074 .

PMID 33270491 .

^ Nijman, Wouter; de Vries, Sjoukje T.; Kloppenburg, Armelle (2023).

"Growth faults and avalanches: Reconstructing Paleoarchean basins in the Pilbara and Kaapvaal cratons" .

Precambrian Research .

398 : 107121.

Bibcode : 2023PreR..39807121N .

doi : 10.1016/j.precamres.2023.107121 .

ISSN 0301-9268 .

^ Nijman, Wouter; Kloppenburg, Armelle; de Vries, Sjoukje T. (2017).

"Archaean basin margin geology and crustal evolution: an East Pilbara traverse" .

Journal of the Geological Society .

174 (6): 1090– 1112.

Bibcode : 2017JGSoc.174.1090N .

doi : 10.1144/jgs2016-127 .

hdl : 1874/357294 .

ISSN 0016-7649 .

^ Baumgartner, Raphael J.; Van Kranendonk, Martin J.; Caruso, Stefano; Campbell, Kathleen A.; Dobson, Michaela J.; Teece, Bronwyn L.; Verrall, Michael; Homann, Martin; Lalonde, Stefan; Visscher, Pieter T. (2024).

"Pyritic stromatolites from the Paleoarchean Dresser Formation, Pilbara Craton: Resolving biogenicity and hydrothermally influenced ecosystem dynamics" .

Geobiology .

22 (4): e12610.

Bibcode : 2024Gbio...22E2610B .

doi : 10.1111/gbi.12610 .

ISSN 1472-4677 .

PMID 38979799 .

^ Harris, A. C.; White, N. C.; McPhie, J.; Bull, S. W.; Line, M. A.; Skrzeczynski, R.; Mernagh, T. P.; Tosdal, R. M. (2009).

"Early Archean Hot Springs above Epithermal Veins, North Pole, Western Australia: New Insights from Fluid Inclusion Microanalysis" .

Economic Geology .

104 (6): 793– 814.

Bibcode : 2009EcGeo.104..793H .

doi : 10.2113/gsecongeo.104.6.793 .

ISSN 0361-0128 .

v t e Biology Introduction ( Genetics , Evolution ) Outline History Timeline Index Biology Overview Science Life Properties ( Adaptation , Energy processing , Growth , Order , Regulation , Reproduction ( Self-replication ), Response to environment ) Hierarchy of life ( Atom > Molecule > Organelle > Cell > Tissue > Organ > Organ system > Organism > Population > Community > Ecosystem > Biosphere ) Reductionistic Emergent property Mechanistic Scientific method Taxonomic rank Theory Law Peer review Biology journals Common name Chemical basis Atoms Amino acids Carbohydrates Chemical bond Chemical element Lipids Matter Quantum Molecules Monomer Nucleic acids Organic compounds pH Polymer Proteins Water Cells ATP Cell cycle Cell theory Cell signaling Cellular respiration Energy transformation Enzyme Eukaryote Fermentation Metabolism Meiosis Mitosis Photosynthesis Prokaryote Genetics DNA Epigenetics Evolutionary developmental biology Gene expression Gene regulation Genomes Mendelian inheritance Post-transcriptional modification Evolution Adaptation Earliest known life forms Function Genetic drift Gene flow History of life Macroevolution Microevolution Mutation Natural selection Phylogenetics Speciation Taxonomy Diversity Archaea Bacteria Eukaryote Alga Animal Fungus Plant Protist Virus Plant form and function Epidermis (botany) Flower Ground tissue Leaf Phloem Plant stem Root Shoot Vascular plant Vascular tissue Xylem Animal form and function Breathing Circulatory system Endocrine system Digestive system Homeostasis Immune system Internal environment Muscular system Nervous system Reproductive system Respiratory system Ecology Biogeochemical cycle Biological interaction Biomass Biomes Biosphere Climate Climate change Community Conservation Ecosystem Habitat niche Microbiome Population dynamics Resources Research methods Laboratory techniques Genetic engineering Transformation Gel electrophoresis Chromatography Centrifugation Cell culture DNA sequencing DNA microarray Green fluorescent protein vector Enzyme assay Protein purification Western blot Northern blot Southern blot Restriction enzyme Polymerase chain reaction Two-hybrid screening in vivo in vitro in silico Field techniques Belt transect mark and recapture species discovery curve Branches Abiogenesis Aerobiology Agronomy Agrostology Anatomy Anthropogeny Anthropology Astrobiology Bacteriology Biochemistry Biogeography Biogeology Bioinformatics Biological engineering Biomathematics Biomechanics Biophysics Biosemiotics Biostatistics Biotechnology Botany Cell biology Cellular microbiology Chemical biology Chronobiology Cognitive biology Computational biology Conservation biology Cryobiology Cytogenetics Dendrology Developmental biology Ecological genetics Ecology Embryology Epidemiology Epigenetics Evolutionary biology Freshwater biology Generative biology Genetics Genomics Geobiology Gerontology Herpetology Histology Human biology Ichthyology Immunology Lipidology Mammalogy Marine biology Microbiology Molecular biology Mycology Neontology Neuroscience Nutrition Ornithology Osteology Paleontology Parasitology Pathology Pharmacology Photobiology Phycology Phylogenetics Physiology Pomology Primatology Proteomics Protistology Quantum biology Relational biology Reproductive biology Sociobiology Structural biology Synthetic biology Systematics Systems biology Taxonomy Teratology Toxicology Virology Virophysics Welfare biology Xenobiology Zoology Glossaries Biology Botanical terms Ecological terms Plant morphology terms Biology portal Category Commons WikiProject v t e Origin of life History of research Panspermia (5th century BC) Spontaneous generation (4th century BC) Primordial soup (19th century) Prebiotic synthesis Pseudo-panspermia Miller–Urey experiment Formamide-based prebiotic chemistry Alternative abiogenesis scenarios Protocells GADV-protein world Clay hypothesis Iron–sulfur world Primordial sandwich PAH world Peptide-RNA world Quasispecies model RNA world Earliest organisms Earliest known life forms Last universal common ancestor (LUCA) Research Astrobiology Paleobiology v t e Evolutionary biology Introduction Outline Timeline of evolution History of life Index Evolution Abiogenesis Adaptation Adaptive radiation Altruism Cheating Reciprocal Baldwin effect Cladistics Coevolution Mutualism Common descent Convergence Divergence Earliest known life forms Evidence of evolution Evolutionary arms race Evolutionary pressure Exaptation Extinction Event Homology Last universal common ancestor Macroevolution Microevolution Mismatch Non-adaptive radiation Origin of life Panspermia Parallel evolution Signalling theory Handicap principle Speciation Species Species complex Taxonomy Unit of selection Gene-centered view of evolution Population genetics Artificial selection Biodiversity Evolutionarily stable strategy Fisher's principle Fitness Inclusive Gene flow Genetic drift Kin selection Inbreeding avoidance Kin recognition Parental investment Parent–offspring conflict Mutation Population Natural selection Sexual dimorphism Sexual selection Flowering plants Fungi Mate choice Social selection Trivers–Willard hypothesis Variation Development Canalisation Evolutionary developmental biology Genetic assimilation Inversion Modularity Phenotypic plasticity Of taxa Bacteria Birds origin Brachiopods Molluscs Cephalopods Dinosaurs Fish Fungi Insects butterflies Life Mammals cats canids wolves dogs hyenas dolphins and whales horses Kangaroos primates humans lemurs sea cows Plants pollinator-mediated Reptiles Spiders Tetrapods Viruses Of organs Cell DNA Flagella Eukaryotes symbiogenesis chromosome endomembrane system mitochondria nucleus plastids In animals eye hair auditory ossicle nervous system brain Of processes Aging Death Programmed cell death Avian flight Biological complexity Cooperation Color vision in primates Emotion Empathy Ethics Eusociality Immune system Metabolism Monogamy Morality Mosaic evolution Multicellularity Sexual reproduction Gamete differentiation/sexes Life cycles/nuclear phases Mating types Meiosis Sex-determination Snake venom Tempo and modes Gradualism / Punctuated equilibrium / Saltationism Micromutation / Macromutation Uniformitarianism / Catastrophism Speciation Allopatric Anagenesis Catagenesis Cladogenesis Cospeciation Ecological Hybrid Non-ecological Parapatric Peripatric Reinforcement Sympatric History Renaissance and Enlightenment Transmutation of species David Hume Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion Charles Darwin On the Origin of Species History of paleontology Transitional fossil Blending inheritance Mendelian inheritance The eclipse of Darwinism Neo-Darwinism Modern synthesis History of molecular evolution Extended evolutionary synthesis Philosophy Darwinism Alternatives Catastrophism Lamarckism Orthogenesis Mutationism Saltationism Structuralism Spandrel Theistic Vitalism Teleology in biology Related Biogeography Ecological genetics Evolutionary medicine Group selection Cultural evolution Cultural group selection Dual inheritance theory Hologenome theory of evolution Missing heritability problem Molecular evolution Astrobiology Phylogenetics Tree Polymorphism Protocell Systematics Transgenerational epigenetic inheritance Category Portal Portals : Biology Evolutionary biology Chemistry Geology Paleontology Science Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Dresser_Formation&oldid=1296762660 " Categories : Geology of Western Australia Pilbara Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with excerpts This page was last edited on 22 June 2025, at 03:15 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Dresser Formation 1 language Add topic

