Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life Toggle Life subsection 1.1 Early life 1.2 Involvement in Monothelite controversy 1.3 Trial and exile 2 Legacy 3 Theology 4 Reception 5 Writings 6 References 7 Further reading 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Maximus the Confessor 46 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Български Català Čeština Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული Kiswahili Latina Latviešu Magyar Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Occitan Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська اردو 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Christian monk, theologian, scholar and saint (c. 580 - 662) Saint Maximus the Confessor Athonite Fresco Icon of Saint Maximos the Confessor Confessor and Theologian Born c.

580 Hisfiyya , Syria Prima , Byzantine Empire [ 1 ] or Constantinople , Byzantine Empire Died ( 662-08-13 ) 13 August 662 Tsageri Venerated in Catholic Church Eastern Orthodox Church Anglican Communion Lutheranism Canonized Pre-Congregation Feast 13 August ( Western Christianity ) 21 January ( Byzantine Christianity ) Theology career Notable work Mystagogy Theological work Tradition or movement Apophatic theology Main interests Theological anthropology , asceticism Notable ideas Dyophysitism Part of a series on the Eastern Orthodox Church Mosaic of Christ Pantocrator , Hagia Sophia Overview Structure Theology ( History of theology ) Liturgy Church history Holy Mysteries View of Salvation View of Mary View of icons Background Crucifixion / Resurrection / Ascension of Jesus Christianity Christian Church Apostolic succession Four Marks of the Church Orthodoxy Organization Autonomy Autocephaly Patriarchate Ecumenical Patriarch Episcopal polity Canon law Clergy Bishops Priests Deacons Monasticism Degrees Bratstvo Autocephalous jurisdictions Autocephalous Churches who are officially part of the communion: Constantinople Alexandria Antioch Jerusalem Russia Serbia Romania Bulgaria Georgia Cyprus Greece Poland Albania Czech Lands and Slovakia Autocephaly recognized by some autocephalous Churches de jure : America North Macedonia Autocephaly and canonicity recognized by Constantinople and 3 other autocephalous Churches: Ukraine (OCU) Spiritual independence recognized by Georgian Orthodox Church: Ukraine (UOC) Autonomous jurisdictions Sinai (JP) Finland (EP) Estonia (EP) Japan (MP) China (MP) Americas (RP) Bessarabia (RP) Moldova (MP) Semi-Autonomous: Crete (EP) Estonia (MP) ROCOR (MP) Episcopal assemblies Australia, New Zealand, and Oceania Austria Belgium, Holland, and Luxembourg Canada France Germany Great Britain and Ireland Italy and Malta Latin America Scandinavia Spain and Portugal Switzerland and Liechtenstein United States of America Noncanonical jurisdictions Old Believers Spiritual Christianity True Orthodoxy Catacomb Church Old Calendarists American Orthodox Catholic Church American World Patriarchs National churches: Abkhazia Belarus Italy Latvia Montenegro Turkey UOC–KP Evangelical Orthodox Ecumenical councils First Seven Ecumenical Councils : Nicaea I Constantinople I Ephesus Chalcedon Constantinople II Constantinople III Nicaea II Other possible ecumenical councils: Constantinople IV Constantinople V Other important councils: Quinisext Council Jassy Moscow Jerusalem Constantinople (1872) History Church Fathers Pentarchy Byzantine Empire Christianization of Georgia Christianization of Bulgaria Christianization of Kievan Rus' Great Schism Russia Ottoman Empire North America Moscow–Constantinople schism 15th–16th c.

1996 2018 Theology History of Eastern Orthodox theology ( 20th century (Neo-Palamism) ) Apophaticism Chrismation Contemplative prayer Essence vs. Energies Hesychasm Holy Trinity Hypostatic union Icons Metousiosis Mystical theology Nicene Creed Nepsis Oikonomia vs Akribeia Ousia Palamism Philokalia Phronema Sin Theosis Theotokos Differences from the Catholic Church Opposition to the Filioque Opposition to papal supremacy Liturgy and worship Divine Liturgy Divine Services Akathist Apolytikion Artos Ectenia Euchologion Holy Water Iconostasis Jesus Prayer Aprakos Kontakion Liturgical entrances Liturgical fans Lity Memorial service Memory Eternal Omophorion Eastern Orthodox bowing Eastern Orthodox marriage Praxis Paraklesis Paschal greeting Paschal Homily Paschal troparion Prayer rope Prosphora Russian bell ringing Semantron Sign of the cross Sticheron Troparion Vestments Use of incense Liturgical calendar Paschal cycle 12 Great Feasts Other feasts: Feast of Orthodoxy Intercession of the Theotokos The four fasting periods: Nativity Fast Great Lent Apostles' Fast Dormition Fast Major figures Saints ( Russian (until 15th century) , Russian (post-15th century) , Serbian , American ) Justin Martyr Athanasius of Alexandria Ephraim the Syrian Basil of Caesarea Cyril of Jerusalem Gregory of Nazianzus Gregory of Nyssa John Chrysostom Cyril of Alexandria John Climacus Maximus the Confessor John of Damascus Theodore the Studite Kassia Cyril and Methodius Photius I of Constantinople Vladimir the Great Sava I of Serbia Gregory Palamas Innocent of Alaska Other topics Architecture Folk Encyclical of the Eastern Patriarchs Cross Saint titles Statistics by country v t e Maximus the Confessor ( Greek : Μάξιμος ὁ Ὁμολογητής , romanized : Maximos ho Homologētēs ), also spelled Maximos , [ 2 ] otherwise known as Maximus the Theologian and Maximus of Constantinople ( c.

580 – 13 August 662), was a Christian monk , theologian , and scholar.

In his early life, Maximus was a civil servant, and an aide to the Byzantine Emperor Heraclius . He gave up this life in the political sphere to enter the monastic life. Maximus had studied diverse schools of philosophy, and certainly what was common for his time, the Platonic dialogues, the works of Aristotle, and numerous later Platonic commentators on Aristotle and Plato, like Plotinus , Porphyry , Iamblichus , and Proclus . When one of his friends began espousing the Christological position known as Monothelitism , Maximus was drawn into the controversy, in which he supported an interpretation of the Chalcedonian formula on the basis of which it was asserted that Jesus had both a human and a divine will . Maximus is venerated in both the Catholic and Eastern Orthodox Churches. He was eventually persecuted for his Christological positions; following a trial, his tongue and right hand were mutilated.

He was then exiled and died on 13 August 662, in Tsageri in present-day Georgia . However, his theology was upheld by the Third Council of Constantinople and he was venerated as a saint soon after his death. His title of " Confessor " means that he suffered for the Christian faith, but was not directly martyred . His feast day is 13 August in the Western Church and 21 January in the Byzantine Christianity .

[ 3 ] Life [ edit ] Early life [ edit ] Very little is known about the details of Maximus' life prior to his involvement in the theological and political conflicts of the Monothelite controversy.

[ 4 ] Numerous Maximian scholars call substantial portions of the Maronite biography into question, including Maximus' birth in Palestine, which was a common seventh century trope to discredit an opponent. Moreover, the exceptional education Maximus evidently received could not have been had in any other part of the Byzantine Empire during that time except for Constantinople, and possibly Caesarea and Alexandria. It is also very unlikely that anyone of low social birth, as the Maronite biography describes Maximus, could have ascended by the age of thirty to be the Protoasekretis of the Emperor Heraclius, one of the most powerful positions in the Empire. It is more likely that Maximus was born of an aristocratic family and received an unparalleled education in philosophy, mathematics, astronomy, etc. It is true, however, that Maximus did not study rhetoric as he himself notes in the prologue to his Earlier Ambigua to John, [ 5 ] to which his lack of high stylistic by Byzantine standards attests. Nevertheless, for reasons not explained in the few autobiographical details to be gleaned from his texts, Maximus left public life and took monastic vows at the monastery of Philippicus in Chrysopolis , a city across the Bosporus from Constantinople. Maximus was elevated to the position of abbot of the monastery.

[ 6 ] When the Persians conquered Anatolia , Maximus was forced to flee to a monastery near Carthage . It was there that he came under the tutelage of Saint Sophronius , and began studying in detail with him the Christological writings of Gregory of Nazianzus and Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite . According to I P Sheldon Williams his achievement was to set these doctrines into a framework of Aristotelian logic, which both suited the temper of the times and made them less liable to misinterpretation.

[ 7 ] Maximus continued his career as a theological and spiritual writer during his lengthy stay in Carthage.

[ 8 ] Maximus was also held in high esteem by the exarch Gregory and the eparch George .

[ 9 ] Involvement in Monothelite controversy [ edit ] A silver hexagramma showing Constans II with his son. Constans II supported Monothelitism , and had Maximus exiled for his refusal to agree to Monothelite teachings.

While Maximus was in Carthage, a controversy broke out regarding how to understand the interaction between the human and divine natures within the person of Jesus . This Christological debate was the latest development in disagreements that began following the First Council of Nicaea in 325, and were intensified following the Council of Chalcedon in 451. The Monothelite position was developed as a compromise between the dyophysitists and the miaphysists , who believed dyophysitism is conceptually indistinguishable from Nestorianism . The Monothelites adhered to the Chalcedonian definition of the hypostatic union : that two natures, one divine and one human, were united in the person of Christ. However, they went on to say that Christ had only a divine will and no human will (Monothelite is derived from the Greek for "one will").

Mosaic of Saint Maximos from the Nea Moni of Chios The Monothelite position was promulgated by Patriarch Sergius I of Constantinople and by Maximus' friend and successor as the Abbot of Chrysopolis, Pyrrhus .

[ 10 ] Following the death of Sergius in 638, Pyrrhus succeeded him as Patriarch, but was shortly deposed owing to political circumstances. During Pyrrhus' exile from Constantinople, Maximus and the deposed Patriarch held a public debate on the issue of Monothelitism. In the debate, which was held in the presence of many North African bishops, Maximus took the position that Jesus possessed both a human and a divine will. The result of the debate was that Pyrrhus admitted the error of the Monothelite position, and Maximus accompanied him to Rome in 645.

[ 11 ] Maximus may have remained in Rome at San Saba , [ 12 ] as he was present when the newly elected Pope Martin I convened the Lateran Council of 649 at the Lateran Basilica in Rome.

[ 13 ] The 105 bishops present condemned Monothelitism in the official acts of the synod, which some believe may have been written by Maximus.

[ 14 ] It was in Rome that Pope Martin and Maximus were arrested in 653 under orders from Constans II , who supported the Monothelite doctrine. Pope Martin was condemned without a trial, and died before he could be sent to the Imperial Capital.

[ 15 ] Trial and exile [ edit ] Maximus' refusal to accept Monothelitism caused him to be brought to the imperial capital of Constantinople to be tried as a heretic in 658. In Constantinople, Monothelitism had gained the favor of both the Emperor and the Patriarch of Constantinople. Maximus stood behind the Dyothelite position and was sent back into exile for four more years. During his trial he was accused of aiding the Muslim conquests in Egypt and North Africa , which he rejected as slander.

[ 16 ] [ 17 ] Constans II (left) having Maximus beaten for refusing to accept Monothelitism . Miniature from the 12th century Manasses Chronicle .

In 662, Maximus was placed on trial once more, and was once more convicted of heresy. Following the trial Maximus was tortured, having his tongue cut out, so he could no longer speak his rebellion, and his right hand cut off, so that he could no longer write letters.

[ 18 ] Maximus was then exiled to the Lazica or Colchis region of modern-day Georgia and was cast in the fortress of Schemarum, perhaps Muris-Tsikhe near the modern town of Tsageri .

[ 19 ] He died soon thereafter, on 13 August 662.

[ 20 ] [ 21 ] The events of the trials of Maximus were recorded by Anastasius Bibliothecarius .

[ 22 ] Legacy [ edit ] Maximus the Confessor and His Miracles . An early 17th-century Stroganov school icon from Solvychegodsk .

Along with Pope Martin I, Maximus was vindicated by the Third Council of Constantinople (the Sixth Ecumenical Council , 680–681), which declared that Christ possessed both a human and a divine will. With this declaration Monothelitism became heresy, and Maximus was posthumously declared innocent.

[ 23 ] Maximus is among those Christians who were venerated as saints shortly after their deaths. The vindication of Maximus' theological position made him extremely popular within a generation after his death, and his cause was aided by the accounts of miracles at his tomb.

[ 24 ] Maximus is one of the last men to be recognized by both the Orthodox and Catholic Churches as a Father of the Church. In the encyclical Spe Salvi (2007), Pope Benedict XVI called Maximus 'the great Greek doctor of the Church', although it is not clear if the Pontiff intended to nominate Maximus 'Doctor of the Church' or to say that he already was one.

[ 25 ] Theology [ edit ] Part of a series on Neoplatonism Reconstructed bust believed to represent Plotinus, the founder of Neoplatonism Concepts Emanationism Hypostasis Porphyrian tree Demiurge Anima mundi Henology Henosis Theurgy Okhema Kenoma Allegorical interpretations of Plato Plato's unwritten doctrines Works Chaldean Oracles Enneads Isagoge On the Cave of the Nymphs On the Mysteries Elements of Theology De Coelesti Hierarchia Commentarii in Somnium Scipionis The Consolation of Philosophy Theology of Aristotle Book of Causes De divisione naturae People Plotinus ( students ) Porphyry Iamblichus Julian the Apostate Syrianus Proclus Ammonius Hermiae Damascius Simplicius of Cilicia Olympiodorus the Younger Asclepius of Tralles Pseudo-Dionysius Martianus Capella Macrobius Boethius Maximus the Confessor Al-Kindi Johannes Scotus Eriugena Related topics Platonic Academy Platonism Middle Platonism Neopythagoreanism Commentaries on Plato Commentaries on Aristotle Neoplatonism and Christianity / Gnosticism Platonism in Islamic philosophy Isma'ilism Druze Kabbalah School of Chartres Platonism in the Renaissance Cambridge Platonists Philosophy portal v t e As a student of Pseudo-Dionysius , Maximus was one of many Christian theologians who preserved and interpreted the earlier Neo-Platonic philosophy, including the thought of such figures as Plotinus and Proclus . Maximus' work on Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite was continued by John Scotus Eriugena at the request of Charles the Bald .

[ 26 ] The Platonic influence on Maximus' thought can be seen most clearly in his theological anthropology . Here, Maximus adopted the Platonic model of exitus-reditus (exit and return), teaching that humanity was made in the image of God , and the purpose of salvation is to restore us to unity with God.

[ 27 ] This emphasis on divinization or theosis helped secure Maximus' place in Eastern theology, as these concepts have always held an important place in Eastern Christianity.

[ 28 ] Christologically Maximus insisted on a strict dyophysitism , which can be seen as a corollary of the emphasis on theosis . In terms of salvation, humanity is intended to be fully united with God. This is possible for Maximus because God was first fully united with humanity in the incarnation.

[ 26 ] If Christ did not become fully human (if, for example, he only had a divine and not a human will), then salvation was no longer possible, as humanity could not become fully divine.

[ 29 ] Furthermore, in his works Maximus the Confessor argued the unconditionality of the divine incarnation.

[ 30 ] Regarding salvation, Maximus, like Origen and St. Gregory of Nyssa , has been described as a proponent of apocatastasis or universal reconciliation , the idea that all rational souls will eventually be redeemed.

[ 31 ] While this claim has been disputed, [ 32 ] others have argued that Maximus shared this belief in universal reconciliation with his most spiritually mature students.

[ 33 ] Reception [ edit ] In Eastern Christianity , Maximus has always been influential.

[ 34 ] A number of his works are included in the Greek Philokalia , a collection of some of the most influential Eastern Orthodox Christian writers.

[ 34 ] Writings [ edit ] Ambigua ad Iohannem ("Difficult Passages Addressed to John") [ 35 ] Ambigua ad Thomam ("Difficult Passages Addressed to Thomas") [ 35 ] Capita XV ("Fifteen Chapters") [ 36 ] Capita de caritate ("Chapters on Charity") [ 35 ] Capita theologica et oeconomica (Chapters on Theology and the Economy) Computus ecclesiasticus ("Ecclesiastical Computation") [ 37 ] Disputatio cum Pyrrho ("Dispute with Pyrrhus") [ 35 ] Epistulae I–XLV (" Epistles 1–45") [ 35 ] Expositio orationis dominicae ("Commentary on the Lord's Prayer") Expositio in Psalmum LIX ("Commentary on Psalm 59") [ 35 ] Liber Asceticus ("On the Ascetic Life") [ 35 ] Mystagogia ("Mystagogy") [ 35 ] Maximi Epistola ad Anastasium monachum discipulum ("Letter of Maximus to Anastasius the Monk and Disciple") [ 36 ] Opuscula theologica et polemica ("Small Theological and Polemical Works") [ 36 ] Quaestiones et dubia ("Questions and Doubtful Passages") [ 35 ] Quaestiones ad Thalassium ("Questions Addressed to Thalassius") [ 35 ] Questiones ad Theopemptum ("Questions Addressed to Theopemptus") [ 36 ] Testimonia et syllogismi ("Testimonies and Syllogisms") [ 36 ] Attributed texts Scholia – commentary on the earlier writings of Pseudo-Dionysius. The original edition in Latin of Balthasar Corderius (Antwerp 1634) attributes all of the Scholia to Maximus, but the authorship has been questioned with Hans Urs von Balthasar (1940, 1961) attributing some of the Scholia to John of Scythopolis .

[ 38 ] Life of the Virgin – earliest complete biography of Mary, the mother of Jesus.

[ 39 ] This is an attributed work and now believed not to be by Maximus the Confessor. Jankowiak and Booth argue that "none of Maximus' characteristic preoccupations appear in the Life , and in turn none of the Life' s central themes appear in the fleeting Marian reflections contained within his genuine corpus". They also write that there is no Greek manuscript witnessing the text, no evidence that any key thinkers who draw on Maximus were aware of the Life' s existence and that no record of the Life as a work exists prior to the second half of the tenth century.

[ 40 ] Collections Maximus Confessor: Selected Writings (Classics of Western Spirituality) . Ed. George C. Berthold. Paulist Press, 1985.

ISBN 0-8091-2659-1 .

On the Cosmic Mystery of Jesus Christ: Selected Writings from St. Maximus the Confessor (St. Vladimir's Seminary Press "Popular Patristics" Series) . Ed. & Trans Paul M. Blowers, Robert Louis Wilken. St. Vladimir's Seminary Press, 2004.

ISBN 0-88141-249-X .

St. Maximus the Confessor: The Ascetic Life, The Four Centuries on Charity (Ancient Christian Writers) . Ed. Polycarp Sherwood. Paulist Press, 1955.

ISBN 0-8091-0258-7 .

Maximus the Confessor (The Early Church Fathers) Intro. & Trans. Andrew Louth. Routledge, 1996.

ISBN 0-415-11846-8 Maximus the Confessor and his Companions (Documents from Exile) (Oxford Early Christian Texts) . Ed. and Trans. Pauline Allen, Bronwen Neil. Oxford University Press, 2004.

ISBN 0-19-829991-5 .

On Difficulties in the Church Fathers: The Ambigua: Volume I, Maximos the Confessor . Ed. and Trans. Nicholas Constas. London: Harvard University Press, 2014.

ISBN 978-0-674-72666-6 .

On Difficulties in the Church Fathers: The Ambigua: Volume II, Maximos the Confessor . Ed. and Trans. Nicholas Constas. London: Harvard University Press, 2014.

ISBN 978-0-674-73083-0 .

The Philokalia: The Complete Text compiled by St Nikodimos of the Holy Mountain and St Makarios of Corinth: Volume II . Ed. and Trans. G.E.H. Palmer, Philip Sherrard, Kallistos Ware. London: Faber and Faber, 1981.

ISBN 978-0-571-15466-1 .

References [ edit ] ^ Allen, Pauline; Neil, Bronwen (2015).

The Oxford Handbook of Maximus the Confessor . Oxford University Press. p. 20.

ISBN 978-0-19-967383-4 .

^ Palmer, G.E.H.; Warr, P.S.K. (1981).

The Philokalia Volume II . Faber and Faber. p. 48.

ISBN 0-571-15466-2 .

^ Petruzzello, Melissa (2023).

"St. Maximus the Confessor" .

Britannica . Encyclopaedia Britannica . Retrieved 29 June 2023 .

^ The following account is based on the lengthy tenth-century biography catalogued as BHG 1234 and printed in Migne's Patrologia Graeca (90, 68A1-109B9). In recent years, however, this account has been called into question on the basis of new scholarly research. The author, or rather compiler, of BHG 1234 turns out to have used one of the biographies of Theodore the Studite (BHG 1755) to fill the gaps in the information he had on Maximus (See W. Lackner, Zu Quellen und Datierung der Maximosvita (BHG 3 1234), in Analecta Bollandiana 85 [1967], p. 285-316). The information the compiler of BHG 1234 did have he drew from the passions extant at the time, in which nothing is said about Maximus' early years (See B. Roosen, Maximi Confessoris Vitae et Passiones Graecae. The Development of a Hagiographic Dossier, in Byzantion 80 [2010], forthcoming). On the basis of mostly internal evidence from Maximus' writings, C. Boudignon advocates a Palestinian birth for Maximus instead (See C. Boudignon, Maxime le Confesseur était-il constantinopolitain?, in B. Janssens – B. Roosen – P. Van Deun [ed.], Philomathestatos. Studies in Greek and Byzantine Texts Presented to Jacques Noret for his Sixty-Fifth Birthday [= Orientalia Lovaniensia Analecta 137], Leuven – Paris – Dudley, MA, 2004, p. 11-43; and id., Le pouvoir de l'anathème ou Maxime le Confesseur et les moines palestiniens du VIIe siècle, in A. Camplani – G. Filoramo, Foundations of Power and  Conflicts of Authority in Late-Antique Monasticism. Proceedings of the International Seminar, Turin, 2–4 December 2004 [= Orientalia Lovaniensia Analecta, 157], Leuven – Paris – Dudley, MA, 2007, p. 245-274). If this is true, it confirms the value of the Maronite biography, even though it is clearly anti-Maximian.

^ Constas, Nicholas (2014). Nicholas Constas (ed.).

On Difficulties in the Church Fathers: The Ambigua, Volume 1 . Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, Dumbarton Oaks Medieval Library Series, Volume 28.

ISBN 978-0-674-72666-6 .

^ M. Gildas (1913).

"St. Maximus of Constantinople" . In Herbermann, Charles (ed.).

Catholic Encyclopedia . New York: Robert Appleton Company.

"This great man was of a noble family of Constantinople." ^ The Cambridge History of Later Greek and Early Medieval Philosophy. ed A H Armstrong Cambridge 1967. p 492 ^ Berthold, George C. (1997). "Maximus Confessor". In Everett Ferguson (ed.).

Encyclopedia of Early Christianity . New York: Garland Publishing.

ISBN 0-8153-1663-1 .

^ Pringle, Denys (1981).

The Defence of Byzantine Africa from Justinian to the Arab Conquest: An Account of the Military History and Archaeology of the African Provinces in the Sixth and Seventh Century . Oxford, United Kingdom: British Archaeological Reports. p. 46.

ISBN 0-86054-119-3 .

^ Herbermann, Charles, ed. (1913).

"St. Maximus of Constantinople" .

Catholic Encyclopedia . New York: Robert Appleton Company.

: "The first action of St. Maximus that we know of in this affair is a letter sent by him to Pyrrhus, then an abbot at Chrysopolis ..." ^ Philip Schaff , History of the Christian Church , Volume IV: Mediaeval Christianity. A.D. 590–1073 (online edition) §111 , accessed 15 January 2007.

^ Sebastian Brock, "An Early Syriac Life of Maximus the Confessor", Analecta Bollandina 91 (1973): 318-319, 328.

^ "Maximus the Confessor", in The Westminster Dictionary of Church History , ed. Jerald Brauer (Philadelphia: Westminster Press, 1971) ( ISBN 0-664-21285-9 ). This is generally known as the First or Second Lateran Synod , and is not recognized as an Ecumenical Council .

^ For example, Gerald Berthold, "Maximus Confessor" in Encyclopedia of Early Christianity , (New York:Garland, 1997) ( ISBN 0-8153-1663-1 ).

^ David Hughes Farmer, The Oxford Dictionary of the Saints (Oxford:Oxford University Press, 1987) ( ISBN 0-19-869149-1 ) p.288. This made Martin the last Bishop of Rome to be venerated as a martyr.

^ Walter Kaegi (2010).

Muslim Expansion and Byzantine Collapse in North Africa (illustrated ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 87.

ISBN 9780521196772 .

^ Hans Urs von Balthasar (2003).

Cosmic Liturgy: The Universe According to Maximus the Confessor . Ignatius Press. p. 40.

ISBN 9780898707588 .

^ Gerald Berthold, "Maximus Confessor" in Encyclopedia of Early Christianity , (New York:Garland, 1997) ( ISBN 0-8153-1663-1 ).

^ George C. Berthold (1985), Maximus Confessor: Selected Writings , p. 31. Paulist Press, ISBN 0-8091-2659-1 .

^ For example, see Catholic Forum Archived 2007-06-25 at the Wayback Machine . The injuries Maximus sustained while being tortured and the conditions of his exile both contributed to his death, causing Maximus to be considered a martyr by many.

^ Allen, Pauline; Neil, Bronwen (16 January 2003).

Maximus the Confessor and his Companions: Documents from Exile . OUP Oxford. p. 40.

ISBN 9780191583421 .

^ Blowers, Paul M. (4 February 2016).

Maximus the Confessor: Jesus Christ and the Transfiguration of the World . Oxford University Press. p. 58.

ISBN 9780191068805 .

^ Herrin, Hans (28 November 2016).

"Maximus the Confessor and the Monothelite controversy" . In Curta, Florin; Holt, Andrew (eds.).

Great Events in Religion: An Encyclopedia of Pivotal Events in Religious History [3 volumes] . ABC-CLIO. p. 352.

ISBN 9781610695664 .

^ For example, from the biography provided by the Orthodox Church in America : "Three candles appeared over the grave of St Maximus and burned miraculously. This was a sign that St Maximus was a beacon of Orthodoxy during his lifetime, and continues to shine forth as an example of virtue for all. Many healings occurred at his tomb." ^ The Sacred Congregation for the Causes of Saints (Prot. Num. VAR. 7479/14) considers the Pope's declaration in Spe Salvi an informal one.

^ a b Herbermann, Charles, ed. (1913).

"St. Maximus of Constantinople" .

Catholic Encyclopedia . New York: Robert Appleton Company.

^ "Maximos, St., Confessor" in the Oxford Dictionary of the Christian Church, ed. F.L. Cross (London: Oxford Press, 1958) ( ISBN 0-19-211522-7 ). One sees this especially in Maximus' Mystagogy and Ambigua .

^ "Maximus the Confessor" in Michael O'Carroll, Trinitas: A Theological Encyclopedia of the Holy Trinity (Delaware:Michael Glazier, Inc, 1987) ( ISBN 0-8146-5595-5 ).

^ "Maximos, St., Confessor" in the Oxford Dictionary of the Christian Church, ed. F.L. Cross (London: Oxford Press, 1958) ( ISBN 0-19-211522-7 ).

^ Hieromonk Artemije Radosavljević, Τὸ Μυστήριον τῆς Σωτηρίας κατὰ τὸν Ἅγιον Μάξιμον τὸν Ὁμολογητήν. Αθήνα, 1975. English version: Bishop Artemije  Radosavljević Why Did God Become Man? The Unconditionality of the Divine Incarnation. Deification as the End and Fulfillment of Salvation According to St. Maximos the Confessor — Source: Τὸ Μυστήριον... [The mystery of salvation according to St. Maximos the Confessor] (Athens: 1975), pp. 180–196 ^ " Apokatastasis Archived 2006-06-20 at archive.today " Theandros: An Online Journal of Orthodox Christian Theology and Philosophy . Accessed 12 August 2007.

Herbermann, Charles, ed. (1913).

"Apocatastasis" .

Catholic Encyclopedia . New York: Robert Appleton Company.

^ Hans Urs von Balthasar, Cosmic Liturgy: The Universe According to Maximus the Confessor (Ignatius Press, 2003), 355–356.

ISBN 0-89870-758-7 .

^ Médaille, John C., The Daring Hope of Hans Urs Von Balthasar , archived from the original on 26 June 2002 , retrieved 15 June 2017 ^ a b Bingaman, Brock; Nassif, Bradley (23 August 2012).

The Philokalia: Exploring the Classic Text of Orthodox Spirituality . OUP USA. p. 333.

ISBN 9780195390261 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j Mitralexis, Sotiris; Steiris, Georgios; Podbielski, Marcin; Lalla, Sebastian (18 September 2017).

Maximus the Confessor as a European Philosopher . Wipf and Stock Publishers. pp.

xv– xvi.

ISBN 9781498295581 .

^ a b c d e Allen, Pauline; Neil, Bronwen (26 March 2015).

The Oxford Handbook of Maximus the Confessor . OUP Oxford. pp. xix.

ISBN 9780191655258 .

^ Allen, Pauline; Neil, Bronwen (26 March 2015).

The Oxford Handbook of Maximus the Confessor . OUP Oxford. p. 35.

ISBN 9780191655258 .

^ Cosmic liturgy: the universe according to Maximus the Confessor – Page 393 Hans Urs von Balthasar 1961 English translation 2003 ^ Stephen J. Shoemaker, trans., Maximus the Confessor, The Life of the Virgin: Translated, with an Introduction and Notes Archived 2012-05-22 at the Wayback Machine (New Haven: Yale University Press, 2012) ( ISBN 0300175043 ); Maximus's Mary , by Sally Cuneen, Commonweal Magazine , 4 December 2009 ^ Jankowiak, M.; Booth, P. (2015).

"A New Date-List of the Works of Maximus the Confessor" in The Oxford Handbook of Maximus the Confessor . Oxford: Oxford University Press. pp.

72– 3.

ISBN 978-0-19-967383-4 .

Further reading [ edit ] Allen, Pauline ; Neil, Bronwen (2015).

The Oxford Handbook of Maximus the Confessor . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-967383-4 .

Baldi, Diego.

Conrad Gesner, i Loci Communes dello pseudo Massimo Confessore e la Melissa del monaco Antonio in Bibliothecae.it 3.1 (2014) Balthasar, Hans Urs (von) .

Cosmic Liturgy: The Universe According to Maximus the Confessor . Ignatius Press, 2003.

ISBN 0-89870-758-7 .

Cooper, Adam G.

The body in St Maximus Confessor: Holy Flesh, Wholly Deified . Oxford Early Christian Studies. Oxford University Press, 2005.

ISBN 0-19-927570-X .

Lauritzen, Frederick.

Pagan energies in Maximus the Confessor: the influence of Proclus on the Ad Thomam 5 in Greek Roman and Byzantine Studies 52.2 (2012) [1] Louth, Andrew.

Maximus the Confessor . The Early Church Fathers Series. Routledge, 1996.

ISBN 978-0415118460 .

Loudovikos, Nikolaos, Protopresbyter.

He Eucharistiake Ontologia: Ta Eucharistiaka Themelia Tou Einai, Hos En Koinonia Ginnesthai, Sten Eschatologike Ontologia Tou Hagiou Maximou Tou Homologete . Published in Greek. Translated Title: Eucharistic Ontology: The Eucharistic Fundaments of Being as Becoming in Communion, in the Eschatological Ontology of St. Maximus the Confessor . Ekdoseis Domos, Athens, Greece, 1992.

ISBN 960-7217-72-1 .

Mitralexis, Sotiris.

Ever-Moving Repose: A Contemporary Reading of Maximus the Confessor's Theory of Time . Veritas. Cascade, 2017.

ISBN 9781532607035 .

Mitralexis, Sotiris, Georgios Steiris, Marcin Podbielski, Sebastian Lalla.

Maximus the Confessor as a European Philosopher Veritas. Cascade, 2017.

ISBN 9781498295581 .

Nichols, Aidan.

Byzantine Gospel: Maximus the Confessor in Modern Scholarship . T. & T. Clark Publishers, 1994.

ISBN 0-567-09651-3 .

Hieromonk Artemije Radosavljević, Τὸ Μυστήριον τῆς Σωτηρίας κατὰ τὸν Ἅγιον Μάξιμον τὸν Ὁμολογητήν. Αθήνα, 1975. English version: Bishop Artemije Radosavljević Why Did God Become Man? The Unconditionality of the Divine Incarnation. Deification as the End and Fulfillment of Salvation According to St. Maximos the Confessor — Source: Τὸ Μυστήριον... [The mystery of salvation according to St. Maximos the Confessor] (Athens: 1975), pp. 180–196 Thunberg, Lars.

Microcosm and Mediator: The Theological Anthropology of Maximus the Confessor.

Second Edition. Open Court, 1995.

ISBN 0-8126-9211-X Tollefsen, Torstein Theodor.

The Christocentric Cosmology of St Maximus the Confessor . Oxford Early Christian Studies. Oxford University Press, 2008.

ISBN 978-0-19-923714-2 .

Törönen, Melchisedec.

Union and Distinction in the Thought of Maximus the Confessor . Oxford Early Christian Studies. Oxford University Press, 2007.

ISBN 978-0199296118 Tympas, G. C. (2014).

Carl Jung and Maximus the Confessor on Psychic Development . Routledge.

ISBN 978-0-415-62517-3 .

External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Maximus the Confessor .

Greek Wikisource has original text related to this article: Μάξιμος ὁ Ὁμολογητής Selected works of Saint Maximus Confessor Herbermann, Charles, ed. (1913).

"St. Maximus of Constantinople" .

Catholic Encyclopedia . New York: Robert Appleton Company.

Maximus Confessor in the Catholic Forum Maximus Confessor in the Orthodox Church in America Greek Opera Omnia by Migne Patrologia Graeca with analytical indexes Summary of Maximus' biography of Mary (mother of Jesus) by Commonweal magazine Uploaded online academic papers on Maximus the Confessor Marek Jankowiak, Phil Booth, A New Date-List of the Works of Maximus the Confessor v t e Saints of the Catholic Church Dicastery for the Causes of Saints Stages of canonization : Servant of God → Venerable → Blessed → Saint Virgin Mary Mother of God (Theotokos) Immaculate Conception Perpetual virginity Assumption Marian apparition Titles of Mary Joseph (husband) Apostles Andrew Barnabas Bartholomew James of Alphaeus James the Great John Jude Matthew Matthias Paul Peter Philip Simon Thomas Archangels Gabriel Michael in the Catholic Church Raphael Confessors Anatolius Anthony of Kiev Athanasius the Confessor Chariton the Confessor Dominic Edward the Confessor Francis of Assisi Francis Borgia Homobonus John Henry Newman Lazarus Zographos Louis Bertrand Martin de Porres Martin of Tours Maximus the Confessor Michael of Synnada Paphnutius the Confessor Paul I of Constantinople Peter Claver Salonius Sergius of Radonezh Theophanes the Confessor Pio of Pietrelcina Disciples Apollos Mary of Bethany Mary Magdalene Priscilla and Aquila Silvanus Stephen Timothy Titus Seventy disciples Doctors of the Church Gregory the Great Ambrose Augustine of Hippo Jerome John Chrysostom Basil of Caesarea Gregory of Nazianzus Athanasius of Alexandria Cyril of Alexandria Cyril of Jerusalem John of Damascus Bede the Venerable Ephrem the Syrian Thomas Aquinas Bonaventure Anselm of Canterbury Isidore of Seville Peter Chrysologus Leo the Great Peter Damian Bernard of Clairvaux Hilary of Poitiers Alphonsus Liguori Francis de Sales Peter Canisius John of the Cross Robert Bellarmine Albertus Magnus Anthony of Padua Lawrence of Brindisi Teresa of Ávila Catherine of Siena Thérèse of Lisieux John of Ávila Hildegard of Bingen Gregory of Narek Irenaeus John Henry Newman Evangelists Matthew Mark Luke John Church Fathers Alexander of Alexandria Alexander of Jerusalem Ambrose of Milan Anatolius Athanasius of Alexandria Augustine of Hippo Caesarius of Arles Caius Cappadocian Fathers Clement of Alexandria Clement of Rome Cyprian of Carthage Cyril of Alexandria Cyril of Jerusalem Damasus I Desert Fathers Desert Mothers Dionysius of Alexandria Dionysius of Corinth Dionysius Ephrem the Syrian Epiphanius of Salamis Fulgentius of Ruspe Gregory the Great Gregory of Nazianzus Gregory of Nyssa Hilary of Poitiers Hippolytus of Rome Ignatius of Antioch Irenaeus of Lyons Isidore of Seville Jerome of Stridonium John Chrysostom John of Damascus Maximus the Confessor Melito of Sardis Quadratus of Athens Papias of Hierapolis Peter Chrysologus Polycarp of Smyrna Theophilus of Antioch Victorinus of Pettau Vincent of Lérins Zephyrinus Martyrs Abda and Abdisho Boris and Gleb Charles de Foucauld Canadian Martyrs Carthusian Martyrs Child Martyrs of Tlaxcala Christina of Persia Dominguito del Val Devasahayam Pillai Dismas the Good Thief Forty Martyrs of England and Wales Four Crowned Martyrs Gerard of Csanád Great Martyr The Holy Innocents Irish Martyrs John Fisher Korean Martyrs Lorenzo Ruiz Martyrs of Lübeck Luigi Versiglia Martyrology Martyrs of Albania Martyrs of Algeria Martyrs of Cajonos Martyrs of Compiègne Martyrs of Drina Martyrs of China Martyrs of Gorkum Martyrs of Japan 21 Martyrs of Libya Martyrs of La Rioja Martyrs of Damascus Martyrs of Laos Martyrs of Natal Martyrs of Otranto Martyrs of Prague Martyrs of Sandomierz Martyrs of the Spanish Civil War Martyrs of Zenta Maximilian Kolbe Óscar Romero Pedro Calungsod Perpetua and Felicity Peter Chanel Pietro Parenzo Philomena Saints of the Cristero War Stephen Teresa Benedicta of the Cross Titus Brandsma 17 Thomasian Martyrs Thomas Becket Thomas More Three Martyrs of Chimbote Ulma Family Uganda Martyrs Vietnamese Martyrs Valentine of Rome Victor and Corona Zanitas and Lazarus of Persia Missionaries Ansgar Augustine of Canterbury Boniface Cyril and Methodius Damien of Molokai Evermode of Ratzeburg Francis Xavier François de Laval Gregory the Illuminator Junípero Serra Nino of Georgia Patrick of Ireland Remigius Sava of Serbia Patriarchs Adam Abel Abraham Isaac Jacob Joseph Joseph (father of Jesus) David Noah Solomon Matriarchs Popes Adeodatus I Adeodatus II Adrian III Agapetus I Agatho Alexander I Anacletus Anastasius I Anicetus Anterus Benedict II Boniface I Boniface IV Caius Callixtus I Celestine I Celestine V Clement I Cornelius Damasus I Dionysius Eleuterus Eugene I Eusebius Eutychian Evaristus Fabian Felix I Felix III Felix IV Gelasius I Gregory I Gregory II Gregory III Gregory VII Hilarius Hormisdas Hyginus Innocent I John I John XXIII John Paul II Julius I Leo I Leo II Leo III Leo IV Leo IX Linus Lucius I Marcellinus Marcellus I Mark Martin I Miltiades Nicholas I Paschal I Paul I Paul VI Peter Pius I Pius V Pius X Pontian Sergius I Silverius Simplicius Siricius Sixtus I Sixtus II Sixtus III Soter Stephen I Stephen IV Sylvester I Symmachus Telesphorus Urban I Victor I Vitalian Zachary Zephyrinus Zosimus Prophets Agabus Amos Anna Baruch ben Neriah David Elijah Ezekiel Habakkuk Haggai Hosea Isaiah Jeremiah Job Joel John the Baptist Jonah Judas Barsabbas Malachi Melchizedek Micah Moses Nahum Obadiah Samuel Seven Maccabees and their mother Simeon Zechariah (prophet) Zechariah (NT) Zephaniah Virgins Agatha of Sicily Agnes of Rome Angela of the Cross Æthelthryth Bernadette Soubirous Catherine of Bologna Brigid of Kildare Catherine Labouré Catherine of Siena Cecilia Clare of Assisi Eulalia of Mérida Euphemia Faustina Kowalska Faustina and Liberata of Como Genevieve Hiltrude of Liessies Joan of Arc Josephine Bakhita Kateri Tekakwitha Lucy of Syracuse Maria Goretti María de las Maravillas de Jesús Narcisa de Jesús Patricia of Naples Rosalia Rose of Lima Teresa of the Andes Teresa of Calcutta Trasilla and Emiliana Ubaldesca Taccini See also Calendar of saints Four Holy Marshals Fourteen Holy Helpers Martyr of charity Military saints Athleta Christi Miles Christianus Church Militant Seven Champions Venerated couples Virtuous pagan Catholic Church portal Saints portal v t e History of Catholic theology Key figures General History of the Catholic Church Timeline History of the papacy Papal primacy Ecumenical councils Catholic Bible Vulgate Biblical canon History of Christian theology Early Church Paul Clement of Rome First Epistle of Clement Didache Ignatius of Antioch Polycarp Epistle of Barnabas The Shepherd of Hermas Aristides of Athens Justin Martyr Epistle to Diognetus Irenaeus Montanism Tertullian Origen Antipope Novatian Cyprian Constantine to Pope Gregory I Eusebius Athanasius of Alexandria Arianism Pelagianism Nestorianism Monophysitism Ephrem the Syrian Hilary of Poitiers Cyril of Jerusalem Basil of Caesarea Gregory of Nazianzus Gregory of Nyssa Ambrose John Chrysostom Jerome Augustine of Hippo John Cassian Orosius Cyril of Alexandria Peter Chrysologus Pope Leo I Boethius Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite Pope Gregory I Early Middle Ages Isidore of Seville John Climacus Maximus the Confessor Monothelitism Ecthesis Bede John of Damascus Iconoclasm Transubstantiation dispute Predestination disputes Paulinus II of Aquileia Alcuin Benedict of Aniane Rabanus Maurus Paschasius Radbertus John Scotus Eriugena High Middle Ages Roscellinus Gregory of Narek Berengar of Tours Peter Damian Anselm of Canterbury Joachim of Fiore Peter Abelard Decretum Gratiani Bernard of Clairvaux Peter Lombard Anselm of Laon Hildegard of Bingen Hugh of Saint Victor Dominic de Guzmán Robert Grosseteste Francis of Assisi Anthony of Padua Beatrice of Nazareth Bonaventure Albertus Magnus Boetius of Dacia Henry of Ghent Thomas Aquinas Siger of Brabant Thomism Roger Bacon Mysticism and reforms Ramon Llull Duns Scotus Dante Alighieri William of Ockham Richard Rolle John of Ruusbroec Catherine of Siena Bridget of Sweden Meister Eckhart Johannes Tauler Walter Hilton The Cloud of Unknowing Heinrich Seuse Geert Groote Devotio Moderna Julian of Norwich Thomas à Kempis Nicholas of Cusa Marsilio Ficino Girolamo Savonarola Giovanni Pico della Mirandola Reformation Counter-Reformation Erasmus Thomas Cajetan Thomas More John Fisher Johann Eck Francisco de Vitoria Thomas of Villanova Ignatius of Loyola Francisco de Osuna John of Ávila Francis Xavier Teresa of Ávila Luis de León John of the Cross Peter Canisius Luis de Molina ( Molinism ) Robert Bellarmine Francisco Suárez Lawrence of Brindisi Francis de Sales Baroque period to French Revolution Tommaso Campanella Pierre de Bérulle Pierre Gassendi René Descartes Mary of Jesus of Ágreda António Vieira Jean-Jacques Olier Louis Thomassin Jacques-Bénigne Bossuet François Fénelon Cornelius Jansen ( Jansenism ) Blaise Pascal Nicolas Malebranche Giambattista Vico Alphonsus Liguori Louis de Montfort Maria Gaetana Agnesi Alfonso Muzzarelli Johann Michael Sailer Clement Mary Hofbauer Bruno Lanteri 19th century Joseph Görres Félicité de La Mennais Luigi Taparelli Antonio Rosmini Ignaz von Döllinger John Henry Newman Henri Lacordaire Jaime Balmes Gaetano Sanseverino Giovanni Maria Cornoldi Wilhelm Emmanuel Freiherr von Ketteler Giuseppe Pecci Joseph Hergenröther Tommaso Maria Zigliara Matthias Joseph Scheeben Émile Boutroux Modernism Neo-scholasticism Léon Bloy Désiré-Joseph Mercier Friedrich von Hügel Vladimir Solovyov Marie-Joseph Lagrange George Tyrrell Maurice Blondel Thérèse of Lisieux 20th century G. K. Chesterton Reginald Garrigou-Lagrange Joseph Maréchal Pierre Teilhard de Chardin Jacques Maritain Étienne Gilson Ronald Knox Georges Bernanos Dietrich von Hildebrand Gabriel Marcel Marie-Dominique Chenu Romano Guardini Edith Stein Fulton Sheen Henri de Lubac Dorothy Day Henri Daniel-Rops Jean Guitton Josemaría Escrivá Nouvelle théologie Karl Rahner Yves Congar Bernard Lonergan Emmanuel Mounier Jean Daniélou Hans Urs von Balthasar Marcel Lefebvre Frederick Copleston Alfred Delp Edward Schillebeeckx Thomas Merton René Girard Hans Küng Johann Baptist Metz Jean Vanier Henri Nouwen 21st century Pope John Paul II Alice von Hildebrand Carlo Maria Martini Pope Benedict XVI Gustavo Gutiérrez Alasdair MacIntyre Walter Kasper Raniero Cantalamessa Michał Heller Peter Kreeft Jean-Luc Marion Tomáš Halík Aidan Nichols Scott Hahn Catholicism portal v t e Philokalia Authors Isaiah the Solitary Evagrius Ponticus John Cassian Mark the Ascetic Hesychius of Sinai Nilus of Sinai Diadochos of Photiki John of Karpathos Anthony the Great Theodore of Edessa [ fr ] Maximus the Confessor Thalassios the Libyan [ fr ] John of Damascus Theognostos Philotheus of Sinai Ilias the Presbyter Theophanes the Monk Peter of Damascus Symeon the Metaphrast Symeon the New Theologian Nikitas Stithatos Theoleptos of Philadelphia Nikephoros the Monk Gregory of Sinai Gregory Palamas Callistus Ignatios Xanthopoulos Kallistos Angelikoudis [ ru ] Symeon of Thessalonica Mark the Gentle Compilers Nicodemus the Hagiorite Macarius of Corinth Translators Paisius Velichkovsky Ignatius Brianchaninov Theophan the Recluse Dumitru Stăniloae Gerald Palmer Philip Sherrard Kallistos (Ware) Portals : Saints Biography Christianity Asia Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF 2 3 4 5 FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Netherlands 2 Norway Latvia Croatia Greece Korea Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Finland Catalonia Belgium People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Maximus_the_Confessor&oldid=1300996973 " Categories : 580 births 662 deaths 7th-century Byzantine writers 7th-century Christian mystics 7th-century Christian saints 7th-century Christian theologians 7th-century philosophers Byzantine Christian mystics Byzantine saints Byzantine theologians Christologists Patristic mystics People celebrated in the Lutheran liturgical calendar People convicted of heresy Saints from Anatolia Philokalia Hidden categories: Articles incorporating a citation from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference Webarchive template wayback links Webarchive template archiveis links Use dmy dates from August 2019 Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Pages using infobox theologian with embed equal yes Articles with hCards Articles containing Greek-language text This page was last edited on 17 July 2025, at 15:12 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Maximus the Confessor 46 languages Add topic

