Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Scope 2 Main elements 3 History 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents National accounts 30 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Català Dansk Deutsch Ελληνικά Español فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Қазақша ລາວ Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Slovenčina Soomaaliga Suomi Svenska తెలుగు Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Accounting system used by a nation Part of a series on Macroeconomics Basic concepts Aggregate demand Aggregate supply Business cycle CAGR Deflation Demand shock Disinflation Effective demand Expectations Adaptive Rational Financial crisis Growth Inflation Demand-pull Cost-push Interest rate Investment Liquidity trap Measures of national income and output GDP GNI NNI Microfoundations Money Endogenous Money creation Demand for money Liquidity preference Money supply National accounts SNA Nominal rigidity Price level Recession Shrinkflation Stagflation Supply shock Saving Unemployment Policies Fiscal Monetary Commercial Central bank Universal basic income Models IS–LM AD–AS Keynesian cross Multiplier Accelerator Phillips curve Arrow–Debreu Harrod–Domar Solow–Swan Ramsey–Cass–Koopmans Overlapping generations General equilibrium DSGE Endogenous growth Matching theory Mundell–Fleming Overshooting NAIRU Related fields Econometrics Economic statistics Monetary economics Development economics Evolutionary economics International economics Schools Mainstream Keynesian Neo- New Monetarism New classical Real business-cycle theory Stockholm New neoclassical synthesis Saltwater and freshwater Heterodox Austrian Chartalism Modern monetary theory Ecological Post-Keynesian Circuitism Disequilibrium Marxian Market monetarism Supply-side People François Quesnay Adam Smith Thomas Robert Malthus Karl Marx Léon Walras Knut Wicksell Irving Fisher Wesley Clair Mitchell John Maynard Keynes Alvin Hansen Michał Kalecki Gunnar Myrdal Simon Kuznets Joan Robinson Friedrich Hayek John Hicks Richard Stone Hyman Minsky Milton Friedman Paul Samuelson Lawrence Klein Edmund Phelps Robert Lucas Jr.

Edward C. Prescott Peter Diamond William Nordhaus Joseph Stiglitz Thomas J. Sargent Paul Krugman N. Gregory Mankiw See also Macroeconomic model Publications in macroeconomics Economics Applied Microeconomics Political economy Mathematical economics Money portal Business portal v t e National accounts is included in the JEL classification codes as JEL: C82 and JEL:E01 National accounts or national account systems ( NAS ) are the implementation of complete and consistent accounting techniques for measuring the economic activity of a nation. These include detailed underlying measures that rely on double-entry accounting . By design, such accounting makes the totals on both sides of an account equal even though they each measure different characteristics, for example production and the income from it. As a method , the subject is termed national accounting or, more generally, social accounting .

[ 1 ] Stated otherwise,  national accounts as systems may be distinguished from the economic data associated with those systems.

[ 2 ] While sharing many common principles with business accounting, national accounts are based on economic concepts.

[ 3 ] One conceptual construct for representing flows of all economic transactions that take place in an economy is a social accounting matrix with accounts in each respective row-column entry.

[ 4 ] National accounting has developed in tandem with macroeconomics from the 1930s with its relation of aggregate demand to total output through interaction of such broad expenditure categories as consumption and investment.

[ 5 ] Economic data from national accounts are also used for empirical analysis of economic growth and development .

[ 1 ] [ 6 ] Scope [ edit ] National accounts broadly present output, expenditure, and income activities of the economic actors (households, corporations, government) in an economy, including their relations with other countries' economies, and their wealth (net worth). They present both flows (measured but it is over a period) and stocks (measured at the end of a period), ensuring that the flows are reconciled with the stocks. As to flows, the national income and product accounts (in U.S. terminology) provide estimates for the money value of income and output per year or quarter, including GDP . As to stocks, the 'capital accounts' are a balance-sheet approach that has assets on one side (including values of land, the capital stock, and financial assets) and liabilities and net worth on the other, measured as of the end of the accounting period.  National accounts also include measures of the changes in assets, liabilities, and net worth per accounting period.  These may refer to flow of funds accounts or, again, capital accounts .

[ 1 ] There are a number of aggregate measures in the national accounts, notably including gross domestic product or GDP , perhaps the most widely cited measure of aggregate economic activity. Ways of breaking down GDP include as types of income (wages, profits, etc.) or expenditure (consumption, investment/saving, etc.). Measures of these are examples of macro - economic data .

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] [ 9 ] [ 10 ] Such aggregate measures and their change over time are generally of strongest interest to economic policymakers, although the detailed national accounts contain a source of information for economic analysis, for example in the input-output tables which show how industries interact with each other in the production process.

National accounts can be presented in nominal or real amounts , with real amounts adjusted to remove the effects of price changes over time.

[ 11 ] A corresponding price index can also be derived from national output.  Rates of change of the price level and output may also be of interest. An inflation rate (growth rate of the price level) may be calculated for national output or its expenditure components.

Economic growth rates (most commonly the growth rate of GDP) are generally measured in real (constant-price) terms. One use of economic-growth data from the national accounts is in growth accounting across longer periods of time for a country or across to estimate different sources of growth, whether from growth of factor inputs or technological change .

[ 12 ] The accounts are derived from a wide variety of statistical source data including surveys , administrative and census data, and regulatory data, which are integrated and harmonized in the conceptual framework.  They are usually compiled by national statistical offices and/or central banks in each country, though this is not always the case, and may be released on both an annual and (less detailed) quarterly frequency. Practical issues include inaccuracies from differences between economic and accounting methodologies, lack of controlled experiments on quality of data from diverse sources, and measurement of intangibles and services of the banking and financial sectors.

[ 13 ] Two developments relevant to the national accounts since the 1980s include the following.

Generational accounting is a method for measuring redistribution of lifetime tax burdens across generations from social insurance , including social security and social health insurance .  It has been proposed as a better guide to the sustainability of a fiscal policy than budget deficits , which reflect only taxes minus spending in the current year.

[ 14 ] Environmental or green national accounting is the method of valuing environmental assets , which are usually not  counted in measuring national wealth, in part due to the difficulty of valuing them. The method has been proposed as an alternative to an implied zero valuation of environmental assets and as a way of measuring the sustainability of welfare levels in the presence of environmental degradation .

[ 15 ] Macro - economic data not derived from the national accounts are also of wide interest, for example some cost-of-living indexes , the unemployment rate , and the labor force participation rate .

[ 16 ] In some cases, a national-accounts counterpart of these may be estimated, such as a price index computed from the personal consumption expenditures and the GDP gap (the difference between observed GDP and potential GDP ).

[ 17 ] Main elements [ edit ] The presentation of national accounts data may vary by country (commonly, aggregate measures are given greatest prominence), however the main national accounts include the following accounts for the economy as a whole and its main economic actors.

Current accounts: production accounts which record the value of domestic output and the goods and services used up in producing that output. The balancing item of the accounts is value added, which is equal to GDP when expressed for the whole economy at market prices and in gross terms; income accounts , which show primary and secondary income flows—both the income generated in production (e.g. wages and salaries) and distributive income flows (predominantly the redistributive effects of government taxes and social benefit payments). The balancing item of the accounts is disposable income ("National Income" when measured for the whole economy); expenditure accounts , which show how disposable income is either consumed or saved. The balancing item of these accounts is saving.

Capital accounts, which record the net accumulation, as the result of transactions, of non-financial assets; and the financing, by way of saving and capital transfers, of the accumulation. Net lending/borrowing is the balancing item for these accounts Financial accounts, which show the net acquisition of financial assets and the net incurrence of liabilities. The balance on these accounts is the net change in financial position.

Balance sheets, which record the stock of assets, both financial and non-financial, and liabilities at a particular point in time. Net worth is the balance from the balance sheets (United Nations, 1993).

The accounts may be measured as gross or net of consumption of fixed capital (a concept in national accounts similar to depreciation in business accounts).

Notably absent from these components, however, is unpaid work , because its value is not included in any of the aforementioned categories of accounts, just as it is not included in calculating gross domestic product (GDP). An Australian study has shown the value of this uncounted work to be approximately 50% of GDP, making its exclusion rather significant.

[ 18 ] As GDP is tied closely to the national accounts system, [ 19 ] this may lead to a distorted view of national accounts. Because national accounts are widely used by governmental policy-makers in implementing controllable economic agendas, [ 20 ] some analysts have advocated for either a change in the makeup of national accounts or adjustments in the formulation of public policy .

[ 21 ] History [ edit ] The original motivation for the development of national accounts and the systematic measurement of employment was the need for accurate measures of aggregate economic activity.  This was made more pressing by the Great Depression and as a basis for Keynesian macroeconomic stabilisation policy and wartime economic planning. The first efforts to develop such measures were undertaken in the late 1920s and 1930s, notably by Colin Clark and Simon Kuznets . Kuznets building on a project that was underway https://www.nber.org/system/files/chapters/c4231/c4231.pdf , Lillian Epstein had been involved in earlier studies.

Richard Stone of the U.K. led later contributions during World War II and thereafter. The first formal national accounts were published by the United States in 1947. Many European countries followed shortly thereafter, and the United Nations published A System of National Accounts and Supporting Tables in 1952.

[ 1 ] [ 22 ] International standards for national accounting are defined by the United Nations System of National Accounts , with the most recent version released for 2008.

[ 23 ] Even before that in early 1920s there were national economic accounts tables. One of such systems was called Balance of national economy and was used in USSR and other socialistic countries to measure the efficiency of socialistic production.

[ 24 ] In Europe, the worldwide System of National Accounts has been adapted in the European System of Accounts (ESA), which is applied by members of the European Union and many other European countries. Research on the subject continues from its beginnings through today.

[ 25 ] See also [ edit ] Accounting identity Aggregation problem European System of Accounts Measures of national income and output Material Product System National Income and Product Accounts (US) Official statistics Penn World Table Savings identity Sectoral balances Social accounting United Nations System of National Accounts References [ edit ] ^ a b c d Nancy  D. Ruggles, 1987. "social accounting," The New Palgrave: A Dictionary of Economics , v. 4, pp. 377–82.

^ United Nations , The System of National Accounts and ö National Accounts Data .

^ Joel S. Demski, 2008.  "accounting and economics," The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics .

Abstract.

^ Graham Pyatt and Jeffery I. Round, ed., 1985.

Social Accounting Matrices: A Basis for Planning , World Bank.

^ John Maynard Keynes , 1936.

The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money , Macmillan.

^ Mankiw, N. Gregory ; Romer, David ; Weil, David N. (1992). "A Contribution to the Empirics of Economic Growth".

Quarterly Journal of Economics .

107 (2): 407– 437.

CiteSeerX 10.1.1.335.6159 .

doi : 10.2307/2118477 .

JSTOR 2118477 .

S2CID 1369978 .

^ Referred to in the Journal of Economic Literature classification codes under JEL: C8 - Data Collection and Data Estimation Methodology and JEL: E01 - Measurement and Data on National Income and Product Accounts and Wealth .

^ T. P. Hill (2001). "Macroeconomic Data".

International Encyclopedia of the Social & Behavioral Sciences . pp.

9111– 9117.

doi : 10.1016/B0-08-043076-7/02228-2 .

ISBN 978-0-08-043076-8 .

^ Lequiller, François; Blades, Derek (2006).

Understanding National Accounts . OECD.

^ François, Lequiller; Blades, Derek W.; Derek, Blades (January 1, 2006).

Understanding National Accounts - Lequiller François, Derek W. Blades - Google Boeken . OECD.

ISBN 9789264025660 . Retrieved March 25, 2013 .

^ • Amartya Sen , 1979. "The Welfare Basis of Real Income Comparisons: A Survey," Journal of Economic Literature , 17(1), p p. 1 –45.

• D. Usher, 1987. "real income," The New Palgrave: A Dictionary of Economics , v. 4, p. 104.

^ From The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics , 2008, 2nd Edition, with Abstract links: •  " economic growth " by Peter Howitt and David N. Weil • " growth accounting " by Francesco Caselli.

^ • Oskar Morgenstern , 1963.

On the Accuracy of Economic Observations ,  2nd ed.

ch. 16 . Princeton.

• H. O. Stekler, 1964. [Review], Journal of the American Statistical Association , 59(307),  pp.

965 -967.

• J. Steven Landefeld, Eugene P. Seskin, and Barbara M. Fraumeni. 2008. "Taking the Pulse of the Economy: Measuring GDP." Journal of Economic Perspectives , 22(2), pp. 193–216. PDF link Archived August 9, 2017, at the Wayback Machine (press + ).

From The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics , 2nd Edition, with Abstract links: • "intangible capital" by Daniel E. Sichel • "national income" by Thomas K. Rymes.

^ • The Economist , Economics A-Z, "Generational Accounting." Accessed 9 Aug. 2010.

• Jagadeesh Gokhale, 2008. "generational accounting." The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics , 2nd Edition.

Abstract and uncorrected proof .

• Laurence J. Kotlikoff , 1992.

Generational Accounting: Knowing Who Pays, and When, for What We Spend . Free Press. Review extract [ permanent dead link ] .

^ From The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics, 2008, 2nd Edition, with Abstract links: •  " green national accounting " by Sjak Smulders • " sustainability ' by Daniel W. Bromley • National Research Council, 1994.

Assigning Economic Value to Natural Resources , National Academy Press. Chapter links.

^ •  Robert Topel, 2008. "unemployment," The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics , 2nd Edition.

Abstract .

• Katharine Bradbury, 2008. "unemployment measurement," The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics , 2nd Edition.

Abstract .

^ Robert J. Gordon and Peter K. Clark, 1984, "Unemployment and Potential Output in the 1980s," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity , (2), pp.

537-568 Archived 2016-05-21 at the Portuguese Web Archive.

^ Blades, François Lequiller, Derek (2006).

Understanding national accounts (Reprint. ed.). Paris: OECD. p. 112.

ISBN 978-92-64-02566-0 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ Blades, François Lequiller, Derek (2006).

Understanding national accounts (Reprint. ed.). Paris: OECD.

ISBN 978-9264025660 .

GDP lies at the heart of the system of national accounts.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ "National Income Accounting and Public Policy" (PDF) .

^ "National Accounts: A Practical Introduction" (PDF) .

^ André Vanoli, 2008. "national accounting, history of," The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics , 2nd Edition.

Abstract.

^ United Nations, System of National Accounts 2008-2008 SNA .

^ Economic theory, [1] .

^ National Bureau of Economic Research Book Series, 1937-2010.

Studies in Income and Wealth , 71 v.

External links [ edit ] Media related to National accounts at Wikimedia Commons v t e Economic classification of countries Developed country Developing country Heavily indebted poor countries Least developed countries Newly industrialized country World Bank high-income economy Three/Four-World Model First World Second World Third World Fourth World Gross domestic product (GDP) Nominal By country past and projected per capita per capita Purchasing power parity (PPP) By country future estimates per capita per capita per person employed Gross national income and Income Disposable income GNI (nominal) per capita GNI (PPP) per capita Per capita growth Income inequality Median income Real income Wages and salary Average wage Europe Employee compensation (per hour) Labour productivity Minimum wage Canada Europe United States Wealth Wealth inequality Wealth per adult Europe Financial assets per capita Other national accounts Gross National Happiness Net material product Research and development spending Stock market capitalization Patents, trademarks, and industrial design filing activity Human development Human Development Index by country inequality-adjusted planetary pressures–adjusted HDI Human Poverty Index Percentage living in poverty Human Capital Index Household income Social Progress Index Digital divide ICT Development Index Number of broadband Internet subscriptions Number of Internet users Smartphone penetration Net international investment position (NIIP) Per capita (creditors) Per capita (debtors) Economics portal World portal v t e Economics Theoretical Microeconomics Decision theory Price theory Game theory Contract theory Mechanism design Macroeconomics Mathematical economics Complexity economics Computational economics Agent-based computational economics Behavioral economics Pluralism in economics Empirical Econometrics Economic statistics Experimental economics Economic history Applied Agriculture Business Cultural Demographic Development Ecological Education Engineering Environmental Evolutionary Financial Geographic Happiness Health History Information Infrastructure Institutions Labour Law Management Non-monetary Organization Participation Personnel Planning Policy Public sector Public choice Social choice Regional Regulatory Resources Rural Service Transport Urban Welfare Schools ( history ) Attention Mainstream Heterodox American (National) Ancient thought Austrian Behavioral Buddhist Chartalism Modern monetary theory Chicago Classical Critique of political economy Democratic Disequilibrium Ecological Evolutionary Feminist Freiwirtschaft Georgism Happiness Historical Humanistic Institutional Keynesian Neo- ( neoclassical–Keynesian synthesis ) New Post- Circuitism Malthusianism Marginalism Marxian Neo- Mercantilism Mixed Mutualism Neoclassical Lausanne New classical Real business-cycle theory New institutional Physiocracy Socialist Stockholm Supply-side Thermo Economists de Mandeville Quesnay Smith Malthus Say Ricardo von Thünen List Bastiat Cournot Mill Gossen Marx Walras Jevons George Menger Marshall Edgeworth Clark Pareto von Böhm-Bawerk von Wieser Veblen Gesell Fisher Pigou Heckscher von Mises Schumpeter Keynes Knight Polanyi Frisch Sraffa Myrdal Hayek Kalecki Röpke Kuznets Tinbergen Robinson von Neumann Hicks Lange Leontief Galbraith Koopmans Schumacher Friedman Samuelson Simon Buchanan Arrow Baumol Solow Rothbard Greenspan Sowell Becker Ostrom Sen Lucas Stiglitz Thaler Hoppe Krugman Piketty more Lists Glossary Economists Publications ( journals ) Schools Category Index Lists Outline Publications Business portal v t e Statistics Outline Index Descriptive statistics Continuous data Center Mean Arithmetic Arithmetic-Geometric Contraharmonic Cubic Generalized/power Geometric Harmonic Heronian Heinz Lehmer Median Mode Dispersion Average absolute deviation Coefficient of variation Interquartile range Percentile Range Standard deviation Variance Shape Central limit theorem Moments Kurtosis L-moments Skewness Count data Index of dispersion Summary tables Contingency table Frequency distribution Grouped data Dependence Partial correlation Pearson product-moment correlation Rank correlation Kendall's τ Spearman's ρ Scatter plot Graphics Bar chart Biplot Box plot Control chart Correlogram Fan chart Forest plot Histogram Pie chart Q–Q plot Radar chart Run chart Scatter plot Stem-and-leaf display Violin plot Data collection Study design Effect size Missing data Optimal design Population Replication Sample size determination Statistic Statistical power Survey methodology Sampling Cluster Stratified Opinion poll Questionnaire Standard error Controlled experiments Blocking Factorial experiment Interaction Random assignment Randomized controlled trial Randomized experiment Scientific control Adaptive designs Adaptive clinical trial Stochastic approximation Up-and-down designs Observational studies Cohort study Cross-sectional study Natural experiment Quasi-experiment Statistical inference Statistical theory Population Statistic Probability distribution Sampling distribution Order statistic Empirical distribution Density estimation Statistical model Model specification L p space Parameter location scale shape Parametric family Likelihood (monotone) Location–scale family Exponential family Completeness Sufficiency Statistical functional Bootstrap U V Optimal decision loss function Efficiency Statistical distance divergence Asymptotics Robustness Frequentist inference Point estimation Estimating equations Maximum likelihood Method of moments M-estimator Minimum distance Unbiased estimators Mean-unbiased minimum-variance Rao–Blackwellization Lehmann–Scheffé theorem Median unbiased Plug-in Interval estimation Confidence interval Pivot Likelihood interval Prediction interval Tolerance interval Resampling Bootstrap Jackknife Testing hypotheses 1- & 2-tails Power Uniformly most powerful test Permutation test Randomization test Multiple comparisons Parametric tests Likelihood-ratio Score/Lagrange multiplier Wald Specific tests Z -test (normal) Student's t -test F -test Goodness of fit Chi-squared G -test Kolmogorov–Smirnov Anderson–Darling Lilliefors Jarque–Bera Normality (Shapiro–Wilk) Likelihood-ratio test Model selection Cross validation AIC BIC Rank statistics Sign Sample median Signed rank (Wilcoxon) Hodges–Lehmann estimator Rank sum (Mann–Whitney) Nonparametric anova 1-way (Kruskal–Wallis) 2-way (Friedman) Ordered alternative (Jonckheere–Terpstra) Van der Waerden test Bayesian inference Bayesian probability prior posterior Credible interval Bayes factor Bayesian estimator Maximum posterior estimator Correlation Regression analysis Correlation Pearson product-moment Partial correlation Confounding variable Coefficient of determination Regression analysis Errors and residuals Regression validation Mixed effects models Simultaneous equations models Multivariate adaptive regression splines (MARS) Linear regression Simple linear regression Ordinary least squares General linear model Bayesian regression Non-standard predictors Nonlinear regression Nonparametric Semiparametric Isotonic Robust Homoscedasticity and Heteroscedasticity Generalized linear model Exponential families Logistic (Bernoulli) / Binomial / Poisson regressions Partition of variance Analysis of variance (ANOVA, anova) Analysis of covariance Multivariate ANOVA Degrees of freedom Categorical / multivariate / time-series / survival analysis Categorical Cohen's kappa Contingency table Graphical model Log-linear model McNemar's test Cochran–Mantel–Haenszel statistics Multivariate Regression Manova Principal components Canonical correlation Discriminant analysis Cluster analysis Classification Structural equation model Factor analysis Multivariate distributions Elliptical distributions Normal Time-series General Decomposition Trend Stationarity Seasonal adjustment Exponential smoothing Cointegration Structural break Granger causality Specific tests Dickey–Fuller Johansen Q-statistic (Ljung–Box) Durbin–Watson Breusch–Godfrey Time domain Autocorrelation (ACF) partial (PACF) Cross-correlation (XCF) ARMA model ARIMA model (Box–Jenkins) Autoregressive conditional heteroskedasticity (ARCH) Vector autoregression (VAR) Frequency domain Spectral density estimation Fourier analysis Least-squares spectral analysis Wavelet Whittle likelihood Survival Survival function Kaplan–Meier estimator (product limit) Proportional hazards models Accelerated failure time (AFT) model First hitting time Hazard function Nelson–Aalen estimator Test Log-rank test Applications Biostatistics Bioinformatics Clinical trials / studies Epidemiology Medical statistics Engineering statistics Chemometrics Methods engineering Probabilistic design Process / quality control Reliability System identification Social statistics Actuarial science Census Crime statistics Demography Econometrics Jurimetrics National accounts Official statistics Population statistics Psychometrics Spatial statistics Cartography Environmental statistics Geographic information system Geostatistics Kriging Category Mathematics portal Commons WikiProject Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=National_accounts&oldid=1297598559 " Categories : National accounts Economic data Official statistics Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from September 2018 Articles with permanently dead external links Webarchive template other archives CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use American English from March 2019 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use mdy dates from March 2019 Categories which are included in the JEL classification codes Commons category link from Wikidata Articles with excerpts This page was last edited on 27 June 2025, at 06:58 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents National accounts 30 languages Add topic

