Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Waters subject to regulation 2 History 3 Difficulties of water rights 4 Legal models 5 Water law by country Toggle Water law by country subsection 5.1 International law 5.2 Canada 5.3 Australia 5.3.1 Tasmania 5.4 Iran 5.5 Water law in the United States 5.6 Water law in England and Wales 5.7 Water law in the European Union 6 See also 7 References 8 Further reading 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Water resources law 12 languages العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা Čeština Deutsch فارسی Français Hausa Nederlands Polski Türkçe Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Water law ) Law and regulations that relate to water resources This article is about the laws regulating the use of water. For environmental protection laws, see water quality law .

This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) The examples and perspective in this article may not represent a worldwide view of the subject .

You may improve this article , discuss the issue on the talk page , or create a new article , as appropriate.

( May 2010 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article's lead section may be too short to adequately summarize the key points .

Please consider expanding the lead to provide an accessible overview of all important aspects of the article.

( May 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a series on Environmental law Pollution control law Environmental impact assessment Air quality law Water quality law Waste management law Environmental cleanup law Natural resources law Species protection Water resources law Mining law Forestry law Fisheries law Game law Reference materials Environmental journals International environmental agreements Environmental laws by country Environmental lawsuits Environmental ministries Supranational environmental agencies Related topics Administrative law Bankruptcy law Climate change litigation Earth jurisprudence Earth law Ecocide Energy law Environmental crime poaching Environmental personhood Environmental justice Insurance law International law Land law Land use Law of the sea Property law Public trust doctrine Rights of nature Right to a healthy environment War and environmental law Wild law v t e Water resources law (in some jurisdictions, shortened to "water law") is the field of law dealing with the ownership, control, and use of water as a resource . It is most closely related to property law , and is distinct from laws governing water quality .

[ 1 ] Waters subject to regulation [ edit ] Water is ubiquitous and does not respect political boundaries. Water resources laws may apply to any portion of the hydrosphere over which claims may be made to appropriate or maintain the water to serve some purpose. Such waters include, but are not limited to: Surface waters —lakes, rivers, streams, oceans, and wetlands; Surface runoff —generally water that flows across the land from rain , floodwaters , and snowmelt before those waters reach watercourses, lakes, wetlands, or oceans; Groundwater —particularly water present in aquifers .

History [ edit ] The Code of Hammurabi, containing one of the earliest legal statutes related to water resources.

The history of people's relation to water illustrates varied approaches to the management of water resources.  "Lipit Ishtar and Ur Nammu both contain water provisions, pre-date Hammurabi by at least 250 years, and clearly provide the normative underpinnings on which the Hammurabi Code was constructed." [ citation needed ] The Code of Hammurabi was one of the earliest written laws to deal with water issues, and this code included the administration of water use. At the time the code was written in ancient Mesopotamia, the civilizations in the surrounding lands were dependent on the Tigris and Euphrates rivers to survive. As a result, the leaders needed to develop intricate canal and irrigation systems to sustain their needs for the water.

[ 2 ] The code was developed about 3,800 years ago by King Hammurabi of Babylonia.

[ 3 ] Difficulties of water rights [ edit ] Water is uniquely difficult to regulate, because laws are designed mainly for land. Water is mobile, its supply varies by year, season, and location, and it can be used simultaneously by many entities.

[ 4 ] As with property law, water rights can be described as a "bundle of sticks" containing multiple, separable activities that can have varying levels of regulation. For instance, some uses of water divert it from its natural course but return most or all of it (e.g.

hydroelectric plants ), while others consume much of what they take (ice, agriculture ), and still others use water without diverting it at all (e.g.

boating ). Each type of activity has its own needs and can in theory be regulated separately. There are several types of conflict likely to arise: absolute shortages; shortages in a particular time or place, diversions of water that reduce the flow available to others, pollutants or other changes (such as temperature or turbidity ) that render water unfit for others' use, and the need to maintain "in-stream flows" of water to protect the natural ecosystem .

One theory of history, put forward in Karl August Wittfogel 's book Oriental Despotism: A Comparative Study of Total Power , holds that many empires were organized around a central authority that controlled a population through monopolizing the water supply. Such a hydraulic empire creates the potential for despotism , and serves as a cautionary tale for designing water regulations.

Water law involves controversy in some parts of the world where a growing population faces increasing competition over a limited natural supply. Disputes over rivers , lakes and underground aquifers cross national borders.

[ 5 ] Although water law is still regulated mainly by individual countries, there are international sets of proposed rules such as the Helsinki Rules on the Uses of the Waters of International Rivers Archived 2006-10-06 at the Wayback Machine and the Hague Declaration on Water Security in the 21st Century .

Long-term issues in water law include the possible effects of global warming on rainfall patterns and evaporation; the availability and cost of desalination technology; the control of pollution ; and the growth of aquaculture .

Legal models [ edit ] The legal right to use a designated water supply is known as a water right . There are two major models used for water rights. The first is riparian rights , where the owner of the adjacent land has the right to the water in the body next to it. The other major model is the prior appropriations model , the first party to make use of a water supply has the first rights to it, regardless of whether the property is near the water source.

[ 6 ] Riparian systems are generally more common in areas where water is plentiful, while appropriations systems are more common in dry climates. As water resource law is complex, many areas have a combination of the two models.

Water law by country [ edit ] International law [ edit ] Main article: Right to water The right to use water to satisfy basic human needs for personal and domestic uses has been protected under international human rights law . When incorporated in national legal frameworks, this right is articulated to other water rights within the broader body of water law. The human right to water has been recognized in international law through a wide range of international documents, including international human rights treaties, declarations and other standards. Additionally, the United Nations passed a resolution stating that the member states "recognizes the right to safe and clean drinking water and sanitation as a human right that is essential for the full enjoyment of life and all human rights." [ 7 ] The human right to water places the main responsibilities upon governments to ensure that people can enjoy "sufficient, safe, accessible and affordable water, without discrimination". Most especially, governments are expected to take reasonable steps to avoid a contaminated water supply and to ensure there are no water access distinctions amongst citizens. Today all states have at least ratified one human rights convention which explicitly or implicitly recognizes the right, and they all have signed at least one political declaration recognizing this right.

Canada [ edit ] Under the Constitution Act, 1867 , jurisdiction over waterways is divided between the federal and provincial governments. Federal jurisdiction is derived from the powers to regulate navigation and shipping, fisheries, and the governing of the northern territories, which has resulted in the passage of: the Fisheries Act , the Navigation Protection Act , the Arctic Waters Pollution Prevention Act , and the Oceans Act .

Provincial jurisdiction is derived from the powers over property and civil rights , matters of a local and private nature, and management of Crown lands . In Ontario , Quebec and other provinces, the beds of all navigable waters are vested in the Crown, in contrast to English law .

[ 8 ] All provincial governments also govern water quality through laws on environmental protection and drinking water , such as the Clean Water Act in Ontario.

Australia [ edit ] Water law in Australia varies with each state.

In the state of New South Wales, water laws are enforced by an independent regulatory body; the Natural Resources Access Regulator .

Tasmania [ edit ] The Tasmanian Water Corporation   compulsorily acquired all drinking water supply infrastructure previously managed by local councils This policy was not popular with all local councillors.

[ 9 ] Iran [ edit ] Seventh program of Iranian government in 2023-22 ordered the preparing and deployment of a new the bureau of unified water resource administration system.

[ 10 ] Water law in the United States [ edit ] Main article: Water law in the United States In the United States there are complex legal systems for allocating water rights that vary by region.

[ 5 ] These varying systems exist for both historical and geographic reasons. Water law encompasses a broad array of subjects or categories designed to provide a framework to resolve disputes and policy issues relating to water: Public waters, including tidal waters and navigable waterways.

Other surface waters—generally water that flows across non-public land from rain, floodwaters, and snowmelt before those waters reach public watercourses.

Groundwater, sometimes called subterranean, percolating, or underground water Public regulation of waters, including flood control, environmental regulation—state and federal, public health regulation and regulation of fisheries Related to all of the above is interplay of public and private rights in water, which draws on aspects of eminent domain law and the federal commerce clause powers Water project law: the highly developed law regarding the formation, operation, and finance of public and quasi-public entities which operate local public works of flood control, navigation control, irrigation, and avoidance of environmental degradation Treaty Rights of Native Americans The law governing these topics comes from all layers of law.  Some derives from common law principles which have developed over centuries, and which evolve as the nature of disputes presented to courts change.  For example, the judicial approach to landowner rights to divert surface waters has changed significantly in the last century as public attitudes about land and water have evolved.   Some derives from state statutory law.  Some derives from the original public grants of land to the States and from the documents of their origination. Some derives from state, federal and local regulation of waters through zoning, public health and other regulation.  Non-federally recognized Indian tribes do not have water rights.

Many states in the Midwestern US, such as Wisconsin, North Dakota, South Dakota, Nebraska, and Kansas, employ a riparian system of law when it comes to water resources.

[ 11 ] Water law in England and Wales [ edit ] Private companies are obliged to publish annually a sizeable report providing a relevant amount of nationwide comparable data on costs, revenues, profits, and performance levels. An independent regulatory authority of the water industry sector analyzes private companies outcomes and sets an allowed level of return which is not fixed and incentive-based.
Privatizations in the UK were driven by an historical under-investment on an asset-intensive sector.

[ 12 ] Water law in the European Union [ edit ] For countries within the European Union , water-related directives are important for water resource management and environmental and water quality standards. Key directives include the Urban Waste Water Directive 1992 [ 13 ] (requiring most towns and cities to treat their wastewater to specified standards), and the Water Framework Directive 2000/60/EC, which requires water resource plans based on river basins , including public participation based on Aarhus Convention principles. See Watertime — the international context , Section 2.

See also [ edit ] Water portal Law portal Clean Water Act Clean Water Act (Ontario) Clean Water Protection Act SB X-7 Colorado River Water Conservation District v. United States Drainage law Environmental Law Food safety Navigable servitude Right to water Water right References [ edit ] ^ "WATER GOVERNANCE" .

ArcGIS StoryMaps . 2020-07-24. Archived from the original on 2021-09-22 . Retrieved 2021-09-22 .

^ Kornfeld, Itzchak E. (2009), Dellapenna, Joseph W.; Gupta, Joyeeta (eds.), "Mesopotamia: A History of Water and Law" , The Evolution of the Law and Politics of Water , Dordrecht: Springer Netherlands, pp.

21– 36, doi : 10.1007/978-1-4020-9867-3_2 , ISBN 978-1-4020-9866-6 , retrieved 2021-09-26 ^ Jones, P. Andrew, and Cech, Tom.

Colorado Water Law for Non-Lawyers . Boulder, CO, USA: University Press of Colorado, 2009.

^ "Water Law Overview - National Agricultural Law Center" .

nationalaglawcenter.org . Retrieved 2021-09-26 .

^ a b Thompson, Olivia N. (2009-10-01).

"Binational Water Management: Perspectives of Local Texas Officials in the U.S.-Mexico Border Region" .

An Applied Research Project Submitted to the Department of Political Science, Texas State University-San Marcos, in Partial Fulfillment for the Requirements for the Degree of Masters of Public Administration, December 2009 .

^ Gopalakrishnan, Chennat (1973).

"The Doctrine of Prior Appropriation and Its Impact on Water Development: A Critical Survey" .

The American Journal of Economics and Sociology .

32 (1): 61– 72.

doi : 10.1111/j.1536-7150.1973.tb02180.x .

ISSN 0002-9246 .

JSTOR 3485791 .

^ "A/RES/64/292 - E - A/RES/64/292 -Desktop" .

undocs.org . Retrieved 2021-09-20 .

^ See The Beds of Navigable Waters Act in Ontario and Civil Code of Quebec Archived 2012-07-23 at the Wayback Machine , s. 919, in Quebec ^ "Water and sewage governance Tasmania" . Flora Fox Regional News. 21 February 2011. Archived from the original on 16 August 2011 . Retrieved 18 January 2022 .

^ "سياست‌هاي كلي برنامه هفتم از سوي مقام معظم رهبري ابلاغ شد" [The general policies of the 7th plan were announced by the Supreme Leader].

dolat.ir (in Persian).

^ Glesner, Richard C. (1966).

"Riparian Water Law - Lakeshore Developments" .

Wisconsin Law Review .

1966 : 172– 190 – via Hein Online.

^ "Remunicipalisation of Water Utilities - A desk review of selected case studies" (PDF) .

water.org.uk .

KPMG . 2017. pp.

1– 2, 11.

Archived from the original on October 3, 2020 . Retrieved October 3, 2020 .

^ "Water pollution - Environment - European Commission" .

ec.europa.eu . 23 January 2024.

Hildering, A. (2004), International Law, Sustainable Development and Water Management , Eburon Academic Publishers, Delft, The Netherlands, 2004 International Law Association Water Resources Committee (2004), Final Report presented at the Association's 2004 Conference in Berlin UNEP (2002), Vital Water Graphics — An Overview of the State of the World's Fresh and Marine Waters . UNEP, Nairobi, Kenya.

Sax, J. L., et al..

Legal Control of Water Resources: Cases and Materials (4th edition) . Thomson/West (2006), ISBN 978-0-314-16314-1 .

Further reading [ edit ] Ute Mager, International Water Law. Global Developments and Regional Examples Jedermann-Verlag, Heidelberg 2015, ISBN 978-3-86825-319-1 .

George Vranesh, Colorado Water Law. Revised Edition , University Press of Colorado (2000), ISBN 978-0-87081-543-0 , 2003 supplement (March, 2004), ISBN 978-0-87081-755-7 Washington Office of Attorney General.

"An Introduction to Washington Water Law." Paul Stanton Kibel Archived 2011-07-24 at the Wayback Machine , Grasp on Water: a Natural Resource that Eludes NAFTA's Notion of Investment , Ecology Law Quarterly (2007) Archived 2013-06-03 at the Wayback Machine External links [ edit ] v t e Natural resources Air Pollution / quality Ambient standards (US) Index Indoor Law Clean Air Act (US) Ozone depletion Emissions Airshed Trading Deforestation (REDD) Energy Bio Law Resources Fossil fuels ( gas , peak coal , peak gas , peak oil ) Geothermal Hydro Nuclear Solar sunlight shade Wind Land Agricultural arable peak farmland Degradation Field Landscape cityscape seascape soundscape viewshed Law property Management habitat conservation Minerals gemstone industrial ore metal mining law sand peak copper phosphorus rights Soil conservation fertility health resilience Use planning reserve Life Biodiversity Bioprospecting biopiracy Biosphere Bushfood Bushmeat Fisheries climate change law management Forests genetic resources law management non-timber products Game law Marine conservation Meadow Pasture Plants FAO Plant Treaty food genetic resources gene banks herbal medicines UPOV Convention wood Rangeland Seed bank Wildlife conservation management Water Types / location Aquifer storage and recovery Drinking Fresh Groundwater pollution recharge remediation Hydrosphere Ice bergs glacial polar Irrigation huerta Marine Rain harvesting Stormwater Surface water Sewage reclaimed water Watershed Aspects Desalination Floods Law Leaching Sanitation improved Scarcity Security Supply Efficiency Conflict Conservation Peak water Pollution Privatization Quality Right Resources improved policy Related Commons enclosure global land tragedy of Economics ecological land Ecosystem services Exploitation overexploitation Earth Overshoot Day Management adaptive Natural capital accounting good Natural heritage Nature reserve remnant natural area Systems ecology Urban ecology Wilderness Resource Common-pool Conflict (perpetuation) Curse Depletion Extraction Nationalism Renewable / Non-renewable Politics Oil war Petroleum politics Petrostate Petro-Islam Resource war Category Authority control databases : National Germany Czech Republic NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐9mpd4
Cached time: 20250812014459
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.549 seconds
Real time usage: 0.681 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1936/1000000
Revision size: 18979/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 100279/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 8157/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 10/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 81513/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.354/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 7601857/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  556.447      1 -total
 28.70%  159.727      1 Template:Reflist
 19.87%  110.540      7 Template:Cite_web
 15.94%   88.703      1 Template:Environmental_law
 15.61%   86.837      1 Template:Sidebar
 12.19%   67.848      1 Template:Multiple_issues
 11.28%   62.764      1 Template:Short_description
 11.06%   61.524      4 Template:Navbox
  9.48%   52.750      1 Template:Natural_resources
  7.13%   39.663      1 Template:Globalize Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:550781:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812014459 and revision id 1304660593. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Water_resources_law&oldid=1304660593 " Category : Water law Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1 Persian-language sources (fa) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with limited geographic scope from May 2010 Wikipedia introduction cleanup from May 2022 All pages needing cleanup Articles covered by WikiProject Wikify from May 2022 All articles covered by WikiProject Wikify Articles with multiple maintenance issues All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from October 2014 This page was last edited on 7 August 2025, at 11:15 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Water resources law 12 languages Add topic

