Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Background 2 Critique 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Phallogocentrism 12 languages العربية Català Deutsch Español Français Galego עברית Polski Português Русский Svenska Türkçe Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Theory in literary analysis This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Phallogocentrism" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( November 2019 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article has an unclear citation style .

The references used may be made clearer with a different or consistent style of citation and footnoting .

( July 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) In critical theory and deconstruction , phallogocentrism is a neologism coined by Jacques Derrida to refer to the privileging of the masculine ( phallus ) in the construction of meaning.

[ 1 ] The term is a blend word of the older terms phallocentrism (focusing on the masculine point of view) and logocentrism (focusing on language in assigning meaning to the world).

Derrida and others identified phonocentrism , or the prioritizing of speech over writing, as an integral part of phallogocentrism.  Derrida explored this idea in his essay "Plato's Pharmacy".

[ 2 ] Background [ edit ] In contemporary literary and philosophical works concerned with gender, the term "phallogocentrism" is commonplace largely as a result of the writings of Jacques Derrida, the founder of the philosophy of deconstruction , which is considered by many academics to constitute an essential part of the discourse of postmodernism.

[ 3 ] Deconstruction is a philosophy of "indeterminateness" and its opposing philosophy, "determinateness". According to deconstruction, indeterminate knowledge is " aporetic ", i.e., based on contradictory facts or ideas ("aporias") that make it impossible to determine matters of truth with any degree of certitude; determinate  knowledge, on the other hand, is " apodictic ", i.e., based on facts or ideas that are considered to be "true", from one perspective or another.

The phallogocentric argument is premised on the claim that modern Western culture has been, and continues to be, both culturally and intellectually subjugated  by "logocentrism" and "phallocentrism".

Logocentrism is the term Derrida uses to refer to the philosophy of determinateness,  while phallocentrism is the term he uses to describe the way logocentrism itself has been genderized by a "masculinist (phallic)" and "patriarchal" agenda. Hence, Derrida intentionally merges the two terms phallocentrism and logocentrism as "phallogocentrism".

The French feminist thinkers of the school of écriture féminine also share Derrida's phallogocentric reading of 'all of Western metaphysics'. For example, Cixous & Clément (1975) decry the "dual, hierarchical oppositions" set up by the traditional phallogocentric philosophy of determinateness, wherein "death is always at work" as "the premise of woman's abasement", woman who has been "colonized" by phallogocentric thinking.

[ 4 ] According to Cixous & Clément, the 'crumbling' of this way of thinking will take place through a Derridean-inspired, anti-phallo / logocentric philosophy of indeterminateness.

Critique [ edit ] Swedish cyberphilosophy authors Alexander Bard and Jan Söderqvist propose a critique of Derrida's interpretation of phallogocentrism in their works.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ where?

] [ full citation needed ] They advocate a return to phallic vision as fundamental and necessary for western civilization after 1945. They regard this phallic return as materialized through technology rather than through ever more academic discourse. In response to Derrida et al ., Bard & Söderqvist propose that the phallogocentric project – which they call eventology – rather needs to be complemented with a return to nomadology , or the myth of the eternal return of the same , a matrichal  [ sic ] renaissance which they claim has already materialized in system theory and complexity theory , from which both feminism and androgynism are merely later but welcome effects. According to Bard & Söderqvist it is merely the centrism and not the phallogos in itself which has ever been problematic.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ importance?

] French philosopher Catherine Malabou , part-time collaborator with Derrida himself, has taken a similar constructive critical approach to the idea of phallogocentrism, for example Malabou (2007) .

[ 7 ] [ full citation needed ] Going into dialogue with psychoanalytic masters like Sigmund Freud , Jacques Lacan and most recently Alain Badiou – to whose philosophy of the event, Malabou responds with a radical traumatology firmly rooted in the neurosciences – her take is simply that psychoanalysis is inadequate to respond to the challenges she forwards due to its phallogocentrist fixation, a dilemma she believes the neurosciences are better fit to solve. The name of her solution to this problem is plasticity .

[ citation needed ] See also [ edit ] Phallic monism References [ edit ] ^ "Jacques Derrida" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Retrieved 2023-05-28 – via iep.utm.edu.

^ Derrida, Jacques (1991).

Dissemination . Chicago, IL: Chicago University Press.

ISBN 978-0226143347 .

^ "Deconstruction" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Retrieved 2023-05-28 – via iep.utm.edu.

^ Cixous, H.

; Clément, C.

(1975).

The Newly Born Woman . Theory and History of Literature. Vol. 24. Translated by Wing, Betsy. Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press (published 1986). p.

65 .

ISBN 0-8166-1466-0 .

^ a b Bard, A.

; Söderqvist, J.

(2014).

Syntheism: Creating God in the Internet age .

^ a b Bard, A.

; Söderqvist, J.

(2018).

Digital Libido: Sex, power, and violence in the network society .

^ Malabou, C.

(2007).

Les nouveaux blessés [ The newly injured ] (in French).

External links [ edit ] "Biases of the ear and eye – Logocentrism" .

aber.ac.uk . Aberdeen, Sc, UK: University of Aberdeen .

Dely, Carole (31 October 2007) [June 2006].

Jacques Derrida: The 'perchance' of a coming of the otherwoman . International Phenomenology Colloquium (in French and English). Porto Alegre, Brazil / Catholic University of Porto Alegre.

ISSN 2104-3272 . Archived from the original on 8 February 2012 – via Sens Public (sens-public.org).

The deconstruction of phallogocentrism from duel to duo v t e Critical theory Origins Frankfurt School Freudo-Marxism Concepts Outline of critical theory Reconstructivism Derivatives Archetypal literary criticism Deconstructivism New historicism Technocriticism Critical ...

animal studies applied linguistics cartography consciousness criminology data studies design discourse analysis ethnography geography geopolitics historiography international relations theory language awareness legal studies literacy management studies medical anthropology pedagogy mathematics pedagogy university studies practice psychiatry psychology queer theory race theory regionalism security studies social theory social work technical practice terrorism studies Theorists Theodor W. Adorno Walter Benjamin Erich Fromm Jürgen Habermas Axel Honneth Max Horkheimer Otto Kirchheimer Siegfried Kracauer Leo Löwenthal Herbert Marcuse Friedrich Pollock Alfred Schmidt Related Binary opposition Critical rationalism Critical realism perception social sciences Theological Cultural Marxism conspiracy theory Hermeneutics of suspicion Immanent critique Phallogocentrism Privilege (social inequality) 2020s controversies around critical race theory Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Phallogocentrism&oldid=1295883278 " Categories : Deconstruction Feminist terminology Feminist theory Theories of language Critical theory Postmodern feminism Neologisms Misogyny Jacques Derrida Hidden categories: CS1 French-language sources (fr) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from November 2019 All articles needing additional references Wikipedia references cleanup from July 2021 All articles needing references cleanup Articles covered by WikiProject Wikify from July 2021 All articles covered by WikiProject Wikify Articles with multiple maintenance issues Vague or ambiguous geographic scope from July 2021 All articles with incomplete citations Articles with incomplete citations from April 2024 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2021 This page was last edited on 16 June 2025, at 12:12 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Phallogocentrism 12 languages Add topic

