Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview 2 Nietzsche and anarchism 3 Nietzsche and fascism 4 Nietzsche and Zionism 5 Nietzsche, analytical psychology and psychoanalysis 6 Early 20th-century thinkers 7 Nietzsche and World War I 8 Nietzsche after World War II 9 List of notable advocates 10 References 11 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Influence and reception of Friedrich Nietzsche 5 languages Deutsch Français 한국어 Italiano Русский Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This article's lead section may be too short to adequately summarize the key points .

Please consider expanding the lead to provide an accessible overview of all important aspects of the article.

( September 2022 ) Nietzsche in 1869 Friedrich Nietzsche 's influence and reception varied widely and may be roughly divided into various chronological periods. Reactions were anything but uniform, and proponents of various ideologies attempted to appropriate his work quite early.

Overview [ edit ] Beginning while Nietzsche was still alive, though incapacitated by mental illness , many Germans discovered his appeals for greater heroic individualism and personality development in Thus Spoke Zarathustra , but responded to those appeals in diverging ways. He had some following among left-wing Germans in the 1890s. Nietzsche's anarchistic influence was particularly strong in France and the United States.

[ 1 ] By World War I, German soldiers even received copies of Thus Spoke Zarathustra as gifts.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] The Dreyfus affair provides another example of his reception: the French antisemitic Right labelled the Jewish and leftist intellectuals who defended Alfred Dreyfus as "Nietzscheans." [ 4 ] Such seemingly paradoxical acceptance by diametrically opposed camps is typical of the history of the reception of Nietzsche's thought. In the context of the rise of French fascism, one researcher notes, "Although, as much recent work has stressed, Nietzsche had an important impact on "leftist" French ideology and theory, this should not obscure the fact that his work was also crucial to the right and to the neither right nor left fusions of developing French fascism.

[ 5 ] Indeed, as Ernst Nolte proposed, Maurrassian ideology of "aristocratic revolt against egalitarian-utopian 'transcendence'" (transcendence being Nolte's term for the ontological absence of theodic center justifying modern "emancipation culture") and the interrelation between Nietzschean ideology and proto-fascism offer extensive space for criticism and the Nietzschean ambiance pervading French ideological fermentation of extremism in time birthing formal fascism, is unavoidable.

Many political leaders of the 20th century were at least superficially familiar with Nietzsche's ideas. However, it is not always possible to determine whether or not they actually read his work. Regarding Hitler, for example, there is a debate. Some authors claim that he probably never read Nietzsche, or that if he did, his reading was not extensive.

[ 6 ] Hitler more than likely became familiar with Nietzsche quotes during his time in Vienna when quotes by Nietzsche were frequently published in pan-German newspapers.

[ 7 ] Nevertheless, others point to a quote in Hitler's Table Talk , where the dictator mentioned Nietzsche when he spoke about what he called "great men", as an indication that Hitler may have been familiarized with Nietzsche's work.

[ 8 ] Other authors like Melendez (2001) point out to the parallels between Hitler's and Nietzsche's titanic anti- egalitarianism , [ 9 ] and the idea of the " übermensch ", [ 10 ] a term which was frequently used by Hitler and Mussolini to refer to the so-called " Aryan race ", or rather, its projected future after fascist engineering.

[ 11 ] Alfred  Rosenberg , an influential Nazi ideologist, also delivered a speech in which he related Nazism to Nietzsche's ideology.

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] Broadly speaking, despite Nietzsche's hostility towards anti-semitism and nationalism, the Nazis made selective use of Nietzsche's philosophy, and eventually, this association caused Nietzsche's reputation to suffer following World War II .

[ 13 ] On the other hand, it is known that Mussolini early on heard lectures about Nietzsche, Vilfredo Pareto , and others in ideologically forming fascism. A girlfriend of Mussolini, Margherita Sarfatti , [ 14 ] who was Jewish, relates that Nietzsche virtually was the transforming factor in Mussolini's "conversion" from hard socialism to spiritualistic, ascetic fascism: [ 15 ] "In 1908 he presented his conception of the superman's role in modern society in a writing on Nietzsche entitled, "The Philosophy of Force." Nietzsche's influence on Continental philosophy increased dramatically after the Second World War.

Nietzsche and anarchism [ edit ] Main article: Anarchism and Friedrich Nietzsche During the 19th century, Nietzsche was frequently associated with anarchist movements, in spite of the fact that in his writings he definitely holds a negative view of egalitarian anarchists.

[ 16 ] Nevertheless, Nietzsche's ideas generated strong interest from key figures from the historical anarchist movement which began in the 1890s. According to a recent study, " Gustav Landauer , Emma Goldman and others reflected on the chances offered and the dangers posed by these ideas in relation to their own politics. Heated debates over meaning, for example on the will to power or on the status of women in Nietzsche’s works, provided even the most vehement critics such as Peter Kropotkin with productive cues for developing their own theories. In recent times, a newer strand called post-anarchism has invoked Nietzsche’s ideas, while also disregarding the historical variants of Nietzschean anarchism. This calls into question the innovative potential of post-anarchism." [ 17 ] Some hypothesize on certain grounds Nietzsche's violent stance against anarchism may (at least partially) be the result of a popular association during this period between his ideas and those of Max Stirner .

[ 18 ] Thus far, no plagiarism has been detected at all, but a probable concealed influence in his formative years.

[ 19 ] Spencer Sunshine writes, "There were many things that drew anarchists to Nietzsche: his hatred of the state; his disgust for the mindless social behavior of "herds"; his anti-Christianity; his distrust of the effect of both the market and the state on cultural production; his desire for an "overman" — that is, for a new human who was to be neither master nor slave; his praise of the ecstatic and creative self, with the artist as his prototype, who could say, "Yes" to the self-creation of a new world on the basis of nothing; and his forwarding of the " transvaluation of values " as source of change, as opposed to a Marxist conception of class struggle and the dialectic of a linear history." [ 20 ] Lacking in Nietzsche is the anarchist utopian-egalitarian belief that every soul is capable of epic greatness: Nietzsche's aristocratic elitism is the death-knell of any Nietzschean conventional anarchism.

[ citation needed ] According to Sunshine: "The list is not limited to culturally oriented anarchists such as Emma Goldman, who gave dozens of lectures about Nietzsche and baptized him as an honorary anarchist. Pro-Nietzschean anarchists also include prominent Spanish CNT – FAI members in the 1930s such as Salvador Seguí and anarcha-feminist Federica Montseny ; anarcho-syndicalist militants like Rudolf Rocker ; and even the younger Murray Bookchin , who cited Nietzsche's conception of the 'transvaluation of values' in support of the Spanish anarchist project." Also in European individualist anarchist circles his influence is clear in thinker/activists such as Émile Armand [ 21 ] and Renzo Novatore [ 22 ] among others. Also more recently in post-left anarchy , Nietzsche is present in the thought of Hakim Bey and Wolfi Landstreicher.

Nietzsche and fascism [ edit ] See also: Philosophy of Friedrich Nietzsche § Jews, nationalism and European identity Wochenspruch der NSDAP 9 April 1939: "What does not kill me makes me stronger." The Italian and German fascist regimes were eager to lay claim to Nietzsche's ideas, and to position themselves as inspired by them. In 1932, Nietzsche's sister, Elisabeth Förster-Nietzsche , received a bouquet of roses from Adolf Hitler during a German premiere of Benito Mussolini 's 100 Days , and in 1934 Hitler personally presented her with a wreath for Nietzsche's grave carrying the words "To A Great Fighter". Also in 1934, Elisabeth gave Hitler Nietzsche's favorite walking stick, and Hitler was photographed gazing into the eyes of a white marble bust of Nietzsche.

[ 23 ] Heinrich Hoffmann 's popular biography Hitler as Nobody Knows Him (which sold nearly a half-million copies by 1938) featured this photo with the caption reading: "The Führer before the bust of the German philosopher whose ideas have fertilized two great popular movements: the national socialist of Germany and the fascist of Italy." [ 24 ] Nietzsche was no less popular among French fascists, perhaps with more doctrinal truthfulness, as Robert S. Wistrich has pointed out The "fascist" Nietzsche was above all considered to be a heroic opponent of necrotic Enlightenment "rationality" and a kind of spiritual vitalist, who had glorified war and violence in an age of herd-lemming shopkeepers, inspiring the anti-Marxist revolutions of the interwar period. According to the French fascist Pierre Drieu La Rochelle , it was the Nietzschean emphasis on the autotelic power of the Will that inspired the mystic voluntarism and political activism of his comrades. Such politicized readings were vehemently rejected by another French writer, the socialo-communist anarchist Georges Bataille , who in the 1930s sought to establish (in ambiguous success) the "radical incompatibility" between Nietzsche (as a thinker who abhorred mass politics) and "the fascist reactionaries." He argued that nothing was more alien to Nietzsche than the pan-Germanism, racism, militarism and anti-Semitism of the Nazis, into whose service the German philosopher had been pressed.

[ 25 ] Bataille here was sharp-witted but combined half-truths without his customary dialectical finesse.

Within Italian fascism , Nietzsche's influence was largely channeled through Italian poet Gabriele D'Annunzio , who was one of the most early Nietzscheans in Italy and translator of Nietzsche's works. Nietzsche exerted influence on Benito Mussolini, who engaged Nietzsche's works from the period of his association with Italian Socialist Party . In August 1924, while addressing the inaugural session of the National Council of the Fascist Party at Palazzo Venezia in Rome, Mussolini said: [ 26 ] A German philosopher [Friedrich Nietzsche] has said: ' Live dangerously .' I would like this to be the motto of the passionate, young Italian Fascism: 'Live dangerously.' This must mean to be ready for everything, any sacrifice, any danger, any action, when it comes to defending the fatherland and fascism. Life as conceived by the Fascist is serious, austere and religious: it is lived entirely in a world driven by the responsible and moral forces of the spirit. The fascist must despise the convenient life. His credo is heroism, while that of the bourgeois is selfishness. Finally, fascism is a religious concept that sees Man in his sublime relationship with a law and a will that transcend the individual. For fascism, the world is not the material world that appears on the surface, where man is an individual isolated from all others, existing in himself, and governed by a law that leads him to live only a life of selfish, momentary pleasure. Fascism was born of a reaction against the present century and against degenerate, agnostic materialism.

Despite the fact that Mussolini often mentioned and cited Nietzsche in different contexts, Nietzsche was not credited as a source of inspiration for fascism in its official definitions in the Enciclopedia Italiana .

[ 26 ] The German philosopher Martin Heidegger , an active member of the Nazi Party, noted that everyone in his day was either 'for' or 'against' Nietzsche while claiming that this thinker heard a "command to reflect on the essence of a planetary domination." Alan D. Schrift cites this passage and writes, "That Heidegger sees Nietzsche heeding a command to reflect and prepare for earthly domination is of less interest to me than his noting that everyone thinks in terms of a position for or against Nietzsche. In particular, the gesture of setting up 'Nietzsche' as a battlefield on which to take one's stand against or to enter into competition with the ideas of one's intellectual predecessors or rivals has happened quite frequently in the twentieth century." [ 27 ] Contrary to Bataille, Thomas Mann , Albert Camus and others, claimed that the Nazi movement, despite Nietzsche' virulent hatred of both volkist- populist socialist and nationalism ("national socialism"), did, in certain of its emphases, share an affinity with Nietzsche's ideas, including his ferocious attacks against democracy , egalitarianism , the communistic -socialistic social model, popular Christianity, parliamentary government, and a number of other things. In The Will to Power Nietzsche praised – sometimes metaphorically, other times both metaphorically and literally – the sublimity of war and warriors, and heralded an international ruling race that would become the "lords of the earth". Here Nietzsche was referring to pan-Europeanism of a Caesarist type, positively embracing Jews, [ 28 ] [ according to whom?

] not a Germanic master race but a neo-imperial elite of culturally refined "redeemers" of humanity, which was otherwise considered wretched and plebeian and ugly in its mindless existence.

The Nazis appropriated, or rather received also inspiration in this case, from Nietzsche's extremely old-fashioned and semi-feudal views on women: Nietzsche despised modern feminism, along with democracy and socialism, as mere egalitarian leveling movements of nihilism. He forthrightly declared, "Man shall be trained for war and woman for the procreation of the warrior, anything else is folly"; and was indeed unified with the Nazi world-view at least in terms of the social role of women: "They belong in the kitchen and their chief role in life is to beget children for German warriors." [ 29 ] Here is one area where Nietzsche indeed did not contradict the Nazis in his politics of "aristocratic radicalism." During the interbellum years, certain Nazis had employed a highly selective reading of Nietzsche's work to advance their ideology, notably Alfred Baeumler , who strikingly omitted the fact of Nietzsche's anti-socialism and anti-nationalism (for Nietzsche, both equally contemptible mass herd movements of modernity) in his reading of The Will to Power . The era of Nazi rule (1933–1945) saw Nietzsche's writings widely studied in German (and, after 1938, Austrian) schools and universities. Despite the fact that Nietzsche had expressed his disgust with plebeian-volkist antisemitism and supremacist German nationalism in the most forthright terms possible (e.g. he resolved "to have nothing to do with anyone involved in the perfidious race-fraud"), phrases like "the will to power" became common in Nazi circles. The wide popularity of Nietzsche among Nazis stemmed in part from the endeavors of his sister, Elisabeth Förster-Nietzsche , the editor of Nietzsche's work after his 1889 breakdown, and an eventual Nazi sympathizer.

Mazzino Montinari , while editing Nietzsche's posthumous works in the 1960s, found that Förster-Nietzsche, while editing the posthumous fragments making up The Will to Power , had cut extracts, changed their order, quoted him out of context, etc.

[ 30 ] Nietzsche's reception among the more intellectually percipient or zealous fascists was not universally warm. For example, one "rabidly Nazi writer, Curt von Westernhagen, who announced in his book Nietzsche, Juden, Antijuden (1936) that the time had come to expose the 'defective personality of Nietzsche whose inordinate tributes for, and espousal of, Jews had caused him to depart from the Germanic principles enunciated by Meister Richard Wagner'." [ 31 ] The real problem with the labelling of Nietzsche as a fascist, or worse, a Nazi, is that it ignores the fact that Nietzsche's aristocratism seeks to revive an older conception of politics, one which he locates in Greek agon which [...] has striking affinities with the philosophy of action expounded in our own time by Hannah Arendt . Once an affinity like this is appreciated, the absurdity of describing Nietzsche's political thought as 'fascist', or Nazi, becomes readily apparent.

[ 32 ] Nietzsche and Zionism [ edit ] Main article: Nietzschean Zionism Jacob Golomb observed, "Nietzsche's ideas were widely disseminated among and appropriated by the first Hebrew Zionist writers and leaders." [ 33 ] According to Steven Aschheim, "Classical Zionism, that essentially secular and modernizing movement, was acutely aware of the crisis of Jewish tradition and its supporting institutions. Nietzsche was enlisted as an authority for articulating the movement's ruptured relationship with the past and a force in its drive to normalization and its activist ideal of self-creating Hebraic New Man." [ 34 ] Francis R. Nicosia notes, "At the height of his fame between 1895 and 1902, some of Nietzsche's ideas seemed to have a particular resonance for some Zionists, including Theodor Herzl ." [ 35 ] Under his editorship the Neue Freie Presse dedicated seven consecutive issues to Nietzsche obituaries, and Golomb notes that Herzl's cousin Raoul Auernheimer claimed Herzl was familiar with Nietzsche and had "absorbed his style." [ 36 ] However, Gabriel Sheffer suggests that Herzl was too bourgeois and too eager to be accepted into mainstream society to be much of a revolutionary (even an "aristocratic" one), and hence could not have been strongly influenced by Nietzsche, but remarks, "Some East European Jewish intellectuals, such as the writers Yosef Hayyim Brenner and Micha Josef Berdyczewski , followed after Herzl because they thought that Zionism offered the chance for a Nietzschean 'transvaluation of values' within Jewry".

[ 37 ] Nietzsche also influenced Theodor Lessing .

Martin Buber was fascinated by Nietzsche, whom he praised as a heroic figure, and he strove to introduce "a Nietzschean perspective into Zionist affairs." In 1901, Buber, who had just been appointed the editor of Die Welt , the primary publication of the World Zionist Organization , published a poem in Zarathustrastil (a style reminiscent of Nietzsche's Thus Spoke Zarathustra ) calling for the return of Jewish literature, art and scholarship.

[ 38 ] Max Nordau , an early Zionist orator and controversial racial anthropologist, insisted that Nietzsche had been insane since birth, and advocated "branding his disciples [...] as hysterical and imbecile." [ 39 ] Nietzsche, analytical psychology and psychoanalysis [ edit ] Carl Jung , the psychiatrist and psychoanalyst who founded analytical psychology, recognized Nietzsche's profundity early on. "From the time Jung first became gripped by Nietzsche’s ideas as a student in Basel to his days as a leading figure in the psychoanalytic movement, Jung read, and increasingly developed, his own thought in a dialogue with the work of Nietzsche. … Untangling the exact influence of Nietzsche on Jung, however, is a complicated business. Jung never openly addressed the exact influence Nietzsche had on his own concepts, and when he did link his own ideas to Nietzsche’s, he almost never made it clear whether the idea in question was inspired by Nietzsche or whether he merely discovered the parallel at a later stage." [ 40 ] In 1934, Jung held a lengthy and insightful seminar on Nietzsche's Zarathustra .

[ 41 ] In 1936, Jung explained that Germans of the present day had been seized or possessed by the psychic force known in Germanic mythology as Wotan , "the god of storm and frenzy, the unleasher of passions and the lust of battle"—Wotan being synonymous with Nietzsche's Dionysus , Jung said.

[ 42 ] A 12th-century stick found among the Bryggen inscriptions, Bergen, Norway bears a runic message by which the population called upon Thor and Wotan for help: Thor is asked to receive the reader, and Wotan to own them.

[ 43 ] "Nietzsche provided Jung both with the terminology (the Dionysian) and the case study (Zarathustra as an example of the Dionysian at work in the psyche) to help him put into words his thoughts about the spirit of his own age: an age confronted with an uprush of the Wotanic/Dionysian spirit in the collective unconscious. This, in a nutshell, is how Jung came to see Nietzsche, and explains why he was so fascinated by Nietzsche as a thinker." [ 40 ] Nietzsche had also an important influence on psychotherapist and founder of the school of individual psychology Alfred Adler . According to Ernest Jones , biographer and personal acquaintance of Sigmund Freud , Freud frequently referred to Nietzsche as having "more penetrating knowledge of himself than any man who ever lived or was likely to live".

[ 44 ] Yet Jones also reports that Freud emphatically denied that Nietzsche's writings influenced his own psychological discoveries; in the 1890s, Freud, whose education at the University of Vienna in the 1870s had included a strong relationship with Franz Brentano , his teacher in philosophy, from whom he had acquired an enthusiasm for Aristotle and Ludwig Feuerbach , was acutely aware of the possibility of convergence of his own ideas with those of Nietzsche and doggedly refused to read the philosopher as a result. In his excoriating — but also sympathetic — critique of psychoanalysis, The Psychoanalytic Movement , Ernest Gellner depicts Nietzsche as setting out the conditions for elaborating a realistic psychology, in contrast with the eccentrically implausible Enlightenment psychology of Hume and Smith, and assesses the success of Freud and the psychoanalytic movement as in large part based upon its success in meeting this "Nietzschean minimum".

[ 45 ] Early 20th-century thinkers [ edit ] Early twentieth-century thinkers who read or were influenced by Nietzsche include: philosophers Martin Heidegger , Ludwig Wittgenstein , Ernst Jünger , Theodor Adorno , Georg Brandes , Martin Buber , Karl Jaspers , Henri Bergson , Jean-Paul Sartre , Albert Camus , Leo Strauss , Michel Foucault , Julius Evola , Emil Cioran , Miguel de Unamuno , Lev Shestov , Ayn Rand , José Ortega y Gasset , Rudolf Steiner and Muhammad Iqbal ; sociologists Ferdinand Tönnies and Max Weber ; composers Richard Strauss , Alexander Scriabin , Gustav Mahler , and Frederick Delius ; historians Oswald Spengler , Fernand Braudel [ 46 ] and Paul Veyne , theologians Paul Tillich and Thomas J.J. Altizer ; the occultists Aleister Crowley and Erwin Neutzsky-Wulff . Novelists Franz Kafka , Joseph Conrad , Thomas Mann , Hermann Hesse , Charles Bukowski , André Malraux , Nikos Kazantzakis , André Gide , Knut Hamsun , August Strindberg , James Joyce , D. H. Lawrence , Vladimir Bartol and Pío Baroja ; psychologists Sigmund Freud , Otto Gross , C. G. Jung , Alfred Adler , Abraham Maslow , Carl Rogers , Rollo May and Kazimierz Dąbrowski ; poets John Davidson , Rainer Maria Rilke , Wallace Stevens and William Butler Yeats ; painters Salvador Dalí , Wassily Kandinsky , Pablo Picasso , Mark Rothko ; playwrights George Bernard Shaw , Antonin Artaud , August Strindberg , and Eugene O'Neill ; and authors H. P. Lovecraft , Olaf Stapledon , Menno ter Braak , Richard Wright , Robert E. Howard , and Jack London . American writer H. L. Mencken avidly read and translated Nietzsche's works and has gained the sobriquet "the American Nietzsche". In his book on Nietzsche, Mencken portrayed the philosopher as a proponent of anti-egalitarian aristocratic revolution, a depiction in sharp contrast with left-wing interpretations of Nietzsche. Nietzsche was declared an honorary anarchist by Emma Goldman , and he influenced other anarchists such as Guy Aldred , Rudolf Rocker , Max Cafard and John Moore .

[ citation needed ] The popular conservative writer, philosopher, poet, journalist and theological apologist of Catholicism G. K. Chesterton expressed contempt for Nietzsche's ideas, deeming his philosophy basically a poison or death-wish of Western culture: I do not even think that a cosmopolitan contempt for patriotism is merely a matter of opinion, any more than I think that a Nietzscheite contempt for compassion is merely a matter of opinion. I think they are both heresies so horrible that their treatment must not be so much mental as moral, when it is not simply medical. Men are not always dead of a disease and men are not always damned by a delusion; but so far as they are touched by it they are destroyed by it.

— May 31, 1919, Illustrated London News Thomas Mann 's essays mention Nietzsche with respect and even adoration, although one of his final essays, "Nietzsche's Philosophy in the Light of Recent History", looks at his favorite philosopher through the lens of Nazism and World War II and ends up placing Nietzsche at a more critical distance. Many of Nietzsche's ideas, particularly on artists and aesthetics , are incorporated and explored throughout Mann's works. The theme of the aesthetic justification of existence Nietzsche introduced from his earliest writings, in "The Birth of Tragedy" declaring sublime art as the only metaphysical consolation of existence; and in the context of fascism and Nazism, the Nietzschean aestheticization of politics void of morality and ordered by caste hierarchy in service of the creative caste, has posed many problems and questions for thinkers in contemporary times. One of the characters in Mann's 1947 novel Doktor Faustus represents Nietzsche fictionally. In 1938 the German existentialist Karl Jaspers wrote the following about the influence of Nietzsche and Søren Kierkegaard : The contemporary philosophical situation is determined by the fact that two philosophers, Kierkegaard and Nietzsche, who did not count in their times and, for a long time, remained without influence in the history of philosophy, have continually grown in significance. Philosophers after Hegel have increasingly returned to face them, and they stand today unquestioned as the authentically great thinkers of their age. [...] The effect of both is immeasurably great, even greater in general thinking than in technical philosophy — Jaspers, Reason and Existenz Bertrand Russell in his History of Western Philosophy was scathing in his chapter on Nietzsche, asking whether his work might not be called the "mere power-phantasies of an invalid" and referring to Nietzsche as a "megalomaniac": It is obvious that in his day-dreams he is a warrior, not a professor; all of the men he admires were military.  His opinion of women, like every man's, is an objectification of his own emotion towards them, which is obviously one of fear.  "Forget not thy whip"-- but nine women out of ten would get the whip away from him, and he knew it, so he kept away from women, and soothed his wounded vanity with unkind remarks. [...] [H]e is so full of fear and hatred that spontaneous love of mankind seems to him impossible.  He has never conceived of the man who, with all the fearlessness and stubborn pride of the superman, nevertheless does not inflict pain because he has no wish to do so. Does any one suppose that Lincoln acted as he did from fear of hell? Yet to Nietzsche, Lincoln is abject, Napoleon magnificent. [...] I dislike Nietzsche because he likes the contemplation of pain, because he erects conceit into duty, because the men whom he most admires are conquerors, whose glory is cleverness in causing men to die.  But I think the ultimate argument against his philosophy, as against any unpleasant but internally self-conscious ethic, lies not in an appeal to facts, but in an appeal to the emotions.  Nietzsche despises universal love; I feel it the motive power to all that I desire as regards the world.  His followers have had their innings, but we may hope that it is coming rapidly to an end.

— Russell, History of Western Philosophy Likewise, the fictional valet Reginald Jeeves , created by author P. G. Wodehouse , is a fan of Baruch Spinoza , recommending his works to his employer, Bertie Wooster , over those of Friedrich Nietzsche: You would not enjoy Nietzsche, sir. He is fundamentally unsound.

— Wodehouse, Carry On Jeeves Nietzsche and World War I [ edit ] World War I was called at the time "Nietzsche in action", as well as the "Euro-Nietzschean" or "Anglo-Nietzschean" war, where national sentiment overcame Christian and Socialist ideals.

[ 47 ] Nietzsche after World War II [ edit ] Sculpture Das Röckener Bacchanal by Klaus Friedrich Messerschmidt (2000), near Nietzsche's grave at Röcken in Germany.

The appropriation of Nietzsche's work by the Nazis, combined with the rise of analytic philosophy , ensured that British and American academic philosophers would almost completely ignore him until at least 1950.

George Santayana dismissed Nietzsche in his 1916 Egotism in German Philosophy as another " prophet of Romanticism ". Analytic philosophers, if they mentioned Nietzsche at all, characterized him as a literary figure rather than as a philosopher. Nietzsche's present stature in the English-speaking world owes much to the exegetical writings and improved Nietzsche translations by the Jewish-German, American philosopher Walter Kaufmann and the British scholar R. J. Hollingdale .

Nietzsche's influence on Continental philosophy increased dramatically after the Second World War, especially among the French intellectual Left and post-structuralists .

According to the philosopher René Girard , [ 48 ] Nietzsche's greatest political legacy lies in his 20th-century French interpreters, among them Georges Bataille , Pierre Klossowski , Michel Foucault , Gilles Deleuze (and Félix Guattari ), and Jacques Derrida . This philosophical movement (originating with the work of Bataille) has been dubbed French Nietzscheanism .

[ 49 ] Foucault's later writings, for example, revise Nietzsche's genealogical method to develop anti-foundationalist theories of power that divide and fragment rather than unite polities (as evinced in the liberal tradition of political theory). Deleuze, arguably the foremost of Nietzsche's Leftist interpreters, used the much-maligned "will to power" thesis in tandem with Marxian notions of commodity surplus and Freudian ideas of desire to articulate concepts such as the rhizome and other "outsides" to state power as traditionally conceived.

Gilles Deleuze and Pierre Klossowski wrote monographs drawing new attention to Nietzsche's work, and a 1972 conference at Cérisy-la-Salle ranks as the most important event in France for a generation's reception of Nietzsche. In Germany interest in Nietzsche was revived from the 1980s onwards, particularly by the German philosopher Peter Sloterdijk , who has devoted several essays to Nietzsche.

Ernst Nolte the German historian, in his literature analyzing fascism and Nazism, presented Nietzsche as a force of the Counter-Enlightenment and foe of all modern "emancipation politics", and Nolte's judgment generated impassioned dialogue.

In recent years, Nietzsche has also influenced members of the analytical philosophy tradition, such as Bernard Williams in his last finished book, Truth And Truthfulness: An Essay In Genealogy (2002).  Prior to that Arthur Danto , with his book, Nietzsche as Philosopher (1965), presented what was the first full-length study of Nietzsche by an analytical philosopher. Then later, Alexander Nehamas , came out with his book, Nietzsche: Life as Literature (1985).

List of notable advocates [ edit ] Peter Sloterdijk Costin Alamariu Georg Brandes Walter Kaufmann References [ edit ] ^ O. Ewald, "German Philosophy in 1907", in The Philosophical Review, Vol. 17, No. 4, Jul., 1908, pp. 400-426; T. A. Riley, "Anti-Statism in German Literature, as Exemplified by the Work of John Henry Mackay", in PMLA, Vol. 62, No. 3, Sep., 1947, pp. 828-843; C. E. Forth, "Nietzsche, Decadence, and Regeneration in France, 1891-95", in Journal of the History of Ideas, Vol. 54, No. 1, Jan., 1993, pp. 97-117 ^ Steven E. Aschheim notes that "[a]bout 150,000 copies of a specially durable wartime Zarathustra were distributed to the troops" in The Nietzsche Legacy in Germany, 1890-1990 , Berkeley and Los Angeles, 1992, p. 135 ^ Kaufmann, p. 8 ^ Schrift, A.D. (1995).

Nietzsche's French Legacy: A Genealogy of Poststructuralism . Routledge.

ISBN 0-415-91147-8 .

^ Mary Ann Frese Witt, The Search for Modern Tragedy , Cornell University Press, 2001, p. 137 ^ Weaver Santaniello, Nietzsche, God, and the Jews , SUNY Press, 1994, p. 41: "Hitler probably never read a word of Nietzsche"; Berel Lang , Post-Holocaust: Interpretation, Misinterpretation, and the Claims of History , Indiana University Press, 2005, p. 162: "Arguably, Hitler himself never read a word of Nietzsche; certainly, if he did read him, it was not extensively"; Jacob Golomb, Nietzsche and Jewish Culture , Routledge, 1997, p. 9: "To be sure, it is almost certain that Hitler either never read Nietzsche directly or read very little."; Andrew C. Janos, East Central Europe in the Modern World , Stanford University Press, 2002, p. 184: "By all indications, Hitler never read Nietzsche. Neither Mein Kampf nor Hitler's Table Talk ( Tischgesprache ) mentions his name. In all fairness, one may say Hitler did read Nietzsche in some capacity, but not in a scholarly fashion. In any case, Nietzschean ideas reached him through the filter of Alfred Rosenberg's Myth of the Twentieth Century , and, more simply, through what was coffeehouse Quatsch in Vienna and Munich. This at least is the impression he gives in his published conversations with Dietrich Eckart." ^ Brigitte Hamann, Hitler's Vienna: A Dictator's Apprenticeship, p.74 ^ Jacob Golomb & Robert S. Wistrich (2002), " Nietzsche, Godfather of Fascism? On the Uses and Abuses of a Philosophy ", Princeton University Press, 2007. Retrieved on June 8th, 2013. "In Hitler's Table Talk , [Hitler] refers to Nietzsche, saying: " In our part of the world, the Jews would have immediately eliminated Schopenhauer , Nietzsche , and Kant . If the Bolsheviks had dominion over us for 200 years, what works of our past would be handed on to posterity? Our great men would fall into oblivion, or else they'd be presented to future generations as criminals and bandits.

" ^ Meléndez Germán (2001), Nietzsche en perspectiva , Universidad Nacional de Colombia , pages 255-258. Chapter "Poder y Anti-igualitarismo en Nietzsche y Hitler", by Ernst Tugendhat .

^ Star Alexander, The New York Times , January 13, 2012 .

^ a b Alexander, Jeffrey (2011).

A Contemporary Introduction to Sociology (2nd ed.). Paradigm.

ISBN 978-1-61205-029-4 .

^ Rosenberg is quoted " In a truly historical sense, the movement eclipses the rest of the world, much as Nietzsche, the individual, eclipsed the powers of his times.

" ^ Rafael Arévalo Martínez (1943), Nietzsche el conquistador: (la doctrina que engendró la segunda guerra mundial.) , Tipografía Sánchez & De Guise, 170 pp.

^ Sarfatti (July 2004).

The Life of Benito Mussolini .

ISBN 1-4179-3962-1 .

^ Simonetta Falasca-Zamponi, Fascist Spectacle: The Aesthetics of Power in Mussolini's Italy , University of California Press, 2000, p. 44 ^ In Beyond Good and Evil (6.2:126), to only cite one volcanic attack against anarchists of modernity, he refers to "anarchist dogs" ^ Miething, Dominique (2016).

Anarchistische Deutungen der Philosophie Friedrich Nietzsches. Deutschland, Großbritannien, USA (1890-1947) . Baden-Baden: Nomos. p. 15ff.

doi : 10.5771/9783845280127 .

ISBN 978-3-8487-3711-6 .

^ "Nietzsche's possible reading, knowledge, and plagiarism of Max Stirner's The Ego and Its Own (1845) has been a contentious question and frequently discussed for more than a century now." Thomas H. Brobjer, "Philologica: A Possible Solution to the Stirner-Nietzsche Question", in The Journal of Nietzsche Studies , Issue 25, Spring 2003, pp. 109-114 ^ Laska, Bernd A.

"Nietzsche's initial crisis" .

Germanic Notes and Reviews .

33 (2): 109– 33.

^ Spencer Sunshine, "Nietzsche and the Anarchists" ^ The Anarchism of Émile Armand by Émile Armand ^ Toward the Creative Nothing by Renzo Novatore ^ John Rodden, Repainting the Little Red Schoolhouse: A History of Eastern German Education, 1945-1995 , Oxford University Press, 2002, p 289 ^ Hans D. Sluga, Heidegger's Crisis: Philosophy and Politics in Nazi Germany , Harvard University Press, 1993, p 179 ^ Jacob Golomb, Robert S. Wistrich, Nietzsche, Godfather of Fascism?: On The Uses and Abuses of a Philosophy , Princeton University Press, 2002, p 162 ^ a b Sznajder, Mario (2002). "Nietzsche, Mussolini, and Italian Fascism". In Golomb, Jacob; Wistrich, Robert S. (eds.).

Nietzsche, godfather of fascism?: On the uses and abuses of a philosophy . Princeton University Press. pp.

235– 263.

^ Alan D. Schrift (Ed.), Why Nietzsche still?

, University of California Press, 2000, pp 184–185 ^ Human, All-Too-Human [475] and The Dawn [68] and [205], Nietzsche praises the virtues of the Jewish people and criticizes the mistakenness in Europe's anti-Semitism ^ William Lawrence Shirer, The Rise and Fall of the Third Reich: A History of Nazi Germany , Simon and Schuster, 1960, pp 99–101.

^ Mazzino Montinari , "La Volonté de puissance" n'existe pas , Éditions de l'Éclat , 1996 ^ Jacob Golomb, Robert S. Wistrich, Nietzsche, Godfather of Fascism?: On The Uses and Abuses of a Philosophy , Princeton University Press, 2002, p 149 ^ Keith Ansell-Pearson, An Introduction to Nietzsche as Political Thinker: The Perfect Nihilist , Cambridge University Press, 1994, pp 33–34 ^ Jacob Golomb, Nietzsche and Zion , Cornell University Press, 2004, p. 1 ^ Steven E. Aschheim, The Nietzsche legacy in Germany, 1890-1990 , University of California Press, 1994, p 102 ^ Francis R. Nicosia, Zionism and Anti-Semitism in Nazi Germany , Cambridge University Press, 2008, p 36 ^ Jacob Golomb, Nietzsche and Zion , Cornell University Press, 2004, pp 25–27 ^ Gabriel Sheffer, U.S.–Israeli Relations at the Crossroads , Routledge, 1997, p 170 ^ Jacob Golomb (Ed.), Nietzsche and Jewish Culture , Routledge, 1997, pp 235–236 ^ Robert S. Wistrich, Laboratory for World Destruction: Germans and Jews in Central Europe , University of Nebraska Press, 2007, p 158 ^ a b Rensma, Ritske.

"Jung's Reception of Friedrich Nietzsche" .

Depth Insights . Retrieved 15 March 2017 .

^ Jung Timeline Archived 2007-05-23 at the Wayback Machine ^ Jung, Carl Gustav (1958).

Essays on Contemporary Events . London: Routledge Classics. p. 18.

ISBN 0-415-27835-X .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ McLeod, Mees (2006:30).

^ Jones, The Life and Work of Sigmund Freud ^ Gellner, Ernest, The Psychoanalytic Movement. The Cunning of Unreason , with a foreword by José Brunner, orig. 1983, Oxford: Blackwell, 2003, pp. 17ff.

^ See Fernand Braudel 's preface to The Mediterranean and the Mediterranean World in the Age of Philip II , where he says he had been largely influenced by the Second Untimely Meditation ^ Salter, William Mackintire (1917). "Nietzsche and the War".

International Journal of Ethics .

27 (3): 357– 379.

doi : 10.1086/intejethi.27.3.2377396 .

JSTOR 2377396 .

S2CID 170857115 .

^ René Girard, "Dionysus versus the Crucified" , MLN , Vol. 99, No. 4 (Sep., 1984), pp. 816–835.

^ Alan D. Schrift, Poststructuralism and Critical Theory's Second Generation , Routledge, 2014, ch. 1: French Nietzscheanism.

Further reading [ edit ] John Moore with Spencer Sunshine, ed. (2004).

I Am Not A Man, I Am Dynamite!: Friedrich Nietzsche and the Anarchist Tradition .

Autonomedia . p. 160.

ISBN 1-57027-121-6 . Archived from the original ( Paperback ) on 2007-04-06 . Retrieved 2007-05-08 .

Ratner-Rosenhagen, Jennifer (2012).

American Nietzsche: A History of an Icon and His Ideas . Chicago: University of Chicago Press .

ISBN 978-0-226-70581-1 .

Wallis, Glenn (2024).

Nietzsche NOW! The Great Immoralist on the Vital Issues of Our Time . Warbler Press.

ISBN 978-1-962572-41-5 .

v t e Friedrich Nietzsche Works The Birth of Tragedy On the Pathos of Truth Philosophy in the Tragic Age of the Greeks On Truth and Lies in a Nonmoral Sense Untimely Meditations On the Advantage and Disadvantage of History for Life Hymnus an das Leben Human, All Too Human The Dawn of Day Idylls from Messina The Gay Science Thus Spoke Zarathustra Beyond Good and Evil On the Genealogy of Morality The Case of Wagner Twilight of the Idols The Antichrist Ecce Homo Dionysian Dithyrambs Nietzsche contra Wagner The Will to Power (posthumous) Concepts and philosophy Affirmation Amor fati Apollonian and Dionysian The Four Great Errors Eternal return Faith in the Earth Genealogy (philosophy) God is dead Holy Lie Immaculate perception Last man Master–slave morality Perspectivism Ressentiment Transvaluation of values Tschandala Übermensch Will to power World riddle Influence and reception Costin Alamariu Giorgio de Chirico Works about Nietzsche The Journal of Nietzsche Studies Nietzschean Zionism Related Anarchism and Nietzsche Library of Friedrich Nietzsche Nietzsche's views on women Nietzsche and free will Nietzsche Archive Nietzsche-Haus, Naumburg Nietzsche-Haus, Sils Maria Relationship with Max Stirner My Sister and I Elisabeth Förster-Nietzsche (sister) Herd instinct Zarathustra's roundelay Friedrich Nietzsche Prize v t e Historiography Historians list / by area of study History historians historicity history theories of history Historical sources Types Primary sources Secondary sources Tertiary sources Sources Annals Archives Artifacts Archaeological site Chronicles Codices Deeds Facsimiles Features Hieroglyphs Historical documents Logbooks Manuscripts Illuminated Oral tradition Papyri Religious texts Scrolls War diaries Service records Fields of study By scale Big History World history Human history Local history Microhistory By source Archival science / Library and information science ( template ) Books / Writing systems Chorography Chronology dating Diplomatics Encyclopaedistics Epigraphy Genealogy Heraldry Numismatics (Money) Onomastics Oral history preservation Phaleristics Philology Postage stamps Prosopography Sigillography Toponymy Vexillology By topic Anthropology / Paleoanthropology Cultural Ecology / Environment / Geography Economic Business Capitalism Perspectives on capitalism by school of thought Thought Intellectual Geistesgeschichte Linguistics Maritime Medieval churches Military Political Constitutional Diplomatic Social Feminism Gender Indigenous Labour LGBTQ Rural Quantitative Urban Women Methodology Case study Periodization Historical eras Tarikh Three-age system Approaches, schools Annales school History of mentalities Nouvelle histoire Historiometry / Cliometrics Comparative historical research Critical Decoloniality Feminist Historical anthropology Historical determinism Historism Historical-critical method Humanistic Indiscipline of history [ pt ] Leninist Marxist Historical materialism Nationalist Ancestral civilisation Nationalization of history People's history Subaltern Studies Pop history Quantitative history Revisionist Transnational Whig Great Man theory Concepts General Change and continuity Historic preservation Historic recurrence Historical significance Historicity Historiology [ es ] Theory of history [ de ] Philosophy Specific Black legend Coloniality and decolonization of knowledge Dark Ages Historical negationism Historian's fallacy / Presentism Invented tradition Modernisation theory Narratives Paradigm shift Pax list Thirty-year rule Transhistoricity Translatio imperii / Translatio studii Vaticinium ex eventu Periodization of modern history Age of Discovery Age of Enlightenment European Civil War / Second Thirty Years' War Long 18th / 19th century Renaissance Continuity thesis By country or region Africa African historiography Egypt Pyramid construction techniques Black Egypt Thesis [ es ] Ethiopia Morocco Greater Morocco Rwanda Double genocide theory Maafa Americas Canada Metropolitan-hinterland thesis Residential schools Staples thesis Indigenous population history Latin America Argentina May Revolution / Causes Revisionist [ es ] Peru Iquicha Royalism Colonial Spanish America Casta United States African-American history Nadir of American race relations Neoabolitionism Reconstruction era Consensus history Cyclical theory Frontier thesis Political history Eras Progressive-era historians Eurasia Albania Dealbanisation Austria Habsburg myth Balhae Belarus Litvinism Bulgaria Byzantine Empire [ de ] Early [ ru ] Croatia Europe Ancient [ ru ] Medieval [ ru ] New Age [ ru ] Georgia Aryan Kartli Greek Ages of Man Iran 2,500-year celebration Japan Korea Nationalist Goguryeo controversies North Macedonia Philippines Early settlements Portugal [ pt ] Lusotropicalism Romania Great Union Serbia Kosovo Myth Sweden Götaland theory Switzerland Taiwan Ukraine Executed Renaissance Vietnam Nam tiến Trưng sisters Ancient Rome Catilinarian conspiracy Christianization Constantinian shift Expansion Fall of Western Rome Prosopography Succession Byzantine succession Moscow, third Rome Ottoman claim Problem of two emperors China 5000-year civilization assertion Archaeology Wunu School [ zh ] Century of humiliation Conquest dynasty "Chineseness" debate New Qing History Golden ages Hua–Yi distinction Four Barbarians Sinocentrism Self-Strengthening Movement Sprouts of capitalism Tibetan sovereignty debate France Cordon sanitaire Frankish Interregnum [ fr ] Grand Siècle Legendary Saracen [ fr ] Location of Alésia [ fr ] Lyon [ fr ] Historiography of Vichy France Germany Alltagsgeschichte Borussian myth Historikerstreit Sonderweg Strukturgeschichte [ de ] Sybel-Ficker controversy Vergangenheitsbewältigung India Greater Magadha Indocentrism Indigenous Aryanism Ireland Great Famine " More Irish than the Irish themselves " Revisionism Revolutionary period Italy Fascist Italy Fourth Italian War of Independence Historiae Patriae Monumenta Historical Series of the Bank of Italy Italians, the good people Rerum italicarum scriptores Revisionism of Risorgimento Southern question Neo-Bourbonism Poland Golden Liberty Sarmatism Deluge Partitions Polish People's Republic [ pl ] Russia Anti-Normanism Pre-Revolutionary Russia [ ru ] Skeptic School [ ru ] Soviet Union October Revolution Soviet famine of 1930–1933 Causes of the Holodomor Holodomor genocide question Holodomor in modern politics Spain Black legend / White legend Hispanism Carlism in the Francoist era Convivencia Inquisition Limpieza de sangre controversy [ es ] Reconquista Islamic revolution of Spain [ es ] Revisionist Colonies or Provinces Spanish decline [ es ] Ser de España [ es ] Turkey Kemalist Ottoman Empire Ghaza thesis Decline thesis United Kingdom Poor Laws Scotland Kingdom of Alba Westminster Stone Storm over the gentry Suffragette Campaign Tudor myth Ricardians Winter of Discontent British Empire Cambridge School Porter–MacKenzie debate Second colonial occupation Oceania Colonial Australia By war, conflict v t e Military historiography Military history List of military museums Pre-18th century conflicts Albigensian Crusade Catharism debate Crusades Islamic views Eighty Years' War Origins Fall of Babylon Gallic Wars Late Bronze Age collapse Dorian invasion Sea Peoples Peloponnesian War 18th and 19th century conflicts Coalition Wars (1792–1815) French Revolution Causes War in the Vendée Napoleonic era Invasion of Russia Waterloo American Civil War Origins Turning point Franco-Prussian War Causes Paris Commune Great Game Indian Rebellion of 1857 Causes Paraguayan War War of 1812 Origins War of the Pacific Causes World War I Causes ( Color books / Fischer thesis ) Late Ottoman genocides ( Causes of the Armenian genocide ) Patriotic consent Persian famine of 1917–1919 Powder keg of Europe Schlieffen Plan Spirit of 1914 / 1917 Treaty of Brest-Litovsk , Germany imposed this on Russia in 1918 Treaty of Versailles Reparations War guilt question Article 231 Reichstag inquiry Interwar period Burning of Smyrna Polish–Soviet War Causes Spanish Civil War Background World War II Causes "Blitzkrieg" concept Broad vs. narrow front German resistance to Nazism Nazi foreign policy debate Eastern Front Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact Soviet offensive plans Soviets and the Warsaw Uprising Massacres of Poles in Volhynia and Eastern Galicia Winter War Background Spirit The Holocaust Auschwitz bombing debate Awareness in Nazi Germany and German-occupied Europe Functionalism–intentionalism debate In relation to the Armenian genocide / Nakba Pope Pius XII and the Holocaust Pius Wars "Polish death camp" Responsibility Slovakia Uniqueness Pacific War Atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki "Battle for Australia" Bengal famine Second Sino-Japanese War Nanjing Massacre Western Front Battle of France Guilty Men Résistancialisme Vichy France Cold War Origins 1948 Palestine war Palestinian expulsion and flight / Ongoing Nakba Zionism as settler colonialism New Historians Malayan Emergency Causes Algerian War Six-Day War Origins Iranian revolution Causes Iran–Iraq War Falklands War Sovereignty dispute Sri Lankan civil war Origins Post-Cold War Russo-Georgian War Background Responsibility Syrian revolution Causes Related Conflict thesis Gunpowder and gun transmission War and genocide Category By person Political leaders Adolf Hitler Alexander the Great Amin al-Husseini Aurangzeb Cato the Younger Che Guevara Chiang Ching-kuo [ zh ] Chiang Kai Shek [ zh ] Constantine the Great Gregory Palamas Horatio Nelson Hypatia Jiang Zemin [ zh ] Joseph Stalin [ ru ] José de San Martín Juan Manuel de Rosas Klemens von Metternich Leonid Brezhnev Louis Riel Mao Zedong [ zh ] Muammar Gaddafi Napoleon Neville Chamberlain Pedro II of Brazil Simon Bolivar Cult of personality [ es ] Bolivarianism Saladin Sun Yat-sen [ zh ] Thomas Aquinas Thomas Jefferson Ulysses S. Grant Warren G. Harding Yuan Shikai [ zh ] Zhou Enlai [ zh ] Zhuge Liang [ zh ] Historical rankings Australia Canada Modern Germany Netherlands United Kingdom United States Others The Beatles Charles Darwin Friedrich Nietzsche H. P. Lovecraft Jane Austen Muhammed Historicity Judaism Medieval Christian Jesus Historicity Resurrection Religious perspectives Christianity Judaism Islam J. R. R. Tolkien The Lord of the Rings Madonna Robert Falcon Scott Socrates Søren Kierkegaard William Shakespeare Other topics Bears in antiquity Crisis of historiography [ pt ] Feudalism Library of Alexandria Nationalism in the Middle Ages Professionalization and institutionalization of history Salons Western European colonialism and colonization Desacralization of knowledge Economics Industrial Revolution Great Recession Great Depression School of Thoughts Historical school of economics English historical school of economics Religion Avestan geography Early Christianity Background Historical reliability of the Gospels Primacy of Peter Opposition to Papal supremacy Proto-orthodox Christianity Early Islam Criticism of the Quran Succession to Muhammad Islamic golden age Kharijites Ecclesiastical history of the Catholic Church Second Vatican Council Hermeneutics of Vatican Council II [ it ] Hesychast controversy Protestant Reformation Proto-Protestantism Criticism of Protestantism Protestant work ethic Jesuit historiography Modern Jewish history Wissenschaft des Judentums Schools of thought Biblical criticism Catholic theology Panbabylonism Urreligion Perennial Religionsgeschichtliche Schule Roman Revisionist school of Islamic studies Science / Technology Merton thesis Protestant Ethic and Capitalism Heroic theory of invention and scientific development Gunpowder and gun transmission Torsion mangonel myth Organizations, publications Heritage registers Historical society ( list ) History institutes History journals template Related Commemorative plaque Documentary film Hagiography Historical fiction Historical realism Historiographic metafiction Historical geographic information system Category Multimedia NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐89xl4
Cached time: 20250814224653
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.715 seconds
Real time usage: 0.857 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 8022/1000000
Revision size: 44058/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 354933/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 13135/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 47/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 88484/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.354/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 21084963/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  648.753      1 -total
 38.12%  247.332     17 Template:Navbox
 24.48%  158.805      1 Template:Historiography
 24.10%  156.380      1 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
 21.89%  142.044      1 Template:Reflist
 14.83%   96.232     36 Template:Ill
 12.42%   80.605      1 Template:Lang
 10.54%   68.397      1 Template:Nietzsche
  8.34%   54.110      1 Template:ISBN
  8.14%   52.798      8 Template:Cite_book Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:10739609:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814224653 and revision id 1298308650. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Influence_and_reception_of_Friedrich_Nietzsche&oldid=1298308650 " Categories : Friedrich Nietzsche Reception of writers Cultural influence by writer Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1 errors: ISBN date Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia introduction cleanup from September 2022 All pages needing cleanup Articles covered by WikiProject Wikify from September 2022 All articles covered by WikiProject Wikify All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2019 Articles containing German-language text All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from October 2017 Articles with unsourced statements from September 2022 This page was last edited on 1 July 2025, at 18:14 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Influence and reception of Friedrich Nietzsche 5 languages Add topic

