Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Chemical composition 2 Health Toggle Health subsection 2.1 Concerns 3 Cultural implications Toggle Cultural implications subsection 3.1 Farming 3.2 Sulfur Springs 4 Cause and treatment 5 Levels of sulfur in water around the world 6 Environment 7 References Toggle the table of contents Sulfur water 5 languages العربية Français Hausa Italiano Русский Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Water exposed to hydrogen sulfide gas Water heavily contaminated with sulfur Part of a series on Pollution Air pollution from a factory Air Acid rain Air quality index Atmospheric dispersion modeling Chlorofluorocarbon Combustion Exhaust gas Haze Household air pollution Global dimming Global distillation Indoor air quality Non-exhaust emissions Ozone depletion Particulates Persistent organic pollutant Smog Soot Volatile organic compound Biological Biological hazard Genetic Illegal logging Introduced species Invasive species Digital Information Electromagnetic Light Ecological Overillumination Radio spectrum Natural Ozone Radium and radon in the environment Volcanic ash Wildfire Noise Transportation Health effects from noise Marine mammals and sonar Noise barrier Noise control Soundproofing Radiation Actinides Bioremediation Depleted uranium Nuclear fission Nuclear fallout Plutonium Poisoning Radioactivity Uranium Radioactive waste Soil Agricultural Land degradation Bioremediation Defecation Electrical resistance heating Illegal mining Soil guideline values Phytoremediation Solid waste Advertising mail Biodegradable waste Brown waste Electronic waste Food waste Green waste Hazardous waste Industrial waste Litter Mining Municipal solid waste Nanomaterials Plastic Packaging waste Post-consumer waste Waste management Space Space debris Visual Air travel Advertising clutter Overhead power lines Traffic signs Urban blight Vandalism War Chemical warfare Herbicidal warfare Agent Orange Nuclear holocaust Nuclear fallout Nuclear famine Nuclear winter Scorched earth Unexploded ordnance War and environmental law Water Agricultural wastewater Biosolids Diseases Eutrophication Firewater Freshwater Groundwater Hypoxia Industrial wastewater Marine Monitoring Nonpoint source Nutrient Ocean acidification Oil spill Pharmaceuticals Freshwater salinization Septic tanks Sewage Shipping Sludge Stagnation Sulfur water Surface runoff Turbidity Urban runoff Water quality Wastewater Topics History Pollutants Heavy metals Paint Misc Area source Brain health and pollution Debris Dust Garbology Legacy Thermal pollution Midden Point source Waste Toxic Lists Diseases Law by country Most polluted cities Least polluted cities by PM2.5 Treaties Most polluted rivers Categories By country Environment portal Ecology portal v t e Sulfur water (or sulphur water ) is a condition where water is exposed to hydrogen sulfide gas, giving it a distinct "rotten egg" smell. This condition has different purposes in culture varying from health to implications for plumbing.

Chemical composition [ edit ] Sulfur water is made out of dissolved minerals that contain sulfate. These include baryte (BaSO 4 ), epsomite (MgSO 4 7H 2 O) and gypsum (CaSO 4 2H 2 0).

[ 1 ] It is reported that a notable change in taste to the water is found dependent upon the type of sulfate affecting the water. For sodium sulfate, 250 to 500 mg/litre, with calcium sulfate at 250 to 1000 mg/litre and magnesium sulfate at 400 to 600 mg/litre. A study by Zoeteman found that having 270 mg of calcium sulfate and 90 mg of magnesium sulfate actually had improved the taste of the water.

Health [ edit ] Bathing in water high in sulfur or other minerals for its presumed health benefits is known as balneotherapy . These are said to give a person bathing in the waters "ageless beauty" and relief from aches and pains.

[ 2 ] While humans have been able to adapt to higher levels of concentrations with time, some effects of ingestion of sulfur water has found to have cathartic effects on people consuming water with sulfate concentrations of 600 mg/litre according to a study from the US Department of health in 1962. Some adverse effects that have been found include dehydration , with excess amounts of sodium or magnesium sulfate in a person's diet according to a study in 1980, with some populations, such as children and elderly people, being seen as higher risk.

A survey was done in North Dakota US to better derive whether there was direct causation of a laxative effect from having sulfur in drinking water.

[ 3 ] Results of Survey Sulfate concentrate in drinking water Percentage of people who reported a laxative effect <500 mg of sulfate per litre 21% 500–1000 mg of sulfate per litre 28% 1000–1500 mg per litre 68% From this data, it was concluded that water containing more than 750 mg of sulfate per litre was due to a laxative effect, and below 600 was not.

[ 4 ] Concerns [ edit ] According to the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), drinking water with high levels of sulfate can cause diarrhea, especially in infants.

[ 5 ] Cultural implications [ edit ] Farming [ edit ] Cattle in Wyoming At the University of Wyoming in America, sulfur water was studied to see the effects it can have upon the performance of steers that are on a forage-based diet. Due to sulfur being a requirement to living things, as it contains essential amino acids that are used to create proteins , sulfur water, which is commonly found in Western States of America, is a major contributor to sulfur in the herds diet. However, with a herd drinking high concentrate of sulfur water, ruminants may contract sulfur induced polioencephalomalacia (sPEM), which is a neurological disorder. Because of this finding, the study tries to reach the goal of finding a dietary supplement which can be used to counteract the negative health effects on the steers.

To reduce the extra sulfur in the ruminant's diet, ruminal bacteria break the excess down, resulting in Hydrogen Sulfide , which is soluble in water, but as temperature increases, the solubility decreases, which leads to the hydrogen sulfide gas being reinhaled by the animal, causing sulfur induced polioencephalomalacia. The study attempted to resolve this issue by introducing clinoptilolite to the diet of the herd, but has found inconclusive evidence which requires more study of clinoptilolite effects on methanogenesis and biohydrogenation.

Sulfur Springs [ edit ] See also: Mineral spring A sulfur spring in Thermopylae There is also believed to be great health benefits within sulfur water, with sulfur water springs being a common thing within many cultures. Such springs can be found in many countries such as New Zealand, Japan and Greece. These sulfur springs are often created due to the local volcanic activity which contributes to heating up nearby water systems. This is due to volcanoes exhaling water vapour heavily encased in metals, with sulfur dioxide being one of them.

In New Zealand , the North Island was brought to fame in the 1800s, with its baths heated naturally from a volcano near the town of Rotorua . There are 28 spa hot pools which visitors can soak themselves, along with sulfur mud baths.

Another famous spring is the spring in Greece , Thermopylae , which means "hot springs" derives its name from its springs, as it was believed to be the entrance to Hades .

[ 6 ] Cause and treatment [ edit ] The condition indicates a high level of sulfate-reducing bacteria in the water supply. This may be due to the use of well water, poorly treated city water, or water heater contamination.

Various methods exist to treat sulfur in water. These methods include Filtration of the water using a carbon filter (useful for very small amounts of hydrogen sulfide) Filtration of the water through a canister of manganese oxide coated greensand Aeration of the water Chlorination of water (can be used to treat large amounts of hydrogen sulfide) Levels of sulfur in water around the world [ edit ] The Global Environment Monitoring System for Freshwater (GEMS/Water) has said that typical fresh water holds about 20 mg/litre of sulfur, and can range from 0 to 630 mg/litre in rivers, 2 to 250 mg/litre in lakes and 0 to 230 mg/litre in groundwater .

[ citation needed ] Canada's rain has been found to have sulfate concentrations of 1.0 and 3.8 mg/L in 1980, found in a study by Franklin published in 1985.

[ 7 ] Western Canada in rivers ranged from 1 to 3040 mg/litre, with most concentrations below 580 mg/litre according to results from Environment Canada in 1984. Central Canada had levels that were also high in Saskatchewan , there were median levels of 368 mg/litre in drinking water from ground water supplies, and 97 mg/litre in surface water supplies, with a range of 32170 mg/litre.

A study conducted in Canada [ 8 ] found that a treatment to reduce sulfur in drinking water had actually increased it. This was conducted in Ontario , which had a mean sulfur level of 12.5 mg/litre when untreated, and 22.5 mg/litre after the treatment.

The Netherlands has had below 150 mg/litre concentrations of sulfur water in their underground water supplies. 65% of water treatment plants reported that the sulfur level of drinking water was below 25 mg/litre, as found in a study by Dijk-Looijaard & Fonds in 1985.

[ 9 ] The US had the Public Health Service in 1970 to measure levels of sulfate in drinking water sources in nine different geographic areas. The results concluded that all of the 106 surface water supplies that were sampled had sulfate present, as well as 645 of 658 ground water deposits that were tested. The levels of sulfur that was found ranged from less than 1 mg/litre to 770.

Environment [ edit ] Due to sulfates being used in industrial products, they are often discharged into water supplies in the environment. This includes mines, textile mills and other industrial processes that involve using sulfates. Sulfates, such as magnesium , potassium and sodium are all highly soluble in water, which is what creates sulfur water, while other sulfates which are metal based, such as calcium and barium are less soluble. Atmospheric sulfur dioxide, also can infect surface water, and sulfur trioxide can combine with water vapour in the air, and create sulfur water rain, or what is colloquially known as acid rain .

[ 10 ] v t e Pollution History Air Acid rain Air quality index Air pollution measurement Atmospheric dispersion modeling Chlorofluorocarbon Combustion Biofuel Biomass Coal Joss paper Open burning of waste Construction Renovation Demolition Exhaust gas Diesel exhaust Haze Smoke Indoor air quality Internal combustion engine Global dimming Global distillation Mining Ozone depletion Particulates Asbestos Oil refining Polluting cooking fuels Persistent organic pollutant Smelting Smog Soot Black carbon Volatile organic compound Waste Biological Biological hazard Genetic pollution Introduced species Invasive species Digital Information pollution Electromagnetic Light Ecological light pollution Overillumination Radio spectrum pollution Natural Ozone Radium and radon in the environment Volcanic ash Wildfire Noise Transportation Land Water Air Rail Sustainable transport Urban Sonar Marine mammals and sonar Industrial Military Abstract Noise control Radiation Actinides Bioremediation Nuclear fission Nuclear fallout Plutonium Poisoning Radioactivity Uranium Electromagnetic radiation and health Radioactive waste Soil Agricultural pollution Herbicides Manure waste Pesticides Land degradation Bioremediation Open defecation Electrical resistance heating Soil guideline values Phytoremediation Solid waste Advertising mail Biodegradable waste Brown waste Electronic waste Battery recycling Foam food container Food waste Green waste Hazardous waste Biomedical waste Chemical waste Construction waste Lead poisoning Mercury poisoning Toxic waste Industrial waste Lead smelting Litter Mining Coal mining Gold mining Surface mining Deep sea mining Mining waste Uranium mining Municipal solid waste Garbage Nanomaterials Plastic pollution Microplastics Packaging waste Post-consumer waste Waste management Landfill Thermal treatment Space Satellite Visual Air travel Clutter (advertising) Traffic signs Overhead power lines Vandalism War Chemical warfare Herbicidal warfare ( Agent Orange ) Nuclear holocaust ( Nuclear fallout - nuclear famine - nuclear winter ) Scorched earth Unexploded ordnance War and environmental law Water Agricultural wastewater Biological pollution Diseases Eutrophication Firewater Freshwater Groundwater Hypoxia Industrial wastewater Marine debris Monitoring Nonpoint source pollution Nutrient pollution Ocean acidification Oil exploitation Oil exploration Oil spill Pharmaceuticals Sewage Septic tanks Pit latrine Shipping Stagnation Sulfur water Surface runoff Thermal Turbidity Urban runoff Water quality Topics Pollutants Heavy metals Paint Brain health and pollution Misc Area source Debris Dust Garbology Legacy pollution Midden Point source Waste Responses Cleaner production Industrial ecology Pollution haven hypothesis Pollutant release and transfer register Polluter pays principle Pollution control Waste minimisation Zero waste Lists Diseases Law by country Most polluted cities Least polluted cities by PM 2.5 Most polluted countries Most polluted rivers Treaties Categories ( by country ) Commons WikiProject Environment WikiProject Ecology Environment portal Ecology portal References [ edit ] ^ "Grove, (William) Dennis, (23 July 1927–11 April 2004), Chairman, North West Water Group, 1989–93", Who Was Who , Oxford University Press, 2007-12-01, doi : 10.1093/ww/9780199540884.013.u18347 ^ Heaney, Kerry (2018-07-15).

"Road tripping the North Island" .

escape.com.au . Retrieved 2020-06-05 .

^ "Grove, (William) Dennis, (23 July 1927–11 April 2004), Chairman, North West Water Group, 1989–93", Who Was Who , Oxford University Press, 2007-12-01, doi : 10.1093/ww/9780199540884.013.u18347 ^ Esteban, Emilio; Rubin, Carol H.; McGeehin, Michael A.; Flanders, W. Dana; Baker, Michael J.; Sinks, Thomas H. (July 1997). "Evaluation of Infant Diarrhea Associated with Elevated Levels of Sulfate in Drinking Water: A Case-Control Investigation in South Dakota".

International Journal of Occupational and Environmental Health .

3 (3): 171– 176.

doi : 10.1179/oeh.1997.3.3.171 .

ISSN 1077-3525 .

PMID 9891115 .

^ Cervin M.

"Sulfur Springs: To Soak or not to Soak?" . Fox . Retrieved 24 February 2015 .

^ Huebner, Sabine (2015-01-05). "Oxford Classical, The Oxford Classical Dictionary. 4th Ed. General Editors Simon Hornblower and Antony Spawforth. Assistant Ed. Esther Eidinow. Oxford, Oxford University Press 2012".

Historische Zeitschrift .

300 (1): 149– 152.

doi : 10.1515/hzhz-2015-0019 .

ISSN 2196-680X .

^ Franklin CA, Burnett RT, Paolini RJ, Raizenne ME (November 1985).

"Health risks from acid rain: a Canadian perspective" .

Environmental Health Perspectives .

63 : 155– 68.

doi : 10.1289/ehp.8563155 .

PMC 1568495 .

PMID 4076081 .

^ Countdown acid rain : future abatement strategies : summary report / report prepared by Air Resources Branch, Ontario Ministry of the Environment . [Toronto, Ont.]: Queens Printer for Ontario. 1992.

doi : 10.5962/bhl.title.23413 .

ISBN 0-7729-5986-2 .

^ van Dijk-Looijaard AM, de Kruijf HA (December 1985). "Legislation and policy for the protection of the drinking water supply in The Netherlands".

The Science of the Total Environment .

47 : 59– 82.

Bibcode : 1985ScTEn..47...59V .

doi : 10.1016/0048-9697(85)90319-5 .

PMID 4089614 .

^ Delisle CE, Schmidt JW (1977) The effects of sulphur on water and aquatic life in Canada. In: Sulphur and its inorganic derivatives in the Canadian environment. Ottawa, Ontario, National Research Council of Canada (NRCC No. 15015).

Hydrogen sulfide in drinking water U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Office of Drinking Water and Ground Water, Health Effects from Exposure to High Levels of Sulfate in Drinking Water Study , January 1999 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Sulfur_water&oldid=1257376273 " Categories : Water pollution Water chemistry Sulfur Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Pages using sidebar with the child parameter All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from September 2023 This page was last edited on 14 November 2024, at 16:17 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Sulfur water 5 languages Add topic

