Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview 2 Methods 3 Authors and artists of feminist revisionist mythology 4 Related works 5 See also 6 Notes 7 References Toggle the table of contents Feminist revisionist mythology 2 languages فارسی Hausa Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Literature informed by feminist literary criticism Part of a series on Feminism History Feminist history Women's history American British Canadian German Waves First Second Third Fourth Timelines Women's suffrage Muslim countries US Other women's rights Women's suffrage by country Austria Australia Canada Colombia India Japan Kuwait Liechtenstein New Zealand Spain Second Republic Francoist Switzerland United Kingdom Cayman Islands Wales United States states Intersectional variants Fat Lesbian Lesbian of color Radical lesbianism Separatist Sex-positive Transfeminism Postgenderism Vegetarian ecofeminism Socialist Anarchist Queer Jineology Marxist Critical theory Standpoint Materialist Ecofeminist Postcolonial Global Transnational Xenofeminism Jineoloji Multicultural Africana womanism Black Hip hop Lesbian Ratchet Chicana Lesbian Indigenous Native American Multiracial Romani Womanism Other variants Anti-abortion Conservative Equity Femonationalism Liberal Maternal Postfeminism Reactionary State Carceral Imperial Embedded Gender-critical or trans-exclusionary Victim White Religious variants Atheist Buddhist Christian Mormon New Womanist Asian Neopagan Dianic Wicca Reclaiming Ecofeminist Hindu Islamic Jewish Orthodox Sikh Movements and ideologies 4B movement White Feather Campaign Analytical Anti-fascist Anti-pornography Cyber HCI Networked Xeno Difference Cultural Neo Ecofeminism Eugenic Individualist Liberal Equality Social Labor Libertarian Lipstick Stiletto Post-structural Postmodern Radical Political lesbianism Separatist Technofeminism Women's liberation Concepts Antinaturalism Choice feminism Cognitive labor Conscription Complementarianism Literature Children's literature Diversity (politics) Diversity, equity, and inclusion Effects on society Equality Female education Female genital mutilation Femicide Femonationalism Feminism in culture Feminist movement African-American women's suffrage movement Art movement In hip hop Feminist stripper Formal equality Gender equality Gender quota Gender role Girl power Honor killing Ideal womanhood Invisible labor Internalized sexism International Girl's Day and Women's Day Language reform Feminist capitalism Gender-blind Likeability trap Male privilege Matriarchal religion Media Men in feminism Misogyny Trans Oedipus complex Opposition to feminism Pro-feminism Protofeminism Purplewashing Racism Reproductive justice Sentencing disparity Sex workers' rights Sexual harassment Sexual objectification Substantive equality Toxic masculinity Transmisogyny Triple oppression Violence against women War on women Women's empowerment Women-only space Women's health Women's rights Women in the workforce Outlooks Abortion-rights Bicycling and feminism Bodily integrity Criticism of marriage Views on BDSM Views on pornography Views on prostitution Views on sexual orientation Views on sexuality Views on transgender topics Reproductive rights Sexual and reproductive health and rights SCUM Manifesto Theory Feminist method Gender studies Gender mainstreaming Gynocentrism Kyriarchy Male gaze Matriarchy Women's studies Men's studies Patriarchy Écriture féminine Areas of study Anthropology Archaeology Architecture Art Art criticism Literary criticism Film theory Science fiction Biology Composition studies Criminology Pathways perspective Economics FDPA Geography International relations Constructivism Legal theory Pedagogy Philosophy Aesthetics Empiricism Epistemology Ethics Justice ethics Existentialism Metaphysics science Political ecology Political theory Pornography Psychology Therapy Revisionist mythology Sex wars Sexology Sociology Technoscience Theology womanist theology By continent/country Africa Democratic Republic of the Congo Egypt Ethiopia Ghana Mali Nigeria Senegal South Africa Albania Australia Bangladesh Canada China Denmark Finland France Germany Greece Hong Kong India Indonesia Iran Iraq Republic of Ireland Israel Italy Japan Latin America Argentina Brazil Chile Haiti Honduras Mexico Paraguay Trinidad and Tobago Lebanon Malaysia Nepal Netherlands New Zealand Northern Cyprus Norway Pakistan Philippines Poland Russia Saudi Arabia South Korea Sweden Syria Taiwan Thailand Turkey Vietnam Ukraine United Kingdom United States History of women Lists and categories Lists Articles Feminists by nationality Literature American feminist literature Feminist comic books Feminist songs Conservative feminisms Ecofeminist authors Feminist art critics Feminist economists Feminist philosophers Feminist poets Feminist rhetoricians Jewish feminists Muslim feminists Feminist parties Suffragists and suffragettes Women's rights activists Women's studies journals Women's suffrage organizations Categories Women's rights by country Feminists by nationality Feminism portal v t e Feminist revisionist mythology is feminist literature informed by feminist literary criticism , or by the politics of feminism more broadly and that engages with mythology , fairy tales , religion , or other areas.

Overview [ edit ] Lisa Tuttle has defined feminist theory as asking "new questions of old texts".

[ 1 ] She cites the goals of feminist criticism as (1) developing and uncovering a female tradition of writing, (2) interpreting symbolism of women's writing so that it will not be lost or ignored by the male point of view, (3) rediscovering old texts, (4) analyzing women writers and their writings from a female perspective, (5) resisting sexism in literature, and (6) increasing awareness of the sexual politics of language and style.

[ 1 ] Feminist revisionist mythology tends to fulfill at least one of these goals. Instead of just studying prior works though, it is the revision of old texts to create new ones.

Revision Mythmaking is a strategic revisionist use of gender imagery and is a means of exploring and attempting to transform the self and the culture or, in other words, to "subvert and transform the life and literature women poets inherit".

[ 2 ] Alicia Ostriker states in her essay " Stealing the Language " that "we cannot measure the work of women poets, past or present, without a thorough--and if possible demystified-- awareness of the critical context in which they have composed and continued to compose their work. We need to recognize that our customary literary language is systematically gendered in ways that influence what we approve and disapprove of, making it extremely difficult for us to acknowledge certain kinds of originality--of difference--in women poets".

[ 3 ] "The belief that true poetry is genderless—which is a disguised form of believing that true poetry is masculine—means that we have not learned to see women poets generically, to recognize the tradition they belong to, or discuss either the limitation or the strengths of that tradition".

[ 4 ] Methods [ edit ] Authors have used multiple methods of revising myths, including retelling them entirely from the point of view of the main female character, recreating the story in a way that attempts to break down the treatment of women as inactive objects, and telling the story with a feminist narrator who satirically pokes fun at the flawed view of women in the original text.

"Fables are centuries old and were devised to carry a moral lesson, such as Aesop's Fables .

Suniti Namjoshi 's eloquent and knowledgeable 'Blue Donkey' stories draw on this classic tradition of having beasts or mythical birds able to speak and act like humans but the 'Blue Donkey' provides ironic comment rather than a moral lesson. Angela Carter has rewritten fairy tales from the point of view of the heroine. In her collection, The Bloody Chamber , she examines the messages about adolescent sexuality in stories like 'Beauty and the Beast' and 'Snow White' overturning the sexual mythology of simple fairy stories." [ 5 ] [ a ] [ b ] Since the core of revisionist mythmaking for feminist poets lies in the challenging of gender stereotypes embodied in myth, revisionism in its most obvious form consists of hit-and-run attacks [ clarification needed ] on familiar images and the social and literary conventions supporting them. The poems dismantle the literary convention to reveal the social ones and invert both, usually by the simple device of making "the Other" into the primary subject.

[ 6 ] Authors and artists of feminist revisionist mythology [ edit ] Suniti Namjoshi [ 7 ] Angela Carter [ 8 ] Carol P. Christ Anne Sexton [ 9 ] Carol Ann Duffy [ 10 ] Margaret Atwood Madeline Miller Pat Barker Muriel Rukeyser Alta Marija Gimbutas Louise Glück Paula Gunn Allen Mona Van Duyn June Jordan Alicia Ostriker Adrienne Rich Sylvia Plath Clarissa Pinkola Estés Emma Lazarus Luisah Teish Barbara Tedlock Mary Shelley Starhawk Merlin Stone Marion Zimmer Bradley Gloria Anzaldúa Chris Wind Related works [ edit ] Proserpine (1820), by Mary and Percy Bysshe Shelley The Speed of Darkness (1960), by Muriel Rukeyser To Bedlam and Part Way Back (1960), by Anne Sexton All My Pretty Ones (1962), by Anne Sexton Snapshots of a Daughter-in-Law (1963), by Adrienne Rich Ariel (1965), by Sylvia Plath Motherpeace Tarot The Bloody Chamber (1979), by Angela Carter The Silence of the Girls (2018) by Pat Barker See also [ edit ] Feminist literary criticism Historical revisionism Feminist film theory Feminist theory Literary criticism Women's writing in English Feminist Exegesis Feminist theology Notes [ edit ] ^ Beauty and the Beast , a fairy tale first published in 1740 and later analyzed by Angela Carter ^ Snow White , a German fairy tale later analyzed by Angela Carter References [ edit ] ^ a b Tuttle, Lisa.

Encyclopedia of Feminism . Harlow: Longman 1986, p. 184.

^ Ostriker, Alicia.

Stealing the Language: The Emergence of Women's Poetry in America . Women's Press, 1987. pp. 211.

^ Ostriker, Alicia, Stealing the Language: The Emergence of Women's Poetry in America . Women's Press, 1987. pp. 2–3.

^ Ostriker, Alicia, Stealing the Language: The Emergence of Women's Poetry in America . Women's Press, 1987. pp. 9.

^ McNeill, Pearlie.

Fairy Tales.

Routledge International Encyclopedia of Women: Global Women's Issues and Knowledge . 3. New York: Rutledge, 2000. Print.

^ Ostriker, Alicia, Stealing the Language: The Emergence of Women's Poetry in America . Women's Press, 1987. pp. 216.

^ Namjoshi, Suniti. 1988.

The Blue Donkey Fables . London: Women's Press ^ Carter, Angela. 1981.

The Bloody Chamber . London: Penguin ^ Sexton, Anne. 1971.

Transformations . Boston: Houghton Mifflin ^ Duffy, Carol Ann. 1999.

The World's Wife . London: Picador.

ISBN 0-330-37222-X .

v t e Literary criticism Literary theory Archetypal criticism Biographical criticism Chicago school Cultural materialism Darwinian criticism Deconstruction Descriptive poetics Ecocriticism Feminist criticism Formalism Geneva school Geocriticism Marxist criticism New Criticism New historicism Postcolonial criticism Postcritique Psychoanalytic criticism Reader-response criticism Russian formalism Semiotic criticism Sociological criticism Source criticism Thing theory Theorists and critics Plato Aristotle Horace Longinus Plotinus St. Augustine Boethius Aquinas Dante Boccaccio de Pizan Valmiki Lu Ji Sidney Tasso Bacon Hobbes Corneille Dryden Boileau-Despréaux Locke Pope Addison Vico Burke (Edmund) Hume Johnson Young Lessing Reynolds Diderot Kant Wollstonecraft Blake Schiller Schlegel Wordsworth de Staël Schelling Coleridge von Humboldt Keats Schopenhauer Peacock Shelley von Goethe Hegel Leopardi De Sanctis Carlyle Mill Emerson Sainte-Beuve Lowell Poe Arnold Taine Baudelaire Marx Kierkegaard Nietzsche Pater Zola France Wilde Mallarmé Tolstoy Croce Gramsci Eco Freud de Saussure Lévi-Strauss Hulme Benjamin Shklovsky Eliot Jung Trotsky Woolf Richards Bakhtin Bataille Ransom Lacan Lukács Valéry Burke (Kenneth) Cassirer Brooks Mukařovský Sartre de Beauvoir Adorno Jakobson Frye Bachelard Gombrich Heidegger Chomsky Derrida Barthes Foucault Poulet Williams Trilling Kristeva de Man Bloom Achebe Said Deleuze Guattari Girard Cixous Iser White Gadamer Ricoeur Abrams Geertz Marinetti Tzara Breton Loy de Andrade Hu Paz v t e Feminist theory Academic fields Anthropology Archaeology Architecture Art Art criticism Film theory Literary criticism Biology Composition studies Criminology Digital humanities Economics FPDA Geography History International relations ( Constructivism ) Legal theory Pedagogy Philosophy Aesthetics Empiricism Epistemology Ethics Existentialism Metaphysics Science Political ecology Political theory Postmodernism Psychology Sexology Sociology Technoscience Theology Womanist Asian Feminism portal Related subjects Ecofeminism Feminist method Hegemonic masculinity Women's history Women's studies Feminist theorists Elizabeth Anderson Karen Barad Simone de Beauvoir Wendy Brown Nancy Bauer Judith Butler Kimberlé Crenshaw Hélène Cixous Alice Crary Andrea Dworkin Cynthia Enloe Martha Fineman Nancy Fraser Germaine Greer Donna Haraway Sandra Harding Patricia Hill Collins bell hooks Luce Irigaray Julia Kristeva Catharine A. MacKinnon Martha Nussbaum Val Plumwood Diana E. H. Russell Dorothy E. Smith Marilyn Waring Lists Women's studies journals Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Feminist_revisionist_mythology&oldid=1239705394 " Categories : Feminism and the arts Historical revisionism Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Pages using sidebar with the child parameter Wikipedia articles needing clarification from June 2023 This page was last edited on 11 August 2024, at 00:14 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Feminist revisionist mythology 2 languages Add topic

