Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 In folklore Toggle In folklore subsection 2.1 European folklore 2.2 Goblin-like creatures in other cultures 3 In fiction Toggle In fiction subsection 3.1 Fairy tales and folk stories 3.2 Modern fiction 4 Goblin-related place names 5 See also 6 References 7 Bibliography Toggle the table of contents Goblin 44 languages العربية অসমীয়া Azərbaycanca বাংলা Беларуская Bikol Central Български Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Euskara فارسی Français Frysk 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული Magyar Македонски മലയാളം 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Svenska ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 粵語 Zazaki 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Mythical creature For other uses, see Goblin (disambiguation) .

Not to be confused with Gobelin .

Goblin Goblin illustration by John D. Batten from " English Fairy Tales " (19th century) Creature information Grouping Diminutive spirit Similar entities Fairies , demons , brownies , dwarfs , elves , gnomes , imps , and kobolds .

A goblin is a small, grotesque , monstrous humanoid creature that appears in the folklore of multiple European cultures. First attested in stories from the Middle Ages , they are ascribed conflicting abilities, temperaments, and appearances depending on the story and country of origin, ranging from mischievous household spirits to malicious, bestial thieves.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] They often have magical abilities similar to a fairy or demon , such as the ability to shapeshift .

[ 2 ] Similar creatures include brownies , dwarves , duendes , gnomes , imps , leprechauns , and kobolds , but it is also commonly used as a blanket term for all small, fay creatures.

[ 2 ] The term is sometimes expanded to include goblin-like creatures of other cultures, such as the pukwudgie , dokkaebi , or ifrit .

[ 2 ] Etymology Alternative spellings include gobblin , gobeline , gobling , goblyn , goblino , and gobbelin . The term "goblette" has been used to refer to female goblins.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] The word goblin is first recorded in the 14th century and is probably from unattested Anglo-Norman *gobelin , [ 5 ] similar to Old French gobelin , already attested around 1195 in Ambroise of Normandy 's Guerre sainte , and to Medieval Latin gobelinus in Orderic Vitalis before 1141, [ 6 ] [ 7 ] which was the name of a devil or daemon haunting the country around Évreux , Normandy. It may be related both to German kobold and to Medieval Latin cabalus - or *gobalus , itself from Greek κόβαλος ( kobalos ), "rogue", "knave", "imp", "goblin".

[ 6 ] German Kobold contains the Germanic root kov- (Middle German Kobe "refuge, cavity", "hollow in a rock", Dial. English cove "hollow in a rock", English "sheltered recess on a coast", Old Norse kofi "hut, shed" ) which means originally a "hollow in the earth".

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] The word is probably related to Dial. Norman gobe "hollow in a cliff", with simple suffix -lin or double suffixation -el-in (cf. Norman surnames Beuzelin , [ 10 ] Gosselin , [ 11 ] Étancelin , [ 12 ] etc.) [ 13 ] Alternatively, it may be a diminutive or other derivative of the French proper name Gobel , more often Gobeau , [ 5 ] [ 14 ] diminutive forms Gobelet, Goblin, Goblot , but their signification is probably "somebody who sells tumblers or beakers or cups".

[ 15 ] Moreover, these proper names are not from Normandy, where the word gobelin, gobelinus first appears in the old documents.

The Welsh coblyn , a type of knocker , derives from the Old French gobelin via the English goblin .

[ 16 ] In folklore The Princess and the Goblin by George MacDonald , illustrated by Jessie Willcox Smith, 1920 European folklore Goblins are common in English , Scottish , Welsh and Irish folklore, serving as a blanket term for all sorts of evil or mischievous spirits.

In France, the goblins are associated mainly with the region of Normandy. The word "gobelin" is mentioned for the first time in the 12th century, in the texts of Orderic Vitalis. It is described as a wicked creature or a malicious spirit that lived in the region of Évreux. In the stories of Brittany, there are creatures that resemble goblins, such as korrigans, small beings associated with raised stones and ancient tombs. They like to search for hidden treasures and make jokes to humans. Korrigans and Norman goblins are spirits of nature that can be kind or bad depending on the story.

A redcap is a type of goblin who dyes its hat in human blood in Anglo-Scottish border folklore. He is a malevolent goblin, known for his cruelty and blood lust. The Redcap, unlike other often mischievous or ambivalent fairy creatures, is fundamentally scary and frightening in the stories it tells.

Hobgoblins are friendly trickster goblins from English , Scottish , and Pilgrim folklore and literature.

[ 2 ] They are the opposite of the redcap, they are more benevolent goblins and pranksters, frequently mentioned in English tales. Authors such as William Shakespeare (Puck in A Midsummer Night’s Dream) popularized hobgoblins, which are domestic spirits who provide help to humans in exchange for food or other offerings.

The King of the Alders, or Erlking (German: Erlkönig), is a mythical character in Germanic folklore. The Erlking is presented as a malicious supernatural creature that attracts, seduces or frightens children before destroying them. Kobolds are in Germany similar to goblins, often related to mines and houses. Unlike their French and British counterparts, kobolds are sometimes considered as caring domestic helpers, but they can become angry if offended. Their name is etymologically associated with kobalt, which is also a mineral (cobalt), highlighting their connection to mining activities.

The trasgu is a Northern Spanish and Northern Portuguese mythological creature of Celtic and Roman origin. To be more precise, the goblins appear in folklore of northern Spain (Asturias and Galicia) and northern Portugal as the Trasgos or Trasgus. These evil spirits tend to enter homes, move objects or cause disorder. There is an interesting feature of the Trasgus: they tend to do household chores if left unfinished by others. However, they can also cause problems if they feel insulted or neglected.

Goblin-like creatures in other cultures A pukwudgie is a type of goblin from Wamponoag folklore.

The muki is a pale goblin who lives in caves in the Andes in Quechuan folklore.

In South Korea, goblins, known as dokkaebi (도깨비), are important creatures in folklore, where they reward good people and punish the evil, playing tricks on them.

[ 2 ] In Bangladesh, Santal people believe in gudrobonga which is very similar to goblins.

In South India, Kuttichathan is a type of mischievous/evil goblin mainly found in Kerala folklore.

In South African mythology, the tokoloshe (or tikoloshe or tikoloshi) is a dwarf-like creatures similar to a goblin.

Goblins have at times been conflated with the jinn , specifically ifrit and ghilan , of Islamic culture.

[ 17 ] In fiction Fairy tales and folk stories Christina Rossetti 's narrative poem Goblin Market The Princess and the Goblin by George MacDonald "The Goblin Pony", from The Grey Fairy Book (French fairy tale) "The Benevolent Goblin", from Gesta Romanorum (England) [ 18 ] "The Goblins at the Bath House" (Estonia), from A Book of Ghosts and Goblins (1969) "The Goblins Turned to Stone" (Dutch fairy tale) [ 19 ] King Gobb (Moldovan Gypsy folktale) [ citation needed ] Goblins are featured in the Danish fairy tales The Elf Mound , The Goblin and the Grocer , and The Goblin and the Woman .

Goblins are featured in the Norwegian folktale The Christmas Visitors at Kvame .

Goblins are featured in the Swedish fairy tales The Four Big Trolls and Little Peter Pastureman and Dag and Daga and the Flying Troll of Sky Mountain where they live among trolls alongside sprites and gnomes.

Goblins are featured in the French fairy tale called The Golden Branch .

Chinese Ghouls and Goblins (England 1928) "The Goblin of Adachigahara" (Japanese fairy tale) [ 20 ] The Boy Who Drew Cats (Japanese fairy tale) Twenty-Two Goblins (Indian fairy tale) [ 21 ] The Korean nursery song 'Mountain Goblin(산도깨비)' tells of meeting a dokkaebi and running away to live.

Modern fiction In J. R. R. Tolkien 's The Hobbit the evil creatures living in the Misty Mountains are referred to as goblins. In The Lord of the Rings , the same creatures are primarily referred to as orcs where the goblin name was used for the lesser orcs.

Representation of a goblin as it appears in the fantasy role-playing game Dungeons & Dragons Goblinoids are a category of humanoid legendary creatures related to the goblin. The term was popularized in the Dungeons & Dragons fantasy role-playing game, [ 22 ] in which goblins and related creatures are a staple of random encounters . Goblinoids are typically barbaric foes of the various human and " demi-human " races . Even though goblinoids in modern fantasy fiction are derived from J. R. R. Tolkien 's orcs , the main types of goblinoids in Dungeons & Dragons are goblins , bugbears and hobgoblins ; these creatures are also figures of mythology, next to ordinary goblins.

In the Harry Potter book series and the shared universe in which its film adaptations are set, goblins are depicted as strange, but civilised, humanoids who often serve as bankers or craftsmen.

In Terry Pratchett 's Discworld series, goblins are initially a despised and shunned subterranean race; however, in later books, goblins are eventually integrated with the other races, and their mechanical and engineering talents come to be valued.

The Green Goblin is a well-known supervillain , one of the archenemies of Spider-Man , who has various abilities including enhanced stamina, durability, agility, reflexes and superhuman strength due to ingesting a substance known as the "Goblin Formula". He has appeared in various Spider-Man related media, such as comics, television series, video games, and films, including Spider-Man (2002) and Spider-Man: No Way Home (2021) as Norman Osborn , and Spider-Man 3 (2007) and The Amazing Spider-Man 2 (2014) as Harry Osborn . There have been other goblin-related characters like Hobgoblin , Grey Goblin , and Menace .

In the video game series Elder Scrolls , goblins are a hostile beast race said to originate from Summerset Isle, can range in size from being smaller than a Wood Elf to being larger than a Nord and love living in dank places such as caves and sewers.

In early English translations, The Smurfs were called goblins.

[ 23 ] The McDonald's Fry Guys were called Gobblins in earlier McDonaldland advertisements.

The Goosebumps franchise had a Goosebumps House of Shivers book called Goblin Monday which featured the goblins. They are depicted as short creatures with green fur, horns, pointy ears and cat-like eyes who assume human form to trick humans. In addition, the goblins can't deal with nutmeg as it is their only weakness.

Goblin-related place names 'The Gap of Goeblin', a hole and tunnel in Mortain , France.

[ 24 ] Hobroyd (which means 'goblin clearing'), High Peak, Derbyshire, UK.

[ 25 ] Goblin Combe , in north Somerset, UK Goblin Valley State Park , Utah, US Yester Castle (also known as "Goblin Hall") East Lothian, Scotland Goblin Bay, Beausoleil Island , Ontario , Canada Cowcaddens and Cowlairs , Glasgow, Scotland. 'Cow' is an old Scots word for Goblin, while 'cad' means 'nasty'. 'Dens' and 'lairs' refers to goblin homes.

[ 26 ] 541132 Leleākūhonua (then known as 2015 TG 387 ) is an object in the outer solar system nicknamed "The Goblin" See also Fairy Orc Goblin (Dungeons and Dragons) Dwarf (folklore) Kobold Bugbear Gnome Lutin Púca Troll Goblin mode References ^ Edwards, Gillian (1974).

Hobgoblin and Sweet Puck: Fairy names and natures . London: Geoffrey Bles .

ISBN 9780713807103 .

^ a b c d e f Shaijan, Annliya (2019-03-27).

"Goblin Mythology: A Brief Study of the Archetype, Tracing the Explications in English Literature" .

Global Journal of Human-Social Science Research .

19 (4).

ISSN 2249-460X . Archived from the original on 2022-04-10 . Retrieved 2022-05-19 .

^ Anthony, Piers (1992).

The Color of Her Panties .

You can't move me out, you skirted goblette.

^ Porter, Jesse (28 September 2015). "Goblin".

The Adventures of Puss in Boots . Episode 12.

My dear, dear goblette, there is really nothing to it.

^ a b Hoad 1993 , p. 196.

^ a b CNRTL etymology of gobelin (online French) ^ Du Cange et al, Glossarium mediae et infimae latinitatis ...(online French and Latin) [1] ^ Duden, Herkunftswörterbuch : Etymologie der deutschen Sprache , Band 7, Dudenverlag, p. 359 : Kobel, koben, Kobold .

^ Hoad 1993 , p. 101.

^ Géopatronyme : surname Beuzelin in France (online French) ^ Géopatronyme : surname Gosselin in France (online French) Gosselin ^ Géopatronyme : surname Étancelin in France (online French) ^ κόβαλος , Henry George Liddell, Robert Scott, A Greek-English Lexicon , on Perseus ^ Harper, Douglas .

"Goblin" .

The Online Etymological Dictionary . Retrieved 2011-12-20 .

^ Albert Dauzat , Noms et prénoms de France , Librairie Larousse 1980, édition revue et commentée par Marie-Thérèse Morlet . p. 295 Gobel .

^ Franklin, Anna (2002). "Goblin", The Illustrated Encyclopedia of Fairies . London: Paper Tiger.

ISBN 1-84340-240-8 . p. 108 ^ Promey, Sally M.

(2014) Sensational Religion: Sensory Cultures in Material Practice . Yale University Press.

ISBN 9780300187359 pp. 99–100 ^ "Apples4theTeacher - short stories" . Archived from the original on 2017-08-27 . Retrieved 2007-06-15 .

^ Dutch Fairy Tales for Young Folks , 1918, compiled by William Elliot Griffis ^ "Rick Walton - folktale" . Archived from the original on 2007-08-25 . Retrieved 2007-06-15 .

^ Ryder, Arthur W. (1917) Twenty-two Goblins . Sacred texts ^ Weinstock, Jeffrey (2014).

The Ashgate Encyclopedia of Literary and Cinematic Monsters . Ashgate Publishing, Ltd.

ISBN 9781409425625 .

^ "9780854081530 - Dilly Duckling and the Goblins by Peyo; Matagne" .

www.biblio.com . Retrieved 2019-12-22 .

^ Tichy, Jaroslav (1990) Ghosts, Goblins, and Haunted Castles , Aventinum Publishers. p. 51 ^ Hobroyd, Survey of English Place-Names . University of Nottingham ^ Foreman, Carol (2007) Glasgow Street Names . Birlinn. p. 58.

ISBN 1841585882 Bibliography Wikiquote has quotations related to Goblin .

English Wikisource has original text related to this article: Goblin Wikimedia Commons has media related to Goblins .

Briggs, K. M. (2003).

The Anatomy of Puck . London: Routledge.

Briggs, K. M. (1967).

The Fairies in English Literature and Tradition . Chicago: Chicago University Press.

Briggs, K. M. (1978).

The Vanishing People . London: B.T. Batsford.

ISBN 9780394502489 .

Carryl, Charles E.

(1884).

Davy And The Goblin . Boston: Houghton Mifflin.

Dubois, Pierre (2005).

The Complete Encyclopedia of Elves, Goblins, and Other Little Creatures . New York: Abbeville Press.

ISBN 0-789-20878-4 .

Froud, Brian (1996).

The Goblin Companion . Atlanta: Turner.

ISBN 9781570362842 .

Froud, Brian (1983).

Goblins!

. New York: Macmillan.

Hoad, T. F. (1993).

English Etymology . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 0192830988 .

Page, Michael and Robert Ingpen (1987).

British Goblins: Encyclopedia of Things That Never Were . New York: Viking.

Purkiss, Diane (2001).

At the Bottom of the Garden . New York: New York University Press.

Rose, Carol (1996).

Spirits, Fairies, Gnomes and Goblins: an Encyclopedia of the Little People . Santa Barbara, Calif.: ABC-CLIO.

ISBN 9780874368116 .

Sikes, Wirt (1973).

British Goblins: Welsh Folk-lore, Fairy Mythology, Legends and Traditions . Wakefield: EP Pub.

Silver, Carole G. (1999).

Strange and Secret Peoples . Oxford: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-512199-5 .

Zanger, Jules (1997). "Goblins, Morlocks, and Weasels".

Children's Literature in Education .

8 . Oxford: Oxford University Press: 154– 162.

doi : 10.1007/BF01146190 .

S2CID 161822697 .

v t e Fairies in folklore Classifications of fairies Related articles Álfheimr Changeling Elfshot Elves in fiction Middle-earth Fairy godmother Fairy-lock Fairy painting Fairy riding Fairy tale List Fairy Tale (color) Familiar Genius loci Household deity Hungry grass Nature spirit Sacred trees and groves Celtic Germanic Tutelary deity Water spirit Abodes and structures Fairy fort Fairyland Fairy path Fairy ring Attested fairies A–E Adhene Aibell Alp Luachra Anjana Aos Sí (Aes Sídhe) Arkan Sonney Asrai Baobhan sith Banshee Barghest Bean nighe Billy Blind Biróg Bloody Bones Bluecap Blue men of the Minch Bodach Boggart Bogle Boobrie Brag Brownie Brown Man of the Muirs Bucca Buggane Bugbear Bugul Noz Caoineag Cat sìth Cù Sìth Ceffyl Dŵr Clíodhna Clurichaun Coblynau Colt pixie Cyhyraeth Drude Duende Duergar Dullahan Dunnie Each-uisge Elf Alp Dökkálfar and Ljósálfar Elegast Erlking Half-elf Huldufólk Queen of Elphame Svartálfar F–L Fachan Fairy Queen Fear dearg Fear gorta Fenodyree Finfolk Finvarra Fuath Gancanagh Ghillie Dhu Glaistig Glashtyn Groac'h Grindylow Gwragedd Annwn Gwyllion Gwyn ap Nudd Habetrot Hag Haltija The Hedley Kow Heinzelmännchen Hinzelmann Hob Hobbididance Hobgoblin Hödekin Iannic-ann-ôd Jack-o'-lantern Jack o' the bowl Jenny Greenteeth Joan the Wad Joint-eater Kelpie Kilmoulis Knocker Knucker Kobold Klabautermann Korrigan Lady of the Lake Lazy Laurence Leanan sídhe Leprechaun Lubber fiend Lutin Ly Erg M–Z Mare Margot the fairy Meg Mullach Melusine Merrow Mooinjer veggey Morgen Morvarc'h Moss people Nain Rouge Nelly Longarms Nicnevin/Gyre-Carling Nisse Nixie Nuckelavee Nuggle Oberon Peg Powler Pillywiggin Pixie Púca/Pwca Puck Rå Bergsrå Hulder Radande Sjörå Skogsrå Redcap Schrat Sebile Selkie Seonaidh Shellycoat Sleih beggey Sluagh Spriggan Sprite/Water sprite Sylph Titania Tomte Tooth fairy Trow Tylwyth Teg Undine Water bull Water horse Wicked fairy Wight Will-o'-the-wisp Wirry-cow Xana Yallery Brown Yan-gant-y-tan Fairy-like beings worldwide Worldwide Bogeyman Crone Demon Humanoid Little people Merfolk Mermaid Merman UFO Vampire Africa Abatwa Asanbosam Aziza Bultungin Eloko Jengu Kishi Mami Wata Obayifo Rompo Simbi Tikoloshe Yumboes Americas Alux Anchimayen Caipora Canotila Chaneque Christmas elf Chullachaqui Curupira Encantado Fastachee Fearsome critters Grey alien Hopkinsville Goblins Ishigaq Jogah Little green men Muki Nimerigar Nordic alien Nûñnë'hï Pombero Pukwudgie Saci Trauco Yunwi Tsunsdi Asia Diwata Dokkaebi Fallen angel Fox spirit Hồ ly tinh Huli jing Huxian Inari Ōkami Kitsune Kumiho Hyang Irshi Jinn Ifrit Kijimuna Korpokkur Mazzikin Mogwai Mrenh kongveal Orang bunian Peri Preta Hungry ghost Tennin Yaksha / Yakshini Yōkai Yōsei Oceania Bunyip Manaia Menehune Mimis Muldjewangk Nawao Patupaiarehe Ponaturi Taniwha Tipua Wandjina Yara-ma-yha-who Europe Eastern Bannik Căpcăun Domovoy Iele Karzełek Kikimora Leshy Lidérc Likho Ovinnik Polevik Rübezahl Rusalka Samodiva Sânziană Siren Spiriduș Ursitory Vadleany Vâlvă Vântoase Vodyanoy Zână Northern Aitvaras Ajatar Badb Black dog Ent Gabija Gremlin Haltija Headless Horseman Hiisi Hobbit Jack Frost Jimmy Squarefoot Lauma Menninkäinen Morgan Le Fay Pictish Beast Troll Tuatha Dé Danann Southern Basajaun Centaur Cercopes Circe Dionysus Doñas de fuera Farfadet Faun Hecate Hippocampus Kallikantzaros Kobalos Lamina Mairu Mouro Enchanted Moura Nymph List Pan Satyr Silenus Siren Squasc Thiasus Trenti Vila Western Dames blanches Dusios Dwarf Imp Lorelei Perchta Venus in German legend Vittra Witte Wieven / Weiße Frauen Cross-regional Christmas gift-bringer Santa Claus Companions of Elemental Fates Goblin Gnome Ogre Salamander Sandman Wild man See also List of hybrid creatures in folklore List of beings referred to as fairies Category v t e Fantasy fiction History Literature Magic Sources Subgenres Accidental travel Action-adventure Lost world Sword and sorcery Wuxia Alternate history Chuanyue Contemporary Children's fantasy Comedy Bangsian Dark fantasy Grimdark Fairy tale parodies Fairytale fantasy Fantastique Fantasy of manners Hard fantasy High fantasy Historical fantasy Isekai LitRPG Low fantasy Magical girl Mythic Mythpunk Mythopoeia Omegaverse Progression Romantic Science fantasy Dying Earth Planetary romance Shenmo Urban fantasy Occult detective fiction Paranormal romance Weird fiction New weird Weird West Fantasy Western Xianxia Media Film and television Anime Films highest-grossing S&S Television programs Literature Authors Ballantine Adult Fantasy series Comics list The Encyclopedia of Fantasy Fantasy Masterworks Internet Speculative Fiction Database List of novels A–H I–R S–Z List of story collections Publishers Magazines Fantastic Fantastic Adventures Locus The Magazine of Fantasy & Science Fiction Science Fantasy Unknown Weird Tales Other Dungeons & Dragons Féeries Podcasts Awards Balrog British Fantasy Crawford Dragon Gandalf Gemmell Hugo International Fantasy Japan Fantasy Locus Méliès d'Or Mythopoeic Nebula Saturn Tähtifantasia World Fantasy Fandom Art Fanspeak Filk music Harry Potter fandom The Inklings Lovecraft fandom Mythopoeic Society Tolkien fandom Tolkien's influence Works inspired by J. R. R. Tolkien World Fantasy Convention Tropes Creatures Angels Demons Devils Ghouls Elementals Faeries Familiars Fire-breathing monsters Chimera Dragons Gargoyles Imps Jinn Nymphs Shapeshifters Werecats Werewolves Skin-walkers Spirits Talking animals Undead Death Ghosts Liches Mummies Skeletons Vampires Zombies Unicorns Yōkai Characters Barbarian Caveman Damsel in distress Dark lord Donor Dragonslayer Fairy godmother Heroes Magicians Occult detective list Wild man Witches Magic system Hard and soft Elements Dark / neutral / light Ceremonial Love Moon Magic item Grimoire Magic ring Magical weapons Magic sword Runes Wand Schools Alchemy Demonology Divination Egregore Evocation Incantation Necromancy Runecraft Shamanism Shapeshifting Thaumaturgy Theurgy Witchcraft Fantasy races Centaurs Dwarves Elves Treants Giants Gnomes Goblins Gremlins Halflings Hobgoblins Kobolds Leprechauns Merfolk Mermaids Mermen Ogres Oni Orcs Trolls Places and events Quests Worlds list Maps Lost city Hollow Earth Astral plane Dreamworld Castle Enchanted forest Thieves' guild Magic school Related Allegory Epic poetry Fable Fairy tale Ghost stories Gothic fiction Horror fiction LGBT themes in speculative fiction Mecha Mythology Science fiction Supernatural fiction Superhero Tokusatsu Kaiju Urban legend Outline Category Authority control databases National United States Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Goblin&oldid=1293055123 " Categories : Goblins European legendary creatures Fairy tale stock characters Hidden categories: Wikipedia pages semi-protected against vandalism Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2022 Wikisource templates with missing id Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 30 May 2025, at 11:48 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Goblin 44 languages Add topic

