Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life and education 2 Military service 3 Academic career Toggle Academic career subsection 3.1 Academic roles 3.2 Academic work 3.2.1 Work with Daniel Kahneman 3.2.2 Comparative ignorance 3.2.3 Notable contributions 3.3 Approach to research 3.4 Recognition 4 Personality and characteristics 5 Personal life 6 In popular culture Toggle In popular culture subsection 6.1 Tversky intelligence test 6.2 The Undoing Project 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Amos Tversky 26 languages العربية Беларуская Català Čeština Deutsch Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 Italiano עברית Magyar مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Русский Slovenčina Suomi Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Israeli psychologist (1937–1996) Amos Tversky עמוס טברסקי Born Amos Nathan Tversky ( 1937-03-16 ) March 16, 1937 Haifa , British Mandate of Palestine Died June 2, 1996 (1996-06-02) (aged 59) Stanford , California , U.S.

Nationality Israeli Alma mater University of Michigan Hebrew University Known for Prospect theory Heuristics and biases Spouse Barbara Tversky ​ ( m.

1963) ​ Awards MacArthur Award Grawemeyer Award in Psychology (2003) Military career Allegiance Israel Branch Israel Defense Forces Rank Seren (Captain) Battles / wars Suez Crisis Six-Day War Yom Kippur War Scientific career Fields Cognitive psychology , Behavioral economics Institutions Hebrew University Stanford University Doctoral students Maya Bar-Hillel Ruma Falk Amos Nathan Tversky ( Hebrew : עמוס טברסקי ; March 16, 1937 – June 2, 1996) was an Israeli cognitive and mathematical psychologist and a key figure in the discovery of systematic human cognitive bias and handling of risk .

Much of his early work concerned the foundations of measurement. He was co-author of a three-volume treatise, Foundations of Measurement . His early work with Daniel Kahneman focused on the psychology of prediction and probability judgment; later they worked together to develop prospect theory , which aims to explain irrational human economic choices and is considered one of the seminal works of behavioral economics .

Six years after Tversky's death, Kahneman received the 2002 Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences for work he did in collaboration with Amos Tversky.

[ 1 ] While Nobel Prizes are not awarded posthumously, Kahneman has commented that he feels "it is a joint prize. We were twinned for more than a decade." [ 2 ] Tversky also collaborated with many leading researchers including Thomas Gilovich , Itamar Simonson , Paul Slovic and Richard Thaler . A Review of General Psychology survey, published in 2002, ranked Tversky as the 93rd most cited psychologist of the 20th century, tied with Edwin Boring , John Dewey , and Wilhelm Wundt .

[ 3 ] Early life and education [ edit ] Tversky was born in Haifa , British Palestine (now Israel ), as son of the Polish-born veterinarian Yosef Tversky and Lithuanian Jewish Jenia Tversky (née Ginzburg), a social worker who later became a member of the Knesset representing the Mapai (Workers' Party).

[ 4 ] Tversky had one sister, Ruth, thirteen years his senior.

Tversky's mother has said he was self-taught in many areas, including mathematics.

[ 5 ] In high school , Tversky took classes from literary critic Baruch Kurzweil , and befriended classmate Dahlia Ravikovich , who would become an award-winning poet.

Tversky received his bachelor's degree from Hebrew University of Jerusalem in Israel in 1961, and his doctorate in psychology from the University of Michigan in Ann Arbor in 1965. He had already developed a clear vision of researching judgement.

[ 5 ] Military service [ edit ] After high school, Tversky was conscripted into the Israel Defense Forces and served in the Paratroopers Brigade . During this time he was also a member and leader in Nahal , an IDF program that combined compulsory military service with the establishment of agricultural settlements.

[ 6 ] Tversky served with distinction as a paratrooper, making over fifty jumps and eventually rising to the rank of captain. He was decorated for bravery after saving the life of one of his soldiers during a training exercise. In 1956, when Tversky was a platoon commander, his unit conducted a training exercise in front of the IDF General Staff. One of his soldiers was assigned to clear a barbed wire fence with a bangalore torpedo . After activating the fuse, the soldier suffered a panic attack and froze in place instead of running for cover. Ignoring the orders of his commanding officer for everyone to stay put, Tversky rushed from behind the wall that was serving as cover for his unit, picked up the soldier and hauled him ten yards, tossed him on the ground, and covered him with his body. Tversky was wounded by shrapnel from the explosion, which remained in his body for the rest of his life. The soldier he saved was unharmed. When handing him his decoration, IDF Chief of Staff Moshe Dayan , who had witnessed the incident, told him "you did a very stupid and brave thing and you won’t get away with it again." Tversky participated in three wars. He parachuted into combat during the Suez Crisis in 1956, commanded an infantry unit during the Six-Day War in 1967, and served in a psychology field-unit during the Yom Kippur War in 1973.

[ 6 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] Academic career [ edit ] Academic roles [ edit ] After his doctorate, Tversky taught at Hebrew University. He then joined the faculty in the Department of Psychology of Stanford University in 1978, where he spent the rest of his career.

Academic work [ edit ] Work with Daniel Kahneman [ edit ] Amos Tversky's most influential work was done with his longtime collaborator, Daniel Kahneman , in a partnership that began in the late 1960s. Their work explored the biases and failures in rationality continually exhibited in human decision-making.

[ 6 ] Starting with their first paper together, "Belief in the Law of Small Numbers", Kahneman and Tversky laid out eleven "cognitive illusions" that affect human judgment, frequently using small-scale empirical experiments that demonstrate how subjects make irrational decisions under uncertain conditions. (They introduced the notion of cognitive bias in 1972.

[ 7 ] ) This work was highly influential in the field of economics , which had largely presumed rationality of all actors.

[ 8 ] According to Kahneman the collaboration 'tapered off' in the early 1980s, although they tried to revive it.

[ 9 ] Factors included Tversky receiving most of the external credit for the output of the partnership, and a reduction in the generosity with which Tversky and Kahneman interacted with each other.

[ 10 ] Comparative ignorance [ edit ] Tversky and Fox (1995) [ 11 ] addressed ambiguity aversion , the idea that people do not like ambiguous gambles or choices with ambiguity, with the comparative ignorance framework. Their idea was that people are only ambiguity averse when their attention is specifically brought to the ambiguity by comparing an ambiguous option to an unambiguous option. For instance, people are willing to bet more on choosing a correct colored ball from an urn containing equal proportions of black and red balls than an urn with unknown proportions of balls when evaluating both of these urns at the same time. However, when evaluating them separately, people are willing to bet approximately the same amount on either urn. Thus, when it is possible to compare the ambiguous gamble to an unambiguous gamble people are averse — but not when one is ignorant of this comparison.

Notable contributions [ edit ] The shape of the value ( utility ) function in prospect theory . The asymmetry of the function corresponds to loss aversion .

foundations of measurement anchoring and adjustment availability heuristic base rate fallacy conjunction fallacy framing behavioral finance clustering illusion loss aversion prospect theory cumulative prospect theory representativeness heuristic Tversky index support theory contrast model feature matching account of similarity Approach to research [ edit ] Kahneman said that Tversky "had simply perfect taste in choosing problems, and he never wasted much time on anything that was not destined to matter. He also had an unfailing compass that always kept him going forward.

[ 12 ] Tversky's 1974 Science article with Kahneman on cognitive illusions triggered a "cascade of related research," Science News wrote in a 1994 article tracing the recent history of research on reasoning. Decision theorists in economics, business, philosophy and medicine as well as psychologists cited their work.

[ 13 ] Recognition [ edit ] In 1980, he became a fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences .

[ 6 ] In 1984 he was a recipient of the MacArthur Fellowship , and in 1985 he was elected to the National Academy of Sciences .

[ 14 ] Tversky, as a co-recipient with Daniel Kahneman, earned the 2003 University of Louisville Grawemeyer Award for Psychology.

[ 15 ] After Tversky's death, Kahneman was awarded the 2002 Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences for the work he did in collaboration with Tversky. Nobel prizes are not awarded posthumously.

[ 1 ] Personality and characteristics [ edit ] Kahneman has said "Amos was the freest person I have known, and he was able to be free because he was also one of the most disciplined." [ 16 ] Persi Diaconis , a professor of mathematics at Stanford, has said "You were happy being in his presence. There was a light shining out of him." [ 13 ] Gerhard Casper , President of Stanford University, said Tversky "maintained the highest standards of professional ethics", and "His dedication to Stanford and its institutions of faculty governance was exemplary." [ 13 ] Whilst being very collaborative, Tversky also had a lifelong habit of working alone at night while others slept.

[ 17 ] In intellectual debate Tversky "wanted to crush the opposition".

[ 18 ] [ 19 ] Tversky believed that humans live under uncertainty, in a probabilistic universe.

[ 20 ] Personal life [ edit ] In 1963, Tversky married American psychologist Barbara Gans , who later became a professor in the human-development department at Teachers College, Columbia University .

[ 6 ] They had three children together.

He died of a metastatic melanoma in 1996.

[ 21 ] He was a Jewish atheist .

[ 22 ] In popular culture [ edit ] Tversky intelligence test [ edit ] As recounted by Canadian writer Malcolm Gladwell in 2013's David and Goliath: Underdogs, Misfits, and the Art of Battling Giants , Tversky's peers thought so highly of him that they devised a tongue-in-cheek one-part test for measuring intelligence. As related to Gladwell by psychologist Adam Alter , the Tversky intelligence test was "The faster you realized Tversky was smarter than you, the smarter you were." [ 23 ] The Undoing Project [ edit ] Michael Lewis 's book The Undoing Project: A Friendship That Changed Our Minds , released in 2016, is about Tversky's personal and professional relationship with Daniel Kahneman.

[ 24 ] [ 25 ] References [ edit ] ^ a b Altman, Daniel (10 October 2002).

"A Nobel That Bridges Economics and Psychology" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 14 March 2009 .

^ Goode, Erica (5 November 2002).

"A Conversation with Daniel Kahneman; On Profit, Loss and the Mysteries of the Mind" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 14 March 2009 .

^ Haggbloom, Steven J.; Warnick, Renee; Warnick, Jason E.; Jones, Vinessa K.; Yarbrough, Gary L.; Russell, Tenea M.; Borecky, Chris M.; McGahhey, Reagan; et al. (2002).

"The 100 most eminent psychologists of the 20th century" .

Review of General Psychology .

6 (2): 139– 152.

CiteSeerX 10.1.1.586.1913 .

doi : 10.1037/1089-2680.6.2.139 .

S2CID 145668721 .

^ a b A Psychologist Who Shed Light on Our Irrationality Is Born Haaretz, 16 March 2016 ^ a b c Priceless: The Hidden Psychology of Value
By William Poundstone ^ a b c d e Lewis, Michael (2017).

The Undoing Project . New York: W. W. Norton & Company.

ISBN 978-0-393-35610-6 .

^ Kahneman D, Frederick S (2002). "Representativeness Revisited: Attribute Substitution in Intuitive Judgment". In Gilovich T, Griffin DW, Kahneman D (eds.).

Heuristics and Biases: The Psychology of Intuitive Judgment . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. pp.

51– 52.

ISBN 978-0-521-79679-8 .

^ "Amos Tversky, leading decision researcher, dies at 59" .

Stanford University News Service . 1996-06-05. Archived from the original on 2021-03-03 . Retrieved 2017-12-25 .

^ "The Sveriges Riksbank Prize in Economic Sciences in Memory of Alfred Nobel 2002" .

^ Michael Lewis. "The Undoing Project: A Friendship that Changed the World". Penguin, 2016 (ISBN 9780141983035) ^ Fox, Craig R.; Amos Tversky (1995). "Ambiguity Aversion and Comparative Ignorance".

Quarterly Journal of Economics .

110 (3): 585– 603.

CiteSeerX 10.1.1.395.8835 .

doi : 10.2307/2946693 .

JSTOR 2946693 .

^ "The Sveriges Riksbank Prize in Economic Sciences in Memory of Alfred Nobel 2002" .

^ a b c "Amos Tversky, leading decision researcher, dies at 59" . Archived from the original on 2021-03-03 . Retrieved 2017-12-26 .

^ "National Academy of Sciences" .

nas.nasonline.org .

^ "2002- Daniel Kahneman and Amos Tversky" . Archived from the original on 2015-07-23.

^ "The Sveriges Riksbank Prize in Economic Sciences in Memory of Alfred Nobel 2002" .

^ "The Sveriges Riksbank Prize in Economic Sciences in Memory of Alfred Nobel 2002" .

^ Kahnemnan, quoted in Michael Lewis, "The Undoing Project: A Friendship that Changed the World". Penguin, 2016 (ISBN 9780141983035) ^ Tversky..." didn't have Danny's feeling that we should all think together and work together. He thought "F*** You".

Walter Mischel , quoted in Michael Lewis, "The Undoing Project: A Friendship that Changed the World". Penguin, 2016 (ISBN 9780141983035) ^ " People live under uncertainty whether they like it or not..... Man is a deterministic device thrown into a probabilistic Universe. In this match, surprises are expected.

" Notes made by Tversky for a scientific paper. Michael Lewis. "The Undoing Project: A Friendship that Changed the World". Penguin, 2016 (ISBN 9780141983035).

^ Freeman, Karen (6 June 1996).

"Amos Tversky, Expert on Decision Making, Is Dead at 59" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 14 March 2009 .

^ Engber, Daniel.

"How a Pioneer in the Science of Mistakes Ended Up Mistaken" .

Slate Magazine, 21 December 2016. "It's a portrait of besotted opposites: Both Kahneman and Tversky were brilliant scientists, and atheist Israeli Jews...

^ Malcolm Gladwell, David and Goliath: Underdogs, Misfits, and the Art of Battling Giants , 2013, page 103 ^ Engber, Daniel (21 December 2016).

"The Irony Effect" .

Slate . Retrieved 26 January 2017 .

^ "How Two Trailblazing Psychologists Turned the World of Decision Science Upside Down" .

Vanity Fair . 2016-11-14 . Retrieved 2023-08-11 .

External links [ edit ] Quotations related to Amos Tversky at Wikiquote Memorial Resolution - Amos Tversky Boston Globe: The man who wasn't there Daniel Kahneman – Autobiography Tversky in group discussion (39 mins) Tversky lecturing v t e Institutional economics Institutional economists Werner Abelshauser Clarence Edwin Ayres Joe S. Bain Shimshon Bichler Robert A. Brady Daniel Bromley Ha-Joon Chang John Maurice Clark John R. Commons Richard T. Ely Robert H. Frank John Kenneth Galbraith Walton Hale Hamilton Orris C. Herfindahl Albert O. Hirschman Geoffrey Hodgson János Kornai Simon Kuznets Hunter Lewis Jesse W. Markham Wesley Clair Mitchell Gunnar Myrdal Jonathan Nitzan Warren Samuels François Simiand Herbert A. Simon Frank Stilwell George W. Stocking Sr.

Lars Pålsson Syll Thorstein Veblen Edward Lawrence Wheelwright Erich Zimmermann New institutional economists Daron Acemoglu Armen Alchian Masahiko Aoki Steven N. S. Cheung Ronald Coase Harold Demsetz Avner Greif Claude Ménard Douglass North Mancur Olson Elinor Ostrom ( Bloomington school ) Oliver E. Williamson Behavioral economists George Ainslie Dan Ariely Nava Ashraf Ofer Azar Douglas Bernheim Samuel Bowles Sarah Brosnan Colin Camerer David Cesarini Kay-Yut Chen Rachel Croson Werner De Bondt Paul Dolan Stephen Duneier Catherine C. Eckel Armin Falk Urs Fischbacher Herbert Gintis Uri Gneezy David Halpern Charles A. Holt David Ryan Just Daniel Kahneman Djuradj Caranovic Ariel Kalil George Katona Jeffrey R. Kling George Loewenstein Graham Loomes Brigitte C. Madrian Gary McClelland Matteo Motterlini Sendhil Mullainathan Michael Norton Matthew Rabin Howard Rachlin Klaus M. Schmidt Eldar Shafir Hersh Shefrin Robert J. Shiller Uwe Sunde Richard Thaler Amos Tversky Robert W. Vishny Georg Weizsäcker Economic sociologists Jens Beckert Fred L. Block James S. Coleman Paul DiMaggio Paula England Mark Granovetter Donald Angus MacKenzie Joel M. Podolny Lynette Spillman Richard Swedberg Laurent Thévenot Carlo Trigilia Harrison White Viviana Zelizer Key concepts and ideas Accelerator effect Administered prices Barriers to entry Bounded rationality Conspicuous consumption Conspicuous leisure Conventional wisdom Countervailing power Effective competition Herfindahl index Hiding hand principle Hirschman cycle Instrumentalism Kuznets cycles Market concentration Market power Market structure Penalty of taking the lead Satisficing Shortage economy Structure–conduct–performance paradigm Technostructure Theory of two-level planning Veblen goods Veblenian dichotomy Related fields Cultural economics Development economics English historical school of economics Evolutionary economics Evolutionary psychology French historical school Historical school of economics Legal realism Microeconomics Post-Keynesian economics v t e Game theory Glossary Game theorists Games Traditional game theory Definitions Asynchrony Bayesian regret Best response Bounded rationality Cheap talk Coalition Complete contract Complete information Complete mixing Confrontation analysis Conjectural variation Contingent cooperator Coopetition Cooperative game theory Dynamic inconsistency Escalation of commitment Farsightedness Game semantics Hierarchy of beliefs Imperfect information Incomplete information Information set Move by nature Mutual knowledge Non-cooperative game theory Non-credible threat Outcome Perfect information Perfect recall Ply Preference Rationality Sequential game Simultaneous action selection Spite Strategic complements Strategic dominance Strategic form Strategic interaction Strategic move Strategy Subgame Succinct game Topological game Tragedy of the commons Uncorrelated asymmetry Equilibrium concepts Backward induction Bayes correlated equilibrium Bayesian efficiency Bayesian game Bayesian Nash equilibrium Berge equilibrium Bertrand–Edgeworth model Coalition-proof Nash equilibrium Core Correlated equilibrium Cursed equilibrium Edgeworth price cycle Epsilon-equilibrium Gibbs equilibrium Incomplete contracts Inequity aversion Individual rationality Iterated elimination of dominated strategies Markov perfect equilibrium Mertens-stable equilibrium Nash equilibrium Open-loop model Pareto efficiency Payoff dominance Perfect Bayesian equilibrium Price of anarchy Program equilibrium Proper equilibrium Quantal response equilibrium Quasi-perfect equilibrium Rational agent Rationalizability Rationalizable strategy Satisfaction equilibrium Self-confirming equilibrium Sequential equilibrium Shapley value Strong Nash equilibrium Subgame perfect equilibrium Trembling hand equilibrium Strategies Appeasement Bid shading Cheap talk Collusion Commitment device De-escalation Deterrence Escalation Fictitious play Focal point Grim trigger Hobbesian trap Markov strategy Max-dominated strategy Mixed strategy Pure strategy Tit for tat Win–stay, lose–switch Games All-pay auction Battle of the sexes Nash bargaining game Bertrand competition Blotto game Centipede game Coordination game Cournot competition Deadlock Dictator game Trust game Diner's dilemma Dollar auction El Farol Bar problem Electronic mail game Gift-exchange game Guess 2/3 of the average Keynesian beauty contest Kuhn poker Lewis signaling game Matching pennies Obligationes Optional prisoner's dilemma Pirate game Prisoner's dilemma Public goods game Rendezvous problem Rock paper scissors Stackelberg competition Stag hunt Traveler's dilemma Ultimatum game Volunteer's dilemma War of attrition Theorems Arrow's impossibility theorem Aumann's agreement theorem Brouwer fixed-point theorem Competitive altruism Folk theorem Gibbard–Satterthwaite theorem Gibbs lemma Glicksberg's theorem Kakutani fixed-point theorem Kuhn's theorem One-shot deviation principle Prim–Read theory Rational ignorance Rational irrationality Sperner's lemma Zermelo's theorem Subfields Algorithmic game theory Behavioral game theory Behavioral strategy Compositional game theory Contract theory Drama theory Graphical game theory Heresthetic Mean-field game theory Negotiation theory Quantum game theory Social software Key people Albert W. Tucker Alvin E. Roth Amos Tversky Antoine Augustin Cournot Ariel Rubinstein David Gale David K. Levine David M. Kreps Donald B. Gillies Drew Fudenberg Eric Maskin Harold W. Kuhn Herbert Simon Herbert Scarf Hervé Moulin Jean Tirole Jean-François Mertens Jennifer Tour Chayes Ken Binmore Kenneth Arrow Leonid Hurwicz Lloyd Shapley Martin Shubik Melvin Dresher Merrill M. Flood Olga Bondareva Oskar Morgenstern Paul Milgrom Peyton Young Reinhard Selten Robert Aumann Robert Axelrod Robert B. Wilson Roger Myerson Samuel Bowles Suzanne Scotchmer Thomas Schelling William Vickrey Combinatorial game theory Core concepts Combinatorial explosion Determinacy Disjunctive sum First-player and second-player win Game complexity Game tree Impartial game Misère Partisan game Solved game Sprague–Grundy theorem Strategy-stealing argument Zugzwang Games Chess Chomp Clobber Cram Domineering Hackenbush Nim Notakto Subtract a square Sylver coinage Toads and Frogs Mathematical tools Mex Nimber On Numbers and Games Star Surreal number Winning Ways for Your Mathematical Plays Search algorithms Alpha–beta pruning Expectiminimax Minimax Monte Carlo tree search Negamax Paranoid algorithm Principal variation search Key people Claude Shannon John Conway John von Neumann Evolutionary game theory Core concepts Bishop–Cannings theorem Evolution and the Theory of Games Evolutionarily stable set Evolutionarily stable state Evolutionarily stable strategy Replicator equation Risk dominance Stochastically stable equilibrium Weak evolutionarily stable strategy Games Chicken Stag hunt Applications Cultural group selection Fisher's principle Mobbing Terminal investment hypothesis Key people John Maynard Smith Robert Axelrod Mechanism design Core concepts Algorithmic mechanism design Bayesian-optimal mechanism Incentive compatibility Market design Monotonicity Participation constraint Revelation principle Strategyproofness Vickrey–Clarke–Groves mechanism Theorems Myerson–Satterthwaite theorem Revenue equivalence Applications Digital goods auction Knapsack auction Truthful cake-cutting Other topics Bertrand paradox Chainstore paradox Computational complexity of games Helly metric Multi-agent system PPAD-complete Mathematics portal Commons WikiProject Category v t e Psychology History Philosophy Portal Psychologist Basic psychology Abnormal Affective neuroscience Affective science Behavioral genetics Behavioral neuroscience Behaviorism Cognitive / Cognitivism Cognitive neuroscience Social Comparative Cross-cultural Cultural Developmental Differential Ecological Evolutionary Experimental Gestalt Intelligence Mathematical Moral Neuropsychology Perception Personality Psycholinguistics Psychophysiology Quantitative Social Theoretical Applied psychology Anomalistic Applied behavior analysis Art Assessment Aviation Biography of famous people Clinical Coaching Color Community Consumer Counseling Critical Educational Ergonomics Fashion Feminist Food Forensic Health History Humanistic Industrial and organizational Legal Media Medical Military Music Occupational health Pastoral Peace and war Political Positive Photography Psychometrics Psychotherapy Religion School Sex differences Space Sport and exercise Suicidology Systems Trading Traffic Methodologies Animal testing Archival research Behavior epigenetics Case study Content analysis Experiments Human subject research Interviews Neuroimaging Observation Psychophysics Qualitative research Quantitative research Self-report inventory Statistical surveys Concepts Behavior Behavioral engineering Behavioral genetics Behavioral neuroscience Cognition Competence Consciousness Consumer behavior Emotions Feelings Human factors and ergonomics Intelligence Maslow's hierarchy of needs Mental state Mind Psychology of religion Psychometrics Sex differences Terror management theory Psychologists Wilhelm Wundt William James Ivan Pavlov Sigmund Freud Edward Thorndike Carl Jung John B. Watson Clark L. Hull Kurt Lewin Jean Piaget Gordon Allport J. P. Guilford Carl Rogers Erik Erikson B. F. Skinner Donald O. Hebb Ernest Hilgard Harry Harlow Raymond Cattell Abraham Maslow Neal E. Miller Jerome Bruner Donald T. Campbell Hans Eysenck Herbert A. Simon David McClelland Leon Festinger George A. Miller Richard Lazarus Stanley Schachter Robert Zajonc Albert Bandura Roger Brown Endel Tulving Lawrence Kohlberg Noam Chomsky Ulric Neisser Jerome Kagan Walter Mischel Elliot Aronson Daniel Kahneman Paul Ekman Michael Posner Amos Tversky Bruce McEwen Larry Squire Richard E. Nisbett Martin Seligman Ed Diener Shelley E. Taylor John Anderson Ronald C. Kessler Joseph E. LeDoux Richard Davidson Susan Fiske Roy Baumeister Lists Counseling topics Disciplines Organizations Outline Psychologists Psychotherapies Research methods Schools of thought Timeline Topics Category Wiktionary definition Wiktionary category Wikisource Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikinews Wikibooks v t e Decision theory Core concepts Ambiguity aversion Bounded rationality Choice architecture Expected utility Expected value Hyperbolic discounting Leximin Loss aversion Multi-attribute utility Path dependence Principle of indifference Prospect theory Rational choice theory Risk aversion Risk-seeking Satisficing Strategic dominance Subjective expected utility Sure-thing Utility theorem Decision models Anscombe-Aumann framework Causal decision Decision field theory Emotional choice Evidential decision Fuzzy-trace theory Intertemporal choice Naturalistic decision Normative model Quantum cognition Recognition-primed decision Rubicon model Savage's subjective expected utility model Decision analysis tools Analytic hierarchy process Analytic network process Cost–benefit analysis Cost-effectiveness analysis Cost–utility analysis Decision conferencing Decision curve analysis Decision rule Decision support system Decision table Decision tree Decision matrix Decisional balance sheet Gittins index Influence diagram Minimax MCDA Scoring rule Value of information perfect sample uncertainty Paradoxes and biases Allais paradox Certainty effect Cognitive bias Decoy effect Disposition effect Ellsberg paradox Endowment effect Framing effect Heuristics Newcomb's paradox Pseudocertainty effect Reference dependence Regret St. Petersburg paradox Status quo bias Sunk cost Uncertainty and risk Deep uncertainty Exploration–exploitation Info-gap Pignistic probability Robust decision-making Related fields Behavioral economics Game theory Operations research Social choice theory Utility theory Key people David Blackwell Bruno de Finetti Morris H. DeGroot Peter C. Fishburn Gerd Gigerenzer Itzhak Gilboa Daniel Kahneman R. Duncan Luce Oskar Morgenstern Howard Raiffa Leonard J. Savage David Schmeidler Herbert Simon Amos Tversky John von Neumann Category Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Czech Republic Netherlands Norway Croatia Korea Poland 2 Israel Catalonia Academics CiNii Mathematics Genealogy Project zbMATH MathSciNet People DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Amos_Tversky&oldid=1306277639 " Categories : 1937 births 1996 deaths 20th-century Israeli economists 20th-century American psychologists Jewish American atheists American atheists Behavioral economists Behavioral finance American cognitive psychologists Experimental economists Fellows of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences Fellows of the Econometric Society MacArthur Fellows Foreign associates of the National Academy of Sciences Academic staff of the Hebrew University of Jerusalem Stanford University Department of Psychology faculty University of Michigan alumni Jewish Israeli atheists Israeli atheists Israeli emigrants to the United States Israeli psychologists 20th-century Israeli Jews Jewish American scientists Framing theorists Israeli people of Belarusian-Jewish descent Financial economists People from Haifa Deaths from melanoma in California Israeli Ashkenazi Jews Jewish scientists Jewish psychologists APA Distinguished Scientific Award for an Early Career Contribution to Psychology recipients Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Pages using infobox military person with embed Articles with hCards Articles containing Hebrew-language text Articles with excerpts This page was last edited on 16 August 2025, at 22:40 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Amos Tversky 26 languages Add topic

