Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Aspects 2 Conceptualisation 3 Interpretation 4 Measurement 5 Regenerative Agriculture & Soil Health 6 Soil health gap 7 See also 8 References 9 Further reading 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Soil health 4 languages العربية Español فارسی മലയാളം Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia A state of soil, meeting ecosystem functions Soil health is a state of a soil meeting its range of ecosystem functions as appropriate to its environment. In more colloquial terms, the health of soil arises from favorable interactions of all soil components (living and non-living) that belong together, as in microbiota , plants and animals. It is possible that a soil can be healthy in terms of ecosystem functioning but not necessarily serve crop production or human nutrition directly, hence the scientific debate on terms and measurements.

Soil health testing is pursued as an assessment of this status [ 1 ] but tends to be confined largely to agronomic objectives. Soil health depends on soil biodiversity (with a robust soil biota ), and it can be improved via soil management , especially by care to keep protective living covers on the soil and by natural (carbon-containing) soil amendments. Inorganic fertilizers do not necessarily damage soil health if they are not used in excess, and if they bring about a general improvement of overall plant growth which contributes more carbon-containing residues to the soil.

Aspects [ edit ] The term soil health is used to describe the state of a soil in: Sustaining plant and animal productivity (agronomic focus); Enhancing biodiversity ( Soil biodiversity ) (ecological focus); Maintaining or enhancing water and air quality (environmental/climate focus); Supporting human health and habitation .

[ 2 ] sequestering carbon [ 3 ] The phrase "soil health" has largely replaced the older "soil quality". The primary difference between the two expressions is that soil quality was focused on the ability of the soil serve a particular purpose, as in "quality of soil for maize production" or "quality of soil for roadbed preparation" and so on. The word "health" shifted the perception to be an integrative, holistic , and systematic view of the soil's ability to function as a self-sustaining system. The two expressions still overlap considerably. Soil health as an expression derives from organic or "biological farming" movements in Europe, however, well before soil quality was first applied as a discipline around 1990. In 1978, Swiss soil biologist Dr Otto Buess wrote an essay "The Health of Soil and Plants" which largely defines the field even today.

The underlying principle in the use of the term "soil health" is that soil is not just an inert, lifeless growing medium, which modern intensive farming tends to represent, rather it is a living, dynamic and ever-so-subtly changing whole environment. It turns out that soils highly fertile from the point of view of crop productivity are also lively from a biological point of view. It is now commonly recognized that soil microbial biomass is large: in temperate grassland soil the bacterial and fungal biomass have been documented to be 1–2 t (2.0 long tons; 2.2 short tons)/ hectare and 2–5 t (4.9 long tons; 5.5 short tons)/ha, respectively.

[ 4 ] Some microbiologists now believe that 80% of soil nutrient functions are essentially controlled by microbes.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] Using the human health analogy, a healthy soil can be categorized as one: In a state of composite well-being in terms of biological, chemical and physical properties; Not diseased or infirmed (i.e. not degraded , nor degrading), nor causing negative off-site impacts; With each of its qualities cooperatively functioning such that the soil reaches its full potential and resists degradation; Providing a full range of functions (especially nutrient, carbon and water cycling ) and in such a way that it maintains this capacity into the future.

Conceptualisation [ edit ] Soil health is the condition of the soil in a defined space and at a defined scale relative to a set of benchmarks that encompass healthy functioning. It would not be appropriate to refer to soil health for soil-roadbed preparation, as in the analogy of soil quality in a functional class. 
The definition of soil health may vary between users of the term as alternative users may place differing priorities upon the multiple functions of a soil.
Therefore, the term soil health can only be understood within the context of the user of the term, and their aspirations of a soil, as well as by the boundary definition of the soil at issue. Finally, intrinsic to the discussion on soil health are many potentially conflicting interpretations, especially ecological landscape assessment vs agronomic objectives, each claiming to have soil health criteria.

Interpretation [ edit ] Different soils will have different benchmarks of health depending on the "inherited" qualities, and on the geographic circumstance of the soil.
The generic aspects defining a healthy soil can be considered as follows: "Productive" options are broad; Life diversity is broad; Absorbency, storing, recycling and processing is high in relation to limits set by climate ; Water runoff quality is of high standard; Low entropy ; and No damage to or loss of the fundamental components.

This translates to: A comprehensive cover of vegetation ; Carbon levels relatively close to the limits set by soil type and climate; Little leakage of nutrients from the ecosystem; Biological and agricultural productivity relatively close to the limits set by the soil environment and climate; Only geological rates of erosion ; No accumulation of contaminants ; and, An unhealthy soil thus is the simple converse of the above.

Measurement [ edit ] On the basis of the above, soil health will be measured in terms of individual ecosystem services provided relative to the benchmark.  Specific benchmarks used to evaluate soil health include CO 2 release, humus levels, microbial activity, and available calcium.

[ 7 ] Soil health testing is spreading in the United States, Australia and South Africa.

[ 8 ] Cornell University, a land-grant college in NY State, has had a Soil Health Test since 2006. Woods End Laboratories, a private soil lab founded in Maine in 1975, has offered a soil quality package since 1985. Both these services combine physical ( aggregate stability ), chemical (mineral balance), and biological (CO 2 respiration) analyses, which today are considered hallmarks of soil health testing.

[ 9 ] The approach of other soil labs also entering the soil health field is to add into common chemical nutrient testing a biological set of factors not normally included in routine soil testing. The best example is adding biological soil respiration ("CO 2 -Burst") as a test procedure; this has already been adapted to modern commercial labs in the period since 2006.

There is however resistance among soil testing labs and university scientists to add new biological tests, primarily because the established metric of soil fertility is largely based on models constructed from "crop response" studies, which match crop yield to specific chemical nutrient concentrations, and no similar models appear to exist for soil health tests. Critics of novel soil health tests argue that they may be insensitive to management changes.

[ 10 ] Soil test methods have evolved slowly over the past 40 years. However, in this same time USA soils have also lost up to 75% of their carbon ( humus ), causing biological fertility and ecosystem functioning to decline; how much is debatable. Many critics of the conventional system say the loss of soil quality is sufficient evidence that the old soil testing models have failed us, and need to be replaced with new approaches. These older models have stressed "maximum yield" and " yield calibration" to such an extent that related factors have been overlooked. Thus, surface and groundwater pollution with excess nutrients ( nitrates and phosphates ) has grown enormously, and early 2000s measures were reported (in the United States) to be the worst it has been since the 1970s, before the advent of environmental consciousness.

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] [ 13 ] Regenerative Agriculture & Soil Health [ edit ] Regenerative agriculture (RA) is a holistic approach to farming that emphasizes soil conservation, biodiversity, and sustainable land management. Utilizing various soil health practices, regenerative agriculture "integrates local and indigenous knowledge of landscapes, as well as their management, with established scientific knowledge" [ 14 ] while aiming to improve the socioeconomic well-being of a community.

[ 15 ] Central to RA is the principle that healthy soil is foundational to sustainable agriculture, essentially focusing on feeding the soil rather than feeding each plant. RA serves as an opportunity to directly apply soil health practices to produce crops sustainably. Research highlights that regenerative agriculture enhances nutrient cycling while supporting biodiversity and ecosystem services, which are vital for maintaining soil health.

[ 16 ] [ 14 ] Practices such as cover cropping , crop rotation , no-till farming , integrated pest management , permaculture , and composting support self-sustaining soil ecosystems – further enriching soil fertility while reducing dependence on chemical fertilizers and pesticides , demonstrating that cover crops not only reduce erosion but also improve nutrient cycling .

[ 15 ] [ 17 ] RA's primary contributions to soil health is the enhancement of organic matter and microbial activity. A myriad of practices can be used to increase soil organic content, like cover cropping, composting, and crop rotation to improve soil fertility, water retention, and ability to resist soil erosion. Research supports that soil microbial diversity is critical for maintaining fertility and resilience against the changing climate, and regenerative practices have been shown to enhance and support this biodiversity.

[ 17 ] Cover crops act as a protective blanket during the winter months, preventing compaction and erosion, while their roots maintain soil structure and nurture microbial diversity. Crop rotation further enriches soil microbiomes by diversifying nutrient and microbial inputs, disrupting pest cycles, and decreasing reliance on chemical inputs.

[ 14 ] Similarly, no-till farming minimizes physical disturbances to the soil, preserving its structure and improving water infiltration while conserving organic matter and keeping carbon in the soil, and not in the atmosphere.

[ 18 ] [ 15 ] [ 19 ] Permaculture is a design philosophy often incorporated into RA due to its focus on sustainable, ecosystem-based farming practices. Permaculture supports soil health by fostering natural nutrient cycles through techniques like companion planting, mulching, and perennial cropping. It emphasizes the creation of agricultural systems that model and mimic natural ecosystems, promoting biodiversity, more efficient resource use, and long-term soil health. These practices minimize soil erosion, enhance organic matter, and encourage beneficial microbial activity.

[ 20 ] Regenerative agriculture offers significant economic and community benefits as well, nurturing resilient farming systems that enhance local economies and promote social well-being. Economically, RA reduces input costs by minimizing reliance on chemical fertilizers and pesticides, leading to lower operational expenses and increased profitability for farmers.

[ 18 ] Enhanced soil health from practices such as cover cropping and composting improves crop yields and market quality, which can provide greater productivity and financial stability. Although, the lack of heavy machinery increases the amount of necessary labor and steepens dependence on workers.

[ 15 ] Additionally, RA is designed to support community health by improving access to fresh local produce and working to alleviate food insecurity. Through RA, Community Supported Agriculture (CSA) systems can be established to bridge the divides between farmers and consumers, strengthen community ties, and facilitate a direct-market relationship. These practices not only sustain farmers but benefit surrounding communities by promoting sustainable livelihoods and resilience to environmental changes.

[ 21 ] [ 17 ] RA also addresses climate challenges by promoting carbon sequestration through practices like composting and no-till farming . These methods not only mitigate climate change by lowering atmospheric CO 2 levels but also improve soil health, boosting  soil productivity and resilience [ 22 ] (Mishra et al. 295-309). Increasing soil organic carbon through RA practices has measurable effects on reducing atmospheric CO 2 levels while improving soil functionality.

[ 21 ] [ 23 ] The addition of organic material increases levels of soil organic carbon, thereby reducing atmospheric CO 2 levels and enhancing soil fertility and productivity.

[ 24 ] These practices collectively cultivate a resilient soil ecosystem that supports plant growth, enhances pest and disease resistance, and mitigates greenhouse gas emissions through carbon storage . However, despite its many benefits, RA faces challenges in assessment and widespread adoption. Biological indicators of soil health are often underrepresented in current evaluations due to their complexity and the context-specific knowledge required, as biological indicators of soil health often require context-specific ecological knowledge and are not universally standardized.

[ 16 ] [ 17 ] Addressing these gaps and advancing research into RA’s ecological and socioeconomic impacts will be crucial for its broader implementation and success.

Soil health gap [ edit ] Fig. Concept of Soil Health Gap The importance of soil for global food security , agro-ecosystem, environment, and human life has exponentially shifted the research trends toward soil health. However, the lack of a site/region-specific benchmark has limited the research toward understanding the effect of different agronomic managements on soil health. In 2020, Maharjan and his team introduced a new term and concept, "Soil Health Gap" and described how native land in a particular region can help in establishing the benchmark to compare the efficacies of different management practices and at the same time, it can be used in understanding quantitative difference in soil health status.

[ 25 ] See also [ edit ] Dryland salinity – Natural process for soil Ecosystem services – Benefits provided by intact ecosystems Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Soil aggregate stability – Property of soil Soil biodiversity Soil carbon – Solid carbon stored in global soils Soil fertility – Ability of a soil to sustain agricultural plant growth Soil functions – Capabilities of soils Soil policy (Victoria, Australia) Soil quality – Capacity of soil to perform ecosystem services Soil resilience – Ability of a soil to resist or recover its healthy state after disturbance Soil structure – Arrangement of a soil's particles and pore spaces Soil water (retention) – Hydrological property of soil References [ edit ] ^ NRCS 2013 ^ "Soil Quality | NRCS Colorado" . Archived from the original on 2017-01-23 . Retrieved 2018-03-21 .

^ Schlesinger, William H.; Amundson, Ronald (June 2018).

"Managing for soil carbon sequestration: Let's get realistic" .

Global Change Biology .

25 (2): 386– 389.

doi : 10.1111/gcb.14478 .

PMID 30485613 .

^ Nannipieri, P.; Ascher, J.; Ceccherini, M. T.; Landi, L.; Pietramellara, G.; Renella, G. (December 2003).

"Microbial diversity and soil functions" (PDF) .

European Journal of Soil Science .

54 (4): 655– 670.

Bibcode : 2003EuJSS..54..655N .

doi : 10.1046/j.1351-0754.2003.0556.x .

S2CID 247671645 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 2016-04-12.

^ The Role of Soil Biology in Improving Soils Archived 2014-03-12 at the Wayback Machine Webinar ^ "Listing 17 microbes and their effects on the soil and plant health functions" . Explogrow, Dr Malherbe, BSc, BSc Hons., MSc, Pr.Sci.Nat. 22 December 2016.

Archived from the original on 25 June 2016.

^ "Healthy Soil" .

www.highbrixgardens.com .

Archived from the original on 19 December 2016 . Retrieved 26 April 2018 .

^ Kick, Chris (18 February 2014).

"New soil test measures soil health - Farm and Dairy" .

farmanddairy.com .

Archived from the original on 1 December 2017 . Retrieved 26 April 2018 .

^ Bagnall, Dianna K.; Rieke, Elizabeth L.; Morgan, Cristine L. S.; Liptzin, Daniel L.; Cappellazzi, Shannon B.; Honeycutt, C. Wayne (2023-03-01).

"A minimum suite of soil health indicators for North American agriculture" .

Soil Security .

10 : 100084.

Bibcode : 2023SoSec..1000084B .

doi : 10.1016/j.soisec.2023.100084 .

ISSN 2667-0062 .

^ Roper, Wayne R.; Osmond, Deanna L.; Heitman, Joshua L.; Wagger, Michael G.; Reberg-Horton, S. Chris (January 2017).

"Soil Health Indicators Do Not Differentiate among Agronomic Management Systems in North Carolina Soils" .

Soil Science Society of America Journal .

81 (4): 828– 843.

Bibcode : 2017SSASJ..81..828R .

doi : 10.2136/sssaj2016.12.0400 .

^ Bernard T. Nolan; et al. (January 1998).

"A National Look at Nitrate Contamination of Ground Water" .

Water Conditioning and Purification .

39 (12): 76– 79.

Archived from the original on 2014-03-13.

^ Estimating Soil Carbon, Nitrogen, and Phosphorus Mineralization from Short-Term Carbon Dioxide Respiration Communications. in Soil Science and Plant Analysis, 39: 2706–2720, 2008 ^ Soil CO 2 respiration: Comparison of chemical titration, CO 2 IRGA analysis and the Solvita gel system. Renewable Agriculture and Food Systems: 23(2); 171–176 ^ a b c Jayasinghe, Sadeeka L.; Thomas, Dean T.; Anderson, Jonathan P.; Chen, Chao; Macdonald, Ben C. T. (14 November 2023).

"Global Application of Regenerative Agriculture: A Review of Definitions and Assessment Approaches" .

Sustainability .

15 (22): 15941.

Bibcode : 2023Sust...1515941J .

doi : 10.3390/su152215941 .

ISSN 2071-1050 .

^ a b c d Mays, Daniel (10 November 2020).

The No-Till Organic Vegetable Farm: How to Start and Run a Profitable Market Garden That Builds Health in Soil, Crops, and Communities . North Adams, MA: Storey Publishing, LLC.

^ a b Khangura, Ravjit; Ferris, David; Wagg, Cameron; Bowyer, Jamie (2023-01-27).

"Regenerative Agriculture—A Literature Review on the Practices and Mechanisms Used to Improve Soil Health" .

Sustainability .

15 (3): 2338.

Bibcode : 2023Sust...15.2338K .

doi : 10.3390/su15032338 .

ISSN 2071-1050 .

^ a b c d Schon, Nicole; Fraser, Trish; Masters, Nicole; Stevenson, Bryan; Cavanagh, Jo; Harmsworth, Garth; Grelet, Gwen-Aelle (2024-06-21).

Soil health research in the context of regenerative agriculture (Report). AgResearch.

^ a b Spiegal, Bill (18 March 2016).

"Investing In Soil Health Pays" .

Successful Farming . Retrieved 2024-12-08 .

^ M. Tahat, Monther; M. Alananbeh, Kholoud; A. Othman, Yahia; I. Leskovar, Daniel (15 June 2020).

"Soil Health and Sustainable Agriculture" .

Sustainability .

12 (12): 4859.

Bibcode : 2020Sust...12.4859M .

doi : 10.3390/su12124859 .

ISSN 2071-1050 .

^ Zhang, Qian Forrest (6 November 2024).

"From Sustainable Agriculture to Sustainable Agrifood Systems: A Comparative Review of Alternative Models" .

Sustainability .

16 (22): 9675.

Bibcode : 2024Sust...16.9675Z .

doi : 10.3390/su16229675 .

ISSN 2071-1050 .

^ a b Leng, Vira; Cardinael, Rémi; Tivet, Florent; Seng, Vang; Mark, Phearum; Lienhard, Pascal; Filloux, Titouan; Six, Johan; Hok, Lyda; Boulakia, Stéphane; Briedis, Clever; de Moraes Sá, João Carlos; Thuriès, Laurent (2024-10-10).

"Diachronic assessment of soil organic C and N dynamics under long-term no-till cropping systems in the tropical upland of Cambodia" .

SOIL .

10 (2): 699– 725.

Bibcode : 2024SOIL...10..699L .

doi : 10.5194/soil-10-699-2024 .

hdl : 20.500.11850/701968 .

ISSN 2199-3971 .

^ Rani, Meenu; Chaudhary, Bhagwan Singh; Jamal, Saleha; Kumar, Pavan (2022-09-08).

Towards Sustainable Natural Resources: Monitoring and Managing Ecosystem Biodiversity . Springer Nature.

ISBN 978-3-031-06443-2 .

^ Rehberger, Emily; West, Paul; Spillane, Charles; McKeown, Peter (31 May 2023).

"What climate and environmental benefits of regenerative agriculture practices? An evidence review" .

Environmental Research Communications .

5 (5).

Bibcode : 2023ERCom...5e2001R .

doi : 10.1088/2515-7620/acd6dc .

^ "What are the Benefits of Compost" .

U.S. Composting Council .

^ Maharjan, Bijesh; Das, Saurav; Acharya, Bharat Sharma (2020-09-01).

"Soil Health Gap: A concept to establish a benchmark for soil health management" .

Global Ecology and Conservation .

23 : e01116.

Bibcode : 2020GEcoC..2301116M .

doi : 10.1016/j.gecco.2020.e01116 .

ISSN 2351-9894 .

Further reading [ edit ] Kristin Ohlson (2014).

The Soil Will Save Us: How Scientists, Farmers, and Foodies Are Healing the Soil to Save the Planet . Rodale Books.

ISBN 978-1609615543 .

Sir Albert Howard (1947).

The Soil and Health . Devin-Adair Company, NY.

Otto Buess (1978).

Die Gesundheit von Boden and Pflanze "The Health of Soil and Plants" . Deutscher Rat für Landespflege Vol 31 "German Bulletin of Soil Care", Bonn.

Courtney White (2014).

Grass, Soil, Hope: The Journey through Carbon Country . Chelsea Green VT.

External links [ edit ] Improving Soil pH, Reducing Soil Born Disease and Improving Crop Production Living Soils Report (Greenpeace India) NRCS Soil Health and NPK (NRCS) NRCS Soil Health in Field and Forage Crop Production (NRCS) WEBINARS on SOIL HEALTH Soil Quality Indicator Sheets National Look at Groundwater Pollution (USGS) v t e Soil science History Index Main fields Pedology Edaphology Soil biology Soil microbiology Soil zoology Soil ecology Soil physics Soil mechanics Soil chemistry Environmental soil science Agricultural soil science Soil topics Soil Pedosphere Soil morphology Pedodiversity Soil formation Soil erosion Soil contamination Soil retrogression and degradation Soil compaction Soil compaction (agriculture) Soil sealing Soil salinity Alkali soil Soil pH Soil acidification Soil health Soil life Soil biodiversity Soil quality Soil value Soil fertility Soil resilience Soil color Soil texture Soil structure Pore space in soil Pore water pressure Soil crust Soil horizon Soil biomantle Soil carbon Soil gas Soil respiration Soil organic matter Soil moisture Soil water (retention) Soil type v t e Soil classification World Reference Base for Soil Resources (1998–) Acrisols Alisols Andosols Anthrosols Arenosols Calcisols Cambisols Chernozem Cryosols Durisols Ferralsols Fluvisols Gleysols Gypsisols Histosol Kastanozems Leptosols Lixisols Luvisols Nitisols Phaeozems Planosols Plinthosols Podzols Regosols Retisols Solonchaks Solonetz Stagnosol Technosols Umbrisols Vertisols USDA soil taxonomy Alfisols Andisols Aridisols Entisols Gelisols Histosols Inceptisols Mollisols Oxisols Spodosols Ultisols Vertisols Other systems FAO soil classification (1974–1998) Unified Soil Classification System AASHTO Soil Classification System Référentiel pédologique (French classification system) Canadian system of soil classification Australian Soil Classification Polish Soil Classification 1938 USDA soil taxonomy List of U.S. state soils List of vineyard soil types PG-3 (Spanish classification system) Non-systematic soil types Sand Silt Clay Loam Topsoil Subsoil Soil crust Claypan Hardpan Gypcrust Caliche Parent material Pedosphere Laimosphere Rhizosphere Bulk soil Alkali soil Bay mud Blue goo Brickearth Brown earth Calcareous grassland Dark earth Dry quicksand Duplex soil Eluvium Expansive clay Fill dirt Fuller's earth Hydrophobic soil Loess Lunar soil Martian soil Mud Muskeg Paleosol Peat Prime farmland Quicksand Serpentine soil Spodic soil Stagnogley Subaqueous soil Takir Terra preta Terra rossa Tropical peat Yedoma Types of soil Applications Soil conservation Soil management Soil guideline value Soil survey Soil test Soil governance Soil value Soil salinity control Erosion control Agroecology Liming (soil) Related fields Geology Geochemistry Petrology Geomorphology Geotechnical engineering Hydrology Hydrogeology Biogeography Earth materials Archaeology Agricultural science Agrology Societies, Initiatives Australian Society of Soil Science Incorporated Canadian Society of Soil Science Central Soil Salinity Research Institute (India) German Soil Science Society Indian Institute of Soil Science International Union of Soil Sciences International Year of Soil National Society of Consulting Soil Scientists (US) OPAL Soil Centre (UK) Soil Science Society of Poland Soil and Water Conservation Society (US) Soil Science Society of America World Congress of Soil Science Scientific journals Acta Agriculturae Scandinavica B Journal of Soil and Water Conservation Plant and Soil Pochvovedenie Soil Research Soil Science Society of America Journal See also Land use Land conversion Land management Vegetation Infiltration (hydrology) Groundwater Crust (geology) Impervious surface / Surface runoff Petrichor Wikipedia:WikiProject Soil Category soil Category soil science List of soil scientists v t e Natural resources Air Pollution / quality Ambient standards (US) Index Indoor Law Clean Air Act (US) Ozone depletion Emissions Airshed Trading Deforestation (REDD) Energy Bio Law Resources Fossil fuels ( gas , peak coal , peak gas , peak oil ) Geothermal Hydro Nuclear Solar sunlight shade Wind Land Agricultural arable peak farmland Degradation Field Landscape cityscape seascape soundscape viewshed Law property Management habitat conservation Minerals gemstone industrial ore metal mining law sand peak copper phosphorus rights Soil conservation fertility health resilience Use planning reserve Life Biodiversity Bioprospecting biopiracy Biosphere Bushfood Bushmeat Fisheries climate change law management Forests genetic resources law management non-timber products Game law Marine conservation Meadow Pasture Plants FAO Plant Treaty food genetic resources gene banks herbal medicines UPOV Convention wood Rangeland Seed bank Wildlife conservation management Water Types / location Aquifer storage and recovery Drinking Fresh Groundwater pollution recharge remediation Hydrosphere Ice bergs glacial polar Irrigation huerta Marine Rain harvesting Stormwater Surface water Sewage reclaimed water Watershed Aspects Desalination Floods Law Leaching Sanitation improved Scarcity Security Supply Efficiency Conflict Conservation Peak water Pollution Privatization Quality Right Resources improved policy Related Commons enclosure global land tragedy of Economics ecological land Ecosystem services Exploitation overexploitation Earth Overshoot Day Management adaptive Natural capital accounting good Natural heritage Nature reserve remnant natural area Systems ecology Urban ecology Wilderness Resource Common-pool Conflict (perpetuation) Curse Depletion Extraction Nationalism Renewable / Non-renewable Politics Oil war Petroleum politics Petrostate Petro-Islam Resource war Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Soil_health&oldid=1305415828 " Categories : Land management Soil Soil science Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets via Module:Annotated link This page was last edited on 11 August 2025, at 23:18 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Soil health 4 languages Add topic

