Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Definition Toggle Definition subsection 1.1 Early Definitions of Rhetoric, Precursors to Digital Rhetoric, and Rhetoric in the early Computer Age 1.2 Evolving definition of 'digital rhetoric' 1.2.1 Early definitions (1989–2015) 1.2.2 Recent scholarship (2015–present) 1.3 Other definitions 2 Concepts Toggle Concepts subsection 2.1 Circulation 2.2 Critical literacy 2.3 Interactivity 2.4 Procedural rhetoric 2.5 Rhetorical velocity 2.6 Visual rhetoric 3 Forms and objects of study Toggle Forms and objects of study subsection 3.1 Infrastructure 3.1.1 Software 3.2 People 3.2.1 Online communities 3.2.2 Social media 3.2.2.1 Digital activism 3.2.2.2 Influencers and content creators 3.2.3 Online learning 3.3 Interactive media 3.3.1 Video games 3.3.2 Podcasting 3.3.3 Mobile applications 3.3.4 Immersive media 4 Critical approaches Toggle Critical approaches subsection 4.1 Technofeminism 4.2 Rhetorical feminism 4.3 Digital cultural rhetoric 4.4 Embodiment 4.5 Pedagogy 4.5.1 Higher education 4.5.2 K–12 4.5.3 Pre-K 4.6 Digital rhetoric as a field of study 4.6.1 Research ethics 4.7 Narrative Rhetoric 4.8 Prolepsis 5 Social issues Toggle Social issues subsection 5.1 Access 5.2 Legitimacy 5.3 Online harassment 5.4 Misinformation and disinformation 5.5 Politics 5.6 COVID-19 pandemic 6 See also 7 References Toggle the table of contents Digital rhetoric 5 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Latina Русский Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Forms of communication via digital mediums This article may be too technical for most readers to understand .

Please help improve it to make it understandable to non-experts , without removing the technical details.

( April 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Digital rhetoric is an extension of human communication—taking place in a digital sphere.

[ 1 ] Digital rhetoric is communication that exists in the digital sphere. It can be expressed in many different forms, including text, images, videos, and software .

[ 2 ] Due to the increasingly mediated nature of contemporary society, distinctions between digital and non-digital environments are less clear.

[ 3 ] This has expanded the scope of digital rhetoric to account for the increased fluidity with which humans interact with technology .

[ 4 ] The field of digital rhetoric is not yet fully established. It draws theory and practices from the tradition of rhetoric as both an analytical tool and a production guide. As a whole, it can be categorized as a meta-discipline.

[ 2 ] Due to evolving study, digital rhetoric has held various meanings to different scholars over time.

[ 2 ] It can take on a variety of meanings based on what is being analyzed, depending on the concept, forms or objects of study, or rhetorical approach . Digital rhetoric can also be analyzed through the lenses of different social movements .

[ 5 ] Digital rhetoric lacks a strict definition amongst scholars. The discussion and debate toward reaching a definition accounts for much of the writing, study, and teaching of the topic.

[ 6 ] One of the most straightforward definitions for "digital rhetoric" is that it is the application of rhetorical theory to digital communication.

[ 2 ] : 13 Despite the downplays and the inquiries about whether rhetoric is digital to some, digital rhetoric accounts for the values and perceptions that have consistently evolved since technology started gaining dominance. It’s expected to gain dominance exponentially throughout the years as technology continues rapidly changing and evolving so as we adapt to its rhetoric. Rhetoric is art, as Aristotle once said, and it will consistently evolve as technology evolves along with it.

Definition [ edit ] Part of a series on Rhetoric History Ancient Greece Asianism Atticism Attic orators Calliope Sophists Ancient India Ancient Rome The age of Cicero Second Sophistic Middle Ages Byzantine rhetoric Trivium Renaissance Studia humanitatis Modern period Concepts Captatio benevolentiae Chironomia Decorum Delectare Docere Device Eloquence Eloquentia perfecta Eunoia Enthymeme Facilitas Fallacy Informal Figure of speech Scheme Trope Five canons Inventio Dispositio Elocutio Memoria Pronuntiatio Hypsos Imitatio Kairos Method of loci Modes Operations Persuasion Ethos Pathos Logos Situation Style Grand Sotto voce Topos Genres Apologetics Debate Declamation Controversia Deliberative Demagogy Dialectic Socratic method Dissoi logoi Elocution Epideictic Encomium Panegyric Eulogy Farewell speech Forensic Funeral oration Homiletics‎ Sermon Invitational Lecture Public Lightning talk Maiden speech Oratory Polemic Diatribe Eristic Philippic Progymnasmata Suasoria Propaganda Spin Resignation speech Stump speech War-mongering Criticism Cluster Dramatic Pentadic Frame Genre Ideological Metaphoric Mimesis Narrative Neo-Aristotelian Rhetoricians Aeschines Aelius Aristides Antiphon Aristotle Aspasia Augustine Bakhtin Booth Brueggemann Burke Cicero de Man Demosthenes Derrida Dio Chrysostom Erasmus Gorgias Hobbes Hypereides Isocrates Lucian Lysias McLuhan Ong Perelman Pizan Protagoras Quintilian Ramus Richards Seneca the Elder Smith Toulmin Vico Weaver Works Gorgias (380 BC) Phaedrus (c. 370 BC) Rhetoric (c. 350 BC) Rhetoric to Alexander (c. 350 BC) De Sophisticis Elenchis (c. 350 BC) Topics (c. 350 BC) De Inventione (84 BC) Rhetorica ad Herennium (80 BC) De Oratore (55 BC) A Dialogue Concerning Oratorical Partitions (c. 50 BC) De Optimo Genere Oratorum (46 BC) Orator (46 BC) On the Sublime (c. 50) Institutio Oratoria (95) Panegyrici Latini (100–400) Dialogus de oratoribus (102) De doctrina Christiana (426) De vulgari eloquentia (1305) Copia: Foundations of the Abundant Style (1521) Language as Symbolic Action (1966) A General Rhetoric (1970) Subfields Argumentation Cognitive Contrastive Constitutive Digital Feminist Native American New Health and medicine Pedagogy Procedural Science Technology Therapy Visual Composition Related Ars dictaminis Communication studies Composition studies Doxa Glossary of rhetorical terms Glossophobia List of feminist rhetoricians List of speeches Oral skills Orator Pistis Public rhetoric Rhetoric of social intervention model Rhetrickery Rogerian argument Seduction Speechwriting Talking point TED Terministic screen Toulmin model Wooden iron v t e Early Definitions of Rhetoric, Precursors to Digital Rhetoric, and Rhetoric in the early Computer Age [ edit ] Early definitions of rhetoric from western classical/Greek and Roman times are "the art ( techne ) of finding out the available means of persuasion for a given argument," and "the practice of persuasive communication and a formal art of studying such communication." Traditional practices of rhetoric often involved methods that a person could use to construct persuasive speeches, whereas classical rhetoric was concerned with legal speeches, political speeches, and ceremonial speeches.

Rhetoric has developed alongside many technological developments, with digital mediums being amongst the most recent and transformative. There are many ancient and historical examples of "machine's to think with". Early examples of devices being used for the purpose of guiding thought include Martianus Capella 's 9th century glossed collections of prose, philosophy and other writings, and the biblical concordances developed by monks between the 12th and 13th century.

[ 7 ] Some argue that types of man-made artwork and codes, such as ancient Egyptian hieroglyphics , were some of the first forms of digital rhetoric.

[ 2 ] In 1917, C.I Scofield created an annotated version of the King James Bible . This version of the bible would indicate passages that related to one another throughout both the Old and New Testaments, guiding the reader's interpretation of the work. These "connected topic concordances" are similar to "key-in context concordances" used on modern computers.

[ 8 ] The Scofield Bible, which used annotations to explain portions of the text, and relate it to other portions of the book By the 1960s, early computers had become more prominent in many environments, and began seeing application outside of math and science. In 1964, Harvard's Allan B. Ellis published an analysis of how computers could be used to better understand literary works, through having text from The Adventures of Huckleberry plugged into punched cards and having the computer analyze the titular character.

[ 9 ] Between the mid-60's and early 70's, there were several experiments to investigate the potential for computers in the grading of academic papers. These computers were programmed to approximate the way that teachers generally approached the grading process, and judge the content in its quality of vocabulary, composition, and approach to the content.

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] Evolving definition of 'digital rhetoric' [ edit ] The following subsections detail the evolving definition of 'digital rhetoric' as a term since its creation in 1989.

[ 6 ] Early definitions (1989–2015) [ edit ] The term digital rhetoric was coined by rhetorician Richard A. Lanham in a 1989 lecture [ 6 ] and was first published in his 1993 essay collection, The Electronic Word: Democracy, Technology, and the Arts .

[ 12 ] Lanham avoided coming to a firm definition, instead aiming to connect digital communication to examples from traditional communication, discussing the relationship between postmodern theory, digital arts, and classical rhetoric. Digital rhetoric theory is primarily based in traditional rhetoric and shares many of its methods and characteristics, including its status as a meta-discipline. Lanham's work referred to many works of Hypertext theory. Hypertext theory  is a similar, but less broad concept to digital rhetoric, which studied the consequences of computer users interacting with hypertext links.

[ 2 ] Much of the writing on the theory focused on how the meaning that hypertext links gave to words and enforces a relationship between users and the particular words, and how this could be implemented in rhetorical and educational settings.

[ 13 ] During the medieval and Renaissance periods, rhetoric continued to evolve, particularly in religious and legal discourse. Style was increasingly dominant as a field of study, determining how rhetoric was employed in written and verbal communication. The Enlightenment was a reaction against elaborate rhetoric in favor of simplicity and reason. These core ideas carried over into the contemporary period, shaping research on rhetoric in new communication technologies. The shift from print to online media presented new challenges for rhetorical research. Early computer-mediated communication, including email, internet forums, and hypertext, disrupted classical rhetorical theories by adding interactivity and multimodal writing. Researchers began to apply classical rhetorical theories to online texts, studying how persuasion worked in hyperlinked environments and multimedia platforms. Richard Lanham was among the first to apply the term "digital rhetoric" in 1989, studying how rhetorical principles could be applied for digital communication. This period laid the groundwork for the study of digital rhetoric, which continues to expand along with technological growth.

[ 14 ] In 1997, Calgary University professor Doug Brent expanded on the concept of hypertext theory, approaching the topic from a rhetorical framework, when past studies depended more on literary analysis. This presented hypertext as a kind of "new rhetoric".

[ 2 ] [ 15 ] The same year, Bowling Green University scholar Gary Heba united studies of hypertext and visual rhetoric into the concept of "HyperRhetoric", a multimedia communication experience that could not be replicated outside of an internet setting. Heba stated that as the online landscape and the perspectives of users change, HyperRhetoric must also adapt and evolve. This fluidity remains a characteristic of digital rhetoric.

[ 16 ] [ 2 ] The late 1990s and early 2000s represented a greater shift towards rhetoric in digital communication study, and how "persuasion" functions in an online setting.

[ 2 ] In 2005, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute scholar James P. Zappen expanded the conversation beyond persuasion and into digital rhetoric's capacity for creative expression in exploring the behavior of individuals and groups in online settings.

[ 17 ] Recent scholarship (2015–present) [ edit ] In his 2015 book Digital Rhetoric: Theory, Method, Practice, Douglas Eyman defined digital rhetoric as "the application of rhetorical theory (as analytic method or heuristic for production) to digital texts and performances".

[ 2 ] : 44 By this definition, digital rhetoric can be applied as an analytic method for digital content and be a basis for future study, offering rhetorical questions as research guidelines.

[ 2 ] : 12, 44 Eyman categorized the emerging field of digital rhetoric as interdisciplinary in nature, related to fields like: digital literacy , visual rhetoric , new media , human–computer interaction , critical code studies , and a variety of many more.

[ 2 ] : 44 In 2018, rhetorician Angela Haas offered her own definition of digital rhetoric, defining it as "the digital negotiation of information – and its historical, social, economic, and political contexts and influences – to affect change".

[ 18 ] Haas emphasized that digital rhetoric does not solely apply to text-based items—it can also apply to image-based or system-based items. In this way, any form of communication that occurs in the digital sphere can be counted as digital rhetoric.

[ 19 ] In 2023, scholars Zoltan P. Majdik and S. Scott Graham considered not only the rhetorical landscape of artificial intelligence but what it might mean to use artificial intelligence as a resource for rhetorical scholarship. The authors posit a dual perspective on AI—first, as a rapidly developing technology that will have profound effects on human communication, and second, as an object of study for communication scholars who might want to consider using AI in the same way they might consider using any other resource or technology.

[ 20 ] In 2024, Penn State rhetorician Stuart A. Selber defined digital rhetoric studies through a selection of guiding questions: How does traditional rhetoric inform the study of digital communication as a rhetorical medium?

When traditional rhetoric fails to inform scholars in a situation exclusive to digital formats, are new concepts required or can traditional concepts be reconsidered?

If new ideas are needed, what will be their source? How will they be examples of rhetoric?

[ 21 ] Selber stated that a concept is rhetorical if it helps in analyzing how speakers use the circumstances of society and their message's medium to influence the opinions of others.

[ 21 ] Other definitions [ edit ] While most research represents a traditionally Western view of rhetoric, Arthur Smith of UCLA explains that the ancient rhetoric of many cultures, such as African rhetoric, existed independent of Western influence, and developed in ways that reflect the values and functions of those societies.

[ 22 ] Today, rhetoric encompasses all forms of discourse that serve any given purpose within specific contexts, while also being shaped by those contexts.

[ 23 ] Some scholars interpret this rhetorical discourse with greater focus on the digital aspect.

University of Texas 's Casey Boyle, Rutgers University-Camden 's James Brown Jr., and University of Virginia 's Steph Ceraso claim that "the digital" is no longer a single strategy that can be used to enhance traditional rhetoric, but an "ambient condition" that encompass all parts of life.

[ 24 ] As technology has become more ubiquitous, the lines between traditional and digital rhetoric have blurred. Technology and rhetoric can influence and transform each other.

[ 4 ] Concepts [ edit ] Circulation [ edit ] As an example of circulation, Wikipedia is an online encyclopedia that relies on collaborative rhetorical contribution.

Circulation theorizes the ways that text and discourse moves through time and space, and any kind of media can be circulated. A new form of communication is composed, created, and distributed through digital technologies. Media scholar Henry Jenkins explains there is a shift from distribution to circulation, which signals a move toward an increasingly participatory model of culture in which people shape, share, re-frame, and remix media content in ways not previously possible within the traditional rhetorical formats like print.

[ 25 ] The various concepts of circulation include: Collaboration – Digital rhetoric has taken on a very collaborative nature through the use of digital platforms. Sites such as YouTube and Wikipedia involve opportunity for "new forms of collaborative production".

[ 26 ] Digital platforms have created opportunities for more people to enact and create, as digital platforms open doors for collaborative communication that can occur synchronously, asynchronously, over far distances, and across multiple disciplines and professions.

[ 26 ] [ 27 ] Crowdsourcing – Daren Brabham describes the concept of crowdsourcing as the use of modern technology to collaborate, create, and solve problems collectively.

[ 28 ] Ethical concerns have been raised while engaging in crowdsourcing, specifically in situations that lack a clear set of compensation practices or protections in place to secure information.

[ 28 ] Delivery – Digital technologies allow rhetoric to be delivered in new "electronic forms of discourse".

[ 29 ] Acts and modes of communication can be represented digitally by combining multiple different forms of media into a composite helping to create an easy user experience.

[ 30 ] The growing popularity of the Internet meme is an example of combining, circulating, and delivering media in a collaborative effort through file sharing. Although memes are sent through microtransactions they often have a macro-level, large-scale impact.

[ 31 ] Another form of rhetorical delivery are encyclopedias, which traditionally were printed and based primarily on text and images. However, modern technological developments now enable online encyclopedias to integrate sound, animation, video, algorithmic search functions, and high-level productions into a cohesive multimedia experience as part of their new forms of digital rhetoric.

[ 30 ] Critical literacy [ edit ] Critical literacy is the ability to identify bias in media, under the assumption that all media is biased.

[ 32 ] It can also be defined as a communicative tool to lead to social change and promote social action by using a critical lens when approaching social-political topics.

[ 33 ] In order to identify bias amid the immense volume of information imposed on digital audiences, individuals need to develop the ability to process and critically examine content—on both familiar and unfamiliar topics.

[ 34 ] In an essay on critical literacy in writing, the University of Melbourne stated the importance of developing these skills through reading and questioning what texts are trying to accomplish. Ultimately, this allows an idea's interpretation to come from the reader, not the writer.

[ 35 ] For example, a study conducted at the Indiana University in Bloomington used algorithms to assess 14 million Twitter messages containing statements about the 2016 U.S. presidential campaign and election. They found that from May 2016 to March 2017, social bots were responsible for causing approximately 389,000 unsupported political claims to go viral.

[ 36 ] Interactivity [ edit ] Interactivity in digital rhetoric can be defined as the ways in which readers connect to and communicate with digital texts. This includes activity between the audience, the audience and the message being sent, the audience and the medium, and the communication between separate mediums.  Readers have the ability to like, share, repost, comment on, and remix online content. These interactions allow writers, scholars, and content creators to get a better idea of how their work is affecting their audience.

[ 37 ] Some ways communicators promote interactivity include the following: Mind sharing is the methods and components of communication that collective intelligence is gathered and transferred. It is based in the sharing of emotional, knowledge-based, and goal-based sharing. The human ability of language is the primary example of mind-sharing. Mind sharing functions as a method of concept sharing, presenting generally agreed upon meanings for words and phrases, and concept activation sharing, where these specific meanings prompt reactions when communicated.

[ 38 ] Multimodality is a form of communication that uses multiple methods (or modes) to inform audiences of an idea. It can involve a mix of written text, pictures, audio, or videos. These communications offer a wealth of information that could not be accessed from traditional methods, but are disorganized and can be difficult to reach conclusions from. All writing and all communication is, theoretically, multimodal.

[ 39 ] Remix is a method of digital rhetoric that manipulates and transforms an original work to convey a new message. The use of remix can help the creator make an argument by connecting seemingly unrelated ideas into a convincing whole. As modern technology develops, self-publication sites such as YouTube , SoundCloud , and WordPress have stimulated remix culture, allowing for easier creation and dissemination of reworked content. Unlike appropriation, which is the use and potential recontextualization of existing material without significant modification, 'remix' is defined by Ridolfo and Devoss as "the process of taking old pieces of text, images, sounds, and video and stitching them together to form a new product".

[ 40 ] A popular example of remixing is the creation and sharing of memes .

[ 41 ] Procedural rhetoric [ edit ] Procedural rhetoric is rhetoric formed through processes or practices.

[ 42 ] Some scholars view video games as one of these processes through which rhetoric can be formed.

[ 42 ] [ 43 ] For example, ludology scholar and game designer Gonzalo Frasca poses that the simulation-nature of computers and video games offers a "natural medium for modeling reality and fiction".

[ 43 ] Therefore, according to Frasca, video games can take on a new form of digital rhetoric in which reality is mimicked but also created for the future.

[ 43 ] Similarly, scholar Ian Bogost argues that video games can serve as models for how 'real-world' cultural and social systems operate.

[ 42 ] They also argue for the necessity of literacy in playing video games as this allows players to challenge (and ultimately accept or reject) the rhetorical standpoints of these games.

[ 42 ] Rhetorical velocity [ edit ] Rhetorical velocity is the concept of authors writing in a way in which they are able to predict how their work might be recomposed. Scholars Jim Ridolfo and Danielle DeVoss first coined this idea in 2009 when they described rhetorical velocity as "a conscious rhetorical concern for distance, travel, speed, and time, pertaining specifically to theorizing instances of strategic appropriation by a third party".

[ 44 ] Author Sean Morey agrees with this definition of rhetorical velocity and describes it as a creator anticipating the response their work with generate.

[ 45 ] For example, digital rhetoric is often labelled using tags , which are keywords used to help readers find, view, and share relevant texts and information. These tags can be found on blog posts, news articles, scholarly journals , and more. Tagging allows writers, scholars, and content creators to organize their work and make it more accessible and understandable to readers.

[ 46 ] Appropriation carries both positive and negative connotations for rhetorical velocity. In some ways, appropriation is a tool that can be used for the reapplication of outdated ideas to make them better. In other ways, appropriation is seen as a threat to creative and cultural identities.

Social media receives the bulk of this scrutiny due to the lack of education of its users. Most "contributors are often unaware of what they are contributing", [ 47 ] which perpetuates the negative connotation. Scholars in digital rhetoric—such as Jessica Reyman, Amy Hea, and Johndan Johnson-Eilola—explore this topic and its effects on society. Scholars have also connected the role of rhetorical velocity to visual rhetoric through a study of environmental image circulation, demonstrating that "while environmental image circulation is often viewed as an ambivalent, or even performative, practice for environmental citizenship, it is also an important space for cultivating participatory culture online." [ 48 ] Visual rhetoric [ edit ] First, an "initial" meme is created to illustrate some joke or idea.

The "default" skin tone for emojis is yellow.

Digital rhetoric often invokes visual rhetoric due to digital rhetoric's reliance on visuals.

[ 2 ] Charles Hill states that images "do not necessarily have to portray an object, or even a class of objects, that exists or ever did exist" to remain impactful.

[ 49 ] However, the use of imagery for rhetorical purposes in digital spaces cannot always be easily differentiated from "traditional" physical visual mediums. As such, approaching this concept requires a careful analysis of the viewer, situational, and visual contexts involved.

[ 50 ] A prominent part of this concept is its intersection of perspective with technology, as computers allow users to create a curated view for online space. Examples of the Internet relying and reshaping visual rhetoric include Social media platforms like Instagram , [ 51 ] and incredibly realistic deepfakes .

[ 52 ] Then, another user modifies the original to illustrate their own idea; in this image, a "deep fried" effect is added to distort the image.

Digitally-produced art is a significant way users express themselves on technological platforms; the unique intersection of text and image has given rise to new rhetorical language through the modification of slang and in-group language.

[ 53 ] In particular, the culturally-specific and nuanced use of pop culture references through Internet memes have gradually built upon themselves to create complex, highly flexible, and Internet-specific (or even platform-specific) dialects of speech.

[ 54 ] [ 41 ] Through popularity-based natural selection , edits of commonly accepted meme templates fuel the cycle of rhetorical creation.

[ 41 ] Other forms of digital-visual rhetoric include remixing and parodying . In the chapter "Digital Rhetoric Practice" in Digital Rhetoric Theory, Method, Practice , Douglas Eyman speaks about the growth of digital rhetoric in a digital world. Digital rhetoric has become distinguished from its other rhetoric counterparts, as it is an easily accessible path for people to spread their messages through the reuse of already existing content and putting their own twist on it.

[ 2 ] This is widespread because of meme cultures and online video platforms.

[ 55 ] Digital-visual rhetoric does not only rely on intentional manipulation. Sometimes, meanings can arise from unexpected places and otherwise-overlooked features. For example, emojis can carry heavy consequences by permeating daily communication. Varying skin tones provided (or excluded) by developers for emojis may perpetuate preexisting racial biases of colorism .

[ 56 ] Even otherwise-innocuous images of peaches and eggplants are regular stand-ins for genital regions; they can be both harmless modes of flirtation and tools for sexually harassing women online when sent en masse.

[ 56 ] The concept of the avatar also illustrates visual rhetoric's deeply personal impact, particularly when using Miami University scholar James E. Porter's definition of the avatar as an extended "virtual body".

[ 57 ] While scholars such as Beth Kolko hoped for an equitable online world free of physical barriers, social issues still persist in digital realms, such as gender discrimination and racism .

[ 58 ] For example, Victoria Woolums found that, in the video game World of Warcraft , an avatar's gender identity instigated bias from other characters even though an avatar's gender identity may not be physically accurate to its user.

[ 59 ] These relationships are further complicated by the varying degrees of anonymity characterizing inter-user communications in online spaces. While the possibility of true privacy can be facilitated by impersonal avatars, they are still personal manifestations of a user's self in the context of digital spaces.

[ 60 ] Furthermore, the tools available to curate and express these are platform-dependent and ripe for both liberation and exploitation. In circumstances such as Gamergate or debates regarding influencer culture and their portrayals of impossible and computer-edited body image , self-presentation is heavily mediated by accessibility to and mastery of online avatars.

[ 60 ] Forms and objects of study [ edit ] Infrastructure [ edit ] Information infrastructure is the underlying organization of public information on the Internet, which impacts how and what the public accesses online.

[ 61 ] Databases and search engines are information infrastructure as they play a large role in access to and dissemination of information. Information Infrastructure often consists of algorithms and metadata standards, which curate the information presented to the public.

[ 62 ] Software [ edit ] Coding and software engineering are not often recognized as rhetorical writing practices, but in the process of writing code , people instruct machines to "make arguments and judgments and address audiences both mechanic and human".

[ 63 ] Technologies themselves can be viewed as rhetorical genres , simultaneously guiding users' experiences and communication with each other and being shaped and improved through humans use.

[ 64 ] Choices baked into software that are invisible to users impact the user experience and reveal information about the priorities of the software engineers.

[ 65 ] For instance, while Facebook allows users to choose over 50 gender identities to display on their public profile, an investigation into the social media's software revealed that users are filtered into the male-female gender binary within the database for targeted advertising purposes.

[ 66 ] For another example, pieces of software called BitTorrent trackers facilitate the massive distribution of information on Wikipedia. Software facilitates the collective rhetorical action of this encyclopedia.

[ 64 ] The field of software studies encourages the investigation into and recognition of software's impacts on people and culture.

[ 63 ] People [ edit ] Online communities [ edit ] Online communities are groups of people with common interests that interact and engage over the Internet. Many online communities are found within social networking sites, online forums, and chat rooms, such as Facebook , Twitter , Reddit , and 4chan , where members can share and discuss information and inquiries. These online spaces often establish their own rules, norms, and culture, and in some cases, users will adopt community-specific terminology or phrases.

[ 67 ] Scholars have noted that online communities have especially gained prominence among users like e-patients and victim-survivors of abuse .

[ 68 ] Within online health and support groups respectively, members have been able to find others who share similar experiences, receive advice and emotional support, and record their own narrative.

[ 69 ] Online communities support community but in some cases can support polarization.  Communities face issues with online harassment in the form of trolling , cyberbullying , and hate speech .

[ 70 ] According to the Pew Research Center, 41% of Americans have experienced some form of online harassment with 75% of these experiences occurring over social media.

[ 71 ] Another area of concern is the influence of algorithms on delineating the online communities a user comes in contact with. Personalizing algorithms can tailor a user's experience to their analytically determined preference, which creates a " filter bubble ". The user loses agency in content accessibility and information dissemination when these bubbles are created.

[ 72 ] [ 73 ] The loss of agency can lead to polarization, but recent research indicates that individual level polarization is rare.

[ 74 ] Most polarization is due to the influx of users with extreme views that can encourage users to move towards partisan fringes from "gateway communities".

[ 74 ] A demonstration of subtle Instagram filters and how radically they can change image perception Social media [ edit ] Social media makes human connection formal, manageable, and profitable to social media companies.

[ 75 ] The technology that promotes this human connection is not human, but automated. As people use social media and form their experiences on the platforms to meet their interests, the technology also affects how the users interact with each other and the world.

[ 75 ] Social media also allows for the weaving of "offline and online communities into integrated movements".

[ 76 ] Users' actions, such as liking, commenting, sending, retweeting, or saving a post, contribute to the algorithmic customization of their personalized content.

[ 77 ] Social media's reach is determined by these algorithms.

[ 77 ] Social media also offers various image altering tools that can impact image perception—making the platform less human and more automated.

[ 78 ] Digital activism [ edit ] Digital activism serves an agenda-setting function as it can influence mainstream media and news outlets.

Hashtags , which curate posts with similar themes and ideas into a central location on a digital platform, aid in bringing exposure to social and political issues. The subsequent discussions these hashtags create put pressure on private institutions and governments to address these issues, as can be seen with movements like #CripTheVote, [ 79 ] #BringBackOurGirls , [ 76 ] or #MeToo .

[ 80 ] Many recent social movements have originated on Twitter , as Twitter Topic Networks provide a framework for online community organizing. Digital activism allows people who may have not had a voice previously an equal chance to be heard.

[ 76 ] Though some believe that digital activism has a universal function, it takes different forms and philosophies in different parts of the world. In some parts of the world, it takes on a "techno-political" approach, basing communications off of broad political, social, and economic trends, relying on technology prevalent in the free culture movement . Others take a "techno-pragmatic" philosophy, focused more on the specific political and social goal, often at a more personal level. Some areas remain "techno-fragmented", where there are few intersections between traditional and digital forms of activism.

[ 81 ] Influencers and content creators [ edit ] As social media is increasingly becoming more available, the influencer / content creator position has also become recognized as a profession. With such a large and rapid consumer presence on social media, it creates both a helpful and overwhelming source of consumer information for advertisers. There is substantial potential to identify "market mavens" on social media due to fandom culture and the nature of influencer/content creator followings. Social media has opened up business opportunities for corporations to employ influencer marketing , where they can more easily find suitable influencers to advertise their products to their viewers.

[ 82 ] Online learning [ edit ] Although online learning existed previously, its prevalence increased during the COVID-19 pandemic .

[ 83 ] Online learning platforms are known as e-learning management systems (ELMS). They allow both students and teachers access to a shared, digital space which includes classroom resources, assignments, discussions, and social networking through direct messaging and email.

[ 84 ] Although socialization is a component of ELMS, not all students utilize these resources; rather, they focus on the lecturer as the primary resource of knowledge.

[ 85 ] The long-term effects of emergency online learning, which many turned to during the height of the pandemic, is ongoing; however, one study concluded that students' "motivation, self-efficacy, and cognitive engagement decreased after the transition".

[ 86 ] Interactive media [ edit ] Video games [ edit ] The procedural and interactive nature of video games leads them to be rich examples of procedural rhetoric .

[ 87 ] This rhetoric can range from games designed to bolster children's learning to challenging one's assumptions of their world.

[ 88 ] An educational video game developed for students at the University of Texas at Austin , titled Rhetorical Peaks , was made with the goal of examining rhetoric's procedural nature and to capture the constantly changing contexts of rhetoric.

[ 89 ] [ 87 ] The open-ended nature of the game, as well as the developer's intent on playing the game within a classroom setting, encouraged collaboration among students and the development of individual interpretations of the game's plot based on vague clues; this ultimately helped them to realize that there must be a willingness to change between lines of thought and to work both within and beyond accepted limits in understanding rhetoric.

[ clarification needed ] [ 87 ] The Xbox network , an example of virtual communication between real life and online friends that is embedded in the gaming console In mainstream gaming, each game has its own set of language which help shape the way information is transferred between players in their community.

[ 90 ] [ 89 ] Within the realm of online gaming —which includes games such as Call of Duty or League of Legends —players can communicate with each other and create their own rhetoric within the established world of the game, which allows players to influence and be influenced by the other gamers around them.

[ 91 ] The game Detroit: Become Human has another way of encouraging digital rhetoric within the gaming community. This decision-based video game gives the player the power to create their own story that deals with gender, race, and sexuality. Its futuristic message of a human-to-machine relationship prompts discussion due to the difficult moral decisions made while playing. At the end, there are surveys to take to see other players' opinions about certain decisions around the world.

[ 92 ] Podcasting [ edit ] Podcasting is another form of digital rhetoric. Podcasting can augment the ancient progymnasmata in ways that illuminate the relationship between rhetoric and digital sound.

[ 93 ] Podcasting can teach rhetorical practices through soundwriting.

[ 94 ] And a rhetorical pedagogy oriented around narrative nonfiction podcasting may—if it can overcome some key limitations—hold the potential to spark social change.

[ 95 ] Mobile applications [ edit ] Mobile applications (apps) are computer programs designed specifically for mobile devices, such as phones or tablets. Mobile apps cater to a wide range of audiences and needs, and allow for a "cultural hybridity of habit" which allows anyone to stay connected with anyone, anywhere.

[ 96 ] Due to this, there is always access to changing cultures and lifestyles, since there are so many different apps available to research or publish work.

[ 96 ] Furthermore, mobile apps allow individual users to manage aspects of their lives, while the apps themselves are able to change and upgrade socially.

[ 97 ] Telepresence utilized in a professional setting for meetings Information access on mobile devices poses challenges to user interfaces , notably due to the small screen and keys (or lack thereof), in comparison to larger counterparts such as laptops and PCs. However, it also has the advantage of heightening physical interactivity with touch, and presents experiences with multiple senses in this way. Likewise, mobile technologies offer location-based affordances for layering different types of information in communication design.

[ 98 ] With these varying factors, mobile applications need trustworthy, reliable, and helpful UI design and UX design to create successful user experience.

[ 99 ] Immersive media [ edit ] Members of the military using a virtual reality display for training Emerging immersive technologies such as virtual reality remove the visual presence of devices and mimic emotional experiences.

[ 100 ] User immersion into virtual reality includes simulated real-life communication; virtual reality provides the illusion of being somewhere the body physically is not, which contributes to widespread communication that reaches the point of telepresence and telexistence .

[ 100 ] Digital museums, serious games, and interactive documentaries often utilize virtual reality and augmented reality elements to relate users to historical settings and events, to teach them about the topic or to inform them of a specific point of view. While these are useful in conveying information in an immersive setting with an accessible narrative, those narratives can simplify the context to a point where some of the nuance is lost. Museums that employ immersive exhibits often find that tourist engage with these for the purpose of leisure, rather than wanting to gain thorough learning experience.

[ 101 ] Critical approaches [ edit ] Technofeminism [ edit ] Main article: Technofeminism Digital rhetoric gives a platform to technofeminism, a concept that brings together the intersections of gender , capitalism , and technology .

[ 102 ] Technofeminism advocates for equality for women in technology-heavy fields and researches the relationship between women and their devices.

Intersectionality is a term coined by Kimberlé Crenshaw that recognizes the societal injustices based on our identities.

[ 102 ] It is often challenging for women to navigate finding and interacting in digital spaces without harassment or gender biases.

[ 103 ] There is an importance of digital activism for unrepresented communities, such as gender non-conforming and transgender people of all races, disabled people, and people of color .

[ 103 ] Technofeminism and intersectionality are still not very prevalent when developing new technologies and research. In the journal Computers and Composition , only five articles explicitly use the term intersectionality or technofeminism.

[ 102 ] Online feminism also faces challenges of reactive sexism and misogyny. In one example, of the over 600 million internet users in India, 63% users are male, with 39% being female. This contrast in users often makes these heavily male digital spaces hostile to women. While some feminist social media movements are able to inspire policy change or shine a light on issues facing women, others have been subject to severe backlashes with few achievements to show as a result, even if the movement reaches a wide audience.

[ 104 ] Rhetorical feminism [ edit ] Cheryl Glenn, in her article "The Language of Rhetorical Feminism, Anchored in Hope", explores the study of rhetoric, feminism, and hope, introducing a theoretical framework she calls "rhetorical feminism". This framework began as a platform for recognizing and valuing the traditionally overlooked rhetorical practices and powers of marginalized groups called "Others". Glenn's approach is meant to challenge biased attitudes and actions, and promote a what some consider an inclusive and tolerant societal discourse.

[ 105 ] In connection to digital rhetoric, the article underscores the power of digital platforms in their ability to either facilitate or obstruct democratic dialogues. Glenn acknowledges the influence of rhetoric across traditional and digital domains to challenge systems seen as unjust and engage individuals in democratic practices. Glenn's stance within the article aligns with the broader narrative of digital rhetoric, which often explores the dynamics of power, representation, and access to digital platforms in molding public discourse.

[ 105 ] Digital cultural rhetoric [ edit ] As the Internet has expanded, digital media or rhetoric has come to be used to represent or identify a culture. Scholars have studied how digital rhetoric is affected by one's personal factors, such as race , religion , and sexuality. Due to these factors, people utilize different tools and absorb information differently.

[ 2 ] Digital culture has created the need for specialized communities on the web. Computer-mediated communities such as Reddit can give a voice to these specialized communities. One can experience and converse with other like-minded people on the web via comment sections and shared online migration.

[ 106 ] The creation of digital cultural rhetoric has allowed for the use of online slang that other communities may not be aware of. Online communities that explore digital cultural rhetoric allow users to discover their social identity and confront stereotypes that they face (or faced).

[ 107 ] Embodiment [ edit ] Embodiment is the idea that every person has a unique relationship with technology based on their unique set of identities. Studying the relationship between bodies and technology is one way that digital rhetoricians are able to promote equal access and opportunity within the digital sphere.

[ 18 ] Since technology is considered to be an extension of the real world, users are also shaped by the experiences they have in digital spaces. The artificial interactions that occur in online environments allow users to exist in a way that is additive to their human experience.

[ 108 ] Pedagogy [ edit ] With digital rhetoric becoming increasingly present, pedagogical approaches have been proposed by scholars to teach digital rhetoric in the classroom. Courses in digital rhetoric study the intersectionality between users and digital material, as well as how different backgrounds such as age, ethnicity, and gender can affect these interactions.

[ 109 ] Studies of digital pedagogy function as insight into the advantages and disadvantages of implementing digital technology in to education settings, and the consequences of incorrect use.

[ 110 ] Examples include electronic libraries and databases, [ 111 ] as well as "thinking tools" used by students for the purposes of transcription, editing, and tagging of works.

[ 112 ] Digital pedagogy is a wider scope of study than online pedagogy, focusing not only on the internet, but also on the devices and mediums of that convey the online communication.

[ 110 ] Higher education [ edit ] Several scholars teach digital rhetoric courses at universities in the US, although their approaches vary considerably.

[ 2 ] Jeff Grabill, [ 113 ] a scholar with a background in English, education, and technology, encourages his contemporaries to find a bridge between the scholarly field of digital rhetoric and its implementation. Another rhetorician, Cheryl Ball, specializes in areas that consist of multimodal composition and editing practices, digital media scholarship, digital publishing , and university writing pedagogy. Ball teaches students to write and compose multimodal texts by analyzing rhetorical options and choosing the most appropriate genres, technologies, media, and modes for a particular situation.

[ 114 ] [ 115 ] Multimodality also influenced Understanding Rhetoric: A Graphic Guide to Writing by Elizabeth Losh (et al.), which emphasizes engaging the comic form of literacy.

[ 116 ] A similar approach also inspired Melanie Gagich to alter the curriculum of her first-year English course completely, aiming to redefine digital projects as rigorous academic assignments and teach her students necessary audience analysis skills.

[ 117 ] Such a design ultimately allowed students in Gagich's classroom to develop their creativity and confidence as writers.

[ 117 ] In another approach, Douglas Eyman recommends a course in web authoring and design that provides undergraduates more practical instruction in the production and rhetorical understanding of digital texts; specifically, it provides opportunities for students to learn fundamentals of web writing and design conventions, rules, and procedures.

[ 2 ] : 171 Similarly, Collin Bjork argues that "integrating digital rhetoric with usability testing can help researchers cultivate a more complex understanding of how students, instructors, and interfaces interact in OWI [online writing instruction]".

[ 118 ] Other scholars focus more on the relationship between digital rhetoric and social impact. Scholars Lori Beth De Hertogh (et al.) and Angela Haas have published materials discussing intersectionality and digital rhetoric, arguing that the two are inseparable and classes covering digital rhetoric must also explore intersectionality.

[ 18 ] [ 102 ] Iowa State's Lauren Malone has also analyzed the relationship between identity and teaching digital rhetoric through research on online engagement of queer and transgender people of color.

[ 119 ] From this research, Malone created a series of steps for digital rhetoric instructors to take in order to foster inclusivity within their classrooms.

[ 119 ] In her work, scholar Melanie Kill has introduced digital rhetoric to college-aged students, arguing for the importance of editing Wikipedia and capitalizing on their privilege of education and access to materials.

[ 120 ] Similar to De Hertogh (et al.) and Haas, Kill believes an education in digital rhetoric serves all students, as it facilitates positive social change.

[ 120 ] K–12 [ edit ] Many educational systems are framed so that students actively participate in technological systems as designers of digital rhetoric, not passive users.

[ 1 ] There are three core goals students have identified for their coursework: building their own digital space, learning all aspects of digital rhetoric (including the theory, technology, and uses), and applying it in their own lives. The ecological system generated by the interactions of students with classmates, digital media, and other individuals is the basis of "interconnected" rhetorical processes and shared digital work.

[ 1 ] Code for a computer video game Video games are one avenue through which students learn to design the rhetoric and code underlying their technological systems. Video game use has evolved rapidly since the 1980s, and current video games have been incorporated into education.

[ 121 ] Scholar Ian Bogost suggests that video games can be utilized in a multitude of subjects to serve as models for studying the non-digital world. Specifically, he notes that video games could be used as an "entry point" into computer science for students who may not have been interested in the field. Games and game technology enhance learning by operating at the "outer and growing edge of a player's competence".

[ 122 ] Games challenge students at levels that cause frustration but preserve motivation to solve the challenge at this edge.

[ 122 ] Bogost also notes that video games can be taught as rhetorical and expressive in nature, allowing children to model their experiences through programming. When dissected, the ethics and rhetoric in video games' computational systems is exposed.

[ 123 ] Analysis of video games as an interactive medium reveals the underlying rhetoric through the performative activity of the player.

[ 121 ] Recognition of procedural rhetoric through course studies reflects how these mediums can augment politics, advertisement, and information.

[ 121 ] To help address the rhetoric in video game code, scholar Collin Bjork makes a series of recommendations for integrating digital rhetoric with usability testing in online writing instruction.

[ 118 ] Some scholars have also identified specific practices for digital rhetoric instruction in pre-collegiate classrooms. As Douglas Eyman points out, students require agency when learning digital rhetoric, meaning instructors designing lessons must allow students to interact with the technology directly and enact change on the design.

[ 1 ] This is consistent with discoveries by other professors, who claim one of the primary goals of students in a digital rhetoric classroom is to create space for themselves, connections with peers, and deeply understand its significance.

[ 109 ] These interpersonal connections reflect a "thick correlation between digitalization and empowering pedagogy".

[ 124 ] Pre-K [ edit ] The United States Government's Office of Educational Technology has emphasized four guiding principles when using technology with early learners: When used appropriately, technology can be a tool for learning.

The use of technology should allow for increased access to learning opportunities for all children.

Technology can be used to strengthen relationships between children and their families, early educators, and friends.

Technology is most effective when early learners are interacting with adults and peers. Adults can also supervise children online for said effectiveness.

[ 125 ] Despite these four pillars, most studies conclude that learning technology for children under the age of two is not beneficial. At most, technology can be used to promote relationship development for these children; for instance, by using video chat software to connect with loved ones at a distance.

[ 125 ] Digital rhetoric as a field of study [ edit ] In 2009, rhetorician Elizabeth Losh [ 126 ] offered this four-part definition of digital rhetoric in her book Virtualpolitik : [ 127 ] The conventions of new digital genres that are used for everyday discourse, as well as for special occasions, in average people's lives.

Public rhetoric , often in the form of political messages from government institutions, that is represented or recorded through digital technology and disseminated via electronically distributed networks.

The emerging scholarly discipline concerned with the rhetorical interpretation of computer-generated media as objects of study.

Mathematical theories of communication from the field of information science , many of which attempt to quantify the amount of uncertainty in a given linguistic exchange or the likely paths through which messages travel.

[ 128 ] Losh's definition demonstrates that digital rhetoric is a field that relies on different methods to study various types of information, such as code, text, visuals, videos, and so on.

[ 126 ] Douglas Eyman suggests that classical theories can be mapped onto digital media but a larger academic focus should be placed on the "extension of rhetorical theory".

[ 129 ] Careers in developing and analyzing the rhetoric in code form a prominent field of study.

Computers and Composition , a journal established in 1985, focuses on computer communication and has considered the use of "rhetoric as their conceptual framework" and the digital rhetoric in software development.

[ 129 ] Studies on how digital rhetoric implicates various topics are ongoing and encompass many fields. In his book, Digital Griots: African American Rhetoric in a Multimedia Age , Adam J. Banks states that modern day storytellers, like stand-up comics and spoken word poets, give African American rhetoric a flexible approach that is still true to tradition.

[ 130 ] While digital rhetoric can be used to facilitate traditions, select cultures face several practical application issues.

Radhika Gajjala , professor at Bowling Green State University , writes that South Asian cyber feminists face issues with regard to building their web presence.

[ 131 ] Research ethics [ edit ] Writing and rhetoric scholars Heidi McKee and James E. Porter discuss the complicated issue of Internet users posting information publicly on the Internet but expecting the post to be semi-private. This appears contradictory, but socially the Internet is composed of millions of social identities , social groups , social norms , and social influence .

[ 132 ] These social aspects of the Internet are important to consider when studying digital topics because the digital and non-digital are getting harder to distinguish from one another.

[ 133 ] A study conducted by Rösner and Krämer in 2016 showed that participants' identities would reflect the norms of these online social groups. Similar to how social groups are seen in an in-person setting, posts on forums, comment sections, and social media are like having a conversation with friends in a public setting. Typically, researchers would not use a conversation heard in public, but an online conversation is not only available to its social group.

[ 134 ] James Zappen, in his article "Digital Rhetoric: Toward an Integrated Theory", adds that many of these groups foster a creative and collaborative nature to share information to the public.

[ 135 ] McKee and Porter suggest the use of a casuistic heuristic approach to doing digital research. This method of study is based on focusing on the moral principle of ' do no harm ' to the audience and generating needed formulas or diagrams to help guide the researcher when gathering data. It is noted that this method does not provide all the answers. Instead, it is a starting point for the scholar to approach the digital world. More scholars have added their own take to an ethical approach for digital data. Many have a case-based approach with add-on consent from participants (if possible), anonymity to participants, and consideration of what harm could come to the groups being studied.

[ 133 ] [ 136 ] Eyman gives background information on ancient rhetoric going all the way back to Aristotle. including illustrations of both conventional and modern rhetoric. Beginning with ancient Greece and the medieval eras, there is a shift to more modern methods and instances. He explains three expression modes: Ethos, Logos, and Pathos.

[ 1 ] The term "digital" also refers to the physical production of texts, whether they are produced in print or electronically. In rhetorical studies, text can be seen as the medium for persuasive discourse or arguments; however, this tradition is primarily associated with printed texts, with less regard to 'Electric rhetoric', 'computational rhetoric', and 'technorhetoric'.

[ 1 ] Eyman explores how traditional concepts, in rhetoric such as Ethos, Logos, and Pathos [ 1 ] have been modernized to remain relevant today. He clarifies that these age-old methods of persuasion still hold significance but have evolved to be applied now. For instance, establishing credibility or Ethos is no longer solely dependent upon the speaker's character. It now encompasses elements of presence such, as maintaining a reputation, a substantial following, and producing valuable content. When creating points using logic (Logos) incorporating elements such, as charts or videos can aid in clarifying intricate concepts for the audience's comprehension level to increase significantly. To enhance connections (Pathos) integrating visuals along, with sound and video components can intensify the impact of messages by adding a personal and profound touch to them.

Eyman also mentions the shift, in dynamics brought about by platforms where persuasion becomes a process between speakers and audiences, unlike the traditional one-way communication in rhetoric.

[ 1 ] The ability of audiences to actively engage by commenting and sharing enables them to influence and steer conversations in spaces. It's a shift that illustrates how a simple post, on media has the potential to spark extensive discussions and interactions as it resonates with a wider audience. In today's paced communication landscape communicators need to be prepared for interactions and varied responses, from their audience impacting the effectiveness of their message.

Moreover, Eyman discusses the issues surrounding communication strategies. New digital technologies allow tailored messages to target audiences by imposing algorithms determining content visibility. This gives rise, to concerns relating to data privacy, and openness. For example, the use of algorithms to hand picked user content may slightly shape their viewpoints without their awareness. Eyman emphasizes the importance of handling this form of "persuasion" due to its significant impact on public viewpoint or belief.

Overall Eyman believes that digital communicators should be careful with these tools and use them ethically. He argues that rhetoric in the digital world isn't just about persuading; it's also about understanding the impact of these methods and respecting the audience's trust and privacy.

[ 1 ] This balanced approach encourages effective yet ethical communication.

Narrative Rhetoric [ edit ] Digital storytelling is another development over that has grown with the advancement of technology. While most of these have appeared in the context of fictional works, nonfiction, rhetorical work have also taken on elements of narrative theory in a digital setting. Nonfiction "Interactive Digital Narratives" use strategies usually utilized in the service of fictional storytelling as way of conveying information or trying to convince others of a certain position or argument.

[ 137 ] Practical examples of IDNs being applied to works of rhetoric include interactive documentaries, documentaries which the user engages with on some engages with on a level more than simply observing it, and serious games , video games made with goals of nonrecreational education and training. The interactive nature of these communications means that the rhetoric of the narrative is being constantly reshaped and reinterpreted, meaning that there are many digital narratives go on without any true ending.

[ 137 ] Prolepsis [ edit ] Prolepsis refers to the methods by which someone anticipates possible responses and arguments to a message. In digital communication, this exists in the form of social media proleptic cues, where one user issues a social media post makes a claim about the future or attempts to influence actions towards what the future should become. Other users who respond to these posts, in the form of comments or other validating/invalidating reactions, do so based on their own views on the predictions made. These responses serve as feedback for the original user, and as guiding tools for those responding to gauge and adapt to their own predictions.

[ 138 ] The nature of these statements makes it so that there is a possibility that anyone can inspire conversation or calls to action over a certain topic, even if they are ill-informed on the subject. Instances such as these can often lead to the spread of misinformation and disinformation online. The misuse of prolepsis in a digital sphere often occurs through false citations of authority, appeals to cultural and societal fears, and the employment of slippery slope arguments.

[ 138 ] Social issues [ edit ] Access [ edit ] Referred to as the digital divide , issues of economic access and user-level access are recurring issues in digital rhetoric.

[ 139 ] These issues show up most prevalently at the intersection of computers and writing, though the digital divide impacts a multitude of online forums, user bases, and communities. A lack of access can refer to inequality in obtaining information, means of communication, and opportunities. For many that teach digital rhetoric in schools and universities, student access to technologies at home and in school is an operative concern.

[ 140 ] There is some debate about whether mobile devices like smartphones make technology access more equitable.

[ 141 ] In addition, the socioeconomic divide that is created due to accessibility is a major factor of digital rhetoric. For instance, Linda Darling-Hammond , an NIH researcher and professor of education at Stanford University , discusses the lack of educational resources that children of color in America face.

[ 142 ] Further, Angela M. Haas, author of "Wampum as Hypertext: An American Indian Intellectual Tradition of Multimedia Theory and Practice", describes access in a more theoretical way. Her text explains that through access one can connect a physical body with the digital space.

[ 143 ] Another contributing factor is technology diffusion , which refers to how the market for new technology changes over time, and how that influences technology use and production across society.

[ 144 ] Studies conducted by scholar Sunil Wattal conclude that technology diffusion mimics social class status.

[ 144 ] As such, technology diffusion varies from community to community, making it a much greater challenge to ensure access equity across classes. Some researchers suggest that access affects multiple aspects of life and should be considered comprehensively. Some scholars argue that unresolved accessibility issues contribute to social disparities.

[ 142 ] An example of a paywall from a news site Another issue of access comes in the form of paywalls , which can be a major hindrance for education and reduce accessibility to many educational tools and materials. This practice can increase barriers to scholarship and limit open access information.

[ 145 ] Open access removes the barriers of access fees and the restrictions of copyright and licensing, allowing more equal access to works. Open access and digital rhetoric do not eliminate copyright, but they eliminate restrictions by giving authors the choice to maintain their right to copy and distribute their materials however they choose, or turn the rights over to a specific journal. Digital rhetoric involves works that are found online and open access is allowing more people to be able to reach these works.

[ 146 ] Legitimacy [ edit ] There is controversy regarding the innovative nature of digital rhetoric. Arguments opposed to legitimizing web text are Platonically based, in that they reject the new form of scholarship (web text) and praise the old form (print) in the same way that oral communication was originally favored over written communication.

[ 147 ] Originally some traditionalists did not regard online open access journals with the same legitimacy as print journals for this reason; however, digital arenas have become the primary place for disseminating academic information in many areas of scholarship.

[ 148 ] Modern scholars struggle to "claim academic legitimacy" in these new media forms, as the tendency of pedagogy is to write about a subject rather than actively work in it.

[ 149 ] Within the past decade, more scholarly texts have been openly accessible, which provides an innovative way for students to gain access to textual materials online for free, such as scholarly journals like Kairos , [ 150 ] Harlot of the Arts , [ 151 ] and Enculturation .

[ 152 ] Online harassment [ edit ] Online harassment has been identified as a persistent issue, particularly on social media.

[ 153 ] [ 154 ] Analysis linked cyberbullying-specific behaviors, including perpetration and victimization, to a number of detrimental psychosocial outcomes. Massey's research suggests a trend of people posting about their characters and lifestyles reinforces stereotypes (such as "hillbillies"), an outcome based on the fact that the rhetoric of difference is a naturalized component of the ethnic and racial identity.

[ 155 ] Erika Sparby theorized that anonymity and use pseudonyms or avatars on social media gives users more confidence to address someone or something negatively.

[ 156 ] In 2005, these issues led to the launch of the first cyberbullying prevention campaign: STOMP Out Bullying. Like the abundance of campaigns that would form in the next fifteen years, it focuses on creating cyberbullying awareness and reducing and preventing bullying.

[ 157 ] The challenge of bullying within social media has increased following the rise of " cancel culture ", which aims to end the career of a culprit through any means possible, mainly the boycott of their works.

[ 158 ] [ 159 ] More recently, techniques utilizing machine learning and artificial intelligence have become popular in synthesizing deepfakes : realistic but fake videos of people whose faces are swapped out with other people's faces. These kinds of videos can be created by easily obtainable and simple software, inciting concerns that people may use the software to blackmail or bully people online.

[ 160 ] A large quantity of images containing faces are required to create a deepfake. In addition, specific types of characteristics, such as different exposure and color levels, need to be consistent to make a realistic video. However, given the vast amounts of photos of people publicly available on the Internet from social media sites, there is concern about the extent to which people can use deepfakes as a bullying tactic. Reports indicate that deepfake technology has been used in instances of online harassment. One example involved a mother who used deepfake software to frame a few of her daughter's classmates at school by producing fake videos of them in pornographic videos.

[ 161 ] Due to machine learning and artificial intelligence being relatively new subfields of computer science and mathematics, there has not been enough time for deepfake video detection technologies to mature, and so far are only detectable using the human eye to spot irregularities in movement of the people in the videos.

[ 162 ] Misinformation and disinformation [ edit ] While digital rhetoric can often be used to persuade, in some cases it is used to spread false and inaccurate information. The proliferation of illegitimate information over the Internet has given rise to the term misinformation , which is defined as the spread of false claims that may or may not be intended to mislead others.

[ 163 ] This is not to be confused with disinformation , which is illegitimate or inaccurate information that is spread with the intent to mislead others.

[ 164 ] Both misinformation and disinformation have consequences towards the knowledge, perceptions, and, in some cases, actions of individuals. Social media specifically has greatly impacted the spread of false information. Scientific facts, such as the damaging environmental impacts of climate change , now come into question on a daily basis.

[ 163 ] Social media has contributed to the proliferation of misinformation/disinformation because of its viral and largely unfiltered nature. Everyday users have the power to join and perpetuate a narrative that could be entirely false. In recent years, the term " fake news "—used synonymously with misinformation—has been highly popularized and politicized in digital spaces.

[ 165 ] Politics [ edit ] Digital rhetoric can now be found in politics, as it introduces a more direct relationship between politicians and citizens. Digital communication platforms and social networking sites allow citizens to share information and engage in debate with other people of similar or distinct political ideologies , which have been shown to influence and predict the political behavior of individuals outside the digital world.

[ 166 ] Some politicians have used digital rhetoric as a persuasive tool to communicate information to citizens. Some research suggests that digital rhetoric has contributed to increased political participation among citizens. Himelboim et al. journal on online political communication details numerous studies that demonstrate that there is a positive increase in political tolerance and knowledge due to online political communication with different people with different perspectives.

[ 166 ] Theoretical research on digital rhetoric in politics has attributed the increase of political participation to three models: the motivation model, the learning model, and the attitude model.

[ 167 ] The motivation model proposes that digital rhetoric has decreased the opportunity costs of participating in politics since it makes information readily available to the people.

[ 167 ] The learning model suggests that political participation has increased due to the availability of online political information, which may contribute to greater citizen involvement in the political process.

[ 167 ] The attitude model extended from the previous two by suggesting that digital rhetoric has changed the perception of citizens towards politics, particularly by providing interactive tools that allow people to engage in the political process.

[ 167 ] COVID-19 pandemic [ edit ] When shifting to online learning, many schools used video conference applications to continue teaching lessons.

The persistence of the global COVID-19 pandemic has changed both physical and digital spaces. The resulting isolation and economic shutdowns complicated existing issues and created a new set of globalized challenges as it "imposed" a change to the " psychosocial environment".

[ 168 ] The pandemic has forced the majority of individuals with Internet access to depend on technology in order to remain connected to the outside world, and on a larger scale, global economies have become reliant on transitioning business to digital platforms.

[ 169 ] Additionally, the pandemic forced schools across the globe to switch to an 'online only' approach. By March 25, 2020, all school systems in the United States closed indefinitely.

[ 170 ] In search of a platform to host online learning, many schools incorporated popular video chat service Zoom as their method of providing socially distant instruction. In April 2020, Zoom was hosting over 300 million daily meetings, as opposed to 10 million in December 2019.

[ 171 ] The shift to online learning demonstrated the current state of accessibility to digital information while promoting the use of digital learning through Zoom meetings, YouTube videos, and broadcasting systems such as Open Broadcaster Software .

[ 172 ] Still, it is questioned whether or not the switch to online learning has had detrimental impacts on students. In particular, it has been difficult to transition younger students to completely online models of learning, who often miss the social aspects of a school setting.

[ 173 ] The pandemic has also contributed to creating misleading rhetoric in online spaces.

[ 174 ] Heightened public health concerns combined with the accessibility of social media led to the rapid spread of both misinformation and disinformation regarding COVID-19.

[ 174 ] Some people online theorized that the deadly virus could be cured by the ingestion of bleach, while others believed the disease to have been intentionally started by China in an attempt to take over the world.

[ 175 ] In response, many social media sites strengthened their policies relating to false information, but many misleading claims still find their way online.

[ 175 ] See also [ edit ] Artificial intelligence rhetoric Composition studies Computer-mediated communication Digital humanities Digital literacy Digital media Hypermedia Internet studies Media studies Technological convergence Feminist technoscience Technofeminism References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e f g h i Eyman, Douglas (2015).

Digital Rhetoric: Theory, Method, Practice . Ann Arbor, MI: digitalculturebooks.

doi : 10.3998/dh.13030181.0001.001 .

ISBN 978-0-472-07268-2 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q Eyman, Douglas (2015).

Digital Rhetoric: Theory, Method, Practice . University of Michigan Press.

doi : 10.3998/dh.13030181.0001.001 .

ISBN 978-0-472-05268-4 .

[ page needed ] ^ Van Den Eede, Yoni; Goeminne, Gert; Van den Bossche, Marc (June 2017).

"The Art of Living with Technology: Turning Over Philosophy of Technology's Empirical Turn" .

Foundations of Science .

22 (2): 235– 246.

doi : 10.1007/s10699-015-9472-5 .

ISSN 1233-1821 .

S2CID 147446410 .

^ a b Boyle, Casey; Brown, James J.; Ceraso, Steph (May 27, 2018). "The Digital: Rhetoric Behind and Beyond the Screen".

Rhetoric Society Quarterly .

48 (3): 251– 259.

doi : 10.1080/02773945.2018.1454187 .

S2CID 149842629 .

^ Ridolfo, Jim (2013). "Delivering Textual Diaspora: Building Digital Cultural Repositories as Rhetoric Research".

College English .

76 (2): 136– 151.

doi : 10.58680/ce201324270 .

ISSN 0010-0994 .

JSTOR 24238146 .

^ a b c Hodgson, Justin; Barnett, Scot (November 22, 2016).

"Introduction: What is Rhetorical about Digital Rhetoric? Perspectives and Definitions of Digital Rhetoric" .

Archived from the original on April 27, 2017.

^ McCarty, Willard (December 22, 2023).

"Digital rhetoric, literae humaniores and Leibniz's dream" .

Digital Enlightenment Studies .

1 (1).

doi : 10.61147/des.5 .

^ McCarty, Willard (December 22, 2023).

"Digital rhetoric, literae humaniores and Leibniz's dream" .

Digital Enlightenment Studies .

1 (1).

doi : 10.61147/des.5 .

ISSN 3029-0953 .

^ Ellis, Allan B. (1964).

"The Computer and Character Analysis" .

The English Journal .

53 (7): 522– 527.

doi : 10.2307/810597 .

ISSN 0013-8274 .

JSTOR 810597 .

^ Daigon, Arthur (1966).

"Computer Grading of English Composition" .

The English Journal .

55 (1): 46– 52.

doi : 10.2307/811145 .

ISSN 0013-8274 .

JSTOR 811145 .

^ Slotnick, Henry B.; Knapp, John V. (1971).

"Essay Grading by Computer: A Laboratory Phenomenon?" .

The English Journal .

60 (1): 75– 87.

doi : 10.2307/813345 .

ISSN 0013-8274 .

JSTOR 813345 .

^ Lanham, R. A. (1994).

The Electronic Word: Democracy, Technology, and the Arts . University of Chicago Press.

ISBN 978-0-226-46885-3 .

[ page needed ] ^ Landow, George P. (June 1989).

"Hypertext in literary education, criticism, and scholarship" .

Computers and the Humanities .

23 (3): 173– 198.

doi : 10.1007/BF00056142 .

ISSN 0010-4817 .

^ Eyman, Douglas.

Digital Rhetoric Theory, Method, Practice . pp.

12– 27.

^ Brent, Doug (Spring 1997).

"Rhetorics of the Web" .

kairos.technorhetoric.net . Retrieved October 9, 2024 .

^ Heba, Gary (January 1997).

"HyperRhetoric: Multimedia, literacy, and the future of composition" .

Computers and Composition .

14 (1): 19– 44.

doi : 10.1016/S8755-4615(97)90036-0 .

^ Zappen, James P. (July 2005).

"Digital Rhetoric: Toward an Integrated Theory" .

Technical Communication Quarterly .

14 (3): 319– 325.

doi : 10.1207/s15427625tcq1403_10 .

ISSN 1057-2252 .

S2CID 54783060 .

^ a b c Haas, Angela M. (2018). "Toward a Digital Cultural Rhetoric".

The Routledge Handbook of Digital Writing and Rhetoric . pp.

412– 422.

doi : 10.4324/9781315518497-39 .

ISBN 978-1-315-51849-7 .

^ Alexander, Jonathan; Rhodes, Jacqueline, eds. (April 27, 2018).

The Routledge Handbook of Digital Writing and Rhetoric (1 ed.). Routledge.

doi : 10.4324/9781315518497 .

ISBN 978-1-315-51849-7 .

^ Majdik, Zoltan P.; Graham, S. Scott (May 26, 2024).

"Rhetoric of/with AI: An Introduction" .

Rhetoric Society Quarterly .

54 (3): 222– 231.

doi : 10.1080/02773945.2024.2343264 .

ISSN 0277-3945 .

^ a b Selber, Stuart A.; Ridolfo, Jim (April 15, 2024).

"Stuart A. Selber: What is Digital Rhetoric?" .

Argumentation et Analyse du Discours .

32 (32).

doi : 10.4000/aad.8357 .

ISSN 1565-8961 .

^ Smith, Arthur L. (March 1971). "Markings of an African concept of rhetoric".

Today's Speech .

19 (2): 13– 18.

doi : 10.1080/01463377109368973 .

^ Ge, Yunfeng (November 2013). "Book review: Anis S Bawarshi and Mary Jo Reiff, Genre: An Introduction to History, Theory, Research, and Pedagogy".

Discourse & Society .

24 (6): 833– 835.

doi : 10.1177/0957926513490318c .

S2CID 147358289 .

^ Boyle, Casey; Brown, James J.; Ceraso, Steph (May 27, 2018). "The Digital: Rhetoric Behind and Beyond the Screen".

Rhetoric Society Quarterly .

48 (3): 251– 259.

doi : 10.1080/02773945.2018.1454187 .

ISSN 0277-3945 .

S2CID 149842629 .

^ Jenkins, Henry; Lashley, Mark C.; Creech, Brian.

"Voices for a New Vernacular: A Forum on Digital Storytelling Interview with Henry Jenkins" .

International Journal of Communication .

11 : 1061– 1068 – via EBSCOhost.

^ a b Wittke, Volker; Hanekop, Heidemarie, eds. (2011).

New Forms of Collaborative Innovation and Production on the Internet: An Interdisciplinary Perspective (PDF) . Universitätsverlag Göttingen.

ISBN 978-3-86395-020-0 .

^ Olson, Judith S.; Olson, Gary M. (2014).

Working Together Apart: Collaboration Over the Internet . Synthesis Lectures on Human-Centered Informatics (SLHCI). Morgan & Claypool.

ISBN 9781608450510 .

[ page needed ] ^ a b Brabham, Daren C. (2013).

Crowdsourcing (PDF) . Essential Knowledge. MIT Press.

ISBN 9780262518475 .

^ Welch, Kathleen E.; Barrett, Edward (1999).

Electric Rhetoric: Classical Rhetoric, Oralism, and a New Literacy . MIT Press.

ISBN 978-0-262-23202-9 .

[ page needed ] ^ a b Chapman, Nigel; Chapman, Jenny (2000).

Digital Multimedia (1st ed.). New York, NY: John Wiley & Sons, LTD.

ISBN 978-0-471-98386-6 .

[ page needed ] ^ Shifman, Limor (2014).

Memes in Digital Culture . MIT Press.

ISBN 978-0-262-52543-5 .

^ Giselsson, Kristi (May 31, 2020).

"Critical Thinking and Critical Literacy: Mutually Exclusive?" .

International Journal for the Scholarship of Teaching and Learning .

14 (1).

doi : 10.20429/ijsotl.2020.140105 .

^ Norris, Katherine; Lucas, Lisa; Prudhoe, Catherine (2012).

"Preparing Preservice Teachers to Use Critical Literacy in the Early Childhood Classroom" (PDF) .

Multicultural Education . Promising Practices.

19 (2): 52– 62, 62.

S2CID 26401103 – via Google Scholar.

^ "Critical Literacy in A Digital Era: Technology, Rhetoric, and the Public interest" .

Routledge & CRC Press . Retrieved February 21, 2022 .

^ "Critical Literacy – Developing your critical literacy skills" .

The University of Melbourne . 2018.

^ Shao, Chencheng; et al. (2017). "The Spread of Fake News by Social Bots".

arXiv : 1707.07592v1 [ cs.SI ].

Andy Black Associates.

^ Pius Nedumkallel, Jose (January 2020).

"Interactivity of Digital Media: Literature Review and Future Research Agenda" .

International Journal of Interactive Communication Systems and Technologies .

10 (1): 13– 30.

doi : 10.4018/IJICST.2020010102 .

ISSN 2155-4218 .

^ Zaefferer, Dietmar (August 22, 2008), "Language as mind sharing device: Mental and linguistic concepts in a general ontology of everyday life" , Language as mind sharing device: Mental and , De Gruyter Mouton, pp.

193– 230, doi : 10.1515/9783110197792.2.193 , ISBN 978-3-11-019779-2 , retrieved October 19, 2024 ^ Grewal, Dhruv; Herhausen, Dennis; Ludwig, Stephan; Villarroel Ordenes, Francisco (June 1, 2022).

"The Future of Digital Communication Research: Considering Dynamics and Multimodality" .

Journal of Retailing .

98 (2): 224– 240.

doi : 10.1016/j.jretai.2021.01.007 .

hdl : 11585/981477 .

ISSN 0022-4359 .

^ DeVoss, Jim Ridolfo and Dànielle Nicole (January 15, 2009).

"Composing for Recomposition: Rhetorical Velocity and Delivery" .

13.2 . Retrieved October 19, 2024 .

^ a b c Marwick, Alice (November 2013).

"Memes" .

Contexts .

12 (4): 12– 13.

doi : 10.1177/1536504213511210 .

ISSN 1536-5042 .

^ a b c d Bogost, Ian (2008). "The Rhetoric of Video Games".

The Ecology of Games: Connecting Youth, Games, and Learning . Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.

ISBN 978-0-262-69364-6 .

^ a b c Gonzalo, Frasca (2003). "Simulation versus Narrative: Introduction to Ludology". In Wolf, Mark J.P.; Perron, Bernard (eds.).

The Video Game Theory Reader . New York: Routledge.

ISBN 978-0-415-96579-8 .

^ Ridolfo, J. & Devoss, D. (2009).

"Composing for Recomposition: Rhetorical Velocity and Delivery" .

Kairos .

13 (2).

^ Morey, Sean (2017).

The digital writer . Southlake, TX: Fountainhead Press.

ISBN 978-1-68036-354-8 .

OCLC 1018379426 .

^ Morey, Sean (2017).

The Digital Writer . Southlake, Texas: Fountainhead Press. pp.

37– 70.

ISBN 978-1-68036-354-8 .

^ Reyman, J. (2013).

"User Data on the Social Web: Authorship, Agency, and Appropriation" (PDF) .

College English .

75 (5): 513– 532.

doi : 10.58680/ce201323565 . Retrieved November 1, 2014 – via ncte.org.

^ Jones, Madison; Beveridge, Aaron; Garrison, Julian R.; Greene, Abbey; MacDonald, Hannah (2022).

"Tracking Memes in the Wild: Visual Rhetoric and Image Circulation in Environmental Communication" .

Frontiers in Communication .

7 .

doi : 10.3389/fcomm.2022.883278 .

ISSN 2297-900X .

^ Handa, C. (2004). "Reading the Visual in College Writing Classes By Charles Hill".

Visual rhetoric in a digital world: A critical sourcebook . Boston: Bedford/St. Martins.

[ page needed ] ^ Hocks, Mary E. (2003). "Understanding Visual Rhetoric in Digital Writing Environments".

College Composition and Communication .

54 (4): 629– 656.

doi : 10.2307/3594188 .

JSTOR 3594188 .

S2CID 142341944 .

^ Ulfsdotter, Boel; Rogers, Anna B., eds. (2018).

Female Agency and Documentary Strategies: Subjectivities, Identity and Activism . Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.

ISBN 9781474444699 .

^ Citron, Danielle; Chesney, Robert (January 1, 2019).

"Deepfakes and the New Disinformation War" .

Foreign Affairs .

^ Szablewicz, Marcella (2020), Szablewicz, Marcella (ed.), " "Losers" "Acting Gay": Internet Slang, Memes, and Affective Intensities", Mapping Digital Game Culture in China: From Internet Addicts to Esports Athletes , East Asian Popular Culture, Cham: Springer International Publishing, pp.

135– 165, doi : 10.1007/978-3-030-36111-2_6 , ISBN 978-3-030-36111-2 , S2CID 213137393 ^ "The Language of Memes: A Brief Explanation" .

Whatever . June 30, 2018 . Retrieved February 17, 2022 .

^ Marwick, Alice (November 2013).

"Memes" .

Contexts .

12 (4): 12– 13.

doi : 10.1177/1536504213511210 .

ISSN 1536-5042 .

^ a b Matamoros Fernandez, Ariadna (2018).

"Inciting anger through Facebook reactions in Belgium: The use of emoji and related vernacular expressions in racist discourse" .

First Monday .

23 (9): Article number: 94051–20.

ISSN 1396-0466 .

^ Porter, James E. (December 2009). "Recovering Delivery for Digital Rhetoric".

Computers and Composition .

26 (4): 207– 224.

doi : 10.1016/j.compcom.2009.09.004 .

^ Kolko, Beth E. (August 1999). "Representing Bodies in Virtual Space: The Rhetoric of Avatar Design".

The Information Society .

15 (3): 177– 186.

doi : 10.1080/019722499128484 .

^ Woolums, Viola (Fall 2011).

"Gendered Avatar Identity" .

Kairos .

16 (1).

^ a b Cross, Katherine.

"The Queer Avatar of Failure | By: Katherine Cross | Making & Breaking" .

Making and Breaking . Retrieved March 2, 2022 .

^ Johnson, Nathan R. (April 2, 2012).

"Information Infrastructure as Rhetoric: Tools for Analysis" .

Poroi .

8 (1): 1– 3.

doi : 10.13008/2151-2957.1113 .

ISSN 2151-2957 .

^ Johnson, Nathan R. (April 2, 2012).

"Information Infrastructure as Rhetoric: Tools for Analysis" .

Poroi .

8 (1): 1– 3.

doi : 10.13008/2151-2957.1113 .

ISSN 2151-2957 .

^ a b Vee, Annette; Brown, Jr (January 15, 2016).

"Rhetoric Special Issue Editorial Introduction" .

Computational Culture (5).

ISSN 2047-2390 .

^ a b Lewis, Justin (2016).

"Content Management Systems, Bittorrent Trackers, and Large-Scale Rhetorical Genres" .

Journal of Technical Writing and Communication .

46 (1): 4– 26.

doi : 10.1177/0047281615600634 .

S2CID 148056468 .

^ Balsamo, Anne Marie (2011).

Designing culture: the technological imagination at work . Durham [NC]: Duke University Press.

ISBN 978-0-8223-4433-9 .

OCLC 682893337 .

^ Bivens, Rena (June 2017).

"The gender binary will not be deprogrammed: Ten years of coding gender on Facebook" .

New Media & Society .

19 (6): 880– 898.

doi : 10.1177/1461444815621527 .

ISSN 1461-4448 .

S2CID 36100953 .

^ Plant, Robert (January 2004). "Online communities".

Technology in Society .

26 (1): 51– 65.

doi : 10.1016/j.techsoc.2003.10.005 .

^ Arduser, Lora (January 2011). "Warp and Weft: Weaving the Discussion Threads of an Online Community".

Journal of Technical Writing and Communication .

41 (1): 5– 31.

doi : 10.2190/TW.41.1.b .

S2CID 144656923 .

^ O'Neill, Tully (March 1, 2018).

" 'Today I Speak': Exploring How Victim-Survivors Use Reddit" .

International Journal for Crime, Justice and Social Democracy .

7 (1): 44– 59.

doi : 10.5204/ijcjsd.v7i1.402 .

^ Nadim, Marjan; Fladmoe, Audun (July 30, 2019).

"Silencing Women? Gender and Online Harassment" .

Social Science Computer Review .

39 (2): 245– 258.

doi : 10.1177/0894439319865518 .

hdl : 11250/2608353 .

ISSN 0894-4393 .

S2CID 201127019 .

^ "The State of Online Harassment" .

Pew Research Center: Internet, Science & Tech . January 13, 2021 . Retrieved March 2, 2021 .

^ Gallagher, John R. (September 2017). "Writing for Algorithmic Audiences".

Computers and Composition .

45 : 25– 35.

doi : 10.1016/j.compcom.2017.06.002 .

^ Adams, Heather Brook; Applegarth, Risa; Simpson, Amber Hester (September 2020). "Acting with Algorithms: Feminist Propositions for Rhetorical Agency".

Computers and Composition .

57 102581.

doi : 10.1016/j.compcom.2020.102581 .

S2CID 225324822 .

^ a b Waller, Isaac; Anderson, Ashton (2021).

"Quantifying social organization and political polarization in online platforms" .

Nature .

600 (7888): 264– 268.

arXiv : 2010.00590 .

Bibcode : 2021Natur.600..264W .

doi : 10.1038/s41586-021-04167-x .

ISSN 1476-4687 .

PMID 34853472 .

S2CID 236469369 .

^ a b Dijck, José van (2013).

The culture of connectivity: a critical history of social media . Oxford: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-997079-7 .

OCLC 839305263 .

^ a b c Carter Olson, Candi (September 2, 2016). "#BringBackOurGirls: digital communities supporting real-world change and influencing mainstream media agendas".

Feminist Media Studies .

16 (5): 772– 787.

doi : 10.1080/14680777.2016.1154887 .

S2CID 216643349 .

^ a b Swart, Joëlle (April 2021).

"Experiencing Algorithms: How Young People Understand, Feel About, and Engage With Algorithmic News Selection on Social Media" .

Social Media + Society .

7 (2): 205630512110088.

doi : 10.1177/20563051211008828 .

ISSN 2056-3051 .

S2CID 234860990 .

^ McNely, Brian J. (October 2012).

"Shaping organizational image-power through images: Case histories of Instagram" .

2012 IEEE International Professional Communication Conference . pp.

1– 8.

doi : 10.1109/IPCC.2012.6408624 .

ISBN 978-1-4577-2126-7 .

S2CID 1526078 .

^ Mann, Benjamin W (December 1, 2018). "Rhetoric of Online Disability Activism: #CripTheVote and Civic Participation".

Communication, Culture and Critique .

11 (4): 604– 621.

doi : 10.1093/ccc/tcy030 .

^ Rodino-Colocino, Michelle (January 2, 2018).

"Me too, #MeToo: countering cruelty with empathy" .

Communication and Critical/Cultural Studies .

15 (1): 96– 100.

doi : 10.1080/14791420.2018.1435083 .

ISSN 1479-1420 .

^ Kaun, Anne; Uldam, Julie (June 2018).

"Digital activism: After the hype" .

New Media & Society .

20 (6): 2099– 2106.

doi : 10.1177/1461444817731924 .

ISSN 1461-4448 .

^ Harrigan, Paul; Daly, Timothy M.; Coussement, Kristof; Lee, Julie A.; Soutar, Geoffrey N.; Evers, Uwana (February 1, 2021).

"Identifying influencers on social media" .

International Journal of Information Management .

56 102246.

doi : 10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2020.102246 .

ISSN 0268-4012 .

S2CID 225115867 .

^ Zalat, Marwa Mohamed; Hamed, Mona Sami; Bolbol, Sarah Abdelhalim (March 26, 2021).

"The experiences, challenges, and acceptance of e-learning as a tool for teaching during the COVID-19 pandemic among university medical staff" .

PLOS ONE .

16 (3): e0248758.

Bibcode : 2021PLoSO..1648758Z .

doi : 10.1371/journal.pone.0248758 .

ISSN 1932-6203 .

PMC 7997029 .

PMID 33770079 .

^ Rappanta, C. (2020).

"Online University Teaching During and After the Covid-19 Crisis: Refocusing Teacher Presence and Learning Activity" .

Postdigit Sci Educ .

2 (3): 923– 945.

doi : 10.1007/s42438-020-00155-y .

PMC 7339092 .

PMID 40477148 .

S2CID 220381810 .

^ Rapanta, Chrysi; Botturi, Luca; Goodyear, Peter; Guàrdia, Lourdes; Koole, Marguerite (October 1, 2020).

"Online University Teaching During and After the Covid-19 Crisis: Refocusing Teacher Presence and Learning Activity" .

Postdigital Science and Education .

2 (3): 923– 945.

doi : 10.1007/s42438-020-00155-y .

ISSN 2524-4868 .

PMC 7339092 .

PMID 40477148 .

^ Patricia Aguilera-Hermida, A. (January 1, 2020).

"College students' use and acceptance of emergency online learning due to COVID-19" .

International Journal of Educational Research Open .

1 100011.

doi : 10.1016/j.ijedro.2020.100011 .

ISSN 2666-3740 .

PMC 7480788 .

PMID 35059662 .

^ a b c "Procedural Rhetorics – Rhetoric's Procedures: Rhetorical Peaks and What It Means to Win the Game | Currents in Electronic Literacy" .

currents.dwrl.utexas.edu . Retrieved February 24, 2021 .

^ Frossard, Frédérique; Trifonova, Anna; Barajas, Mario (2015). "Teachers Designing Learning Games".

Video Games and Creativity . pp.

159– 183.

doi : 10.1016/b978-0-12-801462-2.00008-4 .

ISBN 978-0-12-801462-2 .

^ a b "Rhetorical Peaks: A Design for Teaching Rhetoric in a Gaming Environment | Welcome to the DWRL" .

www.dwrl.utexas.edu . Retrieved March 3, 2021 .

^ "COD 101: Definitions of Common Call of Duty®: Modern Warfare® Terms" .

blog.activision.com .

^ Vorderer, Peter; Bryant, Jennings (2012).

Playing Video Games: Motives, Responses, and Consequences . Taylor and Francis.

ISBN 978-0-203-87370-0 .

OCLC 847370576 .

[ page needed ] ^ Leach, Rebecca; Dehnert, Marco (January 2, 2021). "Becoming the other: examining race, gender, and sexuality in Detroit: Become Human".

Review of Communication .

21 (1): 23– 32.

doi : 10.1080/15358593.2021.1892173 .

S2CID 233402236 .

^ Detweiler, Eric (April 3, 2019).

"Sounding Out the Progymnasmata" .

Rhetoric Review .

38 (2): 205– 218.

doi : 10.1080/07350198.2019.1588567 .

ISSN 0735-0198 .

S2CID 151021917 .

^ "Soundwriting Pedagogies / CCDP" .

ccdigitalpress.org . Retrieved April 23, 2023 .

^ Choong & Bjork (2023).

"The Student-Podcaster as Narrator of Social Change?" .

library.ncte.org . Retrieved April 23, 2023 .

^ a b Verhulsdonck, Gustav (2014). "Digital Rhetoric and Globalization".

Digital Rhetoric and Global Literacies . Advances in Linguistics and Communication Studies. pp.

1– 40.

doi : 10.4018/978-1-4666-4916-3.ch001 .

ISBN 978-1-4666-4916-3 .

^ Rose, Jessica (August 12, 2016).

The Rhetoric of the iPhone: A Cultural Gateway Of Our Transforming Digital Paradigm .

English Theses (Thesis).

OCLC 956496762 .

^ Butts, Shannon; Jones, Madison (May 20, 2021).

"Deep mapping for environmental communication design" .

Communication Design Quarterly .

9 (1): 4– 19.

doi : 10.1145/3437000.3437001 .

S2CID 234794773 .

^ Campbell, Jessica (October 12, 2021). "Mobile Interface Theory: A Conceptual Tool for Identifying Digital Rhetoric in a Mobile Context".

The 39th ACM International Conference on Design of Communication . New York, NY: ACM. pp.

31– 37.

doi : 10.1145/3472714.3473620 .

ISBN 9781450386289 .

S2CID 238638870 .

^ a b Greengard, Samuel (2019).

Virtual Reality . Cambridge, Massachusetts: The MIT Press. pp. xi-4.

^ Basaraba, Nicole; Arnds, Peter; Edmond, Jennifer; Conlan, Owen (2021).

"New Media Ecology and Theoretical Foundations for Nonfiction Digital Narrative Creative Practice" .

Narrative .

29 (3): 374– 395.

doi : 10.1353/nar.2021.0017 .

ISSN 1538-974X .

^ a b c d De Hertogh, Lori Beth (March 2019).

" 'Feminist Leaning:' Tracing Technofeminist and Intersectional Practices and Values in Three Decades of Computers and Composition" .

Computers and Composition .

51 : 4– 13.

doi : 10.1016/j.compcom.2018.11.004 .

^ a b Haas, Angela (March 2019).

"Introduction by the Guest Editors" .

Computers and Composition .

51 : 1– 3.

doi : 10.1016/j.compcom.2018.11.007 .

^ Pain, Paromita (November 2021).

" "It took me quite a long time to develop a voice": Examining feminist digital activism in the Indian #MeToo movement" .

New Media & Society .

23 (11): 3139– 3155.

doi : 10.1177/1461444820944846 .

ISSN 1461-4448 .

^ a b Glenn, Cheryl (2020).

"The Language of Rhetorical Feminism, Anchored in Hope" .

Open Linguistics .

6 (1): 334– 343.

doi : 10.1515/opli-2020-0023 .

S2CID 221158415 .

^ Blanchard, Anita (2004).

"Blogs as Virtual Communities: Identifying a Sense of Community in the Julie/Julia Project" .

Into the Blogosphere .

^ Duthely, Regina (April 3, 2017). "Black Feminist Hip-Hop Rhetorics and the Digital Public Sphere".

Changing English .

24 (2): 202– 212.

doi : 10.1080/1358684X.2017.1310458 .

S2CID 148707986 .

^ Lindemann, Gesa; Schünemann, David (December 1, 2020).

"Presence in Digital Spaces: A Phenomenological Concept of Presence in Mediatized Communication" .

Human Studies .

43 (4): 627– 651.

doi : 10.1007/s10746-020-09567-y .

ISSN 1572-851X .

S2CID 234389563 .

^ a b "Teaching Digital Rhetoric: Community, Critical Engagement, and Application".

Pedagogy: Critical Approaches to Teaching Literature, Language, Composition, and Culture .

6 (2): 231– 259. April 1, 2006.

doi : 10.1215/15314200-2005-003 .

S2CID 201766824 .

Project MUSE 197069 .

^ a b Volkova, Liliia V.; Lizunova, Larisa R.; Komarova, Iuliia A. (December 30, 2021).

"Digital pedagogy: Problems and solutions" .

Revista on line de Política e Gestão Educacional : 3140– 3152.

doi : 10.22633/rpge.v25iesp.5.16003 .

ISSN 1519-9029 .

^ Volkova, Liliia V.; Lizunova, Larisa R.; Komarova, Iuliia A. (December 30, 2021).

"Digital pedagogy: Problems and solutions" .

Revista on line de Política e Gestão Educacional : 3140– 3152.

doi : 10.22633/rpge.v25iesp.5.16003 .

ISSN 1519-9029 .

^ Bryant, John; Isbell, Mary; Ohge, Christopher; Zimmer, Mary Erica (June 21, 2024).

"Digital Editing and Pedagogy" .

Scholarly Editing .

41 .

doi : 10.55520/KBS01GGN .

ISSN 2167-1257 .

^ "Jeff Grabill | Office of the Provost | Michigan State University" .

provost.msu.edu . Retrieved February 13, 2020 .

^ "Dr. Cheryl E. Ball" .

^ "External Review – Dr. Cheryl E. Ball" . Retrieved November 3, 2024 .

^ Albrecht-Crane, Christa (2015). "Understanding Rhetoric: A Graphic Guide to Writing by Elizabeth Losh et al. (review)".

Rocky Mountain Review of Language and Literature .

69 (1): 104– 107.

Project MUSE 580813 .

^ a b Gagich, Melanie (June 7, 2018).

"Using Digital Rhetoric in a Multimodal Assignment to Disrupt Traditional Academic Writing: Conventions in a First-Year Writing Classroom" .

The Journal of Interactive Technology and Pedagogy, Issue 13 . Retrieved February 17, 2022 .

^ a b Bjork, Collin (September 1, 2018).

"Integrating Usability Testing with Digital Rhetoric in OWI" .

Computers and Composition .

49 : 12.

doi : 10.1016/j.compcom.2018.05.009 .

ISSN 8755-4615 .

S2CID 196160668 .

^ a b Malone, Lauren Ashley (2020).

Intersectional digital rhetoric pedagogy: Queer & trans people of color and digital platform engagement (Thesis). Iowa State University.

doi : 10.31274/etd-20200624-193 .

^ a b Kill, Melanie (June 1, 2015), Hirsch, Brett D. (ed.), "16. Teaching Digital Rhetoric: Wikipedia, Collaboration, and the Politics of Free Knowledge" , Digital Humanities Pedagogy : Practices, Principles and Politics , Digital Humanities Series, Cambridge: Open Book Publishers, pp.

389– 405, ISBN 978-2-8218-5403-1 , retrieved February 15, 2022 ^ a b c Maza, Antonio José Planells de la (2020).

"Los videojuegos como mundos ludoficcionales críticos: el caso de la crisis política española en el ocio digital móvil (2008–2015)" .

Comunicación y Sociedad (in Spanish): 1– 16.

doi : 10.32870/cys.v2020.7365 .

ISSN 2448-9042 .

S2CID 225686398 .

^ a b Gee, James Paul (May 2004). "What Video Games Have to Teach Us about Learning and Literacy".

Education + Training .

46 (4).

doi : 10.1108/et.2004.00446dae.002 .

ISSN 0040-0912 – via St. Martin's Griffen.

^ Boyle, Casey; Brown, James J.; Ceraso, Steph (May 27, 2018). "The Digital: Rhetoric Behind and Beyond the Screen".

Rhetoric Society Quarterly .

48 (3): 251– 259.

doi : 10.1080/02773945.2018.1454187 .

ISSN 0277-3945 .

S2CID 149842629 .

^ Salmieri, Luca (2019). "The Rhetoric of Digitalization in Italian Educational Policies: Situating Reception among Digitally Skilled Teachers".

Italian Journal of Sociology of Education .

11 (2/2019): 162– 183.

doi : 10.14658/pupj-ijse-2019-1-8 .

ISSN 2035-4983 .

^ a b "Guiding Principles for Use of Technology with Early Learners" .

Office of Educational Technology . Retrieved February 28, 2022 .

^ a b "Elizabeth Losh" .

losh.ucsd.edu .

^ Losh, E. (2009).

Virtualpolitik . MIT Press.

ISBN 978-0-262-12304-4 .

^ Losh, Elizabeth (2009).

Virtualpolitik: An Electronic History of Government Media-Making in a Time of War, Scandal, Disaster, Miscommunication, and Mistakes (PDF) . MIT. pp.

47– 48. Archived from the original (PDF) on October 23, 2014 . Retrieved April 24, 2015 .

^ a b "Looking Back and Looking Forward: Digital Rhetoric as Evolving Field | enculturation" .

enculturation.net . Retrieved February 24, 2022 .

^ Banks, Adam J (2011).

Digital griots: African American rhetoric in a multimedia age . Southern Illinois University Press.

ISBN 978-0-8093-3020-1 .

OCLC 977841399 .

[ page needed ] ^ Gajjala, Radhika (March 2003). "South Asian digital diasporas and cyberfeminist webs: negotiating globalization, nation, gender and information technology design".

Contemporary South Asia .

12 (1): 41– 56.

doi : 10.1080/0958493032000123362 .

S2CID 143325390 .

^ McKee, Heidi; Porter, James E. (2008).

"The Ethics of Digital Writing Research: A Rhetorical Approach" .

College Composition and Communication .

59 (4): 711– 749.

doi : 10.58680/ccc20086675 .

ISSN 0010-096X .

JSTOR 20457031 .

^ a b Goodyear, Victoria A. (May 27, 2017).

"Social media, apps and wearable technologies: navigating ethical dilemmas and procedures" .

Qualitative Research in Sport, Exercise and Health .

9 (3): 285– 302.

doi : 10.1080/2159676X.2017.1303790 .

ISSN 2159-676X .

S2CID 151680280 .

^ Rösner, Leonie; Krämer, Nicole C. (July 2016).

"Verbal Venting in the Social Web: Effects of Anonymity and Group Norms on Aggressive Language Use in Online Comments" .

Social Media + Society .

2 (3).

doi : 10.1177/2056305116664220 .

ISSN 2056-3051 .

^ Zappen, James P. (July 2005). "Digital Rhetoric: Toward an Integrated Theory".

Technical Communication Quarterly .

14 (3): 319– 325.

doi : 10.1207/s15427625tcq1403_10 .

ISSN 1057-2252 .

S2CID 54783060 .

^ Kandy Woodfield, ed. (2018).

The ethics of online research . Bingley, UK: Emerald Group Publishing.

ISBN 978-1-78714-485-9 .

OCLC 1020570628 .

^ a b Basaraba, Nicole; Arnds, Peter; Edmond, Jennifer; Conlan, Owen (2021).

"New Media Ecology and Theoretical Foundations for Nonfiction Digital Narrative Creative Practice" .

Narrative .

29 (3): 374– 395.

doi : 10.1353/nar.2021.0017 .

ISSN 1538-974X .

^ a b Landowska, Alina; Rocci, Andrea; Koszowy, Marcin (April 3, 2024).

"Współczesna prolepsis w retoryce cyfrowej: role i funkcje wskazówek proleptycznych | Res Rhetorica" .

Res Rhetorica (in Polish).

11 (1): 138– 154.

doi : 10.29107/rr2024.1.10 .

^ Lohr, Steve (December 4, 2018).

"Digital Divide Is Wider Than We Think, Study Says" .

The New York Times .

^ Reynolds, Thomas J.; Lewis, Charles R. (January 1997). "The changing topography of computer access for composition students".

Computers and Composition .

14 (2): 269– 278.

doi : 10.1016/S8755-4615(97)90027-X .

^ Hea, Amy C.K., ed. (2009).

Going Wireless: A Critical Exploration of Wireless and Mobile Technologies for Composition Teachers and Researchers . Cresskill, N.J.: Hampton Press. pp.

15– 33.

^ a b Smedley, Brian D.; Stith, Adrienne Y.; Colburn, Lois; Evans, Clyde H.; Medicine (US), Institute of (2001).

Inequality in Teaching and Schooling: How Opportunity Is Rationed to Students of Color in America . National Academies Press (US).

^ Haas, Angela M. (2008). "Wampum as Hypertext: An American Indian Intellectual Tradition of Multimedia Theory and Practice".

Studies in American Indian Literatures .

19 (4): 77– 100.

doi : 10.1353/ail.2008.0005 .

S2CID 144801330 .

^ a b Wattal, Sunil; Hong, Yili; Mandviwalla, Munir; Jain, Abhijit (January 2011).

"Technology Diffusion in the Society: Analyzing Digital Divide in the Context of Social Class" .

2011 44th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences . pp.

1– 10.

doi : 10.1109/HICSS.2011.398 .

ISBN 978-1-4244-9618-1 .

S2CID 6222264 .

^ Resnick, Brian (June 3, 2019).

"The war to free science" .

Vox . Retrieved February 17, 2021 .

^ Steinhart, Gail.

"LibGuides: Open Access Publishing: What is Open Access?" .

guides.library.cornell.edu . Retrieved February 17, 2021 .

^ Borgman, Christine (2007).

Scholarship in a Digital Age: Information, Infrastructure, and the Internet . Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. p. 78.

doi : 10.7551/mitpress/7434.001.0001 .

ISBN 9780262255783 .

JSTOR ctt5hhbk7 .

^ Dunham, Gary.

"What are Trends in Scholarly Publishing?" . Archived from the original on April 30, 2012.

^ Ball, C (2004). "Show, not tell: The value of new media scholarship".

Computers and Composition .

21 (4): 403– 425.

doi : 10.1016/j.compcom.2004.08.001 .

^ "Kairos: A Journal of Rhetoric, Technology, and Pedagogy" .

kairos.technorhetoric.net .

^ Harlot of the Arts ^ "enculturation | A Journal of Rhetoric, Writing, and Culture" .

www.enculturation.net .

^ Vogels, Emily A. (January 13, 2021).

"The State of Online Harassment" .

Pew Research Center: Internet, Science & Tech . Retrieved November 10, 2023 .

^ "Online Hate and Harassment: The American Experience 2023" .

ADL . 2023 . Retrieved November 10, 2023 .

^ Massey, Carissa (Spring 2018). "The rhetoric of the real: stereotypes of rural youth in American reality television and stock photography".

Discourse: Studies in the Cultural Politics of Education .

38 (3): 365– 376.

doi : 10.1080/01596306.2017.1306982 .

^ Sparby, Erika M. (September 2017). "Digital Social Media and Aggression: Memetic Rhetoric in 4chan's Collective Identity".

Computers and Composition .

45 : 85– 97.

doi : 10.1016/j.compcom.2017.06.006 .

^ Tucker, Bradford (October 23, 2015).

"Anti-Bullying Organizations and Resources - Array BC" .

Array Behavioral Care . Retrieved October 22, 2024 .

^ Romano, Aja (December 30, 2019).

"Why we can't stop fighting about cancel culture" .

Vox . Retrieved February 18, 2021 .

^ Norris, Pippa (February 2023).

"Cancel Culture: Myth or Reality?" .

Political Studies .

71 (1): 145– 174.

doi : 10.1177/00323217211037023 .

ISSN 0032-3217 .

^ Smith, Hannah E.; JD (October 4, 2021).

"Deepfakes: Technology's Dark Side" .

North Carolina Divorce Lawyers Blog . Retrieved February 16, 2022 .

^ Hinduja, Sameer (March 16, 2021).

"Deepfakes and Cyberbullying" .

Cyberbullying Research Center . Retrieved February 16, 2022 .

^ "Deep Fakes and Social Media: A Q&A With Alex Cohen" .

Digital.gov . June 8, 2021 . Retrieved February 16, 2022 .

^ a b Bloomfield, Emma Frances; Tillery, Denise (January 2, 2019).

"The Circulation of Climate Change Denial Online: Rhetorical and Networking Strategies on Facebook" .

Environmental Communication .

13 (1): 23– 34.

Bibcode : 2019Ecomm..13...23B .

doi : 10.1080/17524032.2018.1527378 .

ISSN 1752-4032 .

S2CID 149955425 .

^ Fallis, Don (December 2015).

"What Is Disinformation?" .

Library Trends .

63 (3): 401– 426.

doi : 10.1353/lib.2015.0014 .

hdl : 2142/89818 .

ISSN 1559-0682 .

^ Gelfert, Axel (2018).

"Fake News: A Definition" .

Informal Logic .

38 (1): 84– 117.

doi : 10.22329/il.v38i1.5068 .

ISSN 0824-2577 .

S2CID 55730612 .

^ a b Himelboim, Itai; Lariscy, Ruthann Weaver; Tinkham, Spencer F.; Sweetser, Kaye D. (February 29, 2012). "Social Media and Online Political Communication: The Role of Interpersonal Informational Trust and Openness".

Journal of Broadcasting & Electronic Media .

56 (1): 92– 115.

doi : 10.1080/08838151.2011.648682 .

S2CID 144127370 .

^ a b c d Jiang, Liang (October 2, 2017). "Why context matters: the role of campaign context in the relationship between digital media use and political participation".

Australian Journal of Political Science .

52 (4): 580– 598.

doi : 10.1080/10361146.2017.1373064 .

S2CID 158661419 .

^ Fegert, Jörg M.; Vitiello, Benedetto; Plener, Paul L.; Clemens, Vera (May 12, 2020).

"Challenges and burden of the Coronavirus 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic for child and adolescent mental health: a narrative review to highlight clinical and research needs in the acute phase and the long return to normality" .

Child and Adolescent Psychiatry and Mental Health .

14 (1): 20.

doi : 10.1186/s13034-020-00329-3 .

ISSN 1753-2000 .

PMC 7216870 .

PMID 32419840 .

^ Ganichev, N. A.; Koshovets, O. B. (February 19, 2021).

"Forcing the Digital Economy: How will the Structure of Digital Markets Change as a Result of the COVID-19 Pandemic" .

Studies on Russian Economic Development .

32 (1): 11– 22.

doi : 10.1134/S1075700721010056 .

ISSN 1075-7007 .

PMC 7893839 .

PMID 33642845 .

^ "The Coronavirus Spring: The Historic Closing of U.S. Schools (A Timeline)" .

Education Week . July 2, 2020 . Retrieved February 18, 2021 .

^ "Zoom Revenue and Usage Statistics (2020)" .

Business of Apps . April 9, 2020 . Retrieved February 18, 2021 .

^ Subhi, M A; Nurjanah, N; Kosasih, U; Rahman, S A (October 2020).

"Design of distance lectures in mathematics education with the use of the integration of Zoom and YouTube application" .

Journal of Physics: Conference Series .

1663 (1): 012058.

Bibcode : 2020JPhCS1663a2058S .

doi : 10.1088/1742-6596/1663/1/012058 .

^ Adnan, Muhammad; Anwar, Kainat (2020).

"Online Learning amid the COVID-19 Pandemic: Students' Perspectives" .

Online Submission .

2 (1): 45– 51.

^ a b Gisondi MA, Barber R, Faust JS, Raja A, Strehlow MC, Westafer LM, Gottlieb M, A Deadly Infodemic: Social Media and the Power of COVID-19 Misinformation J Med Internet Res 2022;24(2):e35552 doi: 10.2196/35552 ^ a b Nguyen, An; Catalan-Matamoros, Daniel (June 25, 2020).

"Digital Mis/Disinformation and Public Engagement with Health and Science Controversies: Fresh Perspectives from Covid-19" .

Media and Communication .

8 (2): 323– 328.

doi : 10.17645/mac.v8i2.3352 .

hdl : 10016/30664 .

S2CID 222228241 .

v t e Communication studies History Outline Topics and terminology Biocommunication Broadcasting Communication Computer-mediated communication Conversation History of communication Information Intercultural Interpersonal Intrapersonal Journalism Literacy Reading Writing Mass media Meaning Media Media ecology Meta-communication Models of communication New media Nonverbal communication Nonviolent Communication Propaganda Public relations Speech Symbol list Telecommunications Text and conversation theory Subfields Closed-loop Communication design Communication theory Communicology Crisis Climate Cross-cultural Developmental Discourse analysis Environmental Global Health International Mass Media studies Mediated cross-border Organizational Political Risk Science Technical Visual Scholars Adorno Barthes Bateson Benjamin Burke Castells Chomsky Craig Ellul Fisher Flusser Gasset Gerbner Goffman Habermas Horkheimer Huxley Innis Jakobson Janis Johnson Kincaid Lippman Luhmann Marcuse McLuhan Mead Morgan Ong Packard Peirce Postman Quebral Richards Rogers Schramm Shannon Tankard Tannen Wertheimer Category v t e Computer-mediated communication Online chat Online discussion Communication software Collaborative software Social network service Virtual learning environment Asynchronous conferencing Email Electronic mailing list FidoNet Usenet Internet forum Textboard Imageboard Bulletin board system Online guestbook Synchronous conferencing Data conferencing Instant messaging Internet Relay Chat LAN messenger Talker Videoconferencing Voice over IP Voice chat in online gaming Web chat Web conferencing Publishing Blog Microblogging Wiki v t e Digital humanities Computational archaeology Computational philosophy Computational theory of mind Computers and writing Cultural analytics Cybertext Digital classics Digital history Digital library Digital Medievalist Digital ontology Digital physics Digital religion Digital rhetoric Digital scholarship Digital theology Digitization E-research Electronic literature Humanistic informatics New media Philosophy of computer science Semantic Web Systems theory Text Encoding Initiative Transliteracy Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Digital_rhetoric&oldid=1298689413 " Categories : Communication studies Digital humanities Internet culture Rhetoric Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from May 2021 CS1 Spanish-language sources (es) CS1 Polish-language sources (pl) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Wikipedia articles that are too technical from April 2022 All articles that are too technical Use mdy dates from March 2024 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from March 2023 This page was last edited on 4 July 2025, at 01:47 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Digital rhetoric 5 languages Add topic

