Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Description 2 See also 3 References 4 Further reading 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Square foot gardening 10 languages العربية Беларуская Català Español فارسی Français Nederlands Polski Русский Simple English Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Method of divided garden beds This article needs additional citations for verification .

Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page . Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "square foot gardening" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( December 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Square foot garden in raised bed Square foot gardening is the practice of dividing the growing area into small square sections, each of for example of 30 cm × 30 cm (1 ft × 1 ft). The aim is to assist the planning and creating of a small but intensively planted vegetable garden . It results in a simple and orderly gardening system, from which it draws much of its appeal.

Mel Bartholomew coined the term "square foot gardening" in his 1981 book of the same name.

Description [ edit ] Diagram of a 4'x4' layout showing various planting densities per square foot Strings are just a guide for plant spacing Wood dividers The phrase "square foot gardening" was popularized by Mel Bartholomew in a 1981 Rodale, Inc.

book [ 1 ] and subsequent PBS television series.

[ 2 ] Bartholomew, a retired engineer, devised the system.

The square foot gardening method recommends using an open-bottom raised bed, 4 by 4 feet (1.2 m × 1.2 m) square. The square beds are then divided into a grid of sixteen one-foot squares. Each square is planted with a different crop, and based on the plant's mature size either 1, 4, 9 or 16 plants are placed per square. Although beds can be longer than four feet, it is recommended for the width of the bed to be no more than four feet because an adult arm can usually reach 2 feet—the distance from the edge to the center of the bed.

Once a "square foot" is harvested, a different crop can be planted. To encourage a variety of different crops in succession , and to discourage pests, each square is used for a different kind of plant ( crop rotation ) within the growing season. The number of plants per square depends on an individual plant's size. For example, a single tomato plant takes a full square, as might large herbs such as oregano or basil , while lettuce plants would be planted 4 per square, and up to 16 per square of plants such as radish or carrots . Tall-growing crops are planted or trellised on the north side of the bed (in the Northern Hemisphere) to avoid shading shorter plants.

One advantage of densely planted crops is that they can form a living mulch and can also prevent weeds from establishing or even germinating. A variety of crops in a small space also prevents plant diseases from spreading easily.

[ 3 ] Since the beds are typically small, making covers or cages to protect plants from pests, cold, wind or too much sun is more practical than with larger gardens. To extend the growing season of a square foot garden, a cold frame may be built around it, and by facing the frame towards the equator, the square foot garden captures more light and heat during colder months of the year.

No specific soil is required although it is recommended to add compost to garden soil. In 2006, Bartholemew began advocating the use of "Mel's Mix", which he described as 1/3 peat moss or coconut coir , 1/3 vermiculite , and 1/3 compost which he claimed yields good results even at only 6 inches (15 cm) depth.

See also [ edit ] Companion planting French intensive gardening Organic gardening Raised bed gardening References [ edit ] ^ Bartholomew, Mel (1981).

Square Foot Gardening . Rodale.

ISBN 9780878573417 .

^ "History" .

Square Foot Gardening Foundation . Retrieved 15 February 2021 .

^ Pongsiri, Montira J.; Roman, Joe ; Ezenwa, Vanessa O.; Goldberg, Tony L.; Koren, Hillel S.; Newbold, Stephen C.; Ostfeld, Richard S.; Pattanayak, Subhrendu K.; Salkeld, Daniel J. (2009).

"Biodiversity loss affects global disease ecology" (PDF) .

BioScience .

59 (11): 945– 954.

doi : 10.1525/bio.2009.59.11.6 .

Further reading [ edit ] Bartholomew, Mel (2013).

All New Square Foot Gardening (2nd ed.). Cool Springs Press.

ISBN 978-1591865483 .

OL 27153546M .

Bird, Christopher (2001).

Cubed Foot Gardening: Growing Vegetables in Raised, Intensive Beds . Lyons Press.

ISBN 9781585743124 .

OL 8818549M .

"Square Foot Gardening Planting Guide for Beginners" .

Wilson Garden Co., Ltd .

"How To Build A Square Foot Garden! A Step By Step Guide" .

myhomemyglobe . 16 October 2019.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Square foot gardening .

Square Foot Gardening Foundation v t e Horticulture and gardening Gardening Allotment Arboretum Butterfly Climate-friendly gardening Community Forest Foodscaping French intensive Garden Garden design computer-aided Groundskeeping Garden tool Green wall Guerrilla Historic conservation History Native Parterre Proplifting Raised bed Square foot Sustainable Xeriscaping Types of gardens Alpine Ancient Egypt Australian Back Baroque Biblical Bog Botanical Bottle Butterfly Byzantine Cactus Colonial Color Communal Garden square Community Container Cottage Dutch East Asian Chinese Suzhou Cantonese Japanese Roji Zen Korean Vietnamese English Sharawadgi Fernery Floating Flower Formal French formal landscape Renaissance Front German Greek Greenhouse Hanging Islamic Italian Renaissance Keyhole Kitchen Knot Market Mary Medieval Monastic Mughal Orchard Indonesian home garden Persian Bāgh Charbagh Paradise Physic Pleasure Prairie Pollinator Rain Rock Roman Roof Rose Sacred School Scottish Sculpture Sensory Shade Shakespeare Shrubbery Spanish Tea Therapeutic Trial Tropical Victory Walled Water Wildlife Winter Zoological Horticulture Agriculture Permaculture stock-free sustainable urban Arboriculture Bonsai Saikei Botany Companion planting Crop most valuable Cutting Flora Floriculture Canada Taiwan Hügelkultur Fruticulture Genetically modified tree Hydroculture Indigenous Intercropping Landscape architecture Olericulture Plant breeding cuttings free-flowering propagation drought tolerance hardiness Pomology Postharvest physiology Roguing Tropical Urban agriculture horticulture forestry reforestation Viticulture Monoculture Organic Biodynamic agriculture Grafting List of organic gardening and farming topics Vegan organic agriculture Plant protection Fungicide Herbicide Index of pesticide articles List of fungicides List of insecticides Pesticide Plant disease forecasting Pruning Weed control Aquamog weed remover Related articles Community orchard Features Floral design Floristry Ikebana Groundskeeping Garden centre Garden tourism List of gardens Lists of plants Perennial Plant collecting Turf management Gardening portal Category Commons WikiProject Portals : Gardening Agriculture and Agronomy Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Square_foot_gardening&oldid=1291688285 " Categories : Books about gardening Gardening television Organic gardening Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from December 2023 Articles needing additional references from December 2023 All articles needing additional references Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 22 May 2025, at 20:02 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Square foot gardening 10 languages Add topic

