Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Origin 2 Properties and shape 3 Gallery 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Tepal 26 languages Català Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego Ido Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Latina Lombard Magyar മലയാളം Nederlands 日本語 Norsk nynorsk Português Suomi Türkçe Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia One of the outer parts of a flower Diagram showing the parts of a mature flower. In this example the perianth is separated into a calyx (sepals) and corolla (petals) A tepal is one of the outer parts of a flower (collectively the perianth ). The term is used when these parts cannot easily be classified as either sepals or petals . This may be because the parts of the perianth are undifferentiated (i.e. of very similar appearance), as in Magnolia , or because, although it is possible to distinguish an outer whorl of sepals from an inner whorl of petals, the sepals and petals have similar appearance (as in Lilium ). The term was proposed by Augustin Pyramus de Candolle in 1827 and was constructed by analogy with the terms "petal" and "sepal".

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] (De Candolle used the term perigonium or perigone for the tepals collectively; the term is since used as a synonym for perianth .) [ 3 ] Origin [ edit ] A Lilium flower showing the six tepals : the outer three are sepals and the inner three are petals.

Undifferentiated tepals are believed to be the ancestral condition in flowering plants . For example, Amborella , which is thought to have separated earliest in the evolution of flowering plants, [ 4 ] has flowers with undifferentiated tepals. Distinct petals and sepals would therefore have arisen by differentiation, probably in response to animal pollination . In typical modern flowers, the outer or enclosing whorl of organs forms sepals, and is specialised for protection of the flower bud as it develops, while the inner whorl forms petals, which attract pollinators .

Tepals formed by similar sepals and petals are common in monocotyledons , particularly the " lilioid monocots ". In tulips , for example, the first and second whorls both contain structures that look like petals. These are fused at the base to form one large, showy, six-parted structure (the perianth). In lilies the organs in the first whorl are separate from the second, but all look similar, thus all the showy parts are often called tepals. Where sepals and petals can in principle be distinguished, usage of the term "tepal" is not always consistent – some authors will refer to "sepals and petals" where others use "tepals" in the same context.

In some plants the flowers have no petals, and all the tepals are sepals modified to look like petals. These organs are described as petaloid , for example, the sepals of hellebores . When the undifferentiated tepals resemble petals, they are also referred to as "petaloid", as in petaloid monocots , orders of monocots with brightly coloured tepals. Since they include Liliales , an alternative name is lilioid monocots.

Properties and shape [ edit ] Terms used in the description of tepals include pubescent (with dense fine, short, soft hairs, downy), puberulent (minutely pubescent, hairs barely visible to the naked eye) and puberulous (dense covering of very short soft hairs). Tepal shape is described in similar terms to those used for leaves (see Glossary of leaf morphology ).

Gallery [ edit ] Flowers with tepals Flowers of Magnolia × alba showing tepals in various stages of development Tepals of Magnolia × wieseneri A hellebore flower showing the petaloid sepals A Sternbergia lutea flower showing the two whorls of tepals A tulip flower showing the petal-like tepals Tepals of Blandfordia nobilis , another lilioid monocot 6 tepals (3 inner, 3 outer) of the rush Juncus squarrosus See also [ edit ] Glossary of plant morphology Plant reproductive morphology References [ edit ] ^ Augustin Pyramus de Candolle (1827).

Organographie végétale, ou Description raisonnée des organes des plantes; pour servir de suite et de développement a la théorie élémentaire de la botanique, et d'introduction a la physiologie végétale et a la physiologie végétale et a la description des familles . Paris: Deterville. p. 503.

^ Augustin Pyramus de Candolle (1841).

Vegetable organography; or, An analytical description of the organs of plants . Vol. 2. Translated by Boughton Kingdon. London: Houlston & Stoneman. p. 90.

^ Stearn, William Thomas (2004).

Botanical Latin (p/b ed.). David & Charles/Timber Press.

ISBN 978-0-7153-1643-6 .

p. 39.

^ Ronse De Craene, L. P. (2007).

"Are Petals Sterile Stamens or Bracts? The Origin and Evolution of Petals in the Core Eudicots" .

Annals of Botany .

100 (3): 621– 630.

doi : 10.1093/aob/mcm076 .

PMC 2533615 .

PMID 17513305 .

Botany: A Brief Introduction To Plant Biology - 5th ed. Thomas L. Rost;  T. Elliot Weier - Wiley & Sons 1979 ISBN 0-471-02114-8 .

Plant Systematics - Jones; Samuel - McGraw-Hill 1979 ISBN 0-07-032795-5 .

v t e Botany History Outline Subdisciplines Archaeobotany Astrobotany Bryology Dendrology Ethnobotany Paleobotany Phycology Phytochemistry Phytogeography Geobotany Plant anatomy Plant ecology Plant intelligence Plant pathology Plant physiology Plant groups Algae Archaeplastida Bryophyte Non-vascular plants Vascular plants Fern Lycophyte Spermatophytes Gymnosperm Angiosperm Plant anatomy Plant morphology ( glossary ) Plant cells Cell wall Phragmoplast Plastid Plasmodesma Vacuole Tissues Cork Ground tissue Mesophyll Meristem Storage organs Vascular tissue Vascular bundle Wood Vegetative Bulb Root Rhizoid Rhizome Shoot Bud Leaf Cataphyll Petiole Sessility Stem Reproductive (incl. Flower) Archegonium Antheridium Androecium Pollen Stamen Anther Filament Staminode Tapetum Flower Aestivation Flower development Floral diagram Floral formula Floral symmetry Whorl Fruit Anatomy Berry Capsule Nut Pyrena Seed Dispersal Endosperm Gametophyte Gynandrium Gynoecium Carpel Ovary Locule Ovule Stigma Style Hypanthium (Floral cup) Inflorescence Bract Pedicellate Raceme Umbel Perianth Tepal Petal Sepal Plant embryo Receptacle Sporophyll Sporophyte Surface structures Cuticle Epicuticular wax Epidermis Nectar Stoma Thorns, spines, and prickles Trichome Plant physiology Materials Aleurone Apical dominance Bulk flow Cellulose Nutrition Photosynthesis Chlorophyll Phytomelanin Plant hormones Respiration Gas Exchange Cellular respiration Sap Starch Sugar Transpiration Turgor pressure Plant growth and habit Habit Cushion plants Rosettes Shrubs Prostrate shrubs Subshrubs Succulent plants Trees Vines Lianas Herbaceous plants Secondary growth Woody plants Reproduction Evolution Ecology Alternation of generations Double fertilization Evolutionary development Evolutionary history timeline Flora Germination Pollination Artificial Pollinators Pollen tube Self Sporangium Microsporangia Microspore Megasporangium Megaspore Spore Plant taxonomy Biological classification Botanical nomenclature Botanical name Correct name Author citation International Code of Nomenclature (ICN) ICN for Cultivated Plants (ICNCP) Cultivated plant taxonomy Citrus taxonomy Cultigen Cultivar Group Grex History of plant systematics Herbarium International Association for Plant Taxonomy (IAPT) Plant taxonomy systems Taxonomic rank Practice Agronomy Floriculture Forestry Horticulture Phytochemical Lists Related Botanical terms Botanists by author abbreviation Botanical expeditions Individual trees Oldest trees Superlative trees Tallest trees Plants Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Tepal&oldid=1297005943 " Category : Plant morphology Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 23 June 2025, at 16:38 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Tepal 26 languages Add topic

