Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 General usage 2 Patient education by type Toggle Patient education by type subsection 2.1 On location 2.2 Paper based 2.3 Web based 3 Advantages 4 References Toggle the table of contents Online patient education 1 language Ikinyarwanda Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Online patient education , also known as online patient engagement , is a method of providing medical information and education to patients using learning management systems delivered through the Internet.

[ 1 ] It is a type of computer-based instruction and includes web seminars, downloadable materials, interactive learning courses, and audio/visual presentations. Generally, online patient education is supplemented with in-person consultations tailored to each individual.

General usage [ edit ] Health professionals use online patient education to prepare patients for medical procedures, administer intake and informed consent paperwork, educate patients about health conditions, provide information about preventive care, encourage healthy behavior and lifestyle changes, etc. Health insurance companies use online patient education to inform patients about coverage policies.

[ citation needed ] Online patient education is gaining popularity as home Internet access becomes more common and medical practices increasingly utilize digital technologies.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Patients either view online patient education programs and materials in a medical office or from their homes or other remote locations with Internet access. Content may include interactive features such as quizzes, live question and answer sessions (in moderated web seminars), and the ability to complete and submit forms.

Patient education by type [ edit ] This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Online patient education" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( September 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) On location [ edit ] Any education delivered verbally by a healthcare provider to a single patient or group of patients can be considered as On Location patient education. Although this is still the most commonly used patient education method it is time-consuming, can have consistency problems, and relies heavily on the individual patient ability to absorb, understand, and retain the verbal information.

Paper based [ edit ] The second most common method. Any information brochure at a healthcare provider office falls under this category. The benefits of printed materials is that patients can refer back to the information Web based [ edit ] Patient education that is made available by a healthcare provider via his/her website, specific portal, or EHR. Web based education can be provided in an Asynchronous and Synchronous styles.

Advantages [ edit ] Educating patients with online technology can be advantageous [ 4 ] for both medical practices and patients because it gives health care providers the opportunity to create comprehensive educational materials that are consistently presented, rather than relying on face-to-face meetings in which information is presented by a staff member.

[ 5 ] Patients need not possess advanced computer/web skills to use this method of learning. A survey of 3200 patients revealed that even patients who are not computer literate are satisfied with online patient education as means of learning about medical care.

[ citation needed ] References [ edit ] ^ Evaluation of bariatric Centers of Excellence Web sites for functionality and efficacy. Surg Obes Relat Dis. 2008 Sep-Oct;4(5):571-4 ^ Issues in patient education Journal of Midwifery & Women's Health, Volume 49, Issue 3, Pages 203-209 ^ Computers in Patient Education. Comput Inform Nurs 21(2):88-96, 2003 ^ Online patient education: A superior alternative to in-person information seminars Surgery for Obesity and Related Diseases, Volume 5, Issue 3, Pages S44-S45 ^ Patients Postoperatively Forget Aspects of Preoperative Patient Education. Obesity Surgery, 15, 2005 1066-1069 v t e Telemedicine and telehealth Background concepts Health informatics In absentia health care Telecommunication Medical record Admission note Blue Button De-identification Electronic health record Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act Personal health record Patient participation Decision aids Doctor–patient relationship E-patient Health 2.0 Health education Knowledge translation mHealth Participative decision-making in organizations Patient Activation Measure Shared decision-making Health information on the Internet Health information on Wikipedia Online patient education PubMed PubMed Central Telemedicine subspecialties eHealth Remote surgery Remote therapy Remote patient monitoring Tele-audiology Tele-epidemiology Teledentistry Teledermatology Telemental health Telenursing Teleophthalmology Telepathology Telepharmacy Telepsychiatry Teleradiology Telerehabilitation Roles to play Open-source healthcare software Patient opinion leader Research participant Virtual patient Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Online_patient_education&oldid=1184194567 " Categories : Health education Telehealth Electronic health records Hidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2023 Articles needing additional references from September 2022 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 8 November 2023, at 22:43 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Online patient education 1 language Add topic

