Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Characteristics Toggle Characteristics subsection 1.1 Reference levels 1.2 Range variation: springs and neaps 2 Tidal constituents Toggle Tidal constituents subsection 2.1 Principal lunar semi-diurnal constituent 2.2 Lunar distance 2.3 Other constituents 2.4 Phase and amplitude 3 History Toggle History subsection 3.1 History of tidal theory 3.2 History of tidal observation 4 Physics Toggle Physics subsection 4.1 Basic theory of two tides 4.2 Forces 4.3 Equilibrium 4.4 Laplace's tidal equations 4.5 Amplitude and cycle time 4.6 Dissipation 4.7 Bathymetry 5 Observation and prediction Toggle Observation and prediction subsection 5.1 Timing 5.2 Analysis 5.3 Example calculation 5.4 Current 5.5 Power generation 6 Navigation 7 Biological aspects Toggle Biological aspects subsection 7.1 Intertidal ecology 7.2 Biological rhythms 8 Other tides Toggle Other tides subsection 8.1 Lake tides 8.2 Atmospheric tides 8.3 Earth tides 8.4 Galactic tides 9 Misnomers 10 See also 11 Notes 12 References 13 Further reading 14 External links Toggle the table of contents Tide 101 languages Afrikaans العربية Aragonés ܐܪܡܝܐ Asturianu Azərbaycanca বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Беларуская भोजपुरी Bikol Central Български བོད་ཡིག Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Чӑвашла Čeština Cymraeg Dansk الدارجة Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge Gàidhlig Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Íslenska Italiano עברית ಕನ್ನಡ ქართული Қазақша Kernowek Kiswahili Kreyòl ayisyen Kurdî Кыргызча ລາວ Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Limburgs Magyar Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം मराठी Bahasa Melayu 閩東語 / Mìng-dĕ̤ng-ngṳ̄ Nederlands 日本語 Nordfriisk Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی ភាសាខ្មែរ Plattdüütsch Polski Português Română Русский Sakizaya Scots Shqip Sicilianu සිංහල Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 文言 Winaray 吴语 粵語 中文 Bajau Sama Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Rise and fall of the sea level under astronomical gravitational influences For other uses, see Tide (disambiguation) .

"Ebbing" and "Ebb tide" redirect here. For other uses, see Ebbing (disambiguation) and Ebb tide (disambiguation) .

Simplified schematic of only the lunar portion of Earth's tides, showing (exaggerated) high tides at the sublunar point and its antipode for the hypothetical case of an ocean of constant depth without land, and on the assumption that Earth is not rotating; otherwise there is a lag angle. Solar tides not shown.

Earth's rotation drags the position of the tidal bulge ahead of the position directly under the Moon showing the lag angle.

In Maine (U.S.), low tide occurs roughly at moonrise and high tide with a high Moon, corresponding to the simple gravity model of two tidal bulges; at most places however, the Moon and tides have a phase shift .

Tide coming in, video stops about 1 + 1 ⁄ 2 hours before high tide Tide coming in Tides are the rise and fall of sea levels caused by the combined effects of the gravitational forces exerted by the Moon (and to a much lesser extent, the Sun ) and are also caused by the Earth and Moon orbiting one another.

Tide tables can be used for any given locale to find the predicted times and amplitude (or " tidal range "). 
The predictions are influenced by many factors including the alignment of the Sun and Moon, the phase and amplitude of the tide (pattern of tides in the deep ocean), the amphidromic systems of the oceans, and the shape of the coastline and near-shore bathymetry (see Timing ). They are however only predictions, and the actual time and height of the tide is affected by wind and atmospheric pressure . Many shorelines experience semi-diurnal tides—two nearly equal high and low tides each day. Other locations have a diurnal tide—one high and low tide each day. A "mixed tide"—two uneven magnitude tides a day—is a third regular category.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ a ] Tides vary on timescales ranging from hours to years due to a number of factors, which determine the lunitidal interval . To make accurate records, tide gauges at fixed stations measure water level over time. Gauges ignore variations caused by waves with periods shorter than minutes. These data are compared to the reference (or datum) level usually called mean sea level .

[ 3 ] While tides are usually the largest source of short-term sea-level fluctuations, sea levels are also subject to change from thermal expansion , wind, and barometric pressure changes, resulting in storm surges , especially in shallow seas and near coasts.

Tidal phenomena are not limited to the oceans, but can occur in other systems whenever a gravitational field that varies in time and space is present. For example, the shape of the solid part of the Earth is affected slightly by Earth tide , though this is not as easily seen as the water tidal movements.

Characteristics Ocean tides are cyclic, rising and falling approximately twice a day. 
Four stages in the tidal cycle are named: [ 4 ] : 235 The water stops falling, reaching a local minimum called low tide .

Sea level rises over several hours, covering the intertidal zone ; flooding .

The water stops rising, reaching a local maximum called high tide .

Sea level falls over several hours, revealing the intertidal zone; ebbing .

Oscillating currents produced by tides are known as tidal streams or tidal currents . The moment that the tidal current ceases is called slack water or slack tide . The tide then reverses direction and is said to be turning. Slack water usually occurs near high water and low water, but there are locations where the moments of slack tide differ significantly from those of high and low water.

[ 5 ] Tides are commonly semi-diurnal (two high waters and two low waters each day), or diurnal (one tidal cycle per day). The two high waters on a given day are typically not the same height (the daily inequality); these are the higher high water and the lower high water in tide tables . Similarly, the two low waters each day are the higher low water and the lower low water . The daily inequality is not consistent and is generally small when the Moon is over the Equator .

[ b ] Reference levels See also: Chart datum § Definitions Illustration by the course of half a month The following reference tide levels can be defined, from the highest level to the lowest: Highest astronomical tide (HAT) – The highest tide which can be predicted to occur. Note that meteorological conditions may add extra height to the HAT.

Mean high water springs (MHWS) – The average of the two high tides on the days of spring tides.

Mean high water neaps (MHWN) – The average of the two high tides on the days of neap tides.

Mean sea level (MSL) – This is the average sea level. The MSL is constant for any location over a long period.

Mean low water neaps (MLWN) – The average of the two low tides on the days of neap tides.

Mean low water springs (MLWS) – The average of the two low tides on the days of spring tides.

Lowest astronomical tide (LAT) – The lowest tide which can be predicted to occur.

[ 7 ] Range variation: springs and neaps Further information: Tidal range The types of tides The semi-diurnal range (the difference in height between high and low waters over about half a day) varies in a two-week cycle. Approximately twice a month, around new moon and full moon when the Sun, Moon, and Earth form a line (a configuration known as a syzygy [ 8 ] ), the tidal force due to the Sun reinforces that due to the Moon. The tide's range is then at its maximum; this is called the spring tide . It is not named after the season , but, like that word, derives from the meaning "jump, burst forth, rise", as in a natural spring . 
Spring tides are sometimes referred to as syzygy tides .

[ 9 ] When the Moon is at first quarter or third quarter, the Sun and Moon are separated by 90° when viewed from the Earth (in quadrature ), and the solar tidal force partially cancels the Moon's tidal force. At these points in the lunar cycle, the tide's range is at its minimum; this is called the neap tide , or neaps . "Neap" is an Anglo-Saxon word meaning "without the power", as in forðganges nip (forth-going without-the-power).

[ 10 ] Neap tides are sometimes referred to as quadrature tides .

[ 9 ] Spring tides result in high waters that are higher than average, low waters that are lower than average, " slack water " time that is shorter than average, and stronger tidal currents than average. Neaps result in less extreme tidal conditions. There is about a seven-day interval between springs and neaps.

Spring tide: Sun and Moon on the same side (0°) Neap tide: Sun and Moon at 90° Spring tide: Sun and Moon at opposite sides (180°) Neap tide: Sun and Moon at 270° Spring tide: Sun and Moon at the same side (cycle restarts) Tidal constituents Further information: Theory of tides § Tidal constituents , and Long-period tides See also: Earth tide § Tidal constituents Tidal constituents are the net result of multiple influences impacting tidal changes over certain periods of time. Primary constituents include the Earth's rotation, the position of the Moon and Sun relative to the Earth, the Moon's altitude (elevation) above the Earth's Equator, and bathymetry . Variations with periods of less than half a day are called harmonic constituents . Conversely, cycles of days, months, or years are referred to as long period constituents.

Tidal forces affect the entire earth , but the movement of solid Earth occurs by mere centimeters. In contrast, the atmosphere is much more fluid and compressible so its surface moves by kilometers, in the sense of the contour level of a particular low pressure in the outer atmosphere.

Principal lunar semi-diurnal constituent Global surface elevation of M2 ocean tide (NASA) [ 11 ] In most locations, the largest constituent is the principal lunar semi-diurnal , also known as the M2 tidal constituent or M 2 tidal constituent . Its period is about 12 hours and 25.2 minutes, exactly half a tidal lunar day , which is the average time separating one lunar zenith from the next, and thus is the time required for the Earth to rotate once relative to the Moon. Simple tide clocks track this constituent. The lunar day is longer than the Earth day because the Moon orbits in the same direction the Earth spins.

The Moon orbits the Earth in the same direction as the Earth rotates on its axis, so it takes slightly more than a day—about 24 hours and 50 minutes—for the Moon to return to the same location in the sky. During this time, it has passed overhead ( culmination ) once and underfoot once (at an hour angle of 00:00 and 12:00 respectively), so in many places the period of strongest tidal forcing is the above-mentioned, about 12 hours and 25 minutes. The moment of highest tide is not necessarily when the Moon is nearest to zenith or nadir , but the period of the forcing still determines the time between high tides.

Because the gravitational field created by the Moon weakens with distance from the Moon, it exerts a slightly stronger than average force on the side of the Earth facing the Moon, and a slightly weaker force on the opposite side. The Moon thus tends to "stretch" the Earth slightly along the line connecting the two bodies. The solid Earth deforms a bit, but ocean water, being fluid, is free to move much more in response to the tidal force, particularly horizontally (see equilibrium tide ).

As the Earth rotates, the magnitude and direction of the tidal force at any particular point on the Earth's surface change constantly; although the ocean never reaches equilibrium—there is never time for the fluid to "catch up" to the state it would eventually reach if the tidal force were constant—the changing tidal force nonetheless causes rhythmic changes in sea surface height.

Types of tides (See Timing (below) for coastal map) When there are two high tides each day with different heights (and two low tides also of different heights), the pattern is called a mixed semi-diurnal tide .

[ 12 ] Lunar distance Low tide at Bangchuidao scenic area, Dalian , Liaoning Province , China Low tide at Ocean Beach in San Francisco , California , U.S.

Low tide at Bar Harbor , Maine , U.S. (2014) The changing distance separating the Moon and Earth also affects tide heights. When the Moon is closest, at perigee , the range increases, and when it is at apogee , the range shrinks. Six or eight times a year perigee coincides with either a new or full moon causing perigean spring tides with the largest tidal range . The difference between the height of a tide at perigean spring tide and the spring tide when the moon is at apogee depends on location but can be as large as a foot higher.

[ 13 ] Other constituents These include solar gravitational effects, the obliquity (tilt) of the Earth's Equator and rotational axis, the inclination of the plane of the lunar orbit and the elliptical shape of the Earth's orbit of the Sun.

A compound tide (or overtide) results from the shallow-water interaction of its two parent waves.

[ 14 ] Phase and amplitude M 2 tidal constituent. Red is most extreme (highest highs, lowest lows), with blues being least extreme. White cotidal lines converge in blue areas indicating little or no tide. Around these convergences, called amphidromic points , curved arrows show the direction of the tides, each indicating a synchronized 6-hour period. Tidal ranges generally increase with increasing distance from amphidromic points. Tide waves move around these points, generally counterclockwise in the N. Hemisphere and clockwise in the S. Hemisphere [ 15 ] [ 16 ] Because the M 2 tidal constituent dominates in most locations, the stage or phase of a tide, denoted by the time in hours after high water, is a useful concept. Tidal stage is also measured in degrees, with 360° per tidal cycle. Lines of constant tidal phase are called cotidal lines , which are analogous to contour lines of constant altitude on topographical maps , and when plotted form a cotidal map or cotidal chart .

[ 17 ] High water is reached simultaneously along the cotidal lines extending from the coast out into the ocean, and cotidal lines (and hence tidal phases) advance along the coast. Semi-diurnal and long phase constituents are measured from high water, diurnal from maximum flood tide. This and the discussion that follows is precisely true only for a single tidal constituent.

For an ocean in the shape of a circular basin enclosed by a coastline, the cotidal lines point radially inward and must eventually meet at a common point, the amphidromic point . The amphidromic point is at once cotidal with high and low waters, which is satisfied by zero tidal motion. (The rare exception occurs when the tide encircles an island, as it does around New Zealand, Iceland and Madagascar .) Tidal motion generally lessens moving away from continental coasts, so that crossing the cotidal lines are contours of constant amplitude (half the distance between high and low water) which decrease to zero at the amphidromic point. For a semi-diurnal tide the amphidromic point can be thought of roughly like the center of a clock face, with the hour hand pointing in the direction of the high water cotidal line, which is directly opposite the low water cotidal line. High water rotates about the amphidromic point once every 12 hours in the direction of rising cotidal lines, and away from ebbing cotidal lines. This rotation, caused by the Coriolis effect , is generally clockwise in the southern hemisphere and counterclockwise in the northern hemisphere. The difference of cotidal phase from the phase of a reference tide is the epoch . The reference tide is the hypothetical constituent "equilibrium tide" on a landless Earth measured at 0° longitude, the Greenwich meridian.

[ 18 ] In the North Atlantic, because the cotidal lines circulate counterclockwise around the amphidromic point, the high tide passes New York Harbor approximately an hour ahead of Norfolk Harbor. South of Cape Hatteras the tidal forces are more complex, and cannot be predicted reliably based on the North Atlantic cotidal lines.

History History of tidal theory Further information: Theory of tides § History Investigation into tidal physics was important in the early development of celestial mechanics , with the existence of two daily tides being explained by the Moon's gravity. Later the daily tides were explained more precisely by the interaction of the Moon's and the Sun's gravity.

Seleucus of Seleucia theorized around 150 BC that tides were caused by the Moon. The influence of the Moon on bodies of water was also mentioned in Ptolemy 's Tetrabiblos .

[ c ] In De temporum ratione ( The Reckoning of Time ) of 725 Bede linked semidurnal tides and the phenomenon of varying tidal heights to the Moon and its phases. Bede starts by noting that the tides rise and fall 4/5 of an hour later each day, just as the Moon rises and sets 4/5 of an hour later.

[ 20 ] He goes on to emphasise that in two lunar months (59 days) the Moon circles the Earth 57 times and there are 114 tides.

[ 21 ] Bede then observes that the height of tides varies over the month. Increasing tides are called malinae and decreasing tides ledones and that the month is divided into four parts of seven or eight days with alternating malinae and ledones .

[ 22 ] In the same passage he also notes the effect of winds to hold back tides.

[ 22 ] Bede also records that the time of tides varies from place to place. To the north of Bede's location ( Monkwearmouth ) the tides are earlier, to the south later.

[ 23 ] He explains that the tide "deserts these shores in order to be able all the more to be able to flood other [shores] when it arrives there" noting that "the Moon which signals the rise of tide here, signals its retreat in other regions far from this quarter of the heavens".

[ 23 ] Later medieval understanding of the tides was primarily based on works of Muslim astronomers , which became available through Latin translation starting from the 12th century.

[ 24 ] Abu Ma'shar al-Balkhi (d. circa 886), in his Introductorium in astronomiam , taught that ebb and flood tides were caused by the Moon.

[ 24 ] Abu Ma'shar discussed the effects of wind and Moon's phases relative to the Sun on the tides.

[ 24 ] In the 12th century, al-Bitruji (d. circa 1204) contributed the notion that the tides were caused by the general circulation of the heavens.

[ 24 ] Simon Stevin , in his 1608 De spiegheling der Ebbenvloet ( The theory of ebb and flood ), dismissed a large number of misconceptions that still existed about ebb and flood. Stevin pleaded for the idea that the attraction of the Moon was responsible for the tides and spoke in clear terms about ebb, flood, spring tide and neap tide , stressing that further research needed to be made.

[ 25 ] [ 26 ] In 1609 Johannes Kepler also correctly suggested that the gravitation of the Moon caused the tides, [ d ] which he based upon ancient observations and correlations.

Galileo Galilei in his 1632 Dialogue Concerning the Two Chief World Systems , whose working title was Dialogue on the Tides , gave an explanation of the tides. The resulting theory, however, was incorrect as he attributed the tides to the sloshing of water caused by the Earth's movement around the Sun. He hoped to provide mechanical proof of the Earth's movement. The value of his tidal theory is disputed. Galileo rejected Kepler's explanation of the tides.

Isaac Newton (1642–1727) was the first person to explain tides as the product of the gravitational attraction of astronomical masses. His explanation of the tides (and many other phenomena) was published in the Principia (1687) [ 28 ] [ 29 ] and used his theory of universal gravitation to explain the lunar and solar attractions as the origin of the tide-generating forces.

[ e ] Newton and others before Pierre-Simon Laplace worked the problem from the perspective of a static system (equilibrium theory), that provided an approximation that described the tides that would occur in a non-inertial ocean evenly covering the whole Earth.

[ 28 ] The tide-generating force (or its corresponding potential ) is still relevant to tidal theory, but as an intermediate quantity (forcing function) rather than as a final result; theory must also consider the Earth's accumulated dynamic tidal response to the applied forces, which response is influenced by ocean depth, the Earth's rotation, and other factors.

[ 30 ] In 1740, the Académie Royale des Sciences in Paris offered a prize for the best theoretical essay on tides.

Daniel Bernoulli , Leonhard Euler , Colin Maclaurin and Antoine Cavalleri shared the prize.

[ 31 ] Maclaurin used Newton's theory to show that a smooth sphere covered by a sufficiently deep ocean under the tidal force of a single deforming body is a prolate spheroid (essentially a three-dimensional oval) with major axis directed toward the deforming body. Maclaurin was the first to write about the Earth's rotational effects on motion. Euler realized that the tidal force's horizontal component (more than the vertical) drives the tide. In 1744 Jean le Rond d'Alembert studied tidal equations for the atmosphere which did not include rotation.

In 1770 James Cook 's barque HMS Endeavour grounded on the Great Barrier Reef . Attempts were made to refloat her on the following tide which failed, but the tide after that lifted her clear with ease. Whilst she was being repaired in the mouth of the Endeavour River Cook observed the tides over a period of seven weeks. At neap tides both tides in a day were similar, but at springs the tides rose 7 feet (2.1 m) in the morning but 9 feet (2.7 m) in the evening.

[ 32 ] Pierre-Simon Laplace formulated a system of partial differential equations relating the ocean's horizontal flow to its surface height, the first major dynamic theory for water tides. The Laplace tidal equations are still in use today.

William Thomson, 1st Baron Kelvin , rewrote Laplace's equations in terms of vorticity which allowed for solutions describing tidally driven coastally trapped waves, known as Kelvin waves .

[ 33 ] [ 34 ] [ 35 ] Others including Kelvin and Henri Poincaré further developed Laplace's theory. Based on these developments and the lunar theory of E W Brown describing the motions of the Moon, Arthur Thomas Doodson developed and published in 1921 [ 36 ] the first modern development of the tide-generating potential in harmonic form: Doodson distinguished 388 tidal frequencies.

[ 37 ] Some of his methods remain in use.

[ 38 ] History of tidal observation Brouscon's Almanach of 1546: Compass bearings of high waters in the Bay of Biscay (left) and the coast from Brittany to Dover (right).

Brouscon's Almanach of 1546: Tidal diagrams "according to the age of the moon".

From ancient times, tidal observation and discussion has increased in sophistication, first marking the daily recurrence, then tides' relationship to the Sun and moon.

Pytheas travelled to the British Isles about 325 BC and seems to be the first to have related spring tides to the phase of the moon.

In the 2nd century BC, the Hellenistic astronomer Seleucus of Seleucia correctly described the phenomenon of tides in order to support his heliocentric theory.

[ 39 ] He correctly theorized that tides were caused by the moon , although he believed that the interaction was mediated by the pneuma . He noted that tides varied in time and strength in different parts of the world. According to Strabo (1.1.9), Seleucus was the first to link tides to the lunar attraction, and that the height of the tides depends on the moon's position relative to the Sun.

[ 40 ] The Naturalis Historia of Pliny the Elder collates many tidal observations, e.g., the spring tides are a few days after (or before) new and full moon and are highest around the equinoxes, though Pliny noted many relationships now regarded as fanciful. In his Geography , Strabo described tides in the Persian Gulf having their greatest range when the moon was furthest from the plane of the Equator. All this despite the relatively small amplitude of Mediterranean basin tides. (The strong currents through the Euripus Strait and the Strait of Messina puzzled Aristotle .) Philostratus discussed tides in Book Five of The Life of Apollonius of Tyana . Philostratus mentions the moon, but attributes tides to "spirits". In Europe around 730 AD, the Venerable Bede described how the rising tide on one coast of the British Isles coincided with the fall on the other and described the time progression of high water along the Northumbrian coast.

The first tide table in China was recorded in 1056 AD primarily for visitors wishing to see the famous tidal bore in the Qiantang River . The first known British tide table is thought to be that of John Wallingford, who died Abbot of St. Albans in 1213, based on high water occurring 48 minutes later each day, and three hours earlier at the Thames mouth than upriver at London .

[ 41 ] In 1614 Claude d'Abbeville published the work " Histoire de la mission de pères capucins en l'Isle de Maragnan et terres circonvoisines ", where he exposed that the Tupinambá people already had an understanding of the relation between the Moon and the tides before Europe.

[ 42 ] William Thomson (Lord Kelvin) led the first systematic harmonic analysis of tidal records starting in 1867. The main result was the building of a tide-predicting machine using a system of pulleys to add together six harmonic time functions. It was "programmed" by resetting gears and chains to adjust phasing and amplitudes. Similar machines were used until the 1960s.

[ 43 ] The first known sea-level record of an entire spring–neap cycle was made in 1831 on the Navy Dock in the Thames Estuary . Many large ports had automatic tide gauge stations by 1850.

John Lubbock was one of the first to map co-tidal lines, for Great Britain, Ireland and adjacent coasts, in 1840.

[ 44 ] William Whewell expanded this work ending with a nearly global chart in 1836.

[ 45 ] In order to make these maps consistent, he hypothesized the existence of a region with no tidal rise or fall where co-tidal lines meet in the mid-ocean. The existence of such an amphidromic point , as they are now known, was confirmed in 1840 by Captain William Hewett, RN , from careful soundings in the North Sea .

[ 46 ] [ 47 ] [ 33 ] Much later, in the late 20th century, geologists noticed tidal rhythmites , which document the occurrence of ancient tides in the geological record, notably in the Carboniferous .

[ 48 ] [ 49 ] Physics Main article: Theory of tides Basic theory of two tides The ocean tide under the Moon is explained by the Moon's gravity being stronger on the ocean closest to it. The tide on the opposite side can be explained either by the centrifugal force as the Earth orbits the barycenter or by the water's inertia as the Moon's gravity is stronger on the solid Earth close to it and it is pull away from the farther water.

[ 50 ] [ 51 ] As a fluid, the ocean has a much bigger response to the combination of gravity and centrifugal forces than the solid earth.

[ 52 ] Forces Main article: Tidal force The tidal force produced by a massive object (Moon, hereafter) on a small particle located on or in an extensive body (Earth, hereafter) is the vector difference between the gravitational force exerted by the Moon on the particle, and the gravitational force that would be exerted on the particle if it were located at the Earth's center of mass.

Whereas the gravitational force subjected by a celestial body on Earth varies inversely as the square of its distance to the Earth, the maximal tidal force varies inversely as, approximately, the cube of this distance.

[ 53 ] If the tidal force caused by each body were instead equal to its full gravitational force (which is not the case due to the free fall of the whole Earth, not only the oceans, towards these bodies) a different pattern of tidal forces would be observed, e.g. with a much stronger influence from the Sun than from the Moon: The solar gravitational force on the Earth is on average 179 times stronger than the lunar, but because the Sun is on average 389 times farther from the Earth, its field gradient is weaker. The overall proportionality is tidal force ∝ ∝ M d 3 ∝ ∝ ρ ρ ( r d ) 3 , {\displaystyle {\text{tidal force}}\propto {\frac {M}{d^{3}}}\propto \rho \left({\frac {r}{d}}\right)^{3},} where M is the mass of the heavenly body, d is its distance, ρ is its average density, and r is its radius. The ratio r / d is related to the angle subtended by the object in the sky. Since the Sun and the Moon have practically the same diameter in the sky, the tidal force of the Sun is less than that of the Moon because its average density is much less, and it is only 46% as large as the lunar, [ f ] thus during a spring tide, the Moon contributes 69% while the Sun contributes 31%. More precisely, the lunar tidal acceleration (along the Moon–Earth axis, at the Earth's surface) is about 1.1 × 10 −7 g , while the solar tidal acceleration (along the Sun–Earth axis, at the Earth's surface) is about 0.52 × 10 −7 g , where g is the gravitational acceleration at the Earth's surface.

[ g ] The effects of the other planets vary as their distances from Earth vary. When Venus is closest to Earth, its effect is 0.000113 times the solar effect.

[ 54 ] At other times, Jupiter or Mars may have the most effect.

The lunar gravity residual field at the Earth's surface is known as the tide-generating force . This is the primary mechanism that drives tidal action and explains two simultaneous tidal bulges; Earth's rotation further accounts for two daily high waters at any location. The figure shows both the tidal field (thick red arrows) and the gravity field (thin blue arrows) exerted on Earth's surface and center (label O) by the Moon (label S).

The ocean's surface is approximated by a surface referred to as the geoid , which takes into consideration the gravitational force exerted by the earth as well as centrifugal force due to rotation. Now consider the effect of massive external bodies such as the Moon and Sun. These bodies have strong gravitational fields that diminish with distance and cause the ocean's surface to deviate from the geoid. They establish a new equilibrium ocean surface which bulges toward the moon on one side and away from the moon on the other side. The earth's rotation relative to this shape causes the daily tidal cycle. The ocean surface tends toward this equilibrium shape, which is constantly changing, and never quite attains it. When the ocean surface is not aligned with it, it's as though the surface is sloping, and water accelerates in the down-slope direction.

Equilibrium The equilibrium tide is the idealized tide assuming a landless Earth.

[ 55 ] It would produce a tidal bulge in the ocean, elongated towards the attracting body (Moon or Sun).
It is not caused by the vertical pull nearest or farthest from the body, which is very weak; rather, it is caused by the tangential or tractive tidal force, which is strongest at about 45 degrees from the body, resulting in a horizontal tidal current.

[ h ] [ i ] [ j ] [ 59 ] Laplace's tidal equations Ocean depths are much smaller than their horizontal extent. Thus, the response to tidal forcing can be modelled using the Laplace tidal equations which incorporate the following features: The vertical (or radial) velocity is negligible, and there is no vertical shear —this is a sheet flow.

The forcing is only horizontal ( tangential ).

The Coriolis effect appears as an inertial force (fictitious) acting laterally to the direction of flow and proportional to velocity.

The surface height's rate of change is proportional to the negative divergence of velocity multiplied by the depth. As the horizontal velocity stretches or compresses the ocean as a sheet, the volume thins or thickens, respectively.

The boundary conditions dictate no flow across the coastline and free slip at the bottom.

The Coriolis effect (inertial force) steers flows moving towards the Equator to the west and flows moving away from the Equator toward the east, allowing coastally trapped waves. Finally, a dissipation term can be added which is an analog to viscosity.

Amplitude and cycle time The theoretical amplitude of oceanic tides caused by the Moon is about 54 centimetres (21 in) at the highest point, which corresponds to the amplitude that would be reached if the ocean possessed a uniform depth, there were no landmasses, and the Earth were rotating in step with the Moon's orbit. The Sun similarly causes tides, of which the theoretical amplitude is about 25 centimetres (9.8 in) (46% of that of the Moon) with a cycle time of 12 hours. At spring tide the two effects add to each other to a theoretical level of 79 centimetres (31 in), while at neap tide the theoretical level is reduced to 29 centimetres (11 in). Since the orbits of the Earth about the Sun, and the Moon about the Earth, are elliptical, tidal amplitudes change somewhat as a result of the varying Earth–Sun and Earth–Moon distances. This causes a variation in the tidal force and theoretical amplitude of about ±18% for the Moon and ±5% for the Sun. If both the Sun and Moon were at their closest positions and aligned at new moon, the theoretical amplitude would reach 93 centimetres (37 in).

Real amplitudes differ considerably, not only because of depth variations and continental obstacles, but also because wave propagation across the ocean has a natural period of the same order of magnitude as the rotation period: if there were no land masses, it would take about 30 hours for a long wavelength surface wave to propagate along the Equator halfway around the Earth (by comparison, the Earth's lithosphere has a natural period of about 57 minutes).

Earth tides , which raise and lower the bottom of the ocean, and the tide's own gravitational self attraction are both significant and further complicate the ocean's response to tidal forces.

Dissipation See also: Tidal acceleration Earth's tidal oscillations introduce dissipation at an average rate of about 3.75 terawatts .

[ 60 ] About 98% of this dissipation is by marine tidal movement.

[ 61 ] Dissipation arises as basin-scale tidal flows drive smaller-scale flows which experience turbulent dissipation. This tidal drag creates torque on the moon that gradually transfers angular momentum to its orbit, and a gradual increase in Earth–moon separation. The equal and opposite torque on the Earth correspondingly decreases its rotational velocity. Thus, over geologic time, the moon recedes from the Earth, at about 3.8 centimetres (1.5 in)/year, lengthening the terrestrial day.

[ k ] Day length has increased by about 2 hours in the last 600 million years. Assuming (as a crude approximation) that the deceleration rate has been constant, this would imply that 70 million years ago, day length was on the order of 1% shorter with about 4 more days per year.

Bathymetry The harbour of Gorey, Jersey falls dry at low tide.

The shape of the shoreline and the ocean floor changes the way that tides propagate, so there is no simple, general rule that predicts the time of high water from the Moon's position in the sky. Coastal characteristics such as underwater bathymetry and coastline shape mean that individual location characteristics affect tide forecasting; actual high water time and height may differ from model predictions due to the coastal morphology's effects on tidal flow. However, for a given location the relationship between lunar altitude and the time of high or low tide (the lunitidal interval ) is relatively constant and predictable, as is the time of high or low tide relative to other points on the same coast. For example, the high tide at Norfolk, Virginia , U.S., predictably occurs approximately two and a half hours before the Moon passes directly overhead.

Land masses and ocean basins act as barriers against water moving freely around the globe, and their varied shapes and sizes affect the size of tidal frequencies. As a result, tidal patterns vary. For example, in the U.S., the East coast has predominantly semi-diurnal tides, as do Europe's Atlantic coasts, while the West coast predominantly has mixed tides.

[ 63 ] [ 64 ] [ 65 ] Human changes to the landscape can also significantly alter local tides.

[ 66 ] Observation and prediction Timing The same tidal forcing has different results depending on many factors, including coast orientation, continental shelf margin, water body dimensions.

The tidal forces due to the Moon and Sun generate very long waves which travel all around the ocean following the paths shown in co-tidal charts . The time when the crest of the wave reaches a port then gives the time of high water at the port. The time taken for the wave to travel around the ocean also means that there is a delay between the phases of the Moon and their effect on the tide. Springs and neaps in the North Sea , for example, are two days behind the new/full moon and first/third quarter moon. This is called the tide's age .

[ 67 ] [ 68 ] The ocean bathymetry greatly influences the tide's exact time and height at a particular coastal point. There are some extreme cases; the Bay of Fundy , on the east coast of Canada, is often stated to have the world's highest tides because of its shape, bathymetry, and its distance from the continental shelf edge.

[ 69 ] Measurements made in November 1998 at Burntcoat Head in the Bay of Fundy recorded a maximum range of 16.3 metres (53 ft) and a highest predicted extreme of 17 metres (56 ft).

[ 70 ] [ 71 ] Similar measurements made in March 2002 at Leaf Basin, Ungava Bay in northern Quebec gave similar values (allowing for measurement errors), a maximum range of 16.2 metres (53 ft) and a highest predicted extreme of 16.8 metres (55 ft).

[ 70 ] [ 71 ] Ungava Bay and the Bay of Fundy lie similar distances from the continental shelf edge, but Ungava Bay is only free of pack ice for about four months every year while the Bay of Fundy rarely freezes.

Southampton in the United Kingdom has a double high water caused by the interaction between the M 2 and M 4 tidal constituents (Shallow water overtides of principal lunar).

[ 72 ] Portland has double low waters for the same reason. The M 4 tide is found all along the south coast of the United Kingdom, but its effect is most noticeable between the Isle of Wight and Portland because the M 2 tide is lowest in this region.

Because the oscillation modes of the Mediterranean Sea and the Baltic Sea do not coincide with any significant astronomical forcing period, the largest tides are close to their narrow connections with the Atlantic Ocean. Extremely small tides also occur for the same reason in the Gulf of Mexico and Sea of Japan . Elsewhere, as along the southern coast of Australia , low tides can be due to the presence of a nearby amphidrome .

Analysis A regular water level chart Isaac Newton 's theory of gravitation first enabled an explanation of why there were generally two tides a day, not one, and offered hope for a detailed understanding of tidal forces and behavior. Although it may seem that tides could be predicted via a sufficiently detailed knowledge of instantaneous astronomical forcings, the actual tide at a given location is determined by astronomical forces accumulated by the body of water over many days. In addition, accurate results would require detailed knowledge of the shape of all the ocean basins—their bathymetry , and coastline shape.

Current procedure for analysing tides follows the method of harmonic analysis introduced in the 1860s by William Thomson . It is based on the principle that the astronomical theories of the motions of Sun and Moon determine a large number of component frequencies, and at each frequency there is a component of force tending to produce tidal motion, but that at each place of interest on the Earth, the tides respond at each frequency with an amplitude and phase peculiar to that locality. At each place of interest, the tide heights are therefore measured for a period of time sufficiently long (usually more than a year in the case of a new port not previously studied) to enable the response at each significant tide-generating frequency to be distinguished by analysis, and to extract the tidal constants for a sufficient number of the strongest known components of the astronomical tidal forces to enable practical tide prediction. The tide heights are expected to follow the tidal force, with a constant amplitude and phase delay for each component. Because astronomical frequencies and phases can be calculated with certainty, the tide height at other times can then be predicted once the response to the harmonic components of the astronomical tide-generating forces has been found.

The main patterns in the tides are the twice-daily variation the difference between the first and second tide of a day the spring–neap cycle the annual variation The Highest Astronomical Tide is the perigean spring tide when both the Sun and Moon are closest to the Earth.

When confronted by a periodically varying function, the standard approach is to employ Fourier series , a form of analysis that uses sinusoidal functions as a basis set, having frequencies that are zero, one, two, three, etc. times the frequency of a particular fundamental cycle. These multiples are called harmonics of the fundamental frequency, and the process is termed harmonic analysis . If the basis set of sinusoidal functions suit the behaviour being modelled, relatively few harmonic terms need to be added. Orbital paths are very nearly circular, so sinusoidal variations are suitable for tides.

For the analysis of tide heights, the Fourier series approach has in practice to be made more elaborate than the use of a single frequency and its harmonics. The tidal patterns are decomposed into many sinusoids having many fundamental frequencies, corresponding (as in the lunar theory ) to many different combinations of the motions of the Earth, the Moon, and the angles that define the shape and location of their orbits.

For tides, then, harmonic analysis is not limited to harmonics of a single frequency.

[ l ] In other words, the harmonies are multiples of many fundamental frequencies, not just of the fundamental frequency of the simpler Fourier series approach. Their representation as a Fourier series having only one fundamental frequency and its (integer) multiples would require many terms, and would be severely limited in the time-range for which it would be valid.

The study of tide height by harmonic analysis was begun by Laplace, William Thomson (Lord Kelvin), and George Darwin .

A.T. Doodson extended their work, introducing the Doodson Number notation to organise the hundreds of resulting terms. This approach has been the international standard ever since, and the complications arise as follows: the tide-raising force is notionally given by sums of several terms. Each term is of the form A o cos ⁡ ⁡ ( ω ω t + p ) , {\displaystyle A_{o}\cos(\omega t+p),} where A o is the amplitude, ω is the angular frequency, usually given in degrees per hour, corresponding to t measured in hours, p is the phase offset with regard to the astronomical state at time t = 0.

There is one term for the Moon and a second term for the Sun. The phase p of the first harmonic for the Moon term is called the lunitidal interval or high water interval.

The next refinement is to accommodate the harmonic terms due to the elliptical shape of the orbits. To do so, the value of the amplitude is taken to be not a constant, but varying with time, about the average amplitude A o . To do so, replace A o in the above equation with A ( t ) where A is another sinusoid, similar to the cycles and epicycles of Ptolemaic theory . This gives A ( t ) = A o ( 1 + A a cos ⁡ ⁡ ( ω ω a t + p a ) ) , {\displaystyle A(t)=A_{o}{\bigl (}1+A_{a}\cos(\omega _{a}t+p_{a}){\bigr )},} which is to say an average value A o with a sinusoidal variation about it of magnitude A a , with frequency ω a and phase p a . Substituting this for A o in the original equation gives a product of two cosine factors: A o ( 1 + A a cos ⁡ ⁡ ( ω ω a t + p a ) ) cos ⁡ ⁡ ( ω ω t + p ) .

{\displaystyle A_{o}{\bigl (}1+A_{a}\cos(\omega _{a}t+p_{a}){\bigr )}\cos(\omega t+p).} Given that for any x and y cos ⁡ ⁡ x cos ⁡ ⁡ y = 1 2 cos ⁡ ⁡ ( x + y ) + 1 2 cos ⁡ ⁡ ( x − − y ) , {\displaystyle \cos x\cos y={\tfrac {1}{2}}\cos(x+y)+{\tfrac {1}{2}}\cos(x-y),} it is clear that a compound term involving the product of two cosine terms each with their own frequency is the same as three simple cosine terms that are to be added at the original frequency and also at frequencies which are the sum and difference of the two frequencies of the product term. (Three, not two terms, since the whole expression is ( 1 + cos ⁡ ⁡ x ) cos ⁡ ⁡ y {\displaystyle (1+\cos x)\cos y} .) Consider further that the tidal force on a location depends also on whether the Moon (or the Sun) is above or below the plane of the Equator, and that these attributes have their own periods also incommensurable with a day and a month, and it is clear that many combinations result. With a careful choice of the basic astronomical frequencies, the Doodson Number annotates the particular additions and differences to form the frequency of each simple cosine term.

Tidal prediction summing constituent parts. The tidal coefficients are defined on the page theory of tides .

Remember that astronomical tides do not include weather effects. Also, changes to local conditions (sandbank movement, dredging harbour mouths, etc.) away from those prevailing at the measurement time affect the tide's actual timing and magnitude. Organisations quoting a "highest astronomical tide" for some location may exaggerate the figure as a safety factor against analytical uncertainties, distance from the nearest measurement point, changes since the last observation time, ground subsidence, etc., to avert liability should an engineering work be overtopped. Special care is needed when assessing the size of a "weather surge" by subtracting the astronomical tide from the observed tide.

Careful Fourier data analysis over a nineteen-year period (the National Tidal Datum Epoch in the U.S.) uses frequencies called the tidal harmonic constituents . Nineteen years is preferred because the Earth, Moon and Sun's relative positions repeat almost exactly in the Metonic cycle of 19 years, which is long enough to include the 18.613 year lunar nodal tidal constituent . This analysis can be done using only the knowledge of the forcing period , but without detailed understanding of the mathematical derivation, which means that useful tidal tables have been constructed for centuries.

[ 73 ] The resulting amplitudes and phases can then be used to predict the expected tides. These are usually dominated by the constituents near 12 hours (the semi-diurnal constituents), but there are major constituents near 24 hours ( diurnal ) as well. Longer term constituents are 14 day or fortnightly , monthly, and semiannual. Semi-diurnal tides dominated coastline, but some areas such as the South China Sea and the Gulf of Mexico are primarily diurnal. In the semi-diurnal areas, the primary constituents M 2 (lunar) and S 2 (solar) periods differ slightly, so that the relative phases, and thus the amplitude of the combined tide, change fortnightly (14 day period).

[ 74 ] In the M 2 plot above, each cotidal line differs by one hour from its neighbors, and the thicker lines show tides in phase with equilibrium at Greenwich. The lines rotate around the amphidromic points counterclockwise in the northern hemisphere so that from Baja California Peninsula to Alaska and from France to Ireland the M 2 tide propagates northward. In the southern hemisphere this direction is clockwise. On the other hand, M 2 tide propagates counterclockwise around New Zealand, but this is because the islands act as a dam and permit the tides to have different heights on the islands' opposite sides. (The tides do propagate northward on the east side and southward on the west coast, as predicted by theory.) The exception is at Cook Strait where the tidal currents periodically link high to low water. This is because cotidal lines 180° around the amphidromes are in opposite phase, for example high water across from low water at each end of Cook Strait. Each tidal constituent has a different pattern of amplitudes, phases, and amphidromic points, so the M 2 patterns cannot be used for other tide components.

Example calculation Tides at Bridgeport, Connecticut , U.S. during a 50-hour period.

Tides at Bridgeport, Connecticut, U.S. during a 30-day period.

Tides at Bridgeport, Connecticut, U.S. during a 400-day period.

Tidal patterns in Cook Strait. The south part (Nelson) has two spring tides per month, versus only one on the north side (Wellington and Napier).

Because the Moon is moving in its orbit around the Earth and in the same sense as the Earth's rotation, a point on the Earth must rotate slightly further to catch up so that the time between semi-diurnal tides is not twelve but 12.4206 hours—a bit over twenty-five minutes extra. The two peaks are not equal. The two high tides a day alternate in maximum heights: lower high (just under three feet), higher high (just over three feet), and again lower high. Likewise for the low tides.

When the Earth, Moon, and Sun are in line (Sun–Earth–Moon, or Sun–Moon–Earth) the two main influences combine to produce spring tides; when the two forces are opposing each other as when the angle Moon–Earth–Sun is close to ninety degrees, neap tides result. As the Moon moves around its orbit it changes from north of the Equator to south of the Equator. The alternation in high tide heights becomes smaller, until they are the same (at the lunar equinox, the Moon is above the Equator), then redevelop but with the other polarity, waxing to a maximum difference and then waning again.

Current The tides' influence on current or flow is much more difficult to analyze, and data is much more difficult to collect. A tidal height is a scalar quantity and varies smoothly over a wide region. A flow is a vector quantity , with magnitude and direction, both of which can vary substantially with depth and over short distances due to local bathymetry. Also, although a water channel's center is the most useful measuring site, mariners object when current-measuring equipment obstructs waterways. A flow proceeding up a curved channel may have similar magnitude, even though its direction varies continuously along the channel. Surprisingly, flood and ebb flows are often not in opposite directions. Flow direction is determined by the upstream channel's shape, not the downstream channel's shape. Likewise, eddies may form in only one flow direction.

Nevertheless, tidal current analysis is similar to tidal heights analysis: in the simple case, at a given location the flood flow is in mostly one direction, and the ebb flow in another direction. Flood velocities are given positive sign, and ebb velocities negative sign. Analysis proceeds as though these are tide heights.

In more complex situations, the main ebb and flood flows do not dominate. Instead, the flow direction and magnitude trace an ellipse over a tidal cycle (on a polar plot) instead of along the ebb and flood lines. In this case, analysis might proceed along pairs of directions, with the primary and secondary directions at right angles. An alternative is to treat the tidal flows as complex numbers, as each value has both a magnitude and a direction.

Tide flow information is most commonly seen on nautical charts , presented as a table of flow speeds and bearings at hourly intervals, with separate tables for spring and neap tides. The timing is relative to high water at some harbour where the tidal behaviour is similar in pattern, though it may be far away.

As with tide height predictions, tide flow predictions based only on astronomical factors do not incorporate weather conditions, which can completely change the outcome.

The tidal flow through Cook Strait between the two main islands of New Zealand is particularly interesting, as the tides on each side of the strait are almost exactly out of phase, so that one side's high water is simultaneous with the other's low water. Strong currents result, with almost zero tidal height change in the strait's center. Yet, although the tidal surge normally flows in one direction for six hours and in the reverse direction for six hours, a particular surge might last eight or ten hours with the reverse surge enfeebled. In especially boisterous weather conditions, the reverse surge might be entirely overcome so that the flow continues in the same direction through three or more surge periods.

A further complication for Cook Strait's flow pattern is that the tide at the south side (e.g. at Nelson ) follows the common bi-weekly spring–neap tide cycle (as found along the west side of the country), but the north side's tidal pattern has only one cycle per month, as on the east side: Wellington , and Napier .

The graph of Cook Strait's tides shows separately the high water and low water height and time, through November 2007; these are not measured values but instead are calculated from tidal parameters derived from years-old measurements. Cook Strait's nautical chart offers tidal current information. For instance the January 1979 edition for 41°13.9′S 174°29.6′E ﻿ / ﻿ 41.2317°S 174.4933°E ﻿ / -41.2317; 174.4933 (northwest of Cape Terawhiti ) refers timings to Westport while the January 2004 issue refers to Wellington. Near Cape Terawhiti in the middle of Cook Strait the tidal height variation is almost nil while the tidal current reaches its maximum, especially near the notorious Karori Rip. Aside from weather effects, the actual currents through Cook Strait are influenced by the tidal height differences between the two ends of the strait and as can be seen, only one of the two spring tides at the north west end of the strait near Nelson has a counterpart spring tide at the south east end (Wellington), so the resulting behaviour follows neither reference harbour.

[ citation needed ] Power generation Main article: Tidal power Tidal energy can be extracted by two means: inserting a water turbine into a tidal current, or building ponds that release/admit water through a turbine. In the first case, the energy amount is entirely determined by the timing and tidal current magnitude. However, the best currents may be unavailable because the turbines would obstruct ships. In the second, the impoundment dams are expensive to construct, natural water cycles are completely disrupted, ship navigation is disrupted. However, with multiple ponds, power can be generated at chosen times. So far, there are few installed systems for tidal power generation (most famously, La Rance at Saint Malo , France) which face many difficulties. Aside from environmental issues, simply withstanding corrosion and biological fouling pose engineering challenges.

Tidal power proponents point out that, unlike wind power systems, generation levels can be reliably predicted, save for weather effects. While some generation is possible for most of the tidal cycle, in practice turbines lose efficiency at lower operating rates. Since the power available from a flow is proportional to the cube of the flow speed, the times during which high power generation is possible are brief.

Navigation US civil and maritime uses of tidal data Tidal flows are important for navigation, and significant errors in position occur if they are not accommodated. Tidal heights are also important; for example many rivers and harbours have a shallow "bar" at the entrance which prevents boats with significant draft from entering at low tide.

Until the advent of automated navigation, competence in calculating tidal effects was important to naval officers. The certificate of examination for lieutenants in the Royal Navy once declared that the prospective officer was able to "shift his tides".

[ 75 ] Tidal flow timings and velocities appear in tide charts or a tidal stream atlas . Tide charts come in sets. Each chart covers a single hour between one high water and another (they ignore the leftover 24 minutes) and show the average tidal flow for that hour. An arrow on the tidal chart indicates the direction and the average flow speed (usually in knots ) for spring and neap tides. If a tide chart is not available, most nautical charts have " tidal diamonds " which relate specific points on the chart to a table giving tidal flow direction and speed.

The standard procedure to counteract tidal effects on navigation is to (1) calculate a " dead reckoning " position (or DR) from travel distance and direction, (2) mark the chart (with a vertical cross like a plus sign) and (3) draw a line from the DR in the tide's direction. The distance the tide moves the boat along this line is computed by the tidal speed, and this gives an "estimated position" or EP (traditionally marked with a dot in a triangle).

Tidal Indicator, Delaware River, Delaware c. 1897. At the time shown in the figure, the tide is 1 + 1 ⁄ 4 feet above mean low water and is still falling, as indicated by pointing of the arrow. Indicator is powered by system of pulleys, cables and a float. (Report Of The Superintendent Of The Coast & Geodetic Survey Showing The Progress Of The Work During The Fiscal Year Ending With June 1897 (p. 483)) Nautical charts display the water's "charted depth" at specific locations with " soundings " and the use of bathymetric contour lines to depict the submerged surface's shape. These depths are relative to a " chart datum ", which is typically the water level at the lowest possible astronomical tide (although other datums are commonly used, especially historically, and tides may be lower or higher for meteorological reasons) and are therefore the minimum possible water depth during the tidal cycle. "Drying heights" may also be shown on the chart, which are the heights of the exposed seabed at the lowest astronomical tide.

Tide tables list each day's high and low water heights and times. To calculate the actual water depth, add the charted depth to the published tide height. Depth for other times can be derived from tidal curves published for major ports. The rule of twelfths can suffice if an accurate curve is not available. This approximation presumes that the increase in depth in the six hours between low and high water is: first hour — 1/12, second — 2/12, third — 3/12, fourth — 3/12, fifth — 2/12, sixth — 1/12.

Biological aspects Intertidal ecology A rock, seen at low water, exhibiting typical intertidal zonation.

Main article: Intertidal ecology Further information: Intertidal zone Intertidal ecology is the study of ecosystems between the low- and high-water lines along a shore. At low water, the intertidal zone is exposed (or emersed ), whereas at high water, it is underwater (or immersed ). Intertidal ecologists therefore study the interactions between intertidal organisms and their environment, as well as among the different species . The most important interactions may vary according to the type of intertidal community. The broadest classifications are based on substrates — rocky shore or soft bottom.

Intertidal organisms experience a highly variable and often hostile environment, and have adapted to cope with and even exploit these conditions. One easily visible feature is vertical zonation , in which the community divides into distinct horizontal bands of specific species at each elevation above low water. A species' ability to cope with desiccation determines its upper limit, while competition with other species sets its lower limit.

Humans use intertidal regions for food and recreation.

Overexploitation can damage intertidals directly. Other anthropogenic actions such as introducing invasive species and climate change have large negative effects.

Marine Protected Areas are one option communities can apply to protect these areas and aid scientific research .

Biological rhythms The approximately 12-hour and fortnightly tidal cycle has large effects on intertidal [ 76 ] and marine organisms.

[ 77 ] Hence their biological rhythms tend to occur in rough multiples of these periods.

[ 78 ] Many other animals such as the vertebrates , display similar circatidal rhythms.

[ 79 ] Examples include gestation and egg hatching. In humans, the menstrual cycle lasts roughly a lunar month , an even multiple of the tidal period. Such parallels at least hint at the common descent of all animals from a marine ancestor.

[ 80 ] Other tides When oscillating tidal currents in the stratified ocean flow over uneven bottom topography, they generate internal waves with tidal frequencies. Such waves are called internal tides .

Shallow areas in otherwise open water can experience rotary tidal currents, flowing in directions that continually change and thus the flow direction (not the flow) completes a full rotation in 12 + 1 ⁄ 2 hours (for example, the Nantucket Shoals ).

[ 81 ] In addition to oceanic tides, large lakes can experience small tides and even planets can experience atmospheric tides and Earth tides . These are continuum mechanical phenomena. The first two take place in fluids . The third affects the Earth's thin solid crust surrounding its semi-liquid interior (with various modifications).

Lake tides Large lakes such as Superior and Erie can experience tides of 1 to 4 cm (0.39 to 1.6 in), but these can be masked by meteorologically induced phenomena such as seiche .

[ 82 ] The tide in Lake Michigan is described as 1.3 to 3.8 cm (0.5 to 1.5 in) [ 83 ] or 4.4 cm ( 1 + 3 ⁄ 4 in).

[ 84 ] This is so small that other larger effects completely mask any tide, and as such these lakes are considered non-tidal.

[ 85 ] Atmospheric tides Main article: Atmospheric tide Atmospheric tides are negligible at ground level and aviation altitudes, masked by weather 's much more important effects. Atmospheric tides are both gravitational and thermal in origin and are the dominant dynamics from about 80 to 120 kilometres (50 to 75 mi), above which the molecular density becomes too low to support fluid behavior.

Earth tides Main article: Earth tide Earth tides or terrestrial tides affect the entire Earth's mass, which acts similarly to a liquid gyroscope with a very thin crust. The Earth's crust shifts (in/out, east/west, north/south) in response to lunar and solar gravitation, ocean tides, and atmospheric loading. While negligible for most human activities, terrestrial tides' semi-diurnal amplitude can reach about 55 centimetres (22 in) at the Equator—15 centimetres (5.9 in) due to the Sun—which is important in GPS calibration and VLBI measurements. Precise astronomical angular measurements require knowledge of the Earth's rotation rate and polar motion , both of which are influenced by Earth tides. The semi-diurnal M 2 Earth tides are nearly in phase with the Moon with a lag of about two hours.

[ citation needed ] Galactic tides Galactic tides are the tidal forces exerted by galaxies on stars within them and satellite galaxies orbiting them. The galactic tide's effects on the Solar System 's Oort cloud are believed to cause 90 percent of long-period comets.

[ 86 ] Misnomers Tsunamis , the large waves that occur after earthquakes, are sometimes called tidal waves , but this name is given by their resemblance to the tide, rather than any causal link to the tide. Other phenomena unrelated to tides but using the word tide are rip tide , storm tide , hurricane tide , and black or red tides . Many of these usages are historic and refer to the earlier meaning of tide as "a portion of time, a season" and "a stream, current or flood".

[ 87 ] See also Aquaculture – Farming of aquatic organisms Clairaut's theorem – Theorem about gravity Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Coastal erosion – Displacement of land along the coastline Establishment of a port Head of tide , also known as tidal reach, or tidal limit – Furthest point upstream where a river is affected by tidal fluctuations Hough function – Eigenfunctions of Laplace's tidal equations which govern fluid motion on a rotating sphere King tide – Especially high spring tide Lunar Laser Ranging experiment – Measuring the distance between the Earth and the Moon with laser light Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Lunar phase – Shape of the Moon's sunlit portion as viewed from Earth Raised beach , also known as Marine terrace – Emergent coastal landform Mean high water spring – Level of water from which depths displayed on a nautical chart are measured Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Mean low water spring – Level of water from which depths displayed on a nautical chart are measured Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Orbit of the Moon – The Moon's circuit around Earth Primitive equations – Equations to approximate global atmospheric flow Tidal barrage – Dam-like structure Tidal island – Island accessible by foot at low tide Tidal locking – Situation in which an astronomical object's orbital period matches its rotational period Tidal prism – Volume of water in an estuary or inlet between mean high tide and mean low tide Tidal resonance – Enhanced tide due to ocean resonance Tidal river – River where flow and level are influenced by tides Tidal stream generator – Type of tidal power generation technology Tidal triggering of earthquakes – Idea that tidal forces may induce seismicity Tide pool – Rocky pool on a seashore, separated from the sea at low tide, filled with seawater Tideline – Where two ocean currents converge Tides in marginal seas – Dynamics of tidal wave deformation in the shallow waters of the marginal seas Portals : Geography Oceans Water Solar System Earth sciences Geophysics Notes ^ Coastal orientation and geometry affects the phase, direction, and amplitude of amphidromic systems , coastal Kelvin waves as well as resonant seiches in bays. In estuaries , seasonal river outflows influence tidal flow.

^ Tide tables usually list mean lower low water (mllw, the 19 year average of mean lower low waters), mean higher low water (mhlw), mean lower high water (mlhw), mean higher high water (mhhw), as well as perigean tides . These are mean values in the sense that they derive from mean data.

[ 6 ] ^ "The moon, too, as the heavenly body nearest the earth, bestows her effluence most abundantly upon mundane things, for most of them, animate or inanimate, are sympathetic to her and change in company with her; the rivers increase and diminish their streams with her light, the seas turn their own tides with her rising and setting, ... " [ 19 ] ^ "Orbis virtutis tractoriæ, quæ est in Luna, porrigitur utque ad Terras, & prolectat aquas sub Zonam Torridam, ... Celeriter vero Luna verticem transvolante, cum aquæ tam celeriter sequi non possint, fluxus quidem fit Oceani sub Torrida in Occidentem, ... " (The sphere of the lifting power, which is [centered] in the moon, is extended as far as to the earth and attracts the waters under the torrid zone, ... However the moon flies swiftly across the zenith; because the waters cannot follow so quickly, the tide of the ocean under the torrid [zone] is indeed made to the west, ..." [ 27 ] ^ See for example, in the 'Principia' (Book 1) (1729 translation), Corollaries 19 and 20 to Proposition 66, on pages 251–254 , referring back to page 234 et seq.; and in Book 3 Propositions 24, 36 and 37, starting on page 255 .

^ According to NASA the lunar tidal force is 2.21 times larger than the solar.

^ See Tidal force – Mathematical treatment and sources cited there.

^ "The ocean does not produce tides as a direct response to the vertical forces at the bulges. The tidal force is only about 1 ten millionth the size of the gravitational force owing to the Earth's gravity. It is the horizontal component of the tidal force that produces the tidal bulge, causing fluid to converge at the sublunar and antipodal points and move away from the poles, causing a contraction there." (...) "The projection of the tidal force onto the horizontal direction is called the tractive force (see Knauss, Fig. 10.11). This force causes an acceleration of water towards the sublunar and antipodal points, building up water until the pressure gradient force from the bulging sea surface exactly balances the tractive force field." [ 56 ] ^ "While the solar and lunar envelopes are thought of as representing the actual ocean waters, another very important factor must be recognized. The components of the tide-generating forces acting tangentially along the water surface turn out to be the most important. Just as it is easier to slide a bucket of water across a floor rather than to lift it, the horizontal tractive components move the waters toward the points directly beneath and away from the sun or moon far more effectively than the vertical components can lift them. These tractive forces are most responsible for trying to form
the ocean into the symmetrical egg-shaped distensions (the tide potential, the equilibrium tide). They reach their maximums in rings 45° from the points directly beneath and away from the sun or moon." [ 57 ] ^ "... the gravitational effect that causes the tides is much too weak to lift the oceans 12 inches vertically away from the earth. It is possible, however, to move the oceans horizontally within the earth's gravitational field. This gathers the oceans toward two points where the height of the water becomes elevated by the converging volume of water." [ 58 ] ^ The day is currently lengthening at a rate of about 0.002 seconds per century.

[ 62 ] ^ To demonstrate this Tides Home Page offers a tidal height pattern converted into an .mp3 sound file, and the rich sound is quite different from a pure tone.

References ^ Reddy, M.P.M. & Affholder, M. (2002).

Descriptive physical oceanography: State of the Art .

Taylor & Francis . p. 249.

ISBN 90-5410-706-5 .

OCLC 223133263 .

Archived from the original on 2023-09-16 . Retrieved 2022-01-05 – via Google Books .

^ Hubbard, Richard (1893).

Boater's Bowditch: The Small Craft American Practical Navigator .

McGraw-Hill Professional. p. 54.

ISBN 0-07-136136-7 .

OCLC 44059064 .

Archived from the original on 2023-09-16 . Retrieved 2022-01-05 – via Google Books .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ "Tidal lunar day" .

NOAA .

Archived from the original on 2018-08-17 . Retrieved 2007-04-07 .

Do not confuse with the astronomical lunar day on the Moon. A lunar zenith is the Moon's highest point in the sky.

^ Mukherjee, Swapna; Ghosh, Kaushik Kiran; Chanda, Abhra (2023).

Environmental Oceanography and Coastal Dynamics . Cham: Springer International Publishing. pp.

1– 25.

doi : 10.1007/978-3-031-34422-0_1 .

ISBN 978-3-031-34421-3 .

^ Mellor, George L. (1996).

Introduction to physical oceanography . Springer. p. 169.

ISBN 1-56396-210-1 .

^ "Glossary of Coastal Terminology: H–M" .

Washington Department of Ecology , State of Washington.

Archived from the original on 21 November 2017 . Retrieved 5 April 2007 .

^ "Definitions of tidal terms" .

Land Information New Zealand .

Archived from the original on 30 August 2014 . Retrieved 20 February 2017 .

^ Swerdlow, Noel M.; Neugebauer, Otto (1984).

Mathematical astronomy in Copernicus's De revolutionibus . Vol. 1. Springer-Verlag. p. 76.

ISBN 0-387-90939-7 .

Archived from the original on 2023-09-16 . Retrieved 2020-11-22 – via Google Books .

^ a b Harris, D.L. (1981).

Tides and Tidal Datums in the United States . Special report (Coastal Engineering Research Center (U.S.))).

United States Army Corps of Engineers , Coastal Engineering Research Center. p. 32.

Archived from the original on 2023-09-16 . Retrieved 2021-08-24 – via Google Books .

^ "neap²".

Oxford English Dictionary (2nd ed.).

Oxford University Press . 1989.

Old English (example given from AD 469: forðganges nip – without the power of advancing). The Danish niptid is probably from the English. The English term neap-flood (from which neap tide comes) seems to have been in common use by AD 725.

^ "Ocean Tides and Magnetic Fields" .

NASA Visualization Studio .

NASA . 30 December 2016.

Archived from the original on 27 November 2020 . Retrieved 20 November 2020 .

^ "Types and causes of tidal cycles" .

U.S. National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) National Ocean Service (Education section). Archived from the original on February 1, 2012.

^ "What is a perigean spring tide?" . National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. 26 February 2021.

Archived from the original on 30 July 2021 . Retrieved 16 July 2021 .

^ Le Provost, Christian (1991). "Generation of Overtides and compound tides (review)". In Parker, Bruce B. (ed.).

Tidal Hydrodynamics .

John Wiley & Sons .

ISBN 978-0-471-51498-5 .

^ Accad, Y. & Pekeris, C.L. (November 28, 1978). "Solution of the Tidal Equations for the M 2 and S 2 Tides in the World Oceans from a Knowledge of the Tidal Potential Alone".

Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London A .

290 (1368): 235– 266.

Bibcode : 1978RSPTA.290..235A .

doi : 10.1098/rsta.1978.0083 .

S2CID 119526571 .

^ "Tide forecasts" . New Zealand: National Institute of Water & Atmospheric Research. Archived from the original on 2008-10-14 . Retrieved 2008-11-07 .

Including animations of the M2, S2 and K1 tides for New Zealand.

^ Marchuk, Guri I.; Kagan, B. A. (6 December 2012).

Dynamics of Ocean Tides . Springer.

ISBN 9789400925717 .

Archived from the original on 16 September 2023 . Retrieved 22 November 2020 – via Google Books .

^ Schureman, Paul (1971).

Manual of harmonic analysis and prediction of tides . U.S. Coast and geodetic survey. p. 204.

Archived from the original on 2017-08-08 . Retrieved 2018-01-14 .

^ Ptolemy (1940). "2".

Tetrabiblos . Vol. 1. Translated by Robbins, Frank E. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press .

^ Bede (1999).

The Reckoning of Time . Translated by Wallis, Faith.

Liverpool University Press . p. 82.

ISBN 0-85323-693-3 .

Archived from the original on 9 April 2023 . Retrieved 1 June 2018 – via Google Books .

^ Bede 1999 , p. 83.

^ a b Bede 1999 , p. 84.

^ a b Bede 1999 , p. 85.

^ a b c d Tolmacheva, Marina (2014). Glick, Thomas F. (ed.).

Medieval Science, Technology, and Medicine: An Encyclopedia: Geography, Chorography .

Routledge . p. 188.

ISBN 978-1135459321 .

^ "Simon Stevin" (PDF) (pdf) (in Dutch). Flanders Marine Institute.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 2014-08-05 . Retrieved 2014-06-01 .

^ Palmerino, Carla Rita; Thijssen, J.M.M.H. (31 August 2004).

The Reception of the Galilean Science of Motion in Seventeenth-Century Europe .

Springer Science+Business Media . p. 200.

ISBN 978-1-4020-2455-9 .

Archived from the original on 12 April 2022 . Retrieved 29 November 2022 – via Google Books .

^ Johannes Kepler, Astronomia nova ... (1609), p. 5 of the Introductio in hoc opus (Introduction to this work).

From page 5: ^ a b Lisitzin, E.

(1974). "2 "Periodical sea-level changes: Astronomical tides" ".

Sea-Level Changes, (Elsevier Oceanography Series) . Vol. 8. p. 5.

^ "What Causes Tides?" . U.S.

National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) National Ocean Service (Education section).

Archived from the original on 2016-08-20 . Retrieved 2009-09-06 .

^ Wahr, J. (1995).

Earth Tides in "Global Earth Physics", American Geophysical Union Reference Shelf #1 . pp.

40– 46.

^ Euler, Leonhard ; Aiton, Eric J. (1996).

Commentationes mechanicae et astronomicae ad physicam pertinentes .

Springer Science+Business Media . pp. 19–.

ISBN 978-3-7643-1459-0 – via Google Books .

^ Thomson, Thomas , ed. (March 1819).

"On Capt. Cook's Account of the Tides" .

Annals of Philosophy .

XIII . London: Baldwin, Cradock and Joy: 204.

Archived from the original on 26 August 2016 . Retrieved 25 July 2015 .

^ a b Zuosheng, Y.; Emery, K.O. & Yui, X. (July 1989).

"Historical Development and Use of Thousand-Year-Old Tide-Prediction Tables" .

Limnology and Oceanography .

34 (5): 953– 957.

Bibcode : 1989LimOc..34..953Z .

doi : 10.4319/lo.1989.34.5.0953 .

^ Cartwright, David E. (1999).

Tides: A Scientific History . Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press .

ISBN 9780521621458 .

^ Case, James (March 2000). "Understanding Tides – From Ancient Beliefs to Present-day Solutions to the Laplace Equations".

SIAM News .

33 (2).

^ Doodson, A.T. (December 1921).

"The Harmonic Development of the Tide-Generating Potential" .

Proceedings of the Royal Society of London A .

100 (704): 305– 329.

Bibcode : 1921RSPSA.100..305D .

doi : 10.1098/rspa.1921.0088 .

^ Casotto, S. & Biscani, F. (April 2004). "A fully analytical approach to the harmonic development of the tide-generating potential accounting for precession, nutation, and perturbations due to figure and planetary terms".

AAS Division on Dynamical Astronomy .

36 (2): 67.

Bibcode : 2004DDA....35.0805C .

^ Moyer, T.D. (2003).

Formulation for observed and computed values of Deep Space Network data types for navigation (PDF) . Deep-space communications and navigation. Vol. 3.

Wiley . pp.

126– 128.

ISBN 0-471-44535-5 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2004-10-16.

^ Flussi e riflussi [ Ebbs and flows ] (in Italian). Milano: Feltrinelli. 2003.

ISBN 88-07-10349-4 .

^ van der Waerden, B.L.

(1987). "The Heliocentric System in Greek, Persian and Hindu Astronomy".

Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences .

500 (1): 525–545 [527].

Bibcode : 1987NYASA.500..525V .

doi : 10.1111/j.1749-6632.1987.tb37224.x .

S2CID 222087224 .

^ Cartwright, D.E. (1999).

"Tides, A Scientific History" .

Eos Transactions .

80 (36): 11, 18.

Bibcode : 1999EOSTr..80..408A .

doi : 10.1029/99EO00304 .

^ "Astronomia indígena prevê influência da lua sobre as marés antes de Galileu e Newton" [Indigenous astronomy predicts moon's influence on tides before Galileo and Newton] (in Brazilian Portuguese). 2009-06-19 . Retrieved 2021-12-11 .

^ "The Doodson–Légé Tide Predicting Machine" . Proudman Oceanographic Laboratory. Archived from the original on 2009-03-20 . Retrieved 2008-10-03 .

^ Lubbock, J.W. (1831).

"On the tides on the coast of Great Britain" .

The Philosophical Magazine .

9 (53): 333– 335.

doi : 10.1080/14786443108647618 .

^ Whewell, William (1836).

"Researches on the tides, sixth series. On the results of an extensive system of tide observations made on the coasts of Europe and America in June 1835" .

Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London .

126 : 289– 341.

Bibcode : 1836RSPT..126..289W .

^ Hewett, William (1841).

"Tide observations in the North Sea" .

The Nautical Magazine : 180– 183.

^ Cartwright, David Edgar (17 August 2000).

Tides: A Scientific History .

Cambridge University Press .

ISBN 978-0-521-79746-7 .

OCLC 1001932580 .

^ Kuecher, Gerald J.; Woodland, Bertram G.; Broadhurst, Frederick M. (1 September 1990).

"Evidence of deposition from individual tides and of tidal cycles from the Francis Creek Shale (host rock to the Mazon Creek Biota), Westphalian D (Pennsylvanian), northeastern Illinois" .

Sedimentary Geology .

68 (3): 211– 221.

Bibcode : 1990SedG...68..211K .

doi : 10.1016/0037-0738(90)90113-8 .

ISSN 0037-0738 .

^ Archer, Allen W; Kuecher, Gerald J; Kvale, Erik P (1995).

"The Role of Tidal-Velocity Asymmetries in the Deposition of Silty Tidal Rhythmites (Carboniferous, Eastern Interior Coal Basin, U.S.A.)" .

SEPM Journal of Sedimentary Research .

65 : 408– 416.

doi : 10.1306/d42680d6-2b26-11d7-8648000102c1865d .

^ Richard, Feynman .

"The Feynman Lectures on Physics Vol. I Ch. 7: The Theory of Gravitation" .

www.feynmanlectures.caltech.edu . Retrieved 2025-06-30 .

^ Feynman, Richard (October 24, 2020).

"Feynman's Lectures on Physics – The Law of Gravitation" .

YouTube . Retrieved 5 December 2024 .

^ Melchior, Paul (1983).

The tides of the planet Earth . Oxford.

^ Young, C. A. (1889).

A Textbook of General Astronomy (PDF) . p. 288.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 2019-10-05 . Retrieved 2018-08-13 .

^ "Interplanetary Low Tide" .

Science Mission Directorate . 2000-05-03.

Archived from the original on 2023-06-04 . Retrieved 2023-06-25 .

^ "Equilibrium tide" .

AMS Glossary . 2020-09-02.

Archived from the original on 2020-08-01 . Retrieved 2020-09-02 .

^ Thompson, LuAnne (2006).

"Physical Processes in the Ocean" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 2020-09-28 . Retrieved 2020-06-27 .

^ Hicks, S.D. (2006).

Understanding Tides (PDF) (Report).

NOAA .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 2022-01-20 . Retrieved 2020-09-02 .

^ Mccully, James Greig (2006).

Beyond The Moon: A Conversational, Common Sense Guide To Understanding The Tides, World Scientific . World Scientific.

ISBN 9789814338189 .

Archived from the original on 2023-09-16 . Retrieved 2022-01-05 – via Google Books .

^ "What Physics Teachers Get Wrong about Tides! - PBS Space Time" .

PBS LearningMedia . 2020-06-17.

Archived from the original on 2020-10-21 . Retrieved 2020-06-27 .

^ Munk, W.; Wunsch, C. (1998). "Abyssal recipes II: energetics of tidal and wind mixing".

Deep-Sea Research Part I .

45 (12): 1977.

Bibcode : 1998DSRI...45.1977M .

doi : 10.1016/S0967-0637(98)00070-3 .

^ Ray, R.D.; Eanes, R.J.; Chao, B.F. (1996). "Detection of tidal dissipation in the solid Earth by satellite tracking and altimetry".

Nature .

381 (6583): 595.

Bibcode : 1996Natur.381..595R .

doi : 10.1038/381595a0 .

S2CID 4367240 .

^ Lecture 2: The Role of Tidal Dissipation and the Laplace Tidal Equations by Myrl Hendershott. GFD Proceedings Volume, 2004, WHOI Notes by Yaron Toledo and Marshall Ward.

^ "map showing world distribution of tide patterns, semi-diurnal, diurnal and mixed semi-diurnal" .

U.S.

National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) National Ocean Service (Education section) .

Archived from the original on 2018-08-27 . Retrieved 2009-09-05 .

^ Thurman, H.V. (1994).

Introductory Oceanography (7th ed.). New York: Macmillan Publishers . pp.

252– 276.

ref ^ Ross, D.A. (1995).

Introduction to Oceanography . New York: HarperCollins . pp.

236– 242.

^ Witze, Alexandra (5 July 2020).

"How humans are altering the tides of the oceans" .

BBC Future .

BBC .

Archived from the original on 6 July 2020 . Retrieved 8 July 2020 .

^ "Glossary of Meteorology" .

American Meteorological Society .

Archived from the original on 2021-05-08 . Retrieved 2021-04-02 .

^ Webster, Thomas (1837).

The elements of physics . Printed for Scott, Webster, and Geary. p.

168 .

^ "FAQ" . Archived from the original on February 12, 2012 . Retrieved June 23, 2007 .

^ a b O'Reilly, C.T.R.; Solvason, Ron & Solomon, Christian (2005). Ryan, J. (ed.). "Where are the World's Largest Tides".

BIO Annual Report "2004 in Review" . Washington, D.C.: Biotechnol. Ind. Org.: 44– 46.

^ a b O'reilly, Charles T.; Solvason, Ron; Solomon, Christian (2005).

"Resolving the World's largest tides" (PDF) . In Percy, J.A; Evans, A.J.; Wells, P.G.; Rolston, S.J. (eds.).

The Changing Bay of Fundy-Beyond 400 years, Proceedings of the 6th Bay of Fundy Workshop, Cornwallis, Nova Scotia, Sept. 29, 2004 to October 2, 2004. Environment Canada-Atlantic Region, Occasional Report no. 23. Dartmouth, N.S. and Sackville, N.B .

Archived (PDF) from the original on August 27, 2016 . Retrieved April 1, 2013 .

^ Pingree, R.D.; Maddock, L. (1978). "The M4 tide in the English Channel derived from a non-linear numerical model of the M2 tide".

Deep-Sea Research .

25 : 53– 63.

^ Center for Operational Oceanographic Products and Services, National Ocean Service, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (January 2000).

"Tide and Current Glossary" (PDF) . Silver Spring, MD.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 2007-01-28 . Retrieved 2007-04-05 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ "Harmonic Constituents" .

NOAA .

Archived from the original on 2007-03-17 . Retrieved 2007-04-05 .

^ Society for Nautical Research (1958).

The Mariner's Mirror .

Archived from the original on 2023-09-16 . Retrieved 2009-04-28 – via Google Books .

^ Bos, A.R.; Gumanao, G.S.; van Katwijk, M.M.; Mueller, B.; Saceda, M.M. & Tejada, R.P. (2011).

"Ontogenetic habitat shift, population growth, and burrowing behavior of the Indo-Pacific beach star Archaster typicus (Echinodermata: Asteroidea)" .

Marine Biology .

158 (3): 639– 648.

Bibcode : 2011MarBi.158..639B .

doi : 10.1007/s00227-010-1588-0 .

PMC 3873073 .

PMID 24391259 .

^ Bos, A.R. & Gumanao, G.S. (2012). "The lunar cycle determines availability of coral reef fishes on fish markets".

Journal of Fish Biology .

81 (6): 2074– 2079.

Bibcode : 2012JFBio..81.2074B .

doi : 10.1111/j.1095-8649.2012.03454.x .

PMID 23130702 .

^ Naylor, Ernest (2010-02-04). "Chapter 5: Lunar and semilunar biorhythms".

Chronobiology of Marine Organisms .

Cambridge University Press .

ISBN 978-1-139-48494-7 .

Archived from the original on 2023-09-16 . Retrieved 2022-01-03 – via Google Books .

^ Zhu, Bokai; Dacso, Clifford C.; O'Malley, Bert W. (2018-07-01).

"Unveiling "Musica Universalis" of the Cell: A Brief History of Biological 12-Hour Rhythms" .

Journal of the Endocrine Society .

2 (7): 727– 752.

doi : 10.1210/js.2018-00113 .

ISSN 2472-1972 .

PMC 6025213 .

PMID 29978151 .

Archived from the original on 2023-09-16 . Retrieved 2022-01-03 .

^ Darwin, Charles (1871).

The Descent of Man, and Selection in Relation to Sex . London: John Murray.

^ Le Lacheur, Embert A. (April 1924).

"Tidal currents in the open sea: Subsurface tidal currents at Nantucket Shoals Light Vessel" .

Geographical Review .

14 (2): 282– 286.

Bibcode : 1924GeoRv..14..282L .

doi : 10.2307/208104 .

JSTOR 208104 .

Archived from the original on 16 September 2023 . Retrieved 4 February 2012 .

^ "Do the Great Lakes have tides?" . Great Lakes Information Network. October 1, 2000. Archived from the original on 2017-12-30 . Retrieved 2010-02-10 .

^ Calder, Vince.

"Tides on Lake Michigan" . Argonne National Laboratory.

Archived from the original on 2019-08-15 . Retrieved 2019-08-14 .

^ Dunkerson, Duane.

"moon and Tides" . Astronomy Briefly.

Archived from the original on 2010-01-15 . Retrieved 2010-02-10 .

^ "Do the Great Lakes have tides?" .

National Ocean Service .

NOAA .

Archived from the original on 2016-04-23 . Retrieved 2016-04-26 .

^ Nurmi, P.; Valtonen, M.J. & Zheng, J.Q. (2001).

"Periodic variation of Oort Cloud flux and cometary impacts on the Earth and Jupiter" .

Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society .

327 (4): 1367– 1376.

Bibcode : 2001MNRAS.327.1367N .

doi : 10.1046/j.1365-8711.2001.04854.x .

^ "tide".

Oxford English Dictionary . Vol. XVIII (2nd ed.).

Oxford University Press . 1989. p. 64.

Further reading 150 Years of Tides on the Western Coast: The Longest Series of Tidal Observations in the Americas Archived 2011-05-05 at the Wayback Machine NOAA (2004).

Eugene I. Butikov: A dynamical picture of the ocean tides Archived 2008-09-11 at the Wayback Machine Tides and centrifugal force Archived 2007-05-12 at the Wayback Machine : Why the centrifugal force does not explain the tide's opposite lobe (with nice animations).

O. Toledano et al.

(2008): Tides in asynchronous binary systems Archived 2017-08-09 at the Wayback Machine Gaylord Johnson "How Moon and Sun Generate the Tides" Archived 2023-09-16 at the Wayback Machine Popular Science , April 1934 Simon, Bernard (2013) [2007].

Coastal Tides . Translated by Manley, David.

Institut océanographique, Fondation Albert Ier, Prince de Monaco .

ISBN 978-2-903581-83-1 . Archived from the original on 2022-11-13 . Retrieved 2021-10-18 .

External links Wikiquote has quotations related to Tides .

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Tides .

NOAA Tides and Currents information and data History of tide prediction Archived 2015-05-09 at the Wayback Machine Department of Oceanography, Texas A&M University Archived 2016-03-04 at the Wayback Machine UK Admiralty Easytide UK, South Atlantic, British Overseas Territories and Gibraltar tide times from the UK National Tidal and Sea Level Facility Tide Predictions for Australia, South Pacific & Antarctica Tide and Current Predictor, for stations around the world v t e Geophysics Overview Outline Geophysicists Subfields Geodynamics Geophysical survey Geomagnetism Geomathematics Geophysical fluid dynamics Mineral physics Near-surface geophysics Paleomagnetism Seismology Tectonophysics Physical phenomena Chandler wobble Coriolis effect Earth's energy budget Earth's magnetic field Geodynamo Geothermal gradient Gravity of Earth Mantle convection Precession of the equinoxes Seismic wave Tide Related disciplines Geodesy Geophysics portal Category Commons v t e Physical oceanography Waves Airy wave theory Ballantine scale Benjamin–Feir instability Boussinesq approximation Breaking wave Clapotis Cnoidal wave Cross sea Dispersion Edge wave Equatorial waves Gravity wave Green's law Infragravity wave Internal wave Iribarren number Kelvin wave Kinematic wave Longshore drift Luke's variational principle Mild-slope equation Radiation stress Rogue wave Draupner wave Rossby wave Rossby-gravity waves Sea state Seiche Significant wave height Soliton Stokes drift Stokes problem Stokes wave Swell Trochoidal wave Tsunami megatsunami Undertow Ursell number Wave action Wave base Wave height Wave nonlinearity Wave power Wave radar Wave setup Wave shoaling Wave turbulence Wave–current interaction Waves and shallow water one-dimensional Saint-Venant equations shallow water equations Wind fetch Wind setup Wind wave model Circulation Atmospheric circulation Baroclinity Boundary current Coriolis force Coriolis–Stokes force Craik–Leibovich vortex force Downwelling Eddy Ekman layer Ekman spiral Ekman transport El Niño–Southern Oscillation General circulation model Geochemical Ocean Sections Study Geostrophic current Global Ocean Data Analysis Project Gulf Stream Humboldt Current Hydrothermal circulation Langmuir circulation Longshore drift Loop Current Modular Ocean Model Ocean current Ocean dynamical thermostat Ocean dynamics Ocean gyre Overflow Princeton Ocean Model Rip current Subsurface ocean current Sverdrup balance Thermohaline circulation shutdown Upwelling Whirlpool Wind generated current World Ocean Circulation Experiment Tides Amphidromic point Earth tide Head of tide Internal tide Lunitidal interval Perigean spring tide Rip tide Rule of twelfths Slack tide Theory of tides Tidal bore Tidal force Tidal power Tidal race Tidal range Tidal resonance Tide gauge Tideline Landforms Abyssal fan Abyssal plain Atoll Bathymetric chart Carbonate platform Coastal geography Cold seep Continental margin Continental rise Continental shelf Contourite Guyot Hydrography Knoll Ocean bank Oceanic basin Oceanic plateau Oceanic trench Passive margin Seabed Seamount Submarine canyon Submarine volcano Plate tectonics Convergent boundary Divergent boundary Fracture zone Hydrothermal vent Marine geology Mid-ocean ridge Mohorovičić discontinuity Oceanic crust Outer trench swell Ridge push Seafloor spreading Slab pull Slab suction Slab window Subduction Transform fault Vine–Matthews–Morley hypothesis Volcanic arc Ocean zones Benthic Deep ocean water Deep sea Littoral Mesopelagic Oceanic Pelagic Photic Surf Swash Sea level Deep-ocean Assessment and Reporting of Tsunamis Global Sea Level Observing System North West Shelf Operational Oceanographic System Sea-level curve Sea level drop Sea level rise World Geodetic System Acoustics Deep scattering layer Ocean acoustic tomography Sofar bomb SOFAR channel Underwater acoustics Satellites Jason-1 OSTM/Jason-2 Jason-3 Related Acidification Argo Benthic lander Color of water DSV Alvin Marginal sea Marine energy Marine pollution Mooring National Oceanographic Data Center Ocean Explorations Observations Reanalysis Ocean surface topography Ocean temperature Ocean thermal energy conversion Oceanography Outline of oceanography Pelagic sediment Sea surface microlayer Sea surface temperature Seawater Science On a Sphere Stratification Thermocline Underwater glider Water column World Ocean Atlas Category Commons Oceans portal v t e Elements of nature Universe Space Time Energy Matter chemical elements particles Change Earth Earth science History geological Structure Geology Plate tectonics Oceans Gaia hypothesis Future Weather Meteorology Atmosphere (Earth) Climate Clouds Moonlight Rain Snow Sunlight Tides Wind tornado tropical cyclone Natural environment Ecology Ecosystem Field Radiation Wilderness Wildfires Life Origin (abiogenesis) Evolutionary history Biosphere Hierarchy Biology astrobiology Biodiversity Organism Eukaryota fauna animals flora plants fungi protista Prokaryotes archaea bacteria Viruses See also Nature-based solutions Category v t e Underwater diving Diving activities Diving modes Atmospheric pressure diving Freediving Saturation diving Scuba diving Snorkeling Surface oriented diving Surface-supplied diving Unmanned diving Diving equipment Cleaning and disinfection of personal diving equipment Human factors in diving equipment design List of diving equipment manufacturers Basic equipment Diving mask Snorkel Swimfin Breathing gas Bailout gas Bottom gas Breathing air Decompression gas Emergency gas supply Heliox Hydreliox Hydrox Nitrox Oxygen Travel gas Trimix Buoyancy and trim equipment Avelo diving system Buoyancy compensator Power inflator Dump valve Variable buoyancy pressure vessel Diving weighting system Ankle weights Integrated weights Trim weights Weight belt Decompression equipment Decompression buoy Decompression chamber Decompression cylinder Decompression trapeze Dive computer Diving bell Diving shot Diving stage Jersey upline Jonline Diving suit Atmospheric diving suit JIM suit Newtsuit Dry suit Sladen suit Standard diving suit Rash vest Wetsuit Dive skins Hot-water suit Helmets and masks Anti-fog Diving helmet Free-flow helmet Lightweight demand helmet Orinasal mask Reclaim helmet Shallow water helmet Standard diving helmet Diving mask Band mask Full-face mask Half mask Instrumentation Bottom timer Depth gauge Dive computer Dive timer Diving watch Helium release valve Electro-galvanic oxygen sensor Pneumofathometer Submersible pressure gauge Mobility equipment Diver propulsion vehicle Human torpedo Wet sub Diving bell Closed bell Wet bell Diving stage Swimfin Monofin PowerSwim Towboard Safety equipment Alternative air source Octopus regulator Pony bottle Bolt snap Buddy line Dive light Diver's cutting tool Diver's knife Diver's telephone Through-water communications Underwater acoustic communication Diving bell Diving safety harness Emergency gas supply Bailout block Bailout bottle Lifeline Screw gate carabiner Emergency locator beacon Rescue tether Safety helmet Shark-proof cage Snoopy loop Navigation equipment Distance line Diving compass Dive reel Line marker Surface marker buoy Silt screw Underwater breathing apparatus Atmospheric diving suit Diving cylinder Burst disc Scuba cylinder valve Diving helmet Reclaim helmet Diving regulator Mechanism of diving regulators Regulator malfunction Regulator freeze Single-hose regulator Twin-hose regulator Full-face diving mask Open-circuit scuba Scuba set Bailout bottle Decompression cylinder Independent doubles Manifolded twin set Scuba manifold Pony bottle Scuba configuration Sidemount Sling cylinder Diving rebreathers Carbon dioxide scrubber Carleton CDBA Clearance Divers Life Support Equipment Cryogenic rebreather CUMA DSEA Dolphin Halcyon PVR-BASC Halcyon RB80 IDA71 Interspiro DCSC LAR-5 LAR-6 LAR-V LARU Mark IV Amphibian Porpoise Ray Siebe Gorman CDBA Salvus Siva Surface-supplied diving equipment Air line Diver's umbilical Diving air compressor Gas panel Hookah Scuba replacement Snuba Standard diving dress Diving equipment manufacturers AP Diving Apeks Aqua Lung America Aqua Lung/La Spirotechnique Beuchat René Cavalero Cis-Lunar Cressi-Sub Dacor DESCO Dive Xtras Divex Diving Unlimited International Drägerwerk Faber Fenzy Maurice Fernez Technisub Oscar Gugen Heinke HeinrichsWeikamp Johnson Outdoors Mares Morse Diving Nemrod Oceanic Worldwide Porpoise Shearwater Research Siebe Gorman Submarine Products Suunto Diving support equipment Access equipment Boarding stirrup Diver lift Diving bell Diving ladder Diving platform (scuba) Diving stage Downline Jackstay Launch and recovery system Messenger line Moon pool Breathing gas handling Air filtration Activated carbon Hopcalite Molecular sieve Silica gel Booster pump Carbon dioxide scrubber Cascade filling system Diver's pump Diving air compressor Diving air filter Water separator High pressure breathing air compressor Low pressure breathing air compressor Gas blending Gas blending for scuba diving Gas panel Gas reclaim system Gas storage bank Gas storage quad Gas storage tube Helium analyzer Nitrox production Membrane gas separation Pressure swing adsorption Oxygen analyser Electro-galvanic oxygen sensor Oxygen compatibility Decompression equipment Air-lock Built-in breathing system Decompression tables Diving bell Bell cursor Closed bell Clump weight Launch and recovery system Wet bell Diving chamber Diving stage Recreational Dive Planner Saturation system Platforms Dive boat Canoe and kayak diving Combat rubber raiding craft Liveaboard Subskimmer Diving support vessel HMS Challenger (K07) Underwater habitat Aquarius Reef Base Continental Shelf Station Two Helgoland Habitat Scott Carpenter Space Analog Station SEALAB Tektite habitat Remotely operated underwater vehicles 8A4-class ROUV ABISMO Atlantis ROV Team COTSBot CURV Deep Drone Épaulard Global Explorer ROV Goldfish-class ROUV Kaikō ROV Kaşif ROUV Long-Term Mine Reconnaissance System Mini Rover ROV OpenROV ROV KIEL 6000 ROV PHOCA Scorpio ROV Sea Dragon-class ROV Seabed tractor Seafox drone SeaPerch SJT-class ROUV T1200 Trenching Unit VideoRay UROVs Safety equipment Diver down flag Diving shot ENOS Rescue-System Hyperbaric lifeboat Hyperbaric stretcher Jackstay Jonline Reserve gas supply General Diving spread Air spread Saturation spread Hot water system Sonar Underwater acoustic positioning system Underwater acoustic communication Freediving Activities Aquathlon Apnoea finswimming Freediving Haenyeo Pearl hunting Ama Snorkeling Spearfishing Underwater football Underwater hockey Underwater rugby Underwater target shooting Competitions Nordic Deep Vertical Blue Disciplines Constant weight (CWT) Constant weight bi-fins (CWTB) Constant weight without fins (CNF) Dynamic apnea (DYN) Dynamic apnea without fins (DNF) Free immersion (FIM) No-limits apnea (NLT) Static apnea (STA) Skandalopetra diving Variable weight apnea (VWT) Variable weight apnea without fins Equipment Diving mask Diving suit Hawaiian sling Polespear Snorkel (swimming) Speargun Swimfins Monofin Water polo cap Freedivers Deborah Andollo Simone Arrigoni Peppo Biscarini Michael Board Sara Campbell Derya Can Göçen Goran Čolak Carlos Coste Robert Croft Mandy-Rae Cruickshank Yasemin Dalkılıç Leonardo D'Imporzano Flavia Eberhard Şahika Ercümen Emma Farrell Francisco Ferreras Pierre Frolla Flavia Eberhard Mehgan Heaney-Grier Elisabeth Kristoffersen Andriy Yevhenovych Khvetkevych Loïc Leferme Enzo Maiorca Jacques Mayol Audrey Mestre Karol Meyer Kate Middleton Stéphane Mifsud Alexey Molchanov Natalia Molchanova Dave Mullins Patrick Musimu Guillaume Néry Herbert Nitsch Umberto Pelizzari Liv Philip Annelie Pompe Stig Severinsen Tom Sietas Martin Štěpánek Walter Steyn Tanya Streeter William Trubridge Devrim Cenk Ulusoy Fatma Uruk Danai Varveri Alessia Zecchini Nataliia Zharkova Kateryna Sadurska Hazards Barotrauma Drowning Freediving blackout Deep-water blackout Shallow-water blackout Hypercapnia Hypothermia Historical Ama Octopus wrestling Swimming at the 1900 Summer Olympics – Men's underwater swimming Organisations AIDA International Scuba Schools International Australian Underwater Federation British Freediving Association Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins Performance Freediving International Professional diving Occupations Ama Commercial diver Commercial offshore diver Hazmat diver Divemaster Diving instructor Diving safety officer Diving superintendent Diving supervisor Haenyeo Media diver Police diver Public safety diver Scientific diver Underwater archaeologist Military diving Army engineer diver Canadian Armed Forces Divers Clearance diver Frogman Minentaucher Royal Navy ships diver United States military divers U.S. Navy diver U.S.Navy master diver Military diving units 7th Marine Brigade Clearance Diving Branch (RAN) Commando Hubert Combat Divers Service (Lithuania) Comando Raggruppamento Subacquei e Incursori Teseo Tesei Decima Flottiglia MAS Frogman Corps (Denmark) Fuerzas Especiales Fukuryu GRUMEC Grup Gerak Khas Jagdkommando JW Formoza JW GROM JW Komandosów Kommando Spezialkräfte Marine KOPASKA MARCOS Marine Commandos Marinejegerkommandoen Marine Raider Regiment Minedykkerkommandoen Namibian Marine Corps Operational Diving Unit Naval Diving Unit (Singapore) Naval Service Diving Section Naval Special Operations Command Operational Diving Division (SA Navy) Royal Engineers Russian commando frogmen Sappers Divers Group Shayetet 13 Special Air Service Special Air Service Regiment Special Actions Detachment Special Boat Service Special Boat Squadron (Sri Lanka) Special Forces Command (Turkey) Special Forces Group (Belgium) Special Operations Battalion (Croatia) Special Service Group (Navy) Special Warfare Diving and Salvage Tactical Divers Group US Marine Corps Force Reconnaissance US Marine Corps Reconnaissance Battalions US Navy SEALs Underwater Construction Teams Underwater Demolition Command Underwater Demolition Team Underwater Offence (Turkish Armed Forces) UNGERIN Underwater work Commercial offshore diving Dive leader Diver training Recreational diver training Hazmat diving Hyperbaric welding Marine construction Offshore construction Underwater construction Media diving Pearl hunting Police diving Potable water diving Public safety diving Scientific diving Ships husbandry Sponge diving Submarine pipeline Underwater archaeology Archaeology of shipwrecks Underwater cutting and welding Underwater demolition Underwater inspection Nondestructive testing Underwater logging Underwater photography Underwater search and recovery Underwater searches Underwater videography Underwater survey Salvage diving SS Egypt Kronan La Belle SS Laurentic RMS Lusitania Mars Mary Rose USS Monitor HMS Royal George Vasa Diving contractors COMEX Helix Energy Solutions Group International Marine Contractors Association Tools and equipment Abrasive waterjet Airlift Baited remote underwater video In-water surface cleaning Brush cart Cavitation cleaning Pressure washing Pigging Hot stab Lifting bag Remotely operated underwater vehicle Thermal lance Tremie Water jetting Underwater weapons Limpet mine Speargun Hawaiian sling Polespear Underwater firearm Gyrojet Mk 1 Underwater Defense Gun Powerhead Underwater pistols Heckler & Koch P11 SPP-1 underwater pistol Underwater revolvers AAI underwater revolver Underwater rifles ADS amphibious rifle APS underwater rifle ASM-DT amphibious rifle QBS-06 Recreational diving Recreational dive sites Index of recreational dive sites List of wreck diving sites Outline of recreational dive sites Specialties Altitude diving Cave diving Deep diving Ice diving Muck diving Open-water diving Rebreather diving Sidemount diving Solo diving Technical diving Underwater photography Wreck diving Diver organisations British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Cave Divers Association of Australia (CDAA) Cave Diving Group (CDG) Comhairle Fo-Thuinn (CFT) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas (FEDAS) Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins (FFESSM) International Association for Handicapped Divers (IAHD) Quintana Roo Speleological Survey (QRSS) Woodville Karst Plain Project (WKPP) Diving tourism industry Dive center Diving in Timor-Leste Diving in the Maldives Environmental impact of recreational diving Scuba diving tourism Scuba diving in the Cayman Islands Shark tourism Sinking ships for wreck diving sites Underwater diving in Guam Diving events and festivals Diversnight Underwater Bike Race Diving safety Human factors in diving equipment design Human factors in diving safety Life-support system Safety-critical system Scuba diving fatalities Underwater diving emergency Water safety Water surface searches Diving hazards List of diving hazards and precautions Environmental Current Delta-P Entanglement hazard Overhead Silt out Wave action Equipment Freeflow Use of breathing equipment in an underwater environment Failure of diving equipment other than breathing apparatus Single point of failure Physiological Cold shock response Decompression Nitrogen narcosis Oxygen toxicity Seasickness Uncontrolled decompression Diver behaviour and competence Incompetence Overconfidence effect Panic Task loading Trait anxiety Willful violation Consequences Barotrauma Decompression sickness Drowning Hypothermia Hypoxia Hypercapnia Hyperthermia Non-freezing cold injury Diving procedures Ascending and descending Emergency ascent Boat diving Canoe and kayak diving Buddy diving buddy check Decompression Decompression practice Pyle stop Ratio decompression Dive briefing Dive log Dive planning Rule of thirds Scuba gas planning Diver communications Diver rescue Diver training Doing It Right Drift diving Gas blending for scuba diving Night diving Rebreather diving Scuba gas management Solo diving Wall diving Risk management Checklist Hazard identification and risk assessment Hazard analysis Job safety analysis Risk assessment Hyperbaric evacuation and rescue Risk control Hierarchy of hazard controls Incident pit Lockout–tagout Permit To Work Redundancy Safety data sheet Situation awareness Diving team Bellman Chamber operator Diver medical technician Diver's attendant Diving supervisor Diving systems technician Gas man Life support technician Stand-by diver Equipment safety Breathing gas quality Testing and inspection of diving cylinders Hydrostatic test Sustained load cracking Diving regulator Breathing performance of regulators Occupational safety and health Association of Diving Contractors International International Marine Contractors Association Code of practice Contingency plan Diving regulations Emergency response plan Diving safety officer Diving superintendent Diving supervisor Operations manual Standard operating procedure Diving medicine Diving disorders List of signs and symptoms of diving disorders Cramp Motion sickness Surfer's ear Pressure related Alternobaric vertigo Barostriction Barotrauma Air embolism Aerosinusitis Barodontalgia Dental barotrauma Middle ear barotrauma Pulmonary barotrauma Compression arthralgia Decompression illness Dysbarism Oxygen Freediving blackout Hyperoxia Hypoxia Oxygen toxicity Inert gases Avascular necrosis Decompression sickness Dysbaric osteonecrosis Inner ear decompression sickness Isobaric counterdiffusion Taravana High-pressure nervous syndrome Hydrogen narcosis Nitrogen narcosis Carbon dioxide Hypercapnia Hypocapnia Breathing gas contaminants Carbon monoxide poisoning Immersion related Asphyxia Drowning Hypothermia Immersion diuresis Instinctive drowning response Laryngospasm Salt water aspiration syndrome Swimming-induced pulmonary edema Treatment Demand valve oxygen therapy First aid Hyperbaric medicine Hyperbaric treatment schedules In-water recompression Oxygen therapy Therapeutic recompression Personnel Diving Medical Examiner Diving Medical Practitioner Diving Medical Technician Hyperbaric nursing Screening Atrial septal defect Effects of drugs on fitness to dive Fitness to dive Psychological fitness to dive Research Researchers in diving physiology and medicine Arthur J. Bachrach Albert R. Behnke Peter B. Bennett Paul Bert George F. Bond Robert Boyle Alf O. Brubakk Albert A. Bühlmann John R. Clarke Guybon Chesney Castell Damant Kenneth William Donald William Paul Fife John Scott Haldane Robert William Hamilton Jr.

Henry Valence Hempleman Leonard Erskine Hill Brian Andrew Hills Felix Hoppe-Seyler Christian J. Lambertsen Simon Mitchell Charles Momsen Neal W. Pollock John Rawlins Charles Wesley Shilling Edward D. Thalmann Jacques Triger Diving medical research organisations Aerospace Medical Association Divers Alert Network (DAN) Diving Diseases Research Centre (DDRC) Diving Medical Advisory Council (DMAC) European Diving Technology Committee (EDTC) European Underwater and Baromedical Society (EUBS) National Board of Diving and Hyperbaric Medical Technology Naval Submarine Medical Research Laboratory Royal Australian Navy School of Underwater Medicine Rubicon Foundation South Pacific Underwater Medicine Society (SPUMS) Undersea and Hyperbaric Medical Society (UHMS) United States Navy Experimental Diving Unit (NEDU) Law Civil liability in recreational diving Diving regulations Duty of care List of legislation regulating underwater diving Investigation of diving accidents Convention on the Protection of the Underwater Cultural Heritage History of underwater diving History of decompression research and development History of dive computers History of Diving Museum History of scuba diving List of researchers in underwater diving Lyons Maritime Museum Man in the Sea Museum Timeline of atmospheric diving suits Timeline of diving technology Pearling in Western Australia US Navy decompression models and tables Archeological sites SS Commodore USS Monitor Queen Anne's Revenge Whydah Gally Underwater art and artists The Diver Jason deCaires Taylor Engineers and inventors Jerónimo de Ayanz y Beaumont William Beebe Georges Beuchat Giovanni Alfonso Borelli Joseph-Martin Cabirol John R. Clarke Jacques Cousteau Charles Anthony Deane John Deane Louis de Corlieu Auguste Denayrouze Ted Eldred Henry Fleuss Émile Gagnan Karl Heinrich Klingert Peter Kreeft Christian J. Lambertsen Yves Le Prieur John Lethbridge Ernest William Moir Joseph Salim Peress Auguste Piccard Joe Savoie Willard Franklyn Searle Gordon Smith Augustus Siebe Pierre-Marie Touboulic Jacques Triger Historical equipment Aqua-Lung RV Calypso SP-350 Denise Magnesium torch Nikonos Porpoise regulator Standard diving dress Sub Marine Explorer Vintage scuba Diver propulsion vehicles Advanced SEAL Delivery System Cosmos CE2F series Dry Combat Submersible Human torpedo Motorised Submersible Canoe Necker Nymph R-2 Mala-class swimmer delivery vehicle SEAL Delivery Vehicle Shallow Water Combat Submersible Siluro San Bartolomeo Welfreighter Wet Nellie Military and covert operations Raid on Alexandria (1941) Sinking of the Rainbow Warrior Scientific projects 1992 cageless shark-diving expedition Mission 31 Awards and events Hans Hass Award International Scuba Diving Hall of Fame London Diving Chamber Dive Lectures NOGI Awards Women Divers Hall of Fame Incidents Dive boat incidents Sinking of MV Conception Diver rescues Alpazat cave rescue Tham Luang cave rescue Early diving John Day (carpenter) Charles Spalding Ebenezer Watson Freediving fatalities Stephen Keenan Loïc Leferme Audrey Mestre Nicholas Mevoli Natalia Molchanova Offshore diving incidents Byford Dolphin diving bell accident Drill Master diving accident Star Canopus diving accident Stena Seaspread diving accident Venture One diving accident Waage Drill II diving accident Wildrake diving accident Professional diving fatalities Roger Baldwin John Bennett Victor F. Guiel Jr.

Francis P. Hammerberg Craig M. Hoffman Peter Henry Michael Holmes Johnson Sea Link accident Edwin Clayton Link Gerard Anthony Prangley Per Skipnes Robert John Smyth Albert D. Stover Richard A. Walker Lothar Michael Ward Joachim Wendler Bradley Westell Arne Zetterström Scuba diving fatalities 1973 Mount Gambier cave diving accident Ricardo Armbruster Allan Bridge David Bright Berry L. Cannon Cotton Coulson Cláudio Coutinho E. Yale Dawson Deon Dreyer Milan Dufek Sheck Exley Maurice Fargues Fernando Garfella Palmer Guy Garman Steve Irwin death Jim Jones Henry Way Kendall Artur Kozłowski Yuri Lipski Kirsty MacColl Linnea Mills Agnes Milowka François de Roubaix Chris and Chrissy Rouse Dave Shaw Wesley C. Skiles Dewey Smith Rob Stewart Esbjörn Svensson Josef Velek Publications Manuals NOAA Diving Manual U.S. Navy Diving Manual Basic Cave Diving: A Blueprint for Survival Underwater Handbook Bennett and Elliott's physiology and medicine of diving Encyclopedia of Recreational Diving The new science of skin and scuba diving Professional Diver's Handbook Basic Scuba Standards and Codes of Practice Code of Practice for Scientific Diving (UNESCO) DIN 7876 IMCA Code of Practice for Offshore Diving ISO 24801 Recreational diving services — Requirements for the training of recreational scuba divers General non-fiction The Darkness Beckons Goldfinder The Last Dive Shadow Divers The Silent World: A Story of Undersea Discovery and Adventure Research List of Divers Alert Network publications Dive guides Training and registration Diver training Competence and assessment Competency-based learning Refresher training Skill assessment Diver training standard Diving instructor Diving school Occupational diver training Commercial diver training Military diver training Public safety diver training Scientific diver training Recreational diver training Introductory diving ISO training standards Teaching method Muscle memory Overlearning Stress exposure training Skills Combat sidestroke Diver navigation Diver trim Ear clearing Frenzel maneuver Valsalva maneuver Finning techniques Scuba skills Buddy breathing Low impact diving Diamond Reef System Surface-supplied diving skills Underwater searches Recreational scuba certification levels Core diving skills Advanced Open Water Diver Autonomous diver CMAS* scuba diver CMAS** scuba diver Introductory diving Low Impact Diver Master Scuba Diver Open Water Diver Supervised diver Leadership skills Dive leader Divemaster Diving instructor Master Instructor Specialist skills Rescue Diver Solo diver Diver training certification and registration organisations European Underwater Federation (EUF) International Diving Regulators and Certifiers Forum (IDRCF) International Diving Schools Association (IDSA) International Marine Contractors Association (IMCA) List of diver certification organizations National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) Nautical Archaeology Society Recreational diver course referral World Recreational Scuba Training Council (WRSTC) Commercial diver certification authorities Australian Diver Accreditation Scheme (ADAS) Commercial diver registration in South Africa Divers Institute of Technology Health and Safety Executive (HSE) Department of Employment and Labour Commercial diving schools Divers Academy International Norwegian diver school Free-diving certification agencies AIDA International (AIDA) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Performance Freediving International (PI) Scuba Schools International (SSI) Recreational scuba certification agencies American Canadian Underwater Certifications (ACUC) American Nitrox Divers International (ANDI) Association nationale des moniteurs de plongée (ANMP) British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Comhairle Fo-Thuinn (CFT) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas (FEDAS) Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins (FFESSM) Federazione Italiana Attività Subacquee (FIAS) Global Underwater Explorers (GUE) International Association for Handicapped Divers (IAHD) International Association of Nitrox and Technical Divers (IANTD) International Life Saving Federation (ILS) Israeli Diving Federation (TIDF) National Academy of Scuba Educators (NASE) National Association of Underwater Instructors (NAUI) Nederlandse Onderwatersport Bond (NOB) Professional Association of Diving Instructors (PADI) Professional Diving Instructors Corporation (PDIC) Professional Technical and Recreational Diving (ProTec) Rebreather Association of International Divers (RAID) Sub-Aqua Association (SAA) Scuba Diving International (SDI) Scuba Educators International (SEI) Scuba Schools International (SSI) Türkiye Sualtı Sporları Federasyonu (TSSF) United Diving Instructors (UDI) YMCA SCUBA Program Scientific diver certification authorities American Academy of Underwater Sciences (AAUS) CMAS Scientific Committee Technical diver certification agencies American Nitrox Divers International (ANDI) British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Diving Science and Technology (DSAT) Federazione Italiana Attività Subacquee (FIAS) International Association of Nitrox and Technical Divers (IANTD) Professional Association of Diving Instructors (PADI) Professional Diving Instructors Corporation (PDIC) Professional Technical and Recreational Diving (ProTec) Rebreather Association of International Divers (RAID) Trimix Scuba Association (TSA) Technical Extended Range (TXR) Cave diving Cave Divers Association of Australia (CDAA) Cave Diving Group (CDG) Global Underwater Explorers (GUE) National Speleological Society#Cave Diving Group (CDG) National Association of Underwater Instructors (NAUI) Technical Diving International (TDI) Military diver training centres Defence Diving School Navy Diving Salvage and Training Center Underwater Escape Training Unit Military diver training courses United States Marine Corps Combatant Diver Course Underwater sports Surface snorkeling Finswimming Snorkeling/breath-hold Spearfishing Underwater football Underwater hockey Australia Turkey Underwater rugby Colombia United States Underwater target shooting Breath-hold Aquathlon Apnoea finswimming Freediving Open Circuit Scuba Immersion finswimming Sport diving Underwater cycling Underwater orienteering Underwater photography Rebreather Underwater photography Sports governing organisations and federations International AIDA International Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques ) National AIDA Hellas Australian Underwater Federation British Freediving Association British Octopush Association British Underwater Sports Association Comhairle Fo-Thuinn Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins South African Underwater Sports Federation Türkiye Sualtı Sporları Federasyonu Underwater Society of America ) Competitions 14th CMAS Underwater Photography World Championship Underwater Hockey World Championships Underwater Orienteering World Championships Underwater Rugby World Championships Underwater divers Pioneers of diving Eduard Admetlla i Lázaro Aquanaut Mary Bonnin Amelia Behrens-Furniss James F. Cahill Jacques Cousteau Billy Deans Dottie Frazier Trevor Hampton Hans Hass Hannes Keller Dick Rutkowski Teseo Tesei Arne Zetterström Underwater scientists archaeologists and environmentalists Michael Arbuthnot Robert Ballard George Bass Mensun Bound Louis Boutan Jeffrey Bozanic Hugh Bradner Cathy Church Eugenie Clark James P. Delgado Sylvia Earle John Christopher Fine George R. Fischer Anders Franzén Honor Frost Fernando Garfella Palmer David Gibbins Graham Jessop Swietenia Puspa Lestari Pilar Luna Robert F. Marx Anna Marguerite McCann Innes McCartney Charles T. Meide Mark M. Newell Lyuba Ognenova-Marinova John Peter Oleson Mendel L. Peterson Richard Pyle Andreas Rechnitzer William R. Royal Margaret Rule Gunter Schöbel Stephanie Schwabe Myriam Seco E. Lee Spence Robert Sténuit Peter Throckmorton Cristina Zenato Scuba record holders Pascal Bernabé Jim Bowden Mark Ellyatt Sheck Exley Nuno Gomes Claudia Serpieri Krzysztof Starnawski Underwater filmmakers and presenters Samir Alhafith David Attenborough Ramón Bravo Jean-Michel Cousteau Richie Kohler Paul Rose Andy Torbet Ivan Tors Andrew Wight James Cameron Underwater photographers Doug Allan Tamara Benitez Georges Beuchat Adrian Biddle Jonathan Bird Eric Cheng Neville Coleman Jacques Cousteau John D. Craig Ben Cropp Bernard Delemotte David Doubilet Candice Farmer John Christopher Fine Rodney Fox Ric Frazier Stephen Frink Peter Gimbel Monty Halls Hans Hass Henry Way Kendall Rudie Kuiter Joseph B. MacInnis Luis Marden Agnes Milowka Noel Monkman Pete Oxford Steve Parish Zale Parry Pierre Petit Leni Riefenstahl Peter Scoones Brian Skerry Wesley C. Skiles E. Lee Spence Philippe Tailliez Ron Taylor Valerie Taylor Albert Tillman John Veltri Stan Waterman Michele Westmorland John Ernest Williamson J. Lamar Worzel Underwater explorers Caves Graham Balcombe Sheck Exley Martyn Farr Jochen Hasenmayer Jill Heinerth Jarrod Jablonski Brian Kakuk William Hogarth Main Tom Mount Jack Sheppard Bill Stone Reefs Arthur C. Clarke Wrecks Leigh Bishop John Chatterton Clive Cussler Bill Nagle Valerie van Heest Aristotelis Zervoudis Aquanauts Andrew Abercromby Joseph M. Acaba Clayton Anderson Richard R. Arnold Serena Auñón-Chancellor Michael Barratt (astronaut) Robert A. Barth Robert L. Behnken Randolph Bresnik Timothy J. Broderick Justin Brown Berry L. Cannon Scott Carpenter Gregory Chamitoff Steve Chappell Catherine Coleman Robin Cook Craig B. Cooper Fabien Cousteau Philippe Cousteau Timothy Creamer Jonathan Dory Pedro Duque Sylvia Earle Jeanette Epps Sheck Exley Albert Falco Andrew J. Feustel Michael Fincke Satoshi Furukawa Ronald J. Garan Jr.

Michael L. Gernhardt Christopher E. Gerty David Gruber Chris Hadfield Jeremy Hansen José M. Hernández John Herrington Paul Hill Akihiko Hoshide Mark Hulsbeck Emma Hwang Norishige Kanai Les Kaufman Scott Kelly Karen Kohanowich Timothy Kopra Dominic Landucci Jon Lindbergh Kjell N. Lindgren Michael López-Alegría Joseph B. MacInnis Sandra Magnus Thomas Marshburn Matthias Maurer K. Megan McArthur Craig McKinley Jessica Meir Simone Melchior Dorothy Metcalf-Lindenburger Andreas Mogensen Karen Nyberg John D. Olivas Takuya Onishi Luca Parmitano Nicholas Patrick Tim Peake Thomas Pesquet Marc Reagan Garrett Reisman Kathleen Rubins Dick Rutkowski Tara Ruttley David Saint-Jacques Josef Schmid Robert Sheats Dewey Smith Steve Squyres Heidemarie Stefanyshyn-Piper Robert Sténuit Hervé Stevenin Nicole Stott James Talacek Daniel M. Tani Robert Thirsk Bill Todd Mark T. Vande Hei Koichi Wakata Rex J. Walheim Shannon Walker John Morgan Wells Joachim Wendler Douglas H. Wheelock Peggy Whitson Dafydd Williams Jeffrey Williams Sunita Williams Reid Wiseman Kimiya Yui Writers and journalists Michael C. Barnette Victor Berge Philippe Diolé Gary Gentile Bret Gilliam Bob Halstead Hillary Hauser Trevor Jackson Steve Lewis John Mattera Rescuers Craig Challen Richard Harris Rick Stanton John Volanthen Frogmen Lionel Crabb Ian Edward Fraser Sydney Knowles James Joseph Magennis Commercial salvors Keith Jessop Science of underwater diving List of researchers in underwater diving Diving physics Metre sea water Neutral buoyancy Underwater acoustics Modulated ultrasound Underwater vision Underwater computer vision Diving physiology Blood shift Cold shock response Diving reflex Equivalent narcotic depth Maximum operating depth Physiological response to water immersion Thermal balance of the underwater diver Underwater vision Work of breathing Decompression theory Decompression models: Bühlmann decompression algorithm Haldane's decompression model Reduced gradient bubble model Thalmann algorithm Thermodynamic model of decompression Varying Permeability Model Equivalent air depth Oxygen window Physiology of decompression Diving environments Underwater exploration Deep-sea exploration Classification List of diving environments by type Altitude diving Benign water diving Confined water diving Deep diving Inland diving Inshore diving Muck diving Night diving Open-water diving Black-water diving Blue-water diving Penetration diving Cave diving Torricellian chamber Ice diving Wreck diving Recreational dive sites Underwater environment Underwater diving environment Impact Environmental impact of recreational diving Low impact diving Other Bathysphere Defense against swimmer incursions Diver detection sonar Offshore survey Rugged compact camera Underwater domain awareness Underwater vehicle Deep-submergence vehicle Aluminaut DSV Alvin American submarine NR-1 Bathyscaphe Archimède FNRS-2 FNRS-3 Harmony class bathyscaphe Sea Pole -class bathyscaphe Trieste II Deepsea Challenger Ictineu 3 JAGO Jiaolong Konsul -class submersible Limiting Factor Russian submarine Losharik Mir Nautile Pisces -class deep submergence vehicle DSV Sea Cliff DSV Shinkai DSV Shinkai 2000 DSV Shinkai 6500 DSV Turtle DSV-5 Nemo Submarine rescue International Submarine Escape and Rescue Liaison Office Submarine Escape and Rescue system (Royal Swedish Navy) McCann Rescue Chamber Submarine rescue ship Deep-submergence rescue vehicle LR5 LR7 MSM-1 Mystic -class deep-submergence rescue vehicle DSRV-1 Mystic DSRV-2 Avalon NATO Submarine Rescue System Priz -class deep-submergence rescue vehicle Russian deep submergence rescue vehicle AS-28 Russian submarine AS-34 ASRV Remora SRV-300 Submarine Rescue Diving Recompression System Type 7103 DSRV URF (Swedish Navy) Submarine escape Escape trunk Submarine escape training facility Submarine Escape Training Facility (Australia) Escape set Davis Submerged Escape Apparatus Momsen lung Steinke hood Submarine Escape Immersion Equipment Special interest groups Artificial Reef Society of British Columbia CMAS Europe Coral Reef Alliance Divers Alert Network Green Fins Finger Lakes Underwater Preserve Association Karst Underwater Research Nautical Archaeology Program Nautical Archaeology Society Naval Air Command Sub Aqua Club PADI AWARE Reef Check Reef Life Survey Rubicon Foundation Save Ontario Shipwrecks SeaKeys Sea Research Society Society for Underwater Historical Research Society for Underwater Technology Underwater Archaeology Branch, Naval History & Heritage Command Neutral buoyancy facilities for Astronaut training Neutral Buoyancy Laboratory Neutral buoyancy pool Neutral buoyancy simulation as a training aid Neutral Buoyancy Simulator Space Systems Laboratory Yuri Gagarin Cosmonaut Training Center Other Nautilus Productions Helicopter Aircrew Breathing Device Scuba diving therapy Seabed mining Category Commons Glossary Indexes: Dive sites Divers Diving Outline Portal Authority control databases International FAST National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐645954cd9f‐s6jz8
Cached time: 20250815205129
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.770 seconds
Real time usage: 2.199 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 14301/1000000
Revision size: 113668/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 746445/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 10318/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 16/100
Expensive parser function count: 27/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 370821/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.967/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 23012983/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1574.874      1 -total
 35.43%  558.029      2 Template:Reflist
 15.58%  245.293     33 Template:Cite_book
 13.39%  210.902     25 Template:Annotated_link
 10.46%  164.764     39 Template:Navbox
  8.20%  129.128     22 Template:Cite_journal
  6.78%  106.821     26 Template:Cite_web
  5.86%   92.229      1 Template:Underwater_diving
  5.62%   88.433      1 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
  4.95%   77.900      4 Template:Lang Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:30718:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250815205129 and revision id 1305118366. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Tide&oldid=1305118366 " Categories : Tides Geodesy Navigation Moon Hidden categories: CS1 errors: ISBN date CS1 Dutch-language sources (nl) CS1 Italian-language sources (it) CS1 Brazilian Portuguese-language sources (pt-br) CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pages Articles containing Latin-language text Articles containing Dutch-language text Articles containing French-language text Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from September 2009 Articles with unsourced statements from August 2008 Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets via Module:Annotated link Webarchive template wayback links Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles containing video clips This page was last edited on 10 August 2025, at 04:54 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Tide 101 languages Add topic

