Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Assignment of names 2 Algorithm to determine the karaṇa 3 Karaṇa names in Malayalam 4 Origin and history of the concept of karaṇa 5 See also 6 References Toggle the table of contents Karaṇa (pañcāṅga) Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Karana (pancanga) ) In Indian astronomy, a karaṇa is a half of a tithi . It is the duration of time in which the difference of the longitudes of the Sun and the Moon is increased by 6 degrees.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] A lunar month has 30 tithi -s and so the number of karaṇa -s in a lunar month is 60. These sixty karaṇa -s are not individually named. Instead, the originators of the concept have chosen 11 names to be associated with the karaṇa -s which means several karaṇa -s will be associated with the same name. Of these 11 names, four are fixed or immovables (or sthira -s) in the sense that they are associated with four unique karaṇa -s in a lunar month. These constant names are Śakuni , Catuṣpāda , Nāga and Kimstughna . The remaining seven names are variable or movable (or, cara -s) in the sense that there are several karaṇa -s associated with each of them. These names are Bava , Bālava , Kaulava , Taitila , Gara , Vaṇij and Vṛṣṭi .

Assignment of names [ edit ] The four fixed names are assigned as follows: Kṛṣṇa pakṣa caturdasi second half : Śakuni Amāvāsya first half : Catuṣpāda Amāvāsya second half : Nāga Śukla pakṣa pratipad first half : Kimstughna The fifty-six half tithi -s starting from Śukla pakṣa pratipad second half to Kṛṣṇa pakṣa caturdasi first half are given the variable names Bava , Bālava , Kaulava , Taitila , Gara , Vaṇij and Vṛṣṭi in a cyclical order. These names are repeated in the same order eight times so that the same name is assigned to eight different half tithi -s.

The fixed and variable names are assigned as in the following table.

Names of karaṇa -s Pakṣa Tithi Half Name Pakṣa Tithi Half Name Śukla Pratipad First Kimstughna Kṛṣṇa ...

...

...

,, ,, Second Bava ,, Ekādasi First Bava ,, Dvitīya First Bālava ,, ,, Second Bālava ,, ,, Second Kaulava ,, Dvādaśī First Kaulava ,, Tṛtīya First Taitila ,, ,, Second Taitila ,, ,, Second Gara ,, Trayodaśī First Gara ,, Caturthi First Vaṇij ,, ,, Second Vaṇij ,, ,, Second Vṛṣṭi ,, Caturdaśī First Vṛṣṭi ,, Pañcami First Bava ,, ,, Second Śakuni ,, ,, Second Bālava ,, Amāvāsya First Catuṣpāda ,, ...

...

...

,, ,, Second Nāga Algorithm to determine the karaṇa [ edit ] The name of the karaṇa at a particular moment on any given day can be determined by the following algorithm.

[ 2 ] Let the longitudes of the Sun and the Moon be S and M respectively at a particular moment on a given day.

If M >= S, then  D = M - S.

If M < S, then  D = (M - S) + 360°.

Divide D by 6°. Let K be the quotient (an integer).

If K = 57, 58, 59, or 0 then the karaṇa is Śakuni , Catuṣpāda , Nāga , or Kimstughna in that order.

Otherwise, if K > 7, subtract the nearest multiple of 7 from K and let K be the resulting number.

Then the karaṇa at the particular moment is the K-th karaṇa in the list of seven variable karaṇa -s, namely, Bava , Bālava , Kaulava , Taitila , Gara , Vaṇij and Vṛṣṭi .

Karaṇa names in Malayalam [ edit ] In the Malayalam astronomical literature, the eleven karaṇas are assigned names which are words for various animals. The English equivalents of the animal words representing the various karaṇas are given below.

[ 3 ] Karaṇa name Malayalam name Meaning of Malayalam name in English Śakuni പുള്ള് Shikra Catuṣpāda നാൽക്കാലി Quadruped Nāga പാമ്പ് Snake Kimstughna പുഴു Worm Bava സിംഹം Lion Bālava പുലി Tiger Kaulava പന്നി Pig Taitila കഴുത Donkey Gara ആന Elephant Vaṇij പശു Cow Vṛṣṭi പട്ടി Dog Origin and history of the concept of karaṇa [ edit ] Most probably the concept of karaṇa arose almost simultaneously with the concept of tithi .

Tithi -s are related to lunar-days and lunar-days are similar in concept to solar days or sāvana days. A sāvana day is the duration of time from one sunrise to the next sunrise. Roughly one half of a sāvana day is the duration of time from sunrise to the next sunset and the other half is the duration of time from sunset to the next sunrise. Before the introduction of the modern concept of tithi , the concept of a lunar day was in vogue. It was the duration of time from one moon-rise to the next moon-rise. Similar to the division of a sāvana day, the lunar-day can also be divided into two halves: One half being the duration of time from moon-rise to the next moon-set (the lunar day time) and the other half being the duration of time from moon-set to the next moon-rise (lunar night time). The concept of karaṇa has originated in this division of the lunar day. Later, when the concept of tithi got established, the concepts of the lunar day time and lunar night time got replaced by the modern artificial concept of half- tithi -s. The works of the Vedāṅga period - Atharva Jyotiṣa and Ṛk-pariśiṣṭa mention the karaṇa -s. So the origination of the concept of karaṇa -s can be traced to as early as the period of Vedāṅga Jyotiṣa , that is, around 500 BCE.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] See also [ edit ] Nakshatra Tithi Nityayoga Vāra References [ edit ] ^ Robert Sewell and Sankara Balakrishna Dikshit (1896).

The Indian Calendar . London: Swan Sonnenschein & Co . Retrieved 2 January 2024 .

^ a b S. Balachandra Rao (2000).

Indian Astronomy: An Introduction . Hyderabad: Universities Press. p. 69 . Retrieved 2 January 2024 .

^ K. Pappootty (June 2006).

ജ്യോതിഷവും   ജ്യോതിശ്ശാസ്ത്രവും (Astronomy and astrology) . Thrissur, Kerala: Kerala Sastra Sahithya Parishad. p. 78 . Retrieved 3 January 2024 .

(in Malayalam) ^ Sankar Balakrishna Dikshit (1981).

English translation of "Bharatiya Jyotish Shastra" (History of Indian Astronomy) Part II . Kolkota: India Metereological Department, Govt of India. p. 277 - 279 . Retrieved 3 January 2024 .

(Translated by R. V. Vaidya from Marathi originally published in 1896.) ^ Shakti Dhara Sharma (1998).

"Development of Pancanga from vedic times upto the present" .

Bulletin of the Astronomical Society of India .

26 : 75– 90 . Retrieved 1 January 2024 .

v t e Calendars Systems Lunar Lunisolar Solar In wide use Astronomical Buddhist Chinese Ethiopian Gregorian Hindu Lunar Hijri Solar Hijri ISO Unix time In more limited use Akan Armenian Assamese (Bhāshkarābda) Assyrian Baháʼí Badí‘ Bali Pawukon Saka Bengali Bangladeshi Berber Borana Burmese Chinese Earthly Branches Heavenly Stems Minguo Solar term Germanic heathen Georgian Hebrew Hindu Vikram Samvat Saka Hmong Igbo Iranian Jalali medieval Zoroastrian Irish Gaelic Islamic Fasli Tabular Jain Japanese Javanese Korean Juche Kurdish Lithuanian Maithili Malayalam Mandaean Manipuri (Meitei) Melanau Mizo (Lushai) Mongolian Nepal Nepal Sambat Vikram Samvat Yele Sambat Nanakshahi Nisg̱a'a Odia Punjabi Romanian Shona Somali Sesotho Slavic Slavic Native Faith Macedonian Tamil Thai lunar solar Tibetan Tripuri Tulu Vietnamese Wicca Xhosa Yoruba Zulu Types Runic Mesoamerican Long Count Calendar round Christian variants Coptic Ethiopian and Eritrean Julian Revised Liturgical year Eastern Orthodox Saints Historical Arabian Attic Aztec Tōnalpōhualli Xiuhpōhualli Babylonian Bulgar Byzantine Cappadocian Celtic Cham Culāsakaraj Coligny Egyptian Enoch Florentine French Republican Germanic Greek Hindu Inca Macedonian Maya Haabʼ Tzolkʼin Muisca Pentecontad Pisan Qumran Rapa Nui Roman Rumi Sexagenary Soviet Swedish Turkmen By specialty Holocene anthropological Proleptic Gregorian / Proleptic Julian historiographical Darian Martian Dreamspell New Age Discordian 'Pataphysical Reform proposals Hanke–Henry Permanent International Fixed Pax Positivist Sexagesimal Symmetry454 World Displays and applications Electronic Perpetual Wall Year naming and numbering Terminology Era Epoch Leap year New Year Regnal name Regnal year Year zero Systems Ab urbe condita Anka year Anno Domini / Common Era Anno Lucis Anno Martyrum Anno Mundi Assyrian Before Present Chinese Imperial Chinese Minguo English and British regnal year Hijri year Human (Holocene) Japanese Korean Nirayana system Seleucid Spanish Yugas Satya Treta Dvapara Kali Vietnamese Fictional Discworld ( Discworld ) Greyhawk ( Dungeons & Dragons ) Middle-earth ( The Lord of the Rings ) Stardate ( Star Trek ) List of calendars Category Links to related articles v t e Indian astronomy Astronomers Apastamba Aryabhata I Aryabhata II Vainu Bappu Bhāskara I Bhāskara II Baudhayana Brahmagupta Sandip Chakrabarti Radhagobinda Chandra Subrahmanyan Chandrasekhar Amil Kumar Das P. Devadas Gautama Siddha M. K. Das Gupta Jyesthadeva Kamalakara Katyayana Lagadha Lalla Madhava of Sangamagrama Prasanta Chandra Mahalanobis Mahavira Manava Jayant Narlikar Parameshvara Achyuta Pisharati Venkatraman Radhakrishnan J. J. Rawal Megh Nad Saha Jagannatha Samrat Bapudeva Sastri Jai Singh II of Amber Nilakantha Somayaji Sripati Mahendra Suri Govind Swarup Utpala Varahamihira Shankara Variyar Vasistha Yajnavalkya Pathani Samanta Works Aryabhatiya Brahmanas Aitareya Brahmana Shatapatha Brahmana Bṛhat Saṃhitā Ganitagannadi Jyotirmimamsa Shulba Sutras Panchangam Khandakhadyaka Mahādevī Makarandasarini Siddhantas Brāhmasphuṭasiddhānta Maha-Siddhanta Pancha-Siddhantika Paulisa Siddhanta Paitamaha Siddhanta Rājamṛgāṅka (astronomy book) Romaka Siddhanta Surya Siddhanta Vasishtha Siddhanta Tantrasangraha Treatise on Astrology of the Kaiyuan Era Vākyakaraṇa Vedanga Jyotisha Vedas Atharvaveda Rigveda Yavanajataka Zij Instruments Armillary sphere Astrolabe Celestial globe Compass Cross-staff Dioptra Equatorial ring Equatorial sundial Globe Gnomon Mural instrument Quadrant Sextant Sundial Triquetrum Water clock Yantraraja Concepts Axial tilt Azimuth Cardinal direction Celestial equator Celestial sphere Celestial spheres Center of mass Circular orbit Deferent and epicycle Earth's rotation Eccentricity Ecliptic Elliptic orbit Equant Geocentrism Geoheliocentrism Globe Gravity Heliocentrism Hindu units of time Jyotiṣa Kali ahargaṇa Kalpa Karana Manvantara Moonlight Nakshatra Nityayoga Parallax Precession Ritu Spherical Earth Sunlight Tithi Vāra Yuga Zodiacal sign Centres Jantar Mantar Jaipur New Delhi Ujjain Varanasi Kerala school of astronomy and mathematics Other regions Babylonian astronomy Ancient Greek astronomy Hellenistic astronomy Islamic astronomy Chinese astronomy European astronomy Months of the Vedic calendar Chaitra Vaisakha Jyeshta Aashaadha Shraavana Bhadrapada Ashvin Kartik Margashirsha Pausha Maagha Phalguna v t e India topics History Overviews Timeline Years Astronomy Clothing Coinage Economics LGBTQ Linguistics Maritime Mathematics Metallurgy Military Paper currency Postal Science and technology Ancient Stone Age Indus Valley Civilisation Vedic period Mahajanapadas Mauryas Indo-Greek Kingdom Achaemenid conquest of the Indus Valley Indo-Parthian kingdom Kushan Empire Alchon Huns Seleucid–Mauryan war Middle Kingdoms Middle kingdoms Chola Middle Ages Medieval India Hoysala Pala Kakatiya Delhi Sultanate Vijayanagara Early Modern Mughals Marathas European trade Bengal War Late modern Colonial Princely state East India Company Plassey 1857 rebellion British Raj Railways Economy Army Commander-in-Chief Zamindari Bengal Renaissance Political reforms Partition of Bengal Independence movement 1943 famine World War II Partition Republic Integration Non-Aligned Movement Five-Year Plans Sino-Indian War Indo-Pakistani wars Green Revolution White Revolution Naxal Insurgency Smiling Buddha Space programme The Emergency Indian Peace Keeping Force (IPKF) Contemporary History of India (1947–present) Economic liberalisation Pokhran-II COVID-19 pandemic Geography Geology Fossil Parks Geology of India Indian Plate Heritage National Geological Monuments of India Sacred groves of India Sacred mountains of India Sacred rivers of India Stones of India Environment Biogeographic classification Biosphere reserves Climate Climate change Earthquakes Ecoregions Environmental issues Fauna Forests Flora Geology National parks Protected areas Wildlife sanctuaries Landforms Beaches Canals Coasts Desert ECZ Extreme points Glaciers Highest point by states Islands Lakes Mountains Mountain passes Plains Indo-Gangetic Eastern coastal Western coastal Rivers Valleys Volcanoes Waterfalls Regions Central East North Northwest Northeast South Southwest Southeast West Subdivisions Autonomous administrative divisions Borders Towns Cities Districts Municipalities States and union territories See also National monuments of India National parks of India Nature worship in Indian-origin religions World Heritage Sites in India Culture of India History of India Tourism in India Politics Government Agencies Energy policy Foreign relations Parliament Lok Sabha Rajya Sabha President Vice President Prime Minister Union Council of Ministers Civil Services Cabinet Secretary State governments State legislative assemblies State legislative councils Governors, Lieutenant Governors and Administrators Chief Ministers Chief Secretaries Law Constitution Penal Code Fundamental rights, principles and duties Human rights Supreme Court Chief Justice High Courts District Courts Enforcement Federal Border Security Force (BSF) Central Industrial Security Force (CISF) Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF) Indo-Tibetan Border Police (ITBP) National Security Guard (NSG) Railway Protection Force (RPF) Sashastra Seema Bal (SSB) Special Protection Group (SPG) Intelligence Bureau of Police Research and Development (BPR&D) Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) Directorate of Revenue Intelligence (DRI) Enforcement Directorate (ED) Intelligence Bureau (IB) Joint Intelligence Committee (JIC) Narcotics Control Bureau (NCB) National Investigation Agency (NIA) Research and Analysis Wing (R&AW) Military Army Navy Air Force Politics Censorship Citizenship Elections Democracy Nationalism Political parties Reservations Scandals Scheduled groups Secularism Women in politics Economy Companies BSE SENSEX NIFTY 50 NIFTY Next 50 NIFTY 500 GIFT Nifty Governance Ministry of Finance Finance ministers Ministry of Commerce and Industry Finance Commission Economic Advisory Council Central Statistical Office Securities and Exchange Board of India Enforcement Directorate External debt Foreign trade Foreign direct investment Foreign exchange reserves Remittances Taxation Subsidies Industrial licensing Voluntary guidelines NITI Aayog Make in India Atmanirbhar Bharat Currency Indian rupee Sign History Historical Forex Digital rupee Coinage Paisa Reserve Bank of India Governor Mint Inflation Financial services Banking Insurance Multi Commodity Exchange Bullion BSE NSE India INX History COVID-19 impact Economic development Liberalisation Licence Raj Green revolution Government initiatives Numbering system People By net worth Demography Income Poverty Labour law Pensions EPFO NPS PPF States Andhra Pradesh Assam Bihar Delhi Goa Gujarat Haryana Himachal Pradesh Jammu and Kashmir Jharkhand Karnataka Kerala Ladakh Madhya Pradesh Maharashtra Mizoram Odisha Punjab Rajasthan Tamil Nadu Telangana Uttarakhand Uttar Pradesh West Bengal Sectors Agriculture Livestock Fishing Automotive Chemical Construction Defence Education Energy Electricity Nuclear Oil and gas Solar Wind Electronics and semiconductor Entertainment Forestry Gambling Healthcare Hospitals Information technology Media Cinema FM Radio Television Printing Mining Coal Iron and Steel Pharmaceuticals Pulp and paper Retail Science and technology Biotechnology Space Telecommunications Textiles Tourism Transport Aviation Civil Ports Rail Roads Electricity Water Power Regulator IRDAI RBI SEBI IBBI PFRDA Other NCLT NCLAT BIFR IBBI IBC SARFESI Act Income Tax Act Companies Act Banking Act Insurance Act FEMA Mumbai Consensus Society and culture Society Caste system Corruption Crime Demographics Indians Education Universities in India Medical colleges in India Law colleges in India Engineering colleges in India Ethnic relations Health Languages Life expectancy Literacy Poverty Prisons Religion Socio-economic issues Standard of living Water supply and sanitation Women Sexuality Youth Culture Arts and entertainment Architecture Blogging Cinema Comics Webcomics Cuisine wine Dance Dress Folklore Festivals Literature Media television Martial arts Music Painting Physical culture Public holidays Sculpture tallest Sport Traditional v t e Astronomy Outline History Timeline Astronomer Astronomical symbols Astronomical object Glossary ... in space Astronomy by Manner Amateur Observational Sidewalk Space telescope Celestial subject Galactic / Extragalactic Local system Solar EM methods Radio Submillimetre Infrared ( Far-infrared ) Visible-light (optical) Ultraviolet X-ray History Gamma-ray Other methods Neutrino Cosmic rays Gravitational radiation High-energy Radar Spherical Multi-messenger Culture Australian Aboriginal Babylonian Chinese Egyptian Greek Hebrew Indian Inuit Maya Medieval Islamic Persian Serbian folk Tibetan Optical telescopes List Category Extremely large telescope Extremely Large Telescope Gran Telescopio Canarias Hale Telescope Hubble Space Telescope Keck Observatory Large Binocular Telescope Southern African Large Telescope Very Large Telescope Related Archaeoastronomy Astrobiology Astrochemistry Astroinformatics Astrology and astronomy Astrometry Astronomers Monument Astroparticle physics Astrophysics Astrotourism Binoculars Constellation IAU Cosmogony Photometry Planetarium Planetary geology Physical cosmology Quantum cosmology List of astronomers French Medieval Islamic Russian Women Telescope X-ray telescope history lists Zodiac Category Commons v t e Science and technology in India Architecture Astronomy Cartography Coinage Logic Mathematics National calendar Engineering History Inventions and discoveries Maritime history Military Measurement systems Metallurgy Education Higher education Research institutes Supercomputing Science museums Sectors Auto Biotechnology Chemical High-speed rail IT Software Nuclear power Technology Pharmaceuticals Renewable energy Telecommunications 4G People Engineers Inventors Nobel laureates Science writers Scientists Technology writers Institutes and programs Ministry of Science and Technology National Centre for Polar and Ocean Research ISRO DRDO Council of Scientific and Industrial Research Category Commons v t e Days and months of the Hindu calendar Days Pratipada Dvitiya Tritiya Chaturthi Panchami Shashthi Saptami Ashtami Navami Dashami Ekadashi Dvadashi Trayodashi Chaturdashi Amavasya Purnima Months Lunar Chaitra Vaishakha Jyeshtha Ashadha Shravana Bhadrapada Ashvin Kartika Margashirsha (Agrahayana) Pausha Magha Phalguna Adhika-masa Solar Meṣa Vṛṣabha Mithuna Karkaṭa Siṃha Kanya Tulā Vṛścika Dhanu Makara Kumbha Mīna Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Karaṇa_(pañcāṅga)&oldid=1297839953 " Categories : Calendars Units of time Hindu astronomy Astronomy in India History of astronomy This page was last edited on 28 June 2025, at 21:14 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Karaṇa (pañcāṅga) Add languages Add topic

