Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Considerations 2 Similar ideas 3 See also 4 References 5 Further reading 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Reality tunnel 2 languages Русский Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Theory of personal perception Reality tunnel is a theory that, with a subconscious set of mental filters formed from beliefs and experiences , every individual interprets the same world differently, hence " Truth is in the eye of the beholder".  It is similar to the idea of representative realism , and was coined by Timothy Leary (1920–1996). It was further expanded on by Robert Anton Wilson (1932–2007), who wrote about the idea extensively in his 1983 book Prometheus Rising .

Wilson and Leary co-wrote a chapter in Leary's 1988 book Neuropolitique (a revised edition of the 1977 book Neuropolitics ), in which they explained further: The gene-pool politics which monitor power struggles among terrestrial humanity are transcended in this info-world, i.e. seen as static, artificial charades. One is neither coercively manipulated into another's territorial reality nor forced to struggle against it with reciprocal game-playing (the usual soap opera dramatics). One simply elects, consciously, whether or not to share the other's reality tunnel.

[ 1 ] Considerations [ edit ] Every kind of ignorance in the world all results from not realizing that our perceptions are gambles. We believe what we see and then we believe our interpretation of it, we don't even know we are making an interpretation most of the time. We think this is reality. – Robert Anton Wilson [ 2 ] [ 3 ] The idea does not necessarily imply that there is no objective truth ; rather that our access to it is mediated through our senses, experience, conditioning , prior beliefs, and other non-objective factors. The implied individual world each person occupies is said to be their reality tunnel. The term can also apply to groups of people united by beliefs: we can speak of the fundamentalist Christian reality tunnel or the ontological naturalist reality tunnel.

A parallel can be seen in the psychological concept of confirmation bias —the human tendency to notice and assign significance to observations that confirm existing beliefs, while filtering out or rationalizing away observations that do not fit with prior beliefs and expectations. This helps to explain why reality tunnels are usually transparent to their inhabitants. While it seems most people take their beliefs to correspond to the "one true objective reality", Robert Anton Wilson emphasizes that each person's reality tunnel is their own artistic creation, whether they realize it or not.

Wilson—like John C. Lilly in his 1968 book Programming and Metaprogramming in the Human Biocomputer —relates that through various techniques one can break down old reality tunnels and impose new reality tunnels by removing old filters and replacing them with new ones, with new perspectives on reality—at will. This is attempted through various processes of deprogramming using neuro-linguistic programming , cybernetics , hypnosis , biofeedback devices, meditation , controlled use of hallucinogens , and forcibly acting out other reality tunnels. Thus, it is believed one's reality tunnel can be widened to take full advantage of human potential and experience reality on more positive levels. Robert Anton Wilson's Prometheus Rising [ 4 ] is (among other things) a guidebook to the exploration of various reality tunnels.

Similar ideas [ edit ] In line with Kantian thought, [ 5 ] as well as the work of Norwood Russell Hanson , studies have indeed shown [ 6 ] [ 7 ] [ 8 ] [ citation needed ] that our brains "filter" the data coming from our senses. This "filtering" is largely unconscious and may be influenced—more-or-less in many ways, in societies and in individuals—by biology, [ 9 ] [ 10 ] [ 11 ] cultural constructs [ 12 ] including education and language [ 13 ] (such as memes), life experiences, [ 14 ] preferences [ 15 ] and mental state, [ 16 ] [ 17 ] belief systems (e.g.

world view , the stock market ), momentary needs, pathology, etc.

An everyday example of such filtering is our ability to follow a conversation, or read, without being distracted by surrounding conversations, once called the cocktail party effect .

[ 7 ] [ 18 ] In his 1986 book Waking Up , [ 19 ] [ 20 ] Charles Tart —an American psychologist and parapsychologist known for his psychological work on the nature of consciousness—introduced the phrase "consensus trance" to the lexicon. Tart likened normal waking consciousness to hypnotic trance. He discussed how each of us is from birth inducted to the trance of the society around us.

[ 21 ] Tart noted both similarities and differences between hypnotic trance induction and consensus trance induction. (See G. I. Gurdjieff ).

Some disciplines— Zen for example, and monastic schools such as Sufism —seek to overcome such conditioned realities by returning to less thoughtful and channeled states of mind. Similarly, the philosophy of life Pyrrhonism seeks to overcome these conditioned realities by inducing epoche ( suspension of judgment ) through skeptical arguments.

Constructivism is a modern psychological response to reality-tunneling.

[ 22 ] For Wilson, a fully functioning human ought to be aware of their reality tunnel, and be able to keep it flexible enough to accommodate, and to some degree empathize with, different reality tunnels, different "game rules", different cultures ... Constructivist thinking is the exercise of metacognition to become aware of our reality tunnels or labyrinths and the elements that "program" them. Constructivist thinking should, ideally, decrease the chance that we will confuse our map of the world with the actual world ... [This philosophy] is currently expressed in many Eastern consciousness-exploration techniques.

[ 23 ] See also [ edit ] 8-Circuit Model of Consciousness Allegory of the Cave Altered state of consciousness Collective consciousness Collective unconscious Consensus reality Consensus theory of truth Cosmic consciousness Direct and indirect realism Fake news General semantics Hyperphantasia Idealism Ideasthesia Intellectual scotoma Paradigm Perspectivism Phaneron Phenomenology Philosophy of Perception Sensorium Schema (psychology) Social constructionism The Social Construction of Reality Self-concept Theory of Mind Tunnel vision (metaphor) Umwelt " Who is the master that sees and hears?

" World view References [ edit ] ^ Neuropolitique, New Falcon Publications, 2006, p. 93 ^ Wilson, Robert (4 January 2007).

"Real Reality" .

YouTube .

Archived from the original on 2021-12-21 . Retrieved 23 July 2011 .

^ Wilson, Robert Anton (2003).

"Maybe Logic: The Lives And Ideas Of Robert Anton Wilson -- Illustrated Interview" . American Buddha . Retrieved 23 July 2011 .

^ Robert Anton Wilson, Prometheus Rising . New Falcon Publications, 1983, 262pp.

ISBN 1-56184-056-4 ^ Matthew Alper, The "God" Part of the Brain: A Scientific Interpretation of Human Spirituality and God . Sourcebooks, Inc., 2008, p.50f.

"The human mind, Kant contended, must be born, not as a clean slate, but with built-in 'modes of perception' that work to organize the multitude of information our sense organs are constantly imparting to us. Without such built-in processing mechanisms, we would experience reality as an unintelligible jumble of sense experiences ." ^ Seed, How do brains filter data?

^ a b New Scientist: ' Party chat' brain filter discovered ^ BBC, Brain 'irrelevance filter' found , 10 Dec 2007. Retrieved 10-11-09.

^ Example, autism . Autistics are unable "to understand the social communication of neurotypicals", and "Three- to five-year-old autistic children are less likely to exhibit social understanding, approach others spontaneously, imitate and respond to emotions...." ^ Bryn Mawr: Serendip, Through Different Eyes: How People with Autism Experience the World ^ See Synesthesia , Apophenia ^ Thom Hartmann, How We Experience The World Differently ^ See Representational systems (NLP) , Linguistic relativity ^ See Constructivism (learning theory) ^ See Solipsism ^ Enhanced Visual Motion Perception in Major Depressive Disorder , The Journal of Neuroscience, July 15, 2009, 29(28):9072-9077 ; doi : 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1003-09.2009 ^ See Qualia ^ Cherry, E. C. (1953) Some experiments on the recognition of speech, with one and with two ears. Journal of Acoustical Society of America 25(5), 975–979.

^ Charles Tart, Waking Up: Overcoming the Obstacles to Human Potential . iUniverse, Inc., 2001, 344pp.

ISBN 0-595-19664-0 ^ [1] Review by Howard Rheingold ^ J. Jeffrey Means, Mary Ann Nelson, Trauma & evil: healing the wounded soul . Fortress Press, 2000, pp. 30–32.

ISBN 0-8006-3270-2 .

"Awakening from the consensus trances in which we are stuck as a result of living in a violent society is rare." ^ Karen Eriksen, Garrett McAuliffe, Teaching counselors and therapists: constructivist and developmental course design . Greenwood Publishing Group, 2001. p. 366.

ISBN 0-89789-795-1 ^ R. Elliott Ingersoll and Cecile Brennan, in Eriksen, McAuliffe 2001, p. 336.

Further reading [ edit ] Thomas Metzinger , The Ego Tunnel: The Science of the Mind and the Myth of the Self . Basic Books, 2009, 288pp.

ISBN 0-465-04567-7 .

P. D. Ouspensky , The Fourth Way : A Record of Talks and Answers to Questions Based on the Teaching of G. I. Gurdjieff . (Prepared under the general supervision of Sophia Ouspensky). New York: Knopf, 1957; London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1957.

External links [ edit ] How our reality tunnels allow us to see only certain things Robert Anton Wilson discusses reality tunnel concept (MP3; 11m) v t e Timothy Leary Bibliography Books The Psychedelic Experience: A Manual Based on the Tibetan Book of the Dead (1964) High Priest (1968) Neurologic (1973) Flashbacks (1983) Theories Reality tunnel Philosophy Eight-circuit model of consciousness Models Interpersonal circumplex Research Harvard Psilocybin Project Concord Prison Experiment Marsh Chapel Experiment League for Spiritual Discovery Communities Zihuatanejo Project Millbrook Music Turn On, Tune In, Drop Out (1967 album) " Give Peace a Chance " (1969, vocals) You Can Be Anyone This Time Around (1970 album) Collaborators Ram Dass Ralph Metzner Robert Anton Wilson Related Set and setting Turn on, tune in, drop out Question authority Ego death Leary–Lettvin debate Leary v. United States " Tomorrow Never Knows " (1966 song) " Legend of a Mind " (1968 song) " Come Together " (1969 song) Return Engagement (1983 documentary) The Sekhmet Hypothesis (1995 book) Dying to Know: Ram Dass & Timothy Leary (2014 documentary) Joanna Harcourt-Smith Winona Ryder (goddaughter) v t e Robert Anton Wilson Fiction The Sex Magicians (1973) The Illuminatus! Trilogy (1975) Schrödinger's Cat Trilogy (1979) Masks of the Illuminati (1981) The Historical Illuminatus Chronicles (1982–1991) Philosophical and non-fiction Playboy's Book of Forbidden Words (1972) Sex, Drugs and Magick (1973) The Book of the Breast (1974) Neuropolitics (1978) The Game of Life (1979) Prometheus Rising (1983) The New Inquisition (1986) Natural Law, or Don't Put a Rubber on Your Willy (1987) Ishtar Rising (1989) Quantum Psychology (1990) Everything Is Under Control (1998) TSOG: The Thing That Ate the Constitution (2002) Cosmic Trigger trilogy Cosmic Trigger I: The Final Secret of the Illuminati (1977) Cosmic Trigger II: Down to Earth (1991) Cosmic Trigger III: My Life After Death (1995) Plays and screenplays Wilhelm Reich in Hell (1987) Reality Is What You Can Get Away With (1992) The Walls Came Tumbling Down (1997) Essays The Illuminati Papers (1980) Right Where You Are Sitting Now (1983) Coincidance: A Head Test (1988) Email to the Universe (2005) Related Semiotext(e) SF Discordianism Operation Mindfuck Principia Discordia Guerrilla ontology Fnord Hagbard Celine Celine's laws Ewige Blumenkraft Reality tunnel 23 enigma SNAFU Principle Chaos magic Church of the SubGenius Ivan Stang Discordian works Neophile Association for Consciousness Exploration Timothy Leary Eight-circuit model of consciousness E-Prime "The map is not the territory" Illuminati (game) v t e Worldview Related terms Basic beliefs / Beliefs Collective consciousness / Collective unconscious Conceptual system Context Conventional wisdom Conventions Cultural movement Epic poetry / National epics / World folk-epics Facts and factoids Framing Ideology Life stance Lifestyle Memes / Memeplex Mental model Metanarrative Mindset Norms Paradigm Philosophical theory Point of view Presuppositions Primal world beliefs Reality tunnel Schemata School of thought Set Social reality Theory of everything Umwelt Value system Aspects Biases Academic Attentional Attitude polarization Belief Cognitive list Collective narcissism Confirmation Congruence Cryptomnesia Cultural Ethnocentrism Filter bubble Homophily In-group favoritism Magical thinking Media Observational error Observer-expectancy Selective exposure Selective perception Self-deception Self-fulfilling prophecy Clever Hans effect placebo effect wishful thinking Status quo Stereotyping ethnic Change and maintenance Activism Argument Argumentum ad populum Attitude change Brainwashing Censorship Charisma Circular reporting Cognitive dissonance Critical thinking Crowd manipulation Cultural dissonance Deprogramming Echo chamber Education religious values Euphemism Excommunication Fearmongering Historical revisionism negationism Ideological repression Indoctrination Manipulation (psychology) Media manipulation Media regulation Missionaries Moral entrepreneurship Persuasion Polite fiction Political engineering Propaganda Propaganda model Proselytism Psychological warfare Religious conversion forced Religious persecution Religious uniformity Revolutions Rhetoric Self-censorship Social change Social control Social engineering Social influence Social progress Suppression of dissent Systemic bias Woozle effect Culture Anthropology cultural social Calendars Ceremonies Coronations Cross-cultural psychology Cultural psychology Doctrine Employment / Serfdom / Slavery Families Funerals / Burial Games Holidays Hygiene ritual Identity (philosophy) cultural Institutions Liminality Liturgy Marriage Myth and ritual Oaths Pilgrimages Play Rites of passage secular Rituals Social class / Social status / Caste Symbols Symbolic boundaries Worship Groupthink Abilene paradox Bandwagon effect Collectives Collective behavior animal Collective effervescence Collective intelligence Conformity Consensus theory Crowd psychology Cults Culture-bound syndromes Deindividuation Doublethink Emergence Emotional contagion Entitativity False consensus effect Folie à deux Group action Group cohesiveness Group dynamics Group emotion Group polarization Groupshift Herd behavior Holism Hysterical contagion Information cascade In-group and out-group Invisible hand Lynching Majoritarianism / Mob rule Mass action Mass psychogenic illness Milieu control Mobbing Moral panic Peer pressure Pluralistic ignorance Political correctness Pseudoconsensus Scapegoating Self-organization Social action Social behavior Social emotions Social exclusion Social facilitation animal Social group Social proof Social psychology Sociology Spontaneous order Status quo Stigmergy Swarm behaviour System justification Viral phenomena Knowledge Axioms tacit assumptions Conceptual framework Epistemology outline Evidence anecdotal scientific Explanations Faith fideism Gnosis Intuition Meaning-making Memory Meta-knowledge Methodology Observation Observational learning Perception Reasoning fallacious logic Revelation Testimony Tradition folklore Truth consensus theory criteria World disclosure Metaphysics Ætiology Afterlife Anima mundi Causality Concepts Consciousness mind–body problem Cosmogony Cosmology religious Creation myth Deities existence Destiny Eschatology Everything / Nothing Evolution Existence Fiction / Nonfiction Free will Future History Ideas Idios kosmos Illusions Incarnation Information Intelligence Magic Matter Miracles Mythology comparative National mythoi Nature philosophical Ontology Origin myths political Otherworlds axes mundi Physics natural philosophy Problem of evil Reality Souls Spirit Supernature Teleology Theology Time Unobservables Value Aesthetic taste Aesthetic Almsgiving / Charity Altruism Autonomy Beauty Codes of conduct Comedy Common good Conscience Consent Creativity Disgust Duty Economics Ecstasy emotional religious Elegance Emotions Aesthetic Entertainment Eroticism Ethics Étiquette Family values Food and drink prohibitions unclean animals Golden Rule Guilt / Culpability Happiness Harmony Honour Human rights Judgement Justice Law jurisprudence religious Liberty political freedom Love Magnificence Maxims Meaning of life Morality public Obligations Peace Piety Praxeology Principles Punishment Qualities Repentance Reverence Rights Sexuality ethics Sin Social stigma Stewardship Styles Sublime, The Suffering Sympathy Taboo Theodicy Trust Unspoken rules Virtues and Vices Works of art Wrongdoing Examples Attitudes Misanthropy Optimism Pessimism Reclusion Weltschmerz Economic and political ideologies Anarchism Authoritarianism Capitalism Christian democracy Collectivism Colonialism Communalism Communism Communitarianism Conservatism Constitutionalism Distributism Environmentalism Extremism Fanaticism Fascism Feminism Fundamentalism Globalism Green politics Imperialism Individualism Industrialisation Intellectualism Islamism Liberalism Libertarianism Masculism Militarism Monarchism Nationalism Pacifism Progressivism Radicalism Reformism Republicanism Sentientism Social democracy Socialism Utilitarianism Veganism Religions African traditional religions Baháʼí Buddhism Caodaism Cheondoism Chinese folk religion Christianity Eastern Orthodox Church Ethnic religions Hinduism Hòa Hảo Islam Jainism Judaism Korean shamanism Modern paganism Rastafari Secularity / Irreligion / Agnosticism / Atheism Shinto Sikhism Spiritism Taoism Tenrikyo Unitarian Universalism Zoroastrianism Schools of philosophy Agriculturalism Aristotelianism Atomism Averroism Cartesianism Cārvāka Collectivism Confucianism / New Confucianism Critical theory Cynicism Cyrenaics Determinism Dualism Eleatics Empiricism Epicureanism Eretrian school Existentialism Fatalism Foundationalism Hedonism Hegelianism Hermeneutics Historicism / New historicism Holism Humanism / Renaissance humanism Idealism Illuminationism ʿIlm al-Kalām Individualism Ionian Kantianism / Neo-Kantianism Kokugaku Legalism Logicians Materialism Megarian school Modernism / Postmodernism Mohism Monism Natural law Naturalism (Chinese) Naturalism (Western) Nihilism Peripatetic Phenomenology Platonism / Neoplatonism Pluralism Positivism Pragmatism Pre-Socratic Pyrrhonism Pythagoreanism / Neopythagoreanism Rationalism Reductionism Scholasticism / Neo-scholasticism Sentientism Social constructionism Sophism Spinozism Stoicism Structuralism / Post-structuralism Thomism Transcendentalism Utilitarianism Yangism Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Reality_tunnel&oldid=1275543539 " Categories : Belief Consciousness Community building Popular psychology Reality Social constructionism Timothy Leary Robert Anton Wilson Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2009 This page was last edited on 13 February 2025, at 17:29 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Reality tunnel 2 languages Add topic

