Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Format Toggle Format subsection 1.1 Electronic logbooks 2 Applications Toggle Applications subsection 2.1 Maritime logbooks 2.2 Shift logbooks 2.3 Manufacturing logbooks 2.4 Other applications 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Logbook 3 languages 한국어 Simple English 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Book for recording activities For books with logarithm tables, see Mathematical table § Tables of logarithms .

Logbook used for NASA's Mars Ingenuity helicopter Two different logbooks for scuba divers.

A logbook (or log book ) is a record used to record states, events, or conditions applicable to complex machines or the personnel who operate them. Logbooks are commonly associated with the operation of aircraft, nuclear plants, particle accelerators, and ships (among other applications).

The term logbook originated with the ship's log , a maritime record of important events in the management, operation, and navigation of a ship. The captain was responsible for keeping a log, as a minimum, of navigational wind, speed, direction and position.

Format [ edit ] Logbooks come in many varieties, but they are sometimes standardized in form and/or content within certain organizations or industries. In some applications like flight training or trucking hours of service , they  contain specific information used to satisfy legal requirements.

Electronic logbooks [ edit ] Prior to the advent of mobile computing , logbooks were almost exclusively printed and bound in hard copy form.  While physical logbooks offer advantages in frontline applications with many users (like aircraft maintenance logs), the proliferation of cloud computing and mobile devices has enabled the development of electronic logbooks .  They may be as complex as software packages, or as simple as editable spreadsheets , but electronic logbooks offer several advantages including virtually unlimited capacity and digital backups .

Applications [ edit ] Maritime logbooks [ edit ] To record key navigation, engine watch, port calls and other operational activities on board vessels of all sizes, marine logbooks must meet the specific reporting requirements of IMO , SOLAS and flag states. When maritime logbooks are of the electronic variety, manually-inserted information is normally combined with data recorded from the vessel's instruments such as time and position. Typical marine logbooks are: Deck logbook – Records navigational events related to the voyage and operations on board Dynamic positioning logbook – Manual recording of operations related to Dynamic Positioning (DP) operations Engine logbook – Records engine events related to the engine and machinery operation Oil record book – Records events related to oil and dirty water as required by IMO's MARPOL convention [ 1 ] Operational log – Records events related to vessel operation, i.e. performance, cargo handling and maritime operations. The Operational Log will typically need some customization to owner's requirement and trade.

Port or harbor logbook – Records incoming and outgoing vessels at a port Radio logbook – Records events relevant to radio traffic as required by IMO and the flag states The maritime industry is increasingly adopting digital logbooks to replace traditional paper-based records, aiming to enhance operational efficiency, ensure compliance with international regulations, and improve data accuracy.
A significant development in this field is the creation of ISO 4891: Ships and Marine Technology – Interoperability of Smart Applications for Ships .

[ 2 ] This standard establishes a framework for the seamless integration of smart applications on vessels, facilitating efficient communication and data exchange between various systems. The standard was developed through a collaboration between DIN , the German Institute for Standardization, and the Japan Ship Technology Research Association [ 3 ] and several reputed stakeholders of the maritime industry.
The adoption of digital logbooks and the establishment of interoperability standards like ISO 4891 reflect a broader trend towards digital transformation in maritime operations, promoting safer, more efficient, and sustainable shipping practices.

Shift logbooks [ edit ] On any industrial site, there is a continuous stream of operational, maintenance and safety events occurring at all levels and areas within the process.

[ 4 ] An electronic shift logbook is used at power plants and in process industry where several shift teams cooperate in maintaining production. Typically the electronic shift logbook is used to record state at the production plant, but it can also contain simple planning functions that notify personnel about upcoming maintenance activities. Compared to the paper logbook the electronic shift logbook enhance the value of the gathered information through; Search functions Defined plant hierarchy for registration of logbook entries Classification according to certain entry types Statistics about most problematic areas Management reports Additionally, access to the information storage can be controlled through user authentication and authorizations mechanisms.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] Manufacturing logbooks [ edit ] This section contains promotional content .

Please help improve it by removing promotional language and inappropriate external links , and by adding encyclopedic text written from a neutral point of view .

( June 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) In manufacturing processes, eLogbook [ 7 ] is required to simplify and digitize traditional logbooks and manual paperwork. It offers an easy-to-use platform that allows you to record, track, and manage production activities, inventory, quality control, and maintenance in real-time. With its intuitive interface and robust features, eLogbook revolutionizes the way to manage documentation and saves time and money. Key features and functionalities of eLogbook in the manufacturing process: Real-time data Inventory management Quality control Maintenance management Customizable reports Integration with existing systems Other applications [ edit ] It has since been applied to a variety of other uses, including: Aircraft pilots must maintain a pilot logbook to record their time spent flying and in a simulator. In addition, aircraft operators must maintain an aircraft technical logbook (or "tech logs") recording the aircraft's flights, maintenance and defects.

In a project , a logbook is a recording which is compiled while it is being done may be called a project diary .

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] In the PRINCE2 project management framework, daily logs are used to record issues, actions or events not caught by other types of registers or logs within the framework. Examples of other logs or registers in PRINCE2 include the lessons log, risk register, issue register, quality register or backlog.

In skydiving , a logbook serves as a parachutist's personal history in the sport and also serves as an identifying document. It also provides drop zones proof to back one's skydiving licenses, ratings and currency.

[ citation needed ] In scuba diving , the dive log documents the experience of a diver by logging a diver's dives.

In the fishing industry , a logbook is used to record catch data as part of the fisheries regulations . It is then submitted to the fishing authorities of the vessel's flag state.

[ citation needed ] For amateur radio , the logbook is where the hams register their contacts and other radio operations. There are several programs to help radio operators in the management of their logbook.

[ citation needed ] For commercial vehicles : In Canada, [ 10 ] the United States, [ 11 ] New Zealand [ 12 ] and other countries, a logbook is used to register driver and operator work time for commercial heavy vehicles. In the United States hours of service are recorded in a logbook. In New Zealand it is referred to as work-time .

In the United Kingdom, a vehicle registration certificate (V5C) and service history is often referred to as a "logbook".

[ 13 ] A race car log book is a document certifying that a car is prepared to a given set of rules and is safe for competitions.

Lab notebooks and electronic lab notebooks are used in research and scientific settings.

See also [ edit ] Look up logbook in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Logbooks .

Inventor's notebook Logging (computing) Service book (disambiguation) Timesheet References [ edit ] ^ "proimio pro-ORB - The original e-ORB" , proimio , Retrieved on 28 October 2012.

^ "ISO 4891:2024" .

ISO . Retrieved 2025-02-04 .

^ Japan Ship Technology Research Association ^ "j5 Operations Logbook Software - j5 International" .

j5 International . Retrieved 2016-05-24 .

^ "ABB shift book product website" , ABB Group , Retrieved on 27 July 2015.

^ "Fortum TOPi logbook product website" , Fortum , Retrieved on 27 July 2015.

^ "The Power of eLogbook: Streamlining Manufacturing For Frontline Success" . 14 May 2024 . Retrieved 2024-06-03 .

^ Triant G. Flouris; Dennis Lock (2016), "Case History or Project Diary", Managing Aviation Projects from Concept to Completion , Routledge, p. 484, ISBN 9781317101956 ^ Nick Graham (2014), "Project Log Checklist", Project Management Checklists For Dummies , John Wiley & Sons, p. 126, ISBN 9781118931431 ^ Ontario Ministry of Transportation (25 July 2019).

"Commercial Vehicle Operators' Safety Manual" .

www.mto.gov.on.ca/ .

^ Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration (17 December 2020).

"FMCSA Hours of Service (HOS)" .

www.fmcsa.dot.gov .

^ "Heavy vehicle work time requirements and logbooks" .

DT Driver Training . Retrieved 2018-04-25 .

^ "Get a vehicle log book (V5C)" .

v t e Historiography Historians list / by area of study History historians historicity history theories of history Historical sources Types Primary sources Secondary sources Tertiary sources Sources Annals Archives Artifacts Archaeological site Chronicles Codices Deeds Facsimiles Features Hieroglyphs Historical documents Logbooks Manuscripts Illuminated Oral tradition Papyri Religious texts Scrolls War diaries Service records Fields of study By scale Big History World history Human history Local history Microhistory By source Archival science / Library and information science ( template ) Books / Writing systems Chorography Chronology dating Diplomatics Encyclopaedistics Epigraphy Genealogy Heraldry Numismatics (Money) Onomastics Oral history preservation Phaleristics Philology Postage stamps Prosopography Sigillography Toponymy Vexillology By topic Anthropology / Paleoanthropology Cultural Ecology / Environment / Geography Economic Business Capitalism Perspectives on capitalism by school of thought Thought Intellectual Geistesgeschichte Linguistics Maritime Medieval churches Military Political Constitutional Diplomatic Social Feminism Gender Indigenous Labour LGBTQ Rural Quantitative Urban Women Methodology Case study Periodization Historical eras Tarikh Three-age system Approaches, schools Annales school History of mentalities Nouvelle histoire Historiometry / Cliometrics Comparative historical research Critical Decoloniality Feminist Historical anthropology Historical determinism Historism Historical-critical method Humanistic Indiscipline of history [ pt ] Leninist Marxist Historical materialism Nationalist Ancestral civilisation Nationalization of history People's history Subaltern Studies Pop history Quantitative history Revisionist Transnational Whig Great Man theory Concepts General Change and continuity Historic preservation Historic recurrence Historical significance Historicity Historiology [ es ] Theory of history [ de ] Philosophy Specific Black legend Coloniality and decolonization of knowledge Dark Ages Historical negationism Historian's fallacy / Presentism Invented tradition Modernisation theory Narratives Paradigm shift Pax list Thirty-year rule Transhistoricity Translatio imperii / Translatio studii Vaticinium ex eventu Periodization of modern history Age of Discovery Age of Enlightenment European Civil War / Second Thirty Years' War Long 18th / 19th century Renaissance Continuity thesis By country or region Africa African historiography Egypt Pyramid construction techniques Black Egypt Thesis [ es ] Ethiopia Morocco Greater Morocco Rwanda Double genocide theory Maafa Americas Canada Metropolitan-hinterland thesis Residential schools Staples thesis Indigenous population history Latin America Argentina May Revolution / Causes Revisionist [ es ] Peru Iquicha Royalism Colonial Spanish America Casta United States African-American history Nadir of American race relations Neoabolitionism Reconstruction era Consensus history Cyclical theory Frontier thesis Political history Eras Progressive-era historians Eurasia Albania Dealbanisation Austria Habsburg myth Balhae Belarus Litvinism Bulgaria Byzantine Empire [ de ] Early [ ru ] Croatia Europe Ancient [ ru ] Medieval [ ru ] New Age [ ru ] Georgia Aryan Kartli Greek Ages of Man Iran 2,500-year celebration Japan Korea Nationalist Goguryeo controversies North Macedonia Philippines Early settlements Portugal [ pt ] Lusotropicalism Romania Great Union Serbia Kosovo Myth Sweden Götaland theory Switzerland Taiwan Ukraine Executed Renaissance Vietnam Nam tiến Trưng sisters Ancient Rome Catilinarian conspiracy Christianization Constantinian shift Expansion Fall of Western Rome Prosopography Succession Byzantine succession Moscow, third Rome Ottoman claim Problem of two emperors China 5000-year civilization assertion Archaeology Wunu School [ zh ] Century of humiliation Conquest dynasty "Chineseness" debate New Qing History Golden ages Hua–Yi distinction Four Barbarians Sinocentrism Self-Strengthening Movement Sprouts of capitalism Tibetan sovereignty debate France Cordon sanitaire Frankish Interregnum [ fr ] Grand Siècle Legendary Saracen [ fr ] Location of Alésia [ fr ] Lyon [ fr ] Historiography of Vichy France Germany Alltagsgeschichte Borussian myth Historikerstreit Sonderweg Strukturgeschichte [ de ] Sybel-Ficker controversy Vergangenheitsbewältigung India Greater Magadha Indocentrism Indigenous Aryanism Ireland Great Famine " More Irish than the Irish themselves " Revisionism Revolutionary period Italy Fascist Italy Fourth Italian War of Independence Historiae Patriae Monumenta Historical Series of the Bank of Italy Italians, the good people Rerum italicarum scriptores Revisionism of Risorgimento Southern question Neo-Bourbonism Poland Golden Liberty Sarmatism Deluge Partitions Polish People's Republic [ pl ] Russia Anti-Normanism Pre-Revolutionary Russia [ ru ] Skeptic School [ ru ] Soviet Union October Revolution Soviet famine of 1930–1933 Causes of the Holodomor Holodomor genocide question Holodomor in modern politics Spain Black legend / White legend Hispanism Carlism in the Francoist era Convivencia Inquisition Limpieza de sangre controversy [ es ] Reconquista Islamic revolution of Spain [ es ] Revisionist Colonies or Provinces Spanish decline [ es ] Ser de España [ es ] Turkey Kemalist Ottoman Empire Ghaza thesis Decline thesis United Kingdom Poor Laws Scotland Kingdom of Alba Westminster Stone Storm over the gentry Suffragette Campaign Tudor myth Ricardians Winter of Discontent British Empire Cambridge School Porter–MacKenzie debate Second colonial occupation Oceania Colonial Australia By war, conflict v t e Military historiography Military history List of military museums Pre-18th century conflicts Albigensian Crusade Catharism debate Crusades Islamic views Eighty Years' War Origins Fall of Babylon Gallic Wars Late Bronze Age collapse Dorian invasion Sea Peoples Peloponnesian War 18th and 19th century conflicts Coalition Wars (1792–1815) French Revolution Causes War in the Vendée Napoleonic era Invasion of Russia Waterloo American Civil War Origins Turning point Franco-Prussian War Causes Paris Commune Great Game Indian Rebellion of 1857 Causes Paraguayan War War of 1812 Origins War of the Pacific Causes World War I Causes ( Color books / Fischer thesis ) Late Ottoman genocides ( Causes of the Armenian genocide ) Patriotic consent Persian famine of 1917–1919 Powder keg of Europe Schlieffen Plan Spirit of 1914 / 1917 Treaty of Brest-Litovsk , Germany imposed this on Russia in 1918 Treaty of Versailles Reparations War guilt question Article 231 Reichstag inquiry Interwar period Burning of Smyrna Polish–Soviet War Causes Spanish Civil War Background World War II Causes "Blitzkrieg" concept Broad vs. narrow front German resistance to Nazism Nazi foreign policy debate Eastern Front Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact Soviet offensive plans Soviets and the Warsaw Uprising Massacres of Poles in Volhynia and Eastern Galicia Winter War Background Spirit The Holocaust Auschwitz bombing debate Awareness in Nazi Germany and German-occupied Europe Functionalism–intentionalism debate In relation to the Armenian genocide / Nakba Pope Pius XII and the Holocaust Pius Wars "Polish death camp" Responsibility Slovakia Uniqueness Pacific War Atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki "Battle for Australia" Bengal famine Second Sino-Japanese War Nanjing Massacre Western Front Battle of France Guilty Men Résistancialisme Vichy France Cold War Origins 1948 Palestine war Palestinian expulsion and flight / Ongoing Nakba Zionism as settler colonialism New Historians Malayan Emergency Causes Algerian War Six-Day War Origins Iranian revolution Causes Iran–Iraq War Falklands War Sovereignty dispute Sri Lankan civil war Origins Post-Cold War Russo-Georgian War Background Responsibility Syrian revolution Causes Related Conflict thesis Gunpowder and gun transmission War and genocide Category By person Political leaders Adolf Hitler Alexander the Great Amin al-Husseini Aurangzeb Cato the Younger Che Guevara Chiang Ching-kuo [ zh ] Chiang Kai Shek [ zh ] Constantine the Great Gregory Palamas Horatio Nelson Hypatia Jiang Zemin [ zh ] Joseph Stalin [ ru ] José de San Martín Juan Manuel de Rosas Klemens von Metternich Leonid Brezhnev Louis Riel Mao Zedong [ zh ] Muammar Gaddafi Napoleon Neville Chamberlain Pedro II of Brazil Simon Bolivar Cult of personality [ es ] Bolivarianism Saladin Sun Yat-sen [ zh ] Thomas Aquinas Thomas Jefferson Ulysses S. Grant Warren G. Harding Yuan Shikai [ zh ] Zhou Enlai [ zh ] Zhuge Liang [ zh ] Historical rankings Australia Canada Modern Germany Netherlands United Kingdom United States Others The Beatles Charles Darwin Friedrich Nietzsche H. P. Lovecraft Jane Austen Muhammed Historicity Judaism Medieval Christian Jesus Historicity Resurrection Religious perspectives Christianity Judaism Islam J. R. R. Tolkien The Lord of the Rings Madonna Robert Falcon Scott Socrates Søren Kierkegaard William Shakespeare Other topics Bears in antiquity Crisis of historiography [ pt ] Feudalism Library of Alexandria Nationalism in the Middle Ages Professionalization and institutionalization of history Salons Western European colonialism and colonization Desacralization of knowledge Economics Industrial Revolution Great Recession Great Depression School of Thoughts Historical school of economics English historical school of economics Religion Avestan geography Early Christianity Background Historical reliability of the Gospels Primacy of Peter Opposition to Papal supremacy Proto-orthodox Christianity Early Islam Criticism of the Quran Succession to Muhammad Islamic golden age Kharijites Ecclesiastical history of the Catholic Church Second Vatican Council Hermeneutics of Vatican Council II [ it ] Hesychast controversy Protestant Reformation Proto-Protestantism Criticism of Protestantism Protestant work ethic Jesuit historiography Modern Jewish history Wissenschaft des Judentums Schools of thought Biblical criticism Catholic theology Panbabylonism Urreligion Perennial Religionsgeschichtliche Schule Roman Revisionist school of Islamic studies Science / Technology Merton thesis Protestant Ethic and Capitalism Heroic theory of invention and scientific development Gunpowder and gun transmission Torsion mangonel myth Organizations, publications Heritage registers Historical society ( list ) History institutes History journals template Related Commemorative plaque Documentary film Hagiography Historical fiction Historical realism Historiographic metafiction Historical geographic information system Category Multimedia NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐qsqt2
Cached time: 20250812015046
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.637 seconds
Real time usage: 0.798 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 6838/1000000
Revision size: 10989/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 333741/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 9827/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 42/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 54464/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.310/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 7751928/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  629.707      1 -total
 42.69%  268.837      1 Template:Historiography
 42.05%  264.795      1 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
 37.03%  233.174     16 Template:Navbox
 22.63%  142.483      1 Template:Reflist
 18.15%  114.264      7 Template:Cite_web
 17.67%  111.289     36 Template:Ill
  9.64%   60.727      1 Template:Short_description
  8.22%   51.755      2 Template:Sister_project
  7.96%   50.133      2 Template:Side_box Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:1509382:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812015046 and revision id 1300715420. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Logbook&oldid=1300715420 " Category : Records management Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with a promotional tone from June 2024 All articles with a promotional tone All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from October 2021 Commons category link is locally defined This page was last edited on 16 July 2025, at 00:40 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Logbook 3 languages Add topic

