Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life and education Toggle Early life and education subsection 1.1 World War II 2 Academic career 3 Hart's students 4 Philosophical method 5 The Concept of Law 6 Other work 7 Writings Toggle Writings subsection 7.1 Festschrift 8 See also 9 References 10 Sources 11 External links Toggle the table of contents H. L. A. Hart 28 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Català Čeština Deutsch Español فارسی Français 한국어 हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית മലയാളം Nederlands 日本語 Norsk nynorsk ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Polski Português Română Русский Slovenščina Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia British legal philosopher (1907–1992) H. L. A. Hart FBA Born Herbert Lionel Adolphus Hart ( 1907-07-18 ) 18 July 1907 Harrogate , England Died 19 December 1992 (1992-12-19) (aged 85) Oxford , England Title Principal of Brasenose College, Oxford (1973–1978) Spouse Jenifer Williams ​ ( m.

1941) ​ Academic background Alma mater New College, Oxford Academic work Discipline Law philosophy Sub-discipline Legal philosophy jurisprudence political philosophy School or tradition Analytic philosophy analytical jurisprudence legal positivism liberalism ordinary-language philosophy Institutions New College, Oxford University College, Oxford Brasenose College, Oxford Doctoral students Brian Barry John Finnis Peter Hacker David Hodgson Joseph Raz Wil Waluchow Main interests Legal philosophy Notable works The Concept of Law (1961) Notable ideas Empiricist normative foundations of legal systems [ 1 ] rule of recognition Herbert Lionel Adolphus Hart FBA ( / h ɑːr t / ; 18 July 1907 – 19 December 1992) was a British legal philosopher . One of the most influential legal theorists of the 20th century, he was instrumental in the development of the theory of legal positivism , which was popularised by his book The Concept of Law .

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Hart's contributions focused on the nature of law, the relationship between law and morality, and the analysis of legal rules and systems, introducing concepts such as the "rule of recognition" that have shaped modern legal thought.

Born in Harrogate, England , Hart received a first class honours degree in classical studies from New College, Oxford , before qualifying at the English bar. During World War II , Hart served in British intelligence, working with figures such as Alan Turing and Dick White . After the war, Hart transitioned to academia, becoming Professor of Jurisprudence at the University of Oxford in 1952, a position he held until 1969.

In addition to his legal positivism, Hart engaged in important debates on the role of law in society, most famously with Patrick Devlin, Baron Devlin over the enforcement of morality through law, and with his successor at Oxford, Ronald Dworkin , on the nature of legal interpretation. Hart's influence extended beyond his own work, mentoring legal thinkers the likes of Joseph Raz , John Finnis , and Ronald Dworkin .

Early life and education [ edit ] Herbert Lionel Adolphus Hart was born on 18 July 1907, [ 4 ] the son of Rose Samson Hart and Simeon Hart, in Harrogate [ 5 ] to which his parents had moved from the East End of London . His father was a Jewish tailor of German and Polish origin; his mother, of Polish origin and a daughter of successful retailers in the clothing trade, handled customer relations and the finances of their firm. He had three siblings, two elder brothers, Albert (1901) and Reggie (1902), and a younger sister, Sybil (1915) Hart was educated at Cheltenham College , Bradford Grammar School , and at New College, Oxford . He took a first in classical greats in 1929.

[ 6 ] Hart became a barrister and practised successfully at the Chancery Bar from 1932 to 1940. He was good friends with Richard Wilberforce , Douglas Jay , and Christopher Cox , among others. He received a Harmsworth Scholarship to the Middle Temple and also wrote literary journalism for the periodical John O'London's Weekly .

[ 6 ] World War II [ edit ] During World War II , Hart worked with MI5 , a division of British military intelligence concerned with unearthing spies who had penetrated Britain, where he renewed Oxford friendships including working with the philosophers Gilbert Ryle and Stuart Hampshire . He worked closely with Dick White , later head of MI5 and then of MI6 . Hart worked at Bletchley Park and was a colleague of the mathematician and codebreaker Alan Turing .

[ 7 ] Hart's war work took him on occasion to MI5 offices at Blenheim Palace , family home of the Dukes of Marlborough and the place where Winston Churchill had been born.

[ citation needed ] He enjoyed telling the story that there he was able to read the diaries of Sarah Churchill, Duchess of Marlborough , wife of the founder of the dynasty John Churchill, 1st Duke of Marlborough . Hart's wit and humanity are demonstrated by the fact that he particularly enjoyed the passage where Sarah reports that John had been away for a long time, had arrived suddenly, and "enjoyed me straight way in his boots". Another incident at Blenheim that Hart enjoyed recounting was that he shared an office with one of the famous Cambridge spies, Anthony Blunt , a fellow member of MI5. Hart wondered which of the papers on his desk Blunt had managed to read and to pass on to his Soviet controllers.

Hart did not return to his legal practice after the war, preferring instead to accept the offer of a teaching fellowship (in philosophy, not law) at New College, Oxford. Hart cites J. L. Austin as particularly influential during this time.

[ 6 ] The two jointly taught from 1948 a seminar on 'Legal and Moral Responsibility'. Among Hart's publications at this time were the essays 'A Logician's Fairytale', 'Is There Knowledge by Acquaintance?', 'Law and Fact' and 'The Ascription of Responsibility and Rights'.

Academic career [ edit ] Hart standing at the entrance to New College, Oxford In 1952, Hart was elected Professor of Jurisprudence at Oxford and was a fellow at University College, Oxford , from 1952 to 1973.

[ 8 ] It was in the summer of that year that he began writing his most famous book, The Concept of Law , though it was not published until 1961. In the interim, he published another major work, Causation in the Law (with Tony Honoré) (1959). He was president of the Aristotelian Society from 1959 to 1960. He gave the 1962 Master-Mind Lecture.

[ 9 ] Hart married Jenifer Fischer Williams , a civil servant, later a senior civil servant, in the Home Office and, still later, Oxford historian at St Anne's College (specialising in the history of the police).

[ 10 ] Jenifer Hart was, for some years in the mid-1930s and fading out totally by decade's end, a 'sleeper' member of the Communist Party of Great Britain . Three decades later she was interviewed by Peter Wright as having been in a position to have passed information to the Soviets, and to Wright, MI5's official spy hunter, she explained her situation; Wright took no action. In fact her work as civil servant was in fields such as family policy and so would have been of no interest to the Soviets.

[ 11 ] The person who recruited her, Bernard Floud , interviewed by Wright shortly after, maintained that he was unable to remember ever having done so. Nor was her husband in a position to convey to her information of use, despite vague newspaper suggestions, given the sharp separation of his work from that of foreign affairs and its focus on German spies and British turncoats rather than on matters related to the Soviet ally. In fact, Hart was anticommunist.

The marriage contained "incompatible personalities", though it lasted right to the end of their lives and gave joy to both at times. Hart did joke with his daughter at one point, however, that "[t]he trouble with this marriage is that one of us doesn't like sex and the other doesn't like food", [ 12 ] and according to Hart's biographer, LSE law professor Nicola Lacey, Hart was by his own account, a "suppressed homosexual".

[ 13 ] Jenifer Hart was believed by her contemporaries to have had an affair of long duration with Isaiah Berlin , a close friend of Hart's. In 1998, Jenifer Hart published Ask Me No More: An Autobiography . The Harts had four children, including, late in life, a son who was disabled, the umbilical cord wrapped around his neck having deprived his brain of oxygen.

Hart's granddaughter Mojo Mathers became New Zealand 's first deaf Member of Parliament in 2011.

[ 14 ] Karen Armstrong , an author who wrote about religion, referenced the Harts' household. She lodged with them for a time to help take care of their disabled son. The description appears in her book, The Spiral Staircase .

[ 15 ] Hart retired from the Chair of Jurisprudence in 1969 and was succeeded by Ronald Dworkin . He subsequently became principal of Brasenose College, Oxford . Hart died in Oxford on 19 December 1992, aged 85.

[ 4 ] He is buried there in Wolvercote Cemetery , which also contains Isaiah Berlin 's grave.

Grave of H. L. A. Hart at the Wolvercote Cemetery in Oxford Hart's students [ edit ] Many of Hart's former students have become important legal, moral, and political philosophers, including Brian Barry , Ronald Dworkin , John Finnis , John Gardner , Kent Greenawalt , Peter Hacker , David Hodgson , Neil MacCormick , Joseph Raz , Chin Liew Ten , and William Twining .  Hart also had a strong influence on a young John Rawls in the 1950s, when Rawls was a visiting scholar at Oxford shortly after finishing his PhD.

Philosophical method [ edit ] Hart strongly influenced the application of methods in his version of Anglo-American positive law to jurisprudence and the philosophy of law in the English-speaking world. Influenced by John Austin , Ludwig Wittgenstein and Hans Kelsen , Hart brought the tools of analytic, and especially linguistic, philosophy to bear on the central problems of legal theory.

Hart's method combined the careful analysis of twentieth-century analytic philosophy with the jurisprudential tradition of Jeremy Bentham , the great English legal, political, and moral philosopher. Hart's conception of law had parallels to the Pure Theory of Law formulated by Austrian legal philosopher Hans Kelsen , though Hart rejected several distinctive features of Kelsen's theory.

Significant in the differences between Hart and Kelsen was the emphasis on the British version of positive law theory which Hart was defending as opposed to the Continental version of positive law theory which Kelsen was defending. This was studied in the University of Toronto Law Journal in an article titled "Leaving the Hart-Dworkin Debate" which maintained that Hart insisted in his book The Concept of Law on the expansive reading of positive law theory to include philosophical and sociological domains of assessment rather than the more focused attention of Kelsen who considered Continental positive law theory as more limited to the domain of jurisprudence itself.

[ 16 ] Hart drew, among others, on Glanville Williams who had demonstrated his legal philosophy in a five-part article, "Language and the Law" and in a paper, "International Law and the Controversy Concerning the Word 'Law'". In the paper on international law, he sharply attacked the many jurists and international lawyers who had debated whether international law was "really" law. They had been wasting everyone's time, for the question was not a factual one, the many differences between municipal and international law being undeniable, but was simply one of conventional verbal usage, about which individual theorists could please themselves, but had no right to dictate to others.

This approach was to be refined and developed by Hart in the last chapter of The Concept of Law (1961), which showed how the use in respect of different social phenomena of an abstract word like law reflected the fact that these phenomena each shared, without necessarily all possessing in common, some distinctive features. Glanville had himself said as much when editing a student text on jurisprudence and he had adopted essentially the same approach to "The Definition of Crime".

[ 17 ] The Concept of Law [ edit ] Main article: The Concept of Law This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

Find sources: "Concept of Law" Hart – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( November 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Hart's most famous work is The Concept of Law , first published in 1961, and with a second edition (including a new postscript) published posthumously in 1994. The book emerged from a set of lectures that Hart began to deliver in 1952, and it is presaged by his Holmes lecture, Positivism and the Separation of Law and Morals , delivered at Harvard Law School .

The Concept of Law developed a sophisticated view of legal positivism. Among the many ideas developed in this book are: A critique of John Austin's theory that law is the command of the sovereign backed by the threat of punishment.

A distinction between primary and secondary legal rules. Primary rules govern the conduct of ordinary citizens, such as rules of criminal law prohibiting theft or requiring tax payment. Secondary rules are rules about rules , such as constitutional rules specifying how criminal laws can be changed or any other rules governing the procedural methods by which primary rules are enforced, prosecuted, and so on. Hart specifically enumerates three secondary rules; they are: The Rule of Recognition , the rule by which any member of society may check to discover what the primary rules of the society are. In a simple society, Hart states, the recognition rule might only be what is written in a sacred book or what is said by a ruler. Hart claimed the concept of rule of recognition as an evolution from Hans Kelsen 's ' basic norm ' ( German : Grundnorm ).

The Rule of Change, the rule by which existing primary rules might be created, altered or deleted.

The Rule of Adjudication, the rule by which the society might determine when a rule has been violated and prescribe a remedy.

A distinction between the internal and external points of view of law and rules, close to (and influenced by) Max Weber 's distinction between legal and sociological perspectives in description of law.

A concept of "open-textured" terms in law, along the lines of Wittgenstein and Waisman, and "defeasible" terms.

A late reply (published as a postscript to the second edition) to Ronald Dworkin , a rights-oriented legal philosopher (and Hart's successor at Oxford) who criticised Hart's version of legal positivism in Taking Rights Seriously (1977), A Matter of Principle (1985) and Law's Empire (1986).

Other work [ edit ] With Tony Honoré , Hart wrote and published Causation in the Law (1959, second edition 1985), which is regarded as one of the important academic discussions of causation in the legal context. The early chapters, which engage philosophically with the concept of causation, are evidently the work of Hart, while the later chapters, which focus on individual cases in English law, appear to have been written by his co-author.

As a result of his famous debate ( Hart–Devlin debate ) with Patrick Devlin, Baron Devlin , on the role of the criminal law in enforcing moral norms, Hart wrote Law, Liberty and Morality (1963), which consisted of three lectures he gave at Stanford University . He also wrote The Morality of the Criminal Law (1965). Hart said that he believed Devlin's view of Mill's harm principle as it related to the decriminalisation of homosexuality was "perverse".

[ 18 ] He later stated that he believed the reforms to the law regarding homosexuality that followed the Wolfenden report "didn't go far enough". Despite this, Hart reported later that he got on well personally with Devlin.

[ 6 ] Hart gave lectures to the Labour Party on closing tax loopholes which were being used by the " super-rich ". Hart considered himself to be "on the Left, the non-communist Left", and expressed animosity towards Margaret Thatcher .

[ 6 ] Writings [ edit ] "The Ascription of Responsibility and Rights", Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society (1949) Definition and Theory in Jurisprudence (1953) Causation in the Law (with Tony Honoré ) (Clarendon Press, 1959) The Concept of Law (Clarendon Press, 1961;  2nd edn 1994;  3rd edn 2012) Law, Liberty and Morality (Stanford University Press, 1963) The Morality of the Criminal Law (Oxford University Press, 1964) Punishment and Responsibility (Oxford University Press, 1968) Essays on Bentham: Studies in Jurisprudence and Political Theory (Clarendon Press, 1982) Essays in Jurisprudence and Philosophy (Oxford University Press, 1983) Festschrift [ edit ] Law, Morality, and Society: Essays in Honour of H. L. A. Hart , edited by P. M. S. Hacker and Joseph Raz (1977) See also [ edit ] Biography portal Hart–Dworkin debate Hart–Fuller debate Legal interpretivism Lon L. Fuller Natural law References [ edit ] ^ Legal Positivism (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy) ^ The Concept of Law (Clarendon Law) (Clarendon Law Series) . Clarendon Law Series.

ASIN 0199644705 .

. However, key ideas in the book have also received fundamental reiterated criticism. For a summary, see C. M. Campbell, "The Career of the Concept" in P. Leith and P. Ingram (eds.) The Jurisprudence of Orthodoxy . London, Routledge, 1988, 1-25.

^ Matthew H. Kramer and Claire Grant (2008). "Introduction", in Matthew H. Kramer, Claire Grant, Ben Colburn , and Anthony Hatzistavrou (ed.): The Legacy of H.L.A. Hart: Legal, Political and Moral Philosophy . Oxford/New York, Oxford University Press, xiii.

^ a b Honoré, Tony (2004). "Hart, Herbert Lionel Adolphus". In Matthew, H. C. G.; Harrison, Brian (eds.).

Oxford Dictionary of National Biography . Vol. 25.

Oxford University Press . pp.

575–580 .

ISBN 019861411X .

OCLC 54778415 .

^ Mullender, Richard: "Nicola Lacey, A Life of H.L.A. Hart: The Nightmare and the Noble Dream – H.L.A. Hart in Anglo-American Context" , Web Journal of Current Legal Issues (review 2007). Oxford University Press, (2004).

ISBN 978-0199202775 ^ a b c d e Sugarman, David; Hart, H. L. A. (2005). "Hart Interviewed: H.L.A. Hart in Conversation with David Sugarman".

Journal of Law and Society .

32 (2). Blackwell: 267– 293.

doi : 10.1111/j.1467-6478.2005.00324.x .

JSTOR 3557228 .

^ Gavaghan, Colin (2007).

Defending the Genetic Supermarket: The Law and Ethics of Selecting the Next Generation . Biomedical Law and Ethics Library.

Routledge . p. 37.

ISBN 978-1135392932 .

^ Darwall-Smith, Robin (2008).

A History of University College, Oxford .

Oxford University Press . pp. 486, 492– 494, 501, 504, 513, 536.

ISBN 978-0199284290 .

^ "Master-Mind Lectures" .

The British Academy .

^ Biography of Jenifer Hart ^ Obituary of Jenifer Hart , Daily Telegraph , 9 April 2005.

^ Margaret Howatson, Obituary: Jenifer Hart , The Independent , 31 March 2005.

^ Nicola Lacey, A Life of H.L.A. Hart (2004).

^ "How got Mojo Mathers got her name" .

Dominion Post . 19 February 2012.

^ Armstrong, Karen (3 January 2005), The Spiral Staircase , HarperPerennial, ISBN 978-0007122295 , OL 9216389M ^ Keith Culver. "Leaving the Hart-Dworkin Debate', University of Toronto Law Journal, pp. 374–398.

^ Baker, Dennis J.; Horder, Jeremy (2013).

The Sanctity of Life and the Criminal Law: The Legacy of Glanville Williams . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-1107020474 .

^ Hart. H. L. A. "Immorality and Treason", The Listener (July 30, 1959). 162–163. Reprinted in Wasserstrom, Richard A. (ed.).

Morality and the Law . Belmont, CA: Wadsworth Publishing, 1971.

[ ISBN missing ] Sources [ edit ] Nicola Lacey , A Life of H. L. A. Hart: The Nightmare and the Noble Dream , Oxford University Press : 2004 ISBN 0199274975 Frederick Schauer , "(Re)Taking Hart," 119 Harv. L. Rev.

852 (2006) (reviewing Lacey, A Life of H. L. A. Hart ) Karen Armstrong , The Spiral Staircase , Harper Collins, 2004 ISBN 0007122284 Carlin Romano , "A Philosopher's Humanity", Chronicle of Higher Education vol. 51 (2005) (reviewing Lacey, A Life of H. L. A. Hart ) link Matthew Kramer , H.L.A. Hart: The Nature of Law , Polity : 2018 ISBN 1509520732 External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to H. L. A. Hart .

Herbert Lionel Adolphus Hart 1970–1992 British Academy In Memoriam by Tony Honoré Obituary: Professor Herbert Hart in The Independent by Zenon Bankowski Short Biography by Tony Honoré [Archived by Wayback Machine] Works by or about H. L. A. Hart at the Internet Archive Academic offices Preceded by Arthur Lehman Goodhart Professor of Jurisprudence at the University of Oxford 1952–1968 Succeeded by Ronald Dworkin Preceded by Noel Frederick Hall Principal of Brasenose College, Oxford 1973–1978 Succeeded by Barry Nicholas Professional and academic associations Preceded by Karl Popper President of the Aristotelian Society 1959–1960 Succeeded by Austin Duncan-Jones Preceded by Ronald Syme Master-Mind Lecturer 1962 Succeeded by John Summerson v t e Principals of Brasenose College, Oxford Matthew Smyth John Hawarden Thomas Blanchard Richard Harris Alexander Nowell Thomas Singleton Samuel Radcliffe Daniel Greenwood Thomas Yate John Meare Robert Shippen Francis Yarborough William Gwyn Ralph Cawley Thomas Barker William Cleaver Frodsham Hodson Ashurst Gilbert Richard Harington Edward Hartopp Cradock Albert Watson Charles Buller Heberden Charles Henry Sampson William Stallybrass Hugh Last Maurice Platnauer Noel Frederick Hall Herbert Hart Barry Nicholas David Hennessy, 3rd Baron Windlesham Roger Cashmore Alan Bowman John Bowers v t e Jurisprudence Legal theory Constitutionalism Critical legal studies Comparative law Economic analysis Legal norms International legal theory Legal history Philosophy of law Sociology of law Philosophers Alexy Aquinas Aristotle Austin Bastiat Beccaria Bentham Blackstone Bobbio Bork Brożek Cardozo Durkheim Dworkin Ehrlich Finnis Fuller Grotius Gurvitch Habermas Haller Han Hart Hegel Hobbes Hägerström Jellinek Jhering Kant Kelsen Leoni Llewellyn Luhmann Maistre Marx Montesquieu Müller Nussbaum Olivecrona Pashukanis Perelman Petrażycki Plato Posner Pound Pufendorf Radbruch Rawls Raz Reinach Renner Ross Rumi Savigny Scaevola Schmitt Shang Suárez Stahl Unger Voegelin Waldron Walzer Weber Works Laws (c. 355 BC) Treatise on Law (c. 1270) The Spirit of Law (1748) Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1820) Pure Theory of Law (1934) The Concept of Law (1961) Natural Law and Natural Rights (1980) Law's Empire (1986) Theories Analytical jurisprudence Deontological ethics Fundamental theory of Catholic canon law German historical school Interpretivism Legal moralism Legal positivism Legal realism Legalism Libertarian theories of law Natural law Paternalism Utilitarianism Virtue jurisprudence Concepts Constitutional amendment Dharma Fa Judicial interpretation Judicial reform Justice Law without the state Legal system Li Question of law Rational-legal authority Usul al-Fiqh Category Law portal Philosophy portal WikiProject Law WikiProject Philosophy changes Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway 2 Latvia Croatia Greece Korea Sweden Poland Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=H._L._A._Hart&oldid=1301769844 " Categories : 1907 births 1992 deaths People educated at Bradford Grammar School People educated at Cheltenham College Alumni of New College, Oxford 20th-century English writers 20th-century English philosophers English Jews Jewish philosophers English legal scholars English political philosophers British philosophers of law Fellows of New College, Oxford Fellows of University College, Oxford Principals of Brasenose College, Oxford Ordinary language philosophy Presidents of the Aristotelian Society Professors of Jurisprudence (University of Oxford) English legal writers MI5 personnel Bletchley Park people Fellows of the British Academy Burials at Wolvercote Cemetery Hidden categories: Articles using Template:ASIN with an all-numeric value Pages with missing ISBNs Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use British English from August 2014 Use dmy dates from August 2014 Articles with hCards All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from May 2016 Articles needing additional references from November 2023 All articles needing additional references Articles containing German-language text Articles with Internet Archive links This page was last edited on 21 July 2025, at 15:34 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents H. L. A. Hart 28 languages Add topic

