Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Early modern aristocracy 1.2 Modern aristocracy 2 Etymology 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Aristocracy (class) 21 languages العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca Ελληνικά Esperanto فارسی Bahasa Indonesia עברית ქართული مصرى 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Română Русский Shqip Simple English Svenska Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Aristocrat ) Upper social class This article is about the form of social class. For the form of government, see Aristocracy . For other uses, see Aristocrat (disambiguation) .

The Ladies Waldegrave , a portrait of three English aristocrats from the Waldegrave family by Joshua Reynolds The aristocracy ( from Greek ἀριστοκρατία aristokratía , "rule of the best"; Latin : aristocratia ) is historically associated with a "hereditary" or a "ruling" social class .

[ 1 ] In many states, the aristocracy included the upper class with hereditary rank and titles. They are usually below only the monarch of a country or nation in its social hierarchy.

[ 2 ] History [ edit ] A château , the primary form of residence for the French aristocracy In some, such as ancient Greece , ancient Rome , or India , aristocratic status came from belonging to a military class. It has also been common, notably in African and Oriental societies, for aristocrats to belong to priestly dynasties. Aristocratic status can involve feudal or legal privileges.

[ 3 ] Plato’s Symposium offers a glimpse into the intellectual and cultural life of aristocracy in ancient Athens . The dialogue takes place at a banquet attended by prominent Athenian aristocrats , illustrating how the elite not only wielded political and military power but also shaped philosophical and artistic discourse . Their discussion on love , centered around Eros , reflects how aristocrats engaged in intellectual refinement and rhetorical debate , reinforcing their status as the cultural and moral leaders of society.

[ 4 ] Early modern aristocracy [ edit ] The ancient world had bequeathed to early modern Europe (notably via Aristotle's Politics ) a political and personal definition of aristocracy as the rule of the best men .

[ 5 ] According to his 1602 political treatise República Mista , Tomás Fernández de Medrano describes an aristocrat as someone who is distinguished by virtue , morality , and wisdom , holding authority over the rest, whether broadly or in specific matters, governing solely for the benefit and welfare of the public.

[ 6 ] While family background and wealth could enhance one’s suitability for public office, they were not definitive. Prominent families could produce unworthy heirs, while talented newcomers might possess the qualities necessary for political leadership. This notion of social status clashed with the medieval system, which divided society into three estates and defined aristocrats primarily as warriors , gradually making aristocracy more rigidly tied to noble birth.

[ 5 ] Across Europe, the aristocracy wielded immense economic, political, and social influence. In England , a small high aristocracy—about two hundred families—controlled roughly a quarter of the kingdom’s land, while in seventeenth-century Bohemia , an even smaller noble class owned two-thirds of the land. This dominance extended beyond landownership, as aristocrats and gentry often monopolized high-ranking positions in the church, military, and administration. Before the French Revolution , aristocratic privilege was deeply embedded in Europe’s social order, shaping both governance and ideology .

[ 5 ] The centralization of royal courts in early modern Europe reshaped aristocratic power, shifting influence from regional noble domains to the monarchy’s court. This transition reflected a broader shift across European aristocracies, where status and influence became increasingly tied to proximity to the sovereign, court patronage, and administrative roles, rather than independent territorial rule.

[ 7 ] Modern aristocracy [ edit ] Despite their decline in the 19th and 20th centuries, aristocrats and gentry remained influential, adapting to modernization as industrialization and democracy eroded traditional claims to privilege. Their response to these changes played a crucial role in shaping the broader transformation of European society.

[ 5 ] In modern European societies, the aristocracy has often coincided with the nobility , a specific class that arose in the Middle Ages , but the term "aristocracy" is sometimes also applied to other elites , and is used as a more general term when describing earlier and non-European societies.

[ 8 ] Aristocracy may be abolished within a country as the result of a revolution against them, such as the French Revolution . Revolutionary leaders, aiming to dismantle hierarchical structures, labeled even non-noble opponents as "aristocrats" in their push for a society without inherited privilege.

[ 5 ] Etymology [ edit ] 2nd Earl and Countess Harcourt , in their coronet and coronation robes by Joshua Reynolds. The countess was a confidant of Queen Charlotte .

The term aristocracy derives from the Greek ἀριστοκρατία ( aristokratia from ἄριστος ( aristos ) 'excellent' and κράτος ( kratos ) 'power').

[ 9 ] In most cases, aristocratic titles were and are hereditary.

The term aristokratia was first used in Athens with reference to young citizens (the men of the ruling class) who led armies at the front line.

Aristokratia roughly translates to "rule of the best born".  Due to martial bravery being highly regarded as a virtue in ancient Greece , it was assumed that the armies were being led by "the best". This virtue was called arete ( ἀρετή ). Etymologically, as the word developed, it also produced a more political term: aristoi ( ἄριστοι ). The term aristocracy is a compound word stemming from the singular of aristoi , aristos ( ἄριστος ), and the Greek word for power, kratos ( κράτος ).

From the ancient Greeks, the term passed to the European Middle Ages for a similar hereditary class of military leaders, often referred to as the nobility . As in Greece, this was a class of privileged men and women whose familial connections to the regional armies allowed them to present themselves as the most "noble" or "best" of society.

See also [ edit ] Gentry Landed gentry (United Kingdom) Landed gentry in China Landed gentry in Poland Honorifics Nobility List of fictional nobility Upper class Imtiaz (Egypt) Chieftaincy (Nigeria) Old money Peerage (United Kingdom) Royal and noble ranks Styles (manner of address) Royal and noble styles Forms of address in the United Kingdom Titles Hereditary title Honorary titles False titles of nobility Adel (Norway) Yangban (Korea) Kuge (Japan) Samanta , Thakur , Zamindar and Jenmi (India) References [ edit ] ^ "Definition of Aristocracy" .

Archived from the original on 2019-03-26 . Retrieved 2019-09-18 .

^ "Definition of ARISTOCRACY" .

www.merriam-webster.com . November 29, 2024.

^ The Aristocrats: a portrait of Britain's nobility and their way of life today , by Roy Perrott, (London 1968), pp. 5–10.

^ "Lovers and Soldiers" .

National Endowment for the Humanities . 2021-06-22 . Retrieved 2025-03-16 .

^ a b c d e "The Aristocracy and Gentry | Encyclopedia.com" .

www.encyclopedia.com . Retrieved 2025-03-16 .

^ Medrano, Juan Fernandez de (1602).

República Mista (in Spanish). Impr. Real.

^ Hernández, Santiago Martínez (2020).

"Between Court and Village: The Evolution of Aristocratic Spaces in Early Modern Spain" .

Renaissance and Reformation / Renaissance et Réforme .

43 (4): 19– 54.

doi : 10.33137/rr.v43i4.36379 .

ISSN 0034-429X .

JSTOR 27028213 .

^ "Modern European societies and the nobility of aristocracy" .

^ The Oxford Companion to British History , John Cannon (editor), Oxford University Press , 1997, ISBN 978-0-19-866176-4 External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Aristocracy .

Heraldica: European Noble, Princely, Royal, and Imperial Titles Look up aristocracy in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

v t e Social class Status Stratum Economic classes Theories Elite theory Gilbert model Marxian Mudsill theory New class Spoon class theory Weberian (three-component) Related topics Caste Chattering classes Class conflict Class discrimination Class society Class traitor Classicide Classless society Euthenics High society Nouveau riche / Parvenu Poverty Ranked society Snobbery Social cleansing Social exclusion Social mobility Social orphan Social position Social stigma Subaltern Status Anxiety By demographic By status Administrative detainee Alien illegal immigrant refugee Citizen dual or multiple native-born naturalized second-class Clique adolescent Convicted Migrant worker Political prisoner Socioeconomic Stateless By " collar " Blue Green Grey New Pink White By type Ruling Aristocracy Aristoi Hanseaten Magnate Oligarchy Russian Patrician Ancient Rome Post-Roman Political Family List Hereditary Royal family Intellectual Clergy Priest Knowledge worker Professor Scholar Warrior Chhetri Cossacks Cuāuh Harii Hashashin Knight Kshatriya Nair Ocēlōtl Pendekar Samurai Spartiate Vanniyar / Vanniar (Chieftain) Upper Business magnate Elite Gabellotto Gentry Lord Nobility Landed Petty Old money Overclass Robber baron Seigneur Superclass Creative Bohemians Middle Bourgeoisie Petite Burgher Lower middle class Upper middle class Working Commoner Lazzaroni Lumpenproletariat Pea-pickers Peasant Precariat Proletariat Working poor Under Ant tribe Outcast Outlaw / Prisoner Serf Plebeian Rat tribe Slave / Freedman Untouchable By country or region United States Affluence American Dream History Mobility Classes Upper Black Donor Gentry Middle Black Mexican-American Upper Middle Underprivileged Lower Under Income Household Inequality Personal Poverty Standard of living Education Homelessness Home-ownership Other regions or countries Africa Belize Cambodia China Colombia France Haiti India Iran Italy Luxembourg Nepal New Zealand Nigeria Romania Sri Lanka Tibet United Kingdom United States Historic 18th-century Spain Ancient Greece Ancient Rome Aztec Ottoman Empire Pre-industrial East Asia Pre-industrial Europe Soviet Union Category Authority control databases İslâm Ansiklopedisi NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐hrnhg
Cached time: 20250814220601
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.414 seconds
Real time usage: 0.507 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1424/1000000
Revision size: 10399/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 95516/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 704/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 11/100
Expensive parser function count: 3/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 48104/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.276/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 16245376/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  423.287      1 -total
 25.51%  107.964      1 Template:Reflist
 24.10%  102.032     15 Template:Lang
 19.58%   82.897      1 Template:Social_class
 19.23%   81.416      1 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
 17.75%   75.115      5 Template:Cite_web
 13.60%   57.573      1 Template:Short_description
  6.99%   29.600      2 Template:Pagetype
  6.00%   25.380      1 Template:Hlist
  4.47%   18.935      4 Template:Main_other Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:20750674:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814220601 and revision id 1303950997. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Aristocracy_(class)&oldid=1303950997 " Categories : High society (social class) Social classes Nobility Aristocracy Hidden categories: CS1 Spanish-language sources (es) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Articles containing French-language text This page was last edited on 3 August 2025, at 01:28 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Aristocracy (class) 21 languages Add topic

