Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 United Kingdom 1.2 Australia 2 Overview 3 Usage 4 Contents 5 Gallery 6 See also 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Backyard 16 languages العربية Bikol Central فارسی 한국어 मराठी Nedersaksies 日本語 Norsk bokmål Русский Soomaaliga தமிழ் Türkçe Tyap اردو 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Back garden ) Residential garden or other land behind a house For other uses, see Backyard (disambiguation) .

Look up backyard or back yard in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

The examples and perspective in this article may not represent a worldwide view of the subject .

You may improve this article , discuss the issue on the talk page , or create a new article , as appropriate.

( January 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) A back yard in Brisbane, Queensland, Australia , in 1929 The back garden of Iford Manor was designed by Harold Peto .

A backyard , or back yard (known in the United Kingdom as a back garden or just garden ), is a yard at the back of a house , common in suburban developments in the Western world.

[ 1 ] It is typically a residential garden located at the rear of a property, on the other side of the house from the front yard . While Western gardens are almost universally based on plants, the "garden" (which etymologically may imply a shorthand of botanical garden ) may use plants sparsely or not at all. Hence, the terms yard and garden are for the context of this article interchangeable in most cases.

History [ edit ] United Kingdom [ edit ] In English suburban and gardening culture, back gardens have a special place.

[ 2 ] In Britain there are over 10 million back gardens.

[ 3 ] British planning require minimum distances between the rear faces of adjacent dwellings and so there is usually space for a back garden of some sort.  In other countries, such as Australia, this does not apply and preference for buildings with a large footprint has tended to squeeze out the space at the rear.

[ 4 ] Australia [ edit ] In Australia, until the mid-20th century, the back yard of a property would traditionally contain a fowl run , outhouse (" dunny "), vegetable patch , and woodheap . More recently, these have been replaced by outdoor entertainments such as a barbecue and swimming pool .

[ 5 ] But, since the 1990s, the trend in Australian suburban development has been for back yards to disappear as the dwellings now occupy almost all of the building plot.

[ 1 ] In higher latitudes, it is economical in low land value regions to use open land surrounding a house for vegetable gardening during summers and allow sunlight to enter house windows from a low horizon angle during winters.  As land value increases, houses are built nearer to each other. In order to preserve some of the open land, house owners may choose to allow construction on the side land of their houses, but not build in front of or behind their house in order to preserve some remnants of open surrounding land.  The back area is known as the backyard or back garden .

Overview [ edit ] A back garden arises when the main building divides the surrounding gardens into two.  This happens especially in the high density housing of British cities and towns.  A semi-detached house typical of the British suburbs of the 20th century will have front gardens which face the road and provide access.  The back gardens in such cases will be more secluded and access will typically be via the dwelling or by a path around the side. A front garden is a formal and semi-public space and so subject to the constraints of convention and law.  However, the back garden is more private and casual, [ 6 ] and so can be put to more purposes.

If the housing is terraced , then no side path is possible and access may be provided by an alley which runs behind the rear of the terrace. While buildings opening directly onto a street may not have a front garden, most will have some space at the back, however small; the exception being back-to-back houses found in northern industrial towns in England such as Leeds , but now mostly demolished. A private back yard with a "privy" (toilet) was a defining feature of the byelaw terraced house , a type of dwelling built to comply with the Public Health Act 1875 .

Usage [ edit ] Because of weather constraints, it is usual to use a garden more in the summer than in the winter, although some usages are traditional, such as for a bonfire on Bonfire Night , 5 November.  Similarly, daytime usage is more common than nighttime.

The back garden of the archdeacon of Canterbury contains a mulberry which is said to have been planted by Erasmus .

Functionally, it may be used for: Growing food [ 3 ] Playing games Relaxing and sunbathing Raising plants Housing pets Drying clothes Making a compost heap Hobbies Locating a greenhouse , conservatory , shed , workshop , outhouse , or garage (if access to  a road is possible) Partying Wildlife refuge Safe area for children Location of an air raid shelter such as the Anderson shelter of World War II [ 7 ] In fact, its functional and recreational use is so varied, that it cannot be easily categorised. Many of the freedoms of the use of the back garden come from the restrictions, social or legal of what are not done in the front.

Usually, clothes are not dried, vegetables are not grown, and sunbathing is not carried out in a front garden. All these can happen in the privacy of the back garden.

Traditionally, people treat a back garden as private to themselves, and not those they are neighbours to. The social etiquette of how one can greet and interact one's neighbours may be complex and defined by many informal social rules.

In some areas, talking to one's neighbours over the back wall (the side wall following the property boundary line) is usual, and is a welcome form of neighbourliness, while in other places it is not.

Contents [ edit ] A backyard of house in Tampere , Finland Depending on the size of the backyard, it may have any number of items (or none), such as: Barbecue Buildings such as: barn , [ 8 ] chicken coop , doghouse , garage , gazebo , [ 8 ] accessory dwelling unit , outhouse , playhouse , [ 8 ] sauna , shed , [ 8 ] smokehouse , workshop , etc.

Compost bin [ 8 ] Decking Fencing Garden Garden furniture (bench, patio table and chairs, umbrella, etc.) Landscaping with or without a lawn or just dirt Playground equipment ( sandbox , slide , swing set , etc.) Renewable energy generator ( solar panels , windmills , etc.) Sandpit also known as a sandbox (US and Canada) Storage tank Swimming pool and/or hot tub Swing_(seat) Hammock Vehicle Waste container Landscape lighting Gallery [ edit ] Back yard of a house in Harvey, Louisiana , United States A playground being built for a homeowner's backyard as part of a handyman project People posing at a backyard party in Canada The backyard of Dunraven House, Wales, 1776 Backyard with pool in Las Vegas, Nevada, United States See also [ edit ] Gardens portal America's Backyard Backyard breeder Backyard compost Backyard chickens Backyard furnace Backyard pond Front yard List of garden types Yard (land) References [ edit ] ^ a b Tony Hall (2010).

The Life and Death of the Australian Backyard .

CSIRO Publishing .

ISBN 9780643098169 .

^ S Chevalier (1998). "From woollen carpet to grass carpet: bridging house and garden in an English suburb".

Material Cultures: Why Some Things Matter . University of Chicago Press.

ISBN 0-226-52601-1 .

Every resident ... has a private garden divided into two areas, the front and the back garden whose social role is ...

^ a b Jules N. Pretty (2007).

The Earth Only Endures: On Reconnecting With Nature and Our Place in It . Earthscan. pp.

36 .

ISBN 978-1-84407-432-7 .

^ Tony Hall (2010), The Life and Death of the Australian Backyard , Csiro Publishing, p. 86, ISBN 978-0-643-09816-9 ^ Patrick Nicol Troy (2000). "The Big Backyard".

A History of European Housing in Australia .

Cambridge University Press . pp.

127– 128.

ISBN 9780521777339 .

^ Richard Webster (1999).

Feng Shui in the Garden . Llewellyn Worldwide. p. 47.

ISBN 1-56718-793-5 .

The back garden is usually more private and casual ^ Alison Ravetz, Richard Turkington (1995), "Gardens and External Space", The Place of Home: English domestic environments, 1914-2000 , Taylor & Francis, pp.

176– 199, ISBN 978-0-419-17980-1 ^ a b c d e Paul Levine; Tom Begnal; Dan Thornton (1997).

Building Backyard Structures: Sheds, Barns, Bins, Gazebos & Other Outdoor Construction .

Sterling Publishers Pvt. Limited.

ISBN 0806942169 .

External links [ edit ] Media related to Backyards at Wikimedia Commons v t e Horticulture and gardening Gardening Allotment Arboretum Butterfly Climate-friendly gardening Community Forest Foodscaping French intensive Garden Garden design computer-aided Groundskeeping Garden tool Green wall Guerrilla Historic conservation History Native Parterre Proplifting Raised bed Square foot Sustainable Xeriscaping Types of gardens Alpine Ancient Egypt Australian Back Baroque Biblical Bog Botanical Bottle Butterfly Byzantine Cactus Colonial Color Communal Garden square Community Container Cottage Dutch East Asian Chinese Suzhou Cantonese Japanese Roji Zen Korean Vietnamese English Sharawadgi Fernery Floating Flower Formal French formal landscape Renaissance Front German Greek Greenhouse Hanging Islamic Italian Renaissance Keyhole Kitchen Knot Market Mary Medieval Monastic Mughal Orchard Indonesian home garden Persian Bāgh Charbagh Paradise Physic Pleasure Prairie Pollinator Rain Rock Roman Roof Rose Sacred School Scottish Sculpture Sensory Shade Shakespeare Shrubbery Spanish Tea Therapeutic Trial Tropical Victory Walled Water Wildlife Winter Zoological Horticulture Agriculture Permaculture stock-free sustainable urban Arboriculture Bonsai Saikei Botany Companion planting Crop most valuable Cutting Flora Floriculture Canada Taiwan Hügelkultur Fruticulture Genetically modified tree Hydroculture Indigenous Intercropping Landscape architecture Olericulture Plant breeding cuttings free-flowering propagation drought tolerance hardiness Pomology Postharvest physiology Roguing Tropical Urban agriculture horticulture forestry reforestation Viticulture Monoculture Organic Biodynamic agriculture Grafting List of organic gardening and farming topics Vegan organic agriculture Plant protection Fungicide Herbicide Index of pesticide articles List of fungicides List of insecticides Pesticide Plant disease forecasting Pruning Weed control Aquamog weed remover Related articles Community orchard Features Floral design Floristry Ikebana Groundskeeping Garden centre Garden tourism List of gardens Lists of plants Perennial Plant collecting Turf management Gardening portal Category Commons WikiProject v t e Rooms and spaces of a house Shared rooms Bonus room Common room Den Dining room Family room Garret Great room Home cinema Keeping room Kitchen dirty kitchen kitchenette Living room Gynaeceum harem Andron man cave Recreation room billiard room Shrine Study Sunroom Private rooms Bathroom toilet Bedroom closet Bedsit Boudoir Cabinet Nursery Spaces Atrium Balcony Breezeway Conversation pit Cubby-hole Deck Elevator dumbwaiter Entryway / Genkan Fireplace hearth Foyer Hall Hallway Inglenook Lanai Loft Loggia Overhang Patio Porch screened sleeping Ramp Secret passage Stairs / Staircase Terrace Veranda Vestibule Technical , utility and storage Attic Basement Carport Cloakroom Closet Crawl space Electrical room Equipment room Furnace room / Boiler room Garage Janitorial closet Larder Laundry room / Utility room / Storage room Mechanical room / floor Pantry Root cellar Semi-basement Storm cellar / Safe room Studio Wardrobe Wine cellar Wiring closet Workshop Great house areas Antechamber Ballroom Kitchen-related butler's pantry buttery saucery scullery spicery still room Conservatory / Orangery Courtyard Drawing room Great chamber Great hall Library Long gallery Lumber room Parlour Sauna Servants' hall Servants' quarters Smoking room Solar State room Swimming pool Turret Undercroft Other Furniture Hidden room House house plan styles types Multi-family residential Secondary suite Duplex Terraced Detached Semi-detached Townhouse Studio apartment Architectural elements Arch Balconet Baluster Belt course Bressummer Ceiling Chimney Colonnade / Portico Column Cornice / Eaves Dome Door Ell Floor Foundation Gable Gate Portal Lighting Molding Ornament Plumbing Quoins Roof shingles Roof lantern Sill plate Style list Skylight Threshold Transom Vault Wall Window Related Backyard Driveway Front yard Garden roof garden Home Home improvement Home repair Shed Tree house Category: Rooms Authority control databases National United States Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Backyard&oldid=1300664858 " Category : Types of garden Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with limited geographic scope from January 2025 Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 15 July 2025, at 18:07 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Backyard 16 languages Add topic

