Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Main sights 3 Climate 4 Transportation 5 Culture 6 Notable people 7 Sports 8 Twin towns 9 See also 10 References 11 External links Toggle the table of contents Dénia 59 languages العربية Aragonés Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Български Català Cebuano Čeština Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Ido Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Italiano ქართული Қазақша Ladin Ladino Lietuvių Lombard Magyar مصرى Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Нохчийн Norsk bokmål Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Română Русский Sardu Shqip Sicilianu Simple English Ślůnski Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Татарча / tatarça ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Vèneto Winaray 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikivoyage Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This article is about a city in Spain. For the place in Israel, see Denia, Haifa .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Dénia" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( August 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Municipality in Valencian Community, Spain Dénia Dénia ( Valencian ) Denia ( Spanish ) Municipality Dénia (official) View of Dénia from the Montgó out to sea Flag Coat of arms Location of Dénia Dénia Show map of Valencian Community Dénia Show map of Spain Coordinates: 38°50′40″N 0°6′40″E ﻿ / ﻿ 38.84444°N 0.11111°E ﻿ / 38.84444; 0.11111 Country Spain Autonomous community Valencian Community Province Alicante Comarca Marina Alta Judicial district Dénia Government • Mayor Vicent Grimalt ( PSOE ) Area • Total 66.2 km 2 (25.6 sq mi) Elevation 22 m (72 ft) Population (2018) [ 1 ] • Total 41,733 • Density 630/km 2 (1,600/sq mi) Demonym(s) denier(a) ( va ) dianense ( es ) Time zone UTC+1 ( CET ) • Summer ( DST ) UTC+2 ( CEST ) Postal code 03700 Website Official website Dénia ( Valencian: [ˈdenia] ; Spanish : Denia [ˈdenja] ) is a historical coastal city in the province of Alicante , Spain , on the Costa Blanca halfway between Alicante and Valencia , and the capital and judicial seat of the comarca of Marina Alta . Denia's historical heritage has been influenced by Iberian , Greek , Roman , Islamic , Napoleonic and Christian civilizations. As of 2024 [update] , it had a population of 49,700, [ 2 ] although this is more than doubled by tourism during the summer months.

History [ edit ] There is evidence of human habitation in the area since prehistoric times and there are significant Iberian ruins on the hillsides nearby. In the 4th century BC it was a Greek colony of Massalia or Emporion , [ citation needed ] perhaps the one mentioned by Strabo [ 3 ] [ 4 ] as Hēmeroskopeion ( Greek : Ημεροσκοπείον ) (meaning "watchtower"). It was an ally of Rome during the Punic Wars , and later was absorbed into the Roman Empire under the name of Dianium (after their goddess Diana). In the 1st century BC Quintus Sertorius established a Roman naval base here.

[ 5 ] From 636–696, under Visigothic rule , it was the seat of a bishop subordinate to Toledo . After the Muslim conquest of Iberia and the dissolution of the Caliphate of Córdoba , Dénia ( Arabic : دانية , Dāniyya ) became the capital of a Taifa kingdom that reigned over part of the Valencian coast and Ibiza .

Slavic Muslim slaves, saqālibah , led by Mujahid ibn Yusuf ibn Ali , profited from the progressive crumbling of the Caliphate's superstructure to gain control over the province of Dénia. The saqālibah managed to free themselves and run the kingdom, which extended its reach as far as the islands of Majorca and its capital Madinah Mayurqah [ es ] . The saqālibah taifa lost its independence in 1076, when it was captured by Ahmad al-Muqtadir , lord of Zaragoza , under which it remained until the Almoravid invasion in 1091. The Muslim Arabs originally built the castle fortress, and the French, who occupied the city for four years during the Peninsular War , rebuilt it in the early 19th century.

Castle de Dénia 1609 Expulsion of the Moriscos at the port of Dénia, by Vincente Mostre The town was reconquered by the Christians in 1244. This caused a decline for the city, which remained nearly uninhabited after the exile of most of the Muslim population. It was later repopulated by the Valencian government. Created a fief in 1298, it was held by the de Sandoval family from 1431, although the city itself was returned to the Aragonese crown in 1455. A marquisate from 1487, Dénia gained many privileges thanks to Francisco Gómez de Sandoval y Rojas, Duke of Lerma , a favourite of Philip III of Spain . It suffered a further period of decay after the decree of Expulsion of the Moriscos (1609), by which 25,000 people left the marquisate, leaving the local economy in a dismal state.

During the War of the Spanish Succession Dénia was besieged by 9,000 French troops in June 1707, who broke down several sections of the town walls using cannon, but their attacks in July were repulsed by the small garrison with great loss of life to the attackers resulting in the siege being raised after 27 days. Dénia, however, fell to the French forces that November. In 1713 the Treaty of Utrecht recognised Louis XIV's grandson Philip, Duke of Anjou , as King of Spain (as Philip V), so returning Dénia to Spanish rule.

It was reacquired by the Spanish crown in 1803, after which Denia gained an increasingly important role as a trading port. A community of English raisin traders lived in Denia from 1800 until the time of the Spanish Civil War in the late 1930s.

Main sights [ edit ] Dénia is home to a large Moorish castle named Castle of Dénia on a rocky crag overlooking the city. It was built in the 11th and 12th century and offers views around the sea, the city and the surrounding area. Located in the castle is the Palau del Governador and its corresponding museum.

Dénia also has the Museu Etnològic with further details on the history and culture of the city.

Route of the Valencian classics Climate [ edit ] Dénia has a Mediterranean climate ( Köppen Csa ), with mild winters and hot summers. The average annual temperature surpasses 18 °C (64 °F) and the rainfall amount is around 750 millimetres (30 in). The mean temperature of the coldest month (January) is around 12 °C (54 °F), while the mean of the hottest month (August) is around 26 °C (79 °F).

[ 6 ] Autumn is by far the wettest season, receiving more than 300 millimetres (12 in) of rainfall, mostly falling in few days but with heavy rainfalls, a phenomenon called cold drop in Spain that is very common on the Valencian coast .

[ 7 ] Both September and October receive more than 100 millimetres (3.9 in) of rainfall while November receives close to 100mm as well. Summer is the driest season, but not rainless, as on average, it receives around 70 to 80 millimetres (2.8 to 3.1 in) although July is almost rainless as on average it receives under 5 millimetres (0.20 in) of rain, being the sunniest month as well.

Storms are common in Autumn, averaging about 15 stormy days per year. The city enjoys around 2750 sunshine hours per year.

[ 8 ] Climate data for Dénia, Spain Month Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Year Mean daily maximum °C (°F) 17 (63) 17 (63) 19 (66) 21 (70) 24 (75) 28 (82) 30 (86) 31 (88) 29 (84) 25 (77) 20 (68) 18 (64) 23 (74) Mean daily minimum °C (°F) 7 (45) 8 (46) 9 (48) 11 (52) 14 (57) 18 (64) 21 (70) 22 (72) 19 (66) 15 (59) 10 (50) 8 (46) 14 (56) Source: Weather2 [ 6 ] Transportation [ edit ] View of Dénia from the castle The ferry to Ibiza and the other Balearic Islands departs daily. The city also serves as the northern terminus for a 1,000 mm ( 3 ft 3 + 3 ⁄ 8 in ) metre gauge railway line through the mountains from Alicante (popularly known as the Limón Express ), run by FGV . This is not a specific tourist railway; it provides transport throughout the year and is geared to commuter use.

Culture [ edit ] Falla The bonfire festival is celebrated each March.  Huge papier-mâché statues called fallas are set up throughout the town, and then set ablaze.

The Bous a la Mar (meaning "Bulls at the Sea") is held in July. The highlight of this week-long festival is watching bulls run down the main street Marqués de Campo , only to be chased into the Mediterranean sea by those daring enough to enter a makeshift bull ring with them.

Since 1974 it has been home to painter and sculptor Joan Castejón . The town honored him as an Adoptive Son of Dénia in 1999.

Since 2015 Dénia has been an UNESCO Creative City of Gastronomy. The celebrity Chef Quique Dacosta has a 3 star Michelin restaurant in the Las Marinas area of the city.

Notable people [ edit ] Abu al-Salt , Andalusian polymath Al-Dani , Andalusian jurist and qari .

Joan Castejón , sculptor Marta García , racing driver Alberto Sols García , biochemist Pepelu , footballer for Valencia CF Sports [ edit ] Dénia's local football team is called Club Deportivo Dénia , and plays in Spain's Third Division .

Twin towns [ edit ] Cholet , France See also [ edit ] Taifa of Dénia References [ edit ] ^ Municipal Register of Spain 2018 .

National Statistics Institute .

^ "Instituto Nacional de Estadística. (Spanish Statistical Institute)" .

Ine.es . Retrieved 4 November 2016 .

^ Strabo (1903). "4". In Falconer, M.A. (ed.).

The Geography of Strabo. Literally translated, with notes, in three volumes . Vol. 3. Translated by Hamilton, Esq., H.C. London: George Bell & Sons . Retrieved 10 July 2020 .

Of these the best known is Hemeroscopium. On the promontory there is a temple to Diana of Ephesus , held in great veneration.

Sertorius used it as an arsenal, convenient to the sea, both on account of its being fortified and fitted for piratical uses, and because it is visible from a great distance to vessels approaching. It is called Dianium, from Diana.

^ Strabo (1877). "4". In Meineke, A. (ed.).

Geographica (in Ancient Greek). Vol. 3. Leipzig: Teubner . Retrieved 10 July 2020 .

^ Parque Natural del Montgó - Estudio Multidisciplinar (in Spanish). Valencia: Conselleria d'Administració Pública, Agencia del Mediambient. 1990. p. 60.

^ a b "Denia Climate Profile" . myweather2.com . Retrieved 30 September 2021 .

^ "Alerta naranja: Dénia y comarca podrían acumular 100 litros/m2 en 12 horas" . 10 September 2019.

^ "Valores climatológicos normales" .

AEMET . Retrieved 30 October 2020 .

External links [ edit ] Festivals Media related to Denia - Dénia at Wikimedia Commons Dénia travel guide from Wikivoyage Articles related to Dénia v t e Municipalities of Marina Alta Alcalalí Beniarbeig Benidoleig Benigembla Benimeli Benissa Calp Castell de Castells El Poble Nou de Benitatxell / Benitachell Dénia Gata de Gorgos L'Atzúbia La Vall d'Alcalà La Vall d'Ebo La Vall de Gallinera La Vall de Laguar Llíber Murla Ondara Orba Parcent Pedreguer Pego Els Poblets El Ràfol d'Almúnia Sagra Sanet y Negrals Senija Teulada Tormos El Verger Xàbia Xaló v t e Municipalities of the province of Alicante Agost Agres Aigües Albatera Alcalalí Alcocer de Planes Alcoleja Alcoy/Alcoi Alfafara Algorfa Algueña Alicante Almoradí Almudaina Altea Aspe Balones Banyeres de Mariola Benasau Beneixama Benejúzar Benferri Beniarbeig Beniardà Beniarrés Benidoleig Benidorm Benifallim Benifato Benigembla Benijófar Benilloba Benillup Benimantell Benimarfull Benimassot Benimeli Benissa Benitaxell Biar Bigastro Bolulla Busot Callosa d'en Sarrià Callosa de Segura Calp Campo de Mirra Castalla Castell de Castells Catral Cañada Cocentaina Confrides Cox Crevillent Daya Nueva Daya Vieja Dolores Dénia El Campello El Ràfol d'Almúnia El Verger Elche Elda Els Poblets Fageca Famorca Finestrat Formentera del Segura Gaianes Gata de Gorgos Gorga Granja de Rocamora El Castell de Guadalest El Fondó de les Neus Guardamar del Segura Hondón de los Frailes Ibi Jacarilla Jalón Jijona/Xixona L'Alfàs del Pi L'Alqueria d'Asnar L'Atzúbia La Nucia La Romana La Torre de les Maçanes La Vall d'Alcalà La Vall de Laguar Llíber Lorcha Los Montesinos Millena Monforte del Cid Monòver Murla Muro de Alcoy Mutxamel Novelda Ondara Onil Orba Orihuela Orxeta Parcent Pedreguer Pego Penàguila Petrel Pilar de la Horadada Pinoso Planes Polop Quatretondeta Rafal Redován Relleu Rojales Sagra Salinas San Fulgencio San Isidro San Miguel de Salinas San Vicente del Raspeig / Sant Vicent del Raspeig Sanet y Negrals Sant Joan d'Alacant Santa Pola Sax Sella Senija Teulada Tibi Tollos Tormos Torrevieja Tàrbena La Vall d'Ebo Vall de Gallinera Villajoyosa/La Vila Joiosa Villena Xàbia v t e Ancient Greece Timeline History Geography Periods Cycladic civilization Minoan civilization Mycenaean Greece Greek Dark Ages Archaic Greece Classical Greece Hellenistic Greece Roman Greece Geography Aegean Sea Aeolis Crete Cyrenaica Cyprus Doris Epirus Hellespont Ionia Ionian Sea Macedonia Magna Graecia Peloponnesus Pontus Taurica Ancient Greek colonies City states Politics Military City states Argos Athens Byzantion Chalcis Corinth Ephesus Miletus Pergamon Eretria Kerkyra Larissa Megalopolis Thebes Megara Rhodes Samos Sparta Lissus (Crete) Kingdoms Bithynia Cappadocia Epirus Greco-Bactrian Kingdom Indo-Greek Kingdom Macedonia Pergamon Pontus Ptolemaic Kingdom Seleucid Empire Federations / Confederations Doric Hexapolis ( c.

1100 – c.

560 BC ) Italiote League ( c.

800 –389 BC) Ionian League (c. 650–404 BC) Peloponnesian League ( c.

550 –366 BC) Amphictyonic League ( c.

595 –279 BC) Acarnanian League (c. 500–31 BC) Hellenic League (499–449 BC) Delian League (478–404 BC) Chalcidian League (430–348 BC) Boeotian League (c. 424–c. 395 BC) Aetolian League (c. 400–188 BC) Second Athenian League (378–355 BC) Thessalian League (374–196 BC) Arcadian League (370–c. 230 BC) Epirote League (370–168 BC) League of Corinth (338–322 BC) Euboean League (c. 300 BC–c. 300 AD) Achaean League (280–146 BC) Politics Boule Free city Koinon Proxeny Stasis Tagus Tyrant Athenian Agora Areopagus Ecclesia Graphe paranomon Heliaia Ostracism Spartan Ekklesia Ephor Gerousia Macedon Synedrion Koinon Military Wars Athenian military Scythian archers Antigonid Macedonian army Army of Macedon Ballista Cretan archers Hellenistic armies Hippeis Hoplite Hetairoi Macedonian phalanx Military of Mycenaean Greece Phalanx Peltast Pezhetairos Sarissa Sacred Band of Thebes Sciritae Seleucid army Spartan army Strategos Toxotai Xiphos Xyston People List of ancient Greeks Rulers Kings of Argos Archons of Athens Kings of Athens Kings of Commagene Diadochi Kings of Macedonia Kings of Paionia Attalid kings of Pergamon Kings of Pontus Ptolemaic dynasty Seleucid dynasty Kings of Sparta Tyrants of Syracuse Artists & scholars Astronomers Geographers Historians Mathematicians Philosophers Playwrights Poets Seven Sages Writers Philosophers Anaxagoras Anaximander Anaximenes Antisthenes Aristotle Democritus Diogenes of Sinope Empedocles Epicurus Gorgias Heraclitus Hypatia Leucippus Parmenides Plato Protagoras Pythagoras Socrates Thales Zeno Authors Aeschylus Aesop Alcaeus Archilochus Aristophanes Bacchylides Euripides Herodotus Hesiod Hipponax Homer Ibycus Lucian Menander Mimnermus Panyassis Philocles Pindar Plutarch Polybius Sappho Simonides Sophocles Stesichorus Theognis Thucydides Timocreon Tyrtaeus Xenophon Others Athenian statesmen Lawgivers Olympic victors Tyrants By culture Ancient Greek tribes Thracian Greeks Ancient Macedonians Society Culture Society Agriculture Calendar Clothing Coinage Cuisine Economy Education Emporium Euergetism Festivals Folklore Homosexuality Law Olympic Games Pederasty Philosophy Prostitution Religion Slavery Warfare Wedding customs Wine Arts and science Architecture Greek Revival architecture Astronomy Literature Mathematics Medicine Music Musical system Pottery Sculpture Technology Theatre Religion Funeral and burial practices Mythology Deities Temple Twelve Olympians Underworld Sacred places Eleusis Delphi Delos Dion Dodona Mount Olympus Olympia Structures Athenian Treasury Lion Gate Long Walls Philippeion Theatre of Dionysus Tunnel of Eupalinos Temples Aphaea Artemis Athena Nike Erechtheion Hephaestus Hera, Olympia Parthenon Samothrace Zeus, Olympia Language Proto-Greek Mycenaean Homeric Dialects Aeolic Arcadocypriot Attic Doric Epirote Ionic Locrian Macedonian Pamphylian Koine Writing Linear A Linear B Cypriot syllabary Greek alphabet Greek numerals Attic numerals Greek colonisation Magna Graecia Mainland Italy Alision Brentesion Caulonia Chone Croton Cumae Elea Heraclea Lucania Hipponion Hydrus Krimisa Laüs Locri Medma Metauros Metapontion Neápolis Pandosia (Lucania) Poseidonia Pixous Rhegion Scylletium Siris Sybaris Sybaris on the Traeis Taras Terina Thurii Sicily Akragas Akrai Akrillai Apollonia Calacte Casmenae Catana Gela Helorus Henna Heraclea Minoa Himera Hybla Gereatis Hybla Heraea Kamarina Leontinoi Megara Hyblaea Messana Naxos Segesta Selinous Syracuse Tauromenion Thermae Tyndaris Aeolian Islands Didyme Euonymos Ereikousa Hycesia Lipara/Meligounis Phoenicusa Strongyle Therassía Cyrenaica Balagrae Barca Berenice Cyrene ( Apollonia ) Ptolemais Iberian Peninsula Akra Leuke Alonis Emporion Helike Hemeroscopion Kalathousa Kypsela Mainake Menestheus's Limin Illicitanus Limin/Portus Illicitanus Rhode Salauris Zacynthos Illyria Aspalathos Apollonia Aulon Epidamnos Epidauros Issa Melaina Korkyra Nymphaion Orikon Pharos Tragurion Thronion Black Sea basin North coast Akra Borysthenes Charax Chersonesus Dioscurias Gorgippia Hermonassa Kalos Limen Kepoi Kerkinitis Kimmerikon Myrmekion Nikonion Nymphaion Olbia Pantikapaion Phanagoria Pityus Tanais Theodosia Tyras Tyritake South coast Abonoteichos Amisos Anchialos Apollonia Athina Bathus Dionysopolis Cotyora Cytorus Eupatoria Heraclea Kerasous Mesambria Odessos Oinòe Phasis Polemonion Rhizos Salmydessus Sesamus Sinope Thèrmae Tium Trapezous Tripolis Zaliche Lists Cities in Epirus People Place names Stoae Temples Theatres Category Portal Outline Authority control databases International VIAF National Germany United States Spain Israel Geographic MusicBrainz area Other NARA Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Dénia&oldid=1301854616 " Categories : Municipalities in the Province of Alicante Tourism in Spain Mediterranean port cities and towns in Spain Greek colonies in Iberia Ancient Greek archaeological sites in Spain Hidden categories: CS1 foreign language sources (ISO 639-2) CS1 Spanish-language sources (es) Articles needing additional references from August 2024 All articles needing additional references Use dmy dates from December 2019 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Valencian-language text Articles containing Spanish-language text Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles containing Catalan-language text Pages using infobox settlement with possible demonym list Pages with Valencian IPA Pages with Spanish IPA Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2024 All articles containing potentially dated statements All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2020 Articles containing Greek-language text Articles containing Arabic-language text Commons link from Wikidata Pages using the Kartographer extension This page was last edited on 22 July 2025, at 02:54 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Dénia 59 languages Add topic

