Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview 2 Breakthrough of the Year 3 Book of the Year 4 Pictures of the Year 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Physics World 6 languages Български Deutsch 한국어 Nederlands Русский Slovenščina Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Journal This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Physics World" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( March 2017 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article relies largely or entirely on a single source .

Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page . Please help improve this article by introducing  citations to additional sources .

Find sources: "Physics World" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( March 2017 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Physics World Cover of May 2019 issue Editor Matin Durrani Categories Science Frequency monthly Circulation 50,000 (2013) [ citation needed ] First issue 1988 ; 37 years ago ( 1988 ) Company IOP Publishing Ltd Country United Kingdom Based in Bristol Language English Website physicsworld .com ISSN 0953-8585 Physics World is the membership magazine of the Institute of Physics , one of the largest physical societies in the world. It is an international monthly magazine covering all areas of physics, pure and applied, and is aimed at physicists in research, industry, physics outreach , and education worldwide.

Overview [ edit ] The magazine was launched in 1988 by IOP Publishing Ltd , under the founding editorship of Philip Campbell .

[ citation needed ] The magazine is made available free of cost to members of the Institute of Physics , who can access a digital edition of the magazine; selected articles can be read by anyone for free online. It was redesigned in September 2005 and has an audited circulation of just under 35000.

The current editor is Matin Durrani.

[ 1 ] Others on the team are Michael Banks (news editor) [ 2 ] and Tushna Commissariat and Sarah Teah (features editors). Hamish Johnston, Margaret Harris and Tami Freeman are online editors.

Alongside the print and online magazine, Physics World produces films and two podcasts.

[ 3 ] The Physics World Stories podcast [ 4 ] is hosted by Andrew Glester [ 5 ] and is produced monthly. The Physics World Weekly podcast is hosted by James Dacey.

[ 6 ] Breakthrough of the Year [ edit ] This section may contain an excessive amount of intricate detail that may only interest a particular audience .

Please help by spinning off or relocating any relevant information, and removing excessive detail that may be against Wikipedia's inclusion policy .

( July 2020 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The magazine makes two awards each year. These are the Physics World Breakthrough of the Year and the Physics World Book of the Year, which have both been awarded annually since 2009.

[ citation needed ] Top 10 works and winners of the Breakthrough of the Year 2009 : "to August Jonathan Home and colleagues at NIST for unveiled the first small-scale device that could be described as a complete " quantum computer " Top results from Tevatron Spins spotted in room-temperature silicon Graphane makes its debut Magnetic monopoles spotted in spin ices Water on the Moon Atoms teleport information over long distance Black-hole analogue traps sound Dark matter spotted in Minnesota A 2.36 TeV big bang at the LHC 2010 : "to ALPHA and the ASACUSA group at CERN for have created new ways of controlling antihydrogen " Exoplanet atmosphere laid bare Quantum effects seen in a visible object Visible-light cloaking of large objects Hail the first sound lasers A Bose–Einstein condensate from light Relativity with a human touch Towards a Star Wars telepresence Proton is smaller than we thought CERN achieves landmark collisions 2011 : Aephraim M. Steinberg and colleagues from the University of Toronto in Canada for using the technique of "weak measurement" to track the average paths of single photons passing through a Young's interference experiment .

[ 7 ] Measuring the wavefunction Cloaking in space and time Measuring the universe using black holes Turning darkness into light Taking the temperature of the early universe Catching the flavour of a neutrino oscillation Living laser brought to life Complete quantum computer made on a single chip Seeing pure relics from the Big Bang 2012 : "to the ATLAS and CMS collaborations at CERN for their joint discovery of a Higgs -like particle at the Large Hadron Collider ".

[ 8 ] Majorana fermions Time-reversal violation Galaxy-cluster motion Peering through opaque materials Room-temperature maser Wiping data will cost you energy Entangling twisted beams Neutrino-based communication Generating and storing energy in one step 2013 : "the IceCube Neutrino Observatory for making the first observations of high-energy cosmic neutrinos".

[ 9 ] Nuclear physics goes pear-shaped Creating 'molecules' of light Planck reveals 'almost perfect' universe Quantum microscope' peers into the hydrogen atom Quantum state endures for 39 minutes at room temperature The first carbon-nanotube computer B-mode polarization spotted in cosmic microwave background The first laser-cooled Bose–Einstein condensate Hofstadter's butterfly spotted in graphene [ 10 ] 2014 : "to the landing by the European Space Agency of the Philae (spacecraft) on 67P/Churyumov–Gerasimenko ", which was the first time a probe had been landed on a comet [ 11 ] Quasar shines a bright light on cosmic web Neutrinos spotted from Sun's main nuclear reaction Laser fusion passes milestone Electrons' magnetic interactions isolated at long last Disorder sharpens optical-fibre images Data stored in magnetic holograms Lasers ignite 'supernovae' in the lab Quantum data are compressed for the first time Physicists sound-out acoustic tractor beam 2015 : "for being the first to achieve the simultaneous quantum teleportation of two inherent properties of a fundamental particle – the photon".

[ 12 ] Cyclotron radiation from a single electron is measured for the first time Weyl fermions are spotted at long last Physicists claim 'loophole-free' Bell-violation experiment First visible light detected directly from an exoplanet LHCb claims discovery of two pentaquarks Hydrogen sulphide is warmest ever superconductor at 203 K Portable 'battlefield MRI' comes out of the lab Fermionic microscope sees first light Silicon quantum logic gate is a first 2016 : "to LIGO's gravitational wave discovery".

[ 13 ] Schrödinger's cat lives and dies in two boxes at once Elusive nuclear-clock transition spotted in thorium-229 New gravimeter-on-a-chip is tiny yet extremely sensitive Negative refraction of electrons spotted in graphene Rocky planet found in habitable zone around Sun's nearest neighbour Physicists take entanglement beyond identical ions 'Radical' new microscope lens combines high resolution with large field of view Quantum computer simulates fundamental particle interactions for the first time The single-atom engine that could 2017 : "to First multimessenger observation of a neutron star merger ".

[ 14 ] Physicists create first ‘topological’ laser Lightning makes radioactive isotopes Super-resolution microscope combines Nobel-winning technologies Particle-free quantum communication is achieved in the lab Ultra-high-energy cosmic rays have extra-galactic origins ‘Time crystals’ built in the lab Metamaterial enhances natural cooling without power input Three-photon interference measured at long last Muons reveal hidden void in Egyptian pyramid 2018 : "Discovery that led to the development of “ twistronics ”, which is a new and very promising technique for adjusting the electronic properties of graphene by rotating adjacent layers of the material." [ 15 ] Multifunctional carbon fibres enable “massless” energy storage Compensator expands global access to advanced radiotherapy IPCC Special Report on 1.5 °C climate change EXPLORER PET/CT produces first total-body scans Combustion-free, propeller-free plane takes flight Quantum mechanics defies causal order, experiment confirms Activating retinal stem cells restores vision in mice Ancient hydrogen reveals clues to dark matter’s identity Superconductivity spotted in a quasicrystal 2019 : "First direct observation of a black hole and its ‘shadow’ by the Event Horizon Telescope " [ 16 ] Neuroprosthetic devices translate brain activity into speech First detection of a “Marsquake” CERN physicists spot symmetry violation in charm mesons “Little Big Coil” creates record-breaking continuous magnetic field Casimir effect creates “quantum trap” for tiny objects Antimatter quantum interferometry makes its debut Quantum computer outperforms conventional supercomputer Trapped interferometer makes a compact gravity probe Wearable MEG scanner used with children for the first time 2020 : "Silicon-based light with a direct band gap in microelectronics " [ 17 ] Taking snapshots of a quantum measurement Quantum correlations discovered in massive mirrors Borexino spots solar neutrinos from elusive fusion cycle First observation of a ferroelectric nematic liquid crystal Thin-film perovskite detectors slash imaging dose Fundamental constants set limit on speed of sound Expanding twistronics to photons Mixed beams enhance particle therapy accuracy The first room-temperature superconductor 2021 : " Quantum entanglement of two macroscopic objects" [ 18 ] Restoring speech in a paralysed man Making 30 lasers emit as one Quantifying wave–particle duality Milestone for laser fusion Innovative particle cooling techniques Observing a black hole’s magnetic field Achieving coherent quantum control of nuclei Observing Pauli blocking in ultracold fermionic gases Confirming the muon’s theory-defying magnetism 2022 : "Deflection of a near-Earth asteroid by DART satellite " [ 19 ] Ushering in a new era for ultracold chemistry Observing the tetraneutron Super-efficient electricity generation The fastest possible optoelectronic switch Opening a new window on the universe by JWST First-in-human FLASH proton therapy Perfecting light transmission and absorption Cubic boron arsenide is a champion semiconductor Detecting an Aharonov–Bohm effect for gravity 2023 : " Brain–computer interface that allowed a paralysed man to walk" [ 20 ] Growing electrodes inside living tissue Neutrinos probe the proton’s structure Simulating an expanding universe in a BEC A double slit in time Building blocks for a large-scale quantum network First X-ray image of a single atom “Smoking gun” evidence of early galaxies transforming the universe Supersonic cracks in materials Antimatter does not fall up Fusion energy breakthrough 2024 : " Quantum error correction with 48 logical qubits; and independently, below the surface code threshold" [ 21 ] Light-absorbing dye turns skin of live mouse transparent Laser cooling positronium Modelling lung cells to personalize radiotherapy A semiconductor and a novel switch made from graphene Detecting the decay of individual nuclei Two distinct descriptions of nuclei unified for the first time New titanium:sapphire laser is tiny, low-cost and tuneable Entangled photons conceal and enhance images First samples returned from the Moon’s far side Book of the Year [ edit ] This section may contain an excessive amount of intricate detail that may only interest a particular audience .

Please help by spinning off or relocating any relevant information, and removing excessive detail that may be against Wikipedia's inclusion policy .

( July 2020 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Top 10 books and the Book of the Year winner A blue ribbon ( ) appears against the winner.

2009 : The Strangest Man: The Hidden Life of Paul Dirac, Quantum Genius by Graham Farmelo The Physics of Rugby –  Trevor Davis (Nottingham University Press) First Principles: The Crazy Business of Doing Serious Science – Howard Burton (Key Porter Books) Oliver Heaviside: Maverick Mastermind of Electricity – Basil Mahon (Institute of Engineering and Technology) Atomic: The First War of Physics and the Secret History of the Atom Bomb – Jim Baggott (Icon Books) Lives in Science – Joseph C Hermanowicz (University of Chicago Press) 13 Things That Don't Make Sense – Michael Brooks (Profile Books) Deciphering the Cosmic Number: The Strange Friendship of Wolfgang Pauli and Carl Jung – Arthur I Miller (W W Norton) Perfect Rigor – Masha Gessen (Houghton Mifflin Harcourt) Plastic Fantastic: How the Biggest Fraud in Physics Shook the Scientific World – Eugenie Samuel Reich (Palgrave Macmillan) 2010 : The Edge of Physics: Dispatches from the Frontiers of Cosmology by Anil Ananthaswamy The Tunguska Mystery – Vladimir Rubtsov (Springer) Coming Climate Crisis? Consider the Past, Beware the Big Fix – Claire L Parkinson (Rowman & Littlefield) How It Ends – Chris Impey (W W Norton) Lake Views: This World and the Universe – Steven Weinberg (Harvard University Press) The Quants: How a New Breed of Math Whizzes Conquered Wall Street and Nearly Destroyed It – Scott Patterson (Crown Business) Newton and the Counterfeiter –  Thomas Levenson (Faber and Faber) Packing for Mars –  Mary Roach (One World Publications/ W W Norton) Massive: The Hunt for the God Particle –  Ian Sample (Virgin Books/Basic Books) How to Teach Quantum Physics to Your Dog –  Chad Orzel 2011 : Quantum Man: Richard Feynman's Life in Science by Lawrence Krauss from Case Western Reserve University [ 22 ] Engineering Animals – Mark Denny and Alan McFadzean Measure of the Earth: the Enlightenment Expedition that Reshaped the World – Larrie Ferreiro The Hidden Reality: Parallel Universes and the Deep Laws of the Cosmos – Brian Greene Lab Coats in Hollywood: Science, Scientists and Cinema – David Kirby Quantum Man: Richard Feynman's Life in Science – Lawrence Krauss Rising Force: the Magic of Magnetic Levitation – James Livingston Modernist Cuisine – Nathan Myhrvold, Chris Young and Maxime Bilet The 4% Universe: Dark Matter, Dark Energy, and the Race to Discover the Rest of Reality – Richard Panek Radioactive: Marie and Pierre Curie, A Tale of Love and Fallout – Lauren Redniss Hindsight and Popular Astronomy – Alan Whiting 2012 : How the Hippies Saved Physics by David Kaiser from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology [ 23 ] A Hole at the Bottom of the Sea: The Race to Kill the BP Oil Gusher – Joel Achenbach The Science Magpie: A Hoard of Fascinating Facts – Simon Flynn The Idea Factory: Bell Labs and the Great Age of American Innovation – Jon Gertner Erwin Schrödinger and the Quantum Revolution – John Gribbin The Geek Manifesto: Why Science Matters – Mark Henderson Life's Ratchet: How Molecular Machines Extract Order from Chaos – Peter M Hoffmann How the Hippies Saved Physics: Science, Counterculture and the Quantum Revival – David Kaiser How to Teach Relativity to Your Dog – Chad Orzel Pricing the Future: Finance, Physics and the 300-Year Journey to the Black–Scholes Equation  – George Szpiro Physics on the Fringe: Smoke Rings, Circlons, and Alternative Theories of Everything – Margaret Wertheim 2013 : Physics in Mind: a Quantum View of the Brain by the biophysicist Werner Loewenstein [ 24 ] The Spark of Life: Electricity in the Human Body – Frances Ashcroft The Particle at the End of the Universe: How the Hunt for the Higgs Boson Leads Us to the Edge of a New World – Sean M. Carroll Hans Christian Ørsted: Reading Nature's Mind – Dan Charly Christensen Churchill's Bomb: a Hidden History of Science, War and Politics – Graham Farmelo Physics in Mind: a Quantum View of the Brain – Werner Loewenstein J Robert Oppenheimer: A Life Inside the Center – Ray Monk The Simpsons and their Mathematical Secrets – Simon Singh Time Reborn: From the Crisis in Physics to the Future of the Universe – Lee Smolin The Theoretical Minimum: What You Need to Know to Start Doing Physics – Leonard Susskind and George Hrabovsky Weird Life: the Search for Life That Is Very, Very Different from Our Own – David Toomey 2014 : Stuff Matters: The Strange Stories of the Marvellous Materials that Shape our Man-made World - Mark Miodownik Wizards, Aliens & Starships: Physics and Math in Fantasy and Science Fiction - Charles Adler Serving the Reich: the Struggle for the Soul of Physics Under Hitler - Philip Ball Five Billion Years of Solitude: the Search for Life Among the Stars - Lee Billings Plutopia: Nuclear Families, Atomic Cities, and the Great Soviet and American Plutonium Disasters - Kate Brown Smashing Physics: Inside the World’s Biggest Experiment - Jon Butterworth Sonic Wonderland: a Scientific Odyssey of Sound - Trevor Cox The Perfect Theory: a Century of Geniuses and the Battle Over General Relativity - Pedro G Ferreira Stuff Matters: the Strange Stories of the Marvellous Materials that Shape Our Man-made World - Mark Miodownik Einstein and the Quantum: the Quest of the Valiant Swabian - Douglas Stone Island on Fire: the Extraordinary Story of Laki, the Volcano that Turned Eighteenth-century Europe - Dark Alexandra Witze and Jeff Kanipe 2015 : Trespassing on Einstein’s Lawn: a Father, a Daughter, the Meaning of Nothing and the Beginning of Everything - Amanda Gefter Life on the Edge: the Coming of Age of Quantum Biology - Jim Al-Khalili and Johnjoe McFadden Physics on Your Feet: Ninety Minutes of Shame but a PhD for the Rest of Your Life - Dmitry Budker and Alexander Sushkov Half-Life: the Divided Life of Bruno Pontecorvo, Physicist or Spy - Frank Close Beyond: Our Future in Space - Chris Impey The Water Book: the Extraordinary Story of Our Most Ordinary Substance - Alok Jha Monsters: the Hindenburg Disaster and the Birth of Pathological Technology - Ed Regis Tunnel Visions: the Rise and Fall of the Superconducting Super Collider - Michael Riordan, Lillian Hoddeson , Adrienne Kolb The Copernicus Complex: the Quest for our Cosmic (In)Significance - Caleb Scharf Atoms Under the Floorboards: the Surprising Science Hidden in Your Home - Chris Woodford 2016 : Why String Theory?

- Joseph Conlon [ 25 ] The Jazz of Physics: the Secret Link Between Music and the Structure of the Universe - Stephon Alexander Storm in a Teacup: the Physics of Everyday Life - Helen Czerski Big Science: Ernest Lawrence and the Invention that Launched the Military-Industrial Complex - Michael Hiltzik Strange Glow: the Story of Radiation - Timothy Jorgensen Cosmos: the Infographic Book of Space - Stuart Lowe and Chris North Spooky Action at a Distance: the Phenomenon that Reimagines Space and Time - George Musser Goldilocks and the Water Bears: the Search for Life in the Universe - Louisa Preston Reality Is Not What It Seems: the Journey to Quantum Gravity - Carlo Rovelli The Pope of Physics: Enrico Fermi and the Birth of the Atomic Age - Gino Segrè and Bettina Hoerlin 2017 : Inferior: How Science Got Women Wrong and the New Research That’s Rewriting the Story - Angela Saini [ 26 ] Marconi: the Man Who Networked the World by Marc Raboy Hidden Figures: the Untold Story of the African American Women Who Helped Win the Space Race by Margot Lee Shetterly The Glass Universe: How the Ladies of the Harvard Observatory Took the Measure of the Stars by Dava Sobel Scale: the Universal Laws of Life and Death in Organisms, Cities and Companies by Geoffrey West Not A Scientist: How Politicians Mistake, Misrepresent and Utterly Mangle Science by Dave Levitan Inferior: How Science Got Women Wrong and the New Research That’s Rewriting the Story by Angela Saini Mapping the Heavens: the Radical Scientific Ideas That Reveal the Cosmos by Priyamvada Natarajan We Have No Idea by Jorge Cham and Daniel Whiteson The Secret Science of Superheroes edited by Ed. Mark Lorch and Andy Miah The Death of Expertise: the Campaign Against Established Knowledge and Why it Matters by Tom Nichols 2018 : Beyond Weird: Why Everything You Thought You Knew About Quantum Physics is Different - Philip Ball [ 27 ] Treknology: the Science of Star Trek from Tricorders to Warp Drives by Ethan Siegel Ad Astra: an Illustrated Guide to Leaving the Planet by Dallas Campbell Exact Thinking in Demented Times: the Vienna Circle and the Epic Quest for the Foundations of Science by Karl Sigmund Beyond Weird: Why Everything You Thought You Knew About Quantum Physics is Different by Philip Ball The Order of Time by Carlo Rovelli Lost in Math: How Beauty Leads Physics Astray by Sabine Hossenfelder The Dialogues: Conversations About the Nature of the Universe by Clifford V Johnson When the Uncertainty Principle Goes to 11: Or How to Explain Quantum Physics with Heavy Metal by Philip Moriarty What is Real: the Unfinished Quest for the Meaning of Quantum Physics by Adam Becker Hello World: How to be Human in the Age of the Machine by Hannah Fry 2019 : The Demon in the Machine: How Hidden Webs of Information are Solving the Mystery of Life - Paul Davies [ 28 ] The Moon: a History for the Future by Oliver Morton The Case Against Reality: How Evolution Hid the Truth from Our Eyes by Donald D Hoffman Fire, Ice and Physics: the Science of Game of Thrones by Rebecca C Thompson Underland: A Deep Time Journey by Robert Macfarlane The Demon in the Machine: How Hidden Webs of Information are Solving the Mystery of Life by Paul Davies The Second Kind of Impossible: the Extraordinary Quest For A New Form of Matter by Paul J Steinhardt Superior: the Return of Race Science by Angela Saini Einstein’s Unfinished Revolution: the Search for What Lies Beyond the Quantum by Lee Smolin The Universe Speaks in Numbers: How Modern Maths Reveals Nature’s Deepest Secrets by Graham Farmelo Catching Stardust: Comets, Asteroids and the Birth of the Solar System by Natalie Starkey Pictures of the Year [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

Find sources: "Physics World" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( July 2020 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Top 10 Favourite Pictures of the Year 2015: New Horizons uncovers Pluto's icy secrets Lasers reveal previously unseen fossil details Clap your eyes on the first 'images' of thunder Could lasers guide and control the path of lightning?

Gravitational lensing creates 'Einstein's cross' of distant supernova Revealing the secret strength of a sea sponge Satellite sensor unexpectedly detects waves in upper atmosphere Balloon bursts approach the speed of sound Imaging the polarity of individual chemical bonds Organic microflowers bloom bright References [ edit ] ^ " Our Team.

" Physics World . Accessed December 15, 2017.

^ " @Mike_Banks "  on Twitter ^ Physics World – Multimedia . Accessed February 14, 2018.

^ "iTunes . Accessed June 29, 2018.

^ .

PlayerFM . Accessed June 29, 2018.

^ Physics World – Audio . Accessed June 29, 2018.

^ "Physics World reveals its top 10 breakthroughs for 2011" , Physics World 16 December 2011 ^ "Physics World reveals its top 10 breakthroughs of 2012" , Physics World 14 December 2012 ^ "Cosmic neutrinos named Physics World 2013 Breakthrough of the Year" , Physics World 13 December 2013 ^ "Graphene research lands one of 2013 top 10 physics breakthroughs" .

Manchester University . Retrieved 7 February 2025 .

^ "Comet landing named Physics World 2014 Breakthrough of the Year" , Physics World 12 December 2014 ^ "Double quantum-teleportation milestone is Physics World 2015 Breakthrough of the Year" , Physics World 11 December 2015 ^ "LIGO's gravitational-wave discovery is Physics World 2016 Breakthrough of the Year" , Physics World 12 December 2016 ^ "First multimessenger observation of a neutron-star merger is Physics World 2017 Breakthrough of the Year – Physics World" .

Physics World . 2017-12-11 . Retrieved 2018-06-13 .

^ "Discovery of 'magic-angle graphene' that behaves like a high-temperature superconductor is Physics World 2018 Breakthrough of the Year" .

Physics World . 2018-12-13 . Retrieved 2019-04-13 .

^ "First direct observation of a black hole and its 'shadow' is Physics World 2019 Breakthrough of the Year" .

Physics World . 2019-12-12 . Retrieved 2020-02-10 .

^ "Silicon-based material with a direct band gap is the Physics World 2020 Breakthrough of the Year" .

Physics World . 2020-12-17 . Retrieved 2021-12-30 .

^ "Quantum entanglement of two macroscopic objects is the Physics World 2021 Breakthrough of the Year" .

Physics World . 2021-12-14 . Retrieved 2021-12-30 .

^ "Deflection of a near-Earth asteroid by DART is the Physics World 2022 Breakthrough of the Year" .

Physics World . 2021-12-14 . Retrieved 2021-12-26 .

^ "Brain–computer interface that allowed a paralysed man to walk is the Physics World 2023 Breakthrough of the Year" .

Physics World . 2023-12-14 . Retrieved 2023-12-29 .

^ "Physics breakthrough of 2024 awarded to quantum computing innovators" .

IOP . 2024-12-20 . Retrieved 2024-12-22 .

^ "Physics World's 2011 Books of the Year" , Physics World 19 December 2011 ^ "Physics World's 2012 Book of the Year" , Physics World 18 December 2012 ^ "Biophysics 'rollercoaster ride' wins Physics World's 2013 Book of the Year" , Physics World 17 December 2013 ^ Shiu, Gary (2016). "Review of Why String Theory?

by Joseph Conlon".

Physics Today .

69 (6): 59– 61.

doi : 10.1063/PT.3.3201 .

ISSN 0031-9228 .

^ "Inferior by Angela Saini wins Physics World’s 2017 Book of the Year" , Physics World 13 December 2017 ^ "Beyond Weird by Philip Ball wins Physics World Book of the Year 2018" , Physics World 17 December 2018 ^ "The Demon in the Machine by Paul Davies wins Physics World Book of the Year 2019" , Physics World 18 December 2019 External links [ edit ] English Wikisource has original text related to this article: Physics World Official website Physics World's channel on YouTube v t e Institute of Physics Awards Appleton Medal Blodgett Medal Born Medal Bragg Medal Burnell Medal Chadwick Medal Curie Medal Dirac Medal Edwards Medal Faraday Medal FInstP Franklin Medal Gabor Medal Glazebrook Medal Holweck Medal Hoyle Medal Jackson Medal Joule Medal Kelvin Medal Massey Medal Maxwell Medal Meitner Medal Moseley Medal Mott Medal Newton Medal Occhialini Medal Payne-Gaposchkin Medal Paterson Medal Phillips Award President's Medal Rayleigh Medal Rutherford Medal Simon Memorial Prize Somerville Medal Tabor Medal Thomson Medal Young Medal Historical Awards Chree Medal Duddell Medal Guthrie Medal Swan Medal Publications IOP Publishing Physics World Reports on Progress in Physics Proceedings of the Physical Society Measurement Science and Technology Presidents James Menter Brian Flowers Brian Pippard Basil Mason Bas Pease Denys Wilkinson Robert Clayton Alec Merrison Godfrey Stafford Cyril Hilsum Roger Blin-Stoyle [ de ] Clive Foxell Arnold Wolfendale Brian Manley Gareth Roberts Peter Williams David Wallace John Enderby Peter Saraga Jocelyn Bell Burnell Marshall Stoneham Jocelyn Bell Burnell (Interim) Peter Knight Frances Saunders Roy Sambles Julia Higgins Jonathan Flint Formed from Institute of Physics Physical Society NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐8425k
Cached time: 20250817051150
Cache expiry: 1277296
Reduced expiry: true
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.523 seconds
Real time usage: 0.669 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 3338/1000000
Revision size: 29927/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 114509/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 13928/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 18/100
Expensive parser function count: 8/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 67825/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.292/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 8846170/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  537.384      1 -total
 23.14%  124.325      1 Template:Reflist
 14.32%   76.962      1 Template:Multiple_issues
 13.71%   73.702      1 Template:Institute_of_Physics
 13.39%   71.941      1 Template:Navbox
 12.96%   69.654      1 Template:Wikisource
 12.57%   67.569      1 Template:Wikisource/outer_core
 12.31%   66.171      1 Template:Wikisource/inner_core
 12.17%   65.373      1 Template:Cite_web
 12.11%   65.065      1 Template:Sister_project Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:1506216:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817051150 and revision id 1297843946. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Physics_World&oldid=1297843946 " Categories : 1988 establishments in the United Kingdom Magazines established in 1988 Science and technology magazines published in the United Kingdom Institute of Physics Monthly magazines published in the United Kingdom Mass media in Bristol Physics magazines Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from March 2017 All articles needing additional references Articles with multiple maintenance issues All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2017 Wikipedia articles that are excessively detailed from July 2020 All articles that are excessively detailed Wikipedia articles with style issues from July 2020 All articles with style issues Articles needing additional references from July 2020 Official website different in Wikidata and Wikipedia This page was last edited on 28 June 2025, at 21:39 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Physics World 6 languages Add topic

