Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 Importance in Sikhism Toggle Importance in Sikhism subsection 2.1 Opposition 3 Comparison with Kosher and Halal methods Toggle Comparison with Kosher and Halal methods subsection 3.1 Terminology for non- jhatka products 4 Availability 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Jhatka 12 languages বাংলা Català Deutsch Español Français മലയാളം Norsk bokmål ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی Svenska தமிழ் اردو Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Animal slaughter in Sikhism Photograph of Sikh soldiers performing a jhatka slaughter, ca.1914–16 Part of a series on Sikhism People Topics Outline History Glossary Sikh gurus Guru Nanak Guru Angad Guru Amar Das Guru Ram Das Guru Arjan Guru Hargobind Guru Har Rai Guru Har Krishan Guru Tegh Bahadur Guru Gobind Singh Guru Granth Sahib Selected revered saints Bhagat Kabir Bhagat Ravidas Bhagat Farid Bhagat Ramanand Bhagat Beni Bhagat Namdev Bhagat Sadhana Bhagat Bhikhan Bhagat Parmanand Bhagat Sain Bhagat Dhanna Bhagat Pipa Bhagat Surdas Bhagat Jaidev Bhagat Trilochan Bhatt Kalshar Bhatt Balh Bhatt Bhalh Bhatt Bhika Bhatt Gayand Bhatt Harbans Bhatt Jalap Bhatt Kirat Bhatt Mathura Bhatt Nalh Bhatt Salh Baba Sundar Satta Doom Balvand Rai Philosophy Naam Japo Kirat Karō Vand Chakkō Charhdi Kalā Guru Maneyo Granth Five Thieves Five Virtues Practices Sikh Rehat Maryada Prohibitions Ardās Kirtan Amrit Velā Dasvand The Five Ks Langar Sewa Simran Nitnem Dastaar (Turban) Naam Karan Amrit Sanskar Anand Karaj Antam Sanskar Scripture Guru Granth Sahib Dasam Granth Sarbloh Granth Five Banis Places and Takhts Gurdwara Harmandir Sahib Akal Takht Keshgarh Sahib Damdama Sahib Patna Sahib Hazur Sahib Culture Literature Music Names Khanda Khalsa General topics Ik Onkar Waheguru Panj Pyare Nirgun and Sargun Nanakshahi calendar Criticism Jathedar of Akal Takht War Sects Sikhism and other religions Sikhism and Hinduism Sikhism and Islam Sikhism and Jainism Religion portal v t e Jhatka ( Punjabi : ਝਟਕਾ , romanized: jhaṭkā ) is a method of slaughtering an animal for meat by a single strike of a sword or axe to sever its head within the Sikh and Hindu religions. This kills the animal almost instantly as opposed to other forms of slaughter. This type of slaughter is preferred by most meat-consuming Sikhs . Also within this method of butchering, the animal must not be scared or shaken before the slaughter but given a dignified, painless death.

Etymology [ edit ] The Punjabi word ਝਟਕਾ , jhaṭkā is derived from the Sanskrit term झटिति , jhaṭiti which means "instantly" or "at once".

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Importance in Sikhism [ edit ] Late 19th century depiction of a jhatka slaughter by Guru Gobind Singh at Anandpur in 1699 to formalize the Khalsa Panth Although not all Sikhs maintain the practice of eating meat butchered in this style, it is well known by most Sikhs to have been mandated by the ten Sikh Gurus: According to the Sikh tradition, only such meat as is obtained from an animal which is killed with one stroke of the weapon causing instant death is fit for human consumption.

Guru Gobind Singh took a rather serious view of this aspect of the whole matter. He, therefore, while permitting flesh to be taken as food repudiated the whole theory of this expiatory sacrifice. Accordingly, he made jhatka meat obligatory for those Sikhs who may be interested in taking meat as a part of their food.

— HS Singha, Sikhism, A Complete Introduction [ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] As stated in the official Khalsa Code of Conduct as well as the Sikh Rehat Maryada , Kutha meat is forbidden, and Sikhs are recommended to eat the jhatka form of meat.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] Jhatka karna or jhatkaund refers to the instant severing of the head of an animal with a single stroke of any weapon , with the underlying intention of killing the animal whilst causing it minimal suffering.

[ 2 ] During the British Raj , the Sikhs began to assert their right to slaughter through Jhatka.

[ 4 ] When jhatka meat was not allowed in jails, and Sikhs detained for their part in the Akali movement resorted to violence and agitations to secure this right. Among the terms in the settlement between the Akalis and the Muslim Unionist government in Punjab in 1942 was that jhatka meat be continued by Sikhs.

On religious Sikh festivals, including Hola Mohalla and Vaisakhi , at the Hazur Sahib Nanded , and many other Sikh Gurdwaras, jhatka meat is offered as "mahaprasad" to all visitors in a Gurdwara.

[ 8 ] This practice is considered to be unacceptable by modern Sikh sects who believe only lacto-vegetarian langar is supposed to be served inside gurudwaras after the introduction of Colonial-era "Mahants" and " Udasis " into Sikh Gurdwaras.

[ 8 ] Opposition [ edit ] Some Sikh organizations, such as the Akhand Kirtani Jatha , have their own codes of conduct regarding meat consumption. These organizations define kutha meat as any type of slaughtered meat, and eating meat of any type is forbidden aside from that which is slaughtered on religious festivals and individual "Akhand paht" three-day prayers.

[ 9 ] In early 1987 Kharkus issued a moral code banning the sale and consumption of meat and for jhatka shops to be closed. The ban led to much of Punjab being without meat and the closing of jhatka shops. Those who continued to sell or eat meat risked death and commonly would have their businesses destroyed and be killed. One survey found that there were no meat or tobacco shops between Amritsar and Phagwara . In the peak of the militancy, most of Punjab was meatless. Famous restaurants that served meat had removed it from their menu and denied ever serving it. The ban was popular among rural Sikhs. Kharkus justified the ban by saying, "No avatars , Hindu or Sikh, ever did these things. To eat meat is the job of rakshasas ( demons ) and we don't want people to become rakshasas ." [ 10 ] [ 11 ] [ 12 ] [ 13 ] Comparison with Kosher and Halal methods [ edit ] Both methods use sharp knives. In the kosher and halal methods, Shechita and Dhabihah respectively, the animal is slaughtered by one swift, uninterrupted cut severing the trachea, esophagus, carotid arteries, jugular veins, and vagus nerves, leaving the spinal cord intact, followed by a period where the blood of the animal is drained out.

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] In the Jhatka method, a swift uninterrupted cut severs the head and the spine.

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] In both Shechita and Dhabihah, a prayer to God is required at the start of the slaughtering process. In Shechita one prayer is sufficient for the slaughter of multiple animals, so long as there is no interruption between them; in Dhabihah a separate prayer is required before each animal is slaughtered.

[ 15 ] This prayer, however, prevents the meat from meeting the requirement of jhatka.

Terminology for non- jhatka products [ edit ] Slaughter by means such as kosher , halal and bali does not meet the requirements of jhatka and the products of it are referred to as kutha meat – abstention from which is one of the requirements for a Sikh to be an initiated Khalsa or sahajdhari according to the Rehat Maryada (Sikh code of conduct).

[ 16 ] [ 17 ] [ 18 ] [ 19 ] In Sikhism, there are three objections to non- jhatka or kutha products: the first being the belief that sacrificing an animal in the name of God is ritualism and something to be avoided; the second being the belief that killing an animal with a slow bleeding method is inhumane; and the third being historic opposition of the right of ruling Muslims to impose its practices on non-Muslims.

[ 20 ] However, kutha meat doesn't include just Halal or Kosher meat but any meat produced by slow bleeding or the perceived religious sacrifice of animals, including meat from animals slaughtered ritualistically in Hinduism , for instance.

[ 21 ] [ 22 ] Availability [ edit ] In Ajmer (Rajasthan, India), there are many jhatka shops, with various bylaws requiring shops to display clearly that they sell jhatka meat.

[ 23 ] In the past, there has been little availability of jhatka meat in the United Kingdom, so people have found themselves eating other types of meat, [ 24 ] although jhatka has become more widely available.

[ 25 ] See also [ edit ] Halal – Islamic term for "permissible" things Christian dietary laws – Christian principles for daily food Dhabihah – Animal slaughter in Islamic law (Muslim method of ritual slaughter) Legal aspects of ritual slaughter Diet in Sikhism – Views on what followers of Sikhism are permitted to eat Shechita – Ritual slaughter of an animal in Jewish law Meat consumption among Sikhs Rehat – Sikh codes of conduct References [ edit ] ^ "Jhatiti, Jhaṭiti: 10 definitions" .

www.wisdomlib.org . 24 March 2019 . Retrieved 10 November 2022 .

^ a b Paul Fieldhouse (2017).

Food, Feasts, and Faith: An Encyclopedia of Food Culture in World Religions . ABC-CLIO. pp.

30– 31.

ISBN 978-1-61069-412-4 .

, Quote: "Jhatka, which comes from the Sanskrit word jhatiti meaning "at once", is a method of slaughter in which a single rapid jerk or blow to the head is believed to produce the least amount of suffering for the animal. (...) Unlike in Islam, there is no religious ritual that accompanies the killing." ^ HS Singha (2009), Sikhism: A Complete Introduction, Hemkunt Press, ISBN 978-8170102458 , pages 81-82 ^ a b Skoda, Uwe; Lettmann, Birgit (October 30, 2017).

India and Its Visual Cultures: Community, Class and Gender in a Symbolic Landscape . SAGE Publishing India.

ISBN 9789386446695 – via Google Books.

^ Chandar, Y. Udaya (2020-02-25).

The Strange Compatriots for Over a Thousand Years . Notion Press.

ISBN 978-1-64760-859-0 .

^ Singh, I. J., Sikhs and Sikhism ISBN 81-7304-058-3 "And one Semitic practice clearly rejected in the Sikh code of conduct is eating flesh of an animal cooked in ritualistic manner; this would mean kosher and halal meat. The reason again does not lie in religious tenet but in the view that killing an animal with a prayer is not going to ennoble the flesh. No ritual, whoever conducts it, is going to do any good either to the animal or to the diner. Let man do what he must to assuage his hunger. If what he gets, he puts to good use and shares with the needy, then it is well used and well spent, otherwise not." ^ Mini Encyclopaedia of Sikhism by H.S. Singha, Hemkunt Press, Delhi.

ISBN 81-7010-200-6 "The practice of the Gurus is uncertain. Guru Nanak seems to have eaten venison or goat, depending upon different Janamsakhi versions of a meal which he cooked at Kurukshetra which evoked the criticism of Brahmins. Guru Amardas ate only rice and lentils but this abstention cannot be regarded as evidence of vegetarianism, only of simple living. Guru Gobind Singh also permitted the eating of meat but he prescribed that it should be jhatka meat and never Halal meat that is in the Muslim fashion." ^ a b "The most special occasion of the Chhauni is the festival of Diwali which is celebrated for ten days. This is the only Sikh shrine at Amritsar where Maha Prasad (meat) is served on special occasions in Langar", The Sikh review, Volume 35, Issue 409 - Volume 36, Issue 420, Sikh Cultural Centre, 1988 ^ Spirit, Khalsa.

"Khalsa Rehat" .

KhalsaSpirit.com . Archived from the original on 6 March 2016 . Retrieved 13 March 2016 .

^ "AISSF forces shopkeepers to shut liquor and meat shops in Punjab" .

India Today . 30 April 1987 . Retrieved 2023-09-14 .

^ "Sikh militants in Punjab, putting a moral edge on... - UPI Archives" .

UPI . Retrieved 2023-05-21 .

^ Chima, Jugdep S. (2010-03-11).

The Sikh Separatist Insurgency in India: Political Leadership and Ethnonationalist Movements . SAGE Publishing India.

ISBN 978-93-5150-953-0 .

^ Fazal, Tanweer (2014-08-01).

Nation-state and Minority Rights in India: Comparative Perspectives on Muslim and Sikh Identities . Routledge.

ISBN 978-1-317-75178-6 .

^ a b Neville Gregory and Temple Grandin (2007), Animal Welfare and Meat Production, CABI, ISBN 978-1845932152 , pages 207-208 ^ a b c Amy J Fitzgerald (2015), Animals as Food, Michigan State University Press, ISBN 978-1611861747 ^ Opinderjit Kaur Takhar (2016).

Sikh Identity: An Exploration of Groups Among Sikhs . Taylor & Francis. pp.

38– 39.

ISBN 978-1-351-90010-2 .

^ Karen Pechilis; Selva J. Raj (2013).

South Asian Religions: Tradition and Today . Routledge. p. 242.

ISBN 978-0-415-44851-2 .

The Sikh Rahit Maryada forbids hair cutting, adultery, the use of intoxicants, and the eating of kutha meat, or meat of an animal or fowl slaughtered slowly.

^ Pashaura Singh (2013). Karen Pechilis; Selva Raj (eds.).

South Asian Religions: Tradition and Today . Routledge. p. 242.

ISBN 978-0-415-44851-2 .

, Quote: "The Sikh Rahit Maryada forbids hair cutting, adultery, the use of intoxicants, and the eating of Kutha meat, that is Muslim halal meat, obtained through the slow bleeding or religious sacrifice of animals".

^ Jamie S. Scott (2012).

The Religions of Canadians . University of Toronto Press. p. 320.

ISBN 978-1-4426-0516-9 .

^ Singha, Dr. H.S. (30 May 2009).

"7 Sikh Traditions and Customs" .

Sikhism: A Complete Introduction . Sikh Studies. Vol. Book 7 (Paperback ed.). New Delhi: Hemkunt Press. p. 81.

ISBN 978-81-7010-245-8 . Retrieved 25 November 2010 .

^ Aditya Menon (14 May 2020).

"Why Hindutva Outfits Are Calling for a Boycott of Halal Products" .

The Quint . Retrieved 23 October 2021 .

^ Mukhopadhyay, K. (2020).

Food and Power: Expressions of Food-Politics in South Asia . SAGE Publications. p. 240.

ISBN 978-93-5388-377-5 . Retrieved 2022-06-10 .

mostly practised in Shakti cult, while Puranas and the Gita forbid animal sacrifice.

^ Order No. Tax/F.15(25)DLB/63 Published in the Govt. Gazette on 13-02-1965 (Part 6) ^ Sikh women in England: their religious and cultural beliefs and social practices By S. K. Rait, p. 63 Trentham Books, 2005 ISBN 1-85856-353-4 ^ Food safety and quality assurance: foods of animal origin By William T. Hubbert, Page 254 Wiley-Blackwell, 1996 ISBN 0-8138-0714-X External links [ edit ] The Politics of Sikh Identity: Understanding Religious Exclusion , Paramjit S. Judge and Manjit Kaur (2010) The Myth of Goat Sacrifice and Hazoor Sahib Sikh Scholar Views on Diet v t e Sikhism Glossary and History Gurus Guru Nanak Guru Angad Guru Amar Das Guru Ram Das Guru Arjan Guru Hargobind Guru Har Rai Guru Har Krishan Guru Tegh Bahadur Guru Gobind Singh Guru Granth Sahib (Sikh holy book) Philosophy Beliefs and principles Guru Maneyo Granth Sikh Rehat Maryada The 52 Hukams Prohibitions Cannabis and Sikhism Diet in Sikhism Practices Khalsa Sikh practices Sikh rites Ardās Kirtan Langar Naam Karan Anand Karaj Amrit Sanchar Amrit Velā Antam Sanskar Three Pillars Kirat Karo Naam Japo Vand Chhako The Five Ks Simran Sewa Charhdi Kala Dasvand Jhatka Scripture Guru Granth Sahib Dasam Granth Sarbloh Granth Gurbani Mul Mantar Japji Sahib Chaupai Jaap Sahib Rehras Sukhmani Sahib Tav-Prasad Savaiye Architecture Gurdwara Harmandir Sahib Janam Asthan Darbar Sahib Kartarpur List Africa Asia Europe North America Bahadurgarh Fort Fateh Burj Hazuri Bagh Baradari Kesgarh Qila Khanda museum Moti Bagh Palace Nanak Shahi bricks Pul Kanjri Qila Mubarak, Patiala Ramgarhia Bunga Samadhi of Ranjit Singh Well of Dina Nath By country Diaspora Afghanistan Australia Austria Bangladesh Belgium Canada Vancouver China Denmark Fiji Finland France Germany Greece India Jammu and Kashmir Kochi Punjab Indonesia Iran Iraq Italy Japan Malaysia Nepal Netherlands New Zealand Niue Norway Pakistan Panama Poland Singapore South Africa South Korea Sweden Switzerland Thailand United Arab Emirates United Kingdom England Scotland Wales Northern Ireland United States U.S. Military Groups, sects and communities Sects of Sikhism Khalsa Mina Namdhari Nanakpanthi Nihang Nirankari Sewapanthi Nirmala Ramraiya Udasi Mazhabi Sikh Piara Singh Bhaniara Agrahari Sikh Jatha Damdami Taksal Akhand Kirtani Jatha Singh Sabha Contemporary Sant Mat movements 3HO Sikh Empire v t e Sikh Empire Rulers Ranjit Singh Kharak Singh Nau Nihal Singh Chand Kaur Sher Singh Jind Kaur Duleep Singh Military conflicts Mughal-Sikh Wars Battle of Bhangani Nadaun Basoli 1st Anandpur 2nd Anandpur Chamkaur Sarsa Muktsar Sonepat Samana Sirhind Sadhaura Chappar Chiri Rahon Lohgarh Jalalabad Jammu Gurdas Nangal Delhi Afghan–Sikh wars Battle of Attock Battle of Multan Battle of Shopian Battle of Nowshera Battle of Peshawar Battle of Jamrud First Anglo-Sikh War Battle of Mudki Battle of Ferozeshah Battle of Aliwal Battle of Sobraon Second Anglo-Sikh War Battle of Ramnagar Battle of Chillianwala Siege of Multan Battle of Gujrat Others Nepal–Sikh War , Sino-Sikh war , Katoch–Sikh War, Hill States–Sikh Wars, Panchayati Revolution , List of battles involving the Sikh Empire Military forces Sikh Khalsa Army Fauj-i-Khas Fauj-i-Ain Kampu-i-mu'alla Adversaries Mughal Empire Durrani Empire Emirate of Afghanistan British East India Company Kingdom of Nepal Qing Empire Hill States Alliance Kingdom of Mankera Namgyal dynasty Barakzai dynasty Sudhans of Poonch Maqpon Dynasty Forts Jamrud Fort Multan Fort Harkishangarh Lahore Fort Zorawar Fort Bahu Fort Gobindgarh Fort Phillaur Fort Firozpur Fort Officials and warriors Natives Dhian Singh Diwan Dina Nath Diwan Bhawani Das Diwan Buta Singh Pratap Singh Misr Diwan Chand Diwan Mulraj Hari Singh Nalwa Mahan Singh Mirpuri Dewan Mokham Chand Khushal Singh Jamadar Zorawar Singh Tej Singh Lal Singh Gulab Singh Balbhadra Kunwar Jawahar Singh Mehta Basti Ram Sham Singh Attariwalla Sher Singh Attariwalla Chattar Singh Attariwalla Desa Singh Majithia Amar Singh Majithia Lehna Singh Majithia Ranjodh Singh Majithia Surat Singh Majithia Mangal Singh Ramgarhia Akali Phula Singh Chandu Lal Ajit Singh Sandhawalia Kahan Singh Nakai Sangat Singh Saini Hukma Singh Veer Singh Jarnail Ghaus Khan Ilahi Bakhsh Fakir Azizuddin Sultan Mahmud Khan Malik Fateh Khan Tiwana Sohan Lal Suri Moti Ram Diwan Ram Dayal Diwan Kirpa Ram Foreigners Jean-François Allard Jean-Baptiste Ventura Claude Auguste Court François Henri Mouton Alexander Gardner Paolo Avitabile Josiah Harlan Johann Martin Honigberger Henry Lawrence Influential families Sandhawalia family Majithia family Tiwana family Mian family Treaties Treaty of Amritsar (1809) Tripartite Treaty (1838) Treaty of Chushul (1842) Treaty of Lahore (1846) Treaty of Amritsar (1846) Miscellaneous Khalsa Darbar records Festivals Bandi Chhor Divas Hola Mohalla Maghi Mela Maghi Vaisakhi Culture Art Music Films Literature Music Names Other topics History Ik Onkar Waheguru Khanda Panj Pyare Places Politics Sikhs in the British Indian Army 11th Sikh Regiment Sikh Regiment Sikh Light Infantry Nanakshahi calendar Ramananda Fariduddin Ganjshakar Kabir Sardar Dastar Dharamyudh Islam Jainism Hinduism Rama Sikhs Ravidassia Women in Sikhism Sikhism and sexual orientation In Fiction Idolatry in Sikhism Criticism Punjab History Punjabis Punjabi language ( Gurmukhī ) Sacred trees Takht Akal Takht Damdama Sahib Kesgarh Sahib Hazur Sahib Patna Sahib Outline Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Jhatka&oldid=1298387446 " Categories : Ritual slaughter Sikh practices Hindu animal sacrifice Hidden categories: CS1: long volume value Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Punjabi-language text Articles containing Sanskrit-language text This page was last edited on 2 July 2025, at 05:26 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Jhatka 12 languages Add topic

