Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Types Toggle Types subsection 1.1 Radial run-out 1.2 Axial run-out 2 Measurement 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Run-out 3 languages العربية Español Norsk bokmål Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Mechanical deviation from the intended axis For other uses, see Runout (disambiguation) .

Top: Radial runout Bottom: Axial runout Main axis Technical symbol for run-out Run-out or runout is an inaccuracy of rotating mechanical systems, specifically that the tool or shaft does not rotate exactly in line with the main axis . For example; when drilling , run-out will result in a larger hole than the drill's nominal diameter due to the drill 
being rotated eccentrically (off axis instead of in line). In the case of bearings , run-out will cause vibration of the machine and increased loads on the bearings.

[ 1 ] Run-out is dynamic and cannot be compensated. If a rotating component, such as a drill chuck, does not hold the drill centrally, then as it rotates the rotating drill will turn about a secondary axis.

Absolute alignment is impossible; a degree of error will always be present.

Types [ edit ] Run-out has two main forms: [ 2 ] Radial run-out is caused by the tool being translated off the machine axis, still parallel. Radial run-out will measure the same all along the machine axis.

Axial run-out is caused by the tool or component being at an angle to the axis. Axial run-out causes the tip of the tool or shaft to rotate off-centre relative to the base. Axial run-out will vary according to how far from the base it is measured.

In addition, irregular run-out is the result of worn or rough bearings which can manifest itself as either axial or radial run-out.

Run-out will be present in any rotating system and, depending on the system, the different forms may either combine increasing total runout, or cancel reducing total runout. At any point along a tool or shaft, it is not possible to determine whether runout is axial or radial; only by measuring along the axis can they be differentiated.

Radial run-out [ edit ] Radial run-out is the result of a rotating component running off centre, such as a ball bearing with an offset centre. This means that the rotating tool or shaft, instead of being centrally aligned, will rotate about a secondary axis. In general, cutting tools are more tolerant of radial run-out since the edges are parallel to the line of cutting tending to keep the tool tip aligned. However, a rotating shaft may be less tolerant of radial run-out since the centre of gravity is displaced by the amount of run-out.

Axial run-out [ edit ] Axial run-out is the result of a rotating component not being parallel with the axis, such as a drill chuck not holding the drill exactly in line with the axis. In general, cutting tools are less tolerant of axial run-out since the tool tip tends to dig in and further increase run-out. However, a shaft may be more tolerant of axial run-out since the centre of gravity is displaced less.

Measurement [ edit ] Typically run-out is measured using a dial indicator pressed against the rotating component while it is turned.

Full indicator movement (previously called total indicator reading or total indicated run-out, TIR) is a term for the measured run-out of any rotating system, including all forms of run-out, at the measured point.

[ 3 ] See also [ edit ] Chaotic rotation Geometric dimensioning and tolerancing Nutation Tire balance , related concept in vehicles References [ edit ] ^ "GD&T Runout Definition | eMachineShop,com" .

^ "Why and How You Should Measure Bearing Run-out" .

www.reliableplant.com . Retrieved 2019-01-07 .

^ "Total Runout Tolerance | eMachineShop.com" .

v t e Metalworking v t e Machining and computing Computer-aided engineering 2.5D CAD CAM G-code Numerical control (NC and CNC) Stewart platform Drilling and threading Die head Drill Drill bit Drill bit shank Drill bit sizes Drilling List of drill and tap sizes Tap and die Tap wrench Threading Grinding and lapping Abrasive Abrasive machining Angle grinder Bench grinder Coated abrasive Cylindrical grinder Diamond plate Flick grinder Grinding Grinding dresser Grinding machine Grinding wheel Jig grinder Lapping Sanding Sharpening stone Spark testing Surface grinder Tool and cutter grinder Machining Boring Broaching Electrical discharge machining Electrochemical machining Electron-beam machining End mill Engraving Facing Hobbing Jig borer Machine tool Machining Metal lathe Milling Milling cutter Pantograph Photochemical machining Planer Reamer Rotary transfer machine Shaper Skiving Turning Ultrasonic machining Machine tools Angle plate Chuck Collet Fixture Indexing head Jig Lathe center Machine taper Magnetic switchable device Mandrel Rotary table Wiggler Terminology Cutting fluid Machining vibrations Speeds and feeds Swarf Tolerance Tool and die making Tramp oil Workpiece Casting Fabrication Forming Jewellery Machining Metallurgy Smithing Tools and terminology Welding Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Run-out&oldid=1276021603 " Category : Mechanical engineering Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use British English from May 2017 This page was last edited on 16 February 2025, at 12:40 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Run-out 3 languages Add topic

