Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Bibliography 3 See also 4 Notes 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Abraham Kaplan 6 languages العربية Deutsch فارسی 日本語 Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American philosopher For the Hebrew writer, see Abraham Kohen Kaplan .

This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) Some of this article's listed sources may not be reliable .

Please help improve this article by looking for better, more reliable sources. Unreliable citations may be challenged and removed.

( July 2017 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .

Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( July 2017 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Abraham Kaplan Born June 11, 1918 Odesa , Russian Empire Died June 19, 1993 (1993-06-19) (aged 75) Los Angeles , California , U.S.

Education Alma mater University of California, Los Angeles Philosophical work Notable works The Conduct of Inquiry Abraham Kaplan (June 11, 1918 – June 19, 1993) was an American philosopher, known best for being the first philosopher to systematically examine the behavioral sciences in his book The Conduct of Inquiry (1964).

[ citation needed ] His thinking was influenced by pragmatists Charles Sanders Peirce , William James , and John Dewey .

[ 1 ] [ failed verification ] Biography [ edit ] Kaplan's parents were Joseph J. and Chava (Lerner) Kaplan.  Abraham's father was a rabbi .  He was raised in Odesa , Ukraine . He became a naturalized citizen of the United States in 1930, after immigrating to the country in 1923.  In 1937, he graduated in chemistry from the College of St. Thomas .  He received a Ph.D. in philosophy 1942 from the University of California, Los Angeles .  He was assistant professor at New York University from 1940 to 1945.  He then returned to the UCLA Department of Philosophy as assistant professor for the next four years of his life, and associate professor for three years after that.  Kaplan became a professor of philosophy in 1952, and stayed there for twelve years.  He was also chair of the department for those twelve years, along with two years past that.

He taught at the University of Michigan from 1962 to 1972 as well.  Then in 1978 he moved to teaching at University of Haifa in Israel , where he also served as dean of the faculty of social sciences.  From 1977 to 1984 he was a faculty member of the RAND Graduate School in Santa Monica, California .  Kaplan also taught at Harvard University , California Institute of Technology , California State Polytechnic University, Pomona , the University of Hawai'i at Manoa and several other schools. While at Harvard, he taught Stanley Cavell . He was also president of the American Philosophical Association from 1947 to 1958.

His co-authored book with Harold Lasswell Power and Society: a framework for political inquiry was published in 1950. His The conduct of inquiry: methodology for behavioral science was published in 1964.

Kaplan was named one of the top ten teachers in the United States in 1966 by Time magazine .  He also traveled to India, Israel, and Japan to study their cultures and beliefs.

On November 17, 1939, Abraham Kaplan married Iona Judith Wax, a child psychologist. They had two children: Karen Eva Kaplan Diskin and Jessica Aryia Kaplan Symonds.

Bibliography [ edit ] Power and Society: A Framework for Political Inquiry , 1951 The new world of philosophy , 1961 American ethics and public policy , 1963 The conduct of inquiry: methodology for behavioral science , 1964 Individuality and the New Society , 1970 In pursuit of wisdom: the scope of philosophy , 1977 See also [ edit ] American philosophy List of American philosophers Notes [ edit ] ^ The conduct of inquiry , p. xv (preface) References [ edit ] New York Times, Obituary Cal Poly Pomona University Library, Biography on Abraham Kaplan The conduct of inquiry at google books 1968 documentary External links [ edit ] Quotations related to Abraham Kaplan at Wikiquote Abraham Kaplan, The Process of Observation (1964) Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Korea Sweden Poland Israel Academics CiNii Mathematics Genealogy Project Artists Grammy Awards People Trove Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Abraham_Kaplan&oldid=1246419345 " Categories : 20th-century American philosophers Pragmatists Odesa Jews Soviet emigrants to the United States University of California, Los Angeles alumni Jewish philosophers New York University faculty University of California, Los Angeles faculty University of Michigan faculty Academic staff of the University of Haifa Harvard University Department of Philosophy faculty 1918 births 1993 deaths UCLA Department of Philosophy faculty Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles lacking reliable references from July 2017 All articles lacking reliable references Articles lacking in-text citations from July 2017 All articles lacking in-text citations Articles with multiple maintenance issues Articles with hCards All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2017 All articles with failed verification Articles with failed verification from July 2017 This page was last edited on 18 September 2024, at 20:56 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Abraham Kaplan 6 languages Add topic

