Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Gallery Toggle Gallery subsection 2.1 Ulysses Gallery at Fontainebleau 3 Notes 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Francesco Primaticcio 32 languages العربية Беларуская Brezhoneg Català Čeština Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Italiano Lietuvių Magyar Македонски مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Русский Suomi Svenska ไทย Türkçe Українська West-Vlams 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Italian painter (1504–1570) "Primaticcio" redirects here. For the metro station, see Primaticcio (Milan Metro) . For the Italian wine grape, see Sangiovese .

For another Italian wine grape that is also known as Primaticcio, see Montepulciano (grape) .

1648 woodcut portrait of Francesco Primaticcio Odysseus and Penelope , 1563 Francesco Primaticcio ( Italian pronunciation: [franˈtʃesko primaˈtittʃo] ; April 30, 1504 – 1570) was an Italian Mannerist painter , architect and sculptor who spent most of his career in France .

Biography [ edit ] Born in Bologna , he trained under Giulio Romano in Mantua and became a pupil of Innocenzo da Imola , executing decorations at the Palazzo Te before securing a position in the court of Francis I of France in 1532.

Holy Family with St Elizabeth and John the Baptist , now in the Hermitage Museum , St Petersburg, Russia.

Ulysses and His Companions Fighting the Cicones Before the City of Ismaros, Study for a destroyed fresco in the Galerie d'Ulysee, Chateau de Fontainebleau Together with Rosso Fiorentino he was one of the leading artists to work at the Chateau Fontainebleau (where he is grouped with the so-called "First School of Fontainebleau ") spending much of his life there. Following Rosso's death in 1540, Primaticcio took control of the artistic direction at Fontainebleau, furnishing the painters and stuccators of his team, such as Nicolò dell'Abate , with designs. He made cartoons for tapestry -weavers and, like all 16th-century court artists, was called upon to design elaborate ephemeral decorations for masques and fêtes, which survive only in preparatory drawings and, sometimes, engravings. Francis I trusted his eye and sent him back to Italy on buying trips in 1540 and again in 1545.

In Rome, part of Primaticcio's commission was to take casts of the best Roman sculptures in the papal collections, some of which were cast in  bronze to decorate the parterres at Fontainebleau.

[ 1 ] Primaticcio retained his position as court painter to Francis' heirs, Henry II and Francis II .  His masterpiece, the Salle d'Hercule at Fontainebleau, occupied him and his team from the 1530s to 1559.

Primaticcio's crowded Mannerist compositions and his long-legged canon of beauty influenced French art for the rest of the century.

Primaticcio turned to architecture towards the end of his life, his greatest work being the Valois Chapel at the Abbey of Saint-Denis , although this was not completed until after his death and was destroyed in 1719.

Gallery [ edit ] Alexander tames Bucephalus The rape of Helena , 1530-1539 Ceiling at Chaalis Abbey Annunciation at Chaalis Ulysses Gallery at Fontainebleau [ edit ] Engravings by Giorgio Ghisi after Francesco Primaticcio's designs for the ceiling of the Ulysses Gallery (destroyed 1738–39) at Fontainebleau Apollo, Pan, and a putto blowing a horn Three Muses and a Gesturing Putto Three Muses and a Putto with a Lyre, a cruciform composition Three Muses and a Putto with Cymbals Hercules, Bacchus, Pan, and Saturn(?) Ceres Seated on Clouds with Two Goddesses and Two Putti Pluto, Neptune, Minerva and Apollo Venus and Cupid, Two Other Goddesses, and a Putto Notes [ edit ] ^ The project, which  brought a first virtual confrontation with Roman sculpture to French patrons and artists, is surveyed in detail by S. Pressouyre, "Les fontes de Primatice à Fontainebleau", Bulletin monumental 127 (1969), pp. 223-38. See also Thomas Clouet, "Fontainebleau de 1541 à 1547. Pour une relecture des Comptes des Bâtiments du roi", Bulletin monumental 170 (2012), pp. 195-234, in which article a precise chronology of the casting of these famous bronzes is established ( english summary ). The precious moulds, at the instigation of Leone Leoni were sent to the Habsburg court in the Spanish Netherland in 1550 and, after serving to make a set of stucco casts for Charles V's daughter Mary of Hungary , Queen-governess of the Netherlands at Binche (where they were destroyed by Henry II's troops in 1554) they were probably forwarded to Leoni in Milan (Bruce Boucher, "Leone Leoni and Primaticcio's Moulds of Antique Sculpture", The Burlington Magazine 123 No. 934 (January 1981), pp. 23-26).

References [ edit ] The Oxford Dictionary of Art , ISBN 0-19-280022-1 Wikimedia Commons has media related to Francesco Primaticcio .

External links [ edit ] Entry in 'Art-cyclopedia' Château de Fontainebleau (in English) The engravings of Giorgio Ghisi , a full text exhibition catalog from The Metropolitan Museum of Art, which contains material on Francesco Primaticcio (see index) ‹ The template below ( Authority control (arts) ) is being considered for deletion. See templates for discussion to help reach a consensus. › Authority control databases International VIAF National Germany United States France BnF data Artists ULAN RKD Artists KulturNav Victoria Scientific illustrators Städel Prado People Italian People Deutsche Biographie Other SNAC Te Papa (New Zealand) Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Francesco_Primaticcio&oldid=1295328969 " Categories : 1504 births 1570 deaths Artists from Bologna 16th-century Italian painters Italian male painters Italian Mannerist painters Italian Mannerist architects Italian Mannerist sculptors French Mannerist painters French architects French sculptors Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Pages with Italian IPA Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 13 June 2025, at 03:28 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Francesco Primaticcio 32 languages Add topic

