Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Process 2 Uses Toggle Uses subsection 2.1 Saddles 2.2 Bows 2.3 Hammers 2.4 Shoes 2.5 Dog chew 2.6 Garrotte / Medical uses 2.7 Boat 3 References Toggle the table of contents Rawhide (material) 5 languages Deutsch 한국어 Русский Suomi Svenska Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Rawhide (textile) ) Untanned hide or animal skin This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Rawhide" material – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( December 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Rawhide is a hide or animal skin that has not been exposed to tanning . It is similar to parchment , much lighter in color than leather made by traditional vegetable tanning.

Rawhide is more susceptible to water than leather, and it quickly softens and stretches if left wet unless well waterproofed.

"Rawhide" laces often sold for boots or baseball gloves are made of normal tanned leather rather than actual rawhide. Rawhide is not pliable when dry and would be unsuitable for that use.

Process [ edit ] The skin from buffalo , deer , elk or cattle from which most rawhide originates is prepared by removing all fur , meat and fat . The hide is then usually stretched over a frame before being dried. The resulting material is hard and translucent. It can be shaped by rewetting and forming before being allowed to thoroughly re-dry. It can be rendered more pliable by 'working', i.e. bending repeatedly in multiple directions, often by rubbing it over a post, sometimes traditionally by chewing. It may also be oiled or greased for a degree of waterproofing.

Uses [ edit ] It is often used for objects such as whips , drumheads or lampshades , and more recently [ citation needed ] chew toys for dogs. It is thought to be more durable than leather, especially in items suffering abrasion during use, and its hardness and its shapability render it more suitable than leather for some items.

Saddles [ edit ] Rawhide is often used to cover saddle trees, which make up the foundation of a western saddle , while wet: it strengthens the wooden tree by drawing up very tight as it dries and resists the abrasion regularly encountered during stock work or rodeo sports.

Bows [ edit ] Rawhide can be used as a backing on a wooden bow.  Such a backing keeps the bow from breaking by protecting the back from damage and preventing splinters from forming. Bows made from softer woods such as birch benefit more from a rawhide backing.

Hammers [ edit ] Soft hammers are also made with rolled rawhide dipped in shellac: these hammers are mostly used to work soft metals without marring them (by jewelers, brass instrument repairmen, boilermakers etc.).

Shoes [ edit ] Maasai sandals exhibit in Bata Shoe Museum , city of Toronto, Ontario province, Canada.

Traditional gaucho 's "boots" are made with horse feet rawhide. Gauchos skin the animal and put the freshly skinned hides on their feet like socks, where they are left to dry, taking the user's feet shape. Like moccasins they are soft-soled. Like ancient Roman cothurnus , the rudimentary boots have no toe box and do not cover the toes completely.

Dog chew [ edit ] Rawhide is used in many dog chews. Some veterinarians discourage the giving of rawhide to dogs because of the animal's inability to digest the rawhide properly, sometimes causing bowel obstruction that is fatal if left untreated.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Garrotte / Medical uses [ edit ] Wet rawhide has been used by some earlier cultures as a means of torture or execution , gradually biting into or squeezing the flesh of body parts it encloses as it dries. An example is buskin .  On the other hand, it has also been used in the context of medicine by First Nations peoples, and other groups such as the Sioux Nation : wet rawhide would be wrapped around a long bone fracture and it would dry, slowly setting the bone; [ 3 ] the dried rawhide then served to support the fracture, similar to how a plaster cast does today.

Boat [ edit ] The pelota was an improvised rawhide boat used for crossing rivers in South and Central America.

Main article: Pelota (boat) References [ edit ] ^ Walters, Patricia.

"Esophageal Foreign Bodies in Small Animals" . MSD Veterinary Manual.

^ "Position Statement on Dog Chews/Treats" . ASPCA.

^ Ezeanya-Esiobu, Chika (2019).

"The Case of Traditional Bonesetting and Orthopaedic Medical Curriculum" .

Indigenous Knowledge and Education in Africa . Frontiers in African Business Research. Springer. pp.

81– 95.

doi : 10.1007/978-981-13-6635-2_6 .

ISBN 9789811366352 .

S2CID 155972924 .

v t e Leather Types Aniline Bicast Boiled Bonded Buckskin Buff Chamois Corinthian Kidskin Law leather Morocco Napa Nubuck Patent Russia Shagreen Shearling Shell cordovan Suede Leather sources Alligator Bison Cattle Calfskin Slunk Crocodile Deer Eel Goat Horse Kangaroo Ostrich Pig Seal Sheep Snake Yak Processes Liming Deliming Bating Tanning Oiling Crafting Bookbinding Cuir de Cordoue Leather carving Substitutes Artificial leather / Leatherette Kirza Naugahyde Presstoff Ultrasuede Alcantara Clarino Pantasote Leather museums German Leather Museum Igualada Leather Museum Walsall Leather Museum Leather Archives and Museum British Museum leather dressing Related History of hide materials Leather subculture Rawhide Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Rawhide_(material)&oldid=1303561009 " Category : Leather Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from December 2021 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from May 2021 This page was last edited on 31 July 2025, at 18:34 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Rawhide (material) 5 languages Add topic

