Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview 2 Reception 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Evolution and the Theory of Games Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Book by John Maynard Smith Evolution and the Theory of Games Cover of Evolution and the Theory of Games , with an exemplary ternary plot of frequency changes of three different strategies.

Author John Maynard Smith Language English Subject Evolutionary game theory Genre Non-fiction Publisher Cambridge University Press Publication date December 1982 Publication place United Kingdom Pages 234 pp.

ISBN 0-521-28884-3 OCLC 8034750 Dewey Decimal 575 19 LC Class QH371 .M325 1982 Evolution and the Theory of Games is a book by the British evolutionary biologist John Maynard Smith on evolutionary game theory .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] The book was initially published in December 1982 by Cambridge University Press .

Overview [ edit ] In the book, John Maynard Smith summarises work on evolutionary game theory that had developed in the 1970s, to which he made several important contributions.

The main contribution of the book is in introducing the concept of Evolutionarily Stable Strategy (ESS). ESS states that for a set of behaviours to be conserved over evolutionary time, they must be the most beneficial avenue of action when common, so that no alternative behaviour can invade. Supposing, for instance, that in a population of frogs, males fight to the death over breeding ponds. This would be an ESS if any one cowardly frog that does not fight to the death always fares worse (in terms of evolutionary survival fitness). A more likely scenario is one in which fighting to the death is not an ESS because a frog might arise that will stop fighting if it realises that it is going to lose. This frog would thus reap the benefits of fighting, but not the ultimate cost. Hence, fighting to the death would easily be invaded by a mutation that causes this "informed fighting." Much complexity can develop from this.

The structure of the book is as follows: Following an introductory chapter, the basic model is outlined. Here the Hawk-Dove model is introduced its assumptions reviewed and then an extended model, playing the field, is outlined. Chapters then include The war of attrition , Games with genetic models and Learning the ESS .  There are then two chapters on Mixed Strategies and three on Asymmetric games.   These are followed by chapters entitled; Life history strategies and the size game , Honesty, bargaining and commitment and The evolution of cooperation .  The main body of the book concludes with a Postscript . After the Postscript are 11 Appendices dealing with some more technical background and illustrative material.  The technical appendices cover the following topics: Matrix notation for game theory / A game with two pure strategies always has an ESS / The Bishop-Cannings theorem / Dynamics and stability / Retaliation / Games between relatives / The war of attrition with random rewards / The ESS when the strategy set is defined by one or more continuous variables / To find the ESS from a set of recurrence relations / Asymmetric games with cyclic dynamics / The reiterated Prisoner's Dilemma [ 4 ] Reception [ edit ] In their review evolutionary game theory, its past and likely influence in the future, Traulsen and Glynatsi  (2023) find that Maynard Smith's book ‘Evolution and the theory of games’ ranks first in terms of citations within the field. This they argue demonstrates the substantial influence that he has had on the field (Traulsen and Glynatsi, 2023, page 2.

[ 5 ] Bennett (1983) reviewed the book in the European Journal of Operational Research [ 6 ] as did Mart Gross (1984) in The Quarterly Review of Biology .

[ 7 ] See also [ edit ] Evolutionary biology portal Evolutionary biology References [ edit ] ^ "Evolution and the Theory of Games AUTHOR: John Maynard Smith, University of Sussex" .

Cambridge University Press . cambridge.org . Retrieved 27 October 2016 .

^ "Evolution and the Theory of Games by John Maynard Smith" .

Goodreads . goodreads.com . Retrieved 27 October 2016 .

^ "Evolution and the Theory of Games, John Maynard Smith, Cambridge University Press, 1982" . dannyreviews.com . Retrieved 27 October 2016 .

^ Maynard Smith, John (1982) Evolution and the Theory of Games, Cambridge University Press, p. vi ^ Traulsen, A., & Glynatsi, N. E. (2023). The future of theoretical evolutionary game theory. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B, 378(1876), 20210508.

^ Bennett, Peter. 1983. “Evolution and the Theory of Games.” European Journal of Operational Research 13 (4): 409–10.

https://doi.org/10.1016/0377-2217(83)90101-7 .

^ Gross, Mart R. 1984. “Evolution and the Theory of Games. John Maynard Smith.” The Quarterly Review of Biology 59 (2): 172–73.

https://doi.org/10.1086/413801 External links [ edit ] Cambridge University Press Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Evolution_and_the_Theory_of_Games&oldid=1301348835 " Categories : 1982 non-fiction books Books about evolution Books about game theory Evolutionary game theory Mathematics books Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 19 July 2025, at 09:07 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Evolution and the Theory of Games Add languages Add topic

