Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Origin 2 Characteristics 3 Roman perspective before Cicero 4 Roman perspective after Cicero 5 Notes 6 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Asiatic style 11 languages Deutsch Ελληνικά Français Galego Հայերեն Italiano Nederlands Polski Русский Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Ancient Greek rhetorical tendency in the 3rd century BCE Asia Minor in the Greco-Roman period, with which the "Asiatic style" of oratory was associated.

Part of a series on Rhetoric History Ancient Greece Asianism Atticism Attic orators Calliope Sophists Ancient India Ancient Rome The age of Cicero Second Sophistic Middle Ages Byzantine rhetoric Trivium Renaissance Studia humanitatis Modern period Concepts Captatio benevolentiae Chironomia Decorum Delectare Docere Device Eloquence Eloquentia perfecta Eunoia Enthymeme Facilitas Fallacy Informal Figure of speech Scheme Trope Five canons Inventio Dispositio Elocutio Memoria Pronuntiatio Hypsos Imitatio Kairos Method of loci Modes Operations Persuasion Ethos Pathos Logos Situation Style Grand Sotto voce Topos Genres Apologetics Debate Declamation Controversia Deliberative Demagogy Dialectic Socratic method Dissoi logoi Elocution Epideictic Encomium Panegyric Eulogy Farewell speech Forensic Funeral oration Homiletics‎ Sermon Invitational Lecture Public Lightning talk Maiden speech Oratory Polemic Diatribe Eristic Philippic Progymnasmata Suasoria Propaganda Spin Resignation speech Stump speech War-mongering Criticism Cluster Dramatic Pentadic Frame Genre Ideological Metaphoric Mimesis Narrative Neo-Aristotelian Rhetoricians Aeschines Aelius Aristides Antiphon Aristotle Aspasia Augustine Bakhtin Booth Brueggemann Burke Cicero de Man Demosthenes Derrida Dio Chrysostom Erasmus Gorgias Hobbes Hypereides Isocrates Lucian Lysias McLuhan Ong Perelman Pizan Protagoras Quintilian Ramus Richards Seneca the Elder Smith Toulmin Vico Weaver Works Gorgias (380 BC) Phaedrus (c. 370 BC) Rhetoric (c. 350 BC) Rhetoric to Alexander (c. 350 BC) De Sophisticis Elenchis (c. 350 BC) Topics (c. 350 BC) De Inventione (84 BC) Rhetorica ad Herennium (80 BC) De Oratore (55 BC) A Dialogue Concerning Oratorical Partitions (c. 50 BC) De Optimo Genere Oratorum (46 BC) Orator (46 BC) On the Sublime (c. 50) Institutio Oratoria (95) Panegyrici Latini (100–400) Dialogus de oratoribus (102) De doctrina Christiana (426) De vulgari eloquentia (1305) Copia: Foundations of the Abundant Style (1521) Language as Symbolic Action (1966) A General Rhetoric (1970) Subfields Argumentation Cognitive Contrastive Constitutive Digital Feminist Native American New Health and medicine Pedagogy Procedural Science Technology Therapy Visual Composition Related Ars dictaminis Communication studies Composition studies Doxa Glossary of rhetorical terms Glossophobia List of feminist rhetoricians List of speeches Oral skills Orator Pistis Public rhetoric Rhetoric of social intervention model Rhetrickery Rogerian argument Seduction Speechwriting Talking point TED Terministic screen Toulmin model Wooden iron v t e The Asiatic style or Asianism ( Latin : genus orationis Asiaticum , Cicero , Brutus 325) refers to an Ancient Greek rhetorical tendency (though not an organized school) that arose in the third century BC, which, although of minimal relevance at the time, briefly became an important point of reference in later debates about Roman oratory.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Origin [ edit ] Hegesias of Magnesia was Asianism's first main representative and was considered its founder. Hegesias "developed and exaggerated stylistic effects harking back to the sophists and  the Gorgianic style." [ 3 ] Characteristics [ edit ] Unlike the more austere, formal and traditional Attic style , Asiatic oratory was more bombastic, emotional, and coloured with wordplay.

[ 2 ] The Asiatic style was distinguished by the use of a prose rhythm, especially the end of clauses ( clausulae ).

[ 4 ] This worked in much the same way as in Latin poetry , although poetic metres themselves were avoided. An effective rhythm could bring an audience to applaud the rhythm alone, [ 5 ] however Cicero criticised Asiatic orators for their overly repetitive endings.

[ 4 ] Roman perspective before Cicero [ edit ] The first known use of the term is in Rome, by Cicero in the mid-first century BC. It came into general and pejorative use for a florid style contrasting with the formal, traditional rhetoric of Atticism , which it was said to have corrupted. The term reflects an association with writers in the Greek cities of Asia Minor . "Asianism had a significant impact on Roman rhetoric, since many of the Greek teachers of rhetoric who came to Rome beginning with the 2d cent. B.C.E. were Asiatic Greeks." [ 6 ] "Mildly Asianic tendencies" have been found in Gaius Gracchus ' oratory, and "more marked" ones in Publius Sulpicius Rufus .

[ 7 ] However we have almost no remnants of oratory that can properly be called Asiatic.

[ 2 ] Cicero ( Orator ad Brutum 325) identifies two distinct modes of the Asiatic style: a more studied and symmetrical style (generally taken to mean "full of Gorgianic figures" [ 8 ] ) employed by the historian Timaeus and the orators Menecles and Hierocles of Alabanda, and the rapid flow and ornate diction of Aeschines of Miletus and Aeschylus of Cnidus. Hegesias' "jerky, short clauses" may be placed in the first class, and Antiochus I of Commagene 's Mount Nemrut inscription in the second.

[ 9 ] The conflation of the two styles under a single name has been taken to reflect the essentially polemical significance of the term: "The key similarity is that they are both extreme and therefore bad; otherwise they could not be more different." [ 8 ] According to Cicero, Quintus Hortensius combined these traditions and made them at home in Latin oratory.

Cicero himself, rejecting the extreme plainness and purism of the Atticists, was attacked by critics such as Licinius Macer Calvus for being on the side of the Asiani ; in response he declared his position as the "Roman Demosthenes " (noting that the preeminent Attic orator would not have qualified as Attic by the strict standards of the oratores Attici of first-century Rome).

[ 10 ] In this sense, although Cicero identified with an Attic orator, he never went so far as to completely criticise Asiatic oratory, [ 11 ] and professed a mixed or middle style ( genus medium ; Quintilian 12.10.18: genus Rhodium...velut medium...atque ex utroque mixtum ) between the low or plain Attic style and the high Asiatic style, called the Rhodian style by association with Molo of Rhodes and Apollonius the Effeminate ( Rhodii , Cicero, Brutus xiii 51).

Roman perspective after Cicero [ edit ] In the Neronian period, the surviving portion of Petronius ' Satyricon begins midway through a rant in which the unreliable narrator, Encolpius, denounces the corruption of Roman literary taste and the Asiatic style in particular: "that flatulent, inflated magniloquence later imported from Asia to Athens has infected every aspiring writer like a pestilential breeze" (trans. Branham and Kinney).

Quintilian accepted Cicero's attitude towards Asianism and Atticism, [ 12 ] and adapted the earlier debate's polemical language, in which objectionable style is called effeminate, in his own De causis corruptae eloquentiae .

[ 13 ] In his Institutio Oratoria (XII.10), Quintilian diagnoses the roots of the two styles in terms of ethnic dispositions: "The Attici, refined and discriminating, tolerated nothing empty or gushing; but the Asiatic race somehow more swollen and boastful was inflated with a more vainglory of speaking" (trans.

Amy Richlin ).

[ 14 ] Pliny the Younger continued to profess the mixed style. The debate remained topical for Tacitus (as seen in Pliny's correspondence with him on oratorical styles in Letter 1.20 Archived 2011-06-15 at the Wayback Machine ) and contributes to the atmosphere of his Dialogus de oratoribus .

Ultimately, there seems to have been a general preponderance or victory of the Asiatic over the Attic style in the imperial period.

[ 2 ] [ 15 ] Notes [ edit ] ^ Hildebrecht Hommel, "Asianismus," in Lexikon der Antike , Zurich: Artemis Verlag, 1965 ^ a b c d Winterbottom, M. 2012 ‘Asianism and Atticism’ in Hornblower, A., Spwaforth, A. and Eidinow, E. (eds.) Oxford Classical Dictionary (4th ed.) 184 ^ Laurent Pernot, Rhetoric in Antiquity , trans. W. E. Higgins, Washington, D.C.: CUA Press, 2005, p. 82 ^ a b Cic. Orat. LXIX/230-1 ^ Cic. Or. 214 ^ David E. Aune, "Asianism," in The Westminster Dictionary of New Testament and Early Christian Literature , Louisville, Ky.: Westminster John Knox Press, 2003 ^ Gian Biagio Conte , Latin Literature: A History , trans. Sodolow, JHU Press, 1994, p. 120 ^ a b Martine Cuypers, "Historiography, Rhetoric, and Science: Rethinking a Few Assumptions on Hellenistic Prose," in James J. Clauss and Martine Cuypers (eds.), A Companion to Hellenistic Literature , Chichester: Wiley-Blackwell, 2010, pp. 328f.

^ H. J. Rose , A Handbook of Greek Literature , 4th rev. ed., London: Methuen, 1950, p. 363, following the analysis of Eduard Norden 's Die antike Kunstprosa ^ Gesine Manuwald, Cicero: Philippics 3-9 , vol. 2, Berlin: Walter de Gruyter, 2007, pp. 129f.

^ Wilamowitz-Möllendorff, U. v. 1900 ‘Asianismus und Atticismus’ Hermes 1-52, 3 ^ G. M. A. Grube , The Greek and Roman Critics , 1968, p. 286 ^ C. O. Brink, "Quintilian's De Causis Corruptae Eloquentiae and Tacitus' Dialogus de Oratoribus ," Classical Quarterly 39:2 (1989), pp. 472-503, at p. 478 ^ Amy Richlin , "Gender and Rhetoric: Producing Manhood in the Schools," in William J. Dominik (ed.), Roman Eloquence , Routledge, 1997, p. 78 ^ Powell, J. G. F. 2012 ‘Latin Prose-Rhythm’, in Hornblower, A., Spwaforth, A. and Eidinow, E. (eds.) Oxford Classical Dictionary (4th ed.) 1224 Further reading [ edit ] Wilamowitz-Möllendorff, U. v. 1900 ‘Asianismus und Atticismus’ Hermes 1-52 Gualtiero Calboli , "Asiani (Oratori)," in Francesco Della Corte (ed.), Dizionario degli scrittori greci e latini , vol. 1, Milan: Marzorati, 1988, pp. 215–232 Jakob Wisse, "Greeks, Romans, and the Rise of Atticism," in J. G. J. Abbenes et al. (eds.), Greek Literary Theory after Aristotle: A Collection of Papers in Honour of D. M. Schenkeveld , Amsterdam: Vrije Universiteit Press, 1995, pp. 65–82 Authority control databases : National Germany Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Asiatic_style&oldid=1268769615 " Categories : Ancient Greek literature Classical Latin literature Greco-Roman relations in classical antiquity Literary movements Rhetoric Cicero Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Latin-language text Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 11 January 2025, at 13:02 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Asiatic style 11 languages Add topic

