Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Origin and range 2 Literature 3 Alphabet 4 Phonology Toggle Phonology subsection 4.1 Vowels 4.1.1 Long a 4.1.2 Short a 4.1.3 Sonorant clusters 4.1.4 Upsilon 4.1.5 Contraction 4.1.6 Vowel shortening 4.1.7 Hyphaeresis 4.2 Consonants 4.2.1 Palatalization 4.2.2 Shortening of ss 4.2.3 Loss of w 4.2.4 Retention of h 4.2.5 Movable n 4.2.6 Rr instead of rs.

4.2.7 Attic replaces the Ionic -σσ with -ττ 5 Morphology 6 Grammar Toggle Grammar subsection 6.1 Number 6.2 Declension 7 Classical Attic Toggle Classical Attic subsection 7.1 Varieties 8 Notes 9 References 10 Further reading 11 External links Toggle the table of contents Attic Greek 35 languages العربية Aragonés বাংলা Български Català Čeština Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto فارسی Français Frysk Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Latina Limburgs Malagasy Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Plattdüütsch Polski Português Русский Српски / srpski Suomi Türkçe Українська اردو 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Attic Greek language ) Ancient Greek dialect group Attic Greek Ἀττικὴ γλῶττα Region Attica , Aegean Islands Era c.

500–300 BC; evolved into Koine Language family Indo-European Hellenic Greek Attic– Ionic Attic Greek Early form Proto-Greek Writing system Greek alphabet Old Attic alphabet Language codes ISO 639-3 – Linguist List grc-att Glottolog atti1240 Distribution of Greek dialects in Greece in the classical period .

[ 1 ] Western group: Doric proper Northwest Doric Achaean Doric (probably Northwest Doric) Central group: Aeolic Arcado-Cypriot Eastern group: Attic Ionic Distribution of Greek dialects in Magna Graecia (Southern Italy and Sicily) in the classical period.

Western group: Doric proper Northwest Doric Achaean Doric (probably Northwest Doric) Eastern group: Attic - Ionic Attic Greek is the Greek dialect of the ancient region of Attica , including the polis of Athens . Often called Classical Greek , it was the prestige dialect of the Greek world for centuries and remains the standard form of the language that is taught to students of Ancient Greek. As the basis of the Hellenistic Koine , it is the most similar of the ancient dialects to later Greek. Attic is traditionally classified as a member or sister dialect of the Ionic branch.

Origin and range [ edit ] Greek is the primary member of the Hellenic branch of the Indo-European language family. In ancient times, Greek had already come to exist in several dialects, one of which was Attic. The earliest attestations of Greek, dating from the 16th to 11th centuries BC, are written in Linear B , an archaic writing system used by the Mycenaean Greeks in writing their language; the distinction between Eastern and Western Greek is believed to have arisen by Mycenaean times or before.

Mycenaean Greek represents an early form of Eastern Greek, the group to which Attic also belongs. Later Greek literature wrote about three main dialects: Aeolic , Doric , and Ionic ; Attic was part of the Ionic dialect group. " Old Attic " is used in reference to the dialect of Thucydides (460–400 BC) and the dramatists of 5th-century Athens whereas " New Attic " is used for the language of later writers following conventionally the accession in 285 BC of Greek-speaking Ptolemy II to the throne of the Kingdom of Egypt . Ruling from Alexandria , Ptolemy launched the Alexandrian period, during which the city of Alexandria and its expatriate Greek-medium scholars flourished.

[ 2 ] The original range of the spoken Attic dialect included Attica and a number of the Aegean Islands ; the closely related Ionic was also spoken along the western and northwestern coasts of Asia Minor in modern Turkey , in Chalcidice , Thrace , Euboea , and in some colonies of Magna Graecia . Eventually, the texts of literary Attic were widely studied far beyond their homeland: first in the classical civilizations of the Mediterranean, including in Ancient Rome and the larger Hellenistic world , and later in the Muslim world , Europe, and other parts of the world touched by those civilizations.

Literature [ edit ] The earliest Greek literature , which is attributed to Homer and is dated to the 8th or 7th centuries BC, is written in "Old Ionic" rather than Attic. Athens and its dialect remained relatively obscure until the establishment of its democracy following the reforms of Solon in the 6th century BC; so began the Classical period , one of great Athenian influence both in Greece and throughout the Mediterranean.

The first extensive works of literature in Attic are the plays of dramatists Aeschylus , Sophocles , Euripides , and Aristophanes dating from the 5th century BC. The military exploits of the Athenians led to some universally read and admired history, as found in the works of Thucydides and Xenophon . Slightly less known because they are more technical and legal are the orations by Antiphon , Demosthenes , Lysias , Isocrates , and many others. The Attic Greek of philosophers Plato (427–347 BC) and his student Aristotle (384–322 BC) dates to the period of transition between Classical Attic and Koine.

Students who learn Ancient Greek usually begin with the Attic dialect and continue, depending upon their interests, to the later Koine of the New Testament and other early Christian writings, to the earlier Homeric Greek of Homer and Hesiod , or to the contemporaneous Ionic Greek of Herodotus and Hippocrates .

Alphabet [ edit ] A ballot voting against Themistocles , son of Neocles, under the Athenian Democracy (see ostracism )  Inscription: ΘΕΜΙΣΘΟΚΛΕΣ ΝΕΟΚΛΕΟΣ (classical standard Θεμιστοκλῆς Νεοκλέους Themistoklês Neokléous ).  The text is an example of the epichoric alphabet; the last two letters of Themistocles are written in a boustrophedon manner and that Ε and Ο are used for both long and short e and o .

Attic Greek, like other dialects, was originally written in a local variant of the Greek alphabet. According to the classification of archaic Greek alphabets , which was introduced by Adolf Kirchhoff , [ 3 ] the Old Attic system belongs to the "eastern" or "blue" type, as it uses the letters Ψ and Χ with their classical values ( /ps/ and /kʰ/ ), unlike "western" or "red" alphabets, which used Χ for /ks/ and expressed /kʰ/ with Ψ . In other respects, Old Attic shares many features with the neighbouring Euboean alphabet (which is "western" in Kirchhoff's classification).

[ 4 ] Like the latter, it used an L-shaped variant of lambda ( ) and an S-shaped variant of sigma ( ). It lacked the consonant symbols xi ( Ξ ) for /ks/ and psi ( Ψ ) for /ps/ , expressing these sound combinations with ΧΣ and ΦΣ , respectively. Moreover, like most other mainland Greek dialects, Attic did not yet use omega ( Ω ) and eta ( Η ) for the long vowels /ɔː/ and /ɛː/ . Instead, it expressed the vowel phonemes /o, oː, ɔː/ with the letter Ο (which corresponds with classical Ο , ΟΥ , Ω ) and /e, eː, ɛː/ with the letter Ε (which corresponds with Ε , ΕΙ , and Η in later classical orthography). Moreover, the letter Η was used as heta , with the consonantal value of /h/ rather than the vocalic value of /ɛː/ .

In the 5th century, Athenian writing gradually switched from this local system to the more widely used Ionic alphabet, native to the eastern Aegean Islands and Asia Minor. By the late 5th century, the concurrent use of elements of the Ionic system with the traditional local alphabet had become common in private writing, and in 403 BC, it was decreed that public writing would switch to the new Ionic orthography, as part of the reform following the Thirty Tyrants . This new system, also called the "Eucleidian" alphabet, after the name of the archon Eucleides , who oversaw the decision, [ 5 ] was to become the classical Greek alphabet throughout the Greek-speaking world. The classical works of Attic literature were subsequently handed down to posterity in the new Ionic spelling, and it is the classical orthography in which they are read today.

Phonology [ edit ] Vowels [ edit ] Long a [ edit ] Proto-Greek long ā → Attic long ē , but ā after e, i, r . ⁓ Ionic ē in all positions. ⁓ Doric and Aeolic ā in all positions.

Proto-Greek and Doric m ā tēr → Attic m ē tēr "mother" Attic chōr ā ⁓ Ionic chōr ē "place", "country" However, Proto-Greek ā → Attic ē after w ( digamma ), deleted by the Classical period.

[ 6 ] Proto-Greek kor wā [ 7 ] → early Attic–Ionic *korw ē → Attic kor ē (Ionic kour ē ) Short a [ edit ] Proto-Greek ă → Attic ě . ⁓ Doric: ă remains.

Doric Art a mis ⁓ Attic Art e mis Sonorant clusters [ edit ] Compensatory lengthening of vowel before cluster of sonorant ( r , l , n , m , w , sometimes y ) and s , after deletion of s . ⁓ some Aeolic: compensatory lengthening of sonorant.

[ 8 ] PIE VsR or VRs → Attic–Ionic–Doric–Boeotian VVR .

VsR or VRs → Lesbian–Thessalian VRR .

[ 9 ] Proto-Indo-European * es-m i (athematic verb) → Attic–Ionic ēm i (εἰμί) ⁓ Lesbian–Thessalian emm i "I am" Upsilon [ edit ] Proto-Greek and other dialects' / u / (English f oo d ) became Attic / y / (pronounced as German ü , French u ) and represented by y in Latin transliteration of Greek names.

Boeotian k ou rios ⁓ Attic k y rios "lord" In the diphthongs eu and au , upsilon continued to be pronounced / u / .

Contraction [ edit ] Attic contracts more than Ionic does.

a + e → long ā .

nik a-e → nik ā "conquer (thou)!" e + e → ē (written ει : spurious diphthong ).

PIE * tr ey-e s → Proto-Greek tr ee s → Attic tr ē s = (τρεῖς), "three" e + o → ō (written ου: spurious diphthong).

early *gen es-o s → Ionic gen eo s → Attic gen ou s "of a kind" (genitive singular: Latin generis , with r from rhotacism ) Vowel shortening [ edit ] Attic ē (from ē -grade of ablaut or Proto-Greek ā ) is sometimes shortened to e : when it is followed by a short vowel, with lengthening of the short vowel ( quantitative metathesis ): ēo → eō when it is followed by a long vowel: ēō → eō when it is followed by u and s : ēus → eus ( Osthoff's law ): basil ēo s → basil eō s "of a king" (genitive singular) basil ēō n → basil eō n (genitive plural) basil ēu si → basil eu si (dative plural) Hyphaeresis [ edit ] Attic deletes one of two vowels in a row, called hyphaeresis ( ὑφαίρεσις ).

Homeric boē-th o-o s → Attic boēth o s "running to a cry", "helper in battle" Consonants [ edit ] Palatalization [ edit ] PIE *ky or *chy → Proto-Greek ts ( palatalization ) → Attic and Euboean Ionic tt — Cycladean/Anatolian Ionic and Koine ss .

Proto-Greek *glō kh-y a → Attic glō tt a — East Ionic glō ss a "tongue" Sometimes,  Proto-Greek *ty and *tw → Attic and Euboean Ionic tt — Cycladean/Anatolian Ionic and Koine ss .

PIE * kwe tw ores → Attic te tt ares — East Ionic te ss eres , "four" (Latin qua ttu or ) Proto-Greek and Doric t before i or y → Attic–Ionic s (palatalization).

Doric ti - the -n ti → Attic tithē si = (τίθει σι ) "he places" ( compensatory lengthening of e → ē = spurious diphthong (ει)) Shortening of ss [ edit ] Doric, Aeolian, early Attic–Ionic ss → Classical Attic s .

PIE * me dh-y os → Homeric ( μέσσος ), me ss os ("palatalization") → Attic ( μέσος ), me s os ("middle") Homeric ( ἐτέλεσσα ) → Attic ( ἐτέλεσα ), "I performed (a ceremony)" Proto-Greek * podsi → Homeric ( ποσσί ) → Attic ( ποσί ), "by foot" Proto-Greek * hopot-yos → dialectal ( ὁπόσσος ) → Attic ( ὁπόσος ) Loss of w [ edit ] Proto-Greek w ( digamma ) was lost in Attic before historical times.

Proto-Greek kor w ā → Attic korē , "girl" [ 10 ] Retention of h [ edit ] Attic retained Proto-Greek h- (from debuccalization of Proto-Indo-European initial s- or y- ), but some other dialects lost it ( psilosis , "stripping", "deaspiration").

Proto-Indo-European * s i-sta-mes → Attic h istamen — Cretan istamen , "we stand" Movable n [ edit ] Attic–Ionic places an n ( movable nu ) at the end of some words that would ordinarily end in a vowel, if the next word starts with a vowel, to prevent hiatus (two vowels in a row). The movable nu can also be used to turn what would be a short syllable into a long syllable for use in meter .

pāsi n élegon , "they spoke to everyone", vs.

pāsi legousi pāsi (n) , dative plural of "all" legousi (n) , "they speak" (third person plural, present indicative active) elege (n) , "he was speaking" (third person singular, imperfect indicative active) titheisi (n) , "he places", "makes" (third person singular, present indicative active: athematic verb) Rr instead of rs.

[ edit ] Attic and Euboean Ionic use rr in words, when Cycladean and Anatolian Ionic use rs: Attic (χερρόνησος) → East Ionic (χερσόνησος), "peninsula" Attic (ἄρρην) → East Ionic (ἄρσην), "male" Attic (θάρρος) → East Ionic (θάρσος), "courage" Attic replaces the Ionic -σσ with -ττ [ edit ] Attic and Euboean Ionic use tt, while Cycladean and Anatolian Ionic use ss: Attic (γλῶττα) → East Ionic (γλῶσσα), "tongue" Attic (πράττειν) → East Ionic (πράσσειν), "to do, to act" Attic (θάλαττα) → East Ionic (θάλασσα), "sea" [ 11 ] Morphology [ edit ] Attic tends to replace the -ter "doer of" suffix with -tes : dikastes for dikaster "judge".

The Attic adjectival ending -eios and corresponding noun ending, both having two syllables with the diphthong ei , stand in place of ēios , with three syllables, in other dialects: politeia , Cretan politēia , "constitution", both from politewia , whose w is dropped.

Grammar [ edit ] Attic Greek grammar follows Ancient Greek grammar to a large extent. References to Attic Grammar are usually in reference to peculiarities and exceptions from Ancient Greek Grammar. This section mentions only some of said peculiarities.

Number [ edit ] Main article: Attic numerals In addition to singular and plural numbers, Attic Greek had the dual number . This was used to count exactly two of something and was present as an inflection in nouns, adjectives, pronouns, and verbs (i.e., any categories inflected for number). Attic Greek was the last dialect to retain it from older forms of Greek, and the dual number had died out by the end of the 5th century BC. In addition to this, in Attic Greek, any plural neuter subjects will only ever take singular conjugation verbs.

Declension [ edit ] Main article: Attic declension With regard to declension , the stem is the part of the declined word to which case endings are suffixed. In the alpha or first declension feminines, the stem ends in long a , which is parallel to the Latin first declension. In Attic–Ionic the stem vowel has changed to ē in the singular, except (in Attic only) after e , i or r . For example, the respective nominative, genitive, dative, and accusative singular forms are γνώμη ( gnome ), γνώμης ( gnomes ), γνώμῃ ( gnome(i) ), γνώμην ( gnomen ), "opinion"; but θεᾱ́ ( thea ), θεᾶς ( theas ), θεᾷ ( thea(i) ), θεᾱ́ν ( thean ), "goddess".

The plural is the same in both cases, gnomai and theai , but other sound changes were more important in its formation. For example, original -as in the nominative plural was replaced by the diphthong -ai , which did not change from a to e . In the few a -stem masculines, the genitive singular follows the second declension: stratiotēs , stratiotou , stratiotēi , etc.

In the omicron or second declension, mainly masculines (but with some feminines), the stem ends in o or e , which is composed in turn of a root plus the thematic vowel , an o or e in Indo-European ablaut series parallel to similar formations of the verb. It is the equivalent of the Latin second declension. The alternation of Greek -os and Latin -us in the nominative singular is familiar to readers of Greek and Latin.

In Attic Greek, an original genitive singular ending *-osyo after losing the s (like in the other dialects) lengthens the stem o to the spurious diphthong -ou (see above under Phonology, Vowels): logos "the word" logou from * logosyo "of the word". The dative plural of Attic–Ionic had -oisi , which appears in early Attic but later simplifies to -ois : anthropois "to or for the men".

Classical Attic [ edit ] See also: Classical Athens Classical Attic may refer either to the varieties of Attic Greek spoken and written in Greek majuscule [ 12 ] in the 5th–4th centuries BC ( Classical-era Attic) or to the Hellenistic- and Roman-era [ 13 ] standardized Attic Greek, mainly on the language of Attic orators and written in Greek uncial .

Attic replaces the Ionic -σσ with -ττ : Attic ( γλῶττα ) → Ionic ( γλῶσσα ), "tongue" Attic ( πράττειν ) → Ionic ( πράσσειν ), "to do, to act, to make" Attic ( θάλαττα ) → Ionic ( θάλασσα ), "sea" Varieties [ edit ] The vernacular and poetic dialect of Aristophanes .

The dialect of Thucydides (mixed Old Attic with neologisms ).

The dialect and orthography of Old Attic inscriptions in Attic alphabet before 403 BC; the Thucydidean orthography is similar.

The conventionalized and poetic dialect of the Attic tragic poets, mixed with Epic and Ionic Greek and used in the episodes (in the choral odes, conventional Doric is used).

Formal Attic of Attic orators , Plato , [ 14 ] Xenophon , and Aristotle , imitated by the Atticists or Neo-Attic writers, considered to be good or Standard Attic.

Wiktionary has a category on Attic Ancient Greek .

Notes [ edit ] ^ Roger D. Woodard (2008), "Greek dialects", in: The Ancient Languages of Europe , ed. R. D. Woodard, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, p. 51.

^ From Goodwin and Gulick's classic text "Greek Grammar" (1930) ^ Kirchhoff, Adolf (1867), Studien zur Geschichte des Griechischen Alphabets .

^ Jeffery, Lilian H. (1961).

The local scripts of archaic Greece . Oxford: Clarendon. 67, 81 ^ Threatte 1980 , pp. 26ff.

^ Smyth, par. 30 and note, 31: long a in Attic and dialects ^ Liddell and Scott, κόρη .

^ Paul Kiparsky , " Sonorant Clusters in Greek " ( Language , Vol. 43, No. 3, Part 1, pp. 619–635: Sep. 1967) on JSTOR .

^ V = vowel , R = sonorant , s is itself.

VV = long vowel , RR = doubled or long sonorant .

^ Liddell and Scott, κόρη .

^ Γ.Ν. Χατζιδάκις, Σύντομος ιστορία της ελληνικής γλώσσης, page 40: "Some special characteristics of the Attic dialect are [...] the double -ρρ instead of -ρσ and the double -ττ instead of -σσ [...]. (Translated from Greek).

^ Only the excavated inscriptions of the era. The Classical Attic works are transmitted in uncial manuscripts.

^ Including the Byzantine Atticists.

^ Platonic style is poetic References [ edit ] Buck, Carl Darling (1955).

The Greek Dialects . The University of Chicago Press .

Goodwin, William W. (1879).

Greek Grammar .

Macmillan Education .

ISBN 0-89241-118-X .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) Smyth, Herbert Weir (1920).

Greek Grammar .

Harvard University Press .

ISBN 0-674-36250-0 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) Threatte, Leslie (1980).

The grammar of Attic inscriptions . Vol. I: Phonology. Berlin: De Gruyter.

Further reading [ edit ] Allen, W. Sidney. 1987.

Vox Graeca: The pronunciation of Classical Greek . 3rd ed. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.

Bakker, Egbert J., ed. 2010.

A companion to the Ancient Greek language . Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell.

Christidis, Anastasios-Phoivos, ed. 2007.

A history of Ancient Greek: From the beginnings to Late Antiquity . Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.

Colvin, Stephen C. 2007.

A historical Greek reader: Mycenaean to the koiné . Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Horrocks, Geoffrey. 2010.

Greek: A history of the language and its speakers . 2nd ed. Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell.

Palmer, Leonard R. 1980.

The Greek language . London: Faber & Faber.

Teodorsson, Sven-Tage. 1974.

The phonemic system of the Attic dialect 400–340 BC . Gothenburg, Sweden: Institute of Classical Studies, University of Göteborg.

Threatte, Leslie. 1980–86.

The grammar of Attic inscriptions . 2 vols. Berlin: de Gruyter.

Γεώργιος Μπαμπινιώτης, Συνοπτική Ιστορία τής Ελληνικής γλώσσας, Athens 2002.

External links [ edit ] Library resources about Attic Greek Online books Resources in your library Resources in other libraries English-Attic Dictionary (Woodhouse) Perseus Digital Library Greek Word Study Tool (Perseus) A Greek Grammar for Colleges (Smyth) Archived 2015-05-01 at the Wayback Machine Syntax of Classical Greek (Gildersleeve) Archived 2015-05-01 at the Wayback Machine Ancient Greek Tutorials – Provides Attic Greek audio recordings Classical (Attic) Greek Online v t e Ancient Greece Timeline History Geography Periods Cycladic civilization Minoan civilization Mycenaean Greece Greek Dark Ages Archaic Greece Classical Greece Hellenistic Greece Roman Greece Geography Aegean Sea Aeolis Crete Cyrenaica Cyprus Doris Epirus Hellespont Ionia Ionian Sea Macedonia Magna Graecia Peloponnesus Pontus Taurica Ancient Greek colonies City states Politics Military City states Argos Athens Byzantion Chalcis Corinth Ephesus Miletus Pergamon Eretria Kerkyra Larissa Megalopolis Thebes Megara Rhodes Samos Sparta Lissus (Crete) Kingdoms Bithynia Cappadocia Epirus Greco-Bactrian Kingdom Indo-Greek Kingdom Macedonia Pergamon Pontus Ptolemaic Kingdom Seleucid Empire Federations / Confederations Doric Hexapolis ( c.

1100 – c.

560 BC ) Italiote League ( c.

800 –389 BC) Ionian League (c. 650–404 BC) Peloponnesian League ( c.

550 –366 BC) Amphictyonic League ( c.

595 –279 BC) Acarnanian League (c. 500–31 BC) Hellenic League (499–449 BC) Delian League (478–404 BC) Chalcidian League (430–348 BC) Boeotian League (c. 424–c. 395 BC) Aetolian League (c. 400–188 BC) Second Athenian League (378–355 BC) Thessalian League (374–196 BC) Arcadian League (370–c. 230 BC) Epirote League (370–168 BC) League of Corinth (338–322 BC) Euboean League (c. 300 BC–c. 300 AD) Achaean League (280–146 BC) Politics Boule Free city Koinon Proxeny Stasis Tagus Tyrant Athenian Agora Areopagus Ecclesia Graphe paranomon Heliaia Ostracism Spartan Ekklesia Ephor Gerousia Macedon Synedrion Koinon Military Wars Athenian military Scythian archers Antigonid Macedonian army Army of Macedon Ballista Cretan archers Hellenistic armies Hippeis Hoplite Hetairoi Macedonian phalanx Military of Mycenaean Greece Phalanx Peltast Pezhetairos Sarissa Sacred Band of Thebes Sciritae Seleucid army Spartan army Strategos Toxotai Xiphos Xyston People List of ancient Greeks Rulers Kings of Argos Archons of Athens Kings of Athens Kings of Commagene Diadochi Kings of Macedonia Kings of Paionia Attalid kings of Pergamon Kings of Pontus Ptolemaic dynasty Seleucid dynasty Kings of Sparta Tyrants of Syracuse Artists & scholars Astronomers Geographers Historians Mathematicians Philosophers Playwrights Poets Seven Sages Writers Philosophers Anaxagoras Anaximander Anaximenes Antisthenes Aristotle Democritus Diogenes of Sinope Empedocles Epicurus Gorgias Heraclitus Hypatia Leucippus Parmenides Plato Protagoras Pythagoras Socrates Thales Zeno Authors Aeschylus Aesop Alcaeus Archilochus Aristophanes Bacchylides Euripides Herodotus Hesiod Hipponax Homer Ibycus Lucian Menander Mimnermus Panyassis Philocles Pindar Plutarch Polybius Sappho Simonides Sophocles Stesichorus Theognis Thucydides Timocreon Tyrtaeus Xenophon Others Athenian statesmen Lawgivers Olympic victors Tyrants By culture Ancient Greek tribes Thracian Greeks Ancient Macedonians Society Culture Society Agriculture Calendar Clothing Coinage Cuisine Economy Education Emporium Euergetism Festivals Folklore Homosexuality Law Olympic Games Pederasty Philosophy Prostitution Religion Slavery Warfare Wedding customs Wine Arts and science Architecture Greek Revival architecture Astronomy Literature Mathematics Medicine Music Musical system Pottery Sculpture Technology Theatre Religion Funeral and burial practices Mythology Deities Temple Twelve Olympians Underworld Sacred places Eleusis Delphi Delos Dion Dodona Mount Olympus Olympia Structures Athenian Treasury Lion Gate Long Walls Philippeion Theatre of Dionysus Tunnel of Eupalinos Temples Aphaea Artemis Athena Nike Erechtheion Hephaestus Hera, Olympia Parthenon Samothrace Zeus, Olympia Language Proto-Greek Mycenaean Homeric Dialects Aeolic Arcadocypriot Attic Doric Epirote Ionic Locrian Macedonian Pamphylian Koine Writing Linear A Linear B Cypriot syllabary Greek alphabet Greek numerals Attic numerals Greek colonisation Magna Graecia Mainland Italy Alision Brentesion Caulonia Chone Croton Cumae Elea Heraclea Lucania Hipponion Hydrus Krimisa Laüs Locri Medma Metauros Metapontion Neápolis Pandosia (Lucania) Poseidonia Pixous Rhegion Scylletium Siris Sybaris Sybaris on the Traeis Taras Terina Thurii Sicily Akragas Akrai Akrillai Apollonia Calacte Casmenae Catana Gela Helorus Henna Heraclea Minoa Himera Hybla Gereatis Hybla Heraea Kamarina Leontinoi Megara Hyblaea Messana Naxos Segesta Selinous Syracuse Tauromenion Thermae Tyndaris Aeolian Islands Didyme Euonymos Ereikousa Hycesia Lipara/Meligounis Phoenicusa Strongyle Therassía Cyrenaica Balagrae Barca Berenice Cyrene ( Apollonia ) Ptolemais Iberian Peninsula Akra Leuke Alonis Emporion Helike Hemeroscopion Kalathousa Kypsela Mainake Menestheus's Limin Illicitanus Limin/Portus Illicitanus Rhode Salauris Zacynthos Illyria Aspalathos Apollonia Aulon Epidamnos Epidauros Issa Melaina Korkyra Nymphaion Orikon Pharos Tragurion Thronion Black Sea basin North coast Akra Borysthenes Charax Chersonesus Dioscurias Gorgippia Hermonassa Kalos Limen Kepoi Kerkinitis Kimmerikon Myrmekion Nikonion Nymphaion Olbia Pantikapaion Phanagoria Pityus Tanais Theodosia Tyras Tyritake South coast Abonoteichos Amisos Anchialos Apollonia Athina Bathus Dionysopolis Cotyora Cytorus Eupatoria Heraclea Kerasous Mesambria Odessos Oinòe Phasis Polemonion Rhizos Salmydessus Sesamus Sinope Thèrmae Tium Trapezous Tripolis Zaliche Lists Cities in Epirus People Place names Stoae Temples Theatres Category Portal Outline v t e Greek language Origin and genealogy Graeco-Aryan Graeco-Armenian Pre-Greek substrate Graeco-Phrygian Hellenic languages Periods Proto-Greek ( c.

2900 –1600 BC) Mycenaean Greek ( c.

1600 –1100 BC) Ancient Greek ( c.

800 –300 BC) Koine Greek ( c.

300 BC –AD 330) Medieval Greek ( c.

330 –1453) Modern Greek (since 1453) Varieties Ancient Central Aeolic Mycenaean Arcadocypriot East Attic Ionic Homeric West Doric Northwest Achaean Epirote Locrian Macedonian Pamphylian Koine Hellenistic Koine Jewish Koine Greek Modern Demotic Katharevousa Cappadocian Misthiotika Cretan Cypriot Himariote Constantinople Italiot Greco/Calabrian Griko/Apulian Maniot Mariupolitan Pontic Romano-Greek Tsakonian Yevanic Greco-Australian Phonology Ancient ( accent / teaching ) Koine Standard Modern Grammar Ancient Koine Standard Modern Writing systems Cypriot syllabary Linear B Greek alphabet History Archaic forms Attic numerals Greek numerals Orthography Diacritics Braille Cyrillization and Romanization Greeklish Literature Ancient Byzantine Modern Promotion and study Hellenic Foundation for Culture Center for the Greek Language Institute for Language and Speech Processing Other Eteocretan language Eteocypriot language Greek language question Morphemes in English Terms of endearment Place names Proverbs Minoan language Greek Language Day Trojan language Comparison of Ancient Greek dictionaries v t e Ages of Greek c.

3rd millennium BC c.

1600–1100 BC c.

800–300 BC c.

300 BC – AD 600 c.

600–1453 Since 1453 Proto-Greek Mycenaean Ancient Koine Medieval Modern Authority control databases National United States France BnF data Latvia Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Attic_Greek&oldid=1306260207 " Categories : Varieties of Ancient Greek Classical languages Languages of ancient Macedonia Languages attested from the 5th century BC 5th-century BC establishments in Greece Languages extinct in the 3rd century BC Hidden categories: Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Attic Greek-language text Language articles with Linglist code Dialects of languages with ISO 639-3 code Dialects with Linguist List code Languages without ISO 639-3 code but with Glottolog code Language articles with unreferenced extinction date Articles containing Classical Greek-language text Pages with plain IPA Articles containing Proto-Indo-European-language text Articles containing Proto-Greek-language text Articles containing Ionic Greek-language text CS1 errors: ISBN date CS1: long volume value Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 16 August 2025, at 20:27 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Attic Greek 35 languages Add topic

