Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biographical details 2 Work 3 Works by Parameshvara 4 See also 5 References 6 Further reading 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Parameshvara Nambudiri 10 languages Català Deutsch Español हिन्दी Kreyòl ayisyen മലയാളം नेपाल भाषा Português संस्कृतम् తెలుగు Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Parameshvara ) Indian mathematician and astronomer (1380–1460) For the concept of God, see Parameshwara (god) .

Parameshvara Nambudiri Born c. 1380 Tirur , Cochin Kingdom Died c. 1460 (1460-00-00) (aged 79–80) Occupation Astronomer-mathematician Known for Mean value theorem Drig system Circumradius formula Notable work Drgganita Goladipika Grahanamandana Vatasseri Parameshvara Nambudiri ( c.

1380–1460) [ 1 ] was a major Indian mathematician and astronomer of the Kerala school of astronomy and mathematics founded by Madhava of Sangamagrama . He was also an astrologer . Parameshvara was a proponent of observational astronomy in medieval India and he himself had made a series of eclipse observations to verify the accuracy of the computational methods then in use. Based on his eclipse observations, Parameshvara proposed several corrections to the astronomical parameters which had been in use since the times of Aryabhata . The computational scheme based on the revised set of parameters has come to be known as the Drgganita or Drig system . Parameshvara was also a prolific writer on matters relating to astronomy. At least 25 manuscripts have been identified as being authored by Parameshvara.

[ 1 ] Biographical details [ edit ] Parameshvara was a Hindu of Bhrgu gotra following the Ashvalayanasutra of the Rigveda . Parameshvara's family name ( Illam ) was Vatasseri and his family resided in the village of Alathiyur (Sanskritised as Asvatthagrama ) in Tirur , Kerala . Alathiyur is situated on the northern bank of the river Nila (river Bharathappuzha ) at its mouth in Kerala. He was a grandson of a disciple of Govinda Bhattathiri (1237–1295 CE), a legendary figure in the astrological traditions of Kerala .

Parameshvara studied under teachers Rudra and Narayana, and also under Madhava of Sangamagrama (c. 1350 – c. 1425) the founder of the Kerala school of astronomy and mathematics .

Damodara , another prominent member of the Kerala school , was his son and also his pupil. Parameshvara was also a teacher of Nilakantha Somayaji (1444–1544) the author of the celebrated Tantrasamgraha .

Work [ edit ] Parameshvara wrote commentaries on many mathematical and astronomical works such as those by Bhāskara I and Aryabhata . He made a series of  eclipse observations over a 55-year period. Constantly attempted to compare these with the theoretically computed positions of the planets. He revised planetary parameters based on his observations.

One of Parameshvara's more significant contributions was his mean value type formula for the inverse interpolation of the sine.

[ 2 ] He was the first mathematician to give a formula for the radius of the circle circumscribing a cyclic quadrilateral.

[ 3 ] The expression is sometimes attributed to Lhuilier [1782], 350 years later. With the sides of the cyclic quadrilateral being a, b, c, and d , the radius R of the circumscribed circle is: R = ( a b + c d ) ( a c + b d ) ( a d + b c ) ( − − a + b + c + d ) ( a − − b + c + d ) ( a + b − − c + d ) ( a + b + c − − d ) .

{\displaystyle R={\sqrt {\frac {(ab+cd)(ac+bd)(ad+bc)}{(-a+b+c+d)(a-b+c+d)(a+b-c+d)(a+b+c-d)}}}.} Works by Parameshvara [ edit ] The following works of Parameshvara are well-known.

[ 4 ] A complete list of all manuscripts attributed to Parameshvara is available in Pingree.

[ 1 ] Bhatadipika – Commentary on Āryabhaṭīya of Āryabhaṭa I Karmadipika – Commentary on Mahabhaskariya of Bhaskara I Paramesvari – Commentary on Laghubhaskariya of Bhaskara I Sidhantadipika – Commentary on Mahabhaskariyabhashya of Govindasvāmi Vivarana – Commentary on Surya Siddhanta and Lilāvati Drgganita – Description of the Drig system (composed in 1431 CE) Goladipika – Spherical geometry and astronomy (composed in 1443 CE) Grahanamandana – Computation of eclipses (Its epoch is 15 July 1411 CE.) Grahanavyakhyadipika – On the rationale of the theory of eclipses Vakyakarana – Methods for the derivation of several astronomical tables See also [ edit ] List of astronomers and mathematicians of the Kerala school References [ edit ] ^ a b c David Edwin Pingree (1981).

Census of the exact sciences in Sanskrit . A. Vol. 4.

American Philosophical Society . pp.

187– 192.

ISBN 978-0-87169-213-9 .

^ Radha Charan Gupta [1979] "A mean-value-type formula for inverse interpolation of the sine", Ganita 30 (1–2): 78—82.

^ Radha Charan Gupta [1977] "Parameshvara's rule for the circumradius of a cyclic quadrilateral", Historia Mathematica 4: 67–74 ^ A.K. Bag (May 1980).

"Indian literature on mathematics during 1400–1800 AD" (PDF) .

Indian Journal of History of Science .

15 (1): 79– 93. Archived from the original (PDF) on 9 March 2012.

Further reading [ edit ] David Pingree , Biography in Dictionary of Scientific Biography (New York 1970–1990).

Bhaskara, Laghubhaskariyam : With Parameshvara's commentary (Poona, 1946).

Bhaskara, Mahabhaskariyam: With Parameshvara's commentary called Karmadipika (Poona, 1945).

Munjala , Laghumanasam : with commentary by Parameshvara (Poona, 1944).

T.A. Sarasvati Amma (1979) Geometry in ancient and medieval India , (Delhi).

K. Shankar Shukla (1957) The Surya-siddhanta with the commentary of Parameshvara (Lucknow).

K. V. Sarma (2008), "Paramesvara", Encyclopaedia of the History of Science, Technology, and Medicine in Non-Western Cultures (2nd edition) edited by Helaine Selin , Springer, ISBN 978-1-4020-4559-2 .

Kim Plofker (1996) "An example of the secant method of iterative approximation in a fifteenth-century Sanskrit text", Historia Mathematica 23 (3): 246–256.

K. K. Raja (1963) "Astronomy and mathematics in Kerala", Brahmavidya 27; 136–143.

K. Chandra Hari (2003).

"Eclipse observations of Parameshvara, the 14th–15th-century astronomer of Kerala" (PDF) .

Indian Journal of History of Science .

38 (1): 43– 57. Archived from the original (PDF) on 16 March 2012 . Retrieved 28 January 2010 .

External links [ edit ] Achar, Narahari (2007).

"Parameśvara of Vāṭaśśeri [Parmeśvara I]" . In Thomas Hockey; et al. (eds.).

The Biographical Encyclopedia of Astronomers . New York: Springer. p. 870.

ISBN 978-0-387-31022-0 .

( PDF version ) O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F.

, "Parameshvara Nambudiri" , MacTutor History of Mathematics Archive , University of St Andrews v t e Kerala school of astronomy and mathematics Astronomers and mathematicians (Complete list) Acyuta Piṣāraṭi Azhvāñceri Taṃprākkaḷ Citrabhānu Dāmodara of Vațaśreņi Devācārya Govinda Bhattathiri Govindasvāmin Haridatta Jyeṣṭhadeva Kochukrishnan Asan Madhava of Sangamagrama Mazhamaṅgalaṃ Nārāyaṇan Naṃpūtiri Nīlakaņțha Sōmayāji Nīlakaṇṭha II Parameśvara of Vațaśśeri Śaṅkaranārāyaṇa Śaṅkara of Mahiṣamaṅgalam Putumana Somayāji Śankara Vāriyar Śaṅkara Varma of Kaṭattanāṭ Udayadivākara Vararuci I Vidyamadhava Treatises Aryabhatiya-bhashya ( Nīlakaņțha Sōmayāji ) Candrachayaganita Dasādhyāyi Drigganita Dṛkkaraṇa Gaṇitayuktayah Golavada Golasara Grahacāraṇinibandhana Jātaka-sāara-saṃgraha Jyotirmimamsa Jyotiśśāstra-saṃgraha Kanakkusāraṃ Karaṇapaddhati Kriyakramakari Laghuvivṛti (commentary on Tantrasamgraha ) Madhyamanayanaprakara Mahābhāskarīya Bhāshya Pañcabodha Sadratnamālā Sidhhantadarpana Spuṭanirṇaya Tantrasamgraha Venvaroha Yuktibhāṣā Concepts/Topics Chandravakyas Drigganita system Kaṭapayādi system Madhava's correction terms Madhava series Madhava's sine table Parahita system Places associated with members of the school Athavanad (Azhvanchery Thamprakkal) Alathiyur (Govinda Bhattathiri, etc) Kadathanadu (Sankara Varman) Mahodayapuram (Kodungallur) (Sankaranarayana) Kudallur (Madhava of Sangamagrama) Peruvanam (Mahishamangalam Sankaran Namputhiri) Thrikkandiyur (Nilakantha Somayaji, etc) Sivapuram (Thrissur) (Putumana Somayaji, etc) Tirunavaya (Haridatta) v t e Indian mathematics Mathematicians Ancient Apastamba Baudhayana Katyayana Manava Pāṇini Pingala Yajnavalkya Classical Āryabhaṭa I Āryabhaṭa II Bhāskara I Bhāskara II Melpathur Narayana Bhattathiri Brahmadeva Brahmagupta Govindasvāmi Halayudha Jyeṣṭhadeva Kamalakara Mādhava of Saṅgamagrāma Mahāvīra Mahendra Sūri Munishvara Narayana Parameshvara Achyuta Pisharati Jagannatha Samrat Nilakantha Somayaji Śrīpati Sridhara Gangesha Upadhyaya Varāhamihira Sankara Variar Virasena Modern Srinivasa Ramanujan Satyendra Nath Bose P.C. Mahalanobis Subrahmanyan Chandrasekhar C.R. Rao Veeravalli S. Varadarajan S. R. Srinivasa Varadhan K. R. Parthasarathy (probabilist) M. S. Narasimhan C. S. Seshadri Harish-Chandra Subbayya Sivasankaranarayana Pillai Tilak Raj Prabhakar Manjul Bhargava Akshay Venkatesh Ravi Vakil Kannan Soundararajan Shanti Swarup Bhatnagar Prize recipients in Mathematical Science Treatises Aryabhatiya Bakhshali manuscript Bijaganita Brāhmasphuṭasiddhānta Ganita Kaumudi Grahalaghava Kanakkusaram Karanapaddhati Līlāvatī Lokavibhaga Pātīgaṇita Paulisa Siddhanta Paitamaha Siddhanta Romaka Siddhanta Sadratnamala Siddhānta Shiromani Śulba Sūtras Surya Siddhanta Tantrasamgraha Vasishtha Siddhanta Veṇvāroha Yuktibhāṣā Yavanajataka Pioneering innovations Brahmi numerals Hindu–Arabic numeral system Symbol for zero (0) Infinite series expansions for the trigonometric functions Centres Kerala school of astronomy and mathematics Jantar Mantar ( Jaipur , New Delhi , Ujjain , Varanasi ) Historians of mathematics Bapudeva Sastri (1821–1900) Shankar Balakrishna Dikshit (1853–1898) Sudhakara Dvivedi (1855–1910) M. Rangacarya (1861–1916) P. C. Sengupta (1876–1962) B. B. Datta (1888–1958) T. Hayashi A. A. Krishnaswamy Ayyangar (1892– 1953) A. N. Singh (1901–1954) C. T. Rajagopal (1903–1978) T. A. Saraswati Amma (1918–2000) S. N. Sen (1918–1992) K. S. Shukla (1918–2007) K. V. Sarma (1919–2005) Translators Walter Eugene Clark Henry Thomas Colebrooke David Pingree Other regions Babylon China Greece Islamic mathematics Europe Modern institutions Indian Statistical Institute Bhaskaracharya Pratishthana Chennai Mathematical Institute Institute of Mathematical Sciences Indian Institute of Science Harish-Chandra Research Institute Homi Bhabha Centre for Science Education Ramanujan Institute for Advanced Study in Mathematics TIFR v t e Scientific Research in Kerala Pre 19th Century Achyuta Pisharati Candravakyas Citrabhanu Damodara Ganita-yukti-bhasa Govinda Bhattathiri Haridatta Jyā, koti-jyā and utkrama-jyā Jyeṣṭhadeva Jyotirmimamsa Karanapaddhati Katapayadi system Kriyakramakari Madhava of Sangamagrama Madhava series Madhava's sine table Melpathur Narayana Bhattathiri Nilakantha Somayaji Parameshvara Sadratnamala Śaṅkaranārāyaṇa Tantrasamgraha Organizations C-DAC Thiruvananthapuram Centre for Development Studies Centre for Earth Science Studies Centre for Mathematical Sciences (Kerala) Centre for Rural Management Centre of Science and Technology for Rural Development Cyberpark Kerala Mathematical Association Kerala Science and Technology Museum Kerala Science Congress Kerala Soil Museum Kerala State Council for Science, Technology and Environment Krishi Vigyan Kendra Kannur Liquid Propulsion Systems Centre Rajiv Gandhi Centre for Biotechnology Regional Agricultural Research Station, Pattambi Rice Research Station, Moncombu Vikram Sarabhai Space Centre Institutions Agricultural Research Station, Anakkayam Agricultural Research Station, Mannuthy Agronomic Research Station, Chalakudy Amrita Institute of Medical Sciences and Research Centre Aromatic and Medicinal Plants Research Station, Odakkali Banana Research Station, Kannara Cashew Research Station, Madakkathara Central Institute of Fisheries Technology Central Marine Fisheries Research Institute Central Tuber Crops Research Institute Centre for Marine Living Resources & Ecology College of Horticulture Crocodile Rehabilitation and Research Centre Institute of Handloom and Textile Technology Indian Institute of Science Education and Research, Thiruvananthapuram Indian Institute of Space Science and Technology Indian Institute of Spices Research Jubilee Mission Medical College and Research Institute Kerala Forest Research Institute Kerala School of Mathematics, Kozhikode Mar Athanasios College for Advanced Studies, Tiruvalla National Institute for Interdisciplinary Science and Technology National Institute of Speech and Hearing National Research Institute for Panchakarma Naval Physical and Oceanographic Laboratory Oriental Research Institute & Manuscripts Library Sree Chitra Tirunal Institute for Medical Sciences and Technology Srinivasa Ramanujan Institute of Basic Sciences St. Ephrem Ecumenical Research Institute Tropical Botanical Garden and Research Institute Vadakke Madham Brahmaswam Vedic Research Centre Scientists Ajit Varki C. V. Subramanian Dileep George E. C. George Sudarshan G. Madhavan Nair George Varghese K. R. Ramanathan K. Radhakrishnan M. G. K. Menon Matthew Pothen Thekaekara P. N. Vinayachandran Pisharoth Rama Pisharoty Pulickel Ajayan R. S. Krishnan Sainudeen Pattazhy T. A. Venkitasubramanian Thanu Padmanabhan Thomas Zacharia Vainu Bappu Varghese Mathai Vinod Scaria Assorted articles A Passage to Infinity FORV Sagar Sampada Swatantra 2014 Techno-lodge Technology Business Incubator TBI-NITC A History of the Kerala School of Hindu Astronomy Templates Category WikiProject India portal Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National Germany United States France BnF data Norway Israel Other IdRef Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Parameshvara_Nambudiri&oldid=1259521163 " Categories : 1380s births 1425 deaths Indian Hindus 14th-century Indian mathematicians 15th-century Indian astronomers Medieval Indian astrologers Kerala school of astronomy and mathematics 15th-century Indian mathematicians 14th-century astrologers 15th-century astrologers Scientists from Kerala People from Malappuram district Scholars from Kerala Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from August 2019 Use Indian English from August 2019 All Wikipedia articles written in Indian English Articles with hCards This page was last edited on 25 November 2024, at 16:55 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Parameshvara Nambudiri 10 languages Add topic

