Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Background 2 Methodology 3 Branches 4 See also 5 References Toggle References subsection 5.1 Citations 5.2 Sources 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Petrology 75 languages العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Башҡортса Беларуская Български Bosanski Català Čeština ChiShona Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa ქართული Қазақша Kiswahili Кыргызча Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar Македонски മലയാളം 閩東語 / Mìng-dĕ̤ng-ngṳ̄ Монгол Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Plattdüütsch Polski Português Română Русский Shqip Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt Winaray 吴语 ייִדיש 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Branch of geology that studies the formation, composition, distribution and structure of rocks This article includes a list of references , related reading , or external links , but its sources remain unclear because it lacks inline citations .

Please help improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( December 2008 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) A thin section of a volcanic sand grain seen under the microscope, with plane-polarized light in the upper picture, and cross-polarized light in the lower picture. Scale box is 0.25 mm.

Petrology (from Ancient Greek πέτρος ( pétros ) ' rock ' and -λογία ( -logía ) ' study of ' ) is the branch of geology that studies rocks , their mineralogy, composition, texture, structure and the conditions under which they form.

[ 1 ] Petrology has three subdivisions: igneous , metamorphic , and sedimentary petrology .

[ 2 ] Igneous and metamorphic petrology are commonly taught together because both make heavy use of chemistry , chemical methods, and phase diagrams. Sedimentary petrology is commonly taught together with stratigraphy because it deals with the processes that form sedimentary rock .

[ 3 ] Modern sedimentary petrology is making increasing use of chemistry.

Background [ edit ] Lithology was once approximately synonymous with petrography , but in current usage, lithology focuses on macroscopic hand-sample or outcrop-scale description of rocks while petrography is the speciality that deals with microscopic details.

In the petroleum industry , lithology, or more specifically mud logging , is the graphic representation of geological formations being drilled through and drawn on a log called a mud log. As the cuttings are circulated out of the borehole , they are sampled, examined (typically under a 10× microscope) and tested chemically when needed.

Methodology [ edit ] Ljudmila Dolar Mantuani (1906–1988), first female professor of petrography in Yugoslavia Petrology utilizes the fields of mineralogy , petrography, optical mineralogy , and chemical analysis to describe the composition and texture of rocks. Petrologists also include the principles of geochemistry and geophysics through the study of geochemical trends and cycles and the use of thermodynamic data and experiments in order to better understand the origins of rocks.

Branches [ edit ] There are three branches of petrology, corresponding to the three types of rocks: igneous , metamorphic , and sedimentary , and another dealing with experimental techniques: Igneous petrology focuses on the composition and texture of igneous rocks (rocks such as granite or basalt which have crystallized from molten rock or magma ). Igneous rocks include volcanic and plutonic rocks .

[ 4 ] Sedimentary petrology focuses on the composition and texture of sedimentary rocks (rocks such as sandstone , shale , or limestone which consist of pieces or particles derived from other rocks or biological or chemical deposits, and are usually bound together in a matrix of finer material).

Metamorphic petrology focuses on the composition and texture of metamorphic rocks (rocks such as slate , marble , gneiss , or schist ) which have undergone chemical, mineralogical or textural changes due to the effects of pressure, temperature, or both). The original rock, prior to change (called the protolith), may be of any sort.

[ 4 ] Experimental petrology employs high-pressure, high-temperature apparatus to investigate the geochemistry and phase relations of natural or synthetic materials at elevated pressures and temperatures. Experiments are particularly useful for investigating rocks of the lower crust and upper mantle that rarely survive the journey to the surface in pristine condition. They are also one of the prime sources of information about completely inaccessible rocks, such as those in the Earth's lower mantle and in the mantles of the other terrestrial planets and the Moon . The work of experimental petrologists has laid a foundation on which modern understanding of igneous and metamorphic processes has been built.

See also [ edit ] Geology portal Earth sciences portal Ore Pedology References [ edit ] Citations [ edit ] ^ The 22nd edition of the Manual of mineral science. Buch . New York: Wiley. 2002. p. 1.

ISBN 978-0-471-25177-4 .

^ Blatt, Harvey; Tracy, Robert J.; Owens, Brent E. (2006).

Petrology: igneous, sedimentary and metamorphic (3rd ed.). New York: Freeman.

ISBN 978-0-7167-3743-8 .

^ Frost, B. R.; Frost, C. D. (2014).

Essentials of Igneous and Metamorphic Petrology .

Cambridge University Press .

^ a b Winter, John D. (2010).

Principles of igneous and metamorphic petrology (2nd ed.). New York: Prentice Hall. pp.

467– 468.

ISBN 978-0-321-59257-6 .

Sources [ edit ] Best, Myron G. (2002), Igneous and Metamorphic Petrology ( Blackwell Publishing ) ISBN 1-4051-0588-7 .

Blatt, Harvey; Tracy, Robert J.; Owens, Brent (2005), Petrology: igneous, sedimentary, and metamorphic ( W. H. Freeman ) ISBN 978-0-7167-3743-8 .

Boggs, S. Jr. (2009), Petrology of Sedimentary Rocks , Cambridge University Press Dietrich, Richard Vincent; Skinner, Brian J. (2009), Gems, Granites, and Gravels: knowing and using rocks and minerals ( Cambridge University Press ) ISBN 978-0-521-10722-8 Fei, Yingwei; Bertka, Constance M.; Mysen, Bjorn O. (eds.) (1999), Mantle Petrology: field observations and high-pressure experimentation (Houston TX: Geochemical Society ) ISBN 0-941809-05-6 .

Philpotts, Anthony; Ague, Jay (2009), Principles of Igneous and Metamorphic Petrology ( Cambridge University Press ) ISBN 978-0-521-88006-0 Robb, L. (2005).

Introduction to Ore-Forming Processes ( Blackwell Science ) ISBN 978-0-632-06378-9 Tucker, M. E.

(2001), Sedimentary Petrology , Blackwell Science Yardley, B. W. D.; Warren, Clare (2021).

An introduction to metamorphic petrology (2 ed.). Cambridge.

ISBN 978-1-108-65955-0 .

OCLC 1226719524 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Petrology .

Wikisource has original works on the topic: Petrology Atlas of Igneous and metamorphic rocks, minerals, and textures – Geology Department, University of North Carolina Metamorphic Petrology Database ( MetPetDB ) – Department of Earth and Environmental Sciences, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute Petrological Database of the Ocean Floor (PetDB) - Center for International Earth Science Information Network, Columbia University v t e Geologic principles and processes Stratigraphic principles Principle of original horizontality Law of superposition Principle of lateral continuity Principle of cross-cutting relationships Principle of faunal succession Principle of inclusions and components Walther's law Petrologic principles Intrusive Extrusive Volcanic Exfoliation Weathering Soil formation Diagenesis Compaction Metamorphism Geomorphologic processes Plate tectonics Salt tectonics Tectonic uplift Subsidence Marine transgression Marine regression Sediment transport Fluvial processes Aeolian processes Glacial processes Mass wasting processes Geology portal v t e Geology Overviews Outline of geology Glossary of geology History of geology Index of geology articles History of geology Geochronology Geological history of Earth Timeline of geology Composition and structure Cosmochemistry Crystallography Geochemistry Mineralogy Petrology Sedimentology Historical geology Stratigraphy Paleontology Paleoclimatology Palaeogeography Dynamic Earth Structural geology Geodynamics Plate tectonics Geomorphology Volcanology Water Glaciology Hydrogeology Marine geology Geodesy Cartography Earth's orbit Geodetic astronomy Geomatics Gravity of Earth Planetary geodesy Remote sensing Geopositioning Geophysics Geomagnetism Geophysical survey Planetary geophysics Seismology Tectonophysics Applications Biogeology Economic geology Engineering geology Environmental geology Planetary geology Geobiology Geologic modelling Forensic geology Forensic geophysics Meteoritics Mining geology Mineral physics Occupations Geologist Petroleum geologist Volcanologist Geology portal Geology Geology Authority control databases International FAST National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic Spain Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Petrology&oldid=1301171651 " Categories : Petrology Petroleum geology Oilfield terminology Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles lacking in-text citations from December 2008 All articles lacking in-text citations CS1 maint: location missing publisher Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 18 July 2025, at 12:48 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Petrology 75 languages Add topic

