Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Projects and programs 3 Academics 4 Student life 5 Athletics 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Regis College (Massachusetts) 2 languages Italiano مصرى Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 42°21′2″N 71°18′33″W ﻿ / ﻿ 42.35056°N 71.30917°W ﻿ / 42.35056; -71.30917 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Regis College, Massachusetts ) Catholic college in Weston, Massachusetts, US For Regis College in Toronto, see Regis College (Toronto) .

For the university in Colorado, see Regis University .

Regis College Type Private university Established 1927 ; 98 years ago ( 1927 ) Founder Sisters of St. Joseph Religious affiliation Roman Catholic ( Sisters of St. Joseph ) Academic affiliations ACCU CIC AICUM [ 1 ] ACSSJ [ 2 ] Endowment $41.6 million (2020) [ 3 ] President Antoinette M. Hays Students 3,230 [ 4 ] (fall 2022) Undergraduates 1,153 Postgraduates 846 Location Weston , Massachusetts , United States 42°21′2″N 71°18′33″W ﻿ / ﻿ 42.35056°N 71.30917°W ﻿ / 42.35056; -71.30917 Campus Suburban 132 acres (53 ha) Colors Crimson and gold Nickname Pride Sporting affiliations NCAA Division III – GNAC Mascot Lion and lioness Website regiscollege.edu Regis College is a private Catholic university run by the Sisters of St. Joseph in Weston, Massachusetts , United States. Regis was founded as a women's college in 1927. In 2007, Regis became co-educational ; it was the last Catholic women's college in the Boston area to start admitting men.

[ 5 ] History [ edit ] Regis College was founded in 1927 by the Sisters of St. Joseph . The college's name is inspired by Mary Regis Casserly who established the Sisters of St. Joseph in Boston in 1873.

[ 6 ] After eight decades as a women's only college, Regis enrolled its first co-educational class in fall 2007.

As of fall 2020, approximately 3,000 undergraduate and graduate students were enrolled at Regis. As of 2020, the school had an 9 to 1 student/faculty ratio.

[ 7 ] Ninety-seven percent of the Class of 2019 had professional employment or were enrolled in graduate school within six months of graduation.

Projects and programs [ edit ] The Center for Global Connections oversees academic and service-learning initiatives for students. The Regis Haiti Project is an international faculty partnership initiative to help elevate Haitian nursing education and empower Haitian nursing faculty through the master's degree to teach others across Haiti.

[ 8 ] Regis offers an accredited pre-school and kindergarten program at its Children's Center. The program teaches children from the age of 15 months to six years old about science, math, engineering, and technology.

[ 9 ] In 2005, Regis founded a Life Long Learning Program (LLARC) that offers courses taught by volunteers to older adults at the Regis College in Weston campus.

[ 10 ] Academics [ edit ] College Hall Regis currently offers degrees and certificates within four schools and one division: The Richard and Sheila Young School of Nursing, the School of Health Sciences, School of Arts and Sciences, the Sloane School of Business and Communication, and the  Theresa Wood Lavine Division of Professional Studies. Specific Degree designations that can be obtained through the attendance of Regis include: A.S.N.

, B.S.N , B.A.

, B.S.

, B.S.W., M.A.T.

, M.S.

, M.S.N.

, D.N.P , M.A.

, Ed.D.

as well as both undergraduate and graduate certificates.

Regis College has cross-registration privileges with Babson , Bentley , Brandeis University , and Boston College as well as a cooperative degree program with Worcester Polytechnic Institute . Regis is affiliated with the Sisters of Saint Joseph College Consortium, University College Cork in Ireland , and Kyoto Notre Dame University in Kyoto, Japan for study abroad, as well as American University ’s Washington Semester program.

Regis offers 27 undergraduate academic programs, 28 graduate and doctoral programs, and 29 minors.

The Richard and Sheila Young School of Nursing is designated as a Center of Excellence in Nursing Education by the National League of Nursing . The school offers undergraduate, graduate, and doctoral programs in Nursing with multiple tracks. The School of Nursing offers a Doctor of Nursing Practice (DNP), fully online Master of Science in Health Administration, a Master of Science in Nursing programs.

[ 11 ] Student life [ edit ] Norman Tower at Regis College On-campus housing is guaranteed for all undergraduates in one of five residence halls: Angela Hall, Maria Hall, Domitilla Hall, St. Joseph Hall, and College Hall. Living on campus helps undergraduate students to experience Regis furthermore than the classroom setting. The Student Center houses the Undergraduate Admissions Office, Main Dining Hall, Tower Tavern, WRGS (the Regis College radio station), the bookstore, a post office, and several lounge areas for meetings or events. The Fine Arts Center houses the Eleanor Welch Casey Theatre and the Carney Art Gallery. The campus also features a Science Center, the Spellman Museum of Stamps & Postal History , and a Fitness Center housing: dance studios, weight and cardiovascular equipment, basketball courts, a swimming pool, and newly designed athletic fields.

There are currently over 25 clubs and organizations in which students may become involved, meet new people and stay active. Students are also free to start their own clubs on campus with help and may petition funding from the college.

In 2009, Regis College underwent construction of its new athletic fields, consisting of a turf field surface for field hockey , lacrosse , and soccer . An eight-lane track surface was constructed around the fields, along with six new tennis courts, and softball diamond with lights. Within the athletic building are the gymnasium, a first class athletic training room, and the pool. The Mary Carr Simone Fitness Center, which holds Cybex equipment, six flat screen HD televisions, and 11 pieces of cardio equipment, can also be found inside the building.

Phase I of a campus development master plan, featuring a new four-story residence hall, quad at the campus core, and a renovated library entrance was completed in summer 2015.

Athletics [ edit ] Regis athletics logo Regis College teams (nicknamed Pride ) participate as a member of the National Collegiate Athletic Association 's Division III . The Pride are a member of the Great Northeast Athletic Conference (GNAC) , which they started competing in for the fall 2017 season. Regis was formerly a member of the Commonwealth Coast Conference (CCC) between the 1988–89 and the 2010–11 seasons and the New England Collegiate Conference (NECC) between the 2011–12 and the 2016–2017 seasons.

Men's sports include basketball, lacrosse, soccer, swimming & diving, tennis, track & field and volleyball; while women's sports include basketball, field hockey, lacrosse, soccer, softball, swimming & diving, tennis, track & field and volleyball. In 2015, The Pride won NECC Championships in Women's Volleyball, Men's and Women's Swimming and Diving, Men's and Women's Tennis, Women's Field Hockey, Men's and Women's Basketball and Women's Lacrosse.

References [ edit ] ^ Acronym for " Association of Independent Colleges and Universities in Massachusetts " ^ Acronym for "Association of Colleges of the Sisters of St. Joseph" ^ As of June 29, 2020.

U.S. and Canadian Institutions Listed by Fiscal Year 2020 Endowment Market Value and Change in Endowment Market Value from FY19 to FY20 (Report). National Association of College and University Business Officers and TIAA . February 19, 2021 . Retrieved February 21, 2021 .

^ "College Navigator - Regis College" .

National Center for Education Statistics . Retrieved July 26, 2024 .

^ Bombardieri, Marcella; Jan, Tracy (September 1, 2006).

"Regis College to admit men in '05" .

The Boston Globe .

^ Mishkin, Linda (2013).

Legendary Locals of Allston-Brighton, Massachusetts . Arcadia Publishing. p. 89.

ISBN 978-1-4671-0051-9 .

^ "Regis at a Glance" . Regis College . Retrieved February 3, 2021 .

^ "Second wave of Haitian nursing students arrive at Regis College" .

Boston Haitian Reporter . June 9, 2014.

^ "Regis College to offer kindergarten program" .

Patriot Ledger . June 28, 2016.

^ Molnar, Zenya (October 1, 2016).

"Adults inspired to continue education at Regis College program" .

^ "Program Details" .

Regis . Retrieved September 3, 2016 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Regis College (Massachusetts) .

Official website Athletics website v t e Great Northeast Athletic Conference Full members Albertus Magnus Falcons Colby-Sawyer Chargers Dean Bulldogs Elms Blazers Emmanuel Saints Lasell Lasers Mitchell Mariners New England College Pilgrims Norwich Cadets Regis Pride Rivier Raiders Saint Joseph (CT) Blue Jays Saint Joseph's (ME) Monks Simmons Sharks Associate members Eastern Nazarene Lions ( men's tennis ) Husson Eagles ( swimming & diving ) Rhode Island College Anchormen ( men's golf ) Southern Maine Huskies ( men's golf ) UMass Dartmouth Corsairs ( men's golf ) Wentworth Leopards ( men's volleyball ) Former members Anna Maria Amcats Daniel Webster Eagles Endicott Gulls Emerson Lions Mount Ida Mustangs Pine Manor Gators Southern Vermont Mountaineers Suffolk Rams Western New England Golden Bears v t e American women's colleges that became coeducational Became coeducational Adelphi Albertus Magnus Andrew Anna Maria Arcadia Avila Barber–Scotia Belhaven Belmont Bennington Blue Mountain Christian Brescia Caldwell Carlow Chatham Chestnut Hill Chowan Columbia (MO) Columbia (SC) Connecticut College Converse Dominican (CA) Dominican (NY) Drexel College of Medicine D'Youville Elms Elmira Emmanuel (MA) Felician Florida State Fontbonne Georgia College Georgian Court Goucher Greensboro Holy Cross (LA) Holy Family (PA) Hood Hunter Huston–Tillotson Immaculata Incarnate Word James Madison Keuka LaGrange Lake Erie Lasell Lesley Lindenwood Longwood Lynn Manhattanville Mary Baldwin Mary Hardin–Baylor Mary Washington Marygrove Marymount (VA) Marymount Manhattan Maryville (MO) Marywood Mercy (NY) Mercyhurst Midway Misericordia Mississippi University for Women Montevallo Mount Mercy Mount St. Joseph Mount Saint Vincent Moravian Notre Dame (MD) Notre Dame de Namur Ohio Dominican Our Lady of the Lake Queens (NC) Radford Randolph Regis (MA) Rivier Rosemont Russell Sage Saint Elizabeth St. Francis (IL) Saint Joseph (CT) Saint Joseph's (ME) St. Joseph's (NY) Saint Mary (KS) St. Mary's (MD) Saint Mary-of-the-Woods St. Scholastica Saint Xavier (IL) Salve Regina Sarah Lawrence Seton Hill Shorter Skidmore Southern Virginia Spalding Stevenson Texas Woman's Thomas More (KY) Trocaire UNC Greensboro University of Science and Arts of Oklahoma UT Southern Valdosta State Vassar Virginia Union Viterbo Washington College of Law Webster West Alabama Wheaton (MA) William Peace William Woods Wilson (PA) Winthrop Coordinate colleges H. Sophie Newcomb Memorial College (merged with Tulane University ) Margaret Morrison Carnegie College (merged with Carnegie Mellon University ) Maryhill College (merged with St. Edward's University ) Mt. Vernon College (with George Washington University ) Pembroke (merged with Brown University ) Radcliffe College (merged with Harvard University ) v t e Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Boston Ordinaries Bishops Jean-Louis Lefebvre de Cheverus Benedict Joseph Fenwick John Bernard Fitzpatrick Archbishops John Joseph Williams William Henry O'Connell Richard Cushing Humberto Sousa Medeiros Bernard Francis Law Seán Patrick O'Malley Richard Henning Auxiliary bishops Cristiano Borro Barbosa Robert Francis Hennessey Mark William O'Connell Robert Philip Reed Peter J. Uglietto Emeriti bishops John Anthony Dooher Arthur L. Kennedy Deceased Joseph Gaudentius Anderson Thomas Francis Markham Emilio S. Allué Francis Xavier Irwin Walter James Edyvean Churches List List of churches in the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Boston Cathedral Cathedral of the Holy Cross Basilicas and shrines Basilica and Shrine of Our Lady of Perpetual Help, Boston St. Anthony Shrine, Boston St. Clement Eucharistic Shrine, Boston Our Lady of Good Voyage, the Seaport Shrine Parishes Holy Name, West Roxbury Holy Trinity, Lowell Our Lady of Czestochowa, Boston Our Lady of Good Voyage, Gloucester Our Lady Help of Christians, Newton Sacred Heart, Cambridge St. Albert the Great, Weymouth St. Charles Borromeo, Waltham St. John the Baptist, Salem St. John the Evangelist, Cambridge St. Joseph, Boston St. Leonard, Boston St. Mary, Dedham ( History ) St. Mary, Milton St. Mary, Newton St. Mary, Waltham St. Mary, Winchester St. Mary - St. Catherine of Siena, Charlestown St. Paul, Cambridge St. Stanislaus Bishop & Martyr, Chelsea St. Susanna, Dedham Former parishes Holy Cross, Boston Our Lady of Mount Carmel, East Boston St. Aidan, Brookline St. Catherine of Sienna, Charlestown St. Joseph, Roxbury St. Mary, Charlestown St. Stephen, Boston Education Seminaries Pope St. John XXIII National Seminary St. John's Seminary Colleges Boston College Emmanuel College Labouré College Merrimack College Regis College St. John's Seminary Closed Marian Court College High schools Academy of Notre Dame , Tyngsboro Arlington Catholic High School , Arlington Austin Preparatory School , Reading Bishop Fenwick High School , Peabody Boston College High School , Dorchester Cathedral High School , Boston Catholic Memorial School , West Roxbury Central Catholic High School , Lawrence Cristo Rey Boston High School , Dorchester Fontbonne Academy , Milton Lowell Catholic High School , Lowell Malden Catholic High School , Malden Newton Country Day School , Newton Notre Dame Academy , Hingham Notre Dame High School , Lawrence St. John's Preparatory School , Danvers St. Mary's High School , Lynn Saint Sebastian's School , Needham Ursuline Academy , Dedham Xaverian Brothers High School , Westwood Closed Cambridge Matignon School , Cambridge Don Bosco Technical High School , Boston Elizabeth Seton Academy , Boston Hudson Catholic High School , Hudson Marian High School , Framingham Mount Alvernia High School , Newton Nazareth Academy , Wakefield Our Lady of Nazareth Academy , Wakefield Pope John XXIII High School , Everett Presentation of Mary Academy , Methuen Sacred Heart High School , Kingston Saint Clement High School , Medford Saint Joseph Preparatory High School , Boston St. Dominic Savio Preparatory High School , Boston Trinity Catholic High School , Newton Former Archbishop Williams High School , Braintree Cardinal Spellman High School , Brockton Priests John P. Brennan Charles A. Finn Gerald Fitzgerald John Geoghan George Kerr Philip King Mimie Pitaro Patrick O'Beirne Dennis J. O'Donovan Paul Fitzpatrick Russell Paul Shanley Henry A. Walsh Other The Pilot (archdiocese newspaper) CatholicTV Regina Cleri Catholic Archdiocese of Boston sex abuse scandal United States portal Catholicism portal Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National United States Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Regis_College_(Massachusetts)&oldid=1299933045 " Categories : Regis College (Massachusetts) 1927 establishments in Massachusetts Catholic universities and colleges in Massachusetts Former women's universities and colleges in the United States Liberal arts colleges in Massachusetts Sisters of Saint Joseph colleges and universities Universities and colleges established in 1927 Universities and colleges in Middlesex County, Massachusetts Weston, Massachusetts Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use mdy dates from January 2025 Coordinates on Wikidata Infobox mapframe without OSM relation ID on Wikidata Articles using infobox university Pages using infobox university with the nickname alias Commons category link from Wikidata Pages using the Kartographer extension This page was last edited on 11 July 2025, at 07:36 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Regis College (Massachusetts) 2 languages Add topic

