Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography Toggle Biography subsection 1.1 Friendly atheism 2 Works Toggle Works subsection 2.1 Influential papers 2.2 Books 2.3 About his work 3 See also 4 Notes and references Toggle the table of contents William L. Rowe 9 languages العربية Deutsch Ελληνικά Español فارسی Bahasa Indonesia Italiano مصرى Português Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American philosopher of religion (1931–2015) William Rowe Born ( 1931-07-26 ) July 26, 1931 Detroit , Michigan , U.S.

Died August 22, 2015 (2015-08-22) (aged 84) Lafayette, Indiana , U.S.

Education Education Wayne State University Chicago Theological Seminary ( MDiv ) University of Michigan ( Ph.D ) Philosophical work Era Contemporary philosophy Region Western philosophy School Analytic philosophy Main interests Philosophy of religion Notable ideas Evidential problem of evil William Leonard Rowe ( / r oʊ / ; July 26, 1931 – August 22, 2015) was a professor of philosophy at Purdue University who specialized in the philosophy of religion .  His work played a leading role in the "remarkable revival of analytic philosophy of religion since the 1970s".

[ 1 ] He was noted for his formulation of the evidential argument from evil .

[ 2 ] Biography [ edit ] William Leonard Rowe was born on July 26, 1931.

[ 3 ] According to Rowe, he became an evangelical Christian during his teenage years and planned to become a minister, eventually enrolling at the Detroit Bible Institute for his collegiate education.  He reported in personal conversation that he became disgruntled there over the firing of one professor for theological views not held by the administration. Thinking it too political for him, he decided to change course and find a close major to theology, namely, philosophy. He then transferred to Wayne State University . From there his plan was to go to Fuller Theological Seminary as a springboard to entering ministry, possibly teaching ministry. He never made it to Fuller. While at Wayne State he reported that one particular professor, whose father was a minister but himself an atheist, had remarkable influence on Rowe.

After his graduation from Wayne State, Rowe began his post-graduate education at the Chicago Theological Seminary (CTS).  He reported that it was at this time he began to take a more critical look at the Bible , learn about its origins and meet theologians who, unlike himself, did not have a fundamentalist perspective.  The result was that his own fundamentalism began to wane.

He received a Master of Divinity degree from CTS, and then went on to pursue a Ph.D.

in philosophy from the University of Michigan .  He completed his doctorate in 1962, taught briefly at the University of Illinois and later that year, joined the faculty of Purdue University.

Rowe described his conversion from Christian fundamentalist to, ultimately, an atheist as a gradual process, resulting from "the lack of experiences and evidence sufficient to sustain my religious life and my religious convictions."  He said that his examination of the origins of the Bible caused him to doubt its being divine in nature, and that he then began to look and pray for signs of the existence of God .  "But in the end, I had no more sense of the presence of God than I had before my [evangelical] conversion experience. So, it was the absence of religious experiences of the appropriate kind that . . . left me free to seriously explore the grounds for disbelief," Rowe said.

[ 4 ] On August 22, 2015, Rowe died at the age of 84.

[ 5 ] Friendly atheism [ edit ] Rowe introduced the concept of a "friendly atheist" in his classic paper on the argument from evil. A friendly atheist is a person who accepts that some theists have rationales for their belief in God, even if it is the case that God doesn't exist. One consequence of Rowe's philosophical friendliness was his adherence to the principle of charity .

[ 6 ] He published in defense of theistic arguments, and was even considered a supporter of the cosmological argument .

[ 7 ] Works [ edit ] Influential papers [ edit ] Rowe, William L. (1979). "The Problem of Evil and Some Varieties of Atheism".

American Philosophical Quarterly .

16 : 335– 41.

Reprinted in Howard-Snyder, Daniel, ed. (1996).

The Evidential Argument from Evil . Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press.

——— (1996). "The Evidential Argument from Evil: A Second Look.". In Howard-Snyder, Daniel (ed.).

The Evidential Argument from Evil . Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press.

Books [ edit ] ——— (1968).

Religious Symbols and God . Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

ISBN 1-121-93077-8 .

——— (1975).

The Cosmological Argument . B: Princeton University Press.

ISBN 0-8232-1885-6 .

——— (1978).

Philosophy of Religion: An Introduction . Wadsworth Publishing.

ISBN 0-495-00725-0 .

——— (1991).

Thomas Reid on Freedom and Morality . Cornell University Press.

ISBN 0-8014-2557-3 .

——— (2004).

Can God Be Free?

. Oxford, England: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 0-19-920412-8 .

About his work [ edit ] Trakakis, Nick (2007).

The God Beyond Belief: In Defence of William Rowe's Evidential Argument from Evil . Springer.

ISBN 978-1-4020-5144-9 .

See also [ edit ] American philosophy List of American philosophers Notes and references [ edit ] ^ Trakakis, Nick (2005). "ROWE, William Leonard". In John R. Shook (ed.).

Dictionary of Modern American Philosophers . Thoemmes Press.

ISBN 1-84371-037-4 .

^ Trakakis, Nick (2006).

"The Evidential Problem of Evil" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Retrieved April 20, 2007 .

^ Rowe, William L. (2007).

Trakakis, Nick (ed.).

William L. Rowe on philosophy of religion . Aldershot, England: Ashgate. p. xiii.

ISBN 978-0-7546-5558-9 .

^ "Purdue philosophy professor a gentle atheist".

Terre Haute Tribune-Star . April 1, 2005.

.

^ "In Memoriam: William L. Rowe (1931-2015)" . prosblogion. Archived from the original on 24 August 2015 . Retrieved 24 September 2015 .

^ Burgess-Jackson, Keith.

"Book Review" . Philosophy @ UTA blog. Archived from the original on July 8, 2011 . Retrieved April 20, 2007 .

^ Taliaferro, Charles.

"Philosophy of Religion" .

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Retrieved April 20, 2007 .

v t e Philosophy of religion Conceptions of God Brahman Demiurge Divine simplicity Egoism God Speaks Holy Spirit Misotheism Pandeism Personal god Process theology Supreme Being Unmoved mover God in Abrahamic religions Buddhism Christianity Hinduism Islam Jainism Judaism Mormonism Sikhism Baháʼí Faith Wicca Existence of God For Beauty Christological Trilemma Resurrection Consciousness Cosmological Kalam cosmological Contingency Metaphysical Degree Desire Experience Existential choice Fine-tuned universe Knowledge Love Mathematics Miracles Morality Mystical idealism Natural-law Necessary existent Seddiqin Nyayakusumanjali Ontological Anselm Gödel Meinongian Modal Mulla Sadra Pascal's wager Reason Proper basis and Reformed epistemology Responses to the problem of evil Teleological Natural law Watchmaker Testimony Historical events Historical personages Trademark Transcendental Against 747 gambit Atheist's Wager Evil Free will Hell Inconsistent revelations Nonbelief Noncognitivism Occam's razor Omnipotence Poor design Russell's teapot Theology Acosmism Agnosticism Animism Antireligion Atheism Creationism Dharmism Deism Demonology Divine command theory Dualism Esotericism Exclusivism Existentialism Christian Atheistic Feminist theology Thealogy Womanist theology Fideism Fundamentalism Gnosticism Henotheism Humanism Religious Secular Christian Inclusivism Theories about religions Monism Monotheism Mysticism Naturalism Metaphysical Religious Humanistic New Age Nondualism Nontheism Pandeism Panentheism Pantheism Perennialism Polytheism Possibilianism Process theology Religious skepticism Spiritualism Shamanism Taoic Theism Transcendentalism Philosophers of religion (by date active) Ancient and medieval Anselm of Canterbury Augustine of Hippo Avicenna Averroes Boethius Gaudapada Gaunilo of Marmoutiers Pico della Mirandola Heraclitus King James VI and I Marcion of Sinope Maimonides Adi Shankara Thomas Aquinas William of Ockham Early modern Augustin Calmet René Descartes Blaise Pascal Desiderius Erasmus Baruch Spinoza Nicolas Malebranche Gottfried W Leibniz William Wollaston Thomas Chubb David Hume Baron d'Holbach Immanuel Kant Johann G Herder 1800 1850 Friedrich Schleiermacher Karl C F Krause Georg W F Hegel Thomas Carlyle William Whewell Ludwig Feuerbach Søren Kierkegaard Karl Marx Albrecht Ritschl Afrikan Spir 1880 1900 Ernst Haeckel W K Clifford Friedrich Nietzsche Harald Høffding William James Vladimir Solovyov Ernst Troeltsch Rudolf Otto Lev Shestov Sergei Bulgakov Pavel Florensky Ernst Cassirer Joseph Maréchal 1920 postwar George Santayana Bertrand Russell Martin Buber René Guénon Paul Tillich Karl Barth Emil Brunner Rudolf Bultmann Gabriel Marcel Reinhold Niebuhr Charles Hartshorne Mircea Eliade Frithjof Schuon J L Mackie Walter Kaufmann Martin Lings Peter Geach George I Mavrodes William Alston Antony Flew 1970 1990 2010 William L Rowe Dewi Z Phillips Alvin Plantinga Anthony Kenny Nicholas Wolterstorff Richard Swinburne Robert Merrihew Adams Ravi Zacharias Peter van Inwagen Daniel Dennett Loyal Rue Jean-Luc Marion William Lane Craig Ali Akbar Rashad Alexander Pruss Related topics Criticism of religion Desacralization of knowledge Ethics in religion Exegesis History of religion Religion Religious language Religious philosophy Relationship between religion and science Faith and rationality Portal Category Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Australia Czech Republic Portugal Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Poland Israel People Trove 2 Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=William_L._Rowe&oldid=1306094257 " Categories : 20th-century American philosophers Analytic philosophers William Tyndale College alumni Wayne State University alumni American atheists 1931 births 2015 deaths University of Michigan alumni Atheist philosophers Chicago Theological Seminary alumni Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use American English from May 2024 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use mdy dates from May 2024 Articles with hCards This page was last edited on 15 August 2025, at 22:27 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents William L. Rowe 9 languages Add topic

