Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 The idea of paideia in ancient and modern cultures 2 Isocrates' influence 3 Sayings and proverbs that defined paideia 4 See also 5 Notes 6 References 7 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Paideia 31 languages Alemannisch العربية Български Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Latina Lietuvių Lingua Franca Nova Bahasa Melayu Polski Português Русский Shqip Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Educational model once used in Athens Not to be confused with Paidia .

Isocrates , shown here in a copy of a bust from Villa Albani in Rome, was one of the foremost thinkers about paideia.

Paideia ( /paɪˈdeɪə/ ; also spelled paedeia ; Greek : παιδεία ) [ 1 ] referred to the rearing and education of the ideal member of the ancient Greek polis or state . These educational ideals later spread to the Greco-Roman world at large, and were called humanitas in Latin.

Paideia was meant to instill aristocratic virtues in the young citizen men who were trained in this way. An ideal man within the polis would be well-rounded, refined in intellect, morals, and physicality, so training of the body, mind, and soul was important. Both practical, subject-based schooling as well as a focus upon the socialization of individuals within the aristocratic order of the polis were a part of this training.

The practical aspects of paideia included subjects within the modern designation of the liberal arts (e.g.

rhetoric , grammar , mathematics , and philosophy ), as well as scientific disciplines like medicine .

Gymnastics and wrestling were valued for their effect on the body alongside the moral education which was imparted by the study of music , poetry , and philosophy .

This approach to the rearing of a well-rounded Greek male was common to the Greek-speaking world, with the exception of Sparta , where agoge was practiced.

The idea of paideia in ancient and modern cultures [ edit ] The Greeks considered paideia to be carried out by the aristocratic class, who tended to intellectualize their culture and their ideas. The culture and the youth were formed to the ideal of kalos kagathos ("beautiful and good").

Aristotle gives his paideia proposal in Book VIII of the Politics . In this, he says that, "education ought to be adapted to the particular form of constitution, since the particular character belonging to each constitution both guards the constitution generally and originally establishes it..." [ 2 ] As a result, Aristotle argues that education should be a public system, not left up to individuals. He goes on to deliberate about what a proper education should entail, weighing different subjects, such as music and drawing, against their benefit towards cultivating virtue. He lists the ways he believes that gymnastic training should be carried out, bringing up some Spartan practices in order to see the benefits and drawbacks of their system. He talks extensively about music and its place in education, ultimately concluding that it should be included, but that there should be specific instruction, "in what times and what rhythms they should take part, and also what kinds of instruments should be used in their studies, as this naturally makes a difference." [ 3 ] The School of Aristotle , by Gustav Adolph Spangenberg The German-American classicist Werner Jaeger used the concept of paideia to trace the development of Greek thought and education from Homer to Demosthenes in Paideia: The Ideals of Greek Culture , [ 4 ] Aristotelian philosopher Mortimer Adler gives a paideia proposal in his criticism of contemporary Western educational systems .

Isocrates' influence [ edit ] Isocrates ' paideia was quite influential, particularly in Athens .

Its goal was to construct a practice of education and politics that brought validity in the democratic deliberative practice while remaining intellectually respectable.

[ 5 ] Isocrates sought to encourage a love of wisdom in his audience by making them apply principles of intellectual consistency to their lives.

[ 6 ] The fundamental aspect of his paideia was consistency on the individual, civic, and panhellenic levels.

[ 5 ] A memento mori mosaic from excavations in the convent of San Gregorio in Rome , featuring the Greek motto "γνῶθι σεαυτόν", meaning "Know thyself".

Sayings and proverbs that defined paideia [ edit ] " Know thyself " and " Nothing in excess " [ 7 ] "Hard is the Good." [ 8 ] See also [ edit ] Arete Classical education The Paideia School Notes [ edit ] ^ "Henry George Liddell, Robert Scott, A Greek-English Lexicon, παιδεία" .

www.perseus.tufts.edu .

^ "Aristotle, Politics, Book 8" .

www.perseus.tufts.edu . Retrieved 2021-12-07 .

^ "Aristotle, Politics, Book 8, section 1341a" .

www.perseus.tufts.edu . Retrieved 2021-12-07 .

^ Jaeger, Werner Wilhelm; Highet, Gilbert (1939).

Paideia: the ideals of Greek culture . Internet Archive. Oxford, B. Blackwell.

^ a b Morgan, Kathryn.

The Education of Athens.

125–153 ^ Jaeger, Werner (1939).

Paideia: the ideals of Greek culture . Internet Archive. Oxford, B. Blackwell.

^ "Plato, Protagoras, section 343b" .

www.perseus.tufts.edu . Retrieved 2021-11-09 .

^ "Plato, Republic, Book 4, section 435c" .

www.perseus.tufts.edu . Retrieved 2021-12-06 .

References [ edit ] Werner Jaeger , Paideia: The Ideals of Greek Culture , vols. I–III, trans. Gilbert Highet, Oxford University Press, 1945.

Oxford English Dictionary , "Paedeia." 2005.

Further reading [ edit ] Takis Fotopoulos , "From (mis)-education to Paideia" , The International Journal of Inclusive Democracy , vol 2, no 1, (2005).

v t e Ancient Greece Timeline History Geography Periods Cycladic civilization Minoan civilization Mycenaean Greece Greek Dark Ages Archaic Greece Classical Greece Hellenistic Greece Roman Greece Geography Aegean Sea Aeolis Crete Cyrenaica Cyprus Doris Epirus Hellespont Ionia Ionian Sea Macedonia Magna Graecia Peloponnesus Pontus Taurica Ancient Greek colonies City states Politics Military City states Argos Athens Byzantion Chalcis Corinth Ephesus Miletus Pergamon Eretria Kerkyra Larissa Megalopolis Thebes Megara Rhodes Samos Sparta Lissus (Crete) Kingdoms Bithynia Cappadocia Epirus Greco-Bactrian Kingdom Indo-Greek Kingdom Macedonia Pergamon Pontus Ptolemaic Kingdom Seleucid Empire Federations / Confederations Doric Hexapolis ( c.

1100 – c.

560 BC ) Italiote League ( c.

800 –389 BC) Ionian League (c. 650–404 BC) Peloponnesian League ( c.

550 –366 BC) Amphictyonic League ( c.

595 –279 BC) Acarnanian League (c. 500–31 BC) Hellenic League (499–449 BC) Delian League (478–404 BC) Chalcidian League (430–348 BC) Boeotian League (c. 424–c. 395 BC) Aetolian League (c. 400–188 BC) Second Athenian League (378–355 BC) Thessalian League (374–196 BC) Arcadian League (370–c. 230 BC) Epirote League (370–168 BC) League of Corinth (338–322 BC) Euboean League (c. 300 BC–c. 300 AD) Achaean League (280–146 BC) Politics Boule Free city Koinon Proxeny Stasis Tagus Tyrant Athenian Agora Areopagus Ecclesia Graphe paranomon Heliaia Ostracism Spartan Ekklesia Ephor Gerousia Macedon Synedrion Koinon Military Wars Athenian military Scythian archers Antigonid Macedonian army Army of Macedon Ballista Cretan archers Hellenistic armies Hippeis Hoplite Hetairoi Macedonian phalanx Military of Mycenaean Greece Phalanx Peltast Pezhetairos Sarissa Sacred Band of Thebes Sciritae Seleucid army Spartan army Strategos Toxotai Xiphos Xyston People List of ancient Greeks Rulers Kings of Argos Archons of Athens Kings of Athens Kings of Commagene Diadochi Kings of Macedonia Kings of Paionia Attalid kings of Pergamon Kings of Pontus Ptolemaic dynasty Seleucid dynasty Kings of Sparta Tyrants of Syracuse Artists & scholars Astronomers Geographers Historians Mathematicians Philosophers Playwrights Poets Seven Sages Writers Philosophers Anaxagoras Anaximander Anaximenes Antisthenes Aristotle Democritus Diogenes of Sinope Empedocles Epicurus Gorgias Heraclitus Hypatia Leucippus Parmenides Plato Protagoras Pythagoras Socrates Thales Zeno Authors Aeschylus Aesop Alcaeus Archilochus Aristophanes Bacchylides Euripides Herodotus Hesiod Hipponax Homer Ibycus Lucian Menander Mimnermus Panyassis Philocles Pindar Plutarch Polybius Sappho Simonides Sophocles Stesichorus Theognis Thucydides Timocreon Tyrtaeus Xenophon Others Athenian statesmen Lawgivers Olympic victors Tyrants By culture Ancient Greek tribes Thracian Greeks Ancient Macedonians Society Culture Society Agriculture Calendar Clothing Coinage Cuisine Economy Education Emporium Euergetism Festivals Folklore Homosexuality Law Olympic Games Pederasty Philosophy Prostitution Religion Slavery Warfare Wedding customs Wine Arts and science Architecture Greek Revival architecture Astronomy Literature Mathematics Medicine Music Musical system Pottery Sculpture Technology Theatre Religion Funeral and burial practices Mythology Deities Temple Twelve Olympians Underworld Sacred places Eleusis Delphi Delos Dion Dodona Mount Olympus Olympia Structures Athenian Treasury Lion Gate Long Walls Philippeion Theatre of Dionysus Tunnel of Eupalinos Temples Aphaea Artemis Athena Nike Erechtheion Hephaestus Hera, Olympia Parthenon Samothrace Zeus, Olympia Language Proto-Greek Mycenaean Homeric Dialects Aeolic Arcadocypriot Attic Doric Epirote Ionic Locrian Macedonian Pamphylian Koine Writing Linear A Linear B Cypriot syllabary Greek alphabet Greek numerals Attic numerals Greek colonisation Magna Graecia Mainland Italy Alision Brentesion Caulonia Chone Croton Cumae Elea Heraclea Lucania Hipponion Hydrus Krimisa Laüs Locri Medma Metauros Metapontion Neápolis Pandosia (Lucania) Poseidonia Pixous Rhegion Scylletium Siris Sybaris Sybaris on the Traeis Taras Terina Thurii Sicily Akragas Akrai Akrillai Apollonia Calacte Casmenae Catana Gela Helorus Henna Heraclea Minoa Himera Hybla Gereatis Hybla Heraea Kamarina Leontinoi Megara Hyblaea Messana Naxos Segesta Selinous Syracuse Tauromenion Thermae Tyndaris Aeolian Islands Didyme Euonymos Ereikousa Hycesia Lipara/Meligounis Phoenicusa Strongyle Therassía Cyrenaica Balagrae Barca Berenice Cyrene ( Apollonia ) Ptolemais Iberian Peninsula Akra Leuke Alonis Emporion Helike Hemeroscopion Kalathousa Kypsela Mainake Menestheus's Limin Illicitanus Limin/Portus Illicitanus Rhode Salauris Zacynthos Illyria Aspalathos Apollonia Aulon Epidamnos Epidauros Issa Melaina Korkyra Nymphaion Orikon Pharos Tragurion Thronion Black Sea basin North coast Akra Borysthenes Charax Chersonesus Dioscurias Gorgippia Hermonassa Kalos Limen Kepoi Kerkinitis Kimmerikon Myrmekion Nikonion Nymphaion Olbia Pantikapaion Phanagoria Pityus Tanais Theodosia Tyras Tyritake South coast Abonoteichos Amisos Anchialos Apollonia Athina Bathus Dionysopolis Cotyora Cytorus Eupatoria Heraclea Kerasous Mesambria Odessos Oinòe Phasis Polemonion Rhizos Salmydessus Sesamus Sinope Thèrmae Tium Trapezous Tripolis Zaliche Lists Cities in Epirus People Place names Stoae Temples Theatres Category Portal Outline Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Paideia&oldid=1263510307 " Categories : Culture of ancient Greece Education in classical antiquity Political philosophy in ancient Greece Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Greek-language text This page was last edited on 17 December 2024, at 02:08 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Paideia 31 languages Add topic

