Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History of the works 2 Aristotle's works by Bekker numbers Toggle Aristotle's works by Bekker numbers subsection 2.1 Fragments 2.2 Printed editions 3 Notes 4 Sources 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Works of Aristotle 18 languages العربية Deutsch Español Français Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Latina Lingua Franca Nova Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål پښتو Polski Português Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Svenska Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia The end of Sophistical Refutations and beginning of Physics on page 184 of Bekker 's 1831 edition.

The works of Aristotle , sometimes referred to by modern scholars with the Latin phrase Corpus Aristotelicum , is the collection of Aristotle 's works that have survived from antiquity.

According to a distinction that originates with Aristotle himself, his writings are divisible into two groups: the " exoteric " and the " esoteric ".

[ 1 ] Most scholars have understood this as a distinction between works Aristotle intended for the public (exoteric), and the more technical works intended for use within the Lyceum (esoteric).

[ 2 ] Modern scholars commonly assume these latter to be Aristotle's own (unpolished) lecture notes (or in some cases possible notes by his students).

[ 3 ] However, one classic scholar offers an alternative interpretation. The 5th century neoplatonist Ammonius Hermiae writes that Aristotle's writing style is deliberately obscurantist so that "good people may for that reason stretch their mind even more, whereas empty minds that are lost through carelessness will be put to flight by the obscurity when they encounter sentences like these".

[ 4 ] Not all of these works are considered genuine, but differ with respect to their connection to Aristotle, his associates and his views. Some are regarded by most scholars as products of Aristotle's "school" and compiled under his direction or supervision. Other works, such as On Colors , may have been products of Aristotle's successors at the Lyceum, e.g., Theophrastus and Strato of Lampsacus . Still others acquired Aristotle's name through similarities in doctrine or content, such as De Plantis , possibly by Nicolaus of Damascus . A final category, omitted here, includes medieval palmistries , astrological and magical texts whose connection to Aristotle is purely fanciful and self-promotional.

In several of the treatises, there are references to other works in the corpus.  Based on such references, some scholars have suggested a possible chronological order for a number of Aristotle's writings.

W. D. Ross , for instance, suggested the following broad chronology (which of course leaves out much): Categories , Topics , Sophistici Elenchi , Analytics , Metaphysics Δ , the physical works, the Ethics , and the rest of the Metaphysics .

[ 5 ] Many modern scholars, however, based simply on lack of evidence, are skeptical of such attempts to determine the chronological order of Aristotle's writings.

[ 6 ] History of the works [ edit ] According to Strabo and Plutarch , after Aristotle's death, his library of writings went to Theophrastus (Aristotle's successor as head of the Lyceum and the Peripatetic school ).

[ 7 ] After the death of Theophrastus, the peripatetic library went to Neleus of Scepsis .

[ 8 ] : 5 Some time later, the Kingdom of Pergamon began conscripting books for a royal library, and the heirs of Neleus hid their collection in a cellar to prevent it from being seized for that purpose. The library was stored there for about a century and a half, in conditions that were not ideal for document preservation. On the death of Attalus III , which also ended the royal library ambitions, the existence of the Aristotelian library was disclosed, and it was purchased by Apellicon and returned to Athens in about 100 BCE .

[ 8 ] : 5–6 Apellicon sought to recover the texts, many of which were seriously degraded at this point due to the conditions in which they were stored. He had them copied out into new manuscripts, and used his best guesswork to fill in the gaps where the originals were unreadable.

[ 8 ] : 5–6 When Sulla seized Athens in 86 BCE , he seized the library and transferred it to Rome. There, Andronicus of Rhodes organized the texts into the first complete edition of Aristotle's works (and works attributed to him).

[ 9 ] The Aristotelian texts we have today are based on these.

[ 8 ] : 6–8 Diogenes Laërtius lists, in his Lives and Opinions of Eminent Philosophers ( c.

230 CE ), works of Aristotle comprising 156 titles divided into approximately 400 books, which he reports as totaling 445,270 lines of writing; [ 10 ] however, many of these are lost or only survive in fragments, and some may have been incorrectly attributed.

[ 8 ] : 9–11 Aristotle's works by Bekker numbers [ edit ] See also: Bekker numbering Bekker numbers , the standard form of reference to works in the Corpus Aristotelicum, are based on the page numbers used in the Prussian Academy of Sciences edition of the complete works of Aristotle ( Aristotelis Opera edidit Academia Regia Borussica , Berlin, 1831–1870).  They take their name from the editor of that edition, the classical philologist August Immanuel Bekker (1785–1871).

Key * Authenticity disputed.

[ ] Generally agreed to be spurious.

Bekker number Work Latin name Logic Organon 1a Categories Categoriae 16a On Interpretation De Interpretatione 24a Prior Analytics Analytica Priora 71a Posterior Analytics Analytica Posteriora 100a Topics Topica 164a On Sophistical Refutations De Sophisticis Elenchis Physics (natural philosophy) 184a Physics Physica 268a On the Heavens De Caelo 314a On Generation and Corruption De Generatione et Corruptione 338a Meteorology Meteorologica 391a [ On the Universe ] [ De Mundo ] 402a On the Soul De Anima Parva Naturalia ("Short Works on Nature") 436a Sense and Sensibilia De Sensu et Sensibilibus 449b On Memory De Memoria et Reminiscentia 453b On Sleep De Somno et Vigilia 458a On Dreams De Insomniis 462b On Divination in Sleep De Divinatione per Somnum 464b On Length and Shortness of Life De Longitudine et Brevitate Vitae 467b On Youth, Old Age, Life and Death, and Respiration De Juventute et Senectute, De Vita et Morte, De Respiratione 481a [ On Breath ] [ De Spiritu ] 486a History of Animals Historia Animalium 639a Parts of Animals De Partibus Animalium 698a Movement of Animals De Motu Animalium 704a Progression of Animals De Incessu Animalium 715a Generation of Animals De Generatione Animalium 791a [ On Colors ] [ De Coloribus ] 800a [ On Things Heard ] [ De audibilibus ] 805a [ Physiognomonics ] [ Physiognomonica ] 815a [ On Plants ] [ De Plantis ] 830a [ On Marvellous Things Heard ] [ De mirabilibus auscultationibus ] 847a [ Mechanics ] [ Mechanica ] 859a Problems * Problemata * 968a [ On Indivisible Lines ] [ De Lineis Insecabilibus ] 973a [ The Situations and Names of Winds ] [ Ventorum Situs ] 974a [ On Melissus, Xenophanes, and Gorgias ] [ De Melisso, Xenophane, Gorgia ] Metaphysics 980a Metaphysics Metaphysica Ethics and politics 1094a Nicomachean Ethics Ethica Nicomachea 1181a Great Ethics * Magna Moralia * 1214a Eudemian Ethics Ethica Eudemia 1249a [ On Virtues and Vices ] [ De Virtutibus et Vitiis Libellus ] 1252a Politics Politica 1343a Economics * Oeconomica * Rhetoric and poetics 1354a Rhetoric Ars Rhetorica 1420a [ Rhetoric to Alexander ] [ Rhetorica ad Alexandrum ] 1447a Poetics Ars Poetica Fragments [ edit ] Surviving fragments of the many lost works of Aristotle were included in the fifth volume of Bekker's edition, edited by Valentin Rose .  These are not cited by Bekker numbers, however, but according to fragment numbers. Rose's first edition of the fragments of Aristotle was Aristoteles Pseudepigraphus (1863).  As the title suggests, Rose considered these all to be spurious. The numeration of the fragments in a revised edition by Rose, published in the Teubner series, Aristotelis qui ferebantur librorum fragmenta , Leipzig, 1886, is still commonly used (indicated by R 3 ), although there is a more current edition with a different numeration by Olof Gigon (published in 1987 as a new vol. 3 in Walter de Gruyter 's reprint of the Bekker edition), and a new de Gruyter edition by Eckart Schütrumpf is in preparation.

[ 11 ] For a selection of the fragments in English translation, see W. D. Ross, Select Fragments ( Oxford 1952 ), and Jonathan Barnes (ed.), The Complete Works of Aristotle: The Revised Oxford Translation , vol. 2, Princeton 1984, pp. 2384–2465. A new translation exists of the fragments of Aristotle's Protrepticus , by Hutchinson and Johnson (2015).

[ 12 ] The works surviving only in fragments include the dialogues On Philosophy (or On the Good ), Eudemus (or On the Soul ), On Justice , and On Good Birth .  The possibly spurious work, On Ideas survives in quotations by Alexander of Aphrodisias in his commentary on Aristotle's Metaphysics .  For the dialogues, see also the editions of Richard Rudolf Walzer , Aristotelis Dialogorum fragmenta, in usum scholarum (Florence 1934), and Renato Laurenti, Aristotele: I frammenti dei dialoghi (2 vols.), Naples: Luigi Loffredo, 1987. Additionally, the Constitution of the Athenians (Greek, Athenaiōn Politeia ; Latin, Atheniensium Respublica ) was not included in Bekker's edition because it was first discovered in 1879.

[ 13 ] Printed editions [ edit ] Aristotle's works have been published in many printed editions, either as complete editions of all surviving writings or as partial collections. English complete editions include: W. D. Ross translation, 12 vols. (Oxford University Press, 1955) Jonathan Barnes translation, 2 vols., 1984 Notes [ edit ] ^ Barnes 1995 , p. 12; Aristotle himself: Nicomachean Ethics 1102a26–27. Aristotle himself never uses the term "esoteric" or "acroamatic". For other passages where Aristotle speaks of exōterikoi logoi , see W. D. Ross , Aristotle's Metaphysics (1953), vol. 2, pp. 408–410. Ross defends an interpretation according to which the phrase, at least in Aristotle's own works, usually refers generally to "discussions not peculiar to the Peripatetic school ", rather than to specific works of Aristotle's own.

^ House, Humphry (1956).

Aristotles Poetics . p.

35 .

^ Barnes 1995 , p. 12.

^ Ammonius (1991).

On Aristotle's Categories . Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.

ISBN 0-8014-2688-X .

p. 15 ^ W. D. Ross , Aristotle's Metaphysics (1953), vol. 1, p. lxxxii.  By the "physical works", Ross means the Physics , On the Heavens , On Generation and Corruption , and the Meteorology ; see Ross, Aristotle's Physics (1936), p. 3.

^ E.g., Barnes 1995 , pp. 18–22.

^ Strabo .

Historical Sketches . Vol. XIII.

Plutarch . "Life of Sulla".

Lives of the Noble Greeks and Romans .

^ a b c d e Aristotle (1885). "On the Nicomachean Ethics, in relation to the other Ethical Writings included among the Works of Aristotle". In Grant, Alexander (ed.).

The Ethics of Aristotle, Illustrated with Essays and Notes . Vol. 1 (4th ed.). Longmans, Green & Co.

^ Porphyry .

The Life of Plotinus . 24.

^ Laërtius, Diogenes.

"V. Aristotle" .

The Lives and Opinions of Eminent Philosophers .

^ " CU-Boulder Expert Wins $75,000 Award For Research On Aristotle," Archived 2016-04-18 at the Wayback Machine University of Colorado Office of News Services, December 14, 2005.

^ D. S. Hutchinson & Monte Ransome Johnson (25 January 2015).

"New Reconstruction, includes Greek text" .

^ Peter John Rhodes.

A Commentary on the Aristotelian Athenaion Politeia (Oxford University Press), 1981, 1993: introduction, pp. 2–5.

Sources [ edit ] Works cited Barnes, Jonathan (1995). "Life and Work".

The Cambridge Companion to Aristotle .

Lynch, John Patrick (1972).

Aristotle's School: a Study of a Greek Educational Institution . University of California Press.

Novak, Joseph A. (2001).

"Abduction and Aristotle's Library" (PDF) . Scholarship at Uwindsor.

Watson, Walter (2012).

The Lost Second Book of Aristotle's Poetics . University of Chicago Press.

ISBN 9780226875101 .

External links [ edit ] English Wikisource has original text related to this article: Works of Aristotle Winzenrieth, Justin.

"The Textual Transmission of the Aristotelian Corpus" . In Zalta, Edward N.

(ed.).

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

The Ancient Catalogues of Aristotle's Writings. A Survey of Current Research The Rediscovery of the Corpus Aristotelicum with an annotated bibliography Bekker's Prussian Academy of Sciences edition of the complete works of Aristotle at Archive.org vol. 1 vol. 2 vol. 3 vol. 4 vol. 5 Lazaris, S. "L'image paradigmatique: des 'Schémas anatomiques' d'Aristote au 'De materia medica' de Dioscoride", Pallas, 93 (2013), p. 131-164 ext. link Oxford Translation of The Works of Aristotle at Archive.org vol. 1 vol. 2 vol. 3 vol. 4 vol. 5 vol. 6 vol. 7 vol. 8 vol. 9 vol. 10 vol. 11 vol. 12 v t e Aristotelianism Overview Aristotle Works Lyceum Ideas and interests Logic Apodicticity Category of being Future contingents Genus–differentia Irrelevant conclusion Syllogism Physics accident Active intellect Antiperistasis Essence Eternity of the world Four causes Hexis Horror vacui Hylomorphism Hypokeimenon Minima naturalia Ousia Passive intellect Potentiality and actuality Substance theory Substantial form Sublunary sphere Theory of universals Unmoved mover Biology Rational animal Ethics Akrasia Arete Eudaimonia Eutrapelia Golden mean Magnanimity Nemesis Philia Phronesis Pleonexia Practical syllogism Politics Mixed government Natural slavery Rhetoric Lexis Paradeigma Poetics Anagnorisis Catharsis Classical unities Diegesis Hamartia Mimesis Mythos Opsis Peripeteia Telos Tragic hero Works Organon Categories On Interpretation Prior Analytics Posterior Analytics Topics Sophistical Refutations Physics Physics On the Heavens On Generation and Corruption Meteorology On the Soul On Animals History Parts Movement Progression Generation Metaphysics Metaphysics Ethics and politics Nicomachean Ethics Eudemian Ethics Politics Constitution of the Athenians Rhetoric and poetics Rhetoric Poetics Parva Naturalia Sense and Sensibilia On Memory On Sleep On Dreams On Divination in Sleep On Length and Shortness of Life On Youth, Old Age, Life and Death, and Respiration Lost Protrepticus Pseudepigrapha On Breath On Colors On Plants On Indivisible Lines On Melissus, Xenophanes, and Gorgias On the Universe On Things Heard Physiognomonics On Marvellous Things Heard Mechanics Problems The Situations and Names of Winds On Virtues and Vices Economics Rhetoric to Alexander Magna Moralia Related topics Transmission of the Greek Classics Commentaries on Aristotle Conimbricenses Metabasis paradox Views on women Wheel paradox Mathematical realism List of writers influenced by Aristotle Category Philosophy portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Works_of_Aristotle&oldid=1293980182 " Categories : Works by Aristotle 4th-century BC books Philosophy bibliographies Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Latin-language text Wikisource templates with missing id This page was last edited on 4 June 2025, at 21:02 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Works of Aristotle 18 languages Add topic

