Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview 2 Australian context 3 Conclusion 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Soil resilience 2 languages العربية فارسی Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Ability of a soil to resist or recover its healthy state after disturbance For other uses, see Resilience (disambiguation) .

Soil resilience refers to the ability of a soil to resist or recover their healthy state in response to destabilising influences. This is a subset of a notion of environmental resilience . Soil resistance, a related term refers to the ability of soil to resist changes or the extent to which a soil will recover from any cropping or management change. The term is distinct from Soil resilience as resistance is the inherent capacity to withstand disturbance, while resilience is the capacity to recover after disturbance.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Overview [ edit ] World map of the soil resilience and performance Soil resilience should first be looked at in terms of soil formation and development ( pedogenesis ), a continuous process taking thousands of years – this puts into context the short time that humans have so extensively utilised, changed and depended directly on soil. Pedogenesis is the result of five factors: the first two are parent material and topography, which are passive and contribute to soil mass and position; the next two are climate and the biosphere , which are active and supply the energy in soil formation. Finally, there is time.

[ 3 ] It is the active factors in soil formation that vary so as to constitute an environmental change or shock. Over time, variations have been significant: Over millions of years the soil has endured varying atmospheric conditions including a complete absence of oxygen and associated behaviour of soil elements in a reducing environment, and the establishment of life – particularly of terrestrial vegetation 420 million years ago.

Over ten thousand years and following the last ice age , though average climate has remained relatively stable, the soil has faced periods of extended wet, dry and fire.

If soil were not resilient, then in the face of past influences it would not be in any condition to support the natural and commercial services that we expect of it currently. So what do we expect of soil resilience?

Constant or evolving state? – Do we expect that the soil to remain constant – to continue to provide the same environmental and commercial services as at present, or; that it will establish a new equilibrium ?

How long will it take? – How long do we expect soils to ‘hold out’ or adjust, and are we realistic about pedological time?

Australian context [ edit ] In Australia , the above questions are relevant given the strong dependence on the soil, yet the significant degradation of soils over little more than 200 years due to adoption of European styled agriculture . This is in the context of the real prospect of climate change , cyclical drought and other degrading affects.

It is in the interest of humans to sustain soils as this is the essence of our existence: [ 4 ] the maintenance of fertile soil is "one of the most vital ecological services the living world performs"; the "mineral and organic contents of soil must be replenished constantly as plants consume soil elements and pass them up the food chain ".

It is claimed by Watson (1992) that the ecosystems of Australia, which have evolved over millennia, have been decimated over the last 200 years. Our expectation has been one of ongoing environmental and commercial service, yet the practices applied have been unsustainable and have led to such soil related problems as salinity, acidity, nutrient decline, erosion and structure decline.

[ 5 ] Barrow (1991) claims that despite decades of humans talking of an impending environmental crisis, including the breaking point of our soils' fertility, threats to the environment have continued to grow faster than the willingness to control them. Even with good intentions and best farming practices, still we are caught out by drought and wet periods, which cause unsustainable degradation.

[ 6 ] The pressure that we impose on the soil in terms of biosphere (direct human impacts included) and climate constitute environmental change – the rate of this change compared to other changes over pedological time constitutes a shock. The resilience of the soil is limited by the rate and extent of change we impose compared with the time that soil requires to recover.

Conclusion [ edit ] Soils are resilient to environmental changes and shocks – that is, they will recover from or adjust to change if sufficient 'pedological' time is allowed. The soil management practices that have been applied by humans in a short time frame are unsustainable – a declining soil health threatens human livelihood.  The resilience of the soil in terms of human expectations and time frames will depend on its ability to recover to an equilibrium state once improved practices have been extensively applied.

See also [ edit ] Soil conservation – Preservation of soil nutrients Soil health – A state of soil, meeting ecosystem functions Land degradation – Gradual destruction of land References [ edit ] ^ Fundamentals of Soil Science . Indian Society of Soil Science. 2012. pp.

643– 644.

^ Arthur, E.; Schjønning, P.; Moldrup, P.; de Jonge, L. W. (2012-03-01).

"Soil resistance and resilience to mechanical stresses for three differently managed sandy loam soils" .

Geoderma .

173– 174: 50– 60.

Bibcode : 2012Geode.173...50A .

doi : 10.1016/j.geoderma.2012.01.007 .

ISSN 0016-7061 .

^ * Paton, TR 1978, The formation of soil material, George Allen and Unwin, London.

^ Baskin, Y 1997, The work of nature, The Scientific Community on Problems of the Environment (SCOPE), Island Press, Washington, DC ^ Watson, C 1992, An ecologically unsustainable agriculture (pp 19–32), in Lawrence, G, Vanclay, FM & Furze, B 1992, Agriculture, environment and society, contemporary issues for Australia, The Macmillan Company of Australia Pty Ltd, Melbourne.

^ Barrow, CJ 1991, Land Degradation, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge v t e Soil science History Index Main fields Pedology Edaphology Soil biology Soil microbiology Soil zoology Soil ecology Soil physics Soil mechanics Soil chemistry Environmental soil science Agricultural soil science Soil topics Soil Pedosphere Soil morphology Pedodiversity Soil formation Soil erosion Soil contamination Soil retrogression and degradation Soil compaction Soil compaction (agriculture) Soil sealing Soil salinity Alkali soil Soil pH Soil acidification Soil health Soil life Soil biodiversity Soil quality Soil value Soil fertility Soil resilience Soil color Soil texture Soil structure Pore space in soil Pore water pressure Soil crust Soil horizon Soil biomantle Soil carbon Soil gas Soil respiration Soil organic matter Soil moisture Soil water (retention) Soil type v t e Soil classification World Reference Base for Soil Resources (1998–) Acrisols Alisols Andosols Anthrosols Arenosols Calcisols Cambisols Chernozem Cryosols Durisols Ferralsols Fluvisols Gleysols Gypsisols Histosol Kastanozems Leptosols Lixisols Luvisols Nitisols Phaeozems Planosols Plinthosols Podzols Regosols Retisols Solonchaks Solonetz Stagnosol Technosols Umbrisols Vertisols USDA soil taxonomy Alfisols Andisols Aridisols Entisols Gelisols Histosols Inceptisols Mollisols Oxisols Spodosols Ultisols Vertisols Other systems FAO soil classification (1974–1998) Unified Soil Classification System AASHTO Soil Classification System Référentiel pédologique (French classification system) Canadian system of soil classification Australian Soil Classification Polish Soil Classification 1938 USDA soil taxonomy List of U.S. state soils List of vineyard soil types PG-3 (Spanish classification system) Non-systematic soil types Sand Silt Clay Loam Topsoil Subsoil Soil crust Claypan Hardpan Gypcrust Caliche Parent material Pedosphere Laimosphere Rhizosphere Bulk soil Alkali soil Bay mud Blue goo Brickearth Brown earth Calcareous grassland Dark earth Dry quicksand Duplex soil Eluvium Expansive clay Fill dirt Fuller's earth Hydrophobic soil Loess Lunar soil Martian soil Mud Muskeg Paleosol Peat Prime farmland Quicksand Serpentine soil Spodic soil Stagnogley Subaqueous soil Takir Terra preta Terra rossa Tropical peat Yedoma Types of soil Applications Soil conservation Soil management Soil guideline value Soil survey Soil test Soil governance Soil value Soil salinity control Erosion control Agroecology Liming (soil) Related fields Geology Geochemistry Petrology Geomorphology Geotechnical engineering Hydrology Hydrogeology Biogeography Earth materials Archaeology Agricultural science Agrology Societies, Initiatives Australian Society of Soil Science Incorporated Canadian Society of Soil Science Central Soil Salinity Research Institute (India) German Soil Science Society Indian Institute of Soil Science International Union of Soil Sciences International Year of Soil National Society of Consulting Soil Scientists (US) OPAL Soil Centre (UK) Soil Science Society of Poland Soil and Water Conservation Society (US) Soil Science Society of America World Congress of Soil Science Scientific journals Acta Agriculturae Scandinavica B Journal of Soil and Water Conservation Plant and Soil Pochvovedenie Soil Research Soil Science Society of America Journal See also Land use Land conversion Land management Vegetation Infiltration (hydrology) Groundwater Crust (geology) Impervious surface / Surface runoff Petrichor Wikipedia:WikiProject Soil Category soil Category soil science List of soil scientists v t e Natural resources Air Pollution / quality Ambient standards (US) Index Indoor Law Clean Air Act (US) Ozone depletion Emissions Airshed Trading Deforestation (REDD) Energy Bio Law Resources Fossil fuels ( gas , peak coal , peak gas , peak oil ) Geothermal Hydro Nuclear Solar sunlight shade Wind Land Agricultural arable peak farmland Degradation Field Landscape cityscape seascape soundscape viewshed Law property Management habitat conservation Minerals gemstone industrial ore metal mining law sand peak copper phosphorus rights Soil conservation fertility health resilience Use planning reserve Life Biodiversity Bioprospecting biopiracy Biosphere Bushfood Bushmeat Fisheries climate change law management Forests genetic resources law management non-timber products Game law Marine conservation Meadow Pasture Plants FAO Plant Treaty food genetic resources gene banks herbal medicines UPOV Convention wood Rangeland Seed bank Wildlife conservation management Water Types / location Aquifer storage and recovery Drinking Fresh Groundwater pollution recharge remediation Hydrosphere Ice bergs glacial polar Irrigation huerta Marine Rain harvesting Stormwater Surface water Sewage reclaimed water Watershed Aspects Desalination Floods Law Leaching Sanitation improved Scarcity Security Supply Efficiency Conflict Conservation Peak water Pollution Privatization Quality Right Resources improved policy Related Commons enclosure global land tragedy of Economics ecological land Ecosystem services Exploitation overexploitation Earth Overshoot Day Management adaptive Natural capital accounting good Natural heritage Nature reserve remnant natural area Systems ecology Urban ecology Wilderness Resource Common-pool Conflict (perpetuation) Curse Depletion Extraction Nationalism Renewable / Non-renewable Politics Oil war Petroleum politics Petrostate Petro-Islam Resource war Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Soil_resilience&oldid=1305010453 " Categories : Land management Soil Soil science Hidden categories: CS1: long volume value Articles with short description Short description with empty Wikidata description This page was last edited on 9 August 2025, at 14:17 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Soil resilience 2 languages Add topic

