Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 As a crime Toggle As a crime subsection 2.1 Examples 2.2 Political 2.3 Motives 2.4 Reaction of authorities 2.5 Cybervandalism 2.6 Defacement 3 As art Toggle As art subsection 3.1 Graphic design 4 See also 5 References 6 Other references 7 Bibliography 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Vandalism 76 languages Afrikaans العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Boarisch Brezhoneg Буряад Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Кыргызча Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Magyar Македонски മലയാളം مصرى Bahasa Melayu Мокшень Nederlands Nedersaksies 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча پنجابی Polski Português Română Русский Sardu Shqip Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Тыва дыл Українська اردو Tiếng Việt West-Vlams 吴语 粵語 Zazaki 中文 ꠍꠤꠟꠐꠤ Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Deliberate damage or defacement of an object or structure This article is about vandalism in general. For the Wikipedia policy on vandalism, see Wikipedia:Vandalism . For the article covering history of Wikipedia vandalism, see Vandalism on Wikipedia . For other uses, see Vandalism (disambiguation) .

This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .

Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( November 2020 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a series on Pollution Air pollution from a factory Air Acid rain Air quality index Atmospheric dispersion modeling Chlorofluorocarbon Combustion Exhaust gas Haze Household air pollution Global dimming Global distillation Indoor air quality Non-exhaust emissions Ozone depletion Particulates Persistent organic pollutant Smog Soot Volatile organic compound Biological Biological hazard Genetic Illegal logging Introduced species Invasive species Digital Information Electromagnetic Light Ecological Overillumination Radio spectrum Natural Ozone Radium and radon in the environment Volcanic ash Wildfire Noise Transportation Health effects from noise Marine mammals and sonar Noise barrier Noise control Soundproofing Radiation Actinides Bioremediation Depleted uranium Nuclear fission Nuclear fallout Plutonium Poisoning Radioactivity Uranium Radioactive waste Soil Agricultural Land degradation Bioremediation Defecation Electrical resistance heating Illegal mining Soil guideline values Phytoremediation Solid waste Advertising mail Biodegradable waste Brown waste Electronic waste Food waste Green waste Hazardous waste Industrial waste Litter Mining Municipal solid waste Nanomaterials Plastic Packaging waste Post-consumer waste Waste management Space Space debris Visual Air travel Advertising clutter Overhead power lines Traffic signs Urban blight Vandalism War Chemical warfare Herbicidal warfare Agent Orange Nuclear holocaust Nuclear fallout Nuclear famine Nuclear winter Scorched earth Unexploded ordnance War and environmental law Water Agricultural wastewater Biosolids Diseases Eutrophication Firewater Freshwater Groundwater Hypoxia Industrial wastewater Marine Monitoring Nonpoint source Nutrient Ocean acidification Oil spill Pharmaceuticals Freshwater salinization Septic tanks Sewage Shipping Sludge Stagnation Sulfur water Surface runoff Turbidity Urban runoff Water quality Wastewater Topics History Pollutants Heavy metals Paint Misc Area source Brain health and pollution Debris Dust Garbology Legacy Thermal pollution Midden Point source Waste Toxic Lists Diseases Law by country Most polluted cities Least polluted cities by PM2.5 Treaties Most polluted rivers Categories By country Environment portal Ecology portal v t e Vandalism is the action involving deliberate destruction of or damage to public or private property.

[ 1 ] The term includes property damage , such as graffiti and defacement directed towards any property without permission of the owner. The term finds its roots in an Enlightenment view that the Germanic Vandals were a uniquely destructive people, as they sacked Rome in 455 AD .

Etymology The Vandals sacking Rome in 455 AD, painted by Karl Bryullov c.

1830 The Vandals , an ancient Germanic people , are associated with senseless destruction as a result of their sack of Rome under King Genseric in 455. During the Enlightenment , Rome was idealized, while the Goths and Vandals were blamed for its destruction. The Vandals may not have been any more destructive than other invaders of ancient times, but they did inspire English poet John Dryden to write, Till Goths, and Vandals, a rude Northern race, Did all the matchless Monuments deface (1694). However, the Vandals did intentionally damage statues, which may be why their name is associated with the vandalism of art . The term Vandalisme was coined in 1794 by Henri Grégoire , bishop of Blois , to describe the destruction of artwork following the French Revolution . The term was quickly adopted across Europe. This new use of the term was important in colouring the perception of the Vandals from later Late Antiquity, popularizing the pre-existing idea that they were a barbaric group with a taste for destruction.

[ 2 ] Historically, vandalism has been justified by painter Gustave Courbet as destruction of monuments symbolizing "war and conquest". Therefore, it is often done as an expression of contempt, creativity, or both. Courbet's attempt, during the 1871 Paris Commune , to dismantle the Vendôme column , a symbol of the past Napoleon III authoritarian Empire, was one of the most celebrated events of vandalism.

Nietzsche himself would meditate after the Commune on the "fight against culture", taking as example the intentional burning of the Tuileries Palace on 23 May 1871. "The criminal fight against culture is only the reverse side of a criminal culture" wrote Klossowski after quoting Nietzsche.

[ 3 ] In a proposal to the International Conference for Unification of Criminal Law held in Madrid in 1933, Raphael Lemkin envisaged the creation of two new international crimes (delicta juris gentium ): the crime of barbarity, consisting in the extermination of racial, religious, or social collectivities, and the crime of vandalism, consisting in the destruction of cultural and artistic works of these groups.

[ 4 ] The proposal was not accepted. A figurative accusation of vandalism was applied towards the theology of Marcion of Sinope .

[ 5 ] As a crime Private citizens commit vandalism when they willfully damage or deface the property of others or the commons . Some vandalism may qualify as culture jamming or sniggling : it is thought by some to be artistic in nature even though carried out illegally or without the property owner's permission. Examples include at least some graffiti art, billboard "liberation", and possibly crop circles . Criminal vandalism takes many forms.

Graffiti on public property is common in many inner cities as part of a gang culture, where they might be used as territorial markers.

[ 6 ] More serious forms of vandalism that may take place during public unrest such as rioting can involve the willful destruction of public and private property . Vandalism per se is sometimes considered one of the less serious common crimes, but it can become quite serious and distressing when committed extensively, violently, or as an expression of hatred and intimidation.

Examples Examples of vandalism include salting lawns, cutting trees without permission, egg throwing , breaking windows, arson, spraying paint on others' properties, tagging , placing glue into locks, tire slashing, keying (scratching) paint, ransacking a property, flooding a house by clogging a sink and leaving the water running, and pulling up plants from the roots without permission.

Vandalized ladder stand in Germany Vandalized seat inside a passenger car on a train in the Czech Republic A broken shopping cart , thrown into a waterway, Netherlands Vandalised facade and bicycle in Hamburg Progression of vandalism as seen in a men's employee bathroom at a grocery store Vandalism on a street sign, making it read "I Swim in Poo nmunit en re" People defacing the walls of the Golconda Fort in Hyderabad , India Defaced coat of arms (probably of Emmanuel de Rohan-Polduc ) in Santa Venera , Malta Political Armand Călinescu 's memorial with the bronze plaque stolen and the name of the assassin written over In elections, opposing candidates' supporters may engage in "political vandalism"⁠—the act of defacing opponents' political posters, bumper stickers , billboards, and other street marketing material. Although the nature of this material is temporary, its effect can be long-lasting as it may reflect both negatively and positively on the candidate whose material is being vandalized as well as on the presumed candidate whose supporters are engaging in the vandalism.

In addition, activists may use the tactic of property destruction [ 7 ] as means of protest, e.g. by smashing the windows of banks, shops and government institutions and setting fire to cars. This often takes place during riots but can also happen as a stand-alone event, e.g. by animal rights activists destroying property owned by farmers, hunters, biotech companies, and research facilities and setting free animals (which is sometimes referred to as eco-terrorism by opponents). Vandalism is also a common tactic of black blocs .

Motives Actions of this kind can be ascribed to anger or envy, or to spontaneous, opportunistic behaviour, possibly for peer acceptance or bravado in gang cultures, or disgruntlement with the target (victim) person or society. Another common motive is to seek attention , and for personal gain.  Opportunistic vandalism of this nature may also be filmed, the mentality of which can be akin to happy slapping . The large-scale prevalence of gang graffiti in some inner cities has almost made it acceptable to the societies based there, so much so that it may go unnoticed, or not be removed, possibly because it may be a fruitless endeavour, to be graffitied on once again. Greed can motivate vandalism as can some political ideologies , wish to draw attention to problems, frustration , even playfulness. Youngsters, the most common vandals, frequently experience low status and boredom . Vandalism enables powerless people to attack those above them, take control and frighten others. Unpunished vandalism can provide relief which reinforces the behaviour. Vandalism by one person can lead to imitation.

[ 8 ] Teenage boys and men in their 20s are most likely to vandalize, but older adults and females are also known to sometimes vandalize, with young children occasionally vandalizing, but in a much smaller form, such as making small crayon drawings on walls.

[ citation needed ] Criminological research into vandalism has found that it serves many purposes for those who engage in it and stems from a variety of motives. Sociologist Stanley Cohen describes seven different types of vandalism: [ 9 ] Headless statue in Ely Cathedral ; ideological vandalism during the English Reformation Acquisitive vandalism (looting and petty theft).

Peer pressure – Teenagers spend more time away from home with peers, and whether they act constructively or destructively can depend on the contacts they make. Disobeying authority can appear cool .

Tactical vandalism (to advance some end other than acquiring money or property – such as breaking a window to be arrested and get a bed for the night in a police cell).

Ideological vandalism (carried out to further an explicit ideological cause or deliver a message).

Vindictive vandalism (for revenge).

Play vandalism (damage resulting from children's games).

Malicious vandalism (damage caused by a violent outpouring of diffuse frustration and rage that often occurs in public settings).

[ 10 ] Cohen's original typology was improved upon by Mike Sutton [ 11 ] whose research led him to add a seventh sub-type of vandalism – Peer Status Motivated Vandalism.

[ 12 ] Reaction of authorities Two billboards with the same original content, the billboard on the right being an example of subvertising —vandalizing with a political message In view of its incivility, punishment for vandalism can be particularly severe in some countries. In Singapore, for example, a person who attempts to cause or commits an act of vandalism may be liable to imprisonment for up to three years and may also be punished with caning . Vandalism in the UK is construed as an environmental crime and may be punished with an ASBO (Anti-Social Behaviour Order).

In the 1990s, former New York City mayor Rudolph Giuliani cracked down on "quality of life crimes", including graffiti. NY Parks Commissioner Henry J. Stern described graffiti as "a metaphor for urban decay perhaps best shown in ' A Clockwork Orange '" adding that "New York City will not be like that".

[ 13 ] Cybervandalism This section needs expansion . You can help by making an edit request adding to it .

( April 2024 ) A website defaced by the Lapsus$ hacker group Cybervandalism is vandalism on the internet, most commonly website defacement . Certain kinds of malware that have no financial intent may also be considered cybervandalism.

Vandalism of the online encyclopedia Wikipedia involves the addition of humorous, nonsensical, offensive or false content to articles.

Vandalism on web maps has been called "cartographic vandalism".

[ 14 ] Defacement Defacement is a type of vandalism that involves damaging the appearance or surface of something. The object of damage may be architecture, books, paintings, sculpture, or other forms of art.

[ 15 ] Examples of defacement include: Marking or removing the part of an object (especially images, be they on the page, in illustrative art or as a sculpture) designed to hold the viewers' attention Scoring a book cover with a blade Splashing paint over a painting in a gallery Smashing the nose of a sculpted bust Damaging or chiselling off sculpted coats of arms Altering the content of web sites and publicly editable repositories to include nonsensical or whimsical references Iconoclasm led to the defacement of many religious artworks.

As art See also: Graffiti A sticker reading "the HELL with SHELL " photographed in Michigan in 1973 Traffic signal light vandalism portraying cannabis in Bogotá , Colombia Though vandalism in itself is illegal, it is often also an integral part of modern popular culture. French painter Gustave Courbet 's attempt to disassemble the Vendôme column during the 1871 Paris Commune was probably one of the first artistic acts of vandalism, celebrated at least since Dada performances during World War I . The Vendôme column was considered a symbol of the recently deposed Second Empire of Napoleon III , and dismantled as such.

After the burning of the Tuileries Palace on 23 May 1871, Philosopher Friedrich Nietzsche himself meditated about the "fight against culture", wondering what could justify culture if it were to be destroyed in such a "senseless" manner (the arguments are: culture is justified by works of art and scientific achievements; exploitation is necessary to those achievements, leading to the creation of exploited people who then fight against culture. In this case, culture cannot be legitimised by art achievements, and Nietzsche writes: "I {also} know what it means: fighting against culture". After quoting him, Klossowski writes: "The criminal fight against culture is only the reverse side of a criminal culture".

[ 3 ] As destruction of monument, vandalism can only have sense in a culture respecting history, archeology : Nietzsche spoke of monumental history . As destruction of monumental history, vandalism was assured a long life (as Herostratus proved): Performance art could make such a claim, as well as Hakim Bey 's poetic terrorism or Destroy 2000 Years of Culture from Atari Teenage Riot . Gustave Courbet's declaration stated: Attendu que la colonne Vendôme est un monument dénué de toute valeur artistique, tendant à perpétuer par son expression les idées de guerre et de conquête qui étaient dans la dynastie impériale, mais que réprouve le sentiment d'une nation républicaine, [le citoyen Courbet] émet le vœu que le gouvernement de la Défense nationale veuille bien l'autoriser à déboulonner cette colonne.

[ 16 ] ('As the Vendôme column is a monument devoid of any artistic value, whose expression tends to perpetuate the ideas of war and conquest from the imperial dynasty, but that reject the sentiment of a republican nation, citizen Courbet declares that the government of National Defense should allow him to dismantle this column.) Hence, painter Courbet justified the dismantlement of the Vendôme column on political grounds, downgrading its artistic value. Vandalism poses the problem of the value of art compared to life's hardships: Courbet thought that the political values transmitted by this work of art neutralized its artistic value. His project was not followed; however, on 12 April 1871, the Commune voted to dismantle the imperial symbol, and the column was taken down on 8 May. After the assault on the Paris Commune by Adolphe Thiers , Gustave Courbet was condemned to pay part of the expenses.

In 1974, Norman Mailer glorified the art of vandalism in his essay "The Faith of Graffiti", which likened tagging in New York City to the work of Giotto and Rauschenberg . New York Authorities responded by coating subway walls with Teflon paint, jailing taggers and requiring hardware stores to keep spray paint under lock and key.

[ 17 ] Tags , designs, and styles of writing are commonplace on clothing, and are an influence on many of the corporate logos . Many skateparks and similar youth-oriented venues are decorated with commissioned graffiti-style artwork, and in many others patrons are welcome to leave their own. There is still, however, a fine line between vandalism as an artform, as a political statement , and as a crime.

Bristol -born guerrilla artist Banksy 's claim is that official vandalism is far worse than that perpetrated by individuals, and that he is decorating buildings of no architectural merit.

[ 18 ] Graphic design Defacing could also be one of the techniques that many graphic designers use, by applying their own hand writing on a graphic itself. Sometimes the use of this technique might be mistaken as vandalism to the original work, as exemplified by the work of Stefan Sagmeister , including his Lou Reed CD cover. A unique use of the defacement technique is the CD cover for A.P.C.

by Jean Touitou , where the designer wrote the title, volume number, and date with her own hand writing on the pre-print blank CD. Creative vandalism of this sort is not limited to writing and sketching. For example, the spraying on the KPIST album Golden coat for MNW Records by Sweden graphic uses gold spray, which may be considered an act of vandalism, but the customer may also appreciate the unicity of each cover that had been sprayed gold in different ways.

[ 19 ] See also Abuse Broken windows theory Criminal mischief Iconoclasm Latrinalia Library book vandalism Malicious mischief Vandalism of art References ^ "Oxford English Dictionary" .

Oxford University Press . Archived from the original on 31 July 2013 . Retrieved 25 April 2015 .

^ Merrills and Miles 2010, pp. 9–10.

^ a b See Pierre Klossowski , Nietzsche and the Vicious Circle , first Chapter: What is the value of culture if those who are exploited by it destroy it?

"En sorte qu'il nous faut être bien loin de vouloir, du haut de notre sentiment de nous-mêmes, imputer le crime d'un combat contre la culture exclusivement à ces malheureux.

Je sais ce que cela veut dire: le combat contre la culture. (...) je me campronnai avec une conviction sérieuse à la valeur métaphysique de l'art, lequel ne saurait exister à cause des pauvres gens, mais doit accomplir des missions plus hautes. Mais, en dépit de mon extrême douleur, je n'étais pas en état de jeter la moindre pierre à ces profanateurs qui, pour moi, n'étaient que les suppôts de la culpabilité universelle, sur laquelle il y a beaucoup à méditer!" Nietzsche quoted by Klossowski pp. 29–30 French edition, who adds: "Le combat criminel contre la culture n'est lui-même que l'envers d'une culture criminelle" ("The criminal fight against culture is only the reverse side of a criminal culture") ^ Lemkin, Raphael (November 1933).

"Akte der Barbarei und des Vandalismus als delicta juris gentium" .

Anwaltsblatt Internationales (Wien) (in German). Archived from the original on 25 February 2021.

^ Birch, J.C.P. (2019).

Jesus in an Age of Enlightenment: Radical Gospels from Thomas Hobbes to Thomas Jefferson . Christianities in the Trans-Atlantic World. Palgrave Macmillan UK. p. 76.

ISBN 978-1-137-51276-5 . Retrieved 20 June 2023 .

^ Ley and Cybriwsky 1974.

^ "Is it OK for protesters to damage property" .

New Internationalist Magazine . No. 440. 1 March 2011. Archived from the original on 14 January 2021.

^ "Psychological Analysis of Vandalism" .

Archived from the original on 4 March 2016 . Retrieved 29 March 2015 .

^ Cohen 1973.

^ "The Psychological View of Why Children Vandalize" .

Archived from the original on 19 March 2015 . Retrieved 29 March 2015 .

^ "Center for Problem-Oriented Policing | Biographies" . Popcenter.org. Archived from the original on 21 June 2010 . Retrieved 10 December 2012 .

^ Sutton, Mike (1987) Differential Rates of Vandalism in a New Town: Towards A Theory of Relative Place. Unpublished PhD Thesis, University of Central Lancashire, October ^ Hicks, Jonathan P. (17 November 1994).

"Mayor Announces New Assault on Graffiti, Citing Its Toll on City" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 .

Archived from the original on 9 March 2021 . Retrieved 8 May 2018 .

^ Ballatore 2014.

^ Library of Congress (1996).

Library of Congress subject headings . Library of Congress. p. 1430.

Archived from the original on 7 March 2023 . Retrieved 17 November 2012 .

^ "La Colonne Vendôme déboulonnée" (in French).

Archived from the original on 3 March 2016 . Retrieved 4 August 2007 .

^ "Fine Art, Sí, Vandalism, No" . Archived from the original on 14 May 2011 . Retrieved 29 October 2008 .

^ D.E. Funk (7 October 2013).

"Banksy the Artist" .

www.Medium.com . Medium-All things art.

Archived from the original on 21 October 2022 . Retrieved 21 October 2022 .

^ Odling-Smee Anne (2002) the new handmade graphics: Beyond digital design. RotoVision SA Other references Ballatore, A. (2014), "Defacing the map: Cartographic vandalism in the digital commons", The Cartographic Journal , 51 (3): 214– 224, arXiv : 1404.3341 , Bibcode : 2014CartJ..51..214B , doi : 10.1179/1743277414y.0000000085 , S2CID 1828882 Cohen, S. (1973), Ward, C. (ed.), Property destruction: Motives and meanings , London: Architectural Press, pp.

23– 53 Goldstein, A. (1996), The Psychology of Vandalism , New York: Plenum Press Ley, D. & Cybriwsky, R. (1974), "Urban Graffiti as Territorial Markers", Annals of the Association of American Geographers , 64 (4): 491– 505, doi : 10.1111/j.1467-8306.1974.tb00998.x Merrills, A.; Miles, R. (2010), The Vandals , John Wiley & Sons , ISBN 978-1-4051-6068-1 Williams, M. (2006), Virtually Criminal: Crime, Deviance, and Regulation Online.

, Abington, UK: Taylor & Francis Bibliography Hammond, Chris.

"BANK" .

www.motinternational.com . Archived from the original on 24 December 2015 . Retrieved 9 March 2016 .

External links The dictionary definition of vandalism at Wiktionary Media related to Vandalism at Wikimedia Commons The Free Dictionary: Vandalism Merriam Webster: Vandalism v t e Types of crime Note: Crimes vary by jurisdiction . Not all types are listed here.

Classes Infraction Misdemeanor Felony Summary Indictable Hybrid Corruption Law portal Against the person Assassination Assault Battery Child abuse Concealment of a corpse Criminal negligence Domestic violence False imprisonment Frameup Harassment Street Home invasion Hate crime Homicide Human trafficking Intimidation Kidnapping Manslaughter ( corporate ) Mayhem Murder felony Homicide Negligent homicide Reckless homicide Robbery Stalking Stabbing Torture Against property Arson Arms trafficking Blackmail Bribery Burglary Cybercrime Embezzlement Extortion False pretenses Forgery Fraud Gambling Intellectual property violation Larceny Looting Payola Pickpocketing Possessing stolen property Robbery Smuggling Parallel import Tax evasion Theft Trespass to land Vandalism Mischief Against the public Apostasy Corruption Censorship violation Dueling Genocide Ethnic cleansing Hostage-taking Illegal immigration People smuggling Insider trading Smuggling Illegal consumption (such as drugs , alcohol , and smoking ) Miscegenation Piracy Political corruption Regicide Terrorism Unreported employment Usurpation War crimes Against the state Lèse-majesté Treason Espionage Secession Sedition Subversion Against justice Against public justice Justice delayed Compounding Contempt Malfeasance in office Miscarriage of justice Judicial misconduct Misprision Perjury Perverting the course of justice Against animals Cruelty to animals Poaching Wildlife smuggling Bestiality Sexual offenses Adultery Bigamy Child sexual abuse Cybersex trafficking Fornication Homosexuality Groping Incest Indecent exposure Masturbation Obscenity Prostitution Rape Pederasty Sex trafficking Sexual assault Sexual harassment Sexual slavery Voyeurism Inchoate offenses Attempt Conspiracy Incitement Solicitation WikiSource Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikinews Authority control databases National Germany United States Czech Republic Latvia Israel Other NARA Encyclopedia of Modern Ukraine Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐api‐ext.codfw.main‐77f755c49c‐lp8ns
Cached time: 20250816224506
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.743 seconds
Real time usage: 0.899 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2783/1000000
Revision size: 26260/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 123264/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 3391/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 20/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 106203/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.510/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 7768424/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  754.731      1 -total
 30.87%  232.954      1 Template:Types_of_crime
 30.69%  231.623      1 Template:Navbox
 25.67%  193.770      8 Template:Excerpt
 17.56%  132.562      1 Template:Reflist
 12.46%   94.062      8 Template:Cite_web
 11.21%   84.571      1 Template:Pollution_sidebar
 11.00%   83.028      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
  7.83%   59.082      1 Template:Short_description
  7.00%   52.798      2 Template:Ambox Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:32676:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250816224506 and revision id 1304660136. Rendering was triggered because: unknown Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Vandalism&oldid=1304660136 " Categories : Vandalism Crimes Property crimes Organized crime activity English phrases Hidden categories: CS1 German-language sources (de) CS1 French-language sources (fr) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages Wikipedia pages semi-protected against vandalism Articles lacking in-text citations from November 2020 All articles lacking in-text citations Use dmy dates from June 2018 Pages using sidebar with the child parameter All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from September 2015 Articles to be expanded from April 2024 All articles to be expanded Commons category link from Wikidata Articles with excerpts This page was last edited on 7 August 2025, at 11:10 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Vandalism 76 languages Add topic

