Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Early history 1.2 Nuclear medicine research in children 1.3 Reform lawsuit 1.4 Twenty-first century 2 Current status 3 See also 4 References 5 Further reading 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Walter E. Fernald Developmental Center 1 language Deutsch Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 42°23′28″N 71°12′38″W ﻿ / ﻿ 42.39111°N 71.21056°W ﻿ / 42.39111; -71.21056 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Historical hospital in Massachusetts Hospital in Massachusetts, United States Walter E. Fernald Developmental Center Massachusetts Department of Mental Retardation Geography Location Waltham , Massachusetts , United States Coordinates 42°23′28″N 71°12′38″W ﻿ / ﻿ 42.39111°N 71.21056°W ﻿ / 42.39111; -71.21056 Organization Funding Government hospital Services Emergency department No History Former name(s) Walter E. Fernald State School Opened 1848 Closed 2014 Links Lists Hospitals in Massachusetts Walter E. Fernald State School, Waltham, MA.

U.S. National Register of Historic Places U.S. Historic district Show map of Massachusetts Show map of the United States Location 200 Trapelo Rd., Waltham, Massachusetts Built 1888 Architect William G. Preston ; Clarence P. Hoyt Architectural style Greek Revival, Queen Anne, Late 19th And 20th Century Revivals MPS Massachusetts State Hospitals And State Schools MPS NRHP reference No.

93001487 [ 1 ] Added to NRHP January 21, 1994 The Walter E. Fernald State School , later the Walter E. Fernald Developmental Center , was the Western hemisphere 's oldest publicly funded institution serving people with developmental disabilities .

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Under its third superintendent, Walter Fernald, it became a model for state institutions for the developmentally disabled. It later was the scene of medical experiments in the 20th century. Investigations into this research led to new regulations regarding human research in children.

The school occupies a 186 acres (75 ha) property off Trapelo Road in Waltham, Massachusetts .

History [ edit ] Early history [ edit ] The Fernald Center, originally called the Experimental School for Teaching and Training Idiotic Children, [ 4 ] [ 5 ] was founded in Boston by reformer Samuel Gridley Howe in 1848 with a $2,500 appropriation from the Massachusetts State Legislature . The school gradually moved to a new permanent location in Waltham between 1888 and 1891.  It eventually encompassed 72 buildings across 196 acres (0.79 km 2 ). At its peak, the school confined some 2,500 people, most of them " feeble-minded " boys.

Under its third superintendent , Walter E. Fernald (1859–1924), the school was viewed as a model educational facility in the field of mental retardation and doctors and politicians from across the country and the world would travel to Waltham to study the methods employed at the center. Fernald was instrumental in the establishment of the first independent farm colony for the disabled ( The Templeton Colony ) and early concepts of special education. However, though he never supported forced sterilization, Fernald was an important figure in the eugenics movement, advocating for the segregation of mentally disabled children from society and coining the term “Defective Delinquent” to describe criminally-inclined mentally disabled children.

[ 6 ] It wasn’t until the end of his life that he had a reversal of many of these ideas, fighting against the segregation of most mentally disabled children, rejecting IQ tests, and supporting community education and out-patient clinics.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] However, by this time, many of his ideas about forced segregation and mass institutionalization had already entered the American mainstream. The school was renamed in his honor in 1925, following his death the previous year.

[ 9 ] The institution did serve a large population of children with cognitive disabilities (referred to as "mentally retarded children"), but The Boston Globe estimates that upwards of half of the inmates tested with IQs in the normal range. In the 20th century, living conditions were spartan or worse; approximately 36 children slept in each dormitory room. There were also reports of physical and sexual abuse.

[ 10 ] Nuclear medicine research in children [ edit ] The Fernald School was the site of the 1946–53 joint experiments by Harvard University and MIT that exposed young male children to tracer doses of radioactive isotopes .

[ 11 ] Documents obtained in 1994 by the United States Department of Energy [ 12 ] revealed the following details: The experiment was conducted in part by a research fellow sponsored by the Quaker Oats Company . Part of the study involved adding radioactive iron and calcium into oatmeal and milk, then feeding the mixture to Fernald students.

[ 13 ] MIT Professor of Nutrition Robert S. Harris led the experiment, which studied the absorption of calcium and iron .

The boys were encouraged to join a "Science Club", which offered larger portions of food, parties, and trips to Boston Red Sox baseball games.

The 57 club members ate iron -enriched cereals and calcium -enriched milk for breakfast. In order to track absorption, several radioactive calcium tracers were given orally or intravenously.

Radiation levels in stool and blood samples would serve as dependent variables.

In another study, 17 subjects received iron supplement shots containing radioisotopes of iron.

[ 14 ] Neither the children nor their parents ever gave adequate informed consent for participation in a scientific study.

The Advisory Committee on Human Radiation Experiments , reporting to the United States Department of Energy in 1994, reported on these experiments: [ 15 ] In 1946, one study exposed seventeen subjects to radioactive iron. The second study, which involved a series of seventeen related subexperiments, exposed fifty-seven subjects to radioactive calcium between 1950 and 1953. It is clear that the doses involved were low and that it is extremely unlikely that any of the children who were used as subjects were harmed as a consequence. These studies remain morally troubling, however, for several reasons. First, although parents or guardians were asked for their permission to have their children involved in the research, the available evidence suggests that the information provided was, at best, incomplete. Second, there is the question of the fairness of selecting institutionalized children at all, children whose life circumstances were by any standard already heavily burdened.

It has been claimed that the highest dose of radiation that any subject was exposed to was 330 millirem , the equivalent of less than one year's background radiation in Denver .

[ 16 ] A 1995 class-action suit resulted in a 1998 District court decision awarding the victims a $1.85 million settlement from MIT and Quaker.

[ 16 ] The school also participated in studies of thyroid function in patients with Down Syndrome and their parents.

[ 17 ] This study showed that their iodine metabolism was similar to normal controls.

Reform lawsuit [ edit ] This situation changed in the 1970s, when a class action suit, Ricci v. Okin , was filed to upgrade conditions at Fernald and several other state institutions for persons with intellectual disability in Massachusetts.  U.S. District Court Judge Joseph Louis Tauro , who assumed oversight of the case in 1972, formally disengaged from the case in 1993, declaring that improvements in the care and conditions at the facilities had made them "second to none anywhere in the world". A result for Fernald residents of the class action suit which took effect in 1993 was the provision of "a guaranteed level of care, regardless of cost, to compensate for decades of neglect and abuse".

[ 3 ] Twenty-first century [ edit ] The buildings and grounds survived into the 2000s as a center for mentally disabled adults, operated by the Massachusetts Department of Mental Retardation.

[ citation needed ] In 2001, 320 adults resided at Fernald, with ages ranging from 27 to 96 years and an average age of 47 years. According to a December 13, 2004 article in the Boston Globe , [ citation needed ] Massachusetts Governor Mitt Romney announced in 2003 that the facility would be closed and the land sold by 2007. In 2003, a coalition of family advocates and state employee unions began a campaign to save Fernald and asked Judge Tauro to resume his oversight of the "Ricci v. Okin" class action lawsuit that had led to improvements at Fernald and the other state facilities beginning in the 1970s.

[ citation needed ] In an August 14, 2007 ruling, Judge Tauro ordered the Department of Mental Retardation to consider the individual wishes of all 185 institution residents before closing the facility.

[ citation needed ] However, in September 2007, the new administration of Governor Deval Patrick appealed Tauro's ruling to the First Circuit U.S. Court of Appeals in Boston. In a statement, the Patrick administration contended that Fernald had become too expensive to continue to operate and that equal or better care could be provided in private, community-based settings for the remaining Fernald residents.

[ citation needed ] The administration's cost claims have been disputed by the Fernald League for the Retarded, Inc., the Massachusetts Coalition of Families and Advocates for the Retarded, Inc. (COFAR) and other family-based organizations, which have continued to advocate for the preservation of Fernald as a site for ICF/MR-level care for its current residents. Those advocacy organizations proposed a "postage-stamp" plan under which Fernald would be scaled back in size and the remaining portion of the campus sold for development.

[ citation needed ] The Patrick administration, however, declined to negotiate with those Fernald advocates, and pressed ahead with its appeal and closure plans.

[ citation needed ] A significant portion of the Waltham campus, encompassing its facilities established through Fernald's tenure, was listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 1994.

[ 18 ] Fernald was the subject of a 2005 documentary film "Front Wards, Back Wards" directed by W.C. Rogers, which has been shown on some PBS television stations.

[ 19 ] [ 20 ] As of June 2013 [update] , Fernald remained open with 13 residents living on grounds, the oldest of whom was 84 years old and a resident since the age of 19.

[ 3 ] It was reported to cost approximately US$ 1,000,000 per client per year, or about four times the United States national average for a state-supported institution.

[ citation needed ] The Fernald Center's last resident was discharged on Thursday, November 13, 2014, [ 21 ] [ 22 ] after a protracted legal and political battle which cost the Commonwealth of Massachusetts over $40 million in additional costs over the projected closure date of 2010. Remaining residents were integrated into community services or other state-operated programs.

[ 23 ] In 2014 the land was purchased by the city of Waltham in two parcels, 139 acres for $2.7 million paid out of Community Preservation Act funds, and 40 acres for $800,000 of city funds. The CPA section may only be used for open space, recreation, or historic preservation. The 40 acre portion has no restrictions for future use.

[ 24 ] There was a period of discussion about building a new high school for Waltham on a section of the site, [ 25 ] [ 26 ] but eventually the proposal was discarded due to difficult topography, potential soil contamination, and a denial of approval from the Massachusetts Historical Commission related to the demolition of certain buildings on the site.

[ 27 ] Current status [ edit ] In May 2017 and 2018, the Waltham Lions Club held a fundraising carnival on the grounds with rides, games, prizes, a petting zoo and food.

[ 28 ] [ 29 ] In November/December 2020 and 2021, the site became the home of the Greater Boston Lights Show, a fundraiser for the Waltham Lions Club chapter.

[ 30 ] The decision to host a holiday lights display at this location angered disability rights advocates.

[ 31 ] In December 2021, the Waltham Recreation Department held an online meeting to collect public input for potential recreational development on the Fernald property.

[ 32 ] While many suggestions were made around walking paths, gardens, and other passive recreation facilities, the majority of the meeting focused on the need to honor and respect the history of Fernald and the treatment of the residents.

[ 33 ] In 2022, an "amusement park" was approved by the City Council for the Fernald, complete with an electric train, mini golf, open green space, tennis and pickleball courts, a massive athletic complex, eight parking lots, an amphitheater, and a universal playground for children with disabilities.

[ 34 ] At a Waltham City Council meeting in December 2023, members approved a $9.5 million loan authorization for the project. As of early 2024 construction on the project has begun with no completion date announced. Many residents have opposed the plan for its lack of transparency and for its perceived offensiveness to the disabled community.

In January 2024, Oliver Egger, a journalist and great-great-grandson of Walter Fernald, wrote an investigative piece in The Boston Globe describing how, despite knowledge by the City of Waltham and the state, thousands of confidential patient records were left on the campus after its closure.

[ 35 ] This was in violation of HIPAA . Soon after the article's publication, the state removed the documents from the campus and admitted wrong-doing.

[ 36 ] The Civil Rights Division of the Department of Health and Human Services has formally launched an investigation.

[ 37 ] In April 2024, The Globe reported that in addition the Massachusetts State Police left decades’ worth of confidential case files at the school for years, removing them in 2017.

[ 38 ] On April 19th, 2025, a four alarm fire at the abandoned site was extinguished by firefighters, less than a year after another fire at the same location. This raised suspicions of possible arson, prompting Massachusetts officials to release a press statement offering a reward to any witnesses.

[ 39 ] See also [ edit ] United States portal Human experimentation in the United States Templeton Developmental Center , another state facility originally established under Fernald's tenure National Register of Historic Places listings in Waltham, Massachusetts Metropolitan State Hospital (Massachusetts) , the state hospital located across the street at 475 Trapelo Road Wrentham State School , Massachusetts' last remaining large scale institution for developmentally disabled people Belchertown State School , a similar state institution that existed from 1922 to 1992 and was built to alleviate overcrowding at Wrentham and Fernald.

References [ edit ] ^ "National Register Information System" .

National Register of Historic Places .

National Park Service . March 13, 2009.

^ "The Walter E. Fernald Association" . Archived from the original on January 17, 2010 . Retrieved June 9, 2009 .

^ a b c Ansberry, Clare (June 29–30, 2013). "At Nation's Oldest Institution For the Disabled, 13 Lives in Limbo".

The Wall Street Journal (paper). pp. A1, A6.

^ "Fernald State School - Asylum Projects" .

www.asylumprojects.org . Archived from the original on July 8, 2024 . Retrieved January 31, 2017 .

^ "Letters and Journals of Samuel Gridley Howe" .

www.disabilitymuseum.org . 1909. Archived from the original on February 28, 2023 . Retrieved January 31, 2017 .

^ Fernald, Walter E. “The Imbecile with Criminal Instincts.” American Medico-Psychological Association, May 1908.

^ AFTER-CARE STUDY OF THE PATIENTS DIS- CHARGED FROM WAVERLEY FOR A PERIOD OF TWENTY-FIVE YEARS By WALTER E. FERNALD, M.D. 
Reprinted from UNGRaDeD, Vol. V, No. &, November, 1919.

^ AN OUT-PATIENT CLINIC IN CONNECTION WITH A STATE INSTITUTION FOR THE FEEBLE-MINDED.* BY WALTER E. FERNALD, M. D., WAVERLEY, Mass.

^ School., Walter E. Fernald State. “Annual Report of the Trustees of the Walter E. Fernald State School at Waltham for the Year Ending November 30, 1925.” DSpace Home, Walter E. Fernald State School, 1 Jan. 1926, http://archives.lib.state.ma.us/handle/2452/782009 .

^ Johnson, Glen (October 12, 2009).

"Apology sought for abuse at Fernald School" .

The Daily News Tribune . Gatehouse Media Inc . Retrieved November 2, 2009 .

[ dead link ] ^ BRONNER F, HARRIS RS, MALETSKOS CJ, BENDA CE (January 1956).

"Studies in calcium metabolism. the fate of intravenously injected radiocalcium in human beings" .

The Journal of Clinical Investigation .

35 (1): 78– 88.

doi : 10.1172/JCI103254 .

PMC 438780 .

PMID 13278403 .

^ "OT-19. Radioisotope Studies at the Fernald State School, Massachusetts" . Archived from the original on June 23, 2024 . Retrieved June 24, 2017 .

^ Magazine, Smithsonian; Boissoneault, Lorraine.

"A Spoonful of Sugar Helps the Radioactive Oatmeal Go Down" .

Smithsonian Magazine . Archived from the original on August 17, 2024 . Retrieved May 11, 2024 .

^ SHARPE LM, PEACOCK WC, COOKE R, HARRIS RS (July 1950).

"The effect of phytate and other food factors on iron absorption" .

The Journal of Nutrition .

41 (3): 433– 46.

doi : 10.1093/jn/41.3.433 .

PMID 15428911 .

^ "Chapter 7: The Studies at Fernald School" .

ACHRE Report . Archived from the original on August 2, 2010.

It is clear that the doses involved were low and that it is extremely unlikely that any of the children who were used as subjects were harmed as a consequence.

^ a b Hussain, Zareena (January 7, 1998).

"MIT to pay $1.85 million in Fernald radiation settlement" .

The Tech . Vol. 11, no. 65. Archived from the original on June 21, 2009 . Retrieved June 9, 2009 .

^ KURLAND GS, FISHMAN J, HAMOLSKY MW, FREEDBERG AS (April 1957).

"Radioisotope study of thyroid function in 21 mongoloid subjects, including observations in 7 parents" .

The Journal of Clinical Endocrinology and Metabolism .

17 (4): 552– 60.

doi : 10.1210/jcem-17-4-552 .

PMID 13406017 .

^ "MACRIS inventory record for Walter E. Fernald School" . Commonwealth of Massachusetts . Retrieved April 25, 2014 .

^ "Front Wards, Back Wards" .

Georgia Public Broadcasting . April 28, 2009 . Retrieved January 31, 2017 .

^ "Front Wards, Back Wards | ITVS" .

itvs.org . Retrieved January 31, 2017 .

^ Josh Kovner (December 3, 2014).

"Opposing Sides Clash As Debate Resumes Over Closing Southbury Training School" .

Hartford Courant . Retrieved January 18, 2015 .

Molly Cole, who directs the disabilities council, pointed to an institution in Massachusetts, the Walter E. Fernald Developmental Center, that was finally shut by the Bay State last month.

^ Ralph Edwards (November 19, 2014).

"Closing of Fernald Developmental Center" .

TASH . Retrieved January 18, 2015 .

On Thursday, November 13, 2014, Fernald Developmental School closed its doors.

^ "Fernald Closes Doors after 126 years of Operation" .

myemail.constantcontact.com . Retrieved May 27, 2019 .

^ "Waltham closes deal on Fernald purchase" .

Wicked Local . Retrieved December 23, 2021 .

^ "Bill allows Waltham to buy Fernald site for $3.7m" .

The Boston Globe . August 6, 2014.

^ Patkin, Abigail.

"Waltham officials grapple with challenges of Fernald as high school site" .

Wicked Local Waltham .

^ "State commission urges city to avoid school at Fernald" .

Wicked Local . Retrieved December 23, 2021 .

^ "Waltham Lions Family Carnival Roars Into Town" .

Waltham, MA Patch . May 16, 2017 . Retrieved December 23, 2021 .

^ "Waltham Lions Club Carnival | walthamma" .

www.city.waltham.ma.us . Retrieved December 23, 2021 .

^ "Greater Boston Light Show, Waltham, MA - 200 Trapelo Rd. Waltham MA" .

Greater Boston Light Show, Waltham, MA . Retrieved December 19, 2020 .

^ "In Waltham, A Holiday Light Show For Charity Stirs Up Controversy" .

News . November 19, 2020 . Retrieved December 19, 2020 .

^ "Virtual Public Input Meeting regarding Fernald Property | walthamma" .

www.city.waltham.ma.us . Retrieved December 23, 2021 .

^ ClockerResident (December 8, 2021).

"Fernald Reuse" .

r/Waltham . Retrieved December 23, 2021 .

^ " 'Amusement park' plan for Waltham's Fernald draws criticism, praise" .

^ "The shameful afterlife of the Fernald School in Waltham - the Boston Globe" .

The Boston Globe .

^ "HIPAA Breach Notification: The Former Fernald Developmental Center" .

www.mass.gov . March 11, 2024.

^ "Feds launch civil rights investigation into patient privacy breach at abandoned Fernald School" . April 4, 2024.

^ "State Police left decades' worth of confidential case files at old Fernald school in Waltham - the Boston Globe" .

The Boston Globe .

^ Wark, Jake (May 6, 2025).

"Two Suspicious Fires at Fernald School Under Investigation" .

Commonwealth of Massachusetts .

Further reading [ edit ] D'Antonio, Michael.

The State Boys Rebellion . New York: Simon & Schuster, 2004.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Walter E. Fernald State School .

Excerpts from the writings of Walter E. Fernald In the swim of things Fernald through the years (photo gallery) Closure of Tufts dental clinic leaves disabled patients without care History of the Fernald Center, City of Waltham v t e Massachusetts hospitals Active Barnstable County Cape Cod Hospital Falmouth Hospital Spaulding Rehabilitation Hospital Cape Cod Berkshire County Austen Riggs Center Berkshire Medical Center Fairview Hospital VA Central Western Massachusetts Healthcare System Bristol County Arbour-Fuller Hospital Morton Hospital and Medical Center St. Luke's Hospital Taunton State Hospital Dukes County Martha's Vineyard Hospital Essex County Lawrence General Hospital Salem Hospital Franklin County VA Central Western Massachusetts Healthcare System Hampden County Baystate Health Holyoke Medical Center Mercy Medical Center Providence Behavioral Health Hospital Soldiers' Home in Holyoke VA Central Western Massachusetts Healthcare System Hampshire County Cooley Dickinson Hospital Northampton Veterans Affairs Medical Center Middlesex County Bedford Veterans Affairs Medical Center Cambridge Hospital CHA Everett Hospital Emerson Hospital Lahey Hospital & Medical Center Lowell General Hospital McLean Hospital MelroseWakefield Hospital MetroWest Medical Center Mount Auburn Hospital Newton-Wellesley Hospital Saints Medical Center Somerville Hospital Tewksbury Hospital Winchester Hospital Nantucket County Nantucket Cottage Hospital Norfolk County Beth Israel Deaconess Hospital - Milton Norwood Hospital South Shore Hospital Wrentham State School Plymouth County Beth Israel Deaconess Hospital-Plymouth Boston Medical Center – South Bridgewater State Hospital Brockton Hospital VA Boston Healthcare System Suffolk County Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center Boston Children's Hospital Boston Medical Center Boston Medical Center – Brighton Brigham and Women's Faulkner Hospital Brigham and Women's Hospital Dana–Farber Cancer Institute Floating Hospital for Children Franciscan Children's Joslin Diabetes Center Lemuel Shattuck Hospital Massachusetts Eye and Ear Massachusetts General Hospital New England Baptist Hospital Spaulding Rehabilitation Hospital Tufts Medical Center VA Boston Healthcare System Worcester County Adcare Hospital Athol Memorial Hospital Federal Medical Center, Devens Hahnemann Hospital Jewish Healthcare Center Milford Regional Medical Center Memorial Hospital Saint Vincent Hospital 2021 strike UMass Memorial Health Care VA Central Western Massachusetts Healthcare System Worcester Recovery Center and Hospital Defunct Barnstable County 551st United States Air Force Hospital Barnstable County Hospital Berkshire County North Adams Regional Hospital Bristol County Lovering Colony State Hospital Paul A. Dever State School Truesdale Hospital Dukes County Penikese Island Leper Hospital Essex County Benjamin Stickney Cable Memorial Hospital Children's Island Sanitarium Danvers State Hospital Essex Hospital Saugus General Hospital Hampden County Monson Developmental Center Hampshire County Belchertown State School Northampton State Hospital Westover Air Force Base Hospital Middlesex County Boston Regional Medical Center Community Memorial Hospital Gaebler Children's Center Lovell General Hospital Metropolitan State Hospital Middlesex County Hospital Murphy Army Hospital Nashoba Valley Medical Center Walter E. Fernald Developmental Center Norfolk County Foxborough State Hospital Medfield State Hospital New England Sinai Hospital Pondville State Hospital Quincy Medical Center Plymouth County Cranberry Specialty Hospital Lakeville Hospital Suffolk County Adams-Nervine Asylum Boston City Hospital Boston Consumptives Hospital Boston Emergency and General Hospital Boston Psychopathic Hospital Boston State Hospital Carney Hospital Dimock Community Health Center Complex Massachusetts Homeopathic Hospital Naval Hospital Boston New England Hospital for Women and Children Worcester County Dale General Hospital Gardner State Hospital Grafton State Hospital Lyman School for Boys Rutland Heights State Hospital State Reform School for Boys Templeton Developmental Center Westborough State Hospital Worcester City Hospital Worcester County Hospital Worcester State Hospital v t e U.S. National Register of Historic Places in Massachusetts Topics Contributing property Keeper of the Register Historic district History of the National Register of Historic Places National Park Service Property types Lists by county Barnstable Berkshire Bristol Dukes Essex Franklin Hampden Hampshire Middlesex Nantucket Norfolk Plymouth Suffolk Worcester ( northern ) Lists by city Barnstable County Barnstable Harwich Bristol County Fall River New Bedford Taunton Essex County Andover Gloucester Ipswich Lawrence Lynn Methuen Salem Hampden County Springfield Middlesex County Arlington Cambridge Concord Framingham Lexington Lowell Marlborough Medford Newton Reading Sherborn Somerville Stoneham Wakefield Waltham Weston Winchester Norfolk County Brookline Milton Quincy Suffolk County Boston northern southern Worcester County Southbridge Uxbridge Worcester eastern northwestern southwestern Other lists Bridges Cape Cod National Seashore National Historic Landmarks Boston Category National Register of Historic Places portal United States portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Walter_E._Fernald_Developmental_Center&oldid=1305986209 " Categories : Human subject research in the United States Hospitals in Middlesex County, Massachusetts Historic districts in Middlesex County, Massachusetts National Register of Historic Places in Waltham, Massachusetts Special schools in Massachusetts Buildings and structures in Waltham, Massachusetts Queen Anne architecture in Massachusetts Hospital buildings completed in 1888 Psychiatric hospitals in Massachusetts Tuberculosis sanatoria in the United States Historic districts on the National Register of Historic Places in Massachusetts 1888 establishments in Massachusetts Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles using NRISref without a reference number All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from August 2024 Use American English from January 2025 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use mdy dates from August 2023 Infobox mapframe without OSM relation ID on Wikidata Coordinates on Wikidata NRHP infobox with nocat All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2024 Articles containing potentially dated statements from June 2013 All articles containing potentially dated statements Commons category link is on Wikidata Pages using the Kartographer extension This page was last edited on 15 August 2025, at 07:18 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Walter E. Fernald Developmental Center 1 language Add topic

