Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Classification 2 Synthetic monomers 3 Biopolymers 4 Natural monomers Toggle Natural monomers subsection 4.1 Amino acids 4.2 Nucleotides 4.3 Glucose and related sugars 4.4 Isoprene 5 See also 6 Notes Toggle the table of contents Monomer 63 languages العربية Azərbaycanca 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Bikol Central Български Bosanski Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Jawa Қазақша Kurdî Кыргызча Lietuvių Lombard Magyar Македонски Bahasa Melayu Монгол Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Occitan Polski Português Română Русский Shqip Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Molecule which reacts with other monomers to form a polymer A monomer ( / ˈ m ɒ n ə m ər / MON -ə-mər ; mono- , "one" + -mer , "part") is a molecule that can react together with other monomer molecules to form a larger polymer chain or two- or three-dimensional network in a process called polymerization .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] IUPAC definition Monomer molecule : A molecule which can undergo polymerization, thereby contributing constitutional units to the essential structure of a macromolecule .

[ 4 ] Classification [ edit ] Chemistry classifies monomers by type, and two broad classes based on the type of polymer they form.

By type: natural vs synthetic, e.g.

glycine vs caprolactam , respectively polar vs nonpolar, e.g.

vinyl acetate vs ethylene , respectively cyclic vs linear, e.g.

ethylene oxide vs ethylene glycol , respectively By type of polymer they form: those that participate in condensation polymerization those that participate in addition polymerization Differing stoichiometry [ 5 ] causes each class to create its respective form of polymer.

This nylon is formed by condensation polymerization of two monomers, yielding water The polymerization of one kind of monomer gives a homopolymer .  Many polymers are copolymers , meaning that they are derived from two different monomers.  In the case of condensation polymerizations, the ratio of comonomers is usually 1:1.  For example, the formation of many nylons requires equal amounts of a dicarboxylic acid and diamine .  In the case of addition polymerizations, the comonomer content is often only a few percent.  For example, small amounts of 1-octene monomer are copolymerized with ethylene to give specialized polyethylene.

Synthetic monomers [ edit ] Ethylene gas (H 2 C=CH 2 ) is the monomer for polyethylene .

Other modified ethylene derivatives include: tetrafluoroethylene (F 2 C=CF 2 ) which leads to Teflon vinyl chloride (H 2 C=CHCl) which leads to PVC styrene (C 6 H 5 CH=CH 2 ) which leads to polystyrene Epoxide monomers may be cross linked with themselves, or with the addition of a co-reactant, to form epoxy BPA is the monomer precursor for polycarbonate Terephthalic acid is a comonomer that, with ethylene glycol, forms polyethylene terephthalate .

Dimethylsilicon dichloride is a monomer that, upon hydrolysis, gives polydimethylsiloxane .

Ethyl methacrylate is an acrylic monomer that, when combined with an acrylic polymer, catalyzes and forms an acrylate plastic used to create artificial nail extensions Biopolymers [ edit ] The term "monomeric protein " may also be used to describe one of the proteins making up a multiprotein complex .

[ 6 ] Natural monomers [ edit ] Some of the main biopolymers are listed below: Amino acids [ edit ] For proteins , the monomers are amino acids . Polymerization occurs at ribosomes . Usually about 20 types of amino acid monomers are used to produce proteins. Hence proteins are not homopolymers.

Nucleotides [ edit ] For polynucleic acids ( DNA / RNA ), the monomers are nucleotides , each of which is made of a pentose sugar, a nitrogenous base and a phosphate group.  Nucleotide monomers are found in the cell nucleus .  Four types of nucleotide monomers are precursors to DNA and four different nucleotide monomers are precursors to RNA.

Glucose and related sugars [ edit ] For carbohydrates, the monomers are monosaccharides. The most abundant natural monomer is glucose , which is linked by glycosidic bonds into the polymers cellulose , starch , and glycogen .

[ 7 ] Isoprene [ edit ] Isoprene is a natural monomer that polymerizes to form a natural rubber , most often cis- 1,4-polyisoprene, but also trans- 1,4-polymer.

Synthetic rubbers are often based on butadiene , which is structurally related to isoprene.

See also [ edit ] Protein subunit List of publications in polymer chemistry Prepolymer Notes [ edit ] ^ Young, R. J. (1987) Introduction to Polymers , Chapman & Hall ISBN 0-412-22170-5 ^ International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry, et al.

(2000) IUPAC Gold Book , Polymerization ^ Clayden, Jonathan ; Greeves, Nick; Warren, Stuart ; Wothers, Peter (2001).

Organic Chemistry (1st ed.). Oxford University Press. pp.

1450– 1466.

ISBN 978-0-19-850346-0 .

^ Jenkins, A. D.; Kratochvíl, P.; Stepto, R. F. T.; Suter, U. W. (1996).

"Glossary of basic terms in polymer science (IUPAC Recommendations 1996)" .

Pure and Applied Chemistry .

68 (12): 2287– 2311.

doi : 10.1351/pac199668122287 .

^ D. Margerison; G. C. East; J. E. Spice (1967).

An Introduction to Polymer Chemistry . Pergamon Press.

ISBN 978-0-08-011891-8 .

^ Bruce Alberts, Alexander Johnson, Julian Lewis, Otin Raff, Keith Roberts, and Peter Walter, Molecular Biology of the Cell, 2008, Garland Science, ISBN 978-0-8153-4105-5 .

^ Ebuengan, Kaye.

"Biomolecules: Classification and structural properties of carbohydrates" .

Academia.edu .

Authority control databases : National Czech Republic Israel Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Monomer&oldid=1290033286 " Category : Monomers Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 12 May 2025, at 11:20 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Monomer 63 languages Add topic

