Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Pastels in Pop Culture 2 Examples 3 Gallery 4 References Toggle the table of contents Pastel (color) 19 languages العربية Bosanski Català Deutsch Español Esperanto فارسی Frysk 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Magyar Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Suomi Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Family of pale colors This article is about the color family. For the art medium, see Pastel .

Pastel Pastel sticks in a variety of colors Common connotations Soothing Pastels or pastel colors belong to a pale family of colors, which, when described in the HSV color space , have high value and low or medium saturation .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] They are named after the artistic medium made from pigment and solid binding agents, similar to crayons . Pastel sticks historically had lower saturation than paints of the same pigment, hence the name of this color family.

The colors of this family are usually described as soothing, [ 3 ] calming, [ 4 ] and nostalgic.

[ 5 ] They tend to lean towards ideas of simplicity and help to contrast against the bolder and brighter colors that trend in our world. They are integrated into interior design in many places, such as healthcare to help soothe anxiety, or in classrooms to help the mind focus. Pastel colors work to oppose the brighter, bolder colors that tend to be common in many other places.

[ 5 ] Pink , mauve , [ 6 ] and baby blue [ 7 ] are commonly used pastel colors, as are mint green , peach , periwinkle , lilac , and lavender .There are no official listing of colors' hex codes, but there are still websites with given color names and hex codes that can be used to find pastel colors. There are also color charts that can be used to physically identify pastel colors.

Pastels in Pop Culture [ edit ] Trends involving pastel colors have maintained cultural relevance in both fashion and interior design. The art deco period of the 1920's and 30's involved pastels greatly in their designs. After this, the 1940's and 50's involved pastels in their interior design, known now as "retro" design, with an association of elegance. Pastels had another rise in popularity around the 1980's specifically in men's fashion. Suits that were pastel in their color started to become very popular around this time, associated feelings of confidence and coolness. In modern day, pastels are still integrated into interior design, and the idea of pastel colors in fashion has only broadened its scope to being used in a variety of settings.

[ 8 ] Pastel colors are valued in fashion because of their ability to match with a variety of other color types. They can be combined with blacks and whites to help contrast the colors more, mixed with other pastels to help bring out a monochromatic look. They are also complimentary to many skin tones, making them accessible to all.

[ 5 ] [ 8 ] While associated feelings have changed within given time periods and their trends, the root of pastels' association is still with relaxation, harmony, and gentleness. They are meant to be used in a variety of scenarios and remain pleasing to the eye and mind.

[ 8 ] Examples [ edit ] Examples of pastels in HEX-code fea3aa f8b88b faf884 baed91 b2cefe f2a2e8 Gallery [ edit ] Gaiety pastels Pastel-colored beads References [ edit ] ^ Gilbert, Beverly Ash (2009).

Beaded Colorways: Freeform Beadweaving Projects and Palettes . Cincinnati, OH: North Light Books. p. 13.

ISBN 9781600613180 . Retrieved July 27, 2013 .

^ Whitaker, Jerry C. (1996).

"Principles of Light, Vision, and Photometry" . In Whitaker, Jerry C. (ed.).

The Electronics Handbook . Boca Raton, Fla.: CRC Press. p. 85.

ISBN 9780849383458 . Retrieved July 27, 2013 .

^ Clark, Sally (2003). House Beautiful Magazine (ed.).

House Beautiful Color: Bright Ideas for Every Room . New York: Sterling Publishing Company. p. 27.

ISBN 9781588162519 .

OCLC 61439232 . Retrieved July 22, 2013 .

^ "The Most Grown-Up Pastel Color Palettes Designers Love For Rooms You Want to Relax in" . May 21, 2024 . Retrieved May 17, 2025 .

^ a b c Sahoo, Shristi (October 25, 2023).

"The Timeless Charm and Psychological Impact of Pastel Colours" . Retrieved May 17, 2025 .

^ McCarthy, Michael; Felicity O'Dell (2002).

English Vocabulary in Use (Advanced) . Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press . p. 154.

ISBN 9780521653978 .

OCLC 49550686 . Retrieved July 27, 2013 .

^ Weber, Jeanette (1990).

Clothing: Fashion, Fabrics, Construction .

McGraw-Hill Education.

ISBN 9780026401616 .

^ a b c Wax, Amy (January 14, 2022).

"Pastel Colors: A History of Elegance!" . Retrieved May 17, 2025 .

v t e Color topics Color science Color physics Electromagnetic spectrum Light Rainbow Visible Spectral colors Chromophore Structural coloration Animal coloration Color of chemicals Water Spectral power distribution Colorimetry Color perception Chromesthesia Sonochromatism Color blindness Achromatopsia Dichromacy Color calibration Color constancy Color task Color code Color temperature Color vision test Evolution of color vision Impossible colors Metamerism Opponent process Afterimage Unique hues Tetrachromacy The dress Color psychology Color symbolism Color preferences Lüscher color test Kruithof curve Political color National colors Chromophobia Chromotherapy Color reproduction Color photography Color balance Color cast Digital image processing Color management Color printing Multi-primary color display Quattron Color model additive RGB subtractive CMYK Color space Color mapping Color philosophy Color scheme Color tool Monochromatic colors Black-and-white Grisaille Complementary colors Analogous colors Achromatic colors (Neutral) Polychromatic colors Light-on-dark Web colors Tinctures in heraldry Color theory Color mixing Primary color Secondary color Chromaticity Color solid Color wheel Color triangle Color analysis (fashion) Color realism (art style) On Vision and Colours (Schopenhauer) Theory of Colours (Goethe) Color terms Basic English terms Red Orange Yellow Green Blue Purple Pink Brown White Gray Black Cultural differences Linguistic relativity and the color naming debate Blue–green distinction in language Color history Black-and-white dualism Blue in culture Color in Chinese culture Traditional colors of Japan Human skin color Color dimensions Hue Dichromatism Colorfulness Pastel colors Luminance Lightness Darkness Brightness Iridescence Fluorescence Grayscale Tint, shade and tone Color organizations Pantone Color Marketing Group Color Association of the United States International Colour Authority International Commission on Illumination (CIE) International Color Consortium International Colour Association Names Lists List of colors: A–F List of colors: G–M List of colors: N–Z List of colors (compact) List of colors by shade List of color palettes List of color spaces List of Crayola crayon colors history Color chart List of RAL colors List of web colors Shades of: Red Orange Yellow Green Cyan Blue Violet Purple Magenta Pink Brown White Gray Black Related Vision Contrast Qualia Lighting Category Index This color-related article is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it .

v t e Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Pastel_(color)&oldid=1301805951 " Categories : Color Color stubs Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use American English from March 2021 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use mdy dates from March 2021 All stub articles This page was last edited on 21 July 2025, at 20:15 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Pastel (color) 19 languages Add topic

