Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Terminology 3 Prominent Australian South Sea Islanders Toggle Prominent Australian South Sea Islanders subsection 3.1 Activism and politics 3.2 Sport 3.3 Other people 4 Recognition and documentation 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle External links subsection 7.1 Attribution 8 External links Toggle the table of contents South Sea Islanders 3 languages العربية Deutsch Italiano Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Australian ethnic group This article is about usage in Australia. For other uses, see Pacific Islander .

For a general context to this article, see White Australia policy .

Ethnic group South Sea Islanders in Australia Flag of the South Sea Islanders South Sea Islander labourers on a Queensland pineapple plantation, 1890s Regions with significant populations Mackay · Bundaberg · Townsville · Brisbane · Gold Coast · Sydney Languages Australian English Related ethnic groups Austronesian peoples South Sea Islanders , formerly referred to as Kanakas , are the Australian descendants of Pacific Islanders from more than 80 islands – including the Oceanian archipelagoes of the Solomon Islands , New Caledonia , Vanuatu , Fiji , the Gilbert Islands , and New Ireland – who were kidnapped or recruited between the mid to late 19th century as labourers in the sugarcane fields of Queensland . Some were kidnapped or tricked (or " blackbirded ") into long-term indentured servitude or slavery , despite the Slavery Abolition Act 1833 criminalising slavery in Australia and other parts of the British Empire . At its height, the recruiting accounted for over half the adult male population of some islands.

History [ edit ] Under the Polynesian Labourers Act 1868 (Qld), recruited labour was indentured for three years in exchange for a small wage of £6 per year as well as rations, accommodation and clothing. Employers were required to deposit their employees’ wages into a Government Savings Bank account.

[ 1 ] The majority were repatriated by the Australian Government in the period between 1906 and 1908 under the Pacific Island Labourers Act 1901 , [ 2 ] a piece of legislation related to the White Australia policy .

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] There was resistance to repatriation, [ 6 ] and controversy regarding the manner in which it was done.

[ 7 ] Those exempted from repatriation, along with a number of others who escaped deportation, remained in Australia to form the basis of what is today Australia's largest non-indigenous black ethnic group. Today, the descendants of those who remained are officially referred to as South Sea Islanders. A 1992 census of South Sea Islanders reported around 10,000 descendants living in Queensland. Fewer than 3,500 were reported in the 2001 Australian census.

[ 8 ] The question of how many Islanders were "blackbirded" is unknown and remains controversial. The extent to which Islanders were recruited legally, persuaded, deceived, coerced or forced to leave their homes and travel to Queensland is difficult to evaluate and also controversial. Official documents and accounts from the period often conflict with the oral tradition passed down to the descendants of workers. Stories of blatantly violent kidnapping tend to relate to the first ten or so years of the trade.

[ citation needed ] With time, owing to intermarriage, many Australian South Sea Islanders also claim a mixed ancestry, including Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people, along with immigrants from the South Pacific Islands and European Australians .

Terminology [ edit ] Blackbirded and recruited islanders were generally referred to as Kanakas (from ‘man’ in Hawaiian [ 9 ] ). However many Islander descendants now regard the term as pejorative and an insulting reminder of their ancestors' exploitation at the hands of the British and the white Australians, and it is now regarded in Australian English as an offensive term.

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] Prominent Australian South Sea Islanders [ edit ] Activism and politics [ edit ] In recent generations, facing many similar forms of discrimination in Australia as Aboriginal Australians and Torres Strait Islanders, Australian South Sea Islanders have been prominent figures in civil rights and politics.

Faith Bandler , Evelyn Scott , and Bonita Mabo (widow of Eddie Mabo ) are prominent Indigenous activists who are also descendants of South Sea Island plantation workers.

Stephen Andrew , who represents Katter's Australian Party in the Queensland Parliament , was the first South Sea Islander to be elected to parliament.

[ 12 ] Federal MP Terry Young 's grandfather was a South Sea Islander.

[ 13 ] Sport [ edit ] Another area Australian South Sea Islanders have excelled in is sport, especially the game of rugby league . Australian international representatives Sam Backo , Mal Meninga , Gorden Tallis and Wendell Sailor are all members of the Australian South Sea Islander community.

Other people [ edit ] Gail Mabo , daughter of Bonita and Eddie Mabo, is a prominent visual artist.

Recognition and documentation [ edit ] For many years, Queensland's South Sea Islander communities sought acknowledgement for past treatment, and recognition as a distinct cultural group. After decades of community advocacy, the Commonwealth Government finally recognised that distinction on August 25, 1994.

State Library of Queensland holds several collections pertaining to the history of Australian South Sea Islanders in Queensland, two significant collections pertain to their long fight for recognition.

[ 14 ] The Australian South Sea Islanders United Council Records 1975–2008, 2021 (Acc. 28617) includes documents, research papers, photographs, recorded interviews and other material relating to the work of the Australian South Sea Islanders United Council (ASSIUC) from the mid 1970s. Formed by a group of first descendants at Tweed Heads in 1975, the ASSIUC was the first national body to represent Australian South Sea Islanders, advocating for national recognition and promoting cultural awareness. A second iteration of the ASSIUC was re-registered in Townsville in 1991 and grew to fourteen branches including two in New South Wales . This body was instrumental in bringing communities together and advocating for change.

[ 15 ] The Australian South Sea Islanders 150 Commemoration and Festival 2013 Papers (Acc. 29744) also include documents such as meeting minutes and correspondence relating to the Australian South Sea Islanders Secretariat Inc., and photographs and interviews conducted by Nic Maclellan on 13 August 2013 at the Australian South Sea Islander 150th Anniversary event at Ormiston House, Brisbane.

[ 16 ] See also [ edit ] White Australia Policy Kanaka (Pacific Island worker) Blackbirding References [ edit ] ^ This Wikipedia article incorporates CC BY 4.0 licensed text from: "Sugar slaves" .

Blogs .

State Library of Queensland . 15 April 2021 . Retrieved 19 May 2021 .

^ "Documenting Democracy: Pacific Island Labourers Act 1901 (Cth)" . National Archives of Australia: Foundingdocs.gov.au. Archived from the original on 26 October 2009 . Retrieved 14 October 2012 .

^ Lawrence, David Russell (October 2014).

"Chapter 9 The plantation economy" (PDF) .

The Naturalist and his "Beautiful Islands": Charles Morris Woodford in the Western Pacific . ANU Press. p. 257.

ISBN 9781925022032 .

^ Lawrence, David Russell (October 2014).

"Chapter 10 The critical question of labour" (PDF) .

The Naturalist and his "Beautiful Islands": Charles Morris Woodford in the Western Pacific . ANU Press. pp.

295– 296.

ISBN 9781925022032 .

^ Stefanie Affeldt: Consuming Whiteness. Australian Racism and the ‘White Sugar’ Campaign . Lit-Verlag, Münster 2014, pp. 152–188.

^ "KANAKA DEPORTATION" .

The Sydney Morning Herald . National Library of Australia. 23 June 1903. p. 5 . Retrieved 15 November 2015 .

^ "KANAKA DEPORTATION" .

The Brisbane Courier . National Library of Australia. 18 December 1906. p. 4 . Retrieved 15 November 2015 .

^ Tracey Flanagan, Meredith Wilkie, and Susanna Iuliano.

"Australian South Sea Islanders: A Century of Race Discrimination under Australian Law" , Australian Human Rights Commission.

^ "Etymology, origin and meaning of kanaka by etymonline" .

Etymonline . 28 September 2017 . Retrieved 7 November 2023 .

^ Macquarie Dictionary (Fourth Edition), 2005, p. 774 ^ "Kanaka dictionary definition - Kanaka defined" .

www.yourdictionary.com .

^ "One Nation reject Stephen Andrew joins Katter's Australian Party" .

Courier Mail . Madura McCormack. 9 September 2024 . Retrieved 9 September 2024 .

^ "First speech" .

Hansard . Parliament of Australia . Retrieved 25 March 2021 .

^ This Wikipedia article incorporates text from Australian South Sea Islander collections (12 May 2022)  published by the State Library of Queensland under CC BY licence , accessed on 27 May 2022.

^ "28617 Australian South Sea Islanders United Council Records 1975-2008, 2021" .

State Library of Queensland OneSearch Catalogue . Retrieved 27 May 2022 .

^ "29744 Australian South Sea Islanders 150 Commemoration and Festival 2013 Papers 2013" .

State Library of Queensland OneSearch Catalogue . Retrieved 27 May 2022 .

External links [ edit ] State Library of Queensland's Nasuven Enares Oral History and Digital Story . Nasuven Enares is a direct descendant of Australian South Sea Islanders (ASSI), people who were forcibly brought to Australia at the turn of the century as indentured labour Attribution [ edit ] This Wikipedia article incorporates text from Sugar slaves (15 April 2021)  published by the State Library of Queensland under CC BY licence , accessed on 19 May 2021.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to South Sea Islanders .

Background and history of the South Sea Islanders at the Queensland Department of Premier and Cabinet website.

Australian South Sea Islanders - State Library of Queensland Plantation Voices - State Library of Queensland exhibition Australian South Sea Islander collections - State Library of Queensland Sugar Slaves - State Library of Queensland Australian South Sea Islanders 150 Commemoration and Festival 2013 Papers 2013 - State Library of Queensland Australian South Sea Islanders United Council Records 1975-2008 - State Library of Queensland The old place: Lot 71, Bli Bli, Queensland - State Library of Queensland. Interviews commissioned for the 2019 Queensland exhibition Plantation Voices: Contemporary conversations with Australian South Sea islanders.

v t e Countries and territories of Oceania List of Oceanian countries by area List of Oceanian countries by population Sovereign states Entire Australia Fiji Kiribati Marshall Islands Micronesia Nauru New Zealand Palau Papua New Guinea Samoa Solomon Islands Tonga Tuvalu Vanuatu In part Chile Easter Island Juan Fernández Islands Ecuador Galápagos Islands Indonesia Central Papua Highland Papua Papua South Papua Southwest Papua West Papua United States Hawaii Palmyra Atoll Associated states Cook Islands Niue Dependencies and other territories Australia Ashmore and Cartier Islands Christmas Island Cocos (Keeling) Islands Coral Sea Islands Norfolk Island France Clipperton Island French Polynesia New Caledonia Wallis and Futuna New Zealand Tokelau United Kingdom Pitcairn Islands United States American Samoa Baker Island Guam Howland Island Jarvis Island Johnston Atoll Kingman Reef Midway Atoll Northern Mariana Islands Wake Island British Overseas Territories Overseas France Overseas collectivity Overseas country of France Realm of New Zealand Political status of the Cook Islands and Niue States and territories of Australia Australian Indian Ocean Territories Territories of the United States Commonwealth (U.S. insular area) Insular area United States Minor Outlying Islands Oceania portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=South_Sea_Islanders&oldid=1306539528 " Categories : Australian people of Melanesian descent Oceanian diaspora in Australia Ethnic groups in Australia Ethnic groups in Oceania Labour history of Australia Slavery in Australia Slavery in Oceania Slavery in the British Empire Hidden categories: Articles incorporating text from the State Library of Queensland Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from November 2017 Use Australian English from January 2018 All Wikipedia articles written in Australian English "Related ethnic groups" needing confirmation Articles using infobox ethnic group with image parameters All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2020 Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 18 August 2025, at 08:43 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents South Sea Islanders 3 languages Add topic

