Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Climate impact 2 History 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Oyashio Current 32 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Беларуская Català Cebuano Čeština Deutsch Eesti Español Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית Кыргызча Lietuvių Македонски മലയാളം Nederlands 日本語 Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Русский Slovenščina Svenska Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Cold subarctic ocean current in the Pacific Ocean "Oyashio" redirects here. For other uses, see Oyashio (disambiguation) .

The Oyashio Current colliding with the Kuroshio Current near Hokkaido . When two currents collide, they create eddies .

Phytoplankton growing in the surface waters become concentrated along the boundaries of these eddies, tracing out the motions of the water.

The ocean currents surrounding the Japanese Archipelago: 1.

Kuroshio 2. Kuroshio extension 3. Kuroshio countercurrent 4. The Tsushima Current 5. The Tsugaru Current 6. The Sōya Current 7. Oyashio 8.

The Liman Current The Oyashio Current ( 親潮 ; "Parental Tide") , also known as the Okhotsk Current or Kurile Current , is a cold subarctic ocean current that flows south and circulates counterclockwise in the western North Pacific Ocean .  The waters of the Oyashio Current originate in the Arctic Ocean and flow southward via the Bering Sea , passing through the Bering Strait and transporting cold water from the Arctic Sea into the Pacific Ocean and the Sea of Okhotsk .  It collides with the Kuroshio Current off the eastern shore of Japan to form the North Pacific Current (or Drift).
The nutrient-rich Oyashio is named for its metaphorical role as the parent ( 親 , oya ) that provides for and nurtures marine organisms.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Climate impact [ edit ] The current has an important impact on the climate of the Russian Far East , mainly in Kamchatka and Chukotka , where the northern limit of tree growth is moved south up to ten degrees compared with the latitude it can reach in inland Siberia . The waters of the Oyashio Current form probably the richest fishery in the world owing to the extremely high nutrient content of the cold water and the very high tides (up to 10 metres (33 ft)) in some areas – which further enhances the availability of nutrients. However, the Oyashio Current also causes Vladivostok to be the most equatorward port to seasonally freeze and require icebreaking ships to remain open in winter. Nonetheless, this has relatively little effect on the fish yield through the Sea of Okhotsk, because the large tides mean freezing does not occur so easily.

History [ edit ] During glacial periods , when lower sea level exposed the Bering land bridge , the current could not flow in the regions the Oyashio affects today. The level of cooling with the onset of glacial conditions (after an interglacial ) was much less than in other areas of the Earth at similar latitudes. This allowed Tōhoku and Hokkaidō – the only areas of East Asia with enough snowfall to potentially form glaciers – to remain unglaciated except at high elevations during periods when Europe and North America were largely glaciated. This lack of glaciation explains why, despite its present climate being much colder than most of Europe , East Asia has retained 96 percent of Pliocene tree genera, whereas Europe has retained only 27%.

[ citation needed ] See also [ edit ] Oceanic gyres Physical oceanography References [ edit ] ^ Qiu, Bo (2001). "Kuroshio and Oyashio Currents".

Encyclopedia of Ocean Sciences (PDF) . Academic Press. pp.

1413– 25.

The upwelled, nutrient-rich water feeds the Oyashio from the north and leads to its nomenclature, parent ( oya ) stream ( shio ).

^ Glattstein, Judy (1996).

Enhance Your Garden with Japanese Plants . Kodansha International. p. 16.

ISBN 978-1-56836-137-6 .

[...] currents whirl around and ascend, and nourish microscopic plankton. Oyashio is thus the parent of fishes.

Reddy, MPM (2001): Descriptive physical oceanography . Taylor and Francis, ISBN 90-5410-706-5 , pp 367–8.

External links [ edit ] Regional Definition page for the Oyashio Current , UNEP Global International Waters Assessment (GIWA), accessed 26 July 2018 v t e Ocean currents and gyres Currents Arctic Ocean East Greenland North Icelandic Norwegian Transpolar Drift Stream Atlantic Ocean Angola Antilles Azores Baffin Island Benguela Brazil Canary Cape Horn Caribbean East Greenland East Iceland Falkland Florida Guinea Gulf Stream Irminger Labrador Lomonosov Loop North Atlantic North Brazil North Equatorial Norwegian Portugal South Atlantic South Equatorial West Greenland West Spitsbergen Indian Ocean Agulhas Agulhas Return East Madagascar Equatorial Counter Indian Monsoon Indonesian Throughflow Leeuwin Madagascar Mozambique North Madagascar Somali South Equatorial West Australian Pacific Ocean Alaska Aleutian California Cromwell Davidson East Australian East Korea Warm Equatorial Counter Humboldt Indonesian Throughflow Kamchatka Kuroshio Mindanao North Equatorial North Korea Cold North Pacific Oyashio South Equatorial Tasman Front Southern Ocean Antarctic Circumpolar Tasman Outflow Gyres Major gyres Indian Ocean Gyre North Atlantic Gyre South Atlantic Gyre North Pacific Gyre South Pacific Gyre Other gyres Beaufort Gyre Ross Gyre Weddell Gyre Related Atmospheric circulation Boundary current Coriolis force Ekman transport Marine debris Marine garbage patches Great Pacific Indian Ocean North Atlantic South Pacific Thermohaline circulation Environment portal Oceans portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Oyashio_Current&oldid=1291343519 " Categories : Currents of the Pacific Ocean Bering Strait Temperate Northern Pacific Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Japanese-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2017 This page was last edited on 20 May 2025, at 16:33 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Oyashio Current 32 languages Add topic

