Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Campus 3 Academics 4 Student body 5 Student life Toggle Student life subsection 5.1 Athletics 5.2 Facilities 5.2.1 Cheryl R. Condon Field 6 Notable people Toggle Notable people subsection 6.1 Alumni 6.2 Faculty 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Elms College 3 languages العربية Español Italiano Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 42°8′32.15″N 72°36′5.00″W ﻿ / ﻿ 42.1422639°N 72.6013889°W ﻿ / 42.1422639; -72.6013889 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Elms Blazers ) Catholic college in Chicopee, Massachusetts, US "Lady of the Elms" redirects here. For the Ohio school, see Our Lady of the Elms High School .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Elms College" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( June 2009 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) College of Our Lady of the Elms Latin : Collegium Dominae Nostrae In Ulmis [ 1 ] Motto Viam Veritatis Elegi Motto in English "I have chosen the way of truth" Type Private college Established 1928 Religious affiliation Roman Catholic ( Sisters of St. Joseph ) Academic affiliation Cooperating Colleges of Greater Springfield Endowment US$ 12 million President Harry Dumay Academic staff 67 Undergraduates 1,217 Location Chicopee , Massachusetts , U.S.

42°8′32.15″N 72°36′5.00″W ﻿ / ﻿ 42.1422639°N 72.6013889°W ﻿ / 42.1422639; -72.6013889 Campus 22 acres (8.9 ha) Colors Green, gold, white Nickname Blazers Sporting affiliations NCAA Division III Website elms.edu The College of Our Lady of the Elms , often called Elms College , is a private Roman Catholic college in Chicopee, Massachusetts in the United States.

History [ edit ] The Sisters of St. Joseph and the Diocese of Springfield co-founded Elms College as a preparatory academy for women in Pittsfield, Massachusetts , the Academy of Our Lady of the Elms, in 1897.

[ 2 ] In 1899, Rev. John McCoy and Bishop Thomas Beaven of the Springfield diocese purchased property in Chicopee and it became St. Joseph's Normal College.

In 1927, the Sisters of Saint Joseph petitioned the Commonwealth of Massachusetts to charter the school as a women's liberal arts college with a specialization in education, the charter was approved in 1928, and the name was changed to the College of Our Lady of the Elms with Rev. Thomas Michael O'Leary as the first president. Through the efforts of the Sisters of St. Joseph and the Springfield diocesan clergy, the curriculum was expanded through the 1940s and 1950s, and in 1953, an evening program was established.

To meet the needs of the surrounding community, Elms developed undergraduate programs in nursing, business management, and communication sciences and disorders during the 1960s and 1970s. In the late 1980s, Weekend College, paralegal studies and legal studies, and a Master of Arts degree program in teaching were instituted.

The Elms College board of trustees voted 23–5 to begin admitting men, starting with the 1998–1999 school year, on October 7, 1997.

Campus [ edit ] Berchmans Hall The campus is about two miles north of Metro Center Springfield, Massachusetts . It is focused on the Keating Quadrangle, which lies at its center, and has 14 buildings.

[ 3 ] In 2014, Elms College completed construction on the Center for Natural and Health Sciences, its first academic building in more than 30 years.

Academics [ edit ] Elms offers thirty-three academic majors to 814 full-time undergraduate students, and it employs 67 full-time faculty members.

[ citation needed ] Academically, the college is divided into the division of business, division of communication sciences and disorders, division of education, division of humanities and fine arts, division of natural sciences, mathematics and technology, and division of social sciences.

In 2013, the division of nursing became the school of nursing. On August 9 2023, Julie Beck was announced as the new dean of the School of Nursing (SON).

[ 4 ] Student body [ edit ] In 2020 the school had about 1,100 students at the undergraduate level, with about 40% eligible for Pell grants . Fred Thys of WBUR wrote that year that "Elms caters to many students who are the first in their family to go to college." [ 5 ] Student life [ edit ] Athletics [ edit ] The Elms College teams participate at the Division III level of the National Collegiate Athletic Association . The team colors are green, gold, and white.  The Elms athletic teams competes in the Great Northeast Athletic Conference [ 6 ] and are known as the Blazers.

Elms Blazers logo Men's sports Women's sports Baseball Basketball Basketball Cross Country Cross Country Field hockey Golf Lacrosse Lacrosse Soccer Soccer Softball Swimming Swimming Volleyball Volleyball Facilities [ edit ] The majority of athletics at Elms College are based out of The Maguire Center, which features a physical therapy and training center, gym and weight room, six-lane swimming pool (Natatorium), 100-meter track, and the Picknelly Arena basketball court.

[ 7 ] In June of 2007, the college announced an athletic fields renovation project involving the soccer specific Leary Field being transformed into a multi-use artificial surface field and the construction of a new NCAA-compliant softball field.

[ 8 ] The baseball team travels to Mackenzie Stadium in Holyoke, Mass.

Cheryl R. Condon Field [ edit ] The new softball field was built in for the 2008 season, it featured newly-added covered dugouts and a batting cage and extended the homerun wall a few feet. The field was dedicated to longtime winningest coach Cheryl R. Condon on April 23 2008.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] Notable people [ edit ] Alumni [ edit ] Joan Hartley , Connecticut politician, Deputy President Pro Tempore of the Connecticut State Senate [ 11 ] Faculty [ edit ] Paul Jenkins , professor of poetry Thomas Michael O'Leary , co-founder and first president of Elms College John Elder Robison , adjunct professor, autistic author of two books, brother of Augusten Burroughs Christopher Joseph Weldon , president of Elms College from 1958 to 1977 References [ edit ] ^ "Search" .

Internet Archive .

^ Songe, Alice H. (1978).

American Universities and Colleges: A Dictionary of Name Changes . Metuchen, N.J.: Scarecrow Press. p.

45 .

ISBN 0810811375 .

^ Elms College Campus Map ^ "Elms College Names Julie Beck Dean of School of Nursing" .

BusinessWest . 2023-08-09 . Retrieved 2024-02-13 .

^ Thys, Fred (2020-06-24).

"For Small Colleges, Decision To Reopen Campus Is Especially Daunting" .

WBUR . Retrieved 2020-06-26 .

^ Elms College Athletics ^ http://athletics.elms.edu/information/facilities/index Archived 2010-06-08 at the Wayback Machine Maguire Center ^ "Elms College building 2 new athletic fields" .

masslive . 2007-06-05 . Retrieved 2024-02-13 .

^ Lightman, Andrew.

"Elms College names softball field for Rockland High School grad" .

Enterprise News . Retrieved 2024-02-13 .

^ "Cheryl Condon, Jennifer LeDoux, Kristin Tassey headed to Elms College Athletics Hall of Fame" . 5 August 2012.

^ "Senator Hartley" .

senatedems.ct.gov . Archived from the original on December 13, 2012 . Retrieved 2024-01-20 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Elms College .

Official website Athletics website v t e Cooperating Colleges of Greater Springfield American International College Bay Path University Elms College Holyoke Community College Springfield College Springfield Technical Community College Western New England University Westfield State University v t e American women's colleges that became coeducational Became coeducational Adelphi Albertus Magnus Andrew Anna Maria Arcadia Avila Barber–Scotia Belhaven Belmont Bennington Blue Mountain Christian Brescia Caldwell Carlow Chatham Chestnut Hill Chowan Columbia (MO) Columbia (SC) Connecticut College Converse Dominican (CA) Dominican (NY) Drexel College of Medicine D'Youville Elms Elmira Emmanuel (MA) Felician Florida State Fontbonne Georgia College Georgian Court Goucher Greensboro Holy Cross (LA) Holy Family (PA) Hood Hunter Huston–Tillotson Immaculata Incarnate Word James Madison Keuka LaGrange Lake Erie Lasell Lesley Lindenwood Longwood Lynn Manhattanville Mary Baldwin Mary Hardin–Baylor Mary Washington Marygrove Marymount (VA) Marymount Manhattan Maryville (MO) Marywood Mercy (NY) Mercyhurst Midway Misericordia Mississippi University for Women Montevallo Mount Mercy Mount St. Joseph Mount Saint Vincent Moravian Notre Dame (MD) Notre Dame de Namur Ohio Dominican Our Lady of the Lake Queens (NC) Radford Randolph Regis (MA) Rivier Rosemont Russell Sage Saint Elizabeth St. Francis (IL) Saint Joseph (CT) Saint Joseph's (ME) St. Joseph's (NY) Saint Mary (KS) St. Mary's (MD) Saint Mary-of-the-Woods St. Scholastica Saint Xavier (IL) Salve Regina Sarah Lawrence Seton Hill Shorter Skidmore Southern Virginia Spalding Stevenson Texas Woman's Thomas More (KY) Trocaire UNC Greensboro University of Science and Arts of Oklahoma UT Southern Valdosta State Vassar Virginia Union Viterbo Washington College of Law Webster West Alabama Wheaton (MA) William Peace William Woods Wilson (PA) Winthrop Coordinate colleges H. Sophie Newcomb Memorial College (merged with Tulane University ) Margaret Morrison Carnegie College (merged with Carnegie Mellon University ) Maryhill College (merged with St. Edward's University ) Mt. Vernon College (with George Washington University ) Pembroke (merged with Brown University ) Radcliffe College (merged with Harvard University ) v t e Great Northeast Athletic Conference Full members Albertus Magnus Falcons Colby-Sawyer Chargers Dean Bulldogs Elms Blazers Emmanuel Saints Lasell Lasers Mitchell Mariners New England College Pilgrims Norwich Cadets Regis Pride Rivier Raiders Saint Joseph (CT) Blue Jays Saint Joseph's (ME) Monks Simmons Sharks Associate members Eastern Nazarene Lions ( men's tennis ) Husson Eagles ( swimming & diving ) Rhode Island College Anchormen ( men's golf ) Southern Maine Huskies ( men's golf ) UMass Dartmouth Corsairs ( men's golf ) Wentworth Leopards ( men's volleyball ) Former members Anna Maria Amcats Daniel Webster Eagles Endicott Gulls Emerson Lions Mount Ida Mustangs Pine Manor Gators Southern Vermont Mountaineers Suffolk Rams Western New England Golden Bears v t e Massachusetts State Collegiate Athletic Conference Full members Anna Maria Amcats Bridgewater State Bears 1 Fitchburg State Falcons Framingham State Rams MCLA Trailblazers 2 Massachusetts Maritime Buccaneers 3 Salem State Vikings 4 Westfield State Owls Worcester State Lancers Associate members Dean Bulldogs 7 Eastern Nazarene Lions 5 Elms Blazers 5 Mitchell Mariners 5 Plymouth State Panthers 6 Springfield Pride 5 UMass Dartmouth Corsairs 6 Former full members Boston State Warriors Lowell State Indians Notes : 1 non-ice hockey member 2 non-football and ice hockey member 3 non-basketball and ice hockey member 4 non-football member 5 men's golf 6 men's ice hockey and football 7 football Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National United States Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Elms_College&oldid=1299747788#Athletics " Categories : Elms College Sisters of Saint Joseph colleges and universities Buildings and structures in Chicopee, Massachusetts Universities and colleges established in 1928 Former women's universities and colleges in the United States Catholic universities and colleges in Massachusetts Universities and colleges in Hampden County, Massachusetts New England Collegiate Conference schools 1928 establishments in Massachusetts Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from June 2009 All articles needing additional references Articles containing Latin-language text Coordinates on Wikidata Infobox mapframe without OSM relation ID on Wikidata Articles using infobox university All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2009 Commons category link from Wikidata Pages using the Kartographer extension This page was last edited on 10 July 2025, at 05:05 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Elms College 3 languages Add topic

