Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Advancement 2 Primate of All Ireland 3 Historical observations 4 Notes 5 References Toggle the table of contents George Stone (bishop) 1 language Svenska Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia English bishop The Most Reverend George Stone D.D.

Archbishop of Armagh Primate of All Ireland Portrait by Allan Ramsay Church Church of Ireland See Armagh Appointed 13 March 1747 In office 1747-1764 Predecessor John Hoadly Successor Richard Robinson Previous post(s) Dean of Ferns (1733–1734) Dean of Derry (1734–1740) Bishop of Ferns and Leighlin (1740–1743) Bishop of Kildare (1743–1745) Bishop of Derry (1745–1747) Orders Consecration 3 August 1740 by John Hoadly Personal details Born 7 January 1708 London , England Died 19 December 1764 (1764-12-19) (aged 56) London , England Buried Westminster Abbey Nationality English Denomination Anglican Parents Andrew Stone & Anne Holbrooke Education Westminster School Alma mater Christ Church, Oxford George Stone (1708 – 19 December 1764) was the Church of Ireland Archbishop of Armagh ( Primate of All Ireland ) from 1747 to his death.

Advancement [ edit ] Born in London, the son of Andrew Stone, a London goldsmith. He was educated at Westminster School and Christ Church, Oxford . Having taken holy orders, his advancement in the Church was very rapid, mainly through the influence of his older brother Andrew Stone . Andrew's connections with George II made him able to promote the preferment of his brother George, who went to Ireland as chaplain to Lionel Sackville, 1st Duke of Dorset when that nobleman became Lord Lieutenant of Ireland in 1731.

[ 1 ] In 1733 Stone was made Dean of Ferns , and in the following year he exchanged this deanery for that of Derry . In 1740 he became Bishop of Ferns and Leighlin , in 1743 Bishop of Kildare , in 1745 Bishop of Derry , and in 1747 Archbishop of Armagh . During the two years that he occupied the See of Kildare he was also Dean of Christ Church, Dublin .

[ 1 ] Primate of All Ireland [ edit ] Christianity portal From the moment that he became Primate of All Ireland , Stone proved himself more a politician than an ecclesiastic. "He was said to have been selfish, worldly-minded, ambitious and ostentatious; and he was accused, though very probably falsely, of gross private vice."  His aim was to secure political power, a desire which brought him into conflict with Henry Boyle , the Speaker of the Irish House of Commons , who had organized a formidable opposition to the government. The Duke of Dorset's reappointment to the Lord Lieutenancy in 1751, with his son Lord George Sackville as Chief Secretary for Ireland , strengthened the primate's position and enabled him to triumph over the popular party on the constitutional question as to the right of the Irish House of Commons to dispose of surplus Irish revenue, which the government maintained was the property of the Crown .

[ 1 ] When Dorset was replaced by the Duke of Devonshire in 1755, Boyle was raised to the peerage as Earl of Shannon and received a pension, and other members of the opposition also obtained pensions or places; and the archbishop, finding himself excluded from power, went into opposition to the government in alliance with John Ponsonby . These two, afterwards joined by the primate's old rival Lord Shannon , and usually supported by the Earl of Kildare , regained control of affairs in 1758, during the viceroyalty of the Duke of Bedford . In the same year, Stone wrote a remarkable letter, preserved in the Bedford Correspondence (ii. 357), in which he speaks very despondingly of the material condition of Ireland and the distress of the people. The archbishop was one of the "undertakers" who controlled the Irish House of Commons, and although he did not regain the almost dictatorial power he had exercised at an earlier period, which had suggested a comparison between him and Cardinal Wolsey , he continued to enjoy a prominent share in the administration of Ireland until his death, which occurred in London on 19 December 1764.

[ 1 ] According to Horace Walpole, his death was due to ruining his constitution by an excess of food and alcohol.

Historical observations [ edit ] Although this "much-abused prelate," as Lecky calls him, was a firm supporter of the English government in Ireland, he was far from being a man of tyrannical or intolerant disposition. It was due to his influence that in the anti-tithe disturbances in Ulster in 1763 the government acted with conspicuous moderation, and that the movement was suppressed with very little bloodshed. He constantly favoured a policy of conciliation towards the Roman Catholics , whose loyalty he defended at different periods of his career both in his speeches in the Irish House of Lords and in his correspondence with ministers in London.

[ 1 ] Philip Stanhope, 4th Earl of Chesterfield told him that he was the only man with the political skills to rule Ireland, but in a dig at his irregular private life, said that it would help if he became a clergyman.

Archbishop Stone, who never married, was a man of remarkably handsome appearance; and his manners were "eminently seductive and insinuating".

Richard Cumberland , who was struck by the "Polish magnificence" of the primate, speaks in the highest terms of his courage, tact, and qualities as a popular leader.

Horace Walpole , who gives a generally unfavourable picture of his private character, acknowledges that Stone possessed "abilities seldom to be matched", and gives him credit for charity, generosity and an absence of malice; and he had the distinction of being mentioned by David Hume as one of the only two men of mark who had perceived merit in that author's History of England on its first appearance. He was himself the author of several volumes of sermons which were published during his lifetime.

[ 1 ] Notes [ edit ] ^ a b c d e f One or more of the preceding sentences incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911). " Stone, George ".

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 25 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 957.

References [ edit ] Richard Mant , History of the Church of Ireland , vol. ii. (London, 1840) J. A. Froude , English in Ireland in the Eighteenth Century (3 vols., London, 1872–1874) W. E. H. Lecky , History of Ireland in the Eighteenth Century (5 vols., London, 1892) J. R. O'Flanagan, Lives of the Lord Chancellors and Keepers of the Great Seal of Ireland (2 vols., London, 1870).

Richard Cumberland, Memoirs (London, 1806) Francis Hardy , Memoirs of the earl of Charlemont (2 vols., 2nd. ed., London, 1812) Horace Walpole , Memoirs of the Reign of George II.

(3 vols., London, 1846) Bedford Correspondence (3 vols., London, 1842–1846) Correspondence of Chatham (4 vols., London, 1838–1840).

Religious titles Preceded by John Hoadly Archbishop of Armagh 1747–1764 Succeeded by Richard Robinson v t e Anglican archbishops of Armagh George Cromer George Dowdall Hugh Goodacre George Dowdall Adam Loftus Thomas Lancaster John Long John Garvey Henry Ussher Christopher Hampton James Ussher John Bramhall James Margetson Michael Boyle Narcissus Marsh Thomas Lindsay Hugh Boulter John Hoadly George Stone Richard Robinson, Lord Rokeby William Newcome William Stuart Lord John Beresford Marcus Beresford Robert Knox Robert Gregg William Alexander John Crozier Charles D'Arcy Godfrey Day John Gregg James McCann George Simms John Armstrong Robin Eames Alan Harper Richard Clarke v t e Bishops of Derry and of Derry and Raphoe Derry George Montgomery Brutus Babington John Tanner George Downham John Bramhall George Wilde Robert Mossom Michael Ward Ezekiel Hopkins William King Charles Hickman John Hartstonge St George Ashe William Nicolson Henry Downes Thomas Rundle Carew Reynell George Stone William Barnard Frederick Hervey (later Earl of Bristol) William Knox Richard Ponsonby (became Bishop of Derry and Raphoe) Derry & Raphoe Richard Ponsonby William Higgin William Alexander George Chadwick Joseph Peacocke Robert Boyd Charles Tyndall Cuthbert Peacocke Robin Eames James Mehaffey Ken Good Andrew Forster v t e Bishops of Kildare William Miagh Thomas Lancaster Thomas Leverous Alexander Craike Robert Daly Daniel Neylan William Pilsworth Robert Ussher William Golborne Thomas Price Ambrose Jones Anthony Dopping William Moreton Welbore Ellis Charles Cobbe George Stone Thomas Fletcher Richard Robinson Charles Jackson George Jones Charles Lindsay v t e Bishops of Ferns and Leighlin Hugh Allen Robert Grave Nicholas Stafford Thomas Ram George Andrews Robert Price Richard Boyle Narcissus Marsh Bartholomew Vigors Josiah Hort John Hoadly Arthur Price Edward Synge George Stone William Cotterell Robert Downes John Garnett Hon William Carmichael Thomas Salmon Richard Robinson Charles Jackson Edward Young Hon Joseph Bourke Walter Cope William Preston Euseby Cleaver Hon Percy Jocelyn Lord Robert Tottenham Thomas Elrington see united to Ossory, Ferns and Leighlin v t e Deans of Christ Church Cathedral, Dublin Robert Paynswick Thomas Lockwood John Garvey Jonas Wheeler Randolph Barlow Henry Tilson James Margetson Patrick Cahill William Berrey Robert Mossom John Parry William Moreton Alexius Stafford Bishops of Kildare Welbore Ellis Charles Cobbe George Stone Thomas Fletcher Richard Robinson Charles Jackson George Jones Charles Lindsay Henry Pakenham (also Dean of St Patrick's ) John West (also Dean of St Patrick's) Richard Chenevix Trench The Lord Plunket William Greene James Walsh Harry Vere White Herbert Kennedy Ernest Lewis-Crosby Norman Emerson Tom Salmon John Paterson Des Harman Dermot Dunne v t e Deans of Derry William Webbe Henry Sutton Michael Wandesford James Margetson Geoffrey Rhodes George Beaumont George Holland John Lesley Peter Morris Coote Ormsby John Bolton George Berkeley George Stone Robert Downes Arthur Smyth Philip Smythe Thomas Barnard William Pery Edward Emily John Hume James Saurin Thomas Gough Usher Tighe Charles Seymour John Gwynn Andrew Smyly Thomas Olphert George Galbraith Richard Hayes Richard King Leslie Lawrenson George Good Cecil Orr William Morton v t e Deans of Ferns John Garvey John Devereux Walter Turner William Campyon Thomas Ram (senior) Thomas Ram (junior) Robert Wilson Anthony Proctor John Watson John Creighton Benjamin Phipps Tobias Pullen Thomas Cox William Crosse Arthur Price Pascal Ducasse Thomas Sawbridge George Stone Joseph Story Robert Watts John Alcock Richard Marlay Thomas Stopford Peter Browne Henry Newland Hamilton Verschoyle William Atkins John Dowse Charles Hind Humphrey Ellison Jonathan Cooper John Alexander Thomas Gibson Henry Lyster William Gibson Alfred Forbes Thomas McFall David Earl Leslie Forrest Paul Mooney Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF 2 FAST WorldCat National United States Netherlands Belgium People Ireland Other SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=George_Stone_(bishop)&oldid=1198548000 " Categories : 1708 births 1764 deaths 18th-century Anglican archbishops Members of the Privy Council of Ireland Members of the Irish House of Lords Deans of Derry Deans of Ferns Deans of Christ Church Cathedral, Dublin Anglican archbishops of Armagh People educated at Westminster School, London Alumni of Christ Church, Oxford Bishops of Ferns and Leighlin Anglican bishops of Kildare Anglican bishops of Derry British expatriate archbishops Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from October 2021 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica articles with no significant updates This page was last edited on 24 January 2024, at 11:35 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents George Stone (bishop) 1 language Add topic

