Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 New Testament Toggle New Testament subsection 1.1 John 17:12 1.2 2 Thessalonians 2:3 1.3 Revelation 2 Derivation 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Son of perdition 4 languages فارسی 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia مصرى Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia New Testament phrase For the term in Mormonism, see Son of perdition (Mormonism) . For the album by Wretched, see Son of Perdition (album) .

Christian eschatology Contrasting beliefs Historicism Interpretations of Revelation Futurism Dispensationalism Preterism Idealism The Millennium Amillennialism Postmillennialism Premillennialism Prewrath rapture Posttribulation rapture Dispensationalism Biblical texts Daniel Seventy Weeks Synoptic Gospels Olivet Discourse Mark 13 Matthew 24 Sheep and Goats Pauline Epistles 2 Thessalonians Johannine literature Revelation (Events) Pseudepigrapha 1 Enoch 2 Esdras Key terms Abomination of desolation Antichrist Apocalypse Apocatastasis Armageddon The Beast False prophet Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse Gog and Magog Great Apostasy Great Tribulation Katechon Kingdom of God Lake of fire Last Judgment Man of sin New Earth New Jerusalem Number of the Beast Rapture Resurrection of the dead Second Coming Seven bowls Seven seals Son of perdition Two witnesses War in Heaven Whore of Babylon Woman of the Apocalypse World to come Christianity portal v t e The son of perdition ( Biblical Greek : ὁ υἱός τῆς ἀπωλείας , ho huios tēs apōleias ) is a phrase associated with a demoniacal title that appears in the New Testament in the Gospel of John 17:12 and in the Second Epistle to the Thessalonians 2:3 .

New Testament [ edit ] The two occurrences of the Greek phrase have traditionally been translated consistently in English Bibles from the Wycliffe Bible , following the Latin Vulgate which has "filius perditionis" (son of perdition) in both instances. However this is not the case in all languages; for example the Luther Bible renders the use in John as "das verlorene Kind" (the lost child), but the use in 2 Thessalonians as "das Kind des Verderbens" (the child of corruption).

John 17:12 [ edit ] In John 17:12 , Jesus , in reference to Judas Iscariot , says that of all his disciples , none has been lost except the "son of perdition".

While I was with them in the world, I kept them in thy name: those that thou gavest me I have kept, and none of them is lost, but the son of perdition; that the scripture might be fulfilled.

— John 17:12 King James Version , 1611 The New International Version translates the phrase as "the one doomed to destruction." D. A. Carson suggests that this verse refers both to Judas' character and to his destiny.

[ 1 ] Various Old Testament origins have been suggested for "that the scripture might be fulfilled." These traditionally include Psalm 41:9 "Yea, mine own familiar friend, in whom I trusted, which did eat of my bread, hath lifted up his heel against me." [ 2 ] Also Psalm 109:8 "Let his days be few; and let another take his office." which is interpreted by Peter in Acts 1:16–20 as having been prophetic of Judas Iscariot.

2 Thessalonians 2:3 [ edit ] In 2 Thessalonians 2:3 , Paul referred to "the son of perdition".

2 Thessalonians 2:3 "Let no man deceive you by any means: for that day shall not come, except there come a falling away first, and that man of sin be revealed, the son of perdition;" King James Version , 1611 He appears to equate this image with the Man of Sin .

Some scholars [ 3 ] and theologians [ 4 ] down through history, including Hippolytus, [ 5 ] Luther, [ 6 ] Wesley, [ 7 ] Manton, [ 8 ] Schaff, [ 9 ] et al, say that first "Son of Perdition" reference is to Antiochus IV Epiphanes , the man who attacked the Second Temple in Jerusalem and defiled it by sacrificing a pig on the altar, erecting a statue of Zeus as himself in the temple, raiding the Temple treasury and minting coins saying "Theos Epiphanes" (God manifest), etc . Even those theologians who advocate an interpretation of Daniel that includes the Roman Empire in their analysis recognize Antiochus as a prototype.

[ 10 ] Revelation [ edit ] Some theologians and scholars also consider "the beast that goes into perdition" mentioned in Revelation 17:8 and 17:11 to be references to the son of perdition." [ 11 ] [ 12 ] Derivation [ edit ] Similar uses of "son" occur in Hebrew, such as "sons of corruption" (Isaiah 1:4 בָּנִים מַשְׁחִיתִים banim mashchitim), however the exact Hebrew or Greek term "son of perdition" does not occur in Jewish writings prior to the New Testament.

According to some modern biblical criticism New Testament writers derived the "son of perdition" (and " man of sin ") concepts from Daniel and 1 Maccabees 2:48 "And they did not surrender the horn to the sinner." et al.

[ 13 ] John related the "Son of Perdition" concepts by language, referring to "the star that fell from heaven" Revelation 9:1 by two names, one Greek, and the other Hebrew. ( Revelation 9:11 ) The Greek name is " Apollyon " (Greek: Aπολλυων), from the Greek root word "apollumi" (Greek:απολλυμι).

[ 14 ] It refers to utter loss, eternal destruction, and disassociation." [Strong's 622 ] The Hebrew name is " Abaddon " (Greek: Aβαδδων), from the Aramaic root word "'abad", which means the same thing as the Greek root word. Strong's 07 Daniel 7:11 says that the eventual destiny of the "great beast" is to be slain, and his body "destroyed" ('abad), and given to the eternal flames (generally accepted by religious scholars to be a reference to hell ).

Matthew Henry wrote: Of the kings that came after Antiochus nothing is here prophesied, for that was the most malicious mischievous enemy to the church, that was a type of the son of perdition, whom the Lord shall consume with the breath of his mouth and destroy with the brightness of his coming, and none shall help him.

[ 15 ] See also [ edit ] Son of perdition (Mormonism) References [ edit ] ^ D. A. Carson , The Gospel According to John (Leicester: Apollos, 1991), p. 563.

^ James Clark A Layman's Theology 2008 Page 72 "12, mentions that He has guarded the disciples and "that none of them is lost but the son of perdition, that the scripture might be fulfilled." The prevailing wisdom probably is that the "son of perdition" was Judas, the fulfilled scripture Psalm 41:9, ..." ^ Commentary Critical: Daniel ch. 11 ^ "Revelation," The People on the Earth: Chapters 2–3, Letter to Ephesus, v 13. Bullinger ^ ANF05, Hippolytus ^ "Table Talk," Martin Luther ^ Commentary on [Daniel] Chapter XI, Wesley, ^ "Thomas Manton: Complete Works of Thomas Manton, D.D. Vol. III – Christian Classics Ethereal Library" .

www.ccel.org . Retrieved 2023-07-29 .

^ NPNF (V2-06), Philip Schaff ^ "Antiochus Epiphanes" . Endtime-truth.com . Retrieved 2012-03-10 .

^ Commentary Critical and Explanatory on the Whole Bible , Jamieson, Fausset, Brown, et al Chapter 17 ^ "Doctrinal Divinity" by John Gill, Chapter 14: Of the Spiritual Reign of Christ ^ Commentary Critical and Explanatory of the Whole Bible, Revelation chapter 17, point 11 ^ Albrecht Oepke (1964). "ἀπολλυμι". In Gerhard Kittel (ed.).

Theological Dictionary of the New Testament, Volume I . Grand Rapids: Wm. B. Eerdmans. p. 397.

^ Matthew Henry's Complete Commentary on the Bible, Daniel, chapter 11 v t e Global catastrophic risks Future of the Earth Future of an expanding universe Ultimate fate of the universe Human extinction risk estimates Technological Chemical warfare Cyberattack Cyberwarfare Cyberterrorism Cybergeddon Ransomware Gray goo Nanoweapons Kinetic bombardment Kinetic energy weapon Nuclear warfare Mutual assured destruction Dead Hand Doomsday Clock Doomsday device Antimatter weapon Electromagnetic pulse (EMP) Safety of high-energy particle collision experiments Micro black hole Strangelet Synthetic intelligence / Artificial intelligence AI takeover Existential risk from artificial intelligence Technological singularity Transhumanism Sociological Anthropogenic hazard Collapsology Doomsday argument Self-indication assumption doomsday argument rebuttal Self-referencing doomsday argument rebuttal Economic collapse Malthusian catastrophe New World Order (conspiracy theory) Nuclear holocaust cobalt famine winter Riots Social crisis Societal collapse State collapse World War III Ecological Climate change Anoxic event Biodiversity loss Mass mortality event Cascade effect Cataclysmic pole shift hypothesis Deforestation Desertification Plant or animal species extinctions Civilizational collapse Tipping points Climate sensitivity Flood basalt Global dimming Global terrestrial stilling Global warming Hypercane Ice age Ecocide Ecological collapse Environmental degradation Habitat destruction Human impact on the environment coral reefs on marine life Land degradation Land consumption Land surface effects on climate Ocean acidification Ozone depletion Resource depletion Sea level rise Supervolcano winter Verneshot Water pollution Water scarcity Earth Overshoot Day Overexploitation Overpopulation Human overpopulation Biological Extinction Extinction event Holocene extinction Human extinction List of extinction events Genetic erosion Genetic pollution Others Biodiversity loss Decline in amphibian populations Decline in insect populations Biotechnology risk Biological agent Biological warfare Bioterrorism Colony collapse disorder Defaunation Dysgenics Interplanetary contamination Pandemic Pollinator decline Overfishing Astronomical Big Crunch Big Rip Coronal mass ejection Cosmological phase transition Geomagnetic storm False vacuum decay Gamma-ray burst Heat death of the universe Proton decay Virtual black hole Impact event Asteroid impact avoidance Asteroid impact prediction Potentially hazardous object Near-Earth object winter Rogue planet Rogue star Near-Earth supernova Hypernova Micronova Solar flare Stellar collision Eschatological Buddhist Maitreya Three Ages Hindu Kalki Kali Yuga Last Judgement Second Coming 1 Enoch Daniel Abomination of desolation Prophecy of Seventy Weeks Messiah Christian Futurism Historicism Interpretations of Revelation Idealism Preterism 2 Esdras 2 Thessalonians Man of sin Katechon Antichrist Book of Revelation Events Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse Seven bowls Seven seals The Beast Two witnesses War in Heaven Whore of Babylon Great Apostasy New Earth New Jerusalem Olivet Discourse Great Tribulation Son of perdition Sheep and Goats Islamic Al-Qa'im Beast of the Earth Dhu al-Qarnayn Dhul-Suwayqatayn Dajjal Israfil Mahdi Sufyani Jewish Messiah War of Gog and Magog Third Temple Norse Zoroastrian Saoshyant Others 2011 end times prediction 2012 phenomenon Apocalypse Apocalyptic literature Apocalypticism Armageddon Blood moon prophecy Earth Changes End time Gog and Magog List of dates predicted for apocalyptic events Messianism Messianic Age Millenarianism Millennialism Premillennialism Amillennialism Postmillennialism Nemesis (hypothetical star) Nibiru cataclysm Rapture Prewrath Posttribulation rapture Resurrection of the dead Vulnerable world hypothesis World to come Fictional Alien invasion Apocalyptic and post-apocalyptic fiction List of apocalyptic and post-apocalyptic fiction List of apocalyptic films Climate fiction Disaster films List of disaster films Zombie apocalypse Zombie Organizations Centre for the Study of Existential Risk Future of Humanity Institute Future of Life Institute Nuclear Threat Initiative General Disaster Depression Financial crisis Survivalism World portal Categories Apocalypticism Future problems Hazards Risk analysis Doomsday scenarios NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐nmlzk
Cached time: 20250814221136
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.434 seconds
Real time usage: 0.554 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1271/1000000
Revision size: 7243/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 62026/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 1582/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 8/100
Expensive parser function count: 4/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 34229/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.295/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 15339406/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  468.728      1 -total
 23.59%  110.585      1 Template:Langx
 19.97%   93.606      1 Template:Reflist
 17.09%   80.115      1 Template:Christian_eschatology
 16.72%   78.350      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 15.70%   73.588      2 Template:Cite_web
 14.17%   66.398      1 Template:Short_description
 12.21%   57.220      1 Template:Doomsday
 12.11%   56.742      3 Template:Navbox
  7.21%   33.777      2 Template:Pagetype Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:223473:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814221136 and revision id 1292552927. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Son_of_perdition&oldid=1292552927 " Categories : Christian terminology Judas Iscariot New Testament words and phrases Antiochus IV Epiphanes Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Biblical Greek-language text This page was last edited on 27 May 2025, at 15:54 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Son of perdition 4 languages Add topic

