Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 The Stone family 2 Architecture 3 Jeremiah Horrocks 4 Dolls Museum 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Carr House, Bretherton 1 language Deutsch Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Carr House (Bretherton, Lancashire, England) ) Listed building in Lancashire, England Carr House Carr House porch, with the inscription above the door Location within the Borough of Chorley General information Architectural style Jacobean Town or city Bretherton Country England Coordinates 53°41′13″N 2°48′54″W ﻿ / ﻿ 53.6869°N 2.8150°W ﻿ / 53.6869; -2.8150 Year(s) built 1613 Client Thomas Stone Technical details Material Brick Listed Building – Grade II* Official name Carr House Designated 22 October 1952 Reference no.

1163160 Carr House is a 17th-century house within the Bank Hall Estate, half-way between the villages of Tarleton and Much Hoole at the extreme north-west of the village of Bretherton , Lancashire , England. The building faces south to the Bretherton road, from which it stands back some distance, and has a foreyard inclosed on the west side by farm buildings.

The Stone family [ edit ] Carr House is the ancestral home of the Stone family. The house was built in 1613 by Thomas Stone, a haberdasher from London, and his brother Andrew, a merchant from Amsterdam.

[ 1 ] The local church of St Michael was built in 1628 and was a gift to the people of the local villages of Croston , Much Hoole and Bretherton by Thomas and Andrew, who also built a manor house for the rector of St Michael's. John gave the church its font and his wife donated the silver goblets and plate that are still used in the church today for communion.

[ 2 ] Andrew shipped goods to England via Hoole and Richard Stone imported Irish panel boards and timber in 1604 for the Shuttleworth family, who were then building Gawthorpe Hall , with 1,000 pieces, storing them until needed in Hoole's tithe barn.

[ 3 ] Architecture [ edit ] The house was built in 1613 and has two wings to each side of a central porch. The building is built of red bricks which have weathered over the centuries, with a blue-brick diaper pattern similar to work of the same period at Bank Hall , Hoole Church and Rufford Old Hall , with stone quoins of irregular length. Externally the building has not been altered very much since construction, as all the old stone mullioned windows remain as they are, therefore the brick work is unaltered. Blue slates cover the roof instead of the usual stone slabs which can be found on most of the old brick houses in Lancashire from this time period. The porch is the main feature of the front, being centrally situated, and rising to the third-storey attic space.

There are ten windows on the front facade, four on the ground floor, five on the first, and one in the attic, with hood moulds; all have four panes of leaded glass, except those over the porch, which have five. Between the upper and lower windows are four vertical cuts in the brickwork which are now filled in with plaster/cement; the history behind them is said to have been a partial evasion of the window tax , the argument being that the upper and lower windows are connected, therefore counting as one. An inscription in raised letters on the stone head of the doorway reads: Thomas Stones of London haberdasher and Andrewe Stones of Amsterdam merchant hath builded this howse of their owne charges and giveth the same unto their brother John Stones: Ano domni 1613. Laus.

The inscription is divided towards the end by the head of the doorway breaking into it. The walls of the upper rooms are stated to have been formerly panelled in oak, but the panelling is said to have been removed to Bank Hall in 1832 when that building was renovated.

[ 4 ] An important feature of the house is a rare cage newel staircase; four inner newel posts rise to the full height of the stairwell without interruption.

[ 5 ] Jeremiah Horrocks [ edit ] The astronomer Jeremiah Horrocks made the first recorded observation of the transit of Venus , on 24 November 1639, from the room above the porch while living at Carr House as the guest and lodger of Mr. Stone.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] It is also believed that Horrocks was the tutor to the Stone family's children.

[ citation needed ] Dolls Museum [ edit ] Carr House was once home to a Dolls Museum that housed the Barry Elder Collection. The collection is now in the Judges' Lodgings Museum in Lancaster.

[ 8 ] The building is a private residence again.

[ 9 ] See also [ edit ] Grade II* listed buildings in Lancashire Listed buildings in Bretherton References [ edit ] ^ "Stone Family Association Website" . Archived from the original on 28 July 2011 . Retrieved 11 October 2009 .

^ "Stone Family Association Website" . Archived from the original on 28 July 2011 . Retrieved 11 October 2009 .

^ Jessica Lofthouse; Lancashire Villages; Robert Hale, London, 1978, P. 48 ^ "Stone Family Association Website" . Archived from the original on 28 July 2011 . Retrieved 11 October 2009 .

^ Chorley Historical and Archaeological Society, "Chorley Halls - Carr House", http://www.chorleyhistorysociety.co.uk/sys2004.htm 2010 ^ Barocas, V. (1971). "Foreword to 'A Country Curate' ".

Quarterly Journal of the Royal Astronomical Society .

12 : 179.

Bibcode : 1971QJRAS..12..179B .

^ Jessica Lofthouse; Lancashire Villages; Robert Hale, London, 1978, p. 49 ^ "Childhood Museum" .

Friends of Lancaster Judges' Lodgings . Retrieved 19 June 2022 .

^ Richard Peace; Lancashire Curiosities; The Dovecote Press, Wimborne, Dorset, 1997, p. 79 External links [ edit ] Historic England .

"Carr House (1163160)" .

National Heritage List for England .

v t e Buildings and structures in the Borough of Chorley Grade I Astley Hall Great Barn Heskin Hall Hoghton Tower Mawdesley Hall Grade II* Bank Hall Buckshaw Hall Carr House Cuerden Hall Rivington Hall Places of worship Chorley: St George St Laurence Euxton: Parish Church Rivington: Unitarian Chapel Grade II Coppull Mill Great House Barn Rivington Hall Barn Runshaw Hall Shaw Hill Places of worship Adlington: Christ St Paul Bretherton: St John the Baptist Brindle: St James Euxton Hall: Chapel Hoghton: Holy Trinity Mawdesley: St Peter Rivington: Church Scheduled monuments Round Loaf Unlisted Charnock Richard Services Chorley Interchange Chorley and South Ribble Hospital Chorley Town Hall HM Prison Garth HM Prison Wymott Mavis Mill Rivington services Winter Hill transmitting station Yarrow Bridge Places of worship Preston England Temple Derelict or demolished Adlington Hall Camelot Theme Park Chisnall Hall Colliery Croston Hall Duxbury Hall Ellerbeck Colliery ROF Chorley Listed in Adlington Anderton Anglezarke Bank Hall Estate Bretherton Brindle Charnock Richard Chorley Clayton-le-Woods Coppull Croston Cuerden Eccleston Euxton Heapey Heath Charnock Heskin Hoghton Mawdesley Rivington Ulnes Walton Wheelton Whittle-le-Woods Withnell Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Carr_House,_Bretherton&oldid=1298721892 " Categories : Buildings and structures in the Borough of Chorley Grade II* listed buildings in Lancashire Country houses in Lancashire Houses completed in 1613 1613 establishments in England Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from July 2025 Use British English from July 2025 Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2025 This page was last edited on 4 July 2025, at 07:28 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Carr House, Bretherton 1 language Add topic

