Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Community land buyouts 2 Community-owned enterprises 3 See also 4 Notes 5 External links and further reading Toggle the table of contents Community ownership 1 language Беларуская Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Community-owned assets or organizations are those that are owned and controlled through some representative mechanisms that allow a community to influence their operation or use and to enjoy the benefits arising.

Benefits of ownership in infrastructure projects such as dams and irrigation are claimed to include increased responsiveness to needs of that community and the community valuing the projects more highly.

Community land buyouts [ edit ] Communities can sometimes buy the land they live on and manage them through locally-run trusts. There are many examples of this in Scotland including Eigg , Assynt and Ulva .

Community-owned enterprises [ edit ] The examples and perspective in this section may not represent a worldwide view of the subject .

You may improve this section , discuss the issue on the talk page , or create a new section, as appropriate.

( November 2013 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) In Saranac Lake, New York , after the local Ames Department Store closed due to bankruptcy and residents were forced to travel 50 miles (80 km) to Plattsburgh for staples, the town was approached by Walmart which offered to build a 250,000-square-foot (23,000 m 2 ) supercenter , but the community felt that Walmart would negatively impact local business and increase traffic. As an alternative, a community-owned store was organized and shares were sold to community residents. $500,000 was raised by about 600 residents who made an average investment of $800. The store, Saranac Lake Community Store, opened in October 29, 2011, in remodeled facilities in downtown Saranac Lake.

Powell, Wyoming , also has a community store established in 2002 under similar circumstances. In both instances the securities were intrastate offerings registered under less onerous state securities laws rather than federal law .

[ 1 ] Funds were raised in a similar way for an independent bookstore in Brooklyn, a coffeehouse in Oakland, and restaurants in Hastings-on-Hudson, New York [ 2 ] and Hardwick, Vermont . In Hardwick two enterprises were created, one which operates a restaurant which prepares meals using locally grown food, another which bought and equipped the location as a restaurant.

[ 3 ] The New Rules Project of the Institute for Local Self-Reliance a nonprofit corporation has worked to make financing of community owned business less onerous. H.R.2930, the Entrepreneur Access to Capital Act [1] Archived 2012-12-15 at the Wayback Machine , would relax securities law requirements making it easier for a community to raise money for community owned enterprises.

[ 4 ] See also [ edit ] Commons Community wealth building Community wind energy Cooperative List of fan-owned sports teams Reclaim the Streets Notes [ edit ] ^ Cortese, Amy (November 12, 2011).

"A Town Creates Its Own Department Store" .

The New York Times . Retrieved November 14, 2011 .

Community ownership seems to resonate in these days of protest.

^ "Love a local business? Buy a share : Sometimes it takes a village to fund a company." by Helaine Olen on CNN Money, September 10, 2009 ^ Mitchell, Stacy (August 24, 2010).

"Grassroots Financing is Underwriting a New Crop of Neighborhood Businesses" . Institute for Local Self-Reliance. Archived from the original on November 13, 2011 . Retrieved November 14, 2011 .

^ Mitchell, Stacy (November 8, 2011).

"Crowdfunding Bill Would Allow People to Invest in Local Businesses" . Institute for Local Self-Reliance. Archived from the original on November 10, 2011 . Retrieved November 14, 2011 .

External links and further reading [ edit ] Bryden, J and Geisler, C (2007) Land Reform and Community - a ‘new wave’ land reform?

Land Use Policy Community Owned Business This article by the American Independent Business Alliance explains the distinctions between community-owned and cooperative businesses and indexes many examples of community-owned enterprises in different business sectors.

"Love a Local Business? Advise it to be careful about selling shares!" blog post by Katovich Law Group "Local Stock Exchanges and National Stimulus" by Michael H. Shuman, originally published in the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco's Community Development Investment Review Volume 5, Issue 2, 2009 "Community Development Investment Review" Volume 5, Issue 2, 2009, foreword by David Erickson, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Full review Could “Small Is Beautiful” Replace “Too Big to Fail?” Don Shaffer, RSF Social Finance New move over land reform , BBC News Online, 19 August 2003 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Community_ownership&oldid=1245001465 " Categories : Anarchist theory Cooperatives Socialism Community development Hidden categories: Articles with limited geographic scope from November 2013 Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 10 September 2024, at 13:06 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Community ownership 1 language Add topic

