Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Description 2 Notes 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Specious present 2 languages Eesti فارسی Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Perception of time The specious present is defined as the "supposed time between past and future" [ 1 ] or "a present that lasts a short stretch of physical time".

[ 2 ] The term was coined by E. R. Clay in his 1882 book The Alternative: A Study in Psychology , and cited by William James in The Principles of Psychology .

[ 1 ] It can be classed as a "thick" conception of time perception , to be contrasted with "thin" conceptions that see the present as instantaneous.

[ 2 ] Description [ edit ] Clay (a pseudonym for E. Robert Kelly [ 3 ] ) wrote in The Alternative: A Study in Psychology (1882): The relation of experience to time has not been profoundly studied. Its objects are given as being of the present, but the part of time referred to by the datum is a very different thing from the conterminous of the past and future which philosophy denotes by the name Present. The present to which the datum refers is really a part of the past — a recent past — delusively given as being a time that intervenes between the past and the future. Let it be named the specious present, and let the past that is given as being the past be known as the obvious past. All the notes of a bar of a song seem to the listener to be contained in the present. All the changes of place of a meteor seem to the beholder to be contained in the present. At the instant of the termination of such series no part of the time measured by them seems to be a past. Time, then, considered relatively to human apprehension, consists of four parts, viz. the obvious past, the specious present, the real present, and the future.

[ 4 ] The concept was developed by philosopher William James .

[ 5 ] In his 1886 article "The Perception of Time", he wrote that "the prototype of all conceived times is the specious present, the short duration of which we are immediately and incessantly sensible".

[ 6 ] In The Principles of Psychology (1890) James includes the Clay quote above, adding, "In short, the practically cognized present is no knife-edge, but a saddle-back, with a certain breadth of its own on which we sit perched, and from which we look in two directions into time. The unit of composition of our perception of time is a duration, with a bow and a stern, as it were—a rearward- and a forward-looking end." [ 7 ] C. D. Broad further elaborated on the concept in Scientific Thought (1923), writing, "Every place to which an observer's body can go is a possible Here . In the same way every event either is, has been or will be Now , on the ordinary view, provided it be short enough to fall into  what psychologists call a Specious  Present ." [ 8 ] The "specious present" has been a subject of discussion in many books and articles about the perception of time, and raises many issues in philosophy and psychology .

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] Notes [ edit ] ^ a b McDermott 2015 .

^ a b Dowden 2025 .

^ Anderon & Grush 2009 .

sfn error: no target: CITEREFAnderonGrush2009 ( help ) ^ Clay 1882 , p. 168.

^ Andersen & Grush 2009 .

^ James 1886 , p. 397.

^ James 1890 , p. 609.

^ Broad 1923 , p. 59.

^ Dainton 2023a .

^ Dainton 2023b .

References [ edit ] Andersen, Holly; Grush, Rick (April 2009).

"A Brief History of Time-Consciousness: Historical Precursors to James and Husserl" (PDF) .

Journal of the History of Philosophy .

47 (2): 277– 307.

doi : 10.1353/hph.0.0118 .

Broad, C. D. (1923).

Scientific Thought . New York: Harcourt, Brace.

Clay, E. R. (1882).

The Alternative: A Study in Psychology . London: Macmillan.

Dainton, Barry (2023a).

"Temporal Consciousness" .

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Dainton, Barry (2023b).

"The Specious Present: Further Issues" .

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Dowden, Bradley (2025).

"Time" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Retrieved 6 May 2025 .

James, William (1886).

"The Perception of Time" .

The Journal of Speculative Philosophy .

20 (4): 374– 407.

JSTOR 25668117 .

James, William (1890).

The Principles of Psychology . New York: Holt.

McDermott, John J. (2015). "Specious present".

The Cambridge Dictionary of Philosophy . Cambridge University Press.

doi : 10.1017/CBO9781139057509 .

External links [ edit ] Wikibooks has more on the topic of: Specious present Media related to Specious present at Wikimedia Commons v t e Time Key concepts Past Present Future Eternity Measurement and standards Chronometry UTC Universal Time TAI Unit of time Orders of magnitude (time) Measurement systems Italian six-hour clock Thai six-hour clock 12-hour clock 24-hour clock Relative hour Daylight saving time Chinese Decimal Hexadecimal Hindu Metric Roman Sidereal Solar Time zone Calendars Main types Solar Lunar Lunisolar Gregorian Julian Hebrew Islamic Solar Hijri Chinese Hindu Panchang Maya List Clocks Main types astronomical astrarium atomic quantum hourglass marine sundial watch 24-hour wristwatch mechanical stopwatch water-based Cuckoo clock Digital clock Grandfather clock History Timeline Chronology History Astronomical chronology Big History Calendar era Deep time Periodization Regnal year Timeline Philosophy of time A series and B series B-theory of time Chronocentrism Duration Endurantism Eternal return Eternalism Event Moving spotlight theory Perdurantism Presentism Temporal finitism Temporal parts The Unreality of Time Religion Mythology Ages of Man Destiny Immortality Dreamtime Kāla Time and fate deities Father Time Wheel of time Kalachakra Human experience and use of time Chronemics Generation time Mental chronometry Music tempo time signature Rosy retrospection Tense–aspect–mood Time management Yesterday – Today – Tomorrow Time in science Geology Geological time age chron eon epoch era period Geochronology Geological history of Earth Physics Absolute space and time Arrow of time Chronon Coordinate time Instant Proper time Spacetime Theory of relativity Time domain Time translation symmetry Time reversal symmetry Other fields Chronological dating Chronobiology Circadian rhythms Clock reaction Glottochronology Time geography Related Leap year Memory Moment Six-hour day Space System time Tempus fugit Time capsule Time immemorial Time travel Category Commons Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Specious_present&oldid=1289196135 " Categories : Present Concepts in the philosophy of mind Time in life Perception Hidden categories: Harv and Sfn no-target errors Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from May 2025 Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 7 May 2025, at 02:02 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Specious present 2 languages Add topic

