Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Milovan Đilas' analysis Toggle Milovan Đilas' analysis subsection 1.1 Similarity to other analyses 2 John Kenneth Galbraith and post-industrial sociology 3 See also 4 References Toggle References subsection 4.1 Bibliography 5 Further reading Toggle Further reading subsection 5.1 Articles 6 External links Toggle the table of contents New class 9 languages العربية فارسی Français Italiano 日本語 Српски / srpski Suomi Türkçe 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Polemic term for the ruling class of Soviet-type states This article is about a theory of Communist states. For other uses, see The New Class .

Part of a series on Communism Concepts Anti-capitalism Class conflict Class consciousness Classless society Collective leadership Communist revolution Commune Communist society Critique of political economy Free association "From each according to his ability, to each according to his needs" Market abolitionism Proletarian internationalism Labour movement Social revolution Stateless society Wage slavery Workers' self-management World revolution Dictatorship of the proletariat Economics Planned economy Gift economy Common ownership Socialization (Marxism) Economic democracy Use value Variants Anarchist Crypto Marxism Leninist Libertarian Pre-Marxist Utopian Primitive Religious Christian Catholic World History Communist League First International Second International Third International Fourth International Fifth International Organisations Communist party list WPC WFTU WFDY IUS WIDF WFSW IOR People Mazdak More Meslier Babeuf Marx Engels Morris Kropotkin Malatesta Pannekoek Du Bois Lenin Luxemburg Kollontai Stalin Trotsky Lukács Thälmann Makhno Bukharin Ho Gramsci Tito Togliatti Benjamin Khrushchev Mao Pot Zhou James Padmore Sartre Hoxha Beauvoir Nkrumah Kim Hobsbawm Althusser Freire Pasolini Mandel Aidit Raja Fanon Castro Berger Guevara Guattari Debord Amin Berlinguer Negri Guzmán Badiou Sison Newton Ali Davis Holloway Hampton Žižek Sankara Öcalan Gordillo Gilmore Marcos Hardt Dean Graeber Lordon Kelley Fisher Prashad Hatherley Moufawad-Paul Saito By region Brazil Britain Cambodia Colombia France India Kerala Korea Nepal Peru Philippines Poland Russia Sumatra Vietnam Symbols Hammer and sickle Red flag (politics) Red star " The Internationale " " Workers of the world, unite!

" Criticism Anti-communism Communist propaganda Criticism of communist party rule Totalitarianism Criticism of Marxism Related  topics 21st-century communist theorists Anti anti-communism Anti-communist mass killings Anti-fascism Communist state Communitarianism Crimes against humanity Genocide Cambodian genocide Holodomor Genocides committed by the Soviet Union Mass killings under communist regimes Internationalism Intentional community Left-wing politics Old Left New Left LGBTQ rights Marx's theory of alienation National communism Romania Red Scare Revolutionary socialism Socialist economics Socialist mode of production Trade union War communism Worker cooperative Communism portal Socialism portal v t e New class is a polemic term by critics of countries that followed the Soviet-type state socialism to describe the privileged ruling class of bureaucrats and Communist party functionaries which arose in these states.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Generally, the group known in the Soviet Union as the nomenklatura conforms to the theory of the new class.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] The term was earlier applied to other emerging strata of the society.

Milovan Đilas ' new-class theory was also used extensively by anti-communist commentators in the Western world in their criticism of the Communist states during the Cold War .

" Red bourgeoisie " is a pejorative synonym for the term new class, crafted by leftist critics and movements like the 1968 student demonstrations in Belgrade . New class is also used as a term in late 1960s post-industrial sociology .

Milovan Đilas' analysis [ edit ] This section has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "New class" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( January 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This section possibly contains original research .

Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations . Statements consisting only of original research should be removed.

( July 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) A theory of the new class was developed by Milovan Đilas the Vice President of the Federal People's Republic of Yugoslavia under Josip Broz Tito , who participated with Tito in the Yugoslav People's Liberation War but was later purged by him as Đilas began to advocate democratic and egalitarian ideals, which he believed were more in line with the way socialism and communism should look like.

[ 5 ] There were also personal antagonisms between the two men, and Tito felt Đilas undermined his leadership. The theory of the new class can be considered to oppose the theories of certain ruling Communists, such as Joseph Stalin , who argued that their revolutions and/or social reforms would result in the extinction of any ruling class as such.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] It was Đilas' observation as a member of a Communist government that Party members stepped into the role of ruling class, a problem which he believed should be corrected through revolution. Đilas' completed his primary work on his new class theory in the mid-1950s. While Đilas was in prison, it was published in 1957 in the West under the title The New Class: An Analysis of the Communist System .

[ 8 ] Đilas posited that the new class' specific relationship to the means of production was one of collective political control, and that the new class' property form was political control. For Đilas, the new class not only seeks expanded material reproduction to politically justify its existence to the working class but also seeks expanded reproduction of political control as a form of property in itself. This can be compared to the capitalist who seeks expanded value through increased sharemarket values, even though the sharemarket itself does not necessarily reflect an increase in the value of commodities produced. Đilas used this argument about property forms to indicate why the new class sought parades, marches and spectacles despite this activity lowering the levels of material productivity. Đilas proposed that the new class only slowly came to self-consciousness of itself as a class. On arriving at a full self-consciousness the initial project undertaken would be massive industrialisation in order to cement the external security of the new class' rule against foreign or alternative ruling classes. In Đilas' schema, this approximated the 1930s and 1940s in the Soviet Union. As the new class suborns all other interests to its own security during this period, it freely executes and purges its own members in order to achieve its major goal of security as a ruling class. After security has been achieved, the new class pursues a policy of moderation towards its own members, effectively granting material rewards and freedom of thought and action within the new class, so long as this freedom is not used to undermine the rule of the new class. Đilas identified this period as the period of Khrushchev 's government in the Soviet Union. Due to the emergence of conflicts of policy within the new class, the potential for palace coups, or populist revolutions is possible, as experienced in Poland and Hungary, respectively. Finally, Đilas predicted a period of economic decline, as the political future of the new class was consolidated around a staid programme of corruption and self-interest at the expense of other social classes. This can be interpreted as a prediction of the Leonid Brezhnev so-called Era of Stagnation by Đilas. Đilas also heavily criticized Soviet imperialist practices for violating the national sovereignty of Eastern European countries and the unequal price exchange in trade between the USSR and these republics. He predicted that these countries would desire more sovereignty and independence from the totalitarian communist imperialist system. This can be interpreted as the prediction of Revolutions of 1989 .

While Đilas posited that the new class was a social class with a distinct relationship to the means of production , he did not claim that this new class was associated with a self-sustaining mode of production . This claim, within Marxist theory, argues that the Soviet-style societies must eventually either collapse backwards towards capitalism, or experience a social revolution towards real socialism . This can be seen as a prediction of the downfall of the Soviet Union.

Robert D. Kaplan 's 1993 book Balkan Ghosts: A Journey through history also contains a discussion with Đilas, [ 9 ] who used his model to anticipate many of the events that subsequently came to pass in the former Yugoslavia. Đilas also argues that a communist society has three phases: the revolutionary phase, the dogmatic phase, and the non-dogmatic phase. The new class does not perish despite attempts to moderate communist practices such as Yugoslavia’s workers' self-management or the reversal of Stalinist totalitarian policies of Khrushchev Thaw . Djilas argues these moderations are only concessions of the communist bureaucracy to appease the working class and therefore consolidate their new class rule. Marxists like Ernest Mandel have criticised Djilas for ignoring the existence of a new socio-economic system, which cannot be reconciled with the old class system.

[ 10 ] Similarity to other analyses [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

( June 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Mikhail Bakunin had made a point in his International Workingmen's Association debates with Marx in the mid-to-late 19th century of bureaucrats becoming a new oppressive class in socialist states. This idea was repeated after the Russian revolution by anarchists like Peter Kropotkin and Nestor Makhno , as well as some Marxists. In 1911, Robert Michels first proposed the Iron law of oligarchy , which described the development of bureaucratic hierarchies in supposedly egalitarian and democratic socialist parties.

[ 11 ] It was later repeated by a leader of the Russian Revolution, Leon Trotsky through his theory of degenerated workers state .

Mao Zedong also had his own version of this idea developed during the Socialist Education Movement to criticize the Chinese Communist Party under Liu Shaoqi . This wide range of people over the decades had different perspectives on the matter, but there was also a degree of core agreement on this idea.

[ citation needed ] Đilas' New Class has also been likened to the professional–managerial class seen in advanced capitalist societies.

[ 12 ] In fact, originating with James Burnham 's famous discussion thereof, [ 13 ] there is a whole tradition that posits a purportedly very troublesome convergence between especially the Chinese and Western political order along such lines.

[ 14 ] John Kenneth Galbraith and post-industrial sociology [ edit ] Canadian-American economist John Kenneth Galbraith also wrote about a similar phenomenon under capitalism, the emergence of a technocratic layer in The New Industrial State and The Affluent Society . The new-class model as a theory of new social groups in post-industrial societies gained ascendency during the 1970s as social and political scientists noted how new-class groups were shaped by post-material orientations in their pursuit of political and social goals.

[ 15 ] New-class themes "no longer have a direct relationship to the imperatives of economic security." [ 16 ] See also [ edit ] Bureaucratic collectivism Corporate sociopolitical activism Cadre management in the Soviet Union Degenerated workers' state Deformed workers' state Managerial state New Soviet man References [ edit ] ^ Sinyavsky, Andrei (1991). "Stalin: The State–Church".

Soviet Civilization: A Cultural History . Arcade Publishing. p. 91.

ISBN 978-1559701594 .

^ Fernandez, Neil C. (1997). "The Class Struggle: A Critique of 'Marxist' Theories".

Capitalism and Class Struggle in the USSR: A Marxist Theory .

Ashgate Publishing . pp.

162– 163.

ISBN 1840141867 .

^ Wasserstein, Bernard (2007).

Barbarism and civilization: a history of Europe in our time .

Oxford University Press . p. 509.

ISBN 978-0-19-873074-3 .

^ Rosenberg, William G.; Siegelbaum, Lewis H., eds. (1993).

Social Dimensions of Soviet Industrialization .

Indiana University Press . p. 8.

ISBN 0-253-20772-X .

^ "Il grande accusatore della 'nuova classe' " [The great accuser of the 'new class'].

La Repubblica (in Italian). 22 April 1984. Archived from the original on 31 July 2019 . Retrieved 31 July 2019 .

^ van Ree (2002) , p.

138 : "Stalin saw the Soviet state after the demise of classes as a classless institution." ^ van Ree (2002) , p.

141 : "... 'in essence' there was 'no dictatorship of the proletariat now either. We have a Soviet democracy'. The reason was that there were only external enemies to suppress. (quote from Stalin, May, 1946)" ^ Schemann, Serge (21 April 1995).

"Milovan Djilas, Yugoslav Critic of Communism, Dies at 83" .

The New York Times .

^ Kaplan, Robert (1993).

"A discussion with Milovan Đilas" .

Balkan Ghosts .

St. Martin's Press .

^ Mandel, Ernest (1979).

"Why the Soviet Bureaucracy Is Not a New Ruling Class" .

Ernest Mandel Internet Archive . Retrieved 20 September 2021 .

^ Hyland, James L. (1995).

Democratic theory: the philosophical foundations . Manchester, England, UK; New York, New York, USA: Manchester University Press . p. 247.

^ Szymanski, Al (1979). "A Critique and Extension of the PMC". In Walker, Pat (ed.).

Between Labour and Capital . Boston: South End Press. pp.

49– 66.

ISBN 0-89608-038-2 .

^ Burnham, James (1941).

The Managerial Revolution: What is Happening in the World . New York: John Day Co.

^ Lyons, N. S. (3 August 2023).

"The China Convergence" .

The Upheaval . Retrieved 19 February 2024 .

^ Bruce-Briggs, B. (1979).

The New Class?

. New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction Publishers .

^ Inglehart, Ronald (1971).

"The Silent Revolution in Europe: the intergenerational change in post-industrial society" (PDF) .

American Political Science Review .

65 : 991– 1017.

doi : 10.2307/1953494 .

JSTOR 1953494 .

S2CID 145368579 .

Bibliography [ edit ] van Ree, Erik (October 28, 2002).

The Political Thought of Joseph Stalin: A Study in Twentieth Century Revolutionary Patriotism (hardcover) (1st ed.).

Routledge . p. 138.

ISBN 978-0700717491 – via Google Books .

Further reading [ edit ] Đilas, Milovan (1983) [1957].

The New Class: An Analysis of the Communist System (paperback ed.). San Diego: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.

ISBN 0-15-665489-X .

Đilas, Milovan (1969).

The Unperfect Society: Beyond the New Class . trans. Dorian Cooke. New York: Harcourt, Brace & World.

ISBN 0-15-693125-7 .

Đilas, Milovan (1998).

Fall of the New Class: A History of Communism's Self-Destruction (hardcover ed.). ???: Alfred A. Knopf .

ISBN 0-679-43325-2 .

. See also the NY Times Books feature with Chapter One online , and also the May 10, 1998 NY Times book review .

A meta-list of relevant publications . Related to Barbrook, Richard (2006).

The Class of the New (paperback ed.). London: OpenMute.

ISBN 0-9550664-7-6 . Archived from the original on 2018-08-01 . Retrieved 2018-12-28 .

Budrys, Grace (1997).

When Doctors Join Unions . Ithaca: ILR Press/ Cornell University Press .

ISBN 0-8014-8354-9 .

Gouldner, Alvin Ward (1979).

The Future of Intellectuals and the Rise of the New Class: A Frame of Reference, Theses, Conjectures, Arguments, and an Historical Perspective on the Role of Intellectuals and Intelligentsia in the International Class Contest of the Modern Era . New York: Seabury Press.

ISBN 0-8164-9358-8 .

Hayek, F. A.

(1994) [1944].

The Road to Serfdom (paperback ed.). Chicago: University of Chicago Press .

ISBN 0-226-32061-8 .

Kaplan, Robert D.

(1993).

Balkan Ghosts: A Journey through History . New York: St. Martin's Press .

ISBN 0-312-08701-2 .

[ permanent dead link ] Kellner, Hansfried & Heuberger, Frank W., eds. (1992).

Hidden Technocrats: The New Class and New Capitalism . New Brunswick: Transaction Publishers .

ISBN 0-88738-443-9 .

Lasch, Christopher (1995).

The Revolt of the Elites and the Betrayal of Democracy . New York: W. W. Norton & Company .

ISBN 0-393-03699-5 .

Orwell, George (1984) [1949].

Nineteen Eighty-Four (paperback ed.). San Diego: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.

ISBN 0-15-166038-7 .

Pérez Soto, Carlos (2008) [2001].

Comunistas otra vez, para una crítica del poder burocrático (Communists again, for a critique of bureaucratic power) . Santiago de Chile: ARCIS - LOM.

ISBN 978-956-282-988-5 .

Sawer, Marian, ed. (1978).

Socialism and the New Class: Towards the Analysis of Structural Inequality Within Socialist Societies . Bedford Park, Australia: Australasian Political Studies Association.

ISBN 0-7258-0074-7 .

Trotsky, Leon (1991) [1937].

The Revolution Betrayed: What is the Soviet Union and Where is it Going?

(paperback ed.). Detroit: Labor Publications.

ISBN 0-929087-48-8 .

Leon Trotsky's famous work considers the alleged betrayal and corruption of the Russian Revolution by Stalin and the new bureaucratic ruling caste.

Articles [ edit ] Registan (October 1/06) – The "New Class": The Rise and Fall of NGOs in Central Asia . Quotes extensively from a presentation by Laurence Jarvik to the Central Eurasian Studies Society, held the University of Michigan. Founding editor Nathan Hamm was a Peace Corps volunteer in Uzbekistan. Published as "NGOs: A 'New Class' in International Relations" (Orbis, 2007).

Mutualist.org – Liberalism & Social Control: The New Class' Will to Power . Most New Class criticism comes explicitly from either the Left or the Right. Rarely does one seem to come from both at once.

The New Criterion (October 1999) – Remembering Milovan Đilas The New York Review of Books (December 7/67) – Same Old New Class . A reply by Christopher Lasch External links [ edit ] Collection of writings by and on Shachtman on the Workers' Liberty website Max Shachtman Internet Archive at Marxists Internet Archive GhostofChristO1. (2023, 12 April).

Alienated Elites: The New Class and Its Discontents.

https://paroxysms.substack.com/p/alienated-elites GhostofChristO1. (2023, 19 April).

The Problem of the "New Elite".

https://paroxysms.substack.com/p/the-problem-of-the-new-elite v t e Marxist phraseology and terminology Philosophy and politics ( Marxist ) Barracks communism Base and superstructure Bourgeoisie Bourgeois democracy Bourgeois nationalism Bourgeois revolution Bourgeois right Bourgeois socialism Capitalist mode of production Class struggle Commodification Dialectics Dictatorship of the proletariat Historical materialism Imperialism Liquidationism Lumpenproletariat Means of labor Metabolic rift Petite bourgeoisie Primitive accumulation of capital Proletarian internationalism Proletarian revolution Pure communism Revisionism Revolutionary spontaneity Revolutionary wave Scientific socialism Socialist mode of production Super-imperialism Theoretician Two-stage theory Wage slavery Workers of the world, unite!

Workers' council Workers' control World communism World revolution Sociology and economics ( Marxian ) Critique of political economy Accumulation of capital Capital Capitalist mode of production Crisis of capitalism Commanding heights of the economy Commodity Commodity production Dominant ideology Exchange value Free association Law of value Materialism Means of production Mode of production Productive forces Production for use Relations of production Ruling class Simple commodity production Socialist mode of production Socially necessary labour time Socialization Social murder Subject of labor Surplus value Use value Value Worker cooperative Marxist–Leninist Anti-revisionism Cadre Central Committee Democratic centralism Dual power Enemy of the people Foco General line of the party National liberation New class People's democracy Politburo Political rehabilitation Popular front Real socialism Revisionism Revolutionary terror Secretariat Self-criticism Socialist accumulation Socialism in one country Social fascism Social imperialism Soviet democracy Democracy in Marxism United front Vanguardism Trotskyist Deformed workers' state Degenerated workers' state French Turn Permanent revolution Social revolution Transitional demand Uneven and combined development United front World revolution Maoist Antagonistic contradiction Anti-revisionism Capitalist roader Continuous revolution theory The East wind prevails over the West wind Four Olds Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Mass line New Democracy Whole-process people's democracy One Divides Into Two People's war Political power grows out of the barrel of a gun Revisionism Revolutionary base area Revolution is not a dinner party Social imperialism Struggle session Other People's Multiparty Democracy v t e Social class Status Stratum Economic classes Theories Elite theory Gilbert model Marxian Mudsill theory New class Spoon class theory Weberian (three-component) Related topics Caste Chattering classes Class conflict Class discrimination Class society Class traitor Classicide Classless society Euthenics High society Nouveau riche / Parvenu Poverty Ranked society Snobbery Social cleansing Social exclusion Social mobility Social orphan Social position Social stigma Subaltern Status Anxiety By demographic By status Administrative detainee Alien illegal immigrant refugee Citizen dual or multiple native-born naturalized second-class Clique adolescent Convicted Migrant worker Political prisoner Socioeconomic Stateless By " collar " Blue Green Grey New Pink White By type Ruling Aristocracy Aristoi Hanseaten Magnate Oligarchy Russian Patrician Ancient Rome Post-Roman Political Family List Hereditary Royal family Intellectual Clergy Priest Knowledge worker Professor Scholar Warrior Chhetri Cossacks Cuāuh Harii Hashashin Knight Kshatriya Nair Ocēlōtl Pendekar Samurai Spartiate Vanniyar / Vanniar (Chieftain) Upper Business magnate Elite Gabellotto Gentry Lord Nobility Landed Petty Old money Overclass Robber baron Seigneur Superclass Creative Bohemians Middle Bourgeoisie Petite Burgher Lower middle class Upper middle class Working Commoner Lazzaroni Lumpenproletariat Pea-pickers Peasant Precariat Proletariat Working poor Under Ant tribe Outcast Outlaw / Prisoner Serf Plebeian Rat tribe Slave / Freedman Untouchable By country or region United States Affluence American Dream History Mobility Classes Upper Black Donor Gentry Middle Black Mexican-American Upper Middle Underprivileged Lower Under Income Household Inequality Personal Poverty Standard of living Education Homelessness Home-ownership Other regions or countries Africa Belize Cambodia China Colombia France Haiti India Iran Italy Luxembourg Nepal New Zealand Nigeria Romania Sri Lanka Tibet United Kingdom United States Historic 18th-century Spain Ancient Greece Ancient Rome Aztec Ottoman Empire Pre-industrial East Asia Pre-industrial Europe Soviet Union Category NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐qtqvv
Cached time: 20250814221527
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.648 seconds
Real time usage: 0.777 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2940/1000000
Revision size: 20486/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 226543/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 10799/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 15/100
Expensive parser function count: 9/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 120598/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.424/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 19551420/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  631.437      1 -total
 30.45%  192.255      6 Template:Navbox
 27.41%  173.060      1 Template:Reflist
 27.35%  172.720     24 Template:Cite_book
 16.03%  101.200      1 Template:Social_class
 15.79%   99.701      1 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
 12.82%   80.968      1 Template:Communism_sidebar
 12.65%   79.872      1 Template:Communism
 12.39%   78.259      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 11.95%   75.451      1 Template:Lang Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:286819:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814221527 and revision id 1276115634. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=New_class&oldid=1276115634 " Categories : 1950s neologisms Anti-communist terminology Bourgeoisie Bureaucratic organization Communist terminology Social groups Upper class Cadre management in the Soviet Union Hidden categories: CS1 Italian-language sources (it) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from January 2023 All articles needing additional references Articles that may contain original research from July 2023 All articles that may contain original research Articles with multiple maintenance issues Articles needing additional references from June 2023 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2023 All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from February 2018 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles containing French-language text This page was last edited on 16 February 2025, at 23:46 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents New class 9 languages Add topic

