Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Work Toggle Work subsection 2.1 Intentionality 2.2 Theory of perception 2.3 Theory of judgment 3 Legacy 4 Bibliography 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Franz Brentano 38 languages العربية تۆرکجه Български Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Íslenska Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Latina Magyar مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Română Русский Slovenčina Slovenščina Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Austrian Catholic priest and philosopher (1838–1917) Franz Brentano Franz Brentano in 1890 Born Franz Clemens Honoratus Hermann Josef Brentano 16 January 1838 Marienberg am Rhein [ de ] , Rhineland , Prussia , German Confederation Died 17 March 1917 ( 1917-03-18 ) (aged 79) Zürich , Switzerland Spouses Ida Lieben (m. 1880–1894; her death) Emilie Rueprecht (m. 1897–1917; his death) Education Education University of Munich University of Berlin University of Münster University of Tübingen ( PhD , 1862) University of Würzburg ( Dr. phil. hab.

, 1866) Theses Von der mannigfachen Bedeutung des Seienden nach Aristoteles (On the Several Senses of Being in Aristotle) (1862) Die Psychologie des Aristoteles, insbesondere seine Lehre vom Nous Poietikos (The Psychology of Aristotle, in Particular His Doctrine of the Active Intellect) (1867) Doctoral advisor Franz Jakob Clemens Other advisors Adolf Trendelenburg Philosophical work Era 19th-century philosophy Region Western philosophy School School of Brentano Aristotelianism Intentionalism ("act psychology") [ 1 ] Empirical psychology [ 2 ] Austrian phenomenology [ 3 ] Austrian realism [ 4 ] [ 5 ] Institutions University of Würzburg (1866–1873) University of Vienna (1873–1895) Notable students Edmund Husserl , Sigmund Freud , Tomáš Masaryk , Rudolf Steiner , Alexius Meinong , Carl Stumpf , Anton Marty , Kazimierz Twardowski , Christian von Ehrenfels Main interests Ontology Psychology Notable ideas Intentionality Intentional object Distinction between genetic and empirical/descriptive psychology [ 6 ] Distinction between sensory and noetic consciousness ( presentations of sensory objects or intuitions versus thinking of concepts ) [ 7 ] [ 8 ] Judgement – predication distinction Time-consciousness [ 6 ] Ecclesiastical career Religion Christianity Church Catholic Church Ordained 6 August 1864 Laicized 1873 Franz Clemens Honoratus Hermann Josef Brentano ( / b r ɛ n ˈ t ɑː n oʊ / ; German: [bʁɛnˈtaːno] ; 16 January 1838 – 17 March 1917) was a German philosopher and psychologist . His 1874 Psychology from an Empirical Standpoint , considered his magnum opus , is credited with having reintroduced the medieval scholastic concept of intentionality into contemporary philosophy.

Originally a Catholic priest , Brentano withdrew from the priesthood in 1873 due to the dogmatic definition of papal infallibility in Pastor aeternus . Working subsequently as a non-denominational professor, his teaching triggered research in a wide array of fields such as linguistics, logic, mathematics and experimental psychology through the young generation of philosophers who were gathered as the School of Brentano .

Life [ edit ] Brentano was born at Marienberg am Rhein [ de ] , near Boppard . He was son of Christian Brentano , brother of Lujo Brentano , and paternal nephew of Clemens Brentano and Bettina von Arnim , and of Gunda (née Brentano) and Friedrich von Savigny . His paternal grandfather was of Italian descent, and some of his ancestors are Sophie von La Roche and Johann Philipp Stadion, Count von Warthausen .

He studied philosophy at the universities of Munich , Würzburg , Berlin (with Adolf Trendelenburg ) and Münster . He had a special interest in Aristotle and scholastic philosophy . He wrote his dissertation in 1862 at Tübingen under the title Von der mannigfachen Bedeutung des Seienden nach Aristoteles ( On the Several Senses of Being in Aristotle ). His thesis advisor was Franz Jakob Clemens .

[ 9 ] Subsequently, he began to study theology and entered the seminary in Munich and then Würzburg. He was ordained a Catholic priest on 6 August 1864.

In 1866 he defended his habilitation thesis , Die Psychologie des Aristoteles, insbesondere seine Lehre vom Nous Poietikos ( The Psychology of Aristotle, in Particular His Doctrine of the Active Intellect , published 1867), and began to lecture at the University of Würzburg . His students in this period included, among others, Carl Stumpf and Anton Marty . Between 1870 and 1873, Brentano was heavily involved in the debate on papal infallibility in matters of Faith. A strong opponent of such dogma , he eventually gave up his priesthood and his tenure in 1873. He remained, however, deeply religious [ 10 ] and dealt with the topic of the existence of God in lectures given at the Universities of Würzburg and Vienna.

[ 11 ] In 1874 Brentano published his major work, Psychology from an Empirical Standpoint . From 1874 to 1895 he taught at the University of Vienna , Austria-Hungary . Among his students were Edmund Husserl , Sigmund Freud , Tomáš Masaryk , Rudolf Steiner , Alexius Meinong , Carl Stumpf , Anton Marty , Kazimierz Twardowski , and Christian von Ehrenfels and many others (see School of Brentano for more details). While he began his career as a full ordinary professor, he was forced to give up both his Austrian citizenship and his professorship in 1880 in order to marry Ida Lieben (Austro-Hungarian law denied matrimony to persons who had been ordained priests even if they later had resigned from priesthood), but he was permitted to stay at the university only as a Privatdozent . After the departure of Twardowski back to Lwów and the death of his wife in 1894, Brentano retired and moved to Florence in 1896, where he married his second wife, Emilie Ruprecht, in 1897. He transferred to Zürich at the outbreak of the First World War , where he died in 1917.

Work [ edit ] Intentionality [ edit ] Main article: Intentionality Brentano is best known for his reintroduction of the concept of intentionality —a concept derived from scholastic philosophy —to contemporary philosophy in his lectures and in his work Psychologie vom empirischen Standpunkt ( Psychology from an Empirical Standpoint ). While often simplistically summarised as "aboutness" or the relationship between mental acts and the external world, Brentano defined it as the main characteristic of mental phenomena , by which they could be distinguished from physical phenomena . Every mental phenomenon, every psychological act has content, is directed at an object (the intentional object ). Every belief, desire etc. has an object that they are about: the believed, the desired. Brentano used the expression "intentional inexistence" to indicate the status of the objects of thought in the mind. The property of being intentional, of having an intentional object, was the key feature to distinguish psychological phenomena and physical phenomena, because, as Brentano defined it, physical phenomena lacked the ability to generate original intentionality , and could only facilitate an intentional relationship in a second-hand manner, which he labeled derived intentionality .

Every mental phenomenon is characterized by what the Scholastics of the Middle Ages called the intentional (or mental) inexistence of an object, and what we might call, though not wholly unambiguously, reference to a content, direction towards an object (which is not to be understood here as meaning a thing), or immanent objectivity. Every mental phenomenon includes something as object within itself, although they do not all do so in the same way. In presentation something is presented, in judgement something is affirmed or denied, in love loved, in hate hated, in desire desired and so on. This intentional in-existence is characteristic exclusively of mental phenomena. No physical phenomenon exhibits anything like it. We could, therefore, define mental phenomena by saying that they are those phenomena which contain an object intentionally within themselves.

— Franz Brentano, Psychology from an Empirical Standpoint , edited by Linda L. McAlister (London: Routledge, 1995 [1874]), pp. 88–89.

Brentano introduced a distinction between genetic psychology ( genetische Psychologie ) and descriptive psychology ( beschreibende or deskriptive Psychologie ): [ 12 ] in his terminology, genetic psychology is the study of psychological phenomena from a third-person point of view, which involves the use of empirical experiments (satisfying, thus, the scientific standards we nowadays expect of an empirical science).

[ 6 ] (This concept is roughly equivalent to what is now called empirical psychology , [ 13 ] cognitive science , [ 13 ] or " heterophenomenology ", an explicitly third-person, scientific approach to the study of consciousness .) The aim of descriptive psychology, on the other hand, is to describe consciousness from a first-person point of view.

[ 6 ] The latter approach was further developed by Husserl and the phenomenological tradition.

[ 14 ] Theory of perception [ edit ] He is also well known for claiming that Wahrnehmung ist Falschnehmung ('perception is misconception') that is to say perception is erroneous. In fact he maintained that external, sensory perception could not tell us anything about the de facto existence of the perceived world, which could simply be illusion. However, we can be absolutely sure of our internal perception. When I hear a tone, I cannot be completely sure that there is a tone in the real world, but I am absolutely certain that I do hear. This awareness, of the fact that I hear, is called internal perception. External perception, sensory perception, can only yield hypotheses about the perceived world, but not truth. Hence he and many of his pupils (in particular Carl Stumpf and Edmund Husserl ) thought that the natural sciences could only yield hypotheses and never universal, absolute truths as in pure logic or mathematics .

However, in a reprinting of his Psychologie vom Empirischen Standpunkte ( Psychology from an Empirical Standpoint ), he recanted this previous view. He attempted to do so without reworking the previous arguments within that work but it has been said that he was wholly unsuccessful. The new view states that when we hear a sound, we hear something from the external world; there are no physical phenomena of internal perception.

[ 15 ] Theory of judgment [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

( March 2010 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Brentano has a theory of judgment which is different from what is currently the predominant ( Fregean ) view. At the centre of Brentano's theory of judgment lies the idea that a judgment depends on having a presentation , but this presentation does not have to be predicated. Even stronger: Brentano thought that predication is not even necessary for judgment, because there are judgments without a predicational content. Another fundamental aspect of his theory is that judgments are always existential . This so-called existential claim implies that when someone is judging that S is P he/she is judging that some S that is P exists. (Note that Brentano denied the idea that all judgments are of the form: S is P [and all other kinds of judgment which combine presentations]. Brentano argued that there are also judgments arising from a single presentation, e.g. “the planet Mars exists” has only one presentation.) In Brentano's own symbols, a judgment is always of the form: ‘+A’ (A exists) or ‘–A’ (A does not exist).

Combined with the third fundamental claim of Brentano, the idea that all judgments are either positive (judging that A exists) or negative (judging that A does not exist), we have a complete picture of Brentano's theory of judgment. So, imagine that you doubt whether midgets exist. At that point you have a presentation of midgets in your mind. When you judge that midgets do not exist, then you are judging that the presentation you have does not present something that exists. You do not have to utter that in words or otherwise predicate that judgment. The whole judgment takes place in the denial (or approval) of the existence of the presentation you have.

The problem of Brentano's theory of judgment is not the idea that all judgments are existential judgments (though it is sometimes a very complex enterprise to transform an ordinary judgment into an existential one), the real problem is that Brentano made no distinction between object and presentation. A presentation exists as an object in your mind. So you cannot really judge that A does not exist, because if you do so you also judge that the presentation is not there (which is impossible, according to Brentano's idea that all judgments have the object which is judged as presentation).

Kazimierz Twardowski acknowledged this problem and solved it by denying that the object is equal to the presentation. This is actually only a change within Brentano's theory of perception, but has a welcome consequence for the theory of judgment, viz. that you can have a presentation (which exists) but at the same time judge that the object does not exist.

Legacy [ edit ] The young Martin Heidegger was very much inspired by Brentano's early work On the Several Senses of Being in Aristotle .
Brentano's focus on conscious (or phenomenal) intentionality was inherited by Carl Stumpf 's Berlin School of experimental psychology , Anton Marty 's Prague School of linguistics, Alexius Meinong 's Graz School of experimental psychology, Kazimierz Twardowski 's Lwów School of philosophy, and Edmund Husserl 's phenomenology .

[ 16 ] Brentano's work also influenced George Stout , [ 17 ] the teacher of G. E. Moore and Bertrand Russell at Cambridge University .

[ 18 ] Bibliography [ edit ] Major works by Brentano in German (1862) On the Several Senses of Being in Aristotle ( Von der mannigfachen Bedeutung des Seienden nach Aristoteles ( doctoral thesis )) ( online ) (1867) The Psychology of Aristotle ( Die Psychologie des Aristoteles, insbesondere seine Lehre vom Nous Poietikos ( habilitation thesis written in 1865/66)) ( online ) (1874) Psychology from an Empirical Standpoint ( Psychologie vom empirischen Standpunkt ) ( Online ) (1924–25) Psychologie vom empirischen Standpunkt.

Ed. Oskar Kraus, 2 vols. Leipzig: Meiner.

ISBN 3-7873-0014-7 [ 19 ] (1876) Was für ein Philosoph manchmal Epoche macht (a work against Plotinus ) ( Online ) (1889) The Origin of our Knowledge of Right and Wrong ( Vom Ursprung sittlicher Erkenntnis ) ( 1902 English edition online ) (1911) Aristotle and his World View ( Aristoteles und seine Weltanschauung ) (1911) The Classification of Mental Phenomena ( Von der Klassifikation der psychischen Phänomene ) (1930) The True and the Evident ( Wahrheit und Evidenz ) (1976) Philosophical Investigations on Space, Time and Phenomena ( Philosophische Untersuchungen zu Raum, Zeit und Kontinuum ) (1982) Descriptive Psychology ( Deskriptive Psychologie ) Collected Works Sämtliche veröffentlichte Schriften in zehn Bänden ( Collected Works in Ten Volumes , edited by Arkadiusz Chrudzimski and Thomas Binder), Frankfurt: Ontos Verlag (now Walter de Gruyter).

1.

Psychologie vom empirischen Standpunkte — Von der Klassifikation der psychischen Phänomene (2008) 2.

Untersuchungen zur Sinnespsychologie (2009) 3.

Schriften zur Ethik und Ästhetik (2010) 4.

Von der mannigfachen Bedeutung des Seienden nach Aristoteles (2014) See also [ edit ] Analytic psychology (Dilthey) Analytic psychology (Stout) Axiological ethics Anna von Lieben (his sister-in-law) Robert von Lieben (his nephew) List of Austrian scientists List of Austrians References [ edit ] ^ Franz Brentano – Britannica.com ^ E. B. Titchener , "Brentano and Wundt: Empirical and Experimental Psychology" , The American Journal of Psychology , 32 (1) (Jan. 1921), pp. 108–120.

^ Robin D. Rollinger, Austrian Phenomenology: Brentano, Husserl, Meinong, and Others on Mind and Object , Walter de Gruyter, 2008, p. 7.

^ Gestalt Theory: Official Journal of the Society for Gestalt Theory and Its Applications (GTA) , 22 , Steinkopff, 2000, p. 94: "Attention has varied between Continental Phenomenology (late Husserl, Merleau-Ponty) and Austrian Realism (Brentano, Meinong, Benussi, early Husserl)".

^ Robin D. Rollinger, Austrian Phenomenology: Brentano, Husserl, Meinong, and Others on Mind and Object , Walter de Gruyter, 2008, p. 114: "The fact that Brentano [in Psychology from an Empirical Standpoint ] speaks of a relation of analogy between physical phenomena and real things existing outside of the mind obviously indicates that he is a realist and not an idealist or a solipsist, as he may indeed be taken to at first glance. Rather, his position is a very extreme representational realism. The things which exist outside of our sensations, he maintains, are in fact to be identified with the ones we find posited in the hypotheses of natural sciences." ^ a b c d Huemer, Wolfgang.

"Franz Brentano" . In Zalta, Edward N.

(ed.).

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

^ Brentano, F., Sensory and Noetic Consciousness: Psychology from an Empirical Standpoint III , International Library of Philosophy and Scientific Method, Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1981.

^ Biagio G. Tassone, From Psychology to Phenomenology: Franz Brentano's 'Psychology from an Empirical Standpoint' and Contemporary Philosophy of Mind , Palgrave Macmillan, 2012, p. 307.

^ Franz Brentano at the Mathematics Genealogy Project ^ Boltzmann, Ludwig. 1995.

Ludwig Boltzmann: His Later Life and Philosophy, 1900-1906: Book Two: The Philosopher . Springer Science & Business Media, p. 3 ^ Brentano, F. C. 1987.

On the Existence of God: Lectures Given at the Universities of Würzburg and Vienna (1868-1891) . Springer Science & Business Media, ^ The first published occurrence of the term is in Brentano's Vom Ursprung sittlicher Erkenntnis (The Origin of our Knowledge of Right and Wrong) published in 1889 (see Franz Brentano, Descriptive Psychology , Routledge, 2012, "Introduction").

^ a b Dale Jacquette (ed.), The Cambridge Companion to Brentano , Cambridge University Press, 2004, p. 67.

^ Anna-Teresa Tymieniecka , Phenomenology World-Wide: Foundations — Expanding Dynamics — Life-Engagements A Guide for Research and Study , Springer, 2014, p. 18: "[Husserl] entrusts this analysis to a pure or phenomenological psychology whose links with Brentano's descriptive psychology are still clearly visible." ^ See Postfix in the 1923 edition (in German) or the 1973, English version ( ISBN 0710074255 , edited by Oskar Kraus; translated [from German] by Antos C. Rancurello, D. B. Terrell and Linda López McAlister ; English edition edited by Linda López McAlister).

^ Uriah Kriegel, "Phenomenal intentionality past and present: introductory , Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences 12 (3):437–444 (2013).

^ Liliana Albertazzi, Immanent Realism: An Introduction to Brentano , Springer, 2006, p. 321.

^ Maria van der Schaar, G. F. Stout and the Psychological Origins of Analytic Philosophy , Springer, 2013, p. viii.

^ Franz Brentano Archiv Graz External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Franz Brentano .

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Franz Brentano .

Franz Brentano website "Franz Brentano and Cornelio Fabro. A forgotten chapter of the Brentanian reception" Archived 2016-03-24 at the Wayback Machine Huemer, Wolfgang.

"Franz Brentano" . In Zalta, Edward N.

(ed.).

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Brandl, Johannes.

"Brentano's Theory of Judgement" . In Zalta, Edward N.

(ed.).

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Franz Brentano's Ontology and His Immanent Realism – Contains a list of the English translations of Brentano's works and an annotated bibliography "Brentano, Franz" .

New International Encyclopedia . 1905.

Works by or about Franz Brentano at the Internet Archive The Origin of the Knowledge of Right and Wrong by Franz Brentano at Project Gutenberg "Franz Brentano Archiv" (Franz Brentano Papers) at Graz University Brentano and the Aristotelian Tradition v t e Aristotelianism Overview Aristotle Works Lyceum Ideas and interests Logic Apodicticity Category of being Future contingents Genus–differentia Irrelevant conclusion Syllogism Physics accident Active intellect Antiperistasis Essence Eternity of the world Four causes Hexis Horror vacui Hylomorphism Hypokeimenon Minima naturalia Ousia Passive intellect Potentiality and actuality Substance theory Substantial form Sublunary sphere Theory of universals Unmoved mover Biology Rational animal Ethics Akrasia Arete Eudaimonia Eutrapelia Golden mean Magnanimity Nemesis Philia Phronesis Pleonexia Practical syllogism Politics Mixed government Natural slavery Rhetoric Lexis Paradeigma Poetics Anagnorisis Catharsis Classical unities Diegesis Hamartia Mimesis Mythos Opsis Peripeteia Telos Tragic hero Works Organon Categories On Interpretation Prior Analytics Posterior Analytics Topics Sophistical Refutations Physics Physics On the Heavens On Generation and Corruption Meteorology On the Soul On Animals History Parts Movement Progression Generation Metaphysics Metaphysics Ethics and politics Nicomachean Ethics Eudemian Ethics Politics Constitution of the Athenians Rhetoric and poetics Rhetoric Poetics Parva Naturalia Sense and Sensibilia On Memory On Sleep On Dreams On Divination in Sleep On Length and Shortness of Life On Youth, Old Age, Life and Death, and Respiration Lost Protrepticus Pseudepigrapha On Breath On Colors On Plants On Indivisible Lines On Melissus, Xenophanes, and Gorgias On the Universe On Things Heard Physiognomonics On Marvellous Things Heard Mechanics Problems The Situations and Names of Winds On Virtues and Vices Economics Rhetoric to Alexander Magna Moralia Related topics Transmission of the Greek Classics Commentaries on Aristotle Conimbricenses Metabasis paradox Views on women Wheel paradox Mathematical realism List of writers influenced by Aristotle Category Philosophy portal Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST 2 WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Greece Korea Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii Mathematics Genealogy Project People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC RISM Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐wztl2
Cached time: 20250817051137
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.768 seconds
Real time usage: 0.955 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 5969/1000000
Revision size: 24716/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 132856/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 19324/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 20/100
Expensive parser function count: 5/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 51722/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.538/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 15371129/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  841.566      1 -total
 28.61%  240.743      1 Template:Infobox_philosopher
 12.93%  108.834      3 Template:Navbox
 12.66%  106.564      1 Template:Aristotelianism
 12.65%  106.433      1 Template:IPA
 10.11%   85.059      1 Template:Infobox_clergy
  8.02%   67.499      1 Template:Death-date_and_age
  7.30%   61.413      1 Template:Short_description
  6.86%   57.771      2 Template:ISBN
  6.32%   53.179      1 Template:Reflist Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:81974:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817051137 and revision id 1298829400. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Franz_Brentano&oldid=1298829400 " Categories : 1853 births 1917 deaths 19th-century Austrian philosophers 19th-century German male writers 19th-century German non-fiction writers 19th-century German philosophers 19th-century Roman Catholics 20th-century Austrian philosophers 20th-century German male writers 20th-century German non-fiction writers 20th-century German philosophers 20th-century Roman Catholics Academic staff of the University of Vienna Academic staff of the University of Würzburg Aristotelian philosophers Catholic philosophers German male non-fiction writers German people of Italian descent German psychologists German Roman Catholic writers Humboldt University of Berlin alumni Ludwig Maximilian University of Munich alumni Ontologists People from Rhein-Hunsrück-Kreis People from the Rhine Province Phenomenologists Philosophers from the Kingdom of Prussia Philosophers of psychology German philosophers of mind Philosophy academics University of Münster alumni University of Würzburg alumni Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with hCards Pages with German IPA Articles needing additional references from March 2010 All articles needing additional references Commons category link from Wikidata Webarchive template wayback links Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the New International Encyclopedia Articles with Internet Archive links This page was last edited on 5 July 2025, at 00:20 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Franz Brentano 38 languages Add topic

