Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Forms of energy 2 Measurement Toggle Measurement subsection 2.1 Units 2.1.1 SI unit 2.1.2 Other metric units 2.1.3 Imperial or US Customary units 2.1.4 Other units 2.2 Related units and concepts 3 Energy industry Toggle Energy industry subsection 3.1 Energy infrastructure 3.2 Energy applications 4 History of energy 5 Physics of energy Toggle Physics of energy subsection 5.1 Allegorical and esoteric 6 Politics Toggle Politics subsection 6.1 Energy issues 6.2 Energy policies and use – national and international 6.2.1 International 6.2.2 Regional and national 7 Economics Toggle Economics subsection 7.1 Energy companies 7.2 Non-profit organizations 7.3 Industry associations 8 Innovators 9 Lists 10 See also 11 References 12 External links Toggle the table of contents Outline of energy 3 languages বাংলা தமிழ் اردو Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Overview of and topical guide to energy See also: Index of energy articles The following outline is provided as an overview of and topical guide to energy: Energy – in physics , this is an indirectly observed quantity often understood as the ability of a physical system to do work on other physical systems.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Since work is defined as a force acting through a distance (a length of space), energy is always equivalent to the ability to exert force (a pull or a push) against an object that is moving along a definite path of certain length.

Forms of energy [ edit ] Chemical energy – energy contained in molecules Electrical energy – energy from electric fields Free energy - energy state function Geothermal energy – thermal energy extracted from the Earth's crust Gravitational energy – energy from gravitational fields Ionization energy – energy that binds an electron to its atom or molecule Kinetic energy – ( ≥0 ), energy of the motion of a body Magnetic energy – energy from magnetic fields Mechanical energy – The sum of (usually macroscopic ) kinetic and potential energies Mechanical wave – ( ≥0 ), a form of mechanical energy propagated by a material's oscillations Nuclear binding energy – energy that binds nucleons to form the atomic nucleus Potential energy – energy possessed by a body by virtue of its position relative to others, stresses within itself, electric charge, and other factors.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] Elastic energy – energy of deformation of a material (or its container) exhibiting a restorative force Gravitational energy – potential energy associated with a gravitational field.

Nuclear potential energy Radiant energy – ( ≥0 ), energy of electromagnetic radiation including light and of gravitational radiation Renewable energy – energy from renewable natural resources that are replenished on a human timescale Rest energy – ( ≥0 ) given by E = mc 2 , where m is an object's rest mass Solar energy Surface energy Sustainable energy Thermal energy – a microscopic , disordered equivalent of mechanical energy Heat – an amount of thermal energy being transferred (in a given process )  in the direction of decreasing temperature Work (physics) – an amount of energy being energy transferred in a given process due to displacement in the direction of an applied force Electric power Electricity Measurement [ edit ] Units [ edit ] Main article: Units of energy List of common units for energy. Official or common symbol in brackets after name and exact or approximate value of unit in joule in brackets after description.

SI unit [ edit ] Joule (J) – the SI -unit for energy. Also called newton meter, watt second, or coulomb volt.

Other metric units [ edit ] Kilowatt-hour (kW·h) – corresponds to one kilowatt of power being used over a period of one hour ( 3.6 MJ ).

Calorie (cal) – equal to the energy need to raise the temperature of one gram of water by one degree Celsius (~4.184 J).

Erg (erg) – unit of energy and mechanical work in the centimetre-gram-second (CGS) system of units (10 −7 J).

Imperial or US Customary units [ edit ] British thermal unit (BTU) – equal to the energy need to raise the temperature of one pound of water by one degree Fahrenheit (~1055 J).

Therm (thm) –  unit of heat energy. In the US gas industry it is defined as exactly 100,000 BTU 59 °F . It is approximately the heat equivalent of burning 100 cubic feet (2.8 m 3 ) of natural gas (~105.5 MJ).

Quad – unit of energy equal to 10 15 (a short-scale quadrillion) BTU.

Foot-pound (ft·lbf or ft·lbf) –  unit of mechanical work, or energy, although in scientific fields one commonly uses joule (~1.356 J).

Other units [ edit ] Electronvolt (eV) – the amount of energy gained by a single unbound electron when it falls through an electrostatic potential difference of one volt (~1.60 × 10 −19 J).

Planck energy ( E P ) – natural unit of energy common in particle physics (~1.96 × 10 9 J).

Barrel of oil equivalent (BOE) – energy unit equal to the energy released when burning one barrel (159 litres) of oil (~6.12 GJ).

Tonne of oil equivalent (toe) – energy unit equal to the energy released when burning one tonne of oil (~42 GJ).

Related units and concepts [ edit ] Volt Ampere Coulomb Efficient energy use Energy recovery Energy recycling Enthalpy EU energy label Fill factor – defined as the ratio of the maximum power (Vmp x Jmp) divided by the short-circuit current (Isc) and open-circuit voltage (Voc) in light current density – voltage (J-V) characteristics of solar cells.

Gigaton – Metric Unit of mass, equal to 1,000,000,000 (1 billion) metric tons, 1,000,000,000,000 (1 trillion) kilograms Any of various units of energy, such as gigatons of TNT equivalent, gigatons of coal equivalent, gigatons petroleum equivalent.

Gray (unit) – (symbol: Gy), is the SI unit of energy for the absorbed dose of radiation. One gray is the absorption of one joule of radiation energy by one kilogram of matter. One gray equals 100 rad, an older unit.

Heat Mass–energy equivalence – where mass has an energy equivalence, and energy has a mass equivalence Megawatt Net energy gain Power factor – of an AC electric power system is defined as the ratio of the real power to the apparent power.

Waste-to-energy Waste-to-energy plant Watt Voltage Zero-energy building Energy industry [ edit ] Energy industry Worldwide energy supply , outline by country/region World energy resources and consumption List of energy resources , substances like fuels, petroleum products and electricity Energy crisis , the need to conserve energy resources Energy development , development of energy resources — ongoing effort to provide abundant and accessible energy, through knowledge, skills and construction Embodied energy , the sum total of energy expended to deliver a good or service as it travels through the economy Energy conservation , tips for conserving energy resources Energy economics , as the foundation of other relationships Energy policy , government policies and plans for energy supply Energy storage , methods commonly used to store energy resources for later use Energy system , an interpretation the energy sector in system terms Ecological energetics Energy balance Energy speculation Free energy suppression conspiracy theory Future energy development – Provides a general overview of future energy development.

History of perpetual motion machines Hubbert peak theory , also known as peak oil – the theory that world oil production will peak (or has peaked), and will then rapidly decline, with a corresponding rapid increase in prices.

Primary production Power harvesting Renewable energy development Energy infrastructure [ edit ] See especially Category:Electric power and Category:Fuels for a large number of conventional energy related topics.

Energy storage Electricity generation Electricity retailing Grid energy storage Liquified natural gas Microwave power transmission Power station Power supply Power transmission Underground power station Energy applications [ edit ] Biofuel Distributed generation Electric vehicle Hybrid vehicle Hydrogen vehicle Maglev Passive solar building design Steam engine Vactrain History of energy [ edit ] History of energy History of the energy industry History of coal History of coal mining Electricity § History History of electromagnetic theory History of electrical engineering History of electronic engineering History of the electric generator History of the electric motor Timeline of the electric motor History of electric power transmission History of nuclear power History of petroleum History of the petroleum industry History of renewable energy History of alternative energy History of hydropower History of solar cells Growth of photovoltaics History of sustainability History of wind power Timeline of sustainable energy research 2020–present History of the steam engine Steam power during the Industrial Revolution Physics of energy [ edit ] Energy Activation energy , explains the differences in the speeds of various chemical reactions Bioenergetics Chemical energetics Energy in physical cosmology Energy in Earth science that is responsible for the macroscopic transformations on the planet Earth Electricity Exergy Green energy Orders of magnitude (energy) , list describing various energy levels between 10 −31 joules and 10 70 joules Thermodynamics Perpetual motion Heat History of energy Forms of energy , the forms in which energy can be defined Energy transformation , relating to energy's changes from one form to another.

Energy (signal processing) , the inner product of a signal in the time domain Energy density spectrum , relating to the distribution of signal energy over frequencies.

Potential energy , the form of energy that is due to position of an object Kinetic energy , the form of energy as a consequence of the motion of an object or its constituents Mechanical energy , the potential energy and kinetic energy present in the components of a mechanical system Binding energy , a concept explaining how the constituents of atoms or molecules are bound together Bond energy , a measure of the strength of a chemical bond Nuclear energy , energy that is the consequence of decomposition or combination of atomic nuclei Osmotic power , also salinity gradient power or blue energy, the energy available from the difference in the salt concentration between seawater and river water Gibbs free energy , a related concept in chemical thermodynamics that incorporates entropy considerations Helmholtz free energy , a thermodynamic potential that measures the "useful" work obtainable from a closed thermodynamic system at a constant temperature, useful for studying explosive chemical reactions Elastic energy , which causes or is released by the elastic distortion of a solid or a fluid Ionization energy (IE), the energy required to strip an atom of an electron Interaction energy , the contribution to the total energy that is a result of interaction between the objects being considered Internal energy (abbreviated E or U), the total kinetic energy due to the motion of molecules (translational, rotational, vibrational) and the total potential energy associated with the vibrational and electric energy of atoms within molecules.

Negative energy Energy conversion , process of converting energy from one form to another Dark energy , used to explain some cosmological phenomena Energy quality , empirical experience of the characteristics of different energy forms as they flow and transform Energy density , amount of energy stored in a given system or region of space per unit volume, or per unit mass Energy flow , flow of energy in an ecosystem through food chains Energetics (disambiguation) , the scientific study of energy in general Stress–energy tensor , the density and flux of energy and momentum in space-time; the source of the gravitational field in general relativity Food energy , energy in food that is available Primary energy , energy contained in raw fuels and any other forms of energy received by a system as input to the system.

Radiant energy , energy that is transported by waves Rotational energy , part of an object's total kinetic energy due to its rotation Solar radiation , radiant energy emitted by the sun, particularly electromagnetic energy Tidal power , also called tidal energy, is a form of hydropower that converts the energy of tides into useful forms of power – mainly electricity, dynamic tidal power , tidal lagoons , tidal barrages Wave power is the transport of energy by ocean surface waves , and the capture of that energy to do useful work — for example, electricity generation , water desalination , or the pumping of water (into reservoirs ). Machinery able to exploit wave power is generally known as a wave energy converter (WEC).

Wind energy is the kinetic energy of air in motion; Wind power is the conversion of wind energy into a useful form of energy, such as using wind turbines to make electricity, windmills for mechanical power, windpumps for water pumping or drainage, or sails to propel ships Allegorical and esoteric [ edit ] Energeticism , theory that there is no matter and everything is composed of energy Energy (esotericism) , invoked by spiritualists for alternative modes of healing the human body as well as a spirit that permeates all of reality.

Orgone , Wilhelm Reich discovered this energy and tried to use it to cure various physical ailments and control the weather.

Bioenergetic analysis , body-oriented Reichian psychotherapy Qi , a concept from Oriental medicine that is sometimes translated as "energy" in the West.

Vitalism , often referred to as "energy" Cold fusion , nuclear fusion at conditions close to room temperature.

Bubble fusion , also known as Sonofusion , energy from acoustic collapse of bubbles.

Water-fuelled car , powering a car using water as fuel.

Politics [ edit ] Energy issues [ edit ] 2000 Watt society Energy democracy Environmental concerns with electricity generation Fuel poverty Greasestock , American showcase of vehicles and technologies powered by alternative energy Low-carbon economy Peak Oil Soft energy path – an energy use and development strategy delineated and promoted by some energy experts and activists Strategic Petroleum Reserve (disambiguation) Energy policies and use – national and international [ edit ] International [ edit ] Energy policy – an introductory article Energy and Environmental Security Initiative Regional and national [ edit ] Main page: Energy policy by country Energy law – overview of many energy laws from various countries and states New York energy law Energy Tax Act – United States energy -related legislation. See also : Category:United States federal energy legislation United Kingdom: Energy policy of the United Kingdom Energy use and conservation in the United Kingdom Economics [ edit ] Energy economics Energy companies [ edit ] ExxonMobil Enercon – Company based in Germany that operates in the wind turbine industry. One of the biggest producers in the world.

Saudi Aramco Sasol United States Enrichment Corporation – contracts with the United States Department of Energy to produce enriched uranium.

Non-profit organizations [ edit ] Musicians United for Safe Energy Industry associations [ edit ] OPEC – Organization of Petroleum-exporting Countries IEA – International Energy Agency CAPP – Canadian Association of Petroleum Producers World LP Gas Association – WLPGA Innovators [ edit ] Alessandro Volta Charles Kettering Farrington Daniels – solar energy Georges Leclanché – battery John Frederic Daniell – Daniell cell Rudolf Diesel – compression ignition internal combustion engine Georges Imbert – wood gas Leonardo da Vinci Moritz von Jacobi Nicolaus Otto – internal combustion engine Robert Stirling – Stirling engine (external combustion) Nikola Tesla James Watt – steam engine with separate condensor Lists [ edit ] List of books about energy issues List of energy abbreviations List of energy storage projects List of large wind farms List of notable renewable energy organizations List of photovoltaics companies List of renewable energy topics by country List of solar thermal power stations Index of wave articles List of wind turbine manufacturers See also [ edit ] Energy portal Renewable energy portal Energy (disambiguation) List of environment topics References [ edit ] ^ "Retrieved on 2010-Dec-05" . Faculty.clintoncc.suny.edu. Archived from the original on 2007-12-13 . Retrieved 2010-12-12 .

^ "Retrieved on 2010-Dec-05" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 2011-04-26 . Retrieved 2010-12-12 .

^ Jain, Mahesh C. (2009).

"Fundamental forces and laws: a brief review" .

Textbook Of Engineering Physics, Part 1 . PHI Learning Pvt. Ltd. p. 10.

ISBN 9788120338623 .

^ McCall, Robert P. (2010). "Energy, Work and Metabolism".

Physics of the Human Body . JHU Press. p.

74 .

ISBN 978-0-8018-9455-8 .

External links [ edit ] Energy at Wikipedia's sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Textbooks from Wikibooks Resources from Wikiversity v t e Energy History Index Outline Fundamental concepts Conservation of energy Energetics Energy Units Energy condition Energy level Energy system Energy transformation Energy transition Mass Negative mass Mass–energy equivalence Power Thermodynamics Enthalpy Entropic force Entropy Exergy Free entropy Heat capacity Heat transfer Irreversible process Isolated system Laws of thermodynamics Negentropy Quantum thermodynamics Thermal equilibrium Thermal reservoir Thermodynamic equilibrium Thermodynamic free energy Thermodynamic potential Thermodynamic state Thermodynamic system Thermodynamic temperature Volume (thermodynamics) Work Types Binding Nuclear Chemical Dark Elastic Electric potential energy Electrical Gravitational Binding Interatomic potential Internal Ionization Kinetic Magnetic Mechanical Negative Phantom Potential Quantum chromodynamics binding energy Quantum fluctuation Quantum potential Quintessence Radiant Rest Sound Surface Thermal Vacuum Zero-point Energy carriers Battery Capacitor Electricity Enthalpy Fuel Fossil Oil Heat Latent heat Hydrogen Hydrogen fuel Mechanical wave Radiation Sound wave Work Primary energy Bioenergy Fossil fuel Coal Natural gas Petroleum Geothermal Gravitational Hydropower Marine Nuclear fuel Natural uranium Radiant Solar Wind Energy system components Biomass Electric power Electricity delivery Energy engineering Fossil fuel power station Cogeneration Integrated gasification combined cycle Geothermal power Hydropower Hydroelectricity Tidal power Wave farm Nuclear power Nuclear power plant Radioisotope thermoelectric generator Oil refinery Solar power Concentrated solar power Photovoltaic system Solar thermal energy Solar furnace Solar power tower Wind power Airborne wind energy Wind farm Use and supply Efficient energy use Agriculture Computing Transport Energy conservation Energy consumption Energy policy Energy development Energy security Energy storage Renewable energy Sustainable energy World energy supply and consumption Africa Asia Australia Canada Europe Mexico South America United States Misc.

Energy in work Carbon footprint Energy democracy Energy recovery Energy recycling Jevons paradox Waste-to-energy Waste-to-energy plant Category Commons Portal WikiProject v t e Wikipedia outlines General reference Culture and the arts Geography and places Health and fitness History and events Mathematics and logic Natural and physical sciences People and self Philosophy and thinking Religion and belief systems Society and social sciences Technology and applied sciences NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐vx7pw
Cached time: 20250812044000
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.356 seconds
Real time usage: 0.499 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1463/1000000
Revision size: 20400/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 43911/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 1046/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 8/100
Expensive parser function count: 6/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 36408/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.211/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 7131258/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  385.715      1 -total
 23.68%   91.338      1 Template:Reflist
 19.20%   74.058      1 Template:Footer_energy
 18.90%   72.884      2 Template:Navbox
 18.05%   69.609      2 Template:Cite_web
 17.26%   66.577      1 Template:Short_description
 16.61%   64.052      1 Template:Sister_project_links
  8.29%   31.994      2 Template:Pagetype
  7.31%   28.190      1 Template:Val
  7.09%   27.335     11 Template:Main_other Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:1841288:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812044000 and revision id 1278601315. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Outline_of_energy&oldid=1278601315 " Categories : Outlines of sciences Outlines Energy Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Pages using Sister project links with default search This page was last edited on 3 March 2025, at 12:45 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Outline of energy 3 languages Add topic

