Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Nominalism 3 Tritheism of Roscelin 4 Notes 5 References Toggle References subsection 5.1 Citations 5.2 Bibliography Toggle the table of contents Roscellinus 33 languages العربية Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Español Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge 한국어 Hrvatski Italiano עברית Қазақша Кыргызча Latina Magyar مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Slovenčina Slovenščina Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia French theologian, c. 1050 – c. 1121 Roscelin of Compiègne ( c.

1050 – c.

1121 ), better known by his Latinized name Roscellinus Compendiensis or Rucelinus , was a French philosopher and theologian , often regarded as the founder of nominalism .

Biography [ edit ] Roscellinus was born in Compiègne , France . Little is known of his life, and knowledge of his doctrines is mainly derived from Anselm and Abelard . He studied at Soissons and Reims , was afterwards attached to the cathedral of Chartres and became canon of Compiègne . As a monk of Compiègne, he was teaching as early as 1087. He had contact with Lanfranc , Anselm, and St. Ivo of Chartres .

Roscellinus's exposition of Nominalist doctrines, and especially his application to the dogma of the Trinity , attracted broad attention. He maintained that the three persons of the Trinity were not referred to as three substances or Gods only by convention, arguing that if they were really one substance then God the Father and the Holy Spirit would have become incarnate along with God the Son . Roscellinus cited Lanfranc and Anselm in support of this doctrine.

In 1092/1093, however, a council convoked at Soissons by the archbishop of Reims condemned his interpretation and accused Roscellinus of tritheism .

[ n 1 ] Roscellinus, out of fear of excommunication and even stoning to death by the orthodox populace, recanted his beliefs, but later returned to professing them.

Roscellinus left for England, but having made himself unpopular by an attack on the doctrines of Anselm, he left the country and repaired to Rome, where he was well received and became reconciled to the Catholic Church. He then returned to France, taught at Tours and Loc-menach (where he had Abelard as a pupil), and finally became canon of Besançon . He is heard of as late as 1121, when he came forward to oppose Abelard's views on the Trinity. He was also sent a letter by Theobald of Étampes in response to his criticisms of the sons of priests.

Of his writings there exists only a letter addressed to Abelard on the Trinity, in which Roscellinus "belittles Abélard and makes merry over his castration ." [ 2 ] Hauréau brings forward his name in connection with a text, "Sententia de universalibus secundum magistrum R.", [ 3 ] but this is a conjecture. His doctrines are attested by Anselm, Abelard, John of Salisbury , and an anonymous epigram.

Nominalism [ edit ] According to Otto of Freisingen , Roscellinus "was the first in our times to institute the theory of words", [ 4 ] but the chronicler of the "Historia Francia" [ 5 ] mentions before him a "magister Johannes", whose personality is much discussed and who has not yet been definitively identified.

The "sententia vocum" was one of the anti-realist solutions of the problem of universals accepted in the early Middle Ages. In accordance with a dichotomy set out by Porphyry , [ 6 ] the first medieval philosophers regarded genera and species either as things or as having no existence. The philosophers described this using terminology drawn from Boethius , referring to such abstract concepts as either res (things) or voces (words). Nominalists held that: only the individual exists (is res ); [ 7 ] universals are merely words ( voces ).

[ 8 ] In Roscellinus's theory, the universal is merely an emission of sound ( flatus vocis ), in conformity with Boethius' definition.

[ 9 ] Because Roscellinus did not discuss the philosophical concepts of genus and species, he is sometimes considered a pseudo-nominalist, or a moderate realist . However, because of his position as the first medieval philosopher to challenge medieval Realism, he has also been invoked as a forefather of modernity.

[ 10 ] Roscellinus was also taken to task by Anselm and Abelard for the less clear idea which he gave of the whole and of composite substance. According to Anselm, he maintained that colour does not exist independently of the horse which serves as its support and that the wisdom of the soul is not outside of the soul which is wise.

[ 11 ] Anselm argues that Roscellinus denies to the whole, such as house, man, real existence of its parts, treating the word alone as having parts.

[ 12 ] Roscellinus was not without his supporters; among them was his contemporary Raimbert of Lille , and what the monk Hériman relates of his doctrine agrees with the statements of the master of Compiègne. Universal substances, says Hériman, are but a breath.

[ 13 ] He merely comments on the saying of Anselm characterized by the same jesting tone, [ 14 ] and says that to understand the windy loquacity of Raimbert of Lille one has but to breathe into his hand.

[ 15 ] Tritheism of Roscelin [ edit ] Roscelin considered the three Divine Persons as three independent beings, like three angels; if usage permitted, he added, it might truly be said that there are three Gods. Otherwise, he continued, God the Father and God the Holy Ghost would have become incarnate with God the Son. To retain the appearance of dogma he admitted that the three Divine Persons had but one will and power [ Audio ... quod Roscelinus clericus dicit in tres personas esse tres res ab invicem separatas, sicut sunt tres angeli, ita tamen ut una sit voluntas et potestas aut Patrem et Spiritum sanctum esse incarnatum; et tres deos vere posse dici si usus admitteret (letter of Anselm to Foulques)].

This characteristic tritheism , which Anselm and Abelard agreed in refuting even after its author's conversion, seems an indisputable application of Roscelin's anti-Realism. He even argues that if the three Divine Persons form but one God, all three have become incarnate. There are therefore three Divine substances, three Gods, as there are three angels, because each substance constitutes an individual, which is the fundamental assertion of anti-Realism. The ideas of the theologian are closely linked with those of the philosopher.

Notes [ edit ] ^ Roscelin's writings and the council's acts have not survived and we know about them principally through the correspondence and writings of Anselm.

[ 1 ] References [ edit ] Citations [ edit ] ^ Cunningham (1836) , p. 312, n. 6 .

^ Russell, Bertrand.

The History of Western Philosophy . Simon & Schuster, 1945, p. 436.

^ ("Notices et extr. de quelques manuscr. lat.", V, Paris, 1892, 224) ^ "primus nostris temporibus sententiam vocum instituit" ( Gesta Friderici imp . in Monum. German. Histor.: Script.

, XX, 376) ^ (cf.

Bouquet , " Recueil des hist. des Gaules et de la France ", XII, Paris, 1781, 3, b, c) ^ ( mox de generibus et speciebus illud quidem sive subsistent sive in nudis intellectibus posita sint ) ^ " nam cum habeat eorum sententia nihil esse praeter individuum ...

" (De gener. et spec., 524).

^ " Fuit autem, nemini magistri nostri Roscellini tam insana sententia ut nullam rem partibus constare vellet, sed sicut solis vocibus species, ita et partes ascridebat " (Abelard, Liber divisionum , ed. Cousin, 471); "[...] Illi utique dialectici, qui non nisi flatum vocis putant universalis esse substantias, et qui colorem non aliud queunt intellegere quam corpus, nec sapientiam hominis aliud quam animam, prorsus a spiritualium quaestionum disputatione sunt exsufflandi.

" (Anselm, De Incarnatione Verbi , p. 285. Opera Omnia, vol. 1. Ed. F.S. Schmitt, 1938); " Alius ergo consistit in vocibus, licet haec opinio cum Roscelino suo fere omnino evanuerit (John of Salisbury, Metalog.

, II, 17).

^ " Nihil enim aliud est prolatio (vocis) quam aeris plectro linguae percussio " ^ Richard J. Utz, "Medievalism as Modernism: Alfred Andersch's Nominalist Littérature engageé ," Studies in Medievalism 6 (1993), 76–90.

^ (De fide trinit., 2) ^ " ita divinam paginam pervertit, ut eo loco quo Dominus partem piscis assi comedisse partem hujus vocis, quae est piscis assi, non partem rei intelligere cogatur " (Cousin, P. Abaelardi opera, II. 151).

^ " eos de sapientium numero merito esse exsufflandos " ^ "a spiritualium quaestionum disputatione sunt exsufflandi" ( P.L.

, 256a) ^ ( manuque ori admota exsufflans " Mon. Germ. Hist.

", XIV, 275) Bibliography [ edit ] This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : De Wulf, Maurice (1912). " Roscelin ". In Herbermann, Charles (ed.).

Catholic Encyclopedia . Vol. 13. New York: Robert Appleton Company.

This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911). " Roscellinus ".

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 23 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 725.

Cunningham, Francis (1836), Text-book of Ecclesiastical History by J.C.I. Gieseler, 3rd ed., Vol. II , Philadelphia: Carey, Lea, & Blanchard [A translation of the original German version] .

(in English) & (in Latin) v t e Medieval philosophers Christian Early " Church Fathers " Augustine of Hippo Boethius Cassiodorus Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite Isidore of Seville John Scotus Eriugena Alcuin 11–12th century " Scholasticism " Anselm of Canterbury Peter Abelard Anselm of Laon Hugh of Saint Victor Richard of Saint Victor Roscelin Peter Lombard Alexander of Hales Bernard of Chartres Dominicus Gundissalinus Gilbert de la Porrée Alain de Lille 13–14th century Robert Grosseteste Michael Scot Albertus Magnus Henry of Ghent Roger Bacon Bonaventure Thomas Aquinas Vitello John Peckham Ramon Llull Siger of Brabant Boetius of Dacia Petrus Peregrinus de Maricourt Meister Eckhart Giles of Rome Godfrey of Fontaines Duns Scotus Durandus Petrus Aureolus William of Ockham Late Jean Buridan Marsilius of Inghen Nicole Oresme Albert of Saxony Francesc Eiximenis Nicholas of Cusa Vincent Ferrer Paul of Venice Lambertus de Monte John Hennon Jewish Medieval Isaac Israeli ben Solomon Saadia Gaon Solomon ibn Gabirol Judah Halevi Abraham ibn Daud Maimonides Nachmanides Gersonides Hasdai Crescas Joseph Albo Islamic Early Jabir ibn Hayyan (Geber) al-Nazzam Al-Kindi (Alkindus) Abu Bakr al-Razi (Rhazes) Ikhwan al-Safa' (Brethren of Purity) Matta ibn Yunus Al-Farabi (Alpharabius) Abu Ya'qub al-Sijistani Ibn Masarra Abd al-Jabbar Al-Amiri Abu Sulayman al-Sijistani Miskawayh Ibn al-Haytham (Alhazen) al-Biruni al-Kirmani High Ibn Sina (Avicenna) Ibn Hazm Al-Ghazali (Algazel) Abu l-Barakat al-Baghdadi Ibn Bajjah (Avempace) Ayn al-Quzat Hamadani Ibn Tufayl Ibn Rushd (Averroes) Late Ibn Sab'in Shahab al-Din Yahya ibn Habash Suhrawardi Fakhr al-Din al-Razi Rashid al-Din Ibn Arabi al-Qazwini Abd al-Latif al-Baghdadi Athir al-Din al-Abhari Nasir al-Din al-Tusi Ibn al-Nafis Qutb al-Din al-Shirazi Ibn Taymiyya Ibn Khaldun See also Renaissance philosophy Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF 2 FAST National Germany United States Italy Czech Republic Netherlands Poland Vatican Israel People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐cz4s5
Cached time: 20250814220143
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.382 seconds
Real time usage: 0.478 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1356/1000000
Revision size: 9661/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 50509/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 1214/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 1/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 29306/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.268/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 17317090/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  413.164      1 -total
 21.70%   89.667      5 Template:Lang
 20.47%   84.556      1 Template:Catholic
 17.41%   71.912      4 Template:Navbox
 16.90%   69.806      1 Template:Medieval_Philosophy
 15.24%   62.974      1 Template:Short_description
  8.01%   33.099      2 Template:Pagetype
  7.44%   30.732      1 Template:Authority_control
  6.29%   25.979      1 Template:Refn
  5.81%   23.994      1 Template:Sfnp Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:771589:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814220143 and revision id 1297373005. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Roscellinus&oldid=1297373005 " Categories : French philosophers of language 1050s births 1120s deaths People from Compiègne French male writers Nominalists 11th-century French philosophers 11th-century French writers 11th-century writers in Latin 12th-century French philosophers Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Latin-language text Articles incorporating a citation from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference Articles incorporating text from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica Articles with Latin-language sources (la) This page was last edited on 25 June 2025, at 20:06 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Roscellinus 33 languages Add topic

