Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 See also 3 Notes 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Semiotic literary criticism 3 languages العربية Български Eesti Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Semiotics General concepts Sign relation relational complex Code Confabulation Connotation / Denotation Encoding / Decoding Lexical Modality Representation Salience Semiosis Semiosphere Semiotic theory of Peirce Umwelt Value Fields Biosemiotics Cognitive semiotics Computational semiotics Literary semiotics Semiotics of culture Social semiotics Methods Commutation test Paradigmatic analysis Syntagmatic analysis Semioticians Roland Barthes Marcel Danesi John Deely Umberto Eco Paolo Fabbri Gottlob Frege Algirdas Julien Greimas Félix Guattari Stuart Hall Louis Hjelmslev Vyacheslav Ivanov Roman Jakobson Roberta Kevelson Kalevi Kull Juri Lotman Charles W. Morris Charles S. Peirce Susan Petrilli John Poinsot Augusto Ponzio Ferdinand de Saussure Thomas Sebeok Michael Silverstein Eero Tarasti Vladimir Toporov Jakob von Uexküll Victoria, Lady Welby Related topics Copenhagen–Tartu school Tartu–Moscow Semiotic School Structuralism Post-structuralism Deconstruction Postmodernism v t e Semiotic literary criticism , also called literary semiotics , is the approach to literary criticism informed by the theory of signs or semiotics . Semiotics, tied closely to the structuralism pioneered by Ferdinand de Saussure , was extremely influential in the development of literary theory out of the formalist approaches of the early twentieth century.

[ 1 ] History [ edit ] The early forms of literary semiotics grew out of formalist approaches to literature, especially Russian formalism , and structuralist linguistics, especially the Prague school .  Notable early semiotic authors included Vladimir Propp , Algirdas Julius Greimas , and Viktor Shklovsky .

[ 2 ] These critics were concerned with a formal analysis of narrative forms which would resemble a literary mathematics, or at least a literary syntax , as far as possible.  They proposed various formal notations for narrative components and transformations and attempted a descriptive taxonomy of existing stories along these lines.

Propp's Morphology of the Folktale (orig. Russian pub. 1928; English trans. 1958) provides an example of the formal and systematic approach.  In successive chapters, Propp analyzes the characters, plot events, and other elements of traditional folktales (primarily from Russia and Eastern Europe).  For each of these key components he provides a letter designation (with superscripts to designate specific subtypes).  He proceeds to analyze individual tales by transposing them into this notation and then to generalize about their structure.  For example: Analysis of a simple, single-move tale of class H-I, of the type: kidnapping of a person.

131. A tsar, three daughters (α).  The daughters go walking (β³), overstay in the garden (δ¹).  A dragon kidnaps them (A¹).  A call for aid (B¹).  Quest of three heroes (C↑).  Three battles with the dragon (H¹–I¹), rescue of the maidens (K 4 ).  Return (↓), reward (w°). (Propp 128) He then gives the complete structure of this story in one line of notation, the analysis complete and ready to be compared systematically with other tales: αβ³δ¹A¹B¹C↑H¹–I¹K 4 ↓w° Later semiotic approaches to literature have often been less systematic (or, in some special cases such as Roland Barthes 's S/Z , they have been so specifically and exhaustively systematic as to render the possibility of a complete literary semiotics doubtful).  As structuralist linguistics gave way to a post-structuralist philosophy of language which denied the scientific ambitions of the general theory of signs, semiotic literary criticism became more playful and less systematic in its ambitions.  Still, some authors harbor more scientific ambition for their literary schemata than others.  Later authors in the semiotic tradition of literary criticism include Tzvetan Todorov , Mikhail Bakhtin , Roland Barthes , Juri Lotman , Julia Kristeva , Michael Riffaterre , and Umberto Eco .

See also [ edit ] Structuralist literary criticism Notes [ edit ] ^ "Semiotics for Beginners: Criticisms" .

visual-memory.co.uk . Retrieved 2017-06-29 .

^ Kiryushchenko, Vitaly (2012).

"Peirce's Semiotics and the Russian Formalism: Points of Convergence" (PDF) .

References [ edit ] Jonathan Culler .

The Pursuit of Signs: Semiotics, Literature, Deconstruction .

ISBN 0-8014-9224-6 .

Structuralist Poetics .

ISBN 0-8014-9155-X .

Terrence Hawkes.

Structuralism and Semiotics .

ISBN 0-415-32153-0 (second edition); ISBN 0-520-03422-8 .

Vladimir Propp.

Morphology of the Folktale .

ISBN 0-292-78376-0 .

External links [ edit ] Semiotics from the Johns Hopkins Guide to Literary Theory and Criticism v t e Literary criticism Literary theory Archetypal criticism Biographical criticism Chicago school Cultural materialism Darwinian criticism Deconstruction Descriptive poetics Ecocriticism Feminist criticism Formalism Geneva school Geocriticism Marxist criticism New Criticism New historicism Postcolonial criticism Postcritique Psychoanalytic criticism Reader-response criticism Russian formalism Semiotic criticism Sociological criticism Source criticism Thing theory Theorists and critics Plato Aristotle Horace Longinus Plotinus St. Augustine Boethius Aquinas Dante Boccaccio de Pizan Valmiki Lu Ji Sidney Tasso Bacon Hobbes Corneille Dryden Boileau-Despréaux Locke Pope Addison Vico Burke (Edmund) Hume Johnson Young Lessing Reynolds Diderot Kant Wollstonecraft Blake Schiller Schlegel Wordsworth de Staël Schelling Coleridge von Humboldt Keats Schopenhauer Peacock Shelley von Goethe Hegel Leopardi De Sanctis Carlyle Mill Emerson Sainte-Beuve Lowell Poe Arnold Taine Baudelaire Marx Kierkegaard Nietzsche Pater Zola France Wilde Mallarmé Tolstoy Croce Gramsci Eco Freud de Saussure Lévi-Strauss Hulme Benjamin Shklovsky Eliot Jung Trotsky Woolf Richards Bakhtin Bataille Ransom Lacan Lukács Valéry Burke (Kenneth) Cassirer Brooks Mukařovský Sartre de Beauvoir Adorno Jakobson Frye Bachelard Gombrich Heidegger Chomsky Derrida Barthes Foucault Poulet Williams Trilling Kristeva de Man Bloom Achebe Said Deleuze Guattari Girard Cixous Iser White Gadamer Ricoeur Abrams Geertz Marinetti Tzara Breton Loy de Andrade Hu Paz Authority control databases : National Czech Republic Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Semiotic_literary_criticism&oldid=1252900307 " Category : Literary criticism This page was last edited on 23 October 2024, at 12:55 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Semiotic literary criticism 3 languages Add topic

