Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Definition 2 History 3 Function 4 Critical play 5 Critiques 6 Critical acclaim 7 Distinctions with Conceptual art 8 See also 9 References Toggle the table of contents Critical design 3 languages Čeština Hrvatski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Aspect of design that challenges preconceptions This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) The topic of this article may not meet Wikipedia's general notability guideline .

Please help to demonstrate the notability of the topic by citing reliable secondary sources that are independent of the topic and provide significant coverage of it beyond a mere trivial mention. If notability cannot be shown, the article is likely to be merged , redirected , or deleted .

Find sources: "Critical design" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( May 2014 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article relies excessively on references to primary sources .

Please improve this article by adding secondary or tertiary sources .

Find sources: "Critical design" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( May 2014 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Critical design" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( May 2014 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Futures studies Concepts Accelerating change Cashless society Global catastrophic risk Future Earth Mathematics Race Climate Space exploration Universe Historical materialism Kondratiev wave Kardashev scale Moore's law Peak oil Population cycle Resource depletion Singularity Swanson's law Techniques Backcasting Causal layered analysis Chain-linked model Consensus forecast Cross impact analysis Delphi Real-time Delphi Foresight Future-proof Futures wheel Future workshop Horizon scanning Reference class forecasting Scenario planning Systems analysis Threatcasting Trend analysis Technology assessment and forecasting Critical design Design fiction Exploratory engineering FTA Hype cycle Science fiction prototyping Speculative design TRL Technology scouting Related topics Futarchy Transhumanism v t e Critical design uses design fiction and speculative design proposals to challenge assumptions and conceptions about the role objects play in everyday life. Critical design plays a similar role to product design , but does not emphasize an object's commercial purpose or physical utility. It is mainly used to share a critical perspective or inspire debate, [ 1 ] while increasing awareness of social, cultural, or ethical issues in the eyes of the public. Critical design was popularized by Anthony Dunne and Fiona Raby through their firm, Dunne & Raby .

Critical design can make aspects of the future physically present to provoke a reaction.

[ 2 ] "Critical design is critical thought translated into materiality. It is about thinking through design rather than through words and using the language and structure of design to engage people." [ 3 ] It may be conflated with the critical theory or the Frankfurt School , but it is not related.

Definition [ edit ] A critical design object challenges an audience's preconceptions, provoking new ways of thinking about the object, its use, and the surrounding culture. Its adverse is affirmative design: design that reinforces the status quo. For a project to succeed in critical design, the viewer must be mentally engaged and willing to think beyond the expected and ordinary. Humor is important, but satire is not the goal.

Many practitioners of critical design have never heard of the term itself, and/or would describe their work differently. Referring to it as critical design simply garners more attention to it, and emphasizes that design has applications beyond problem solving.

It is more of an attitude than a style or movement; a position rather than a method. Critical design builds on this attitude by creatively critiquing concepts and ideologies using fabricated artifacts to embody commentaries around everything from consumer culture to the #MeToo Movement. Regardless of its processes, critical design is often discussed as a unique approach in Design Research , perhaps because of its focus on critiquing widely held social, cultural, and technical beliefs. The process of designing such an object, as well as the presentation and narrative around the object itself, allows for reflection on existing cultural values, morals, and practices. In making such an object, critical designers frequently employ classic design processes—research, user experience, iteration—while working to conceptualize scenarios intended to highlight social, cultural, or political paradigms.

[ 4 ] Design as societal critique is not a new idea.

History [ edit ] Italian Radical Design of the 1960s and 70s was highly critical of prevailing social values and design ideologies.

The term "critical design" was first used in Anthony Dunne's book Hertzian Tales (1999) [ 5 ] and further developed in Design Noir: The Secret Life of Electronic Objects (2001).

[ 6 ] According to Sanders, critical design probes an "ambiguous stimuli that
designers send to people who then respond to them, providing insights for the design process." [ 7 ] Uta Brandes identifies critical design as a discrete Design Research method [ 8 ] and Bowen integrates it into human-centered design activities as a useful tool for stakeholders to critically think about possible futures.

[ 9 ] FABRICA , a communication research center owned by Italian fashion giant Benetton Group , has been actively involved in producing provocative imagery and critical design projects. FABRICA's Visual Communication department, led by Omar Vulpinari, actively participates in critiquing social, political and environmental issues through global awareness campaigns for international magazines and organizations like UN-WHO . Several young artists who have produced critical design projects at FABRICA in recent years are Erik Ravello (Cuba), Yianni Hill (Australia), Marian Grabmayer (Austria), Priya Khatri (India), Andy Rementer (United States), and An Namyoung (South Korea).

Function [ edit ] To attribute to design practice, critical design broadens the vision in design from traditional practice. It is no longer limited to highlighting the physical function in product design, though this causes some ambiguities in the discussion of critical design's function as it maintains in design area. Matt Malpass addresses Larry Ligo's classification of five different types of function: Structural articulation, Physical function, Psychological function, Social function, as well as Cultural-existential function [ 10 ] in his article, with a further discussion of how Modernism leaves a narrower understanding of physical utility when we think about function, [ 11 ] which leads to the ambiguity in critical design's function. As critical design focuses on present social, cultural, and ethical implications of design objects and practice, [ 1 ] it mostly emphasizes on social and cultural impact from its function.

In addition, critical design objects have a lot of potential to contribute to testing ideas during the process of the development of new technology. As Dunne and Raby express their concerns about always lacking communication between the specialists and the general public to form a two-way discussion of new technology. It always limits to one-way flow from specialists to the public.

[ 12 ] Critical design provides a stage to give scenarios, completes the dialog between specialists and the general public and helps to collect feedback from the public for further refinements before the idea is going too far for any changes.

Critical play [ edit ] Researcher Mary Flanagan wrote Critical Play:Radical Game Design in 2009, [ 13 ] the same year that Lindsay Grace started the Critical Gameplay project. Grace's Critical Gameplay project is an internationally exhibited collection of video games that apply critical design. The games provoke questions about the way games are designed and played.  The Critical Gameplay Game, Wait, was awarded the Games for Change hall of fame award for being one of the 5 most important games for social impact since 2003. The work has been shown at Electronic Language International Festival , Games, Learning & Society Conference , Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems among other notable events.

Critiques [ edit ] As critical design has gained mainstream exposure, the discipline has been itself criticized by some for dramatizing so-called 'dystopian scenarios,' which may, in fact, be reflective of real-life conditions in some places in the world. Some see critical design as rooted in the fears of a wealthy, urban, western population and failing to engage with existing social problems. As an example, a project titled Republic of Salivation , by designers Michael Burton and Michiko Nitta, featured as part of MoMA 's Design and Violence series, portrays a society plagued by overpopulation and food scarcity which is reliant on heavily modified, government-provided, nutrient blocks.

[ 14 ] Certain media responses to the work, point to the "presumed naivety of the project," which presents a scenario that "might be dystopian to some, but in some other parts of the world it has been the reality for decades." [ 15 ] Critical acclaim [ edit ] In recognition of their formalization of the field, Anthony Dunne and Fiona Raby were presented with the inaugural MIT Media Lab Award in June 2015 with director Joichi Ito pointing out that "[Dunne and Raby's] pioneering approach to critical design and its intersection with science, technology, art, and the humanities has changed the landscape of design education and practice worldwide." [ 16 ] Distinctions with Conceptual art [ edit ] Conceptual art practice has a very similar role as critical design since both of them are sharing critical perspectives to the public and being commentators to issues, the public may get confused to understand these two different fields. However, Matt Malpass points out that the critical designer still applies the skills from the training and practice as designer but re-orientates these skills from a focus on practical ends to a focus on design work that functions symbolically, culturally, existentially, and discursively.

[ 11 ] Critical design objects are made precisely based on the design principles and carefully follow the design and design research process. Also, critical design objects always stay close to people's everyday life. They tend to be tested on real people and get feedback for further developments. Conceptual art usually associates with gallery spaces and mostly tends to apply the artistic media in the process.

See also [ edit ] Social fiction Design fiction Critical making Critical technical practice Science fiction prototyping Speculative design Talk to Me (exhibition) (MoMA), 2011 Design and the Elastic Mind (exhibition) (MoMA), 2008 References [ edit ] ^ a b Malpass, Matt (2013). "Between Wit and Reason: Defining Associative, Speculative, and Critical Design in Practice".

Design and Culture . 5:3, 333– 356.

^ Tonkinwise, Cameron (1 December 2014).

"How We Intend to Future: Review of Anthony Dunne and Fiona Raby, Speculative Everything: Design, Fiction, and Social Dreaming" .

Design Philosophy Papers .

12 (2): 169– 187.

doi : 10.2752/144871314X14159818597676 .

S2CID 143531152 .

^ Dunne, Anthony; Raby, Fiona (6 December 2013).

Speculative Everything: Design, Fiction, and Social Dreaming . MIT Press.

ISBN 978-0-262-01984-2 . Retrieved 12 December 2021 .

^ "MoMA - Talk to Me" .

^ Dunne, Anthonny (1999).

Hertzian tales : electronic products, aesthetic experience and critical design . London: Royal College of Art computer related design research studio. p. 117.

ISBN 978-1-874175-27-8 .

^ Raby, Fiona (2001).

Design Noir: The Secret Life of Electronic Objects . Basel: Birkhäuser.

ISBN 978-3-7643-6566-0 .

^ Sanders, Elizabeth B.-N. (September 2006). "Design Research in 2006".

Design Research Quarterly .

1 (1): 1– 8.

ISSN 0142-694X .

^ Brandes, Uta (2009).

Designtheorie und Designforschung (in German). Paderborn: Wilhelm Fink.

ISBN 978-3-7705-4664-0 .

^ "Crazy ideas or creative probes?: presenting critical artefacts to stakeholders to develop innovative product ideas".

Proceedings of EAD07: Dancing with Disorder: Design, Discourse and Disaster . April 2007.

^ Ligo, Larry (1984).

The Concept of Function in Twentieth-Century Architectural Criticism . MI: UMI Research Press.

ISBN 9780835715423 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: publisher location ( link ) ^ a b Malpass, Matt (Spring 2015).

"Criticism and Function in Critical Design Practice" (PDF) .

Design Issues .

31 (2): 59– 71.

doi : 10.1162/DESI_a_00322 .

S2CID 57571804 .

^ "Towards a Critical Design" .

Dunne & Raby . 2013.

^ Flanagan, Mary (2009).

Critical Play: Radical Game Design . Cambridge: MIT Press.

ISBN 978-0-262-06268-8 .

^ "Republic of Salivation (Michael Burton and Michiko Nitta)" . 19 December 2013.

^ luizaprado (4 February 2014).

"Questioning the "critical" in Speculative & Critical Design: A rant on the blind privilege that permeates most Speculative Design projects" .

^ Lab, MIT Media (16 July 2015).

"Introducing the Media Lab Award" .

v t e Critical theory Origins Frankfurt School Freudo-Marxism Concepts Outline of critical theory Reconstructivism Derivatives Archetypal literary criticism Deconstructivism New historicism Technocriticism Critical ...

animal studies applied linguistics cartography consciousness criminology data studies design discourse analysis ethnography geography geopolitics historiography international relations theory language awareness legal studies literacy management studies medical anthropology pedagogy mathematics pedagogy university studies practice psychiatry psychology queer theory race theory regionalism security studies social theory social work technical practice terrorism studies Theorists Theodor W. Adorno Walter Benjamin Erich Fromm Jürgen Habermas Axel Honneth Max Horkheimer Otto Kirchheimer Siegfried Kracauer Leo Löwenthal Herbert Marcuse Friedrich Pollock Alfred Schmidt Related Binary opposition Critical rationalism Critical realism perception social sciences Theological Cultural Marxism conspiracy theory Hermeneutics of suspicion Immanent critique Phallogocentrism Privilege (social inequality) 2020s controversies around critical race theory v t e Design Outline Designer Disciplines Communication design Advertising Book design Brand design Exhibit design Film title design Graphic design Motion Postage stamp design Print design Illustration Information design Instructional design News design Photography Retail design Signage / Traffic sign design Typography / Type design Video design Visual merchandising Environmental design Architecture Architectural lighting design Building design Passive solar Ecological design Environmental impact design Garden design Computer-aided Healthy community design Hotel design Interior architecture Interior design EID Keyline design Landscape architecture Sustainable Landscape design Spatial design Urban design Industrial design Automotive design Automotive suspension design CMF design Corrugated box design Electric guitar design Furniture design Sustainable Hardware interface design Motorcycle design Packaging and labeling Photographic lens design Product design Production design Sensory design Service design Interaction design Experience design EED Game design Level design Video game design Hardware interface design Icon design Immersive design Information design Interactive design Sonic interaction design User experience design User interface design Web design Other applied arts Public art design Ceramic / glass design Fashion design Costume design Jewellery design Floral design Game art design Property design Scenic design Sound design Stage/set lighting design Textile design Other design & engineering Algorithm design Behavioural design Boiler design Database design Drug design Electrical system design Experimental design Filter design Geometric design Work design Integrated circuit design Circuit design Physical design Power network design Mechanism design Nuclear weapon design Nucleic acid design Organization design Process design Processor design Protein design Research design Social design Software design Spacecraft design Strategic design Systems design Test design Approaches Active Activity-centered Adaptive web Affective Brainstorming By committee By contract C-K theory Closure Configuration Contextual Continuous Cradle-to-cradle Creative problem-solving Creativity techniques Critical Design fiction Defensive Design–bid–build Design–build architect-led Diffuse Domain-driven Ecological design Energy neutral Engineering design process Probabilistic design Ergonomic Error-tolerant Evidence-based Fault-tolerant Feminist For assembly For behaviour change For manufacturability For Six Sigma For testing For the environment For X Framework-oriented Functional Generative Geodesign HCD High-level Hostile Inclusive Integrated Integrated topside Intelligence-based Iterative KISS principle Low-level Metadesign Mind mapping Modular New Wave Object-oriented Open Over Parametric Participatory Platform-based Policy-based Prevention through Process-centered Public interest Opinion poll Public opinion Rational Regenerative Reliability engineering Research-based Responsibility-driven RWD Safe-life Speculative Sustainable Systemic SOD Tableless web Theory of constraints Top-down and bottom-up Transformation Transgenerational TRIZ Universal Design for All Usage-centered Use-centered User-centered Empathic User innovation Value-driven Value sensitive Privacy by Quality by Secure by Design choice computing controls culture flow justice leadership management marker methods pattern research science sprint strategy theory thinking Tools Intellectual property Organizations Awards Tools AAD Architectural model Blueprint Comprehensive layout CAD CAID Virtual home design software CAutoD Design quality indicator Electronic design automation Flowchart Mockup Design specification Design system Prototype Sketch Storyboard Technical drawing HTML editor Website wireframe Intellectual property Clean-room design Community design Design around Design infringement Design patent Fashion design copyright Geschmacksmuster Industrial design rights European Union Organizations American Institute of Graphic Arts Chartered Society of Designers Design and Industries Association Design Council International Forum Design Design Research Society Awards European Design Award German Design Award Good Design Award (Museum of Modern Art) Good Design Award (Chicago Athenaeum) Graphex IF Product Design Award James Dyson Award Prince Philip Designers Prize Related topics Agile Concept art Conceptual design Creative industries Cultural icon .design Dominant design Enterprise architecture Form factor Futures studies Indie design Innovation management Intelligent design Lean startup New product development OODA loop Philosophy of design Process simulation Reference design Slow design STEAM fields Unintelligent design Visualization Wicked problem Design attributes brief change classic competition architectural student director education elements engineer firm history knowledge language life load museum optimization paradigm principles rationale review specification studies studio technology Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Critical_design&oldid=1296393845 " Categories : Critical design Critical theory Hidden categories: CS1: long volume value CS1 German-language sources (de) CS1 maint: publisher location Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles with topics of unclear notability from May 2014 All articles with topics of unclear notability Articles lacking reliable references from May 2014 All articles lacking reliable references Articles needing additional references from May 2014 All articles needing additional references Articles with multiple maintenance issues This page was last edited on 19 June 2025, at 19:06 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Critical design 3 languages Add topic

