Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Common types Toggle Common types subsection 1.1 Water aspirator 1.2 Steam ejector 1.3 Air ejector 2 See also 3 External links 4 References Toggle the table of contents Vacuum ejector 26 languages العربية Български Català Deutsch Español فارسی Français 한국어 Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Қазақша Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Simple English Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Steam ejector ) Type of ejector-jet pump For other uses, see Aspirator (disambiguation) .

This article relies largely or entirely on a single source .

Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page . Please help improve this article by introducing  citations to additional sources .

Find sources: "Vacuum ejector" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( April 2024 ) Aspirator A brass aspirator. The water inlet and outlet are at the top and bottom, respectively; the air inlet is on the side.

Other names Eductor-jet pump, injector /ejector, filter pump, Venturi pump Uses Vacuum generation, suction Related items Injector , vacuum pump A vacuum ejector , or simply ejector , or aspirator , is a type of vacuum pump , which produces vacuum by means of the Venturi effect .

In an ejector, a working fluid (liquid or gaseous) flows through a jet nozzle into a tube that first narrows and then expands in cross-sectional area. The fluid leaving the jet is flowing at a high velocity which due to Bernoulli's principle results in it having low pressure, thus generating a vacuum. The outer tube then narrows into a mixing section where the high velocity working fluid mixes with the fluid that is drawn in by the vacuum, imparting enough velocity for it to be ejected, the tube then typically expands in order to decrease the velocity of the ejected stream, allowing the pressure to smoothly increase to the external pressure.

The strength of the vacuum produced depends on the velocity and shape of the fluid jet and the shape of the constriction and mixing sections, but if a liquid is used as the working fluid, the strength of the vacuum produced is limited by the vapor pressure of the liquid (for water, 3.2 kPa or 0.46 psi or 32 mbar at 25 °C or 77 °F ).  If a gas is used, however, this restriction does not exist.

If not considering the source of the working fluid, vacuum ejectors can be significantly more compact than a self-powered vacuum pump of the same capacity.

Common types [ edit ] Water aspirator [ edit ] The cheap and simple water aspirator is commonly used in chemistry and biology laboratories and consists of a tee fitting attached to a tap and has a hose barb at one side. The flow of water passes through the straight portion of the tee, which has a restriction at the intersection, where the hose barb is attached. The vacuum hose should be connected to this barb. In the past, water aspirators were common for low-strength vacuums in chemistry benchwork. However, they are water-intensive, and depending on what the vacuum is being used for (e.g. solvent removal), they can violate environmental protection laws such as the RCRA by mixing potentially hazardous chemicals into the water stream, then flushing them down a drain that often leads directly to the municipal sewer. Their use has decreased somewhat as small electric vacuum pumps are far more effective, environmentally safe, and have become more affordable, but the unmatched simplicity and reliability of this device have caused it to remain popular for small labs or as a backup.

Another, much larger version of this device is used in maritime operations as a device to dewater (drain) areas in a ship that have been flooded in emergency situations.  Typically referred to as an eductor in these applications, this is preferred over electrical pumps due to their simplicity, compact size, and greatly mitigated risk of explosion in the event that flammable liquids and/or vapors are present.  Additionally, unlike many mechanical pumps, they can also pass debris as the eductor has no moving parts that can be fouled.  This makes an eductor especially useful in situations where fitting a debris strainer to the suction port will present more issues than it resolves.  The size of the debris that can be passed depends on the physical size of the eductor.  Sizes, flow ratings, and applications vary, including eductors that are permanently installed (typically used in very large spaces, such as a ship's main engine room), or portable models that can be lowered into spaces by a rope and supplied and drained through firefighting hoses.  Most are supplied through a ship's firefighting main, and portable models can also be supplied by an emergency pump, provided it can supply sufficient flow to operate the eductor.

Steam ejector [ edit ] The industrial steam ejector (also called the "steam jet ejector", "steam aspirator", or "evactor") uses steam as a working fluid and multistage systems can produce very high vacuums. Due to the lack of delicate moving parts and the flow of steam providing somewhat of cleaning action, steam ejectors can handle gas flows containing liquids, dust, or even solid particles that would damage or clog many other vacuum pumps. Ejectors made entirely from specialised materials such as PTFE or graphite have allowed usage of extremely corrosive gasses, since steam ejectors have no moving parts they can be constructed in their entirety from almost any material that has sufficient durability.

In order to avoid using too much steam or impractical operating pressures, a single steam-ejector stage is generally not used to generate vacuum below approximately 10 kPa (75 mmHg ).

[ 1 ] To generate higher vacuum, multiple stages are used; in a two-stage steam ejector , for example, the second stage provides vacuum for the waste steam output by the first stage. Condensers are typically used between stages to significantly reduce the load on the later stages. Steam ejectors with two, three, four, five and six stages may be used to produce vacuums down to 2.5 kPa , 300 Pa, 40 Pa, 4 Pa, and 0.4 Pa, respectively.

[ 1 ] Steam ejectors are also suitable for pumping many liquids since if the steam can be easily condensed into the liquid then there is no need to separate the working fluid or manage a mist of liquid droplets. This is the manner in which a steam injector operates.

An additional use for the injector technology is in vacuum ejectors in continuous train braking systems , which were made compulsory in the UK by the Regulation of Railways Act 1889 . A vacuum ejector uses steam pressure to draw air out of the vacuum pipe and reservoirs of continuous train brake. Steam locomotives, with a ready source of steam, found ejector technology ideal with its rugged simplicity and lack of moving parts. A steam locomotive usually has two ejectors: a large ejector for releasing the brakes when stationary and a small ejector for maintaining the vacuum against leaks. The exhaust from the ejectors is invariably directed to the smokebox , by which means it assists the blower in draughting the fire. The small ejector is sometimes replaced by a reciprocating pump driven from the crosshead because this is more economical of steam and is only required to operate when the train is moving.

Air ejector [ edit ] Commonly called an air ejector , Venturi pump , or vacuum ejector . This ejector is similar in operation to the steam ejector but uses high-pressure air as the working fluid. Multistage air ejectors can be used, but since air cannot easily be condensed at room temperature, an air ejector is usually limited to two stages as each subsequent stage would have to be significantly larger than the last. These are commonly used in pneumatic handling equipment when a small vacuum is required to pick up objects since compressed air is often already present to power other parts of the equipment. Air ejectors used to suction liquids directly will produce a fine mist of droplets, this is how airbrushes and many other spraying systems operate, but when a spray is not required it is typically an undesirable effect that limits the applications to gas suction.

The basic elements of an ejector See also [ edit ] Deaerator Diffusion pump Injector Vacuum pump External links [ edit ] eductors.net , water eductor References [ edit ] ^ a b High Vacuum Pumping Equipment , B. D. Power, New York: Reinhold Publishing Corporation, 1966, chapter 4.

v t e Laboratory equipment General Heaters Dryers Alcohol burner Bunsen burner Desiccator Heating mantle Hot plate Lab oven Kiln Meker–Fisher burner Striker Teclu burner Water bath Vacuum dry box Mixers Shakers Chemostat Homogenizer Liquid whistle Magnetic stirrer Mortar and pestle Shaker Sonicator Static mixer Stirring rod Vortex mixer Wash bottle Stands Clamps Holders Beaker clamp Clamp holder Tripod Burette clamp Extension clamp Flask clamp Funnel support Iron ring Pinch clamp Retort stand Screw clamp Test tube holder Test tube rack Wire gauze Lab drying rack Containers Storage Agar plate Cryogenic storage dewar Incubator Laminar flow cabinet Microtiter plate Petri dish Picotiter plate Refrigerator Weighing boat Weighing dish Other items Aspirator Autoclave Balance brush Cork borer Crucible Filter paper File Forceps Centrifuge Microscope Pipeclay triangle Spectrophotometer Splint Stopper Scoopula Spatula Test tube brush Wire brush Inoculation needle Inoculation loop Glassware Apparatus Dean–Stark Soxhlet extractor Kipp's Bottles Boston round Condensers Cold finger Liebig Dishes Evaporating Petri Syracuse Watch glass Flasks Büchner Vacuum (Dewar) Erlenmeyer Fernbach Fleaker Florence Retort Round-bottom Schlenk Volumetric Funnels Büchner Hirsch Dropping Separatory Measuring devices Burette Conical measure Cuvette Eye dropper Eudiometer Graduated cylinder Ostwald viscometer Pipette Tubes Drying Cragie Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) Test Thiele Thistle Other items Beaker Bell jar Gas syringe Vial Analytical chemistry Compositional AutoAnalyzer CHN analyzer Colorimeter Inductively coupled plasma (ICP) device Gas chromatograph (GC) Liquid chromatograph (LC) Mass spectrometer (MS) pH indicator pH meter Microscopy Scanning electron microscope (SEM) Transmission electron microscope (TEM) Thermochemistry Calorimeter differential scanning Melting-point apparatus Thermometer Thermogravimetric analyzer (TGA) Other items Analytical balance Colony counter Spiral plater Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) instrument Plate reader Electronics Control devices Bench power supply Current source Voltage source Function generator Galvanostat Pulse generator Potentiostat Measurement Ammeter Logic analyzer Multimeter Network analyzer Oscilloscope Spectrum analyzer Time-domain reflectometer Transistor tester Voltmeter Tools Heat gun Soldering iron Tweezers Wire stripper General Alligator clip Test probe Safety Personal protective equipment (PPE) Lab coat Face shield Respirator Rubber apron Safety shower Eye and hand Acid-resistant gloves Eyewash station Glove box Medical gloves Nitrile gloves Safety glasses Safety goggles Other items Biosafety cabinet Fire blanket Fire extinguisher Fume hood Safety cabinet Solvent cabinet Instruments used in medical laboratories v t e Plumbing Fundamental concepts Air gap (plumbing) Backflow Compatibility (chemical) Corrosion Drain (plumbing) Drinking water Fuel gas Friction loss Grade (slope) Greywater Heat trap Hydrostatic loop Leak Neutral axis Onsite sewage facility Pressure Sanitary sewer Sewer gas Sewage Sewerage Siphon Storm sewer Stormwater Surface tension Tap water Thermal expansion Thermal insulation Thermosiphon Trap (plumbing) Venturi effect Wastewater Water hammer Water supply network Water table Well Technology Brazing British Standard Pipe (BSP) Cast iron pipe Chemical drain cleaners Compression fitting Copper tubing Crimp (joining) Drain-waste-vent system Ductile iron pipe Flare fitting Garden Hose Thread (GHT) Gasket Hydronics Leak detection National pipe thread (NPT) Nominal Pipe Size (NPS) O-ring Oakum Pipe (fluid conveyance) Pipe dope Pipe support Plastic pipework Push-to-pull compression fittings Putty Sealant Sewage pumping Soldering Solvent welding Swaging Thread seal tape Threaded pipe Tube bending Water heat recycling Components Atmospheric vacuum breaker Automatic bleeding valve Automatic faucet Backflow prevention device Ball valve Bleed screw Booster pump Butterfly valve Check valve Chemigation valve Chopper pump Circulator pump Cistern Closet flange Concentric reducer Condensate pump Coupling (piping) Diaphragm valve Dielectric union Double check valve Eccentric reducer Expansion tank Faucet aerator Float switch Float valve Floor drain Flow limiter Flushing trough Flushometer Gate valve Globe valve Grease trap Grinder pump Hose coupling Manifold Needle valve Nipple (plumbing) Pinch valve Piping and plumbing fitting Plug (sanitation) Pressure regulator Pressure vacuum breaker Pressure-balanced valve Pump Radiator (heating) Reduced pressure zone device Reducer Relief valve Riser clamp Rooftop water tower Safety valve sewage pumping Street elbow Submersible pump Tap (valve) Thermostatic mixing valve Trench drain Vacuum breaker Vacuum ejector Valve Water tank Zone valve Plumbing fixtures Accessible bathtub Bathtub Bidet Dehumidifier Dishwasher Drinking fountain Electric water boiler Evaporative cooler Flush toilet Garbage disposal unit Hot water storage tank Humidifier Icemaker Instant hot water dispenser Laundry tub Shower water recycling shower Sink Storage water heater Sump pump Tankless water heating Urinal Washing machine Washlet Water dispenser Water filter Water heating Water softening Specialized tools Basin wrench Blowtorch Borescope Core drill Drain cleaner Driving cap Flare-nut wrench Pipecutter Pipe wrench Plumber's snake Plumber wrench Plunger Strap wrench Tap and die Measurement and control Control valve Flow sensor Pressure sensor Water detector Water metering Professions, trades, and services Hydronic balancing Hydrostatic testing Leak detection Mechanical, electrical, and plumbing Pipe marking Pipefitter Pipelayer Plumber Industry organizations and standards International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials (IAPMO) NSF International Plumbing & Drainage Institute (PDI) Uniform Plumbing Code (UPC) World Plumbing Council (WPC) Health and safety Plumbing code Scalding Waterborne disease See also Fire sprinkler system Piping Template:HVAC Template:Public health Template:Sewerage Template:Human waste elimination Template:Wastewater Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Vacuum_ejector&oldid=1267859280 " Categories : Laboratory equipment Vacuum pumps Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from April 2024 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 7 January 2025, at 01:27 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Vacuum ejector 26 languages Add topic

