Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 -logy versus -ology 2 Additional usage as a suffix 3 Compound series of works of art 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents -logy 18 languages العربية Aragonés ChiShona Deutsch Ελληνικά Español فارسی 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia ქართული Қазақша Кыргызча Bahasa Melayu 日本語 کوردی Тоҷикӣ Türkçe اردو Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia English language suffix "Logy", "Ology", and "Ologies" redirect here. For other uses, see Logy (disambiguation) and Ology (disambiguation) .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "-logy" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( December 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) -logy is a suffix in the English language, used with words originally adapted from Ancient Greek ending in -λογία ( -logía ).

[ 1 ] The earliest English examples were anglicizations of the French -logie , which was in turn inherited from the Latin -logia .

[ 2 ] The suffix became productive in English from the 18th century, allowing the formation of new terms with no Latin or Greek precedent.

The English suffix has two separate main senses, reflecting two sources of the -λογία suffix in Greek: [ 3 ] a combining form used in the names of school or bodies of knowledge, e.g., theology (loaned from Latin in the 14th century ) or sociology . In words of the type theology , the suffix is derived originally from -λογ- ( -log- ) (a variant of -λεγ- , -leg- ), from the Greek verb λέγειν ( legein , 'to speak').

[ 4 ] The suffix has the sense of "the character or deportment of one who speaks or treats of [a certain subject]", or more succinctly, "the study of [a certain subject]".

[ 5 ] (The Ancient Greek noun λόγος lógos mentioned below can also be translated, among other things, as "subject matter".

[ 6 ] ) the root word nouns that refer to kinds of speech, writing or collections of writing, e.g., eulogy or trilogy . In words of this type, the "-logy" element is derived from the Greek noun λόγος ( logos , 'speech', 'account', 'story').

[ 4 ] The suffix has the sense of "[a certain kind of] speaking or writing".

[ 7 ] Philology is an exception: while its meaning is closer to the first sense, the etymology of the word is similar to the second sense.

[ 8 ] -logy versus -ology [ edit ] In English names for fields of study, the suffix -logy is most frequently found preceded by the euphonic connective vowel o so that the word ends in -ology .

[ 9 ] In these Greek words, the root is always a noun and -o- is the combining vowel for all declensions of Greek nouns. However, when new names for fields of study are coined in modern English, the formations ending in -logy almost always add an -o- , except when the root word ends in an "l" or a vowel, as in these exceptions: [ 10 ] analogy , dekalogy , disanalogy , genealogy , genethlialogy , hexalogy ; herbalogy (a variant of herbology ), mammalogy , mineralogy , paralogy , petralogy (a variant of petrology ); elogy ; heptalogy ; antilogy , festilogy ; trilogy , tetralogy , pentalogy ; palillogy , pyroballogy ; dyslogy ; eulogy ; and brachylogy .

[ 7 ] Linguists sometimes jokingly refer to haplology as haplogy (subjecting the word haplology to the process of haplology itself).

Additional usage as a suffix [ edit ] Per metonymy , words ending in -logy are sometimes used to describe a subject rather than the study of it (e.g., technology ). This usage is particularly widespread in medicine; for example, pathology is often used simply to refer to "the disease" itself (e.g., "We haven't found the pathology yet") rather than "the study of a disease".

Books, journals, and treatises about a subject also often bear the name of this subject (e.g., the scientific journal Ecology ).

When appended to other English words, the suffix can also be used humorously to create nonce words (e.g., beerology as "the study of beer"). As with other classical compounds , adding the suffix to an initial word-stem derived from Greek or Latin may be used to lend grandeur or the impression of scientific rigor to humble pursuits, as in cosmetology ("the study of beauty treatment") or cynology ("the study of dog training").

Compound series of works of art [ edit ] The -logy or -ology suffix is commonly used to indicate finite series of art works like books or movies. For paintings, the "tych" suffix is more common (e.g.

diptych , triptych ). Examples include: Trilogy for three works Tetralogy for four works Pentalogy for five works Hexalogy for six works Heptalogy for seven works Further terms like duology (two, mostly in genre fiction ) quadrilogy (four) and octalogy (eight) have been coined but are rarely used: for a series of 10, sometimes "decalog" is used (e.g. in the Virgin Decalog ) instead of "decalogy".

See also [ edit ] List of words ending in ology Classical compound Suffixes References [ edit ] ^ List of ancient Greek words ending in -λογία on Perseus ^ "-logy." The American Heritage Dictionary of the English Language , Fourth Edition. Houghton Mifflin Company, 2004. retrieved 20 Aug. 2008.

^ "-logy." Dictionary.com Unabridged (v 1.1). Random House, Inc. retrieved 20 Aug. 2008.

^ a b "-logy." The Concise Oxford Dictionary of English Etymology . Oxford University Press, 1986. retrieved 20 August 2008.

^ "-logy." Online Etymology Dictionary . retrieved 20 Aug. 2008 ^ Liddell, Henry George; Scott, Robert.

"A Greek–English Lexicon" .

Perseus Project . Tufts University . Retrieved 8 February 2016 .

^ a b "-logy." The Oxford English Dictionary , Second Edition. Oxford University Press, 1989. retrieved 20 August 2008.

^ "Philology." Online Etymology Dictionary . retrieved 14 Jul. 2011 ^ Eric Partridge, Origins , 2nd edition, New York, Macmillan, 1959 ^ Words Ending In ogy : Words Ending With ogy External links [ edit ] Look up -logy or logy in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

The famous British "ology" advertisement Ologies (a long list of fields of study, and a paragraph of exceptions at the bottom of the page) Affixes: -logy Ology Words It provides list of A–Z English words ending with the suffix -ology and their field of study Ologies and Isms Ologies and Graphys Ologies – Wikiversity Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=-logy&oldid=1282875506 " Categories : Suffixes of Greek origin English suffixes Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from December 2024 All articles needing additional references Use dmy dates from December 2022 Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text This page was last edited on 29 March 2025, at 04:21 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents -logy 18 languages Add topic

