Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Inachid Dynasty 2 Danaid Dynasty 3 Abantiad Dynasty Toggle Abantiad Dynasty subsection 3.1 Lineage of Anaxagoras 3.2 Lineage of Melampus 3.3 Lineage of Bias 4 Pelopid Dynasty 5 Heraclid Dynasty 6 Non-Heraclid Dynasty 7 Notes 8 Further reading Toggle the table of contents List of kings of Argos 10 languages Български Deutsch Español Italiano Magyar Русский Slovenčina Suomi Українська Tiếng Việt Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Before the establishment of a democracy , the Ancient Greek city-state of Argos was ruled by kings . Most of them are probably mythical or only semi-historical. This list is based on that largely given by Eusebius of Caesarea .

An alternative version supplied by Tatian of the original 17 consecutive kings of Argos includes Apis and Argios between Argos and Triopas.

Inachid Dynasty [ edit ] Inachos, the supposed son of Oceanos and Tethys , is affirmed to have been the founder of this kingdom. He married his sister Melissa, by whom he had two sons, Phoroneus and Aegialeus: he is supposed to be the father of Io, and therefore the Greeks are sometimes called "Inachoi" after him (see also the names of the Greeks ).

Inachos .

Phoroneus . Son of Inachos.

Apis . Son of Phoroneus.

Argos Pelasgos or Argeos. Son of Zeus and Niobe, the daughter of Phoroneus.

Argos named the kingdom after himself.

Criasos or Pirasos or Peranthos . Son of Argos.

Phorbas . Son of either Argos or Criasos.

Triopas . Son of Phorbas.

Jasos . According to different sources, he was son of either Phoroneus, Argos Pelasgos, Argos Panoptes, or Triopas.

Agenor .  Son of Triopas.

Crotopos . Son of Agenor.

Sthenelos .

Pelasgos Gelanor . He gave Danaus his kingdom in response to an oracle or omen.

Danaid Dynasty [ edit ] Danaos . Son of Belus, a mythical king of Egypt. Danaus had fifty daughters, the Danaides.

Lynceus . Son of Aigyptos. Killed Danaus and married Danaus's daughter Hypermnestra.

Lynceus means "lynx-eyed".

Abantiad Dynasty [ edit ] Abas . Son of Lynceus.

Proetos . A son of Abas.

Acrisios . A son of Abas. Twin brother of Proetos; they were rivals since the womb. Acrisios defeated and exiled Proetos and later shared the kingdom with him, surrendering to him Tiryns and eastern Argolis.

Perseus Eurymedon. Son of Zeus and Danaë (the daughter of Acrisios). Perseus never reigned at Argos, traded the kingdom of Argos for that of Tiryns (which had been ruled by Megapenthes ) and established the city and kingdom of Mycenae .

Megapenthes . Son of Proetos.

Argeos . Son of Megapenthes.

Lineage of Anaxagoras [ edit ] Anaxagoras . A descendant of Megapenthes. The kingdom of Argos was divided into three parts. One third was given to Melampos and another to Bias (brother of Melampos) while Anaxagoras and his lineage continued to rule the central region.

Alector . Son of Anaxagoras.

Iphis . Son of Alector.

Sthenelos . Regained the portion of the kingdom given to Melampus upon the death of Amphilochus.

Cylarabes , or Cylarabos , or Cylasabos . Son of Sthenelos. Regained the portion of the kingdom given to Bias upon the death of Cyanippus.

Lineage of Melampus [ edit ] Melampos .

Antiphates .

Oicles or Oikles or Oecles .

Amphiaraus or Amphiaraos .

Amphilochos .  Son of Alcmaeon; he bequeathed his portion of the kingdom of Argos to Sthenelos.

Lineage of Bias [ edit ] Bias Talaus or Talaon . Son of Bias. One of the Argonauts.

Adrastos . Son of Talaos. Name is translated traditionally as "nonparticipant" or "uncooperative". Reigned during the war of the Seven Against Thebes.

Diomedes . According to legend, Cometes , son of Sthenelos, had an affair with Diomedes's wife Aegiale while Diomedes was away for the Trojan War .

Cyanippus . Son of Aegialeus and grandson of Adrastus. Upon his death, Cylarabes assumed control of his kingdom, thus reuniting Argolis.

Pelopid Dynasty [ edit ] Orestes . King of Mycenae and son of Agamemnon of the Trojan War. Orestes gained the throne of Argos and Sparta upon the death of Cylarabes.

Tisamenos .  Son of Orestes. He was the final king of Argos, Mycenae and Sparta before the kingdom was conquered by the Heracleidae .

Heraclid Dynasty [ edit ] Kings claimed to be descendants of the mythological hero Heracles , many themselves mythological, include Temenus .  Son of Aristomachos. Ancestor of the royal Macedonian dynasty, the Temenids .

Pheidon I . Son of Temenus.

Deiphontes . Son-in-law of Temenos.

Cisos or Ceisos . Temenos had left his kingdom to his son in law Deiphontes even though he had natural sons of his own. In consequence of this, Deiphontes was slain by the stratagems of the sons of Temenos, the eldest of whom, Cisos, became king.

Medon . Son of Ceisos.

Maron . Son of Ceisos.

[ 1 ] Thestros (also known as thestios). Son of Maron.

[ 1 ] Akoos (or Acous) [ 1 ] or Merops . Sons of Thestros.

Aristodamidas (or Aristodamis). Son of Akoos or Merops.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Eratos (Eratus).

[ 3 ] Pheidon II . Son of Aristodamidas.

Damocratidas (dated by G.Huxley at around 600 B.C [ 4 ] ).

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] unknown Leokedes son of Pheidon.

[ 7 ] Meltas . Son of Lacidamos.

In historical times, kings of Argos lacked historical power, the tyrant king Pheidon excepted.

Non-Heraclid Dynasty [ edit ] This is the king after the heraaclids fell out.

Aigon (Aegon) . (According to Plutarch in Moralia ) [ 8 ] [ 9 ] Notes [ edit ] ^ a b c d Theophilus of Antioch, Apology to Autolycus, 2.7 ^ Diodorus Siculus, Library, fragments of  Book 7,17 ^ Pausanias, 2.36 ^ 1958, G.Huxley "Argos et les derniers Temenides", BCH 82 ^ How Argive Was the "Argive" Heraion? The Political and Cultic Geography of the Argive Plain, 900-400 B. C.
Jonathan M. Hall
American Journal of Archaeology
American Journal of Archaeology
Vol. 99, No. 4 (Oct., 1995), pp. 577-613 (37 pages)
Published by: The University of Chicago Press ^ Pausanias, 4.35.2 ^ Herodotus , Histories 6,127,3 Pausanias , Travels in Greece 2,19,2 ^ Ephoros Book I and the Kings of Argos
Author(s): A. Andrewes
Source: The Classical Quarterly, Jan. - Apr., 1951, New Series, Vol. 1, No. 1/2 (Jan. -
Apr., 1951), pp. 39-45
Published by: Cambridge University Press on behalf of The Classical Association ^ Plutarch .On the Fortune or the Virtue of Alexander, Moralia Further reading [ edit ] Felix J., "Die Attische Königsliste," Klio 3 (1902), 406–439.

v t e Ancient Greece Timeline History Geography Periods Cycladic civilization Minoan civilization Mycenaean Greece Greek Dark Ages Archaic Greece Classical Greece Hellenistic Greece Roman Greece Geography Aegean Sea Aeolis Crete Cyrenaica Cyprus Doris Epirus Hellespont Ionia Ionian Sea Macedonia Magna Graecia Peloponnesus Pontus Taurica Ancient Greek colonies City states Politics Military City states Argos Athens Byzantion Chalcis Corinth Ephesus Miletus Pergamon Eretria Kerkyra Larissa Megalopolis Thebes Megara Rhodes Samos Sparta Lissus (Crete) Kingdoms Bithynia Cappadocia Epirus Greco-Bactrian Kingdom Indo-Greek Kingdom Macedonia Pergamon Pontus Ptolemaic Kingdom Seleucid Empire Federations / Confederations Doric Hexapolis ( c.

1100 – c.

560 BC ) Italiote League ( c.

800 –389 BC) Ionian League (c. 650–404 BC) Peloponnesian League ( c.

550 –366 BC) Amphictyonic League ( c.

595 –279 BC) Acarnanian League (c. 500–31 BC) Hellenic League (499–449 BC) Delian League (478–404 BC) Chalcidian League (430–348 BC) Boeotian League (c. 424–c. 395 BC) Aetolian League (c. 400–188 BC) Second Athenian League (378–355 BC) Thessalian League (374–196 BC) Arcadian League (370–c. 230 BC) Epirote League (370–168 BC) League of Corinth (338–322 BC) Euboean League (c. 300 BC–c. 300 AD) Achaean League (280–146 BC) Politics Boule Free city Koinon Proxeny Stasis Tagus Tyrant Athenian Agora Areopagus Ecclesia Graphe paranomon Heliaia Ostracism Spartan Ekklesia Ephor Gerousia Macedon Synedrion Koinon Military Wars Athenian military Scythian archers Antigonid Macedonian army Army of Macedon Ballista Cretan archers Hellenistic armies Hippeis Hoplite Hetairoi Macedonian phalanx Military of Mycenaean Greece Phalanx Peltast Pezhetairos Sarissa Sacred Band of Thebes Sciritae Seleucid army Spartan army Strategos Toxotai Xiphos Xyston People List of ancient Greeks Rulers Kings of Argos Archons of Athens Kings of Athens Kings of Commagene Diadochi Kings of Macedonia Kings of Paionia Attalid kings of Pergamon Kings of Pontus Ptolemaic dynasty Seleucid dynasty Kings of Sparta Tyrants of Syracuse Artists & scholars Astronomers Geographers Historians Mathematicians Philosophers Playwrights Poets Seven Sages Writers Philosophers Anaxagoras Anaximander Anaximenes Antisthenes Aristotle Democritus Diogenes of Sinope Empedocles Epicurus Gorgias Heraclitus Hypatia Leucippus Parmenides Plato Protagoras Pythagoras Socrates Thales Zeno Authors Aeschylus Aesop Alcaeus Archilochus Aristophanes Bacchylides Euripides Herodotus Hesiod Hipponax Homer Ibycus Lucian Menander Mimnermus Panyassis Philocles Pindar Plutarch Polybius Sappho Simonides Sophocles Stesichorus Theognis Thucydides Timocreon Tyrtaeus Xenophon Others Athenian statesmen Lawgivers Olympic victors Tyrants By culture Ancient Greek tribes Thracian Greeks Ancient Macedonians Society Culture Society Agriculture Calendar Clothing Coinage Cuisine Economy Education Emporium Euergetism Festivals Folklore Homosexuality Law Olympic Games Pederasty Philosophy Prostitution Religion Slavery Warfare Wedding customs Wine Arts and science Architecture Greek Revival architecture Astronomy Literature Mathematics Medicine Music Musical system Pottery Sculpture Technology Theatre Religion Funeral and burial practices Mythology Deities Temple Twelve Olympians Underworld Sacred places Eleusis Delphi Delos Dion Dodona Mount Olympus Olympia Structures Athenian Treasury Lion Gate Long Walls Philippeion Theatre of Dionysus Tunnel of Eupalinos Temples Aphaea Artemis Athena Nike Erechtheion Hephaestus Hera, Olympia Parthenon Samothrace Zeus, Olympia Language Proto-Greek Mycenaean Homeric Dialects Aeolic Arcadocypriot Attic Doric Epirote Ionic Locrian Macedonian Pamphylian Koine Writing Linear A Linear B Cypriot syllabary Greek alphabet Greek numerals Attic numerals Greek colonisation Magna Graecia Mainland Italy Alision Brentesion Caulonia Chone Croton Cumae Elea Heraclea Lucania Hipponion Hydrus Krimisa Laüs Locri Medma Metauros Metapontion Neápolis Pandosia (Lucania) Poseidonia Pixous Rhegion Scylletium Siris Sybaris Sybaris on the Traeis Taras Terina Thurii Sicily Akragas Akrai Akrillai Apollonia Calacte Casmenae Catana Gela Helorus Henna Heraclea Minoa Himera Hybla Gereatis Hybla Heraea Kamarina Leontinoi Megara Hyblaea Messana Naxos Segesta Selinous Syracuse Tauromenion Thermae Tyndaris Aeolian Islands Didyme Euonymos Ereikousa Hycesia Lipara/Meligounis Phoenicusa Strongyle Therassía Cyrenaica Balagrae Barca Berenice Cyrene ( Apollonia ) Ptolemais Iberian Peninsula Akra Leuke Alonis Emporion Helike Hemeroscopion Kalathousa Kypsela Mainake Menestheus's Limin Illicitanus Limin/Portus Illicitanus Rhode Salauris Zacynthos Illyria Aspalathos Apollonia Aulon Epidamnos Epidauros Issa Melaina Korkyra Nymphaion Orikon Pharos Tragurion Thronion Black Sea basin North coast Akra Borysthenes Charax Chersonesus Dioscurias Gorgippia Hermonassa Kalos Limen Kepoi Kerkinitis Kimmerikon Myrmekion Nikonion Nymphaion Olbia Pantikapaion Phanagoria Pityus Tanais Theodosia Tyras Tyritake South coast Abonoteichos Amisos Anchialos Apollonia Athina Bathus Dionysopolis Cotyora Cytorus Eupatoria Heraclea Kerasous Mesambria Odessos Oinòe Phasis Polemonion Rhizos Salmydessus Sesamus Sinope Thèrmae Tium Trapezous Tripolis Zaliche Lists Cities in Epirus People Place names Stoae Temples Theatres Category Portal Outline Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=List_of_kings_of_Argos&oldid=1294206405 " Categories : Kings of Argos Lists of monarchs Mycenaean Greece Greece history-related lists Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 6 June 2025, at 08:28 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents List of kings of Argos 10 languages Add topic

