Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 History Toggle History subsection 2.1 Early Palaeo-Inuit cultures 2.2 Norse settlement 2.3 Thule culture (1300–present) 2.4 1500–1814 2.5 Treaty of Kiel to World War II (1814–1945) 2.6 Home rule and self-rule (1945–present) 3 Geography Toggle Geography subsection 3.1 Northernmost land 3.2 Climate change 3.3 Geology 3.4 Biodiversity 4 Government and politics Toggle Government and politics subsection 4.1 Political system 4.2 Government 4.3 Administrative divisions 4.4 Military 5 Economy Toggle Economy subsection 5.1 Transport 5.2 Tourism 5.3 Mining 6 Demographics Toggle Demographics subsection 6.1 Population 6.2 Languages 6.3 Religion 6.4 Education 6.5 Social issues 6.5.1 Compulsory contraception of Inuit women 6.5.2 LGBTQ rights 7 Culture Toggle Culture subsection 7.1 Fine arts 7.2 Media 7.3 Music 7.4 Cuisine 7.5 Sport 7.6 Religion 8 See also 9 Notes 10 References Toggle References subsection 10.1 Bibliography 11 External links Toggle the table of contents Greenland 203 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch አማርኛ Anarâškielâ अंगिका Ænglisc العربية Aragonés Arpetan Asturianu Avañe'ẽ Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه Basa Bali বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Boarisch བོད་ཡིག Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Чӑвашла Cebuano Čeština Chavacano de Zamboanga Chi-Chewa Cymraeg Dansk Davvisámegiella Deutsch ދިވެހިބަސް Diné bizaad Dolnoserbski Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Estremeñu Euskara فارسی Fiji Hindi Føroyskt Français Frysk Gaeilge Gaelg Gagauz Gàidhlig Galego गोंयची कोंकणी / Gõychi Konknni 客家語 / Hak-kâ-ngî 한국어 Hausa Հայերեն हिन्दी Hornjoserbsce Hrvatski Ido Ilokano বিষ্ণুপ্রিয়া মণিপুরী Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Interlingue ᐃᓄᒃᑎᑐᑦ / inuktitut Iñupiatun Ирон IsiXhosa Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa Kabɩyɛ Kalaallisut ಕನ್ನಡ ქართული Kaszëbsczi Қазақша Kernowek Ikinyarwanda Kiswahili Коми Kreyòl ayisyen Kurdî Ladin Ladino ລາວ Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Ligure Limburgs Lingála Lingua Franca Nova Livvinkarjala Magyar मैथिली Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം Malti Māori मराठी მარგალური مصرى ဘာသာမန် مازِرونی Bahasa Melayu ꯃꯤꯇꯩ ꯂꯣꯟ 閩東語 / Mìng-dĕ̤ng-ngṳ̄ Монгол မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands Nedersaksies नेपाली 日本語 Нохчийн Nordfriisk Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Novial Occitan Олык марий ଓଡ଼ିଆ Oromoo Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Pangcah پنجابی Papiamentu پښتو ភាសាខ្មែរ Picard Piemontèis Tok Pisin Plattdüütsch Polski Português Română Runa Simi Русиньскый Русский Саха тыла Sakizaya Sardu Scots Seediq Seeltersk Shqip Sicilianu සිංහල Simple English سنڌي Slovenčina Slovenščina Ślůnski Soomaaliga کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Taqbaylit တႆး Tayal తెలుగు ไทย Тоҷикӣ Lea faka-Tonga ᏣᎳᎩ Türkçe Türkmençe Удмурт Українська اردو ئۇيغۇرچە / Uyghurche Vèneto Vepsän kel’ Tiếng Việt Volapük Võro 文言 West-Vlams Winaray Wolof 吴语 ייִדיש Yorùbá 粵語 Zazaki Zeêuws Žemaitėška 中文 Betawi Kadazandusun Jaku Iban Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikinews Wikivoyage Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 72°00′N 40°00′W ﻿ / ﻿ 72.000°N 40.000°W ﻿ / 72.000; -40.000 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Autonomous territory of Denmark This article is about the Danish territory. For the island itself, see Geography of Greenland . For other uses, see Greenland (disambiguation) .

Autonomous territory in the Kingdom of Denmark Greenland Kalaallit Nunaat ( Greenlandic ) Grønland ( Danish ) Autonomous territory in the Kingdom of Denmark Flag Coat of arms Anthem : " Nunarput, utoqqarsuanngoravit " ( Greenlandic ) "Vort ældgamle land under isblinkens bavn" ( Danish ) "You Our Ancient Land" Kalaallit song : " Nuna asiilasooq " ( Greenlandic ) "The Land of Great Length" [ a ] Royal anthems: Der er et yndigt land ( Danish ) (English: "There is a lovely country" ) Kong Christian stod ved højen mast ( Danish ) (English: "King Christian stood by the lofty mast" ) Location of Greenland (dark green) in the Kingdom of Denmark (light green) Sovereign state Kingdom of Denmark Union with Norway 1262 Danish-Norwegian recolonization 1721 Unification with Denmark 14 January 1814 Home rule 1 May 1979 Further autonomy and self rule 21 June 2009 [ 2 ] [ 3 ] Capital and largest city Nuuk 64°10′N 51°44′W ﻿ / ﻿ 64.167°N 51.733°W ﻿ / 64.167; -51.733 Official languages Greenlandic [ b ] Recognized languages Danish , English , and other languages if necessary [ b ] Ethnic groups (2020) 89.51% Greenlandic Inuit 7.5% Danish 1.1% other Nordic 1.9% others [ 5 ] Religion Christianity ( Church of Greenland ) Demonym(s) Greenlander Greenlandic Danish Government Devolved government within a parliamentary constitutional monarchy • Monarch Frederik X • Prime Minister of Denmark Mette Frederiksen • High Commissioner Julie Præst Wilche • Greenlandic Prime Minister Jens-Frederik Nielsen • Speaker of the Inatsisartut Kim Kielsen Legislature Folketinget (Kingdom of Denmark) Inatsisartut (Greenland) National representation • Folketing ( 2 members ) Aaja Chemnitz Larsen ( IA ) Aki-Matilda Høegh-Dam ( N ) Area • Total 2,166,086 km 2 (836,330 sq mi) • Water (%) 83.1 [ c ] Highest elevation 3,700 m (12,100 ft) Population • 2024 estimate 56,836 [ 6 ] ( 210th ) • Density 0.028/km 2 (0.1/sq mi) GDP ( PPP ) 2023 estimate • Total $4.48 billion [ 7 ] • Per capita $78,840 GDP (nominal) 2023 estimate • Total $3.33 billion [ 8 ] • Per capita $58,499 [ 9 ] Gini (2023) 56.0 [ 10 ] high HDI (2010) 0.786 [ 11 ] high · 61st Currency Danish krone ( DKK ) Time zone UTC±00:00 to UTC-04:00 Date format dd-mm-yyyy Driving side Right Calling code +299 Postal codes 39xx ISO 3166 code GL Internet TLD .gl Greenland [ d ] is an autonomous territory [ e ] in the Kingdom of Denmark .

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] It is by far the largest geographically of three constituent parts of the kingdom; the other two are metropolitan Denmark and the Faroe Islands . It shares a small 1.2 km border with Canada on Hans Island . Citizens of Greenland are full citizens of Denmark and of the European Union . Greenland is one of the Overseas Countries and Territories of the European Union and is part of the Council of Europe .

[ 16 ] It is the world's largest island , [ f ] and lies between the Arctic and Atlantic oceans, east of the Canadian Arctic Archipelago . Greenland's Kaffeklubben Island , off the northern coast, is the world's northernmost undisputed point of land [ g ] — Cape Morris Jesup on the mainland was thought to be so until the 1960s. The capital and largest city is Nuuk .

[ 16 ] Economically, Greenland is heavily reliant on aid from Denmark , amounting to nearly half of the territory's total public revenue.

Though a part of the continent of North America , Greenland has been politically and culturally associated with the European kingdoms of Norway and Denmark for more than a millennium, beginning in 986.

[ 18 ] Greenland has been inhabited at intervals over at least the last 4,500 years by circumpolar peoples whose forebears migrated there from what is now Canada.

[ 19 ] [ 20 ] Norsemen from Norway settled the uninhabited southern part of Greenland beginning in the 10th century (having previously settled Iceland ), and their descendants lived in Greenland for 400 years until disappearing in the late 15th century. The 13th century saw the arrival of Inuit .

From the late 15th century, the Portuguese attempted to find the northern route to Asia, which ultimately led to the earliest cartographic depiction of its coastline. In the 17th century, Dano-Norwegian explorers reached Greenland again, finding their earlier settlement extinct and reestablishing a permanent Scandinavian presence on the island. When Denmark and Norway separated in 1814, Greenland was transferred from the Norwegian to the Danish crown. The 1953 Constitution of Denmark ended Greenland's status as a colony, integrating it fully into the Danish state. In the 1979 Greenlandic home rule referendum , Denmark granted home rule to Greenland. In the 2008 Greenlandic self-government referendum , Greenlanders voted for the Self-Government Act, which transferred more power from the Danish government to the local Naalakkersuisut (Greenlandic government).

[ 21 ] Under this structure, Greenland gradually assumed responsibility for a number of governmental services and areas of competence. The Danish government retains control of citizenship, monetary policy, security policies, and foreign affairs. With the melting of the ice due to global warming , its abundance of mineral wealth, and its strategic position between Eurasia , North America and the Arctic zone, Greenland holds strategic importance for the Kingdom of Denmark, NATO, and the EU.

Most residents of Greenland are Inuit.

[ 22 ] The population is concentrated mainly on the southwest coast, strongly influenced by climatic and geographical factors, and the rest of the island is sparsely populated. With a population of 56,583 (2022), [ 23 ] Greenland is the least densely populated country in the world.

[ 24 ] Greenland is socially progressive, like metropolitan Denmark; education and healthcare are free, and LGBTQ rights in Greenland are some of the most extensive in the world. Sixty-seven percent of its electricity production comes from renewable energy, mostly from hydropower .

[ 25 ] Etymology The early Norse settlers named the island Greenland . In the Icelandic sagas , the Norwegian Erik the Red was exiled from Iceland with his father, Thorvald, who had committed manslaughter. With his extended family and his thralls ( slaves or serfs ) , he set out in ships to explore an icy land known to lie to the northwest. After finding a habitable area and settling there, he named it Grœnland (translated as "Greenland"), supposedly in the hope that the pleasant name would attract settlers.

[ 26 ] [ 27 ] [ 28 ] The Saga of Erik the Red states: "In the summer, Erik left to settle in the country he had found, which he called Greenland, as he said people would be attracted there if it had a favourable name." [ 29 ] The name of the territory in the Greenlandic language is Kalaallit Nunaat , ' land of the Kalaallit ' .

[ 30 ] The Kalaallit are the Greenlandic Inuit who inhabit the territory's western region. The Greenlandic Inuit term Nunaat does not include waters and ice.

[ 31 ] History Main article: History of Greenland For a chronological guide, see Timeline of Greenland .

Early Palaeo-Inuit cultures Areas of Independence I and Independence II cultures around Independence Fjord In prehistoric times, Greenland was home to several successive Palaeo-Inuit cultures known primarily through archaeological finds. The earliest entry of the Palaeo-Inuit into Greenland is thought to have occurred about 2500 BC. From about 2500 BC to 800 BC, southern and western Greenland was inhabited by the Saqqaq culture . Most finds of remains from that period have been around Disko Bay , including the site of Saqqaq, for which the culture is named.

[ 32 ] [ 33 ] From 2400 BC to 1300 BC, the Independence I culture existed in northern Greenland. It was a part of the Arctic small-tool tradition .

[ 34 ] [ 35 ] [ 36 ] Towns, including Deltaterrasserne , appeared. About 800 BC, the Saqqaq culture disappeared and the Early Dorset culture emerged in western Greenland and the Independence II culture in northern Greenland.

[ 37 ] It is unknown whether the Dorset people ever encountered the later Thule people . The people of the Dorset culture lived mainly by hunting whales and reindeer .

[ 38 ] [ 39 ] [ 40 ] [ 41 ] Norse settlement Main article: Norse settlements in Greenland Summer Night Off the Greenland Coast Circa Year 1000 , by Carl Rasmussen , 1875 From 986, the west coast was settled by Icelanders and Norwegians , through a contingent of 14 boats led by Erik the Red. They formed three settlements—the Eastern Settlement , the Western Settlement , and the Middle Settlement —on fjords near the southwestern tip of the island.

[ 18 ] [ 42 ] They shared the island with the late Dorset culture inhabitants, who occupied the northern and western parts, and later with those of the Thule culture, who entered from the north. Norse Greenlanders submitted to Norwegian rule in 1261 under the Kingdom of Norway .

[ 43 ] The Kingdom of Norway entered a personal union with Denmark in 1380, and from 1397 was a part of the Kalmar Union .

[ 44 ] The Norse settlements, such as Brattahlíð , thrived for centuries, before disappearing in the 15th century, perhaps at the onset of the Little Ice Age .

[ 45 ] Except for some runic inscriptions, the only contemporary records or historiography that survive from the Norse settlements are of their contact with Iceland or Norway. Medieval Norwegian sagas and historical works mention Greenland's economy, the bishops of Gardar , and the collection of tithes. A chapter in the Konungs skuggsjá ( The King's Mirror ) describes Norse Greenland 's exports, imports, and grain cultivation.

The last written records of the Norse Greenlanders are from a 1408 marriage at Hvalsey Church , which is now the best-preserved Norse ruin.

Icelandic saga accounts of life in Greenland were composed in the 13th century and later, and are not primary sources for the history of early Norse Greenland.

[ 28 ] Those accounts are closer to primary for more contemporaneous accounts of late Norse Greenland. Modern understanding therefore mostly depends on the physical data from archaeological sites. Interpretation of ice-core and clam-shell data suggests that between AD 800 and 1300 the regions around the fjords of southern Greenland had a relatively mild climate, several degrees Celsius warmer than usual in the North Atlantic [ 46 ] with trees and herbaceous plants growing and livestock being farmed.

Barley was grown as a crop up to the 70th parallel.

[ 47 ] The ice cores show that Greenland has had dramatic temperature shifts many times in the past 100,000 years.

[ 48 ] Similarly the Icelandic Book of Settlements records famines during the winters, in which "the old and helpless were killed and thrown over cliffs".

[ 46 ] These Norse settlements vanished during the 14th and early 15th centuries.

[ 49 ] The demise of the Western Settlement coincides with a decrease in summer and winter temperatures. A study of North Atlantic seasonal temperature variability during the Little Ice Age showed a significant decrease in maximum summer temperatures beginning about the turn of the 14th century—as much as 6 to 8 °C (11 to 14 °F) lower than modern summer temperatures.

[ 50 ] The study also found that the lowest winter temperatures of the last 2,000 years occurred in the late 14th century and early 15th century. The Eastern Settlement was probably abandoned in the early to mid-15th century, during this cold period .

Estimated extent of Arctic cultures in Greenland from 900 AD to 1500 AD. Coloured areas on each map indicate the extent and migration patterns over time of the Dorset , Thule , and Norse cultures.

Theories drawn from archaeological excavations at Herjolfsnes in the 1920s suggest that the condition of human bones from this period indicates that the Norse population was malnourished, possibly because of soil erosion resulting from the Norsemen's destruction of natural vegetation in the course of farming, turf-cutting, and wood-cutting. Malnutrition may also have resulted from widespread deaths from pandemic plague; [ 51 ] the decline in temperatures during the Little Ice Age; and armed conflicts with the Skrælings (Norse word for Inuit, meaning "wretches" [ 45 ] ). Recent archaeological studies somewhat challenge the general assumption that the Norse colonization had a dramatic negative environmental effect on the vegetation. Data support traces of a possible Norse soil amendment strategy.

[ 52 ] More recent evidence suggests that the Norse, who never numbered more than about 2,500, gradually abandoned the Greenland settlements over the 15th century as walrus ivory , [ 53 ] the most valuable export from Greenland, decreased in price because of competition with other sources of higher-quality ivory, and that there was actually little evidence of starvation or difficulties.

[ 54 ] Other explanations of the disappearance of the Norse settlements have been proposed: Lack of support from the homeland.

[ 51 ] Ship-borne marauders (such as Basque , English, or German pirates), rather than Skrælings , could have plundered and displaced the Greenlanders.

[ 55 ] They were "the victims of hidebound thinking and of a hierarchical society dominated by the Church and the biggest land owners. In their reluctance to see themselves as anything but Europeans, the Greenlanders failed to adopt the kind of apparel that the Inuit employed as protection against the cold and damp or to borrow any of the Inuit hunting gear." [ 18 ] [ 45 ] That portion of the Greenlander population willing to adopt Inuit ways and means intermarried with and assimilated into the Inuit community.

[ 56 ] Much of the Greenland population is mixed Inuit and European ancestry. It was impossible in 1938 when Stefansson wrote his book to distinguish between intermarriage before the European loss of contact and after the contact was restored.

"Norse society's structure created a conflict between the short-term interests of those in power, and the long-term interests of the society as a whole." [ 45 ] Thule culture (1300–present) The Thule people are the ancestors of the current Greenlandic population. No genes from the Palaeo-Inuit Dorset culture have been found in the present population of Greenland.

[ 57 ] The Thule culture migrated eastward from what is now known as Alaska around 1000 AD, reaching Greenland around 1300. The Thule culture was the first to introduce to Greenland such technological innovations as dog sleds and toggling harpoons .

There is an account of contact and conflict with the Norse population, as told by the Inuit. It is republished in The Norse Atlantic Sagas , by Gwyn Jones. Jones reports that there is also an account of perhaps the same incident, of more doubtful provenance, told by the Norse side.

1500–1814 The Cantino planisphere , completed by an unknown Portuguese cartographer in 1502, depicts Greenland as a Portuguese territory claimed by King Manuel I .

Hans Egede (1686–1758), Lutheran missionary, credited with revitalising Denmark's relationship with Greenland In 1500, King Manuel I of Portugal sent Gaspar Corte-Real to Greenland in search of a Northwest Passage to Asia which, according to the Treaty of Tordesillas , was part of Portugal's sphere of influence. In 1501, Corte-Real returned with his brother, Miguel Corte-Real . Finding the sea frozen, they headed south and arrived in Labrador and Newfoundland . Upon the brothers' return to Portugal, the cartographic information supplied by Corte-Real was incorporated into a new map of the world which was presented to Ercole I d'Este , Duke of Ferrara , by Alberto Cantino in 1502. The Cantino planisphere , made in Lisbon, accurately depicts the southern coastline of Greenland.

[ 58 ] In 1605–1607, King Christian IV of Denmark and Norway sent a series of expeditions to Greenland and Arctic waterways to locate the lost eastern Norse settlement and assert Danish-Norwegian sovereignty over Greenland. The expeditions were mostly unsuccessful, partly due to leaders who lacked experience with the difficult Arctic ice and weather conditions, and partly because the expedition leaders were given instructions to search for the Eastern Settlement on the east coast of Greenland just north of Cape Farewell , which is almost inaccessible due to southward drifting ice . The pilot on all three trips was English explorer James Hall .

After the Norse settlements died off, Greenland came under the de facto control of various Inuit groups, but the Dano-Norwegian government never forgot or relinquished the claims to Greenland that it had inherited from the Norse. When it re-established contact with Greenland in the early 17th century, Denmark-Norway asserted its sovereignty over the island. In 1721 a joint mercantile and clerical expedition led by Dano-Norwegian missionary Hans Egede was sent to Greenland, not knowing whether a Norse civilization remained there. This expedition is part of the Dano-Norwegian colonization of the Americas . After 15 years in Greenland, Hans Egede left his son Paul Egede in charge of the mission there and returned to Denmark, where he established a Greenland Seminary. This new colony was centred at Godthåb ("Good Hope") on the southwest coast. Gradually, Greenland was opened up to Danish merchants, but closed to those from other countries.

Treaty of Kiel to World War II (1814–1945) See also: Denmark expedition and Greenland in World War II Godthåb in Greenland, c.

1878 Pictures of Greenland, c.

1863 When the union between the crowns of Denmark and Norway was dissolved in 1814, the Treaty of Kiel severed Norway's former colonies and left them under the control of the Danish monarch. Norway occupied then-uninhabited eastern Greenland as Erik the Red's Land in July 1931, claiming that it constituted terra nullius . Norway and Denmark agreed to submit the matter in 1933 to the Permanent Court of International Justice , which decided against Norway.

[ 59 ] Greenland's connection to Denmark was severed on 9 April 1940, early in World War II , after Denmark was occupied by Nazi Germany . On 8 April 1941, the United States occupied Greenland to defend it against a possible invasion by Germany.

[ 60 ] The United States' occupation of Greenland continued until 1945. Greenland was able to buy goods from the United States and Canada by selling cryolite from the mine at Ivittuut .

In World War II , the United States military used Bluie as a code name for Greenland, where they kept several bases named "Bluie (East or West) (sequential numeral)".

[ 61 ] The major air bases were Bluie West-1 at Narsarsuaq and Bluie West-8 at Søndre Strømfjord (Kangerlussuaq), both of which are still used as Greenland's major international airports.

During this war, the system of government changed: Governor Eske Brun ruled the island under a law of 1925 that allowed governors to take control under extreme circumstances; Governor Aksel Svane was transferred to the United States to lead the commission to supply Greenland. The Danish Sirius Patrol guarded the northeastern shores of Greenland in 1942 using dog sleds. They detected several German weather stations and alerted American troops, who destroyed the facilities. After the collapse of the Third Reich, Albert Speer briefly considered escaping in a small aeroplane to hide out in Greenland, but changed his mind and decided to surrender to the United States Armed Forces .

[ 62 ] Greenland had a protected and very isolated society until 1940.

[ 63 ] It was a colony, and it was believed that its society would be subject to exploitation or even eradication if the country was opened up. The Danish government had maintained a strict monopoly of Greenlandic trade , allowing no more than small scale barter trading with British whalers. In wartime Greenland developed a sense of self-reliance through self-government and independent communication with the outside world. Despite this change, in 1946 a commission including the highest Greenlandic council, the Landsrådene , recommended patience and no radical reform of the system.

Home rule and self-rule (1945–present) Margrethe II of Denmark, during whose reign (1972–2024) Greenland received home-rule in 1979 and self-rule in 2009.

Queen Margrethe II Land is named after her.

The first step towards a change of government was initiated with the Greenland Commission , which operated from 1948 to 1950. With its final report (the G-50), the first steps toward the modernization of Greenland were taken. The report recommended that Greenland become a modern welfare state , modelled after Denmark proper and with Denmark's development as sponsor, and the trade monopoly was abolished.

[ 64 ] With the 1953 Danish constitution, Greenland's colonial status ended, and the island was incorporated into the Danish realm as an amt (county), and thus fully integrated into Denmark like all other Danish counties. Danish citizenship was extended to Greenlanders. Danish policies toward Greenland consisted of a strategy of cultural assimilation — or de-Greenlandification. During this period, the Danish government promoted the exclusive use of the Danish language in official matters, and required Greenlanders to go to Denmark for their post-secondary education. Many Greenlandic children grew up in boarding schools in southern Denmark, and some lost their cultural ties to Greenland. While the policies "succeeded" in the sense of shifting Greenlanders from being primarily subsistence hunters into being urbanized wage earners, the Greenlandic elite began to reassert a Greenlandic cultural identity. A movement developed in favour of Greenlandic independence , reaching its peak in the 1970s.

[ 65 ] As in metropolitan Denmark, Greenland has seen significant expansion of the welfare state in the postwar era. Education and healthcare are free, and LGBTQ rights in Greenland are some of the most extensive in the Americas and the world. In 1987, the University of Greenland was founded to provide Greenlanders with higher education in their own language and country.

The United States offered to buy Greenland from Denmark for $100,000,000 in 1946; Denmark firmly rejected the offer, as the island was seen as an integral part of the Danish kingdom, important to its history and national identity.

[ 66 ] [ 67 ] In 1951 Denmark and the United States signed the Greenland Defense Agreement, which allowed the United States to keep its military bases in Greenland, and to establish new bases or "defence areas" if deemed necessary by NATO . The U.S. military could freely use and move between these defence areas, but was not to infringe upon Danish sovereignty in Greenland.

[ 68 ] The United States greatly expanded Thule Air Base between 1951 and 1953 as part of a unified NATO defence strategy. The local population of three nearby villages was moved more than 100 km (62 miles) away in the winter. The United States tried to construct a subterranean network of secret nuclear missile launch sites in the Greenlandic ice cap, named Project Iceworm .

[ 69 ] According to documents declassified in 1996, [ 70 ] this project was managed from Camp Century from 1960 to 1966 before abandonment as unworkable.

[ 71 ] The missiles were never fielded, and necessary consent from the Danish Government to do so was never sought. The Danish government was not aware of the programme's mission until 1997, when they discovered it while looking in the declassified documents for records related to the crash of a nuclear-equipped B-52 bomber near the Thule air base in 1968.

[ 72 ] In 1973, an amicable border dispute between Denmark and Canada arose over the ownership of Hans Island , a small island in Nares Strait directly between Greenland and the Canadian territory of Nunavut . The island remained in dispute until 2022, when both countries agreed to split the disputed island roughly in half.

[ 73 ] Due to political complications in relation to Denmark's entry into the European Common Market in 1972, Denmark began to seek a different status for Greenland, resulting in the Home Rule Act of 1979.

A referendum was held on 17 January 1979. This gave Greenland limited autonomy, with its own legislature taking control of some internal policies, while the Parliament of Denmark maintained full control of external policies, security, and natural resources. The law came into effect on 1 May 1979. The Danish monarch remains Greenland's head of state . In 1985, Greenland left the European Economic Community (EEC), as it did not agree with the EEC 's commercial fishing regulations and an EEC ban on sealskin products.

[ 74 ] Greenland voters approved a referendum on greater autonomy on 25 November 2008.

[ 75 ] [ 76 ] According to one study, the 2008 vote created what "can be seen as a system between home rule and full independence".

[ 77 ] On 21 June 2009, Greenland gained self-rule with provisions for assuming responsibility for self-government of its judicial affairs , policing matters, and natural resources . Also, Greenlanders were recognized as a separate people under international law .

[ 78 ] Denmark maintains control of the territory's foreign affairs and defence matters, and upholds an annual block grant of 3.2 billion Danish kroner. As Greenland begins to collect revenues from its natural resources, this grant will gradually be diminished; this is generally considered to be a step toward the territory's eventual full independence from Denmark.

[ 79 ] In 2012, Greenlandic was declared the sole official language of Greenland at a historic ceremony.

[ 2 ] [ 4 ] [ 80 ] [ 81 ] [ 82 ] In February 2024, Naalakkersuisut released a policy document outlining the territory's goal of asserting greater autonomy in international affairs. The strategy emphasizes Greenland's right to influence decisions that impact its future. Key objectives include strengthening relations with Arctic North America, promoting regional peace, enhancing security cooperation within the Kingdom of Denmark and NATO, and addressing the growing global interest in the Arctic from major powers such as the United States, Canada, Russia, and China.

[ 83 ] Since 2019, U.S. president Donald Trump has claimed that the U.S. should control Greenland , [ 78 ] stating that its residents "want to be with us", despite 85% opposition by Greenlandic adults.

[ 84 ] The Danish government called Trump's claims "absurd" and Prime Minister Mette Frederiksen emphasized that Greenland is not for sale.

[ 85 ] Denmark's minister of defence Troels Lund Poulsen has said that Trump cannot demand a part of Denmark's territory, [ 86 ] and Greenland's prime minister Jens-Frederik Nielsen said Trump will not get Greenland.

[ 87 ] The Greenland government has accused the United States of foreign interference in its affairs, [ 88 ] and Greenland's then-prime minister Múte Bourup Egede said "until recently, we could trust the Americans, who were our allies and friends, and with whom we enjoyed working very closely, but that time is over." [ 89 ] In April 2025, the New York Times reported that plans to claim Greenland were now official U.S. policy, to be accomplished through public relations and social media, and by persuading Greenlanders with cash payments.

[ 90 ] In April 2025, U.S.

Pituffik Space Base commander Susannah Meyers was fired for undermining U.S leadership after she wrote an e-mail in which she disagreed with U.S. vice president JD Vance 's assessment of Greenland's security.

[ 91 ] Geography Main articles: Geography of Greenland and Climate of Greenland See also: Climate of the Arctic § Greenland , Administrative divisions of Greenland , and Territorial claims in the Arctic Greenland bedrock is above sea level.

Greenland is the world's largest non-continental island [ 92 ] and the third largest area in North America after Canada and the United States.

[ 93 ] It is between latitudes 59° and 83°N , and longitudes 11° and 74°W . Over 80% of Greenland lies north of the Arctic Circle . Greenland is bordered by the Arctic Ocean to the north, the Greenland Sea to the east, the North Atlantic Ocean to the southeast, the Davis Strait to the southwest, Baffin Bay to the west, the Nares Strait and Lincoln Sea to the northwest. The nearest countries to Greenland are Canada, with which it shares a maritime border , to the west and southwest across Nares Strait and Baffin Bay, as well as a shared land border on Hans Island ; [ 94 ] and Iceland, southeast of Greenland in the Atlantic Ocean. Greenland also contains the world's largest national park ; it is the largest constituent country by area in the world and is the fourth largest country subdivision in the world , after Sakha Republic in Russia, Australia's state of Western Australia , and Russia's Krasnoyarsk Krai , and the largest in North America.

The lowest temperature ever recorded in the Northern Hemisphere was recorded in Greenland, near the topographic summit of the Greenland Ice Sheet , on 22 December 1991, when the temperature reached −69.6 °C (−93.3 °F).

[ 95 ] In Nuuk, the average daily temperature varies over the seasons from −5.1 to 9.9 °C (22.8 to 49.8 °F).

[ 96 ] The total area of Greenland is 2,166,086 km 2 (836,330 sq mi) (including other offshore minor islands), of which the Greenland ice sheet covers 1,755,637 km 2 (677,855 sq mi) (81%) and has a volume of approximately 2,850,000 km 3 (680,000 cu mi).

[ 97 ] The highest point on Greenland is Gunnbjørn Fjeld at 3,700 m (12,100 ft) of the Watkins Range ( East Greenland mountain range ). The majority of Greenland, however, is less than 1,500 m (4,900 ft) in elevation.

Below the ice there is a series of canyons, the biggest called Greenland's Grand Canyon which was formed by flowing rivers of water from the repeated cycle of ice melting and new ice forming.

[ 98 ] Near the coast elevations rise suddenly and steeply.

[ 99 ] The ice flows generally to the coast from the centre of the island. A survey led by French scientist Paul-Emile Victor in 1951 concluded that, under the ice sheet, Greenland is composed of three large islands.

[ 100 ] This is disputed, but if it is so, they would be separated by narrow straits, reaching the sea at Ilulissat Icefjord , at Greenland's Grand Canyon and south of Nordostrundingen .

All towns and settlements of Greenland are situated along the ice-free coast, with the population being concentrated along the west coast. The northeastern part of Greenland is not part of any municipality, but it is the site of the world's largest national park, Northeast Greenland National Park .

[ 101 ] Polar explorer and anthropologist Knud Rasmussen (1879–1933), called the "father of Eskimology ", was the first to explore the Greenland ice sheet by dog sled .

Ludvig Mylius-Erichsen (1872–1907), who died while commander of the 1906–1908 Denmark expedition , documenting vast areas of unexplored coastlines and fjords At least four scientific expedition stations and camps had been established on the ice sheet in the ice-covered central part of Greenland (indicated as pale blue in the adjacent map): Eismitte , North Ice , North GRIP Camp and The Raven Skiway. There is a year-round station Summit Camp on the ice sheet, established in 1989. The radio station Jørgen Brønlund Fjord was, until 1950, the northernmost permanent outpost in the world.

The extreme north of Greenland, Peary Land , is not covered by an ice sheet, because the air there is too dry to produce snow, which is essential in the production and maintenance of an ice sheet.

In 2007, the existence of a new island was announced. Named " Uunartoq Qeqertaq " (English: Warming Island ), this island has always been present off the coast of Greenland but was covered by a glacier. This glacier was discovered in 2002 to be shrinking rapidly, and by 2007 had completely melted away, leaving the exposed island.

[ 102 ] The island was named Place of the Year by the Oxford Atlas of the World in 2007.

[ 103 ] Ben Keene, the atlas's editor, commented: In the last two or three decades, global warming has reduced the size of glaciers throughout the Arctic and earlier this year, news sources confirmed what climate scientists already knew: water, not rock, lay beneath this ice bridge on the east coast of Greenland. More islets are likely to appear as the sheet of frozen water covering the world's largest island continues to melt.

[ 104 ] Some controversy surrounds the history of the island, specifically over whether the island might have been revealed during a brief warm period in Greenland during the mid-20th century.

[ 105 ] Northernmost land Main article: Northernmost point of land The northernmost point of land on Earth was long thought to be Cape Morris Jesup at the northern tip of mainland Greenland. However, in 1969 a Canadian team surveyed Kaffeklubben Island (latitude 83° 39′ 45″ N), which was first recorded in 1900 and first visited in 1921, and determined that its northernmost point is 750 m north of Cape Morris Jesup. It is thus the northernmost undisputed permanent land.

[ 106 ] Other points have been claimed to be the northernmost point, with dispute over the title arising from ice sheets , water movement and inundation, and storm activity that may build, shift, or destroy banks of gravelly moraine material. In 1978 Uffe Petersen, a member of the Danish Geodetic Institute , discovered Oodaaq Island at 83° 40' 32.5" N. Its last confirmed sighting was in 1979.

[ 107 ] In 2003, a small protrusion of rocks and boulders, 35 m × 15 m (115 ft × 49 ft) in length and width, was discovered by Arctic explorer Dennis Schmitt and his team at latitude 83° 42' N and unofficially named 83-42 .

[ 108 ] Whether this land is permanent is uncertain; a 2022 bathymetric survey determined that it was likely not connected to the seafloor, but rather rocky material on top of sea ice, and thus not land.

[ 109 ] Climate change See also: Climate change in the Arctic and Sea level rise 2012 NASA graphics show the extent of a then-record melting event Potential equilibrium states of the ice sheet in response to different equilibrium carbon dioxide concentrations in parts per million, 2023 [ 110 ] The Greenland ice sheet always loses some mass from ice calving at its coasts, but it used to balance this on average by the accumulation of snowfall.

[ 111 ] However, Greenland has been warming since around 1900, [ 112 ] and starting in the 1980s, the losses became larger than the gains.

[ 113 ] After 1996, Greenland has not had a single year when it did not lose mass on average.

[ 114 ] In the 2010s, the Greenland ice sheet melted at its fastest rate during at least the past 12,000 years, and is on track to exceed that later in the century.

[ 115 ] In 2012, 2019 and 2021, so-called "massive melting events" occurred, when practically the entire surface of the ice sheet was melting and no accumulation took place.

[ 116 ] [ 117 ] [ 118 ] During the 2021 event, rain fell at Greenland's highest point for the first time in recorded history, an event so unexpected that the research station at the summit had no rain gauges for the occasion.

[ 119 ] As with the ice loss elsewhere, the melting of Greenland contributes to sea level rise. Between 2012 and 2017, this melting added an average of 0.68 mm per year, [ 120 ] equal to 37% of sea level rise from land ice sources (excluding thermal expansion of water from the continual increase in the ocean heat content ).

[ 121 ] By the end of the century, the melting of Greenland alone will add between ~ 6 cm ( 2 + 1 ⁄ 2 in) if the temperature change is kept below 2 °C (3.6 °F), to around 13 cm (5 in) if the most intense climate change scenario with ever-increasing greenhouse gas emissions is followed.

[ 122 ] : 1302 Under this scenario, the worst case for Greenland melting could reach 33 cm (13 in) of sea level rise equivalent.

[ 123 ] The large quantities of fresh meltwater also affect the Atlantic meridional overturning circulation (AMOC) by diluting key currents, slowing it down.

[ 124 ] [ 125 ] Due to this meltwater input, the circulation may even collapse outright with widespread detrimental effects, although research suggests this is likely only if the highest possible warming is sustained for multiple centuries.

[ 126 ] [ 127 ] Greenland's ice sheet has a volume of ~2,900,000 cubic kilometres (696,000 cu mi). This means that if it were all to melt, global sea level would increase by ~7.4 m (24 ft) from that event alone.

[ 128 ] However, it also means that it will take at least 1,000 years for the ice sheet to disappear even with very high rates of global warming, [ 123 ] and in around 10,000 years under lower rates of warming which still cross the threshold for the ice sheet's disappearance.

[ 129 ] [ 130 ] This threshold likely lies for between 1.7 °C (3.1 °F) and 2.3 °C (4.1 °F). Reducing the warming back to 1.5 °C (2.7 °F) or lower above preindustrial levels (such as through large-scale carbon dioxide removal ) would arrest the losses, but still cause greater ultimate sea level rise than if the threshold had never been exceeded.

[ 131 ] Further, 1.5 °C (2.7 °F) itself appears to commit the Greenland ice sheet to 1.4 m ( 4 + 1 ⁄ 2 ft) of sea level rise.

[ 132 ] A study published in January 2025 in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences reported an "abrupt, coherent, climate-driven transformation" from "blue" (more transparent) to "brown" (less transparent) states of lakes in Greenland after a season of both record heat and rainfall drove a state change in these systems.

[ 133 ] This change was said to alter "numerous physical, chemical, and biological lake features", and the state changes were said to be unprecedented.

[ 133 ] Geology The island was part of the very ancient Precambrian continent of Laurentia , the eastern core of which forms the Greenland Shield, while the less exposed coastal strips became a plateau. On these ice-free coastal strips are sediments formed in the Precambrian , overprinted by metamorphism and now formed by glaciers, which continue into the Cenozoic and Mesozoic in parts of the island.

In the east and west of Greenland there are remnants of flood basalts and igneous intrusions, such as the Skaergaard intrusion . Notable rock provinces ( metamorphic igneous rocks, ultramafics, and anorthosites) are found on the southwest coast at Qeqertarsuatsiaat. East of Nuuk, the banded iron ore region of Isukasia, over three billion years old, contains the world's oldest rocks, such as greenlandite (a rock composed predominantly of hornblende and hyperthene), formed 3.8 billion years ago, [ 134 ] and nuummite. In southern Greenland, the Illimaussaq alkaline complex consists of pegmatites such as nepheline, syenites (especially kakortokite or naujaite) and sodalite (sodalite-foya). In Ivittuut, where cryolite was formerly mined, there are fluoride -bearing pegmatites. To the north of Igaliku, there are the Gardar alkaline pegmatitic intrusions of augite syenite, gabbro, etc.

To the west and southwest are Palaeozoic carbonatite complexes at Kangerlussuaq (Gardiner complex) and Safartoq, and basic and ultrabasic igneous rocks at Uiffaq on Disko Island, where there are masses of heavy native iron up to 25 t (28 short tons) in the basalts.

[ 135 ] The palaeontology of East Greenland is specially rich, with some of the early tetrapods such as the Acanthostega and Ichthyostega from the Devonian [ 136 ] and unique Triassic animals such as the phytosaur Mystriosuchus alleroq [ 137 ] and the dinosaurs Issi saaneq [ 138 ] and tracks.

[ 139 ] Biodiversity See also: Flora and fauna of Greenland , Reindeer hunting in Greenland , Fishing industry in Greenland , and Whaling § Greenland Greenlandic muskoxen at King Oscar Fjord The Greenland Dog was brought from Siberia around 1000 AD.

Greenland is home to two ecoregions: Kalaallit Nunaat high arctic tundra and Kalaallit Nunaat low arctic tundra .

[ 140 ] There are approximately 700 known species of insects in Greenland, which is low compared with other countries (over one million species have been described worldwide). The sea is rich in fish and invertebrates, especially in the milder West Greenland Current ; a large part of the Greenland fauna is associated with marine-based food chains, including large colonies of seabirds. The few native land mammals in Greenland include the polar bear , reindeer (introduced by Europeans), arctic fox , arctic hare , musk ox , collared lemming , ermine , and arctic wolf . The last four are found naturally only in East Greenland , having immigrated from Ellesmere Island . There are dozens of species of seals and whales along the coast. Land fauna consists predominantly of animals which have spread from North America or, in the case of many birds and insects , from Europe . There are no native or free-living reptiles or amphibians on the island.

[ 141 ] Phytogeographically , Greenland belongs to the Arctic province of the Circumboreal Region within the Boreal Kingdom . The island is sparsely populated in vegetation; plant life consists mainly of grassland and small shrubs, which are regularly grazed by livestock. The most common tree native to Greenland is the European white birch ( Betula pubescens ) along with grey-leaf willow ( Salix glauca ), rowan ( Sorbus aucuparia ), common juniper ( Juniperus communis ) and other smaller trees, mainly willows.

Greenland's flora consists of about 500 species of "higher" plants, such as flowering plants , ferns , horsetails and lycopodiophyta . Of the other groups, the lichens are the most diverse, with about 950 species; there are 600–700 species of fungi; mosses and bryophytes are also found. Most of Greenland's higher plants have circumpolar or circumboreal distributions; only a dozen species of saxifrage and hawkweed are endemic . A few plant species were introduced by the Norsemen, such as cow vetch .

Humpback whale in Disko Bay near Ilulissat (Jacobshavn ) The terrestrial vertebrates of Greenland include the Greenland dog , which was introduced by the Inuit , as well as European -introduced species such as Greenlandic sheep , goats , cattle , reindeer , horse , chicken and sheepdog , all descendants of animals imported by Europeans.

[ citation needed ] Marine mammals include the hooded seal ( Cystophora cristata ) as well as the grey seal ( Halichoerus grypus ).

[ 142 ] Whales frequently pass very close to Greenland's shores in the late summer and early autumn. Whale species include the beluga whale , blue whale , Greenland whale , fin whale , humpback whale , minke whale , narwhal , pilot whale , sperm whale .

[ 143 ] As of 2009, 269 species of fish from over 80 different families are known from the waters surrounding Greenland. Almost all are marine species with only a few in freshwater, such as Atlantic salmon and charr .

[ 144 ] The fishing industry is the primary industry of Greenland's economy, accounting for the majority of territory's total exports.

[ 145 ] Birds, particularly seabirds, are an important part of Greenland's animal life; they consist of both Palearctic and Nearctic species, breeding populations of auks , puffins , skuas , and kittiwakes are found on steep mountainsides.

[ 146 ] [ 147 ] [ 148 ] [ 149 ] Greenland's ducks and geese include common eider , long-tailed duck , king eider , white-fronted goose , pink-footed goose and barnacle goose . Breeding migratory birds include the snow bunting , lapland bunting , ringed plover , red-throated loon and red-necked phalarope . Non-migratory land birds include the arctic redpoll , ptarmigan , short-eared owl , snowy owl , gyrfalcon and white-tailed eagle .

[ 141 ] Government and politics Main article: Politics of Greenland See also: 2025 Greenlandic general election , Greenland and the European Union , and Politics of Denmark Frederik X , King of Denmark Prime Minister of Denmark Mette Frederiksen Premier of Greenland Jens-Frederik Nielsen The Greenlandic government Naalakkersuisut holds executive power in local government affairs. The head of the Greenlandic government is called Naalakkersuisut Siulittaasuat ("Premier"). Any other member of the cabinet is called a Naalakkersuisoq ("Minister"). The Greenlandic parliament is called Inatsisartut ("Legislators"). The parliament currently has 31 members.

[ 150 ] In contemporary times, elections are held at municipal, national ( Inatsisartut ), and kingdom ( Folketing ) levels.

Greenland is a self-governing entity within the constitutional monarchy of the Kingdom of Denmark, in which King Frederik X is the head of state. The monarch officially retains executive power and presides over the Council of State ( privy council ).

[ 151 ] [ 152 ] However, following the introduction of a parliamentary system of government, the duties of the monarch have since become strictly representative and ceremonial , [ 153 ] such as the formal appointment and dismissal of the prime minister and other ministers in the executive government. The monarch is not answerable for his or her actions, and the monarch's person is sacrosanct.

[ 154 ] Following World War II, the United Nations mandated that colonies should become independent, enter into free association with another country, or be fully integrated into the metropole (the former colonial power). Denmark opted in 1952 to integrate Greenland into the Danish Realm . In 1979, the Danish government and parliament introduced home rule for Greenland which meant that Naalakkersuisut could assume control over 17 different areas of government. Further devolution of power from Denmark to Greenland came with the "Greenland Self-Government Act" (GSGA) in 2009, that added 33 new areas of government to the pool, the Naalakkersuisut assume control over. The GSGA also resulted from a recognition in Denmark that the people of Greenland had a right to self-determination, and gave a legal section for Naalakkersuisut to trigger an independence process (Section 21, GSGA).

[ 155 ] [ 156 ] [ 157 ] Greenland membership in the Council of Europe through Denmark also shows activities at international level, with the last recorded activity in January 2025 concerning a visit from the Committee for the Prevention of Torture .

Political system Christiansborg in Copenhagen , seat of the Danish Parliament , from where Greenland's foreign, defence and security policy is decided [ 158 ] The party system was dominated by the social-democratic Forward Party, and the democratic socialist Inuit Community Party, both of which broadly have argued for greater independence from Denmark.

[ when?

] While the 2009 election saw the unionist Democrat Party (two MPs) decline greatly, the 2013 election consolidated the power of the two main parties at the expense of the smaller groups, and saw the eco-socialist Inuit Party elected to the Parliament for the first time. The dominance of the Forward and Inuit Community parties began to wane after the snap 2014 and 2018 elections.

[ citation needed ] The non-binding 2008 referendum on self-governance favouring increased self-governance and autonomy was passed winning 76.22% of the vote.

[ 159 ] In 1985, Greenland left the European Economic Community (EEC), unlike Denmark, which remains a member. The EEC later became the European Union (EU, renamed and expanded in scope in 1992). Greenland retains some ties through its associated relationship with the EU. However, EU law largely does not apply to Greenland except in the area of trade. Greenland is designated as a member of the Overseas Countries and Territories (OCT) and is thus officially not a part of the European Union , though Greenland can and does receive support from the European Development Fund , Multiannual Financial Framework , European Investment Bank and EU programmes.

[ 160 ] [ 161 ] Government Municipalities of Greenland Greenland's head of state is King Frederik X . The King's government in Denmark appoints a high commissioner ( Rigsombudsmand ) to represent it on the island. The commissioner is Julie Præst Wilche .

The Greenland constituency elects two MP representatives to the Kingdom Parliament ( Folketinget ) in Denmark, out of a total of 179. The current representatives are Aki-Matilda Høegh-Dam of the Naleraq Party and Aaja Chemnitz Larsen of the Inuit Community Party.

[ 162 ] Greenland has a national Parliament that consists of 31 representatives . The government is the Naalakkersuisut , whose members are appointed by the premier . The premier is the head of government , and is usually the leader of the majority party in Parliament. The premier is Múte Bourup Egede of the Inuit Ataqatigiit party.

[ 163 ] Administrative divisions Main article: Administrative divisions of Greenland Formerly consisting of three counties comprising a total of 18 municipalities, Greenland abolished these in 2009 and has since been divided into large territories known as "municipalities" ( Greenlandic : kommuneqarfiit , Danish : kommuner ): Sermersooq ("Much Ice") around the capital Nuuk and also including all East Coast communities; Kujalleq ("South") around Cape Farewell ; Qeqqata ("Centre") north of the capital along the Davis Strait ; Qeqertalik ("The one with islands") surrounding Disko Bay ; and Avannaata ("Northern") in the northwest; the latter two having come into being as a result of the Qaasuitsup municipality, one of the original four, being partitioned in 2018. The northeast of the island composes the unincorporated Northeast Greenland National Park .

Pituffik Space Base is also unincorporated, an enclave within Avannaata municipality. As a territorial concession granted to the United States in perpetuity, it is administered by the United States Space Force . During its construction, there were as many as 12,000 American residents but in recent [ clarification needed ] years the number has been below 1,000.

[ citation needed ] Military Main article: Military of Greenland The United States has operated Pituffik Space Base , originally Thule Air Base, since the 1950s.

Greenland does not have its own military. As a territory of Denmark, the Danish military is responsible for Greenland's defence and the island is within the area overseen by the NATO military alliance. The Joint Arctic Command is the Danish military branch responsible for Greenland. It includes several patrol ships, maritime patrol aircraft , helicopters, and the elite Sirius Dog Sled Patrol . The Danish military has personnel based at Nuuk , Kangerlussuaq , Daneborg , Station Nord , Mestersvig , Grønnedal , and a liaison detachment at Thule Air Base .

[ 164 ] There is also one United States military base in Greenland: Pituffik Space Base (previously Thule Air Base), which is home to the United States Space Force 's global network of sensors providing missile warning, space surveillance and space control to North American Aerospace Defence Command (NORAD). Elements of the sensor systems are commanded and controlled variously by Space Deltas 2 , 4 , and 6 .

[ 165 ] Formerly there had been several U.S. bases in Greenland. The 1951 Greenland Defense Agreement allowed the United States to keep its military bases there, and to establish new bases with the consent of Greenland and Denmark, if deemed necessary by NATO.

[ 68 ] [ 166 ] In 1995, a political scandal in Denmark occurred after a report revealed the government had given tacit permission for nuclear weapons to be located in Greenland, in contravention of Denmark's 1957 nuclear-free zone policy.

[ 167 ] [ 72 ] The United States built a secret nuclear powered base, called Camp Century , in the Greenland ice sheet.

[ 168 ] On 21 January 1968, a B-52G, with four nuclear bombs aboard as part of Operation Chrome Dome , crashed on the ice of the North Star Bay while attempting an emergency landing at Thule Air Base .

[ 169 ] The resulting fire caused extensive radioactive contamination.

[ 170 ] One of the H-bombs remains lost.

[ 171 ] [ 172 ] Economy Main article: Economy of Greenland The single most important factor in the Greenlandic economy is financial aid from Denmark, mainly in the form of the bloktilskud [ da ] ( block grant ). In 2024, the bloktilskud to Greenland was 4.3 billion kr, in of itself amounting to a third of the island's total public revenue.

[ 173 ] On top of this, the Danish state covered the expenses for i.a. judiciary and defence, which together were estimated to amount to over 1 billion kr.

[ 174 ] As of 2019 [update] it subsidizes Greenland with 4.3 billion kr. annually, [ 175 ] up from 3,6 billion kr. in 2009.

[ 176 ] Sermiligaaq , one of more than 60 settlements ( Danish : bygder ) The Greenlandic economy is highly dependent on fishing. Fishing accounts for more than 90% of Greenland's exports.

[ 177 ] The shrimp and fish industry is by far the largest income earner.

[ 178 ] Greenland is abundant in minerals, [ 177 ] but extraction has been limited. A state company, Nunaoil , was created to help develop the hydrocarbon industry in Greenland. However, in July 2021, Greenland banned all new oil and gas exploration in its territory, after government officials said that the environmental "price of oil extraction is too high".

[ 179 ] Greenland is a very difficult place to extract natural resources, for a number of reasons, including extreme weather conditions and a strong environmentalist community.

[ 180 ] The New York Times reported in March 2025 that, despite dozens of exploratory projects, there are only two active mines in Greenland.

[ 180 ] Electricity has traditionally been generated by oil or diesel power plants, even if there is a large surplus of potential hydropower . There is a programme to build hydropower plants. The first, and still the largest, is Buksefjord hydroelectric power plant .

There are also plans to build a large aluminium smelter, using hydropower to create an exportable product. It is expected that much of the labour needed will be imported.

[ 181 ] The European Union has urged Greenland to restrict development by the People's Republic of China of rare-earth mineral projects, as China accounts for 95% of the world's current supply. However, in early 2013 the government of Greenland said that it had no plans to impose such restrictions.

[ 182 ] The public sector, including publicly owned enterprises and the municipalities, plays a dominant role in Greenland's economy. About half the government revenues come from grants from the Danish government, an important supplement to the gross domestic product (GDP). Gross domestic product per capita is equivalent to that of the average economies of Europe.

Greenland suffered an economic contraction in the early 1990s. Since 1993, the economy has improved. The Greenland Home Rule Government (GHRG) has pursued a tight fiscal policy since the late 1980s, which has helped create surpluses in the public budget and low inflation. Since 1990, Greenland has registered a foreign-trade deficit following the closure of the last remaining lead and zinc mine that year. In 2017, new sources of ruby in Greenland have been discovered, promising to enhance the gemstone industry in Greenland and add a new export.

[ 183 ] Transport Main articles: Transport in Greenland and List of airports in Greenland Air transport connects Greenland internally and with other nations . There is also scheduled boat traffic, but the long distances lead to long travel times and low frequency. There are virtually no roads between cities because the coast has many fjords that would require ferry service to connect a road network. The only exception is a gravel road of 4.8 km (3 mi) length between Kangilinnguit and the now abandoned former cryolite mining town of Ivittuut .

[ 184 ] In addition, the lack of agriculture, forestry and similar countryside activities has meant that very few country roads have been built. Greenland has no passenger railways.

A one-lane dirt road designed primarily for all-terrain vehicles (secondarily for bicycles and hiking), is under construction between Kangerlussuaq and the town of Sisimiut (Holstensborg). As of June 2023, the road was scheduled for completion in 2024.

[ 185 ] A news report in Sermitsiaq declared the road itself to be completed already in September 2021, [ 186 ] but maintenance work and mud problems [ 187 ] have caused delays. There are plans to extend the road to a two-lane gravel road, but a date for its construction to start has not been announced.

[ 188 ] There are a total of 13 registered civil airports and 47 helipads in Greenland; most of them are unpaved and located in rural areas. All civil aviation matters are handled by the Danish Transport Authority . Most airports have short runways and can only be served by special fairly small aircraft on fairly short flights. Intercontinental flights connect mainly to Copenhagen or Reykjavík-Keflavík . Travel between international destinations (except Iceland) and most cities, requires a plane change in Nuuk.

Air Greenland is the flag carrier of Greenland Nuuk Airport (GOH) is the hub and international gateway for international and domestic airline passenger transport, after having undergone a major expansion in 2024.

Air Greenland is the flag carrier of Greenland. Additionally, Icelandair provides year-round services to Greenlandic airports. Seasonal and charter flights are also offered by other airlines.

[ 189 ] [ 190 ] Until 2024, Kangerlussuaq Airport (SFJ) was the main international gateway to Greenland, but is far from the vicinity of the larger metropolitan capital areas.

[ 191 ] [ 192 ] Ilulissat Airport (JAV) and Narsarsuaq Airport (UAK) are domestic airports that also serve limited international flights to Iceland and are both being reconstructed and expanded to enable larger aircraft to serve the airport by 2026, the latter in a new location closer to Qaqortoq .

[ 193 ] [ 194 ] Sea passenger transport is served by several coastal ferries.

Arctic Umiaq Line makes a single round trip per week, taking 80 hours each direction.

[ 195 ] Cargo freight by sea is handled by the shipping company Royal Arctic Line from, to and across Greenland. It provides trade and transport opportunities between Greenland, Europe, and North America.

Tourism Main article: Tourism in Greenland Tourism increased significantly between 2015 and 2019, with the number of visitors increasing from 77,000 per year to 105,000.

[ 196 ] One source estimated that in 2019 the revenue from this aspect of the economy was about 450 million kroner (US$67 million). Like many aspects of the economy, this slowed dramatically in 2020 and into 2021, due to restrictions required as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic ; [ 197 ] one source describes it as being the "biggest economic victim of the coronavirus" (the overall economy did not suffer too severely as of mid-2020, thanks to the fisheries "and a hefty subsidy from Copenhagen").

[ 198 ] Greenland's goal for returning tourism is to develop it "right" and to "build a more sustainable tourism for the long run".

[ 199 ] Mining Greenland is often portrayed as rich in rare-earth minerals , but experts argue this promise is largely illusory, as mining remains limited due to high costs, lack of infrastructure, and minimal local refining capacity. Although the island does contain resources, similar minerals are more abundant and accessible in other countries like the U.S., Brazil, Vietnam, and China, making Greenland an uncompetitive option. Despite a legal framework for mining, some ventures and over 30 years of Greenlandic efforts to attract American investment, success has been limited, and the belief in a quick mineral bonanza is increasingly seen as a geopolitical mirage.

[ 200 ] Mining of ruby deposits began in 2007. Other mineral prospects include iron, uranium , aluminium, nickel, platinum , tungsten , titanium , and copper . The state company Nunamineral has been launched on the Copenhagen Stock Exchange to raise more capital to increase the production of gold, started in 2007.

Demographics For statistics on demographics, see Demographics of Greenland .

See also: List of Greenlanders , Greenlandic Inuit , and Danish people in Greenland Population Tunumiit Inuit couple from Kulusuk In 2021, Greenland had a population of 56,421.

[ 201 ] That year, 18,800 people resided in the capital city Nuuk . Nearly all Greenlanders live along the fjords in the south-west of the main island, which has a relatively mild climate, especially considering the high latitude upon which it lies.

[ 202 ] Whereas the majority of the population lives north of 64°N in colder coastal climates, Greenland's warmest climates such as the vegetated area around Narsarsuaq are sparsely populated.

The majority of the population is Lutheran . The historically important Moravian Brothers ( Herrnhuters ) were a congregation of faith, in a Danish context based in Christiansfeld in South Jutland , and partially of German origin, but their name does not signify they were ethnic Moravians ( Czechs ).

In terms of ethnicity, the population is estimated to be of 89.5% Greenlandic , 7.5% Danish , 1.1% other Nordic and 1.9% other origins.

[ 5 ] The multi-ethnic population of European - Inuit represent people of Danish , Norwegian and to a lesser degree of Faroese , Icelandic , Dutch ( whalers ), German and American descent.

[ citation needed ] A 2015 wide genetic study of Greenlanders found modern-day Inuit in Greenland are direct descendants of the first Inuit pioneers of the Thule culture who arrived in the 13th century, with approximately 25% admixture of the European colonizers from the 16th century. Despite previous speculations, no evidence of Viking settlers predecessors has been found.

[ 203 ] Largest cities or towns in Greenland 2020 estimate [ 204 ] Rank Name Municipality Pop.

Rank Name Municipality Pop.

1 Nuuk Sermersooq 18,326 11 Nanortalik Kujalleq 1,185 2 Sisimiut Qeqqata 5,582 12 Upernavik Avannaata 1,092 3 Ilulissat Avannaata 4,670 13 Qasigiannguit Qeqertalik 1,081 4 Aasiaat Qeqertalik 3,069 14 Qeqertarsuaq Qeqertalik 839 5 Qaqortoq Kujalleq 3,050 15 Qaanaaq Avannaata 646 6 Maniitsoq Qeqqata 2,534 16 Kangaatsiaq Qeqertalik 520 7 Tasiilaq Sermersooq 2,063 17 Kangerlussuaq Qeqqata 508 8 Uummannaq Avannaata 1,407 18 Kullorsuaq Avannaata 453 9 Narsaq Kujalleq 1,346 19 Ittoqqortoormiit Sermersooq 345 10 Paamiut Sermersooq 1,308 20 Kangaamiut Qeqqata 293 Languages A bilingual parking sign in Nuuk in Danish and Greenlandic Greenlandic (effectively West Greenlandic ), spoken by nearly 50,000 people, became the sole official language in 2009.

[ 205 ] The majority of the population speak both Danish and West Greenlandic Kalaallisut (the most populous Eskaleut language ). They have been used in public affairs since the establishment of home rule in 1979. In practice, Danish is still widely used in administration, academia, and skilled trades and other professions. The orthography of Greenlandic, established in 1851, [ 206 ] was revised in 1973. The literacy rate was 100% in 2007.

[ 178 ] About 12% of the population speak Danish as their primary language. These are primarily Danish immigrants, many of whom speak Danish as their first and sometimes only language. Monolingual Danish speakers are concentrated in Nuuk and other larger towns. A debate about the roles of Greenlandic and Danish in the country's future is ongoing. While Greenlandic was dominant in all smaller settlements, most of the multi-ethnic Inuit ancestors spoke Danish as a second language. In larger towns, especially Nuuk, Danish was more important for social matters. English is growing in importance, and is now taught from the first school year.

[ 207 ] [ failed verification ] West Greenland has long been the most populous area of the island, and this has contributed to its variety of Greenlandic, Kalaallisut, becoming the de facto official language of Greenland. Around 3,000 people speak East Greenlandic (Tunumiisut) and nearly 1,000 around northern Qaanaaq speak Inuktun . North Greenlandic is closer to the Inuit languages of Canada than it is to other Greenlandic.

[ 208 ] Each of these varieties is nearly unintelligible to the speakers of the others and some linguists consider Tunumiisut to be a separate language altogether.

[ 209 ] A UNESCO report labelled the other varieties as endangered , and measures are now considered to protect the East Greenlandic dialect.

[ 210 ] Religion Main article: Religion in Greenland Religion in Greenland (2010): [ 211 ] [ 212 ] Protestantism (95.5%) Roman Catholicism (0.20%) Other Christian (0.40%) Inuit religion (0.80%) Agnostic (2.30%) Atheist (0.20%) Other religion (0.60%) 21st-century reproduction of Thjodhild's church, with Eriksfjord in the background, thought to be the first church and chapel in North America The nomadic Inuit were traditionally shamanistic , with a well-developed religion primarily concerned with appeasing a vengeful and fingerless sea goddess called Sedna who controlled the success of the seal and whale hunts .

[ 213 ] The first Norse colonists worshipped the Norse gods , but Erik the Red 's son Leif was converted to Christianity by King Olaf Trygvesson on a trip to Norway in 999 and sent missionaries back to Greenland. These swiftly established sixteen parishes, some monasteries, and a bishopric at Garðar .

Rediscovering these colonists and spreading ideas of the Protestant Reformation among them was one of the primary reasons for the Danish recolonization in the 18th century. Under the patronage of the Royal Mission College in Copenhagen, Norwegian and Danish Lutherans and German Moravian missionaries searched for the missing Norse settlements, but no Norse were found, and instead they began preaching to the Inuit. The principal figures in the Christianization of Greenland were Hans and Poul Egede and Matthias Stach . The New Testament was translated piecemeal from the time of the first settlement on Kangeq Island, but the first translation of the whole Bible was not completed until 1900. An improved translation using the modern orthography was completed in 2000.

[ 214 ] [ better source needed ] The major religion is Protestant Christianity , represented mainly by the Church of Denmark , which is Lutheran in orientation. There are no official census data on religion in Greenland, but the Bishop of Greenland Sofie Petersen [ 215 ] estimates that 85% of the Greenlandic population are members of her congregation.

[ 216 ] The Church of Denmark is the established church through the Constitution of Denmark .

[ 217 ] A small Roman Catholic minority is pastorally served by the Roman Catholic Diocese of Copenhagen . There are still Christian missionaries on the island, but mainly from charismatic movements proselytising fellow Christians.

[ 218 ] Education Education is organized in a similar way to Denmark. Students have ten years of mandatory primary school . This is followed by secondary education, focused on either work training or preparation for university education. There is one institution of higher learning, the University of Greenland ( Greenlandic : Ilisimatusarfik ) in Nuuk. Many Greenlanders attend universities in Denmark or elsewhere.

The public school system in Greenland is, as in Denmark, under the jurisdiction of the municipalities. The legislature specifies the standards allowed for the content in schools, but the municipal governments decide how the schools under their responsibility are run.

Education is free and compulsory for children aged seven to 16. The financial outlay devoted to education is 11.3% of GDP. Section 1 of the Government Ordinance on Public Schools (amended in 1997) requires Greenlandic as the language of instruction.

Education is governed by a regulation adopted in 1990 and amended in 1993 and 1994. Under this legislation, linguistic integration in primary and lower secondary schools became compulsory for all students . The aim is to place Greenlandic-speaking and Danish-speaking pupils in the same classes, whereas previously they were placed in separate classes according to their mother tongue. At the same time, the government guarantees that Danish speakers can learn Greenlandic. In this way, the Greenlandic government wants to give the same linguistic, cultural and social education to all students, both those of Greenlandic and Danish origin. A study, which was carried out during a three-year trial period, concluded that this bilingual had achieved positive results.

The Ilimmarfik ( University of Greenland ) campus is in Nuuk .

About 100 schools exist, in which both Greenlandic and Danish are used. Generally, Greenlandic is taught from kindergarten to the end of secondary school, but Danish is compulsory from the first cycle of primary school as a second language. As in Denmark with Danish, the school system provides for "Greenlandic 1" and "Greenlandic 2" courses. Language tests allow students to move from one level to the other. Based on the teachers' evaluation of their students, a third level of courses has been added: "Greenlandic 3". Secondary education in Greenland is generally vocational and technical. The system is governed by Regulation No. 16 of 28 October 1993 on Vocational and Technical Education , Scholarships and Career Guidance.

Danish remains the main language of instruction. The capital, Nuuk, has a (bilingual) teacher training college and a (bilingual) university. At the end of their studies, all students must pass a test in the Greenlandic language.

Higher education is offered in Greenland: university education, training of journalists, training of primary and lower secondary school teachers, training of social workers, training of social educators and training of nurses and nursing assistants. Greenlandic students can continue their education in Denmark, if they wish and have the financial means to do so. For admission to Danish educational institutions, Greenlandic applicants are placed on an equal footing with Danish applicants.

Scholarships are granted to Greenlandic students who are admitted to Danish educational institutions. To be eligible for these scholarships, the applicant must be a Danish citizen and have had permanent residence in Greenland for at least five years. The total period of residence outside Greenland may not exceed three years.

Social issues The rate of suicide in Greenland is very high. According to a 2010 census, Greenland holds the highest suicide rate in the world .

[ 219 ] [ 220 ] Another significant social issue faced by Greenland is a high rate of alcoholism.

[ 221 ] The rate of alcohol consumption in Greenland peaked in the 1980s, when it was twice as high as in Denmark; by 2010 it had fallen slightly below that of Denmark. Alcohol prices are far higher in Greenland than in Denmark, meaning that consumption has a large social impact.

[ 222 ] [ 223 ] The prevalence of HIV/AIDS has been high in Greenland, reaching a peak in the 1990s when the number of AIDS-related deaths was also relatively high. Through a number of initiatives, the prevalence (along with the death rate, through efficient treatment) has fallen and is now low, about 0.13% in the 2010s, [ 224 ] [ 225 ] below that of most other countries .

In recent decades, Greenland’s rate of unemployment has generally been somewhat above that of Denmark; [ 226 ] in 2017, the rate was 6.8% in Greenland, [ 227 ] compared to 5.6% in Denmark.

[ 228 ] Compulsory contraception of Inuit women Main article: Spiral case In the 1960s and 1970s, at a time when the population was increasing, 4,500 Greenland Inuit women and girls (roughly half of all fertile females) were fitted with intrauterine devices (IUDs) by Danish doctors. Sometimes girls (as young as 12) were taken directly from school to have these devices inserted, without their parents' permission. The procedure was also carried out on some Inuit girls at boarding schools in Denmark. On 30 September 2022, the Danish Health Minister, Magnus Heunicke , announced a two-year investigation into the decisions leading to the practice and its implementation.

[ 229 ] Greenlandic doctors also carried out the same illegal procedures on several Inuit women after Greenland took control of its health care system in 1991.

[ 230 ] LGBTQ rights Main article: LGBTQ rights in Greenland LGBTQ rights in Greenland are some of the most extensive in the Americas and the world, relatively similar to those in Denmark proper in Europe. Transgender people in Greenland may change the gender designation on their official identity documents. A law passed in 2016 by decree allows legal gender changes based on self-determination.

[ 231 ] [ 232 ] Since 2010, Greenland has had laws prohibiting hate speech against LGBTQ+ persons. Greenland’s parliament passed a Law on Equal Treatment and Anti-Discrimination in May 2024, taking effect on 1 July 2024. The law prohibits all discrimination on the basis of “sexual orientation, gender identity, gender expression, [and] gender characteristics”, among other characteristics. The law also creates an Equal Treatment Board to manage discrimination complaints and an Equality Council to promote non-discrimination.

[ 233 ] Culture Main article: Culture of Greenland See also: Human rights in Denmark § Indigenous rights Greenlandic culture is a blending of traditional Inuit ( Kalaallit , Tunumiit , Inughuit ) and Scandinavian culture. Inuit, or Kalaallit, culture has a strong artistic tradition, dating back thousands of years. The Kalaallit are known for an art form of figures called tupilak or a "spirit object". Traditional art-making practices thrive in the Ammassalik .

[ 234 ] Sperm whale ivory remains a valued medium for carving.

[ 235 ] Fine arts The Inuit have their own arts and crafts tradition; for example, they carve tupilaks, sculptures of figures of avenging monsters practised within shaman traditions.

[ 236 ] This Kalaallisut word means soul or spirit of a deceased person and describes an artistic figure, usually no more than 20 centimetres (8 in) tall, carved mainly from walrus ivory, with a variety of unusual shapes. This sculpture actually represents a mythical or spiritual being; usually, however, it has become a mere collector's item because of its grotesque appearance for Western visual habits. Modern artisans still use indigenous materials such as musk ox and sheep wool, seal fur, shells, soapstone, reindeer antlers or gemstones.

The history of Greenlandic painting began with Aron von Kangeq, who depicted the old Greenlandic sagas and myths in his drawings and watercolours in the mid-19th century. In the 20th century, landscape and animal painting developed, as well as printmaking and book illustrations with sometimes expressive colouring. It was mainly through their landscape paintings that Kiistat Lund and Buuti Pedersen became known abroad. Anne-Birthe Hove chose themes from Greenlandic social life. There is a museum of fine arts in Nuuk, the Nuuk Art Museum .

Media Kalaallit Nunaata Radioa (KNR) is the public broadcasting company of Greenland. It is an associate member of Eurovision and of the Nordvision network. Nearly one hundred people are directly employed by the company, which is one of the largest in the territory.

[ 237 ] The city of Nuuk has its own radio and television station. The television channel, Nanoq Media , was created on 1 August 2002. It is the largest local television station in Greenland, reaching more than 4,000 households as receiving members, which corresponds to about 75% of all households in the capital.

[ 238 ] Only two newspapers are published in Greenland, both of which are distributed nationally. The Greenlandic weekly Sermitsiaq is published every Friday, while the online version is updated several times a day. It is named after the mountain Sermitsiaq, located about 15 km (9.5 mi) northeast of Nuuk, and was distributed only in Nuuk until the 1980s. The bi-weekly Atuagagdliutit/Grønlandsposten (AG) is published every Tuesday and Thursday, in Greenlandic as Atuagagdliutit and in Danish as Grønlandsposten , with all articles published in both languages.

Music Main article: Music of Greenland Nive Nielsen in 2016, Greenlandic singer and songwriter Greenlandic filmmaker Inuk Silis Høegh with members of the Greenlandic band Sumé , 2015 Greenland's musical heritage blends traditional Inuit forms with modern genres. The traditional Inuit drum dance and song, known as qilaatersorneq , is a cornerstone of Greenlandic culture.

[ 239 ] The qilaat , a frame drum made from driftwood or walrus ribs and covered with animal stomach or bladder, is played by striking the rim from underneath with a stick. These performances served various purposes, including entertainment, spiritual ceremonies, and conflict resolution through song duels, where participants would satirize each other to settle disputes.

[ 240 ] In 2021, UNESCO recognized Inuit drum dancing and singing as part of the Intangible Cultural Heritage of Humanity .

[ 241 ] [ 242 ] [ 239 ] The arrival of Christian missionaries in the 18th century led to the suppression of drum dances, deemed pagan . They were replaced by polyphonic choral singing, influenced by German hymns from the Herrnhuter Brüdergemeinde .

[ 243 ] European whalers introduced instruments like the fiddle and accordion, leading to the development of kalattuut , or Greenlandic polka, characterized by fast-paced dances performed during communal gatherings.

[ 244 ] [ 245 ] [ 246 ] In contemporary times, Greenland has a vibrant music scene. The band Sumé , active in the 1970s, pioneered Greenlandic rock music with politically charged lyrics advocating for cultural independence.

[ 247 ] Nanook , formed in 2008, is a pop-rock band known for singing in Greenlandic and rejecting offers to switch to English, emphasizing cultural authenticity.

[ 248 ] [ 249 ] Other notable artists include Chilly Friday (rock), Siissisoq (rock), Nuuk Posse (hip hop), and Rasmus Lyberth (folk), who performed in the Danish national final for the 1979 Eurovision Song Contest in Greenlandic.

Simon Lynge stands out as the first Greenlandic solo artist to release an album across the United Kingdom .

[ 250 ] Cuisine Main article: Greenlandic cuisine The national dish of Greenland is suaasat , a soup made from seal meat . Meat from marine mammals, game, birds, and fish have a large role in the Greenlandic diet. Due to the glacial landscape, most ingredients come from the ocean.

[ 251 ] Spices are seldom used besides salt and pepper.

[ 252 ] Greenlandic coffee is a "flaming" dessert coffee (set alight before serving) made with coffee, whiskey, Kahlúa, Grand Marnier, and whipped cream. It is stronger than the familiar Irish dessert coffee.

[ 253 ] Sport Main article: Sport in Greenland Sport is an important part of Greenlandic culture, as the population is generally quite active.

[ 254 ] Popular sports include association football , track and field , handball and skiing . Handball is often referred to as the national sport, [ 255 ] and the men's national team was ranked among the top 20 in the world in 2001.

Greenland has excellent conditions for skiing , fishing , snowboarding , ice climbing and rock climbing , although mountain climbing and hiking are preferred by the general public. Although the environment is generally ill-suited for golf, there is a golf course in Nuuk.

Religion The majority of Greenlanders are members of the Lutheran Church.

[ 256 ] The Church of Greenland is a diocese of the Lutheran World Federation through the Evangelical Lutheran Church in Denmark.

[ 257 ] There are 17 parishes in the Church of Greenland.

[ 256 ] See also Index of Greenland-related articles Outline of Greenland Åland ( Finland ) Svalbard ( Norway ) Notes ^ Nuna asiilasooq has equal status as a regional anthem but is generally used only in Greenland.

[ 1 ] ^ a b Greenlandic has been the sole official language of Greenland since 2009.

[ 2 ] [ 4 ] ^ As of 2000: 410,449 km 2 (158,475 sq mi) ice-free; 1,755,637 km 2 (677,855 sq mi) ice-covered.

Density: 0.14/km 2 (0.36/sq mi) for ice-free areas.

^ Greenlandic : Kalaallit Nunaat , pronounced [kalaːɬːit nʉnaːt] ; Danish : Grønland , pronounced [ˈkʁɶnˌlænˀ] ^ Danish : rigsdel , literally ' realm part ' [ 12 ] [ 13 ] ^ Afro-Eurasia , the Americas , Australia , and Antarctica are all larger than Greenland, but they are generally considered continents , not islands.

[ 17 ] ^ Stray Dog West is considered the most northerly competitor claim, although it is generally sunken at high tide .

References ^ "03EM/01.25.01-50 Spørgsmål til Landsstyret: Hvornår fremsætter Landsstyret beslutning om Grønlands" [03EM/01.25.01-50 Questions to the Home Rule Government: When does the Home Rule Government make a decision on Greenland].

Government of Greenland . 7 October 2003. Archived from the original on 13 December 2014 . Retrieved 13 December 2014 .

^ a b c (in Danish) TV 2 Nyhederne – "Grønland går over til selvstyre" Archived 9 August 2023 at the Wayback Machine TV 2 Nyhederne ( TV 2 News ) – Ved overgangen til selvstyre, er grønlandsk nu det officielle sprog. Retrieved 22 January 2012.

^ "Self-rule introduced in Greenland" .

BBC News . 21 June 2009.

Archived from the original on 25 April 2010 . Retrieved 4 May 2010 .

^ a b (in Danish) Law of Greenlandic Selfrule Archived 8 February 2012 at the Wayback Machine (see chapter 7) ^ a b "The World Factbook – Central Intelligence Agency" .

cia.gov .

Archived from the original on 9 January 2021 . Retrieved 3 October 2020 .

^ "Population of Greenland" .

Greenlandic Population as of 2022 .

Archived from the original on 4 August 2023 . Retrieved 12 August 2022 .

^ Greenland in Figures 2013 (PDF) .

Statistics Greenland .

ISBN 978-87-986787-7-9 .

ISSN 1602-5709 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 21 September 2013 . Retrieved 2 September 2013 .

^ "Greenland | Data" .

data.worldbank.org .

Archived from the original on 31 May 2023 . Retrieved 9 August 2021 .

^ "GDP per capita (Current US$) - Greenland | Data" .

Archived from the original on 27 March 2023 . Retrieved 9 January 2025 .

^ Hasell, Joe; Arriagada, Pablo; Ortiz-Ospina, Esteban; Roser, Max (2023).

"Income inequality: Gini coefficient (before tax)" .

Economic Inequality . Our World in Data . Retrieved 23 March 2025 .

^ Avakov, Aleksandr Vladimirovich (2012).

Quality of Life, Balance of Powers, and Nuclear Weapons (2012): A Statistical Yearbook for Statesmen and Citizens . Algora Publishing. p. 51.

ISBN 978-0-87586-892-9 .

Archived from the original on 9 March 2024 . Retrieved 18 September 2022 .

^ "Greenland and The Faroe Islands" .

UM-ENEN . Retrieved 28 January 2025 .

^ "Political system" .

japan.um.dk . Retrieved 28 January 2025 .

^ "Greenland: The world's largest island" .

Denmark.dk .

Archived from the original on 20 December 2023 . Retrieved 14 January 2024 .

^ * Dallen J. Timothy (6 November 2020).

Tourism in European Microstates and Dependencies: Geopolitics, Scale and Resource Limitations . CABI. pp. 94–.

ISBN 978-1-78924-310-9 .

OCLC 1162434605 .

Archived from the original on 10 June 2024 . Retrieved 18 September 2022 .

This ....This change in governance also resulted in Greenland becoming an autonomous 'constituent country' in the Danish realm...

Benedikter, Thomas (19 June 2006).

"The working autonomies in Europe" .

Society for Threatened Peoples .

Archived from the original on 9 March 2008 . Retrieved 3 June 2019 .

Denmark has established very specific territorial autonomies with its two island territories Ackrén, Maria (November 2017).

"Greenland" . Autonomy Arrangements in the World. Archived from the original on 30 August 2019 . Retrieved 30 August 2019 .

Faroese and Greenlandic are seen as official regional languages in the self-governing territories belonging to Denmark.

"Greenland" .

International Cooperation and Development .

European Commission . 3 June 2013.

Archived from the original on 16 September 2014 . Retrieved 27 August 2019 .

Greenland [...] is an autonomous territory within the Kingdom of Denmark ^ a b "Greenland" .

The World Factbook . CIA.

Archived from the original on 9 January 2021 . Retrieved 13 January 2021 .

^ "Joshua Calder's World Island Information" . Worldislandinfo.com.

Archived from the original on 23 April 2011 . Retrieved 6 September 2010 .

^ a b c The Fate of Greenland's Vikings Archived 11 January 2011 at the Wayback Machine , by Dale Mackenzie Brown, Archaeological Institute of America , 28 February 2000 ^ "Saqqaq-kulturen kronologi" . National Museum of Denmark. Archived from the original on 7 December 2013 . Retrieved 2 August 2013 .

^ Saillard J, Forster P, Lynnerup N, Bandelt HJ, Nørby S (2000).

"mtDNA variation among Greenland Eskimos: the edge of the Beringian expansion" .

American Journal of Human Genetics .

67 (3): 718– 26.

doi : 10.1086/303038 .

ISSN 0002-9297 .

PMC 1287530 .

PMID 10924403 .

^ Greenland in Figures 2012 (PDF) . stat.gl.

ISBN 978-87-986787-6-2 .

ISSN 1602-5709 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 13 November 2012 . Retrieved 10 February 2013 .

^ Mcghee, Robert (3 April 2015).

"Thule Culture" .

Canadian Encyclopedia . Historica Canada.

Archived from the original on 20 November 2015 . Retrieved 1 June 2015 .

^ "Population of Greenland" .

Archived from the original on 4 August 2023 . Retrieved 12 August 2022 .

^ "Population density (people per sq. km of land area)" . The World Bank.

Archived from the original on 5 June 2013 . Retrieved 3 November 2012 .

^ "Vedvarende energi" . Nukissiorfiit.

Archived from the original on 10 June 2024 . Retrieved 28 March 2023 .

^ Eirik the Red's Saga . Gutenberg.org. 8 March 2006.

Archived from the original on 11 May 2011 . Retrieved 6 September 2010 .

^ "How Greenland got its name" Archived 19 March 2012 at the Wayback Machine .

The Ancient Standard . 17 December 2010.

^ a b Grove, Jonathan (2009).

"The place of Greenland in medieval Icelandic saga narrative" .

Journal of the North Atlantic .

2 : 30– 51.

doi : 10.3721/037.002.s206 .

S2CID 163032041 . Archived from the original on 11 April 2012.

^ Evans, Andrew.

"Is Iceland Really Green and Greenland Really Icy?" Archived 4 December 2017 at the Wayback Machine , National Geographic (30 June 2016).

^ Stern , p. 89 ^ "Maps of Inuit Nunangat (Inuit Regions of Canada)" .

Inuit Tapiriit Kanatami . 5 September 2008 . Retrieved 20 June 2019 .

^ Grønnow, B. (1988). "Prehistory in permafrost: Investigations at the Saqqaq site, Qeqertasussuk, Disco Bay, West Greenland".

Journal of Danish Archaeology .

7 (1): 24– 39.

doi : 10.1080/0108464X.1988.10589995 .

^ Møbjerg, T. (1999). "New adaptive strategies in the Saqqaq culture of Greenland, c. 1600–1400 BC".

World Archaeology .

30 (3): 452– 65.

doi : 10.1080/00438243.1999.9980423 .

JSTOR 124963 .

^ "The history of Greenland – From dog sled to snowmobile" . Greenland.com. Archived from the original on 27 September 2011 . Retrieved 10 September 2011 .

^ "Migration to Greenland – the history of Greenland" . Greenland.com.

Archived from the original on 5 September 2011 . Retrieved 10 September 2011 .

^ Rasch, M.; Jensen, J. F. (1997). "Ancient Eskimo dwelling sites and Holocene relative sea-level changes in southern Disko Bugt, central West Greenland".

Polar Research .

16 (2): 101– 15.

Bibcode : 1997PolRe..16..101R .

doi : 10.3402/polar.v16i2.6629 .

^ Ramsden, P.; Tuck, J. A. (2001).

"A Comment on the Pre-Dorset/Dorset Transition in the Eastern Arctic" .

Anthropological Papers of the University of Alaska . New Series.

1 : 7– 11.

Archived from the original on 8 April 2022.

^ Grønnow, B. (1986). "Recent archaeological investigations of West Greenland caribou hunting".

Arctic Anthropology .

23 (1/2): 57– 80.

JSTOR 40316103 .

^ Rowley, G. (1940).

"The Dorset culture of the eastern Arctic" .

American Anthropologist .

42 (3): 490– 99.

doi : 10.1525/aa.1940.42.3.02a00080 .

^ Gulløv, H. C.; Appelt, M. (2001). "Social bonding and shamanism among Late Dorset groups in High Arctic Greenland".

The archaeology of shamanism . Routledge. p. 146.

ISBN 0-415-25255-5 .

^ Gulløv, H. C. (1996).

In search of the Dorset culture in the Thule culture. The Paleoo Cultures of Greenland . Copenhagen: Danish Polar Center (Publication No. 1). pp.

201– 14.

^ Kudeba, N. (19 April 2014). Chapter 5, "Norse Explorers from Erik the Red to Leif Erikson", in Canadian Explorers .

^ "Viking Settlers in Greenland" .

Encyclopedia.com .

Archived from the original on 10 June 2024 . Retrieved 18 December 2023 .

^ Boraas, Tracey (2002).

Sweden . Capstone Press. p.

24 .

ISBN 0-7368-0939-2 .

^ a b c d Diamond, Jared (2006).

Collapse: How Societies Choose to Fail or Succeed . Harmondsworth [Eng.]: Penguin.

ISBN 978-0-14-303655-5 .

^ a b Arnold C. (June 2010) "Cold Did In the Norse", Earth Magazine . p. 9.

^ Behringer, Wolfgang (9 September 2009).

Kulturgeschichte des Klimas: Von der Eiszeit zur globalen Erwärmung (in German). Munich: Dt. Taschenbuch-Verlag.

ISBN 978-3-406-52866-8 .

Archived from the original on 24 June 2023 . Retrieved 18 September 2022 .

^ Alley, R.; Mayewski, P.; Peel, D.; Stauffer, B. (1996).

"Twin ice cores from Greenland reveal history of climate change, more" .

Eos, Transactions American Geophysical Union .

77 (22): 209– 10.

Bibcode : 1996EOSTr..77R.209A .

doi : 10.1029/96EO00142 .

Archived from the original on 14 April 2018 . Retrieved 16 August 2019 .

^ " Why societies collapse Archived 2 August 2012 at the Wayback Machine ". ABC Science.

^ Patterson, W. P.; Dietrich, K. A.; Holmden, C.; Andrews, J. T. (23 March 2010).

"Two millennia of North Atlantic seasonality and implications for Norse colonies" .

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences .

107 (12): 5306– 5310.

Bibcode : 2010PNAS..107.5306P .

doi : 10.1073/pnas.0902522107 .

PMC 2851789 .

PMID 20212157 .

^ a b Ingstad, Helge; Stine Ingstad, Anne (2000).

The Viking Discovery of America: The Excavation of a Norse Settlement in L'Anse Aux Meadows, Newfoundland . Breakwater Books. pp. 28–.

ISBN 1-55081-158-4 .

^ Bishop, Rosie R., et al. "A charcoal-rich horizon at Ø69, Greenland: evidence for vegetation burning during the Norse landnám?." Journal of Archaeological Science 40.11 (2013): 3890–902 ^ Leone, Mark P.; Knauf, Jocelyn E. (2015).

Historical Archaeologies of Capitalism . Springer. p. 211.

ISBN 978-3-319-12760-6 .

^ Folger, Tim.

"Why Did Greenland's Vikings Vanish?" .

Archived from the original on 17 March 2017 . Retrieved 13 March 2017 .

^ Trigger, Bruce G.; Washburn, Wilcomb E.; Adams, Richard E. W. (1996).

The Cambridge History of the Native Peoples of the Americas . Cambridge University Press. p. 331.

ISBN 0-521-57393-9 .

^ Stefansson, Vilhjalmur (1938).

Unsolved Mysteries of the Arctic . The Macmillan Company. pp.

1– 36.

ISBN 9781878100955 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ "Inuit were not the first people to settle in the Arctic" , CBC News (Canada), 28 August 2014 ^ Nebenzahl, Kenneth.

Rand McNally Atlas of Columbus and The Great Discoveries (Rand McNally & Company; Genoa, Italy ; 1990); The Cantino Planisphere, Lisbon, 1502 , pp. 34–37.

^ Legal Status of Eastern Greenland Archived 11 May 2011 at the Wayback Machine , PCIJ Series A/B No. 53 (1933) ^ America First Committee (1990) [8 July 1941]. Doenecke, Justus D. (ed.).

In Danger Undaunted: The Anti-Interventionist Movement of 1940–1941 . Hoover Institution Press.

ISBN 0-8179-8841-6 .

Archived from the original on 30 June 2023 . Retrieved 18 September 2022 .

^ Morison, Samuel Eliot (1975).

History of United States Naval Operations in World War II, Volume 1: The Battle of the Atlantic September 1939 – May 1943 . Boston: Little, Brown and Company. p. 62.

^ Speer, Albert .

Inside the Third Reich, 1971.

^ "Eske Brun - det moderne Grønlands ophavsmand?" . Sermitsiaq. 24 November 2010 . Retrieved 19 April 2012 .

^ Grønlands historie danmarkshistorien.dk ^ Loukacheva, Natalia (2007).

The Arctic Promise: Legal and Political Autonomy of Greenland and Nunavut . University of Toronto Press. p. 25.

ISBN 978-0-8020-9486-5 .

Archived from the original on 13 April 2016.

^ "Deepfreeze Defense" .

Time . 27 January 1947. Archived from the original on 21 February 2009 . Retrieved 14 May 2008 .

^ Miller, John J. (7 May 2001).

"Let's Buy Greenland! — A complete missile-defense plan" .

National Review . Archived from the original on 7 January 2010.

^ a b Beukel, Erik (2010). "The Greenland Issue". In Rytter, Jens Elo (ed.).

Phasing Out the Colonial Status of Greenland, 1945–54: A Historical Study . Meddelelser om Grønland. Vol. 37. Museum Tusculanum Press. pp.

56– 57.

ISBN 978-87-635-2587-9 .

ISSN 0106-1062 .

^ Weiss, Erik D. “Cold War Under the Ice: The Army’s Bid for a Long-Range Nuclear Role, 1959–1963.” Journal of Cold War Studies , vol. 3, no. 3, 2001, pp. 31–58.

JSTOR website Retrieved 12 Apr. 2025.

^ Petersen, Nikolaj (17 December 2007).

"The Iceman That Never Came" .

Scandinavian Journal of History .

33 . Scandinavian Journal of History Volume 33, 2008 – Issue 1: 75– 98.

doi : 10.1080/03468750701449554 .

S2CID 142526881 .

Archived from the original on 24 March 2022 . Retrieved 15 August 2020 .

^ "A Radioactive Cold War Military Base Will Soon Emerge From Greenland's Melting Ice" .

Smithsonian . 5 August 2016.

Archived from the original on 20 August 2019 . Retrieved 20 August 2019 .

^ a b "Cataclysmic cargo: The hunt for four missing nuclear bombs after a B-52 crash" .

The Washington Post . 21 January 2018.

Archived from the original on 7 June 2020 . Retrieved 20 August 2019 .

^ Murphy, Matt (14 June 2022).

"Whisky Wars: Denmark and Canada strike deal to end 50-year row over Arctic island" .

BBC . Retrieved 10 January 2025 .

^ Stern , pp. 55–56 ^ Cowell, Alan (26 November 2008).

"Greenland Vote Favors Independence" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on 17 April 2009 . Retrieved 4 May 2010 .

^ "Vejledende folkeafstemning om selvstyre ? 25-11-2008" (in Kalaallisut). SermitValg. 26 November 2008. Archived from the original on 8 December 2008 . Retrieved 26 November 2008 .

^ "CIDOB – Secession and Counter-secession. An International Relations Perspective" .

CIDOB . p. 70.

Archived from the original on 27 January 2018 . Retrieved 19 May 2018 .

^ a b Description of the Greenlandic Self-Government Act on the webpage of the Danish Ministry of State Archived 22 September 2014 at the Wayback Machine "The Self-Government Act provides for the Self-Government authorities to assume a number of new fields of responsibility, such as administration of justice, including the establishment of courts of law; the prison and probation service; the police; the field relating to company law, accounting and auditing; mineral resource activities; aviation; law of legal capacity, family law and succession law; aliens and border controls; the working environment; as well as financial regulation and supervision, cf. Schedule I and II in the Annex to the Self-Government Act." ^ Greenland takes step toward independence from Denmark Archived 18 July 2018 at the Wayback Machine .

The Daily Telegraph (21 June 2009). Retrieved 29 September 2012.

^ "Nearly independent day" .

The Economist . 20 June 2009.

Archived from the original on 25 June 2009 . Retrieved 20 June 2009 .

^ "Greenland set for self-rule" .

The Australian . 19 June 2009. Archived from the original on 24 June 2009 . Retrieved 20 June 2009 .

^ Boswell, Randy (19 June 2009).

"Greenland takes big step towards full independence" .

Canwest News Services . Canada.com. Archived from the original on 24 June 2009 . Retrieved 20 June 2009 .

^ Naalakkersuisut/Government of Greenland, Ministry for Statehood and Foreign Affairs (February 2024).

"Greenland's Foreign, Security and Defense Policy 2024-2033—an Arctic Strategy" (PDF) . Translated by Cohen, Paul.

^ "Poll: 85% of Greenlanders don't want to join the U.S." Axios.

^ "European leaders ponder 'cruel paradox' of U.S. threatening tariffs and a possible land grab" .

PBS . Retrieved 3 February 2025 .

^ "Danmarks forsvarsminister om Grønland: – Trump kan ikke bare diktere" .

Aftenposten . Retrieved 5 March 2025 .

^ Zhuang, Yan (31 March 2025).

"Greenland's Prime Minister Says the U.S. Will Not 'Get' the Island" .

NYT . Retrieved 31 March 2025 .

^ "Greenland accuses US of 'foreign interference' ahead of second lady's visit" .

Le Monde . Retrieved 25 March 2025 .

^ "Greenland Furious, Will Boycott US Second Lady's Visit Amid Buyout Threats" . Retrieved 25 March 2025 .

^ "USA har planen klar for å overta Grønland" .

Aftenposten . Retrieved 11 April 2025 .

^ "US fires Greenland military base chief for 'undermining' Vance" .

BBC . Retrieved 17 April 2025 .

^ "The Island of Greenland" .

Hidden Journeys – explore the world from the air . Archived from the original on 14 July 2014 . Retrieved 8 July 2014 .

^ "Demographic Yearbook – Table 3: Population by sex, rate of population increase, surface area, and density" (PDF) .

United Nations Statistics Division . 2008.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 24 December 2010 . Retrieved 24 September 2010 .

^ "Boundary dispute" .

Global Affairs Canada . 14 June 2022.

Archived from the original on 16 June 2022 . Retrieved 17 July 2023 .

^ "WMO verifies −69.6°C Greenland temperature as Northern hemisphere record" .

World Meteorological Organization . 22 September 2020. Archived from the original on 18 December 2023.

^ "Nuuk, Greenland – Detailed climate information and monthly weather forecast" .

Weather Atlas . Yu Media Group.

Archived from the original on 17 August 2019 . Retrieved 17 August 2019 .

^ "IPCC Climate Change 2001: Working Group I: The Scientific Basis" . Grida.no. Archived from the original on 16 December 2007 . Retrieved 6 September 2010 .

^ Keisling, Benjamin; Nielsen, Lisbeth; Hvidberg, Christine; Nuterman, Roman; DeConto, Robert (2020).

"Pliocene–Pleistocene megafloods as a mechanism for Greenlandic megacanyon formation" .

GeoScienceWorld .

48 (7): 737– 741.

Bibcode : 2020Geo....48..737K .

doi : 10.1130/G47253.1 . Retrieved 19 November 2024 .

^ Schneider, D. (2003).

"American Scientist Online – Greenland or Whiteland?" . Sigma Xi.

Archived from the original on 10 May 2011 . Retrieved 3 March 2008 .

^ "Find Greenland Icecap Bridges Three Islands" . No. 97.

Ellensburg Daily Record .

The Associated Press . 24 October 1951. p. 6.

Archived from the original on 12 April 2016 . Retrieved 13 May 2012 .

^ "The National Park" . Greenland.com. Archived from the original on 27 June 2013 . Retrieved 18 June 2013 .

^ McCarthy, Michael (24 April 2007).

"An island made by global warming" .

The Independent . London. Archived from the original on 30 August 2008 . Retrieved 4 May 2010 .

^ "Place of the Year" . Blog.oup.com. 3 December 2007.

Archived from the original on 15 October 2009 . Retrieved 6 September 2010 .

^ Publications, Usa Int'L Business. Denmark Company Laws and Regulations Handbook: Strategic Information and Basic Laws. Place of Publication Not Identified: Intl Business Pubns Usa, 2015. 20–21. Print.

^ Revkin, Andrew C. (28 April 2008).

"Arctic Explorer Rebuts 'Warming Island' Critique" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on 27 September 2010 . Retrieved 6 September 2010 .

^ "Kaffeklubben Island | Island in Arctic Circle, History" .

Britannica . Retrieved 27 December 2024 .

^ Jancik, John (2004).

"Jensenland, historical timeline of the search for the northernmost point of land on Earth" .

American Alpine Club . Retrieved 27 December 2024 .

^ Burress, Charles (17 June 2004).

"BERKELEY / Romancing the north / Berkeley explorer may have stepped on ancient Thule" .

SFGATE . Retrieved 27 December 2024 .

^ "The 'Northernmost Island in the World' is actually an iceberg" .

LeisterGroup . 25 September 2022. Archived from the original on 15 November 2024 . Retrieved 27 December 2024 .

^ Höning, Dennis; Willeit, Matteo; Calov, Reinhard; Klemann, Volker; Bagge, Meike; Ganopolski, Andrey (27 March 2023). "Multistability and Transient Response of the Greenland Ice Sheet to Anthropogenic CO2 Emissions".

Geophysical Research Letters .

50 (6): e2022GL101827.

doi : 10.1029/2022GL101827 .

S2CID 257774870 .

^ Noël, B.; van Kampenhout, L.; Lenaerts, J. T. M.; van de Berg, W. J.; van den Broeke, M. R. (19 January 2021). "A 21st Century Warming Threshold for Sustained Greenland Ice Sheet Mass Loss".

Geophysical Research Letters .

48 (5): e2020GL090471.

Bibcode : 2021GeoRL..4890471N .

doi : 10.1029/2020GL090471 .

hdl : 2268/301943 .

S2CID 233632072 .

^ Kjeldsen, Kristian K.; Korsgaard, Niels J.; Bjørk, Anders A.; Khan, Shfaqat A.; Box, Jason E.; Funder, Svend; Larsen, Nicolaj K.; Bamber, Jonathan L.; Colgan, William; van den Broeke, Michiel; Siggaard-Andersen, Marie-Louise; Nuth, Christopher; Schomacker, Anders; Andresen, Camilla S.; Willerslev, Eske; Kjær, Kurt H. (16 December 2015). "Spatial and temporal distribution of mass loss from the Greenland Ice Sheet since AD 1900".

Nature .

528 (7582): 396– 400.

Bibcode : 2015Natur.528..396K .

doi : 10.1038/nature16183 .

hdl : 1874/329934 .

PMID 26672555 .

S2CID 4468824 .

^ Mouginot, Jérémie; Rignot, Eric; Bjørk, Anders A.; van den Broeke, Michiel; Millan, Romain; Morlighem, Mathieu; Noël, Brice; Scheuchl, Bernd; Wood, Michael (20 March 2019).

"Forty-six years of Greenland Ice Sheet mass balance from 1972 to 2018" .

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences .

116 (19): 9239– 9244.

Bibcode : 2019PNAS..116.9239M .

doi : 10.1073/pnas.1904242116 .

PMC 6511040 .

PMID 31010924 .

^ Stendel, Martin; Mottram, Ruth (22 September 2022).

"Guest post: How the Greenland ice sheet fared in 2022" .

Carbon Brief .

Archived from the original on 22 October 2022 . Retrieved 22 October 2022 .

^ Briner, Jason P.; Cuzzone, Joshua K.; Badgeley, Jessica A.; Young, Nicolás E.; Steig, Eric J.; Morlighem, Mathieu; Schlegel, Nicole-Jeanne; Hakim, Gregory J.; Schaefer, Joerg M.; Johnson, Jesse V.; Lesnek, Alia J.; Thomas, Elizabeth K.; Allan, Estelle; Bennike, Ole; Cluett, Allison A.; Csatho, Beata; de Vernal, Anne; Downs, Jacob; Larour, Eric; Nowicki, Sophie (30 September 2020). "Rate of mass loss from the Greenland Ice Sheet will exceed Holocene values this century".

Nature .

586 (7827): 70– 74.

Bibcode : 2020Natur.586...70B .

doi : 10.1038/s41586-020-2742-6 .

PMID 32999481 .

S2CID 222147426 .

^ "Greenland enters melt mode" .

Science News . 23 September 2013.

Archived from the original on 5 August 2012 . Retrieved 14 August 2012 .

^ "Record melt: Greenland lost 586 billion tons of ice in 2019" .

phys.org .

Archived from the original on 13 September 2020 . Retrieved 6 September 2020 .

^ Barnes, Adam (9 August 2021).

" 'Massive melting event' torpedoes billions of tons of ice the whole world depends on" .

The Hill .

Archived from the original on 25 August 2021 . Retrieved 24 August 2021 .

Ice cores show that these widespread melt events were really rare prior to the 21st century, but since then, we have had several melt seasons.

^ Patel, Kasha (19 August 2021).

"Rain falls at the summit of Greenland Ice Sheet for first time on record" .

Washington Post .

Archived from the original on 19 August 2021 . Retrieved 24 August 2021 .

Rain fell on and off for 13 hours at the station, but staff are not certain exactly how much rain fell...there are no rain gauges at the summit because no one expected it to rain at this altitude.

^ Shepherd, Andrew; Ivins, Erik; Rignot, Eric; Smith, Ben; van den Broeke, Michiel; Velicogna, Isabella ; Whitehouse, Pippa; Briggs, Kate; Joughin, Ian; Krinner, Gerhard; Nowicki, Sophie (12 March 2020).

"Mass balance of the Greenland Ice Sheet from 1992 to 2018" .

Nature .

579 (7798): 233– 239.

doi : 10.1038/s41586-019-1855-2 .

hdl : 2268/242139 .

ISSN 1476-4687 .

PMID 31822019 .

S2CID 219146922 .

Archived from the original on 23 October 2022 . Retrieved 23 October 2022 .

^ Bamber, Jonathan L; Westaway, Richard M; Marzeion, Ben; Wouters, Bert (1 June 2018).

"The land ice contribution to sea level during the satellite era" .

Environmental Research Letters .

13 (6): 063008.

Bibcode : 2018ERL....13f3008B .

doi : 10.1088/1748-9326/aac2f0 .

hdl : 1983/58218615-dedd-43a8-a8ea-79fb83130613 .

^ Fox-Kemper, B.; Hewitt, H.T.

; Xiao, C.; Aðalgeirsdóttir, G.; Drijfhout, S.S.; Edwards, T.L.; Golledge, N.R.; Hemer, M.; Kopp, R.E.; Krinner, G.; Mix, A. (2021).

"Chapter 9: Ocean, Cryosphere and Sea Level Change" (PDF) . In Masson-Delmotte, V.; Zhai, P.; Pirani, A.; Connors, S.L.; Péan, C.; Berger, S.; Caud, N.; Chen, Y.; Goldfarb, L. (eds.).

Climate Change 2021: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group I to the Sixth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change . AGU Fall Meeting Abstracts. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK and New York, NY, US.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 24 October 2022 . Retrieved 22 October 2022 .

^ a b Aschwanden, Andy; Fahnestock, Mark A.; Truffer, Martin; Brinkerhoff, Douglas J.; Hock, Regine; Khroulev, Constantine; Mottram, Ruth; Khan, S. Abbas (19 June 2019).

"Contribution of the Greenland Ice Sheet to sea level over the next millennium" .

Science Advances .

5 (6): 218– 222.

Bibcode : 2019SciA....5.9396A .

doi : 10.1126/sciadv.aav9396 .

PMC 6584365 .

PMID 31223652 .

^ "Melting Greenland ice sheet may affect global ocean circulation, future climate" . Phys.org. 22 January 2016.

Archived from the original on 19 August 2023 . Retrieved 25 January 2016 .

^ Yang, Qian; Dixon, Timothy H.; Myers, Paul G.; Bonin, Jennifer; Chambers, Don; van den Broeke, M. R.; Ribergaard, Mads H.; Mortensen, John (22 January 2016).

"Recent increases in Arctic freshwater flux affects Labrador Sea convection and Atlantic overturning circulation" .

Nature Communications .

7 10525.

Bibcode : 2016NatCo...710525Y .

doi : 10.1038/ncomms10525 .

PMC 4736158 .

PMID 26796579 .

^ Bakker, P; Schmittner, A; Lenaerts, JT; Abe-Ouchi, A; Bi, D; van den Broeke, MR; Chan, WL; Hu, A; Beadling, RL; Marsland, SJ; Mernild, SH; Saenko, OA; Swingedouw, D; Sullivan, A; Yin, J (11 November 2016). "Fate of the Atlantic Meridional Overturning Circulation: Strong decline under continued warming and Greenland melting".

Geophysical Research Letters .

43 (23): 12, 252– 12, 260.

Bibcode : 2016GeoRL..4312252B .

doi : 10.1002/2016GL070457 .

hdl : 10150/622754 .

S2CID 133069692 .

^ Canadell, J.G.; Monteiro, P.M.S.; Costa, M.H.; Cotrim da Cunha, L.; Cox, P.M.; Eliseev, A.V.; Henson, S.; Ishii, M.; Jaccard, S.; Koven, C.; Lohila, A. (2021).

"Global Carbon and Other Biogeochemical Cycles and Feedbacks" (PDF) . In Masson-Delmotte, V.; Zhai, P.; Piran, A.; Connors, S.L.; Péan, C.; Berger, S.; Caud, N.; Chen, Y.; Goldfarb, L. (eds.).

Climate Change 2021: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group I to the Sixth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change . AGU Fall Meeting Abstracts. pp.

673– 816.

Bibcode : 2021AGUFM.U13B..05K .

doi : 10.1017/9781009157896.007 .

ISBN 978-1-009-15789-6 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 6 April 2023 . Retrieved 20 March 2024 .

^ "How Greenland would look without its ice sheet" .

BBC News . 14 December 2017.

Archived from the original on 7 December 2023 . Retrieved 7 December 2023 .

^ Armstrong McKay, David; Abrams, Jesse; Winkelmann, Ricarda; Sakschewski, Boris; Loriani, Sina; Fetzer, Ingo; Cornell, Sarah; Rockström, Johan; Staal, Arie; Lenton, Timothy (9 September 2022).

"Exceeding 1.5°C global warming could trigger multiple climate tipping points" .

Science .

377 (6611): eabn7950.

doi : 10.1126/science.abn7950 .

hdl : 10871/131584 .

ISSN 0036-8075 .

PMID 36074831 .

S2CID 252161375 .

Archived from the original on 14 November 2022 . Retrieved 22 October 2022 .

^ Armstrong McKay, David (9 September 2022).

"Exceeding 1.5°C global warming could trigger multiple climate tipping points – paper explainer" .

climatetippingpoints.info .

Archived from the original on 18 July 2023 . Retrieved 2 October 2022 .

^ Bochow, Nils; Poltronieri, Anna; Robinson, Alexander; Montoya, Marisa; Rypdal, Martin; Boers, Niklas (18 October 2023).

"Overshooting the critical threshold for the Greenland ice sheet" .

Nature .

622 (7983): 528– 536.

Bibcode : 2023Natur.622..528B .

doi : 10.1038/s41586-023-06503-9 .

PMC 10584691 .

PMID 37853149 .

^ Christ, Andrew J.; Rittenour, Tammy M.; Bierman, Paul R.; Keisling, Benjamin A.; Knutz, Paul C.; Thomsen, Tonny B.; Keulen, Nynke; Fosdick, Julie C.; Hemming, Sidney R.; Tison, Jean-Louis; Blard, Pierre-Henri; Steffensen, Jørgen P.; Caffee, Marc W.; Corbett, Lee B.; Dahl-Jensen, Dorthe; Dethier, David P.; Hidy, Alan J.; Perdrial, Nicolas; Peteet, Dorothy M.; Steig, Eric J.; Thomas, Elizabeth K. (20 July 2023). "Deglaciation of northwestern Greenland during Marine Isotope Stage 11".

Science .

381 (6655): 330– 335.

Bibcode : 2023Sci...381..330C .

doi : 10.1126/science.ade4248 .

OSTI 1992577 .

PMID 37471537 .

S2CID 259985096 .

^ a b Saros, Jasmine E.; Hazukova, Vaclava; Northington, Robert M.; McGowan, Suzanne (21 January 2025).

"Abrupt transformation of West Greenland lakes following compound climate extremes associated with atmospheric rivers" .

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America .

122 (4): e2413855122.

Bibcode : 2025PNAS..12213855S .

doi : 10.1073/pnas.2413855122 .

PMC 11789078 .

PMID 39835905 .

^ "Banded iron formation (BIF) deposits" (PDF) . 9 March 2013. Archived from the original (PDF) on 9 March 2013 . Retrieved 20 April 2021 .

^ "Mineralienatlas – Fossilienatlas" .

www.mineralienatlas.de (in German).

Archived from the original on 10 June 2024 . Retrieved 20 April 2021 .

^ Marzola, Marco; Mateus, Octávio; Milàn, Jesper; Clemmensen, Lars B. (3 March 2018).

"A review of Palaeozoic and Mesozoic tetrapods from Greenland" .

Bulletin of the Geological Society of Denmark .

66 : 21– 46.

Bibcode : 2018BuGSD..66...21M .

doi : 10.37570/bgsd-2018-66-02 .

ISSN 2245-7070 .

^ López-Rojas, Víctor; Clemmensen, Lars B.; Milàn, Jesper; Wings, Oliver; Klein, Nicole; Mateus, Octávio (30 September 2022).

"A new phytosaur species (Archosauriformes) from the Upper Triassic of Jameson Land, central East Greenland" .

Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology .

42 (3) e2181086.

Bibcode : 2022JVPal..42E1086L .

doi : 10.1080/02724634.2023.2181086 .

ISSN 0272-4634 .

S2CID 257756028 .

^ Beccari, Victor; Mateus, Octávio; Wings, Oliver; Milàn, Jesper; Clemmensen, Lars B. (November 2021).

"Issi saaneq gen. et sp. nov.—A New Sauropodomorph Dinosaur from the Late Triassic (Norian) of Jameson Land, Central East Greenland" .

Diversity .

13 (11): 561.

Bibcode : 2021Diver..13..561B .

doi : 10.3390/d13110561 .

hdl : 10362/128951 .

ISSN 1424-2818 .

^ Lallensack, Jens; Klein, Hendrik; Milán, Jesper; Wings, Oliver; Mateus, Octávio; Clemmensen, Lars (2017).

"Sauropodomorph dinosaur trackways from the Fleming Fjord Formation of East Greenland: evidence for Late Triassic sauropods" .

Acta Palaeontologica Polonica .

62 .

doi : 10.4202/app.00374.2017 .

hdl : 10362/33146 .

ISSN 0567-7920 .

S2CID 91179289 .

^ Dinerstein, Eric; Olson, David; Joshi, Anup; Vynne, Carly; Burgess, Neil D.; Wikramanayake, Eric; Hahn, Nathan; Palminteri, Suzanne; Hedao, Prashant; Noss, Reed; Hansen, Matt; Locke, Harvey; Ellis, Erle C; Jones, Benjamin; Barber, Charles Victor; Hayes, Randy; Kormos, Cyril; Martin, Vance; Crist, Eileen; Sechrest, Wes; Price, Lori; Baillie, Jonathan E. M.; Weeden, Don; Suckling, Kierán; Davis, Crystal; Sizer, Nigel; Moore, Rebecca; Thau, David; Birch, Tanya; Potapov, Peter; Turubanova, Svetlana; Tyukavina, Alexandra; de Souza, Nadia; Pintea, Lilian; Brito, José C.; Llewellyn, Othman A.; Miller, Anthony G.; Patzelt, Annette; Ghazanfar, Shahina A.; Timberlake, Jonathan; Klöser, Heinz; Shennan-Farpón, Yara; Kindt, Roeland; Lillesø, Jens-Peter Barnekow; van Breugel, Paulo; Graudal, Lars; Voge, Maianna; Al-Shammari, Khalaf F.; Saleem, Muhammad (2017).

"An Ecoregion-Based Approach to Protecting Half the Terrestrial Realm" .

BioScience .

67 (6): 534– 545.

doi : 10.1093/biosci/bix014 .

ISSN 0006-3568 .

PMC 5451287 .

PMID 28608869 .

^ a b "Greenland Wildlife" .

Redaction . The Great Danish Encyclopedia. 2014.

Archived from the original on 13 March 2016 . Retrieved 8 October 2015 .

^ "Greenland".

Encyclopædia Britannica , Eleventh Edition.

^ "Animal life in Greenland – an introduction by the tourist board" .

Greenland Guide . Narsaq Tourist Office. n.d. Archived from the original on 27 April 2012 . Retrieved 1 May 2012 .

^ Møller, P. R.; Nielsen, J.; Knudsen, S. W.; Poulsen, J. Y.; Sünksen, K.; Jørgensen, O. A. (2010).

"A checklist of the fish fauna of Greenland waters" .

Zootaxa .

2378 (1): 1– 84.

ISBN 978-1-86977-468-4 .

OCLC 551668689 .

^ "Economy and Industry in Greenland – Naalakkersuisut" .

naalakkersuisut.gl .

Archived from the original on 2 April 2019 . Retrieved 17 August 2019 .

^ Durinck, Jan; Falk, Knud (1996).

"The distribution and abundance of seabirds off southwestern Greenland in autumn and winter 1988-1989" .

Polar Research .

15 (1): 23– 42.

Bibcode : 1996PolRe..15...23D .

doi : 10.3402/polar.v15i1.6634 .

^ Mehlum, Fridtjof (April 1989).

Summer distribution of seabirds in northern Greenland and Barents Seas . Skrifter. Vol. 191.

Norsk Polarinstitutt .

ISBN 82-90307-53-5 .

^ "Greenland" . PeakVisor.

Archived from the original on 12 October 2023 . Retrieved 2 October 2023 .

^ Seabird Harvest in the Arctic – Prepared by the Circumpolar Seabird Group (CBird) (Report). Conservation of Arctic Flora and Fauna. September 2008.

Archived from the original on 29 September 2023 . Retrieved 2 October 2023 .

^ "Inatsisartut" (in Kalaallisut). Inatsisartut.gl. Archived from the original on 17 August 2018 . Retrieved 29 December 2020 .

^ "The executive power is vested in the King." The Constitution of Denmark – Section 3.

Archived 10 July 2011 at the Wayback Machine ^ "The body of Ministers shall form the Council of State, in which the Successor to the Throne shall have a seat when he is of age. The Council of State shall be presided over by the King..." The Constitution of Denmark – Section 17.

Archived 10 July 2011 at the Wayback Machine ^ The Monarchy today Archived 15 February 2015 at the Wayback Machine – The Danish Monarchy (kongehuset.dk). Access date: 16 June 2012 ^ "The King shall not be answerable for his actions; his person shall be sacrosanct." The Constitution of Denmark – Section 13.

Archived 10 July 2011 at the Wayback Machine ^ Jakobsen, Uffe; Larsen, Henrik (2 January 2024).

"The development of Greenland's self-government and independence in the shadow of the unitary state" .

The Polar Journal .

14 (1): 9– 10, 20– 21.

Bibcode : 2024PolJ...14....9J .

doi : 10.1080/2154896X.2024.2342117 .

ISSN 2154-896X .

^ Statsministeriet (29 November 1978), Lov om Grønlands hjemmestyre , retrieved 30 January 2025 ^ Statsministeriet (6 December 2009), Lov om Grønlands Selvstyre , retrieved 30 January 2025 ^ Jonatan Robbert, Larsen (7 January 2025).

"OVERBLIK: Hvad bestemmer Grønland selv?" .

DR . Retrieved 7 January 2025 .

^ Greenland votes for more autonomy , Archived 27 November 2008 at the Wayback Machine BBC News , 26 November 2008 ^ "EU Relations with Greenland" . European Union.

Archived from the original on 9 June 2011 . Retrieved 3 October 2020 .

^ "Overseas Countries and Territories (OCT)" . European Union.

Archived from the original on 13 August 2011 . Retrieved 3 October 2020 .

^ Folketinget – Folketinget.dk Archived 28 June 2015 at the Wayback Machine . Ft.dk. Retrieved on 21 June 2016.

^ "Múte Egede er ny formand for Naalakkersuisut" .

KNR (in Danish).

Archived from the original on 25 April 2022 . Retrieved 23 April 2021 .

^ "Arctic" .

Danish Ministry of Defence . 19 February 2021.

^ "Trump reportedly wants to 'buy' Greenland. This is what it's like at the US's Arctic base there" .

Business Insider . 16 August 2019.

Archived from the original on 19 August 2019 . Retrieved 19 August 2019 .

^ Weber, Joachim, ed. (2020).

Handbook on Geopolitics and Security in the Arctic . Springer. p. 79.

^ Hansen, H. C.

(16 November 1957).

"Danish Prime Minister Gives Tacit Go-Ahead For U.S. Nuclear Weapons in Greenland" . The Nautilus Institute. Archived from the original on 6 November 2007 . Retrieved 20 March 2009 .

^ "A Top-Secret US Military Base Will Melt Out of the Greenland Ice Sheet" .

VICE Magazine . 9 March 2019.

Archived from the original on 20 August 2019 . Retrieved 20 August 2019 .

^ "The Cold War's Missing Atom Bombs" .

Der Spiegel . 14 November 2008.

Archived from the original on 27 June 2019 . Retrieved 20 August 2019 .

^ "US B-52 nuclear bomber crash in Greenland 51 years ago has ill Danes seeking compensation" .

Fox News . 3 June 2019.

Archived from the original on 8 June 2019 . Retrieved 20 August 2019 .

^ Corera, Gordon (10 November 2008).

"Mystery of lost US nuclear bomb" . BBC News.

Archived from the original on 23 October 2017 . Retrieved 22 August 2019 .

^ "US left nuclear weapon under ice in Greenland" .

The Daily Telegraph . 11 November 2008.

Archived from the original on 20 August 2019 . Retrieved 20 August 2019 .

^ Winther, Bent (6 January 2025).

"Selvstændighed? Mette Frederiksen har det stærkeste kort på hånden" .

Berlingske . Retrieved 6 January 2025 .

^ "Redegørelse om rigsfællesskabet 2024. Afgivet af statsministeren (Mette Frederiksen) den 28 February 2024. ft.dk" (PDF) .

^ Cite error: The named reference jrc20190828 was invoked but never defined (see the help page ).

^ Cite error: The named reference hannestad20140324 was invoked but never defined (see the help page ).

^ a b Walsh, Maurice (28 January 2017).

" 'You can't live in a museum': the battle for Greenland's uranium" .

The Guardian .

ISSN 0261-3077 .

Archived from the original on 29 January 2017 . Retrieved 28 January 2017 .

^ a b "Greenland" .

CIA World Factbook .

Archived from the original on 9 January 2021 . Retrieved 15 May 2007 .

^ COHEN, LI (16 July 2021).

"Greenland halts new oil exploration to combat climate change and focus on sustainable development" . CBC.

Archived from the original on 19 July 2021 . Retrieved 20 July 2021 .

^ a b Gettleman, Jeffrey ; Tekeli, Maya; Buckley, Chris (3 March 2025).

"For Greenland's Minerals, the Harsh Reality Behind the Glittering Promise" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 5 March 2025 .

^ "Greenland's red hot labour market" .

Nordic Labour Journal . 12 October 2011.

Archived from the original on 1 February 2013 . Retrieved 10 February 2013 .

^ Chinese Workers—in Greenland?

Archived 13 February 2013 at the Wayback Machine 10 February 2013 BusinessWeek .

^ "Greenland Rubies: What We Know At This Point | National Jeweler" .

www.nationaljeweler.com .

Archived from the original on 17 August 2019 . Retrieved 17 August 2019 .

^ "Greenland – Transportation" .

www.iexplore.com .

Archived from the original on 10 October 2018 . Retrieved 10 October 2018 .

^ "ATV-sporet mellem Sisimiut og Kangerlussuaq bliver færdig næste år" (in Danish). Qeqqata Kommunia. 25 May 2023.

Archived from the original on 30 December 2023 . Retrieved 30 December 2023 .

^ "ATV-sporet mellem Kangerlussuaq og Sisimiut er færdig" (in Danish). Sermitsiaq. 25 September 2011.

Archived from the original on 22 June 2023 . Retrieved 30 December 2023 .

^ "Hönnun vegar á milli Sisimiut og Kangerlussuaq – verkfræðilegar áskoranir í óbyggðum Grænlands" (in Icelandic). Verkís. 3 July 2023.

Archived from the original on 30 December 2023 . Retrieved 30 December 2023 .

^ "Forslag: Naalakkersuisut bør punge ud til grusvej til omkring 500 mio. kr" (in Danish). Sermitsiaq. 27 March 2023.

Archived from the original on 30 December 2023 . Retrieved 30 December 2023 .

^ "Nuuk Airport" .

www.mit.gl .

Archived from the original on 3 September 2019 . Retrieved 21 September 2019 .

^ "tripsta" . Archived from the original on 21 September 2019 . Retrieved 3 January 2020 .

^ "Mittarfeqarfiit, Grønlands Lufthavne, Greenland Airports Today's Flights Airports Kangerlussuaq airport – mit.gl" .

www.mit.gl .

Archived from the original on 22 September 2019 . Retrieved 21 September 2019 .

^ "City, high-rise apartments, cosy atmosphere, culture, rock, gourmet restaurants, cafés, fashion outlets, art, the national museum and the university – all the ingredients of a capital – Nuuk" .

www.airgreenland.gl .

Archived from the original on 21 September 2019 . Retrieved 21 September 2019 .

^ " "Delays in Ilulissat Airport Construction Project Push Opening to 2026" | en.365Nyt" . 28 May 2024 . Retrieved 14 October 2024 .

[ permanent dead link ] ^ "Ilulissat Airport" .

www.mit.gl .

Archived from the original on 17 September 2019 . Retrieved 21 September 2019 .

^ Woodman, Georg (18 October 2017).

2033-The Century After: How the World Would Look/Be If Nazi Germany & Empire Japan Had Won World War II . Strategic Book Publishing & Rights Agency.

ISBN 978-1-68181-946-4 .

Archived from the original on 20 September 2022 . Retrieved 18 September 2022 .

^ "Tourism Statistics Report 2019, Greenland" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 4 February 2021 . Retrieved 12 January 2022 .

^ "Greenland's Economy Autumn 2020, Summary" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 17 April 2021 . Retrieved 27 March 2021 .

^ "Greenland's economy is poised to rebound in 2021, 2 June 2020" . 2 June 2020.

Archived from the original on 22 May 2023 . Retrieved 27 March 2021 .

^ Stephanie Vermillion (24 March 2021).

"Greenland Is Approaching Tourism Slowly—And Taking Lessons from Iceland, 24 March 2021" .

Archived from the original on 16 January 2022 . Retrieved 20 January 2022 .

^ "Geologist warns prospect of a mineral bonanza in Greenland is a mirage" .

Cbs News . Retrieved 19 April 2025 .

^ "Greenland in Figures 2021" (PDF) .

Greenland in Figures 2021 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 2 June 2021 . Retrieved 8 December 2021 .

^ "Greenland" . Stalvik.com.

Archived from the original on 23 September 2010 . Retrieved 6 September 2010 .

^ Moltke, Ida; Fumagalli, Matteo; Korneliussen, Thorfinn (2015).

"Uncovering the Genetic History of the Present-Day Greenlandic Population" .

American Journal of Human Genetics .

96 (1): 54– 69.

doi : 10.1016/j.ajhg.2014.11.012 .

PMC 4289681 .

PMID 25557782 .

^ "Greenland" .

citypopulation.de .

Archived from the original on 30 August 2018 . Retrieved 22 August 2021 .

^ "Danish doubts over Greenland vote" .

BBC News . 27 November 2008.

Archived from the original on 7 December 2012 . Retrieved 10 February 2013 .

^ Kleinschmidt, Samuel 1968 (1851): Grammatik der grønlændischen Sprache : mit teilweisem Einschluss des Labradordialekts. Hildesheim : Olms, 1968.

^ "Travelling in Greenland" . Greenland Representation to the EU, Greenland Home Rule Government. Archived from the original on 16 May 2014.

^ Mennecier, Philippe (1978).

Le tunumiisut, dialecte inuit du Groenland oriental: description et analyse , Collection linguistique, 78, Societé de linguistique de Paris.

^ "Atlas of the world's languages in danger" .

unesdoc.unesco.org .

Archived from the original on 11 November 2020 . Retrieved 21 February 2023 .

^ "Sermersooq will secure Eastern Greenlandic" (in Danish).

Kalaallit Nunaata Radioa . 6 January 2010.

Archived from the original on 16 May 2016 . Retrieved 19 May 2010 .

^ "Greenland, Religion and Social Profile | National Profiles | International Data" .

Thearda.com . 21 June 2009.

Archived from the original on 24 September 2017 . Retrieved 18 June 2016 .

^ "Table: Christian Population as Percentages of Total Population by Country | Pew Research Center" . 19 December 2011.

Archived from the original on 11 May 2017 . Retrieved 27 September 2017 .

^ Taboo, Personal and Collective Representations: Origin and Positioning Within Cultural Complexes . Taylor & Francis. 2019.

ISBN 978-1-351-03988-8 .

Archived from the original on 20 September 2022 . Retrieved 18 September 2022 .

^ Sørensen, Leif Kiil (29 November 2000).

"Grønlandsk bibel præsenteret | Kristeligt Dagblad" . Kristeligt-dagblad.dk.

Archived from the original on 11 May 2011 . Retrieved 6 September 2010 .

^ "Bells ring a wake-up call for climate justice" .

World Council of Churches . 14 December 2009. Archived from the original on 25 March 2012 . Retrieved 30 August 2010 .

^ "Grønland, Grundloven og Gejstligheden" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 25 April 2012 . Retrieved 30 April 2012 .

^ "Constitution of Denmark – Section IV" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 1 March 2016 . Retrieved 22 September 2016 .

The Evangelical Lutheran Church shall be the Established Church of Denmark, and, as such, it shall be supported by the State.

^ "The only Muslim in Greenland who fasts for 21 hours" .

The Jazba Blog . 8 August 2011. Archived from the original on 1 August 2020 . Retrieved 26 January 2020 .

^ "The Suicide Capital of the World" .

Slate . 9 October 2009.

Archived from the original on 4 March 2013 . Retrieved 13 March 2013 .

^ "Rising suicide rate baffles Greenland" .

Archived from the original on 23 March 2013 . Retrieved 13 March 2013 .

^ "Greenland profile – Overview" Archived 18 September 2018 at the Wayback Machine .

BBC News .

^ Aage, H. (2012).

"Alcohol in Greenland 1951–2010: consumption, mortality, prices" .

International Journal of Circumpolar Health .

71 : 18444.

doi : 10.3402/ijch.v71i0.18444 .

PMC 3525923 .

PMID 23256091 .

^ Madsen, M. H.; Grønbæk, M.; Bjerregaard, P.; Becker, U. (2005).

"Urbanization, migration and alcohol use in a population of Greenland Inuit" .

International Journal of Circumpolar Health .

64 (3): 234– 45.

doi : 10.3402/ijch.v64i3.17987 .

PMID 16050317 .

^ Bjorn-Mortensen, K.; Ladefoged, K; Obel, N.; Helleberg, M. (2013).

"The HIV epidemic in Greenland – a slow spreading infection among adult heterosexual Greenlanders" .

Int J Circumpolar Health .

7232 : 19558.

doi : 10.3402/ijch.v72i0.19558 .

PMC 3577920 .

PMID 23431117 .

^ "Nye tilfælde af HIV blandt unge" .

Naalakkersuisut . 13 October 2019. Archived from the original on 23 November 2019 . Retrieved 22 November 2019 .

^ "Arbejde" . europas-lande.dk. Archived from the original on 23 November 2019 . Retrieved 22 November 2019 .

^ "Unemployment rate" . Statistics Greenland. 2017 . Retrieved 22 November 2019 .

[ permanent dead link ] ^ "Euro area unemployment at 8.7%, December 2017" (PDF) .

Eurostat .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 12 February 2018 . Retrieved 22 November 2019 .

^ "Inuit Greenlanders demand answers over Danish birth control scandal" .

BBC News . 30 September 2022.

Archived from the original on 1 October 2022 . Retrieved 1 October 2022 .

^ "Grønland har ansvar for 15 spiralsager" . Sermitsiaq . Retrieved 20 October 2024 .

^ "§2, Imm. 3, Qitiusumik Inunnik Nalunaarsuiffik pillugu inatsisip (CPR pillugu inatsit) allanngortinneqarneranik inatsisit Kalaallit Nunaannut atuutilersinneqarnerannik peqqussut (Greenlandic)" (PDF) . Retrieved 1 September 2020 .

^ "§2, Stk 3., Anordning om ikrafttræden for Grønland af love om ændring af lov om Det Centrale Personregister (Danish)" . Retrieved 1 September 2020 .

^ "Greenland (Denmark)" .

database.ilga.org . Retrieved 30 December 2024 .

^ Hessel , p. 20 ^ Hessel , p. 21 ^ "The making of a tupilak and its consequences" .

Museon .

Archived from the original on 5 January 2022 . Retrieved 5 January 2022 .

^ "Kalaallit Nunaata Radioa | KNR" .

knr.gl .

Archived from the original on 28 January 2023 . Retrieved 19 April 2021 .

^ "Nanoq Media" .

nanoqmedia.gl .

Archived from the original on 19 April 2021 . Retrieved 19 April 2021 .

^ a b "Drum dance and drum song – Trap Greenland" . Retrieved 15 May 2025 .

^ "Qilaat - The Greenlandic frame drum" .

greenlandicpopularmusic . Retrieved 15 May 2025 .

^ "Inuit drum dancing and singing - UNESCO Intangible Cultural Heritage" .

ich.unesco.org . Retrieved 15 May 2025 .

^ "UNESCO honours Inuit drum dancing" .

United Nations Western Europe . 15 December 2021 . Retrieved 15 May 2025 .

^ "Denmark.dk: Official website - Denmark - Greenland: an Overview" . 12 February 2006. Archived from the original on 12 February 2006 . Retrieved 15 May 2025 .

^ "Kalattuut – Greenlandic style – Trap Greenland" . Retrieved 15 May 2025 .

^ "Kalattuut – Greenlandic polka" .

greenlandicpopularmusic . Retrieved 15 May 2025 .

^ "Music in Greenland" .

Visit Greenland . Retrieved 15 May 2025 .

^ Bours, Etienne (2000). "Sealskin Hits". In Broughton, Simon; Ellingham, Mark (eds.).

World Music, Vol. 1: Africa, Europe and the Middle East . McConnachie, James and Duane, Orla (Ed.).

Rough Guides . p. –145.

ISBN 1-85828-636-0 ^ "Roskilde-aktuelle Nanook: et fænomen fra Grønland" .

gaffa.dk (in Danish). 7 January 2019 . Retrieved 15 May 2025 .

^ "Elsner bræður og Ísbjarnarguðinn - RÚV.is" .

RÚV . 25 April 2015 . Retrieved 15 May 2025 .

^ "Interview: Simon Lynge - singer/songwriter" .

The Scotsman . 14 January 2010 . Retrieved 15 May 2025 .

^ "Greenland – Greenlandic cuisine – Official Greenland Travel Guide" . 14 April 2010. Archived from the original on 14 April 2010 . Retrieved 16 July 2019 .

^ "Greenland – Traditional Greenlandic food – Official Greenland Travel Guide" . 27 March 2010. Archived from the original on 27 March 2010 . Retrieved 16 July 2019 .

^ "Greenland – Greenlandic coffee – Official Greenland Travel Guide" . 30 March 2010. Archived from the original on 30 March 2010 . Retrieved 28 July 2019 .

^ Wilcox and Latif , p. 109 ^ Wilcox and Latif , p. 110 ^ a b Henao, Luis Andres (6 March 2025).

"Most Greenlanders are Lutheran, 300 years after a missionary brought the faith to the remote island" .

Associated Press .

^ Lutheran World Federation 2023 Membership Figures (Report). June 2024 . Retrieved 10 March 2025 .

Bibliography Bardarson, I. (ed. Jónsson, F.) "Det gamle Grønlands beskrivelse af Ívar Bárðarson (Ivar Bårdssön)", (Copenhagen, 1930) (in Danish) .

CIA World Factbook , 2000.

Conkling, P. W.

et al.

(2011). The Fate of Greenland: Lessons from Abrupt Climate Change, co-authored with Richard Alley, Wallace Broecker and George Denton, with photographs by Gary Comer, MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts.

Hessel, Ingo (2006).

Arctic Spirit . Vancouver, BC: Douglas and McIntyre.

ISBN 978-1-55365-189-5 .

Lund, S. (1959). "The Marine Algae of East Greenland. 1. Taxonomical Part".

Meddr Gronland .

156 (1): 1– 245.

Lund, S. (1959). "The Marine Algae of East Greenland. 11. Geographic Distribution".

Meddr Gronland .

156 : 1– 70.

Oldendow, Knud.(1958). "Printing in Greenland".

Libri: International Journal of Libraries & Information Services 8 (3/4): 223–62.

Sowa, F. (2013). "Indigenous Peoples and the Institutionalization of the Convention on Biological Diversity in Greenland".

Arctic Anthropology .

50 (1): 72– 88.

doi : 10.3368/aa.50.1.72 .

S2CID 143294645 .

Sowa, F. (2013).

Relations of Power & Domination in a World Polity: The Politics of Indigeneity & National Identity in Greenland.

In: Heininen, L.

Arctic Yearbook 2013. The Arctic of regions vs. the globalized Arctic.

Akureyri: Northern Research Forum, pp. 184–198.

www.arcticyearbook.com/ay2013 .

Archived 19 February 2015 at the Wayback Machine Sowa, F. (2014).

Greenland.

in: Hund, A.

Antarctica and the Arctic Circle: A Geographic Encyclopedia of the Earth's Polar Regions.

Santa Barbara, California: ABC-CLIO, pp. 312–316.

Steffen, Konrad , N. Cullen, and R. Huff (2005). "Climate variability and trends along the western slope of the Greenland Ice Sheet during 1991–2004", Proceedings of the 85th American Meteorological Society Annual Meeting (San Diego, California).

Stern, Pamela (2004).

Historical Dictionary of the Inuit . Lanham, Maryland: The Scarecrow Press.

ISBN 0-8108-5058-3 .

OCLC 54768167 .

Wilcox, Jonathan; Latif, Zawiah Abdul (2007).

Cultures of the World: Iceland . Marshall Cavendish.

ISBN 978-0-7614-2074-3 .

Archived from the original on 10 June 2024 . Retrieved 18 September 2022 .

External links Government of Greenland official website (in Danish and Kalaallisut only) Greenland at Denmark.dk , the official website of Denmark.

Visit Greenland – the official Greenlandic Tourist Board Inuit Circumpolar Council Greenland Brown, Robert (1880).

"Greenland" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. XI (9th ed.). pp.

166– 171.

Nansen, Fridtjof Wedel-Jarlsberg (1911).

"Greenland" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 12 (11th ed.). pp.

542– 548.

72°00′N 40°00′W ﻿ / ﻿ 72.000°N 40.000°W ﻿ / 72.000; -40.000 v t e Greenland articles Greenland is an autonomous constituent country of the Kingdom of Denmark History Timeline Paleo-Eskimo Dorset culture Thule people Norse Colonization Eastern Settlement Western Settlement Language Skræling Hans Egede Treaty of Kiel Erik the Red's Land Fridtjof Nansen Land World War II Thule accident County of Greenland Home rule Autonomy (self-rule) Cartographic expeditions Geography Climate change Fjords Geology Glaciers Ice sheet Islands by area Mountains National park Rivers Straits Towns and villages Wildlife Politics Administrative divisions Elections Independence movement Foreign relations High Commissioner Parliament Law enforcement LGBT rights Military Political parties Ruling monarchs Political leader Governor (1728–1730, 1925–1979) Inspector (1782–1924) Prime Minister (1979–current) Economy Bank Companies Krone (currency) Fishing industry Mining National Bank Taxation Telecommunications Tourism Transport Society Demographics Inuit Inughuit Kalaallit Tunumiit Danes Danish Greenlander Notable individuals artists Inuit Suicide Culture Art Cuisine Hunting Jante Law Mythology Language Music Public holidays Religion Sports Symbols Coat of arms Flag National (civic) anthem Royal anthem Outline Index Category Links to related articles v t e Administrative divisions of Greenland (since 2018) Municipalities Avannaata Kujalleq Qeqertalik Qeqqata Sermersooq Unincorporated areas Pituffik Space Base Northeast Greenland National Park v t e Nordic Council Full members Denmark Finland Iceland Norway Sweden Associate members Åland Faroe Islands Greenland Observer / offices Sápmi Estonia ( identity ) Latvia Lithuania Schleswig-Holstein v t e Nordic countries States Denmark Finland Iceland Norway Sweden Autonomous countries Åland Faroe Islands Greenland ( Territory ) Special status / cultural area Svalbard Sápmi Related Climate of the Nordic countries Comparison of the Nordic countries Nordic Council Nordic Cross flag Subdivisions of the Nordic countries LGBT in the Nordic countries Nordic diplomatic missions See also Norsemen Old Norse Nordic identity in Estonia Scandinavia Category v t e Dependencies of European Union states Denmark Faroe Islands Greenland France Clipperton Island French Polynesia French Southern and Antarctic Lands Adélie Land Île Amsterdam Crozet Islands Îles Éparses Kerguelen Islands Île Saint-Paul New Caledonia Saint Barthélemy Saint Martin Saint Pierre and Miquelon Wallis and Futuna Netherlands Aruba Caribbean Netherlands Curaçao Sint Maarten v t e Outlying territories of European countries Territories under European sovereignty but closer to or on continents other than Europe (see inclusion criteria for further information).

Denmark Greenland Faroe Islands France Clipperton Island French Guiana French Polynesia French Southern and Antarctic Lands Adélie Land Crozet Islands Kerguelen Islands Saint Paul and Amsterdam Islands Amsterdam Island Saint Paul Island Scattered Islands in the Indian Ocean Bassas da India Europa Island Glorioso Islands Geyser Shoal Juan de Nova Island Tromelin Island Guadeloupe Martinique Mayotte New Caledonia Réunion Saint Barthélemy Saint Martin Saint Pierre and Miquelon Wallis and Futuna Netherlands Aruba Caribbean Netherlands Bonaire Saba Sint Eustatius Curaçao Sint Maarten Norway Bouvet Island Peter I Island Queen Maud Land Portugal Azores Madeira Spain Canary Islands Ceuta Melilla Plazas de Soberanía Alboran Island Alhucemas Islands Chafarinas Islands Velez Islands United Kingdom Anguilla Bermuda British Antarctic Territory British Virgin Islands Cayman Islands Falkland Islands Montserrat Pitcairn Islands Saint Helena, Ascension and Tristan da Cunha Ascension Island Saint Helena Tristan da Cunha South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands Turks and Caicos Islands v t e Countries and dependencies of North America Sovereign states Entire Antigua and Barbuda The Bahamas Barbados Belize Canada Costa Rica Cuba Dominica Dominican Republic El Salvador Grenada Guatemala Haiti Honduras Jamaica Mexico Nicaragua Panama Saint Kitts and Nevis Saint Lucia Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Trinidad and Tobago United States In part Colombia San Andrés and Providencia France Guadeloupe Martinique Caribbean Netherlands Bonaire Saba Sint Eustatius Venezuela Nueva Esparta Federal Dependencies Dependencies Denmark Greenland France Clipperton Island St. Barthélemy St. Martin St. Pierre and Miquelon Netherlands Aruba Curaçao Sint Maarten United Kingdom Anguilla Bermuda British Virgin Islands Cayman Islands Montserrat Turks and Caicos Islands United States Puerto Rico United States Virgin Islands North America portal v t e Polar exploration Arctic Ocean History Expeditions Research stations Farthest North North Pole Barentsz Heemskerck Hudson Marmaduke Carolus Parry North magnetic pole J. Ross J. C. Ross Abernethy Kane Hayes Polaris expedition Polaris C. F. Hall Bessels British Arctic Expedition HMS Alert Nares HMS Discovery Stephenson Markham Lady Franklin Bay Expedition Greely Lockwood Brainard Nansen's Fram expedition Fram Nansen Johansen Sverdrup Jason Amedeo Andrée's balloon expedition S. A. Andrée F. Cook SS Roosevelt Peary Henson Sedov Byrd Norge Amundsen Nobile Wisting Riiser-Larsen Ellsworth Italia Nautilus Wilkins ANT-25 Chkalov Baydukov Belyakov Drifting ice stations NP-1 Papanin Shirshov E. Fyodorov Krenkel NP-36 NP-37 Georgiy Sedov Badygin Wiese USS Nautilus USS Skate Plaisted Herbert NS Arktika Barneo Arktika 2007 Mir submersibles Sagalevich Chilingarov Iceland Greenland Pytheas Brendan Papar Vikings Naddodd Garðar Ingólfr Norse colonization of North America Gunnbjörn Snæbjörn galti Erik the Red Christian IV's expeditions J. Hall Cunningham Lindenov C. Richardson Danish colonization Egede Scoresby Jason Nansen Sverdrup Peary Rasmussen Northwest Passage Northern Canada Cabot G. Corte-Real M. Corte-Real Frobisher Gilbert Davis Hudson Discovery Bylot Baffin Munk I. Fyodorov HMS Resolution J. Cook HMS Discovery Clerke Mackenzie Kotzebue J. Ross HMS Griper Parry HMS Hecla Lyon HMS Fury Hoppner Crozier J. C. Ross Coppermine expedition Franklin Back Dease Simpson HMS Blossom Beechey Franklin's lost expedition HMS Erebus HMS Terror Collinson Rae–Richardson expedition Rae J. Richardson Austin McClure expedition HMS Investigator McClure HMS Resolute Kellett Belcher Kennedy Bellot Isabel Inglefield 2nd Grinnell expedition USS Advance Kane Fox McClintock HMS Pandora Young Fram Sverdrup Gjøa Amundsen Rasmussen Karluk Stefansson Bartlett St. Roch H. Larsen Cowper North East Passage Russian Arctic Pomors Koch boats Willoughby Chancellor Barentsz Heemskerck Mangazeya Hudson Poole Siberian Cossacks Perfilyev Stadukhin Dezhnev Popov Ivanov Vagin Permyakov Great Northern Expedition Bering Chirikov Malygin Ovtsyn Minin V. Pronchishchev M. Pronchishcheva Chelyuskin Kh. Laptev D. Laptev Chichagov Lyakhov Billings Sannikov Gedenshtrom Wrangel Matyushkin Anjou Litke Lavrov Pakhtusov Tsivolko Middendorff Austro-Hungarian Expedition Weyprecht Payer Vega Expedition A. E. Nordenskiöld Palander Jeannette expedition USS Jeannette De Long Melville Yermak Makarov Zarya Toll Kolomeitsev Matisen Kolchak Sedov Rusanov expedition Rusanov Kuchin Brusilov expedition Sv. Anna Brusilov Albanov Konrad Wiese Nagórski Taymyr / Vaygach Vilkitsky Maud Amundsen AARI Samoylovich Begichev Urvantsev Sadko Ushakov Glavsevmorput Schmidt Aviaarktika Shevelev A. Sibiryakov Voronin Chelyuskin Krassin Gakkel Nuclear-powered icebreakers Lenin Arktika -class icebreaker Antarctic Continent History Expeditions Antarctic/Southern Ocean Roché Bouvet Kerguelen HMS Resolution J. Cook HMS Adventure Furneaux Smith San Telmo Vostok Bellingshausen Mirny Lazarev Bransfield Palmer Davis Weddell Morrell Astrolabe Dumont d'Urville United States Exploring Expedition USS Vincennes Wilkes USS Porpoise Ringgold Ross expedition HMS Erebus ( J. C. Ross Abernethy ) HMS Terror ( Crozier ) Cooper Challenger expedition HMS Challenger Nares Murray Jason C. A. Larsen " Heroic Age " Belgian Antarctic Expedition Belgica de Gerlache Lecointe Amundsen Cook Arctowski Racoviță Dobrowolski Southern Cross Southern Cross Borchgrevink Discovery Discovery Discovery Hut Gauss Gauss Drygalski Swedish Antarctic Expedition Antarctic O. Nordenskjöld C. A. Larsen Scottish Antarctic Expedition Bruce Scotia Orcadas Base Nimrod Expedition Nimrod French Antarctic Expeditions Pourquoi-Pas Charcot Japanese Antarctic Expedition Shirase Amundsen's South Pole expedition Fram Amundsen Framheim Polheim Terra Nova Terra Nova Scott Wilson E. R. Evans Crean Lashly Filchner Australasian Antarctic Expedition SY Aurora Mawson Far Eastern Party Imperial Trans-Antarctic Expedition Endurance Shackleton Wild James Caird Ross Sea party Mackintosh Shackleton–Rowett Expedition Quest IPY · IGY Modern research Christensen Byrd BANZARE BGLE Rymill New Swabia Ritscher Operation Tabarin Marr Operation Highjump Captain Arturo Prat Base British Antarctic Survey Operation Windmill Ketchum Ronne Expedition F. Ronne E. Ronne Schlossbach Operation Deep Freeze McMurdo Station Commonwealth Trans-Antarctic Expedition Hillary V. Fuchs Soviet Antarctic Expeditions 1st Somov Klenova Mirny 2nd Tryoshnikov 3rd Tolstikov Antarctic Treaty System Transglobe Expedition Fiennes Burton Lake Vostok Kapitsa Farthest South South Pole HMS Resolution J. Cook HMS Adventure Furneaux Weddell HMS Erebus J. C. Ross HMS Terror Crozier Southern Cross Borchgrevink Discovery Barne Nimrod Shackleton Wild Marshall Adams South magnetic pole Mawson David Mackay Amundsen's South Pole expedition Fram Amundsen Bjaaland Helmer Hassel Wisting Polheim Terra Nova Scott E. Evans Oates Wilson Bowers Cherry-Garrard Byrd Balchen McKinley Dufek Amundsen–Scott South Pole Station Hillary V. Fuchs Pole of Cold Vostok Station Pole of inaccessibility Pole of Inaccessibility research station Tolstikov Crary A. Fuchs Messner v t e Danish overseas empire Colonies and trading posts of the Danish East India Company (1620–1777) East Indies Governorate General Fort Dansborg Settlements Frederiksnagore (Serampore) Danmarksnagore (Gondalpara) Oddeway Torre (Malabar Coast) Frederiksøerne (Nicobar Islands) Factories Calicut (Kozhikode) Colachel Machilipatnam Trading posts Balasore Oddeway Torre (Malabar Coast) Pipli Colonies and trading posts of the Danish West India Company (1668–1776) West Indies Colonies in the Caribbean Saint Thomas Saint John Saint Croix Colonies and trading posts of the Crown (1658–1850) Gold Coast Trading posts in Africa Augustaborg Carlsborg Christiansborg Frederiksborg Fredensborg Kongensten Prinsensten William Settlements of the Bergen Greenland Company (1721–1727) Settlements Haabets Colonie Colonies and trading posts of Hans Egede (1727-1747?), Claus Paarss (1728-1730), the Moravian missions (1733-1900), Jacob Severin (1734-1949) and the General Trade Company (1747–1774) North Greenland and South Greenland Trading posts Egede and Paarss Godt-Haab Haabets Ø Moravian missions Lichtenfels Neu-Herrnhut Severin Christianshaab Frederikshaab Jacobshavn General Trade Company Christianshaab Claushavn Egedesminde Fiskenæsset Frederikshaab Godhavn Godt-Haab Holsteinsborg Jacobshavn Julianehaab Lichtenfels Neu-Herrnhut Ritenbenck Sukkertoppen Umanak Upernavik Colonies of the Kingdom of Denmark (1536–1953) Until 1850 Gold Coast Until 1869 East Indies Until 1874 Iceland 3 Until 1917 West Indies Until 1948 Faroe Islands 3 Until 1953 Greenland 3 3 Became autonomous countries of the Kingdom of Denmark; Iceland gained full independence in 1944.

Kingdom of Denmark (1948–present) Danish Realm Denmark Faroe Islands Greenland v t e World's largest islands 100,000 km 2 (38,610 sq mi) and greater Greenland New Guinea Borneo Madagascar Baffin Island Sumatra Honshu Victoria Island (Canada) Great Britain Ellesmere Island Sulawesi South Island Java North Island Luzon Newfoundland Cuba Iceland Islands portal 20,000–99,999 km 2 (7,722–38,610 sq mi) Mindanao Ireland Hokkaido Hispaniola Sakhalin Banks Island Sri Lanka Tasmania Devon Island Alexander Island Severny Island Isla Grande de Tierra del Fuego Axel Heiberg Island Melville Island Southampton Island Marajó Spitsbergen Kyushu Taiwan New Britain Prince of Wales Island Yuzhny Island Hainan Vancouver Island Timor Sicily Somerset Island Kotelny Island Sardinia Bananal Portals : Denmark North America Europe Islands European Union Greenland at Wikipedia's sister projects : Media from Commons News from Wikinews Texts from Wikisource Resources from Wikiversity Travel guides from Wikivoyage Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic Spain Norway Greece Israel Geographic MusicBrainz area Artists KulturNav People UK Parliament Other IdRef NARA Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐92v5d
Cached time: 20250817124011
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 3.676 seconds
Real time usage: 4.248 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 28866/1000000
Revision size: 201321/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 1071566/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 167456/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 23/100
Expensive parser function count: 79/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 998094/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 2.251/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 20928148/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 3559.929      1 -total
 49.78% 1771.958      2 Template:Reflist
 20.76%  738.991    115 Template:Cite_web
 11.48%  408.788      1 Template:Navboxes
 11.07%  394.189      1 Template:Infobox_political_division
 11.06%  393.767     44 Template:Cite_journal
 10.22%  363.895      2 Template:Infobox
  9.84%  350.466     19 Template:Navbox
  8.06%  287.034      2 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
  7.22%  256.961      1 Template:Polar_exploration Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:12118:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817124011 and revision id 1306024551. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Greenland&oldid=1306024551 " Categories : Greenland Christian states Danish dependencies Danish Realm Dependent territories in North America Former Norwegian colonies Inuit territories Island countries Kingdom of Norway (872–1397) Members of the Nordic Council Nordic countries Northern America Regions of the Arctic Special territories of the European Union States and territories established in 1979 Hidden categories: Articles containing Greenlandic-language text Pages with Greenlandic IPA Articles containing Danish-language text Pages with Danish IPA Pages with reference errors Articles with Danish-language sources (da) Webarchive template wayback links CS1 German-language sources (de) CS1 errors: ISBN date CS1 Kalaallisut-language sources (kl) CS1 Danish-language sources (da) Pages with broken reference names CS1 Icelandic-language sources (is) All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from June 2025 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with dead external links from February 2024 Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia pages semi-protected against vandalism Use dmy dates from March 2022 Use British English from January 2025 Pages using infobox settlement with bad settlement type Articles containing explicitly cited English-language text Articles containing Old Norse-language text Articles containing explicitly cited American English-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2019 Pages using multiple image with auto scaled images All articles with vague or ambiguous time Vague or ambiguous time from January 2025 Articles with unsourced statements from January 2025 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from January 2025 Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2019 All articles containing potentially dated statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2025 Pages using largest cities with unknown parameters All articles with failed verification Articles with failed verification from February 2025 All articles lacking reliable references Articles lacking reliable references from January 2022 Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from EB9 Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Coordinates on Wikidata This page was last edited on 15 August 2025, at 13:26 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Greenland 203 languages Add topic

