Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 In linguistics 2 Benefits of using classification schemes 3 Kinds of classification schemes 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Classification scheme (information science) 22 languages Արեւմտահայերէն Български Brezhoneg Dansk Deutsch Français Interlingua Italiano Қазақша Монгол Nederlands 日本語 Nordfriisk Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Română Русский Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Classification scheme ) Type of science This article needs attention from an expert in computer science . The specific problem is: boundaries of subject with information science and relative to semantic spectrum are unclear..

WikiProject Computer science may be able to help recruit an expert.

( October 2022 ) In information science and ontology , a classification scheme is an arrangement of classes or groups of classes. The activity of developing the schemes bears similarity to taxonomy , but with perhaps a more theoretical bent, as a single classification scheme can be applied over a wide semantic spectrum while taxonomies tend to be devoted to a single topic.

In the abstract, the resulting structures are a crucial aspect of metadata ,  often represented as a hierarchical structure and accompanied by descriptive information of the classes or groups. Such a classification scheme is intended to be used for the classification of individual objects into the classes or groups, and the classes or groups are based on characteristics which the objects (members) have in common.

The ISO/IEC 11179 metadata registry standard uses classification schemes as a way to classify administered items, such as data elements , in a metadata registry .

Some quality criteria for classification schemes are: Whether different kinds are grouped together. In other words, whether it is a grouping system or a pure classification system. In case of grouping, a subset (subgroup) does not have (inherit) all the characteristics of the superset, which makes that the knowledge and requirements about the superset are not applicable for the members of the subset.

Whether the classes have overlaps.

Whether subordinates (may) have multiple superordinates. Some classification schemes allow that a kind of thing has more than one superordinate others do not. Multiple supertypes for one subtype implies that the subordinate has the combined characteristics of all its superordinates. This is called multiple inheritance (of characteristics from multiple superordinates to their subordinates).

Whether the criteria for belonging to a class or group are well defined.

Whether the kinds of relations between the concepts are made explicit and well defined.

Whether subtype-supertype relations are distinguished from composition relations (part-whole relations) and from object-role relations.

In linguistics [ edit ] In linguistics , subordinate concepts are described as hyponyms of their respective superordinates; typically, a hyponym is 'a kind of' its superordinate.

[ 1 ] Benefits of using classification schemes [ edit ] Using one or more classification schemes for the classification of a collection of objects has many benefits.  Some of these include: It allows a user to find an individual object quickly on the basis of its kind or group.

It makes it easier to detect duplicate objects.

It conveys semantics (meaning) of an object from the definition of its kind, which meaning is not conveyed by the name of the individual object or its way of spelling.

Knowledge and requirements about a kind of thing can be applied to other objects of that kind.

Kinds of classification schemes [ edit ] The following are examples of different kinds of classification schemes.  This list is in approximate order from informal to more formal: thesaurus – a collection of categorized concepts, denoted by words or phrases, that are related to each other by narrower term, wider term and related term relations.

taxonomy – a formal list of concepts, denoted by controlled words or phrases, arranged from abstract to specific, related by subtype-supertype relations or by superset-subset relations.

data model – an arrangement of concepts (entity types), denoted by words or phrases, that have various kinds of relationships. Typically, but not necessarily, representing requirements and capabilities for a specific scope (application area).

network (mathematics) – an arrangement of objects in a random graph.

ontology – an arrangement of concepts that are related by various well defined kinds of relations. The arrangement can be visualized in a directed acyclic graph .

One example of a classification scheme for data elements is a representation term .

See also [ edit ] ISO/IEC 11179 Faceted classification Metadata Ontology (computer science) Representation class Representation term Simple Knowledge Organisation System Semantic spectrum References [ edit ] ^ Keith Allan (2002, p. 260), Natural Language Semantics, Blackwell Publishers Ltd, Oxford, ISBN 0-631-19296-4 .

External links [ edit ] OECD Glossary of Statistical Terms – Classification Schemes ISO/IEC 11179-2:2005 Metadata registries (MDR) – Part 2: Classification Nancy Lawler's presentation on Classification Schemes Archived 2007-09-28 at the Wayback Machine Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Classification_scheme_(information_science)&oldid=1276309787 " Categories : Metadata Metadata registry ISO/IEC 11179 Classification systems Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing expert attention from October 2022 All articles needing expert attention Computer science articles needing expert attention Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 18 February 2025, at 02:50 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Classification scheme (information science) 22 languages Add topic

