Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Chincha Islands War 2 Perspectives Toggle Perspectives subsection 2.1 Geopolitical 2.2 Environmental security 3 Conflict resources Toggle Conflict resources subsection 3.1 History 3.2 Conventions 3.3 Legal frameworks 3.4 Supporting external conflicts 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Resource war 3 languages Čeština Shqip کوردی Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia War fought over resources Part of a series on War ( outline ) History Prehistoric Ancient Thermal Gunpowder Timeline Post-classical Castles Early modern Military revolution Pike and shot Napoleonic warfare Late modern Industrial warfare Fourth-gen warfare AI warfare Military Organization Command and control Defense ministry Reserves Ranks Branches: Army Navy Air force Marines Coast guard Border guard Special forces Cyber force Space force Specialties: Staff Engineers Intel Recon Medical Police Diving Pilot Land units: Infantry Armor Cavalry Artillery Special forces Signal corps Naval units: Warships Submarines Aircraft carriers Landing craft Auxiliary ships Air units: Fighters Bombers Command Close air support Electronic-warfare Reconnaissance Combat systems: Fire-control system Fire-control radar Director (military) Combat information center Sonar Radar Historical: Ship gun fire-control Gun data computer Torpedo data computer Development: Basic training Military manoeuvrers Combat training Battlespace Aerospace Aerial Airborne Space Land Cold-region Desert Fortification Jungle Mountain Urban Subterranean Tunnel Sea Amphibious Blue Brown Green Surface Underwater Seabed Cyber Information Weapons Air defence Armor Artillery Barrage Biological Camouflage Cavalry Horses Air cavalry Chemical Combined arms Conventional Cyber Denial Disinformation Drone / Robot Electromagnetic Firearms Infantry Loitering Missile Music Nuclear Psychological Radiological Submarine Unconventional Tactics List of military tactics Aerial Airlift Air assault Airbridge Airdrop Anti-aircraft Anti-sub Anti-tank Battle Cavalry Charge CQC Counterattack Counterinsurgency Convoy Defeat in detail Foxhole Drone Envelopment Formation Guerrilla Naval Rapid dominance Encirclement Investment Siege Swarm Screen Tactical objective Target saturation Trench Withdrawal Operational Military operation Special Operations research Blitzkrieg Expeditionary Deep operation Maneuver Operational manoeuvre group Raid Covert Stay-behind Strategy List of military strategies and concepts Military campaign Anti-access Attrition Commerce raiding Counter-offensive Culminating Defence in depth Fabian Empty fort Mosaic Deception Defensive Depth Goal Nuclear Naval Offensive Scorched earth Grand strategy Asymmetric Blockade Broken-backed Class Cold war Colonial Conquest Containment Divide and conquer Economic Endemic Fleet in being Irregular Liberation Limited Network-centric New generation Perpetual Political Princely Proxy Religious Resource Strategic Succession Technology Theater Total war World war Administrative Branch Policy Staff Training Service Sociology Organization Area of responsibility Chain of command Command and control Doctrine Order of battle Principles of war Economy of force Medicine Engineers Intelligence Ranks Technology and equipment Personnel Recruitment Conscription Draft evasion Mobilization Training Specialism Soldier Morale Volunteer Women Children Transgender Harassment Conscientious objector Conscription and sexism Counter-recruitment Logistics History War economy Arms industry Materiel Supply-chain management Military–industrial complex Base MOB FOB Outpost Science Power projection Loss-of-strength gradient Lanchester's laws Force multiplication Morale Law Belligerent Occupation Armistice Ceasefire Court-martial Desertion Geneva Conventions Geneva Protocol Islamic rules Justice Lawful / Unlawful combatant Perfidy Regular / Irregular Jewish laws on war Right of conquest Right of self-defence Rules of engagement Self-determination Martial law War crime War and genocide War treason Theory Air supremacy Appeasement Command of the sea Deterrence theory Full-spectrum dominance Overmatch Just war theory Principles of war Philosophy of war Security dilemma Tripwire force Wargaming Simulation Exercises Combat effectiveness Center of gravity Non-warfare Arms control Counter-insurgency Deterrence Disaster response Grey-zone Gunboat diplomacy Humanitarian aid Law enforcement Low-intensity conflict Military engineering Peacekeeping Peacebuilding Peace through strength Show of force Culture Awards and decorations Battle cry Warrior War film Military science fiction War novel Anti-war movement Foot drill War song Uniform Wargame Militarization / Militarism Antimilitarism Camp follower Books Seven Military Classics The Art of War De re militari Strategemata Related Women in war War resister War studies Horses in warfare Wartime sexual violence Fifth column Mercenary Pacifism Privateer Private military company Soldiers are murderers Lists Battles Military occupations Military terms Operations Sieges War crimes Wars Weapons Writers v t e A resource war is a type of war caused by conflict over resources . In a resource war, there is typically a nation or group that controls the resource and an aggressor that wishes to seize control over said resource. This power dynamic between nations has been a significant underlying factor in conflicts since the late 19th century.

[ 1 ] Following the rise of industrialization , the amount of raw materials an industrialized nation uses to sustain its activities is heightened.

[ 2 ] History [ edit ] Chincha Islands War [ edit ] Illustration of the Chincha Islands of Peru, circa 1859 One of the most prolific examples of resource war in history is the conflict over Chincha Island guano in the late 19th century. The Chincha Islands of Peru are situated off of the southern coast of Peru, where many seabirds were known to roost and prey on fish brought there by the currents of the Pacific Ocean .

[ 3 ] The guano of these seabirds is incredibly dense in nutrients and became a sought-after resource as a fertilizer .

[ 4 ] Soil that was nutrient rich allowed for higher crop yields, which subsequently translated to better sustenance of the population and overall improved economic performance. Known colloquially as "white gold", guano from the Chincha Islands began to catch the interest of Spain , the United Kingdom , the United States , and other industrial powers at the time.

[ 5 ] The international interest for that resource resulting in a number of conflicts including the Chincha Islands War between Spain and Peru and the War of the Pacific between Chile, Bolivia, and Peru.

[ 6 ] Although the primary inciting force of the conflict originated over possession of the nutrient-rich guano, Spain also attempted to exercise prior colonial control over Peru during its aggressions during this conflict. The Chincha Islands guano became a resource of imperialism with foreign nations inciting conflict and establishing dominion over it. In 1856, United States President Franklin Pierce passed the Guano Islands Act with the exclusive purpose of addressing American scarcity over guano.

[ 7 ] Under the Guano Islands Act, any piece of uninhabited land that harbors a guano deposit could be claimed as a territory of the United States to extract the resource.

[ 8 ] The legislation acted as a workaround for the United States to access Peruvian seabird guano since direct trade was not an option because of a treaty between Peru and the United Kingdom.

[ 6 ] Perspectives [ edit ] Geopolitical [ edit ] Under the geopolitical lens for interpreting resource wars, the main rationale behind resource conflict is strategic. It assumes that control over the resource provides a particular advantage to that nation and interprets hostile attempts to take over the resource as a means to acquire that advantage for themselves. Resources that are deemed strategic shift over time and pertain to what is required for economic expansion or success at the time. Examples of this include timber during the seventeenth century for naval development or oil during the twentieth century onward for enabling military technology and transportation.

[ 9 ] Environmental security [ edit ] Dr. Thomas Homer-Dixon at an NDP convention in British Columbia, circa 2007 Also known as the environmental scarcity or political economy, the environmental security perspective interprets resource conflict as a response to resource scarcity . A notable proponent of the environmental security perspective is Dr.

Thomas Homer-Dixon , a Canadian political scientist and professor at the University of Waterloo. The work of Homer-Dixon focuses on two different phenomena regarding the effect of resources on violent conflict: resource scarcity and resource abundance. Under the environmental security perspective, resource scarcity perpetuates conflict by inciting pressures on a society that is dealing with resource deprivation. According to Homer-Dixon, populations struggling with resource scarcity are also impacted by overpopulation and inequitable resource allocation .

[ 10 ] Overpopulation and inequitable resource allocation can make resource scarcity even more pronounced, creating a cyclical instability in the society.

[ 10 ] Conversely, countries with natural resource abundance are impacted in a different way. Countries that are wealthy in resources have been shown to have disproportionate economic growth, less democracy, and overall insufficient development outcomes.

[ 11 ] This permeates from an overdependence on their resource from an economic standpoint, where authoritarian traits may begin to take effect.

[ 10 ] This creates pressure on the citizens as a whole due to undermined governance of the nation and volatile economic state if the resource fluctuates heavily in price.

[ 12 ] This phenomenon is known as the resource curse .

Conflict resources [ edit ] Conflict resources are natural resources extracted in a conflict zone and sold to perpetuate the fighting.

[ 13 ] There is both statistical and anecdotal evidence that the presence of precious commodities can prolong conflicts (a " resource curse ").

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] [ 16 ] An unfortunate irony is that many countries rich in minerals are impoverished in terms of their capacity for governance. Conflict, corruption and bribery may be seen as the typical costs of doing business.

[ 17 ] The extraction and sale of blood diamonds , also known as "conflict diamonds", is a better-known phenomenon which occurs under virtually identical conditions.

Petroleum can also be a conflict resource. Other commodities are also involved in financing conflict.

History [ edit ] The concept of "conflict resource", or "conflict commodity " emerged in the late 1990s, initially in relation to the " blood diamonds " that were financing rebellions in Angola and Sierra Leone .

[ 18 ] Then "conflict timber" financed hostilities in Cambodia and Liberia .

[ 19 ] Conventions [ edit ] The concept was first officially discussed by the UN General Assembly in the context of 'conflict diamonds': [ 20 ] The UN Security Council has since referred to conflict resources in several resolutions, particularly resolutions 1533 and I698.97.

[ 21 ] Since 1996 the Bonn International Center for Conversion has tracked resource governance and conflict intensity by country.

[ 22 ] Aside from fossil fuels , metals, diamonds, and timber it tracks the governance of other primary goods that might fund conflicts, including: poppy seeds and talc (Afghanistan), rubber (Côte d'Ivoire), cotton (Zambia), and cocoa (Indonesia).

Legal frameworks [ edit ] Main article: Conflict minerals law Several countries and organizations, including the United States , European Union , and OECD have designated tantalum, tin, tungsten, and gold connected to conflict in the DRC as conflict minerals and legally require companies to report trade or use of conflict minerals as a way to reduce incentives for armed groups to extract and fight over the minerals.

Supporting external conflicts [ edit ] In the 2020s, the concept of conflict minerals was extended to those mined to support conflicts in parts of the world other than where the mining takes place. The Wagner Group has been granted mining rights in the Central African Republic in return for securing the continuity of the government. This "blood gold" is then sold to support Russia in the Russo-Ukrainian War .

[ 23 ] Wagner also has gold-related operations in Mali and Sudan.

[ 24 ] See also [ edit ] Oil war Petro-aggression Resource curse Territorial disputes in the South China Sea Water conflict References [ edit ] ^ Acemoglu, D.; Golosov, M.; Tsyvinski, A.; Yared, P. (2012-01-06).

"A Dynamic Theory of Resource Wars" .

The Quarterly Journal of Economics .

127 (1): 283– 331.

doi : 10.1093/qje/qjr048 .

hdl : 1721.1/70960 .

ISSN 0033-5533 .

^ Bakeless, John (1921).

The Economic Causes of Modern War: A Study of the Period: 1878-1918 . New York: Moffat, Yard, and Company.

^ "The Hard Workers of the Peruvian Guano (The Chincha Islands), 2014" .

Agence VU' . Retrieved 2022-07-02 .

^ Durfee, Nell (2018-04-27).

"Holy Crap! A Trip to the World's Largest Guano-Producing Islands" .

Audubon . Retrieved 2022-07-02 .

^ Mancini, Mark (2015-08-12).

"How an Old Bird Poop Law Can Help You Claim an Island" .

Mental Floss . Retrieved 2022-07-02 .

^ a b Brazeau, Mark (2018-04-04).

"Remember the Guano Wars" .

The Breakthrough Institute . Retrieved 2022-07-02 .

^ Underhill, Kevin (2014-07-08).

"The Guano Islands Act" .

Washington Post .

ISSN 0190-8286 . Retrieved 2022-07-02 .

^ Cornell Law School.

"48 U.S. COde Chapter 8- GUANO ISLANDS" .

Legal Information Institute .

^ Le Billon, Philippe (2007).

"Geographies of War: Perspectives on 'Resource Wars' " .

Geography Compass .

1 (2): 163– 182.

Bibcode : 2007GComp...1..163L .

doi : 10.1111/j.1749-8198.2007.00010.x – via Wiley.

^ a b c Homer-Dixon, Thomas (1994). "Environmental Scarcities and Violent Conflict: Evidence from Cases".

International Security .

19 (1): 5– 40.

doi : 10.2307/2539147 .

hdl : 10535/2855 .

JSTOR 2539147 .

S2CID 154212598 .

^ Smith, Benjamin; Waldner, David (2021-04-30).

Rethinking the Resource Curse (1 ed.). Cambridge University Press.

doi : 10.1017/9781108776837 .

ISBN 978-1-108-77683-7 .

S2CID 233539488 .

^ Norman, Catherine S. (2009).

"Rule of Law and the Resource Curse: Abundance Versus Intensity" .

Environmental and Resource Economics .

43 (2): 183– 207.

Bibcode : 2009EnREc..43..183N .

doi : 10.1007/s10640-008-9231-y .

ISSN 0924-6460 .

S2CID 59417490 .

^ p.8, Conflict and Development: Peacebuilding and Post-conflict Resolution; Sixth Report of Session 2005–06, Great Britain: Parliament: House of Commons: International Development Committee, The Stationery Office, 2006 ^ Philippe Le Billon, "Fuelling War: Natural Resources and Armed Conflicts", Adelphi Paper 373, IISS & Routledge, 2006.

^ Michael Ross,"How Do Natural Resources Influence Civil War? Evidence from Thirteen Cases", International Organization, 2004.

^ James Fearon and David lotinakin "Ethnicity, Insurgency, and Civil War" American Political Science Review , 2003.

^ Agbiboa, Daniel Egiegba (2011-11-03).

"Between Corruption and Development: The Political Economy of State Robbery in Nigeria" .

Journal of Business Ethics .

108 (3): 325– 345.

doi : 10.1007/s10551-011-1093-5 .

ISSN 0167-4544 .

S2CID 154968679 .

^ " 'Blood diamonds' crackdown deal" .

BBC News . 28 June 2000 . Retrieved 8 October 2020 .

Peter Hain : without blood diamonds, the war in Sierra Leone could not be financed... In the face of enormous suffering caused by the diamond-fuelled wars in Sierra Leone, Angola and the Democratic Republic of Congo , we have a duty to ensure that we are doing as much as we can.

^ "Liberian 'conflict' timber faces trade ban" .

Greenpeace UK. 7 May 2003. Archived from the original on 20 May 2011 . Retrieved 8 October 2020 .

^ UNGA Resolution 55/56 (2001) Archived 2006-11-08 at the Wayback Machine ^ Cassill, Deby L. (2014).

"What can ants tell us about corporate social responsibility?" .

Handbook of Research on Marketing and Corporate Social Responsibility : 269– 287.

doi : 10.4337/9781783476091.00023 .

ISBN 9781783476091 .

^ Accessible through "the BICC Resource Conflict Monitor" . Archived from the original on 2011-01-22 . Retrieved 2010-06-05 .

^ Scott Detrow; Emma Klein; Tinbete Ermyas (December 27, 2023).

"How 'blood gold' from Africa is funding Russia's war on Ukraine" .

NPR .

^ "The Blood Gold Report" . Retrieved March 2, 2024 .

v t e Natural resources Air Pollution / quality Ambient standards (US) Index Indoor Law Clean Air Act (US) Ozone depletion Emissions Airshed Trading Deforestation (REDD) Energy Bio Law Resources Fossil fuels ( gas , peak coal , peak gas , peak oil ) Geothermal Hydro Nuclear Solar sunlight shade Wind Land Agricultural arable peak farmland Degradation Field Landscape cityscape seascape soundscape viewshed Law property Management habitat conservation Minerals gemstone industrial ore metal mining law sand peak copper phosphorus rights Soil conservation fertility health resilience Use planning reserve Life Biodiversity Bioprospecting biopiracy Biosphere Bushfood Bushmeat Fisheries climate change law management Forests genetic resources law management non-timber products Game law Marine conservation Meadow Pasture Plants FAO Plant Treaty food genetic resources gene banks herbal medicines UPOV Convention wood Rangeland Seed bank Wildlife conservation management Water Types / location Aquifer storage and recovery Drinking Fresh Groundwater pollution recharge remediation Hydrosphere Ice bergs glacial polar Irrigation huerta Marine Rain harvesting Stormwater Surface water Sewage reclaimed water Watershed Aspects Desalination Floods Law Leaching Sanitation improved Scarcity Security Supply Efficiency Conflict Conservation Peak water Pollution Privatization Quality Right Resources improved policy Related Commons enclosure global land tragedy of Economics ecological land Ecosystem services Exploitation overexploitation Earth Overshoot Day Management adaptive Natural capital accounting good Natural heritage Nature reserve remnant natural area Systems ecology Urban ecology Wilderness Resource Common-pool Conflict (perpetuation) Curse Depletion Extraction Nationalism Renewable / Non-renewable Politics Oil war Petroleum politics Petrostate Petro-Islam Resource war Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Resource_war&oldid=1292216814 " Categories : Causes of war Resources Resource economics Resource extraction Economic warfare Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 25 May 2025, at 20:24 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Resource war 3 languages Add topic

