Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Methods Toggle Methods subsection 1.1 Sketching 1.2 Manual or by instrument 1.3 Computer aided design 2 Applications Toggle Applications subsection 2.1 Architecture 2.2 Engineering 2.3 Software engineering 3 Related fields Toggle Related fields subsection 3.1 Technical illustration 3.1.1 Cutaway drawing 4 Technical drawings Toggle Technical drawings subsection 4.1 Types 4.1.1 Two-dimensional representation 4.1.2 Three-dimensional representation 4.2 Views 4.2.1 Multiview 4.2.2 Section 4.2.3 Auxiliary 4.2.4 Pattern 4.2.5 Exploded 4.3 Standards and conventions 4.3.1 Basic drafting paper sizes 4.4 Patent drawing 4.5 Sets of technical drawings 4.5.1 Working drawings for production 4.5.2 Assembly drawings 4.5.3 As-fitted drawings 5 See also 6 References 7 Further reading 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Technical drawing 54 languages Afrikaans العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Català Чӑвашла Corsu Deutsch Emiliàn e rumagnòl Español Esperanto Euskara Eʋegbe فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Latina Lietuvių Magyar Bahasa Melayu Монгол Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Română Русский Shqip Simple English Slovenčina Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska தமிழ் తెలుగు Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Creation of standards and the technical drawings Not to be confused with Technical draw , a boxing term.

Part of series on Technical drawings By field Architectural drawing Floor plan Electrical drawing Engineering drawing Plumbing drawing Structural drawing Scientific illustration Mechanical systems drawing Working drawing Archaeological illustration Types Sketches Blueprint Technical drawing Assembly drawing Cross section Cutaway diagram Line drawings Patent drawings Technical illustration CAD Product and manufacturing information Exploded view Standards INT : ISO 128 US : ANSI/ASME Y14.1 RU : ESKD See also Outline of drawing and drawings 3D projection v t e Drafter at work Copying technical drawings in 1973 Technical drawing , drafting or drawing , is the act and discipline of composing drawings that visually communicate how something functions or is constructed.

Technical drawing is essential for communicating ideas in industry and engineering .
To make the drawings easier to understand, people use familiar symbols , perspectives , units of measurement , notation systems, visual styles, and page layout . Together, such conventions constitute a visual language and help to ensure that the drawing is unambiguous and relatively easy to understand. Many of the symbols and principles of technical drawing are codified in an international standard called ISO 128 .

The need for precise communication in the preparation of a functional document distinguishes technical drawing from the expressive drawing of the visual arts . Artistic drawings are subjectively interpreted; their meanings are multiply determined. Technical drawings are understood to have one intended meaning.

[ 1 ] A draftsman is a person who makes a drawing (technical or expressive). A professional drafter who makes technical drawings is sometimes called a drafting technician.

Methods [ edit ] Sketching [ edit ] Sketch for a government building A sketch is a quickly executed, freehand drawing that is usually not intended as a finished work. In general, sketching is a quick way to record an idea for later use. Architect's sketches primarily serve as a way to try out different ideas and establish a composition before  a more finished work, especially when the finished work is expensive and time-consuming.

Architectural sketches, for example, are a kind of diagram .

[ 2 ] These sketches, like metaphors , are used by architects as a means of communication in aiding design collaboration. This tool helps architects to abstract attributes of hypothetical provisional design solutions and summarize their complex patterns, thereby enhancing the design process.

[ 2 ] Manual or by instrument [ edit ] A drafting table Old-fashioned technical drawing instruments Stencils for lettering technical drawings to DIN standards The basic drafting procedure is to place a piece of paper (or other material) on a smooth surface with right-angle corners and straight sides—typically a drawing board . A sliding straightedge known as a T-square is then placed on one of the sides, allowing it to be slid across the side of the table, and over the surface of the paper.

"Parallel lines" can be drawn by moving the T-square and running a pencil or technical pen along the T-square's edge. The T-square is used to hold other devices such as set squares or triangles. In this case, the drafter places one or more triangles of known angles on the T-square — which is itself at right angles to the edge of the table — and can then draw lines at any chosen angle to others on the page. Modern drafting tables are equipped with a drafting machine that is supported on both sides of the table to slide over a large piece of paper. Because it is secured on both sides, lines drawn along the edge are guaranteed to be parallel.

[ 3 ] The drafter uses several technical drawing tools to draw curves and circles. Primary among these are the compasses , used for drawing arcs and circles, and the French curve , for drawing curves. A spline is a rubber coated articulated metal that can be manually bent to most curves.

Drafting templates assist the drafter with creating recurring objects in a drawing without having to reproduce the object from scratch every time. This is especially useful when using common symbols; i.e. in the context of stagecraft , a lighting designer will draw from the USITT standard library of lighting fixture symbols to indicate the position of a common fixture across multiple positions. Templates are sold commercially by a number of vendors, usually customized to a specific task, but it is also not uncommon for a drafter to create his own templates.

This basic drafting system requires an accurate table and constant attention to the positioning of the tools. Even tasks as simple as drawing two angled lines meeting at a point require a number of moves of the T-square and triangles, and in general, drafting can be a time-consuming process.

A solution to these problems was the introduction of the mechanical "drafting machine", an application of the pantograph (sometimes referred to incorrectly as a "pentagraph" in these situations) which allowed the drafter to have an accurate right angle at any point on the page quickly. These machines often included the ability to change the angle, hence removing the need for the triangles.

In addition to the mastery of the mechanics of drawing lines, arcs and circles (and text) onto a piece of paper—with respect to the detailing of physical objects—the drafting effort requires a thorough understanding of geometry, trigonometry and spatial comprehension, and in all cases demands precision and accuracy, and attention to detail of high order.

Although drafting is sometimes accomplished by a project engineer, architect, or shop personnel (such as a machinist ), skilled drafters (or designers) usually accomplish the task, and are always in demand to some degree.

Computer aided design [ edit ] Main articles: Computer-aided design and Product and manufacturing information Today, the mechanics of the drafting task have largely been automated and accelerated through the use of computer-aided design (CAD) systems.

There are two types of CAD systems used for the production of technical drawings: two dimensions (2D) and three dimensions (3D).

An example of a drawing drafted in AutoCAD 2D CAD systems such as AutoCAD or MicroStation replace the paper drawing discipline. The lines, circles, arcs, and curves are created within the software. It is down to the technical drawing skill of the user to produce the drawing. There is still much scope for error in the drawing when producing first and third angle orthographic projections , auxiliary projections and cross-section views . A 2D CAD system is merely an electronic drawing board. Its greatest strength over direct to paper technical drawing is in the making of revisions. Whereas in a conventional hand drawn technical drawing, if a mistake is found, or a modification is required, a new drawing must be made from scratch, the 2D CAD system allows a copy of the original to be modified, saving considerable time. 2D CAD systems can be used to create plans for large projects such as buildings and aircraft but provide no way to check the various components will fit together.

View of a CAD model of a four- cylinder inline crankshaft with pistons A 3D CAD system (such as KeyCreator , Autodesk Inventor , or SolidWorks ) first produces the geometry of the part; the technical drawing comes from user defined views of that geometry. Any orthographic, projected or sectioned view is created by the software. There is no scope for error in the production of these views. The main scope for error comes in setting the parameter of first or third angle projection and displaying the relevant symbol on the technical drawing. 3D CAD allows individual parts to be assembled together to represent the final product. Buildings, aircraft, ships, and cars are modelled, assembled, and checked in 3D before technical drawings are released for manufacture.

Both 2D and 3D CAD systems can be used to produce technical drawings for any discipline. The various disciplines (electrical, electronic, pneumatic, hydraulic, etc.) have industry recognized symbols to represent common components.

BS and ISO produce standards to show recommended practices but it is up to individuals to produce the drawings to a standard. There is no definitive standard for layout or style. The only standard across engineering workshop drawings is in the creation of orthographic projections and cross-section views.

In representing complex, three-dimensional objects in two-dimensional drawings, the objects can be described by at least one view plus material thickness notes and as many views and sections that are required to show all features of an object.

Applications [ edit ] See also: List of computer-aided manufacturing software Architecture [ edit ] To plan a renovation, this architect takes measurements he will later enter into his computer-aided design system.

Main article: Architectural drawing See also: Building information modeling The art and design that goes into making buildings is known as architecture . To communicate all aspects of the shape or design, detail drawings are used. In this field, the term plan is often used when referring to the full section view of these drawings as viewed from three feet above finished floor to show the locations of doorways, windows, stairwells, etc.

[ 4 ] Architectural drawings describe and document an architect's design.

[ 5 ] Engineering [ edit ] Main article: Engineering drawing See also: Mechanical engineering Engineering can be a very broad term. It stems from the Latin ingenerare , meaning "to create".

[ 6 ] Because this could apply to everything that humans create, it is given a narrower definition in the context of technical drawing. Engineering drawings generally deal with mechanical engineered items, such as manufactured parts and equipment.

Engineering drawing of a machine tool part Engineering drawings are usually created in accordance with standardized conventions for layout, nomenclature, interpretation, appearance (such as typefaces and line styles), size, etc.

Its purpose is to accurately and unambiguously capture all the geometric features of a product or a component. The end goal of an engineering drawing is to convey all the required information that will allow a manufacturer to produce that component.

Software engineering [ edit ] Software engineering practitioners make use of diagrams for designing software. Formal standards and modelling languages such as Unified Modelling Language (UML) exist but most diagramming happens using informal ad hoc diagrams that illustrate a conceptual model .

[ 7 ] Practitioners reported that diagramming helped with analysing requirements , [ 7 ] : 539 design, refactoring , documentation, onboarding , communication with stake holders.

[ 8 ] : 560 Diagrams are often transient or redrawn as required. Redrawn diagrams can act as a form of shared understanding in a team.

[ 8 ] : 561 Related fields [ edit ] Technical illustration [ edit ] Illustration of a drum set Main article: Technical illustration Technical illustration is the use of illustration to visually communicate information of a technical nature. Technical illustrations can be component technical drawings or diagrams . The aim of technical illustration is "to generate expressive images that effectively convey certain information via the visual channel to the human observer".

[ 9 ] The main purpose of technical illustration is to describe or explain these items to a more or less nontechnical audience. The visual image should be accurate in terms of dimensions and proportions, and should provide "an overall impression of what an object is or does, to enhance the viewer's interest and understanding".

[ 10 ] According to Viola (2005), "illustrative techniques are often designed in a way that even a person with no technical understanding clearly understands the piece of art. The use of varying line widths to emphasize mass, proximity, and scale helped to make a simple line drawing more understandable to the lay person. Cross hatching, stippling, and other low abstraction techniques gave greater depth and dimension to the subject matter".

[ 9 ] Cutaway drawing [ edit ] Cutaway drawing of the Nash 600 , an American car of the 1940s Main article: Cutaway drawing A cutaway drawing is a technical illustration, in which part of the surface of a three-dimensional model is removed in order to show some of the model's interior in relation to its exterior.

The purpose of a cutaway drawing is to "allow the viewer to have a look into an otherwise solid opaque object. Instead of letting the inner object shine through the surrounding surface, parts of outside object are simply removed. This produces a visual appearance as if someone had cutout a piece of the object or sliced it into parts. Cutaway illustrations avoid ambiguities with respect to spatial ordering, provide a sharp contrast between foreground and background objects, and facilitate a good understanding of spatial ordering".

[ 11 ] Technical drawings [ edit ] Types [ edit ] The two types of technical drawings are based on graphical projection .

[ 1 ] This is used to create an image of a three-dimensional object onto a two-dimensional surface.

Two-dimensional representation [ edit ] Two-dimensional representation uses orthographic projection to create an image where only two of the three dimensions of the object are seen.

Three-dimensional representation [ edit ] In a three-dimensional representation, also referred to as a pictorial, all three dimensions of an object are visible.

Views [ edit ] Multiview [ edit ] Main article: Multiview orthographic projection Multiview is a type of orthographic projection . There are two conventions for using multiview, first-angle and third-angle. In both cases, the front or main side of the object is the same. First-angle is drawing the object sides based on where they land. Example, looking at the front side, rotate the object 90 degrees to the right. What is seen will be drawn to the right of the front side. Third-angle is drawing the object sides based on where they are. Example, looking at the front side, rotate the object 90 degrees to the right. What is seen is actually the left side of the object and will be drawn to the left of the front side.

Section [ edit ] While multiview relates to external surfaces of an object, section views show an imaginary plane cut through an object. This is often useful to show voids in an object.

Auxiliary [ edit ] Auxiliary views utilize an additional projection plane other than the common planes in a multiview. Since the features of an object need to show the true shape and size of the object, the projection plane must be parallel to the object surface. Therefore, any surface that is not in line with the three major axis needs its own projection plane to show the features correctly.

Pattern [ edit ] See also: Rabattement (drafting) Patterns, sometimes called developments , show the size and shape of a flat piece of material needed for later bending or folding into a three-dimensional shape.

[ 12 ] Exploded [ edit ] Main article: Exploded-view drawing Exploded-view drawing of a gear pump An exploded-view drawing is a technical drawing of an object that shows the relationship or order of assembly of the various parts.

[ 13 ] It shows the components of an object slightly separated by distance or suspended in surrounding space in the case of a three- dimensional exploded diagram. An object is represented as if there had been a small controlled explosion emanating from the middle of the object, causing the object's parts to be separated relative distances away from their original locations.

An exploded view drawing (EVD) can show the intended assembly of mechanical or other parts. In mechanical systems, the component closest to the center is usually assembled first or is the main part inside which the other parts are assembled. The EVD can also help to represent the disassembly of parts, where those on the outside are normally removed first.

[ 14 ] Standards and conventions [ edit ] Basic drafting paper sizes [ edit ] Main article: Paper size There have been many standard sizes of paper at different times and in different countries, but today most of the world uses the international standard (A4 and its siblings). North America uses its own sizes.

ISO A-series paper sizes, used in most countries of the world ANSI paper sizes, used in North America Patent drawing [ edit ] The Wright brothers ' patent drawings for their aeroplane (1908) Main article: Patent drawing The applicant for a patent will be required by law to furnish a drawing of the invention if or when the nature of the case requires a drawing to understand the invention with the job. This drawing must be filed with the application. This includes practically all inventions except compositions of matter or processes , but a drawing may also be useful in the case of many processes.

[ 13 ] The drawing must show every feature of the invention specified in the claims and is required by the patent office rules to be in a particular form. The Office specifies the size of the sheet on which the drawing is made, the type of paper, the margins, and other details relating to the making of the drawing. The reason for specifying the standards in detail is that the drawings are printed and published in a uniform style when the patent issues and the drawings must also be such that they can be readily understood by people using the patent descriptions.

[ 13 ] Sets of technical drawings [ edit ] Working drawings for production [ edit ] Working drawings are the set of technical drawings used during the manufacturing phase of a product.

[ 15 ] In architecture, these include civil drawings , architectural drawings , structural drawings , mechanical systems drawings , electrical drawings , and plumbing drawings .

Assembly drawings [ edit ] Assembly drawings show how different parts go together, identify those parts by number, and have a parts list, often referred to as a bill of materials.

[ 16 ] In a technical service manual, this type of drawing may be referred to as an exploded view drawing or diagram.
These parts may be used in engineering.

As-fitted drawings [ edit ] Also called as-built and as-made , an as-fitted drawing represents a record of a completed work, literally as fitted. An as-fitted drawing is based upon working drawings and updated to reflect any changes during construction or manufacture.

[ 17 ] See also [ edit ] Circuit diagram Linear scale Reprography Schematic diagram Shop drawing Technical communication Technical geography Technical lettering Specification (technical standard) Geometric drawing References [ edit ] ^ a b Goetsch, David L.; Chalk, William S.; Nelson, John A. (2000).

Technical Drawing . Delmar Technical Graphics Series (Fourth ed.).

Albany : Delmar Learning. p. 3.

ISBN 978-0-7668-0531-6 .

OCLC 39756434 .

^ a b Richard Boland and Fred Collopy (2004).

Managing as designing . Stanford University Press, 2004.

ISBN 0-8047-4674-5 , p.69.

^ Bhatt, N.D.

Machine Drawing . Charotar Publication.

^ Jefferis, Alan; Madsen, David (2005), Architectural Drafting and Design (5th ed.), Clifton Park, NY: Delmar Cengage Learning, ISBN 1-4018-6715-4 ^ Goetsch et al. (2000) p. 792 ^ Lieu, Dennis K; Sorby, Sheryl (2009), Visualization, Modeling, and Graphics for Engineering Design (1st ed.), Clifton Park, NY: Delmar Cengage Learning, ISBN 978-1-4018-4249-9 , pp. 1–2 ^ a b Baltes, Sebastian; Diehl, Stephan (11 November 2014).

"Sketches and diagrams in practice" .

Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGSOFT International Symposium on Foundations of Software Engineering . FSE 2014. Hong Kong, China: Association for Computing Machinery. pp.

530– 541.

arXiv : 1706.09172 .

doi : 10.1145/2635868.2635891 .

ISBN 978-1-4503-3056-5 .

S2CID 2436333 .

^ a b Cherubini, Mauro; Venolia, Gina; DeLine, Rob; Ko, Amy J.

(29 April 2007), "Let's go to the whiteboard: How and why software developers use drawings" , Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , New York, NY, US: Association for Computing Machinery, pp.

557– 566, doi : 10.1145/1240624.1240714 , ISBN 978-1-59593-593-9 , S2CID 6604218 , retrieved 8 September 2021 ^ a b Ivan Viola and Meister E. Gröller (2005). "Smart Visibility in Visualization". In: Computational Aesthetics in Graphics, Visualization and Imaging . L. Neumann et al. (Ed.) ^ "The Role of the Technical Illustrator in Industry" .

industriegrafik.com . 15 June 2002. Archived from the original on 14 August 2009 . Retrieved 15 February 2009 .

^ Diepstraten, J.; Weiskopf, D.; Ertl, T. (2003).

"Interactive Cutaway Illustrations" (PDF) .

vis.uni-stuttgart.de . Archived from the original (PDF) on 16 December 2005.

in Brunet, P.; Fellner, D. (eds.). "Eurographics 2003".

Eurographics .

22 (3). The Eurographics Association and Blackwell Publishers.

^ Goetsch et al. (2000), p. 341 ^ a b c "General Information Concerning Patents § 1.84 Standards for drawings" .

USPTO.gov . January 2005. Archived from the original on 30 January 2009 . Retrieved 13 February 2009 .

^ Michael E. Brumbach, Jeffrey A. Clade (2003).

Industrial Maintenance . Cengage Learning, 2003 ISBN 0-7668-2695-3 , p.65 ^ Ralph W. Liebing (1999).

Architectural working drawings . John Wiley and Sons, 1999.

ISBN 0-471-34876-7 .

^ Goetsch et al. (2000), p. 613 ^ "as-built drawings" .

BusinessDictionary.com . 26 December 2017. Archived from the original on 3 December 2017 . Retrieved 1 January 2018 .

Further reading [ edit ] Peter J. Booker (1963).

A History of Engineering Drawing . London: Northgate.

Franz Maria Feldhaus (1963).

The History of Technical Drawing Wolfgang Lefèvre ed. (2004).

Picturing Machines 1400–1700: How technical drawings shaped early engineering practice.

MIT Press, 2004.

ISBN 0-262-12269-3 External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Technical drawing .

Historical technical diagrams and drawings on NASA.gov A history of CAD Archived 18 September 2009 at the Wayback Machine Drafting Standards v t e Visualization of technical information Fields Biological data visualization Chemical imaging Crime mapping Data visualization Educational visualization Flow visualization Geovisualization Information visualization Mathematical visualization Medical imaging Molecular graphics Product visualization Scientific visualization Social visualization Software visualization Technical drawing User interface design Visual analytics Visual culture Volume visualization Image types Chart Diagram Engineering drawing Graph of a function Ideogram Map Photograph Pictogram Plot Sankey diagram Schematic Skeletal formula Statistical graphics Table Technical drawings Technical illustration People Pre-19th century Edmond Halley Charles-René de Fourcroy Joseph Priestley Gaspard Monge 19th century Charles Dupin Adolphe Quetelet André-Michel Guerry William Playfair August Kekulé Charles Joseph Minard Francis Amasa Walker John Venn Oliver Byrne Matthew Sankey Charles Booth John Snow Florence Nightingale Karl Wilhelm Pohlke Toussaint Loua Francis Galton Early 20th century Edward Walter Maunder Otto Neurath W. E. B. Du Bois Henry Gantt Arthur Lyon Bowley Howard G. Funkhouser John B. Peddle Ejnar Hertzsprung Henry Norris Russell Max O. Lorenz Fritz Kahn Harry Beck Erwin Raisz Mid 20th century Jacques Bertin Rudolf Modley Arthur H. Robinson John Tukey Mary Eleanor Spear Edgar Anderson Howard T. Fisher Late 20th century Borden Dent Nigel Holmes William S. Cleveland George G. Robertson Bruce H. McCormick Catherine Plaisant Stuart Card Pat Hanrahan Edward Tufte Ben Shneiderman Michael Friendly Howard Wainer Clifford A. Pickover Lawrence J. Rosenblum Thomas A. DeFanti George Furnas Sheelagh Carpendale Cynthia Brewer Jock D. Mackinlay Alan MacEachren David Goodsell Kwan-Liu Ma Michael Maltz Leland Wilkinson Alfred Inselberg Early 21st century Ben Fry Jeffrey Heer Jessica Hullman Daniel A. Keim Gordon Kindlmann Aaron Koblin Christopher R. Johnson Manuel Lima David McCandless Mauro Martino John Maeda Miriah Meyer Tamara Munzner Ade Olufeko Hanspeter Pfister Hans Rosling Claudio Silva Moritz Stefaner Fernanda Viégas Martin Wattenberg Bang Wong Hadley Wickham Related topics Cartography Chartjunk Color coding Computer graphics in computer science CPK coloring Graph drawing Graphic design Graphic organizer Imaging science Information art Information graphics Information science Misleading graph Neuroimaging Patent drawing Scientific modelling Spatial analysis Visual perception Volume cartography Volume rendering Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐api‐ext.codfw.main‐77f755c49c‐6x84s
Cached time: 20250817130513
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.468 seconds
Real time usage: 0.613 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 3006/1000000
Revision size: 25803/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 73332/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 2023/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 16/100
Expensive parser function count: 15/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 85581/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.270/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 6563696/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  490.853      1 -total
 26.84%  131.755      1 Template:Reflist
 14.72%   72.258      3 Template:Cite_book
 14.62%   71.780      1 Template:Technical_drawings
 13.75%   67.506      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 11.26%   55.274      1 Template:Short_description
 10.85%   53.276      1 Template:Commons_category
 10.48%   51.433      1 Template:Sister_project
 10.17%   49.938      1 Template:Side_box
  7.17%   35.211      2 Template:Pagetype Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:54952:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817130513 and revision id 1306386907. Rendering was triggered because: unknown Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Technical_drawing&oldid=1306386907 " Categories : Technical drawing Architecture occupations Engineering occupations Infographics Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Commons category link from Wikidata Webarchive template wayback links Use dmy dates from August 2019 This page was last edited on 17 August 2025, at 13:05 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Technical drawing 54 languages Add topic

