Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 Terminology Toggle Terminology subsection 2.1 Chattel slavery 2.2 Bonded labour 2.3 Dependents 2.4 Forced labour 2.4.1 Child soldiers and child labour 2.5 Forced marriage 2.6 Other uses of the term 3 Characteristics Toggle Characteristics subsection 3.1 Economics 3.2 Identification 4 Legal aspects Toggle Legal aspects subsection 4.1 Private versus state-owned slaves 4.2 Legal rights 5 History Toggle History subsection 5.1 Africa 5.2 Middle East 5.3 Americas 5.3.1 Spanish colonial America 5.3.2 English and Dutch Caribbean 5.3.3 Brazil 5.3.4 Haiti 5.3.5 United States 5.4 Asia-Pacific 5.4.1 East Asia 5.4.2 South Asia 5.4.3 South East Asia 5.4.4 Oceania 5.5 Europe 5.5.1 Ancient Greece and Rome 5.5.2 Medieval and early modern Europe 5.5.3 World War II 5.5.4 Communist states 6 Contemporary slavery Toggle Contemporary slavery subsection 6.1 Distribution 6.1.1 China 6.1.2 Libya 6.1.3 Mauritania 6.1.4 North Korea 6.1.5 Taiwan 6.1.6 Yemen 6.2 Economics 6.3 Trafficking 7 Abolitionism Toggle Abolitionism subsection 7.1 In antiquity 7.2 Americas 7.3 Europe 7.4 Worldwide 8 Apologies Toggle Apologies subsection 8.1 Reparations 9 Media 10 See also 11 References Toggle References subsection 11.1 Bibliography 12 Further reading Toggle Further reading subsection 12.1 Surveys and reference 12.1.1 United States 12.1.2 Slavery in the modern era 13 External links Toggle External links subsection 13.1 Historical 13.2 Modern Toggle the table of contents Slavery 159 languages Адыгэбзэ Afrikaans Alemannisch አማርኛ Ænglisc العربية Aragonés অসমীয়া Asturianu Avañe'ẽ Aymar aru Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه বাংলা Banjar 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Bikol Central Български Boarisch བོད་ཡིག Bosanski Brezhoneg Буряад Català Чӑвашла Čeština ChiShona ChiTumbuka Cymraeg Dansk الدارجة Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Estremeñu Euskara فارسی Fiji Hindi Føroyskt Français Frysk Fulfulde Gaeilge Gàidhlig Galego Gĩkũyũ ગુજરાતી 한국어 Hausa Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa ಕನ್ನಡ Къарачай-малкъар ქართული Қазақша Kiswahili Kongo Kreyòl ayisyen Kriyòl gwiyannen Kurdî Кыргызча Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Limburgs Lingála La .lojban.

Lombard Magyar Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം Malti मराठी مصرى Bahasa Melayu Mirandés Монгол မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands नेपाली नेपाल भाषा 日本語 Нохчийн Nordfriisk Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Papiamentu پښتو Patois ភាសាខ្មែរ Piemontèis Plattdüütsch Polski Português Qaraqalpaqsha Qırımtatarca Română Runa Simi Русиньскый Русский Саха тыла Sardu Setswana Shqip Sicilianu සිංහල Simple English سنڌي Slovenčina Slovenščina Soomaaliga کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Татарча / tatarça తెలుగు ไทย Thuɔŋjäŋ Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Tyap Українська اردو ئۇيغۇرچە / Uyghurche Vèneto Tiếng Việt Võro Winaray 吴语 ייִדיש Yorùbá 粵語 Zazaki Žemaitėška 中文 Batak Mandailing Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Chattel slavery ) Ownership of people as property "Slave" and "Slaves" redirect here. For other uses, see Slave (disambiguation) .

"Slave master" redirects here. For other uses, see Slave Master (disambiguation) .

"Slave labour" redirects here. For the Banksy artwork, see Slave Labour (mural) .

Part of a series on Forced labour and slavery Contemporary Child labour Child soldiers Conscription CSEC Debt bondage India Forced marriage Bride buying Child marriage Wife selling Forced prostitution Human trafficking Child China Cybersex Europe Fraud factory India United States Involuntary servitude ... in 21st-century jihadism ... in Africa Peonage Penal labour Sex trafficking China Europe United States Sexual slavery Wage slavery Historical Antiquity Babylonia Egypt Greece Rome Medieval Europe Ancillae Black Sea slave trade Byzantine Empire Genoese slave trade Kholop Prague slave trade Serfs History In Russia Emancipation Thrall Venetian slave trade Balkan slave trade Muslim world Baqt Barbary Coast slave trade pirates Sack of Baltimore Slave raid of Suðuroy Turkish Abductions Bukhara slave trade Concubinage history Ma malakat aymanukum Avret Pazarları Harem Abbasid harem Ottoman Imperial Harem Safavid imperial harem Qajar harem Jarya / Cariye Odalisque Qiyan Umm al-walad Circassian slave trade Contract of manumission Crimean slave trade Kafala system Khazar slave trade Khivan slave trade Ottoman Empire Avret Pazarları Saqaliba Slavery in the Abbasid Caliphate Slavery in al-Andalus Slavery in the Rashidun Caliphate Slavery in the Umayyad Caliphate Slavery in the Abbasid Caliphate Volga Bulgarian slave trade 21st century Atlantic slave trade Brazil Bristol Database Dutch Middle Passage Nantes New France Panyarring Spanish Empire Slave Coast Thirteen colonies Topics and practice Blackbirding Child soldiers Conscription Devshirme Ghilman Mamluk Coolie Corvée labour Drapetomania Dysaesthesia aethiopica Field slaves in the United States Treatment Gladiator Gladiatrix House slaves Planter class Proslavery thought Saqaliba Seasoning Slave market Slave Power Slave raiding Slavocracy Voluntary slavery White slavery Naval Galley slave Impressment Pirates Shanghaiing Slave ship By country or region Sub-Saharan Africa Contemporary Africa Trans-Saharan slave trade Red Sea slave trade Indian Ocean slave trade Zanzibar slave trade Angola Chad Comoros Ethiopia Mali Mauritania Niger Nigeria Seychelles Somalia Somali slave trade South Africa Sudan Zanzibar North and South America Pre-Columbian America Aztec Americas indigenous U.S. Natives United States field slaves female contemporary maps partus prison labour slave codes treatment interregional proslavery sexual slavery The Bahamas Canada Caribbean Barbados British Virgin Islands Trinidad Code Noir Latin America Brazil Lei Áurea Colombia Cuba Haiti revolt Restavek ( Encomienda ) Puerto Rico East, Southeast, and South Asia Haruwa-charuwa Human trafficking in Southeast Asia Bhutan Brunei China Booi Aha Eunuchs Laogai penal system India Debt bondage Chukri System Bawi system Indonesia Japan comfort women Karayuki-san Korea Kwalliso Nobi Malaysia Maldives Slavery in the Mongol Empire Thailand Yankee princess Vietnam Australia and Oceania Australia Human trafficking Blackbirding Slave raiding in Easter Island Human trafficking in Papua New Guinea Blackbirding in Polynesia Europe and North Asia Sex trafficking in Europe United Kingdom Penal Labour Slavery Albania Bulgaria Denmark Dutch Republic Finland France Georgia Germany in World War II Hungary Malta Norway Poland Portugal Romania Russia Serbia Spain Sweden Switzerland North Africa and West Asia Afghanistan Bacha bazi Algeria Bahrain Egypt Human trafficking in the Middle East Iran Iraq Jordan Kuwait Lebanon Libya Morocco Oman Palestine Saudi Arabia Syria Tunisia Qatar Yemen United Arab Emirates Religion Bible Christianity Catholicism Mormonism Islam Judaism Baháʼí Faith Opposition and resistance Abolitionism U.K.

U.S.

Brussels Anti-Slavery Conference 1889–90 Temporary Slavery Commission 1926 Slavery Convention Committee of Experts on Slavery Advisory Committee of Experts on Slavery Ad Hoc Committee on Slavery Supplementary Convention on the Abolition of Slavery Abolitionists Anglo-Egyptian Slave Trade Convention Anti-Slavery International Blockade of Africa U.K.

U.S.

Colonization Liberia Sierra Leone Compensated emancipation Freedman Manumission Freedom suit Slave Power Underground Railroad songs Slave rebellion Slave Trade Acts International law Third Servile War 13th Amendment to the United States Constitution Timeline of abolition of slavery and serfdom Abolition of slave trade in Persian gulf [ fa ] Related Common law Forced labour Fugitive slaves laws convention Great Dismal Swamp maroons Indentured servitude List of slaves owners last survivors of American slavery List of slavery-related memorials and museums Slave catcher Slave marriages in the United States Slave narrative films songs Slave name Slave patrol Slave Route Project breeding court cases Washington Jefferson J.Q. Adams Lincoln Emancipation Proclamation 40 acres Freedmen's Bureau Iron bit Emancipation Day v t e Slavery is the ownership of a person as property , especially in regards to their labour.

[ 1 ] It is an economic phenomenon and its history resides in economic history.

[ 2 ] Slavery typically involves compulsory work, with the slave's location of work and residence dictated by the party that holds them in bondage.

Enslavement is the placement of a person into slavery, and the person is called a slave or an enslaved person (see § Terminology ).

Peter , a slave from Louisiana , in 1863. The scars are the result of a whipping by his overseer.

Many historical cases of enslavement occurred as a result of breaking the law, becoming indebted, suffering a military defeat, or exploitation for cheaper labor; other forms of slavery were instituted along demographic lines such as race or sex . Slaves would be kept in bondage for life, or for a fixed period of time after which they would be granted freedom .

[ 3 ] Although slavery is usually involuntary and involves coercion, there are also cases where people voluntarily enter into slavery to pay a debt or earn money due to poverty . In the course of human history , slavery was a typical feature of civilization , [ 4 ] and existed in most societies throughout history, [ 5 ] [ 6 ] but it is now outlawed in most countries of the world, except as a punishment for a crime .

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] In general there were two types of slavery throughout human history: domestic and productive.

[ 4 ] In chattel slavery , the slave is legally rendered the personal property (chattel) of the slave owner. In economics, the term de facto slavery describes the conditions of unfree labour and forced labour that most slaves endure.

[ 9 ] In 2019, approximately 40 million people, of whom 26% were children, were still enslaved throughout the world despite slavery being illegal. In the modern world, more than 50% of slaves provide forced labour , usually in the factories and sweatshops of the private sector of a country's economy.

[ 10 ] In industrialised countries, human trafficking is a modern variety of slavery; in non-industrialised countries, people in debt bondage are common, [ 9 ] others include captive domestic servants , people in forced marriages , and child soldiers .

[ 11 ] Etymology The word slave was borrowed into Middle English through the Old French esclave which ultimately derives from Byzantine Greek σκλάβος ( sklábos ) or εσκλαβήνος ( ésklabḗnos ).

According to the widespread view, which has been known since the 18th century, the Byzantine Σκλάβινοι ( Sklábinoi ), Έσκλαβηνοί ( Ésklabēnoí ), borrowed from a Slavic tribe self-name *Slověne, turned into σκλάβος , εσκλαβήνος ( Late Latin sclāvus) in the meaning 'prisoner of war slave', 'slave' in the 8th/9th century, because they often became captured and enslaved.

[ 12 ] [ 13 ] [ 14 ] [ 15 ] However this version has been disputed since the 19th century.

[ 16 ] [ 17 ] An alternative contemporary hypothesis suggests that Medieval Latin sclāvus via * scylāvus derives from Byzantine σκυλάω ( skūláō , skyláō ) or σκυλεύω ( skūleúō , skyleúō ) with the meaning "to strip the enemy (killed in a battle)" or "to make booty / extract spoils of war".

[ 18 ] [ 19 ] [ 20 ] [ 21 ] This version has been criticized as well.

[ 22 ] Terminology There is no consensus among historians about whether terms such as " unfree labourer " or "enslaved person", rather than "slave", should be used when describing the victims of slavery.

[ 4 ] According to those proposing a change in terminology, slave perpetuates the crime of slavery in language by reducing its victims to a nonhuman noun instead of "carry[ing] them forward as people, not the property that they were" (see also People-first language ). Other historians prefer slave because the term is familiar and shorter, or because it accurately reflects the inhumanity of slavery, with person implying a degree of autonomy that slavery does not allow.

[ 23 ] Chattel slavery Flogging a slave fastened to the ground , illustration in an 1853 anti-slavery pamphlet A poster for a slave auction in Georgia , U.S., 1860 Portrait of an older woman in New Orleans with her enslaved servant girl in the mid-19th century As a social institution, chattel slavery classes slaves as chattels ( personal property ) owned by the enslaver; like livestock, they can be bought and sold at will.

[ 24 ] Chattel slavery was historically the normal form of slavery worldwide and was practiced in places such as classical Greece and the Roman Empire , where it was considered a keystone of society.

[ 25 ] [ 26 ] [ 27 ] Other places where it was extensively practiced include the Muslim world such as Medieval Egypt , [ 28 ] Subsaharan Africa, [ 29 ] Brazil, the Antebellum United States , and parts of the Caribbean such as Cuba and Haiti.

[ 30 ] [ 31 ] The Iroquois enslaved others in ways that "looked very like chattel slavery." [ 32 ] Beginning in the 18th century, a series of abolitionist movements in Europe and the Americas saw slavery as a violation of the slaves' rights as people (" all men are created equal "), and sought to abolish it. Abolitionism encountered extreme resistance but was eventually successful. Several of the states of the United States began abolishing slavery during the American Revolutionary War. 
After the French Revolution , the government of France abolished slavery in 1794, but Napoleon reintroduced it in 1802 and permanent abolition did not occur until 1848. 
In much of the British Empire , slavery was subject to abolition in 1833, throughout the United States it was abolished in 1865 as a result of the Civil War , which was fought after the attempted secession of the South in order to protect its "Peculiar Institution" (I.e. slavery).  In Cuba slavery was abolished in 1886. The last country in the Americas to abolish slavery was Brazil, in 1888 .

[ 33 ] Chattel slavery survived longest in the Middle East . After the trans-Atlantic slave trade had been suppressed, the ancient trans-Saharan slave trade , the Indian Ocean slave trade and the Red Sea slave trade continued to traffic slaves from the African continent to the Middle East.

During the 20th century, the issue of chattel slavery was addressed and investigated globally by international bodies created by the League of Nations and the United Nations (UN), such as the Temporary Slavery Commission in 1924–1926, the Committee of Experts on Slavery in 1932, and the Advisory Committee of Experts on Slavery in 1934–1939.

[ 34 ] By the time of the UN Ad Hoc Committee on Slavery in 1950–1951, legal chattel slavery still existed only in the Arabian Peninsula: in Oman , in Qatar , in Saudi Arabia , in the Trucial States and in Yemen .

[ 34 ] Legal chattel slavery was finally abolished in the Arabian Peninsula in the 1960s: Saudi Arabia and Yemen in 1962, in Dubai in 1963, and Oman as the last in 1970.

[ 34 ] The last country to abolish slavery, Mauritania , did so in 1981 . While slavery had technically been banned by colonial France in French West Africa (including Mauritania) already in 1905, [ 35 ] this had been a purely nominal ban. The 1981 ban on slavery was not enforced in practice, as legal mechanisms to prosecute those who used slaves were not implemented until 2007.

[ 36 ] [ 37 ] Bonded labour Main article: Debt bondage See also: Money marriage and Chukri system Indenture, also known as bonded labour or debt bondage, is a form of unfree labour in which a person works to pay off a debt by pledging themself as collateral. The services required to repay the debt, and their duration, may be undefined. Debt bondage can be passed on from generation to generation, with children required to pay off their progenitors' debt.

[ 38 ] Debt bondage is most prevalent in South Asia, [ 38 ] and is the most widespread form of slavery today.

[ 39 ] Money marriage refers to a marriage where a child, usually a girl, is married off to settle debts owed by their parents.

[ 40 ] The Chukri system is a debt bondage system found in parts of Bengal where a woman or girl can be coerced into prostitution in order to pay off debts.

[ 41 ] Dependents The word slavery has also been used to refer to a legal state of dependency to somebody else.

[ 42 ] [ 43 ] For example, in Persia , the situations and lives of such slaves could be better than those of common citizens.

[ 44 ] A Black family works a cotton plantation in Mississippi. The subtitle says "We'se done all dis's morning".

Forced labour Main article: Forced labour See also: Human trafficking Forced labour, or unfree labour, is sometimes used to describe an individual who is forced to work against their own will, under threat of violence or other punishment. This may also include institutions not commonly classified as slavery, such as serfdom , conscription and penal labour . As slavery has been legally outlawed in all countries, forced labour in the present day (frequently referred to as " modern slavery ") revolves around illegal control.

Human trafficking primarily involves women and children forced into prostitution and is the fastest growing form of forced labour, with Thailand, Cambodia, India, Brazil and Mexico having been identified as leading hotspots of commercial sexual exploitation of children .

[ 45 ] [ 46 ] Child soldiers and child labour Main article: Child slavery See also: Child labour and Military use of children In 2007, Human Rights Watch estimated that 200,000 to 300,000 children served as soldiers in then-current conflicts.

[ 47 ] [ 48 ] More girls under 16 work as domestic workers than any other category of child labour, often sent to cities by parents living in rural poverty as with the Haitian restaveks .

[ 49 ] Forced marriage See also: Marriage by abduction and Child marriage Forced marriages or early marriages are often considered types of slavery. Forced marriage continues to be practiced in parts of the world including some parts of Asia and Africa and in immigrant communities in the West.

[ 50 ] [ 51 ] [ 52 ] [ 53 ] Marriage by abduction occurs in many places in the world today, with a 2003 study finding a national average of 69% of marriages in Ethiopia being through abduction.

[ 54 ] Other uses of the term The word slavery is often used as a pejorative to describe any activity in which one is coerced into performing. Some argue that military drafts and other forms of coerced government labour constitute "state-operated slavery." [ 55 ] [ 56 ] Some libertarians and anarcho-capitalists view government taxation as a form of slavery.

[ 57 ] "Slavery" has been used by some anti-psychiatry proponents to define involuntary psychiatric patients, claiming there are no unbiased physical tests for mental illness and yet the psychiatric patient must follow the orders of the psychiatrist. They assert that instead of chains to control the slave, the psychiatrist uses drugs to control the mind.

[ 58 ] Drapetomania was a pseudoscientific psychiatric diagnosis for a slave who desired freedom; "symptoms" included laziness and the tendency to flee captivity.

[ 59 ] [ 60 ] Some proponents of animal rights have applied the term slavery to the condition of some or all human-owned animals, arguing that their status is comparable to that of human slaves.

[ 61 ] The labour market, as institutionalized under contemporary capitalist systems, has been criticized by mainstream socialists and by anarcho-syndicalists , who utilise the term wage slavery as a pejorative or dysphemism for wage labour .

[ 62 ] [ 63 ] [ 64 ] Socialists draw parallels between the trade of labour as a commodity and slavery.

Cicero is also known to have suggested such parallels.

[ 65 ] Characteristics Economics Economists have modeled the circumstances under which slavery (and variants such as serfdom ) appear and disappear. One theoretical model is that slavery becomes more desirable for landowners where land is abundant, but labour is scarce, such that rent is depressed and paid workers can demand high wages. If the opposite holds true, then it is more costly for landowners to guard the slaves than to employ paid workers who can demand only low wages because of the degree of competition.

[ 66 ] Thus, first slavery and then serfdom gradually decreased in Europe as the population grew. They were reintroduced in the Americas and in Russia as large areas of land with few inhabitants became available.

[ 67 ] Slavery is more common when the tasks are relatively simple and thus easy to supervise, such as large-scale monocrops such as sugarcane and cotton , in which output depended on economies of scale . This enables systems of labour, such as the gang system in the United States, to become prominent on large plantations where field hands toiled with factory-like precision. Then, each work gang was based on an internal division of labour that assigned every member of the gang to a task and made each worker's performance dependent on the actions of the others. The slaves chopped out the weeds that surrounded the cotton plants as well as excess sprouts. Plow gangs followed behind, stirring the soil near the plants and tossing it back around the plants. Thus, the gang system worked like an assembly line .

[ 68 ] Since the 18th century, critics have argued that slavery hinders technological advancement because the focus is on increasing the number of slaves doing simple tasks rather than upgrading their efficiency. For example, it is sometimes argued that, because of this narrow focus, technology in Greece – and later in Rome – was not applied to ease physical labour or improve manufacturing.

[ 69 ] [ 70 ] The work of the Mercedarians was in ransoming Christian slaves held in North Africa (1637).

Scottish economist Adam Smith stated that free labour was economically better than slave labour, and that it was nearly impossible to end slavery in a free, democratic, or republican form of government since many of its legislators or political figures were slave owners and would not punish themselves. He further stated that slaves would be better able to gain their freedom under centralized government, or a central authority like a king or church.

[ 71 ] [ 72 ] Similar arguments appeared later in the works of Auguste Comte , especially given Smith's belief in the separation of powers , or what Comte called the "separation of the spiritual and the temporal" during the Middle Ages and the end of slavery, and Smith's criticism of masters, past and present. As Smith stated in the Lectures on Jurisprudence , "The great power of the clergy thus concurring with that of the king set the slaves at liberty. But it was absolutely necessary both that the authority of the king and of the clergy should be great. Where ever any one of these was wanting, slavery still continues..." [ 73 ] Sale and inspection of slaves Even after slavery became a criminal offense, slave owners could get high returns. According to researcher Siddharth Kara , the profits generated worldwide by all forms of slavery in 2007 were $91.2 billion. That was second only to drug trafficking, in terms of global criminal enterprises. At the time the weighted average global sales price of a slave was estimated to be approximately $340, with a high of $1,895 for the average trafficked sex slave, and a low of $40 to $50 for debt bondage slaves in part of Asia and Africa. The weighted average annual profits generated by a slave in 2007 was $3,175, with a low of an average $950 for bonded labour and $29,210 for a trafficked sex slave. Approximately 40% of slave profits each year were generated by trafficked sex slaves, representing slightly more than 4% of the world's 29 million slaves.

[ 74 ] Identification Branding of a female slave Barefooted slaves depicted in David Roberts ' Egypt and Nubia , issued between 1845 and 1849 Slave branding, c.

1853 Slaves are often identified or marked via mutilation or tattooing . A widespread practice was branding , either to explicitly mark slaves as property or as punishment. Some slaves are forced to wear shackles that cannot be removed such as cuffs , legcuffs , collars, chains , or anklets .

Legal aspects Private versus state-owned slaves Slaves have been owned privately by individuals but have also been under state ownership. For example, the kisaeng were women from low castes in pre modern Korea, who were owned by the state under government officials known as hojang and were required to provide entertainment to the aristocracy. In the 2020s, in North Korea , Kippumjo ("Pleasure Brigades") are made up of women selected from the general population to serve as entertainers and as concubines to the rulers of North Korea.

[ 75 ] [ 76 ] "Tribute labor" is compulsory labor for the state and has been used in various iterations such as corvée , mit'a and repartimiento . The internment camps of totalitarian regimes such as the Nazis and the Soviet Union placed increasing importance on the labor provided in those camps, leading to a growing tendency among historians to designate such systems as slavery.

[ 77 ] A combination of these include the encomienda where the Spanish Crown granted private individuals the right to the free labour of a specified number of natives in a given area.

[ 78 ] In the "Red Rubber System" of both the Congo Free State and French ruled Ubangi-Shari , [ 79 ] labour was demanded as taxation; private companies were conceded areas within which they were allowed to use any measures to increase rubber production.

[ 80 ] Convict leasing was common in the Southern United States where the state would lease prisoners for their free labour to companies.

Legal rights Depending upon the era and the country, slaves sometimes had a limited set of legal rights. For example, in the Province of New York , people who deliberately killed slaves were punishable under a 1686 statute.

[ 81 ] And, as already mentioned, certain legal rights attached to the nobi in Korea, to slaves in various African societies, and to black female slaves in the French colony of Louisiana . Giving slaves legal rights has sometimes been a matter of morality, but also sometimes a matter of self-interest. For example, in ancient Athens , protecting slaves from mistreatment simultaneously protected people who might be mistaken for slaves, and giving slaves limited property rights incentivized slaves to work harder to get more property.

[ 82 ] In the southern United States prior to the extirpation of slavery in 1865 , a proslavery legal treatise reported that slaves accused of crimes typically had a legal right to counsel, freedom from double jeopardy , a right to trial by jury in graver cases, and the right to grand jury indictment, but they lacked many other rights such as white adults' ability to control their own lives.

[ 83 ] History Main article: History of slavery See also: Slavery in antiquity Corinthian black-figure terra-cotta votive tablet of slaves working in a mine, dated to the late seventh century BC Slavery predates written records and has existed in many cultures.

[ 84 ] Slavery is rare among hunter-gatherer populations because it requires economic surpluses and a substantial population density. Thus, although it has existed among unusually resource-rich hunter gatherers, such as the American Indian peoples of the salmon -rich rivers of the Pacific Northwest coast, slavery became widespread only with the invention of agriculture during the Neolithic Revolution about 11,000 years ago.

[ 4 ] Slavery was practiced in almost every ancient civilization.

[ 84 ] Such institutions included debt bondage, punishment for crime, the enslavement of prisoners of war , child abandonment , and the enslavement of slaves' offspring.

[ 85 ] Africa See also: Slavery in Africa Slavery was widespread in Africa, which pursued both internal and external slave trade.

[ 86 ] In the Senegambia region, between 1300 and 1900, close to one-third of the population was enslaved. In early Islamic states of the western Sahel , including Ghana , Mali , Segou , and Songhai , about a third of the population were enslaved.

[ 87 ] In European courtly society, and European aristocracy, black African slaves and their children became visible in the late 1300s and 1400s. Starting with Frederick II, Holy Roman Emperor , black Africans were included in the retinue . In 1402 an Ethiopian embassy reached Venice . In the 1470s black Africans were painted as court attendants in wall paintings that were displayed in Mantua and Ferrara . In the 1490s black Africans were included on the emblem of the Duke of Milan .

[ 88 ] 13th-century slave market in Yemen [ 89 ] During the trans-Saharan slave trade , slaves from West Africa were transported across the Sahara desert to North Africa to be sold to Mediterranean and Middle eastern civilizations. During the Red Sea slave trade , slaves were transported from Africa across the Red Sea to the Arabian Peninsula. The Indian Ocean slave trade , sometimes known as the east African slave trade, was multi-directional. Africans were sent as slaves to the Arabian Peninsula , to Indian Ocean islands (including Madagascar ), to the Indian subcontinent , and later to the Americas. These traders captured Bantu peoples ( Zanj ) from the interior in present-day Kenya , Mozambique and Tanzania and brought them to the coast.

[ 90 ] [ 91 ] There, the slaves gradually assimilated in rural areas, particularly on Unguja and Pemba islands.

[ 92 ] Some historians assert that as many as 17 million people were sold into slavery on the coast of the Indian Ocean, the Middle East, and North Africa, and approximately 5 million African slaves were bought by Muslim slave traders and taken from Africa across the Red Sea, Indian Ocean, and Sahara Desert between 1500 and 1900.

[ 93 ] The captives were sold throughout the Middle East. This trade accelerated as superior ships led to more trade and greater demand for labour on plantations in the region. Eventually, tens of thousands of captives were being taken every year.

[ 92 ] [ 94 ] [ 95 ] The Indian Ocean slave trade was multi-directional and changed over time. To meet the demand for menial labour, Bantu slaves bought by east African slave traders from southeastern Africa were sold in cumulatively large numbers over the centuries to customers in Egypt, Arabia, the Persian Gulf, India, European colonies in the Far East, the Indian Ocean islands , Ethiopia , Sudan and Somalia.

[ 96 ] According to the Encyclopedia of African History , "It is estimated that by the 1890s the largest slave population of the world, about 2 million people, was concentrated in the territories of the Sokoto Caliphate . The use of slave labour was extensive, especially in agriculture." [ 97 ] [ 98 ] The Anti-Slavery Society estimated there were 2 million slaves in Ethiopia in the early 1930s out of an estimated population of 8 to 16 million.

[ 99 ] Slave labour in East Africa was drawn from the Zanj , Bantu peoples that lived along the East African coast.

[ 91 ] [ 100 ] The Zanj were for centuries shipped as slaves by Arab traders to all the countries bordering the Indian Ocean during the Indian Ocean slave trade . The Umayyad and Abbasid caliphs recruited many Zanj slaves as soldiers and, as early as 696, there were slave revolts of the Zanj against their Arab enslavers during their slavery in the Umayyad Caliphate in Iraq. The Zanj Rebellion , a series of uprisings that took place between 869 and 883 near Basra (also known as Basara), against the slavery in the Abbasid Caliphate situated in present-day Iraq, is believed to have involved enslaved Zanj that had originally been captured from the African Great Lakes region and areas further south in East Africa .

[ 101 ] It grew to involve over 500,000 slaves and free men who were imported from across the Muslim empire and claimed over "tens of thousands of lives in lower Iraq".

[ 102 ] The Zanj who were taken as slaves to the Middle East were often used in strenuous agricultural work.

[ 103 ] As the plantation economy boomed and the Arabs became richer, agriculture and other manual labour work was thought to be demeaning. The resulting labour shortage led to an increased slave market.

Slave market in Algiers , 1684 In Algiers , the capital of Algeria, captured Christians and Europeans were forced into slavery. In about 1650, there were as many as 35,000 Christian slaves in Algiers.

[ 104 ] By one estimate, raids by Barbary slave traders on coastal villages and ships extending from Italy to Iceland, enslaved an estimated 1 to 1.25 million Europeans between the 16th and 19th centuries.

[ 105 ] [ 106 ] [ 107 ] However, this estimate is the result of an extrapolation which assumes that the number of European slaves captured by Barbary pirates was constant for a 250-year period: There are no records of how many men, women and children were enslaved, but it is possible to calculate roughly the number of fresh captives that would have been needed to keep populations steady and replace those slaves who died, escaped, were ransomed, or converted to Islam. On this basis it is thought that around 8,500 new slaves were needed annually to replenish numbers – about 850,000 captives over the century from 1580 to 1680. By extension, for the 250 years between 1530 and 1780, the figure could easily have been as high as 1,250,000.

[ 108 ] Davis' numbers have been refuted by other historians, such as David Earle, who cautions that true picture of Europeans slaves is clouded by the fact the corsairs also seized non-Christian whites from eastern Europe.

[ 108 ] In addition, the number of slaves traded was hyperactive, [ clarification needed ] with exaggerated estimates relying on peak years to calculate averages for entire centuries, or millennia. Hence, there were wide fluctuations year-to-year, particularly in the 18th and 19th centuries, given slave imports, and also given the fact that, prior to the 1840s, there are no consistent records. Middle East expert, John Wright, cautions that modern estimates are based on back-calculations from human observation.

[ 109 ] Such observations, across the late 16th and early 17th century observers, account for around 35,000 European Christian slaves held throughout this period on the Barbary Coast, across Tripoli, Tunis, but mostly in Algiers. The majority were sailors (particularly those who were English), taken with their ships, but others were fishermen and coastal villagers. However, most of these captives were people from lands close to Africa, particularly Spain and Italy.

[ 110 ] This eventually led to the bombardment of Algiers by an Anglo-Dutch fleet in 1816.

[ 111 ] [ 110 ] Arab-Swahili slave traders and their captives on the Ruvuma River in East Africa, 19th century Under Omani Arabs, Zanzibar became East Africa's main slave port , with as many as 50,000 African slaves passing through every year during the 19th century.

[ 112 ] [ 113 ] Some historians estimate that between 11 and 18 million African slaves crossed the Red Sea, Indian Ocean, and Sahara Desert from 650 to 1900 AD.

[ 84 ] [ failed verification ] [ 114 ] Eduard Rüppell described the losses of Nuba slaves from Southern sudan being transported on foot to Egypt: "after the Daftardar bey's 1822 campaign in the southern Nuba mountains, nearly 40,000 slaves were captured. However, through bad treatment, disease and desert travel barely 5,000 made it to Egypt." [ 115 ] W.A. Veenhoven wrote: "The German doctor, Gustav Nachtigal , an eye-witness, believed that for every slave who arrived at a market three or four died on the way ...

Keltie ( The Partition of Africa , London, 1920) believes that for every slave the Arabs brought to the coast at least six died on the way or during the slavers' raid.

Livingstone puts the figure as high as ten to one." [ 116 ] Systems of servitude and slavery were common in parts of Africa, as they were in much of the ancient world . In many African societies where slavery was prevalent, the slaves were not treated as chattel slaves and were given certain rights in a system similar to indentured servitude elsewhere in the world. The forms of slavery in Africa were closely related to kinship structures. In many African communities, where land could not be owned, enslavement of individuals was used as a means to increase the influence a person had and expand connections.

[ 117 ] This made slaves a permanent part of a master's lineage and the children of slaves could become closely connected with the larger family ties.

[ 118 ] Children of slaves born into families could be integrated into the master's kinship group and rise to prominent positions within society, even to the level of chief in some instances. However, stigma often remained attached and there could be strict separations between slave members of a kinship group and those related to the master.

[ 117 ] Slavery was practiced in many different forms: debt slavery, enslavement of war captives, military slavery, and criminal slavery were all practiced in various parts of Africa.

[ 119 ] Slavery for domestic and court purposes was widespread throughout Africa.

A model showing a cross-section of a typical 1700s European slave ship on the Middle Passage , National Museum of American History When the Atlantic slave trade began, many of the local slave systems began supplying captives for chattel slave markets outside Africa. Although the Atlantic slave trade was not the only slave trade from Africa, it was the largest in volume and intensity. As Elikia M'bokolo wrote in Le Monde diplomatique : The African continent was bled of its human resources via all possible routes. Across the Sahara, through the Red Sea, from the Indian Ocean ports and across the Atlantic. At least ten centuries of slavery for the benefit of the Muslim countries (from the ninth to the nineteenth).... Four million enslaved people exported via the Red Sea , another four million through the Swahili ports of the Indian Ocean, perhaps as many as nine million along the trans-Saharan caravan route, and eleven to twenty million (depending on the author) across the Atlantic Ocean.

[ 120 ] The trans-Atlantic slave trade peaked in the late 18th century, when the largest number of slaves were captured on raiding expeditions into the interior of West Africa. These expeditions were typically carried out by African kingdoms , such as the Oyo Empire ( Yoruba ), the Ashanti Empire , [ 121 ] the kingdom of Dahomey , [ 122 ] and the Aro Confederacy .

[ 123 ] It is estimated that about 15 percent of slaves died during the voyage , with mortality rates considerably higher in Africa itself in the process of capturing and transporting indigenous peoples to the ships.

[ 124 ] [ 125 ] Mauritania was the last country in the world to officially ban slavery, in 1981, [ 36 ] with legal prosecution of slaveholders established in 2007.

[ 126 ] Middle East See also: Islamic views on slavery , History of slavery in the Muslim world , Slavery in the Umayyad Caliphate , Slavery in the Abbasid Caliphate , Slavery in the Mamluk Sultanate , and Slavery in the Ottoman Empire 13th century slave market, Yemen.

Slaves and concubines are considered as possessions in Islam; [ 127 ] Masters may sell, bequeath, give away, pledge, share, hire out or compel them to earn Money.

[ 128 ] 19th-century engraving depicting an Arab slave-trading caravan transporting black African slaves across the Sahara Desert In the earliest known records, slavery is treated as an established institution. The Code of Hammurabi ( c.

1760 BC ), for example, prescribed death for anyone who helped a slave escape or who sheltered a fugitive.

[ 129 ] The Bible mentions slavery as an established institution.

[ 84 ] Slavery existed in Pharaonic Egypt , but studying it is complicated by terminology used by the Egyptians to refer to different classes of servitude over the course of history. Interpretation of the textual evidence of classes of slaves in ancient Egypt has been difficult to differentiate by word usage alone.

[ 130 ] [ 131 ] The three apparent types of enslavement in ancient Egypt were chattel slavery, bonded labour, and forced labour.

[ 132 ] [ 133 ] [ 134 ] Following the Islamic conquests of the 7th and 8th century, slavery was regulated by the Islamic law, in parallell to the Middle East being more or less united by a succession of Islamic empires. The history of slavery in the Muslim Middle East was therefore reflected in the slavery of the Islamic empires that succeeded each other between the 7th and the 20th century. Slavery was hence reflected in the institution of slavery in the Rashidun Caliphate (632–661), slavery in the Umayyad Caliphate (661–750), slavery in the Abbasid Caliphate (750–1258), slavery in the Mamluk Sultanate (1258–1517) and slavery in the Ottoman Empire (1517–1922), before slavery was finally abolished in one Muslim country after another during the 20th century.

Historically, slaves in the Arab World came from many different regions, including Sub-Saharan Africa (mainly Zanj ), [ 135 ] the Caucasus (mainly Circassians ), [ 136 ] Central Asia (mainly Tartars ), and Central and Eastern Europe (mainly Slavs Saqaliba ).

[ 137 ] These slaves were trafficked to the Arab world from Africa via the Trans-Saharan slave trade, the Baqt treaty, the Red Sea slave trade and the Indian Ocean slave trade ; from Asia via the Bukhara slave trade ; and from Europe via the Prague slave trade , the Venetian slave trade and the Barbary slave trade , respectively.

Ottoman wars saw Europeans dragged to that empire.

Between 1517 and 1917, most of the Middle East consisted of the Ottoman Empire . In the Ottoman capital of Constantinople , about one-fifth of the population consisted of slaves.

[ 4 ] The city was a major centre of the slave trade in the 15th and later centuries.

Eastern European slaves were provided for slavery in the Ottoman Empire via the Crimean slave trade by Tatar raids on Slavic villages [ 138 ] but also by conquest and the suppression of rebellions, in the aftermath of which entire populations were sometimes enslaved and sold across the Empire, reducing the risk of future rebellion.
The Ottomans also purchased slaves from traders who brought slaves into the Empire from Europe and Africa. It has been estimated that some 200,000 slaves – mainly Circassians – were imported into the Ottoman Empire between 1800 and 1909.

[ 139 ] In 1908, women slaves were still sold in the Ottoman Empire.

[ 140 ] German orientalist, Gustaf Dalman , reported seeing slaves in Muslim houses in Aleppo , belonging to Ottoman Syria, in 1899, and that boys could be bought as slaves in Damascus and Cairo in as late as 1909.

[ 141 ] Persian slave in the Khanate of Khiva , 19th century A major center of slave trade to the Middle east was central Asia, where the Bukhara slave trade had supplied slaves to the Middle East for thousands of years from antiquity until the 1870s.
A slave market for captured Russian and Persian slaves was the Khivan slave trade centred in the Central Asian khanate of Khiva .

[ 142 ] In the early 1840s, the population of the Uzbek states of Bukhara and Khiva included about 900,000 slaves.

[ 139 ] By 1870, chattel slavery had been at least formally banned in most areas of the world, with the exception of Muslim lands in Caucasus, Africa, and the Persian Gulf.

[ 143 ] While slavery was by the 1870s viewed as morally unacceptable in the West, slavery was not considered to be immoral in the Muslim world since it was an institution recognized ( halal ) in the Quran and morally justified under the guise of warfare against non-Muslims ( kafir of Dar al-Harb ), and non-Muslims were kidnapped and enslaved by Muslims around the Muslim world: in the Balkans, the Caucasus, the Baluchistan, India, South West Asia and the Philippines.

[ 143 ] Slaves where marched in shackles to the coasts of Sudan, Ethiopia and Somali, placed upon dhows and trafficked across the Indian Ocean to the Gulf of Aden, or across the Red Sea to Arabia and Aden, with weak slaves being thrown in the sea; or across the Sahara desert via the Trans-Saharan slave trade to the Nile, while dying from exposure and swollen feet.

[ 143 ] Ottoman anti slavery laws where not enforced in the late 19th-century, particularly not in Hejaz; the first attempt to ban the Red Sea slave trade in 1857, the firman of 1857 , resulted in a rebellion in the Hejaz Province, the Hejaz rebellion , which resulted in Hejaz being exempted from the ban.

[ 144 ] The Anglo-Ottoman Convention of 1880 formally banned the Red Sea slave trade, but it was not enforced in the Ottoman Provinces in the Arabian Peninsula.

[ 144 ] In the late 19th century, the Sultan of Morocco stated to Western diplomats that it was impossible for him to ban slavery because such a ban would not be enforceable, but the British asked him to ensure that the slave trade in Morocco would at least be handled discreet and away from the eyes of foreign witnesses.

[ 144 ] Chattel slavery lasted in most of the Middle East until the 20th century. The Red Sea slave trade still provided enslaved people from Africa to the Arabian Peninsula after World War II. As recently as the 1960s, Saudi Arabia's slave population was estimated at 300,000.

[ 145 ] Along with Yemen, the Saudis abolished slavery in 1962.

[ 146 ] Americas Further information: Atlantic slave trade ; Encomienda ; Mita (Inca) ; Institute for Trafficked, Exploited, and Missing Persons ; Slavery in colonial Spanish America ; Slavery in Brazil ; and Slavery in the United States Enslavement in the Americas existed before European arrival and was used for numerous reasons.

[ 147 ] Slavery in Mexico can be traced back to the Aztecs .

[ 148 ] Other Amerindians , such as the Inca of the Andes, the Tupinambá of Brazil, the Creek of Georgia, and the Comanche of Texas, also practiced slavery.

[ 84 ] Slavery in Canada was practiced by First Nations and by European settlers .

[ 149 ] Slave-owning people of what became Canada were, for example, the fishing societies, such as the Yurok , that lived along the Pacific coast from Alaska to California, [ 150 ] on what is sometimes described as the Pacific or Northern Northwest Coast. Some of the indigenous peoples of the Pacific Northwest Coast , such as the Haida and Tlingit , were traditionally known as fierce warriors and slave-traders, raiding as far as California. Slavery was hereditary, the slaves being prisoners of war and their descendants were slaves.

[ 151 ] Some nations in British Columbia continued to segregate and ostracize the descendants of slaves as late as the 1970s.

[ 152 ] Diagrams of a slave ship and the alignment of captive slaves during the Atlantic slave trade Slavery in America remains a contentious issue and played a major role in the history and evolution of some countries, triggering a revolution , a civil war , and numerous rebellions.

The countries that controlled most of the transatlantic slave market in terms of number of slaves shipped were the UK, Portugal and France.

Slaves embarked to America from 1450 until 1800 by country In order to establish itself as an American empire, Spain had to fight against the relatively powerful civilizations of the New World . The Spanish conquest of the indigenous peoples in the Americas included using the Natives as forced labour. The Spanish colonies were the first Europeans to use African slaves in the New World on islands such as Cuba and Hispaniola .

[ 153 ] It was argued by some contemporary writers to be intrinsically immoral.

[ 154 ] [ 155 ] [ 156 ] Bartolomé de las Casas , a 16th-century Dominican friar and Spanish historian, participated in campaigns in Cuba (at Bayamo and Camagüey ) and was present at the massacre of Hatuey ; his observation of that massacre led him to fight for a social movement away from the use of natives as slaves. Also, the alarming decline in the native population had spurred the first royal laws protecting the native population . The first African slaves arrived in Hispaniola in 1501.

[ 157 ] This era saw a growth in race-based slavery.

[ 158 ] England played a prominent role in the Atlantic slave trade. The " slave triangle " was pioneered by Francis Drake and his associates, though English slave-trading would not take off until the mid-17th century.

Many whites who arrived in North America during the 17th and 18th centuries came under contract as indentured servants.

[ 159 ] The transformation from indentured servitude to slavery was a gradual process in Virginia. The earliest legal documentation of such a shift was in 1640 where a black man, John Punch , was sentenced to lifetime slavery, forcing him to serve his master, Hugh Gwyn , for the remainder of his life, for attempting to run away. This case was significant because it established the disparity between his sentence as a black man and that of the two white indentured servants who escaped with him (one described as Dutch and one as a Scotchman). It is the first documented case of a black man sentenced to lifetime servitude and is considered one of the first legal cases to make a racial distinction between black and white indentured servants.

[ 160 ] [ 161 ] After 1640, planters started to ignore the expiration of indentured contracts and keep their servants as slaves for life. This was demonstrated by the 1655 case Johnson v. Parker , where the court ruled that a black man, Anthony Johnson of Virginia, was granted ownership of another black man, John Casor , as the result of a civil case.

[ 162 ] This was the first instance of a judicial determination in the Thirteen Colonies holding that a person who had committed no crime could be held in servitude for life.

[ 163 ] [ 164 ] Spanish colonial America In 1519, Hernán Cortés brought the first modern slave to Mexico.

[ 165 ] In the mid-16th century, the Spanish New Laws , prohibited slavery of the indigenous people, including the Aztecs . A labour shortage resulted. This led to the African slaves being imported, as they were not susceptible to smallpox. In exchange, many Africans were afforded the opportunity to buy their freedom, while eventually others were granted their freedom by their masters.

[ 165 ] In Jamaica, the Spanish enslaved many of the Taino ; some escaped, but most died from European diseases and overwork. The Spaniards also introduced the first African slaves.

[ 166 ] Spain practically did not trade in slaves until 1810 after the rebellions and independence of its American territories or viceroyalties. After the Napoleonic invasions, Spain had lost its industry and its American territories, except in Cuba and Puerto Rico, where the African slave trade to Cuba began on a massive scale from 1810 onwards. It was started by French planters exiled from the French lost colony Saint Domingue (Haiti) who settled in the eastern part of Cuba .

In 1789, the Spanish Crown led an effort to reform slavery, as the demand for slave labour in Cuba was growing. The Crown issued a decree, Código Negro Español (Spanish Black Code), that specified food and clothing provisions, put limits on the number of work hours , limited punishments, required religious instruction, and protected marriages, forbidding the sale of young children away from their mothers. The British made other changes to the institution of slavery in Cuba. However, planters often flouted the laws and protested against them, considering them a threat to their authority and an intrusion into their personal lives.

[ 167 ] English and Dutch Caribbean Planting the sugar cane, British West Indies , 1823 Statue of Bussa , who led the largest slave rebellion in Barbadian history In the early 17th century, the majority of the labour in Barbados was provided by European indentured servants, mainly English , Irish and Scottish , with African and native American slaves providing little of the workforce. The introduction of sugar cane in 1640 completely transformed society and the economy. Barbados eventually had one of the world's largest sugar industries.

[ 168 ] The workable sugar plantation required a large investment and a great deal of heavy labour. At first, Dutch traders supplied the equipment, financing, and African slaves, in addition to transporting most of the sugar to Europe. In 1644, the population of Barbados was estimated at 30,000, of which about 800 were of African descent, with the remainder mainly of English descent. By 1700, there were 15,000 free whites and 50,000 enslaved Africans. In Jamaica, although the African slave population in the 1670s and 1680s never exceeded 10,000, by 1800 it had increased to over 300,000. The increased implementation of slave codes or black codes, which created differential treatment between Africans and the white workers and ruling planter class. In response to these codes, several slave rebellions were attempted or planned during this time, but none succeeded.

Funeral at slave plantation, Dutch Suriname . 1840–1850.

The planters of the Dutch colony of Suriname relied heavily on African slaves to cultivate, harvest and process the commodity crops of coffee, cocoa, sugar cane and cotton plantations.

[ 169 ] The Netherlands abolished slavery in Suriname in 1863.

Many slaves escaped the plantations. With the help of the native South Americans living in the adjoining rain forests, these runaway slaves established a new and unique culture in the interior that was highly successful in its own right. They were known collectively in English as Maroons , in French as Nèg'Marrons (literally meaning "brown negroes", that is "pale-skinned negroes"), and in Dutch as Marrons . The Maroons gradually developed several independent tribes through a process of ethnogenesis , as they were made up of slaves from different African ethnicities. These tribes include the Saramaka , Paramaka, Ndyuka or Aukan, Kwinti , Aluku or Boni, and Matawai. The Maroons often raided plantations to recruit new members from the slaves and capture women, as well as to acquire weapons, food and supplies. They sometimes killed planters and their families in the raids.

[ 170 ] The colonists also mounted armed campaigns against the Maroons, who generally escaped through the rain forest, which they knew much better than did the colonists. To end hostilities, in the 18th century the European colonial authorities signed several peace treaties with different tribes. They granted the Maroons sovereign status and trade rights in their inland territories, giving them autonomy.

Brazil Public flogging of a slave in 19th-century Brazil , by Johann Moritz Rugendas Slave punishment by Jacques Étienne Arago , 1839 Slavery in Brazil began long before the first Portuguese settlement was established in 1532, as members of one tribe would enslave captured members of another.

[ 171 ] Later, Portuguese colonists were heavily dependent on indigenous labour during the initial phases of settlement to maintain the subsistence economy, and natives were often captured by expeditions called bandeiras . The importation of African slaves began midway through the 16th century, but the enslavement of indigenous peoples continued well into the 17th and 18th centuries.

During the Atlantic slave trade era, Brazil imported more African slaves than any other country. Nearly 5 million slaves were brought from Africa to Brazil during the period from 1501 to 1866.

[ 172 ] Until the early 1850s, most African slaves who arrived on Brazilian shores were forced to embark at West Central African ports, especially in Luanda (in present-day Angola). Today, with the exception of Nigeria, the country with the largest population of people of African descent is Brazil.

[ 173 ] Slave labour was the driving force behind the growth of the sugar economy in Brazil, and sugar was the primary export of the colony from 1600 to 1650. Gold and diamond deposits were discovered in Brazil in 1690, which sparked an increase in the importation of African slaves to power this newly profitable market. Transportation systems were developed for the mining infrastructure, and population boomed from immigrants seeking to take part in gold and diamond mining. Demand for African slaves did not wane after the decline of the mining industry in the second half of the 18th century. Cattle ranching and foodstuff production proliferated after the population growth, both of which relied heavily on slave labour. 1.7 million slaves were imported to Brazil from Africa from 1700 to 1800, and the rise of coffee in the 1830s further enticed expansion of the slave trade.

Brazil was the last country in the Western world to abolish slavery. Forty percent of the total number of slaves brought to the Americas were sent to Brazil.

[ citation needed ] Haiti Slavery in Haiti began at an unknown time with slavery being already practiced by the native populations when Christopher Columbus on the island in 1492.

[ 174 ] European colonists would go and institutionalize slavery on the island and turn it into a major business which was devastating to the native population.

[ 175 ] Following the indigenous Taíno 's near decimation from forced labour, disease and war, the Spanish, under advisement of the Catholic priest Bartolomé de las Casas , and with the blessing of the Catholic church, who also wished to protect the indigenous people, began engaging in earnest in the use of African slaves.

[ clarification needed ] During the French colonial period beginning in 1625, the economy of Haiti (then known as Saint-Domingue ) was based on slavery, and the practice there was regarded as the most brutal in the world.

Saint-Domingue slave revolt in 1791 Following the Treaty of Ryswick of 1697, Hispaniola was divided between France and Spain . France received the western third and subsequently named it Saint-Domingue. To develop it into sugarcane plantations, the French imported thousands of slaves from Africa. Sugar was a lucrative commodity crop throughout the 18th century. By 1789, approximately 40,000 white colonists lived in Saint-Domingue. The whites were vastly outnumbered by the tens of thousands of African slaves they had imported to work on their plantations, which were primarily devoted to the production of sugarcane. In the north of the island, slaves were able to retain many ties to African cultures, religion and language; these ties were continually being renewed by newly imported Africans. Blacks outnumbered whites by about ten to one.

The French-enacted Code Noir ("Black Code"), prepared by Jean-Baptiste Colbert and ratified by Louis XIV , had established rules on slave treatment and permissible freedoms. Saint-Domingue has been described as one of the most brutally efficient slave colonies; one-third of newly imported Africans died within a few years.

[ 176 ] Many slaves died from diseases such as smallpox and typhoid fever .

[ 177 ] They had birth rates around 3 percent, and there is evidence that some women aborted fetuses, or committed infanticide , rather than allow their children to live within the bonds of slavery.

[ 178 ] [ 179 ] As in its Louisiana colony , the French colonial government allowed some rights to free people of color : the mixed-race descendants of white male colonists and black female slaves (and later, mixed-race women). Over time, many were released from slavery. They established a separate social class. White French Creole fathers frequently sent their mixed-race sons to France for their education. Some men of color were admitted into the military. More of the free people of color lived in the south of the island, near Port-au-Prince , and many intermarried within their community. They frequently worked as artisans and tradesmen, and began to own some property. Some became slave holders. The free people of color petitioned the colonial government to expand their rights.

Slaves that made it to Haiti from the trans-Atlantic journey and slaves born in Haiti were first documented in Haiti's archives and transferred to France's Ministry of Defense and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. As of 2015 [update] , these records are in The National Archives of France. According to the 1788 Census, Haiti's population consisted of nearly 40,000 whites, 30,000 free coloureds and 450,000 slaves.

[ 180 ] The Haitian Revolution of 1804, the only successful slave revolt in human history, precipitated the end of slavery in all French colonies, which came in 1848 .

United States A coffle of slaves being driven on foot from Staunton , Virginia, to Tennessee in 1850 Slavery in the United States was the legal institution of human chattel enslavement, primarily of Africans and African Americans , that existed in the United States of America in the 18th and 19th centuries, after it gained independence from the British and before the end of the American Civil War . Slavery had been practiced in British America from early colonial days and was legal in all Thirteen Colonies , at the time of the Declaration of Independence in 1776. By the time of the American Revolution , the status of slave had been institutionalized as a racial caste associated with African ancestry.

[ 181 ] The United States became polarized over the issue of slavery, represented by the slave and free states divided by the Mason–Dixon line , which separated free Pennsylvania from slave Maryland and Delaware.

Congress, during the Jefferson administration, prohibited the importation of slaves , effective 1808, although smuggling (illegal importing) was not unusual.

[ 182 ] Domestic slave trading, however, continued at a rapid pace, driven by labour demands from the development of cotton plantations in the Deep South . Those states attempted to extend slavery into the new western territories to keep their share of political power in the nation. Such laws proposed to Congress to continue the spread of slavery into newly ratified states include the Kansas-Nebraska Act .

The treatment of slaves in the United States varied widely depending on conditions, times, and places. The power relationships of slavery corrupted many whites who had authority over slaves, with children showing their own cruelty. Masters and overseers resorted to physical punishments to impose their wills. Slaves were punished by whipping, shackling, hanging , beating, burning, mutilation, branding and imprisonment. Punishment was most often meted out in response to disobedience or perceived infractions, but sometimes abuse was carried out to re-assert the dominance of the master or overseer of the slave.

[ 183 ] Treatment was usually harsher on large plantations, which were often managed by overseers and owned by absentee slaveholders.

William Wells Brown , who escaped to freedom, reported that on one plantation, slave men were required to pick 80 pounds (36 kg) of cotton per day, while women were required to pick 70 pounds (32 kg) per day; if any slave failed in their quota, they were subject to whip lashes for each pound they were short. The whipping post stood next to the cotton scales.

[ 184 ] A New York man who attended a slave auction in the mid-19th century reported that at least three-quarters of the male slaves he saw at sale had scars on their backs from whipping.

[ 185 ] By contrast, small slave-owning families had closer relationships between the owners and slaves; this sometimes resulted in a more humane environment but was not a given.

[ 183 ] More than one million slaves were sold from the Upper South , which had a surplus of labour, and taken to the Deep South in a forced migration, splitting up many families. New communities of African American culture were developed in the Deep South, and the total slave population in the South eventually reached 4 million before liberation.

[ 186 ] [ 187 ] In the 19th century, proponents of slavery often defended the institution as a "necessary evil". White people of that time feared that emancipation of black slaves would have more harmful social and economic consequences than the continuation of slavery. The French writer and traveler Alexis de Tocqueville , in Democracy in America (1835), expressed opposition to slavery while observing its effects on American society. He felt that a multiracial society without slavery was untenable, as he believed that prejudice against black people increased as they were granted more rights. Others, like James Henry Hammond argued that slavery was a "positive good" stating: "Such a class you must have, or you would not have that other class which leads progress, civilization, and refinement." The Southern state governments wanted to keep a balance between the number of slave and free states to maintain a political balance of power in Congress . The new territories acquired from Britain , France , and Mexico were the subject of major political compromises. By 1850, the newly rich cotton-growing South was threatening to secede from the Union , and tensions continued to rise. Many white Southern Christians, including church ministers, attempted to justify their support for slavery as modified by Christian paternalism.

[ 188 ] The largest denominations, the Baptist, Methodist, and Presbyterian churches, split over the slavery issue into regional organizations of the North and South.

Slaves on a Virginia plantation ( The Old Plantation , c.

1790 ) When Abraham Lincoln won the 1860 election on a platform of halting the expansion of slavery, according to the 1860 U.S. census , roughly 400,000 individuals, representing 8% of all U.S. families, owned nearly 4,000,000 slaves.

[ 189 ] One-third of Southern families owned slaves.

[ 190 ] The South was heavily invested in slavery. As such, upon Lincoln's election, seven states broke away to form the Confederate States of America . The first six states to secede held the greatest number of slaves in the South. Shortly after, over the issue of slavery, the United States erupted into an all-out Civil War , with slavery legally ceasing as an institution following the war in December 1865.

In 1865, the United States ratified the 13th Amendment to the United States Constitution , which banned slavery and involuntary servitude "except as punishment for a crime whereof the party shall have been duly convicted," providing a legal basis for forced labor to continue in the country. This led to the system of convict leasing , which affected primarily African Americans. The Prison Policy Initiative , an American criminal justice think tank, cites the 2020 US prison population as 2.3 million, and nearly all able-bodied inmates work in some fashion. In Texas , Georgia , Alabama and Arkansas , prisoners are not paid at all for their work. In other states, prisoners are paid between $0.12 and $1.15 per hour.

Federal Prison Industries paid inmates an average of $0.90 per hour in 2017. Inmates who refuse to work may be indefinitely remanded into solitary confinement or have family visitation revoked. From 2010 to 2015 and again in 2016 and in 2018 , some prisoners in the US refused to work , protesting for better pay, better conditions, and for the end of forced labor. Strike leaders were punished with indefinite solitary confinement. Forced prison labor occurs in both government-run prisons and private prisons .

CoreCivic and GEO Group constitute half the market share of private prisons, and they made a combined revenue of $3.5 billion in 2015. The value of all labor by inmates in the United States is estimated to be in the billions. In California , 2,500 incarcerated workers fought wildfires for only $1 per hour through the CDCR's Conservation Camp Program , which saves the state as much as $100 million a year.

[ 191 ] Asia-Pacific See also: History of slavery in Asia East Asia A contract from the Tang dynasty recording the purchase of a 15-year-old slave for six bolts of plain silk and five coins See also: Slavery in China Slavery existed in ancient China as early as the Shang dynasty .

[ 192 ] Slavery was employed largely by governments as a means of maintaining a public labour force.

[ 193 ] [ 194 ] Until the Han dynasty , slaves were sometimes discriminated against but their legal status was guaranteed.  As can be seen from the some historical records as "Duansheng, Marquis of Shouxiang, had his territory confiscated because he killed a female slave" ( Han dynasty records in DongGuan ), " Wang Mang 's son Wang Huo murdered a slave, Wang Mang severely criticized him and forced him to commit suicide" ( Book of Han : Biography of Wang Mang ), Murder against slaves was as taboo as murder against free people, and perpetrators were always severely punished. Han dynasty can be said to be very distinctive compared to other countries of the same period (In most cases, lords were free to kill their slaves) in terms of slaves human rights .

After the Southern and Northern Dynasties ,  Due to years of poor harvests, the influx of foreign tribes, and the resulting wars,  The number of slaves exploded. They became a class and were called " jianmin [ zh ] ( Chinese : 贱民)", The word literally means "inferior person".  As stated in The commentary of Tang Code : "Slaves and inferior people are legally equivalent to livestock products",  They always had a low social status, and even if they were deliberately murdered, the perpetrators received only a year in prison, and were punished even when they reported the crimes of their lords.

[ 195 ] However, in the Later period of the dynasty, perhaps because the increase in the number of slaves slowed down again, the penalties for crimes against them became harsh again.  For example, the famous contemporary female poet Yu Xuanji , she was publicly executed for murdering her own slave.

Many Han Chinese were enslaved in the process of the Mongol invasion of China proper .

[ 196 ] According to Japanese historians Sugiyama Masaaki (杉山正明) and Funada Yoshiyuki (舩田善之), Mongolian slaves were owned by Han Chinese during the Yuan dynasty .

[ 197 ] [ 198 ] Slavery has taken various forms throughout China's history. It was reportedly abolished as a legally recognized institution, including in a 1909 law [ 199 ] [ 200 ] fully enacted in 1910, [ 201 ] although the practice continued until at least 1949.

[ 196 ] Tang Chinese soldiers and pirates enslaved Koreans, Turks, Persians, Indonesians, and people from Inner Mongolia, central Asia, and northern India.

[ 202 ] [ 203 ] The greatest source of slaves came from southern tribes, including Thais and aboriginals from the southern provinces of Fujian, Guangdong, Guangxi, and Guizhou. Malays, Khmers, Indians, and "black skinned" peoples (who were either Austronesian Negritos of Southeast Asia and the Pacific Islands, or Africans, or both) were also purchased as slaves in the Tang dynasty.

[ 204 ] In the 17th century Qing dynasty , there was a hereditarily servile people called Booi Aha ( Manchu : booi niyalma ; Chinese transliteration: 包衣阿哈), which is a Manchu word literally translated as "household person" and sometimes rendered as " nucai ." The Manchu was establishing close personal and paternalist relationship between masters and their slaves, as Nurhachi said, "The Master should love the slaves and eat the same food as him".

[ 205 ] However, booi aha "did not correspond exactly to the Chinese category of "bond-servant slave" (Chinese:奴僕); instead, it was a relationship of personal dependency on a master which in theory guaranteed close personal relationships and equal treatment, even though many western scholars would directly translate "booi" as "bond-servant" (some of the "booi" even had their own servant).

[ 196 ] Chinese Muslim (Tungans) Sufis who were charged with practicing xiejiao (heterodox religion), were punished by exile to Xinjiang and being sold as a slave to other Muslims, such as the Sufi begs .

[ 206 ] Han Chinese who committed crimes such as those dealing with opium became slaves to the begs, this practice was administered by Qing law.

[ 207 ] Most Chinese in Altishahr were exile slaves to Turkestani Begs.

[ 208 ] While free Chinese merchants generally did not engage in relationships with East Turkestani women, some of the Chinese slaves belonging to begs, along with Green Standard soldiers, Bannermen, and Manchus, engaged in affairs with the East Turkestani women that were serious in nature.

[ 209 ] Kisaeng , women from outcast or slave families who were trained to provide entertainment, conversation, and sexual services to men of the upper class Slavery in Korea existed since before the Three Kingdoms of Korea period, in the first century BCE.

[ 210 ] Slavery has been described as "very important in medieval Korea, probably more important than in any other East Asian country, but by the 16th century, population growth was making [it] unnecessary".

[ 211 ] Slavery went into decline around the 10th century but came back in the late Goryeo period when Korea also experienced multiple slave rebellions .

[ 210 ] In the Joseon period of Korea, members of the slave class were known as nobi . The nobi were socially indistinct from freemen (i.e., the middle and common classes) other than the ruling yangban class, and some possessed property rights, and legal and civil rights. Hence, some scholars argue that it is inappropriate to call them "slaves", [ 212 ] while some scholars describe them as serfs .

[ 213 ] [ 214 ] The nobi population could fluctuate up to about one-third of the total, but on average the nobi made up about 10% of the total population.

[ 210 ] In 1801, the majority of government nobi were emancipated, [ 215 ] and by 1858, the nobi population stood at about 1.5 percent of the Korean population.

[ 216 ] During the Joseon period, the nobi population could fluctuate up to about one-third of the population, but on average the nobi made up about 10% of the total population.

[ 210 ] The nobi system declined beginning in the 18th century.

[ 217 ] Since the outset of the Joseon dynasty and especially beginning in the 17th century, there was harsh criticism among prominent thinkers in Korea about the nobi system. Even within the Joseon government, there were indications of a shift in attitude toward the nobi.

[ 218 ] King Yeongjo implemented a policy of gradual emancipation in 1775, [ 211 ] and he and his successor King Jeongjo made many proposals and developments that lessened the burden on nobi, which led to the emancipation of the vast majority of government nobi in 1801.

[ 218 ] In addition, population growth, [ 211 ] numerous escaped slaves, [ 210 ] growing commercialization of agriculture, and the rise of the independent small farmer class contributed to the decline in the number of nobi to about 1.5% of the total population by 1858.

[ 216 ] The hereditary nobi system was officially abolished around 1886–87, [ 210 ] [ 216 ] and the rest of the nobi system was abolished with the Gabo Reform of 1894.

[ 210 ] [ 219 ] However, slavery did not completely disappear in Korea until 1930, during Imperial Japanese rule. During the Imperial Japanese occupation of Korea around World War II, some Koreans were used in forced labour by the Imperial Japanese, in conditions which have been compared to slavery.

[ 210 ] [ 220 ] These included women forced into sexual slavery by the Imperial Japanese Army before and during World War II, known as " comfort women ".

[ 210 ] [ 220 ] After the Portuguese first made contact with Japan in 1543, slave trade developed in which Portuguese purchased Japanese as slaves in Japan and sold them to various locations overseas, including Portugal, throughout the 16th and 17th centuries.

[ 221 ] [ 222 ] Many documents mention the slave trade along with protests against the enslavement of Japanese. Japanese slaves are believed to be the first of their nation to end up in Europe, and the Portuguese purchased numbers of Japanese slave girls to bring to Portugal for sexual purposes, as noted by the Church [ 223 ] in 1555. Japanese slave women were even sold as concubines to Asian lascar and African crew members, along with their European counterparts serving on Portuguese ships trading in Japan, mentioned by Luis Cerqueira, a Portuguese Jesuit, in a 1598 document.

[ 224 ] Japanese slaves were brought by the Portuguese to Macau , where they were enslaved to Portuguese or became slaves to other slaves.

[ 225 ] [ 226 ] Some Korean slaves were bought by the Portuguese and brought back to Portugal from Japan, where they had been among the tens of thousands of Korean prisoners of war transported to Japan during the Japanese invasions of Korea (1592–98) .

[ 227 ] [ 228 ] Historians pointed out that at the same time Hideyoshi expressed his indignation and outrage at the Portuguese trade in Japanese slaves, he was engaging in a mass slave trade of Korean prisoners of war in Japan.

[ 229 ] [ 230 ] Fillippo Sassetti saw some Chinese and Japanese slaves in Lisbon among the large slave community in 1578, although most of the slaves were black.

[ 231 ] [ 232 ] [ 233 ] [ 234 ] [ 235 ] The Portuguese also valued Oriental slaves more than the black Africans and the Moors for their rarity. Chinese slaves were more expensive than Moors and blacks and showed off the high status of the owner.

[ 236 ] The Portuguese attributed qualities like intelligence and industriousness to Chinese, Japanese and Indian slaves.

[ 237 ] [ 233 ] King Sebastian of Portugal feared rampant slavery was having a negative effect on Catholic proselytization, so he commanded that it be banned in 1571.

[ 238 ] Hideyoshi was so disgusted that his own Japanese people were being sold en masse into slavery on Kyushu , that he wrote a letter to Jesuit Vice-Provincial Gaspar Coelho on July 24, 1587, to demand the Portuguese, Siamese (Thai), and Cambodians stop purchasing and enslaving Japanese and return Japanese slaves who ended up as far as India.

[ 239 ] [ 240 ] [ 241 ] Hideyoshi blamed the Portuguese and Jesuits for this slave trade and banned Christian proselytizing as a result.

[ 242 ] [ self-published source ] [ 243 ] In 1595, a law was passed by Portugal banning the selling and buying of Chinese and Japanese slaves.

[ 244 ] South Asia Slavery in India was widespread by the 6th century BC, and perhaps even as far back as the Vedic period .

[ 245 ] Slavery intensified during the Muslim domination of northern India after the 11th century.

[ 246 ] Slavery existed in Portuguese India after the 16th century. The Dutch, too, largely dealt in Abyssian slaves, known in India as Habshis or Sheedes.

[ 247 ] Arakan/Bengal, Malabar, and Coromandel remained the largest sources of forced labour until the 1660s.

Between 1626 and 1662, the Dutch exported on an average 150–400 slaves annually from the Arakan-Bengal coast. During the first 30 years of Batavia's existence, Indian and Arakanese slaves provided the main labour force of the Dutch East India Company, Asian headquarters. An increase in Coromandel slaves occurred during a famine following the revolt of the Nayaka Indian rulers of South India (Tanjavur, Senji, and Madurai) against Bijapur overlordship (1645) and the subsequent devastation of the Tanjavur countryside by the Bijapur army. Reportedly, more than 150,000 people were taken by the invading Deccani Muslim armies to Bijapur and Golconda. In 1646, 2,118 slaves were exported to Batavia, the overwhelming majority from southern Coromandel. Some slaves were also acquired further south at Tondi, Adirampatnam, and Kayalpatnam. Another increase in slaving took place between 1659 and 1661 from Tanjavur as a result of a series of successive Bijapuri raids. At Nagapatnam, Pulicat, and elsewhere, the company purchased 8,000–10,000 slaves, the bulk of whom were sent to Ceylon, while a small portion were exported to Batavia and Malacca. Finally, following a long drought in Madurai and southern Coromandel, in 1673, which intensified the prolonged Madurai-Maratha struggle over Tanjavur and punitive fiscal practices, thousands of people from Tanjavur, mostly children, were sold into slavery and exported by Asian traders from Nagapattinam to Aceh, Johor, and other slave markets.

In September 1687, 665 slaves were exported by the English from Fort St. George, Madras. And, in 1694–96, when warfare once more ravaged South India, a total of 3,859 slaves were imported from Coromandel by private individuals into Ceylon.

[ 248 ] [ 249 ] [ 250 ] [ 251 ] The volume of the total Dutch Indian Ocean slave trade has been estimated to be about 15–30% of the Atlantic slave trade, slightly smaller than the trans-Saharan slave trade, and one-and-a-half to three times the size of the Swahili and Red Sea coast and the Dutch West India Company slave trades.

[ 252 ] According to Sir Henry Bartle Frere (who sat on the Viceroy's Council), there were an estimated 8 or 9 million slaves in India in 1841. About 15% of the population of Malabar were slaves. Slavery was legally abolished in the possessions of the East India Company by the Indian Slavery Act, 1843 .

[ 84 ] South East Asia Main articles: Slavery in Brunei , Slavery in Indonesia , and Slavery in  Malaysia The hill tribe people in Indochina were "hunted incessantly and carried off as slaves by the Siamese (Thai), the Anamites (Vietnamese), and the Cambodians".

[ 253 ] A Siamese military campaign in Laos in 1876 was described by a British observer as having been "transformed into slave-hunting raids on a large scale".

[ 253 ] The census, taken in 1879, showed that 6% of the population in the Malay sultanate of Perak were slaves.

[ 139 ] Enslaved people made up about two-thirds of the population in part of North Borneo in the 1880s.

[ 139 ] Oceania Slaves ( he mōkai ) had a recognised social role in traditional Māori society in New Zealand.

[ 254 ] Blackbirding occurred on islands in the Pacific Ocean and Australia, especially in the 19th century.

[ 255 ] Europe Ancient Greece and Rome Main articles: Slavery in ancient Greece , Slavery in ancient Rome , and Black Sea slave trade Ishmaelites purchase Joseph , by Schnorr von Carolsfeld , 1860 Records of slavery in Ancient Greece begin with Mycenaean Greece .

Classical Athens had the largest slave population, with as many as 80,000 in the 6th and 5th centuries BC.

[ 256 ] As the Roman Republic expanded outward, entire populations were enslaved, across Europe and the Mediterranean. Slaves were used for labour, as well as for amusement (e.g., gladiators and sex slaves ). This oppression by an elite minority eventually led to slave revolts (see Roman Servile Wars ); the Third Servile War was led by Spartacus .

By the late Republican era, slavery had become an economic pillar of Roman wealth, as well as Roman society.

[ 257 ] It is estimated that 25% or more of the population of Ancient Rome was enslaved, although the actual percentage is debated by scholars and varied from region to region.

[ 258 ] [ 259 ] Slaves represented 15–25% of Italy 's population, [ 260 ] mostly war captives, [ 260 ] especially from Gaul [ 261 ] and Epirus . Estimates of the number of slaves in the Roman Empire suggest that the majority were scattered throughout the provinces outside of Italy.

[ 260 ] Generally, slaves in Italy were indigenous Italians.

[ 262 ] Foreigners (including both slaves and freedmen) born outside of Italy were estimated to have peaked at 5% of the total in the capital, where their number was largest. Those from outside of Europe were predominantly of Greek descent. Jewish slaves never fully assimilated into Roman society, remaining an identifiable minority. These slaves (especially the foreigners) had higher death rates and lower birth rates than natives and were sometimes subjected to mass expulsions.

[ 263 ] The average recorded age at death for the slaves in Rome was seventeen and a half years (17.2 for males; 17.9 for females).

[ 264 ] Medieval and early modern Europe Main articles: Balkan slave trade , Barbary slave trade , Crimean slave trade , Slavery in the Byzantine Empire , and Slavery in medieval Europe Adalbert of Prague pleads with Boleslaus II, Duke of Bohemia for the release of slaves.

Slavery in early medieval Europe was so common that the Catholic Church repeatedly prohibited it, or at least the export of Christian slaves to non-Christian lands, as for example at the Council of Koblenz (922), the Council of London (1102) (which aimed mainly at the sale of English slaves to Ireland) [ 265 ] and the Council of Armagh (1171).

Serfdom , on the contrary, was widely accepted. In 1452, Pope Nicholas V issued the papal bull Dum Diversas , granting the kings of Spain and Portugal the right to reduce any "Saracens (Muslims), pagans and any other unbelievers" to perpetual slavery, legitimizing the slave trade as a result of war.

[ 266 ] The approval of slavery under these conditions was reaffirmed and extended in his Romanus Pontifex bull of 1455. Large-scale trading in slaves was mainly confined to the South and East of early medieval Europe: the Byzantine Empire and the Muslim world were the destinations, while pagan Central and Eastern Europe (along with the Caucasus and Tartary ) were important sources.

Viking , Arab , Greek , and Radhanite Jewish merchants were all involved in the slave trade during the Early Middle Ages.

[ 267 ] [ 268 ] [ 269 ] The trade in European slaves reached a peak in the 10th century following the Zanj Rebellion , which dampened the use of African slaves in the Arab world.

[ 270 ] [ 271 ] In Britain, slavery continued to be practiced following the fall of Rome, while sections of Æthelstan 's and Hywel the Good 's laws dealt with slaves in medieval England and medieval Wales respectively.

[ 272 ] [ 273 ] The trade particularly picked up after the Viking invasions, with major markets at Chester [ 274 ] and Bristol [ 275 ] supplied by Danish, Mercian, and Welsh raiding of one another's borderlands. At the time of the Domesday Book , nearly 10% of the English population were slaves.

[ 276 ] William the Conqueror introduced a law preventing the sale of slaves overseas.

[ 277 ] According to historian John Gillingham , by 1200 slavery in the British Isles was non-existent.

[ 278 ] Slavery had never been authorized by statute within England and Wales, and in 1772, in the case Somerset v Stewart , Lord Mansfield declared that it was also unsupported within England by the common law. The slave trade was abolished by the Slave Trade Act 1807 , although slavery remained legal in possessions outside Europe until the passage of the Slavery Abolition Act 1833 and the Indian Slavery Act, 1843 .

[ 279 ] However, when England began to have colonies in the Americas, and particularly from the 1640s, African slaves began to make their appearance in England and remained a presence until the eighteenth century. In Scotland, slaves continued to be sold as chattels until late in the eighteenth century (on the second May 1722, an advertisement appeared in the Edinburgh Evening Courant , announcing that a stolen slave had been found, who would be sold to pay expenses, unless claimed within two weeks).

[ 280 ] For nearly two hundred years in the history of coal mining in Scotland, miners were bonded to their "maisters" by a 1606 Act "Anent Coalyers and Salters". The Colliers and Salters (Scotland) Act 1775 stated that "many colliers and salters are in a state of slavery and bondage" and announced emancipation; those starting work after July 1, 1775, would not become slaves, while those already in a state of slavery could, after 7 or 10 years depending on their age, apply for a decree of the Sheriff's Court granting their freedom. Few could afford this, until a further law in 1799 established their freedom and made this slavery and bondage illegal.

[ 280 ] [ 281 ] A British captain witnessing the miseries of slaves in Ottoman Algeria , 1815.

The Byzantine-Ottoman wars and the Ottoman wars in Europe brought large numbers of slaves into the Islamic world.

[ 282 ] To staff its bureaucracy, the Ottoman Empire established a janissary system which seized hundreds of thousands of Christian boys through the devşirme system. They were well cared for but were legally slaves owned by the government and were not allowed to marry. They were never bought or sold. The empire gave them significant administrative and military roles. The system began about 1365; there were 135,000 janissaries in 1826, when the system ended.

[ 283 ] After the Battle of Lepanto , 12,000 Christian galley slaves were recaptured and freed from the Ottoman fleet .

[ 284 ] Eastern Europe suffered a series of Tatar invasions , the goal of which was to loot and capture slaves for selling them to Ottomans as jasyr .

[ 138 ] Seventy-five Crimean Tatar raids were recorded into Poland–Lithuania between 1474 and 1569.

[ 285 ] Slavic and African slaves in Córdoba, illustration from Cantigas de Santa Maria , 13th Century Medieval Spain and Portugal were the scene of almost constant Muslim invasion of the predominantly Christian area. Periodic raiding expeditions were sent from Al-Andalus to ravage the Iberian Christian kingdoms, bringing back booty and slaves. In a raid against Lisbon in 1189, for example, the Almohad caliph Yaqub al-Mansur took 3,000 female and child captives, while his governor of Córdoba , in a subsequent attack upon Silves , Portugal, in 1191, took 3,000 Christian slaves.

[ 286 ] From the 11th to the 19th century, North African Barbary Pirates engaged in raids on European coastal towns to capture Christian slaves to sell at slave markets in places such as Algeria and Morocco.

[ 287 ] The maritime town of Lagos was the first slave market created in Portugal (one of the earliest colonizers of the Americas) for the sale of imported African slaves – the Mercado de Escravos , opened in 1444.

[ 288 ] [ 289 ] In 1441, the first slaves were brought to Portugal from northern Mauritania.

[ 289 ] By 1552, black African slaves made up 10% of the population of Lisbon .

[ 290 ] [ 291 ] In the second half of the 16th century, the Crown gave up the monopoly on slave trade, and the focus of European trade in African slaves shifted from import to Europe to slave transports directly to tropical colonies in the Americas – especially Brazil.

[ 289 ] In the 15th century one-third of the slaves were resold to the African market in exchange of gold.

[ 292 ] Until the late 18th century, the Crimean Khanate (a Muslim Tatar state) maintained a massive slave trade with the Ottoman Empire and the Middle East.

[ 138 ] The slaves were captured in southern Russia, Poland-Lithuania , Moldavia , Wallachia , and Circassia by Tatar horsemen [ 293 ] and sold in the Crimean port of Kaffa .

[ 294 ] About 2 million mostly Christian slaves were exported over the 16th and 17th centuries [ 295 ] until the Crimean Khanate was destroyed by the Russian Empire in 1783.

[ 296 ] Crimean Tatar raiders enslaved more than 1 million Eastern Europeans.

[ 297 ] In Kievan Rus and Muscovy , slaves were usually classified as kholops . According to David P. Forsythe, "In 1649 up to three-quarters of Muscovy's peasants, or 13 to 14 million people, were serfs whose material lives were barely distinguishable from slaves. Perhaps another 1.5 million were formally enslaved, with Russian slaves serving Russian masters." [ 298 ] Slavery remained a major institution in Russia until 1723, when Peter the Great converted the household slaves into house serfs. Russian agricultural slaves were formally converted into serfs earlier in 1679.

[ 299 ] Slavery in Poland was forbidden in the 15th century; in Lithuania, slavery was formally abolished in 1588; they were replaced by the second serfdom.

In Scandinavia, thralldom was abolished in the mid-14th century.

[ 300 ] During the Age of Enlightenment , individuals, whether religious or not, held diverse and inconsistent beliefs about race and slavery and despite discussions on individual rights and freedoms; slavery was not abolished, but expanded significantly.

[ 301 ] The secular enlightenment allowed for scientific racism to emerge as a basis for slavery.

[ 302 ] It allowed for coexistence of conflicting views on the moral status of black enslavement and the inferior physical status of those people being enslaved, based on the science at the time.

[ 303 ] [ 304 ] The theory of polygenesis (multiple independent human origins) generally lead to support or symapathy with slavery and this was used by nonreligious individuals to counter religious theories of monogenesis (single origin to one couple).

[ 305 ] World War II Prisoners forced to work on the Buchenwald–Weimar rail line, 1943 Main article: Forced labour under German rule during World War II During the Second World War , Nazi Germany effectively enslaved about 12 million people , both those considered undesirable and citizens of conquered countries, with the avowed intention of treating these Untermenschen (sub-humans) as a permanent slave-class of inferior beings who could be worked until they died, and who possessed neither the rights nor the legal status of members of the Aryan race .

[ 306 ] Besides Jews, the harshest deportation and forced labour policies were applied to the populations of Poland, [ 307 ] Belarus, Ukraine, and Russia. By the end of the war, half of Belarus' population had been killed or deported.

[ 308 ] [ 309 ] Communist states Main article: Gulag Workers being forced to haul rocks up a hill in a Gulag Between 1930 and 1960, the Soviet Union created a system of, according to Anne Applebaum and the "perspective of the Kremlin ", slave labor camps called the Gulag ( Russian : ГУЛаг , romanized : GULag ).

[ 310 ] Prisoners in these camps were worked to death by a combination of extreme production quotas, physical and psychological brutality, hunger, lack of medical care, and the harsh environment.

Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn , who survived eight years of Gulag incarceration, provided firsthand testimony about the camps with the publication of The Gulag Archipelago , after which he was awarded the Nobel Prize in Literature .

[ 311 ] [ 312 ] Fatality rate was as high as 80% during the first months in many camps. Hundreds of thousands of people, possibly millions, died as a direct result of forced labour under the Soviets.

[ 313 ] Golfo Alexopoulos suggests comparing labor in the Gulag with "other forms of slave labor" and notes its "violence of human exploitation" in Illness and Inhumanity in Stalin's Gulag : [ 314 ] Stalin's Gulag was, in many ways, less a concentration camp than a forced labor camp and less a prison system than a system of slavery. The image of the slave appears often in Gulag memoir literature. As Varlam Shalamov wrote: "Hungry and exhausted, we leaned into a horse collar, raising blood blisters on our chests and pulling a stone-filled cart up the slanted mine floor. The collar was the same device used long ago by the ancient Egyptians." Thoughtful and rigorous historical comparisons of Soviet forced labor and other forms of slave labor would be worthy of scholarly attention, in my view. For as in the case of global slavery, the Gulag found legitimacy in an elaborate narrative of difference that involved the presumption of dangerousness and guilt. This ideology of difference and the violence of human exploitation have left lasting legacies in contemporary Russia.

Historian Anne Applebaum writes in the introduction of her book that the word GULAG has come to represent "the system of Soviet slave labor itself, in all its forms and varieties" : [ 315 ] The word "GULAG" is an acronym for Glavnoe Upravlenie Lagerei , or Main Camp Administration, the institution which ran the Soviet camps. But over time, the word has also come to signify the system of Soviet slave labor itself, in all its forms and varieties: labor camps, punishment camps, criminal and political camps, women's camps, children's camps, transit camps. Even more broadly, "Gulag" has come to mean the Soviet repressive system itself, the set of procedures that Alexander Solzhenitsyn once called "our meat grinder": the arrests, the interrogations, the transport in unheated cattle cars, the forced labor, the destruction of families, the years spent in exile, the early and unnecessary deaths.

Applebaum's introduction has been criticized by Gulag researcher Wilson Bell, [ 316 ] stating that her book "is, aside from the introduction , a well-done overview of the Gulag, but it did not offer an interpretative framework much beyond Solzhenitsyn 's paradigms".

[ 317 ] Contemporary slavery See also: Slavery in contemporary Africa , Child slavery , Trafficking of children , Illegal immigration § Slavery , and Slavery in the 21st century Modern incidence of slavery, as a percentage of the population, by country (2024) Even though slavery is now outlawed in every country, the number of slaves today is estimated as between 12 million and 29.8 million.

[ 318 ] [ 319 ] [ 320 ] According to a broad definition of slavery, there were 27 million people in slavery in 1999, spread all over the world.

[ 321 ] In 2005, the International Labour Organization provided an estimate of 12.3 million forced labourers.

[ 322 ] Siddharth Kara has also provided an estimate of 28.4 million slaves at the end of 2006 divided into three categories: bonded labour / debt bondage (18.1 million), forced labour (7.6 million), and trafficked slaves (2.7 million).

[ 74 ] Kara provides a dynamic model to calculate the number of slaves in the world each year, with an estimated 29.2 million at the end of 2009.

Tuareg society is traditionally hierarchical, ranging from nobles, through vassals, to dark-skinned slaves.

[ 323 ] According to a 2003 report by Human Rights Watch , an estimated 15 million children in debt bondage in India work in slavery-like conditions to pay off their family's debts.

[ 324 ] [ 325 ] Slavoj Žižek asserts that new forms of contemporary slavery have been created in the post-Cold War era of global capitalism , including migrant workers deprived of basic civil rights on the Arabian Peninsula , the total control of workers in Asian sweatshops and the use of forced labor in the exploitation of natural resources in Central Africa .

[ 326 ] Distribution In June 2013, U.S. State Department released a report on slavery. It placed Russia , China , and Uzbekistan in the worst offenders category. Cuba, Iran, North Korea, Sudan , Syria, and Zimbabwe were at the lowest level. The list also included Algeria, Libya, Saudi Arabia and Kuwait among a total of 21 countries.

[ 327 ] [ 328 ] In Kuwait, there are more than 600,000 migrant domestic workers who are vulnerable to forced labor and legally tied to their employers, who often illegally take their passports.

[ 329 ] In 2019, online slave markets on apps such as Instagram were uncovered.

[ 330 ] In the preparations for the 2022 World Cup in Qatar , thousands of Nepalese, the largest group of labourers, faced slavery in the form of denial of wages, confiscation of documents, and inability to leave the workplace.

[ 331 ] In 2016, the United Nations gave Qatar 12 months to end migrant worker slavery or face investigation.

[ 332 ] The Walk Free Foundation reported in 2018 that slavery in wealthy Western societies is much more prevalent than previously known, in particular the United States and Great Britain, which have 403,000 (one in 800) and 136,000 slaves respectively. Andrew Forrest, founder of the organization, said that "The United States is one of the most advanced countries in the world yet has more than 400,000 modern slaves working under forced labour conditions." [ 333 ] An estimated 40.3 million are enslaved globally, with North Korea having the most slaves at 2.6 million (one in 10). Of the estimated 40.3 million people in contemporary slavery, 71% are women and 29% are men. The report found of the 40.3 million in modern slavery, 15.4 million are in forced marriages and 24.9 million are in forced labor .

[ 334 ] The foundation defines contemporary slavery as "situations of exploitation that a person cannot refuse or leave because of threats, violence, coercion, abuse of power, or deception." [ 335 ] China See also: Xinjiang internment camps In March 2020, the Chinese government was found to be using the Uyghur minority for forced labour, inside sweat shops . According to a report published then by the Australian Strategic Policy Institute (ASPI) , no fewer than around 80,000 Uyghurs were forcibly removed from the region of Xinjiang and used for forced labour in at least twenty-seven corporate factories.

[ 336 ] According to the Business and Human Rights resource center, corporations such as Abercrombie & Fitch , Adidas , Amazon , Apple , BMW , Fila , Gap , H&M , Inditex , Marks & Spencer , Nike , North Face , Puma , PVH , Samsung , and UNIQLO have each sourced products from these factories prior to the publication of the ASPI report.

[ 337 ] Libya Main article: Slavery in Libya § Slavery in the post-Gaddafi era During the Second Libyan Civil War , Libyans started capturing Sub-Saharan African migrants trying to get to Europe through Libya and selling them on slave markets or holding them hostage for ransom [ 338 ] Women are often raped, used as sex slaves , or sold to brothels .

[ 339 ] [ 340 ] [ 341 ] Child migrants suffer from abuse and child rape in Libya.

[ 342 ] [ 343 ] Mauritania Mauritania , was the last country to abolish slavery (in 1981), it is estimated that 20% of its population of 3 million people are enslaved as bonded labourers, [ 37 ] [ 344 ] [ 345 ] with black Haratin being slaves and Berbers and Arabs the owners.

[ 346 ] Slavery in Mauritania was criminalized in August 2007.

[ 37 ] However, although slavery, as a practice, was legally banned in 1981, it was not a crime to own a slave until 2007.

[ 347 ] Although many slaves have escaped or have been freed since 2007, as of 2012 [update] , only one slave owner had been sentenced to serve time in prison.

[ 348 ] North Korea See also: Human rights in North Korea North Korea's human rights record is often considered to be the worst in the world and has been globally condemned, with the United Nations , the European Union and groups such as Human Rights Watch all critical of the country's record. Forms of torture , forced labour, and abuses are all widespread. Most international human rights organizations consider North Korea to have no contemporary parallel [ 349 ] with respect to violations of liberty.

[ 350 ] [ 351 ] [ 352 ] [ 353 ] Taiwan Taiwan's migrant worker population—estimated in 2018 to be up to 660,000 in number—have reportedly faced slavery-like conditions involving sexual abuse in the domestic work sector [ 354 ] and forced labor in fishing sectors.

[ 355 ] [ 356 ] Taiwan is among a minority of places in the world that legally allows labor brokers to charge migrant workers for services which elsewhere are covered by employers as human resource costs.

[ 357 ] A few Taiwanese universities have reportedly tricked students from Eswatini , [ 358 ] Uganda and Sri Lanka into forced labour at factories as payment for the university programs.

[ 359 ] Some charity groups in 2007 also insisted that foreign women—mostly from China and Southeast Asia—were being forced into prostitution, although local police in Tainan disagreed and said they deliberately came to Taiwan "to sell sex".

[ 360 ] Yemen See also: Slavery in Yemen Despite being formally abolished in the 1960s, slavery in Yemen remains a significant issue exacerbated by ongoing conflict and socio-economic instability.  An estimated 85,000 people remaining enslaved as of 2022.  The Iran-backed Houthi militias have been accused of reinstating traditional slavery systems. Reports indicate that over 1,800 Yemenis have been forced into servitude by prominent Houthi leaders, with the Houthis dividing society into hierarchical classes of masters and slaves.

[ 361 ] [ 362 ] This modern slavery encompasses various forms, such as forced labor, sexual exploitation, human trafficking, and child recruitment.

[ 363 ] Vulnerable populations include the Al Muhamashīn community, Ethiopian migrants, and children who are subjected to severe discrimination and exploitation.

[ 363 ] [ 362 ] Despite legal prohibitions against slavery in Yemen, enforcement is weak due to political instability and ongoing civil war.

[ 364 ] International organizations have documented these abuses, highlighting the need for stronger interventions to combat slavery and human trafficking in the region.

[ 363 ] Economics While American slaves in 1809 were sold for around $40,000 (in inflation adjusted dollars), a slave nowadays can be bought for just $90, making replacement more economical than providing long-term care.

[ 365 ] Slavery is a multibillion-dollar industry with estimates of up to $35 billion generated annually.

[ 366 ] Trafficking Victims of human trafficking are typically recruited through deceit or trickery (such as a false job offer, false migration offer, or false marriage offer), sale by family members, recruitment by former slaves, or outright abduction. Victims are forced into a "debt slavery" situation by coercion, deception, fraud, intimidation, isolation, threat, physical force, debt bondage or even force-feeding with drugs to control their victims.

[ 367 ] "Annually, according to U.S. government-sponsored research completed in 2006, approximately 800,000 people are trafficked across national borders, which does not include millions trafficked within their own countries. Approximately 80% of transnational victims are women and girls, and up to 50% are minors, reports the U.S. State Department in a 2008 study.

[ 368 ] While the majority of trafficking victims are women who are forced into prostitution (in which case the practice is called sex trafficking), victims also include men, women and children who are forced into manual labour .

[ 369 ] Because of the illegal nature of human trafficking, its extent is unknown. A U.S. government report, published in 2005, estimates that about 700,000 people worldwide are trafficked across borders each year. This figure does not include those who are trafficked internally.

[ 369 ] Another research effort revealed that roughly 1.5 million individuals are trafficked either internally or internationally each year, of which about 500,000 are sex trafficking victims.

[ 74 ] Abolitionism Main article: Abolitionism For a chronological guide, see Timeline of abolition of slavery and serfdom .

v t e Slave trade suppression Abolitionism Firman of 1830 Suppression of the slave trade in the Persian Gulf Firman of 1854 Firman of 1857 Anglo-Egyptian Slave Trade Convention Anglo-Ottoman Convention of 1880 Blockade of Africa Kanunname of 1889 Brussels Anti-Slavery Conference 1889–90 Brussels Conference Act of 1890 West Africa Squadron (U.K.) African Slave Trade Patrol (U.S.) Africa Squadron (U.S.) Brazil Squadron (U.S.) Eastern Naval Division (Brazil) Slave Trade Acts Capture of the Providentia Capture of the Presidente Capture of the El Almirante Capture of the Marinerito Capture of the Veloz Passagera Capture of the Brillante Convention of Saint-Germain-en-Laye 1919 Creole case La Amistad Incident Capture of the Emanuela Bombardment of Johanna Mary Carver Affair Edward Barley Incident Battle of Little Bereby Hamerton Treaty Frere Treaty Treaty of Jeddah (1927) Moresby Treaty Temporary Slavery Commission 1926 Slavery Convention Advisory Committee of Experts on Slavery Ad Hoc Committee on Slavery Supplementary Convention on the Abolition of Slavery A painting of the 1840 World Anti-Slavery Convention at Exeter Hall in London [ 370 ] Slavery has existed, in one form or another, throughout recorded human history – as have, in various periods, movements to free large or distinct groups of slaves.

[ citation needed ] In antiquity Emperor Ashoka , who ruled the Maurya Empire in the Indian subcontinent from 269 to 232 BCE, abolished the slave trade but not slavery.

[ 371 ] The Qin dynasty , which ruled China from 221 to 206 BCE, abolished slavery and discouraged serfdom. However, many of its laws were overturned when the dynasty was overthrown.

[ 372 ] Slavery was again abolished by Wang Mang in China in 17 CE but was reinstituted after his assassination.

[ 373 ] Americas The Spanish colonization of the Americas sparked a discussion about the right to enslave Native Americans. A prominent critic of slavery in the Spanish New World colonies was the Spanish missionary and bishop, Bartolomé de las Casas , who was the first to document the European maltreatment of and cruelty towards American natives.

[ 374 ] In the United States, all of the northern states had abolished slavery by 1804, with New Jersey being the last to act.

[ 375 ] Abolitionist pressure produced a series of small steps towards emancipation. After the Act Prohibiting Importation of Slaves went into effect on January 1, 1808, the importation of slaves into the United States was prohibited, [ 376 ] but not the internal slave trade , nor involvement in the international slave trade externally. Legal slavery persisted outside the northern states, but abolitionists took an active role in opposing slavery by supporting the Underground Railroad , and violent clashes between anti-slavery and pro-slavery Americans occurred, including in Bleeding Kansas , a series of political and armed disputes in 1854–1858 as to whether Kansas would join the United States as a slave or free state. By 1860, the total number of slaves reached almost four million, and the American Civil War, beginning in 1861, led to the end of slavery in the United States.

[ 187 ] Slaves in areas controlled by the Confederacy were legally emancipated in 1863, when Lincoln issued the Emancipation Proclamation , and slavery was banned nationwide, except as punishment for a crime, in 1865, with the ratification of the 13th Amendment to the U.S. Constitution .

Many of the freed slaves became sharecroppers and indentured servants. In this manner, some became tied to the very parcel of land into which they had been born a slave having little freedom or economic opportunity because of Jim Crow laws which perpetuated discrimination, limited education, promoted persecution without due process and resulted in continued poverty. Fear of reprisals such as unjust incarcerations and lynchings deterred upward mobility further.

Olaudah Equiano . His autobiography, published in 1789, helped in the creation of the Slave Trade Act 1807 which ended the African slave trade for Britain and its colonies.

Joseph Jenkins Roberts , born in Virginia, was the first president of Liberia , which was founded in 1822 for freed American slaves.

Europe France abolished slavery in 1794 during the Revolution, [ 377 ] but it was restored in 1802 under Napoleon.

[ 378 ] It has been asserted that, before the Revolution, slavery was illegal in metropolitan France (as opposed to its colonies), [ 379 ] but this has been refuted.

[ 380 ] One of the most significant milestones in the campaign to abolish slavery throughout the world occurred in England in 1772, with British Judge Lord Mansfield , whose opinion in Somersett's Case was widely taken to have held that slavery was illegal in England. This judgement also laid down the principle that slavery contracted in other jurisdictions could not be enforced in England.

[ 381 ] The last person to be deemed a slave in a British court was Bell (Belinda) who was transported to the Americas in 1772 as a "slave for life" by a Perth court.

[ 382 ] Sons of Africa was a late 18th-century British group that campaigned to end slavery. Its members were Africans in London, freed slaves who included Ottobah Cugoano , Olaudah Equiano and other leading members of London's black community. It was closely connected to the Society for Effecting the Abolition of the Slave Trade , a non-denominational group founded in 1787, whose members included Thomas Clarkson . British Member of Parliament William Wilberforce led the anti-slavery movement in the United Kingdom, although the groundwork was an anti-slavery essay by Clarkson. Wilberforce was urged by his close friend, Prime Minister William Pitt the Younger , to make the issue his own and was also given support by reformed Evangelical John Newton . The Slave Trade Act was passed by the British Parliament on March 25, 1807, making the slave trade illegal throughout the British Empire , [ 383 ] Wilberforce also campaigned for abolition of slavery in the British Empire, which he lived to see in the Slavery Abolition Act 1833 .

After the 1807 act abolishing the slave trade was passed, these campaigners switched to encouraging other countries to follow suit, notably France and the British colonies. Between 1808 and 1860, the British West Africa Squadron seized approximately 1,600 slave ships and freed 150,000 Africans who were aboard.

[ 384 ] Action was also taken against African leaders who refused to agree to British treaties to outlaw the trade, for example against "the usurping King of Lagos", deposed in 1851. Anti-slavery treaties were signed with over 50 African rulers.

[ 385 ] Worldwide In 1839, the world's oldest international human rights organization, Anti-Slavery International , was formed in Britain by Joseph Sturge , which campaigned to outlaw slavery in other countries.

[ 386 ] There were celebrations in 2007 to commemorate the 200th anniversary of the abolition of the slave trade in the United Kingdom through the work of the British Anti-Slavery Society .

In the 1860s, David Livingstone 's reports of atrocities within the Arab slave trade in Africa stirred up the interest of the British public, reviving the flagging abolitionist movement. The Royal Navy throughout the 1870s attempted to suppress "this abominable Eastern trade", at Zanzibar in particular. In 1905, the French abolished indigenous slavery in most of French West Africa .

[ 387 ] On December 10, 1948, the United Nations General Assembly adopted the Universal Declaration of Human Rights , which declared freedom from slavery is an internationally recognized human right . Article 4 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights states: No one shall be held in slavery or servitude; slavery and the slave trade shall be prohibited in all their forms.

[ 388 ] In 2014, for the first time in history, major leaders of many religions, Buddhist , Hindu , Christian , Jewish , and Muslim met to sign a shared commitment against modern-day slavery; the declaration they signed calls for the elimination of slavery and human trafficking by 2020.

[ 389 ] The signatories were: Pope Francis , Mātā Amṛtānandamayī , Bhikkhuni Thich Nu Chân Không (representing Zen Master Thích Nhất Hạnh ), Datuk K Sri Dhammaratana, Chief High Priest of Malaysia, Rabbi Abraham Skorka , Rabbi David Rosen, Abbas Abdalla Abbas Soliman, Undersecretary of State of Al Azhar Alsharif (representing Mohamed Ahmed El-Tayeb, Grand Imam of Al-Azhar), Grand Ayatollah Mohammad Taqi al-Modarresi, Sheikh Naziyah Razzaq Jaafar, Special advisor of Grand Ayatollah (representing Grand Ayatollah Sheikh Basheer Hussain al Najafi), Sheikh Omar Abboud, Justin Welby, Archbishop of Canterbury, and Metropolitan Emmanuel of France (representing Ecumenical Patriarch Bartholomew.) [ 389 ] Groups such as the American Anti-Slavery Group , Anti-Slavery International , Free the Slaves , the Anti-Slavery Society, and the Norwegian Anti-Slavery Society continue to campaign to eliminate slavery.

[ citation needed ] UNESCO has been working to break the silence surrounding the memory of slavery since 1994, through The Slave Route Project .

[ 390 ] Apologies On May 21, 2001, the National Assembly of France passed the Taubira law, recognizing slavery as a crime against humanity . Apologies on behalf of African nations, for their role in trading their countrymen into slavery, remain an open issue since slavery was practiced in Africa even before the first Europeans arrived and the Atlantic slave trade was performed with a high degree of involvement of several African societies. The black slave market was supplied by well-established slave trade networks controlled by local African societies and individuals.

[ 391 ] There is adequate evidence citing case after case of African control of segments of the trade. Several African nations such as the Calabar and other southern parts of Nigeria had economies depended solely on the trade. African peoples such as the Imbangala of Angola and the Nyamwezi of Tanzania would serve as middlemen or roving bands warring with other African nations to capture Africans for Europeans.

[ 392 ] Several historians have made important contributions to the global understanding of the African side of the Atlantic slave trade. By arguing that African merchants determined the assemblage of trade goods accepted in exchange for slaves, many historians argue for African agency and ultimately a shared responsibility for the slave trade.

[ 393 ] In 1999, President Mathieu Kérékou of Benin issued a national apology for the central role Africans played in the Atlantic slave trade.

[ 121 ] Luc Gnacadja , minister of environment and housing for Benin, later said: "The slave trade is a shame, and we do repent for it." [ 394 ] Researchers estimate that 3 million slaves were exported out of the Slave Coast bordering the Bight of Benin .

[ 394 ] President Jerry Rawlings of Ghana also apologized for his country's involvement in the slave trade.

[ 121 ] The issue of an apology is linked to reparations for slavery and is still being pursued by entities across the world. For example, the Jamaican Reparations Movement approved its declaration and action plan. In 2007, British Prime Minister Tony Blair made a formal apology for Great Britain's involvement in slavery.

[ 395 ] On February 25, 2007, the Commonwealth of Virginia resolved to 'profoundly regret' and apologize for its role in the institution of slavery. Unique and the first of its kind in the U.S., the apology was unanimously passed in both Houses as Virginia approached the 400th anniversary of the founding of Jamestown .

[ 396 ] On August 24, 2007, Mayor of London Ken Livingstone issued a public apology for London's role in Atlantic slave trade, which took place at an event commemorating the 200th anniversary of the British slave trade's abolition. In his speech, Livingstone described the slave trade as "the racial murder of not just those who were transported but generations of enslaved African men, women and children. To justify this murder and torture black people had to be declared inferior or not human... We live with the consequences today." [ 397 ] City officials in Liverpool , which was a large slave trading port, apologized in 1999.

[ 398 ] On July 30, 2008, the United States House of Representatives passed a resolution apologizing for American slavery and subsequent discriminatory laws.

[ 399 ] In June 2009, the U.S. Senate passed a resolution apologizing to African-Americans for the "fundamental injustice, cruelty, brutality, and inhumanity of slavery". The news was welcomed by President Barack Obama , the nation's first president of African descent.

[ 400 ] Some of President Obama's ancestors may have been slave owners.

[ 401 ] In 2010, Libyan leader Muammar Gaddafi apologized for Arab involvement in the slave trade, saying: "I regret the behavior of the Arabs... They brought African children to North Africa, they made them slaves, they sold them like animals, and they took them as slaves and traded them in a shameful way." [ 402 ] Reparations Main article: Reparations for slavery There have been movements to achieve reparations for those formerly held as slaves or for their descendants. Claims for reparations for being held in slavery are handled as a civil law matter in almost every country. This is often decried as a serious problem, since former slaves' relatives lack of money means they often have limited access to a potentially expensive and futile legal process . Mandatory systems of fines and reparations paid to an as yet undetermined group of claimants from fines, paid by unspecified parties, and collected by authorities have been proposed by advocates to alleviate this "civil court problem." Since in almost all cases there are no living ex-slaves or living ex-slave owners these movements have gained little traction. In nearly all cases the judicial system has ruled that the statute of limitations on these possible claims has long since expired.

In June 2023, The Brattle Group presented a report at an event at the University of the West Indies in which reparations were estimated, for harms both during and after the period of transatlantic chattel slavery, at over 100 trillion dollars.

[ 403 ] [ 404 ] Media Further information: List of films featuring slavery Poster for Spartacus Film has been the most influential medium in the presentation of the history of slavery to the general public around the world.

[ 405 ] The American film industry has had a complex relationship with slavery and until recent decades often avoided the topic. Films such as The Birth of a Nation (1915) [ 406 ] and Gone with the Wind (1939) became controversial because they gave a favourable depiction. In 1940 The Santa Fe Trail gave a liberal but ambiguous interpretation of John Brown 's attacks on slavery.

[ 407 ] The Civil Rights Movement in the 1950s made defiant slaves into heroes.

[ 408 ] The question of slavery in American memory necessarily involves its depictions in feature films.

[ 409 ] Most Hollywood films used American settings, although Spartacus (1960) , dealt with an actual revolt in the Roman Empire known as the Third Servile War . The revolt failed, and all the rebels were executed, but their spirit lived on according to the film.

[ 410 ] Spartacus stays surprisingly close to the historical record.

[ 411 ] The Last Supper ( La última cena in Spanish) was a 1976 film directed by Cuban Tomás Gutiérrez Alea about the teaching of Christianity to slaves in Cuba, and emphasizes the role of ritual and revolt.

Burn!

takes place on the imaginary Portuguese island of Queimada (where the locals speak Spanish) and it merges historical events that took place in Brazil, Cuba, Santo Domingo, Jamaica, and elsewhere.

Historians agree that films have largely shaped historical memories, but they debate issues of accuracy, plausibility, moralism, sensationalism , how facts are stretched in search of broader truths, and suitability for the classroom.

[ 412 ] [ 410 ] Berlin argues that critics complain if the treatment emphasizes historical brutality, or if it glosses over the harshness to highlight the emotional impact of slavery.

[ 413 ] See also Bodmin manumissions , the names and details of slaves freed in Medieval Bodmin International Day for the Abolition of Slavery International Slavery Museum Involuntary servitude List of slaves List of slave owners Mukataba Slave rebellion Slavery in the 21st century Slave-owning slaves Supplementary Convention on the Abolition of Slavery Wilberforce Institute for the Study of Slavery and Emancipation References ^ Allain, Jean (2012). "The Legal Definition of Slavery into the Twenty-First Century". In Allain, Jean (ed.).

The Legal Understanding of Slavery: From the Historical to the Contemporary . Oxford: Oxford University Press . pp.

199– 219.

ISBN 978-0-19-164535-8 .

^ Harper, Kyle (2015).

Slavery in the Late Roman World, AD 275-425 . Cambridge University Press. p. 11.

ISBN 9781107640818 .

Slavery is an economic phenomenon, and a history of slavery must be situated within the economic history of the ancient world.

^ Baker-Kimmons, Leslie C. (2008).

"Slavery" . In Schaefer, Richard T. (ed.).

Encyclopedia of Race, Ethnicity, and Society . Vol. 3.

SAGE Publishing . p. 1234.

ISBN 9781412926942 .

^ a b c d e Hellie, Richard (May 6, 2023).

"Slavery" .

Encyclopædia Britannica .

^ Pargas, Damian (2023). "Introduction: Historicizing and Spatializing Global Slavery".

The Palgrave Handbook of Global Slavery throughout History . Palgrave MacMillan.

ISBN 978-3031132629 .

^ Engerman, Stanley; Paquette, Robert; Drescher, Seymour, eds. (2001).

Slavery (Oxford Reader) (Reprinted ed.). Oxford University Press. p. 1.

ISBN 9780192893024 .

By the end of the twentieth century, slavery was no longer legally or morally acceptable anywhere in the world. Only two centuries ago, slavery was still among the most ubiquitous institutions in human societies, and had existed in most times and places throughout history.

^ Bales 2004 , p. 4.

^ White, Shelley K.; White, Jonathan M.; Korgen, Kathleen Odell (2014).

Sociologists in Action on Inequalities: Race, Class, Gender, and Sexuality .

SAGE Publishing . p. 43.

ISBN 978-1-4833-1147-0 .

^ a b "Slavery in the 21st century" . Newint.org. Archived from the original on May 27, 2010 . Retrieved August 29, 2010 .

^ Hodal, Kate (May 31, 2016).

"One in 200 people is a slave. Why?" .

The Guardian . Archived from the original on April 30, 2019.

^ "Religion & Ethics – Modern slavery: Modern forms of slavery" .

BBC . January 30, 2007. Archived from the original on January 6, 2014 . Retrieved June 16, 2009 .

^ "slave".

Oxford English Dictionary (2nd ed.). 1989.

^ Jankowiak, Marek (February 2017).

"What Does the Slave Trade in the Saqaliba Tell Us about Early Islamic Slavery?" .

International Journal of Middle East Studies .

49 (1): 169– 172.

doi : 10.1017/S0020743816001240 .

ISSN 0020-7438 .

^ "The international slave trade" .

Encyclopædia Britannica .

^ Lewis 1992 , Chapter 1.

^ Kluge, Friedrich (1899).

"Artikel Sklave" [Article Slave].

Etymologisches Wörterbuch Der Deutschen Sprache [ Etymological dictionary of the German language ] (in German) (6 ed.). Strassburg: Trübner. p. 366.

^ Dostoevsky, Fyodor (1981). "Самое последнее слово цивилизации". In В. Г. Базанов и др., ИРЛИ (ed.).

Polnoye sobraniye sochineniy. V 30 tomakh Полное собрание сочинений. В 30 томах [ Full composition of writings. In 30 volumes ] (in Russian). Vol. 23. Дневник писателя за 1876 год. Май-октябрь. Leningrad: Наука. Ленингр. отд-ние. pp. 63, 382. Archived from the original on May 20, 2018.

^ Korth, Georg (1970). "Zur Etymologie des Wortes 'Slavus' (Sklave)" [On the etymology of the word 'Slavus' (slave)].

Glotta, Zeitschrift für Griechische und Lateinische Sprache (in German).

48 (1/2). Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht (GmbH & Co. KG): 145– 153.

JSTOR 40266114 .

^ Kluge, Friedrich (1989).

"Artikel Sklave" . In Elmar Seebold (ed.).

Etymologisches Wörterbuch Der Deutschen Sprache (in German) (22 ed.). Berlin & New York: De Gruyter . p. 676.

ISBN 3-11-006800-1 .

^ Köbler, Gerhard (1995).

"Sklave" [Slave].

Deutsches Etymologisches Rechtswörterbuch [ German Etymological Legal Dictionary ] (in German). Tübingen: Mohr. p. 371.

ISBN 978-3-8252-1888-1 .

^ Scholten, Daniel (2020). "Sklave und Slawe" [Slave and Slav].

Deutsch für Dichter und Denker: Unsere Muttersprache in neuem Licht [ German for poets and thinkers: Our mother tongue in a new light ] (in German). Bright Star Books.

ISBN 978-3-948287-06-1 . Archived from the original on October 24, 2020.

^ Ditten, Hans (1972). "Kritik an G. Korth".

Byzantinoslavica . Vol. 33. Prague: Academia, de l'Academie Tchecoslovaque des Sciences et Lettres. pp.

183– 184.

^ Waldman, Katy (May 19, 2015).

"Slave or Enslaved Person? It's not just an academic debate for historians of American slavery" .

Slate .

Archived from the original on May 21, 2015.

^ Brace, Laura (2004).

The Politics of Property: Labour, Freedom and Belonging .

Edinburgh University Press . p. 162.

ISBN 978-0-7486-1535-3 . Retrieved May 31, 2012 .

^ Keith Bradley (March 7, 2016).

"slavery, Roman" .

Oxford Classical Dictionary .

Oxford University Press .

doi : 10.1093/acrefore/9780199381135.013.7311 .

ISBN 978-0-19-938113-5 . Retrieved June 27, 2023 .

chattel-slavery, whereby the slave‐owner enjoyed complete mastery (dominium) over the slave's physical being […] was evident throughout the central era of Roman history, and in Roman no less than Greek thought was regarded as both the necessary antithesis of civic freedom ^ Bradley, Keith (November 2, 2020).

" 'The Bitter Chain of Slavery': Reflections on Slavery in Ancient Rome" .

Harvard University . Archived from the original on April 11, 2021 . Retrieved November 15, 2022 .

^ Finley, Moses I. (1980).

Ancient Slavery and Modern Ideology . Viking Press. p. 71.

ISBN 9780670122776 .

^ Alexander, J. (2001). "Islam, Archaeology and Slavery in Africa".

World Archaeology .

33 (1): 51.

doi : 10.1080/00438240120047627 .

JSTOR 00438243 .

Chattel-slaves were needed, especially from the ninth to thirteenth centuries, in the gold and emerald (carbuncle) mines of the Wadi Allaqi in the deserts east of the Nile's  2nd Cataract ^ Burkholder, Mark A.; Johnson, Lyman L. (2019). "1. America, Iberia, and Africa Before the Conquest".

Colonial Latin America (10th ed.).

Oxford University Press . p. 10.

Wealth rested heavily on the possession of slaves across the large empires of West Africa as well as in Benin and other kingdoms […] Slave owners in sub-Saharan Africa also employed their chattel in a variety of occupations.

^ Bergad, Laird W. (2007).

The Comparative Histories of Slavery in Brazil, Cuba, and the United States . New York: Cambridge University Press. pp. 57, 132, 165, 166.

ISBN 9780521872355 .

^ Slavery and Social Death : A Comparative Study, Orlando (1982).

Patterson . Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press. pp. X.

ISBN 9780674986909 .

^ Wendy Warren (2016).

New England Bound (1st. ed.).

W. W. Norton & Company . pp.

110– 111.

ISBN 978-0-87140-672-9 .

the Iroquois confederacy, people who practiced a form of captive taking that in some ways looked very like chattel slavery ^ "Traditional or Chattel Slavery" .

FSE Project . The Feminist Sexual Ethics Project . Retrieved August 31, 2014 .

^ a b c Miers, S. (2003). Slavery in the Twentieth Century: The Evolution of a Global Problem. USA: AltaMira Press.

^ Ghanem, Omar (August 21, 2007).

"Slavery in Mauritania Emancipating the Free" .

Onislam.net . Archived from the original on October 28, 2014 . Retrieved October 28, 2014 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown ( link ) ^ a b Okeowo, Alexis (September 8, 2014).

"Freedom Fighter: A slaving society and an abolitionist's crusade" .

The New Yorker . Archived from the original on January 6, 2018 . Retrieved October 16, 2014 .

^ a b c "Mauritanian MPs pass slavery law" .

BBC News . August 9, 2007 . Retrieved May 23, 2010 .

^ a b Bales 2004 , pp. 15–18.

^ "Debt bondage remains the most prevalent form of forced labour worldwide" .

United Nations . September 15, 2016 . Retrieved July 27, 2021 .

^ "Nigeria's young daughters are sold as 'money wives' " .

Al Jazeera . September 21, 2018 . Retrieved May 12, 2020 .

^ Sleightholme; Indrani (1996).

Guilty Without Trial . Rutgers University Press. pp.

11– 12.

ISBN 0-8135-2381-8 .

^ Chatterjee, Indrani; Eaton, Richard (2006).

Slavery and South Asian History .

Indiana University Press . p. 3.

ISBN 978-0-253-11671-0 .

^ Dandamayev, M. A.; Barda; Bardadārī.

Encyclopædia Iranica .

^ Farazmand, Ali (1998). "Persian/Iranian Administrative Tradition". In Shafritz, Jay M. (ed.).

International Encyclopedia of Public Edict and Administration . Boulder, CO: Westview Press . pp. 1640–1645 (1642).

Persians never practiced mass slavery, and in many cases the situations and lives of semi-slaves (prisoners of war) were in fact better than the common citizens of Persia.

^ "Experts encourage action against sex trafficking" . November 2, 2009.

Archived from the original on December 23, 2009.

^ "Rights–Mexico: 16,000 Victims of Child Sexual Exploitation" .

ipsnews.net . August 13, 2007 . Retrieved February 11, 2016 .

^ "Campaign Page: Child Soldiers" .

Human Rights Watch . June 2001. Archived from the original on February 13, 2008.

^ Chikwanine, Michel; Humphrey, Jessica (September 1, 2015).

Child Soldier: When Boys and Girls Are Used in War . Kids Can Press Ltd.

ISBN 978-1-77138-126-0 .

^ Sullivan, Kevin (December 26, 2008).

"In Togo, a 10-Year-Old's Muted Cry: 'I Couldn't Take Any More' " .

Archived from the original on June 12, 2018 . Retrieved January 15, 2024 .

^ "Two-year-old 'at risk' of forced marriage" .

BBC News . March 5, 2013.

^ "Honor Diaries: Child/Forced Marriage: Factsheet" (PDF) . Honordiaries.com. Archived from the original (PDF) on September 24, 2015 . Retrieved September 29, 2015 .

^ Black, Debra (September 20, 2013).

"Forced marriages rampant in Ontario" .

The Hamilton Spectator . Archived from the original on March 26, 2017 . Retrieved September 20, 2013 .

^ "Without Consent: Forced Marriage in Australia" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on June 13, 2015.

^ "UNICEF supports fight to end marriage by abduction in Ethiopia" . reliefweb.int. November 9, 2004 . Retrieved August 29, 2013 .

^ Krembs, Peter (January 20, 2003).

"An Idea Not Worth Drafting: Conscription is Slavery" . Capmag.com . Retrieved September 29, 2015 .

^ Kopel, Dave .

"Nationalized Slavery; A policy Italy should dump" .

davidkopel.com . Archived from the original on October 12, 2007.

. Refers to both the military and national service requirements of Italy as slavery ^ Machan, Tibor R. (April 13, 2000).

"Tax Slavery" .

Ludwig von Mises Institute . Retrieved October 9, 2006 .

^ Valenstein, Elliot (2002).

Blaming the Brain: The Truth About Drugs and Mental Health .

Simon & Schuster . p. 26.

ISBN 978-0-7432-3787-1 .

^ Szasz, Thomas Stephen .

Psychiatric Slavery . Retrieved September 29, 2015 – via Google Books.

^ Schaler, J. A. (2003).

"Slavery and psychiatry" .

British Journal of Psychiatry .

183 : 77– 78.

doi : 10.1192/bjp.183.1.77-a .

PMID 12835252 .

^ Spiegel, Marjorie (1996).

The Dreaded Comparison: Human and Animal Slavery . New York: Mirror Books.

^ For sources about the concept of "wage slavery" and its various interpretations, see "wage slave" .

dictionary.com . Retrieved March 4, 2013 .

^ Ellerman 1992 .

^ "wage slave" . merriam-webster.com . Retrieved March 4, 2013 .

^ "Constitution Society – Advocates and enforcers of the U.S. and State Constitutions" . Archived from the original on December 21, 2020 . Retrieved February 6, 2021 .

...vulgar are the means of livelihood of all hired workmen whom we pay for mere manual labour, not for artistic skill; for in their case the very wage they receive is a pledge of their slavery.

^ North, Douglass C.; Thomas, Robert Paul (December 1971). "The Rise and Fall of the Manorial System: A Theoretical Model".

The Journal of Economic History .

31 (4): 777– 803.

doi : 10.1017/S0022050700074623 .

JSTOR 2117209 .

S2CID 154616683 .

^ Domar, Evsey D. (March 1970). "The Causes of Slavery or Serfdom: A Hypothesis".

The Journal of Economic History .

30 (1): 18– 32.

doi : 10.1017/S0022050700078566 .

JSTOR 2116721 .

S2CID 154921369 .

^ Lagerlöf, Nils-Petter (November 12, 2006).

"Slavery and other property rights" .

MPRA Paper 372 . Retrieved May 6, 2009 .

^ "Technology" . History.com. January 4, 2008. Archived from the original on April 23, 2008 . Retrieved May 6, 2009 .

^ Helper, Hinton Rowan (1857).

The Impending Crisis of the South: How to Meet It . New York: Burdick Brothers.

^ McKivigan, John R.; Snay, Mitchell (1998).

Religion and the Antebellum Debate Over Slavery .

University of Georgia Press . p. 68.

ISBN 978-0-8203-2076-2 . Retrieved May 31, 2012 .

^ Griswold, Charles L. (1999).

Adam Smith and the Virtues of Enlightenment .

Cambridge University Press . p. 198.

ISBN 978-0-521-62891-4 . Retrieved May 31, 2012 .

^ Forbes 1998 , p. 74.

^ a b c Kara, Siddharth (2008).

Sex Trafficking – Inside the Business of Modern Slavery .

Columbia University Press .

ISBN 978-0-231-13960-1 .

^ "Louis Dor (Saturday 30 April 2016) Kim Jong-un is recruiting a new 'pleasure squad' of teenage girls" . April 30, 2016.

^ Ryall, Julian (April 2, 2015).

"Kim Jong-un brings back 'pleasure troupe' entertainers" .

The Telegraph .

^ "From private to state slavery and back again" .

Eurozine . July 31, 2017 . Retrieved August 12, 2021 .

^ Lockhart, James; Schwartz, Stuart.

Early Latin America . New York: Cambridge University Press . p. 138.

The encomienda in its early heyday granted a lifetime monopoly on the utilization of temporary Indian labor in a given area to one Spaniard, the encomendero.

^ "One day we will start a big war" .

Foreign Policy .

Archived from the original on February 5, 2017 . Retrieved February 13, 2017 .

^ Stengers, Jean (1969). "The Congo Free State and the Belgian Congo before 1914". In Gann, L. H.; Duignan, Peter (eds.).

Colonialism in Africa, 1870–1914 . Vol. I. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press . p. 272.

^ Pollak, Michael (March 28, 2014).

"Determining the Legal Rights of Slaves" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved February 11, 2021 .

^ Ober, Josiah (June 26, 2018).

Athenian Legacies: Essays on the Politics of Going On Together .

Princeton University Press .

ISBN 978-0-691-19016-7 .

^ Cobb, Thomas (1999) [1858].

An Inquiry into the Law of Negro Slavery in the United States of America .

University of Georgia Press . pp.

268– 269.

^ a b c d e f "Historical survey: Slave-owning societies" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Archived from the original on February 23, 2007.

^ Harris, W. V. (February 3, 2011).

Demography, Geography, and the Sources of Roman Slaves . Rome's Imperial Economy.

Oxford University Press . pp.

88– 110.

doi : 10.1093/acprof:osobl/9780199595167.003.0005 .

ISBN 978-0-19-959516-7 .

^ Perbi, Akosua (April 5, 2001).

"Slavery and the Slave Trade in Pre-colonial Africa" (PDF) . latinamericanstudies.org . Retrieved August 11, 2016 .

^ "Welcome to Encyclopædia Britannica's Guide to Black History" .

Britannica.com . Archived from the original on December 30, 2007 . Retrieved March 19, 2018 .

^ Bindman, David; Gates (Jr.), Henry Louis; Dalton, Karen C. C., eds. (2010).

The Image of the Black in Western Art . Vol. 2.

Belknap Press of Harvard University Press . p. 27.

ISBN 978-0-674-05271-0 .

^ Mohaiemen, Naeem (July 27, 2004).

"Slaves in Saudi" .

The Daily Star . Vol. 5, no. 61 . Retrieved February 7, 2021 .

^ Ochiengʼ, William Robert (1975).

Eastern Kenya and Its Invaders . East African Literature Bureau. p. 76 . Retrieved May 15, 2015 – via Google Books .

^ a b Ogot, Bethwell A.

(April 1970). "Zamani: a survey of East African history".

African Affairs : 104.

doi : 10.1093/oxfordjournals.afraf.a096007 .

ISSN 1468-2621 .

^ a b Lodhi, Abdulaziz (2000).

Oriental influences in Swahili: a study in language and culture contacts . Acta Universitatis Gothoburgensis. p. 17.

ISBN 978-91-7346-377-5 .

^ "Focus on the slave trade" .

BBC . September 3, 2001. Archived from the original on May 25, 2017.

^ Fage, John Donnelly ; Tordoff, William (2001).

A History of Africa (4 ed.). Budapest: Routledge . p. 258.

ISBN 978-0-415-25248-5 .

^ Tannenbaum, Edward R.; Dudley, Guilford (1973).

A History of World Civilizations . Wiley. p. 615.

ISBN 978-0-471-84480-8 .

^ Campbell 2004 , p. ix.

^ Shillington, Kevin (July 4, 2013).

Encyclopedia of African History 3-Volume Set .

Routledge . p. 1401.

ISBN 978-1-135-45670-2 .

^ "Slow Death for Slavery: The Course of Abolition in Northern Nigeria, 1897–1936 (review)" .

Journal of World History . Archived from the original on April 11, 2016 . Retrieved December 31, 2021 .

^ " "Freedom is a good thing but it means a dearth of slaves": Twentieth Century Solutions to the Abolition of Slavery" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on May 15, 2011 . Retrieved August 29, 2010 .

^ Bagley, H. R. C. (August 1, 1997).

The Last Great Muslim Empires .

BRILL .

ISBN 978-90-04-02104-4 .

^ Rodriguez 2007a , p. 585.

^ Asquith, Christina.

"Revisiting the Zanj and Re-Visioning Revolt: Complexities of the Zanj Conflict – 868–883 AD – slave revolt in Iraq" . Archived from the original on March 6, 2016.

^ "Islam, From Arab To Islamic Empire: The Early Abbasid Era" . History-world.org. Archived from the original on September 24, 2018 . Retrieved March 23, 2016 .

^ Kissling, H. J.; Spuler, Bertold; Barbour, N.; Trimingham, J. S.; Braun, H.; Hartel, H. (August 1, 1997).

The Last Great Muslim Empires . BRILL.

ISBN 978-90-04-02104-4 .

^ Syed, Muzaffar Husain (2011).

A Concise History of Islam . New Delhi: VIJ Books (India) Pty Ltd. p. 453.

ISBN 978-93-81411-09-4 .

According to Robert Davis, from the 16th to 19th century, pirates captured 1 million to 1.25 million Europeans as slaves.

^ Davis, R. (September 16, 2003).

Christian Slaves, Muslim Masters: White Slavery in the Mediterranean, The Barbary Coast, and Italy, 1500–1800 .

Palgrave Macmillan UK.

ISBN 978-1-4039-4551-8 – via Google Books .

^ "When Europeans Were Slaves: Research Suggests White Slavery Was Much More Common Than Previously Believed" . Research News. Archived from the original on July 25, 2011 . Retrieved October 10, 2007 .

^ a b Carroll, Rory (March 11, 2004).

"New book reopens old arguments about slave raids on Europe" .

The Guardian .

ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved December 11, 2017 .

^ Wright, John (2007). "Trans-Saharan Slave Trade".

Routledge .

^ a b Davis, Robert (February 17, 2011).

"British Slaves on the Barbary Coast" .

BBC .

^ Baepler, B. (January 1999). "White Slaves, African Masters: An Anthology of American Barbary Captivity Narratives".

The SHAFR Guide Online .

University of Chicago Press : 5.

doi : 10.1163/2468-1733_shafr_sim030170256 .

^ "Swahili Coast" .

National Geographic . October 17, 2002. Archived from the original on December 30, 2007 . Retrieved September 30, 2015 .

^ "Remembering East African slave raids" .

BBC News . March 30, 2007 . Retrieved February 6, 2021 .

^ "Focus on the slave trade" .

BBC News . September 3, 2001 . Retrieved February 6, 2021 .

^ Campbell 2007 , p. 173.

^ Veenhoven, Willem A. (1977).

Case Studies on Human Rights And Fundamental Freedoms: A World Survey . Martinus Nijhoff Publishers. p. 440.

ISBN 978-90-247-1956-3 . Retrieved May 31, 2012 .

^ a b Snell, Daniel C. (2011). "Slavery in the Ancient Near East". In Keith Bradley and Paul Cartledge (ed.).

The Cambridge World History of Slavery . New York: Cambridge University Press . pp.

4– 21.

^ Lovejoy, Paul E. (1989). "The Impact of the Atlantic Slave Trade on Africa: A Review of the Literature".

Journal of African History : 30.

^ Foner, Eric (2012).

Give Me Liberty: An American History . New York: W. W. Norton & Company . p. 18.

^ M'bokolo, Elikia (April 1, 1998).

"The impact of the slave trade on Africa" .

Le Monde diplomatique . Retrieved February 7, 2021 .

^ a b c Gates, Henry Louis Jr.

(April 22, 2010).

"Opinion | Ending the Slavery Blame-Game" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved February 13, 2021 .

^ Bortolot, Alexander Ives (October 2003).

"The Transatlantic Slave Trade]" .

metmuseum.org . Retrieved February 6, 2021 .

^ "Nigeria – The Slave Trade" .

countrystudies.us .

U.S. Library of Congress . Archived from the original on February 7, 2021 . Retrieved February 6, 2021 .

^ Rubinstein, W. D. (2004).

Genocide: a history . Pearson Education. pp.

76– 78.

ISBN 978-0-582-50601-5 .

^ Mancke, Elizabeth; Shammas, Carole (May 31, 2005).

The Creation of the British Atlantic World .

Johns Hopkins University Press . pp.

30– 31.

ISBN 978-0-8018-8039-1 .

^ Corrigan, Terence (September 6, 2007).

"Mauritania: Country Made Slavery Illegal Last Month" .

South African Institute of International Affairs . The East African Standard. Archived from the original on August 4, 2011 . Retrieved January 21, 2008 .

^ Jonathan E. Brockopp (2000), Early Mālikī Law: Ibn ʻAbd Al-Ḥakam and His Major Compendium of Jurisprudence, Brill, ISBN 978-9004116283 , p. 131 ^ Levy 1957 , p. 77.

sfn error: no target: CITEREFLevy1957 ( help ) ^ "Mesopotamia: The Code of Hammurabi" . #7. Archived from the original on May 14, 2011.

... the shepherd of the oppressed and of the slaves ... If any one buy from the son or the slave of another man ^ Shaw, Garry J. (October 26, 2012). "Slavery, Pharaonic Egypt".

The Encyclopedia of Ancient History . Hoboken, New Jersey, USA: John Wiley & Sons , Inc.

doi : 10.1002/9781444338386.wbeah15006 .

ISBN 978-1-4443-3838-6 .

^ "Ancient Egypt: Slavery, its causes and practice" .

reshafim.org.il . Retrieved March 6, 2019 .

^ David, Rosalie (April 1, 1998).

The Ancient Egyptians (Beliefs & Practices) . Sussex Academic Press. p. 91.

^ Everett, Susanne (October 24, 2011).

History of Slavery . Chartwell Books. pp.

10– 11.

^ Dunn, Jimmy (October 24, 2011).

"Slaves and Slavery in Ancient Egypt" . Retrieved April 9, 2016 .

^ Lewis 1992 , p. 53.

^ "Horrible Traffic in Circassian Women – Infanticide in Turkey" .

New York Daily Times . August 6, 1856 . Retrieved August 29, 2010 – via The Lost Museum Archive.

^ "Soldier Khan" . Avalanche Press . Retrieved August 29, 2010 .

^ a b c Kizilov, Mikhail (2007).

"Slave Trade in the Early Modern Crimea From the Perspective of Christian, Muslim, and Jewish Sources" .

Journal of Early Modern History .

11 (1): 1– 31.

doi : 10.1163/157006507780385125 .

^ a b c d Clarence-Smith, W. G. (2006).

Islam and the Abolition of Slavery .

Oxford University Press . p. 13.

ISBN 978-0-19-522151-0 .

^ "Sexual slavery – the harem" . BBC – Religion & Ethics. Archived from the original on May 21, 2009.

^ Dalman, Gustaf (2020). Abdulhadi-Sukhtian, Nadia (ed.).

Work and Customs in Palestine, volume II . Vol. 2 (Agriculture). Translated by Schick, Robert. Ramallah: Dar Al Nasher. pp.

176– 177.

ISBN 978-9950-385-84-9 .

^ "The Freeing of the Slaves" . Khiva.info . Retrieved August 29, 2010 .

^ a b c Miers, S. (2003). Slavery in the Twentieth Century: The Evolution of a Global Problem. Storbritannien: AltaMira Press. p.16 ^ a b c Miers, S. (2003). Slavery in the Twentieth Century: The Evolution of a Global Problem. Storbritannien: AltaMira Press. p. 17 ^ Veenhoven, Willem Adriaan; Ewing, Winifred Crum; Samenlevingen, Stichting Plurale (1975).

Case Studies on Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms: A World Survey .

BRILL . p. 452.

ISBN 978-90-247-1779-8 . Retrieved May 31, 2012 .

^ "Religion & Ethics – Islam and slavery: Abolition" . BBC. Archived from the original on May 21, 2009 . Retrieved May 1, 2010 .

^ Gallay, Alan (2016). "Indian Slavery".

The Oxford Handbook of Slavery in the Americas . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 9780198758815 .

Slavery existed among the indigenous peoples of the Americas before the European arrival. Its character varied from place to place. In societies that practiced human sacrifice, slaves were captured from enemies for ritualistic purposes. This occurred, for instance, among the Aztecs in Mexico and the Indians of the Pacific Northwest. More commonly, native peoples captured enemies to procure slave laborers for agricultural production and public works projects, particularly in Central and South America. Captivity, however, was not the only rationale for enslavement.

^ "Aztec Social Structure" .

University of Texas at Austin . Archived from the original on February 23, 2011.

^ Lawson, Russell M.; Lawson, Benjamin A. (October 11, 2019).

Race and Ethnicity in America: From Pre-contact to the Present [4 volumes] .

ABC-CLIO . p. 16.

ISBN 978-1-4408-5097-4 .

^ "Slavery in the New World" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Retrieved February 25, 2011 .

^ Ames, Kenneth M. (June 2001). "Slaves, Chiefs and Labour on the Northern Northwest Coast".

World Archaeology . 33 (The Archaeology of Slavery) (1): 1– 17.

doi : 10.1080/00438240120047591 .

JSTOR 827885 .

S2CID 162278526 .

^ Donald, Leland (1997).

"Aboriginal Slavery on the Northwest Coast of North America" .

University of California Press .

ISBN 978-0-520-91811-5 . Retrieved December 25, 2019 – via Google Books .

^ "The World Factbook" .

CIA . Archived from the original on June 29, 2011 . Retrieved August 8, 2010 .

^ "Sicut Dudem -Against the Enslavement of Black Natives of the Canary Islands" .

papalencyclicals.net . January 13, 1435.

^ "Sublimus Dei – On the Enslavement and Evangelization of Indians" .

papalencyclicals.net . May 29, 1537.

^ Hanke, Lewis (1974).

All Mankind Is One: A Study of the Disputation Between Bartolomé de Las Casas and Juan Ginés de Sepúlveda on the Religious and Intellectual Capacity of the American Indians .

Northern Illinois University Press . p. xi.

ISBN 0-87580-043-2 .

"For the first time, and probably for the last, a colonizing nation organized a formal enquiry into the justice of the methods used to extend its empire. For the first time, too, in the modern world, we see an attempt to stigmatize an entire race as inferior, as born slaves according to the theory elaborated centuries before by Aristotle." ^ "Health In Slavery" . Archived from the original on October 3, 2006.

^ Panzer, Joel S. (1996).

The Popes and Slavery . Alba House. p. 3.

ISBN 0-8189-0764-9 .

"The earlier forms of servitude were varied, complex, and very often of a different sociological category than those which were prevalent after the 14th century. While all forms of servitude are certainly unacceptable to most people today, this has not always been the case. Formerly, the rules of war and society were such that servitude was often imposed as a penalty on criminals and prisoners of war, and was even freely chosen by many workers for economic reasons. Children born of those held in servitude were also at times considered to be in the same state as that of their parents. These types of servitude were the most common among those generally considered to establish the so-called 'just titles' of servitude." ^ Galenson, David W. (March 1984). "The Rise and Fall of Indentured Servitude in the Americas: An Economic Analysis".

The Journal of Economic History .

XLIV (1): 1– 26.

doi : 10.1017/S002205070003134X .

JSTOR 2120553 .

S2CID 154682898 .

^ Bavis ; Donoghue (2010) , pp. 943–974; Higginbotham (1978) , p. 7 ^ "Slave Laws" . Virtual Jamestown . Retrieved November 4, 2013 .

^ Billings, Warren M. (2009).

The Old Dominion in the Seventeenth Century: A Documentary History of Virginia, 1606–1700: Easyread Super Large 18pt Edition . ReadHowYouWant.com. pp.

286– 87.

ISBN 978-1-4429-6090-9 .

^ Federal Writers' Project (1954).

Virginia: A Guide to the Old Dominion . US History Publishers. p. 76.

ISBN 978-1-60354-045-2 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ Danver (2010) , p. 322; Kozlowski (2010) , p. 78; Conway (2008) , p.

5 ; Toppin (2010) , p. 46; Foner (1980) ; Burnham (1993) ^ a b Agurilar-Moreno, Manuel (2006).

Handbook to Life in the Aztec World .

California State University , Los Angeles.

^ "Jamaican History I" . Discover Jamaica. Archived from the original on August 5, 2013 . Retrieved August 23, 2013 .

^ Childs, Matt D. (2006).

1812 Aponte Rebellion in Cuba and the Struggle against Atlantic Slavery .

University of North Carolina Press .

ISBN 978-0-8078-5772-4 .

^ Ali, Arif (1997).

Barbados: Just Beyond Your Imagination . Hansib Publishing (Caribbean) Ltd. pp. 46, 48.

ISBN 978-1-870518-54-3 .

^ Streissguth, Tom (2009).

Suriname in Pictures . Twenty-First Century Books. p.

23 .

ISBN 978-1-57505-964-8 .

^ Mentelle, Simon M. (1777).

"Extract of the Dutch Map Representing the Colony of Surinam" .

wdl.org . Digital World Library via Library of Congress . Retrieved February 7, 2021 .

^ "Domínio Público – Pesquisa Básica" [Public Domain – Basic Research].

dominiopublico.gov.br (in Brazilian Portuguese).

^ "Vergonha Ainda Maior: Novas informações disponíveis em um enorme banco de dados mostram que a escravidão no Brasil foi muito pior do que se sabia antes" [Even Greater Shame: New information available from a huge database shows that slavery in Brazil was far worse than previously known].

Veja (in Portuguese). Archived from the original on March 13, 2015 . Retrieved March 16, 2015 .

^ "African Heritage and Memories of Slavery in Brazil and the South Atlantic World By Ana Lucia Araujo" .

cambriapress.com . Archived from the original on March 22, 2023 . Retrieved February 7, 2021 .

^ Rodriguez 2007 , p. 227.

^ Reséndez, Andrés (2016).

The Other Slavery: The Uncovered Story of Indian Enslavement in America .

Houghton Mifflin Harcourt . p. 17.

ISBN 978-0-547-64098-3 .

^ Farmer, Paul (April 15, 2004).

"Who removed Aristide?" .

London Review of Books . pp.

28– 31. Archived from the original on June 8, 2008 . Retrieved February 19, 2010 .

^ Kiple, Kenneth F. (2002).

The Caribbean Slave: A Biological History .

Cambridge University Press . p. 145.

ISBN 978-0-521-52470-4 .

^ Campbell 2008 , pp. 27–53.

^ Moitt, Bernard (2001).

Women and Slavery in the French Antilles, 1635–1848 .

Indiana University Press . p. 63.

^ Coupeau, Steeve (2008).

The History of Haiti .

Greenwood Publishing Group . p. 18.

ISBN 978-0-313-34089-5 .

^ Wood, Peter (2003).

"The Birth of Race-Based Slavery" .

Slate . Archived from the original on January 20, 2023.

^ Smith, Julia Floyd (1973).

Slavery and Plantation Growth in Antebellum Florida, 1821–1860 . Gainesville: University of Florida Press . p. 44.

ISBN 978-0-8130-0323-8 – via Google Books .

^ a b Moore, Wilbert Ellis (1980).

American Negro Slavery and Abolition: A Sociological Study . Ayer Publishing.

^ Clinton, Catherine (1999).

Scholastic Encyclopedia of the Civil War . Scholastic Reference. p. 8.

ISBN 978-0-590-37228-2 .

^ McInnis, Maurie D. (2011).

Slaves Waiting for Sale: Abolitionist Art and the American Slave Trade .

University of Chicago Press . p. 129.

ISBN 978-0-226-55933-9 .

^ Behrendt, Stephen (1999). "Transatlantic Slave Trade".

Africana: The Encyclopedia of the African and African American Experience . New York: Basic Civitas Books.

ISBN 978-0-465-00071-5 .

Based on "records for 27,233 voyages that set out to obtain slaves for the Americas".

^ a b "Social Aspects of the Civil War" .

National Park Service . Archived from the original on July 14, 2007.

^ "Why Did So Many Christians Support Slavery?" .

christianitytoday.com . January 1992 . Retrieved August 28, 2017 .

^ "1860 Census Results" . Archived from the original on June 4, 2004.

^ Coates, Ta-Nehisi (August 9, 2010).

"Small Truth Papering Over a Big Lie" .

The Atlantic . Retrieved September 29, 2015 .

^ Lowe, Jaime (July 27, 2021).

"What Does California Owe Its Incarcerated Firefighters?" .

The Atlantic . Retrieved August 29, 2023 .

^ Pargas, Damian Alan; Roşu, Felicia (December 7, 2017).

Critical Readings on Global Slavery (4 vols.) .

BRILL .

ISBN 978-90-04-34661-1 .

^ "Slavery and forced labour in Ancient China and the Ancient Mediterranean" .

The University of Edinburgh .

University of Edinburgh . Archived from the original on March 6, 2019 . Retrieved March 6, 2019 .

^ Ober, Josiah; Scheidel, Walter; Shaw, Brent D.; Sanclemente, Donna (April 18, 2007). "Toward Open Access in Ancient Studies: The Princeton-Stanford Working Papers in Classics".

Hesperia .

76 (1): 229– 242.

doi : 10.2972/hesp.76.1.229 .

ISSN 0018-098X .

S2CID 145709968 .

^ "Outline of the Senmin system during the Ritsuryo period" (PDF) . June 14, 2024.

^ a b c Rodriguez 1997 , pp. 146–147.

^ 杉山正明《忽必烈的挑战》，社会科学文献出版社，2013年，第44–46頁 ^ 船田善之《色目人与元代制度、社会 – 重新探讨蒙古、色目、汉人、南人划分的位置》,〈蒙古学信息〉2003年第2期 ^ Williams, R. Owen (November 2006).

Encyclopedia of Antislavery and Abolition [Two Volumes] .

Greenwood Press .

ISBN 978-0-313-01524-3 .

^ Zhao, Gang (1986).

Man and Land in Chinese History: An Economic Analysis .

Stanford University Press .

ISBN 978-0-8047-1271-2 .

^ Huang, Philip C. (2001).

Code, Custom, and Legal Practice in China: The Qing and the Republic Compared .

Stanford University Press .

ISBN 978-0-8047-4111-8 .

^ "Kao-li maid-servant" .

Memoirs of the Research Department of the Tōyō Bunko (2). Tokyo: Tōyō Bunko : 63. 1928.

ISSN 0082-562X .

^ Lee (1997) , p. 49; Davis (1988) , p. 51; Salisbury (2004) , p. 316 ^ Schafer, Edward H. (1963).

The Golden Peaches of Samarkand: A Study of Tʻang Exotics .

University of California Press . pp.

45– 46.

ISBN 978-0-520-05462-2 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ Granet, Marcel (2013) [1930], "The History of Civilization" , Chinese Civilization , London: Routledge , pp.

500– 503, doi : 10.4324/9781315005508-24 , ISBN 978-1-315-00550-8 ^ Lipman, Jonathan Neaman (2004).

Familiar strangers: a history of Muslims in Northwest China . Seattle: University of Washington Press . p. 69.

ISBN 978-0-295-97644-0 . Retrieved November 28, 2010 .

^ Brook, Timothy; Wakabayashi, Bob Tadashi (2000).

Opium regimes: China, Britain, and Japan, 1839–1952 .

University of California Press . p. 148.

ISBN 978-0-520-22236-6 . Retrieved November 28, 2010 .

^ Millward 1998 , p. 145.

^ Millward 1998 , p. 206.

^ a b c d e f g h i Rodriguez 1997 , pp. 392–393.

^ a b c Klein, Martin A. (2014).

Historical Dictionary of Slavery and Abolition .

Rowman & Littlefield Publishers. p. 13.

ISBN 978-0-8108-7528-9 .

^ Rhee, Young-hoon; Yang, Donghyu (December 1999).

"Korean Nobi in American Mirror: Yi Dynasty Coerced Labor in Comparison to the Slavery in the Antebellum Southern United States" .

Working Paper Series . Institute of Economic Research, Seoul National University . Archived from the original on November 6, 2018 . Retrieved February 14, 2017 .

^ Campbell 2004 , pp. 153–157.

^ Palais, James B. (1998).

Views on Korean social history . Institute for Modern Korean Studies, Yonsei University . p. 50.

ISBN 978-89-7141-441-5 . Retrieved February 15, 2017 .

Another target of his critique is the insistence that slaves (nobi) in Korea, especially in Choson dynasty, were closer to serfs (nongno) than true slaves (noye) in Europe and America, enjoying more freedom and independence than what a slave would normally be allowed.

^ Kim, Youngmin; Pettid, Michael J. (2011).

Women and Confucianism in Choson Korea: New Perspectives .

SUNY Press . p. 141.

ISBN 978-1-4384-3777-4 . Retrieved February 14, 2017 .

^ a b c Campbell 2004 , pp. 162–163.

^ Campbell 2004 , p. 157.

^ a b Kim, Youngmin; Pettid, Michael J. (2011).

Women and Confucianism in Choson Korea: New Perspectives .

SUNY Press . pp.

140– 41.

ISBN 978-1-4384-3777-4 . Retrieved February 14, 2017 .

^ Korean National Commission for UNESCO (2004).

Korean History: Discovery of Its Characteristics and Developments . Hollym. p. 14.

ISBN 978-1-56591-177-2 .

^ a b Tierney, Helen (1999).

Women's Studies Encyclopedia .

Greenwood Publishing Group . p. 277.

ISBN 978-0-313-31071-3 .

^ Hoffman, Michael (May 26, 2013).

"The rarely, if ever, told story of Japanese sold as slaves by Portuguese traders" .

The Japan Times . Archived from the original on May 5, 2019 . Retrieved March 2, 2014 .

^ "Europeans had Japanese slaves, in case you didn't know…" .

Japan Probe . May 10, 2007. Archived from the original on March 4, 2016 . Retrieved January 7, 2018 .

^ Hertel, Ralf; Keevak, Michael (2017).

Early Encounters between East Asia and Europe: Telling Failures .

Routledge .

ISBN 978-1-317-14718-3 .

^ Michael Weiner, ed. (2004).

Race, Ethnicity and Migration in Modern Japan: Imagined and imaginary minorities (illustrated ed.).

Taylor & Francis . p. 408.

ISBN 978-0-415-20857-4 . Retrieved February 2, 2014 .

^ Appiah, Kwame Anthony ; Gates, Henry Louis Jr.

, eds. (2005).

Africana: The Encyclopedia of the African and African American Experience . Vol. 3. Oxford: Oxford University Press . p. 479.

ISBN 978-0-19-517055-9 . Retrieved February 13, 2021 .

^ Appiah, Kwame Anthony ; Gates, Henry Louis Jr.

, eds. (2010).

Encyclopedia of Africa . Vol. 1. Oxford: Oxford University Press . p. 187.

ISBN 978-0-19-533770-9 . Retrieved February 13, 2021 .

^ Robert Gellately; Ben Kiernan, eds. (2003).

The Specter of Genocide: Mass Murder in Historical Perspective (reprint ed.).

Cambridge University Press . p.

277 .

ISBN 978-0-521-52750-7 . Retrieved February 2, 2014 .

Hideyoshi korean slaves guns silk.

^ McCormack, Gavan (2001).

Reflections on Modern Japanese History in the Context of the Concept of "genocide" . Edwin O. Reischauer Institute of Japanese Studies. Harvard University, Edwin O. Reischauer Institute of Japanese Studies. p. 18.

^ Lidin, Olof G. (2002).

Tanegashima – The Arrival of Europe in Japan .

Routledge . p. 170.

ISBN 978-1-135-78871-1 . Retrieved February 2, 2014 .

^ Stanley, Amy (2012).

Selling Women: Prostitution, Markets, and the Household in Early Modern Japan . Vol. 21 of Asia: Local Studies / Global Themes. Matthew H. Sommer.

University of California Press .

ISBN 978-0-520-95238-6 . Retrieved February 2, 2014 .

^ Spence, Jonathan D. (1985).

The memory palace of Matteo Ricci (illustrated, reprint ed.).

Penguin Books . p. 208.

ISBN 978-0-14-008098-8 . Retrieved May 5, 2012 .

countryside.16 Slaves were everywhere in Lisbon, according to the Florentine merchant Filippo Sassetti, who was also living in the city during 1578. Black slaves were the most numerous, but there were also a scattering of Chinese ^ Leite, José Roberto Teixeira (1999).

A China no Brasil: influências, marcas, ecos e sobrevivências chinesas na sociedade e na arte brasileiras (in Portuguese). UNICAMP. Universidade Estadual de Campinas. p. 19.

ISBN 978-85-268-0436-4 .

Idéias e costumes da China podem ter-nos chegado também através de escravos chineses, de uns poucos dos quais sabe-se da presença no Brasil de começos do Setecentos.17 Mas não deve ter sido através desses raros infelizes que a influência chinesa nos atingiu, mesmo porque escravos chineses (e também japoneses) já existiam aos montes em Lisboa por volta de 1578, quando Filippo Sassetti visitou a cidade,18 apenas suplantados em número pelos africanos. Parece aliás que aos últimos cabia o trabalho pesado, ficando reservadas aos chins tarefas e funções mais amenas, inclusive a de em certos casos secretariar autoridades civis, religiosas e militares.

^ a b Pinto, Jeanette (1992).

Slavery in Portuguese India, 1510–1842 . Bombay: Himalaya Pub. House. p. 18.

ISBN 978-81-7040-587-0 .

ing Chinese as slaves, since they are found to be very loyal, intelligent and hard working' ... their culinary bent was also evidently appreciated. The Florentine traveller Fillippo Sassetti, recording his impressions of Lisbon's enormous slave population circa 1580, states that the majority of the Chinese there were employed as cooks.

^ Boxer (1968) , p. 225: "be very loyal, intelligent, and hard-working. Their culinary bent (not for nothing is Chinese cooking regarded as the Asiatic equivalent to French cooking in Europe) was evidently appreciated. The Florentine traveller Filipe Sassetti recording his impressions of Lisbon's enormous slave population circa 1580, states that the majority of the Chinese there were employed as cooks. Dr. John Fryer, who gives us an interesting ...".

^ Leite, José Roberto Teixeira (1999).

A China No Brasil: Influencias, Marcas, Ecos E Sobrevivencias Chinesas Na Sociedade E Na Arte Brasileiras [ China in Brazil: Influences, Marks, Echoes and Chinese Survivals in Brazilian Society and Art ] (in Portuguese). UNICAMP. Universidade Estadual de Campinas. p. 19.

ISBN 978-85-268-0436-4 .

^ Finkelman, Paul; Miller, Joseph Calder (1998).

Macmillan encyclopedia of world slavery . Vol. 2. Macmillan Reference US. p. 737.

ISBN 978-0-02-864781-4 .

OCLC 39655102 .

^ de Sande (2012) ; Saunders (1982) , p. 168; Boxer (1968) , p. 225: "be very loyal, intelligent, and hard-working. Their culinary bent (not for nothing is Chinese cooking regarded as the Asiatic equivalent to French cooking in Europe) was evidently appreciated. The Florentine traveller Filipe Sassetti recording his impressions of Lisbon's enormous slave population circa 1580, states that the majority of the Chinese there were employed as cooks. Dr. John Fryer, who gives us an interesting ...".

^ Nelson, Thomas (Winter 2004). "Slavery in Medieval Japan".

Monumenta Nipponica .

59 (4): 463– 492.

JSTOR 25066328 .

^ Daigaku, Jōchi (2004).

Monumenta Nipponica .

Sophia University . p. 465.

^ Kitagawa, Joseph Mitsuo (2013).

Religion in Japanese History (illustrated, reprint ed.).

Columbia University Press . p. 144.

ISBN 978-0-231-51509-2 . Retrieved February 2, 2014 .

^ Calman, Donald (2013).

Nature and Origins of Japanese Imperialism .

Routledge . p. 37.

ISBN 978-1-134-91843-0 . Retrieved February 2, 2014 .

^ Kshetry, Gopal (2008).

Foreigners in Japan: A Historical Perspective . Xlibris Corporation.

ISBN 978-1-4691-0244-3 .

[ self-published source ] ^ Moran, J.F. (2012).

Japanese and the Jesuits .

Routledge .

ISBN 978-1-134-88112-3 . Retrieved February 2, 2014 .

^ Dias, Maria Suzette Fernandes (2007).

Legacies of slavery: comparative perspectives . Cambridge Scholars Publishing. p. 71.

ISBN 978-1-84718-111-4 .

^ footnote 2: (...) While it is likely that the institution of slavery existed in India during the Vedic period, the association of the Vedic 'Dasa' with 'slaves' is problematic and likely to have been a later development.

^ Levi, Scott C. (November 2002).

"Hindus Beyond the Hindu Kush: Indians in the Central Asian Slave Trade" .

Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society .

12 (3): 277– 288.

doi : 10.1017/S1356186302000329 .

JSTOR 25188289 .

S2CID 155047611 .

Sources such as the Arthasastra, the Manusmriti and the Mahabharata demonstrate that institutionalized slavery was well established in India by beginning of the common era ^ "Windows – Slice of history" .

The Tribune .

^ Subrahmanyam (1997) , pp. 201–253; Prakash (1998) , p. 5; Prakash (1985) ; Richards (2012) ; Raychaudhuri & Habib (1982) ; Arasaratnam (1995) ; Vink (1998) ; Arasaratnam (1996) ; Love (1913) ^ V.B. Lieberman, Burmese Administrative Cycles: Anarchy and Conquest, c. 1580–1760 (Princeton, N.J., 1984); G.D. Winius, "The 'Shadow Empire' of Goa in the Bay of Bengal," Itinerario 7, no. 2 (1983); D.G.E. Hall, "Studies in Dutch relations with Arakan," Journal of the Burma Research Society 26, no. 1 (1936):; D.G.E. Hall, "The Daghregister of Batavia and Dutch Trade with Burma in the Seventeenth Century," Journal of the Burma Research Society 29, no. 2 (1939) ^ VOC 1479, OBP 1691, fls. 611r–627v, Specificatie van Allerhande Koopmansz. tot Tuticurin, Manaapar en Alvatt.rij Ingekocht, 1670/71–1689/90; W. Ph. Coolhaas and J.van Goor, eds, Generale Missiven van Gouverneurs-Generaal en Raden van Indiaan Heren Zeventien der Verenigde Oostindische Compagnie (The Hague, 1960–present), passim; T. Raychaudhuri, Jan Company in Coromandel, 1605–1690: A Study on the Interrelations of European Commerce and Traditional Economies (The Hague, 1962) ^ For exports of Malabar slaves to Ceylon, Batavia, see Generale Missiven VI; H.K. s'Jacob ed., De Nederlanders in Kerala, 1663–1701: De Memories en Instructies Betreffende het Commandement Malabar van de Verenigde Oostindische Compagnie , Rijks Geschiedkundige Publication, Kleine serie 43 (The Hague, 1976); R. Barendse, "Slaving on the Malagasy Coast, 1640–1700," in S. Evers and M. Spindler, eds, Cultures of Madagascar: Ebb and Flow of Influences (Leiden, 1995). See also M.O. Koshy, The Dutch Power in Kerala (New Delhi, 1989); K.K. Kusuman, Slavery in Travancore (Trivandrum, 1973); M.A.P. Meilink-Roelofsz, De Vestiging der Nederlanders ter Kuste Malabar (The Hague, 1943); H. Terpstra, De Opkomst der Westerkwartieren van de Oostindische Compagnie (The Hague, 1918).

^ Of 2,467 slaves traded on 12 slave voyages from Batavia, India, and Madagascar between 1677 and 1701 to the Cape, 1,617 were landed with a loss of 850 slaves, or 34.45%. On 19 voyages between 1677 and 1732, the mortality rate was somewhat lower (22.7%). See Shell, "Slavery at the Cape of Good Hope, 1680–1731," p. 332. Filliot estimated the average mortality rate among slaves shipped from India and West Africa to the Mascarene Islands at 20–25% and 25–30%, respectively. Average mortality rates among slaves arriving from closer catchment areas were lower: 12% from Madagascar and 21% from Southeast Africa. See Filliot, La Traite des Esclaves, p. 228; A. Toussaint, La Route des Îles: Contribution Ã l'Histoire Maritime des Mascareignes (Paris, 1967); Allen, "The Madagascar Slave Trade and Labor Migration." ^ a b Bowie, Katherine A. (1996).

"Slavery in Nineteenth-Century Northern Thailand: Archival Anecdotes and Village Voices" .

Kyoto Review of Southeast Asia .

44 . Yale University Southeast Asia Studies Monograph Series: 16– 33.

^ Klein, Martin A. (2014). "Maori".

Historical Dictionary of Slavery and Abolition . Historical Dictionaries of Religions, Philosophies, and Movements Series (2 ed.). Lanham, Maryland: Rowman & Littlefield . p. 253.

ISBN 978-0-8108-7528-9 . Retrieved February 23, 2019 .

Slaves called mokai were an important part of pre-colonial Maori society.

^ https://www.abc.net.au/news/2017-09-17/blackbirding-australias-history-of-kidnapping-pacific-islanders/8860754 [ bare URL ] ^ Lauffer, Siegfried (August 1, 1957). Berneker, Erich (ed.). "Die Bergwerkssklaven von Laureion, I. Teil" [The Mine Slaves of Laureion, Part I].

Zeitschrift der Savigny-Stiftung für Rechtsgeschichte: Romanistische Abteilung (in German).

74 (1): 916.

doi : 10.7767/zrgra.1957.74.1.403 .

ISSN 2304-4934 .

S2CID 179216974 .

^ "Slavery in Ancient Rome" . Dl.ket.org. Archived from the original on February 22, 2010 . Retrieved August 29, 2010 .

^ Harper, Kyle (2011).

Slavery in the Late Roman World, AD 275–425 .

Cambridge University Press . pp.

59– 60.

ISBN 978-1-139-50406-5 . Retrieved August 11, 2016 .

^ "Resisting Slavery in Ancient Rome" .

BBC News . November 5, 2009 . Retrieved August 29, 2010 .

^ a b c Scheidel, Walter .

"The Roman slave supply" (PDF) .

Stanford University .

^ Joshel, Sandra R. (August 6, 2010).

Slavery in the Roman World .

Cambridge University Press .

ISBN 978-0-521-53501-4 .

^ Santosuosso, Antonio (2001).

Storming the Heavens .

Westview Press . pp.

43– 44.

ISBN 978-0-8133-3523-0 .

^ Noy, David (2000).

Foreigners at Rome: Citizens and Strangers . Duckworth with the Classical Press of Wales.

ISBN 978-0-7156-2952-9 .

^ Harper, James (April 1972). "Slaves and Freedmen in Imperial Rome".

The American Journal of Philology .

93 (2).

Johns Hopkins University Press : 341– 342.

doi : 10.2307/293259 .

JSTOR 293259 .

^ Thomas, Hugh (2006).

The Slave Trade: History of the Atlantic Slave Trade, 1440–1870 . Weidenfeld & Nicolson. p. 35.

ISBN 978-0-7538-2056-8 .

^ Hayes, Diana (2003). "Reflections on Slavery". In Curran, Charles E. (ed.).

Change in Official Catholic Moral Teachings . Paulist Press.

ISBN 978-0-8091-4134-0 .

^ "Slave trade" .

Encyclopedia Britannica . May 14, 2020 . Retrieved February 13, 2021 .

^ Singer, Isido Singer; Jacobs, Joseph.

"Slave-trade" . Jewishencyclopedia.com . Retrieved August 29, 2010 .

^ "Slavery Encyclopedia of Ukraine" . Encyclopediaofukraine.com . Retrieved August 29, 2010 .

^ Postan, Michael Moïssey; Miller, Edward (1987).

The Cambridge Economic History of Europe: Trade and industry in the Middle Ages .

Cambridge University Press . p. 417.

ISBN 978-0-521-08709-4 . Retrieved May 31, 2012 .

^ Boyce Davies, Carole Elizabeth (2008).

Encyclopedia of the African Diaspora: Origins, Experiences, and Culture .

ABC-CLIO . p. 1002.

ISBN 978-1-85109-705-0 . Retrieved May 31, 2012 .

^ Jurasinski, S. (2015).

The Old English Penitentials and Anglo-Saxon Law . Studies in Legal History.

Cambridge University Press . p. 96.

ISBN 978-1-107-08341-7 . Retrieved May 11, 2023 – via Google Books .

^ Foot, S. (2011).

AEthelstan: The First King of England . The English Monarchs Series.

Yale University Press . p. 139.

ISBN 978-0-300-12535-1 . Retrieved May 11, 2023 – via Google Books .

^ Goose, Nigel (October 18, 2007).

"Victoria county history: a history of the county of Chester, vol. V, 2, The city of Chester: culture, buildings and institutions – Edited by Christopher P. Lewis and Alan T. Thacker Victoria county history: a history of the county of Durham, vol. IV, Darlington – Edited by Gillian Cookson Victoria county history: a history of the County of Oxford, vol. XV, Carterton, Minster Lovell, and environs (Bampton Hundred part three) – Edited by S. Townley" .

The Economic History Review .

60 (4): 830– 832.

doi : 10.1111/j.1468-0289.2007.00401_3.x .

ISSN 0013-0117 .

^ Clapham, John H.

A Concise Economic History of Britain from the Earliest Times .

CUP Archive . p. 63. GGKEY:HYPAY3GPAA5.

^ "Medieval English society" .

University of Wisconsin . Archived from the original on February 14, 2005 . Retrieved September 5, 2009 .

^ Hudson, John (2012).

The Oxford History of the Laws of England . Vol. II (871–1216) (First ed.). Oxford: Oxford University Press . pp.

424– 425.

ISBN 978-0-19-163003-3 .

^ Gillingham, John (Summer 2014), "French chivalry in twelfth-century Britain?", The Historian , pp.

8– 9 ^ "The Saxon Slave-Market in Bristol" .

Building History . July 2006 . Retrieved February 6, 2021 .

^ a b "Erskine May on Slavery in Britain (Vol. III, Chapter XI)" . Retrieved November 2, 2017 .

^ Barrowman, James (September 14, 1897).

"Slavery In The Coal-Mines Of Scotland" . Scottish Mining Website . Retrieved November 2, 2017 .

^ Phillips, William D. Jr. (1985).

Slavery from Roman times to the Early Transatlantic Trade . Manchester: Manchester University Press . p. 37.

ISBN 978-0-7190-1825-1 .

^ Nicolle, David (1995).

"The Janissaries" .

Osprey Publishing . Retrieved February 7, 2021 .

^ "Famous Battles in History The Turks and Christians at Lepanto" . Trivia-library.com. Archived from the original on November 19, 2017 . Retrieved August 29, 2010 .

^ Davies, Brian (2007).

Warfare, State and Society on the Black Sea Steppe, 1500–1700 . Routledge. p. 17.

ISBN 978-0-415-23986-8 .

^ Brodman, James William.

"Ransoming Captives in Crusader Spain: The Order of Merced on the Christian-Islamic Frontier" . Libro.uca.edu . Retrieved August 29, 2010 .

^ "British Slaves on the Barbary Coast" . Archived from the original on March 10, 2008.

^ Goodman, Joan E.; McNeely, Tom (2001).

A Long and Uncertain Journey: The 27,000 Mile Voyage of Vasco Da Gama . Mikaya Press.

ISBN 978-0-9650493-7-5 . Retrieved May 31, 2012 .

^ a b c Marques, António Henrique R. de Oliveira (1972).

History of Portugal: From Lusitania to empire .

Columbia University Press . pp.

158– 160, 362– 370.

ISBN 978-0-231-03159-2 .

^ Lowe, K. J. P. (2005).

Black Africans In Renaissance Europe .

Cambridge University Press . p. 156.

ISBN 978-0-521-81582-6 . Retrieved May 31, 2012 .

^ Northrup, David (2002).

Africa's Discovery of Europe: 1450 to 1850 .

Oxford University Press . p. 8.

ISBN 978-0-19-514084-2 . Retrieved May 31, 2012 .

^ Klein, Herbert S. (2010).

The Atlantic Slave Trade .

Cambridge University Press .

ISBN 978-1-139-48911-9 .

^ Subtelny, Orest (2000).

Ukraine: A History .

University of Toronto Press . p. 106.

ISBN 978-0-8020-8390-6 . Retrieved May 31, 2012 .

^ Inalcik, Halil (1979).

"Servile Labor in the Ottoman Empire" . In Ascher, Abraham; Halasi-Kun, Tibor; Kiràly, Béla K. (eds.).

The Mutual Effects of the Islamic and Judeo-Christian Worlds: The East European Pattern . New York: Columbia University Press . pp.

25– 43. Archived from the original on September 11, 2009.

^ Darjusz Kołodziejczyk, as reported by Kizilov, Mikhail (2007).

"Slaves, Money Lenders, and Prisoner Guards:The Jews and the Trade in Slaves and Captivesin the Crimean Khanate" .

The Journal of Jewish Studies .

58 (2): 189– 210.

doi : 10.18647/2730/JJS-2007 .

^ Matsuki, Eizo.

"The Crimean Tatars and their Russian-Captive Slaves" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on June 5, 2013.

^ Glyn Williams, Brian (2013).

"The Sultan's Raiders: The Military Role of the Crimean Tatars in the Ottoman Empire" (PDF) .

The Jamestown Foundation . p. 27. Archived from the original (PDF) on October 21, 2013.

^ Forsythe, David P. (August 27, 2009).

Encyclopedia of Human Rights . OUP USA.

ISBN 978-0-19-533402-9 .

^ "Historical survey: Ways of ending slavery" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Archived from the original on October 16, 2014.

^ "Träldom" .

Nordisk familjebok (in Swedish). 1920. pp.

159– 160 . Retrieved February 6, 2021 – via Project Runeberg.

^ Tyson, Thomas N; Oldroyd, David (May 2019). "Accounting for slavery during the Enlightenment: Contradictions and interpretations".

Accounting History .

24 (2): 212– 215, 217– 218.

doi : 10.1177/1032373218759971 .

^ Alexander, Nathan G. (2019).

Race in a Godless World: Atheism, Race, and Civilization, 1850-1914 . New York University Press. p. 7-8.

ISBN 9781479835003 .

^ Curran, Andrew S. (2013).

The Anatomy of Blackness: Science & Slavery in an Age of Enlightenment . Johns Hopkins Univ. Press. pp. 215, 220– 221.

ISBN 9781421409658 .

^ "Enlightenment, Freedom, and Slavery" .

Monticello .

^ Alexander, Nathan G. (2019). "Atheism and Polygenesis in the Nineteenth Century: Charles Bradlaugh's Racial Anthropology".

Modern Intellectual History .

16 (3): 836, 838.

^ "Nazi slave fund passes final hurdle" . May 30, 2001 . Retrieved February 6, 2021 .

^ Beyer, John; Schneider, Stephan.

"Forced Labour under Third Reich" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on April 3, 2017 . Retrieved February 1, 2023 .

^ Steinert, Johannes-Dieter.

Kleine Ostarbeiter: Child Forced Labor in Nazi Germany and German Occupied Eastern Europe . 127th Annual Meeting American Historical Association.

...apart from Jewish forced labourers – workers from Belarus, Ukraine and Russia had to endure the worst working and living conditions. Moreover, German occupation policies in the Soviet Union were far more brutal than in any other country, and German deportation practices the most inhuman.

^ "The Holocaust in Belarus" .

Facing History and Ourselves . May 12, 2020 . Retrieved December 29, 2020 .

The non-Jewish population was subjected to Nazi terror, too. Hundreds of thousands were deported to Germany as slave laborers, thousands of villages and towns were burned or destroyed, and millions were starved to death as the Germans plundered the entire region. Timothy Snyder estimates that 'half of the population of Soviet Belarus was either killed or forcibly displaced during World War II: nothing of the kind can be said of any other European country.' ^ For sources about forced slave labor in GULAG camps, see Applebaum (2003) , p. xv, Introduction: "Gulag is the word an acronym for Glavnoe Upravlenie Lagerei or Central Administration of Camps. Over time, it has also indicated not only the administration of concentration camps, but also the very system of Soviet slave labor, in all its forms and varieties"; Gregory & Lazarev (2003) , p. 112: "From the perspective of the Kremlin, Magadan existed as the center of a domestic colony based on slave labor."; Barnes (2011) , pp. 7, 36, 262; Dobson (2012) , pp. 735–743 ^ Gregory & Lazarev (2003) , p. vii: "Much has been written, and much is still to be written, about the Gulag. We all know of its status as an "archipelago" (in Solzhenitsyn's words) of penal slavery, inflicted on millions and held as a threat over the rest of the population." ^ Applebaum 2003 .

^ For sources about life in the Gulag camps, please see: Conquest (1978) ; Lester & Krysinska (2008) , pp. 170–179; Anderson & Tollison (1985) , p. 295: "This is the fact that the forced labor system of the Gulag is an example of slavery in the absence of well-defined and enforced property rights in slaves."; Meltzer (1993) ^ Alexopoulos, Golfo (2017).

Illness and Inhumanity in Stalin's Gulag . Yale University Press. New Haven, CT: Yale University/The Hoover Institution. p. 5.

^ Applebaum, Anne (2007). "Introduction".

Gulag: A History . Anchor. Archived from the original on September 5, 2017.

^ "Wilson Bell" .

Academia.edu .

^ Barenberg, Alan; Bell, Wilson T.; Kinnear, Sean; Maddox, Steven; Viola, Lynne (November 14, 2017).

"New directions in Gulag studies: a roundtable discussion" .

Canadian Slavonic Papers .

59 ( 3– 4): 2.

doi : 10.1080/00085006.2017.1384665 .

S2CID 165354205 .

^ "A Mauritanian Abolitionist's Crusade Against Slavery" .

The New Yorker . September 8, 2014 . Retrieved September 29, 2015 .

^ "Forced labour – Themes" .

International Labour Organization . Archived from the original on February 9, 2010 . Retrieved March 14, 2010 .

^ "Inaugural Global Slavery Index Reveals More Than 29 Million People Living In Slavery" .

Global Slavery Index 2013 . October 4, 2013. Archived from the original on April 7, 2016 . Retrieved October 17, 2013 .

^ Bales 1999 , p. 9, Chapter 1.

^ A Global Alliance Against Forced Labour . International Labour Organisation. 2005.

ISBN 978-92-2-115360-3 .

^ Fortin, Jacey (January 16, 2013).

"Mali's Other Crisis: Slavery Still Plagues Mali, And Insurgency Could Make It Worse" .

International Business Times .

^ Coursen-Neff, Zama; Tribune, International Herald (January 30, 2003).

"For 15 million in India, a childhood of slavery" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved February 11, 2021 .

^ "Child Slaves Abandoned to India's Silk Industry" .

Human Rights Watch . January 23, 2003 . Retrieved February 11, 2021 .

^ Žižek, Slavoj (2018).

The Courage of Hopelessness: A Year of Acting Dangerously . Melville House. p. 29.

ISBN 978-1-61219-003-7 .

Archived from the original on July 27, 2020 . Retrieved July 11, 2018 – via Google Books .

^ "27 Million People Said to Live in 'Modern Slavery' " .

The New York Times . June 20, 2013.

^ DeLuca, Matthew (June 19, 2013).

" 'Modern-day slavery': State Dept. says millions of human trafficking victims go unidentified" .

NBC News . Archived from the original on June 23, 2013 . Retrieved February 12, 2021 .

^ Sebastian, Clare (July 30, 2018).

"She escaped domestic slavery, now she helps other survivors" . CNN . Retrieved February 7, 2021 .

^ Pinnell, Owen; Kelly, Jess (November 1, 2019).

"Kuwait moves on Instagram slave traders after BBC investigation" .

BBC News . Retrieved February 7, 2021 .

^ Pattisson, Pete (September 25, 2013).

"Qatar's World Cup 'slaves' " .

Archived from the original on September 26, 2013 . Retrieved January 16, 2024 .

^ Booth, Robert (March 24, 2016).

"UN gives Qatar a year to end forced labour of migrant workers" .

The Guardian . Retrieved February 7, 2021 .

^ Helmore, Edward (July 19, 2018).

"Over 400,000 people living in 'modern slavery' in U.S., report finds" .

The Guardian . Retrieved July 21, 2018 .

^ "Global Slavery Index" .

globalslaveryindex.org . Retrieved June 20, 2022 .

^ Tutton, Mark (July 19, 2018).

"Modern slavery in developed countries more common than thought" .

CNN . Retrieved July 21, 2018 .

^ Xu, Vicky Xiuzhong; Cave, Danielle; Leiboid, James; Munro, Kelsey; Ruser, Nathan (February 2020).

"Uyghurs for Sale" .

Australian Strategic Policy Institute . Archived from the original on August 24, 2020 . Retrieved January 20, 2021 .

^ "China: 83 major brands implicated in report on forced labour of ethnic minorities from Xinjiang assigned to factories across provinces; Includes company responses – Business & Human Rights Resource Centre" .

business-humanrights.org .

^ Quackenbush, Casey (December 1, 2017). "The Libyan Slave Trade Has Shocked the World. Here's What You Should Know".

Time .

^ "African migrants 'sold in slave markets' " . BBC News. April 11, 2017.

^ "African migrants sold as 'slaves' for $200 in Libya" .

Nation Media Group .

Agence France-Presse . April 12, 2017. Archived from the original on April 12, 2017.

^ Doctorow, Cory (April 11, 2017).

"West African migrants are kidnapped and sold in Libyan slave markets" .

Boing Boing .

^ Adams, Paul (February 28, 2017).

"Libya exposed as child migrant abuse hub" .

BBC News .

^ "Immigrant Women, Children Raped, Starved in Libya's Hellholes: Unicef" .

::ALWAGHT . February 28, 2017. Archived from the original on March 30, 2019 . Retrieved November 19, 2017 .

^ "The Abolition season on BBC World Service" .

BBC News . Retrieved August 29, 2010 .

^ Sutter, John D. (March 2012).

"Slavery's last stronghold" .

CNN . Retrieved May 28, 2012 .

^ "Mauritania" .

genocidewatch . Retrieved March 7, 2025 .

^ "UN: There is hope for Mauritania's slaves" .

CNN . March 17, 2012. Archived from the original on March 23, 2022 . Retrieved January 3, 2014 .

^ "Anti-slavery law still tough to enforce" .

The New Humanitarian . December 11, 2012 . Retrieved February 6, 2021 .

^ "Issues North Korea" .

Amnesty International UK .

Archived from the original on July 2, 2014 . Retrieved July 1, 2014 .

^ "VII. Conclusions and Recommendations" .

Report of the Commission of Inquiry on Human Rights in the Democratic People's Republic of Korea . United Nations Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights. February 17, 2014. p. 365.

Archived from the original on February 27, 2014 . Retrieved July 1, 2014 .

^ World Report 2014: North Korea .

Human Rights Watch . January 21, 2014.

Archived from the original on July 7, 2014 . Retrieved July 1, 2014 .

^ "North Korea" .

Christian Solidarity Worldwide .

Archived from the original on July 14, 2014 . Retrieved July 1, 2014 .

^ "ICNK welcomes UN inquiry on North Korea report, calls for action" .

International Coalition to Stop Crimes Against Humanity in North Korea . February 20, 2014.

Archived from the original on October 6, 2014 . Retrieved July 1, 2014 .

^ "Modern day slavery" .

Missionary Society of St. Columban . January 25, 2018. Archived from the original on May 22, 2024 . Retrieved May 19, 2024 .

Many of them are locked in the house of their Taiwanese employers, never allowed to have a day off, and virtually under the control of their employer," Fr O'Neill said. "Some are also victims of sexual abuse – raped by the husband who is their employer. They run away and become undocumented workers, then they are lured by the illegal brokers to find work. Some of them end up in brothels and become victims of sex trafficking.

^ Death By Fishing: How Taiwan's Seafood Got Tainted With Blood | CNA Correspondent (Television production).

CNA . March 3, 2022 . Retrieved May 19, 2024 – via YouTube.

^ "Greenpeace Condemns Biden Administration's Top Tier Ranking of Taiwan in latest Trafficking in Persons Report" .

Greenpeace . June 15, 2023 . Retrieved May 19, 2024 .

^ Peter Bengtsen (October 31, 2023).

"Debt Bondage in Space, and Taiwan" .

The Diplomat .

^ "Swaziland: Students in Taiwan Forced to Work 'Like Slaves' in Frozen Chicken Factory" .

AllAfrica . November 20, 2018. Archived from the original on November 20, 2018.

^ Huang Rongwen (February 10, 2022).

"Exploitation cases of Sri Lankan students in Taiwan expose education sector flaws" .

The Morning (Sri Lanka) .

National Changhua University of Education . Archived from the original on May 22, 2024 . Retrieved May 20, 2024 .

^ Max Hirsch (May 23, 2007).

"Officials divided on sex slave issue" .

Taipei Times . Retrieved May 22, 2024 .

^ "Exclusive - Houthis Restore Slavery in Yemen" .

english.aawsat.com . Retrieved October 23, 2024 .

^ a b Srebrnik, Henry (February 4, 2024).

" "Henry Srebrnik: The world ignores slavery in Yemen" " .

Telegraph-Journal . Retrieved October 24, 2024 .

^ a b c "Yemen's Houthis and STC accused of forcing Ethiopian women into 'sexual slavery' " .

Middle East Eye . Retrieved October 23, 2024 .

^ "Yemen" .

Antislavery in Domestic Legislation . Retrieved October 23, 2024 .

^ "Economics and Slavery" (PDF) . Du.edu. Archived from the original (PDF) on July 25, 2014 . Retrieved August 18, 2013 .

^ Bradford, Laurence (July 23, 2013).

"Modern day slavery in Southeast Asia: Thailand and Cambodia" .

Inside Investor . Archived from the original on March 23, 2015 . Retrieved July 24, 2013 .

^ "Trafficking FAQs – Amnesty International USA" .

Amnesty International . March 30, 2007. Archived from the original on July 8, 2009 . Retrieved August 29, 2010 .

^ "Lost Daughters – An ongoing tragedy in Nepal" .

Women News Network . December 5, 2008. Archived from the original on June 12, 2018 . Retrieved February 6, 2021 .

^ a b "US State Department Trafficking report" . State.gov . Retrieved August 29, 2010 .

^ Haydon, Benjamin Robert (1841).

"The Anti-Slavery Society Convention, 1840 – National Portrait Gallery" . London: NPR . Retrieved February 11, 2021 .

Donated by British and Foreign Anti-Slavery Society in 1880 ^ Clarence-Smith, William.

"Religions and the abolition of slavery – a comparative approach" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on March 29, 2017 . Retrieved August 28, 2013 .

^ The Earth and Its Peoples: A Global History .

Cengage Learning . 2009. p. 165.

ISBN 978-0-618-99238-6 .

^ Encyclopedia of Antislavery and Abolition .

Greenwood Publishing Group . 2011. p. 155.

ISBN 978-0-313-33143-5 .

^ Dussel, Enrique (January 4, 2021).

"Bartolomé de Las Casas" .

Encyclopedia Britannica . Retrieved February 13, 2021 .

^ Green, Howard L. (1995).

Words that Make New Jersey History: A Primary Source Reader . Rutgers University Press. p. 84.

ISBN 978-0-8135-2113-8 .

1804: With passage of the law excerpted here, New Jersey became the last state in the North to abolish slavery.

^ Foner, Eric (December 30, 2007).

"Opinion | Forgotten Step Toward Freedom (Published 2007)" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved February 6, 2021 .

^ Dorigny, Marcel, ed. (2003).

The Abolitions of Slavery: From L. F. Sonthonax to Victor Schoelcher, 1793, 1794, 1848 . Paris: UNESCO Publishing. p. vi.

ISBN 978-1-57181-432-6 . Retrieved August 16, 2022 – via Google Books .

^ Dwyer, Philip (2008). "Remembering and Forgetting in Contemporary France: Napoleon, Slavery, and the French History Wars".

French Politics, Culture & Society .

26 (3).

Berghahn Books : 110– 122.

doi : 10.3167/fpcs.2008.260306 .

JSTOR 42843569 .

^ Peabody, Sue (1984). "Race, Slavery, and the Law in Early Modern France".

The Historian .

56 (3).

Taylor & Francis : 501– 510.

doi : 10.1111/j.1540-6563.1994.tb01322.x .

JSTOR 24448702 .

^ Chatman, Samuel L. (2000). " 'There are no Slaves in France': A Re-Examination of Slave Laws in Eighteenth Century France".

The Journal of Negro History .

85 (3).

University of Chicago Press on behalf of the Association for the Study of African American Life and History: 144– 153.

doi : 10.2307/2649071 .

JSTOR 2649071 .

S2CID 141017958 .

^ Wise, Steven M. (2006).

Though the Heavens May Fall: The Landmark Trial that Led to the End of Human Slavery . Pimlico.

ISBN 978-1-84413-430-4 .

^ Rothschild, Emma (2013).

The inner life of empires: an eighteenth-century history (1. paperback pr ed.). Princeton, NJ: Princeton Univ. Press.

ISBN 978-0-691-15612-5 .

^ "Royal Navy and the Slave Trade : Battles: History: Royal Navy" . Archived from the original on January 28, 2009 . Retrieved September 29, 2015 .

^ "Devon – Abolition – Sailing against slavery" .

BBC . February 28, 2007 . Retrieved September 29, 2015 .

^ "The West African Squadron and slave trade" . Pdavis.nl . Retrieved August 29, 2010 .

^ "Anti-Slavery International: UNESCO Education" .

UNESCO . November 13, 2002 . Retrieved September 29, 2015 .

^ "Home Page | Agrarian Studies" (PDF) .

Yale University . Archived from the original (PDF) on May 2, 2013 . Retrieved September 30, 2015 .

^ "The law against slavery" .

BBC . Retrieved October 5, 2008 .

^ a b Belardelli, Giulia (December 2, 2014).

"Pope Francis And Other Religious Leaders Sign Declaration Against Modern Slavery" .

HuffPost .

^ "Routes of Enslaved Peoples" . UNESCO . Retrieved July 13, 2023 .

^ Boahen, A. Adu.; Ajayi, J. F. Ade.; Tidy, Michael (1986).

Topics in West African history (2 ed.). Burnt Mill, Harlow, Essex, England: Longman Group.

ISBN 0-582-58504-X .

OCLC 15580435 .

^ Person-Lynn, Kwaku.

"Afrikan Involvement In Atlantic Slave Trade" . Africawithin.com. Archived from the original on April 18, 2008 . Retrieved August 29, 2010 .

^ Ball, Jeremy R. (November 2003), "Alcohol and Slaves" , H-Net Reviews (Review), archived from the original on January 22, 2005 , retrieved February 6, 2021 ^ a b Services, Tribune News.

"Benin Officials Apologize for Role in U.S. Slave Trade" .

Chicago Tribune . Retrieved February 6, 2021 .

^ "Blair 'sorry' for UK slavery role" .

BBC News . March 14, 2007 . Retrieved February 6, 2021 .

^ "Virginia 'sorry' for slavery role" .

BBC News . February 25, 2007 . Retrieved August 29, 2010 .

^ Muir, Hugh (August 24, 2007).

"Livingstone weeps as he apologises for slavery" .

The Guardian . London.

Archived from the original on January 7, 2020 . Retrieved January 7, 2020 .

^ Coslett, Paul (September 24, 2014).

"Liverpool's slavery apology" .

BBC News . Retrieved January 7, 2020 .

^ "Congress Apologizes for Slavery, Jim Crow" .

NPR . Retrieved February 6, 2021 .

^ "Obama praises 'historic' Senate slavery apology" .

Agence France-Presse . June 19, 2009. Archived from the original on February 25, 2014 . Retrieved July 22, 2009 – via Google News .

^ Nitkin, David; Merritt, Harry (March 2, 2007).

"A New Twist to an Intriguing Family History" .

The Baltimore Sun . Archived from the original on September 30, 2007.

^ Akhalbey, Francis (November 15, 2019).

"Watch Gaddafi apologize on behalf of Arabs for their cruel treatment of Africans during the Arab slave trade" .

Face2Face Africa . Retrieved February 27, 2022 .

^ Brown, Kim (July 10, 2023).

"Brattle Consultants Quantify Reparations for Transatlantic Chattel Slavery in Pro Bono Paper" .

Brattle . Retrieved July 29, 2023 .

^ Mahon, Leah (August 2023). "£18 Trillion What Britain owes in reparation".

The Voice . pp.

6– 7.

^ Martin, Michael T.; Wall, David C. (February 19, 2013).

The Politics of Cine-Memory . A Companion to the Historical Film. Oxford, UK: Blackwell Publishing Ltd. pp.

445– 467.

doi : 10.1002/9781118322673.ch22 .

ISBN 978-1-118-32267-3 .

^ Stokes, Melvyn (January 15, 2008).

D.W. Griffith's The Birth of a Nation: A History of the Most Controversial Motion Picture of All Time .

Oxford University Press .

ISBN 978-0-19-804436-9 .

^ Morsberger, Robert E. (1977).

"Slavery and 'The Santa Fe Trail,' or, John Brown on Hollywood's Sour Apple Tree" .

American Studies .

18 (2): 87– 98. Archived from the original on November 6, 2018 . Retrieved May 16, 2013 .

^ Vera, Hernán; Gordon, Andrew M. (2003).

Screen saviors: Hollywood fictions of whiteness .

Rowman & Littlefield . pp.

54– 56.

ISBN 978-0-8476-9947-6 .

^ Worthington-Smith, Hammet; Deburg, William L. Van (1984). "Slavery & Race in American Popular Culture".

Black American Literature Forum .

18 (4): 181.

doi : 10.2307/2904301 .

ISSN 0148-6179 .

JSTOR 2904301 .

^ a b Davis 2002 , Chapter 2.

^ Davis 2002 , Chapter 3.

^ Mintz, Steven (1998). "Spielberg's Amistad and the History Classroom".

The History Teacher .

31 (3): 370– 73.

doi : 10.2307/494885 .

JSTOR 494885 .

^ Berlin, Ira (2004). "American Slavery in History and Memory and the Search for Social Justice".

Journal of American History .

90 (4): 1251– 1268.

doi : 10.2307/3660347 .

JSTOR 3660347 .

Bibliography Anderson, Gary M.; Tollison, Robert D. (1985).

"Life in the Gulag: A Property Rights Perspective" .

Cato Journal .

5 . Retrieved December 30, 2020 .

Applebaum, Anne (2003).

Gulag: A History . New York: Knopf Doubleday Publishing.

Arasaratnam, Sinnappah (1995). "Slave Trade in the Indian Ocean in the Seventeenth Century". In Mathew, Kuzhippalli S. (ed.).

Mariners, Merchants and Oceans: Studies on Maritime History . New Delhi: Manohar.

ISBN 978-81-7304-075-7 .

Arasaratnam, Sinnappah (1996).

Ceylon and the Dutch: 1600-1800: External Influences and Internal Change in Early Modern Sri Lanka . Brookfield, VT: Variorum.

ISBN 978-0-86078-579-8 .

Bales, Kevin (1999).

Disposable People: New Slavery in the Global Economy . Berkeley: University of California Press .

ISBN 978-0-520-21797-3 .

Bales, Kevin (2004).

New slavery: a reference handbook (2nd ed.). Santa Barbara, Calif.: ABC-CLIO .

ISBN 1-85109-816-X .

OCLC 61363605 .

Barnes, Steven A. (April 4, 2011).

Death and Redemption: The Gulag and the Shaping of Soviet Society . Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press .

Bavis, Barbara.

"Research Guides: American Women: Resources from the Law Library: Introduction" .

guides.loc.gov .

Law Library of Congress . Retrieved February 11, 2021 .

Boxer, C. R.

(1968) [1948].

Fidalgos in the Far East 1550–1770 (2nd revised ed.). Hong Kong: Oxford University Press .

ISBN 978-0-19-638074-2 .

Burnham, Philip (1993).

"Selling Poor Steven" .

American Heritage Magazine . Archived from the original on May 7, 2006.

Campbell, Gwyn (2004).

The Structure of Slavery in Indian Ocean Africa and Asia . London: Frank Cass.

ISBN 978-1-135-75917-9 .

Campbell, Gwyn; Miers, Suzanne; Miller, Joseph Calder , eds. (2007).

Women and Slavery: Africa, the Indian Ocean world, and the medieval north Atlantic . Vol. 1. Athens: Ohio University Press .

ISBN 978-0-8214-1723-2 .

Campbell, Gwyn; Miers, Suzanne; Miller, Joseph Calder , eds. (2008).

Women and Slavery: The Modern Atlantic . Vol. 2. Athens: Ohio University Press .

ISBN 978-0-8214-1725-6 .

Conquest, Robert (1978).

Kolyma: The Arctic Death Camps . New York: Viking Press.

Conway, John (2008).

A Look at the Thirteenth and Fourteenth Amendments: Slavery Abolished, Equal Protection Established .

Enslow Publishers .

ISBN 978-1-59845-070-5 .

Danver, Steven (2010).

Popular Controversies in World History .

ABC-CLIO .

ISBN 978-1-59884-078-0 .

Davis, Natalie Zemon (2002).

Slaves on Screen: Film and Historical Vision . Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press .

ISBN 978-0-674-00821-2 .

Dobson, Miriam (October 2012). "Stalin's Gulag: Death, Redemption and Memory".

The Slavonic and East European Review .

90 (4): 735– 743.

doi : 10.5699/slaveasteurorev2.90.4.0735 .

S2CID 148284255 .

Donoghue, John (2010).

"Out of the Land of Bondage": The English Revolution and the Atlantic Origins of Abolition" .

The American Historical Review .

115 (4): 943– 974.

doi : 10.1086/ahr.115.4.943 .

Ellerman, David Patterson (1992).

Property and Contract in Economics: The Case for Economic Democracy . Cambridge, Mass: Blackwell Publishing .

ISBN 978-1-55786-309-6 .

Foner, Philip S. (1980).

History of Black Americans: From Africa to the emergence of the cotton kingdom .

Oxford University Press . Archived from the original on October 14, 2013.

Forbes, Robert P. (1998).

"Slavery and the Evangelical Movement" . In McKivigan, John R.; Snay, Mitchell (eds.).

Religion and the Antebellum Debate Over Slavery . Athens, GA: University of Georgia Press . pp.

68– 106.

ISBN 978-0-8203-2076-2 .

Gregory, Paul R.; Lazarev, Valery (October 1, 2003).

The Economics of Forced Labor: The Soviet Gulag . Stanford, CA: Hoover Press .

Higginbotham, A. Leon Jr.

(1978).

In the Matter of Color: Race and the American Legal Process: The Colonial Period . New York: Oxford University Press . p. 7.

ISBN 978-0-19-502745-7 .

Kozlowski, Darrell (2010).

Colonialism: Key Concepts in American History .

Infobase Publishing .

ISBN 978-1-60413-217-5 .

Lee, Kenneth B. (1997).

Korea and East Asia: the story of a Phoenix .

Greenwood Publishing Group . p. 49.

ISBN 978-0-275-95823-7 . Retrieved July 4, 2010 .

Lester, David; Krysinska, Karolina (2008).

"Suicide in the Soviet Gulag Camps" (pdf) .

Archives of Suicide Research .

12 (2): 170– 179.

doi : 10.1080/13811110701857541 .

PMID 18340600 .

S2CID 205804782 . Retrieved December 30, 2020 .

Lewis, Bernard (1992).

Race and Slavery in the Middle East: An Historical Enquiry . New York: Oxford University Press .

ISBN 978-0-19-505326-5 .

Love, Henry Davison (1913).

Vestiges of Old Madras, 1640-1800 . London: Government of India .

OL 1773373W .

Meltzer, Milton (1993).

"Slavery: A World History" .

Personal Research Collection .

Millward, James A. (1998).

Beyond the Pass: Economy, Ethnieitya and Empire in Qing Central Asia, 1759-1564 . Stanford: Stanford University Press .

ISBN 978-0-8047-2933-8 .

Prakash, Om (January 1, 1985).

The Dutch East India Company and the Economy of Bengal, 1630-1720 .

Princeton University Press .

doi : 10.1515/9781400857760 .

ISBN 978-1-4008-5776-0 .

Prakash, Om (June 28, 1998).

European Commercial Enterprise in Pre-Colonial India . Vol. II. New York: Cambridge University Press . p. 5.

ISBN 978-0-521-25758-9 .

Raychaudhuri, Tapan; Habib, Irfan, eds. (1982).

The Cambridge Economic History of India I . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press .

Richards, John F. (2012).

The Mughal Empire . The New Cambridge History of India, Part I. Vol. 5. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press .

ISBN 978-0-511-58406-0 .

Rodriguez, Junius P.

(1997).

The Historical Encyclopedia of World Slavery . Vol. 1. Santa Barbara, Calif: ABC-CLIO .

ISBN 978-0-87436-885-7 .

Rodriguez, Junius P.

(2007a).

Slavery in the United States: A Social, Political, and Historical Encyclopedia . Santa Barbara, Calif: ABC-CLIO .

ISBN 978-1-85109-544-5 .

Salisbury, Joyce E.

(2004).

The Greenwood Encyclopedia of Daily Life: The medieval world .

Greenwood Press . p. 316.

ISBN 978-0-313-32543-4 . Retrieved January 9, 2011 .

de Sande, Duarte (2012). Massarella, Derek (ed.). "Japanese Travellers in Sixteenth-century Europe: A Dialogue Concerning the Mission of the Japanese Ambassadors to the Roman Curia (1590)".

Works Issued by the Hakluyt Society . Third Series.

25 (25).

Ashgate Publishing , Ltd.

ISBN 978-1-4094-7223-0 .

ISSN 0072-9396 .

Saunders, A.C. de C.M. (1982).

A Social History of Black Slaves and Freedmen in Portugal, 1441–1555 (illustrated ed.).

Cambridge University Press . p. 168.

ISBN 978-0-521-23150-3 . Retrieved February 2, 2014 .

Subrahmanyam, Sanjay (1997). "Slaves and Tyrants: Dutch Tribulations in Seventeenth-Century Mrauk-U".

Journal of Early Modern History .

1 (3): 201– 253.

doi : 10.1163/157006597x00028 .

ISSN 1385-3783 .

Toppin, Edgar (2010).

The Black American in United States History . Allyn & Bacon.

ISBN 978-1-4759-6172-0 .

Vink, Markus P. M. (June 1998).

Encounters on the Opposite Coast: Cross-Cultural Contacts between the Dutch East India Company and the Nayaka State of Madurai in the Seventeenth Century (PhD). Vol. 1.

University of Minnesota .

ISBN 978-0-591-92325-4 .

ProQuest 304436379 . Retrieved February 14, 2021 .

Further reading Surveys and reference Books Beckert, Sven (2014).

Empire of Cotton: A Global History .

Knopf Doubleday .

ISBN 978-0-385-35325-0 .

Davies, Stephen (2008).

"Slavery, World" . In Hamowy, Ronald (ed.).

The Encyclopedia of Libertarianism . Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage; Cato Institute . pp.

464– 469.

doi : 10.4135/9781412965811.n285 .

ISBN 978-1-4129-6580-4 .

LCCN 2008009151 .

OCLC 750831024 .

Davis, David Brion (1988) [1966].

The Problem of Slavery in Western Culture . Oxford: Oxford University Press .

ISBN 978-0-19-505639-6 .

Davis, David Brion (1999).

The Problem of Slavery in the Age of Revolution, 1770–1823 .

Oxford University Press .

ISBN 978-0-19-988083-6 .

Drescher, Seymour (2009).

Abolition: A History of Slavery and Antislavery .

Cambridge University Press . p. 281.

ISBN 978-1-139-48296-7 .

Eden, Jeff (2018).

Slavery and Empire in Central Asia .

Cambridge University Press .

ISBN 978-1-108-63732-9 .

Gordon, Murray (1989).

Slavery in the Arab World .

Rowman & Littlefield .

ISBN 978-0-941533-30-0 .

Greene, Jacqueline Dembar (2001).

Slavery in Ancient Egypt and Mesopotamia . Turtleback Books.

ISBN 978-0-613-34472-2 .

Heuman, Gad J. (2003).

The Slavery Reader .

Psychology Press .

ISBN 978-0-415-21304-2 .

Hogendorn, Jan; Johnson, Marion (2003).

The Shell Money of the Slave Trade .

Cambridge University Press .

ISBN 978-0-521-54110-7 .

Lal, K.S.

(1994).

Muslim Slave System in Medieval India . Aditya Prakashan.

ISBN 978-81-85689-67-8 . Archived from the original on May 12, 2008.

Miers, Suzanne; Kopytoff, Igor (1979).

Slavery in Africa: Historical and Anthropological Perspectives . Madison: University of Wisconsin Press .

ISBN 978-0-299-07334-3 .

Montejo, Esteban (2016). Barnet, Miguel (ed.).

Biography of a Runaway Slave: Fiftieth Anniversary Edition .

Northwestern University Press .

ISBN 978-0-8101-3342-6 .

[ permanent dead link ] Morgan, Kenneth (2007).

Slavery and the British Empire: From Africa to America .

Oxford University Press .

ISBN 978-0-19-156627-1 .

Postma, Johannes (2005).

The Atlantic Slave Trade .

University Press of Florida .

ISBN 978-0-8130-2906-1 .

Reséndez, Andrés (2016).

The Other Slavery: The Uncovered Story of Indian Enslavement in America .

Houghton Mifflin Harcourt .

ISBN 978-0-547-64098-3 .

Rodriguez, Junius P.

(2007).

Encyclopedia of Slave Resistance and Rebellion . Vol. 2. Westport, Conn: Greenwood Press .

ISBN 978-0-313-33273-9 .

Shell, Robert Carl-Heinz (1994).

Children of Bondage: A Social History of the Slave Society at the Cape of Good Hope, 1652–1838 . Hanover, NH: University Press of New England [for] Wesleyan University Press .

ISBN 978-0-8195-5273-0 .

Westermann, William Linn (1955).

The Slave Systems of Greek and Roman Antiquity . American Philosophical Society.

ISBN 978-0-87169-040-1 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) Williams, Eric (2021).

Capitalism and Slavery, Third Edition .

The University of North Carolina Press .

ISBN 978-1469663678 .

Journal articles and reviews Bartlett, Will (May 1994). "Review: Property and Contract in Economics".

Economic and Industrial Democracy .

15 (2): 296– 298.

doi : 10.1177/0143831x94152010 .

S2CID 220850066 .

Burczak, Theodore (June 2001). "Ellerman's Labor Theory of Property and the Injustice of Capitalist Exploitation".

Review of Social Economy .

59 (2): 161– 183.

doi : 10.1080/00346760110035572 .

JSTOR 29770104 .

S2CID 144866813 .

Devine, Pat (November 1, 1993). "Review: Property and Contract in Economics".

Economic Journal .

103 (421): 1560– 1561.

doi : 10.2307/2234490 .

JSTOR 2234490 .

Lawson, Colin (1993). "Review: Property and Contract in Economics".

The Slavonic and East European Review .

71 (4): 792– 793.

JSTOR 4211433 .

Lutz, Mark A. (1995). "Book Reviews: Property and Contract in Economics".

Review of Social Economy .

53 (1): 141– 147.

doi : 10.1080/00346769500000007 .

Pole, J. R. (June 1977). "Review: Slavery and Revolution: The Conscience of the Rich".

The Historical Journal .

20 (2): 503– 513.

doi : 10.1017/S0018246X00011171 .

JSTOR 2638543 .

S2CID 162624457 .

Smith, Stephen C. (December 1994). "Property and Contract in Economics".

Journal of Comparative Economics .

19 (3): 463– 466.

doi : 10.1006/jcec.1994.1115 .

Woltjer, Geert (March 1996). "Book review: Property and Contract in Economics".

European Journal of Law and Economics .

3 (1): 109– 112.

doi : 10.1007/bf00149085 .

S2CID 195243866 .

United States Baptist, Edward (2016).

The Half Has Never Been Told: Slavery and the Making of American Capitalism . Basic Books.

ISBN 978-0-465-09768-5 .

Beckert, Sven ; Rockman, Seth, eds. (2016).

Slavery's Capitalism: A New History of American Economic Development .

University of Pennsylvania Press .

ISBN 978-0-8122-2417-7 .

Berlin, Ira (2009).

Many Thousands Gone: The First Two Centuries of Slavery in North America .

Harvard University Press .

ISBN 978-0-674-02082-5 .

Berlin, Ira; Favreau, Marc; Miller, Steven (2011).

Remembering Slavery: African Americans Talk About Their Personal Experiences of Slavery and Freedom . New Press.

ISBN 978-1-59558-763-3 .

Blackmon, Douglas A. (2012).

Slavery by Another Name: The re-enslavement of black americans from the civil war to World War Two . Icon Books Limited.

ISBN 978-1-84831-413-9 .

Boles, John B. (2015).

Black Southerners, 1619–1869 .

University Press of Kentucky . p. 3.

ISBN 978-0-8131-5786-3 .

Engerman, Stanley Lewis (1999).

Terms of Labor: Slavery, Serfdom, and Free Labor . Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-8047-3521-6 .

Genovese, Eugene D.

(2011).

Roll, Jordan, Roll: The World the Slaves Made . Knopf Doubleday Publishing Group.

ISBN 978-0-307-77272-5 .

King, Richard H.; Genovese, Eugene (1977). "Marxism and the Slave South".

American Quarterly .

29 (1): 117.

doi : 10.2307/2712264 .

ISSN 0003-0678 .

JSTOR 2712264 .

Mintz, S.

"Slavery Facts & Myths" .

Digital History . Archived from the original on November 6, 2006.

Morgan, Edmund Sears (1975).

American Slavery, American Freedom: The Ordeal of Colonial Virginia . New York: Norton.

ISBN 978-0-393-05554-2 .

; online review Parish, Peter J. (1989).

Slavery: History and Historians . New York: Westview Press .

ISBN 978-0-06-437001-1 .

Parish, Peter J. (2018).

Slavery: History And Historians .

Routledge .

ISBN 978-0-429-97694-0 .

Phillips, Ulrich Bonnell (1918).

American Negro Slavery: A Survey of the Supply, Employment and Control of Negro Labor as Determined by the Plantation Régime . D. Appleton. p. 1.

Phillips, Ulrich Bonnell (2007).

Life and Labor in the Old South .

University of South Carolina Press .

ISBN 978-1-57003-678-1 .

Resendez, Andres (2016).

The Other Slavery: The Uncovered Story of Indian Enslavement in America .

Houghton Mifflin Harcourt . p. 448.

ISBN 978-0-544-60267-0 – via Google Books .

Sellers, James Benson (1994).

Slavery in Alabama .

University of Alabama Press .

ISBN 978-0-8173-0594-9 .

Stampp, Kenneth Milton (1969).

The Peculiar Institution: Slavery in the Antebellum South . A.A. Knopf.

Trenchard, David (2008).

"Slavery in America" . In Hamowy, Ronald (ed.).

The Encyclopedia of Libertarianism . Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage; Cato Institute . pp.

469– 70.

doi : 10.4135/9781412965811.n286 .

ISBN 978-1-4129-6580-4 .

LCCN 2008009151 .

OCLC 750831024 .

Vorenberg, Michael (May 21, 2001).

Final Freedom: The Civil War, the Abolition of Slavery, and the Thirteenth Amendment .

Cambridge University Press .

ISBN 978-0-521-65267-4 .

Weinstein, Allen; Gatell, Frank Otto; Sarasohn, David, eds. (1979).

American Negro Slavery: A Modern Reader .

Oxford University Press .

ISBN 978-0-19-502470-8 .

Slavery in the modern era Brass, Tom; van der Linden, Marcel (1997).

Free and unfree labour: the debate continues . Peter Lang.

ISBN 978-3-906756-87-5 .

Brass, Tom (2015).

Towards a Comparative Political Economy of Unfree Labour: Case Studies and Debates .

Taylor & Francis .

ISBN 978-1-317-82735-1 .

Bales, Kevin, ed. (2005).

Understanding Global Slavery: A Reader .

University of California Press .

ISBN 978-0-520-93207-4 .

Bales, Kevin (2007).

Ending Slavery: How We Free Today's Slaves .

University of California Press .

ISBN 978-0-520-25470-1 .

Craig, Gary (2007).

Contemporary Slavery in the UK: Overview and Key Issues (PDF) . York: Joseph Rowntree Foundation.

ISBN 978-1-85935-573-2 . Archived from the original (PDF) on June 14, 2007 . Retrieved December 17, 2007 .

Hawk, David R. (2012).

The Hidden Gulag: The Lives and Voices of "those Who Are Sent to the Mountains" (PDF) . Washington, DC: U.S. Committee for Human Rights in North Korea.

ISBN 978-0-615-62367-2 . Archived from the original (PDF) on March 13, 2015 . Retrieved September 21, 2012 .

Nazer, Mende; Lewis, Damien (2009).

Slave: My True Story . PublicAffairs.

ISBN 978-0-7867-3897-7 .

Sage, Jesse (2015).

Enslaved: True Stories of Modern Day Slavery . St. Martin's Press.

ISBN 978-1-250-08310-4 .

Sowell, Thomas (2010).

"The Real History of Slavery" .

Black Rednecks and White Liberals . ReadHowYouWant.com.

ISBN 978-1-4596-0221-2 .

External links Look up slavery in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Slavery .

Wikiquote has quotations related to Slavery .

Wikisource has the text of the 1905 New International Encyclopedia article  " Slavery ".

Historical Slavery in America: A Resource Guide at the Library of Congress The Bibliography of Slavery and World Slaving , University of Virginia : a searchable database of 25,000 scholarly works on slavery and the slave trade Digital Library on American Slavery at University of North Carolina at Greensboro "Slavery Fact Sheets" .

Digital History .

University of Houston . Archived from the original on February 9, 2014.

The West African Squadron and slave trade , history of the Victorian Royal Navy Slavery and the Making of America at WNET "Understanding Slavery" . Discovery Education. Archived from the original on March 26, 2010.

Slavery archival sources , University of London, Senate House Library Mémoire St Barth (archives & history of slavery, slave trade and their abolition) , Comité de Liaison et d'Application des Sources Historiques 2010 Archives of the Middelburgsche Commercie Compagnie (MCC), 1720–1889 'Trade Company of Middelburg' , Inventory of the archives of the Dutch slave trade across the Atlantic (in Dutch) Slave Ships and the Middle Passage at Encyclopedia Virginia The Trans-Atlantic and Intra-American slave trade databases at Emory University Modern 2018 Global Slavery Index at the Walk Free Foundation What is Modern Slavery?

; Office To Monitor And Combat Trafficking In Persons, U.S. Department of State.

Links to related articles v t e Slave narratives Slave Narrative Collection Individuals by continent of enslavement Africa Robert Adams Marcus Berg Francis Bok Isaac Brassard Felice Caronni James Leander Cathcart Ólafur Egilsson Petro Kilekwa Elizabeth Marsh Mende Nazer Hark Olufs Thomas Pellow Joseph Pitts Antoine Qaurtier Guðríður Símonardóttir Maria ter Meetelen Andreas Matthäus Wolfgang Johann Georg Wolffgang Asia Brigitta Scherzenfeldt Europe Olaudah Equiano Nunzio Otello Francesco Gioacchino Ukawsaw Gronniosaw Macuncuzade Mustafa Efendi Jean Marteilhe Roustam Raza Lovisa von Burghausen Ottoman Empire George of Hungary Konstantin Mihailović Johann Schiltberger Václav Vratislav z Mitrovic [ cs ] North America: Canada Marie-Joseph Angélique John R. Jewitt North America: Caribbean Juan Francisco Manzano Esteban Montejo Mary Prince Pierre Toussaint Marcos Xiorro North America: United States Sam Aleckson Jordan Anderson William J. Anderson Jared Maurice Arter Solomon Bayley Polly Berry Henry Bibb Leonard Black James Bradley Henry "Box" Brown John Brown William Wells Brown Peter Bruner Ellen and William Craft Hannah Crafts Lucinda Davis Noah Davis Lucy A. Delaney Ayuba Suleiman Diallo Frederick Douglass Kate Drumgoold Jordan Winston Early Sarah Jane Woodson Early Peter Fossett David George Moses Grandy Lear Green William Green William Grimes Josiah Henson Fountain Hughes John Andrew Jackson Harriet Jacobs Thomas James John Jea Paul Jennings Elizabeth Keckley Boston King Lunsford Lane J. Vance Lewis Jermain Wesley Loguen James Mars Solomon Northup Greensbury Washington Offley John Parker William Parker James Roberts Moses Roper Omar ibn Said William Henry Singleton James Lindsay Smith Venture Smith Austin Steward Pierre Toussaint Harriet Tubman Wallace Turnage Bethany Veney Booker T. Washington Wallace Willis Harriet E. Wilson Zamba Zembola South America Mahommah Gardo Baquaqua Miguel de Buría Osifekunde Non-fiction books The Interesting Narrative of the Life of Olaudah Equiano (1789) The Narrative of Robert Adams (1816) American Slavery as It Is (1839) Narrative of the Life of Frederick Douglass, an American Slave (1845) The Life of Josiah Henson (1849) Twelve Years a Slave (1853) My Bondage and My Freedom (1855) Incidents in the Life of a Slave Girl (1861) The Underground Railroad Records (1872) Biography of a Slave (1875) Life and Times of Frederick Douglass (1881) Up from Slavery (1901) Slave Narratives: A Folk History of Slavery in the United States (1936–38) The Peculiar Institution (1956) The Slave Community (1972) Barracoon: The Story of the Last "Black Cargo" (2018) Fiction/novels Oroonoko (1688) Sab (1841) Uncle Tom's Cabin (1852) The Heroic Slave (1852) Clotel (1853) The Bondwoman's Narrative ( c.

1853 – c.

1861 ) Dred: A Tale of the Great Dismal Swamp (1856) Our Nig (1859) Jubilee (1966) The Confessions of Nat Turner (1967) Roots: The Saga of an American Family (1976) Underground to Canada (1977) Kindred (1979) Dessa Rose (1986) Beloved (1987) Middle Passage (1990) Queen: The Story of an American Family (1993) Hang a Thousand Trees with Ribbons (1996) Ama: A Story of the Atlantic Slave Trade (2001) Walk Through Darkness (2002) The Known World (2003) Unburnable (2006) The Book of Negroes (2007) The Underground Railroad (2016) Young adult books Amos Fortune, Free Man (1951) I, Juan de Pareja (1965) Copper Sun (2006) Essays " To a Southern Slaveholder " (1848) A Key to Uncle Tom's Cabin (1853) Plays The Escape; or, A Leap for Freedom (1858) The Octoroon (1859) Omar (2022) Documentaries Unchained Memories (2003) Frederick Douglass and the White Negro (2008) Related Abolitionism in the United States African-American literature Anti-Tom novels Atlantic slave trade Captivity narrative Caribbean literature Films featuring slavery Slavery in the United States Songs of the Underground Railroad Treatment of slaves in the United States List of last surviving American enslaved people Book of Negroes (1783) Cotton Plantation Record and Account Book (1847) Slave-Trading in the Old South (1931) Sarah Johnson's Mount Vernon (2008) Slave Songs of the United States (1867) Amazing Grace: An Anthology of Poems about Slavery (2002) The Hemingses of Monticello (2008) v t e Unfree labour relationships and institutions Conscription Corvée Encomienda Haruwa–charuwa Labour camp Mit'a Penal labour Serfdom Slavery Truck wages v t e Discrimination Forms Institutional Reverse Structural Statistical Systemic Taste-based Attributes Age Caste Class Disability Economic Genetic Hair texture Height Language Dialect Looks Mental disorder Nationality or citizenship Race / Ethnicity Reverse Skin color Scientific racism Rank Sex Reverse Sexual orientation Species Size Viewpoint Social Arophobia Anti-albinism Acephobia Adultism Anti-altruistic Anti-autism Anti-homelessness Anti-drug addicts Anti-intellectualism Anti-intersex Anti-left handedness Anti-Masonry Aporophobia Audism Biphobia Clannism Elitism Endophobia Ephebiphobia Health mental in poverty Fatphobia Gayphobia Gerontophobia Heterosexism HIV/AIDS stigma Hypergamy Homophobia In-group Leprosy stigma Lesbophobia Against men Misandry Misogyny Misogynoir Nepotism Outgroup Perpetual foreigner Pregnancy Sectarianism Supremacism Aryanism Black Hutu Chauvinism Han Female Human Nordicism Male Ultranationalism White Transphobia Non-binary Transmisogyny Trans men Vegaphobia Xenophilia Xenophobia Religious Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Race / Ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people Manifestations Algorithmic bias Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Blood libel Bullying Cancel culture Capital punishment for homosexuality Carnism Compulsory sterilization Corrective rape Counter-jihad Cultural genocide Defamation Democide Dog whistle Domicide Economic Education Academic In curricula Sexism Eliminationism Eliminationist antisemitism Employment Enemy of the people Environmental racism Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnocide Excellence Gender-based dress codes Cosmetics policy High heel policy Forced conversion Freak show Gay bashing Gendercide Transgender genocide Genital modification and mutilation Circumcision Female genital mutilation Intersex medical interventions Genocide examples Glass ceiling Hate crime Disability hate crime Violence against LGBTQ people Violence against transgender people Hate group Hate speech Institutional discrimination Institutional racism Homeless dumping Housing Hypergamy Age disparity Indian rolling International inequality Kill Haole Day Lavender scare LGBTQ+ grooming conspiracy theory Linguicide Lynching Media bias Minority stress Moral exclusion Mortgage Native American mascots Braves Blackhawks Chiefs Occupational Apartheid Inequality Injustice Segregation Opposition to immigration Paper genocide Persecution Pogrom Political Political repression Ideological repression Purge Racialization Religious persecution Religious terrorism Religious violence Religious war Scapegoating Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Sentencing disparity Sexual harassment Sex-selective abortion Slut-shaming Structural abuse Structural discrimination Structural evil Structural inequality Structural violence Untermensch Trans bashing Victimisation Violence against women White flight White genocide conspiracy theory Wife selling Witch hunt Discriminatory policies Algorithmic wage discrimination Age of candidacy Apartheid in South Africa in Israel Blood purity Blood quantum Breadwinner model Conscription and sexism Disabilities Catholic Jewish Disparate impact Fagging Gender pay gap Gender roles Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Gerontocracy Gerrymandering Ghetto benches Internment Jewish quota Opposition to LGBTQ rights MSM blood donation restrictions No kid zone Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota) One-drop rule Racial quota Racial steering Redlining Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting) Segregation age racial Jim Crow laws Nuremberg Laws Segregation academy religious sexual in Islam Social exclusion Sodomy law State atheism State religion Ugly law Voter suppression White Australia policy Countermeasures Affirmative action Anti-discrimination law Anti-racism Audit study Autism rights movement Gender-blind Blind audition Constitutional colorblindness Cross-sex friendship Cultural assimilation Cultural pluralism Diversity, equity, and inclusion Diversity training Empowerment Fat acceptance movement Feminism Fighting Discrimination Golden Rule Hate speech laws by country Human rights Intersex human rights Korenizatsiia LGBTQ rights Mad pride Music in the movement against apartheid Racial integration Reappropriation Rock Against Sexism Self-determination Social integration Stop Murder Music Toleration Transgender rights movement Universal suffrage Women's rights Related topics Allophilia Amatonormativity Bias Capital punishment for homosexuality Cisnormativity Civil liberties Criminalization of homosexuality Dehumanization Diseases of despair Ethnic penalty Figleaf Heteronormativity Historical eugenics Internalized oppression Intersectionality Masculism Oikophobia Oppression Police brutality Polyculturalism Power distance Prejudice Prisoner abuse Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racism by country Racial color blindness Religious intolerance Second-generation gender bias Snobbery Social equity Social exclusion Social model of disability Social privilege Christian male white Social stigma Speciesism Stereotype The talk Category Commons v t e Racism Types of racism Aversive Colorism Covert Cultural Cyber Environmental Formal Gendered Institutional Internalized Patent Laissez-faire Linguistic Neocolonial Romantic Scientific Societal Substantive Symbolic Manifestations of racism Anti-miscegenation laws Apartheid Biological determinism Discrimination based on nationality Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic jokes Ethnic slurs Ethnic stereotype Hate crime Hate speech Hate group Hypodescent / Hyperdescent Racial capitalism Racialization Racial hierarchy Racial nationalism Racial profiling Racial segregation Racism by region Global apartheid Africa South Africa Zimbabwe Asia China Japan North Korea South Korea Thailand Vietnam Arab world Libya Saudi Arabia Sudan Australia Europe Denmark France Germany Italy Poland Portugal Russia Soviet Union Spain Ukraine United Kingdom Middle East Iran Israel Palestine Turkey North America Canada United States Mexico South America Argentina Brazil Chile Racism by target Arab Asians Chinese Chinese Americans Zainichi Chinese Japanese Japanese Americans Japanese Koreans Korean Zainichi Koreans Vietnamese Black African Americans Arab Women Mexican Native Americans Jewish Anti-racism Jewish Americans In Jewish communities LGBT Middle Eastern Muslim Romani Slavic Wine industry Racial supremacy Black supremacy White supremacy White Related topics Ableism Alt-right Anti-racism Casteism Ethnic plastic surgery Go back to where you came from Herrenvolk democracy Interminority racism in the United States Hispanics/Latinos Lynching Passing Perpetual foreigner Psychometrics of racism Race and sexuality Race card Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racial misrepresentation Racial figleaf Racial integration Racial quota Racism in sport in Australia Reverse racism Sociology of race and ethnic relations Xenophobia Category Commons Index v t e Substantive human rights What is considered a human right is in some cases controversial; not all the topics listed are universally accepted as human rights Civil and political Equality before the law Freedom from arbitrary arrest and detention Freedom of assembly Freedom of association Cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment Freedom from discrimination Freedom of information Freedom of movement Freedom of religion Freedom from slavery Freedom of speech Freedom of thought Freedom from torture LGBT rights Liberty Nationality Personhood Presumption of innocence Access to justice Right of asylum Right to die Right to a fair trial Right to counsel Right to family life Right to keep and bear arms Right to life Right to petition Right to privacy Right to protest Right to refuse medical treatment Right to resist Right of return Right of self-defense Right to truth Security of person Speedy trial Suffrage right to be a candidate Right to homeland Economic, social and cultural Digital rights Equal pay for equal work Fair remuneration Labor rights Right to an adequate standard of living Right to clothing Right to development Right to education Right to food Right to health Right to a healthy environment Right to housing Right to Internet access Right to property Right to public participation Right of reply Right to rest and leisure Right of return Right to science and culture Right to social security Right to water Right to work Sexual and reproductive Abortion Family planning Family rights Freedom from involuntary female genital mutilation Freedom from forced circumcision Intersex human rights LGBT rights Sexual and reproductive health Right to sexuality v t e Employment Classifications Academic tenure Casual Contingent work Full-time job Gig worker Job sharing Part-time job Self-employment Side job Skilled worker Journeyman Technician Tradesperson Independent contractor Labour hire Temporary work Laborer Wage labour Hiring Application Background check Business networking Cover letter Curriculum vitae Drug testing Employment contract Employment counsellor Executive search list Induction programme Job fair Job fraud Job hunting Job interview Letter of recommendation Onboarding Overqualification Person–environment fit Personality–job fit theory Personality hire Probation Realistic job preview Recruitment Résumé Simultaneous recruiting of new graduates Underemployment Work-at-home scheme Roles Cooperative Employee Employer Internship Job Labour hire Permanent employment Supervisor Volunteering Working class Blue-collar Green-collar Grey-collar Pink-collar Precariat White-collar Red-collar New-collar No-collar Orange-collar Scarlet-collar Black-collar Gold-collar Career and training Apprenticeship Artisan Master craftsman Avocation Career assessment Career counseling Career development Coaching Creative class Education Continuing education E-learning Employability Further education Graduate school Induction training Knowledge worker Licensure Lifelong learning Overspecialization Practice-based professional learning Professional association Professional certification Professional development Professional school Reflective practice Retraining Vocational education Vocational school Vocational university Mentorship Occupational Outlook Handbook Practice firm Profession Operator Professional Tradesman Vocation Attendance Break Break room Career break Furlough Gap year Leave of absence Long service leave No call, no show Sabbatical Sick leave Stress leave Time clock Schedules 35-hour workweek Four-day week Eight-hour day 996 working hour system Flextime On-call Overtime Remote work Six-hour day Shift work Working time Workweek and weekend Wages and salaries Frisch elasticity of labor supply Global labor arbitrage Labour economics Labor share Labour supply Living wage Maximum wage National average salary World Europe Minimum wage Canada Hong Kong Europe United States Price elasticity of demand Progressive wage Singapore Overtime rate Paid time off Performance-related pay Remuneration Salary cap Benefits Annual leave Casual Friday Child care Disability insurance Health insurance Life insurance Marriage leave Parental leave Pension By country Sick leave United States Take-home vehicle Taxes Payroll tax Tax bracket Income tax Negative Disposable income Salary packaging Unreported employment Safety and health Crunch Epilepsy and employment Human factors and ergonomics Karoshi List of countries by rate of fatal workplace accidents Occupational burnout Occupational disease Occupational exposure limit Occupational health psychology Occupational injury Occupational noise Occupational stress Personal protective equipment Repetitive strain injury Right to sit United States Sick building syndrome Work accident Occupational fatality Workers' compensation Workers' right to access the toilet Workplace health promotion Workplace phobia Workplace wellness Equal opportunity Affirmative action Discrimination Equal pay for equal work Gender pay gap Glass ceiling Infractions Corporate collapses and scandals Accounting scandals Control fraud Corporate behaviour Corporate crime Exploitation of labour Dress code Employee handbook Employee monitoring Evaluation Labour law Sexual harassment Sleeping while on duty Wage theft Whistleblower Workplace bullying Workplace harassment Workplace incivility Willingness Boreout Careerism Civil conscription Conscription Critique of work Dead-end job Job satisfaction McJob Organizational commitment Refusal of work Slavery Bonded labour Human trafficking Labour camp Penal labour Peonage Truck wages Unfree labour Wage slavery Work ethic Work–life interface Downshifting Slow living Workaholic Termination At-will employment Dismissal Banishment room Constructive dismissal Wrongful dismissal Employee offboarding Exit interview Layoff Notice period Pink slip Resignation Letter of resignation Restructuring Retirement Mandatory retirement Microretirement Retirement planning Retirement spend-down Severance package Golden handshake Golden parachute Turnover Unemployment Barriers to entry Discouraged worker Economic depression Great Depression Long Depression Frictional unemployment Full employment Graduate unemployment Involuntary unemployment Jobless recovery Phillips curve Recession Great Recession Job losses caused by the Great Recession Lists of recessions Recession-proof job Reserve army of labour Structural unemployment Technological unemployment Types of unemployment Unemployment benefits Unemployment Convention, 1919 Unemployment extension List of countries by unemployment rate Employment-to-population ratio List Wage curve Youth unemployment Public programs Workfare Unemployment insurance Make-work job Job creation program Job creation index Job guarantee Employer of last resort Guaranteed minimum income Right to work Historical: U.S.A.: Civil Works Administration Works Progress Administration Comprehensive Employment and Training Act See also Bullshit job Busy work Credentialism and educational inflation Emotional labor Evil corporation Going postal Kiss up kick down Labor rights Make-work job Narcissism in the workplace Post-work society Presenteeism Psychopathy in the workplace Sunday scaries Slow movement (culture) Toxic leader Toxic workplace Wage compression Working poor Workhouse See also templates Aspects of corporations Aspects of jobs Aspects of occupations Aspects of organizations Aspects of workplaces Corporate titles Critique of work Organized labor v t e Social class Status Stratum Economic classes Theories Elite theory Gilbert model Marxian Mudsill theory New class Spoon class theory Weberian (three-component) Related topics Caste Chattering classes Class conflict Class discrimination Class society Class traitor Classicide Classless society Euthenics High society Nouveau riche / Parvenu Poverty Ranked society Snobbery Social cleansing Social exclusion Social mobility Social orphan Social position Social stigma Subaltern Status Anxiety By demographic By status Administrative detainee Alien illegal immigrant refugee Citizen dual or multiple native-born naturalized second-class Clique adolescent Convicted Migrant worker Political prisoner Socioeconomic Stateless By " collar " Blue Green Grey New Pink White By type Ruling Aristocracy Aristoi Hanseaten Magnate Oligarchy Russian Patrician Ancient Rome Post-Roman Political Family List Hereditary Royal family Intellectual Clergy Priest Knowledge worker Professor Scholar Warrior Chhetri Cossacks Cuāuh Harii Hashashin Knight Kshatriya Nair Ocēlōtl Pendekar Samurai Spartiate Vanniyar / Vanniar (Chieftain) Upper Business magnate Elite Gabellotto Gentry Lord Nobility Landed Petty Old money Overclass Robber baron Seigneur Superclass Creative Bohemians Middle Bourgeoisie Petite Burgher Lower middle class Upper middle class Working Commoner Lazzaroni Lumpenproletariat Pea-pickers Peasant Precariat Proletariat Working poor Under Ant tribe Outcast Outlaw / Prisoner Serf Plebeian Rat tribe Slave / Freedman Untouchable By country or region United States Affluence American Dream History Mobility Classes Upper Black Donor Gentry Middle Black Mexican-American Upper Middle Underprivileged Lower Under Income Household Inequality Personal Poverty Standard of living Education Homelessness Home-ownership Other regions or countries Africa Belize Cambodia China Colombia France Haiti India Iran Italy Luxembourg Nepal New Zealand Nigeria Romania Sri Lanka Tibet United Kingdom United States Historic 18th-century Spain Ancient Greece Ancient Rome Aztec Ottoman Empire Pre-industrial East Asia Pre-industrial Europe Soviet Union Category v t e African diaspora Geography Americas / Latin America Caribbean Anguilla Antigua and Barbuda Aruba Bahamas Barbados Bermuda Cayman Islands Cuba Afro-Roma Arará Cape Verdean Ganga-Longoba Curaçao Dominica Dominican Republic Cocolo Samaná Americans Grenada Haiti Marabou Marron Jamaica Afro-Roma Coromantee Igbos Jamaican Maroons Puerto Rico Saint Kitts and Nevis Saint Lucia Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Garifuna Trinidad and Tobago Douglas Merikins Turks and Caicos Islands Central America Belize Garifuna Costa Rica El Salvador Guatemala Honduras Miskito people Miskito Sambu Nicaragua Panama Cimarrón North America Canada Black Mennonites Indigenous Black Canadians New Brunswick Nova Scotia Ontario African immigrants Mexico Mascogos United States African Americans Afro-Roma Affrilachians African-American Jews Alabama Creoles Black Mennonites Black Southerners Black Hispanic Black Indians / Freedmen Cherokee freedmen Chickasaw freedmen Choctaw freedmen Creek freedmen Seminole freedmen Creoles of color Gullah Brass Ankles Chestnut Ridge people Dominickers Fulani Garifuna Igbos Louisiana Redbones Lumbee Melungeons Somali Bantus Yoruba African immigrants South America Argentina Bolivia Brazil Kalungas Macombo Quilombola Chile Colombia Raizal Ecuador French Guiana Aluku Ndyuka Saramaka Guyana Paraguay Peru Suriname Kwinti Matawai Ndyuka Paramaccan Saramaka Uruguay Venezuela Europe ( Blacks ) Abkhazia Austria Belgium Finland France Paris Germany Greece Blacks Ireland Italy Netherlands Norway Poland Portugal Romania Russia Spain Sweden Switzerland Ukraine United Kingdom Cambridge Liverpool London Scotland Wales Middle East Iran Iraq Israel Ethiopian Israelis Sudanese refugees Jordan Oman Palestine Saudi Arabia Syria Turkey Africans United Arab Emirates Yemen Asia and Oceania Australia China Guangzhou Hong Kong Afro-Asians in South Asia India and Pakistan Siddi in Karnataka Indonesia Black Dutchmen Mardijker Japan Malaysia New Zealand Sri Lanka Kaffirs Atlantic Saint Helena Secondary Afro-American diaspora Africa Ghana African Americans Tabom Liberia Americo-Liberians Nigeria Afro-Brazilians Saro Sierra Leone Sierra Leone Creole Europe France African Americans Haitians United Kingdom African Americans Afro-Caribbean people British Jamaicans Asia and Oceania Israel African Hebrew Israelites Japan Related topics African diaspora religions Anti-African sentiment Anti-Black racism Atlantic slave trade Coromantee Igbo Kongo Tikar Yoruba Slavery in the Ottoman Empire Black Lives Matter Black power Civil rights movement Creole peoples Genetic history Maroons Pan-Africanism Slavery Reparations Category Commons v t e Incarceration Science Criminology Penology Prison healthcare Australia Punishment Stanford prison experiment Prisoners Convict Criminal Detainee Hostage Political prisoner Prisoner of conscience Prisoner of war Slave Prisons Types Black site Corrective labor colony Debtors' Extermination camp Farm Internment Island Labor camp Battalion Chain gang Military Penal colony Prisoner-of-war camp Private Ship Youth detention center Security levels House arrest Administrative detention Open Maximum security Supermax Death row Components Cell Cemetery Commissary Food Library Nursery Officer Sally port Trusty system Warden Escape Prison escapes Helicopter Prisoner-of-war escapes Culture Art Film Gang United States Literature American Ring Slang Tattooing Social issues Abuse United States Contemplative programs Education Informants LGBTQ Mentally ill people in the United States Mobile phones Pay-to-stay Prison overcrowding United States Private prisons United States Protective custody Rape United States Religion United States Riots Sexuality Social hierarchy Solitary confinement Strikes Suicide Violence Women in prison United States Organizations Association for the Protection and Assistance of the Convicted (Brazil) Black and Pink Florida Justice Institute International Network of Prison Ministries Justice Action Justice Defenders Mount Tamalpais College POA Prison abolition movement Prison Advice and Care Trust Prison-Ashram Project Prison Fellowship Prison Fellowship International Prison Legal News Prison Officers' Association (Ireland) The Prison Phoenix Trust Prison Radio Prison Reform Trust WriteAPrisoner.com Leaving prison Rehabilitation Work release Lists Countries by incarceration rate Prisons Films featuring prisons By country Australia Chile China Estonia Germany Iceland India Ireland, Republic of Jamaica Japan New Zealand North Korea Norway Peru Russia Soviet Union Gulag Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom and British overseas territories Bermuda England and Wales Northern Ireland Scotland United States Imprisonment and detention Commons v t e Worldview Related terms Basic beliefs / Beliefs Collective consciousness / Collective unconscious Conceptual system Context Conventional wisdom Conventions Cultural movement Epic poetry / National epics / World folk-epics Facts and factoids Framing Ideology Life stance Lifestyle Memes / Memeplex Mental model Metanarrative Mindset Norms Paradigm Philosophical theory Point of view Presuppositions Primal world beliefs Reality tunnel Schemata School of thought Set Social reality Theory of everything Umwelt Value system Aspects Biases Academic Attentional Attitude polarization Belief Cognitive list Collective narcissism Confirmation Congruence Cryptomnesia Cultural Ethnocentrism Filter bubble Homophily In-group favoritism Magical thinking Media Observational error Observer-expectancy Selective exposure Selective perception Self-deception Self-fulfilling prophecy Clever Hans effect placebo effect wishful thinking Status quo Stereotyping ethnic Change and maintenance Activism Argument Argumentum ad populum Attitude change Brainwashing Censorship Charisma Circular reporting Cognitive dissonance Critical thinking Crowd manipulation Cultural dissonance Deprogramming Echo chamber Education religious values Euphemism Excommunication Fearmongering Historical revisionism negationism Ideological repression Indoctrination Manipulation (psychology) Media manipulation Media regulation Missionaries Moral entrepreneurship Persuasion Polite fiction Political engineering Propaganda Propaganda model Proselytism Psychological warfare Religious conversion forced Religious persecution Religious uniformity Revolutions Rhetoric Self-censorship Social change Social control Social engineering Social influence Social progress Suppression of dissent Systemic bias Woozle effect Culture Anthropology cultural social Calendars Ceremonies Coronations Cross-cultural psychology Cultural psychology Doctrine Employment / Serfdom / Slavery Families Funerals / Burial Games Holidays Hygiene ritual Identity (philosophy) cultural Institutions Liminality Liturgy Marriage Myth and ritual Oaths Pilgrimages Play Rites of passage secular Rituals Social class / Social status / Caste Symbols Symbolic boundaries Worship Groupthink Abilene paradox Bandwagon effect Collectives Collective behavior animal Collective effervescence Collective intelligence Conformity Consensus theory Crowd psychology Cults Culture-bound syndromes Deindividuation Doublethink Emergence Emotional contagion Entitativity False consensus effect Folie à deux Group action Group cohesiveness Group dynamics Group emotion Group polarization Groupshift Herd behavior Holism Hysterical contagion Information cascade In-group and out-group Invisible hand Lynching Majoritarianism / Mob rule Mass action Mass psychogenic illness Milieu control Mobbing Moral panic Peer pressure Pluralistic ignorance Political correctness Pseudoconsensus Scapegoating Self-organization Social action Social behavior Social emotions Social exclusion Social facilitation animal Social group Social proof Social psychology Sociology Spontaneous order Status quo Stigmergy Swarm behaviour System justification Viral phenomena Knowledge Axioms tacit assumptions Conceptual framework Epistemology outline Evidence anecdotal scientific Explanations Faith fideism Gnosis Intuition Meaning-making Memory Meta-knowledge Methodology Observation Observational learning Perception Reasoning fallacious logic Revelation Testimony Tradition folklore Truth consensus theory criteria World disclosure Metaphysics Ætiology Afterlife Anima mundi Causality Concepts Consciousness mind–body problem Cosmogony Cosmology religious Creation myth Deities existence Destiny Eschatology Everything / Nothing Evolution Existence Fiction / Nonfiction Free will Future History Ideas Idios kosmos Illusions Incarnation Information Intelligence Magic Matter Miracles Mythology comparative National mythoi Nature philosophical Ontology Origin myths political Otherworlds axes mundi Physics natural philosophy Problem of evil Reality Souls Spirit Supernature Teleology Theology Time Unobservables Value Aesthetic taste Aesthetic Almsgiving / Charity Altruism Autonomy Beauty Codes of conduct Comedy Common good Conscience Consent Creativity Disgust Duty Economics Ecstasy emotional religious Elegance Emotions Aesthetic Entertainment Eroticism Ethics Étiquette Family values Food and drink prohibitions unclean animals Golden Rule Guilt / Culpability Happiness Harmony Honour Human rights Judgement Justice Law jurisprudence religious Liberty political freedom Love Magnificence Maxims Meaning of life Morality public Obligations Peace Piety Praxeology Principles Punishment Qualities Repentance Reverence Rights Sexuality ethics Sin Social stigma Stewardship Styles Sublime, The Suffering Sympathy Taboo Theodicy Trust Unspoken rules Virtues and Vices Works of art Wrongdoing Examples Attitudes Misanthropy Optimism Pessimism Reclusion Weltschmerz Economic and political ideologies Anarchism Authoritarianism Capitalism Christian democracy Collectivism Colonialism Communalism Communism Communitarianism Conservatism Constitutionalism Distributism Environmentalism Extremism Fanaticism Fascism Feminism Fundamentalism Globalism Green politics Imperialism Individualism Industrialisation Intellectualism Islamism Liberalism Libertarianism Masculism Militarism Monarchism Nationalism Pacifism Progressivism Radicalism Reformism Republicanism Sentientism Social democracy Socialism Utilitarianism Veganism Religions African traditional religions Baháʼí Buddhism Caodaism Cheondoism Chinese folk religion Christianity Eastern Orthodox Church Ethnic religions Hinduism Hòa Hảo Islam Jainism Judaism Korean shamanism Modern paganism Rastafari Secularity / Irreligion / Agnosticism / Atheism Shinto Sikhism Spiritism Taoism Tenrikyo Unitarian Universalism Zoroastrianism Schools of philosophy Agriculturalism Aristotelianism Atomism Averroism Cartesianism Cārvāka Collectivism Confucianism / New Confucianism Critical theory Cynicism Cyrenaics Determinism Dualism Eleatics Empiricism Epicureanism Eretrian school Existentialism Fatalism Foundationalism Hedonism Hegelianism Hermeneutics Historicism / New historicism Holism Humanism / Renaissance humanism Idealism Illuminationism ʿIlm al-Kalām Individualism Ionian Kantianism / Neo-Kantianism Kokugaku Legalism Logicians Materialism Megarian school Modernism / Postmodernism Mohism Monism Natural law Naturalism (Chinese) Naturalism (Western) Nihilism Peripatetic Phenomenology Platonism / Neoplatonism Pluralism Positivism Pragmatism Pre-Socratic Pyrrhonism Pythagoreanism / Neopythagoreanism Rationalism Reductionism Scholasticism / Neo-scholasticism Sentientism Social constructionism Sophism Spinozism Stoicism Structuralism / Post-structuralism Thomism Transcendentalism Utilitarianism Yangism Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Spain Israel Other Historical Dictionary of Switzerland NARA İslâm Ansiklopedisi Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐g9sgw
Cached time: 20250817222649
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 4.428 seconds
Real time usage: 4.917 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 33936/1000000
Revision size: 283890/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 1598414/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 242319/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 18/100
Expensive parser function count: 81/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 1710795/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 2.773/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 23710446/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 3884.443      1 -total
 53.03% 2060.114      1 Template:Reflist
 31.96% 1241.570    226 Template:Cite_book
 12.93%  502.417    119 Template:Cite_web
  6.47%  251.366     50 Template:Cite_journal
  6.28%  243.752     53 Template:Cite_news
  6.16%  239.314     37 Template:Sfn
  3.24%  125.791      1 Template:Navboxes
  2.93%  113.832     35 Template:Lang
  2.05%   79.495      1 Template:Slavery Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:27992:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817222649 and revision id 1306071206. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Slavery&oldid=1306071206#Chattel_slavery " Categories : Slavery Business ethics Employment Human rights abuses Labor Social classes Hidden categories: CS1 German-language sources (de) CS1 uses Russian-language script (ru) CS1: long volume value CS1 Russian-language sources (ru) CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown Harv and Sfn no-target errors CS1 errors: ISBN date CS1 Brazilian Portuguese-language sources (pt-br) CS1 Portuguese-language sources (pt) All accuracy disputes Accuracy disputes from January 2019 All articles with bare URLs for citations Articles with bare URLs for citations from August 2025 CS1 Swedish-language sources (sv) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pages Use Oxford spelling from August 2016 Use mdy dates from August 2023 Articles containing explicitly cited English-language text Articles containing Old French (842-ca. 1400)-language text Articles containing Byzantine Greek-language text Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Articles containing Medieval Latin-language text Articles containing Latin-language text Articles containing Korean-language text Wikipedia articles needing clarification from December 2023 All articles with failed verification Articles with failed verification from August 2020 Articles containing French-language text Articles containing Spanish-language text Articles containing Dutch-language text Articles containing Portuguese-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from May 2025 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from September 2023 Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2015 All articles containing potentially dated statements Articles containing Manchu-language text All articles with self-published sources Articles with self-published sources from January 2019 Articles containing Russian-language text Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2012 Articles with unsourced statements from March 2024 Articles with unsourced statements from May 2022 All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from September 2023 Articles with permanently dead external links Commons category link from Wikidata Articles with Dutch-language sources (nl) This page was last edited on 15 August 2025, at 19:36 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Slavery 159 languages Add topic

