Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Opinions 2 Definitions 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Honesty 48 languages العربية Asturianu Български Català Чӑвашла ChiShona Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Italiano עברית ಕನ್ನಡ Қазақша Kiswahili Lietuvių Magyar မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Română Русский Shqip Sicilianu Simple English کوردی Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Moral quality of truthfulness "Honest" redirects here. For other uses, see Honesty (disambiguation) .

Diogenes Searching for an Honest Man , attributed to J. H. W. Tischbein ( c.

1780 ) Honesty or truthfulness is a facet of moral character that connotes positive and virtuous attributes such as integrity , truthfulness , straightforwardness (including straightforwardness of conduct: earnestness ), along with the absence of lying, cheating, theft, etc. Honesty also involves being trustworthy, loyal , fair , and sincere .

A reputation for honesty is denoted by terms like reputability and trustworthiness . Honesty about one's future conduct, loyalties, or commitments is called accountability , reliability, dependability , or conscientiousness .

Someone who goes out of their way to tell possibly unwelcome truths extends honesty into the region of candor or frankness. The Cynics engaged in a challenging sort of frankness like this called parrhêsia .

Opinions [ edit ] A sign in Taytay Church , Philippines, encouraging churchgoers to practice honesty Honesty is valued in many ethnic and religious cultures.

[ 1 ] "Honesty is the best policy" is a proverb of Edwin Sandys , while the quote "Honesty is the first chapter in the book of wisdom " is attributed to Thomas Jefferson , as used in a letter to Nathaniel Macon .

[ 2 ] April 30 is national Honesty Day in the United States .

William Shakespeare described honesty as an attribute people leave behind when he wrote that "no legacy is so rich as honesty" in act 3, scene 5 of " All's Well that Ends Well ." [ 3 ] Tolstoy thought that honesty was revolutionary: “No feats of heroism are needed to achieve the greatest and most important changes in the existence of humanity.... it is only needful that each individual should say what he really feels or thinks, or at least that he should not say what he does not think.” [ 4 ] Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn ("Live Not By Lies," 1974) and Václav Havel ( The Power of the Powerless , 1978) agreed. Havel wrote: [L]iving within the truth has more than a mere existential dimension (returning humanity to its inherent nature), or a noetic dimension (revealing reality as it is), or a moral dimension (setting an example for others). It also has an unambiguous political dimension. If the main pillar of the system is living a lie, then it is not surprising that the fundamental threat to it is living the truth.

The 18th century enlightenment philosopher William Wollaston argued that all religion ultimately reduces to ethics and all ethics reduces to honesty ( The Religion of Nature Delineated , 1722). “[E]very intelligent, active, and free being should so behave himself, as by no act to contradict truth; ...treat every thing as being what it is.” All else would follow from that.

Immanuel Kant made the duty of honesty a core example of his ethical theories .

Others noted, however, that "too much honesty might be seen as undisciplined openness".

[ 5 ] For example, individuals may be perceived as being "too honest" if they honestly express the negative opinions of others, either without having been asked their opinion, or having been asked in a circumstance where the response would be trivial. This concern manifests in political correctness , with individuals refraining from expressing their true opinions due to a general societal condemnation of such views. Research also found that honesty can lead to interpersonal harm because people avoid information about how their honest behavior affects others.

[ 6 ] Definitions [ edit ] Merriam-Webster defines honesty as "fairness and straightforwardness of conduct" or "adherence to the facts".

[ 7 ] The Oxford English Dictionary defines honesty as "the quality of being honest." [ 8 ] Honest is, in turn, defined as "Free of deceit; truthful and sincere...Morally correct or virtuous...(attributive) Fairly earned, especially through hard work...(of an action) done with good intentions even if unsuccessful or misguided...(attributive) Simple, unpretentious, and unsophisticated.

[ 9 ] See also [ edit ] Authenticity (philosophy) – Concept in existential psychology and philosophy Good faith – Intention to be fair, open, and honest Integrity – Moral virtue and practice Lie – Intentionally false statement made to deceive Morality – Distinction between right and wrong or good and bad behavior Parrhesia – Rhetoric practice Radical honesty – Complete honesty devoid of any kind of deception Sincerity – Virtue of honest and genuine communication Spin (propaganda) – Form of propaganda in public relations and politics Trust – Assumption of and reliance on the honesty of another party Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Truth – Being in accord with fact or reality References [ edit ] ^ Rogers, Carl R. (1964). "Toward a modern approach to values: The valuing process in the mature person".

The Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology .

68 (2): 160– 67.

doi : 10.1037/h0046419 .

PMID 14117966 .

Dahlsgaard, Katherine; Peterson, Christopher; Seligman, Martin E.P. (2005). "Shared Virtue: The Convergence of Valued Human Strengths Across Culture and History".

Review of General Psychology .

9 (3): 203– 13.

doi : 10.1037/1089-2680.9.3.203 .

Hilbig, Benjamin E.; Zettler, Ingo (2009). "Pillars of cooperation: Honesty–Humility, social value orientations, and economic behavior".

Journal of Research in Personality .

43 (3): 516– 19.

doi : 10.1016/j.jrp.2009.01.003 .

Van Lange, Paul A.M.; Kuhlman, D. Michael (1994). "Social value orientations and impressions of partner's honesty and intelligence: A test of the might versus morality effect".

Journal of Personality and Social Psychology .

67 (1): 126– 41.

doi : 10.1037/0022-3514.67.1.126 .

Schluter, Dolph; Price, Trevor (1993). "Honesty, Perception and Population Divergence in Sexually Selected Traits".

Proceedings of the Royal Society B .

253 (1336): 117– 22.

doi : 10.1098/rspb.1993.0089 .

PMID 8396772 .

^ "Thomas Jefferson to Nathaniel Macon" .

The Thomas Jefferson Papers Series 1. General Correspondence. 1651–1827 . January 12, 1819.

Archived from the original on October 6, 2017 . Retrieved July 9, 2013 .

^ William Shakespeare.

All's Well That Ends Well Archived 2019-06-12 at the Wayback Machine MIT Shakespeare.

^ Tolstoy, Lev (1894), On Patriotism ^ MacKinnon, Barbara; Fiala, Andrew (2015).

Ethics: Theory and Contemporary Issues (Concise ed.). p. 93.

[ ISBN missing ] ^ Levine, E.; Munguia Gomez, D. (2021).

" 'I'm just being honest.' When and why honesty enables help versus harm" .

Journal of Personality and Social Psychology .

120 (1): 33– 56.

doi : 10.1037/pspi0000242 .

PMID 32463271 .

S2CID 218977238 .

Archived from the original on 2021-04-13 . Retrieved 2021-02-05 – via APA PsycNet.

^ "Honesty" .

Merriam-Webster . 2017.

Archived from the original on 2017-10-06.

^ "Honesty" .

Oxford English Dictionary . 2017. Archived from the original on 2017-10-06.

^ "Honest" .

Oxford English Dictionary . 2017. Archived from the original on 2016-09-28.

External links [ edit ] Look up honesty in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Wikiquote has quotations related to Honesty .

v t e Virtues About virtues Endowment Moral character Nicomachean Ethics Positive psychology Trait theory Virtue ethics Virtue families Bodhipakkhiyā dhammā Brahmavihārās Bushidō Catalogue of Vices and Virtues Emi Omo Eso Epistemic virtues Five virtues Four Cardinal Principles and Eight Virtues Intellectual virtues Moral virtues Nine Noble Virtues Omoluwabi Pāramīs Prussian virtues Scout Law Seven virtues Cardinal Theological Teachings of the Seven Grandfathers Three Treasures Values in Action Inventory of Strengths Yamas Individual virtues Accountability Alertness Altruism Authenticity Calmness Charisma Charity Chastity Chivalry Cleanliness Compassion Conscientiousness Courage Civil Moral Courtesy Diligence Discernment Discipline Duty Empathy Endurance Equanimity Etiquette Faith Faithfulness Fidelity Foresight Forgiveness Frugality Generosity Glory Good faith Gratitude Heroism Honesty Honour Hope Hospitality Humanity Humility Impartiality Innocence Insight Integrity Intelligence Emotional Social Judgement Justice Kindness Love Loyalty Magnanimity Magnificence Meekness Mercy Moderation Modesty Nonattachment Patience Patriotism Perspicacity Philanthropy Piety Filial Pity Politeness Prudence Punctuality Religion Renunciation Resilience Respect Reverence Righteous indignation Righteousness Self-control Self-cultivation Self-transcendence Simplicity Sincerity Solidarity Sportsmanship Sympathy Taste Temperance Tranquillity Trust Wisdom Wit Workmanship Chinese De Jing Li Ren Yi Greek Agape Arete Ataraxia Eutrapelia Philotimo Phronesis Sophia Sophrosyne Indian Adhiṭṭhāna Ahimsa Akrodha Aparigraha Ārjava Asteya Brahmacharya Dāna Dhṛti Hrī Karuṇā Kshama Kshanti Mettā Muditā Nishkama Karma Prajñā Samatva Satya Shaucha Sevā Śraddhā / Saddhā Upekṣā Vīrya Latin Auctoritas Caritas Decorum Dignitas Fides Gravitas Humanitas Pietas Virtus Other Ganbaru Giri Sadaqah Seny Sisu Virtù Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Honesty&oldid=1291990356 " Categories : Deception Truth Virtue Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Pages with missing ISBNs Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets via Module:Annotated link Articles containing Latin-language text Articles containing Catalan-language text Articles containing Italian-language text This page was last edited on 24 May 2025, at 15:53 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Honesty 48 languages Add topic

