Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Career 3 Awards & honours 4 Work 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Paul Vitányi 3 languages تۆرکجه Français Русский Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Dutch theoretical computer scientist Paul Michael Béla Vitányi Paul M. B. Vitányi 2005 Born ( 1944-07-21 ) 21 July 1944 (age 81) Budapest Nationality Dutch Alma mater Delft University of Technology Free University of Amsterdam Known for Simplicity theory Kolmogorov complexity Normalized Compression Distance Normalized Google Distance Information Distance Incompressibility Method Shared register Kolmogorov structure function Reversible computing Scientific career Fields Computer science , Mathematics Institutions CWI , University of Amsterdam , University of Copenhagen , Massachusetts Institute of Technology , Monash University , Tokyo Institute of Technology , NICTA at University of New South Wales , Boston University , University of Waterloo Doctoral advisor Jaco de Bakker Arto Salomaa Doctoral students Ronald Cramer [ 1 ] John Tromp Barbara Terhal Ronald de Wolf Paul Michael Béla Vitányi (born 21 July 1944) is a Dutch computer scientist, professor of computer science at the University of Amsterdam and researcher at the Dutch Centrum Wiskunde & Informatica .

Biography [ edit ] Vitányi was born in Budapest to a Dutch mother and a Hungarian father. He received his degree of mathematical engineer from Delft University of Technology in 1971 and his Ph.D.

from the Free University of Amsterdam in 1978.

[ 1 ] Career [ edit ] Vitányi was appointed professor of computer science at the University of Amsterdam , and researcher at the National Research Institute for Mathematics and Computer Science in the Netherlands ( CWI ) where he is currently a CWI Fellow. He was guest professor at the University of Copenhagen in 1978; research associate at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in 1985/1986; Gaikoku-Jin Kenkyuin (councilor professor) at INCOCSAT at the Tokyo Institute of Technology in 1998; visiting professor at Boston University in 2004, at Monash University in 1996 and at the National ICT of Australia NICTA at University of New South Wales in 2004/2005; visiting professor at and adjunct professor of computer science at the University of Waterloo from 2005.

Vitányi has served on the editorial boards of Distributed Computing (1987–2003), Information Processing Letters ; the Theory of Computing Systems ; the Parallel Processing Letters ; the International journal of Foundations of Computer Science ; the Entropy ; the Information ; the SN Computer Science ; the Journal of Computer and Systems Sciences (guest editor), and elsewhere.

Awards & honours [ edit ] 1999 – National Outstanding Scientific and Technological Book Award of the People's Republic of China 2003 – CWI Fellow 2003 – Bronze Medal University of Helsinki 2005 – Adjunct Professor Computer Science University of Waterloo 2007 – Knighthood in the Order of the Netherlands Lion , [ 2 ] [ 3 ] 2007 – International Federation for Information Processing (IFIP) Silver Core Award 2011 – Member of the Academia Europaea .

[ 4 ] 2020 - McGuffey Longevity Award of the Textbook & Academic Authors Association (TAA).

Work [ edit ] Vitányi has worked on cellular automata , computational complexity , distributed and parallel computing , machine learning and prediction, physics of computation , Kolmogorov complexity , information theory and quantum computing , publishing over 200 research papers and some books.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] As of 2020 his work on normalized compression distance was used in 15 US patents and on 
normalized Google distance in 10 US patents.

Together with Ming Li he pioneered theory and applications of Kolmogorov complexity.

[ 8 ] They co-authored the textbook An Introduction to Kolmogorov Complexity and Its Applications , [ 9 ] parts of which have been translated into Chinese, Russian and Japanese. The textbook 
received the William Holmes McGuffey Longevity Award [ 10 ] of the Textbook & Academic Authors Association (TAA) (2020), and the Chinese translation [ 11 ] received the National Outstanding Scientific and Technological Book Award of the People's Republic of China (1999).

References [ edit ] ^ a b Paul Michael Béla Vitányi at the Mathematics Genealogy Project .

^ "Paul Vitányi ontvangt koninklijke onderscheiding" .

Computable .

VNU Media . 10 September 2007 . Retrieved 29 May 2009 .

^ "Analysing Human Aspects of Safety-Critical Software" .

ercim-news.ercim.eu .

^ Academia Europaea ^ Computer science papers DBLP ^ "Paul Vitanyi" .

scholar.google.com .

^ "MathSciNet Mathematical Reviews" .

^ Li, Ming; Vitanyi, Paul M. B. (May 3, 2007).

"Applications of algorithmic information theory" .

Scholarpedia .

2 (5): 2658.

Bibcode : 2007SchpJ...2.2658L .

doi : 10.4249/scholarpedia.2658 .

^ M. Li and P. M. B.Vitányi, An Introduction to Kolmogorov Complexity and its Applications , Springer, New York, 1993 (1st Ed.), 1997 (2nd ed.), 2008 (3rd ed.), 2019 (4th ed.) ^ Schmieder, Eric (February 26, 2020).

"TAA announces 2020 Textbook Award winners - Textbook & Academic Authors Association Blog" .

^ "Chinese translation of An Introduction to Kolmogorov Complexity and its Applications " .

External links [ edit ] Personal web page Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Australia Czech Republic Netherlands Norway Croatia Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii ORCID Mathematics Genealogy Project zbMATH Google Scholar DBLP MathSciNet Other IdRef Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Paul_Vitányi&oldid=1292664191 " Categories : 1944 births Living people Dutch computer scientists Theoretical computer scientists Researchers in distributed computing Delft University of Technology alumni Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam alumni Academic staff of the University of Amsterdam Scientists from Budapest Knights of the Order of the Netherlands Lion Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles with hCards This page was last edited on 28 May 2025, at 05:08 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Paul Vitányi 3 languages Add topic

