Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life and work Toggle Life and work subsection 1.1 Early life 1.2 Manchester and Salford 1.3 Paris 1.4 Brussels 1.5 Return to Prussia 1.6 Back in Britain 1.7 Later years 2 Personality 3 Legacy Toggle Legacy subsection 3.1 Influences 4 Major works Toggle Major works subsection 4.1 The Holy Family (1844) 4.2 The Condition of the Working Class in England (1845) 4.3 The Peasant War in Germany (1850) 4.4 Herr Eugen Dühring's Revolution in Science (1878) 4.5 Socialism: Utopian and Scientific (1880) 4.6 Dialectics of Nature (1883) 4.7 The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State (1884) 5 Notes 6 References 7 Sources 8 Further reading Toggle Further reading subsection 8.1 Studies 8.2 Commentaries on Engels 8.3 Fiction works 8.4 Graphic novel 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Friedrich Engels 126 languages Afrikaans አማርኛ العربية Aragonés অসমীয়া Asturianu Avañe'ẽ Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) भोजपुरी Български Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Чӑвашла Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Føroyskt Français Frysk Furlan Gaeilge Gaelg Gàidhlig Galego 客家語 / Hak-kâ-ngî 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hornjoserbsce Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Ирон Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa ಕನ್ನಡ ქართული Қазақша Kreyòl ayisyen Kurdî Кыргызча ລາວ Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Lingua Franca Nova Magyar Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം मराठी მარგალური مصرى مازِرونی Bahasa Melayu Монгол မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands नेपाली 日本語 Нохчийн Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی پښتو ភាសាខ្មែរ Piemontèis Polski Português Română Rumantsch Runa Simi Русский Scots Sesotho Shqip Sicilianu Simple English سنڌي Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Татарча / tatarça తెలుగు ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська اردو ئۇيغۇرچە / Uyghurche Vèneto Tiếng Việt Volapük Võro Walon Winaray 吴语 Yorùbá 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Checked From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Engels ) Page version status This is an accepted version of this page This is the latest accepted revision , reviewed on 11 August 2025 .

German philosopher (1820–1895) "Engels" redirects here. For other uses, see Engels (disambiguation) .

Not to be confused with the 19th-century economist Ernst Engel .

Friedrich Engels Engels in 1879 Born ( 1820-11-28 ) 28 November 1820 Barmen , Kingdom of Prussia Died 5 August 1895 (1895-08-05) (aged 74) London, England Political party Communist Correspondence Committee (1846–1847) Communist League (1847–1852) International Workingmen's Association (1864–1872) Spouse Lizzie Burns ​ ​ ( m.

1878 ; died 1878 ) ​ Partner Mary Burns (died 1863) Education Education Gymnasium zu Elberfeld [ de ] (withdrew) [ 1 ] University of Berlin (withdrew) [ 1 ] Philosophical work Era 19th-century philosophy Region Western philosophy School Continental philosophy Marxism Main interests Political philosophy political economy class struggle criticism of capitalism Notable works The Condition of the Working Class in England Anti-Dühring Socialism: Utopian and Scientific The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State The German Ideology The Communist Manifesto Notable ideas Alienation and exploitation of the worker dialectical materialism historical materialism false consciousness Signature Friedrich Engels [ a ] ( / ˈ ɛ ŋ ɡ əl z / ENG -gəlz ; [ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] German: [ˈfʁiːdʁɪç ˈɛŋl̩s] ; 28 November 1820 – 5 August 1895)  was a German philosopher, political theorist, journalist, and revolutionary socialist . He was also a businessman and Karl Marx 's lifelong friend and closest collaborator, serving as the co-founder of Marxism .

Born in Barmen in the Kingdom of Prussia , Engels was the son of a wealthy textile manufacturer. Despite his bourgeois background, he became a staunch critic of capitalism , influenced by his observations of industrial working conditions in Manchester , England, as published in his early work The Condition of the Working Class in England (1845). He met Marx in 1844, after which they jointly authored works including The Holy Family (1844), The German Ideology (written 1846), and The Communist Manifesto (1848), and worked as political activists in the Communist League and First International . Engels also supported Marx financially for much of his life, enabling him to continue his writing in London. After Marx's death in 1883, Engels edited from his manuscripts to complete Volumes II and III of his work Das Kapital (1885 and 1894).

Engels' own works, including Anti-Dühring (1878), Socialism: Utopian and Scientific (1880), Dialectics of Nature (written 1872–1882), The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State (1884), and Ludwig Feuerbach and the End of Classical German Philosophy (1886), are foundational to Marxist theory.

Life and work [ edit ] Early life [ edit ] The Engels family house at Barmen (now in Wuppertal ), Germany Friedrich Engels was born on 28 November 1820 in Barmen , Jülich-Cleves-Berg , Prussia (now Wuppertal , Germany), as the eldest son of Friedrich Engels Sr.

[ de ] (1796–1860) and of Elisabeth "Elise" Franziska Mauritia van Haar (1797–1873).

[ 6 ] The wealthy Engels family owned large cotton-textile mills in Barmen and Salford , England, both expanding industrial cities. Friedrich's parents were devout Calvinists and raised their children accordingly—he was baptised in the Calvinist Reformed Evangelical Parish of Elberfeld .

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] At the age of 13, Engels attended secondary school ( Gymnasium ) in the adjacent city of Elberfeld but had to leave at 17 due to pressure from his father, who wanted him to become a businessman and work as a mercantile apprentice in the family firm.

[ 9 ] After a year in Barmen, the young Engels was, in 1838, sent by his father to undertake an apprenticeship at a trading house in Bremen .

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] His parents expected that he would follow his father into a career in the family business. Their son's revolutionary activities disappointed them. It would be some years before he joined the family firm.

[ according to whom?

] While at Bremen, Engels began reading the philosophy of Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel , whose teachings dominated German philosophy at that time. In September 1838 he published his first work, a poem entitled "The Bedouin", in the Bremisches Conversationsblatt No. 40. He also engaged in other literary work and began writing newspaper articles critiquing the societal ills of industrialisation .

[ 12 ] [ 13 ] He wrote under the pseudonym "Friedrich Oswald" to avoid connecting his family with his provocative writings.

[ according to whom?

] In 1841, Engels performed his military service in the Prussian Army as a member of the Household Artillery (German: Garde-Artillerie-Brigade ). Assigned to Berlin, he attended university lectures at the University of Berlin and began to associate with groups of Young Hegelians . He anonymously published articles in the Rheinische Zeitung , exposing the poor employment and living conditions endured by factory workers.

[ 11 ] The editor of the Rheinische Zeitung was Karl Marx, but Engels would not meet Marx until late November 1842.

[ 14 ] Engels acknowledged the influence of German philosophy on his intellectual development throughout his career.

[ 10 ] In 1840, he also wrote: "To get the most out of life you must be active, you must live and you must have the courage to taste the thrill of being young." [ 15 ] Engels developed atheistic beliefs and his relationship with his parents became strained.

[ 16 ] Manchester and Salford [ edit ] In 1842, his parents sent the 22-year-old Engels to Salford , England, a manufacturing centre where industrialisation was on the rise. He was to work in Weaste , Salford , [ 17 ] in the offices of Ermen and Engels 's Victoria Mill, which made sewing threads.

[ 18 ] [ 19 ] Engels's father thought that working at the Salford firm might make his son reconsider some of his radical opinions.

[ 10 ] [ 19 ] On his way to Salford and Manchester, Engels visited the office of the Rheinische Zeitung in Cologne and met Karl Marx for the first time. Initially, they were not impressed with each other.

[ 20 ] Marx mistakenly thought that Engels was still associated with the Young Hegelians of Berlin, with whom Marx had just broken off ties.

[ 21 ] In Manchester, Engels met Mary Burns , a fierce young Irish woman with radical opinions who worked in the Engels factory.

[ 22 ] [ 23 ] They began a relationship that lasted 20 years until her death in 1863.

[ 24 ] [ 25 ] The two never married, as both were against the institution of marriage. While Engels regarded stable monogamy as a virtue, he considered the current state and church-regulated marriage as a form of class oppression.

[ 26 ] [ 27 ] Burns guided Engels through Manchester and Salford , showing him the worst districts for his research.

[ according to whom?

] Engels was often described as a man with a very strong libido and not much restraint. He had many lovers and despite his condemnation of prostitution as "exploitation of the proletariat by the bourgeoisie" he also occasionally paid for sex. In 1846 he wrote to Marx: "If I had an income of 5000 francs I would do nothing but work and amuse myself with women until I went to pieces. If there were no Frenchwomen, life wouldn't be worth living. But so long as there are grisettes , well and good!" At a Workers' Union meeting in Brussels, Engels's friend turned rival Moses Hess accused Engels of raping his wife Sibylle. Engels vehemently denied the charge, writing in a letter to Marx that Sibylle's "rage with me is unrequited love, pure and simple." [ 7 ] [ 28 ] While in Manchester between October and November 1843, Engels wrote his first critique of political economy , entitled "Umrisse zu einer Kritik der Nationalökonomie" ( Outlines of a Critique of Political Economy ).

[ 29 ] Engels sent the article to Paris, where Marx and Arnold Ruge published it in the Deutsch–Französische Jahrbücher in 1844.

[ 18 ] Engels observed the slums of Manchester in close detail, and took notes of its horrors, such as child labour , the despoiled environment, and overworked and impoverished labourers.

[ 30 ] He sent a trilogy of articles to Marx. These were published in the Rheinische Zeitung and then in the Deutsch–Französische Jahrbücher , chronicling the conditions among the working class in Manchester. He later collected these articles for his influential first book, The Condition of the Working Class in England (1845).

[ 31 ] Written between September 1844 and March 1845, the book was published in German in 1845. In the book, Engels described the "grim future of capitalism and the industrial age", [ 30 ] noting the details of the squalor in which the working people lived.

[ 32 ] The book was published in English in 1887. Archival resources contemporary to Engels's stay in Manchester shed light on some of the conditions he describes, including a manuscript (MMM/10/1) held by special collections at the University of Manchester. This recounts cases seen in the Manchester Royal Infirmary, where industrial accidents dominated, and which resonate with Engels's comments on the disfigured persons seen walking around Manchester as a result of such accidents.

[ according to whom?

] Engels continued his involvement with radical journalism and politics. He frequented areas popular among members of the English labour and Chartist movements, whom he met. He also wrote for several journals, including The Northern Star , Robert Owen 's New Moral World , and the Democratic Review newspaper.

[ 24 ] [ 33 ] [ 34 ] Paris [ edit ] An early photograph of Engels, thought to show him aged 20–25 (c. 1840–45) [ 7 ] [ 35 ] [ 36 ] [ 37 ] Engels returned to Germany in 1844. On the way, he stopped in Paris to meet Karl Marx, with whom he had an earlier correspondence. Marx had been living in Paris since late October 1843, after the Rheinische Zeitung was banned in March 1843 by the Prussian government.

[ 38 ] Prior to meeting Marx, Engels had become established as a fully developed materialist and scientific socialist , independent of Marx's philosophical development.

[ 39 ] In Paris, Marx and Arnold Ruge were publishing the Deutsch–Französische Jahrbücher , of which only one issue appeared (in 1844), and in which Engels wrote Outlines of a Critique of Political Economy . Engels met Marx for a second time at the Café de la Régence on the Place du Palais, on 28 August 1844. The two quickly became close friends and remained so their entire lives. Marx had read and was impressed by Engels's articles on The Condition of the Working Class in England in which he had written that "[a] class which bears all the disadvantages of the social order without enjoying its advantages, [...] Who can demand that such a class respect this social order?" [ 40 ] Marx adopted Engels's idea that the working class would lead the revolution against the bourgeoisie as society advanced toward socialism, and incorporated this as part of his own philosophy.

[ 41 ] Engels stayed in Paris to help Marx write The Holy Family .

[ 42 ] It was an attack on the Young Hegelians and the Bauer brothers and was published in late February 1845. Engels's earliest contribution to Marx's work was writing for the Deutsch–Französische Jahrbücher , edited by both Marx and Arnold Ruge , in Paris in 1844. During this time in Paris, both Marx and Engels began their association with and then joined the secret revolutionary society called the League of the Just .

[ 43 ] The League of the Just had been formed in 1837 in France to promote an egalitarian society through the overthrow of the existing governments. In 1839, the League participated in the 1839 rebellion fomented by the French utopian revolutionary socialist, Louis Auguste Blanqui ; as Ruge remained a Young Hegelian in his belief, Marx and Ruge soon split and Ruge left the Deutsch–Französische Jahrbücher .

[ 44 ] Following the split, Marx remained friendly enough with Ruge that he sent Ruge a warning on 15 January 1845 that the Paris police were going to execute orders against him, Marx and others at the Deutsch–Französische Jahrbücher requiring all to leave Paris within 24 hours.

[ 45 ] Marx was expelled from Paris by French authorities on 3 February 1845 and settled in Brussels with his wife and one daughter.

[ 46 ] Having left Paris on 6 September 1844, Engels returned to his home in Barmen to work on his The Condition of the Working Class in England , which was published in late May 1845.

[ 46 ] Even before the publication of his book, Engels moved to Brussels in late April 1845, to collaborate with Marx on another book, German Ideology .

[ 47 ] While living in Barmen, Engels began making contact with Socialists in the Rhineland to raise money for Marx's publication efforts in Brussels; these contacts became more important as both Marx and Engels began political organising for the Social Democratic Workers' Party of Germany .

[ 48 ] Brussels [ edit ] De Zwaan (the Swan), Brussels, where The Communist Manifesto is reputed to have been written [ 49 ] The nation of Belgium, founded in 1830, had one of the most liberal constitutions in Europe and functioned as a refuge for progressives from other countries. From 1845 to 1848, Engels and Marx lived in Brussels , spending much of their time organising the city's German workers. Shortly after their arrival, they contacted and joined the underground German Communist League . The Communist League was the successor organisation to the League of the Just which had been founded in 1837 but had recently disbanded.

[ 50 ] Influenced by Wilhelm Weitling , the Communist League was an international society of proletarian revolutionaries with branches in various European cities.

[ 51 ] The Communist League also had contacts with the underground conspiratorial organisation of Louis Auguste Blanqui . Many of Marx's and Engels's current friends became members of the Communist League. Old friends like Georg Friedrich Herwegh , who had worked with Marx on the Rheinsche Zeitung , Heinrich Heine , the famous poet, a young physician by the name of Roland Daniels , Heinrich Bürgers and August Herman Ewerbeck , all maintained their contacts with Marx and Engels in Brussels.

Georg Weerth , who had become a friend of Engels in England in 1843, now settled in Brussels.

Carl Wallau and Stephen Born (real name Simon Buttermilch) were both German immigrant typesetters who settled in Brussels to help Marx and Engels with their Communist League work. Marx and Engels made many new important contacts through the Communist League. One of the first was Wilhelm Wolff , who soon became one of Marx's and Engels's closest collaborators. Others were Joseph Weydemeyer and Ferdinand Freiligrath , a famous revolutionary poet. While most of the associates of Marx and Engels were German immigrants living in Brussels, some were Belgians. Phillipe Gigot, a Belgian philosopher and Victor Tedesco, a lawyer from Liège, both joined the Communist League.

Joachim Lelewel , a prominent Polish historian and participant in the Polish uprising of 1830–1831, was also a frequent associate.

[ 52 ] [ 53 ] The Communist League commissioned Marx and Engels to write a pamphlet explaining the principles of communism. This became the Manifesto of the Communist Party , better known as The Communist Manifesto .

[ 54 ] It was first published on 21 February 1848 and ends with the lines: "Let the ruling classes tremble at a Communistic revolution. The proletariat have nothing to lose but their chains. They have a world to win. Working Men of All Countries, Unite!" [ 10 ] Engels's mother wrote in a letter to him of her concerns, commenting that he had "really gone too far" and "begged" him "to proceed no further".

[ 55 ] She further stated: You have paid more heed to other people, to strangers, and have taken no account of your mother's pleas. God alone knows what I have felt and suffered of late. I was trembling when I picked up the newspaper and saw therein that a warrant was out for my son's arrest.

[ 55 ] Return to Prussia [ edit ] There was a revolution in France in 1848 that soon spread to other Western European countries . These events caused Engels and Marx to return to Cologne in their homeland of Prussia. While living there, they created and served as editors for a new daily newspaper called the Neue Rheinische Zeitung .

[ 18 ] Besides Marx and Engels, other frequent contributors to the Neue Rheinische Zeitung included Karl Schapper , Wilhelm Wolff , Ernst Dronke , Peter Nothjung , Heinrich Bürgers , Ferdinand Wolff and Carl Cramer.

[ 56 ] Engels's mother gave unwitting witness to the effect of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung on the revolutionary uprising in Cologne in 1848. Criticising his involvement in the uprising she states in a 5 December 1848 letter to Friedrich that "nobody, ourselves included, doubted that the meetings at which you and your friends spoke, and also the language of (Neue) Rh.Z.

were largely the cause of these disturbances." [ 57 ] Engels's parents hoped that young Engels would "decide to turn to activities other than those which you have been pursuing in recent years and which have caused so much distress".

[ 57 ] At this point, his parents felt the only hope for their son was to emigrate to America and start his life over. They told him that he should do this or he would "cease to receive money from us"; however, the problem in the relationship between Engels and his parents was worked out without Engels having to leave England or being cut off from financial assistance from his parents.

[ 57 ] In July 1851, Engels's father arrived to visit him in Manchester, England. During the visit, his father arranged for Engels to meet Peter Ermen of the office of Ermen & Engels , to move to Liverpool and to take over sole management of the office in Manchester.

[ 58 ] In 1849, Engels travelled to Bavaria for the Baden and Palatinate revolutionary uprising , an even more dangerous involvement. Starting with an article called "The Magyar Struggle", written on 8 January 1849, Engels, himself, began a series of reports on the Revolution and War for Independence of the newly founded Hungarian Republic.

[ 59 ] Engels's articles on the Hungarian Republic became a regular feature in the Neue Rheinische Zeitung under the heading "From the Theatre of War"; however, the newspaper was suppressed during the June 1849 Prussian coup d'état. After the coup, Marx lost his Prussian citizenship , was deported and fled to Paris, then London.

[ 60 ] Engels stayed in Prussia and took part in an armed uprising in South Germany as an aide-de-camp in the volunteer corps of August Willich .

[ 61 ] [ 62 ] [ 63 ] Engels also took two cases of rifle cartridges with him when he went to join the uprising in Elberfeld on 10 May 1849.

[ 64 ] Later when Prussian troops came to Kaiserslautern to suppress an uprising there, Engels joined a group of volunteers under the command of August Willich, who were going to fight the Prussian troops.

[ 65 ] When the uprising was crushed, Engels was one of the last members of Willich's volunteers to escape by crossing the Swiss border. Marx and others became concerned for Engels's life until they heard from him.

[ 66 ] Engels travelled through Switzerland as a refugee and eventually made it to safety in England.

[ 10 ] On 6 June 1849 Prussian authorities issued an arrest warrant for him which contained a physical description as "height: 5 feet 6 inches; hair: blond; forehead: smooth; eyebrows: blond; eyes: blue; nose and mouth: well proportioned; beard: reddish; chin: oval; face: oval; complexion: healthy; figure: slender. Special characteristics: speaks very rapidly and is short-sighted".

[ 67 ] As to his "short-sightedness", Engels admitted as much in a letter written to Joseph Weydemeyer on 19 June 1851 in which he says he was not worried about being selected for the Prussian military because of "my eye trouble, as I have now found out once and for all which renders me completely unfit for active service of any sort".

[ 68 ] Once he was safe in Switzerland, Engels began to write down all his memories of the recent military campaign against the Prussians. This writing eventually became the article published as "The Campaign for the German Imperial Constitution".

[ 69 ] Back in Britain [ edit ] Engels's house in Primrose Hill , London To help Marx with Neue Rheinische Zeitung Politisch-ökonomische Revue , the new publishing effort in London, Engels sought ways to escape the continent and travel to London. On 5 October 1849, Engels arrived in the Italian port city of Genoa.

[ 70 ] There, Engels booked passage on the English schooner, Cornish Diamond under the command of a Captain Stevens.

[ 71 ] The voyage across the western Mediterranean, around the Iberian Peninsula by sailing schooner took about five weeks. Finally, the Cornish Diamond sailed up the River Thames to London on 10 November 1849 with Engels on board.

[ 72 ] Upon his return to Britain, Engels re-entered the Manchester company in which his father held shares to support Marx financially as he worked on Das Kapital .

[ 73 ] [ 74 ] Unlike his first period in England (1843), Engels was now under police surveillance. He had "official" homes and "unofficial homes" all over Salford, Weaste and other inner-city Manchester districts where he lived with Mary Burns under false names to confuse the police.

[ 32 ] Little more is known, as Engels destroyed over 1,500 letters between himself and Marx after the latter's death so as to conceal the details of their secretive lifestyle.

[ 32 ] Despite his work at the mill, Engels found time to write a book on Martin Luther , the Protestant Reformation and the 1525 revolutionary war of the peasants , entitled The Peasant War in Germany .

[ 75 ] He also wrote a number of newspaper articles including "The Campaign for the German Imperial Constitution" which he finished in February 1850 [ 76 ] and "On the Slogan of the Abolition of the State and the German 'Friends of Anarchy'" written in October 1850.

[ 77 ] In April 1851, he wrote the pamphlet "Conditions and Prospects of a War of the Holy Alliance against France".

[ 78 ] Marx and Engels denounced Louis Bonaparte when he carried out a coup against the French government and made himself president for life on 2 December 1851. Engels wrote to Marx on 3 December 1851, characterising the coup as "comical" [ 79 ] and referred to it as occurring on "the 18th Brumaire", the date of Napoleon I's coup of 1799 according to the French Republican Calendar .

[ 80 ] Marx later incorporated this comically ironic characterisation of the coup into his essay about it. He called the essay The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte using Engels's suggested characterisation.

[ 81 ] Marx also borrowed Engels' characterisation of Hegel's notion of the World Spirit that history occurred twice, "once as a tragedy and secondly as a farce" in the first paragraph of his new essay.

[ 82 ] Meanwhile, Engels started working at the mill owned by his father in Manchester as an office clerk, the same position he held in his teens while in Germany where his father's company was based. Engels worked his way up to become a partner in the firm in 1864.

[ citation needed ] Five years later, Engels retired from the business and could focus more on his studies.

[ 18 ] At this time, Marx was living in London but they were able to exchange ideas through daily correspondence. One of the ideas that Engels and Marx contemplated was the possibility and character of a potential revolution in Russia. As early as April 1853, Engels and Marx anticipated an "aristocratic-bourgeois revolution in Russia which would begin in "St. Petersburg with a resulting civil war in the interior".

[ 83 ] The model for this type of aristocratic-bourgeois revolution in Russia against the autocratic Tsarist government in favour of a constitutional government had been provided by the Decembrist Revolt of 1825.

[ 84 ] Despite the unsuccessful revolt against the Tsarist government in favour of a constitutional government, both Engels and Marx anticipated a bourgeois revolution in Russia would occur, which would bring about a bourgeois stage in Russian development to precede a communist stage. By 1881, both Marx and Engels began to contemplate a course of development in Russia that would lead directly to the communist stage without the intervening bourgeois stage. This analysis was based on what Marx and Engels saw as the exceptional characteristics of the Russian village commune or obshchina .

[ 85 ] While doubt was cast on this theory by Georgi Plekhanov , Plekhanov's reasoning was based on the first edition of Das Kapital (1867) which predated Marx's interest in Russian peasant communes by two years. Later editions of the text demonstrate Marx's sympathy for the argument of Nikolay Chernyshevsky , that it should be possible to establish socialism in Russia without an intermediary bourgeois stage provided that the peasant communes were used as the basis for the transition.

[ 86 ] In 1870, Engels moved to London where he and Marx lived until Marx's death in 1883.

[ 10 ] Engels's London home from 1870 to 1894 was at 122 Regent's Park Road .

[ 87 ] In October 1894 he moved to 41 Regent's Park Road, Primrose Hill , NW1, where he died the following year.

[ citation needed ] Marx's first London residence was a cramped flat at 28 Dean Street , Soho . From 1856, he lived at 9 Grafton Terrace, Kentish Town , and then in a tenement at 41 Maitland Park Road in Belsize Park from 1875 until his death in March 1883.

[ 88 ] Mary Burns died suddenly of heart disease in 1863, after which Engels became close with her younger sister Lydia (" Lizzie "). They lived openly as a couple in London and married on 11 September 1878, hours before Lizzie's death.

[ 89 ] [ 90 ] Later years [ edit ] Later in their lives, Marx and Engels came to argue that in some countries workers might be able to achieve their aims through peaceful means .

[ 91 ] In following this, Engels argued that socialists were evolutionists, although they remained committed to social revolution .

[ 92 ] Similarly, Tristram Hunt argues that Engels was sceptical of "top-down revolutions" and later in life advocated "a peaceful, democratic road to socialism ".

[ 30 ] Engels also wrote in his introduction to the 1891 edition of Marx's The Class Struggles in France that "rebellion in the old style, street fighting with barricades, which decided the issue everywhere up to 1848, was to a considerable extent obsolete", [ 93 ] [ 94 ] although some such as David W. Lowell empashised their cautionary and tactical meaning, arguing that "Engels questions only rebellion 'in the old style', that is, insurrection: he does not renounce revolution. The reason for Engels' caution is clear: he candidly admits that ultimate victory for any insurrection is rare, simply on military and tactical grounds".

[ 95 ] In his introduction to the 1895 edition of Marx's The Class Struggles in France , Engels attempted to resolve the division between reformists and revolutionaries in the Marxist movement by declaring that he was in favour of short-term tactics of electoral politics that included gradualist and evolutionary socialist measures while maintaining his belief that revolutionary seizure of power by the proletariat should remain a goal. In spite of this attempt by Engels to merge gradualism and revolution, his effort only diluted the distinction of gradualism and revolution and had the effect of strengthening the position of the revisionists.

[ 96 ] Engels's statements in the French newspaper Le Figaro , in which he wrote that "revolution" and the "so-called socialist society" were not fixed concepts, but rather constantly changing social phenomena, and argued that this made "us socialists all evolutionists", increased the public perception that Engels was gravitating towards evolutionary socialism. Engels also argued that it would be "suicidal" to talk about a revolutionary seizure of power at a time when the historical circumstances favoured a parliamentary road to power that he predicted could bring " social democracy into power as early as 1898". Engels's stance of openly accepting gradualist, evolutionary and parliamentary tactics while claiming that the historical circumstances did not favour revolution caused confusion.

Marxist revisionist Eduard Bernstein interpreted this as indicating that Engels was moving towards accepting parliamentary reformist and gradualist stances, but he ignored that Engels's stances were tactical as a response to the particular circumstances and that Engels was still committed to revolutionary socialism .

[ 97 ] Engels was deeply distressed when he discovered that his introduction to a new edition of The Class Struggles in France had been edited by Bernstein and orthodox Marxist Karl Kautsky in a manner which left the impression that he had become a proponent of a peaceful road to socialism.

[ 96 ] On 1 April 1895, four months before his death, Engels responded to Kautsky: I was amazed to see today in the Vorwärts an excerpt from my 'Introduction' that had been printed without my knowledge and tricked out in such a way as to present me as a peace-loving proponent of legality [at all costs]. Which is all the more reason why I should like it to appear in its entirety in the Neue Zeit in order that this disgraceful impression may be erased. I shall leave Liebknecht in no doubt as to what I think about it and the same applies to those who, irrespective of who they may be, gave him this opportunity of perverting my views and, what's more, without so much as a word to me about it.

[ 98 ] After Marx's death, Engels devoted much of his remaining years to editing Marx's unfinished volumes of Das Kapital . He is credited with preventing the work from being lost due to Marx's "incredibly difficult handwriting".

[ 99 ] He had to provide it with structure and develop its lines of thought, so that the second and third volumes of Capital are effectively joint in authorship and its content (except for the extensive forewords added by Engels) cannot be attributed exclusively to either author.

[ 100 ] Some scholars, notably Georges Labica [ fr ] , thought that Engels had altered the course of Marx's analysis, but the shift in focus from the exploitation of labourers to the accumulation of capital, and the introduction of the possibility that capitalism could survive the tendency of the rate of profit to fall is argued by van Holthoon to be already Marx's, with the latter notion present in the long unpublished Grundrisse .

[ 100 ] While the task of editing Capital forced Engels to abandon his unfinished Dialectics of Nature , he still completed two other works of his own in the years following Marx's death.

[ 101 ] In The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State (1884), he made an argument using anthropological evidence of the time to show that family structures changed over history and that the concept of monogamous marriage came from the necessity within class society for men to control women to ensure their own children would inherit their property. He argued a future communist society would allow people to make decisions about their relationships free of economic constraints.

Ludwig Feuerbach and the End of Classical German Philosophy was published in 1886. On 5 August 1895, Engels died of throat cancer in London, aged 74.

[ 102 ] [ 103 ] Following cremation at Woking Crematorium , his ashes were scattered off Beachy Head , near Eastbourne , as he had requested.

[ 103 ] [ 104 ] He left a considerable estate to Eduard Bernstein and Louise Freyberger (wife of Ludwig Freyberger ), valued for probate at £25,265 0s. 11d, equivalent to £3,686,193 in 2023.

[ 105 ] [ 106 ] Personality [ edit ] Engels in 1868 [ 107 ] Engels's interests included poetry, fox hunting and hosting regular Sunday parties for London's left-wing intelligentsia where, as one regular put it, "no one left before two or three in the morning". His stated personal motto was "take it easy" while "jollity" was listed as his favourite virtue.

[ 108 ] Of Engels's personality and appearance, Robert Heilbroner described him in The Worldly Philosophers as "tall and rather elegant, he had the figure of a man who liked to fence and to ride to hounds and who had once swum the Weser River four times without a break" as well as having been "gifted with a quick wit and facile mind" and of a gay temperament, being able to "stutter in twenty languages". He had a great enjoyment of wine and other "bourgeois pleasures". Engels favoured forming romantic relationships with women of the proletariat and found a long-term partner in a working-class woman named Mary Burns , although they never married. After her death, Engels was romantically involved with her younger sister Lydia Burns .

[ 109 ] Historian and former Labour MP Tristram Hunt , author of The Frock-Coated Communist: The Revolutionary Life of Friedrich Engels , [ 7 ] argues that Engels "almost certainly was, in other words, the kind of man Stalin would have had shot".

[ 30 ] Hunt sums up the disconnect between Engels's personality and the Soviet Union which later utilised his works, stating: This great lover of the good life, passionate advocate of individuality, and enthusiastic believer in literature, culture, art and music as an open forum could never have acceded to the Soviet Communism of the 20th century, all the Stalinist claims of his paternity notwithstanding.

[ 7 ] [ 30 ] As to the religious persuasion attributable to Engels, Hunt writes: In that sense the latent rationality of Christianity comes to permeate the everyday experience of the modern world—its values are now variously incarnated in the family, civil society, and the state. What Engels particularly embraced in all of this was an idea of modern pantheism , or, rather, pandeism , a merging of divinity with progressing humanity, a happy dialectical synthesis that freed him from the fixed oppositions of the pietist ethos of devout longing and estrangement. 'Through Strauss I have now entered on the straight road to Hegelianism... The Hegelian idea of God has already become mine, and thus I am joining the ranks of the "modern pantheists",' Engels wrote in one of his final letters to the soon-to-be-discarded Graebers [Wilhelm and Friedrich, priest trainees and former classmates of Engels].

[ 7 ] Engels was a polyglot and was able to write and speak in numerous languages, including Russian, Italian, Portuguese, Irish, Spanish, Polish, French, English, German and the Milanese dialect .

[ 110 ] Legacy [ edit ] Part of a series on Marxism Outline Theoretical works Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844 The Condition of the Working Class in England The German Ideology Wage Labour and Capital The Communist Manifesto The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte Grundrisse Capital Critique of the Gotha Programme Dialectics of Nature The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State What Is to Be Done?

The Accumulation of Capital Philosophical Notebooks Terrorism and Communism The State and Revolution Essays on Marx's Theory of Value History and Class Consciousness Prison Notebooks The Black Jacobins On Practice Dialectic of Enlightenment A Critique of Soviet Economics The Long Revolution Guerrilla Warfare The Wretched of the Earth Reading Capital The Society of the Spectacle Pedagogy of the Oppressed Ideology and Ideological State Apparatuses Ways of Seeing How Europe Underdeveloped Africa Social Justice and the City Women, Race and Class Marxism and the Oppression of Women Imagined Communities Hegemony and Socialist Strategy The Sublime Object of Ideology Time, Labor and Social Domination The Age of Extremes The Origin of Capitalism Empire Late Victorian Holocausts Change the World Without Taking Power Caliban and the Witch An Introduction to the Three Volumes of Karl Marx's Capital Capitalist Realism Capital in the Anthropocene Philosophy Alienation Dialectical materialism Ideology Philosophy of nature Philosophy in the Soviet Union Reification Marxist ethics Critique of political economy Capital ( accumulation ) Crisis theory Commodity Concrete and abstract labor Factors of production Falling profit-rate tendency Means of production Mode of production Capitalist Socialist Productive forces Scientific socialism State monopoly capitalism Surplus product Socially necessary labour time Value-form Wage labour Sociology Base and superstructure Bourgeoisie Class Class consciousness Classless society Commodity fetishism Communist society Critical theory Cultural hegemony Democracy Dictatorship of the proletariat Soviet Radical Democratic centralism Exploitation False consciousness Human nature Immiseration Imperialism Lumpenproletariat Metabolic rift Proletariat Private property Relations of production State theory Working class History Class struggle Historical determinism Primitive accumulation Proletarian revolution World revolution Theory of historical trajectory Aspects Aesthetics Archaeology Criminology Cultural Marxism Cultural Studies Ethics Film theory Geography Historiography Literary criticism Marxism and religion Sociology Philosophy Common variants Structural Autonomist Marxism–Leninism Guevarism Maoism Neo-Gramscianism Regulation school Third-worldist Titoism Trotskyism Hegelian Budapest School Frankfurt School Humanist Neue Marx-Lektüre Open Praxis School Both Black Classical Communization Feminist Leninism Neo Post Western Other variants Analytical Austromarxism Hispanic marxism Centrist Eurocommunism Instrumental Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Nkrumaism Political Revisionist Situationist Socialism with Chinese characteristics Wertkritik People Marx Engels Morris Lafargue Rubin Kautsky Plekhanov Du Bois Connolly Lenin Luxemburg Liebknecht Kollontai Stalin Trotsky Grossman Zinoviev Bloch Lukács Korsch Bukharin Ho Serge Gramsci Pashukanis Bordiga Benjamin Mao Basu Mariátegui Horkheimer Dutt Brecht Marcuse Kalecki Fromm Cox Lefebvre James Adorno Padmore Sartre Deutscher Beauvoir Sombart Nkrumah Sweezy Emmanuel Hill Bettelheim Draper Jones Hobsbawm Althusser Hinton Williams Freire Cunhal Lara Mandel Sivanandan Miliband Cabral Thompson Bauman Fanon Berger Castro Guevara Liebman Heller Guattari Mészáros O'Connor Wallerstein Mies Tronti Debord Amin Hall Nairn Parenti Negri Jameson Dussel Harvey Laclau Bahro Poulantzas Vattimo Badiou Harnecker Altvater Ismail Anderson Löwy Vogel Sison Easthope Rancière Berman Przeworski Cohen Therborn Losurdo Postone Rodney Bannerji Spivak Newton Wood Federici Wolff Balibar Eagleton Kurz Rowbotham Mouffe Geras Brenner Davis Massey Cleaver Bishop Haraway Panitch Clarke Jessop Davis Wright Fraser Burawoy Holloway Rose Screpanti Tamás Hampton Cano Žižek Berardi Sankara Hennessy McDonnell Douzinas Roediger Foster West Ghandy Marcos Heinrich Prashad Kelley Dean Lordon Linera Fisher Li Prestes Coulthard Malm Seymour Toscano Bhattacharya Moufawad-Paul Srnicek Horvat Hamza Saito Journals Antipode Capital & Class Capitalism Nature Socialism Constellations Critique: Journal of Socialist Theory Historical Materialism Mediations Monthly Review New Left Review Race & Class Rethinking Marxism Science & Society Socialist Register Related topics 21st-century communist theorists Anarchism Creative destruction Conflict theory Criticism of Marxism Communism Communalism Economic determinism History of communism Left-wing politics Marxian economics New Left Old Left Municipalism Political ecology Socialism Authoritarian Democratic Market Reformist Revolutionary Social Utopian Left-wing populism Universal class Vulgar Marxism Economism Worker cooperative Workers' council Communism portal Economics portal Philosophy portal Politics portal Socialism portal v t e In his biography of Engels, Vladimir Lenin wrote: "After his friend Karl Marx (who died in 1883), Engels was the finest scholar and teacher of the modern proletariat in the whole civilised world. [...] In their scientific works, Marx and Engels were the first to explain that socialism is not the invention of dreamers, but the final aim and necessary result of the development of the productive forces in modern society. All recorded history hitherto has been a history of class struggle, of the succession of the rule and victory of certain social classes over others." [ 111 ] According to Paul Kellogg , there is "some considerable controversy" regarding "the place of Frederick Engels in the canon of ' classical Marxism '". While some such as Terrell Carver dispute "Engels' claim that Marx agreed with the views put forward in Engels' major theoretical work, Anti-Dühring ", others such as E. P. Thompson "identified a tendency to make 'old Engels into a whipping boy, and to impugn him any sign that once chooses to impugn subsequent Marxsisms ' ".

[ 93 ] Tristram Hunt argues that Engels has become a convenient scapegoat , too easily blamed for the state crimes of Communist regimes such as China, the Soviet Union and those in Africa and Southeast Asia, among others. Hunt writes that "Engels is left holding the bag of 20th century ideological extremism" while Karl Marx "is rebranded as the acceptable, post–political seer of global capitalism ".

[ 30 ] Hunt largely exonerates Engels, stating that "[i]n no intelligible sense can Engels or Marx bear culpability for the crimes of historical actors carried out generations later, even if the policies were offered up in their honor".

[ 30 ] Andrew Lipow describes Marx and Engels as "the founders of modern revolutionary democratic socialism".

[ 112 ] While admitting the distance between Marx and Engels on one hand and Joseph Stalin on the other, some writers such as Robert Service are less charitable, noting that the anarchist Mikhail Bakunin predicted the oppressive potential of their ideas, arguing that "[i]t is a fallacy that Marxism's flaws were exposed only after it was tried out in power. [...] [Marx and Engels] were centralisers. While talking about 'free associations of producers', they advocated discipline and hierarchy".

[ 113 ] Paul Thomas, of the University of California, Berkeley , claims that while Engels had been the most important and dedicated facilitator and diffuser of Marx's writings, he significantly altered Marx's intents as he held, edited and released them in a finished form and commentated on them. Engels attempted to fill gaps in Marx's system and extend it to other fields. In particular, Engels is said to have stressed historical materialism , assigning it a character of scientific discovery and a doctrine, forming Marxism as such. A case in point is Anti-Dühring which both supporters and detractors of socialism treated as an encompassing presentation of Marx's thought. While in his extensive correspondence with German socialists, Engels modestly presented his own secondary place in the couple's intellectual relationship and always emphasised Marx's outstanding role, Russian communists such as Lenin raised Engels up with Marx and conflated their thoughts as if they were necessarily congruous. Soviet Marxists then developed this tendency to the state doctrine of dialectical materialism .

[ 114 ] A 1985 1 rouble coin from the Soviet Union commemorating the 165th anniversary of Engels' birth Since 1931, Engels has had a Russian city named after him— Engels, Saratov Oblast . It served as the capital of the Volga German Republic within Soviet Russia and as part of Saratov Oblast . A town named Marx is located 50 kilometres (30 miles) northeast.

[ 115 ] In July 2017, as part of the Manchester International Festival , a Soviet-era statue of Engels was installed by sculptor Phil Collins at Tony Wilson Place in Manchester .

[ 116 ] It was transported from the village of Mala Pereshchepina in Eastern Ukraine , after the statue had been deposed from its central position in the village in the wake of laws outlawing communist symbols in Ukraine introduced in 2015. In recognition of the important influence Manchester had on his work, the 3.5-metre statue now stands on Manchester's First Street .

[ 117 ] [ 118 ] The installation of what was originally an instrument of propaganda drew criticism from Kevin Bolton in The Guardian .

[ 119 ] The Friedrich Engels Guards Regiment (also known as NVA Guard Regiment 1) was a special guard unit of the East German National People's Army (NVA). The guard regiment was established in 1962 from parts of the Hugo Eberlein Guards Regiment and given the title "Friedrich Engels" in 1970.

[ according to whom?

] Friedrich Engels Guard Regiment , East Berlin, 1990 In Brighton and Hove there is a Bus named after Engels, due to his love of the Eastbourne as a holiday resort and ashes being scattered in the city .

[ 120 ] Influences [ edit ] According to Norman Levine, in spite of his criticism of the utopian socialists , Engels's beliefs were influenced by the French socialist Charles Fourier . From Fourier, he derives four main points that characterise the social conditions of a communist state. The first point maintains that every individual would be able to fully develop their talents by eliminating the specialisation of production. Without specialisation, every individual would be permitted to exercise any vocation of their choosing for as long or as little as they would like. If talents permitted it, one could be a baker for a year and an engineer the next. The second point builds upon the first, as with the ability of workers to cycle through different jobs of their choosing, the fundamental basis of the social division of labour is destroyed and the social division of labour will disappear as a result. If anyone can be employed at any job that they wish, then there are clearly no longer any divisions or barriers to entry for labour, otherwise, such fluidity between entirely different jobs would not exist. The third point continues from the second as once the social division of labour is gone, the division of social classes based on property ownership will fade with it. If the labour division puts a man in charge of a farm, that farmer owns the productive resources of that farm. The same applies to the ownership of a factory or a bank. Without labour division, no single social class may claim exclusive rights to a particular means of production since the absence of labour division allows all to use it. Finally, the fourth point concludes that the elimination of social classes destroys the sole purpose of the state and it will cease to exist. As Engels stated in his own writing, the only purpose of the state is to abate the effects of class antagonisms. With the elimination of social classes based on property, the state becomes obsolete and a communist society, at least in the eyes of Engels, is achieved.

[ 121 ] Major works [ edit ] The Holy Family (1844) [ edit ] Cover of the first edition of Engels's The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State , first published in 1884 Main article: The Holy Family (book) This book was written by Marx and Engels in November 1844. It is a critique of the Young Hegelians and their trend of thought which was very popular in academic circles at the time. The title was suggested by the publisher and is meant as a sarcastic reference to the Bauer Brothers and their supporters.

[ 122 ] The book created a controversy with much of the press and caused Bruno Bauer to attempt to refute the book in an article published in Wigand's [ de ] Vierteljahrsschrift in 1845. Bauer claimed that Marx and Engels misunderstood what he was trying to say. Marx later replied to his response with his own article published in the journal Gesellschaftsspiegel [ de ] in January 1846. Marx also discussed the argument in chapter 2 of The German Ideology .

[ 122 ] The Condition of the Working Class in England (1845) [ edit ] Main article: The Condition of the Working Class in England A study of the deprived conditions of the working class in Manchester and Salford, based on Engels's personal observations. The work also contains seminal thoughts on the state of socialism and its development. Originally published in German and only translated into English in 1887, the work initially had little impact in England; however, it was very influential with historians of British industrialisation throughout the twentieth century.

[ 123 ] The Peasant War in Germany (1850) [ edit ] Main article: The Peasant War in Germany An account of the early 16th-century uprising known as the German Peasants' War , with a comparison with the recent revolutionary uprisings of 1848–1849 across Europe.

[ 124 ] Herr Eugen Dühring's Revolution in Science (1878) [ edit ] Main article: Anti-Dühring Popularly known as Anti-Dühring , this book is a detailed critique of the philosophical positions of Eugen Dühring , a German philosopher and critic of Marxism. In the course of replying to Dühring, Engels reviews recent advances in science and mathematics seeking to demonstrate the way in which the concepts of dialectics apply to natural phenomena. Many of these ideas were later developed in the unfinished work, Dialectics of Nature . Three chapters of Anti-Dühring were later edited and published under the separate title, Socialism: Utopian and Scientific .

[ citation needed ] Socialism: Utopian and Scientific (1880) [ edit ] Main article: Socialism: Utopian and Scientific In this work, one of the best-selling socialist books of the era, [ 125 ] Engels briefly described and analyzed the ideas of notable utopian socialists such as Charles Fourier and Robert Owen . Engels pointed out their strong points and shortcomings, and provided an explanation of the scientific socialist framework for the understanding of capitalism, and an outline of the progression of social and economic development from the perspective of historical materialism .

[ citation needed ] Dialectics of Nature (1883) [ edit ] Main article: Dialectics of Nature Dialectics of Nature (German: "Dialektik der Natur") is an unfinished 1883 work by Engels that applies Marxist ideas, particularly those of dialectical materialism, to science. It was first published in the Soviet Union in 1925.

[ 126 ] The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State (1884) [ edit ] Main article: The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State In this work, Engels argues that the family is an ever-changing institution that has been shaped by capitalism. It contains a historical view of the family in relation to issues of class, female subjugation and private property .

Tristram Hunt describes Engels as a pioneering feminist and as "the intellectual architect of socialist feminism", and according to him, "Engels' relevance rests on...

The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State ." Engels wrote that   in primeval societies women were treated with a high degree of respect and took major social roles, but this changed drastically with the development of private property and monogamic family; in times contemporary to Engels, monogamic family was underpinned by capitalism, what asserted the suppression of women's rights.

[ 127 ] [ 128 ] Notes [ edit ] ^ Also sometimes spelt in English as Frederick Engels [ 2 ] References [ edit ] ^ a b Norman Levine, Divergent Paths: The Hegelian Foundations of Marx's Method , Lexington Books, 2006, p. 92: "the Young never graduated from the gymnasium, never went to university..." ^ For the English use of "Frederick Engels" see for instance: Biographies of Marx and Engels at marxists.org ^ Wells, John (3 April 2008).

Longman Pronunciation Dictionary (3rd ed.). Pearson Longman.

ISBN 978-1-4058-8118-0 .

^ "Engels" .

Random House Webster's Unabridged Dictionary .

^ Merriam-Webster, Engels .

^ A copy of Friedrich Engels's birth certificate appears on page 577 of the Collected Works of Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels: Volume 2 (New York: International Publishers, 1975).

^ a b c d e f Hunt, Tristram (2009).

The Frock-Coated Communist: The Revolutionary Life of Friedrich Engels . Metropolitan/Henry Holt & Co.

ISBN 9780805080254 .

OCLC 263983621 .

^ A copy of Friedrich Engels's baptism certificate appears on page 580 of the Collected Works of Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels: Volume 2 (New York: International Publishers, 1975).

^ "Friedrich Engels Facts in Encyclopedia of World Biography" . The Gale Group, Inc . Retrieved 8 January 2019 .

^ a b c d e f "Lenin: Friedrich Engels" . Marxists.org . Retrieved 13 February 2010 .

^ a b Tucker, Robert C.

The Marx-Engels Reader , p. xv ^ Progress Publishers.

"Preface by Progress Publishers" . Marxists.org . Retrieved 13 February 2010 .

^ "Footnotes to Volume 1 of Marx Engels Collected Works" . Marxists.org. 15 November 1941 . Retrieved 13 February 2010 .

^ Gemkow 1972 , p. 53.

^ Henderson 1976 , p. 9.

^ Friedrich Engels.

"Letters of Marx and Engels, 1845" . Marxists.org . Retrieved 13 February 2010 .

^ Brooks-Pollock, Tom (11 March 2014).

"Ten things Manchester gets the credit for when really it should be Salford" .

Manchester Evening News . Retrieved 31 March 2020 .

^ a b c d "Biography on Engels" . Marxists.org . Retrieved 13 February 2010 .

^ a b "Legacies – Engels in Manchester" . BBC. p. 1 . Retrieved 13 February 2010 .

^ Wheen, Francis Karl Marx: A Life , p. 75.

^ Gemkow 1972 , p. 53–54.

^ Edmund Wilson, To the Finland Station: A Study in the Writing and Acting of History (1940) ^ Schmidtgall 1981 , p. 61.

^ a b "Legacies – Engels in Manchester" .

BBC . p. 2 . Retrieved 13 February 2010 .

^ Whitfield 1988 .

^ Carver, Terrell (2003).

Engels: A Very Short Introduction .

Oxford University Press . pp.

71 –72.

ISBN 978-0-19-280466-2 .

^ Draper, Hal (July 1970).

"Marx and Engels on Women's Liberation" .

International Socialism . Retrieved 29 November 2011 .

^ Mary Gabriel, Love and Capital: Karl and Jenny Marx and the Birth of a Revolution (Hachette, 2011).

^ " Outlines of a Critique of Political Economy ," in marxists.org ; see also: Collected Works of Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels: Volume 3 ( International Publishers : New York, 1975), pp. 418–445.

^ a b c d e f g Garner, Dwight (18 August 2009).

"Fox Hunter, Party Animal, Leftist Warrior" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 31 August 2020 .

^ The Condition of the Working Class in England , in the Collected Works of Marx and Engels: Volume 4 (International Publishers: New York, 1975) pp. 295–596.

^ a b c "Friedrich Engels in Salford" .

Salford Star .

^ Marx, Karl (1880).

"Introduction to the French Edition of Engels" .

Marxists Internet Archive . Archived from the original on 14 March 2004 . Retrieved 13 February 2010 .

^ Whitfield, Roy (1988) "The Double Life of Friedrich Engels." In: Manchester Region History Review , vol. 2, no. 1, 1988 ^ Henderson 1976 .

^ Dash, Mike (1 August 2013).

"How Friedrich Engels' Radical Lover Helped Him Father Socialism: Mary Burns exposed the capitalist's son to the plight of the working people of Manchester" .

Smithsonian Institution .

^ Green 2008 .

^ Fedoseyev 1973 , pp. 41–42, 49.

^ Fedoseyev 1973 , p. 71.

^ Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels, Collected Works: Volume 4, p. 424.

^ Fedoseyev 1973 , pp. 82–83.

^ The Holy Family , Collected Works of Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels: Volume 4 , pp. 3–211.

^ Fedoseyev 1973 , p. 60.

^ Fedoseyev 1973 , pp. 57–58.

^ Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels, "Letter from Marx to Ruge" (15 January 1845) contained in Collected Works: Volume 38 , p. 15.

^ a b Gemkow 1972 , p. 625.

^ German Ideology is located in the Collected Works of Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels pp. 19–539.

^ Gemkow 1972 , p. 101.

^ Thomson, Emma (2012).

Flanders : Northern Belgium : the Bradt travel guide . Chalfont St. Peter: Bradt Travel Guides. p. 92.

ISBN 978-1-84162-377-1 .

OCLC 810098009 .

^ Isaiah Berlin, Karl Marx: His Life and Environment ( Oxford University Press : Oxford, England, 1963) pp. 159–160.

^ Isaiah Berlin, Karl Marx: His Life and Environment p. 160.

^ Fedoseyev 1973 , pp. 86–88.

^ Gary Tedman, Aesthetics & Alienation (Zero Books: Hampshire, 1973) ^ Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels, Manifesto of the Communist Party contained in the Collected Works Volume 6 pp. 477–517.

^ a b Elisabeth Engels's letter contained at No. 6 of the Appendix, Collected Works of Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels: Volume 38 (International Publishers: New York, 1982) pp. 540–541.

^ Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels, "Banquet in Gürzenich" contained in the Collected Works: Volume 9 (International Publishers: New York, 1977) p. 490.

^ a b c Elisabeth Engels's letter to Friedrich Engels contained at No. 8 of the Appendix in the Collected Works of Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels: Volume 38 , p. 543.

^ Friedrich Engels letter to Karl Marx dated 6 July 1851 and contained at No. 186 of the Collected Works of Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels: Volume 38 , p. 378.

^ Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels, "The Magyar Struggle" contained in Collected Works: Volume 8 , pp. 227–238.

^ See Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels, Collected Works: Volume 8 , pp. 451–480 and Volume 9 , pp. 9–463.

^ "Engels, Friedrich (encyclopedia)" . Marxists.org . Retrieved 13 February 2010 .

^ Isaiah Berlin, Karl Marx: His Life and Environment , 4th ed. 1978, New York and Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1996, p. 130, ISBN 978-0-19-510326-7 .

^ Mike Rapport, 1848 Year of Revolution , London: Little Brown, 2008, p. 342, ISBN 978-0-316-72965-9 .

^ Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels, "Elberfeld" contained in the Collected Works: Volume 9 (International Publishers: New York, 1977) p. 447.

^ Gemkow 1972 , p. 205.

^ "Letter from Engels to Jenny Marx" (25 July 1849) contained in the Collected Works: Volume 38 pp. 202–204.

^ Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels, Collected Works: Volume 9 , p. 524, ^ Friedrich Engels letter contained at No. 183 of the Collected Works of Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels: Volume 38 , p. 370.

^ Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels, Collected Works: Volume 10 , p. 147.

^ See the "Letter from Engels to George Julian Harney" dated 5 October 1849, in the Collected Works of Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels: Volume 38 p. 217.

^ Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels, "Letter from Engels to George Julian Harney (5 October 1849) Collected Works: Volume 38 p. 217.

^ Gemkow 1972 , p. 213.

^ "Legacies – Engels in Manchester" . BBC. p. 4 . Retrieved 13 February 2010 .

^ "Legacies – Engels in Manchester" . BBC. p. 5 . Retrieved 13 February 2010 .

^ "The Peasant War in Germany" and s contained in the Collected Works of Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels: Volume 10 pp. 397–482.

^ The article called "The Campaign for the German Imperial Constitution" is contained in the Collected Works of Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels: Volume 10 p. 147 ^ The article "On the Slogan of the Abolition of the State and the German 'Friends of Anarchy'" is contained in the Collected Works of Marx and Engels: Volume 10 p. 486.

^ The pamphlet "Conditions and Prospects of a War of the Holy Alliance against France" is contained in the Collected Works of Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels: Volume 10 p. 542.

^ Friedrich Engels's letter to Karl Marx dated 3 December 1851 contained in the "Collected Works of Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels: Volume 38", p. 503.

^ See note 517 located at p. 635 in the "Collected Works of Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels: Volume 38.

^ Karl Marx, "The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte" contained in the Collected Works of Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels: Volume 11 , p. 98.

^ Karl Marx, "The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte" contained in the Collected Works of Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels: Volume 11 , p. 103.

^ Letter from Engels to Joseph Weydemeyer dated 12 April 1853, contained in the Collected Works of Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels: Volume 39 (New York: International Publishers, 1983) pp. 305–306.

^ W. Bruce Lincoln, The Romanovs: Autocrats of All the Russias (New York: Dial Press, 1981) pp. 408–413.

^ See the letter from Karl Marx to Vera Zasulich contained in the Collected Works of Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels: Volume 46 , (New York: International Press, 1992), pp. 71–72, and Engels's "Preface to the Russian Edition of 1882" in The Communist Manifesto .

^ Gareth Stedman Jones, note on Engels's "Preface to the Russian Edition of 1882" in The Communist Manifesto (London: Penguin Books, 2002).

^ Plaque #213 on Open Plaques – Accessed July 2010 ^ "Photos of Marx's Residence(s)" . Marxists.org . Retrieved 13 February 2010 .

^ Henderson, William Otto (1976).

The Life of Friedrich Engels . Psychology Press. p. 567.

ISBN 978-0-7146-3040-3 .

^ Samuel Hollander (2011).

Friedrich Engels and Marxian Political Economy . Cambridge University Press. p. 358.

ISBN 978-1-139-49844-9 .

^ Gray, Daniel; Johnson, Elliott; Walker, David (2014).

Historical Dictionary of Marxism . Historical Dictionaries of Religions, Philosophies, and Movements (2nd ed.). Lanham, Maryland: Rowman & Littlefield. pp. 119–120.

ISBN 9781442237988 .

^ Steger 1999 , pp. 181–196.

^ a b Kellogg, Paul (Summer 1991). "Engels and the Roots of 'Revisionism': A Re-Evaluation".

Science & Society . Guilford Press.

55 (2): 158–174.

JSTOR 40403133 .

^ Daniels, Robert Vincent (1969) [1960].

The Conscience of the Revolution, Communist Opposition in Russia . New York: Simon & Schuster. p. 7.

ISBN 9780671203870 .

^ Lowell, David W. (1984).

From Marx to Lenin: An Evaluation of Marx's Responsibility for Soviet Authoritarianism (reprinted ed.). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. p. 83.

ISBN 9780521261883 .

^ a b Steger 1999 , p. 182.

^ Steger 1999 , p. 186.

^ Engels, Friedrich (2004).

Collected Works .

50 . New York: International Publishers. p. 86.

^ van Holthoon 2022 , p. 91.

^ a b van Holthoon 2022 , p. 92–94.

^ Płoski, Stanisław (1935), "Fryderyk Engels. Życie, prace i walki. W 40-tą rocznicę zgonu" (PDF) , Lewy Tor (13): 19– 20 ^ Gabriel, Mary (14 September 2011).

Love and Capital: Karl and Jenny Marx and the Birth of a Revolution . Little, Brown.

ISBN 9780316191371 . Retrieved 8 May 2020 – via Google Books.

^ a b "Letters: Marx-Engels Correspondence 1895" . Marxists.org . Retrieved 13 February 2010 .

^ Kerrigan, Michael (1998).

Who Lies Where – A guide to famous graves . London: Fourth Estate Limited. p.

156 .

ISBN 978-1-85702-258-2 .

^ UK Retail Price Index inflation figures are based on data from Clark, Gregory (2017).

"The Annual RPI and Average Earnings for Britain, 1209 to Present (New Series)" .

MeasuringWorth . Retrieved 7 May 2024 .

^ "Engels, Frederick" .

probatesearchservice.gov . UK Government. 1895 . Retrieved 14 June 2020 .

^ Manchester Photographers by Gillian Read. Ed. Royal Photographic Society's Historical Group, 1982: "George Lester, 51, King Street, Manchester (1863–1868). See the photo in Jenny Marx album too.

^ Engels, Friedrich.

"Friedrich Engels's "Confession" " .

Marxists Internet Archive . Archived from the original on 27 April 2014 . Retrieved 25 October 2014 .

^ Robert L.heilbroner (1953).

The Worldly Philosophers (the Great Economic Thinkers) .

^ Paul Lafargue; Jacques Bonhomme (15 August 1905).

"Friedrich Engels" .

Marxists Internet Archive (from The Social Democrat journal) . Marxists Internet Archive . Retrieved 15 April 2013 .

^ Vladimir Ilyich Lenin.

"Friedrich Engels" . Marxists.org . Retrieved 25 January 2011 .

^ Lipow, Arthur (1991).

Authoritarian Socialism in America: Edward Bellamy and the Nationalist Movement . University of California Press. p. 1.

ISBN 9780520075436 . "We are not among those communists who are out to destroy personal liberty, who wish to turn the world into one huge barrack or into a gigantic workhouse. There certainly are some communists who, with an easy conscience, refuse to countenance personal liberty and would like to shuffle it out of the world because they consider that it is a hindrance to complete harmony. But we have no desire to exchange freedom for equality. We are convinced that in no social order will freedom be assured as in a society based upon communal ownership. Thus wrote the editors of the Journal of the Communist League in 1847, under the direct influence of the founders of modern revolutionary democratic socialism, Karl Marx and Frederick Engels." ^ Robert Service (2007).

Comrades: A World History of Communism . London: Macmillan. p. 37 ^ Thomas, Paul (1991), "Critical Reception: Marx then and now", in Carver, Terrell (ed.), The Cambridge Companion to Marx , Cambridge University Press, pp.

36– 42 ^ "Friedrich Engels' beard inspires climbing sculpture in Salford" .

BBC News . 9 December 2014 . Retrieved 31 January 2017 .

^ "Watch as Friedrich Engels statue is put together in Manchester city centre" .

Manchester Evening News . 14 July 2017 . Retrieved 16 December 2017 .

^ "Spotlight on Statues: Friedrich Engels, First Street" .

Manchester's Finest . 23 July 2018 . Retrieved 23 August 2021 .

^ "Phil Collins: why I took a Soviet statue of Engels across Europe to Manchester" .

The Guardian . 30 June 2017 . Retrieved 23 August 2021 .

^ Bolton, Kevin (19 July 2017).

"Manchester has a Soviet statue of Engels. Shame no one asked the city's Ukrainians" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 6 January 2018 .

^ "Brighton & Hove Bus and Coach Company Limited" .

history.buses.co.uk . Retrieved 19 February 2025 .

^ Levine, Norman (August 1985). "Lenin's Utopianism".

Studies in Soviet Thought .

30 (2): 101– 102.

doi : 10.1007/BF01043754 .

JSTOR 20100033 .

S2CID 144891961 .

^ a b "The Holy Family by Marx and Engels" .

Marxists Internet Archive . Retrieved 13 February 2010 .

^ Griffin, Emma.

"The 'industrial revolution': interpretations from 1830 to the present" . Retrieved 9 March 2013 .

^ The Peasant War in Germany, trans. Moissaye J. Olgin (New York: International Publishers, 1966).

^ Engels, Friedrich (1970) [1892].

"Introduction" .

Socialism: Utopian and Scientific . Marx/Engels Selected Works. Vol. 3.

Progress Publishers .

From this French text, a Polish and a Spanish edition were prepared. In 1883, our German friends brought out the pamphlet in the original language. Italian, Russian, Danish, Dutch, and Roumanian translations, based upon the German text, have since been published. Thus, the present English edition, this little book circulates in 10 languages. I am not aware that any other Socialist work, not even our Communist Manifesto of 1848, or Marx's Capital, has been so often translated. In Germany, it has had four editions of about 20,000 copies in all.

Cited in Carver, Terrell (2003).

Engels: A Very Short Introduction .

Oxford University Press . p.

56 .

ISBN 978-0-19-280466-2 .

and Thomas, Paul (1991), "Critical Reception: Marx then and now", in Carver, Terrell (ed.), The Cambridge Companion to Marx , Cambridge University Press ^ Engels.

"1883-Dialectics of Nature-Index" .

marxists.anu.edu.au . Retrieved 4 May 2018 .

^ Hunt, Tristram (28 April 2009).

"Feminist friend or foe?" .

The Guardian .

^ "Friedrich Engels was not a hypocrite" .

The Guardian . 6 May 2009.

Sources [ edit ] Carver, Terrell (2003).

Engels: A Very Short Introduction .

Oxford University Press .

ISBN 978-0-19-280466-2 .

Carver, Terrell (1989).

Friedrich Engels: His Life and Thought . London: Palgrave Macmillan.

ISBN 978-0312045012 .

Fedoseyev, Petr Nikolaevich; et al. (multiple) (1973).

Karl Marx: A Biography .

Progress Publishers .

Fedoseev, Petr Nikolaevich; et al. (multiple) (1989).

Karl Marx: A Biography .

Progress Publishers .

ISBN 5-01-000318-X .

Gemkow, Heinrich; et al. (multiple) (1972), Friedrich Engels: A Biography , Dresden: Zeit im Bild Green, John (2008).

Engels: A Revolutionary Life . London: Artery Publications.

ISBN 978-0-9558228-0-3 .

Henderson, William Otto (1976).

The Life of Friedrich Engels . London: Cass.

ISBN 0714640026 .

Hollander, Samuel (2011).

Friedrich Engels and Marxian Political Economy . New York: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-1-139-49844-9 .

Hunt, Tristram (2009).

The Frock-Coated Communist: The Revolutionary Life of Friedrich Engels . London: Allen Lane.

ISBN 978-0713998528 .

Schmidtgall, Harry (1981), Friedrich Engels' Manchester-Aufenthalt 1842–1844. Soziale Bewegungen und politische Diskussionen. Mit Auszügen aus Jakob Venedeys England-Buch (1845) und unbekannten Engels-Dokumenten , Schriften aus dem Karl-Marx-Haus, 25, Trier: Karl-Marx-Haus Steger, Manfred B.

(1999), "Friedrich Engels and the Origins of German Revisionism: Another Look", in Carver, Terrell; Steger, Manfred B. (eds.), Engels After Marx , University Park, PA: Pennsylvania State University , pp.

181– 196, ISBN 9780271018911 van Holthoon, Frits (2022), "Friedrich Engels and the Revolution", in Backhaus, Jürgen Georg; Chaloupek, Günther; Frambach, Hans A. (eds.), 200 Years of Friedrich Engels: A Critical Assessment of His Life and Scholarship , The European Heritage in Economics and the Social Sciences, vol. 25, Cham: Springer, pp.

91– 105, doi : 10.1007/978-3-031-10115-1_7 , ISBN 978-3-031-10114-4 Whitfield, Roy (1988), Friedrich Engels in Manchester: the Search for a Shadow , Manchester: Working Class Movement Library, ISBN 0906932211 Further reading [ edit ] Studies [ edit ] Blackledge, Paul (2019).

Friedrich Engels and Modern Social and Political Theory . New York: SUNY Press.

ISBN 978-1438476872 .

Carlton, Grace (1965).

Friedrich Engels: The Shadow Prophet . London: Pall Mall Press.

ASIN B0000CMSPY .

Carver, Terrell (2020), Engels before Marx , Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan Coates, Zelda Kahan (1920), The Life and Work of Friedrich Engels , London: Communist Party of Great Britain Kangal, Kaan (2020), Friedrich Engels and the Dialectics of Nature , Cham: Palgrave Macmillan Kuroda, Kan'ichi (2000), Engels' Political Economy: On the Difference in Philosophy between Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels , Tokyo: Akane Books, ISBN 4899890494 Liedman, Sven-Eric (2022), The Game of Contradictions: The Philosophy of Friedrich Engels and Nineteenth Century Science , Boston: Brill Mayer, Gustav (1936) [1934]. Crossman, R.H.S. (ed.).

Friedrich Engels: A Biography . Translated by Gilbert Highet; Helen Highet. Alfred A. Knopf.

ASIN B0006AN5IS .

Riazanov, David (1927), Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels: An Introduction to Their Lives and Work , New York: International Publishers Rigby, Stephen Henry (1992), Engels and the Formation of Marxism: History, Dialectics and Revolution , Manchester: Manchester University Press, ISBN 0719035309 Rose, Margaret A. (1978), Reading the Young Marx and Engels: Poetry, Parody, and the Censor , London: Croom Helm , ISBN 0856647926 Commentaries on Engels [ edit ] Royle, Camilla (2020), A Rebel's Guide to Engels , London: Bookmarks.

ISBN 9781912926541 "Engels showed how humans change the world" .

Socialist Worker (Britain) . 14 January 2020.

Fiction works [ edit ] Square Enix (2017), Nier: Automata . Where a machine named Engels tries to overthrow the android species for the machines' sake.

Graphic novel [ edit ] A biographical German graphic novel called Engels – Unternehmer und Revolutionär ("Engels – Businessman and Revolutionary") was published in 2020.

ISBN 3948755493 External links [ edit ] This section's use of external links may not follow Wikipedia's policies or guidelines .

Please improve this article by removing excessive or inappropriate external links, and converting useful links where appropriate into footnote references .

( August 2020 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Friedrich Engels at Wikipedia's sister projects Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Data from Wikidata Marx/Engels Biographical Archive The Legend of Marx, or "Engels the founder" by Maximilien Rubel Reason in Revolt: Marxism and Modern Science Engels: The Che Guevara of his Day The Brave New World: Tristram Hunt On Marx and Engels' Revolutionary Vision German Biography from dhm.de Marx and Engels (1973).

Selected Works . Vol. 1. Moscow: Progress Publishers.

Marx and Engels (1973).

Selected Works . Vol. 2. Moscow: Progress Publishers.

Marx and Engels (1973).

Selected Works . Vol. 3. Moscow: Progress Publishers.

Marx and Engels (1982).

Selected Correspondence (third revised ed.). Moscow: Progress Publishers.

Frederick Engels: A Biography (Soviet work) Frederick Engels: A Biography (East German work) Engels was Right: Early Human Kinship was Matriliineal Archive of Karl Marx / Friedrich Engels Papers at the International Institute of Social History Friedrich Engels at the Marxists Internet Archive .

Works by Friedrich Engels at Project Gutenberg Works by or about Friedrich Engels at the Internet Archive Works by Friedrich Engels at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) Libcom.org/library Friedrich Engels archive Works by Friedrich Engels (in German) at Zeno.org Pathfinder Press Archived 7 November 2013 at the Wayback Machine Friedrich Engels, "On Rifled Cannon" , articles from the New York Tribune , April, May and June 1860, reprinted in Military Affairs 21, no. 4 (Winter 1957) ed. Morton Borden, 193–198.

Marx and Engels in their native German language Engels in Eastbourne – Commemorating the life, work and legacy of Friedrich Engels in Eastbourne Links to related articles v t e Karl Marx Family Heinrich Marx Henriette Pressburg Jenny von Westphalen Jenny Longuet Laura Marx Eleanor Marx Louise Juta Charles Longuet Paul Lafargue Edward Aveling Helene Demuth Biographies Karl Marx: The Story of His Life Karl Marx: His Life and Environment Karl Marx: His Life and Thought Films Die Deutschen Marx Reloaded The Young Karl Marx Miss Marx Memberships Communist League International Workingmen's Association Other cultural depictions Assassin's Creed Syndicate The Leader Karl Marx in Kalbadevi Marx in Soho Marx Returns " The Philosophers' Football Match " Tomb Statues " World Forum/Communist Quiz " Young Marx Related Friedrich Engels 2807 Karl Marx Opium of the people Timeline v t e Communism Concepts Anti-capitalism Class conflict Class consciousness Classless society Collective leadership Communist revolution Commune Communist society Critique of political economy Free association "From each according to his ability, to each according to his needs" Market abolitionism Proletarian internationalism Labour movement Social revolution Stateless society Wage slavery Workers' self-management World revolution Dictatorship of the proletariat Economics Planned economy Gift economy Common ownership Socialization (Marxism) Economic democracy Use value Variants Anarchist Crypto Marxism Leninist Libertarian Pre-Marxist Utopian Primitive Religious Christian Catholic World History Communist League First International Second International Third International Fourth International Fifth International Organisations Communist party list WPC WFTU WFDY IUS WIDF WFSW IOR People Mazdak More Meslier Babeuf Marx Engels Morris Kropotkin Malatesta Pannekoek Du Bois Lenin Luxemburg Kollontai Stalin Trotsky Lukács Thälmann Makhno Bukharin Ho Gramsci Tito Togliatti Benjamin Khrushchev Mao Pot Zhou James Padmore Sartre Hoxha Beauvoir Nkrumah Kim Hobsbawm Althusser Freire Pasolini Mandel Aidit Raja Fanon Castro Berger Guevara Guattari Debord Amin Berlinguer Negri Guzmán Badiou Sison Newton Ali Davis Holloway Hampton Žižek Sankara Öcalan Gordillo Gilmore Marcos Hardt Dean Graeber Lordon Kelley Fisher Prashad Hatherley Moufawad-Paul Saito By region Brazil Britain Cambodia Colombia France India Kerala Korea Nepal Peru Philippines Poland Russia Sumatra Vietnam Symbols Hammer and sickle Red flag (politics) Red star " The Internationale " " Workers of the world, unite!

" Criticism Anti-communism Communist propaganda Criticism of communist party rule Totalitarianism Criticism of Marxism Related topics 21st-century communist theorists Anti anti-communism Anti-communist mass killings Anti-fascism Communist state Communitarianism Crimes against humanity Genocide Cambodian genocide Holodomor Genocides committed by the Soviet Union Mass killings under communist regimes Internationalism Intentional community Left-wing politics Old Left New Left LGBTQ rights Marx's theory of alienation National communism Romania Red Scare Revolutionary socialism Socialist economics Socialist mode of production Trade union War communism Worker cooperative Communism portal Socialism portal v t e Socialism History - Outline Schools of thought 21st century Agrarian Communist Democratic Ethical Feminist Green Guild Labourism Syndicalism Liberal Market Marxian Nationalist Reformist Revolutionary Scientific Social democracy Utopian Fourierism Icarianism Owenism Saint-Simonianism Technocracy Libertarian ( from below ) Anarchism Collectivist Communist Free-market Left-wing laissez-faire Green Individualist Insurrectionary Magonism Mutualism Neozapatismo Platformism Communalism Social Syndicalist Left-libertarianism Libertarian Marxism Left communism Council communism Luxemburgism Mao-Spontex Trotskyism Pabloism Posadism Orthodox Third camp Authoritarian ( from above ) Barracks Nechayevism Blanquism Bolshevism Leninism Marxism–Leninism Brezhnevism Castroism Ceaușism Guevarism Ho Chi Minh Thought Hoxhaism Husakism Juche Kadarism Khrushchevism Maoism Dengism Maoism–Third Worldism Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Marxism–Leninism–Maoism–Gonzalo Thought Marxism–Leninism–Maoism–Prachanda Path Xi Jinping Thought Stalinism Neo-Stalinism National Tkachevism State Lassallism Religious Buddhist Christian anarchism communism Islamic Jewish Regional variants African African-Caribbean Arab Bolivarian Chinese Communist Nationalist Chiangist European Eurocommunism Indian Israeli Indonesian Melanesian Mexican Soviet In one country Real Sri Lankan Third World Yugoslav Key topics and issues Anti-revisionism Criticism of capitalism Criticism of socialism Critique of political economy Critique of work Class struggle Democracy Dictatorship of the proletariat Egalitarianism Equal liberty Equality of opportunity Equality of outcome History of anarchism History of communism History of socialism History of social democracy Impossibilism " The Internationale " Internationalism Socialist Internationals First International Second International Third International Fourth International Fifth International Socialist International Land reform Left-wing politics Mixed economy Mode of production Nanosocialism Nationalization Planned economy Post-capitalism Proletarian revolution Reformism Revisionism Socialisation of production Socialist economics Socialist market economy Socialist state State capitalism State-owned enterprise Trade union Welfare state Workers' council Concepts Adhocracy Basic income Calculation in kind Common ownership Cooperative ownership Decentralized planning Direct democracy Economic democracy Economic planning Equal opportunity Free association of producers Industrial democracy Labor-time calculation Labour voucher Organizational self-management Production for use Public ownership Social dividend Socialist mode of production Technocracy Workplace democracy People 16th c.

Tommaso Campanella Thomas More 18th c.

Gracchus Babeuf Louis Antoine de Saint-Just Victor d'Hupay Gabriel Bonnot de Mably Sylvain Maréchal Étienne-Gabriel Morelly 19th c.

Stephen Pearl Andrews Mikhail Bakunin John Goodwyn Barmby Enrico Barone August Bebel Edward Bellamy Eduard Bernstein Louis Blanc Louis Auguste Blanqui Philippe Buchez Georg Büchner Philippe Buonarroti Francisco Largo Caballero Étienne Cabet Edward Carpenter Nikolay Chernyshevsky James Connolly Victor Prosper Considerant Claire Démar Théodore Dézamy W. E. B. Du Bois Prosper Enfantin Friedrich Engels Charles Fourier Emma Goldman William Batchelder Greene Charles Hall Alexander Herzen Thomas Hodgskin Jean Jaurès Mother Jones Karl Kautsky Peter Kropotkin Paul Lafargue Ferdinand Lassalle Pyotr Lavrov Alexandre Ledru-Rollin Pierre Leroux Helen Macfarlane Errico Malatesta Karl Marx Louise Michel Nikolay Mikhaylovsky William Morris Robert Owen Antonie Pannekoek Giovanni Pascoli Constantin Pecqueur Georgi Plekhanov Pierre-Joseph Proudhon Luis Emilio Recabarren Henri de Saint-Simon Mikhail Saltykov-Shchedrin George Sand Friedrich Wilhelm Schulz Eugène Sue Lysander Spooner Fred M. Taylor William Thompson Pyotr Tkachev Benjamin Tucker Suzanne Voilquin Alfred Russel Wallace Josiah Warren Wilhelm Weitling Oscar Wilde 20th c.

Tariq Ali Salvador Allende Inejirō Asanuma Hafez al-Assad Clement Attlee Aung San Deng Xiaoping Jiang Zemin Henri Barbusse Jyoti Basu Simone de Beauvoir Walter Benjamin Tony Benn Léon Blum Grace Lee Boggs Murray Bookchin Bertolt Brecht Aristide Briand Nikolai Bukharin Cornelius Castoriadis Noam Chomsky M. N. Roy G. D. H. Cole Jeremy Corbyn Marcel Déat Guy Debord Eugene V. Debs John Dewey Alexander Dubček Albert Einstein Faiz Ahmad Faiz Muammar Gaddafi Einar Gerhardsen Mikhail Gorbachev Maxim Gorky Antonio Gramsci Safdar Hashmi Eric Hobsbawm Saddam Hussein Dolores Ibárruri Pablo Iglesias Posse Jayaprakash Narayan Russell Jacoby Kim Jong-il Kim Il Sung Martin Luther King Jr.

Alexandra Kollontai James Larkin E. M. S. Namboodiripad Jack Layton Henri Lefebvre Claude Lefort Vladimir Lenin György Lukács Rosa Luxemburg Lu Xun Alasdair MacIntyre Nestor Makhno Nelson Mandela José Carlos Mariátegui Adrien Marquet Mao Dun Salama Moussa François Mitterrand Imre Nagy Gamal Abdel Nasser Jawaharlal Nehru Ernst Niekisch Ne Win George Orwell Sylvia Pankhurst Fred Paterson Karl Polanyi Pierre Renaudel B. T. Ranadive Bertrand Russell Gaetano Salvemini Bernie Sanders Jean-Paul Sartre Arthur Scargill Léopold Sédar Senghor George Bernard Shaw Sukarno Sun Yat-sen R. H. Tawney E. P. Thompson Ernst Toller Leon Trotsky Ram Manohar Lohia H. G. Wells Cornel West Clara Zetkin Howard Zinn J. Posadas 21st c.

Pedro Castillo Hugo Chávez Bob Crow Hu Jintao Kemal Kılıçdaroğlu Kim Jong Un Hasan Piker Lula da Silva Evo Morales Yanis Varoufakis Xi Jinping Vaush Organizations International socialist organizations Socialist parties See also Economic calculation problem Marxist philosophy New Left Old Left Socialism by country Socialist calculation debate Categories Socialism WikiProject Socialism portal Communism portal Organized Labour portal v t e Social democracy History Age of Enlightenment Frankfurt Declaration French Revolution Godesberg Program Humanism Internationalist–defencist schism Keynesianism Labor movement Marxism Orthodox Revisionist Nordic model Reformist–revolutionary dispute Socialism Revolutions of 1848 Utopian socialism Welfare capitalism Concepts Civil liberties Democracy Economic Industrial Representative Marxist Dirigisme Environmentalism Environmental protection Fair trade Gradualism Internationalism Labor rights Land reform Left-wing nationalism Mixed economy Nationalization Negative and positive rights Progressivism Reformism Left Socialism Revolutionary socialism Secularism Social corporatism Social justice Social market economy Socialist state Capitalism Socialism Trade union Tripartisme Welfare Welfare state Variants Democratic socialism Ethical socialism Evolutionary socialism Liberal socialism Socialism of the 21st century Third Way People Ambedkar Allende Ardern Attlee Awolowo Batlle y Ordóñez Bebel Ben-Gurion Berger Bernstein Betancourt Bhutto Blair Blanc Bonnell Brandt Branting Brown Bruenig Callaghan Cárdenas Chávez Clark Craxi Crosland Corbyn Curtin Daszyński Debs Douglas Drees Ebert Ecevit Engels Erlander Fraser Gaitskell Gandhi Gerhardsen González Goulart Hardie Hilferding Hook Ingerman Jaurès Jenkins Junmai Katayama Kautsky Kerensky Kéthly Kirk Kulinski Lagos Lassalle Layton Lenin Lévesque Liebknecht (father) Liebknecht (son) Luxemburg MacDonald Mandela Marx Morales Myrdal Nehru Pakman Palme Plekhanov Prodi Russell Rustin Sanders Savage Stauning Thomas Den Uyl Vail Webb Whitlam Wilson Woodsworth Wynn Zhordania Organizations International Trade Union Confederation International Union of Socialist Youth Party of European Socialists Progressive Alliance Socialist International Young European Socialists By region Austria Germany United States Related Communism " The Internationale " Socialism Types of socialism Economics portal Politics portal Socialism portal v t e Critique of political economy 18th–19th-century Friedrich Engels Karl Marx Thomas Carlyle John Ruskin Paul Lafargue Erik Johan Stagnelius 20th–21st-century Jean Baudrillard Guy Debord Mahatma Gandhi André Gorz Moishe Postone Étienne Balibar Neue Marx-Lektüre Helmut Reichelt Hans-Georg Backhaus Robert Kurz Michael Heinrich Mark Fisher Roman Rosdolsky Claus Peter Ortlieb Georges Bataille Katrine Marçal Concepts Abstract labour and concrete labour Capitalist mode of production Commodity Chrematistics Dismal Science Illth Law of value Socially necessary labour time Valorisation Value-form Written works Unto This Last Sarvodaya The Right to Be Lazy Das Kapital Grundrisse Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844 The Mirror of Production A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy Outlines of a Critique of Political Economy An Introduction to the Three Volumes of Karl Marx's Capital Critique of Economic Reason Discourse on Inequality The Accursed Share Who Cooked Adam Smith's Dinner?

Related Assume a can opener Classical economics Chrematistics Criticism of capitalism Critique of work Economic anthropology Economics Mainstream economics Occam's razor v t e Social philosophy Concepts Agency Anomie Convention Cosmopolitanism Customs Cultural heritage Culturalism Inter Mono Multi Culture Counter Familialism History Honour Human nature Identity Formation Ideology Institutions Invisible hand Loyalty Modernity Morality Public Mores National character Natural law Personhood Reification Ressentiment Rights Sittlichkeit Social alienation Social norms Spontaneous order Stewardship Traditions Values Family Volksgeist Worldview Schools Budapest School Catholic social teaching Distributism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Social Frankfurt School Personalism Philosophers Ancient Confucius Laozi Mencius Mozi Xunzi Medieval Alpharabius Aquinas Avempace Bruni Ibn Khaldun Maimonides Ibn Tufayl Early modern Calvin Erasmus Guicciardini Locke Luther Milton Montaigne Müntzer 18th and 19th centuries Arnold Bentham Bonald Burke Carlyle Comte Condorcet Emerson Engels Fichte Fourier Franklin Hegel Helvétius Herder Hume Jefferson Kant Kierkegaard Le Bon Le Play Marx Mill Nietzsche Owen Renan Rousseau Royce Ruskin Smith Spencer de Staël Stirner Taine Thoreau Tocqueville Vico Vivekananda Voltaire 20th and 21st centuries Adorno Agamben Arendt Aron Badiou Baudrillard Bauman Benoist Berlin Butler Camus de Beauvoir Debord Deleuze Dewey Du Bois Durkheim Eco Evola Foucault Fromm Gandhi Gehlen Gentile Gramsci Guénon Habermas Han Heidegger Hoppe Irigaray Kirk Kołakowski Kropotkin Land Lasch MacIntyre Marcuse Maritain Negri Niebuhr Nussbaum Oakeshott Ortega Pareto Polanyi Radhakrishnan Röpke Santayana Scruton Shariati Simmel Skinner Sombart Sowell Spengler Strauss Taylor Voegelin Walzer Weber Weil Zinn Žižek Works De Officiis (44 BC) Oration on the Dignity of Man (1486) A Vindication of Natural Society (1756) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Civilization and Its Discontents (1930) The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction (1935) The Second Sex (1949) One-Dimensional Man (1964) The Society of the Spectacle (1967) The History of Sexuality (1976) The Culture of Narcissism (1979) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) Gender Trouble (1990) The Malaise of Modernity (1991) Intellectuals and Society (2010) See also Agnotology Axiology Critical theory Cultural criticism Cultural pessimism Ethics Historism Historicism Humanities Philosophy of culture Philosophy of education Philosophy of history Political philosophy Social criticism Social science Social theory Sociology Category v t e Political philosophy Terms Authority Citizenship‎ Duty Elite Emancipation Freedom Government Hegemony Hierarchy Justice Law Legitimacy Liberty Monopoly Nation Obedience Peace People Pluralism Power Progress Propaganda Property Regime Revolution Rights Ruling class Society Sovereignty‎ State Utopia War Government Aristocracy Oligarchy Autocracy Bureaucracy Dictatorship Democracy Ochlocracy Gerontocracy Meritocracy Monarchy Tyranny Plutocracy Technocracy Theocracy Ideologies Agrarianism Anarchism Capitalism Christian democracy Colonialism Communism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Corporatism Distributism Environmentalism Fascism Feminism Feudalism Imperialism Islamism Liberalism Libertarianism Localism Marxism Monarchism Multiculturalism Nationalism Nazism Populism Republicanism Social Darwinism Social democracy Socialism Third Way Concepts Balance of power Bellum omnium contra omnes Body politic Clash of civilizations Common good Consent of the governed Divine right of kings Family as a model for the state Monopoly on violence Natural law Negative and positive rights Night-watchman state Noble lie Noblesse oblige Open society Ordered liberty Original position Overton window Separation of powers Social contract State of nature Statolatry Supermajority Tyranny of the majority Philosophers Antiquity Aristotle Chanakya Cicero Confucius Han Fei Lactantius Mencius Mozi Plato political philosophy Polybius Shang Sun Tzu Thucydides Xenophon Middle Ages Al-Farabi Aquinas Averroes Bruni Dante Gelasius al-Ghazali Ibn Khaldun Marsilius Muhammad Nizam al-Mulk Ockham Plethon Wang Early modern period Boétie Bodin Bossuet Calvin Campanella Filmer Grotius Guicciardini Hobbes political philosophy James Leibniz Locke Luther Machiavelli Milton More Müntzer Pufendorf Spinoza Suárez 18th and 19th centuries Bakunin Bastiat Beccaria Bentham Bolingbroke Bonald Burke Carlyle Comte Condorcet Constant Cortés Engels Fichte Fourier Franklin Godwin Haller Hegel Herder Hume Iqbal Jefferson Kant political philosophy Le Bon Le Play Madison Maistre Marx Mazzini Mill Montesquieu Nietzsche Owen Paine Renan Rousseau Sade Saint-Simon Smith Spencer de Staël Stirner Taine Thoreau Tocqueville Tucker Voltaire 20th and 21st centuries Agamben Ambedkar Arendt Aron Badiou Bauman Benoist Berlin Bernstein Burnham Chomsky Dmowski Du Bois Dugin Dworkin Evola Foucault Fromm Fukuyama Gandhi Gentile Gramsci Guénon Habermas Hayek Hoppe Huntington Kautsky Khomeini Kirk Kropotkin Laclau Lenin Luxemburg Mansfield Mao Marcuse Maurras Michels Mises Mosca Mouffe Negri Nozick Nussbaum Oakeshott Ortega Pareto Popper Qutb Rand Rawls Röpke Rothbard Russell Sartre Schmitt Scruton Shariati Sorel Spann Spengler Strauss Sun Taylor Voegelin Walzer Weber Works Republic (c. 375 BC) Politics (c. 350 BC) On the Republic (51 BC) Treatise on Law (c. 1274) Monarchy (1313) The Prince (1532) Leviathan (1651) Two Treatises of Government (1689) The Spirit of Law (1748) The Social Contract (1762) Reflections on the Revolution in France (1790) Rights of Man (1791) Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1820) Democracy in America (1835–1840) The Communist Manifesto (1848) On Liberty (1859) The Revolt of the Masses (1929) The Road to Serfdom (1944) The Open Society and Its Enemies (1945) The Origins of Totalitarianism (1951) A Theory of Justice (1971) The End of History and the Last Man (1992) Related Authoritarianism Collectivism and individualism Conflict theories Contractualism Critique of political economy Egalitarianism Elite theory Elitism History of political thought Institutional discrimination Jurisprudence Justification for the state Political ethics Political spectrum Left-wing politics Centrism Right-wing politics Political theology Political violence Separation of church and state Separatism Social justice Statism Totalitarianism Category:Political philosophy Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Chile Greece Argentina Korea Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Finland Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii Scopus zbMATH Artists ULAN MusicBrainz KulturNav FID People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Historical Dictionary of Switzerland SNAC Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐fbctf
Cached time: 20250817043551
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.788 seconds
Real time usage: 2.138 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 16579/1000000
Revision size: 84686/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 606100/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 150020/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 22/100
Expensive parser function count: 33/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 405756/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.050/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 26928556/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1670.403      1 -total
 17.25%  288.193      2 Template:Reflist
 16.04%  267.928      1 Template:Infobox_philosopher
 11.11%  185.522     29 Template:Cite_web
  9.13%  152.488      1 Template:Navboxes
  7.51%  125.498     26 Template:Cite_book
  6.92%  115.517      1 Template:IPA
  5.83%   97.397      7 Template:Navbox
  5.39%   90.010     25 Template:Sfn
  5.08%   84.846      1 Template:Marxism Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:stable-pcache:47096:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817043551 and revision id 1305339076. Rendering was triggered because: unknown Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Friedrich_Engels&oldid=1305339076 " Categories : Friedrich Engels 1820 births 1895 deaths 19th-century atheists 19th-century German businesspeople 19th-century German economists 19th-century German historians 19th-century German journalists 19th-century German male writers 19th-century German non-fiction writers 19th-century German philosophers 19th-century German writers 19th-century Prussian people Atheist philosophers Businesspeople from Wuppertal Critics of political economy Deaths from throat cancer in England Economists from the Kingdom of Prussia German communist writers German anti-capitalists German atheism activists German writers on atheism German emigrants to England German industrialists German journalists German Marxist writers German people of the Revolutions of 1848 German philosophers of culture German philosophers of history German political philosophers German revolutionaries German socialist feminists Marxist feminists Marxist theorists Materialists Members of the International Workingmen's Association Orthodox Marxists People from the Province of Jülich-Cleves-Berg People from the Rhine Province Philosophers of economics Prussian Army personnel Socialist economists Theoretical historians Theorists on Western civilization Urban theorists Writers from Wuppertal Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia pending changes protected pages Use dmy dates from January 2025 Use British English from December 2015 Biography with signature Articles with hCards Pages with German IPA All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from October 2024 Articles containing German-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from September 2014 Articles with unsourced statements from July 2021 Articles with unsourced statements from October 2024 Wikipedia external links cleanup from August 2020 Pages using Sister project links with hidden wikidata Articles with Marxists Internet Archive links Articles with Project Gutenberg links Articles with Internet Archive links Articles with LibriVox links Articles with German-language sources (de) Webarchive template wayback links Articles containing French-language text Articles containing Latin-language text This page was last edited on 11 August 2025, at 13:48 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Friedrich Engels 126 languages Add topic

