Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History and priority dispute 2 Notes 3 References 4 Further reading 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Mechanical equivalent of heat 19 languages العربية বাংলা Deutsch Español فارسی 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Italiano Magyar 日本語 Norsk nynorsk Português Română Русский Suomi தமிழ் Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Concept that motion and heat are interchangeable For other uses, see conservation of energy .

This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .

Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( July 2014 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) James Prescott Joule Julius Robert von Mayer In the history of science , the mechanical equivalent of heat states that motion and heat are mutually interchangeable and that in every case, a given amount of work would generate the same amount of heat, provided the work done is totally converted to heat energy.  The mechanical equivalent of heat was a concept that had an important part in the development and acceptance of the conservation of energy and the establishment of the science of thermodynamics in the 19th century. Its independent and simultaneous discovery by James Prescott Joule and by Julius Robert von Mayer led to a priority dispute .

History and priority dispute [ edit ] Joule's apparatus for measuring the mechanical equivalent of heat in which the " work " of the falling weight is converted into the " heat " of agitation in the water.

Benjamin Thompson , Count Rumford, had observed the frictional heat generated by boring cannon at the arsenal in Munich, Bavaria, circa 1797 . Rumford immersed a cannon barrel in water and arranged for a specially blunted boring tool. He showed that the water could be boiled within roughly two and a half hours and that the supply of frictional heat was seemingly inexhaustible.

Based on his experiments, he published " An Inquiry Concerning the Source of the Heat Which Is Excited by Friction ", (1798), Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society p. 102. This scientific paper provided a substantial challenge to established theories of heat and began the 19th century revolution in thermodynamics. The experiment inspired the work of James Prescott Joule in the 1840s. Joule's more exact measurements on equivalence were pivotal in establishing the kinetic theory at the expense of the caloric theory . The idea that heat and work are equivalent was also proposed by Julius Robert von Mayer in 1842 in the leading German physics journal and independently by James Prescott Joule in 1843, in the leading British physics journal. Similar work was carried out by Ludwig A. Colding in 1840–1843, though Colding's work was little known outside his native Denmark.

A collaboration between Nicolas Clément and Sadi Carnot in the 1820s had some related thinking near the same lines.

[ 1 ] In 1845, Joule published a paper entitled "The Mechanical Equivalent of Heat", in which he specified a numerical value for the amount of mechanical work required to produce a unit of heat. In particular Joule had experimented on the amount of mechanical work generated by friction needed to raise the temperature of a pound of water by one degree Fahrenheit and found a consistent value of 778.24 foot pound force (4.1550 J · cal −1 ). Joule contended that motion and heat were mutually interchangeable and that, in every case, a given amount of work would generate the same amount of heat. Von Mayer also published a numerical value for mechanical equivalent of heat in 1845 but his experimental method wasn't as convincing.

Though a standardised value of 4.1860 J·cal −1 was established in the early 20th century, in the 1920s, it was ultimately realised that the constant has magnitude close to the specific heat of water, a quantity that varies with temperature between the values of 4.17 and 4.22 J· g −1 · °C −1 . The change in unit was the result of the demise of the calorie as a unit in physics and chemistry .

Both von Mayer and Joule met with initial neglect and resistance despite having published in leading European physics journals, but by 1847, a lot of leading scientists of the day were paying attention.

Hermann Helmholtz in 1847 published what is considered a definitive declaration of the conservation of energy . Helmholtz had learned from reading Joule's publications, though Helmholtz eventually came around to crediting both Joule and von Mayer for priority.

Also in 1847, Joule made a well-attended presentation at the annual meeting of British Association for the Advancement of Science . Among those in attendance was William Thomson . Thomson was intrigued but initially skeptical. Over the next two years, Thomson became increasingly convinced of Joule's theory, finally admitting his conviction in print in 1851, simultaneously crediting von Mayer. Thomson collaborated with Joule, mainly by correspondence, Joule conducting experiments, Thomson analysing the results and suggesting further experiments. The collaboration lasted from 1852 to 1856. Its published results did much to bring about general acceptance of Joule's work and the kinetic theory .

However, in 1848, von Mayer had first had sight of Joule's papers and wrote to the French Académie des Sciences to assert priority. His letter was published in the Comptes Rendus and Joule was quick to react. Thomson's close relationship with Joule allowed him to become dragged into the controversy. The pair planned that Joule would admit von Mayer's priority for the idea of the mechanical equivalent but to claim that experimental verification rested with Joule. Thomson's associates, co-workers and relatives such as William John Macquorn Rankine , James Thomson , James Clerk Maxwell , and Peter Guthrie Tait joined to champion Joule's cause.

However, in 1862, John Tyndall , in one of his many excursions into popular science and many public disputes with Thomson and his circle, gave a lecture at the Royal Institution entitled On Force [1] in which he credited von Mayer with conceiving and measuring the mechanical equivalent of heat. Thomson and Tait were angered, and an undignified public exchange of correspondence took place in the pages of the Philosophical Magazine , and the rather more popular Good Words . Tait even resorted to championing Colding's cause in an attempt to undermine von Mayer.

Though Tyndall again pressed von Mayer's cause in Heat: A Mode of Motion (1863) with the publication of Sir Henry Enfield Roscoe 's Edinburgh Review article Thermo-Dynamics in January 1864, Joule's reputation was sealed while that of von Mayer entered a period of obscurity.

Notes [ edit ] ^ The usage of terms such as work , force , energy , power , etc.

in the 18th and 19th centuries by scientific workers does not necessarily reflect the standardised modern usage.

References [ edit ] ^ Lervig, P. Sadi Carnot and the steam engine:Nicolas Clément's lectures on industrial chemistry, 1823-28. Br. J Hist. Sci. 18::147, 1985.

Further reading [ edit ] Foucault, L.

(1854) “Equivalent mécanique de la chaleur. M. Mayer, M. Joule. Chaleur spécifique des gaz sous volume constant. M. Victor Regnault”, Journal des débats politiques et littéraires , Thursday 8 June Lloyd, J.T. (1970). "Background to the Joule-Mayer Controversy".

Notes and Records of the Royal Society .

25 (2): 211– 225.

doi : 10.1098/rsnr.1970.0030 .

S2CID 71802199 .

Sharlin, H.I. (1979).

Lord Kelvin: The Dynamic Victorian . Pennsylvania State University Press.

ISBN 0-271-00203-4 .

, pp . 154–5 Smith, C. (1998).

The Science of Energy: A Cultural History of Energy Physics in Victorian Britain . Chicago University Press.

ISBN 0-226-76421-4 .

Smith, C. (2004) "Joule, James Prescott (1818-1889)", Oxford Dictionary of National Biography , Oxford University Press, < http://www.oxforddnb.com/view/article/15139 , accessed 27 July 2005> (subscription required) Zemansky, M.W. (1968) Heat and Thermodynamics: An Intermediate Textbook , McGraw-Hill, pp . 86–87 External links [ edit ] Media related to Mechanical equivalent of heat at Wikimedia Commons v t e History of physics ( timeline ) Classical physics Astronomy timeline Electromagnetism timeline Electrical engineering Maxwell's equations Fluid mechanics timeline Aerodynamics Field theory Gravitational theory timeline Material science timeline Metamaterials Mechanics timeline Variational principles Optics Spectroscopy Thermodynamics timeline Energy Entropy Perpetual motion Modern physics Computational physics timeline Condensed matter timeline Superconductivity Cosmology timeline Big Bang theory General relativity tests Geophysics Nuclear physics Fission Fusion Power Weapons Quantum mechanics timeline Atoms Molecules Quantum field theory Subatomic physics timeline Special relativity timeline Lorentz transformations tests Recent developments Quantum information timeline Loop quantum gravity Nanotechnology String theory On specific discoveries Cosmic microwave background Graphene Gravitational waves Subatomic particles timeline Higgs boson Neutron Speed of light By periods Copernican Revolution Golden age of cosmology Golden age of physics Medieval Islamic world Astronomy Noisy intermediate-scale quantum era By groups Harvard Computers The Martians Oxford Calculators Via Panisperna boys Women in physics Scientific disputes Bohr–Einstein Chandrasekhar–Eddington Galileo affair Leibniz–Newton Joule–von Mayer Shapley–Curtis Relativity priority Special relativity General relativity Transfermium Wars Category v t e History of chemistry ( timeline ) By branch Physical chemistry ( timeline ) Atomic theory Molecular theory Electrochemistry Spectroscopy Thermodynamics timeline Organic chemistry ( timeline ) Biochemistry Nuclear chemistry Fission Fusion Power Weapons Applied chemistry Cosmetics Material science Nanotechnology Pharmacy Ancient history Chinese alchemy Medieval Islamic World alchemy Indian metallurgy Periodic table ( timeline ) By elements F Al On specific discoveries Battery Carbon nanotubes timeline Electrophoresis Gaseous fuel Graphene Gunpowder Haber process Scientific disputes Element naming Drexler–Smalley Joule–von Mayer Transfermium Wars Other Women in chemistry Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Mechanical_equivalent_of_heat&oldid=1297025092 " Categories : History of thermodynamics History of physics Discovery and invention controversies Scientific rivalry Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles lacking in-text citations from July 2014 All articles lacking in-text citations Pages using multiple image with auto scaled images Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 23 June 2025, at 19:08 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Mechanical equivalent of heat 19 languages Add topic

