Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Mechanisms of evolution Toggle Mechanisms of evolution subsection 1.1 Religion as an adaptation 1.2 Religion as a by-product 1.3 Religion as a meme 2 See also 3 References 4 Further reading 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Evolutionary psychology of religion 9 languages العربية বাংলা Español فارسی Français Italiano עברית Русский 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Study of religious belief using evolutionary psychology principles Part of a series on Spirituality Outline Religion History Timeline Traditional Elite religion Jewish Merkabah Kabbalah Hasidism Christian Catholic Mysticism Sufism Folk religion Modern Buddhist modernism New religious movement Secular spirituality " Spiritual but not religious " Syncretism Spiritual experience Lived religion List of substances used in rituals Mystical or religious experience Oceanic feeling Religious ecstasy Spiritual practice Spiritual development Divine embodiment Ego death Entheogen History Archaeological record Aztec Maya Cannabis Individuation No-mind Self-actualization Spiritual activism Influences Western General Divine illumination Pantheism Panentheism Antiquity Divinity Gnosticism Hermeticism Neoplatonism Western esotericism Medieval Mysticism Early modern Perennial philosophy Jakob Böhme Emanuel Swedenborg Pietism Modern Romanticism Transcendentalism Universalism New Thought Theosophy Anthroposophy Occultism Spiritualism Esoteric Christianity New Age Orientalist Comparative religion Neo-Advaita Nonduality Orientalism Theosophical Society Asian Pre-historic Proto-Indo-Iranian religion Iran Zoroastrianism India Advaita Vedanta Buddha-nature Enlightenment Kevala jnana Madhyamaka Moksha Neo-Vedanta Tantra Yoga Yogachara East-Asia Taoism Other non-Western Animism Shamanism Totemism Psychological Humanistic psychology Mindfulness Positive psychology Self-help Self-realization True self and false self Research Neurological Mystical psychosis Cognitive science of religion Neuroscience of religion Geschwind syndrome Evolutionary psychology of religion Category v t e The evolutionary psychology of religion is the study of religious belief using evolutionary psychology principles. It is one approach to the psychology of religion . As with all other organs and organ functions, the brain 's functional structure is argued to have a genetic basis, and is therefore subject to the effects of natural selection and evolution . Evolutionary psychologists seek to understand cognitive processes, religion in this case, by understanding the survival and reproductive functions they might serve.

[ 1 ] Mechanisms of evolution [ edit ] See also: Evolutionary origin of religions Scientists generally agree with the idea that a propensity to engage in religious behavior evolved early in human history. However, there is disagreement on the exact mechanisms that drove the evolution of the religious mind. There are two schools of thought. One is that religion itself evolved due to natural selection and is an adaptation , in which case religion conferred some sort of evolutionary advantage. The other is that religious beliefs and behaviors, such as the concept of a "proto-god", [ 2 ] [ 3 ] may have emerged as by-products of other adaptive traits without initially being selected for because of their own benefits.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] A third suggestion is that different aspects of religion require different evolutionary explanations but also that different evolutionary explanations may apply to several aspects of religion.

[ 7 ] Religious behavior often involves significant costs—including economic costs, celibacy , dangerous rituals , or the expending of time that could be used otherwise. This would suggest that natural selection should act against religious behavior unless it or something else causes religious behavior to have significant advantages.

[ 8 ] Religion as an adaptation [ edit ] Further information: Psychological adaptation , Handicap principle , and Signalling theory Richard Sosis and Candace Alcorta have reviewed several of the prominent theories for the adaptive value of religion.

[ 4 ] Many are "social solidarity theories", which view religion as having evolved to enhance cooperation and cohesion within groups. Group membership in turn provides benefits which can enhance an individual's chances for survival and reproduction. These benefits range from coordination advantages [ 6 ] to the facilitation of costly behavior rules.

[ 5 ] Sosis also researched 200 utopian communes in the 19th-century United States, both religious and secular (mostly socialist ). 39% of the religious communes were still functioning 20 years after their founding while only 6% of the secular communes were.

[ 9 ] The number of costly sacrifices that a religious commune demanded from its members had a linear effect on its longevity, while in secular communes demands for costly sacrifices did not correlate with longevity and the majority of the secular communes failed within 8 years. Sosis cites anthropologist Roy Rappaport in arguing that rituals and laws are more effective when sacralized .

[ 10 ] Social psychologist Jonathan Haidt cites Sosis's research in his 2012 book The Righteous Mind as the best evidence that religion is an adaptive solution to the free-rider problem by enabling cooperation without kinship .

[ 11 ] Evolutionary medicine researcher Randolph M. Nesse and theoretical biologist Mary Jane West-Eberhard have argued instead that because humans with altruistic tendencies are preferred as social partners they receive fitness advantages by social selection , [ list 1 ] with Nesse arguing further that social selection enabled humans as a species to become extraordinarily cooperative and capable of creating culture .

[ 16 ] Edward O. Wilson's theory of "eusociality" strongly suggests group cohesion as the impetus for the development of religion.  Wilson posits that the individuals of a small percentage of species (including homo sapiens , ants, termites, bees and a few other species) replicated their genes by adhering to one of a number of competing groups.  He further postulates that, in homo sapiens, thanks to their enormous forebrains, there evolved a complex interplay between group evolution and individual evolution within a group.

[ 17 ] [ page needed ] These social solidarity theories may help to explain the painful or dangerous nature of many religious rituals.

Costly-signaling theory suggests that such rituals might serve as public and hard-to-fake signals that an individual's commitment to the group is sincere. Since there would be a considerable benefit in trying to cheat the system—taking advantage of group-living benefits without taking on any possible costs—the ritual would not be something simple that can be taken lightly.

[ 4 ] Warfare is a good example of a cost of group living, and Richard Sosis, Howard C. Kress, and James S. Boster carried out a cross-cultural survey which demonstrated that men in societies which engage in war do submit to the costliest rituals.

[ 18 ] Studies that show more direct positive associations between religious practice and health and longevity are more controversial. Harold G. Koenig and Harvey J. Cohen summarized and assessed the results of 100 evidence-based studies that systematically examined the relationship between religion and human well-being, finding that 79% showed a positive influence.

[ 19 ] Such studies rate in mass media, as seen in a 2009 NPR program which covered University of Miami professor Gail Ironson's findings that belief in God and a strong sense of spirituality correlated with a lower viral load and improved immune-cell levels in HIV patients.

[ 20 ] Richard P. Sloan of Columbia University, in contrast, told the New York Times that "there is no really good compelling evidence that there is a relationship between religious involvement and health." [ 21 ] Debate continues over the validity of these findings, which do not necessarily prove a direct cause-and-effect relationship between religion and health. Mark Stibich claims there is a clear correlation but that the reason for it remains unclear.

[ 22 ] A criticism of such placebo effects , as well as the advantage of religion giving a sense of meaning, is that it seems likely that less complex mechanisms than religious behavior could achieve such goals.

[ 8 ] Religion as a by-product [ edit ] See also: Agent detection Stephen Jay Gould cites religion as an example of an exaptation or spandrel , but he does not himself select a definite trait that he thinks natural selection has actually acted on. He does, however, bring up Freud 's suggestion that large human brains, which evolved for other reasons, led to consciousness . The beginning of consciousness forced humans to deal with the concept of personal mortality . Religion may have been one solution to this problem.

[ 23 ] Other researchers have proposed specific psychological processes that natural selection may have fostered alongside religion. Such mechanisms may include the ability to infer the presence of organisms that might do harm ( agent detection ), the ability to come up with causal narratives for natural events ( etiology ), and the ability to recognize that other people have minds of their own with their own beliefs, desires and intentions ( theory of mind ). These three adaptations (among others) allow human beings to imagine purposeful agents behind many observations that could not readily be explained otherwise, e.g. thunder, lightning, movement of planets, complexity of life.

[ 24 ] Pascal Boyer suggests in his book Religion Explained (2001) that there is no simple explanation for religious consciousness . He builds on the ideas of cognitive anthropologists Dan Sperber and Scott Atran , who argued that religious cognition represents a by-product of various evolutionary adaptations, including folk psychology . He argues that one such factor is that it has, in most cases, been advantageous for humans to remember "minimally counter-intuitive" concepts that are somewhat different from the daily routine and somewhat violate innate expectations about how the world is constructed. A god that is in many aspects like humans but much more powerful is such a concept, while the often much more abstract god discussed at length by theologians is often too counter-intuitive. Experiments support that religious people think about their god in anthropomorphic terms even if this contradicts the more complex theological doctrines of their religion.

[ 8 ] Pierre Lienard and Pascal Boyer suggest that humans evolved a "hazard-precaution system" which allowed them to detect potential threats in the environment and to attempt to respond appropriately.

[ 25 ] Several features of ritual behaviors, often a major feature of religion, are held to trigger this system. These include the occasion for the ritual (often the prevention or elimination of danger or evil), the harm believed to result from nonperformance of the ritual, and the detailed prescriptions for proper performance of the ritual. Lienard and Boyer discuss the possibility that a sensitive hazard-precaution system itself may have provided fitness benefits, and that religion then "associates individual, unmanageable anxieties with coordinated action with others and thereby makes them more tolerable or meaningful".

Justin L. Barrett in Why Would Anyone Believe in God?

(2004) suggests that belief in God is natural because it depends on mental tools possessed by all human beings. He suggests that the structure and development of human minds make belief in the existence of a supreme god (with properties such as being superknowing, superpowerful and immortal ) highly attractive. He also compares belief in God to belief in other minds, and devotes a chapter to looking at the evolutionary psychology of atheism . He suggests that one of the fundamental mental modules in the brain is the Hyperactive Agency Detection Device (HADD), another potential system for identifying danger. This HADD may confer a survival benefit even if it is over-sensitive: it is better to avoid an imaginary predator than to be killed by a real one. This would tend to encourage belief in ghosts and spirits .

[ 26 ] According to Justin L. Barrett, having a scientific explanation for mental phenomena does not mean we should stop believing in them. "Suppose science produces a convincing account for why I think my wife loves me — should I then stop believing that she does?" [ 27 ] Though hominids probably began using their emerging cognitive abilities to meet basic needs like nutrition and mates, Terror Management Theory argues that this happened before they had reached the point where significant self- (and thus end-of-self-) awareness arose. Awareness of death became a highly disruptive byproduct of prior adaptive functions. The resulting anxiety threatened to undermine these very functions and thus needed amelioration. Any social formation or practice that was to be widely accepted by the masses needed to provide a means of managing such terror. The main strategy to do so was to "become an individual of value in a world of meaning … acquiring self-esteem [via] the creation and maintenance of culture", as this would counter the sense of insignificance represented by death and provide: 1) symbolic immortality through the legacy of a culture that lives on beyond the physical self ("earthly significance") 2) literal immortality, the promise of an afterlife or continued existence featured in religions ("cosmic significance").

[ 28 ] Robert Sapolsky isolates potential neurological and evolutionary adjuvants for religious belief.

[ 29 ] Religion as a meme [ edit ] See also: Memes and Memetics Richard Dawkins suggests in The Selfish Gene (1976) that cultural memes function like genes in that they are subject to natural selection. In The God Delusion (2006)  Dawkins further argues that because religious truths cannot be questioned, [ citation needed ] their very nature encourages religions to spread like "mind viruses ". In such a conception, it is necessary that the individuals who are unable to question their beliefs are more biologically fit than individuals who are capable of questioning their beliefs. Thus, in such a conception, sacred scriptures or oral traditions created a behavioral pattern that elevated biological fitness for believing individuals. Individuals who were capable of challenging such beliefs, even if the beliefs were enormously improbable, became rarer and rarer in the population.

[ non sequitur ] This model holds that religion is a byproduct of the cognitive modules in the human brain that arose in the evolutionary past to deal with problems of survival and reproduction. Initial concepts of supernatural agents may arise in the tendency of humans to "overdetect" the presence of other humans or predators (for example: momentarily mistaking a vine for a snake). For instance, a man might report that he felt something sneaking up on him, but it vanished when he looked around.

[ 30 ] Stories of these experiences are especially likely to be retold, passed on and embellished due to their descriptions of standard ontological categories (person, artifact, animal, plant, natural object) with counterintuitive properties (humans that are invisible, houses that remember what happened in them, etc.). These stories become even more salient when they are accompanied by activation of non-violated expectations for the ontological category (houses that "remember" activates our intuitive psychology of mind; i.e. we automatically attribute thought processes to them).

[ 31 ] One of the attributes of our intuitive psychology of mind is that humans are interested in the affairs of other humans. This may result in the tendency for concepts of supernatural agents to inevitably cross-connect with human intuitive moral feelings (evolutionary behavioral guidelines). In addition, the presence of dead bodies creates an uncomfortable cognitive state in which dreams and other mental modules (person identification and behavior prediction) continue to run decoupled from reality, producing incompatible intuitions that the dead are somehow still around. When this is coupled with the human predisposition to see misfortune as a social event (as someone's responsibility rather than the outcome of mechanical processes) it may activate the intuitive "willingness to make exchanges" module of the human theory of minds, compelling the bereaved to try to interact and bargain with supernatural agents ( ritual ).

[ 32 ] In a large enough group, some individuals will seem better skilled at these rituals than others and will become specialists. As societies grow and encounter other societies, competition will ensue and a "survival of the fittest" effect may cause the practitioners to modify their concepts to provide a more abstract, more widely acceptable version. Eventually the specialist practitioners form a cohesive group or guild with its attendant political goals (religion).

[ 32 ] See also [ edit ] Attachment theory and psychology of religion Cognitive fluidity Cognitive science of religion Genetic fallacy Group cohesiveness Origin of morality Self-sacrifice References [ edit ] ^ Steadman, L.; Palmer, C. (2008).

The Supernatural and Natural Selection: Religion and Evolutionary Success . Paradigm.

^ Turner, Léon P. (2014). "9: Neither Friends nor Enemies: The Complex Relationship between Cognitive and Humanistic Accounts of Religious Belief". In Watts, Fraser; Turner, Léon P. (eds.).

Evolution, Religion, and Cognitive Science: Critical and Constructive Essays . Oxford: Oxford University Press. p. 162.

ISBN 9780199688081 . Retrieved 26 July 2019 .

It seems therefore, for Barrett at least, that universal sociocultural factors do have some role to play in the origins of all proto-god concepts [...].

^ Compare for example: Griffin, Daniel F. (2008). "The Existence and General Characteristics of Our Universe".

Greater Than Can Be Conceived: The Rationality of Belief in a God Beyond Comprehension . p. 75 . Retrieved 26 July 2019 .

As it is currently defined, proto-god has the potential to cause the existence of our universe, but as of yet we have no reason for thinking that it actually would .

^ a b c Sosis, R.; Alcorta, C. (2003). "Signaling, solidarity, and the sacred: the evolution of religious behavior".

Evolutionary Anthropology .

12 (6): 264– 274.

doi : 10.1002/evan.10120 .

S2CID 443130 .

^ a b Watts, Joseph; Greenhill, Simon J.; Atkinson, Quentin D.; Currie, Thomas E.; Bulbulia, Joseph; Gray, Russell D. (2015-04-07).

"Broad supernatural punishment but not moralizing high gods precede the evolution of political complexity in Austronesia" .

Proceedings of the Royal Society of London B: Biological Sciences .

282 (1804): 20142556.

doi : 10.1098/rspb.2014.2556 .

PMC 4375858 .

PMID 25740888 .

^ a b Dávid-Barrett, Tamás; Carney, James (2015-08-14). "The deification of historical figures and the emergence of priesthoods as a solution to a network coordination problem".

Religion, Brain & Behavior .

6 (4): 307– 317.

doi : 10.1080/2153599X.2015.1063001 .

ISSN 2153-599X .

S2CID 146979343 .

^ Lindenfors, Patrik; Svensson, Jonas (2021-04-20).

"Evolutionary explanations for religion: An interdisciplinary critical review" .

Research Ideas and Outcomes .

7 : e66132.

doi : 10.3897/rio.7.e66132 .

ISSN 2367-7163 .

S2CID 234492800 .

^ a b c The Oxford Handbook of Evolutionary Psychology , edited by Robin Dunbar and Louise Barret, Oxford University Press, 2007, Chapter 44: "The Evolution of Religion" by Joseph A. Bulbulia ^ Sosis, Richard (2000). "Religion and Intragroup Cooperation: Preliminary Results of a Comparative Analysis of Utopian Communities".

Cross-Cultural Research .

34 (1).

SAGE Publishing : 70– 87.

doi : 10.1177/106939710003400105 .

S2CID 44050390 .

^ Sosis, Richard; Bressler, Eric R. (2003). "Cooperation and Commune Longevity: A Test of the Costly Signaling Theory of Religion".

Cross-Cultural Research .

37 (2).

SAGE Publishing : 211– 239.

CiteSeerX 10.1.1.500.5715 .

doi : 10.1177/1069397103037002003 .

S2CID 7908906 .

^ Haidt, Jonathan (2012).

The Righteous Mind: Why Good People Are Divided by Politics and Religion . New York: Vintage Books . pp.

298– 299.

ISBN 978-0307455772 .

^ Nesse, Randolph (2019).

Good Reasons for Bad Feelings: Insights from the Frontier of Evolutionary Psychiatry .

Dutton . pp.

172– 176.

ISBN 978-1101985663 .

^ West-Eberhard, Mary Jane (1975). "The Evolution of Social Behavior by Kin Selection".

The Quarterly Review of Biology .

50 (1).

University of Chicago Press : 1– 33.

doi : 10.1086/408298 .

JSTOR 2821184 .

S2CID 14459515 .

^ West-Eberhard, Mary Jane (1979). "Sexual Selection, Social Competition, and Evolution".

Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society .

123 (4).

American Philosophical Society : 222– 34.

JSTOR 986582 .

^ Nesse, Randolph M.

(2007). "Runaway social selection for displays of partner value and altruism".

Biological Theory .

2 (2).

Springer Science+Business Media : 143– 55.

CiteSeerX 10.1.1.409.3359 .

doi : 10.1162/biot.2007.2.2.143 .

S2CID 195097363 .

^ Nesse, Randolph M.

(2009). "10. Social Selection and the Origins of Culture". In Schaller, Mark ; Heine, Steven J.

; Norenzayan, Ara; Yamagishi, Toshio; Kameda, Tatsuya (eds.).

Evolution, Culture, and the Human Mind . Philadelphia: Taylor & Francis . pp.

137– 50.

ISBN 978-0805859119 .

^ Wilson, Edward O. (2007).

The Social Conquest of Earth . Liveright.

ISBN 978-0871403636 .

^ Sosis, R.; Kress, H. C.; Boster, J. S. (2007). "Scars for war: evaluating alternative signaling explanations for cross-cultural variance in ritual costs".

Evolution and Human Behavior .

28 (4): 234– 247.

Bibcode : 2007EHumB..28..234S .

CiteSeerX 10.1.1.628.3646 .

doi : 10.1016/j.evolhumbehav.2007.02.007 .

^ Koenig, Harold G.; Cohen, Harvey J. (2001).

The Link between Religion and Health: Psychoneuroimmunology and the Faith Factor . Oxford: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 0-19-514360-4 .

^ Hagerty, Barbara (2009).

"Can Positive Thoughts Help Heal Another Person?" . National Public Radio . Retrieved 2009-12-19 .

Ironson says over time, those who turned to God after their diagnosis had a much lower viral load and maintained those powerful immune cells at a much higher rate than those who turned away from God.

^ Duenwald, Mary (May 7, 2002).

"Religion and Health: New Research Revives an Old Debate" .

New York Times . Retrieved 2009-12-19 .

^ "How Religion Can Improve Health" . Archived from the original on 2016-03-03 . Retrieved 2011-09-01 .

^ Gould, S. J. (1991). "Exaptation: a crucial tool for an evolutionary psychology".

Journal of Social Issues .

47 (3): 43– 65.

doi : 10.1111/j.1540-4560.1991.tb01822.x .

^ Atran, S; Norenzayan, A (2004).

"Religion's evolutionary landscape: counterintuition, commitment, compassion, communion" (PDF) .

The Behavioral and Brain Sciences .

27 (6).

Behavioral and Brain Sciences : 713– 30, discussion 730–70.

doi : 10.1017/s0140525x04000172 .

PMID 16035401 .

S2CID 1177255 .

^ Lienard, P.; Boyer, P. (2006). "Whence collective rituals? A cultural selection model of ritualized behavior".

American Anthropologist .

108 (4): 824– 827.

doi : 10.1525/aa.2006.108.4.814 .

^ Barrett, Justin L. (2004). "3".

Why Would Anyone Believe in God . AltaMira Press.

ISBN 0-7591-0667-3 .

^ The New York Times "Darwin's God" March 4, 2007 ^ Landau, M. J.; Solomon, S.; Pyszczynski, T.; Greenberg, J. (2007).

"On the compatibility of terror management theory and perspectives on human evolution" .

Evolutionary Psychology .

5 (3): 476– 519.

doi : 10.1177/147470490700500303 .

^ Sapolsky, Robert (April 2003) [2002].

"Belief and Biology" . The Freedom From Religion Foundation, Inc . Retrieved 12 May 2025 .

^ Guthrie, Stewart Elliot (1995).

Faces in the Clouds: A New Theory of Religion . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 0-19-506901-3 .

^ Boyer, Pascal .

"Functional Origins of Religious concepts" . Archived from the original on 2009-10-10 . Retrieved 2009-12-19 .

^ a b Boyer, Pascal (2001).

Religion Explained: The Evolutionary Origins of Religious Thought . Basic Books.

ISBN 0-465-00695-7 .

Bundled references ^ [ 12 ] [ 13 ] [ 14 ] [ 15 ] Further reading [ edit ] Robert Wright´s "The Evolution of God" Stewart Guthrie Faces in the clouds A New Theory of Religion ISBN 0-19-509891-9 .

Evolutionary psychology of religion Steven Pinker .

Adaptations, Exaptations, and Spandrels Attachment, Evolution, and the Psychology of Religion ISBN 1-59385-088-3 Atran, Scott In Gods We Trust: The Evolutionary Landscape of Religion ISBN 0-19-517803-3 Religious thought and behaviour as by-products of brain function Pascal Boyer Minds and Gods: The Cognitive Foundations of Religion By Todd Tremlin , 2006 ISBN 0-19-530534-5 Is Religion Adaptive? Yes, No, Neutral, but Mostly, We Don't Know External links [ edit ] International Association for the Cognitive Science of Religion v t e Religion Religious groups and denominations Western and Middle Eastern Abrahamic Judaism Orthodox Haredi Hasidic Modern Zionist Conservative Reform Karaite Haymanot Reconstructionist Renewal Humanistic list Christianity Catholicism Latin Eastern Eastern Orthodoxy Oriental Orthodoxy Nestorianism Ancient Assyrian Proto-Protestantism Hussites / Moravians Waldensians Protestantism Adventism Anabaptism Amish Brethren Hutterites Mennonites Schwenkfelder Church Anglicanism Baptists Calvinism Congregationalism Presbyterianism Reformed Charismatic Christianity Pentecostal Charismatic Neo-charismatic Evangelicalism Irvingism Lutheran Methodist Holiness Non-denominational Plymouth Brethren Quakerism Restorationism Esoteric The Christian Community Independent Catholicism Old Catholic Judaizers Nontrinitarianism Bible Students Associated Bible Students Free Bible Students Friends of Man Jehovah's Witnesses Kitawala Laymen's Home Missionary Movement Christadelphians Mormonism Oneness Pentecostalism Spiritual Swedenborgianism Tolstoyan Unitarianism list Islam Sunnism Ash'arism Maturidism Atharism Salafism Wahhabism Modernist Salafism Shi'ism Alawism Ali-Illahism Ismailism Twelver Shi'ism Zaydism Sufism Khawarij Ibadism Alevism Ishikism Kurdish Alevism Ahmadi Mahdavism Quranism Milah Abraham Non-denominational list Other Bábism Azalism Baháʼí Faith Druze Mandaeism Rastafari Samaritanism Iranian Zoroastrian Blagovery Ilm-e-Khshnoom Mazdaznan Zurvanism Kurdish Shabakism Yarsanism Other Assianism/Uatsdin Roshani Manichaeism Chinese Manichaeism Yazdânism Yazidism Eastern East Asian Chinese Chinese folk religion Confucianism Luoism Nuo Salvationist Xiantiandao Yiguandao Falun Gong Taoism Folk Taoism Yao Taoism Japonic Shinto list Shugendō New religions Tenrikyo Ryukyuan Korean Korean shamanism Cheondoism Jeungsanism Vietnamese Vietnamese folk religion Đạo Mẫu Caodaism Hoahaoism Đạo Bửu Sơn Kỳ Hương Indian Hinduism Vaishnavism Krishnaism Sri Vaishnavism Brahma Sampradaya Nimbarka Sampradaya Pushtimarg Mahanubhava Ramanandi Warkari Swaminarayan Shaivism Shaiva Siddhanta Ganapatya Kashmiri Kapalika Kaumaram Lingayatism Nath Balinese Shaktism Smartism Śrauta Sant Mat Neo-Hinduism list Buddhism Theravada Mahayana Chan / Zen / Thiền Amidism Nichiren Vajrayana Tibetan Neo-Buddhism list Other Ayyavazhi Kalash Jainism Digambara Śvetāmbara Sarnaism Kirat Mundhum Vedda religions Ravidassia Sikhism Khalsa Sects Ethnic Altaic Turko - Mongolic Burkhanism Tengrism Vattisen Yaly Tungusic Evenki Manchu Austroasiatic Sarnaism Austronesian Batak Parmalim Dayak Kaharingan Indonesian Aliran Kepercayaan Kejawèn Kapitayan Karo Pemena Malaysian Traditional Sabahan religions Philippine Dayawism Tagalog Polynesian Hawaiian Māori Sumbese Marapu Sundanese Wiwitan Native American Abenaki Alaskan Anishinaabe Ojibwe Midewiwin Wabunowin Apache Blackfoot Californian Kuksu Miwok Ohlone Pomo Chilote Choctaw Crow Ghost Dance / Sun Dance Guarani Haida Ho-Chunk Iroquois Cherokee Four Mothers Society Keetoowah Society Longhouse Mohawk Muscogee Creek Seneca Wyandot Jivaroan Kwakwakaʼwakw Lenape Mapuche Mesoamerican Aztec Maya Purépecha Muisca Native American Church Navajo Nuu-chah-nulth Pawnee Pueblo Acoma Pueblo Hopi Zuni Sioux Lakota Wocekiye Tsimshian Ute Washat Dreamers Yaqui Tai and Miao Ahom Hmongism Mo Satsana Phi Tibeto-Burmese Bon Burmese Benzhuism Bimoism Bathouism Bongthingism Dongba Donyi-Polo Gurung Heraka Kiratism Qiang Sanamahism Traditional African North African Berber Guanche church Sub-Saharan African Akamba Akan Baluba Bantu Kongo Zulu Bushongo Dinka Dogon Efik Fon and Ewe Ik Lotuko Lozi Lugbara Maasai Mbuti Odinala San Serer Tumbuka Urhobo Waaqeffanna Yoruba Ifá Diasporic : Candomblé Bantu Jejé Ketu Comfa Convince Espiritismo Kumina Obeah Palo Quimbanda Santería Tambor de Mina Trinidad Orisha Umbanda Vodou Voodoo Winti Other ethnic Aboriginal Australian Inuit Papuan Siberian New religious movements Syncretic Blagovery Brahmoism Chinese Falun Gong Coconut Religion Japanese Meivazhi Modekngei New Acropolis New Age New Thought Rajneesh Rastafari Sant Mat Radha Soami Spiritualism Subud Tensegrity Thelema Theosophy Neo-Theosophy Agni Yoga and Roerichism Transcendental Meditation Unitarian Universalism White Brotherhood Modern paganism African Godianism Armenian Baltic Dievturība Romuva Caucasian Abkhaz Circassian Celtic Druidry Germanic Hellenism (modern religion) Neoshamanism Ossetian Polytheistic reconstructionism Italo-Roman Kemetism Romanian Slavic Authentism Uralic Estonian Finnish Hungarian Mari Erzya Sámi Udmurt Wicca Zalmoxianism list De novo Anthroposophy The Christian Community Discordianism Eckankar Fourth Way Goddess Jediism Satanism Scientology UFO religion Raëlism Historical religions Prehistoric Paleolithic Ainu Armenian Baltic Latvian Lithuanian Old Prussian Basque Celtic Druidism Irish Cook Islands Dravidian Egyptian Atenism Etruscan Finnish Fuegian Selkʼnam Georgian Germanic Anglo-Saxon Continental Frankish Norse Greek Gnosticism Greco-Buddhism Hermeticism Mysteries Orphism Guanche Harappan Hittite Hungarian Hurrian Illinois Inca Jamaican Maroon Manichaeism Mazdakism Melanesian Mesopotamian Babylonian Sumerian Micronesian Nauruan indigenous religion Olmec Paleo-Balkan Albanian Dacian Illyrian Thracian Proto-Indo-Iranian Iranian Vedic Ancestral Pueblo Pueblo II Pueblo III Pueblo IV Rapa Nui Roman Cult of Magna Mater Gallo-Roman Imperial cult Mithraism Mysteries of Isis Natale di Roma Semitic Arabian Nabataean Babylonian Canaanite Punic Yahwism Scythian Slavic Somali Tongan Turkic Tengrism Urartu Vainakh Zapotec Topics Aspects Apostasy / Disaffiliation Behaviour Beliefs Call to prayer Laicism / Laity Covenant Conversion Deities Denomination Entheogens Faith God Goddess Meditation Monasticism Monk Novice Nun Mysticism Mythology Ordination Orthodoxy Orthopraxy Paganism Prayer Prophecy Religious experience Ritual Liturgy Purification Sacrifice Sacred space Bodies of water Groves Mountains Trees Soul Spirituality Supernatural Symbols Text Truth Water Worship Astral Fire Nature Place Theism Animism Deism Dualism Henotheism Monotheism Nontheism Pandeism Panentheism Pantheism Polytheism Transtheism Religious studies Anthropology Cognitive science Comparative Demographics Ethnic Folk Indigenous Major World Evolutionary origin of religion Evolutionary psychology History Neurotheology Philosophy Psychology Sociology Soteriology Salvation Theology Theories about religion Women Religion and society Agriculture Business Clericalism / Clergy Monasticism Ordination Priest Conversion Assimilation Missionary Proselytism Disability Education Fanaticism Freedom Pluralism Syncretism Toleration Universalism Fundamentalism Growth Gender Happiness LGBTQ people Homosexuality Intersex people Transgender people Minorities National church National religiosity levels Politics Populations Religiocentrism Schism School Science Sexuality State Suicide Theocracy Vegetarianism Video games Violence Persecution Terrorism War Sectarian Wealth Secularism and irreligion Agnosticism Antireligion Atheism Criticism Deconstruction Objectivism Secular humanism Secular religion Secular theology Secularization Separation of church and state Unaffiliated Overviews and lists Abrahamic prophets Deification Deities Founders Index Mass gatherings Names of God New religious movements Organizations Outline Religions and spiritual traditions Scholars Timeline Religion by country Africa Algeria Angola Benin Botswana Burkina Faso Burundi Cameroon Cape Verde Central African Republic Chad Comoros Democratic Republic of the Congo Republic of the Congo Djibouti Egypt Equatorial Guinea Eritrea Eswatini Ethiopia Gabon Gambia Ghana Guinea Guinea-Bissau Ivory Coast Kenya Lesotho Liberia Libya Madagascar Malawi Mali Mauritania Mauritius Morocco Mozambique Namibia Niger Nigeria Rwanda São Tomé and Príncipe Senegal Seychelles Sierra Leone Somalia South Africa South Sudan Sudan Tanzania Togo Tunisia Uganda Zambia Zimbabwe Asia Afghanistan Armenia Azerbaijan Bahrain Bangladesh Bhutan Brunei Cambodia China Cyprus Georgia Hong Kong India Indonesia Iran Iraq Israel Japan Jordan Kazakhstan Korea North Korea South Korea Kuwait Kyrgyzstan Laos Lebanon Macau Malaysia Maldives Mongolia Myanmar Nepal Oman Pakistan Palestine Philippines Qatar Saudi Arabia Singapore Sri Lanka Syria Taiwan Tajikistan Thailand Timor-Leste Turkey Turkmenistan United Arab Emirates Uzbekistan Vietnam Yemen Europe Albania Andorra Austria Belarus Belgium Bosnia and Herzegovina Bulgaria Croatia Czechia Denmark Estonia Finland France Germany Greece Hungary Iceland Ireland Italy Kosovo Latvia Liechtenstein Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Moldova Monaco Montenegro Netherlands North Macedonia Norway Poland Portugal Romania Russia San Marino Serbia Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden Switzerland Ukraine United Kingdom England Northern Ireland Scotland Wales North America Antigua and Barbuda Bahamas Barbados Belize Canada Costa Rica Cuba Dominica Dominican Republic El Salvador Grenada Guatemala Haiti Honduras Jamaica Mexico Nicaragua Panama Saint Kitts and Nevis Saint Lucia Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Trinidad and Tobago United States Oceania Australia Fiji Kiribati Marshall Islands Micronesia Nauru New Zealand Palau Papua New Guinea Samoa Solomon Islands Tonga Tuvalu Vanuatu South America Argentina Bolivia Brazil Chile Colombia Ecuador Guyana Paraguay Peru Suriname Uruguay Venezuela Category Portal v t e Evolutionary psychology History Evolutionary thought Theoretical foundations Adaptationism Cognitive revolution Cognitivism Gene selection theory Modern synthesis Criticism Evolutionary processes Adaptations Altruism Cheating Hamiltonian spite Reciprocal Baldwin effect By-products Evolutionarily stable strategy Exaptation Fitness Inclusive Kin selection Inbreeding avoidance Kin recognition Parental investment Parent–offspring conflict Mismatch Natural selection Sexual selection Costly signaling Male / female intrasexual competition Mate choice Sexual dimorphism Social selection Species-typical behavior Areas Cognition / Emotion Affect Display Display rules Facial expression Behavioral modernity Cognitive module / modularity of mind Adaptive unconscious / Unconscious cognition Automatic and controlled processes Cognitive specialization Computational theory of mind Domain generality Domain specificity / learning Dual process theory Cognitive tradeoff hypothesis Evolution of the brain Evolution of nervous systems Fight-or-flight response Arachnophobia Basophobia Ophidiophobia Folk biology / taxonomy Folk psychology / theory of mind Intelligence Flynn effect Wason selection task Motor control / skill Multitasking Numerical cognition Number sense Approximate number system Parallel individuation system Sleep Visual perception Color vision Eye Naïve physics Culture Aesthetics Literary criticism Musicology Anthropology Biological Crime Language Origin Psychology Speech Morality Moral foundations Religion Origin Universals Development Attachment Bonding Affectional / maternal / paternal bond Caregiver deprivation Childhood attachment Cinderella effect Cognitive development Education Language acquisition Personality development Socialization Human factors / Mental health Cognitive ergonomics Computer-mediated communication Engineering psychology Human–computer interaction Media naturalness theory Neuroergonomics Depression Digital media use and mental health Hypophobia Imprinted brain hypothesis Mind-blindness Psychological effects of Internet use Rank theory of depression Schizophrenia Screen time Smartphones and pedestrian safety Social aspects of television Societal effects of cars Distracted driving Lead–crime hypothesis Mobile phones and driving safety Texting while driving Sex Activity Adult attachment Age disparity Arousal Concealed ovulation Coolidge effect Desire Fantasy Hormonal motivation Incest taboo Westermarck effect Jealousy Mate guarding Mating preferences Mating strategies Orientation Ovulatory shift hypothesis Pair bond Physical / Sexual attraction Sexuality / male / female Sexy son hypothesis Sex differences Aggression Autism Cognition Crime Division of labour Emotional intelligence Empathising–systemising theory Gender role Intelligence Memory Mental health Narcissism Neuroscience Schizophrenia Substance abuse Suicide Variability hypothesis Related subjects Academic disciplines Behavioral / evolutionary economics Behavioral epigenetics / genetics Affective / behavioral / cognitive / evolutionary neuroscience Biocultural anthropology Biolinguistics Biological psychiatry Cognitive ethology Cognitive psychology Cognitive science Comparative psychology Cross-cultural psychology Ethology Evolutionary biology Evolutionary medicine Functional psychology Neuropsychology Philosophy of mind Population genetics Primatology Sociobiology Research topics Animal / comparative cognition Animal communication Animal consciousness Animal culture Animal language Animal navigation Animal training Animal-made art Cognitive bias Emotion g factor in non-humans Great ape language Human–animal communication Number sense Primate cognition Theory of mind Tool use Cultural evolution Evolutionary epistemology Missing heritability problem Unit of selection Coevolution Cultural group selection Dual inheritance theory Fisher's principle Group selection Hologenome theory Lamarckism / acquired characteristics Population Punctuated equilibrium Recent human evolution Species Species complex Transgenerational epigenetic inheritance Trivers–Willard hypothesis Theoretical positions Cultural selection theory Determinism / indeterminism Biological determinism Connectionism Cultural determinism Environmental determinism Nature versus nurture Psychological nativism Social constructionism Social determinism Standard social science model Functionalism Memetics Multilineal evolution Neo-Darwinism Neoevolutionism Sociocultural evolution Unilineal evolution Evolutionary psychologists Evolutionary psychology Psychology portal Evolutionary biology portal NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐lmwtk
Cached time: 20250817235441
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.811 seconds
Real time usage: 0.985 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 3635/1000000
Revision size: 29013/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 352402/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 3705/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 11/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 161815/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.413/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 6884164/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  688.062      1 -total
 43.87%  301.834      2 Template:Reflist
 21.06%  144.900     11 Template:Cite_book
 14.53%   99.972     14 Template:Cite_journal
 12.95%   89.086      1 Template:Spirituality_sidebar
 12.80%   88.088      1 Template:Religion_topics
 12.67%   87.172      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 12.27%   84.433      1 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
 10.01%   68.892      1 Template:Short_description
  6.09%   41.877      1 Template:Pn Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:14780759:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817235441 and revision id 1306128129. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Evolutionary_psychology_of_religion&oldid=1306128129 " Categories : Evolutionary psychology Psychology of religion Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from October 2018 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2019 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from May 2025 This page was last edited on 16 August 2025, at 03:03 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Evolutionary psychology of religion 9 languages Add topic

