Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Structure Toggle Structure subsection 1.1 Development 2 Function Toggle Function subsection 2.1 Aorta 2.2 Capillaries 3 Clinical significance 4 History 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Artery 100 languages العربية Aragonés ܐܪܡܝܐ Asturianu Azərbaycanca বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Башҡортса Беларуская Български Bosanski Català Čeština Cymraeg Dagbanli Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa ಕನ್ನಡ ქართული کٲشُر Қазақша Kiswahili Kreyòl ayisyen Kurdî Кыргызча ລາວ Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Lingua Franca Nova Magyar Македонски മലയാളം მარგალური Bahasa Melayu Монгол မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands नेपाली नेपाल भाषा 日本語 Нохчийн Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oromoo Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Piemontèis Plattdüütsch Polski Português Română Runa Simi Русский Shqip Simple English سنڌي Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் తెలుగు ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt Võro Winaray 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Arteries ) Blood vessels that carry blood away from the heart "Arteries" redirects here. For specific arteries, see List of arteries of the human body .

For other uses, see Artery (disambiguation) .

Artery Diagram of an artery Details System Circulatory system Identifiers Latin arteria ( plural : arteriae) Greek ἀρτηρία MeSH D001158 TA98 A12.0.00.003 TA2 3896 FMA 50720 Anatomical terminology [ edit on Wikidata ] An artery (from Greek ἀρτηρία (artēríā) ) [ 1 ] is a blood vessel in humans and most other animals that takes oxygenated blood away from the heart in the systemic circulation to one or more parts of the body. Exceptions that carry deoxygenated blood are the pulmonary arteries in the pulmonary circulation that carry blood to the lungs for oxygenation, and the umbilical arteries in the fetal circulation that carry deoxygenated blood to the placenta . It consists of a multi-layered artery wall wrapped into a tube-shaped channel.

Arteries contrast with veins , which carry deoxygenated blood back towards the heart; or in the pulmonary and fetal circulations carry oxygenated blood to the lungs and fetus respectively.

Structure [ edit ] Microscopic anatomy of an artery Cross-section of a human artery See also: Arterial tree The anatomy of arteries can be separated into gross anatomy , at the macroscopic level , and microanatomy , which must be studied with a microscope . The arterial system of the human body is divided into systemic arteries , carrying blood from the heart to the whole body, and pulmonary arteries , carrying deoxygenated blood from the heart to the lungs .

Large arteries (such as the aorta) are composed of many different types of cells, namely endothelial, smooth muscle, fibroblast, and immune cells.

[ 2 ] As with veins, the arterial wall consists of three layers called tunics, namely the tunica intima , tunica media , and tunica externa , from innermost to outermost. The externa , alternatively known as the tunica adventitia , is composed of collagen fibers and elastic tissue —with the largest arteries containing vasa vasorum , small blood vessels that supply the walls of large blood vessels.

[ 3 ] Most of the layers have a clear boundary between them, however the tunica externa has a boundary that is ill-defined. Normally its boundary is considered when it meets or touches the connective tissue.

[ 4 ] Inside this layer is the tunica media , which is made up of smooth muscle cells, elastic tissue (also called connective tissue proper ) and collagen fibres.

[ 3 ] The innermost layer, which is in direct contact with the flow of blood, is the tunica intima . The elastic tissue allows the artery to bend and fit through places in the body. This layer is mainly made up of endothelial cells (and a supporting layer of elastin rich collagen in elastic arteries). The hollow internal cavity in which the blood flows is called the lumen .

Development [ edit ] Further information: Angiogenesis and Vasculogenesis Arterial formation begins and ends when endothelial cells begin to express arterial specific genes, such as ephrin B2 .

[ 5 ] Function [ edit ] Arteries form part of the human circulatory system This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Artery" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( May 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Main article: Circulatory system Arteries form part of the circulatory system . They carry blood that is oxygenated after it has been pumped from the heart .

Coronary arteries also aid the heart in pumping blood by sending oxygenated blood to the heart, allowing the muscles to function. Arteries carry oxygenated blood away from the heart to the tissues, except for pulmonary arteries , which carry blood to the lungs for oxygenation (usually veins carry deoxygenated blood to the heart but the pulmonary veins carry oxygenated blood as well).

[ 6 ] There are two types of unique arteries. The pulmonary artery carries blood from the heart to the lungs , where it receives oxygen. It is unique because the blood in it is not "oxygenated", as it has not yet passed through the lungs. The other unique artery is the umbilical artery , which carries deoxygenated blood from a fetus to its mother.

Arteries have a blood pressure higher than other parts of the circulatory system. The pressure in arteries varies during the cardiac cycle . It is highest when the heart contracts and lowest when heart relaxes . The variation in pressure produces a pulse , which can be felt in different areas of the body, such as the radial pulse .

Arterioles have the greatest collective influence on both local blood flow and on overall blood pressure. They are the primary "adjustable nozzles" in the blood system, across which the greatest pressure drop occurs. The combination of heart output ( cardiac output ) and systemic vascular resistance , which refers to the collective resistance of all of the body's arterioles , are the principal determinants of arterial blood pressure at any given moment.

Arteries have the highest pressure and have narrow lumen diameter.

[ clarification needed ] Systemic arteries are the arteries (including the peripheral arteries ), of the systemic circulation , which is the part of the cardiovascular system that carries oxygenated blood away from the heart, to the body , and returns deoxygenated blood back to the heart. Systemic arteries can be subdivided into two types—muscular and elastic—according to the relative compositions of elastic and muscle tissue in their tunica media as well as their size and the makeup of the internal and external elastic lamina. The larger arteries (>10  mm diameter) are generally elastic and the smaller ones (0.1–10 mm) tend to be muscular. Systemic arteries deliver blood to the arterioles , and then to the capillaries , where nutrients and gasses are exchanged.

After traveling from the aorta , blood travels through peripheral arteries into smaller arteries called arterioles , and eventually to capillaries .

Arterioles help in regulating blood pressure by the variable contraction of the smooth muscle of their walls, and deliver blood to the capillaries . This smooth muscle contraction is primarily influenced by activity of the sympathetic vasomotor nerves innervating  the arterioles.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] Enhanced  sympathetic activation prompts vasoconstriction, reducing the lumen diameter. A reduced lumen diameter consequently elevates the blood pressure within the arterioles.

[ 9 ] Conversely, decreased sympathetic activity within the vasomotor nerves causes vasodilation of the vessels thereby decreasing blood pressure.

[ 10 ] Aorta [ edit ] Main article: Aorta The aorta is the largest blood vessel in human body.

The aorta is the root systemic artery (i.e., main artery). In humans, it receives blood directly from the left ventricle of the heart via the aortic valve . As the aorta branches and these arteries branch, in turn, they become successively smaller in diameter, down to the arterioles . The arterioles supply capillaries , which in turn empty into venules . The first branches off of the aorta are the coronary arteries , which supply blood to the heart muscle itself. These are followed by the branches of the aortic arch, namely the brachiocephalic artery , the left common carotid , and the left subclavian arteries.

Capillaries [ edit ] Main article: Capillaries The capillaries are the smallest of the blood vessels and are part of the microcirculation . The microvessels have a width of a single cell in diameter to aid in the fast and easy diffusion of gasses, sugars and nutrients to surrounding tissues. Capillaries have no smooth muscle surrounding them and have a diameter less than that of red blood cells ; a red blood cell is typically 7 micrometers outside diameter, capillaries typically 5 micrometers inside diameter. The red blood cells must distort in order to pass through the capillaries.

These small diameters of the capillaries provide a relatively large surface area for the exchange of gasses and nutrients.

Clinical significance [ edit ] Diagram showing the effects of atherosclerosis on an artery Systemic arterial pressures are generated by the forceful contractions of the heart's left ventricle . High blood pressure is a factor in causing arterial damage. Healthy resting arterial pressures are relatively low, mean systemic pressures typically being under 100 mmHg (1.9 psi ; 13 kPa ) above surrounding atmospheric pressure (about 760 mmHg, 14.7 psi, 101 kPa at sea level). To withstand and adapt to the pressures within, arteries are surrounded by varying thicknesses of smooth muscle which have extensive elastic and inelastic connective tissues . The pulse pressure, being the difference between systolic and diastolic pressure, is determined primarily by the amount of blood ejected by each heart beat, stroke volume , versus the volume and elasticity of the major arteries.

A blood squirt , also known as an arterial gush, is the effect when an artery is cut due to the higher arterial pressures. Blood is spurted out at a rapid, intermittent rate, that coincides with the heartbeat. The amount of blood loss can be copious, can occur very rapidly, and be life-threatening.

[ 11 ] Over time, factors such as elevated arterial blood sugar (particularly as seen in diabetes mellitus ), lipoprotein , cholesterol , high blood pressure , stress and smoking , are all implicated in damaging both the endothelium and walls of the arteries, resulting in atherosclerosis . Atherosclerosis is a disease marked by the hardening of arteries. This is caused by an atheroma or plaque in the artery wall and is a build-up of cell debris, that contain lipids , (cholesterol and fatty acids ), calcium [ 12 ] [ 13 ] and a variable amount of fibrous connective tissue .

Accidental intra-arterial injection either iatrogenically or through recreational drug use can cause symptoms such as intense pain, paresthesia and necrosis . It usually causes permanent damage to the limb;  often amputation is necessary.

[ 14 ] History [ edit ] Further information: Circulatory system § History Among the Ancient Greeks before Hippocrates , all blood vessels were called Φλέβες, phlebes . The word arteria then referred to the windpipe .

[ 15 ] Herophilos was the first to describe anatomical differences between the two types of blood vessel. While Empedocles believed that the blood moved to and fro through the blood vessels, there was no concept of the capillary vessels that join arteries and veins, and there was no notion of circulation.

[ 16 ] Diogenes of Apollonia developed the theory of pneuma , originally meaning just air but soon identified with the soul itself, and thought to co-exist with the blood in the blood vessels.

[ 17 ] The arteries were thought to be responsible for the transport of air to the tissues and to be connected to the trachea . This was as a result of finding the arteries of cadavers devoid of blood.

In medieval times, it was supposed that arteries carried a fluid, called "spiritual blood" or "vital spirits", considered to be different from the contents of the veins . This theory went back to Galen . In the late medieval period, the trachea , [ 18 ] and ligaments were also called "arteries".

[ 19 ] William Harvey described and popularized the modern concept of the circulatory system and the roles of arteries and veins in the 17th century.

Alexis Carrel at the beginning of the 20th century first described the technique for vascular suturing and anastomosis and successfully performed many organ transplantations in animals; he thus actually opened the way to modern vascular surgery that was previously limited to vessels' permanent ligation.

References [ edit ] ^ ἀρτηρία , Henry George Liddell, Robert Scott, A Greek-English Lexicon , on Perseus ^ Scipione, Corey A.; Hyduk, Sharon J.; Polenz, Chanele K.; Cybulsky, Myron I. (December 2023).

"Unveiling the Hidden Landscape of Arterial Diseases at Single-Cell Resolution" .

Canadian Journal of Cardiology .

39 (12): 1781– 1794.

doi : 10.1016/j.cjca.2023.09.009 .

PMID 37716639 .

^ a b Steve, Paxton; Michelle, Peckham; Adele, Knibbs (2003).

"The Leeds Histology Guide" .

^ Sidawy, Anton (2019).

Rutherford's Vascular Surgery and Endovascular Therapy . Amsterdam, Netherlands: Elsevier, Inc. pp.

34– 48.

ISBN 9780323427913 .

^ Swift, MR; Weinstein, BM (Mar 13, 2009).

"Arterial-venous specification during development" .

Circulation Research .

104 (5): 576– 88.

doi : 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.108.188805 .

PMID 19286613 .

^ Maton, Anthea; Jean Hopkins; Charles William McLaughlin; Susan Johnson; Maryanna Quon Warner; David LaHart; Jill D. Wright (1999).

Human Biology and Health . Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey: Prentice Hall.

ISBN 0-13-981176-1 .

^ Aalkjær, Christian; Nilsson, Holger; De Mey, Jo G. R. (2021-04-01).

"Sympathetic and sensory-motor nerves in peripheral small arteries" .

Physiological Reviews .

101 (2): 495– 544.

doi : 10.1152/physrev.00007.2020 .

ISSN 0031-9333 .

PMID 33270533 .

S2CID 227282958 .

^ Bruno, Rosa Maria; Ghiadoni, Lorenzo; Seravalle, Gino; Dell'Oro, Raffaella; Taddei, Stefano; Grassi, Guido (2012).

"Sympathetic regulation of vascular function in health and disease" .

Frontiers in Physiology .

3 : 284.

doi : 10.3389/fphys.2012.00284 .

ISSN 1664-042X .

PMC 3429057 .

PMID 22934037 .

^ Renna, Nicolás F.; de las Heras, Natalia; Miatello, Roberto M. (2013-07-22).

"Pathophysiology of Vascular Remodeling in Hypertension" .

International Journal of Hypertension .

2013 : e808353.

doi : 10.1155/2013/808353 .

ISSN 2090-0384 .

PMC 3736482 .

PMID 23970958 .

^ Schwarzwald, Colin C.; Bonagura, John D.; Muir, William W. (2009-01-01), Muir, William W.; Hubbell, John A. E. (eds.), "Chapter 3 - The Cardiovascular System" , Equine Anesthesia (Second Edition) , Saint Louis: W.B. Saunders, pp.

37– 100, ISBN 978-1-4160-2326-5 , retrieved 2023-11-17 ^ "U.S. Navy Standard First Aid Manual, Chapter 3 (online)" . Retrieved 3 Feb 2003 .

^ Bertazzo, S.

et al.

Nano-analytical electron microscopy reveals fundamental insights into human cardiovascular tissue calcification.

Nature Materials 12 , 576-583 (2013).

^ Miller, J. D. Cardiovascular calcification: Orbicular origins.

Nature Materials 12 , 476-478 (2013).

^ Sen MD, Surjya; Nunes Chini MD Phd, Eduardo; Brown MD, Michael J. (June 2005).

"Complications After Unintentional Intra-arterial Injection of Drugs: Risks, Outcomes, and Management Strategies" (Online archive of Volume 80, Issue 6, Pages 783–795, June 2005 Mayo Clinic Proceedings) .

Mayo Clinic Proceedings .

80 (6). MAYO Clinic: 783– 95.

doi : 10.1016/S0025-6196(11)61533-4 .

PMID 15945530 . Retrieved 25 August 2014 .

Unintentional intra-arterial injection of medication, either iatrogenic or self-administered, is a source of considerable morbidity. Normal vascular anatomical proximity, aberrant vasculature, procedurally difficult situations, and medical personnel error all contribute to unintentional cannulation of arteries in an attempt to achieve intravenous access. Delivery of certain medications via arterial access has led to clinically important sequelae, including paresthesias, severe pain, motor dysfunction, compartment syndrome, gangrene, and limb loss. We comprehensively review the current literature, highlighting available information on risk factors, symptoms, pathogenesis, sequelae, and management strategies for unintentional intra-arterial injection. We believe that all physicians and ancillary personnel who administer intravenous therapies should be aware of this serious problem.

^ The heart and the vascular system in ancient Greek medicine. From Alcmaeon to Galen. Oxford University Press 1973, special edition for Sandpiper Books 2001. ISBN 0-19-858135-1 p.24 ^ The heart and the vascular system in ancient Greek medicine. From Alcmaeon to Galen. Oxford University Press 1973, special edition for Sandpiper Books 2001. ISBN 0-19-858135-1 p.18 ^ The heart and the vascular system in ancient Greek medicine. From Alcmaeon to Galen. Oxford University Press 1973, special edition for Sandpiper Books 2001. ISBN 0-19-858135-1 p.26 ^ Oxford English Dictionary.

^ Shakespeare, William. Hamlet Complete, Authoritative Text with Biographical and Historical Contexts, Critical History, and Essays from Five Contemporary Critical Perspectives. Boston: Bedford Books of St. Martins Press, 1994. pg. 50.

External links [ edit ] Look up artery in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Arteries .

Human arterial system v t e Human systems and organs Musculoskeletal system Skeletal system Bone Carpus Collar bone (clavicle) Thigh bone (femur) Fibula Humerus Mandible Metacarpus Metatarsus Ossicles Patella Phalanges Radius Skull Tarsus Tibia Ulna Rib Vertebra Pelvis Sternum Cartilage Joints Fibrous joint Cartilaginous joint Synovial joint Muscular system Muscle Tendon Diaphragm Circulatory system Cardiovascular system peripheral Artery Vein Lymphatic vessel Heart Lymphatic system primary Bone marrow Thymus secondary Spleen Lymph node CNS equivalent Glymphatic system Nervous system Brain Spinal cord Nerve Sensory system Ear Eye Somatic system Tissue Integumentary system Skin Subcutaneous tissue Breast Mammary gland Haematopoietic and immune systems Myeloid Myeloid immune system Lymphoid Lymphoid immune system Respiratory system Upper Nose Nasopharynx Larynx Lower Trachea Bronchus Lung Digestive system Mouth Salivary gland Tongue Lip Tooth upper GI Oropharynx Laryngopharynx Esophagus Stomach lower GI Small intestine Appendix Colon Rectum Anus accessory Liver Biliary tract Pancreas Urinary system Genitourinary system Kidney Ureter Bladder Urethra Reproductive system Male Scrotum Penis Prostate Testicle Seminal vesicle Female Uterus Vagina Vulva Ovary Placenta Endocrine system Pituitary Pineal Thyroid Parathyroid Adrenal Islets of Langerhans v t e Arteries and veins Vessels Arteries Nutrient artery Arteriole Metarteriole Elastic artery Capillaries Types Continuous Fenestrated Sinusoidal Precapillary sphincter Precapillary resistance Veins Vena comitans Superficial vein Deep vein Perforator vein Emissary veins Venous plexus Venule Lymph Lymphatic vessel Lymph Lymph capillary Circulatory system Systemic Left heart → Aorta → Arteries → Arterioles → Capillaries → Venules → Veins → Vena cava → ( Right heart ) Pulmonary Right heart → Pulmonary arteries → Lungs → Pulmonary vein → ( Left heart ) Microanatomy Microvessel Microcirculation Tunica intima Endothelium Internal elastic lamina Tunica media Tunica externa Vasa vasorum Vasa nervorum Vascular nerves Rete mirabile Circulatory anastomosis Arteries in the human body v t e Arteries of the head and neck CCA ECA sup. thyroid superior laryngeal sternocleidomastoid branch infrahyoid branch cricothyroid branch glandular branches asc. pharyngeal posterior meningeal pharyngeal branches inferior tympanic lingual suprahyoid dorsal lingual deep lingual sublingual facial cervical branches ( ascending palatine , tonsillar , submental , glandular ) facial branches ( inferior labial superior labial / nasal septum lateral nasal angular ) occipital sternocleidomastoid meningeal occipital auricular descending post. auricular stylomastoid stapedial auricular occipital supf. temporal transverse facial middle temporal ( zygomatico-orbital ) anterior auricular frontal parietal maxillary 1st part / mandibular anterior tympanic deep auricular middle meningeal ( superior tympanic , petrosal ) accessory meningeal inferior alveolar 2nd part / pterygoid to muscles of mastication ( deep temporal , pterygoid , masseteric ) buccal 3rd part / pterygopalatine posterior superior alveolar infraorbital ( anterior superior alveolar ) descending palatine ( greater palatine , lesser palatine ) artery of the pterygoid canal sphenopalatine ( posterior septal branches , posterior lateral nasal ) pharyngeal ICA cervical carotid sinus petrous Vidian caroticotympanic cavernous / ophthalmic orbital group: anterior ethmoidal posterior ethmoidal lacrimal ( lateral palpebral ) medial palpebral terminal ( supraorbital , supratrochlear , dorsal nasal ) ocular group: central retinal ciliary ( short posterior , long posterior , anterior ) Circulus arteriosus major hypophysial ( superior , inferior ) brain Circle of Willis ACA ( anterior communicating , Recurrent artery of Heubner , Orbitofrontal artery ) MCA ( anterolateral central , Prefrontal artery , Superior terminal branch , Inferior terminal branch , Anterior temporal branch ) posterior communicating anterior choroidal ScA vertebral artery meningeal spinal ( posterior , anterior ) basilar : pontine labyrinthine cerebellar ( AICA , SCA , PICA ) cerebral ( PCA ) thyrocervical trunk inferior thyroid inferior laryngeal tracheal esophageal ascending cervical pharyngeal glandular branches transverse cervical superficial branch deep branch / dorsal scapular scapular anastomosis suprascapular acromial branch scapular anastomosis costocervical trunk deep cervical Supreme Intercostal artery v t e Arteries of the torso and chest Lungs Pulmonary artery Right Left ( Ligamentum arteriosum ) Heart Coronary circulation Right coronary : SA nodal AV nodal Atrial Right marginal Posterior descending Left coronary : Left anterior descending Left circumflex ( Left marginal ) Aorta Sections Ascending aorta Aortic arch Descending aorta Thoracic aorta Abdominal aorta Aortic body Aortic arch Brachiocephalic Thyreoidea ima Right subclavian Right common carotid Left common carotid External carotid Internal carotid Carotid body Carotid sinus Carotid bifurcation Left subclavian Internal thoracic : Anterior intercostal Thymic Pericardiacophrenic Perforating branches terminal ( Musculophrenic , superior epigastric ) Costocervical trunk : Highest intercostal ( Posterior intercostal 1–2 ) Deep cervical Descending aorta visceral: Bronchial Esophageal Mediastinal parietal: Posterior intercostal 3–11 Subcostal Superior phrenic v t e Arteries of the abdomen and pelvis Abdominal aorta Inferior phrenic Superior suprarenal Celiac Left gastric Esophageal branches Common hepatic Proper hepatic cystic Right gastric Gastroduodenal right gastroepiploic superior pancreaticoduodenal supraduodenal Splenic Pancreatic branches greater dorsal Short gastrics Left gastroepiploic Superior mesenteric Inferior pancreaticoduodenal Intestinal jejunal ileal arcades vasa recta Ileocolic colic anterior cecal posterior cecal ileal branch appendicular Right colic Middle colic Marginal Suprarenal Middle suprarenal Renal Inferior suprarenal Ureteral Gonadal Testicular artery Ovarian artery Lumbar Lumbar arteries Inferior mesenteric Left colic Marginal Sigmoid Superior rectal Common iliac Internal iliac Posterior surface Iliolumbar Lumbar branch Iliac branch Anterior surface Superior vesical artery Umbilical artery Medial umbilical ligament to ductus deferens Obturator Anterior branch Pubic branch Posterior branch Acetabular branch Cruciate anastomosis Corona mortis Middle rectal Vaginal branch ♀ / Prostatic branch ♂ Uterine ♀ Arcuate Vaginal branches Ovarian branches Tubal branches Spiral Vaginal ♀ / Inferior vesical ♂ Inferior gluteal Accompanying of sciatic nerve Cruciate anastomosis Internal pudendal Inferior rectal Perineal posterior scrotal posterior labial Bulb of penis / vestibule Urethral Deep artery of the penis helicine Deep artery of clitoris Dorsal of the penis Dorsal of the clitoris External iliac Inferior epigastric Corona mortis Deep circumflex iliac Femoral see arteries of lower limbs Median sacral Coccygeal glomus v t e Arteries of the human arm Axillary Shoulder before teres minor 1st part Superior thoracic artery 2nd part Thoracoacromial artery pectoral branch acromial branch clavicular branch deltoid branch Lateral thoracic artery 3rd part Subscapular artery scapular anastomosis circumflex scapular artery thoracodorsal artery anterior humeral circumflex artery posterior humeral circumflex artery Brachial Arm before cubital fossa profunda brachii radial collateral medial collateral ulnar collateral superior inferior Radial artery forearm radial recurrent wrist/carpus Dorsal carpal branch dorsal carpal arch Palmar carpal branch deep palmar arch hand Superficial palmar branch princeps pollicis radialis indicis artery superficial palmar arch Median artery median artery Ulnar artery forearm ulnar recurrent anterior posterior common interosseous anterior posterior interosseous recurrent wrist/carpus Dorsal carpal branch dorsal carpal arch Palmar carpal branch superficial palmar arch Arterial Arches Dorsal carpal arch dorsal metacarpal dorsal digital Palmar carpal arch superficial palmar arch common palmar digital proper palmar digital deep palmar arch palmar metacarpal v t e Arteries of the human leg Inferior epigastric cremasteric ♂ / round ligament ♀ Deep circumflex iliac no major branches Femoral In femoral canal superficial epigastric superficial circumflex iliac superficial external pudendal deep external pudendal anterior scrotal ♂ Descending genicular saphenous branch articular branches Deep femoral artery medial circumflex femoral ascending descending superficial deep acetabular lateral circumflex femoral descending transverse ascending perforating Cruciate anastomosis Trochanteric anastomosis Popliteal Genicular superior genicular ( medial , lateral ) middle genicular inferior genicular ( medial , lateral ) Sural no major branches Anterior tibial tibial recurrent posterior anterior anterior malleolar medial lateral dorsalis pedis : tarsal ( medial , lateral ) Tibial-fibular (Tibial-peroneal) trunk Posterior tibial circumflex fibular medial plantar lateral plantar fibular (peroneal) Arches arcuate dorsal metatarsal first dorsal metatarsal deep plantar dorsal digital arteries plantar arch plantar metatarsal common plantar digital proper plantar digital Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic Israel Other Terminologia Anatomica Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐m9dxj
Cached time: 20250817043738
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.799 seconds
Real time usage: 1.030 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 4316/1000000
Revision size: 19820/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 508971/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 90521/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 16/100
Expensive parser function count: 12/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 123405/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.459/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 13257190/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  816.725      1 -total
 29.90%  244.188     33 Template:Navbox
 21.32%  174.130      1 Template:Reflist
 13.36%  109.109      6 Template:Cite_journal
 11.23%   91.741      1 Template:Human_systems_and_organs
 11.03%   90.098      1 Template:Infobox_anatomy
 10.50%   85.729      1 Template:Infobox
 10.49%   85.681      1 Template:Human_arteries
 10.22%   83.460      1 Template:Navboxes
  8.87%   72.446      1 Template:Short_description Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:36790:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817043738 and revision id 1291940564. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Artery&oldid=1291940564 " Categories : Angiology Cardiovascular physiology Cardiovascular system Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from May 2024 All articles needing additional references Wikipedia articles needing clarification from May 2024 Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 24 May 2025, at 09:04 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Artery 100 languages Add topic

