Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biographical background 2 Purpose 3 Structure 4 Influence 5 References 6 Bibliography 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Academica (Cicero) 6 languages Català Français Italiano Português Română Suomi Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Text on Greek philosophy by Cicero (45 BC) Academica Title page of Cicero’s Academica, edited by Johann August Goerenz Author Cicero Language Classical Latin Subject Academic Skepticism Genre Philosophy Publication date May, 45 BCE Publication place Roman Republic Preceded by Hortensius Followed by De finibus bonorum et malorum The Academica (also On Academic Skepticism , Academici Libri or Academic Books ) is work in a fragmentary state written by the Academic Skeptic philosopher Cicero published in two editions. The first edition is referred to as the Academica Priora.

It was released in May 45 BCE and comprised two books, known as the Catulus and the Lucullus.

The Catulus has been lost. Cicero subsequently extensively revised and expanded the work, releasing a second edition comprising four books. Except for part of Book 1 and 36 fragments, all of the second edition has been lost. The second edition is referred to as Academica Posteriora or Academici Libri or Varro.

The Academica was the second of five books written by Cicero in his attempt to popularise Greek philosophy in Ancient Rome , and it is the only one of the five books that exclusively focused on promoting Academic Skepticism, the school of Hellenistic philosophy to which Cicero belonged. It was preceded by the now-lost Hortensius which argued that the pursuit of philosophy is the most important endeavor one can engage in their leisure time.

Biographical background [ edit ] Marcus Tullius Cicero , the author of the Academica .

Just before Cicero turned his efforts to writing books on philosophy he experienced a series of hardships.

Gaius Julius Caesar had become both dictator and consul in 46 BCE, and was subverting elements of the Roman Senate , of which the decidedly republican Cicero was a fervent supporter.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Cicero had divorced his wife Terentia in 46 BCE, [ 3 ] and in 45 BC he married Publilia, a rich young girl in his ward , although the marriage quickly fell apart.

[ 4 ] In February 45 BCE, Cicero's daughter, Tullia , whom he loved greatly, died after giving birth.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] These misfortunes shook him to his core, with the death of his daughter being most disturbing. In a letter to his friend , Titus Pomponius Atticus , Cicero wrote, "I have lost the one thing that bound me to life." Cicero soon found that the only thing which enabled him to get on with life was reading and writing. He retreated to his villa at Astura , where he isolated himself and composed his philosophical works.

[ 7 ] Purpose [ edit ] In the Academica Cicero aimed to present a complicated series of philosophical debates that had spanned over 250 years.

The first layer in this series has four main stages, and concerns the debates between the Stoics and Academic Skeptics about epistemology from the third and second centuries BCE.

1.

Zeno of Citium , the founder of Stoicism, made and defended his novel epistemological claims ( katalepsis ) which were attacked by his contemporary, Arcesilaus , scholarch of the Platonic Academy and the founder of Academic Skepticism. (Circa 275 to 240 BCE).

2. Zeno's views were reformulated and defended against Arcesilaus by Chrysippus . (Circa 240 to 210 BCE).

3. Chrysippus' defense was elaborated on by his student Diogenes of Babylon and attacked with renewed vigor by the Academic Skeptic Carneades . (Circa 170 to 150 BCE).

4. Carneades' arguments were opposed by Diogenes' student Antipater of Tarsus , and the nature of Carneades' skepticism was disputed by Carneades' students Clitomachus and Metrodorus of Stratonicea . (Circa 140 to 110 BCE).

The second layer of arguments is about intra-Academic disputes about the most consistent form of skepticism. This layer has three main stages.

1.

Philo of Larissa , scholarch of the Academy, abandoned the radical skepticism of his teacher, Clitomachus, and adopted a form of mitigated skepticism. (Circa 100 to 90 BCE).

2. Philo's position was criticized and rejected by two of his students, Aenesidemus and Antiochus of Ascalon . Aenesidemus continued to adhere to radical skepticism. He left the Academy and adopted Pyrrhonism , in doing so either reviving or re-founding the school that Pyrrho had started and who had influenced Arcislaus to found Academic Skepticism. Antiochus abandoned skepticism and founded a syncretic school that revived the doctrines of the Old Academy , combining them with doctrines of the Peripatetic school , but relying on Stoic epistemology.  (Circa late 90s BCE).

3. Due to pressure from his critics, Philo abandoned mitigated skepticism for a form of naturalistic fallibilism , which was criticized by Antiochus and by Academics who still adhered to skepticism. (Circa 80s BCE).

The third and final layer of arguments is with the Roman interlocutors in Cicero's dialogues. These are set in 62 BCE in the first edition and 45 BCE in the second edition.

[ 8 ] Structure [ edit ] The surviving parts of the Academica are structured with book 1 of the second edition serving as the beginning, abbreviated as "Ac. 1", with the Lucullus , the second book of the first edition, following, abbreviated as "Ac. 2".

The first edition is set on two consecutive days in 62 BCE. The conversation is among four prominent Roman leaders: Quintus Lutatius Catulus Capitolinus , Quintus Hortensius , Lucius Licinius Lucullus , and Cicero. The conversation on the first day takes place in the seaside villa of Catullus, for the Catullus, The Lucullus takes place the second day in the seaside villa of Hortensius.  In the dialogue, Lucullus insists that he is repeating Antiochus ' arguments from memory. Catullus says he is repeating his father's views, which appear to be the same as Philo's initial views. Hortensius denies that he has any philosophical expertise. Cicero champions the Academic Skeptic views of Clitomachus .

[ 9 ] The second edition Cicero titled Academica Liberi ("Academic Books"). This edition comprised four books. All of this edition is lost except for a substantial portion of book 1 and 36 fragments. Cicero's motivation for the revision was that the characters he had chosen for the dialogue in the first edition were unsuitable for technical philosophical arguments the dialogue contained.

[ 10 ] He replaced all of the interlocutors except himself. The new interlocutors were Marcus Terentius Varro , who was a follower of Antiochus, and Titus Pomponius Atticus , an Epicurean . This edition was set in the spring of 45 BCE, at Varro's villa on Lucrine Lake .

Book 1: Varro presents Antiochus' history of philosophy. Cicero gives an alternative history from the perspective of Academic Skepticism.

Book 2: Cicero presents a series of skeptical arguments against the veridicality of the senses.

Book 3: This book corresponded closely with the speech Lucullus gave in the Lucullus.

Book 4: This book corresponded closely with the speech Cicero gave in the Lucullus.

Influence [ edit ] Augustine of Hippo Augustine of Hippo (354–430 CE), who ultimately systematized Christian philosophy, was initially an adherent of Manichaeism . After eight or nine years of adhering to the Manichaean faith (as an "auditor", the lowest level in the sect's hierarchy), he turned from Manichaeism, taking up skepticism , which he subsequently rejected in favor of Christianity. In 386 CE, he published Contra Academicos (Against the Academic Skeptics) which argued against Cicero's claims in the Academica on the following grounds: Objection from Error: Through logic, Augustine argued that philosophical skepticism does not lead to eudaimonia as the Academic Skeptics claimed. In summary: A wise man lives according to reason, and thus is able to be happy.

Someone who is searching for knowledge but never finds it is in error.

Imperfection objection: People in error are not happy, because being in error is an imperfection, and people cannot be happy with an imperfection.

Conclusion: Someone who is still seeking knowledge cannot be happy.

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] Error of Non-Assent: Augustine's argument that epoche (suspending belief) does not fully prevent one from error. In summary: Introduction of the error: Let P be true. If a person fails to believe P due to epoche in order to avoid error, this is committing an error.

The Anecdote of the Two Travelers: Travelers A and B are trying to reach the same destination. At a fork in the road, a poor shepherd tells them to go left. Traveler A believes him and reaches the correct destination. Traveler B instead believes the advice of a well-dressed townsman to go right, because his advice seems more persuasive. However, the townsman is actually a samardocus (con man) so Traveler B never reaches the correct destination.

The Anecdote of the Adulterer: A man suspends belief that adultery is bad, and commits adultery with another man's wife because it is persuasive to him. Under Academic Skepticism, this man cannot be charged because he acted on what was persuasive to him without assenting belief.

Conclusion: Suspending belief exposes individuals to an error as defined by the Academic Skeptics.

[ 11 ] References [ edit ] ^ Taylor (1963) , p. 487.

^ Strauss (2016) , pp. 18–20.

^ Treggiari (2007) , p. 131.

^ Salisbury (2001) , p. 345.

^ Eder & Strothmann (2006) .

^ Taylor (1963) , pp. 487–88.

^ Taylor (1963) , p. 488.

^ Brittain(2006) , pp. xiii - xix ^ Brittain(2006) , pp. xii ^ Cicero , ad Atticus 13 ^ a b Dutton, Blake D. (2016-02-25).

Augustine and academic skepticism : a philosophical study . Ithaca.

ISBN 9781501703553 .

OCLC 951625897 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ Hick, John (1970).

Classical and contemporary readings in the philosophy of religion (2nd ed.). Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall.

ISBN 978-0131352698 .

OCLC 90682 .

Bibliography [ edit ] Library resources about Academica (Cicero) Online books Resources in your library Resources in other libraries Brittain, Charles (2006).

On Academic Scepticism .

Indianapolis, IN : Hackett Publishing.

ISBN 0-87220-774-9 .

Strauss, Barry (2016).

The Death of Caesar: The Story of History's Most Famous Assassination .

New York City, NY : Simon and Schuster .

ISBN 978-1-4516-6881-0 .

Taylor, John Hammond (1963). "St. Augustine and the 'Hortensius' of Cicero".

Studies in Philology .

60 (3): 487– 498.

JSTOR 4173424 .

Treggiari, Susan (2007).

Terentia, Tullia and Publilia: The Women of Cicero's Family .

London, UK : Routledge .

ISBN 978-1-134-26456-8 .

Salisbury, Joyce E.

(2001).

Encyclopedia of Women in the Ancient World .

Santa Barbara, CA : ABC-CLIO .

ISBN 978-1-57607-092-5 .

Eder, Walter; Strothmann, Meret (2006).

"Tullia" . In Hubert Cancik; Helmuth Schneider; Christine F. Salazar; Manfred Landfester; Francis G. Gentry (eds.).

Brill's New Pauly, Antiquity Volumes .

doi : 10.1163/1574-9347_bnp_e1222290 .

ISBN 9789004122598 . Archived from the original on July 8, 2019 . Retrieved February 12, 2018 .

(subscription required) External links [ edit ] Academic_Questions translated by Charles Duke Yonge (1891), at Wikisource Cicero: Academica translated by H. Rackham (1933), at attalus.org The Academica of Cicero , Latin edition by James S. Reid (1874), at Project Gutenberg v t e Marcus Tullius Cicero Personal life Political career Writings Treatises Rhetoric and politics De Inventione De Oratore Book III De Partitionibus Oratoriae De Optimo Genere Oratorum Brutus Orator De Legibus Philosophical Hortensius Academica Consolatio De Finibus Bonorum et Malorum Tusculanae Disputationes De Natura Deorum De Divinatione De Fato Cato Maior de Senectute Laelius de Amicitia De Officiis De Re Publica Somnium Scipionis Paradoxa Stoicorum Marcus Tullius Cicero Orations Political De Imperio Cn. Pompei In Catilinam I–IV In Toga Candida Pro Milone Pro Marcello Philippicae Judicial Pro Quinctio Pro Roscio Amerino Divinatio in Caecilium In Verrem Pro Tullio Pro Caecina Pro Cluentio Pro Archia Poeta Pro Caelio Letters Epistulae ad Atticum Epistulae ad Brutum Epistulae ad Familiares Epistulae ad Quintum Fratrem Portrayals Cicero at His Villa at Tusculum (1839 painting) Related Summum bonum Terentia (wife) Tullia (daughter) Cicero Minor (son) Quintus Tullius Cicero (brother) Cicero, Illinois Cicero, New York v t e Philosophical skepticism Skeptical philosophies Academic Skepticism Ajñana Cartesian Charvaka Humeanism Pyrrhonism Solipsism Skeptical philosophers Sanjaya Belatthiputta Xenophanes Xeniades Metrodorus of Chios Anaxarchus Nausiphanes Pyrrho Timon Academic skeptics Arcesilaus Diocles of Cnidus Lacydes Telecles and Evander Hegesinus Carneades Hagnon of Tarsus Metrodorus of Stratonicea Aristanax Clitomachus Charmadas Aeschines of Neapolis Philo of Larissa Cicero Gaius Aurelius Cotta Dio of Alexandria Aenesidemus Favorinus Agrippa Sextus Empiricus Jayarāśi Bhaṭṭa Nicholas of Autrecourt Montaigne Pierre Charron Francisco Sanches Uriel da Costa William Chillingworth René Descartes Simon Foucher Pierre Bayle David Hume Gottlob Ernst Schulze William Drummond Benson Mates Peter Unger Robert Fogelin Skeptical scenarios Acatalepsy Aporia Brain in a vat Dream argument Epoche Evil demon Five-minute hypothesis Münchhausen trilemma Ignoramus et ignorabimus Problem of the criterion Problem of induction Reductio ad absurdum Regress argument Simulation hypothesis Suspension of judgment Wax argument Responses Here is one hand Semantic externalism Process reliabilism Epistemic closure Contextualism Relativism Skeptical philosophical literature Barhaspatya sutras Academica ( Cicero ) Outlines of Pyrrhonism Against the Dogmatists Against the Mathematicians Essays ( Montaigne ) Discourse on the Method A Treatise of Human Nature Aenesidemus Types of skepticism Radical Local Moral Scientific Religious Jewish skeptics Pseudoskepticism Authority control databases International VIAF 2 National Germany United States France BnF data Australia Vatican Israel Other IdRef 2 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Academica_(Cicero)&oldid=1291947057 " Categories : Philosophical works by Cicero Dialogues Works about skepticism Hidden categories: CS1 maint: location missing publisher Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Pages containing links to subscription-only content This page was last edited on 24 May 2025, at 10:04 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Academica (Cicero) 6 languages Add topic

