Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 History 3 Purpose 4 Collectibility 5 Commercial uses 6 See also 7 Notes 8 References 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Pamphlet 30 languages العربية Bosanski Dansk Deutsch Español فارسی Français Gaeilge 한국어 हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia עברית Кыргызча Magyar मराठी Bahasa Melayu नेपाली 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Português Shqip Simple English Suomi Svenska ไทย ייִדיש 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Unbound book This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Pamphlet" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( February 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) An 18th-century painting of a girl with a basket of pamphlets Due to their low cost and ease of production, pamphlets have often been used to popularize political or religious ideas.

A pamphlet is an unbound book (that is, without a hard cover or binding ). Pamphlets may consist of a single sheet of paper that is printed on both sides and folded in half, in thirds, or in fourths, called a leaflet or it may consist of a few pages that are folded in half and saddle stapled at the crease to make a simple book.

In the "International Standardization of Statistics Relating to Book Production and Periodicals", UNESCO defines a pamphlet as "a non- periodical printed publication of 5 to 48 pages, excluding covers, published in a specific country and available to the public," while a book is "a non-periodical printed publication of at least 49 pages, excluding covers." These definitions are intended solely for UNESCO's book production statistics.

[ 1 ] Etymology [ edit ] The word pamphlet for a small work ( opuscule ) issued by itself without covers came into Middle English c.

1387 as pamphilet or panflet , generalized from a twelfth-century amatory comic poem with a satiric flavor, Pamphilus, seu de Amore ('Pamphilus: or, Concerning Love'), written in Latin .

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Pamphilus's name is derived from the Greek name Πάμφιλος , meaning "beloved of all".

[ 4 ] The poem was popular and widely copied and circulated on its own, forming a slim codex .

History [ edit ] The pamphlet form of literature has been used for centuries as an economical vehicle for the broad distribution of information.

See also: Pamphlet wars The earliest appearance of the word is in The Philobiblon (1344; ch. viii) of Richard de Bury , who speaks of " panfletos exiguos " {'little pamphlets'}.

[ 5 ] Its modern connotations of a tract concerning a contemporary issue was a product of the heated arguments leading to the English Civil War ; this sense appeared in 1642.

[ 3 ] In some European languages, this secondary connotation, of a disputatious tract, has come to the fore: compare libelle , from the Latin libellus , denoting a "little book".

[ a ] Pamphlets functioned in place of magazine articles in the pre-magazine era, which ended in the mid-nineteenth century. There were hundreds of them in the United States alone. They were a primary means of communication for people interested in political and religious issues, such as slavery . Pamphlets never looked at both sides of a question; most were avowedly partisan , trying not just to inform but to convince the reader.

Purpose [ edit ] A 1918 Finnish propaganda pamphlet signed by General Mannerheim circulated by the Whites urging the Reds to surrender during the Finnish Civil War . English: To the residents and troops of Tampere ! Resistance is hopeless. Raise the white flag and surrender. The blood of the citizen has been shed enough. We will not kill like the Reds kill their prisoners. Send your representative with a white flag.

Pamphlets can contain anything from information on kitchen appliances to medical information and religious treatises. Pamphlets are very important in marketing because they are cheap to produce and can be distributed easily to customers. Pamphlets have also long been an important tool of political protest and political campaigning for similar reasons.

A pamphleteer is a historical term for someone who produces or distributes pamphlets, especially for a political cause.

Collectibility [ edit ] Due to their ephemeral nature and to the wide array of political and religious perspectives given voice by the format's ease of production, pamphlets are prized by many book collectors . Substantial accumulations have been amassed and transferred to ownership of academic research libraries around the world.

Particularly comprehensive collections of American political pamphlets are housed at New York Public Library , the Tamiment Library of New York University , and the Jo Labadie collection at the University of Michigan .

[ 7 ] Commercial uses [ edit ] The pamphlet has been widely adopted in commerce, particularly as a format for marketing communications. There are numerous purposes for pamphlets, such as product descriptions or instructions, corporate information, events promotions or tourism guides and they are often used in the same way as leaflets or brochures.

See also [ edit ] Brochure Chapbook Flyer (pamphlet) Folded leaflet Long-form journalism Notes [ edit ] ^ In German, French, Spanish and Italian pamphlet often has negative connotations of slanderous libel or religious propaganda; idiomatic neutral translations of the English, pamphlet include flugblatt and broschüre in German; fascicule in French; and folleto in Spanish. In Russian and Romanian, the word памфлет in Russian Cyrillic; pamflet in Romanian, also normally connotes a work of propaganda or satire, so it is best translated as "brochure" ( брошюра in Russian; broşură in Romanian).

[ 6 ] References [ edit ] ^ "Recommendation concerning the International Standardization of Statistics Relating to Book Production and Periodicals: UNESCO" .

portal.unesco.org . Archived from the original on 2012-05-29.

^ s.v.

"pamphlet" .

Oxford English Dictionary (Online ed.).

Oxford University Press .

(Subscription or participating institution membership required.) ^ a b Harper, Douglas.

"pamphlet" .

Online Etymology Dictionary .

^ πάμφιλος .

Liddell, Henry George ; Scott, Robert ; A Greek–English Lexicon at the Perseus Project .

^ Tedder, Henry Richard (1911).

"Pamphlets" . In Chisholm, Hugh (ed.).

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 20 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. pp.

659– 661.

[Contains an extensive history of the pamphlet form from the 14th century, in England, France, and Germany].

^ "De definiții pentru pamflet" .

DEX online : Dicționare ale limbii române .

^ Johnson, Oakley C. (1974).

Marxism in United States History Before the Russian Revolution (1876–1917) . New York: Published for A.I.M.S. by Humanities Press. p. vii.

ISBN 0-391-00326-7 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Pamphlets .

Randy Silverman, 1987. "Small, Not Insignificant: a Specification for a Conservation Pamphlet Binding Structure", The Book and Paper Group Annual 6 .

Historical overview focusing on pamphlet binding.

19th Century British Pamphlets Online.

Information about a project that digitised 26,000 19th century pamphlets from UK research libraries.

19th Century Pamphlet Collection.

Collection of 19th-century pamphlets, predominantly of Irish interest and covering a broad spectrum of subjects. A UCD Digital Library Collection.

19th Century Social History Pamphlets Collection.

Collection of pamphlets relating to 19th century Irish social history, particularly the themes of education, health, famine, poverty, business and communications. A UCD Digital Library Collection.

v t e Paper products Containers Box Carton Cigarette pack Coffee cup sleeve Corrugated box Corrugated fiberboard Envelope Molded pulp Oyster pail Paper bag Paper cup Paperboard Shipping tube Hygiene Facial tissue Napkin Paper towel Toilet paper Wet wipe Stationery Continuous stationery Greeting card Index card Letter Manila folder Notebook Postage stamp Postcard Post-it note Financial Banknote Business card Coupon Paper money Passbook Visiting card Decorations Ingrain wallpaper Mat Wallpaper Media Book Magazine Newspaper Newsprint Pamphlet Recreation Confetti Paper craft Paper toys Playing card Quilling Other Drink coaster Filter paper Form Paper model Sandpaper Security paper v t e Academic publishing Journals Academic journal Public health Papers Paper Abstract Review article Position paper Literature review Grey literature Working paper White paper Technical report Annual report Pamphlet Essay Lab notes Other publication types Thesis Collection of articles Patent Biological Chemical Book Monograph Chapter Treatise Poster session Proceedings Impact and ranking Acknowledgment index Altmetrics Article-level metrics Author-level metrics Bibliometrics C-score Journal ranking Eigenfactor g-index h -index Impact factor Rankings of academic publishers Science-wide author databases of standardized citation indicators Scientometrics SCImago Journal Rank Citation cartel Reform and access Academic journal publishing reform Open access Citation advantage Serials crisis Sci-Hub #ICanHazPDF Versioning Preprint Postprint Version of record Erratum Retraction Indexes and search engines Google Scholar AMiner BASE CORE Semantic Scholar Scopus Web of Science Paperity OpenAlex Index Copernicus ERIH PLUS Sherpa Romeo OpenAIRE Related topics Imprint Scientific writing Peer review Scholarly communication Scientific literature Learned society Open research Open scientific data ORCID Electronic publishing Ingelfinger rule Least publishable unit " Publish or perish " Lists Academic databases and search engines Academic journals Copyright policies Highly Cited Researchers Open-access journals Preprint policies Scientific journals Style/formatting guides University presses Authority control databases International FAST National Germany United States Czech Republic Israel Other NARA 2 Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐dx8kq
Cached time: 20250814222633
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.489 seconds
Real time usage: 0.627 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2164/1000000
Revision size: 8625/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 68681/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 3504/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 3/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 50297/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.335/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 15208331/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  533.545      1 -total
 25.39%  135.458      2 Template:Reflist
 17.21%   91.808     13 Template:Lang
 13.34%   71.191      3 Template:Cite_web
 12.88%   68.698      2 Template:Navbox
 12.64%   67.443      1 Template:Paper_products
 11.24%   59.982      1 Template:Commons_category
 10.91%   58.189      1 Template:Sister_project
 10.66%   56.870      1 Template:Side_box
  9.73%   51.929      1 Template:Short_description Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:264757:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814222633 and revision id 1283417642. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Pamphlet&oldid=1283417642 " Categories : Pamphlets Advertising publications by format Paper products Hidden categories: Articles containing German-language text Articles containing French-language text Articles containing Spanish-language text Articles containing Russian-language text Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from February 2024 All articles needing additional references Articles containing Middle English (1100-1500)-language text Articles containing Latin-language text Articles containing explicitly cited English-language text Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 1 April 2025, at 11:40 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Pamphlet 30 languages Add topic

