Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Latin Averroism 2 Neoplatonism and Aristotelianism 3 Revival in the Renaissance 4 Revival in continental philosophy 5 See also 6 References Toggle the table of contents Double truth 13 languages Čeština Eesti Ελληνικά Español Français Հայերեն 日本語 Polski Português Русский Suomi Türkçe Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia View that religion and philosophy might arrive at contradictory truths For Buddhist principle, see Two truths doctrine .

This article is about the religious philosophical theory. For statements that are both true and false, see Dialetheism .

Double-truth theory is "the view that religion and philosophy , as separate sources of knowledge, might arrive at contradictory truths without detriment to either".

[ 1 ] Latin Averroism [ edit ] In medieval Europe, the Church was specifically opposed to " Latin Averroists " (see Averroës ), such as the prominent Averroist Siger of Brabant . It sought to halt the spread of certain of Aristotle 's doctrines — those that dealt with physical science [ 2 ] [ 3 ] (see Aristotelian physics , Condemnations of 1210-1277 ), which the reconquest of Spain and, accordingly, access to the libraries of the Moors had re-introduced into the Latin literate world.

[ citation needed ] Neoplatonism and Aristotelianism [ edit ] At the time, much of the theology of the Roman Catholic Church was influenced by Neoplatonic ideas, and Aristotelianism struck many as heretical .

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] Siger and others seem to have conceded this, and to have used the sharp reason/faith distinction that came to be known as "double truth" as a way of legitimizing discussion of Aristotle despite that concession.

[ 6 ] The teachings of Aristotle came to be accepted as second only to the teachings of the Church.

Thomas Aquinas , in his Summa Theologica (1267–73), rejected Neoplatonism and stated that there can be no conflict between reason and faith.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] Revival in the Renaissance [ edit ] Questions remained, and again came to the fore when scientists such as Copernicus made discoveries which seemed to contradict scripture.  The doctrine of "double truth" was revived by the scholastics under the rubric "two truths".  Thus, according to the scholastics, there was a lesser truth, that the Earth circled the Sun, as Copernicus said, and a greater truth, that when Joshua fought at Jericho it was the Sun, not the Earth, which stood still.  The scholastics held that both "truths" were true in their own sphere.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] Francis Bacon exemplifies this concept in his book The Advancement of Learning arguing that the fact that revelation was contrary to reason is what gave value to faith.

[ 11 ] Revival in continental philosophy [ edit ] John Sallis , described by Simon Critchley as the first distinctive voice in American continental philosophy , addresses the question of 'double truth', bringing to it both his formative experiences as a student of classical philosophy as well as his commanding understanding of continental philosophy. In his 'Double Truth' (1995) he reframes the problem, suggesting that 'truth is the double of being' (xii).

[ 12 ] See also [ edit ] Faith and rationality Natural theology Non-overlapping magisteria Postliberal theology References [ edit ] ^ "double-truth theory" .

Encyclopædia Britannica .

^ Gilson, Etienne, Reason and Revelation in the Middle Ages , Charles Scribner's Sons 1938 (1966 Reprint), pp. 19-30 ^ See, e.g., Gilson, Etienne, "La doctrine de la double vérité," Études de philosophie médiévale (1921), pp. 51-69; translated as, History of Christian Philosophy in the Middle Ages (1955).

^ John Francis Quinn (1973).

The historical constitution of St. Bonaventure's philosophy . PIMS.

ISBN 978-0-88844-023-5 .

^ "The Metaphysics of John Duns Scotus", pathways (essays) , Fr. Seamus Mulholland ^ See, e.g., ^ St Thomas Aquinas Summa Theologica (translated by Fathers of the English Dominican Province), Christian Classics, 1981, ISBN 0-87061-063-5 ISBN 978-0870610639 .

^ "The Battle of Aristotle", Arthur Little, Studies: An Irish Quarterly Review, Vol. 36, No. 141 (Mar., 1947), pp. 57–68 ^ Will Durant, The Reformation , Simon and Schuster, 1957.

^ See also: Dictionary of the History of Ideas Double Truth Archived May 6, 2009, at the Wayback Machine ^ The History of Western Philosophy by Bertrand Russell (1947), Allen & Unwin, p. 564.

^ John Sallis, Double Truth: Religion and the Representation of the Past (SUNY Press, 1995). Reviewed by Steve W. Davis, 'Truth Otherwise than Truth: Wonder' Research in Phenomenology 26 (1996), pp. 276–283.

[1] and Michael D. Barber, Modern Schoolman 73 (2):186-186 (1996).

[2] . Also the subject of chapter ten of Berndard Freydburg, The Thought of John Sallis: Phenomenology, Plato, Imagination [DOI: 10.2307/j.ctv47w64n.19].

v t e Catholic philosophy Ethics Cardinal virtues Divine command Just price Just war Probabilism Natural law Personalism Seven virtues Social teaching Option for the poor Social mortgage Theological virtues Virtue ethics Schools Medieval Augustinianism Scholasticism Thomism Scotism Occamism Modern Salamanca Christian humanism Cartesianism Molinism Neo-scholasticism Analytical Thomism Universals Augustinian realism Nominalism Conceptualism Moderate realism Scotistic realism Other Theological intellectualism Theological voluntarism Foundationalism Philosophers Abelard Adler Albertus Alcuin Anscombe Anselm Aquinas Augustine Bacon Boethius Bonaventure Chateaubriand Chesterton Clement Cusa Descartes Dionysius Erasmus Eriugena Ficino Gassendi Isidore Krasicki Llull Lombard MacIntyre Maistre Malebranche Maritain Montaigne More Newman Occam Pascal Pico Rahner Ratzinger Scheler Scotus Stein Suárez Wojtyła Concepts Actus Essendi Actus primus Actus purus Aevum Augustinian values Cardinal virtues Cartesian dualism Cogito, ergo sum Dehellenization Differentia Disputation Divine illumination Double truth Evil demon Formal distinction Guardian angel Haecceity Head of a pin Homo unius libri Infused righteousness Memento mori Occam's razor Ontological argument Pascal's wager Peripatetic axiom Principle of double effect Quiddity Quinque viae Rota Fortunae Seven deadly sins Theodicy Augustinian Irenaean Trademark argument Univocity Utopia Related Catholic theology Platonism Aristotelianism Neoplatonism Islamic philosophy Doctor of the Church Renaissance Rationalism Empiricism Phenomenology Catholicism portal Philosophy portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Double_truth&oldid=1285830209 " Categories : Scholasticism Religious philosophical concepts Truth Phenomenology Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2012 This page was last edited on 16 April 2025, at 02:16 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Double truth 13 languages Add topic

