Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Name 2 Artists 3 Subjects and style 4 Drawings and miniatures 5 Notes 6 References 7 Further reading 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Antwerp Mannerism 7 languages Български Català Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Français Nederlands Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Northern Renaissance art movement Master of the Von Groote Adoration , the Von Groote Adoration of the Magi , with at left King David receiving the Emissaries of the Twelve Tribes and right The Queen of Sheba before Solomon Jan van Dornicke , The Marriage of the Virgin , Saint Louis Art Museum Antwerp Mannerism refers to the style of a group of largely anonymous painters active in the southern Netherlands, principally in Antwerp , in roughly the first three decades of the 16th century. The movement marks the tail end of Early Netherlandish painting and an early phase within Dutch and Flemish Renaissance painting . The style bore no relation to Italian Mannerism , which it mostly predates by a few years, but the name suggests that it was a reaction to the "classic" style of the earlier Flemish painters , [ 1 ] [ 2 ] just as the Italian Mannerists were reacting to, or trying to go beyond, the classicism of High Renaissance art.

The Antwerp Mannerists' style is certainly "mannered", and "characterized by an artificial elegance.  Their paintings typically feature elongated figures posed in affected, twisting, postures, colorful ornate costumes, fluttering drapery, Italianate architecture decorated with grotesque ornament, and crowded groups of figures...".

[ 3 ] Joseph Koerner notes "a diffuse sense of outlandishness in Antwerp art, of an exoticism both of subject and means ... evoking a non-localized elsewhere".

[ 4 ] Adoration of the Magi by anonymous Antwerp Mannerist The subject of the Adoration of the Magi was a particular favourite, as it allowed the artists to give free rein to their preoccupation with ornament and the simulation and imitation of luxury products.

[ 5 ] The Biblical Magi were also regarded as the patron saints of travellers and merchants, which was relevant for the painters' clientele in what had become Europe's main centre for international trade, in a "meteoric rise" after 1501, when the first Asian cargos were landed by Portuguese ships.

[ 6 ] The theme of rich commodities arriving from distant and exotic parts of the world had a natural appeal to Antwerp merchant buyers, a large proportion themselves foreign.  Many artists from around the Netherlands and further afield moved to the city to benefit from the boom, which saw large workshops "that grew into assembly lines", and a great increase in the quantity of art produced, but also some fall in quality; this is especially seen among the minor figures grouped under this term.

[ 7 ] Many smaller works were produced without commissions, for sale from shop windows, at fairs, or to dealers, rather than for an individual commission, an indication of a growing trend in Netherlandish painting.  The Antwerp Pand was a trade fair lasting six weeks, where many painters sold works, and the latest ideas were exchanged and diffused.

[ 8 ] Although sometimes spoken of as the "subterm "Antwerp Mannerism" as part of "Northern Mannerism in the early sixteenth century", [ 9 ] the movement is better distinguished from the Northern Mannerism of later in the century, which developed from Italian Mannerism . There was very little continuity between the two, with Northern Mannerism proper developing in the Netherlands only after a gap of about fifty years after Antwerp Mannerism declined in the 1530s, and after the next stylistic wave of Romanism , [ 10 ] heavily influenced by Italian painting, as seen in the later works of Gossaert .

Name [ edit ] Master of the Lille Adoration triptych of the Adoration of the Magi , Museum Boijmans Van Beuningen , Rotterdam The term Antwerp Manierists was first used in 1915 by Max Jakob Friedländer in his work Die Antwerpener Manieristen von 1520 , in which he made a first attempt to put order in the growing number of works from the Netherlands that were catalogued under the "name of embarrassment 'pseudo- Herri met de Bles ' " (usually now "Pseudo Bles" or "Pseudo-Blesius").

[ 11 ] Friedländer used the term Antwerp Mannerism here as synonymous for "Antwerp style".

[ 12 ] Even though he added the location 'Antwerp' to name the artists and placed them in the year 1520,  Friedländer made it clear that he did not intend to limit the group strictly to Antwerp and the time period to circa 1520, even though he was of the opinion that most of the "pseudo-Bles' works originated from Antwerp and Antwerp workshops.

[ 13 ] Friedländer placed the works attributed to the group in a time period between 1500 and 1530.

[ 14 ] Despite the name Antwerp Mannerism the style was not limited to Antwerp. The style also appeared in the north of France and the Northern Netherlands.

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] Artists [ edit ] The Nativity by Jan de Beer , 1515–1525.

Although attempts have been made to identify the individual artists that were part of this movement, most of the paintings remain attributed to anonymous masters as the paintings were not signed.  This anonymity has contributed to a lack of knowledge about or popularity of their works.  Only a minority of the works have been attributed. The makers of the altarpieces have been given notnames based on any external knowledge about the works such as an inscription, a previous owner, the place where it was kept or a date found on the work. These include as the Pseudo-Bles, the Master of the Von Groote Adoration , the Master of Amiens, the Master of the Antwerp Adoration and the Master of 1518 .  Works that cannot be attributed directly to a named master are attributed to Anonymous Antwerp Mannerist .

[ 17 ] The Master of the Lille Adoration is a new figure, first proposed in 1995.

[ 18 ] There is evidence that some workshops developed division of labour, with different artists specializing in figures, landscape or architectural backgrounds, and dividing the work on a particular painting between them, and different workshops specializing in one or two subjects.

[ 19 ] Compositions were often copied, repeated or adapted; for example at least six versions of an Adoration of the Magi triptych composition by Joos van Cleve and his workshop are known, though varying considerably in size, with the widths of the centre panel ranging from 56 to 93 cm.

[ 20 ] It has been possible to identify some of the artists.

Jan de Beer , Jan de Molder , the Master of 1518 (possibly Jan Mertens or Jan van Dornicke ) and Adriaen van Overbeke are some of the identified artists who are regarded as Antwerp Mannerists.

[ 16 ] The early paintings of Jan Gossaert and Adriaen Isenbrandt (in Bruges ) also show characteristics of the style.

[ 21 ] The paintings combine Early Netherlandish and Northern Renaissance styles, and incorporate both Flemish and Italian traditions into the same compositions.

[ 22 ] [ 23 ] A particular problem is that Antwerp was very badly hit by the Beeldenstorm of 1566, when a large proportion of the altarpieces in the churches were destroyed by iconoclastic rioters.  Some of these are documented and probably many were signed, which would have helped greatly in attributing the mostly smaller paintings that have survived; these were no doubt still in private houses.  The Sack of Antwerp or "Spanish Fury" of 1576, by unpaid Spanish troops caused much further destruction.

Master of the Antwerp Adoration (and workshop), The Holy Family with Two Saints , c.

1520 Elsewhere in the Netherlands, artists in the large workshop of Cornelis Engebrechtsz.

in Leiden seem to have pulled their reluctant master in the Mannerist direction, [ 24 ] and at least the extravagant clothes and architectural settings are seen in the otherwise more solidly based works of the Master of Delft and in Haarlem Jan Mostaert .  The Antwerp workshop of Joos van Cleve (probably originally German) could work in the style, as well as others.

[ 25 ] Subjects and style [ edit ] The Antwerp Mannerists typically depicted religious subjects, which they interpreted generally in a more superficial manner than the Flemish artists of the previous century in favour of a more fluid form and an abundance of meticulously rendered details.

[ 26 ] Although one scholar has described Friedlander's label as "utterly inefficient as a stylistic guide", [ 27 ] there are communalities. Their "essentially late Gothic style is characterized by calligraphically complicated compositions peopled with elongated, theatrically-dressed figures animated by improbable poses and repetitive gestures".

[ 28 ] According to James Snyder, "Receptivity, not originality, characterises the style of Antwerp painting, resulting in a hodgepodge of modes that are nearly impossible to sort out... With some effort, a few basic tendencies can be discerned which include selective eclecticism and archaism in terms of style, Mannerism in matters of taste, and specialization in subject matter." [ 29 ] Master of 1518 , triptych with Raising of Lazarus , Last Supper , and Mary Magdalene with donor portrait The compositions typically include architectural ruins.  The architecture is initially Gothic but later Renaissance motifs become dominant.

[ 30 ] [ 31 ] The "antique" style appears in paintings when hardly any built examples existed in the Low Countries , any more than ruins from Roman architecture .  The Mannerist painters show very little evidence of having visited Italy (where Jan Gossaert had been in 1508–09), and their idea of alla antica style must be derived from Italian prints, and sometimes drawings.  At this period painters or other artists were the usual designers of buildings, especially their ornament, and until a court case in Utrecht in 1543, master-masons were prohibited from doing so there by guild restrictions.

[ 32 ] Adoration of the Magi , with left King David receiving the Emissaries of the Twelve Tribes and right The Queen of Sheba before Solomon , c.

1515 , given to the "Pseudo-blesius", Prado .

[ 33 ] The fantastic and exotic costumes many characters wear were already a feature of Early Netherlandish painting in the previous century, and the Biblical Magi and their retinues gave one of the most typical settings for this.  They seem to derive partly from theatrical contexts, such as tableaux vivants in royal entries and other pageants, which artists were often asked to design.

[ 34 ] Another influence was the visit of the Byzantine Emperor John VIII Palaiologos and his 700-strong retinue to the Ferrara stage of the Council of Florence in 1438.  They were drawn by Pisanello and others, and the drawings were copied across Europe. The emperor's stylish hat, with a long pointed peak in front, seen on the Medal of John VIII Palaeologus , was especially popular, and versions appear in a good proportion of paintings of the Magi (as in some illustrated here).  The large costumes were also useful in concealing deficiencies in the artists' figure drawing, which the complicated poses would otherwise have exposed.

[ 35 ] The artists liked "chromatic" colouring, as was becoming fashionable in Italy, and coleur changeante transitions between colours in fabrics, imitating silks (called cangiante in Italy).

[ 36 ] Compositional elements, especially figures, are often taken from outside sources, especially prints, but also drawings which appear to have been passed around within and perhaps between workshops:"Thus background groups are endlessly repeated, the same repoussoire figures fill in a variety of empty corners, and stock poses answer many demands".

[ 37 ] The prints of Albrecht Dürer were the most common easily traceable source.

[ 38 ] Woodcut style also influenced the type of underdrawing revealed by special photography, "extremely detailed underdrawing with an elaborate system of shading (hatching and crosshatching) and broad, curling contour lines". This is sometimes described as using the "woodcut convention" or having the "woodcut look".

[ 39 ] Although "detailed underdrawing in the woodcut convention appears labor intensive, it simplified the production process and saved on costs".

[ 40 ] Apart from the Adoration of the Magi , many of the panels or triptychs produced by the Antwerp Mannerists depicted the major events in the Life of Christ , including the Nativity ,  and the Crucifixion.

[ 26 ] [ 41 ] Larger triptych altarpieces for churches might have several small scenes on the reverses of the hinged wings, [ 42 ] giving the "closed view" which was displayed most of the time, the wings only being opened perhaps on Sundays or feast days (or for visitors on a small payment to the sacristan ).

Drawings and miniatures [ edit ] A number of highly finished drawings in the Antwerp style, possibly copies of paintings, can be shown to have been used as the basis for miniatures in illuminated manuscript books of hours made in France, probably around Tours , by the so-called "1520s Hours Workshop".  At the same time the continuing Ghent-Bruges style of illumination had little influence in French manuscripts.

[ 43 ] Jan de Beer , Martyrdom of Saint Sebastian Adriaen van Overbeke Triptych of the crucifixion , Maagdenhuis, Antwerp Notes [ edit ] ^ Snyder, 402 ^ Janson, H.W.; Janson, Anthony F. (1997).

History of Art (5th, rev. ed.). New York: Harry N. Abrams, Inc.

ISBN 0-8109-3442-6 .

^ Konowitz, p. 180 ^ Koerner, 53 (re-arranged) ^ Elizabeth A. H. Cleland, Grand Design: Pieter Coecke van Aelst and Renaissance Tapestry , Metropolitan Museum of Art, 6 October 2014 ^ Koerner, 55; Ainsworth, 35; Wisse; Snyder, 399-400 ^ Snyder, 400-401 ^ Ainsworth, 36–37, 314; Koerner, 48 ^ Wisse ^ Snyder, 402 ^ Max J. Friedländer: Die Antwerpener Manieristen von 1520. In: Jahrbuch der königlich preußischen Kunstsammlungen 36, 1915, p. 65–91, p. 65 (in German) ^ Kolder Weij, Hermesdorf, Huvenne:.. The painting of the Low Countries, Part 1. Amsterdam University Press, 2006, p. 174 ^ Max J. Friedländer, 1915, p. 66 ^ Max J. Friedländer, 1915, p. 86 ^ Wisse; Snyder, 401 ^ a b ExtravagAnt! Antwerp pictures for the European market 1500–1525 at Codart ^ Wisse ^ Konowicz, throughout ^ Ainsworth, 36, 262, 268 ^ Leeflang, 63 ^ Snyder, 419-421 ^ "Maniëristen, Antwerpse".

Winkler Prins encyclopedia (8 ed.). 1975.

^ Wisse ^ Snyder, 456 ^ Snyder, 412-418; Leeflang, 63 ^ a b "H. Bex-Verschaeren" "Meester van de Antwerpse aanbidding ", in: Openbaar Kunstbezit, 1965 (in Dutch) ^ Van Den Brink, 166 ^ Orth, 79 ^ Snyder, 400-401 ^ De schilderkunst der Lage Landen: De Middeleeuwen en de zestiende eeuw , Amsterdam University Press, 2006, p. 172-175 (in Dutch) ^ Koerner, 48 ^ Kavaler, 31–36 ^ Prado note ^ Ainsworth, 260 ^ Snyder, 401; see for example the exposed leg at bottom left in the Crucificxion triptych in the gallery.

^ Ainsworth, 260 ^ Orth, 79 (quoted); Wisse ^ Orth, 80 ^ Leeflang, 65 ^ Leeflang, 66 ^ Snyder, 402 ^ Van Den Brink, throughout ^ Orth, 79 References [ edit ] Ainsworth, Maryan Wynn et al., From Van Eyck to Bruegel: Early Netherlandish Paintings in the Metropolitan Museum of Art , 2009, Metropolitan Museum of Art, 2009.

ISBN 0-8709-9870-6 , google books Kavaler, Ethan Matt, in Ainsworth, Maryan Wynn (ed), Man, Myth, and Sensual Pleasures: Jan Gossart's Renaissance : the Complete Works , 2010, Metropolitan Museum of Art, ISBN 1588393984 9781588393982, fully online Koerner, Joseph Leo , "The Epihany of the Black Magus Circa 1500" in, Bindman, D., Gates, H. L.

(2010).

The Image of the Black in Western Art: From the "Age of Discovery" to the Age of Abolition: artists of the Renaissance and Baroque , United Kingdom: Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, "Adoration+of+the+Magi"+Jan+Mostaert+Rijksmuseum&pg=PA53 google books Konowitz, Ellen. "Dirk Vellert and the Master of the Lille Adoration: Some Antwerp Mannerist Paintings Reconsidered." Oud Holland , vol. 109, no. 4, 1995, pp. 177–190, JSTOR . Accessed 20 Dec. 2020.

Leeflang, Micha. "Joos Van Cleve's "Adoration of the Magi" in Detroit: Revealing the Underdrawing," Bulletin of the Detroit Institute of Arts 82, no. 1/2 (2008): 60-75. Accessed January 3, 2021.

JSTOR Orth, Myra D. "Antwerp Mannerist Model Drawings in French Renaissance Books of Hours: A Case Study of the 1520s Hours Workshop." The Journal of the Walters Art Gallery 47 (1989): 61-90. Accessed December 31, 2020.

JSTOR Snyder, James .

Northern Renaissance Art , 1985, Harry N. Abrams, ISBN 0136235964 Wisse, Jacob, " Northern Mannerism in the Early Sixteenth Century ",  In Heilbrunn Timeline of Art History. New York: The Metropolitan Museum of Art, 2002 Van Den Brink, Peter. "A Shattered Jigsaw Puzzle: On a Partly Reconstructed Altarpiece by the Master of the Antwerp Adoration", Wallraf-Richartz-Jahrbuch 68 (2007): 161-80, Accessed December 31, 2020.

JSTOR Further reading [ edit ] P. van den Brink, Extravagant!.  A forgotten chapter of Antwerp painting 1500–1530 , exhibition catalogue, Antwerp, Koninklijk Museum voor Schone Kunsten, 15 October – 31 December 2005; Maastricht, Bonnefantenmuseum, 22 January – 9 April 2006 External links [ edit ] Media related to Antwerp Mannerists at Wikimedia Commons v t e Premodern , Modern and Contemporary art movements List of art movements / periods Premodern (Western) Ancient Thracian Dacian Nuragic Aegean Cycladic Minoan Minyan ware Mycenaean Greek Sub-Mycenaean Protogeometric Geometric Orientalizing Archaic Black-figure Red-figure Severe style Classical Kerch style Hellenistic "Baroque" Indo-Greek Greco-Buddhist Neo-Attic Etruscan Scythian Iberian Gaulish Roman Republican Gallo-Roman Julio-Claudian Pompeian Styles Trajanic Severan Medieval Late antique Early Christian Coptic Ethiopian Migration Period Anglo-Saxon Hunnic Insular Lombard Visigothic Donor portrait Pictish Mozarabic Repoblación Viking Byzantine Iconoclast Macedonian Palaeologan Italo-Byzantine Frankish Merovingian Carolingian Pre-Romanesque Ottonian Romanesque Mosan Spanish Norman Norman-Sicilian Opus Anglicanum Gothic Gothic art in Milan International Gothic International Gothic art in Italy Lucchese school Crusades Moscow school Novgorod school Vladimir-Suzdal school Duecento Sienese school Mudéjar Medieval cartography Italian school Majorcan school Mappa mundi Renaissance Italian Renaissance Trecento Proto-Renaissance Florentine school Pittura infamante Quattrocento Ferrarese school Forlivese school Venetian school Cinquecento High Renaissance Bolognese school Mannerism Counter- Maniera Northern Renaissance Early Netherlandish World landscape Ghent–Bruges school Northern Mannerism German Renaissance Cologne school Danube school Dutch and Flemish Renaissance Antwerp Mannerism Romanism Still life English Renaissance Tudor court Cretan school Turquerie Fontainebleau school Art of the late 16th century in Milan 17th century Baroque Baroque in Milan Flemish Baroque Caravaggisti in Utrecht Tenebrism Louis XIII style Lutheran Baroque Stroganov school Animal painting Guild of Romanists Dutch Golden Age Delft school Capriccio Heptanese school Classicism Louis XIV style Poussinists and Rubenists 18th century Rococo Rocaille Louis XV style Frederician Chinoiserie Fête galante Neoclassicism Goût grec Louis XVI style Adam style Directoire style Neoclassical architecture in Milan Picturesque Colonial art Art of the African diaspora African-American Caribbean Haitian Colonial Asian art Arts in the Philippines Letras y figuras Tipos del País Colonial Asian Baroque Company style Latin American art Casta painting Indochristian art Chilote school Cuzco school Quito school Latin American Baroque Art borrowing Western elements Islamic Moorish Manichaean Mughal Qajar Qing handicrafts Western influence in Japan Akita ranga Uki-e Transition to modern (c. 1770 – 1862) Romanticism Fairy painting Danish Golden Age Troubadour style Nazarene movement Purismo Shoreham Ancients Düsseldorf school Pre-Raphaelites Hudson River School American luminism Orientalism Norwich school Empire style Historicism Revivalism Biedermeier Realism Barbizon school Costumbrismo Verismo Macchiaioli Academic art Munich school in Greece Neo-Grec Etching revival Modern (1863–1944) 1863–1899 Neo-romanticism National romanticism Yōga Nihonga Japonisme Anglo-Japanese style Beuron school Hague school Peredvizhniki Impressionism American Hoosier Group Boston school Amsterdam Canadian Heidelberg school Aestheticism Arts and Crafts Art pottery Tonalism Decadent movement Symbolism Romanian Russian Volcano school Incoherents Post-Impressionism Neo-Impressionism Luminism Divisionism Pointillism Pont-Aven School Cloisonnism Synthetism Les Nabis American Barbizon school California tonalism Costumbrismo 1900–1914 Art Nouveau Art Nouveau in Milan Primitivism California Impressionism Secessionism School of Paris Munich Secession Vienna Secession Berlin Secession Sonderbund Pennsylvania Impressionism Mir iskusstva Ten American Painters Fauvism Expressionism Die Brücke Der Blaue Reiter Noucentisme Deutscher Werkbund American Realism Ashcan school Cubism Proto-Cubism Orphism A Nyolcak Neue Künstlervereinigung München Futurism Cubo-Futurism Art Deco Metaphysical Rayonism Productivism Synchromism Vorticism 1915–1944 Sosaku-hanga Suprematism School of Paris Crystal Cubism Constructivism Latin American Universal Constructivism Dada Shin-hanga Neoplasticism De Stijl Purism Return to order Novecento Italiano Figurative Constructivism Stupid Cologne Progressives Arbeitsrat für Kunst November Group Australian tonalism Dresden Secession Social realism Functionalism Bauhaus Kinetic art Anthropophagy Mingei Group of Seven New Objectivity Grosvenor school Neues Sehen Surrealism Iranian Latin American Mexican muralism Neo-Fauvism Precisionism Aeropittura Asso Scuola Romana Cercle et Carré The Group Harlem Renaissance Kapists Regionalism California Scene Painting Heroic realism Socialist realism Nazi art Streamline Moderne Concrete art Abstraction-Création Tiki The Ten Dimensionism Boston Expressionism Leningrad school Contemporary and Postmodern (1945–present) 1945–1959 International Typographic Style Abstract expressionism Washington Color School Visionary art Vienna School of Fantastic Realism Spatialism Color field Lyrical abstraction Tachisme Arte Informale COBRA Nuagisme Generación de la Ruptura Jikken Kōbō Metcalf Chateau Mono-ha Nanyang Style Action painting American Figurative Expressionism in New York New media art New York school Hard-edge painting Bay Area Figurative Movement Les Plasticiens Gutai Art Association Gendai Bijutsu Kondankai Pop art Situationist International Soviet Nonconformist Ukrainian underground Lettrism Letterist International Ultra-Lettrist Florida Highwaymen Cybernetic art Antipodeans 1960–1969 Otra Figuración Afrofuturism Nueva Presencia ZERO Happening Neo-Dada Neo-Dada Organizers Op art Nouveau réalisme Nouvelle tendance Capitalist realism Art & Language Arte Povera Black Arts Movement The Caribbean Artists Movement Chicano art movement Conceptual art Land art Systems art Video art Minimalism Fluxus Generative art Post-painterly abstraction Intermedia Psychedelic art Nut Art Photorealism Environmental art Performance art Process art Institutional critique Light and Space Street art Feminist art movement in the US Saqqakhaneh movement The Stars Art Group Tropicália Yoru no Kai Artificial intelligence visual art 1970–1999 Post-conceptual art Installation art Artscene Postminimalism Endurance art Sots Art Moscow Conceptualists Pattern and Decoration Pliontanism Punk art Neo-expressionism Transavantgarde Saint Soleil school Guerrilla art Lowbrow art Telematic art Appropriation art Neo-conceptual art New European Painting Tunisian collaborative painting Memphis Group Cyberdelic Neue Slowenische Kunst Scratch video Transgressive Retrofuturism Young British Artists Superfiction Taring Padi Superflat New Leipzig school Artist-run initiative Artivism The Designers Republic Grunge design Verdadism Chinese Apartment Art 2000– present Amazonian pop art Altermodern Art for art Art game Art intervention Brandalism Classical Realism Contemporary African art Africanfuturism Contemporary Indigenous Australian art Crypto art Cyborg art Excessivism Fictive art Flat design Corporate Memphis Hypermodernism Hyperrealism Idea art Internet art Post-Internet iPhone art Kitsch movement Lightpainting Massurrealism Modern European ink painting Neo-futurism Neomodern Neosymbolism Passionism Post-YBAs Relational art Skeuomorphism Software art Sound art Stuckism Superflat SoFlo Superflat Superstroke Toyism Unilalianism Vaporwave Walking Artists Network Related topics History of art Abstract art Asemic writing Anti-art Avant-garde Ballets Russes Christian art Art in the Protestant Reformation and Counter-Reformation Catholic art Icon Lutheran art Digital art Fantastic art Folk art Hierarchy of genres Genre painting History painting Illuminated manuscript Illustration Interactive art Jewish art Kitsch Landscape painting Modernism Modern sculpture Late modernism Naïve art Outsider art Portrait Prehistoric European art Queer art Realism Shock art Trompe-l'œil Western painting Category v t e Early Netherlandish art (c. 1420s–1530s) Early Netherlandish artists Active mainly in the Southern Netherlands (mostly present-day Belgium ) Luís Alimbrot Alexander Bening Simon Bening Ambrosius Benson Lancelot Blondeel Aelbert Bouts Dieric Bouts Melchior Broederlam Robert Campin Petrus Christus Pierre Coustain Jacques Daret Gerard David Jean Delemer Jan de Beer Colijn de Coter Jan Gossaert Gerard Horenbout Lucas Horenbout Adriaen Isenbrandt Cornelis Liefrinck Lambert Lombard Simon Marmion Quentin Matsys Hans Memling Jan de Molder Joachim Patinir Jan Provoost Aert van den Bossche Hugo van der Goes Vrancke van der Stockt Goswin van der Weyden Rogier van der Weyden Jan van Dornicke Hubert van Eyck Jan van Eyck Justus van Gent Lieven van Lathem Bernard van Orley Jacob van Utrecht Master of Affligem Master of the Antwerp Adoration Master of the Embroidered Foliage Master of the Legend of St. Barbara Master of the Legend of Saint Lucy Master of the Legend of St. Ursula (Bruges) Master of the Legend of the Magdalen Master of the Lille Adoration Master of the Lübeck Bible Master of the Mansi Magdalen Master of the Morrison Triptych Master of the Prodigal Son Master of the View of Ste-Gudule Active mainly in the Northern Netherlands (mostly present-day Netherlands ) Hieronymus Bosch Geertgen tot Sint Jans Jan Joest van Calcar Lucas van Leyden Jacob Cornelisz van Oostsanen Master of Alkmaar Master of the Amsterdam Death of the Virgin Master of the Figdor Deposition Main centres Antwerp Bruges Brussels Ghent Tournai The Hague General Early Netherlandish painting Works by Early Netherlandish masters Flemish Primitives Arts in the court of Philip the Good Guild of Saint Luke Netherlandish art International Gothic Northern Renaissance Netherlandish Renaissance Northern Mannerism Antwerp Mannerism Antwerp school Ghent–Bruges school Adoration of the Magi Nativity of Jesus in art Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Antwerp_Mannerism&oldid=1264572334 " Categories : Mannerism Flemish Renaissance painters Art movements Early Netherlandish painters Netherlandish Renaissance art Hidden categories: Articles with German-language sources (de) Articles with Dutch-language sources (nl) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 22 December 2024, at 13:01 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Antwerp Mannerism 7 languages Add topic

