Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Description 2 Asthetairoi 3 Battalions 4 See also 5 Notes 6 References Toggle the table of contents Pezhetairos 12 languages Български Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Latina Magyar Polski Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Ancient Macedonian soldiers This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Pezhetairos" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( February 2020 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The pezhetairoi ( Greek : πεζέταιροι , singular: pezhetairos) were the backbone of the Macedonian army and Diadochi kingdoms. They were literally "foot companions" (in Greek, pezos means "pedestrian" and hetairos means "companion" or "friend").

The Macedonian phalanxes were made up almost entirely of pezhetairoi. Pezhetairoi were very effective against both enemy cavalry and infantry, as their long pikes could be used to impale enemies charging on horseback or to keep enemy infantry with shorter weapons at bay.

Description [ edit ] The pezhetairoi were the battalions of the Macedonian phalanx . They first came to prominence during the reign of Philip II , particularly when they played  important role in Philip's subjugation of Greece at the Battle of Chaeronea in 338 BC. Philip created this unit by lengthening the spear to the point of becoming a true pike , removing the heavy armor, and replacing the large shield with a smaller alternative.

[ 1 ] They were armed with the sarissa , a long spear with a shaft made from flexible cornel wood , which had a much longer reach than the traditional hoplite spear.

[ 2 ] Because of its length, the phalanx could present the spearpoints of around five files of men; which made the phalanx almost impenetrable, and fearsome to oppose.

The name "foot companions" was coined by Alexander III during the reign of his father Philip II as a recruiting method.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] By labeling his infantry as his personal "companions" and "friends," Philip was able to engage a wider manpower base for his subsequent military campaigns, as positions in his personal infantry would denote pride and honor.

[ 4 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] Tactically, the pezhetairoi were best used as a strong defensive line, rather than as shock troops. The length of the sarissa, while making them terrifying for an enemy to oppose, severely limited their maneuverability; and if they were taken in flank or rear they had little chance of responding. This was particularly clear at the Battle of Gaugamela in 331 BC, when the rapid advance of the right wing caused a breach to open between two of the battalions of pezhetairoi—a force of enemy cavalry broke through and, had it not been for a lack of discipline in their own command, under Parmenion , and for Alexander's placing of a second line of traditional hoplites in reserve, the phalanx might have been destroyed from the rear.

[ 1 ] Apart from in pitched battles, the pezhetairoi and their sarissas were not very practical; it is supposed that they were re-armed, and their tactics adapted, to suit the guerrilla warfare that was prevalent, and necessary, in Bactria and Sogdia .

[ citation needed ] Asthetairoi [ edit ] There is a separate group of Pezhetairoi called Asthetairoi (singular Asthetairos ). There is a debate as it is not fully clear what the prefix asth- ( Greek : ασθ -) is referring to. Some claim it comes from asty (= city) or asthoi (= townsmen), which would mean the Asthetairoi were recruited from cities. But the units referred to as Asthetairoi were recruited in northern Macedonia, where there are just a few cities. Another suggestion is that asth- comes from aristoi (= the best) and thus implying they were some kind of elite. This would correspond to the fact that they were placed on the right side next to the hypaspists . The common conception is that Asthetairoi means 'closest companion' in terms of kinship and designated units from Upper Macedonia. Another explanation is that 'close' is referring to their position in battle, as they were the closest to the king. For fighting near the Hypaspists it is possible that they were better trained and equipped than normal Pezhetairoi.

[ 8 ] Battalions [ edit ] The battalions of pezhetairoi appear to have been organised on a regional basis, at least to begin with. We know of battalions named for the regions of Orestis/Lyncestis (two battalions probably combining men from both regions), Elimaea and Tymphaea—if all pezhetairoi were from Upper Macedonia then we would expect the other battalions to have represented Eordaea and Pelagonia. In 334 BC Alexander the Great took six battalions of pezhetairoi with him to Asia . By the time the army moved into India in 327 BC, a seventh battalion had been added.

At the Battle of the Granicus the battalions were those of (from right to left): Perdiccas , Coenus , Amyntas , Philip, Meleager , and Craterus .

[ 9 ] At the Battle of Issus the battalions were those of (from right to left): Coenus, Perdiccas, Craterus, Meleager, Ptolemy (replacing Philip), Amyntas.

[ 10 ] At the Battle of Gaugamela the battalions were those of (from right to left): Coenus, Perdiccas, Meleager, Polyperchon (replacing Ptolemy), Simmias (deputising for Amyntas, who was recruiting in Macedonia), Craterus.

[ 11 ] At the Battle of the Hydaspes River only five battalions took part, and were those of (from right to left): Antigenes , Clitus the White , Meleager, Attalus , Gorgias. The other battalions (those of Polyperchon and Alcetas ) remained on the western bank of the Hydaspes, under the command of Craterus, and crossed only when Alexander was victorious, in order to continue with the pursuit of the fleeing Indians. However, there is much supposition and guesswork regarding this battle.

[ 12 ] See also [ edit ] Peltast Notes [ edit ] ^ a b c Hanson, Victor Davis (2007-12-18).

Carnage and Culture: Landmark Battles in the Rise to Western Power . Knopf Doubleday Publishing Group.

ISBN 978-0-307-42518-8 .

^ a b Chen, Falin; Hsu, Fang-Tzu (2020-04-27).

How Humankind Created Science: From Early Astronomy to Our Modern Scientific Worldview . Springer Nature.

ISBN 978-3-030-43135-8 .

^ Cole, Myke (2018-10-18).

Legion versus Phalanx: The Epic Struggle for Infantry Supremacy in the Ancient World . Bloomsbury Publishing.

ISBN 978-1-4728-2843-9 .

^ a b Hammond, Nicholas Geoffrey Lemprière (1993).

Collected Studies . Adolf M. Hakkert.

ISBN 9789025610500 .

^ Historia: Zeitschrift Für Alte Geschichte . University of California: F. Steiner. 1991.

^ Howe, Timothy; Müller, Sabine; Stoneman, Richard (2016-11-30).

Ancient Historiography on War and Empire . Oxbow Books.

ISBN 978-1-78570-302-7 .

^ Wheatley, Pat; Hannah, Robert (2009).

Alexander & His Successors: Essays from the Antipodes : a Companion to Crossroads of History: the Age of Alexander; Alexander's Empire: Formulation to Decay . Regina Books.

ISBN 978-1-930053-58-8 .

^ Macedonian Warrior: Alexander's Elite Infantryman ^ Arrian, Alexander's Anabasis 1.14.2 ^ Arrian, Alexander's Anabasis 2.8.3–4.

^ Arrian, Alexander's Anabasis 3.11.9–10.

^ Fuller, pp. 180–199.

References [ edit ] F.E. Adcock.

The Greek and Macedonian Art of War . California: 1957.

J.F.C. Fuller.

The Generalship of Alexander the Great . New Jersey: 1960.

D. Lonsdale.

Alexander, Killer of Men. Alexander the Great and the Macedonian Art of War . London: 2004.

Waldemar Heckel, Ryan Jones, Christa Hook.

Macedonian Warrior: Alexander's Elite Infantryman . Oxford: 2006.

v t e Ancient Greece Timeline History Geography Periods Cycladic civilization Minoan civilization Mycenaean Greece Greek Dark Ages Archaic Greece Classical Greece Hellenistic Greece Roman Greece Geography Aegean Sea Aeolis Crete Cyrenaica Cyprus Doris Epirus Hellespont Ionia Ionian Sea Macedonia Magna Graecia Peloponnesus Pontus Taurica Ancient Greek colonies City states Politics Military City states Argos Athens Byzantion Chalcis Corinth Ephesus Miletus Pergamon Eretria Kerkyra Larissa Megalopolis Thebes Megara Rhodes Samos Sparta Lissus (Crete) Kingdoms Bithynia Cappadocia Epirus Greco-Bactrian Kingdom Indo-Greek Kingdom Macedonia Pergamon Pontus Ptolemaic Kingdom Seleucid Empire Federations / Confederations Doric Hexapolis ( c.

1100 – c.

560 BC ) Italiote League ( c.

800 –389 BC) Ionian League (c. 650–404 BC) Peloponnesian League ( c.

550 –366 BC) Amphictyonic League ( c.

595 –279 BC) Acarnanian League (c. 500–31 BC) Hellenic League (499–449 BC) Delian League (478–404 BC) Chalcidian League (430–348 BC) Boeotian League (c. 424–c. 395 BC) Aetolian League (c. 400–188 BC) Second Athenian League (378–355 BC) Thessalian League (374–196 BC) Arcadian League (370–c. 230 BC) Epirote League (370–168 BC) League of Corinth (338–322 BC) Euboean League (c. 300 BC–c. 300 AD) Achaean League (280–146 BC) Politics Boule Free city Koinon Proxeny Stasis Tagus Tyrant Athenian Agora Areopagus Ecclesia Graphe paranomon Heliaia Ostracism Spartan Ekklesia Ephor Gerousia Macedon Synedrion Koinon Military Wars Athenian military Scythian archers Antigonid Macedonian army Army of Macedon Ballista Cretan archers Hellenistic armies Hippeis Hoplite Hetairoi Macedonian phalanx Military of Mycenaean Greece Phalanx Peltast Pezhetairos Sarissa Sacred Band of Thebes Sciritae Seleucid army Spartan army Strategos Toxotai Xiphos Xyston People List of ancient Greeks Rulers Kings of Argos Archons of Athens Kings of Athens Kings of Commagene Diadochi Kings of Macedonia Kings of Paionia Attalid kings of Pergamon Kings of Pontus Ptolemaic dynasty Seleucid dynasty Kings of Sparta Tyrants of Syracuse Artists & scholars Astronomers Geographers Historians Mathematicians Philosophers Playwrights Poets Seven Sages Writers Philosophers Anaxagoras Anaximander Anaximenes Antisthenes Aristotle Democritus Diogenes of Sinope Empedocles Epicurus Gorgias Heraclitus Hypatia Leucippus Parmenides Plato Protagoras Pythagoras Socrates Thales Zeno Authors Aeschylus Aesop Alcaeus Archilochus Aristophanes Bacchylides Euripides Herodotus Hesiod Hipponax Homer Ibycus Lucian Menander Mimnermus Panyassis Philocles Pindar Plutarch Polybius Sappho Simonides Sophocles Stesichorus Theognis Thucydides Timocreon Tyrtaeus Xenophon Others Athenian statesmen Lawgivers Olympic victors Tyrants By culture Ancient Greek tribes Thracian Greeks Ancient Macedonians Society Culture Society Agriculture Calendar Clothing Coinage Cuisine Economy Education Emporium Euergetism Festivals Folklore Homosexuality Law Olympic Games Pederasty Philosophy Prostitution Religion Slavery Warfare Wedding customs Wine Arts and science Architecture Greek Revival architecture Astronomy Literature Mathematics Medicine Music Musical system Pottery Sculpture Technology Theatre Religion Funeral and burial practices Mythology Deities Temple Twelve Olympians Underworld Sacred places Eleusis Delphi Delos Dion Dodona Mount Olympus Olympia Structures Athenian Treasury Lion Gate Long Walls Philippeion Theatre of Dionysus Tunnel of Eupalinos Temples Aphaea Artemis Athena Nike Erechtheion Hephaestus Hera, Olympia Parthenon Samothrace Zeus, Olympia Language Proto-Greek Mycenaean Homeric Dialects Aeolic Arcadocypriot Attic Doric Epirote Ionic Locrian Macedonian Pamphylian Koine Writing Linear A Linear B Cypriot syllabary Greek alphabet Greek numerals Attic numerals Greek colonisation Magna Graecia Mainland Italy Alision Brentesion Caulonia Chone Croton Cumae Elea Heraclea Lucania Hipponion Hydrus Krimisa Laüs Locri Medma Metauros Metapontion Neápolis Pandosia (Lucania) Poseidonia Pixous Rhegion Scylletium Siris Sybaris Sybaris on the Traeis Taras Terina Thurii Sicily Akragas Akrai Akrillai Apollonia Calacte Casmenae Catana Gela Helorus Henna Heraclea Minoa Himera Hybla Gereatis Hybla Heraea Kamarina Leontinoi Megara Hyblaea Messana Naxos Segesta Selinous Syracuse Tauromenion Thermae Tyndaris Aeolian Islands Didyme Euonymos Ereikousa Hycesia Lipara/Meligounis Phoenicusa Strongyle Therassía Cyrenaica Balagrae Barca Berenice Cyrene ( Apollonia ) Ptolemais Iberian Peninsula Akra Leuke Alonis Emporion Helike Hemeroscopion Kalathousa Kypsela Mainake Menestheus's Limin Illicitanus Limin/Portus Illicitanus Rhode Salauris Zacynthos Illyria Aspalathos Apollonia Aulon Epidamnos Epidauros Issa Melaina Korkyra Nymphaion Orikon Pharos Tragurion Thronion Black Sea basin North coast Akra Borysthenes Charax Chersonesus Dioscurias Gorgippia Hermonassa Kalos Limen Kepoi Kerkinitis Kimmerikon Myrmekion Nikonion Nymphaion Olbia Pantikapaion Phanagoria Pityus Tanais Theodosia Tyras Tyritake South coast Abonoteichos Amisos Anchialos Apollonia Athina Bathus Dionysopolis Cotyora Cytorus Eupatoria Heraclea Kerasous Mesambria Odessos Oinòe Phasis Polemonion Rhizos Salmydessus Sesamus Sinope Thèrmae Tium Trapezous Tripolis Zaliche Lists Cities in Epirus People Place names Stoae Temples Theatres Category Portal Outline Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Pezhetairos&oldid=1288803283 " Categories : Ancient Greek infantry types Infantry units and formations of Macedon Military units and formations of the Hellenistic world Pikes (weapon) Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from February 2020 All articles needing additional references Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from September 2020 This page was last edited on 4 May 2025, at 20:55 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Pezhetairos 12 languages Add topic

