Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Agriculture 2 Crafts Toggle Crafts subsection 2.1 Pottery 3 Trade Toggle Trade subsection 3.1 Maritime commerce 3.2 Retail 4 Taxation 5 Currency 6 Shopping 7 See also 8 Notes 9 Sources 10 Bibliography 11 External links Toggle the table of contents Economy of ancient Greece 13 languages العربية Català Ελληνικά Español Français Galego Bahasa Indonesia עברית Norsk bokmål Русский Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Economy of ancient Greece" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( October 2017 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Men weighing merchandise, side B of an Attic black-figure amphora The economy of ancient Greece was defined largely by the region's dependence on imported goods. As a result of the poor quality of Greece 's soil , agricultural trade was of particular importance. The impact of limited crop production was somewhat offset by Greece's paramount location, as its position in the Mediterranean gave its provinces control over some of Egypt's most crucial seaports and trade routes. Beginning in the 6th century BC, trade craftsmanship and commerce , principally maritime , became pivotal aspects of Greek economic output.

[ 1 ] Agriculture [ edit ] Main article: Agriculture in ancient Greece Greek soil has been likened to "stinginess" or "tightness" ( Ancient Greek : stenokhôría , στενοχωρία ) which helps explain Greek colonialism and the importance of the cleruchies of Asia Minor in controlling the supply of wheat . The olive tree and grapevine , as well as orchards, were complemented by the cultivation of herbs , vegetables , and oil-producing plants.

Husbandry was badly developed due to a lack of available land.

Sheep and goats were the most common types of livestock, while bees were kept to produce honey , the only source of sugar known to the ancient Greeks.

Up to 80% of the Greek population was employed in the agricultural industry. Agricultural work followed the rhythm of the seasons: harvesting olives and trimming grapevines at the beginning of autumn and the end of winter; setting aside fallow land in the spring; harvesting cereals in the summer; cutting wood, sowing seeds, and harvesting grapes in autumn.

In the ancient era, most lands were held by the aristocracy . During the 7th century BC, demographic expansion and the distribution of successions created tensions between these landowners and the peasants. In Athens , this was changed by Solon 's reforms, which eliminated debt bondage and protected the peasantry. Nonetheless, a Greek aristocrat's domains remained small compared with the Roman latifundia .

Crafts [ edit ] Woman working with wool, 480-470 BC, National Archaeological Museum of Athens Main article: Ancient Greek crafts Much of the craftsmanship of ancient Greece was part of the domestic sphere . However, the situation gradually changed between the 8th and 4th centuries BC, with the increased commercialization of the Greek economy. Thus, weaving and baking , activities so important to the Western late medieval economy, were done only by women before the 6th century BC. After the growth of commerce, slaves started to be used widely in workshops. Only fine dyed tissues, like those made with Tyrian purple , were created in workshops. On the other hand, working with metal , leather , wood , or clay was a specialized activity that was looked down upon by most Greeks.

The basic workshop was often family-operated.

Lysias 's shield manufacture employed 350 slaves; Demosthenes ' father, a maker of swords , used 32. After the death of Pericles in 429 BC, a new class emerged: that of the wealthy owners and managers of workshops. Examples include Cleon and Anytus , noted tannery owners, and Kleophon , whose factory produced lyres .

Non-slave workers were paid by assignment since the workshops could not guarantee regular work. In Athens, those who worked on state projects were paid one drachma per day, no matter what craft they practised. The workday generally began at sunrise and ended in the afternoon.

Pottery [ edit ] Main article: Pottery of ancient Greece The potter's work consisted of selecting the clay, fashioning the vase, drying and painting and baking it, and then applying varnish. Part of the production went to domestic usage (dishes, containers, oil lamps) or for commercial purposes, and the rest served religious or artistic functions. Techniques for working with clay have been known since the Bronze Age ; the potter's wheel is a very ancient invention. The ancient Greeks did not add any innovations to these processes [ citation needed ] .

The creation of artistically decorated vases in Greece had strong foreign influences. For instance, the famed black-figure style of Corinthian potters was most likely derived from the Syrian style of metalworking. The heights to which the Greeks brought the art of ceramics is, therefore, due entirely to their artistic sensibilities and not to technical ingenuity.

Pottery in ancient Greece was most often the work of slaves. Many of the potters of Athens assembled between the agora and the Dipylon, in the Kerameikon . They most often operated as small workshops, consisting of a master, several paid artisans, and slaves.

Trade [ edit ] Greece's main exports were olive oil, wine , pottery , and metalwork . Imports included grains and pork from Sicily , Arabia , Egypt , Ancient Carthage , and the Bosporan Kingdom .

Maritime commerce [ edit ] The main participants in Greek commerce were the class of traders known as emporoi ( ἕμποροι ). The state collected a duty on their cargo. At Piraeus (the main port of Athens), this tax was set initially at 1% or higher.

[ 2 ] By the end of the 5th century, the tax had been raised to 33 talents ( Andocides , I, 133–134). In 413, Athens ended the collection of tribute from the Delian League and imposed a 5% duty on all the ports of her empire ( Thucydides , VII, 28, 4) in the hope of increasing revenues. These duties were never protectionist , but were merely intended to raise money for the public treasury.

The growth of trade in Greece led to the development of financial techniques. Most merchants, lacking sufficient cash assets , resorted to borrowing to finance all or part of their expeditions. A typical loan for a large venture in 4th century BC Athens, was generally a large sum of cash (usually less than 2,000 drachmas), lent for a short time (the length of the voyage, a matter of several weeks or months), at a high rate of interest (often 12% but reaching levels as high as 100%). The terms of the contract were always laid out in writing, differing from loans between friends ( eranoi ). The lender bore all the risks of the journey, in exchange for which the borrower committed his cargo and his entire fleet, which were precautionarily seized upon their arrival at the port of Piraeus .

Trade in ancient Greece was free: the state controlled only the supply of grain. In Athens, following the first meeting of the new Prytaneis , trade regulations were reviewed, with a specialized committee overseeing the trade in wheat, flour, and bread.

One of the main drivers of trade in Ancient Greece was colonization. As larger city states set up colonies, there would be trade between the founding city and its colony.

[ 3 ] Furthermore, differing climates between cities and their respective colonies created comparative advantages in goods. For example, colonies in Sicily would often have better weather and be able to export grain to more populous cities.

[ 3 ] Larger city states often exported more value added goods, such as olive oil, back out to colonies.

[ 3 ] The number of shipwrecks found in the Mediterranean Sea provides valuable evidence of the development of trade in the ancient world.

[ 4 ] Only two shipwrecks were found that dated from the 8th century BC. However, archaeologists have found forty-six shipwrecks dated from the 4th century BC, which would appear to indicate that there occurred a very large increase in the volume of trade between these centuries. Considering that the average ship tonnage also increased in the same period, the total volume of trade increased probably by a factor of 30.

Retail [ edit ] While peasants and artisans often sold their wares, there were also retail merchants known as kápêloi ( κάπηλοι ). Grouped into guilds , they sold fish, olive oil, and vegetables. Women sold perfume or ribbons . Merchants were required to pay a fee for their space in the marketplace. They were viewed poorly by the general population, and Aristotle labelled their activities as: "a kind of exchange which is justly censured, for it is unnatural, and a mode by which men gain from one another." [ 5 ] Parallel to the "professional" merchants were those who sold the surplus of their household products such as vegetables, olive oil, or bread. This was the case for many of the small-scale farmers of Attica . Among townsfolk, this task often fell to the women. For instance, Euripides ' mother sold chervil from her garden (cf.

Aristophanes , The Acharnians , v. 477–478).

Taxation [ edit ] Direct taxation was not well-developed in ancient Greece. The eisphorá ( εἰσφορά ) was a tax on the wealth of the very rich, but it was levied only when needed — usually in times of war. Large fortunes were also subject to liturgies which was the support of public works. Liturgies could consist of, for instance, the maintenance of a trireme , a chorus during a theatre festival, or a gymnasium . In some cases, the prestige of the undertaking attracted volunteers (analogous in modern terminology to endowment, sponsorship, or donation). Such was the case for the choragus , who organized and financed choruses for a drama festival. In other instances, like the burden of outfitting and commanding a trireme, the liturgy functioned more like a mandatory donation (what we would today call a one-time tax), with the prestige of such a position and other elites' social pressure reducing noncompliance. In some cities, like Miletus and Teos , heavy taxation was imposed on citizens.

The eisphora was a progressive tax , as it was applied to only the wealthiest.  The citizens had the ability to reject the taxation, if they believed there was someone else who was wealthier not being taxed.  The wealthier would have to pay the liturgy.

[ 6 ] On the other hand, indirect taxes were quite important. Taxes were levied on houses, slaves, herds and flocks, wines, and hay, among other things. The right to collect many of these taxes was often transferred to publicans , or telônai ( τελῶναι ). However, this was not true of all cities.

Thasos ' gold mines and Athens' taxes on business allowed them to eliminate these indirect taxes. Subjugated groups such as the Penestae of Thessaly and the Helots of Sparta were taxed by the city-states in which they resided.

Currency [ edit ] Athenian coin, Athenian Agora Museum Coinage probably began in Lydia around the cities of Asia Minor under its control.

[ 7 ] Early electrum coins have been found at the Temple of Diana at Ephesus . The technique of minting coins arrived in mainland Greece around 550 BC, beginning with coastal trading cities like Aegina and Athens. Their use spread and the city-states quickly secured a monopoly on their creation. The very first coins were made from electrum (an alloy of gold and silver), followed by pure silver, the most commonly found valuable metal in the region. The mines of the Pangaeon hills allowed the cities of Thrace and Macedon to mint a large number of coins. Laurium's silver mines provided the raw materials for the "Athenian owls", [ 8 ] [ 9 ] the most famous coins of the ancient Greek world. Less-valuable bronze coins appeared at the end of the 5th century.

Coins played several roles in the Greek world. They provided a medium of exchange , mostly used by city-states to hire mercenaries and compensate citizens. They were also a source of revenue as foreigners had to change their money into the local currency at an exchange rate favourable to the State. They served as a mobile form of metal resources, which explains discoveries of Athenian coins with high levels of silver at great distances from their home city. Finally, the minting of coins lent an air of undeniable prestige to any Greek city or city-state.

Shopping [ edit ] The shopping centres in Ancient Greece were called agoras . The literal meaning of the word is "gathering place" or "assembly". The agora was the centre of the athletic, artistic, spiritual and political life of the city. The Ancient Agora of Athens was the best-known example. Early in Greek history (18th century–8th century BC), free-born citizens would gather in the agora for military duty or to hear statements of the ruling king or council. Every city had its agora where merchants could sell their products. There was linen from Egypt , Ivory from Africa , Spices from Syria , and more. Prices were rarely fixed, so bargaining was a common practice.

See also [ edit ] Slavery in Ancient Greece Roman economy Economy of Greece Notes [ edit ] ^ "The Economy of Ancient Greece" .

^ Fawcett, Peter (2016).

" "When I Squeeze You with Eisphorai": Taxes and Tax Policy in Classical Athens" .

Hesperia: The Journal of the American School of Classical Studies at Athens .

85 (1): 153– 199.

doi : 10.2972/hesperia.85.1.0153 .

ISSN 0018-098X .

JSTOR 10.2972/hesperia.85.1.0153 .

S2CID 155364909 .

^ a b c Morris, Ian (2004).

"Economic Growth in Ancient Greece" .

Journal of Institutional and Theoretical Economics .

160 (4): 709– 742.

doi : 10.1628/0932456042776050 .

ISSN 0932-4569 .

JSTOR 40752487 .

^ "Databases" .

The Oxford Roman Economy Project . Retrieved 2021-04-08 .

^ R. W. Demand.

The Origins of International Economics . Routledge, 2004.

ISBN 0-415-31555-7 . p. 17.

^ McCannon ^ Oxford Classical Dictionary , "Coinage" ^ Wood, J. R.; Hsu, Y-T.; Bell, C. (2021).

"Sending Laurion Back to the Future: Bronze Age Silver and the Source of Confusion" (PDF) .

Internet Archaeology .

56 (9).

doi : 10.11141/ia.56.9 .

S2CID 236973111 .

^ Wood, J.R. (2022).

"Other ways to examine the finances behind the birth of Classical Greece" .

Archaeometry .

doi : 10.1111/arcm.12839 .

Sources [ edit ] Bresson, Alain .

The Making of the Ancient Greek Economy: Institutions, Markets, and Growth In the City-States . Expanded and updated English edition. Translated by Steven Rendall. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2015.

Donlan, Walter. "The Homeric economy." In A new companion to Homer , edited by Ian Morris and Barry B. Powell, 649–67. New York: E.J. Brill, 1997.

Finley, Moses I.

The ancient economy . 2d ed. Sather Classical Lectures 48. Berkeley: Univ. of California Press, 1985.

Foraboschi, Daniele. "The Hellenistic economy: indirect intervention by the state." In Production and Public Powers In Classical Antiquity , edited by Elio Lo Cascio and Dominic Rathbone, 37–43. Cambridge: Cambridge Philological Society, 2000.

Adam Izdebski, Tymon Sloczyński, Anton Bonnier, Grzegorz Koloch, and Katerina Kouli. 2020. " Landscape Change and Trade in Ancient Greece: Evidence from Pollen Data ." The Economic Journal.

Meikle, Scott.

Aristotle's economic thought . Oxford: Clarendon, 1995.

Migeotte, Léopold.

The economy of the Greek cities: From the Archaic period to the early Roman Empire . Berkeley: Univ. of California Press, 2009.

Morris, Ian. "The Athenian economy twenty years after The ancient economy ." Classical Philology 89, no. 4 (1994): 351–66.

Pomeroy, Sarah B.

Xenophon's Oeconomicus : A social and historical commentary . Oxford: Clarendon, 1994.

Scheidel, Walter, Ian Morris, and Richard Saller, eds.

The Cambridge economic history of the Greco-Roman world . Cambridge, UK: Cambridge Univ. Press, 2007.

Scheidel, Walter, and Sitta von Reden .

The Ancient Economy . Hoboken: Taylor and Francis, 2012.

Bibliography [ edit ] Library resources about Economy of ancient Greece Online books Resources in your library Resources in other libraries Scheidel, Walter, Ian Morris, and Richard P. Saller, eds.

The Cambridge Economic History of the Greco-Roman World (2008) 958pp Sideris, Athanasios (2015).

"Sideris, Athanasios, Principles and Practice in Classical World's Economy " . Masaryk University . Retrieved 2015-01-20 .

(45 pp., a concise overview for students) External links [ edit ] Economic Thought in Ancient Greece , Mises Institute Wage and Price Controls in the Ancient World , Mises Institute v t e Ancient Greece Timeline History Geography Periods Cycladic civilization Minoan civilization Mycenaean Greece Greek Dark Ages Archaic Greece Classical Greece Hellenistic Greece Roman Greece Geography Aegean Sea Aeolis Crete Cyrenaica Cyprus Doris Epirus Hellespont Ionia Ionian Sea Macedonia Magna Graecia Peloponnesus Pontus Taurica Ancient Greek colonies City states Politics Military City states Argos Athens Byzantion Chalcis Corinth Ephesus Miletus Pergamon Eretria Kerkyra Larissa Megalopolis Thebes Megara Rhodes Samos Sparta Lissus (Crete) Kingdoms Bithynia Cappadocia Epirus Greco-Bactrian Kingdom Indo-Greek Kingdom Macedonia Pergamon Pontus Ptolemaic Kingdom Seleucid Empire Federations / Confederations Doric Hexapolis ( c.

1100 – c.

560 BC ) Italiote League ( c.

800 –389 BC) Ionian League (c. 650–404 BC) Peloponnesian League ( c.

550 –366 BC) Amphictyonic League ( c.

595 –279 BC) Acarnanian League (c. 500–31 BC) Hellenic League (499–449 BC) Delian League (478–404 BC) Chalcidian League (430–348 BC) Boeotian League (c. 424–c. 395 BC) Aetolian League (c. 400–188 BC) Second Athenian League (378–355 BC) Thessalian League (374–196 BC) Arcadian League (370–c. 230 BC) Epirote League (370–168 BC) League of Corinth (338–322 BC) Euboean League (c. 300 BC–c. 300 AD) Achaean League (280–146 BC) Politics Boule Free city Koinon Proxeny Stasis Tagus Tyrant Athenian Agora Areopagus Ecclesia Graphe paranomon Heliaia Ostracism Spartan Ekklesia Ephor Gerousia Macedon Synedrion Koinon Military Wars Athenian military Scythian archers Antigonid Macedonian army Army of Macedon Ballista Cretan archers Hellenistic armies Hippeis Hoplite Hetairoi Macedonian phalanx Military of Mycenaean Greece Phalanx Peltast Pezhetairos Sarissa Sacred Band of Thebes Sciritae Seleucid army Spartan army Strategos Toxotai Xiphos Xyston People List of ancient Greeks Rulers Kings of Argos Archons of Athens Kings of Athens Kings of Commagene Diadochi Kings of Macedonia Kings of Paionia Attalid kings of Pergamon Kings of Pontus Ptolemaic dynasty Seleucid dynasty Kings of Sparta Tyrants of Syracuse Artists & scholars Astronomers Geographers Historians Mathematicians Philosophers Playwrights Poets Seven Sages Writers Philosophers Anaxagoras Anaximander Anaximenes Antisthenes Aristotle Democritus Diogenes of Sinope Empedocles Epicurus Gorgias Heraclitus Hypatia Leucippus Parmenides Plato Protagoras Pythagoras Socrates Thales Zeno Authors Aeschylus Aesop Alcaeus Archilochus Aristophanes Bacchylides Euripides Herodotus Hesiod Hipponax Homer Ibycus Lucian Menander Mimnermus Panyassis Philocles Pindar Plutarch Polybius Sappho Simonides Sophocles Stesichorus Theognis Thucydides Timocreon Tyrtaeus Xenophon Others Athenian statesmen Lawgivers Olympic victors Tyrants By culture Ancient Greek tribes Thracian Greeks Ancient Macedonians Society Culture Society Agriculture Calendar Clothing Coinage Cuisine Economy Education Emporium Euergetism Festivals Folklore Homosexuality Law Olympic Games Pederasty Philosophy Prostitution Religion Slavery Warfare Wedding customs Wine Arts and science Architecture Greek Revival architecture Astronomy Literature Mathematics Medicine Music Musical system Pottery Sculpture Technology Theatre Religion Funeral and burial practices Mythology Deities Temple Twelve Olympians Underworld Sacred places Eleusis Delphi Delos Dion Dodona Mount Olympus Olympia Structures Athenian Treasury Lion Gate Long Walls Philippeion Theatre of Dionysus Tunnel of Eupalinos Temples Aphaea Artemis Athena Nike Erechtheion Hephaestus Hera, Olympia Parthenon Samothrace Zeus, Olympia Language Proto-Greek Mycenaean Homeric Dialects Aeolic Arcadocypriot Attic Doric Epirote Ionic Locrian Macedonian Pamphylian Koine Writing Linear A Linear B Cypriot syllabary Greek alphabet Greek numerals Attic numerals Greek colonisation Magna Graecia Mainland Italy Alision Brentesion Caulonia Chone Croton Cumae Elea Heraclea Lucania Hipponion Hydrus Krimisa Laüs Locri Medma Metauros Metapontion Neápolis Pandosia (Lucania) Poseidonia Pixous Rhegion Scylletium Siris Sybaris Sybaris on the Traeis Taras Terina Thurii Sicily Akragas Akrai Akrillai Apollonia Calacte Casmenae Catana Gela Helorus Henna Heraclea Minoa Himera Hybla Gereatis Hybla Heraea Kamarina Leontinoi Megara Hyblaea Messana Naxos Segesta Selinous Syracuse Tauromenion Thermae Tyndaris Aeolian Islands Didyme Euonymos Ereikousa Hycesia Lipara/Meligounis Phoenicusa Strongyle Therassía Cyrenaica Balagrae Barca Berenice Cyrene ( Apollonia ) Ptolemais Iberian Peninsula Akra Leuke Alonis Emporion Helike Hemeroscopion Kalathousa Kypsela Mainake Menestheus's Limin Illicitanus Limin/Portus Illicitanus Rhode Salauris Zacynthos Illyria Aspalathos Apollonia Aulon Epidamnos Epidauros Issa Melaina Korkyra Nymphaion Orikon Pharos Tragurion Thronion Black Sea basin North coast Akra Borysthenes Charax Chersonesus Dioscurias Gorgippia Hermonassa Kalos Limen Kepoi Kerkinitis Kimmerikon Myrmekion Nikonion Nymphaion Olbia Pantikapaion Phanagoria Pityus Tanais Theodosia Tyras Tyritake South coast Abonoteichos Amisos Anchialos Apollonia Athina Bathus Dionysopolis Cotyora Cytorus Eupatoria Heraclea Kerasous Mesambria Odessos Oinòe Phasis Polemonion Rhizos Salmydessus Sesamus Sinope Thèrmae Tium Trapezous Tripolis Zaliche Lists Cities in Epirus People Place names Stoae Temples Theatres Category Portal Outline v t e Ancient seafaring Vessels Types Balangay Bangka Beden Coracle Dhow Dragon boat Dugout canoe Fire ship Galley Penteconter Kunlun ship Liburna Longship Multihull Navis lusoria Obelisk ship Outriggers Sakman Single-outrigger Catamaran Trimaran Polyremes Bireme Oared warships Trireme Quadrireme Quinquereme Hexareme Tessarakonteres Raft Reed boat Sailing ship Solar ship Tomol Tākitimu Uru by region Austronesia Egypt Persia Rome Propulsion Paddling Sailing Towing Poling Components Anchor Bow Cabin Deck Figurehead Hull Planking Keel Mast Oar Paddle Rope Rudder Steering oar Sail Sail components Stem Sternpost Strake Tiller Construction Boat building Careening Carvel built Clinker built Dugout Framing Frame-first Shell-first Joinery Lashed-lug Mortise and tenon Phoenician joint Scarf joint Sewn-plank Shipbuilding By region: Egypt Rigging Crab claw Fore-and-aft Lateen Settee Tanja Triangular sail Junk Mast-aft Spritsail Square Armaments Ballista Catapult Corvus Dolphin Fire ship Harpax Ram Sambuca Wrecks and relics Earliest Pesse canoe Dufuna canoe Abydos Moor Sand Dokos Khufu ship Ferriby Boats Dover Bronze Age Boat Uluburun Canaanite Cape Gelidonya Zambratija Rochelongue Austronesia Pontian boat Butuan boats Black Sea‎ Sinop D Greek Kyrenia Leontophoros Syracusia Ashkelon Antikythera Canaanite and Phoenician Bajo de la Campana Canaanite shipwreck Gozo Ma'agan Michael Mazarrón Punic Marsala Punic shipwreck Roman Alkedo Arles Rhône 3 Blackfriars I Caligula's Giant Ship De Meern ships Isis Madrague de Giens Nemi ships Marausa Yassi Ada Nordic Hjortspring boat Nydam boat Lists Oldest surviving Museum ships Surviving ancient ships Navigation, and ports and harbors Navigation Celestial Charts Coastal Lighthouses History Ocean swell Stick chart Periplus Piloting Pilot boat Maritime pilot By region: Inuit Micronesian Polynesia Ports and harbors Actium Aden Adulis Alexandria Apollonia Aradus Arikamedu Arsinoe Avalites Barbarikon Barygaza Basra Berenice Troglodytica Bosphorus Byblos Caesarea Maritima Canopus Carthage Centumcellae Charmutha Chittagong Delos Essina Giao Chỉ Godavaya Guangzhou Jambukola Jeddah Kaveri Poompattinam Kedah Korkai Leptis Magna Lothal Manthai Madurai Malao Mersa Gawasis Myos Hormos Martaban Mueang Phra Rot Muscat Muziris Narbonne Nesis Óc Eo ( Cattigara ) Opone Ostia Antica Palembang Piraeus Portus Augusti Portus Pisanus Prosphorion Ptolemais Theron Puteoli Qal'at al-Bahrain Qandala Quilon Rhacotis Sarapion Satingpra Sidon Socotra Sounagoura Thapsus Trincomalee Tulum Tyndis Tyre Wadi al-Jarf Zanzibar History Prehistory Timeline Britain Oceania Remote Near Ubaid period Indus Valley Civilizations Ancient Egypt Old Kingdom Austronesia Sa Huỳnh Lapita Micronesia Langkasuka Kedah Champa Kutai Tarumanagara Kalingga Srivijaya Sunda Polynesia Minoan Indus Valley Tamilakam Chola Chera Pandya Somalia Dilmun Maya Nuragic Mycenaean Phoenicia Olmecs Carthage Greece Archaic Classical Rome Achaemenid Nabatea Aksum Migration and exploration Peopling of Australia Peopling of Micronesia Austronesian Expansion Greeks in pre-Roman Gaul Ocean exploration Phoenician maritime expansion Sardinia Circumnavigation of Africa Pytheas' voyage to Britain Roman circumnavigation of Britain Timeline Mariners and explorers Henenu Euthymenes Hanno the Navigator Himilco Sataspes Androsthenes of Thasos Archias of Pella Alexander the Great Nearchus Pytheas Megasthenes Xu Fu Hippalus Julius Caesar Eudoxus of Cyzicus Maes Titianus Military Navies Egyptian Achaemenid Greek Roman Battles Mediterranean: Alashiya Nile Delta Salamis Artemisium Eurymedon Naupactus Olpae Syracuse Cynossema Arginusae Mytilene Hellespont Echinades Salamis II Mylae Cape Hermaeum Ecnomus Drepana Aegates Lake Trasimene Chios Myonessus Nile Naulochus Mycale Actium Tactics Boarding Grappling Incendiaries Oared vessels Sailing ships Greek navy Ramming By region China India Odisha Japan Rome South America Rafts Economy and trade Whaling Fishing Egypt Land of Punt Indo–Mesopotamia relations Meluhha Tin Spice trade Austronesian network Sa Huynh-Kalanay Incense trade Maritime Silk Road Periplus of the Erythraean Sea Maya Greece Greco–Indian shipping Rome Indo–Roman Piracy History Mediterranean piracy Ameinias the Phocian Cilician pirates Jewish pirates Kidnapping of Julius Caesar Pompey's campaign against the pirates Research and education Scholars Historians David Blackman Lionel Casson Fik Meijer John Sinclair Morrison William L. Rodgers Chester G. Starr Archaeologists George Bass Jean-Yves Empereur Boris Rankov J. Richard Steffy Peter Throckmorton Shelley Wachsmann Topics and theories Coastal defence and fortification Grave goods Lighthouses Alexandria Marine art Marine navigation Maritime archaeology Naval warfare Maritime temples Temple of Isthmia Temple of Poseidon, Sounion Samothrace temple complex Nusantao network Phoenician discovery of America Pre-Columbian theories Sea Peoples Shipbuilding Shell middens Ship burial Tacking Thalassocracy Underwater archaeology Underwater exploration Sites H3 Qal'at al-Bahrain Experimental archaeology Ship replica Heyerdahl expeditions Kon-Tiki Ra and Ra II Austronesian replicas Hōkūleʻa Sarimanok Te Au o Tonga Hawaiʻiloa canoe Samudra Raksa Alingano Maisu Saina Balangay Voyage Faʻafaite Gaualofa Marumaru Atua Mediterranean Olympias Regina Phoenician Ship Expedition Viking replicas Viking Others Vital Alsar Ivlia Abora Viracocha Tangaroa Oakleaf Morgawr Institutes and conferences Advisory Council on Underwater Archaeology Archaeological Institute of America European Association of Archaeologists Institute of Nautical Archaeology International Congress of Maritime Museums Nautical Archaeology Society RPM Nautical Foundation Sea Research Society Society for American Archaeology Museums and memorials Boat Museum, Kolkata Bodrum Museum of Underwater Archaeology Giza Solar boat museum Grand Egyptian Museum Ancient Shipwreck Museum at Kyrenia Castle Museum of Ancient Seafaring Museum of Ancient Ships, Pisa National Museum of Subaquatic Archaeology Viking ship museums: Oslo Roskilde Legend and literature Legend Ark of bulrushes Flood myths Genesis Gilgamesh Greek Literature Odyssey Histories (Herodotus) On the Ocean Argonautica Histories (Polybius) Metamorphoses Geography Aeneid NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐kkp7x
Cached time: 20250814220048
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.611 seconds
Real time usage: 0.825 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2601/1000000
Revision size: 18653/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 342990/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 1440/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 6/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 59534/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.336/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 16897841/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  551.066      1 -total
 26.07%  143.653      2 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
 20.77%  114.442      1 Template:Ancient_Greece_topics
 20.40%  112.417      1 Template:Reflist
 19.20%  105.815      5 Template:Lang
 13.40%   73.830      3 Template:Cite_web
 11.55%   63.648      1 Template:Short_description
 10.51%   57.941      1 Template:More_citations_needed
 10.49%   57.816     18 Template:Navbox
  9.64%   53.110      1 Template:Ambox Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:5425195:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814220048 and revision id 1292034704. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Economy_of_ancient_Greece&oldid=1292034704 " Categories : Economy of ancient Greece Ancient economies Economic history of Greece Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from October 2017 All articles needing additional references Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2016 This page was last edited on 24 May 2025, at 20:54 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Economy of ancient Greece 13 languages Add topic

