Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Middle East 1.2 Europe 1.3 United States 2 See also 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Pomology 38 languages العربية Беларуская Български Català Čeština Deutsch Eesti Español فارسی Français Galego ગુજરાતી 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano ქართული Қазақша Кыргызча Latina Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Plattdüütsch Polski Português Română Русский کوردی Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska தமிழ் Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська Winaray 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikibooks Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Study of fruits and their cultivation Illustration of the 'Willermoz' pear by Alexandre Bivort from Album de Pomologie (1848–1852) Pomology (from Latin pomum , " fruit ", + -logy , "study") is a branch of botany that studies fruits and their cultivation . Someone who researches and practices the science of pomology is called a pomologist . The term fruticulture (from Latin fructus , "fruit", + cultura , "care") is also used to describe the agricultural practice of growing fruits in orchards .

Pomological research is mainly focused on the development, enhancement, cultivation, and physiological studies of fruit trees . The goals of fruit tree improvement include enhancement of fruit quality, regulation of production periods, and reduction of production costs .

History [ edit ] Middle East [ edit ] In ancient Mesopotamia, pomology was practiced by the Sumerians , who are known to have grown various types of fruit, including dates , grapes, apples, melons, and figs.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] While the first fruits cultivated by the Egyptians were likely indigenous , such as the palm date and sorghum , more fruits were introduced as other cultural influences were introduced.

Grapes and watermelon were found throughout predynastic Egyptian sites, as were the sycamore fig , dom palm, and Christ's thorn . The carob , olive , apple , and pomegranate were introduced to Egyptians during the New Kingdom . Later, during the Greco-Roman period peaches and pears were also introduced.

[ 3 ] Europe [ edit ] The ancient Greeks and Romans also had a healthy tradition of pomology, and they cultivated a wide range of fruits, including apples , pears , figs , grapes , quinces , citron, strawberries , blackberries , elderberries, currants , damson plums , dates, melons , rose hips , and pomegranates .

[ 4 ] Less common fruits were the more exotic azeroles and medlars .

Cherries and apricots , both introduced in the 1st century BC, were popular. Peaches were introduced in the 1st century AD from Persia.

Oranges and lemons were known but used more for medicinal purposes than in cookery. The Romans, in particular, were known for their advanced methods of fruit cultivation and storage, and they developed many of the approaches that are still used in modern pomology.

[ 4 ] United States [ edit ] During the mid-19th century in the United States , farmers were expanding fruit orchard programs in response to growing markets. At the same time, horticulturists from the USDA and agricultural colleges were bringing new varieties to the US from foreign expeditions, and developing experimental lots for these fruits. In response to this increased interest and activity, the USDA established the Division of Pomology in 1886 and named Henry E. Van Deman as chief pomologist. An important focus of the division was to publish illustrated accounts of new varieties and to disseminate research findings to fruit growers and breeders through special publications and annual reports. During this period Andrew Jackson Downing and his brother Charles were prominent in pomology and horticulture , producing The Fruits and Fruit Trees of America (1845).

[ 5 ] The introduction of new varieties required an exact portrait of the fruit so that plant breeders could accurately document and disseminate their research results. Since the use of scientific photography was not widespread in the late 19th century, the USDA commissioned artists to create watercolor illustrations of newly introduced cultivars . Many of the watercolors were used for lithographic reproductions in USDA publications, such as the Report of the Pomologist and the Yearbook of Agriculture .

[ citation needed ] Today, the collection of approximately 7,700 watercolors is preserved in the National Agricultural Library 's Special Collections, [ 6 ] where it serves as a major historic and botanic resource to a variety of researchers, including horticulturists , historians, artists, and publishers.

[ citation needed ] See also [ edit ] Arboriculture Floriculture Horticulture Olericulture Trophort Viticulture References [ edit ] ^ "Farming" .

British Museum . Archived from the original on 16 June 2016 . Retrieved 15 June 2016 .

^ Tannahill, Reay (1968).

The fine art of food . Folio Society.

^ Janick, Jules (February 2005). "The Origins of Fruits, Fruit Growing and Fruit Breeding".

Plant Breeding Reviews . Vol. 25. pp.

255– 320.

doi : 10.1002/9780470650301.ch8 .

ISBN 9780470650301 .

^ a b John E. Stambaugh, The Ancient Roman City , JHU Press (1988), p. 148.

^ Downing, Andrew Jackson (1855).

The Fruits and Fruit Trees of America (1845) online .

^ "Guide to the USDA Special Collections" .

National Agricultural Library . Archived from the original on 2011-01-09 . Retrieved 2009-03-08 .

External links [ edit ] American Pomological Society —Oldest fruit organization in North America German Pomological Society —German fruit organization v t e Horticulture and gardening Gardening Allotment Arboretum Butterfly Climate-friendly gardening Community Forest Foodscaping French intensive Garden Garden design computer-aided Groundskeeping Garden tool Green wall Guerrilla Historic conservation History Native Parterre Proplifting Raised bed Square foot Sustainable Xeriscaping Types of gardens Alpine Ancient Egypt Australian Back Baroque Biblical Bog Botanical Bottle Butterfly Byzantine Cactus Colonial Color Communal Garden square Community Container Cottage Dutch East Asian Chinese Suzhou Cantonese Japanese Roji Zen Korean Vietnamese English Sharawadgi Fernery Floating Flower Formal French formal landscape Renaissance Front German Greek Greenhouse Hanging Islamic Italian Renaissance Keyhole Kitchen Knot Market Mary Medieval Monastic Mughal Orchard Indonesian home garden Persian Bāgh Charbagh Paradise Physic Pleasure Prairie Pollinator Rain Rock Roman Roof Rose Sacred School Scottish Sculpture Sensory Shade Shakespeare Shrubbery Spanish Tea Therapeutic Trial Tropical Victory Walled Water Wildlife Winter Zoological Horticulture Agriculture Permaculture stock-free sustainable urban Arboriculture Bonsai Saikei Botany Companion planting Crop most valuable Cutting Flora Floriculture Canada Taiwan Hügelkultur Fruticulture Genetically modified tree Hydroculture Indigenous Intercropping Landscape architecture Olericulture Plant breeding cuttings free-flowering propagation drought tolerance hardiness Pomology Postharvest physiology Roguing Tropical Urban agriculture horticulture forestry reforestation Viticulture Monoculture Organic Biodynamic agriculture Grafting List of organic gardening and farming topics Vegan organic agriculture Plant protection Fungicide Herbicide Index of pesticide articles List of fungicides List of insecticides Pesticide Plant disease forecasting Pruning Weed control Aquamog weed remover Related articles Community orchard Features Floral design Floristry Ikebana Groundskeeping Garden centre Garden tourism List of gardens Lists of plants Perennial Plant collecting Turf management Gardening portal Category Commons WikiProject v t e Branches of biology Abiogenesis Aerobiology Agronomy Agrostology Anatomy Anthropogeny Anthropology Astrobiology Bacteriology Biochemistry Biogeography Biogeology Bioinformatics Biological engineering Biomathematics Biomechanics Biophysics Biosemiotics Biostatistics Biotechnology Botany Cell biology Cellular microbiology Chemical biology Chronobiology Cognitive biology Computational biology Conservation biology Cryobiology Cytogenetics Dendrology Developmental biology Ecological genetics Ecology Embryology Epidemiology Epigenetics Evolutionary biology Freshwater biology Generative biology Genetics Genomics Geobiology Gerontology Herpetology Histology Human biology Ichthyology Immunology Lipidology Mammalogy Marine biology Microbiology Molecular biology Mycology Neontology Neuroscience Nutrition Ornithology Osteology Paleontology Parasitology Pathology Pharmacology Photobiology Phycology Phylogenetics Physiology Pomology Primatology Proteomics Protistology Quantum biology Relational biology Reproductive biology Sociobiology Structural biology Synthetic biology Systematics Systems biology Taxonomy Teratology Toxicology Virology Virophysics Welfare biology Xenobiology Zoology See also History of biology Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine Timeline of biology and organic chemistry Authority control databases International VIAF National Germany Czech Republic Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Pomology&oldid=1260139599 " Categories : Pomology Fruit Agronomy Branches of botany Horticulture Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Latin-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2021 This page was last edited on 29 November 2024, at 02:44 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Pomology 38 languages Add topic

