Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Pólya on Fejér 3 Gallery 4 See also 5 References 6 Sources 7 External links 8 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Lipót Fejér 20 languages Български Català Deutsch Español Esperanto Français 한국어 Italiano עברית Magyar مصرى 日本語 Polski Português Română Русский Svenska Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Hungarian mathematician For other people named Leopold Weiss, see Leopold Weiss (disambiguation) The native form of this personal name is Fejér Lipót . This article uses Western name order when mentioning individuals.

Lipót Fejér Fejér c.

1928 Born ( 1880-02-09 ) 9 February 1880 Pécs , Austria-Hungary Died 15 October 1959 (1959-10-15) (aged 79) Budapest , Hungary Nationality Hungarian Alma mater University of Budapest Known for Fejér kernel Fejér quadrature Fejér's theorem Fejér–Riesz theorem Scientific career Fields Mathematics Institutions University of Budapest University of Berlin Doctoral advisor Hermann Schwarz Doctoral students Paul Erdős John von Neumann George Pólya Tibor Radó László Kalmár Marcel Riesz John Horvath Gábor Szegő Michael Fekete János Aczél Steven Gaal Other notable students Cornelius Lanczos Lipót Fejér (or Leopold Fejér , Hungarian pronunciation: [ˈfɛjeːr] ; 9 February 1880 – 15 October 1959) was a Hungarian mathematician of Jewish heritage. Fejér was born Leopold Weisz , [ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] and changed to the Hungarian name Fejér [ 4 ] around 1900.

Biography [ edit ] He was born in Pécs , Austria-Hungary , into the Jewish family of Victoria Goldberger and Samuel Weiss. His maternal great-grandfather Samuel Nachod was a doctor and his grandfather was a renowned scholar, author of a Hebrew-Hungarian dictionary. Leopold's father, Samuel Weiss, was a shopkeeper in Pecs. In primary schools Leopold was not doing well, so for a while his father took him away to home schooling. The future scientist developed his interest in mathematics in high school thanks to his teacher Sigismund Maksay.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] Fejér studied mathematics and physics at the University of Budapest and at the University of Berlin , where he was taught by Hermann Schwarz .  In 1902 he earned his doctorate from University of Budapest (today Eötvös Loránd University ). From 1902 to 1905 Fejér taught there and from 1905 until 1911 he taught at Franz Joseph University in Kolozsvár in Austria-Hungary (now Cluj-Napoca in Romania ). In 1911 Fejér was appointed to the chair of mathematics at the University of Budapest and he held that post until his death. He was elected corresponding member (1908), member (1930) of the Hungarian Academy of Sciences .

During his period in the chair at Budapest Fejér led a highly successful Hungarian school of analysis. He was the thesis advisor of mathematicians such as John von Neumann , Paul Erdős , George Pólya and Pál Turán . Thanks to Fejér, Hungary has developed a strong mathematical school: he has educated a new generation of students who have gone on to become eminent scientists. As Polya recalled, a large number of them became interested in mathematics thanks to Fejér, his fascinating personality and charisma. Fejér gave short (no more than an hour) but very entertaining lectures and often sat with students in cafés, discussing mathematical problems and telling stories from his life and how he interacted with the world's leading mathematicians.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] Fejér's research concentrated on harmonic analysis and, in particular, Fourier series .

[ 8 ] Fejér collaborated to produce important papers, one with Carathéodory on entire functions in 1907 and another major work with Frigyes Riesz in 1922 on conformal mappings (specifically, a short proof of the Riemann mapping theorem ).

In 1944, Fejér was forced to resign because of his Jewish background. One night at the end of December 1944, members of the Arrow Cross Party stormed into his house. Fejér and all the residents of his house were convoyed to the banks of the Danube and were about to be shot , but were miraculously saved by a phone call "from a brave officer". Fejér was later found in a hospital in the city, where he was admitted "under unexplained circumstances". This severe trauma left a permanent mark on the scientist's mental faculties, something even he himself noticed and later often said of himself "since I became an idiot".

[ 6 ] Still, according to his colleagues, he kept on an even keel until mid-1950s, when he became senile.

[ 7 ] Lipót Fejér died in Budapest on 15 October 1959. His grave is in the distinguished Kerepesi Cemetery .

[ 9 ] Pólya on Fejér [ edit ] This section contains too many or overly lengthy quotations .

Please help summarise the quotations . Consider transferring direct quotations to Wikiquote or excerpts to Wikisource .

( November 2008 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) If you could see him in his rather Bohemian attire (which was, I suspect, carefully chosen) you would find him very eccentric. Yet he would not appear so in his natural habitat, in a certain section of Budapest middle-class society, many members of which had the same manners, if not quite the same mannerisms, as Fejér — there he would appear about half eccentric.

— George Pólya , George Pólya, "Some mathematicians I have known", Amer. Math. Monthly 76 (1969), 746–753 Pólya writes the following about Fejér, telling us much about his personality: [ 10 ] He had artistic tastes. He deeply loved music and was a good pianist. He liked a well-turned phrase. 'As to earning a living', he said, 'a professor's salary is a necessary, but not sufficient, condition.' Once he was very angry with a colleague who happened to be a topologist , and explaining the case at length he wound up by declaring '... and what he is saying is a topological mapping of the truth'.

He had a quick eye for foibles and miseries; in seemingly dull situations he noticed points that were unexpectedly funny or unexpectedly pathetic. He carefully cultivated his talent of raconteur; when he told, with his characteristic gestures, of the little shortcomings of a certain great mathematician, he was irresistible. The hours spent in continental coffee houses with Fejér discussing mathematics and telling stories are a cherished recollection for many of us. Fejér presented his mathematical remarks with the same verve as his stories, and this may have helped him in winning the lasting interest of so many younger men in his problems.

Lipót Fejér (standing to the right) , with Greek mathematician Constantin Carathéodory (1873–1950; left) In the same article Pólya writes about Fejér's style of mathematics: Fejér talked about a paper he was about to write up. 'When I write a paper,' he said, 'I have to rederive for myself the rules of differentiation and sometimes even the commutative law of multiplication.' These words stuck in my memory and years later I came to think that they expressed an essential aspect of Fejér's mathematical talent; his love for the intuitively clear detail.

It was not given to him to solve very difficult problems or to build vast conceptual structures. Yet he could perceive the significance, the beauty, and the promise of a rather concrete not too large problem, foresee the possibility of a solution and work at it with intensity. And, when he had found the solution, he kept on working at it with loving care, till each detail became fully transparent.

It is due to such care spent on the elaboration of the solution that Fejér's papers are very clearly written, and easy to read and most of his proofs appear very clear and simple. Yet only the very naive may think that it is easy to write a paper that is easy to read, or that it is a simple thing to point out a significant problem that is capable of a simple solution.

Gallery [ edit ] (Left to right); Standing: Frigyes Riesz , Béla Kerékjártó , Alfréd Haar , Gyula Kőnig , Rudolf Ortvay [ hu ] ; On chairs: József Kürschák , George David Birkhoff , O.D. Kellog, Lipót Fejér; Sitting on the floor: Tibor Radó , István Lipka [ hu ] , László Kalmár , Pál Szász [ hu ] Fejér's grave in Kerepesi Cemetery , Budapest See also [ edit ] Fejér window Real algebraic geometry References [ edit ] ^ "Nemzeti Örökség Intézete - Fejér Lipót (1900-ig Weisz Leopold)" .

^ "Fejér Lipót - Névpont 2021" .

^ "Fejér Lipót" .

^ Weiss in German means "white", fejér is archaic spelling in Hungarian for "white".

Biography ^ "Fejér Lipót" (in Hungarian). Nevpont . Retrieved 17 April 2023 .

^ a b J J O'Connor and E F Robertson.

"Lipót Fejér" . School of Mathematics and Statistic, University of St Andrews, Scotland . Retrieved 17 April 2023 .

^ a b Hersch 1993 .

^ a b Struik 1987 , p. 213.

^ Szegö 1960 .

^ Pólya, G (1961). "Leopold Fejér".

J. London Math. Soc .

36 : 501– 506.

doi : 10.1112/jlms/s1-36.1.501 .

Sources [ edit ] Szegö, Gabor (1960).

"Leopold Fejér: In memoriam, 1880-1959" .

Bull. Amer. Math. Soc .

66 (5): 346– 352.

doi : 10.1090/S0002-9904-1960-10441-7 .

MR 0114742 .

Hersch, Reuben (1993).

"A Visit to Hungarian Mathematics" .

The Mathematical Intelligencer .

15 (2): 13– 26.

doi : 10.1007/BF03024187 .

S2CID 122827181 .

Struik, Dirk J. (1987).

A Concise History of Mathematics: Fourth Revised Edition . Courier Corporation. p. 213.

ISBN 9780486138886 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Lipót Fejér .

Birthplace of Lipót Fejér .

O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F.

, "Lipót Fejér" , MacTutor History of Mathematics Archive , University of St Andrews Lipót Fejér at the Mathematics Genealogy Project Further reading [ edit ] Mikolás, Miklós (1970–1980). "Fejér, Lipót".

Dictionary of Scientific Biography . Vol. 4. New York: Charles Scribner's Sons. pp.

561– 2.

ISBN 978-0-684-10114-9 .

Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Australia Netherlands Sweden Poland Israel Academics CiNii Mathematics Genealogy Project zbMATH MathSciNet People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Lipót_Fejér&oldid=1270085135 " Categories : 1880 births 1959 deaths People from Pécs Hungarian Jews Approximation theorists 20th-century Hungarian mathematicians Members of the Hungarian Academy of Sciences Mathematical analysts Academic staff of Franz Joseph University Burials at Kerepesi Cemetery Mathematicians from Austria-Hungary Hidden categories: CS1 Hungarian-language sources (hu) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from January 2022 Articles with hCards Pages with Hungarian IPA Wikipedia articles with style issues from November 2008 All articles with style issues Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 17 January 2025, at 21:06 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Lipót Fejér 20 languages Add topic

