Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Background 2 Protest 3 Media coverage 4 Legacy 5 References Toggle the table of contents Cummeragunja walk-off 2 languages Deutsch Français Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 1939 protest by Aboriginal Australians Cummeragunja walk-off Date 4 February 1939 ( 1939-02-04 ) Location Cummeragunja Station Participants Jack Patten Bill Onus Eric Onus William Cooper The Cummeragunja walk-off was a 1939 protest by Aboriginal Australians at the Cummeragunja Station , an Aboriginal reserve in southern New South Wales . Approximately 100 residents of the station walked off in protest at poor living conditions and mistreatment by the white station manager, as well as the perceived indifference of the Aborigines Protection Board and the state government. The protest was led by Aboriginal activist Jack Patten .

Background [ edit ] The Cummeragunja Mission was mostly home to Yorta Yorta people who had been relocated in the late 19th century from the Maloga Mission . In January 1935, according to W.B. Payne, a Church of Christ missionary, Christian churches were indifferent and neglecting Aboriginal people at the mission , "While thousands of pounds were being raised for missions in foreign countries the aborigines in Australia were regarded as outcasts".

[ 1 ] Over the years, the New South Wales government had tightened its control on the operation of the mission. By late 1938 people had become unhappy with the management of the mission, living conditions and restrictions on their movement.

[ 2 ] The appointment of Arthur McQuiggan as manager of Cummeragunja precipitated a deterioration in relations between the Aboriginal residents and authorities. McQuiggan had previously been accused of beating boys at the Kinchela Aboriginal Boys' Home and accepted a transfer rather than be dismissed from his post.

[ 3 ] He and his wife, who assumed the role of matron, were "patronising and authoritarian", angering residents by failing to address poor sanitary conditions and by bringing a respected female elder before a local court where she was charged and convicted of a petty offence.

William Cooper of the Australian Aborigines' League (AAL) visited the station in early 1938 and was "appalled by the conditions he saw", making complaints to the New South Wales state government and Premier Bertram Stevens .

[ 4 ] In October 1938, the residents of Cummeragunja petitioned the Aborigines Protection Board to dismiss the McQuiggans, setting out a list of grievances.

[ 4 ] They were supported by Cooper and the AAL which called for an independent inquiry into the board's actions.

[ 5 ] However, the board refused to receive the petition and returned the document to McQuiggan, who publicly displayed it and invited signatories to remove their names. His actions were widely seen as an insult and raised fears of retaliation.

[ 6 ] In November 1938, Jack Patten visited Cummeragunja as part of a tour of Aboriginal communities in New South Wales. In the same year he had established The Australian Abo Call as the first newspaper catering to Aboriginal people. At Cummeragunja, where his brother George and other family members lived, Patten addressed a meeting of residents but was met with a police presence. He subsequently reported to Sydney newspapers a number of issues at the reserve, including that multiple children had died of malnutrtion, that "mental and physical cruelty" were being inflicted by white officials, and that the Aborigines Protection Board was allowed Aboriginal people to use only 14 acres (5.7 ha) of the reserve, which totalled over 2,900 acres (1,200 ha).

[ 7 ] Protest [ edit ] On 1 February 1939, Patten returned to the station and addressed a meeting of residents at the station hall. At the meeting he "outlined the new legislation the state government was intending to introduce, described conditions on other supervised reserces, claimed children were going to be removed , and alleged the station would become a closed compound under the Board's new policy".

[ 8 ] Several residents left Cummeragunja immediately following Patten's speech. He telegrammed the state government that residents were leaving, which he attributed to intimidation, starvation and victimisation, and demanded an immediate inquiry. Patten addressed a further impromptu meeting two days later, after which he and his brother were arrested and charged with "enticing Aborigines to leave a reserve".

[ 8 ] The walk-off was in contravention of rules set by the Board.

[ 2 ] [ 9 ] [ 10 ] [ 11 ] Patten's arrested spurred a further walk-off of residents, who collected their belongings and began leaving in groups, many of which crossed the Murray River into Victorian jurisdiction and set up camp on the riverbanks near Barmah . The number of residents who left is uncertain but was likely around 100, although contemporary sources reported figures between 60 and 300 people.

[ 8 ] Activist Bill Onus put off his potential career as a budding actor to return from Melbourne to his place of birth for the walk-off.

[ 12 ] Media coverage [ edit ] While the walk-off received widespread coverage in mainstream newspapers, it was "heavily influenced by contemporary racism and so was profoundly unsympathetic". The board produced a narrative that residents had "panicked or been misled by agitators", which was repeated without further analysis.

[ 13 ] A number of participants in the walk-off were interviewed by journalists and reported various motivations.

Shadrach James stated that his people "had for years lived in a hand to mouth fashion, often in a semi-starved condition", while another resident reported that the infant death rate at the reserve had been substantial.

[ 8 ] Other common complaints were the cruelty of the McQuiggans, the loss of land promised by the board (including land which Aboriginal people had cleared for farming that had been leased to white farmers), and the threat of child removals.

[ 14 ] Legacy [ edit ] Many of the people who left the mission in February 1939 settled in northern Victoria in towns such as Barmah , Echuca and Shepparton .

[ 15 ] The walk-off was one of the first mass protests by Indigenous Australians , and had significant impact on events that followed later, such the 1967 referendum .

[ 16 ] The third episode of the 1981 miniseries, Women of the Sun , is a fictional story based on the walk-off.

In October 2010, the opera Pecan Summer , based on the walk-off, opened in Mooroopna , near Shepparton.

Deborah Cheetham – whose uncle Jimmy Little was born at Cummeragunja Mission – wrote, composed and performed in this production by the Short Black Opera Company.

[ 17 ] [ 18 ] In 2020, Ross Morgan, a Yorta Yorta man, designed the Collingwood Football Club 's Indigenous guernsey which was worn against North Melbourne in round 13 as part of the Australian Football League 's Sir Doug Nicholls round tradition. According to Morgan, the walk-off is still strongly remembered by those who were involved and their descendants.

[ 19 ] References [ edit ] ^ "Aborigines Neglected – Missioner's Complaint – Churches not Doing Enough" .

The Mercury .

Davies Brothers Ltd . 22 January 1935. p. 7 . Retrieved 4 April 2012 – via National Library of Australia.

^ a b "Cummeragunja – Mission History" .

Mission Voices .

ABC Online . Archived from the original on 27 May 2009 . Retrieved 19 November 2009 .

^ Attwood 2003 , p. 42.

^ a b Attwood 2003 , p. 43.

^ Attwood 2003 , p. 44.

^ Attwood 2003 , pp. 44–45.

^ Attwood, Bain (2003).

Rights for Aborigines . Allen & Unwin. p. 44.

ISBN 1864489839 .

^ a b c d Attwood 2003 , p. 45.

^ "Struggle for Justice" .

Mission Voices .

ABC Online . Archived from the original on 15 May 2009 . Retrieved 19 November 2009 .

^ "New DVD tells story of Shepparton Koori Community" . Victorian Department of the Attorney General. 23 April 2008. Archived from the original on 30 October 2009 . Retrieved 19 November 2009 .

^ "NSW Station – Man Convicted" .

The Argus . 11 March 1939 . Retrieved 19 November 2009 – via National Library of Australia .

^ Reich, Hannah (13 August 2021).

"Documentary Ablaze reveals civil rights leader Bill Onus might have been the first Aboriginal filmmaker" .

ABC News . The Screen Show.

Australian Broadcasting Corporation . Retrieved 16 August 2021 .

^ Attwood 2003 , p. 48.

^ Attwood 2003 , p. 46.

^ "Cummeragunja Mission – Significant Events" .

Mission Voices .

ABC Online . Archived from the original on 1 March 2012 . Retrieved 19 November 2009 .

^ Dobson, Mahalia (4 February 2019).

"Yorta Yorta people return to Cummeragunja 80 years after historical 'walk-off' " .

ABC News .

Australian Broadcasting Corporation . Retrieved 16 August 2021 .

^ Short Black Opera Company proudly presents Pecan Summer – World Premiere Archived 2011-07-06 at the Wayback Machine (retrieved 10 October 2010) ^ "Rehearsals and talent search for first Indigenous opera" .

AM .

ABC Radio National . 18 September 2009 . Retrieved 19 November 2009 .

; "Pecan Summer Pt 1: Empowering Voices" .

Message Stick .

ABC Television . 15 November 2009 . Retrieved 19 November 2009 .

^ "Amazing art and stories to match: Every AFL club's Indigenous Round guernsey" .

Fox Sports . Australia. 20 August 2020 . Retrieved 23 August 2020 .

v t e Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islanders Peoples Aboriginal Australians Communities Aboriginal groups Tasmanians Torres Strait Islanders Victorians Western Australians Individuals Activists Musicians People from politics and public service Performing artists Sportspeople Visual artists Writers Culture Astronomy Bora Corroboree Country Deadly Awards Deities The Dreaming Enumeration Elders Flags Aboriginal Torres Strait Islander Kinship Kurdaitcha Literature of Indigenous Australians Marn Grook Message stick NAIDOC Week National Indigenous Human Rights Awards Outstation movement Religion and mythology Riji Seasons Sacred sites Smoking ceremony Songlines Traditional custodianship Tjurunga Torres Strait Islands Language(s) Avoidance speech Australian Aboriginal English Macro-Gunwinyguan languages Australian Creole Language groups Loanwords into English Palawa Pama–Nyungan languages Placenames Sign languages Taboo on the dead Torres Strait English Torres Strait Island languages Organisations ATSIC Aboriginal Medical Service Aborigines Advancement League Aborigines Progressive Association AIATSIS Australian Aboriginal Progressive Association Australian Aborigines' League Mass media National Congress of Australia's First Peoples National Indigenous Council Office of the Registrar of Indigenous Corporations Politics Registered Aboriginal Party Reconciliation Australia National Reconciliation Week Sorry Day TSRA Land councils Central Land Council Kimberley Land Council Maralinga Tjarutja Metropolitan Local Aboriginal Land Council NSW Aboriginal Land Council Northern Land Council South West Aboriginal Land and Sea Council Tiwi Land Council Bushcraft Boomerang Buka Bush bread Bush tucker Bush medicine Coolamon Dugout canoe Fibrecraft Fire-stick farming Food groups Humpy Possum-skin cloak Scarred tree Soaks Spinifex resin Sweets Waddy Woomera Arts Artefacts Bark painting Contemporary visual art Dance Didgeridoo Dreaming Music Music groups Rock NATSIA Award Papunya Tula Sandpainting Vibe Visual art Yininmadyemi History Aboriginal Land Rights Act 1976 Australian Frontier Wars Bathurst War Hawkesbury and Nepean Wars Caledon Bay crisis Cummeragunja walk-off Day of Mourning Gurindji Strike Historical figures History Prehistory Australian history wars King plates Massacres Black War Missions Native police Native Title Act 1993 New Deal for Aborigines Pilbara strike Pintupi Nine Stolen Generations Apology Tent embassy Western Australia Issues 1967 Referendum Constitutional recognition Crime Health Land rights Native title Protected Area Media portrayal Northern Territory National Emergency Response Self-determination Reconciliation Stolen Generations Half-Caste Act Uluru Statement from the Heart Treaty Truth Voice Voting rights Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Cummeragunja_walk-off&oldid=1297005652 " Categories : Indigenous Australian politics Australian Aboriginal cultural history Protests in Australia 1939 in Australia 1939 protests 1930s in New South Wales Riverina February 1939 in Australia Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use Australian English from August 2018 All Wikipedia articles written in Australian English Use dmy dates from August 2018 This page was last edited on 23 June 2025, at 16:35 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Cummeragunja walk-off 2 languages Add topic

