Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Terminology 2 True-range multilateration 3 Pseudo-range multilateration 4 References Toggle the table of contents Trilateration 18 languages العربية Български Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Español Français 한국어 Italiano ქართული Қазақша Македонски Русский Slovenčina Српски / srpski Svenska Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Multilateration ) Use of distances for determining unknown coordinates of a point Trilateration in three-dimensional geometry Intersection point of three pseudo-ranges Trilateration is the use of distances (or "ranges") for determining the unknown position coordinates of a point of interest, often around Earth ( geopositioning ).

[ 1 ] When more than three distances are involved, it may be called multilateration , for emphasis.

The distances or ranges might be ordinary Euclidean distances ( slant ranges ) or spherical distances (scaled central angles ), as in true-range multilateration ; or biased distances ( pseudo-ranges ), as in pseudo-range multilateration .

Trilateration or multilateration should not be confused with triangulation , which uses angles for positioning; and direction finding , which determines the line of sight direction to a target without determining the radial distance .

Terminology [ edit ] Multiple, sometimes overlapping and conflicting terms are employed for similar concepts – e.g., multilateration without modification has been used for aviation systems employing both true-ranges and pseudo-ranges.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Moreover, different fields of endeavor may employ different terms. In geometry , trilateration is defined as the process of determining absolute or relative locations of points by measurement of distances, using the geometry of circles , spheres or triangles . In surveying, trilateration is a specific technique.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] True-range multilateration [ edit ] This section is an excerpt from True-range multilateration .

[ edit ] True-range multilateration (also termed range-range multilateration and spherical multilateration) is a method to determine the location of a movable vehicle or stationary point in space using multiple ranges ( distances ) between the vehicle/point and multiple spatially-separated known locations (often termed "stations").

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] Energy waves may be involved in determining range, but are not required.

True-range multilateration is both a mathematical topic and an applied technique used in several fields. A practical application involving a fixed location occurs in surveying .

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] Applications involving vehicle location are termed navigation when on-board persons/equipment are informed of its location, and are termed surveillance when off-vehicle entities are informed of the vehicle's location.

Two slant ranges from two known locations can be used to locate a third point in a two-dimensional Cartesian space (plane), which is a frequently applied technique (e.g., in surveying). Similarly, two spherical ranges can be used to locate a point on a sphere, which is a fundamental concept of the ancient discipline of celestial navigation — termed the altitude intercept problem. Moreover, if more than the minimum number of ranges are available, it is good practice to utilize those as well. This article addresses the general issue of position determination using multiple ranges.

In two-dimensional geometry , it is known that if a point lies on two circles, then the circle centers and the two radii provide sufficient information to narrow the possible locations down to two – one of which is the desired solution and the other is an ambiguous solution. Additional information often narrow the possibilities down to a unique location. In three-dimensional geometry, when it is known that a point lies on the surfaces of three spheres, then the centers of the three spheres along with their radii also provide sufficient information to narrow the possible locations down to no more than two (unless the centers lie on a straight line).

True-range multilateration can be contrasted to the more frequently encountered pseudo-range multilateration , which employs range differences to locate a (typically, movable) point. Pseudo range multilateration is almost always implemented by measuring times-of-arrival (TOAs) of energy waves. True-range multilateration can also be contrasted to triangulation , which involves the measurement of angles .

Pseudo-range multilateration [ edit ] This section is an excerpt from Pseudo-range multilateration .

[ edit ] Pseudo-range multilateration , often simply multilateration (MLAT) when in context, is a technique for determining the position of an unknown point, such as a vehicle, based on measurement of biased times of flight (TOFs) of energy waves traveling between the vehicle and multiple stations at known locations. 
TOFs are biased by synchronization errors in the difference between times of arrival (TOA) and times of transmission (TOT): TOF=TOA-TOT .

Pseudo-ranges (PRs) are TOFs multiplied by the wave propagation speed: PR=TOF ⋅ s . In general, the stations' clocks are assumed synchronized but the vehicle's clock is desynchronized.

In MLAT for surveillance , the waves are transmitted by the vehicle and received by the stations; the TOT is unique and unknown, while the TOAs are multiple and known. When MLAT is used for navigation (as in hyperbolic navigation ), the waves are transmitted by the stations and received by the vehicle; in this case, the TOTs are multiple but known, while the TOA is unique and unknown. In navigation applications, the vehicle is often termed the "user"; in surveillance applications, the vehicle may be termed the "target".

The vehicle's clock is considered an additional unknown, to be estimated along with the vehicle's position coordinates. 
If d {\displaystyle d} is the number of physical dimensions being considered (e.g., 2 for a plane) and m {\displaystyle m} is the number of signals received (thus, TOFs measured), it is required that m ≥ ≥ d + 1 {\displaystyle m\geq d+1} .

Processing is usually required to extract the TOAs or their differences from the received signals, and an algorithm is usually required to solve this set of equations. An algorithm either: (a) determines numerical values for the TOT (for the receiver(s) clock) and d {\displaystyle d} vehicle coordinates; or (b) ignores the TOT and forms m − − 1 {\displaystyle m-1} (at least d {\displaystyle d} ) time difference of arrivals (TDOAs), which are used to find the d {\displaystyle d} vehicle coordinates. Almost always, d = 2 {\displaystyle d=2} (e.g., a plane or the surface of a sphere) or d = 3 {\displaystyle d=3} (e.g., the real physical world). Systems that form TDOAs are also called hyperbolic systems, [ 11 ] for reasons discussed below.

A multilateration navigation system provides vehicle position information to an entity "on" the vehicle (e.g., aircraft pilot or GPS receiver operator). A multilateration surveillance system provides vehicle position to an entity "not on" the vehicle (e.g., air traffic controller or cell phone provider). By the reciprocity principle, any method that can be used for navigation can also be used for surveillance, and vice versa (the same information is involved).

Systems have been developed for both TOT and TDOA (which ignore TOT) algorithms. In this article, TDOA algorithms are addressed first, as they were implemented first. Due to the technology available at the time, TDOA systems often determined a vehicle location in two dimensions. TOT systems are addressed second. They were implemented, roughly, post-1975 and usually involve satellites. Due to technology advances, TOT algorithms generally determine a user/vehicle location in three dimensions. However, conceptually, TDOA or TOT algorithms are not linked to the number of dimensions involved.

References [ edit ] ^ Engineers, A.S.C. (1994).

Glossary of the Mapping Sciences . American Society of Civil Engineers. p. 548.

ISBN 978-0-7844-7570-6 . Retrieved 2022-11-07 .

^ "Multilateration (MLAT) Concept of use", International Civil Aviation Organization, 2007 ^ "Radar Basics" , Christian Wolff, undated ^ Encyclopædia Britannica ^ diracdelta Archived 2010-08-12 at the Wayback Machine ^ free dictionary ^ Accuracy limitations of range-range (spherical) multilateration systems , Harry B. Lee, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Lincoln Laboratory, Report Number: DOT/TSC-RA-3-8-(1) (Technical note 1973-43), Oct. 11, 1973 ^ " Rho-Rho Loran-C Combined with Satellite Navigation for Offshore Surveys ". S.T. Grant, International Hydrographic Review , undated ^ Wirtanen, Theodore H. (1969). "Laser Multilateration".

Journal of the Surveying and Mapping Division .

95 (1). American Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE): 81– 92.

doi : 10.1061/jsueax.0000322 .

ISSN 0569-8073 .

^ Escobal, P. R.; Fliegel, H. F.; Jaffe, R. M.; Muller, P. M.; Ong, K. M.; Vonroos, O. H. (2013-08-07).

"A 3-D Multilateration: A Precision Geodetic Measurement System" .

JPL Quart. Tech. Rev .

2 (3) . Retrieved 2022-11-06 .

^ Proc, Jerry (2021).

"Hyperbolic Radionavigation Systems" . Retrieved April 11, 2022 .

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Trilateration&oldid=1226607139 " Categories : Geometry Geopositioning Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with excerpts This page was last edited on 31 May 2024, at 18:44 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Trilateration 18 languages Add topic

