Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Intentional harm vis-à-vis side effects 2 Criticisms 3 See also 4 Notes 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Principle of double effect 14 languages العربية Deutsch Eesti Español فارسی Français Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Lietuvių 日本語 Polski Português Simple English 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Christian ethical consideration This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Principle of double effect" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( April 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a series on Thomas Aquinas Thomism Scholasticism Apophatic theology Aseity Divine simplicity Analogia entis Quinque viae Beatific vision Actus purus Actus essendi Primum Movens Correspondence theory Hylomorphism Substance theory ( ousia ) Substantial form Quiddity ( essence / accident nature ) Peripatetic axiom Principle of double effect Transcendentals Aristotelian ethics Cardinal / Theological Natural law Determinatio Just war Satisfaction theory of the atonement Thomistic sacramental theology Just price Concupiscence Intrinsic finality Thomistic theology of merit Compatibilism Theological intellectualism Works Summa Theologica Treatise on Law Summa contra Gentiles Contra Errores Graecorum Commentaries on Aristotle De regno, ad regem Cypri De regimine Judaeorum De principiis naturae, ad fratrem Sylvestrum De aeternitate mundi, contra murmurantes De motu cordis, ad Magistrum Philippum Quaestiones Disputatae de Veritate Commentary on the Book of Causes De iudiciis astrorum Compendium Theologiae Catena aurea Hymns and prayers Adoro te devote Creator ineffabilis Lauda Sion O sacrum convivium Pange lingua gloriosi corporis mysterium Tantum ergo Sacris solemniis Panis angelicus Verbum supernum prodiens O salutaris hostia Influences Aristotle St. Paul Pseudo-Dionysius St. Augustine St. Boethius Avicenna Peter Lombard Averroes Maimonides St. Albertus Magnus Classical Thomists Cantimpré Saint-Cher Beauvais Penyafort Innocent V Lessines Piperno Moerbeke Martí Trilia Houghton Apolda Sutton Auvergne Benedict XI Fontaines Winterburn Colonna Ymbert di Bologna Fiadoni Guidonis Nédellec Paludanus Holkott Regina Bromyard Kydones Eymerich Calecas Ferrer Dominici Gerson Gorkum Sabunde Capreolus Pierozzi de Flandria Torquemada de Rupe Niger Almadura Mirabilibus Savonarola Fabri Gostynin Głogów Tetzel Deza Mazzolini di Ferrara Gaetanus Koellin Pagnino Faber Vitoria Catherinus Ory Soto (Domingo) Cano Pelargus Soto (Pedro) Senensis Mercado Medina de Granada Fernandes Báñez Zumel Porrecta Duperron Medices Lessius Malvenda Lemos Álvarez Oliva Rispoli Riccardi Gravina Poinsot Ripada Molinier Torres Vallgornera Pallavicino Nicolaï Lynch Ferre Gonet Bancel Quétif Massoulié Alexandre Échard Benedict XIII Serry Plessis Gotti Leocata Concina Benedict XIV De Rubeis Burke de Boxadors Mamachi Gazzaniga Neo-Thomism Aertsen Anquín Anscombe Arintero Ashley Barron Bocheński Bouquillon Bourke Canals Coffey Copleston Coreth Cornoldi Daujat De Wulf Fabro Fairweather Farrer Feser Franca Gardet Garrigou-Lagrange Gauthier Geach George Grenier Hawkins von Donnersmarck Henle Hugon Inagaki Jolivet Kleutgen Knasas Komar Koninck Krąpiec Leo XIII Lira Lonergan MacIntyre Maréchal Maritain Marshall Mascall McInerny Meinvielle Millán-Puelles Newman Pace Pecci Pegis Piolanti Pirotta Pius X Ramírez Régis Ripperger Russo Ryan Sanseverino Sertillanges Simon Smith Stein Tanaka Taparelli Torre Ušeničnik White Wilhelmsen Wippel Woodbury Zigliara History Medieval philosophy Condemnations of 1210–1277 Canonization of Thomas Aquinas Second scholasticism Pontifical University of Saint Thomas Aquinas School of Salamanca Physical premotion Congregatio de Auxiliis Salmanticenses and Complutenses Neo-scholasticism Æterni Patris Editio Leonina Neo-Thomism in Brazil Analytical Thomism ICUSTA Scholarship Aquinas Index Thomisticus Nova et Vetera Revue thomiste The Cambridge Companion to Aquinas The Oxford Handbook of Aquinas The Thomist Thomas Aquinas Dictionary Art 1476 Altarpiece Carafa Chapel Charles Bridge statue Cortona Triptych Enthroned Madonna and Child with Saints Fiesole Altarpiece Madonna and Child with St Dominic and St Thomas Aquinas San Pietro Martire Triptych The Apotheosis of Saint Thomas Aquinas The Vision of Fray Lauterio The Vision of Saint Thomas Aquinas Temptation of St. Thomas Triumph of Saint Thomas Aquinas Related topics Aristotelianism Actus primus Catholic theology Doctor of the Church Dominican Order Empiricism List of institutions named after Aquinas Saint Thomas Aquinas Church Catholic Church portal Philosophy portal v t e Part of a series of articles on Abortion and the Catholic Church Official opposition Canon 915 Eucharist denial or excommunication Canon 1397 §2 Evangelium vitae Humanae vitae In politics Philosophy and theology Consistent life ethic Culture of life Sanctity of life Ensoulment Double effect Indirect abortion History Gianna Beretta Molla Margaret McBride excommunication 2009 Brazilian girl abortion case Death of Savita Halappanavar Activism March for Life Life and Family Paris Prague Washington, D.C.

West Coast Priests for Life Sisters of Life Knights of Columbus Catholic Answers CatholicVote.org American Life League Center for Family and Human Rights National Right to Life Committee Dissidence Catholics for Choice A Catholic Statement on Pluralism and Abortion See also Other Christian views In the United States Abortion Abortion law Catholic Church portal v t e The principle of double effect (also known as the rule of double effect , the doctrine of double effect , often abbreviated as DDE or PDE , double-effect reasoning , or simply double effect ) is a set of ethical criteria which Christian philosophers have advocated for evaluating the permissibility of acting when one's otherwise legitimate act may also cause an effect one would otherwise be obliged to avoid. The first known example of double-effect reasoning is Thomas Aquinas ' treatment of homicidal self-defense, in his work Summa Theologica .

[ 1 ] This set of criteria states that, if an action has foreseeable harmful effects that are practically inseparable from the good effect, it is justifiable if the following are true: the nature of the act is itself good, or at least morally neutral; the agent intends the good effect and does not intend the bad effect, either as a means to the good or as an end in itself; the good effect outweighs the bad effect in circumstances sufficiently grave to justify causing the bad effect and the agent exercises due diligence to minimize the harm.

[ 2 ] Intentional harm vis-à-vis side effects [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( February 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The principle of double effect is based on the idea that there is a morally relevant difference between an "intended" consequence of an act and one that is foreseen by the actor but not calculated to achieve their motive. This distinction becomes clear when comparing different types of military actions, such as those of a tactical bomber versus a terror bomber. A tactical bomber engages in strikes on enemy military targets, knowing that some civilian casualties are a foreseen but unintended consequence. However, their intention is the military objective. In contrast, a terror bomber deliberately targets civilians to induce fear and achieve political objectives, making the harm to civilians the means to an end. While civilian casualties occur in both cases, the tactical bomber’s intention is not to cause harm, and the action itself is aimed at a legitimate military goal. Because advocates of double effect propose that consequentially similar acts can be morally different, double effect is most often criticized by consequentialists who consider the consequences of actions entirely determinative of the action's morality.

In their use of the distinction between intent and foresight without intent, advocates of double effect make three arguments. First, that intent differs from foresight, even in cases in which one foresees an effect as inevitable. Second, that one can apply the distinction to specific sets of cases found in military ethics (terror bombing/strategic bombing), medical ethics (craniotomy/hysterectomy), and social ethics (euthanasia). Third, that the distinction has moral relevance, importance, or significance.

A common application of the principle is in the use of opioids to treat pain, but which also hasten someone’s death, when treating imminently terminal patients.

[ 3 ] The doctrine consists of four conditions that must be satisfied before an act is morally permissible: The nature-of-the-act condition.

The action itself must be morally good or, at the very least, morally neutral.

The right-intention condition.

The intention must be the achieving of only the good effect, with the bad effect being only an unintended side effect. All reasonable measures to avoid or mitigate the bad effect must be taken.

The concurrence condition.

The good effect must be caused by the action at least as immediately (in terms of causality, not—necessarily—temporally) as the bad effect.  It is impermissible to attempt to bring about an indirect good with a direct evil.

[ 4 ] Also formulated as: The means-end condition.

The bad effect must not be the means by which one achieves the good effect. Good ends do not justify evil means.

[ 5 ] [ note 1 ] The proportionality condition.

There must be a proportionately grave reason for permitting the evil effect.

Criticisms [ edit ] While some consequentialists may reject the Principle, Alison McIntyre states that "many criticisms of the principle of double effect do not proceed from consequentialist assumptions".

[ 6 ] Alyson Hoyt argues that the DDE should not be used in wartime due to its potential for misuse and the complexity of modern warfare. She claims while the DDE aims to justify actions with unintended harmful consequences, it can be easily manipulated to rationalize civilian casualties as mere "side effects" of military objectives.

[ 7 ] A. Dirk Moses in his book The Problems of Genocide , writes that the doctrine of double effect is used to excuse the killing of civilians as collateral damage of military activity. He disputes that war can justify such killings, and questions why they should be considered more morally permissible than killing civilians for other reasons, such as genocide.

[ 8 ] See also [ edit ] Trolley problem – a moral dilemma exploring the principle of double effect Competing harms and necessity – similar theories in law Lesser of two evils principle Notes [ edit ] ^ It is debated whether these formulations are equivalent, or whether one or the other suffers from difficulty in distinguishing when something is the means by which a good is achieved, and when merely a foreseen-but-undesired side-effect; see 4.2 , "The Problem of Closeness", in [ 6 ] .

References [ edit ] ^ Summa Theologiae , IIa-IIae Q. 64, art. 7 ^ T. A. Cavanaugh, Double-Effect Reasoning: Doing Good and Avoiding Evil , p.36, Oxford: Clarendon Press ^ "BBC - Ethics - Euthanasia: The doctrine of double effect" .

^ Catholic University of America (1967).

New Catholic Encyclopedia . Vol. 4 (1st ed.). New York: McGraw-Hill . p. 1021.

ISBN 978-0-07-010235-4 .

OCLC 367202 .

Archived from the original on 2011-03-21.

^ Mark Timmons, Moral Theory: An Introduction (Rowman & Littlefield 2003 ISBN 978-0-8476-9768-7 ), p. 80 ^ a b McIntyre, Alison (2004-07-28).

"Doctrine of Double Effect" .

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

^ Hoyt, Alyson (2004-07-28).

"The Doctrine of Double Effect as an Ineffective Tool in War Theory" .

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

^ Moses, A. Dirk (2021).

The Problems of Genocide: Permanent Security and the Language of Transgression . Cambridge University Press. p. 2.

ISBN 978-1-107-10358-0 .

External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Principle of double effect .

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy entry PhilPapers Bibliography: 'Doctrine of Double Effect' v t e Thomas Aquinas Thomism Scholasticism Apophatic theology Aseity Divine simplicity Analogia entis Quinque viae Beatific vision Actus purus Actus essendi Primum Movens Correspondence theory Hylomorphism Substance theory ( ousia ) Substantial form Quiddity ( essence / accident nature ) Peripatetic axiom Principle of double effect Transcendentals Aristotelian ethics Cardinal / Theological Natural law Determinatio Just war Satisfaction theory of the atonement Thomistic sacramental theology Just price Concupiscence Intrinsic finality Thomistic theology of merit Compatibilism Theological intellectualism Works Summa Theologica Treatise on Law Summa contra Gentiles Contra Errores Graecorum Commentaries on Aristotle De regno, ad regem Cypri De regimine Judaeorum, ad Ducissam Brabantiae De principiis naturae, ad fratrem Sylvestrum De aeternitate mundi, contra murmurantes De motu cordis, ad Magistrum Philippum Quaestiones Disputatae de Veritate Commentary on the Book of Causes De iudiciis astrorum Compendium Theologiae Catena aurea Hymns and prayers Adoro te devote Creator ineffabilis Lauda Sion O sacrum convivium Pange lingua gloriosi corporis mysterium Tantum ergo Sacris solemniis Panis angelicus Verbum supernum prodiens O salutaris hostia Influences Aristotle St. Paul Pseudo-Dionysius St. Augustine St. Boethius Avicenna Peter Lombard Averroes Maimonides St. Albertus Magnus Classical Thomists Cantimpré Saint-Cher Beauvais Penyafort Innocent V Lessines Piperno Moerbeke Martí Trilia Houghton Apolda Sutton Auvergne Benedict XI Fontaines Winterburn Colonna Ymbert di Bologna Fiadoni Guidonis Nédellec Paludanus Holkott Regina Bromyard Kydones Eymerich Calecas Ferrer Dominici Gerson Gorkum Sabunde Capreolus Pierozzi de Flandria Torquemada de Rupe Niger Almadura Mirabilibus Savonarola Fabri Gostynin Głogów Tetzel Deza Mazzolini di Ferrara Gaetanus Koellin Pagnino Faber Vitoria Catherinus Ory Soto (Domingo) Cano Pelargus Soto (Pedro) Senensis Mercado Medina de Granada Fernandes Báñez Zumel Porrecta Duperron Medices Lessius Malvenda Lemos Álvarez Oliva Rispoli Riccardi Gravina Poinsot Ripada Molinier Torres Vallgornera Pallavicino Nicolaï Lynch Ferre Gonet Bancel Quétif Massoulié Alexandre Échard Benedict XIII Serry Plessis Gotti Leocata Concina Benedict XIV De Rubeis Burke de Boxadors Mamachi Gazzaniga Neo-Thomism Aertsen Anquín Anscombe Arintero Ashley Barron Bocheński Bouquillon Bourke Canals Coffey Copleston Coreth Cornoldi Daujat De Wulf Fabro Fairweather Farrer Feser Franca Gardet Garrigou-Lagrange Gauthier Geach George Grenier Hawkins von Donnersmarck Henle Hugon Inagaki Jolivet Kleutgen Knasas Komar Koninck Krąpiec Leo XIII Lira Lonergan MacIntyre Maréchal Maritain Marshall Mascall McInerny Meinvielle Millán-Puelles Newman Pace Pecci Pegis Piolanti Pirotta Pius X Ramírez Régis Ripperger Russo Ryan Sanseverino Sertillanges Simon Smith Stein Tanaka Taparelli Torre Ušeničnik White Wilhelmsen Wippel Woodbury Zigliara History Medieval philosophy Condemnations of 1210–1277 Canonization of Thomas Aquinas Second scholasticism Pontifical University of Saint Thomas Aquinas School of Salamanca Physical premotion Congregatio de Auxiliis Salmanticenses and Complutenses Neo-scholasticism Æterni Patris Editio Leonina Neo-Thomism in Brazil Analytical Thomism ICUSTA Scholarship Aquinas Index Thomisticus Nova et Vetera Revue thomiste The Cambridge Companion to Aquinas The Oxford Handbook of Aquinas The Thomist Thomas Aquinas Dictionary Art 1476 Altarpiece Carafa Chapel Charles Bridge statue Cortona Triptych Enthroned Madonna and Child with Saints Fiesole Altarpiece Madonna and Child with St Dominic and St Thomas Aquinas San Pietro Martire Triptych The Apotheosis of Saint Thomas Aquinas The Vision of Fray Lauterio The Vision of Saint Thomas Aquinas Temptation of St. Thomas Triumph of Saint Thomas Aquinas Related topics Aristotelianism Actus primus Catholic theology Doctor of the Church Dominican Order Empiricism List of institutions named after Aquinas Saint Thomas Aquinas Church Catholicism portal v t e Catholic philosophy Ethics Cardinal virtues Divine command Just price Just war Probabilism Natural law Personalism Seven virtues Social teaching Option for the poor Social mortgage Theological virtues Virtue ethics Schools Medieval Augustinianism Scholasticism Thomism Scotism Occamism Modern Salamanca Christian humanism Cartesianism Molinism Neo-scholasticism Analytical Thomism Universals Augustinian realism Nominalism Conceptualism Moderate realism Scotistic realism Other Theological intellectualism Theological voluntarism Foundationalism Philosophers Abelard Adler Albertus Alcuin Anscombe Anselm Aquinas Augustine Bacon Boethius Bonaventure Chateaubriand Chesterton Clement Cusa Descartes Dionysius Erasmus Eriugena Ficino Gassendi Isidore Krasicki Llull Lombard MacIntyre Maistre Malebranche Maritain Montaigne More Newman Occam Pascal Pico Rahner Ratzinger Scheler Scotus Stein Suárez Wojtyła Concepts Actus Essendi Actus primus Actus purus Aevum Augustinian values Cardinal virtues Cartesian dualism Cogito, ergo sum Dehellenization Differentia Disputation Divine illumination Double truth Evil demon Formal distinction Guardian angel Haecceity Head of a pin Homo unius libri Infused righteousness Memento mori Occam's razor Ontological argument Pascal's wager Peripatetic axiom Principle of double effect Quiddity Quinque viae Rota Fortunae Seven deadly sins Theodicy Augustinian Irenaean Trademark argument Univocity Utopia Related Catholic theology Platonism Aristotelianism Neoplatonism Islamic philosophy Doctor of the Church Renaissance Rationalism Empiricism Phenomenology Catholicism portal Philosophy portal Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Latvia Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Principle_of_double_effect&oldid=1300700564 " Categories : Bioethics Thomism Ethical principles Catholic Church and abortion Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from April 2023 All articles needing additional references Articles needing additional references from February 2024 This page was last edited on 15 July 2025, at 22:51 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Principle of double effect 14 languages Add topic

