Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Signs and symptoms Toggle Signs and symptoms subsection 1.1 Degrees 2 Diagnosis Toggle Diagnosis subsection 2.1 Classification 2.2 PDD and PDD-NOS 3 Treatment 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Pervasive developmental disorder 24 languages العربية Català Deutsch Eesti Español Euskara فارسی Français Frysk 한국어 Hrvatski Italiano עברית Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Simple English Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Svenska Türkçe 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Developmental disorder; related to autism "PDD" redirects here. For dementia associated with Parkinson's disease, see Parkinson's disease dementia . For other uses, see PDD (disambiguation) .

Not to be confused with PDD-NOS or Developmental disorder .

Medical condition Pervasive developmental disorder Specialty Psychiatry , pediatrics The diagnostic category pervasive developmental disorders ( PDD ), as opposed to specific developmental disorders (SDD), was a group of disorders characterized by delays in the development of multiple basic functions including socialization and communication . It was defined by the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM) (from 1980 to 2013), and the International Classification of Diseases (ICD) (until 2022).

The pervasive developmental disorders included autism , Asperger syndrome , pervasive developmental disorder not otherwise specified (PDD-NOS), childhood disintegrative disorder (CDD), overactive disorder associated with intellectual disability and stereotyped movements, and Rett syndrome .

[ 1 ] As of the publication of the DSM-5 in 2013, the first four of these disorders are now known collectively as autism spectrum disorder ; the last disorder is much rarer, and is sometimes placed on the autism spectrum and sometimes not.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] The onset of pervasive developmental disorders occurs during infancy, but a specific condition is usually not identified until the child is around three years old. Parents may begin to question the health of their child when developmental milestones are not met, including age appropriate motor movement and speech production.

[ 4 ] There is a division among doctors on the use of the term PDD.

[ 5 ] Many use the term PDD as a short way of saying PDD-NOS.

[ 5 ] Others diagnose the general category label of PDD because they are hesitant to diagnose very young children with a specific type of PDD, such as autism.

[ 5 ] Both approaches contribute to confusion about the term, because the term PDD is intended by its coiners and major bodies to refer to a category of disorders and not be used as a diagnostic label.

[ 5 ] The fifth edition of the DSM removed PDD as a category of diagnoses, and largely replaced it with ASD and a measure of the relative severity of the condition.

[ 6 ] The eleventh edition of the ICD also removed the category.

Signs and symptoms [ edit ] Symptoms of PDD may include behavioral and communication problems such as: Difficulty using and understanding language [ 7 ] Difficulty relating to people, objects, and events; [ 7 ] for example, lack of eye contact, pointing behavior, and lack of facial responses Unusual play with toys and other objects.

[ 7 ] Paranoia, a characteristic form of social anxiety, derealization, transient psychosis, and unconventional beliefs if environment or routine are changed without notice [ 7 ] Repetitive body movements or behavior patterns, [ 7 ] such as hand flapping, hair twirling, foot tapping, or more complex movements [ 8 ] Difficulty regulating behaviors and emotions, which may result in temper tantrums, anxiety, and aggression [ 8 ] Emotional breakdowns [ citation needed ] Delusional or unconventional perception of the world [ citation needed ] Maladaptive daydreaming [ citation needed ] Degrees [ edit ] Children with PDD vary widely in abilities, intelligence, and behaviors. Some children do not speak at all, others speak in limited phrases or conversations, and some have relatively normal language development. Repetitive play skills and limited social skills are generally evident. Unusual responses to sensory information—loud noises, lights—are common.

[ 7 ] Diagnosis [ edit ] Diagnosis is usually made during early childhood. Individuals who received diagnoses based on the DSM-IV maintain their diagnosis under the autism spectrum disorders. However, an editorial published in the October 2012 issue of American Journal of Psychiatry notes that, while some doctors argue that there is insufficient evidence to support the diagnostic distinction between ASD and PDD, multiple literature reviews found that studies showing significant differences between the two disorders significantly outnumbered those that found no difference.

[ 9 ] The World Health Organization ’s International Classification of Diseases , 10th edition ( ICD-10 ) categorized PDD into five distinct subtypes, each with their own diagnostic criteria.

[ 1 ] The five subtypes, childhood autism , atypical autism , Rett syndrome , Asperger syndrome and childhood disintegrative disorder , are characterized by abnormalities in social interactions and communication.

[ 1 ] The disorders were primarily diagnosed based on behavioral features, although the presence of any other medical conditions is important, it is not taken into account when making a diagnosis.

[ medical citation needed ] Before the release of the DSM-5, some clinicians used PDD-NOS as a "temporary" diagnosis for children under the age of five when, for whatever reason, they are reluctant to diagnose autism. There are several justifications for this. Very young children have limited social interaction and communication skills to begin with, so it can be difficult to correctly diagnose milder cases of autism in toddlers. The unspoken assumption is that by the age of five, unusual behaviors will either resolve or develop into diagnosable autism. However, some parents view the PDD label as no more than a euphemism for autism spectrum disorders, while the PDD label makes it more difficult to receive aid for early childhood intervention .

[ medical citation needed ] Classification [ edit ] The pervasive developmental disorders were: [ 5 ] Pervasive developmental disorder not otherwise specified (PDD-NOS), which includes atypical autism, and is the most common (47% of autism diagnoses); [ 10 ] Typical autism , the best-known; Asperger syndrome (9% of autism diagnoses); Rett syndrome ; and Childhood disintegrative disorder (CDD).

The first three of these disorders are commonly called the autism spectrum disorders ; the last two disorders are much rarer, and are sometimes placed in the autism spectrum and sometimes not.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] In May 2013, the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual –5th Edition ( DSM-5 ) was released, updating the classification for pervasive developmental disorders. The grouping of disorders, including PDD-NOS, autism, Asperger syndrome, Rett syndrome, and CDD, has been removed and replaced with the general term of autism spectrum disorders (ASDs). The American Psychiatric Association has concluded that using the general diagnosis of ASD supports more accurate diagnoses. The grouping of these disorders into ASD also reflects that autism is characterized by common symptoms and should therefore bear a single diagnostic term. In order to distinguish between the different disorders, the DSM-5 employs severity levels. The severity levels take into account required support, restricted interests and repetitive behaviors, and deficits in social communication.

[ 11 ] PDD and PDD-NOS [ edit ] There is a division among doctors on the use of the term PDD.

[ 5 ] Many use the term PDD as a short way of saying PDD-NOS.

[ 5 ] Others use the general category because the term PDD actually refers to a category of disorders and is not a diagnostic label.

[ 5 ] PDD is not itself a diagnosis, while PDD-NOS is a diagnosis. To further complicate the issue, PDD-NOS can also be referred to as "atypical personality development", "atypical PDD", or "atypical autism".

[ citation needed ] Treatment [ edit ] Further information: Autism spectrum § Treatment Medications are used to address certain behavioral problems; therapy for children with PDD should be specialized according to the child's specific needs.

[ 7 ] Some children with PDD benefit from specialized classrooms in which the class size is small and instruction is given on a one-to-one basis. Others function well in standard special education classes or regular classes with support. Early intervention, including appropriate and specialized educational programs and support services, play a critical role in improving the outcome of individuals with PDD.

[ 7 ] See also [ edit ] Infantile neuroaxonal dystrophy Multiple complex developmental disorder Multisystem developmental disorder References [ edit ] ^ a b c World Health Organization (1992).

The ICD-10 classification of mental and behavioural disorders : clinical descriptions and diagnostic guidelines . World Health Organization.

ISBN 92-4-154422-8 .

OCLC 28294867 .

^ a b Lord C, Cook EH, Leventhal BL, Amaral DG (2000).

"Autism spectrum disorders" .

Neuron .

28 (2): 355– 63.

doi : 10.1016/S0896-6273(00)00115-X .

PMID 11144346 .

S2CID 7100507 .

^ a b Johnson CP, Myers SM, Council on Children with Disabilities (2007).

"Identification and evaluation of children with autism spectrum disorders" .

Pediatrics .

120 (5): 1183– 215.

doi : 10.1542/peds.2007-2361 .

PMID 17967920 .

^ Autism Health Center.

"Pervasive Developmental Disorders (PDDs)" . WebMD . Retrieved 2013-06-29 .

^ a b c d e f g h National Dissemination Center for Children with Disabilities (NICHCY) (October 2003) Disability Info: Pervasive Developmental Disorders (FS20).

Archived 2008-03-09 at the Wayback Machine Fact Sheet 20 (FS20) ^ Posar, Annio; Resca, Federica; Visconti, Paola (2015).

"Autism according to diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders 5(th) edition: The need for further improvements" .

Journal of Pediatric Neurosciences .

10 (2): 146– 148.

doi : 10.4103/1817-1745.159195 .

ISSN 1817-1745 .

PMC 4489060 .

PMID 26167220 .

^ a b c d e f g h This article incorporates public domain material from NINDS Pervasive Developmental Disorders Information Page .

National Institutes of Health .

^ a b Baird, G.; Douglas, H. R.; director, a.; Murphy, M. S. (2011-10-21).

"Recognising and diagnosing autism in children and young people: summary of NICE guidance" .

BMJ .

343 (oct21 1): d6360.

doi : 10.1136/bmj.d6360 .

ISSN 0959-8138 .

PMID 22021468 .

S2CID 31196910 .

^ American Psychiatric Publishing.

"Autism Spectrum Disorder" (PDF) . American Psychiatric Association . Retrieved 4 July 2013 .

^ Jon Baio, EdS, National Center on Birth Defects and Developmental Disabilities, CDC (2012).

"Prevalence of Autism Spectrum Disorders — Autism and Developmental Disabilities Monitoring Network, 14 Sites, United States, 2008" .

^ Autism Research Institute.

"DSM-V: What Changes May Mean" . Retrieved 29 June 2013 .

External links [ edit ] CDC's "Learn the Signs. Act Early." campaign - Information for parents on early childhood development and developmental disabilities NINFS Pervasive Developmental Disorders Information Page Classification D ICD - 11 : 6A02.Z ICD - 10 : F84 ICD - 9-CM : 299 MeSH : D002659 DiseasesDB : 33524 External resources eMedicine : ped/1780 v t e Autism Main Causes Diagnosis Epidemiology Epigenetics Heritability History Memory Pathophysiology Sex and gender Societal and cultural aspects Therapies Diagnoses Pervasive developmental disorder Autistic disorder Asperger syndrome Pervasive developmental disorder not otherwise specified Childhood disintegrative disorder High-functioning autism Associated conditions and phenomena Alexithymia Anxiety LGBTQ identities Burnout Catatonia Masking Meltdowns Inertia Echolalia Echopraxia Emotional dysregulation Hyperlexia Infodumping Late talker Monotropism Nonspeaking Pathological demand avoidance Pronoun reversal Savant syndrome Special interests Stimming Sensory overload Comorbid conditions Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder Avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder Avoidant personality disorder Anxiety disorder obsessive–compulsive disorder Bipolar disorder Developmental coordination disorder Developmental verbal dyspraxia Epilepsy Gender dysphoria Global developmental delay Intellectual disability Major depressive disorder Schizoid personality disorder Sensory processing disorder Sleep disorder Suicide Tinnitus Associated syndromes 22q13 deletion syndrome Angelman syndrome CHARGE syndrome Cohen syndrome Cornelia de Lange syndrome DiGeorge syndrome Down syndrome Fetal valproate spectrum disorder Fragile X syndrome MECP2 duplication syndrome Neurofibromatosis type I Noonan syndrome Multiple hamartoma syndrome Rett syndrome Smith–Lemli–Opitz syndrome Timothy syndrome Tuberous sclerosis Williams syndrome Related issues Ableism Autistic rights movement Critical autism studies Discrimination Double empathy problem Employment Military service and conscription Multiple complex developmental disorder Neurodiversity Neuroqueer theory Peripheral neuropathy Reduced affect display Sanism Self-harm Suicidal ideation TEACCH program Twice exceptional Violence and autism Controversies Facilitated communication Lancet MMR autism fraud MMR vaccine Rapid prompting method Thiomersal Chelation Combating Autism Act Autistic supremacism Diagnostic scales Autism Diagnostic Interview Autism Diagnostic Observation Schedule Childhood Autism Rating Scale Gilliam Asperger's disorder scale Screening scales Autism-spectrum quotient Childhood Autism Spectrum Test Ritvo Autism and Asperger Diagnostic Scale Lists Autism-related topics Fictional characters Schools Accommodations Autism-friendly Curb cut effect Inclusive design Neurodiversity and labor rights Neuroinclusive design Sensory friendly Supported employment Universal design Category v t e Mental disorders ( Classification ) Adult personality and behavior Sexual Ego-dystonic sexual orientation Paraphilia Fetishism Voyeurism Sexual anhedonia Sexual anorexia Sexual maturation disorder Sexual relationship disorder Other Factitious disorder Munchausen syndrome Fear of intimacy Gender dysphoria Intermittent explosive disorder Dermatillomania Kleptomania Pyromania Trichotillomania Personality disorder Childhood and learning Emotional and behavioral ADHD Conduct disorder ODD Emotional and behavioral disorders Separation anxiety disorder Movement disorders Stereotypic Social functioning DAD RAD Selective mutism Speech Cluttering Stuttering Tic disorder Tourette syndrome Intellectual disability X-linked intellectual disability Lujan–Fryns syndrome Psychological development ( developmental disabilities ) Pervasive Specific Mood (affective) Bipolar Bipolar I Bipolar II Bipolar NOS Cyclothymia Depression Atypical depression Dysthymia Major depressive disorder Melancholic depression Seasonal affective disorder Mania Neurological and symptomatic Autism spectrum Autism Asperger syndrome High-functioning autism PDD-NOS Savant syndrome Dementia AIDS dementia complex Alzheimer's disease Creutzfeldt–Jakob disease Frontotemporal dementia Huntington's disease Mild cognitive impairment Parkinson's disease Pick's disease Sundowning Vascular dementia Wandering Other Delirium Organic brain syndrome Post-concussion syndrome Neurotic , stress -related and somatoform Adjustment Adjustment disorder with depressed mood Anxiety Phobia Agoraphobia Childhood phobia Social anxiety Social phobia Anthropophobia Specific social phobia Specific phobia Claustrophobia Other Generalized anxiety disorder OCD Panic attack Panic disorder Paranoia Stress Acute stress reaction PTSD Dissociative Depersonalization-derealization disorder Dissociative identity disorder Dissociative amnesia Dissociative fugue Dissociative disorder not otherwise specified Other specified dissociative disorder Somatic symptom Body dysmorphic disorder Conversion disorder Ganser syndrome Globus pharyngeus Psychogenic non-epileptic seizures False pregnancy Hypochondriasis Mass psychogenic illness Nosophobia Psychogenic pain Somatization disorder Physiological and physical behavior Eating Anorexia nervosa Bulimia nervosa Rumination syndrome Other specified feeding or eating disorder Nonorganic sleep Hypersomnia Insomnia Parasomnia Night terror Nightmare REM sleep behavior disorder Postnatal Postpartum depression Postpartum psychosis Sexual desire Hypersexuality Hypoactive sexual desire disorder Psychoactive substances, substance abuse and substance-related Drug overdose Hallucinogen persisting perception disorder Intoxication Physical dependence Rebound effect Stimulant psychosis Substance dependence Substance-induced psychosis Withdrawal Schizophrenia , schizotypal and delusional Delusional Delusional disorder Folie à deux Psychosis and schizophrenia-like Brief reactive psychosis Schizoaffective disorder Schizophreniform disorder Schizophrenia Childhood schizophrenia Disorganized (hebephrenic) schizophrenia Pseudoneurotic schizophrenia Simple-type schizophrenia Other Catatonia Symptoms and uncategorized Impulse-control disorder Klüver–Bucy syndrome Psychomotor agitation Stereotypy Caregiver burden Category Authority control databases National United States Japan Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐58fkv
Cached time: 20250817050245
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.559 seconds
Real time usage: 0.699 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 3520/1000000
Revision size: 13839/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 151489/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 5768/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 16/100
Expensive parser function count: 11/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 75386/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.346/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 20011892/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  599.202      1 -total
 27.23%  163.140      1 Template:Reflist
 26.26%  157.339      9 Template:Navbox
 21.21%  127.097      1 Template:Medical_resources
 16.40%   98.247      2 Template:Hlist
 11.84%   70.927      2 Template:Short_description
 11.49%   68.832      1 Template:Cite_book
  9.09%   54.456      1 Template:ICD11
  9.08%   54.410      1 Template:Infobox_medical_condition_(new)
  8.39%   50.259      6 Template:Fix Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:242189:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817050245 and revision id 1301330526. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Pervasive_developmental_disorder&oldid=1301330526 " Categories : Pervasive developmental disorders Special education Neurological disorders in children Learning disabilities Autism spectrum disorders Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2021 Articles with unsourced statements from July 2020 Articles with unsourced statements from July 2021 This page was last edited on 19 July 2025, at 06:54 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Pervasive developmental disorder 24 languages Add topic

