Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 In different fields Toggle In different fields subsection 2.1 In Ancient philosophy 2.2 In Western philosophy 2.2.1 Religion 2.2.2 Phenomenology 2.3 In epistemology 2.4 In historiography 2.4.1 Trouillot 2.5 In social sciences 3 See also 4 References 5 Further reading 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Subjectivity and objectivity (philosophy) 6 languages العربية Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Кыргызча Русский Türkçe Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Objectivity (philosophy) ) Basic distinction in philosophy The distinction between subjectivity and objectivity is a basic idea of philosophy , particularly epistemology and metaphysics . Various understandings of this distinction have evolved through the work of philosophers over centuries. One basic distinction is: Something is subjective if it is dependent on minds (such as biases , perception , emotions , opinions , imaginary objects , or conscious experiences ).

[ 1 ] If a claim is true exclusively when considering the claim from the viewpoint of a sentient being, it is subjectively true. For example, one person may consider the weather to be pleasantly warm, and another person may consider the same weather to be too hot; both views are subjective.

Something is objective if it can be confirmed or assumed independently of any minds. If a claim is true even when considering it outside the viewpoint of a sentient being, then it may be labelled objectively true. For example, many people would regard "2 + 2 = 4" as an objective statement of mathematics.

Both ideas have been given various and ambiguous definitions by differing sources as the distinction is often a given but not the specific focal point of philosophical discourse.

[ 2 ] The two words are usually regarded as opposites , though complications regarding the two have been explored in philosophy: for example, the view of particular thinkers that objectivity is an illusion and does not exist at all, or that a spectrum joins subjectivity and objectivity with a gray area in-between, or that the problem of other minds is best viewed through the concept of intersubjectivity , developing since the 20th century.

The distinction between subjectivity and objectivity is often related to discussions of consciousness , agency , personhood , philosophy of mind , philosophy of language , reality , truth , and communication (for example in narrative communication and journalism ).

Etymology [ edit ] The root of the words subjectivity and objectivity are subject and object , philosophical terms that mean, respectively, an observer and a thing being observed. The word subjectivity comes from subject in a philosophical sense, meaning an individual who possesses unique conscious experiences, such as perspectives, feelings, beliefs, and desires, [ 1 ] [ 3 ] or who (consciously) acts upon or wields power over some other entity (an object ).

[ 4 ] In different fields [ edit ] In Ancient philosophy [ edit ] Aristotle's teacher Plato considered geometry to be a condition of his idealist philosophy concerned with universal truth.

[ clarification needed ] In Plato's Republic , Socrates opposes the sophist Thrasymachus 's relativistic account of justice, and argues that justice is mathematical in its conceptual structure, and that ethics was therefore a precise and objective enterprise with impartial standards for truth and correctness, like geometry.

[ 5 ] The rigorous mathematical treatment Plato gave to moral concepts set the tone for the western tradition of moral objectivism that came after him.

[ 6 ] [ citation needed ] His contrasting between objectivity and opinion became the basis for philosophies intent on resolving the questions of reality , truth , and existence . He saw opinions as belonging to the shifting sphere of sensibilities , as opposed to a fixed, eternal and knowable incorporeality . Where Plato distinguished between how we know things and their ontological status, subjectivism such as George Berkeley 's depends on perception .

[ 7 ] In Platonic terms, a criticism of subjectivism is that it is difficult to distinguish between knowledge, opinions, and subjective knowledge.

[ 8 ] Platonic idealism is a form of metaphysical objectivism, holding that the ideas exist independently from the individual. Berkeley's empirical idealism, on the other hand, holds that things only exist as they are perceived . Both approaches boast an attempt at objectivity. Plato's definition of objectivity can be found in his epistemology , which is based on mathematics , and his metaphysics , where knowledge of the ontological status of objects and ideas is resistant to change.

[ 7 ] In Western philosophy [ edit ] In Western philosophy, the idea of subjectivity is thought to have its roots in the works of the European Enlightenment thinkers Descartes and Kant though it could also stem as far back as the Ancient Greek philosopher Aristotle 's work relating to the soul.

[ 9 ] [ 2 ] The idea of subjectivity is often seen as a peripheral to other philosophical concepts, namely skepticism , individuals and individuality, and existentialism .

[ 2 ] [ 9 ] The questions surrounding subjectivity have to do with whether or not people can escape the subjectivity of their own human existence and whether or not there is an obligation to try to do so.

[ 1 ] Important thinkers who focused on this area of study include Descartes, Locke , Kant, Hegel , Kierkegaard , Husserl , Foucault , Derrida , Nagel , and Sartre .

[ 1 ] Subjectivity was rejected by Foucault and Derrida in favor of constructionism , [ 1 ] but Sartre embraced and continued Descartes' work in the subject by emphasizing subjectivity in phenomenology .

[ 1 ] [ 10 ] Sartre believed that, even within the material force of human society, the ego was an essentially transcendent being—posited, for instance, in his opus Being and Nothingness through his arguments about the 'being-for-others' and the 'for-itself' (i.e., an objective and subjective human being).

[ 10 ] The innermost core of subjectivity resides in a unique act of what Fichte called " self-positing ", where each subject is a point of absolute autonomy , which means that it cannot be reduced to a moment in the network of causes and effects.

[ 11 ] Religion [ edit ] One way that subjectivity has been conceptualized by philosophers such as Kierkegaard is in the context of religion .

[ 1 ] Religious beliefs can vary quite extremely from person to person, but people often think that whatever they believe is the truth. Subjectivity as seen by Descartes and Sartre was a matter of what was dependent on consciousness, so, because religious beliefs require the presence of a consciousness that can believe, they must be subjective.

[ 1 ] This is in contrast to what has been proven by pure logic or hard sciences , which does not depend on the perception of people, and is therefore considered objective.

[ 1 ] Subjectivity is what relies on personal perception regardless of what is proven or objective.

[ 1 ] Many philosophical arguments within this area of study have to do with moving from subjective thoughts to objective thoughts with many different methods employed to get from one to the other along with a variety of conclusions reached.

[ 1 ] This is exemplified by Descartes deductions that move from reliance on subjectivity to somewhat of a reliance on God for objectivity.

[ 1 ] [ 12 ] Foucault and Derrida denied the idea of subjectivity in favor of their ideas of constructs in order to account for differences in human thought.

[ 1 ] Instead of focusing on the idea of consciousness and self-consciousness shaping the way humans perceive the world, these thinkers would argue that it is instead the world that shapes humans, so they would see religion less as a belief and more as a cultural construction.

[ 1 ] Phenomenology [ edit ] Others like Husserl and Sartre followed the phenomenological approach.

[ 1 ] This approach focused on the distinct separation of the human mind and the physical world, where the mind is subjective because it can take liberties like imagination and self-awareness where religion might be examined regardless of any kind of subjectivity.

[ 10 ] The philosophical conversation around subjectivity remains one that struggles with the epistemological question of what is real, what is made up, and what it would mean to be separated completely from subjectivity.

[ 1 ] In epistemology [ edit ] In opposition to philosopher René Descartes ' method of personal deduction [ clarification needed ] , natural philosopher Isaac Newton applied the relatively objective scientific method to look for evidence before forming a hypothesis.

[ 13 ] Partially in response to Kant 's rationalism , logician Gottlob Frege applied objectivity to his epistemological and metaphysical philosophies. If reality exists independently of consciousness , then it would logically include a plurality of indescribable forms. Objectivity requires a definition of truth formed by propositions with truth value . An attempt of forming an objective construct incorporates ontological commitments to the reality of objects.

[ 14 ] The importance of perception in evaluating and understanding objective reality is debated in the observer effect of quantum mechanics.

Direct or naïve realists rely on perception as key in observing objective reality, while instrumentalists hold that observations are useful in predicting objective reality. The concepts that encompass these ideas are important in the philosophy of science .

Philosophies of mind explore whether objectivity relies on perceptual constancy .

[ 15 ] In historiography [ edit ] History as a discipline has wrestled with notions of objectivity from its very beginning. While its object of study is commonly thought to be the past , the only thing historians have to work with are different versions of stories based on individual perceptions of reality and memory .

Several history streams developed to devise ways to solve this dilemma: Historians like Leopold von Ranke (19th century) have advocated for the use of extensive evidence –especially archived physical paper documents– to recover the bygone past, claiming that, as opposed to people's memories, objects remain stable in what they say about the era they witnessed, and therefore represent a better insight into objective reality .

[ 16 ] In the 20th century, the Annales School emphasized the importance of shifting focus away from the perspectives of influential men –usually politicians around whose actions narratives of the past were shaped–, and putting it on the voices of ordinary people.

[ 17 ] Postcolonial streams of history challenge the colonial-postcolonial dichotomy and critique Eurocentric academia practices, such as the demand for historians from colonized regions to anchor their local narratives to events happening in the territories of their colonizers to earn credibility .

[ 18 ] All the streams explained above try to uncover whose voice is more or less truth-bearing and how historians can stitch together versions of it to best explain what " actually happened.

" Trouillot [ edit ] The anthropologist Michel-Rolph Trouillot developed the concepts of historicity 1 and 2 to explain the difference between the materiality of socio - historical processes (H1) and the narratives that are told about the materiality of socio-historical processes (H2).

[ 19 ] This distinction hints that H1 would be understood as the factual reality that elapses and is captured with the concept of " objective truth ", and that H2 is the collection of subjectivities that humanity has stitched together to grasp the past. Debates about positivism , relativism , and postmodernism are relevant to evaluating these concepts' importance and the distinction between them.

In his book "Silencing the past", Trouillot wrote about the power dynamics at play in history-making, outlining four possible moments in which historical silences can be created: (1) making of sources (who gets to know how to write, or to have possessions that are later examined as historical evidence ), (2) making of archives (what documents are deemed important to save and which are not, how to classify materials, and how to order them within physical or digital archives), (3) making of narratives (which accounts of history are consulted, which voices are given credibility ), and (4) the making of history (the retrospective construction of what The Past is).

[ 19 ] Because history ( official , public , familial , personal) informs current perceptions and how we make sense of the present , whose voice gets to be included in it –and how– has direct consequences in material socio-historical processes. Thinking of current historical narratives as impartial depictions of the totality of events unfolded in the past by labeling them as "objective" risks sealing historical understanding. Acknowledging that history is never objective and always incomplete has a meaningful opportunity to support social justice efforts. Under said notion, voices that have been silenced are placed on an equal footing to the grand and popular narratives of the world, appreciated for their unique insight of reality through their subjective lens.

In social sciences [ edit ] Subjectivity is an inherently social mode that comes about through innumerable interactions within society. As much as subjectivity is a process of individuation , it is equally a process of socialization, the individual never being isolated in a self-contained environment, but endlessly engaging in interaction with the surrounding world.
Culture is a living totality of the subjectivity of any given society constantly undergoing transformation.

[ 20 ] Subjectivity is both shaped by it and shapes it in turn, but also by other things like the economy, political institutions, communities, as well as the natural world.

Though the boundaries of societies and their cultures are indefinable and arbitrary, the subjectivity inherent in each one is palatable and can be recognized as distinct from others. Subjectivity is in part a particular experience or organization of reality , which includes how one views and interacts with humanity, objects, consciousness, and nature, so the difference between different cultures brings about an alternate experience of existence that forms life in a different manner. A common effect on an individual of this disjunction between subjectivities is culture shock , where the subjectivity of the other culture is considered alien and possibly incomprehensible or even hostile.

Political subjectivity is an emerging concept in social sciences and humanities.

[ 4 ] Political subjectivity is a reference to the deep embeddedness of subjectivity in the socially intertwined systems of power and meaning. "Politicality", writes Sadeq Rahimi in Meaning, Madness and Political Subjectivity , "is not an added aspect of the subject, but indeed the mode of being of the subject, that is, precisely what the subject is ." [ 21 ] Scientific objectivity is practicing science while intentionally reducing partiality , biases, or external influences. Moral objectivity is the concept of moral or ethical codes being compared to one another through a set of universal facts or a universal perspective and not through differing conflicting perspectives.

[ 22 ] Journalistic objectivity is the reporting of facts and news with minimal personal bias or in an impartial or politically neutral manner.

See also [ edit ] Philosophy portal Psychology portal Dogma Factual relativism Intersubjectivity Journalistic objectivity Naïve realism Objectivity (science) Objectivism Omniscience Phenomenology (philosophy) Phenomenology (psychology) Political subjectivity Q methodology Relativism Subject (philosophy) Transcendental subjectivity " Subjectivity is Truth ", an existential interpretation of subjectivity by Søren Kierkegaard Self Vertiginous question References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p Solomon, Robert C.

"Subjectivity" , in Honderich, Ted.

Oxford Companion to Philosophy (Oxford University Press, 2005), p.900.

^ a b c Bykova, Marina F. (February 2018). "On the Problem of Subjectivity: Editor's Introduction".

Russian Studies in Philosophy .

56 : 1–5 – via EBSCOhost.

^ Gonzalez Rey, Fernando (June 2019). "Subjectivity in Debate: Some Psychology".

Journal for the Theory of Social Behaviour .

49 : 212– 234 – via EBCOhost.

^ a b Allen, Amy (2002). "Power, Subjectivity, and Agency: Between Arendt and Foucault".

International Journal of Philosophical Studies .

10 (2): 131– 49.

doi : 10.1080/09672550210121432 .

S2CID 144541333 .

^ Plato , "The Republic", 337B, HarperCollins Publishers, 1968 ^ Frede, Dorothea; Lee, Mi-Kyoung (2023).

"Plato's Ethics: An Overview" .

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University . Retrieved 22 December 2024 .

^ a b E. Douka Kabîtoglou (1991).

"Shelley and Berkeley: The Platonic Connection" (PDF) : 20– 35.

{{ cite journal }} : Cite journal requires |journal= ( help ) ^ Mary Margaret Mackenzie (1985).

"Plato's moral theory" .

Journal of Medical Ethics .

11 (2): 88– 91.

doi : 10.1136/jme.11.2.88 .

PMC 1375153 .

PMID 4009640 .

^ a b Strazzoni, Andrea (2015). "Introduction. Subjectivity and Individuality: Two Strands in Early Modern Philosophy".

Societate Si Politica .

9 .

^ a b c Thomas, Baldwin. "Sartre, Jean-Paul," in Honderich, Ted.

Oxford Companion to Philosophy (Oxford University Press, 2005). pp. 834–837 ^ Žižek, Slavoj (2019-09-23). "The Fall That Makes Us Like God, Part I".

The Philosophical Salon . Archived from the original on 2019-09-25. Retrieved 2019-09-25.

^ Cottingham, John. "Descartes, René," in Honderich, Ted.

Oxford Companion to Philosophy (Oxford University Press, 2005), p. 201–205.

^ Suzuki, Fumitaka (March 2012).

"The Cogito Proposition of Descartes and Characteristics of His Ego Theory" (PDF) .

Bulletin of Aichi University of Education .

61 : 73– 80.

^ Clinton Tolley.

"Kant on the Generality of Logic" (PDF) . University of California, San Diego.

{{ cite journal }} : Cite journal requires |journal= ( help ) ^ Tyler Burge , Origins of Objectivity , Oxford University Press, 2010.

^ Leopold von Ranke, "Author’s Preface," in History of the Reformation in Germany, trans. Sarah Austin, vii–xi. London: George Rutledge and Sons, 1905.

^ Andrea, A. (1991). Mentalities in history. The Historian 53(3), 605–608.

^ Chakrabarty, D. (1992). Postcoloniality and the artifice of history: Who speaks for "Indian" pasts?Representations, (37), 1–26. doi:10.2307/2928652.

^ a b Trouillot, Michel-Rolph. (1995). Silencing the past : power and the production of history. Boston, Mass. :Beacon Press, ^ Silverman, H.J. ed., 2014. Questioning foundations: truth, subjectivity, and culture. Routledge.

[ page needed ] ^ Rahimi, Sadeq (2015).

Meaning, Madness and Political Subjectivity: A Study of Schizophrenia and Culture in Turkey . Oxford & New York: Routledge. p. 8.

ISBN 978-1138840829 .

Archived from the original on 2015-04-02 . Retrieved 2015-03-22 .

^ Rescher, Nicholas (January 2008). "Moral Objectivity".

Social Philosophy and Policy .

25 (1): 393– 409.

doi : 10.1017/S0265052508080151 .

S2CID 233358084 .

Further reading [ edit ] Bachelard, Gaston .

La formation de l'esprit scientifique: contribution à une psychanalyse de la connaissance . Paris: Vrin, 2004.

ISBN 2-7116-1150-7 .

Beiser, Frederick C.

German Idealism: The Struggle Against Subjectivism, 1781–1801 . Harvard University Press, 2002.

Block, Ned ; Flanagan, Owen J.; & Gzeldere, Gven (Eds.) The Nature of Consciousness: Philosophical Debates . Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1997.

ISBN 978-0-262-52210-6 Bowie, Andrew.

Aesthetics and Subjectivity : From Kant to Nietzsche . Manchester: Manchester University Press, 1990.

Castillejo, David.

The Formation of Modern Objectivity . Madrid: Ediciones de Arte y Bibliofilia, 1982.

Dallmayr, Winfried Reinhard.

Twilight of Subjectivity: Contributions to a Post-Individualist Theory Politics . Amherst, MA:[University of Massachusetts Press, 1981.

Ellis, C. & Flaherty, M.

Investigating Subjectivity: Research on Lived Experience . Newbury Park, CA: Sage, 1992.

ISBN 978-0-8039-4496-1 Farrell, Frank B.

Subjectivity, Realism, and Postmodernism: The Recovery of the World in Recent Philosophy . Cambridge – New York: Cambridge University Press, 1994.

Gaukroger, Stephen.

Objectivity . Oxford University Press, 2012.

Johnson, Daniel (July 2003).

"On Truth As Subjectivity In Kierkegaard's Concluding Unscientific Postscript" .

Quodlibet Journal .

5 ( 2– 3). Archived from the original on 2017-06-24 . Retrieved 2023-06-28 .

Kuhn, Thomas S.

The Structure of Scientific Revolutions . Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1996, 3rd ed.

ISBN 0-226-45808-3 .

Lauer, Quentin.

The Triumph of Subjectivity: An Introduction to Transcendental Phenomenology . Fordham University Press, 1958.

Megill, Allan.

Rethinking Objectivity . London: Duke UP, 1994.

Nagel, Ernest .

The Structure of Science . New York: Brace and World, 1961.

Nagel, Thomas .

The View from Nowhere . Oxford: Oxford UP, 1986 Nozick, Robert .

Invariances: the structure of the objective world . Cambridge: Harvard UP, 2001.

Popper, Karl. R.

Objective Knowledge: An Evolutionary Approach . Oxford University Press, 1972.

ISBN 0-19-875024-2 .

Rescher, Nicholas .

Objectivity: the obligations of impersonal reason . Notre Dame: Notre Dame Press, 1977.

Rorty, Richard .

Objectivity, Relativism, and Truth . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1991 Rousset, Bernard.

La théorie kantienne de l'objectivité , Paris: Vrin, 1967.

Scheffler, Israel .

Science and Subjectivity . Hackett, 1982. Voices of Wisdom; a multicultural philosophy reader. Kessler External links [ edit ] Look up Subjectivity in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

"Objectivity" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Subjectivity and Objectivity —by Pete Mandik v t e Consciousness Figures Philosophy Alfred North Whitehead Arthur Schopenhauer Baruch Spinoza Bertrand Russell Brian O'Shaughnessy Charles Augustus Strong Christopher Peacocke Colin McGinn Daniel Dennett David Chalmers David Hume David Papineau David Pearce Donald Davidson Douglas Hofstadter Edmund Husserl Frank Jackson Fred Dretske Galen Strawson George Berkeley George Henry Lewes Georges Rey Gottfried Leibniz Immanuel Kant John Eccles John Locke John Polkinghorne John Searle Joseph Levine Karl Popper Keith Frankish Kenneth M. Sayre Maurice Merleau-Ponty Max Velmans Michael Tye Martin Heidegger Ned Block Patricia Churchland Paul Churchland Philip Goff René Descartes Thomas Metzinger Thomas Nagel William Kingdon Clifford William Lycan William Seager Psychology Carl Gustav Jung Donald D. Hoffman Franz Brentano Gustav Fechner Julian Jaynes Kurt Koffka Max Wertheimer Sigmund Freud Wilhelm Wundt William James Wolfgang Köhler Neuroscience Anil Seth Antonio Damasio Benjamin Libet Bernard Baars Christof Koch Francis Crick Francisco Varela Gerald Edelman Giulio Tononi Karl Pribram Lawrence Weiskrantz Michael Gazzaniga Michael Graziano Patrick Wilken Roger Sperry Stanislas Dehaene Steven Laureys Stuart Hameroff Wolf Singer Others Annaka Harris David Bohm Eugene Wigner Erwin Schrödinger Marvin Minsky Max Planck Roger Penrose Susan Blackmore Victor J. Stenger Wolfgang Pauli Theories Philosophy of mind Anomalous monism Computationalism Double-aspect theory Eliminative materialism Emergentism Epiphenomenalism Functionalism Idealism Interactionism Materialism Mind–body dualism Monism Neutral monism New mysterianism Nondualism Panpsychism Parallelism Physicalism Property dualism Reflexive monism Revisionary materialism Solipsism Type physicalism (reductive materialism, identity theory) Science Attention schema theory Consciousness causes collapse Dynamic core hypothesis Damasio's theory of consciousness Electromagnetic theories of consciousness Global workspace theory Higher-order theories of consciousness Holonomic brain theory Integrated information theory Lamme's recurrent feedback hypothesis Multiple drafts model Orchestrated objective reduction Topics Agnosia Altered state of consciousness Animal consciousness Artificial consciousness Attention Attentional control Awareness Binding problem Binocular rivalry Blindsight Brain Cartesian theater Consciousness after death Disorders of consciousness Divided consciousness Dual consciousness (split-brain) Experience Explanatory gap Free will Flash suppression Hallucination Hard problem of consciousness Heterophenomenology Higher consciousness Illusion Introspection illusion Knowledge argument Locked-in syndrome Mind Mind–body problem Minimally conscious state Neural correlates of consciousness Neurophenomenology Ontology Phenomenology Philosophical zombie Philosophy of mind Primary consciousness Problem of other minds Qualia Quantum mind Reentry Sakshi Purusha Secondary consciousness Sentience Sentientism Sociology of human consciousness Soul Stream of consciousness Subconscious Subjective character of experience Subjectivity and objectivity Unconscious mind Unconsciousness Upanishads Visual masking Consciousness causes collapse Yogachara Works A Universe of Consciousness Association for the Scientific Study of Consciousness Consciousness and Cognition Consciousness Explained Cosmic Consciousness How the Self Controls Its Brain Journal of Consciousness Studies Online Consciousness Conference Psyche The Astonishing Hypothesis The Conscious Mind The Emperor's New Mind The Science of Consciousness Understanding Consciousness " What Is It Like to Be a Bat?

" Wider than the Sky Category Commons v t e Philosophy Branches Branches Applied philosophy Logic Metaphilosophy Philosophy of education Philosophy of information Philosophy of language Philosophy of mathematics Philosophy of religion Philosophy of science Political philosophy Practical philosophy Social philosophy Theoretical philosophy Aesthetics Aesthetic response Formalism Institutionalism Epistemology Empiricism Fideism Naturalism Particularism Rationalism Skepticism Solipsism Ethics Consequentialism Deontology Virtue Free will Compatibilism Determinism Hard Incompatibilism Hard Libertarianism Metaphysics Atomism Dualism Idealism Monism Naturalism Realism Mind Behaviorism Eliminativism Emergentism Epiphenomenalism Functionalism Objectivism Subjectivism Normativity Absolutism Particularism Relativism Nihilism Skepticism Universalism Ontology Action Event Process Reality Anti-realism Conceptualism Idealism Materialism Naturalism Nominalism Physicalism Realism By era By era Ancient Western Medieval Renaissance Early modern Modern Contemporary Ancient Chinese Agriculturalism Confucianism Legalism Logicians Mohism Chinese naturalism Taoism Yangism Greco- Roman Presocratic Ionians Pythagoreans Eleatics Atomists Sophists Cyrenaics Cynicism Eretrian school Megarian school Academy Peripatetic school Hellenistic philosophy Pyrrhonism Stoicism Epicureanism Academic Skepticism Middle Platonism School of the Sextii Neopythagoreanism Second Sophistic Neoplatonism Church Fathers Dispositio Indian Hindu Samkhya Nyaya Vaisheshika Yoga Mīmāṃsā Ājīvika Ajñana Cārvāka Jain Anekantavada Syādvāda Buddhist Abhidharma Sarvāstivadā Pudgalavada Sautrāntika Madhyamaka Svatantrika and Prasangika Śūnyatā Yogacara Tibetan Persian Mazdakism Mithraism Zoroastrianism Zurvanism Medieval East Asian Neotaoism Tiantai Huayan Chan Zen Neo-Confucianism Korean Confucianism European Christian Augustinianism Scholasticism Thomism Scotism Occamism Renaissance humanism Indian Vedanta Acintya bheda abheda Advaita Bhedabheda Dvaita Nimbarka Sampradaya Shuddhadvaita Vishishtadvaita Navya-Nyāya Islamic Aristotelianism Averroism Avicennism Illuminationism ʿIlm al-Kalām Sufi Jewish Judeo-Islamic Modern Anarchism Classical Realism Collectivism Conservatism Determinism Dualism Edo neo-Confucianism Empiricism Existentialism Foundationalism Historicism Holism Humanism Anti- Idealism Absolute British German Objective Subjective Transcendental Individualism Kokugaku Liberalism Materialism Modernism Monism Naturalism Natural law Nihilism New Confucianism Neo-scholasticism Pessimism Pragmatism Phenomenology Positivism Reductionism Rationalism Social contract Socialism Transcendentalism Utilitarianism People Cartesianism Kantianism Neo Kierkegaardianism Krausism Hegelianism Marxism Newtonianism Nietzscheanism Spinozism Contemporary Analytic Applied ethics Analytic feminism Analytical Marxism Communitarianism Consequentialism Critical rationalism Experimental philosophy Falsificationism Foundationalism / Coherentism Internalism and externalism Logical positivism Legal positivism Meta-ethics Moral realism Quinean naturalism Normative ethics Ordinary language philosophy Postanalytic philosophy Quietism Rawlsian Reformed epistemology Systemics Scientism Scientific realism Scientific skepticism Transactionalism Contemporary utilitarianism Vienna Circle Wittgensteinian Continental Critical theory Deconstruction Existentialism Feminist Frankfurt School Hermeneutics Neo-Marxism New Historicism Phenomenology Posthumanism Postmodernism Post-structuralism Social constructionism Structuralism Western Marxism Miscellaneous Kyoto School Objectivism Postcritique Russian cosmism By region By region African Bantu Egyptian Ethiopian Africana Eastern Buddhist Chinese Indian Indonesian Japanese Korean Taiwanese Vietnamese Middle Eastern Iranian Islamic Jewish Pakistani Turkish Western ( Analytic / Continental ) American Australian British Scottish Canada Czech Danish Dutch Finland French German Greek Italian Maltese Polish Slovene Spanish Miscellaneous Amerindian Aztec Romanian Russian Yugoslav Philosophy portal Category v t e Epistemology Epistemologists William Alston Aquinas Robert Audi Augustine A. J. Ayer George Berkeley Laurence BonJour Gilles Deleuze Keith DeRose René Descartes John Dewey Fred Dretske Edmund Gettier Alvin Goldman Nelson Goodman Paul Grice Anil Gupta Susan Haack David Hume Immanuel Kant Søren Kierkegaard Peter Klein Saul Kripke Hilary Kornblith David Lewis John Locke G. E. Moore John McDowell Robert Nozick Alvin Plantinga Plato Duncan Pritchard James Pryor Hilary Putnam W. V. O. Quine Thomas Reid Bertrand Russell Gilbert Ryle Wilfrid Sellars Susanna Siegel Ernest Sosa P. F. Strawson Baruch Spinoza Timothy Williamson Ludwig Wittgenstein Nicholas Wolterstorff Vienna Circle more...

Theories Coherentism Constructivism Contextualism Empiricism Evolutionary epistemology Fallibilism Feminist epistemology Fideism Foundationalism Holism Infinitism Innatism Naïve realism Naturalized epistemology Phenomenalism Positivism Rationalism Reductionism Reliabilism Representational realism Skepticism Transcendental idealism Concepts A priori knowledge A posteriori knowledge Analysis Analytic–synthetic distinction Belief Certainty Common sense Descriptive knowledge Exploratory thought Epistemic injustice Epistemic virtue Gettier problem Induction Internalism and externalism Justification Knowledge Meta Objectivity Privileged access Problem of induction Problem of other minds Perception Procedural knowledge Proposition Regress argument Simplicity Truth Uncertainty Related articles Faith and rationality Formal epistemology Metaepistemology Philosophy of perception Philosophy of science Social epistemology Virtue epistemology Category Outline Portal WikiProject Stubs Discussion v t e Philosophy of science Concepts Analysis Analytic–synthetic distinction A priori and a posteriori Causality Mill's Methods Commensurability Consilience Construct Correlation function Creative synthesis Demarcation problem Empirical evidence Experiment design Explanatory power Fact Falsifiability Feminist method Functional contextualism Hypothesis alternative null Ignoramus et ignorabimus Inductive reasoning Intertheoretic reduction Inquiry Measurement Nature Objectivity Observation Paradigm Problem of induction Scientific evidence Evidence-based practice Scientific law Scientific method Scientific pluralism Scientific Revolution Testability Theory choice ladenness scientific Underdetermination Unity of science Variable control dependent and independent Theories Coherentism Confirmation holism Constructive empiricism Constructive realism Constructivist epistemology Contextualism Conventionalism Deductive-nomological model Epistemological anarchism Evolutionism Fallibilism Foundationalism Hypothetico-deductive model Inductionism Instrumentalism Model-dependent realism Naturalism Physicalism Positivism / Reductionism / Determinism Pragmatism Rationalism / Empiricism Received view / Semantic view of theories Scientific essentialism Scientific formalism Scientific realism / Anti-realism Scientific skepticism Scientism Structuralism Uniformitarianism Verificationism Vitalism Philosophy of...

Biology Chemistry Physics Space and time Social science Archaeology Economics Geography History Linguistics Psychology Related topics Criticism of science Descriptive science Epistemology Exact sciences Faith and rationality Hard and soft science History and philosophy of science Non-science Pseudoscience Normative science Protoscience Questionable cause Relationship between religion and science Rhetoric of science Science studies Sociology of scientific ignorance Sociology of scientific knowledge Philosophers of science Precursors Roger Bacon Francis Bacon Galileo Galilei Isaac Newton David Hume Auguste Comte Henri Poincaré Pierre Duhem Rudolf Steiner Karl Pearson Charles Sanders Peirce Wilhelm Windelband Alfred North Whitehead Bertrand Russell Otto Neurath C. D. Broad Michael Polanyi Hans Reichenbach Rudolf Carnap Karl Popper Carl Gustav Hempel W. V. O. Quine Thomas Kuhn Imre Lakatos Paul Feyerabend Ian Hacking Bas van Fraassen Larry Laudan Category Philosophy portal Science portal Subjectivity and objectivity (philosophy) at Wikipedia's sister projects : Definitions from Wiktionary Quotations from Wikiquote Resources from Wikiversity Data from Wikidata Authority control databases : National Czech Republic Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Subjectivity_and_objectivity_(philosophy)&oldid=1300527367 " Categories : Concepts in epistemology Concepts in metaphilosophy Concepts in political philosophy Concepts in the philosophy of mind Concepts in the philosophy of science Metaphysical properties Metaphysics of mind Ontology Philosophy of psychology Subjective experience Hidden categories: CS1 errors: missing periodical Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from July 2017 Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use American English from July 2023 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Wikipedia articles needing clarification from July 2020 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from December 2021 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from November 2021 Articles with Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy links This page was last edited on 14 July 2025, at 21:29 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Subjectivity and objectivity (philosophy) 6 languages Add topic

