Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Features 2 Study 3 Types of outcrops 4 Examples 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Outcrop 37 languages Afrikaans العربية Беларуская Български Català Čeština Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Hausa Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Қазақша Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Nederlands 日本語 Occitan Polski Português Română Русский Slovenčina Svenska ไทย Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Visible exposure of bedrock or ancient superficial deposits on the surface of the Earth This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Outcrop" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( September 2011 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Outcrop of volcanic rock in Germany An outcrop or rocky outcrop is a visible exposure of bedrock or ancient superficial deposits on the surface of the Earth and other terrestrial planets .

[ 1 ] Features [ edit ] Outcrops do not cover the majority of the Earth's land surface because in most places the bedrock or superficial deposits are covered by soil and vegetation and cannot be seen or examined closely. However, in places where the overlying cover is removed through erosion or tectonic uplift , the rock may be exposed, or crop out . Such exposure will happen most frequently in areas where erosion is rapid and exceeds the weathering rate such as on steep hillsides, mountain ridges and tops, river banks, and tectonically active areas. In Finland , glacial erosion during the last glacial maximum ( c.

11000 BC), followed by scouring by sea waves, followed by isostatic uplift has produced many smooth coastal and littoral outcrops.

Bedrock and superficial deposits may also be exposed at the Earth's surface due to human excavations such as quarrying and building of transport routes.

Study [ edit ] Outcrops allow direct observation and sampling of the bedrock in situ for geologic analysis and creating geological maps . In situ measurements are critical for proper analysis of geological history and outcrops are therefore extremely important for understanding the geologic time scale of earth history. Some of the types of information that cannot be obtained except from bedrock outcrops or by precise drilling and coring operations, are structural geology features orientations (e.g. bedding planes, fold axes, foliation ), depositional features orientations (e.g. paleo-current directions, grading, facies changes), paleomagnetic orientations. Outcrops are also very important for understanding fossil assemblages, and paleo-environment, and evolution as they provide a record of relative changes within geologic strata .

Accurate description, mapping, and sampling for laboratory analysis of outcrops made possible all of the geologic sciences and the development of fundamental geologic laws such as the law of superposition , the principle of original horizontality , principle of lateral continuity , and the principle of faunal succession .

Types of outcrops [ edit ] Outcrops occur in numerous forms, including, but not limited to: [ 2 ] Cliffs Tors Escarpments Inselbergs Examples [ edit ] On Ordnance Survey maps in Great Britain , cliffs are distinguished from outcrops: cliffs have a continuous line along the top edge with lines protruding down; outcrops have a continuous line around each area of bare rock. An outcrop example in California is the Vasquez Rocks , familiar from location shooting use in many films , composed of uplifted sandstone .

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] Yana is another example of outcrops, located in Uttara Kannada district in Karnataka , India .

Serrote Branco outcrop in Caicó , Brazil Precambrian outcrop in Finland Granite outcrops at Silesian Stones Mountain in southwestern Poland Outcrop near Yana, India Outcrop of the Roubidoux Formation in the Ozarks of southern Missouri Outcrop in the Vasquez Rocks Natural Area Park of southern California Valley of Desolation in the Camdeboo National Park See also [ edit ] Earth sciences portal Digital outcrop model – Digital 3D representation of the outcrop surface Geological formation – Fundamental unit of lithostratigraphy Geologic time scale – System that relates geologic strata to time List of rock formations Subcrop – Term in geology Floater (geology) – Rock fragments detached from original outcrop References [ edit ] ^ Howell, J. V., 1960, Glossary of Geology and Related Sciences . Washington, DC: American Geological Institute, pp. 207–208 ^ Fitzsimons, James A.; Michael, Damian R. (2017-07-01).

"Rocky outcrops: A hard road in the conservation of critical habitats" .

Biological Conservation . Small Natural Features.

211 : 36– 44.

doi : 10.1016/j.biocon.2016.11.019 .

ISSN 0006-3207 .

^ "oxy.edu. Vazquez Rocks. access date:5/22/2010" . Archived from the original on 2011-06-08 . Retrieved 2010-05-24 .

^ "parks.lacounty.gov. Vazquez Rocks Natural Area and Nature Center. access date:5/22/2010" . Archived from the original on 2012-09-20 . Retrieved 2010-05-24 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Outcrops .

The dictionary definition of outcrop at Wiktionary Authority control databases National United States Latvia Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Outcrop&oldid=1303997103 " Categories : Rock formations Rocks Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from September 2011 All articles needing additional references Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 3 August 2025, at 09:25 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Outcrop 37 languages Add topic

