Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Plot synopsis 2 I Am Albert Einstein 3 Press 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents I Am Albert Einstein Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Book by Brad Meltzer I Am Albert Einstein Author Brad Meltzer Illustrator Chris Eliopoulos Language English Series Ordinary People Change the World Genre Children's Book Publisher Dial Books for Young Readers, an imprint of Penguin Group (USA) Inc.

Publication date 2014 Publication place United States Media type Print ( Hardback ) Pages 40 pp ISBN 9780803740846 OCLC 864709674 I Am Albert Einstein is a 2014 children's book written by Brad Meltzer in the " Ordinary People Change the World " series. It follows the adventures of a young Albert Einstein learning important lessons.

Plot synopsis [ edit ] The book features a young Albert Einstein, before he discovered the theory of relativity. As a child, young Albert Einstein was given a compass that fascinated him. No matter which way he turned it, it pointed north. The compass had a profound impact on his life. It inspired him to never stop being curious, and never stop discovering.

I Am Albert Einstein [ edit ] The idea for the "Ordinary People Change the World" series came to Meltzer as he was shopping for his young daughter. All he saw in the racks were many T-shirts with princesses and loud mouth athletes. Meltzer wanted to give his daughter real heroes, ordinary people who stood up for what is right and changed the world. Together with award-winning comics artist Chris Eliopoulos , Meltzer created the "Ordinary People Change the World" children's book series. Each book features the story of a hero when they were a child. The publisher has ordered 12 books in the series.

Press [ edit ] The book was named the #3 best children's nonfiction book of 2014 by Amazon.

[ 1 ] When I Am Rosa Parks was released, all previous three books in the "Ordinary People Change the World" series appeared simultaneously on the New York Times Bestseller List: I Am Rosa Parks at #2; I Am Abraham Lincoln at #6; and I Am Amelia Earhart at #8.

[ 2 ] Meltzer was featured on many morning news shows to discuss the books, including CBS This Morning .

[ 3 ] See also [ edit ] Illana Katz , co-author of 1995 children's storybook, In a World of His Own: A Storybook About Albert Einstein References [ edit ] ^ "Best Books of the Year 2014: Nonfiction Children's Books" .

Amazon . Retrieved 21 November 2013 .

^ "New York Times Bestseller List" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 6 July 2014 .

^ "Historic Heroes Come to Life In Children's Books" .

CBS News . Retrieved 9 June 2012 .

External links [ edit ] [1] - Brad Meltzer v t e Albert Einstein Physics Theory of relativity Special relativity General relativity Mass–energy equivalence (E=mc 2 ) Brownian motion Photoelectric effect Einstein coefficients Einstein solid Equivalence principle Einstein field equations Einstein radius Einstein relation (kinetic theory) Einstein ring Cosmological constant Bose–Einstein condensate Bose–Einstein statistics Bose–Einstein correlations Einstein–Cartan theory Einstein–Infeld–Hoffmann equations Einstein–de Haas effect EPR paradox Bohr–Einstein debates Teleparallelism Thought experiments Unsuccessful investigations Wave–particle duality Gravitational wave Tea leaf paradox Works Annus mirabilis papers (1905) " Investigations on the Theory of Brownian Movement " (1905) Relativity: The Special and the General Theory (1916) The Meaning of Relativity (1922) The World as I See It (1934) The Evolution of Physics (1938) " Why Socialism?

" (1949) Russell–Einstein Manifesto (1955) In popular culture Die Grundlagen der Einsteinschen Relativitäts-Theorie (1922 documentary) The Einstein Theory of Relativity (1923 documentary) Relics: Einstein's Brain (1994 documentary) Insignificance (1985 film) Young Einstein (1988 film) Picasso at the Lapin Agile (1993 play) I.Q.

(1994 film) Einstein's Gift (2003 play) Einstein and Eddington (2008 TV film) Genius (2017 series) Oppenheimer (2023 film) Prizes Albert Einstein Award Albert Einstein Medal Kalinga Prize Albert Einstein Peace Prize Albert Einstein World Award of Science Einstein Prize for Laser Science Einstein Prize (APS) Books about Einstein Albert Einstein: Creator and Rebel Einstein and Religion Einstein for Beginners Einstein: His Life and Universe Einstein in Oxford Einstein on the Run Einstein's Cosmos I Am Albert Einstein Introducing Relativity Subtle is the Lord Family Mileva Marić (first wife) Elsa Einstein (second wife; cousin) Lieserl Einstein (daughter) Hans Albert Einstein (son) Pauline Koch (mother) Hermann Einstein (father) Maja Einstein (sister) Eduard Einstein (son) Robert Einstein (cousin) Bernhard Caesar Einstein (grandson) Evelyn Einstein (granddaughter) Thomas Martin Einstein (great-grandson) Siegbert Einstein (distant cousin) Related Awards and honors Brain House Memorial Political views Religious views Things named after Einstein–Oppenheimer relationship Albert Einstein Archives Einstein's Blackboard Einstein Papers Project Einstein refrigerator Einsteinhaus Einsteinium Max Talmey Emergency Committee of Atomic Scientists Category Portals : Biography Books Children's literature Science Society Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=I_Am_Albert_Einstein&oldid=1267038097 " Categories : 2014 children's books American children's books American picture books Children's history books Children's books adapted into television shows English-language children's books Books about Albert Einstein Books by Brad Meltzer Children's books about scientists Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 3 January 2025, at 09:13 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents I Am Albert Einstein Add languages Add topic

