Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Works Toggle Works subsection 2.1 Cretica 3 Epimenides paradox 4 See also 5 Footnotes 6 Notes 7 References 8 Further reading 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Epimenides 29 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Català Čeština Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Latina Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Română Русский Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Epimenides of Knossos ) 7th/6th-century BCE Greek seer, philosopher, and poet This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .

Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( February 2012 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Epimenides of Knossos Epimenides of Knossos (or Epimenides of Crete ) ( / ɛ p ɪ ˈ m ɛ n ɪ d iː z / ; Ancient Greek : Ἐπιμενίδης ) was a semi- mythical 7th- or 6th-century BC Greek seer and philosopher - poet , from Knossos or Phaistos .

Life [ edit ] While tending his father's sheep, Epimenides is said to have fallen asleep for fifty-seven years in a Cretan cave sacred to Zeus , after which he reportedly awoke with the gift of prophecy ( Diogenes Laërtius i. 109–115).

Plutarch writes that Epimenides purified Athens after the pollution brought by the Alcmeonidae , and that the seer's expertise in sacrifices and reform of funeral practices were of great help to Solon in his reform of the Athenian state. The only reward he would accept was a branch of the sacred olive, and a promise of perpetual friendship between Athens and Knossos (Plutarch, Life of Solon , 12; Aristotle , Ath. Pol . 1).

Athenaeus also mentions him, in connection with the self-sacrifice of the erastes and eromenos pair of Aristodemus and Cratinus , who were believed to have given their lives in order to purify Athens. Even in antiquity there were those who held the story to be mere fiction ( The Deipnosophists, XIII. 78–79). Diogenes Laërtius preserves a number of spurious letters between Epimenides and Solon in his Lives of the Philosophers . Epimenides was also said to have prophesied at Sparta on military matters.

He died in Crete at an advanced age; according to his countrymen, who afterwards honoured him as a god, he lived nearly three hundred years. According to another story, he was taken prisoner in a war between the Spartans and Knossians, and put to death by his captors, because he refused to prophesy favourably for them.

Pausanias reports that when Epimenides died, his skin was found to be covered with tattooed writing. This was considered odd, because the Greeks reserved tattooing for slaves . Some modern scholars [ who?

] have seen this as evidence that Epimenides was heir to the shamanic religions of Central Asia , because tattooing is often associated with shamanic initiation .

[ citation needed ] The skin of Epimenides was preserved at the courts of the ephores in Sparta , conceivably as a good-luck charm.

According to Diogenes Laërtius, Epimenides met Pythagoras in Crete, and they went to the Cave of Ida .

[ 1 ] Works [ edit ] Epimenides from " Promptuarii Iconum Insigniorum " Several prose and poetic works, now lost, were attributed to Epimenides, including a theogony , an epic poem on the Argonautic expedition , prose works on purifications and sacrifices, a cosmogony , oracles, a work on the laws of Crete, and a treatise on Minos and Rhadymanthus .

Cretica [ edit ] Epimenides' Cretica (Κρητικά) is quoted twice in the New Testament . Its only source is a 9th-century Syriac commentary by Isho'dad of Merv on the Acts of the Apostles , discovered, edited and translated (into Greek) by Prof.

J. Rendel Harris in a series of articles.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] In the poem, Minos addresses Zeus thus: J. Rendel Harris' hypothetical Greek text: [ 3 ] Τύμβον ἐτεκτήναντο σέθεν, κύδιστε μέγιστε, Κρῆτες, ἀεὶ ψευδεῖς, κακὰ θηρία, γαστέρες ἀργαί.

Ἀλλὰ σὺ γ᾽ οὐ θνῇσκεις, ἕστηκας γὰρ ζοὸς αίεί, Ἐν γὰρ σοὶ ζῶμεν καὶ κινύμεθ᾽ ἠδὲ καὶ ἐσμέν.

Translation: They fashioned a tomb for you, holy and high one, Cretans, always liars, evil beasts, idle bellies.

But you are not dead: you live and abide forever, For in you we live and move and have our being.

The "lie" of the Cretans is that Zeus was mortal; Epimenides considered Zeus immortal. "Cretans, always liars," with the same theological intent as Epimenides, also appears in the Hymn to Zeus of Callimachus . The fourth line is quoted (with a reference to one of "your own poets")  in Acts of the Apostles , chapter 17, verse 28 .

The second line is quoted, with a veiled attribution ("a prophet of their own"), in the Epistle to Titus , chapter 1, verse 12 , to warn Titus about the Cretans. The "prophet" in Titus 1:12 is identified by Clement of Alexandria as "Epimenides" ( Stromata , i. 14 ). In this passage, Clement mentions that "some say" Epimenides should be counted among the seven wisest philosophers.

Chrysostom ( Homily 3 on Titus ) gives an alternative fragment: For even a tomb, King, of you They made, who never died, but ever shall be.

Epimenides paradox [ edit ] The Epimenides paradox refers to a saying attributed to Epimenides: "All Cretans are liars." [ a ] This statement creates a paradox of self-reference similar to the liar paradox . This quote is referenced in the New Testament Epistle to Titus , which indirectly alludes to Epimenides as a "prophet" of the Cretans.

See also [ edit ] Poetry portal Non-canonical books referenced in the Bible Footnotes [ edit ] ^ Greek : Κρῆτες ἀεὶ ψεῦσται Notes [ edit ] ^ Hicks, R.D. (1972).

"PYTHAGORAS (c. 582-500 B.C.)" . Diogenes Laertius.

^ Rendel Harris, J. (October 1906).

"The Cretans always liars" .

The Expositor . Seventh Series.

2 : 305– 17 . Retrieved April 9, 2020 .

^ a b Rendel Harris, J. (April 1907).

"A further note on the Cretans" .

The Expositor . Seventh Series.

3 : 332– 337 . Retrieved April 9, 2020 .

^ Rendel Harris, J. (April 1912). "St. Paul and Epimenides".

The Expositor . Eighth Series.

4 : 348– 353.

References [ edit ] This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911). " Epimenides ".

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 9 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 694.

Further reading [ edit ] Demoulin, Hubert (1901).

Épiménide de Crète.

Bruxelles. New edition with updates: Paris: Les Belles Lettres, 2024.

Dodds, Eric R., The Greeks and the Irrational , University of California Press, 2004.

ISBN 978-0-520-93127-5 . pp. 140–147.

Laërtius, Diogenes .

"The Seven Sages: Epimenides" .

Lives of the Eminent Philosophers . Vol. 1:1. Translated by Hicks, Robert Drew (Two volume ed.). Loeb Classical Library.

Parker, Robert, "Epimenides", in Brill's New Pauly : Encyclopaedia of the Ancient World. Antiquity, Volume 4 , Cyr – Epy, edited by Hubert Cancik and Helmuth Schneider, Brill, 2004.

ISBN 9004122672 .

Zaykov, Andrey.

Epimemdes' activities in Sparta (In Russian + English summary). In: Journal of Ancient History. Moscow, 2002. No 4. P. 110-130.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Epimenides .

Epimenides of Crete Fragments at demonax.info Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 FAST WorldCat National Germany United States Czech Republic Spain Netherlands Norway Greece Poland Vatican Israel Catalonia Academics CiNii People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Epimenides&oldid=1290039352 " Categories : 6th-century BC Greek poets 6th-century BC Greek philosophers Archaic Greek seers Ancient Greek shamans Classical oracles Immigrants to Archaic Athens Longevity myths Luck Seven Sages of Greece Rip Van Winkle-type stories Ancient Knossians Ancient Phaistians Ancient Cretan poets 7th-century BC Greek philosophers Hidden categories: Articles containing Greek-language text Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles lacking in-text citations from February 2012 All articles lacking in-text citations Use mdy dates from March 2025 Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from March 2025 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2025 Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica Wikipedia articles incorporating the template Lives of the Eminent Philosophers Commons category link is on Wikidata Year of birth unknown Year of death unknown This page was last edited on 12 May 2025, at 12:23 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Epimenides 29 languages Add topic

