Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Ancient Greek 1.2 Byzantine Empire 1.3 Islamic world 1.4 Western Europe 1.5 Modern era 2 Contemporary Toggle Contemporary subsection 2.1 Ethics 2.2 Meta-ontology 2.3 Problem of universals 3 See also 4 Notes 5 References 6 Further reading 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Aristotelianism 44 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Català Čeština Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Italiano ქართული Қазақша Кыргызча Lingua Franca Nova Magyar Македонски Malagasy မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål پښتو Polski Português Română Русский Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Philosophical tradition inspired by the work of Aristotle Aristotle by Francesco Hayez , 1811 Aristotelianism ( / ˌ ær ɪ s t ə ˈ t iː l i ə n ɪ z əm / ARR -i-stə- TEE -lee-ə-niz-əm ) is a philosophical tradition inspired by the work of Aristotle , usually characterized by deductive logic and an analytic inductive method in the study of natural philosophy and metaphysics . It covers the treatment of the social sciences under a system of natural law . It answers why-questions by a scheme of four causes , including purpose or teleology , and emphasizes virtue ethics . Aristotle and his school wrote tractates on physics , biology , metaphysics , logic , ethics , aesthetics , poetry , theatre , music , rhetoric , psychology , linguistics , economics , politics , and government . Any school of thought that takes one of Aristotle's distinctive positions as its starting point can be considered "Aristotelian" in the widest sense. This means that different Aristotelian theories (e.g. in ethics or in ontology ) may not have much in common as far as their actual content is concerned besides their shared reference to Aristotle.

In Aristotle's time, philosophy included natural philosophy , which preceded the advent of modern science during the Scientific Revolution . The works of Aristotle were initially defended by the members of the Peripatetic school and later on by the Neoplatonists , who produced many commentaries on Aristotle's writings . In the Islamic Golden Age , Avicenna and Averroes translated the works of Aristotle into Arabic and under them, along with philosophers such as Al-Kindi and Al-Farabi , Aristotelianism became a major part of early Islamic philosophy .

Moses Maimonides adopted Aristotelianism from the Islamic scholars and based his Guide for the Perplexed on it and that became the basis of Jewish scholastic philosophy . Although some of Aristotle's logical works were known to western Europe , it was not until the Latin translations of the 12th century and the rise of scholasticism that the works of Aristotle and his Arabic commentators became widely available. Scholars such as Albertus Magnus and Thomas Aquinas interpreted and systematized Aristotle's works in accordance with Catholic theology .

After retreating under criticism from modern natural philosophers, the distinctively Aristotelian idea of teleology was transmitted through Wolff and Kant to Hegel , who applied it to history as a totality. However, this project was criticized by Trendelenburg and Brentano as non-Aristotelian, Hegel's influence is now often said to be responsible for an important Aristotelian influence upon Marx .

Recent Aristotelian ethical and "practical" philosophy, such as that of Gadamer and McDowell , is often premised upon a rejection of Aristotelianism's traditional metaphysical or theoretical philosophy. From this viewpoint, the early modern tradition of political republicanism , which views the res publica , public sphere or state as constituted by its citizens' virtuous activity, can appear thoroughly Aristotelian.

Alasdair MacIntyre was a notable modern Aristotelian philosopher who helped to revive virtue ethics in his book After Virtue .

MacIntyre revises Aristotelianism with the argument that the highest temporal goods, which are internal to human beings, are actualized through participation in social practices.

History [ edit ] Ancient Greek [ edit ] Main article: Peripatetic school The original followers of Aristotle were the members of the Peripatetic school . The most prominent members of the school after Aristotle were Theophrastus and Strato of Lampsacus , who both continued Aristotle's researches. During the Roman era , the school concentrated on preserving and defending his work.

[ 1 ] The most important figure in this regard was Alexander of Aphrodisias who commentated on Aristotle's writings. With the rise of Neoplatonism in the 3rd century, Peripateticism as an independent philosophy came to an end. Still, the Neoplatonists sought to incorporate Aristotle's philosophy within their own system and produced many commentaries on Aristotle .

Byzantine Empire [ edit ] Byzantine Aristotelianism emerged in the Byzantine Empire in the two decades after 1118 through the initiative of the princess Anna Comnena who commissioned a number of scholars to write commentaries on previously neglected works of Aristotle.

[ 2 ] Michael of Ephesus wrote commentaries on the works of Aristotle's animal biology, on the Sophistical Refutations , the only work of the Organon not to have a commentary and the Politics , completing the series of commentaries on Aristotle's extant works. Byzantine philosophers also filled in the gaps in the commentaries that had survived down to their time; Alexander of Aphrodisias' commentary on the Metaphysics, of which only the first five books survived, was completed by Michael of Ephesus, who, along with Eustratius , compiled a number of fragmentary commentaries on the Nicomachean Ethics which they supplemented with their own interpretations.

[ 3 ] Islamic world [ edit ] See also: Averroism and Avicennism A medieval Arabic representation of Aristotle teaching a student.

In the Abbasid Empire , many foreign works were translated into Arabic , large libraries were constructed, and scholars were welcomed.

[ 4 ] Under the caliphs Harun al-Rashid and his son Al-Ma'mun , the House of Wisdom in Baghdad flourished. Christian scholar Hunayn ibn Ishaq (809–873) was placed in charge of the translation work by the caliph. In his lifetime, Ishaq translated 116 writings, including works by Plato and Aristotle, into Syriac and Arabic.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] With the founding of House of Wisdom, the entire corpus of Aristotelian works that had been preserved (excluding the Eudemian Ethics , Magna Moralia and Politics ) became available, along with its Greek commentators; this corpus laid a uniform foundation for Islamic Aristotelianism .

[ 7 ] Al-Kindi (801–873) was the first of the Muslim Peripatetic philosophers and is known for his efforts to introduce Greek and Hellenistic philosophy to the Arab world .

[ 8 ] He incorporated Aristotelian and Neoplatonist thought into an Islamic philosophical framework. This was an important factor in the introduction and popularization of Greek philosophy in the Muslim intellectual world.

[ 9 ] In the 9th century, Persian astrologer Albumasarl 's Introductorium in Astronomiam was one of the most important sources for the recovery of Aristotle for medieval European scholars.

[ 10 ] The philosopher Al-Farabi (872–950) had great influence on science and philosophy for several centuries, and in his time was widely thought second only to Aristotle in knowledge (alluded to by his title of "the Second Teacher"). His work, aimed at synthesis of philosophy and Sufism , paved the way for the work of Avicenna (980–1037).

[ 11 ] Avicenna was one of the main interpreters of Aristotle.

[ 12 ] The school of thought he founded became known as Avicennism , which was built on ingredients and conceptual building blocks that are largely Aristotelian and Neoplatonist.

[ 13 ] At the western end of the Mediterranean Sea , during the reign of Al-Hakam II (961 to 976) in Córdoba , a massive translation effort was undertaken, and many books were translated into Arabic.

Averroes (1126–1198), who spent much of his life in Cordoba and Seville , was especially distinguished as a commentator of Aristotle. He often wrote two or three different commentaries on the same work, and some 38 commentaries by Averroes on the works of Aristotle have been identified.

[ 14 ] Although his writings had an only marginal impact in Islamic countries, his works would eventually have a huge impact in the Latin West , [ 14 ] and would lead to the school of thought known as Averroism .

Western Europe [ edit ] See also: Scholasticism and Thomism Aristotle, holding his Ethics (detail from The School of Athens ) Although some knowledge of Aristotle seems to have lingered on in the ecclesiastical centres of western Europe after the fall of the Roman empire, by the ninth century, nearly all that was known of Aristotle consisted of Boethius 's commentaries on the Organon , and a few abridgments made by Latin authors of the declining empire, Isidore of Seville and Martianus Capella .

[ 15 ] From that time until the end of the eleventh century, little progress is apparent in Aristotelian knowledge.

[ 15 ] The renaissance of the 12th century saw a major search by European scholars for new learning.

James of Venice , who probably spent some years in Constantinople , translated Aristotle's Posterior Analytics from Greek into Latin in the mid-twelfth century, [ 16 ] thus making the complete Aristotelian logical corpus, the Organon , available in Latin for the first time. Scholars travelled to areas of Europe that once had been under Muslim rule and still had substantial Arabic-speaking populations. From central Spain , which had returned to Christian rule in the eleventh century, scholars produced many of the Latin translations of the 12th century . The most productive of these translators was Gerard of Cremona , [ 17 ] ( c.

1114 –1187), who translated 87 books, [ 18 ] which included many of the works of Aristotle such as his Posterior Analytics , Physics , On the Heavens , On Generation and Corruption , and Meteorology .

Michael Scot ( c.

1175 –1232) translated Averroes ' commentaries on the scientific works of Aristotle.

[ 19 ] Aristotle's physical writings began to be discussed openly. At a time when Aristotle's method was permeating all theology, these treatises were sufficient to cause his prohibition for heterodoxy in the Condemnations of 1210–1277 .

[ 15 ] In the first of these, in Paris in 1210, it was stated that "neither the books of Aristotle on natural philosophy or their commentaries are to be read at Paris in public or secret, and this we forbid under penalty of ex-communication ." [ 20 ] However, despite further attempts to restrict the teaching of Aristotle, by 1270, the ban on Aristotle's natural philosophy was ineffective.

[ 21 ] William of Moerbeke ( c.

1215 –1286) undertook a complete translation of the works of Aristotle or, for some portions, a revision of existing translations. He was the first translator of the Politics ( c.

1260 ) from Greek into Latin. Many copies of Aristotle in Latin then in circulation were assumed to have been influenced by Averroes, who was suspected of being a source of philosophical and theological errors found in the earlier translations of Aristotle. Such claims were without merit, however, as the Alexandrian Aristotelianism of Averroes followed "the strict study of the text of Aristotle, which was introduced by Avicenna, [because] a large amount of traditional Neoplatonism was incorporated with the body of traditional Aristotelianism".

[ 22 ] Albertus Magnus ( c.

1200 –1280) was among the first medieval scholars to apply Aristotle's philosophy to Christian thought. He produced paraphrases of most of the works of Aristotle available to him.

[ 23 ] He digested, interpreted and systematized the whole of Aristotle's works, gleaned from the Latin translations and notes of the Arabian commentators, in accordance with Church doctrine. His efforts resulted in the formation of a Christian reception of Aristotle in the Western Europe.

[ 23 ] Albertus did not repudiate Plato . In that, he belonged to the dominant tradition of philosophy that preceded him, namely the "concordist tradition", [ 24 ] which sought to harmonize Aristotle with Plato through interpretation (see for example Porphyry 's On Plato and Aristotle Being Adherents of the Same School ). Albertus famously wrote: "Scias quod non perficitur homo in philosophia nisi ex scientia duarum philosophiarum: Aristotelis et Platonis." ( Metaphysics , I, tr. 5, c. 5)
(Know that a man is not perfected in philosophy if it weren't for the knowledge of the two philosophers, Aristotle and Plato) Thomas Aquinas (1225–1274), the pupil of Albertus Magnus, wrote a dozen commentaries on the works of Aristotle.

[ 25 ] Thomas was emphatically Aristotelian, he adopted Aristotle's analysis of physical objects, his view of place, time and motion, his proof of the prime mover, his cosmology, his account of sense perception and intellectual knowledge, and even parts of his moral philosophy .

[ 25 ] The philosophical school that arose as a legacy of the work of Thomas Aquinas was known as Thomism , and was especially influential among the Dominicans , and later, the Jesuits .

[ 25 ] Using Albert's and Thomas's commentaries, as well as Marsilius of Padua's Defensor pacis , 14th-century scholar Nicole Oresme translated Aristotle's moral works into French and wrote extensively comments on them.

Modern era [ edit ] After retreating under criticism from modern natural philosophers, the distinctively Aristotelian idea of teleology was transmitted through Wolff and Kant to Hegel , who applied it to history as a totality.

[ citation needed ] Although this project was criticized by Trendelenburg and Brentano as un-Aristotelian, [ citation needed ] Hegel had an exceptional admiration for Aristotle who often served as an exemplar in key passages of Hegel’s work.

[ 26 ] Hegel's influence is now often said to be responsible for an important Aristotelian influence upon Marx .

[ 27 ] Postmodernists , in contrast, reject Aristotelianism's claim to reveal important theoretical truths.

[ 28 ] In this, they follow Heidegger 's critique of Aristotle as the greatest source of the entire tradition of Western philosophy.

Contemporary [ edit ] See also: Neo-scholasticism and Scholasticism § Analytical Scholasticism Ethics [ edit ] Aristotelianism is understood by its proponents as critically developing Plato's theories.

[ dubious – discuss ] [ 29 ] Some recent Aristotelian ethical and 'practical' philosophy, such as that of Gadamer and McDowell , is often premised upon a rejection of Aristotelianism's traditional metaphysical or theoretical philosophy.

[ citation needed ] From this viewpoint, the early modern tradition of political republicanism , which views the res publica , public sphere or state as constituted by its citizens' virtuous activity, can appear thoroughly Aristotelian.

[ citation needed ] Mortimer J. Adler described Aristotle's Nicomachean Ethics as a "unique book in the Western tradition of moral philosophy, the only ethics that is sound, practical, and undogmatic." [ 30 ] The contemporary Aristotelian philosopher Alasdair MacIntyre helped to revive virtue ethics in his book After Virtue . MacIntyre revises Aristotelianism with the argument that the highest temporal goods, which are internal to human beings, are actualized through participation in social practices. He opposes Aristotelianism to the managerial institutions of capitalism and its state, and to rival traditions—including the philosophies of Hume , Kant , Kierkegaard , and Nietzsche —that reject its idea of essentially human goods and virtues and instead legitimize capitalism . Therefore, on MacIntyre's account, Aristotelianism is not identical with Western philosophy as a whole; rather, it is "the best theory so far, [including] the best theory so far about what makes a particular theory the best one." [ 31 ] Politically and socially, it has been characterized as a newly 'revolutionary Aristotelianism'. This may be contrasted with the more conventional, apolitical, and effectively conservative uses of Aristotle by, for example, Gadamer and McDowell.

[ 32 ] Other important contemporary Aristotelian theorists include Fred D. Miller, Jr.

[ 33 ] in politics and Rosalind Hursthouse in ethics.

[ 34 ] Meta-ontology [ edit ] Neo-Aristotelianism in meta-ontology holds that the goal of ontology is to determine which entities are fundamental and how the non-fundamental entities depend on them.

[ 35 ] The concept of fundamentality is usually defined in terms of metaphysical grounding . Fundamental entities are different from non-fundamental entities because they are not grounded in other entities.

[ 35 ] For example, it is sometimes held that elementary particles are more fundamental than the macroscopic objects (like chairs and tables) they compose. This is a claim about the grounding-relation between microscopic and macroscopic objects.

These ideas go back to Aristotle's thesis that entities from different ontological categories have different degrees of fundamentality. For example, substances have the highest degree of fundamentality because they exist in themselves. Properties, on the other hand, are less fundamental because they depend on substances for their existence.

[ 36 ] Jonathan Schaffer's priority monism is a recent form of neo-Aristotelian ontology. He holds that there exists only one thing on the most fundamental level: the world as a whole. This thesis does not deny our common-sense intuition that the distinct objects we encounter in our everyday affairs like cars or other people exist. It only denies that these objects have the most fundamental form of existence.

[ 37 ] Problem of universals [ edit ] The problem of universals is the question of whether and in what way universals exist. Aristotelians and Platonists agree that universals have actual, mind-independent existence; thus they oppose the nominalist standpoint. Aristotelians disagree with Platonists, however, about the mode of existence of universals. Platonists hold that universals exist in some form of "Platonic heaven" and thus exist independently of their instances in the concrete, spatiotemporal world. Aristotelians, on the other hand, deny the existence of universals outside the spatiotemporal world. This view is known as immanent realism.

[ 38 ] For example, the universal "red" exists only insofar as there are red objects in the concrete world. Were there no red objects there would be no red-universal. This immanence can be conceived in terms of the theory of hylomorphism by seeing objects as composed of a universal form and the matter shaped by it.

David Malet Armstrong was a modern defender of Aristotelianism on the problem of universals. States of affairs are the basic building blocks of his ontology, and have particulars and universals as their constituents. Armstrong is an immanent realist in the sense that he holds that a universal exists only insofar as it is a constituent of at least one actual state of affairs. Universals without instances are not part of the world.

[ 39 ] Taking a realist approach to universals also allows an Aristotelian realist philosophy of mathematics , according to which mathematics is a science of properties that are instantiated in the real (including physical) world, such as quantitative and structural properties.

[ 40 ] See also [ edit ] Aristotelian ethics Aristotelian physics Commentaries on Aristotle Corpus Aristotelicum Phronesis Platonism Wheel of fire Notes [ edit ] ^ Furley, David (2003), From Aristotle to Augustine: Routledge History of Philosophy , 2, Routledge ^ Ierodiakonou, Katerina; Bydén, Börje (2018).

"Byzantine Philosophy" . In Zalta, Edward N.

(ed.).

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

^ Ierodiakonou & Bydén 2018 .

^ Wiet, Gaston .

"Baghdad: Metropolis of the Abbasid Caliphate" . Retrieved 2010-04-16 .

^ Opth: Azmi, Khurshid. "Hunain bin Ishaq on Ophthalmic Surgery." Bulletin of the Indian Institute of History of Medicine 26 (1996): 69–74. Web. 29 Oct. 2009 ^ Lindberg, David C. The Beginnings of Western Science: Islamic Science. Chicago: The University of Chicago , 2007. Print.

^ Manfred Landfester, Hubert Cancik, Helmuth Schneider (eds.), Brill's New Pauly: Encyclopaedia of the Ancient World. Classical tradition , Volume 1, Brill, 2006, p. 273.

^ Klein-Frank, F.

Al-Kindi . In Leaman, O & Nasr, H (2001).

History of Islamic Philosophy . London: Routledge. p 165 ^ Felix Klein-Frank (2001) Al-Kindi , pages 166–167. In Oliver Leaman & Hossein Nasr.

History of Islamic Philosophy . London: Routledge.

^ Richard Lemay, Abu Ma'shar and Latin Aristotelianism in the Twelfth Century, The Recovery of Aristotle's Natural Philosophy through Iranian Astrology , 1962.

^ "Avicenna (Ibn Sina) (c.980–1037)" . The Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Retrieved 2007-07-13 .

^ "Avicenna (Abu Ali Sina)" . Sjsu.edu. Archived from the original on 11 January 2010 . Retrieved 2010-01-19 .

^ "Avicenna" .

Encyclopedia Iranica . Retrieved 2010-04-14 .

^ a b Edward Grant, (1996), The foundations of modern science in the Middle Ages , page 30. Cambridge University Press ^ a b c Auguste Schmolders, History of Arabian Philosophy in The eclectic magazine of foreign literature, science, and art , Volume 46. February 1859 ^ L.D. Reynolds and Nigel G. Wilson, Scribes and Scholars, Oxford, 1974, p. 106.

^ C. H. Haskins, Renaissance of the Twelfth Century, p. 287. "more of Arabic science passed into Western Europe at the hands of Gerard of Cremona than in any other way." ^ For a list of Gerard of Cremona's translations see: Edward Grant (1974) A Source Book in Medieval Science , (Cambridge: Harvard Univ. Pr.), pp. 35–8 or Charles Burnett, "The Coherence of the Arabic-Latin Translation Program in Toledo in the Twelfth Century," Science in Context , 14 (2001): at 249-288, at pp. 275–281.

^ Christoph Kann (1993). "Michael Scotus". In Bautz, Traugott (ed.).

Biographisch-Bibliographisches Kirchenlexikon (BBKL) (in German). Vol. 5. Herzberg: Bautz. cols. 1459–1461.

ISBN 3-88309-043-3 .

^ Edward Grant, A Source Book in Medieval Science , page 42 (1974). Harvard University Press ^ Rubenstein, Richard E.

Aristotle's Children: How Christians, Muslims, and Jews Rediscovered Ancient Wisdom and Illuminated the Middle Ages , page 215 (2004). Houghton Mifflin Harcourt ^ Schmölders, Auguste (1859).

" 'Essai sur les Ecoles Philosophiques chez les Arabes' par Auguste Schmölders, (Paris 1842)" [Essay on the Schools of Philosophy in Arabia] (full–text/pdf) . In Telford, John; Barber, Benjamin Aquila; Watkinson, William Lonsdale; Davison, William Theophilus (eds.).

The London Quarterly Review . Vol. 11. J.A. Sharp. p. 60.

We have said already that the most interesting and important of the Arabian schools is that which was the simple expression of Alexandrian Aristotelianism, the school of Avicenna and Averroes; or, as the Arabians themselves called it par excellence, that of the 'philosophers.' In no material point did they differ from their master, and, therefore, an exposition of their doctrines would be useless to those who know anything of the history of philosophy; but, before the strict study of the text of Aristotle, which was introduced by Avicenna, a large amount of traditional Neo-Platonism was incorporated with the body of traditional Aristotelianism, so as to take them sometimes far astray from their master's track.

^ a b Führer, Markus.

"Albert the Great" . In Zalta, Edward N.

(ed.).

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

^ Henricus Bate, Helmut Boese, Carlos Steel, On Platonic Philosophy , Leuven: Leuven University Press, 1990, p. xvi.

^ a b c McInerny, Ralph.

"Saint Thomas Aquinas" . In Zalta, Edward N.

(ed.).

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

^ Quote: "[Aristotle] was one of the richest and vastest (deepest) of all the scientific geniuses that have as yet appeared, and no time has produced anyone like him...Aristotle penetrated the entire mass and all aspects of the real universe, and made its richness and dispersion subject to the concept. Most of the philosophical sciences have him to thank for their differentiation and their beginnings. […] He is vast and speculative like no other." ( Lectures on the History of Philosophy ). As quoted in Gilbert Gérard; Cadenza Academic Translations.

"Hegel, Reader of Aristotle's Metaphysics. Substance as Subject" .

Revue de métaphysique et de morale (in English and French). 2012/2 (74): 195– 223.

Archived from the original on March 24, 2025.

( Cairn.info ).

^ For example, George E. McCarthy (ed.), Marx and Aristotle: Nineteenth-Century German Social Theory and Classical Antiquity , Although many disagree Rowman & Littlefield, 1992.

^ For example, Ted Sadler, Heidegger and Aristotle: The Question of Being , Athlone, 1996.

^ For contrasting examples of this, see Hans-Georg Gadamer, The Idea of the Good in Platonic-Aristotelian Philosophy (trans. P. Christopher Smith), Yale University Press, 1986, and Lloyd P. Gerson, Aristotle and Other Platonists , Cornell University Press, 2005.

^ Adler 1985 .

^ Alasdair MacIntyre, 'An Interview with Giovanna Borradori', in Kelvin Knight (ed.), The MacIntyre Reader , Polity Press / University of Notre Dame Press, 1998, p. 264.

^ Kelvin Knight, Aristotelian Philosophy: Ethics and Politics from Aristotle to MacIntyre , Polity Press, 2007.

^ Fred D. Miller, Jr., Nature, Justice, and Rights in Aristotle's Politics , Oxford University Press, 1997.

^ Rosalind Hursthouse, On Virtue Ethics , Oxford University Press, 1999.

^ a b Jonathan Schaffer (2009).

"On What Grounds What Metametaphysics" (PDF) . In Chalmers; Manley; Wasserman (eds.).

Metametaphysics . Oxford University Press. pp.

347– 83.

ISBN 978-0199546046 .

^ Cohen, S. Marc (2020).

"Aristotle's Metaphysics" .

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University.

^ Schaffer, Jonathan (1 January 2010).

"Monism: The Priority of the Whole" .

The Philosophical Review .

119 (1): 31– 76.

doi : 10.1215/00318108-2009-025 .

ISSN 0031-8108 .

^ Balaguer, Mark (2016).

"Platonism in Metaphysics" .

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University.

^ Armstrong, D. M. (29 July 2010). "4. States of Affairs".

Sketch for a Systematic Metaphysics . OUP Oxford.

ISBN 978-0-19-161542-9 .

^ Franklin, James (2021).

"Mathematics as a science of non-abstract reality: Aristotelian realist philosophies of mathematics" .

Foundations of Science .

25 (2): 327– 344.

doi : 10.1007/s10699-021-09786-1 .

hdl : 1959.4/unsworks_74712 .

S2CID 233658181 . Retrieved 30 June 2021 .

References [ edit ] Adler, Mortimer (1985).

Ten Philosophical Mistakes: Basic Errors In Modern Thought - How they came about, their consequences, and how to avoid them . Macmillan.

ISBN 0-02-500330-5 .

Further reading [ edit ] Adler, Mortimer (1978).

Aristotle for Everybody: Difficult Thought Made Easy . Touchstone, Simon & Schuster.

ISBN 978-0-684-83823-6 .

Chappell, Timothy (ed.), Values and Virtues: Aristotelianism in Contemporary Ethics , Oxford University Press, 2006.

Ferrarin, Alfredo , Hegel and Aristotle , Cambridge University Press, 2001.

Kenny, Anthony , Essays on the Aristotelian Tradition , Oxford University Press, 2001.

Knight, Kelvin, Aristotelian Philosophy: Ethics and Politics from Aristotle to MacIntyre , Polity Press, 2007.

ISBN 978-0-7456-1976-7 .

Knight, Kelvin & Paul Blackledge (eds.), Revolutionary Aristotelianism: Ethics, Resistance and Utopia , Lucius & Lucius (Stuttgart, Germany), 2008.

Lobkowicz, Nicholas, Theory and Practice: History of a Concept from Aristotle to Marx , University of Notre Dame Press, 1967.

MacIntyre, Alasdair, After Virtue: A Study in Moral Theory , University of Notre Dame Press, 1984 / Duckworth, 1985 (2nd edn.).

MacIntyre, Alasdair, Whose Justice? Which Rationality?

, University of Notre Dame Press / Duckworth, 1988.

MacIntyre, Alasdair, Three Rival Versions of Moral Enquiry: Encyclopaedia, Genealogy, and Tradition , University of Notre Dame Press / Duckworth, 1990.

MacIntyre, Alasdair, 'The Theses on Feuerbach: A Road Not Taken', in Kelvin Knight (ed.), The MacIntyre Reader , University of Notre Dame Press / Polity Press, 1998.

MacIntyre, Alasdair, Dependent Rational Animals: Why Human Beings Need the Virtues , Open Court / Duckworth, 1999.

MacIntyre, Alasdair, 'Natural Law as Subversive: The Case of Aquinas' and 'Rival Aristotles: 1. Aristotle Against Some Renaissance Aristotelians; 2. Aristotle Against Some Modern Aristotelians', in MacIntyre, Ethics and Politics: Selected Essays volume 2, Cambridge University Press, 2006.

Moraux, Paul, Der Aristotelismus bei den Griechen, Von Andronikos bis Alexander von Aphrodisias : Vol. I:  Die Renaissance des Aristotelismus im I. Jh.v. Chr. (1973); Vol. II: Der Aristotelismus im I. und II. Jh.n. Chr. (1984); Vol. III: Alexander von Aphrodisias (2001) – Edited by Jürgen Wiesner, with a chapter on Ethics by Robert W. Sharples.

Riedel, Manfred (ed.), Rehabilitierung der praktischen Philosophie , Rombach, volume 1, 1972; volume 2, 1974.

Ritter, Joachim, Metaphysik und Politik: Studien zu Aristoteles und Hegel , Suhrkamp, 1977.

Russell, Bertrand (1967), A History of Western Philosophy , Simon & Schuster, ISBN 0671201581 Schrenk, Lawrence P. (ed.), Aristotle in Late Antiquity , Catholic University of America Press, 1994.

Sharples, R. W. (ed.), Whose Aristotle? Whose Aristotelianism?

, Ashgate, 2001.

Shute, Richard, On the History of the Process by Which the Aristotelian Writings Arrived at Their Present Form , Arno Press, 1976 (originally 1888).

Sorabji, Richard (ed.), Aristotle Transformed: The Ancient Commentators and Their Influence , Duckworth, 1990.

Stocks, John Leofric, Aristotelianism , Harrap, 1925.

Veatch, Henry B.

, Rational Man: A Modern Interpretation of Aristotelian Ethics , Indiana University Press, 1962.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Aristotelianism .

The Rediscovery of the Corpus Aristotelicum and the Birth of Aristotelianism with an annotated bibliography Clayton, Edward. (2005).

Political Philosophy of Alasdair MacIntyre , Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy International Society for MacIntyrean Enquiry v t e Aristotelianism Overview Aristotle Works Lyceum Ideas and interests Logic Apodicticity Category of being Future contingents Genus–differentia Irrelevant conclusion Syllogism Physics accident Active intellect Antiperistasis Essence Eternity of the world Four causes Hexis Horror vacui Hylomorphism Hypokeimenon Minima naturalia Ousia Passive intellect Potentiality and actuality Substance theory Substantial form Sublunary sphere Theory of universals Unmoved mover Biology Rational animal Ethics Akrasia Arete Eudaimonia Eutrapelia Golden mean Magnanimity Nemesis Philia Phronesis Pleonexia Practical syllogism Politics Mixed government Natural slavery Rhetoric Lexis Paradeigma Poetics Anagnorisis Catharsis Classical unities Diegesis Hamartia Mimesis Mythos Opsis Peripeteia Telos Tragic hero Works Organon Categories On Interpretation Prior Analytics Posterior Analytics Topics Sophistical Refutations Physics Physics On the Heavens On Generation and Corruption Meteorology On the Soul On Animals History Parts Movement Progression Generation Metaphysics Metaphysics Ethics and politics Nicomachean Ethics Eudemian Ethics Politics Constitution of the Athenians Rhetoric and poetics Rhetoric Poetics Parva Naturalia Sense and Sensibilia On Memory On Sleep On Dreams On Divination in Sleep On Length and Shortness of Life On Youth, Old Age, Life and Death, and Respiration Lost Protrepticus Pseudepigrapha On Breath On Colors On Plants On Indivisible Lines On Melissus, Xenophanes, and Gorgias On the Universe On Things Heard Physiognomonics On Marvellous Things Heard Mechanics Problems The Situations and Names of Winds On Virtues and Vices Economics Rhetoric to Alexander Magna Moralia Related topics Transmission of the Greek Classics Commentaries on Aristotle Conimbricenses Metabasis paradox Views on women Wheel paradox Mathematical realism List of writers influenced by Aristotle Category Philosophy portal v t e Philosophy Branches Branches Applied philosophy Logic Metaphilosophy Philosophy of education Philosophy of information Philosophy of language Philosophy of mathematics Philosophy of religion Philosophy of science Political philosophy Practical philosophy Social philosophy Theoretical philosophy Aesthetics Aesthetic response Formalism Institutionalism Epistemology Empiricism Fideism Naturalism Particularism Rationalism Skepticism Solipsism Ethics Consequentialism Deontology Virtue Free will Compatibilism Determinism Hard Incompatibilism Hard Libertarianism Metaphysics Atomism Dualism Idealism Monism Naturalism Realism Mind Behaviorism Eliminativism Emergentism Epiphenomenalism Functionalism Objectivism Subjectivism Normativity Absolutism Particularism Relativism Nihilism Skepticism Universalism Ontology Action Event Process Reality Anti-realism Conceptualism Idealism Materialism Naturalism Nominalism Physicalism Realism By era By era Ancient Western Medieval Renaissance Early modern Modern Contemporary Ancient Chinese Agriculturalism Confucianism Legalism Logicians Mohism Chinese naturalism Taoism Yangism Greco- Roman Presocratic Ionians Pythagoreans Eleatics Atomists Sophists Cyrenaics Cynicism Eretrian school Megarian school Academy Peripatetic school Hellenistic philosophy Pyrrhonism Stoicism Epicureanism Academic Skepticism Middle Platonism School of the Sextii Neopythagoreanism Second Sophistic Neoplatonism Church Fathers Dispositio Indian Hindu Samkhya Nyaya Vaisheshika Yoga Mīmāṃsā Ājīvika Ajñana Cārvāka Jain Anekantavada Syādvāda Buddhist Abhidharma Sarvāstivadā Pudgalavada Sautrāntika Madhyamaka Svatantrika and Prasangika Śūnyatā Yogacara Tibetan Persian Mazdakism Mithraism Zoroastrianism Zurvanism Medieval East Asian Neotaoism Tiantai Huayan Chan Zen Neo-Confucianism Korean Confucianism European Christian Augustinianism Scholasticism Thomism Scotism Occamism Renaissance humanism Indian Vedanta Acintya bheda abheda Advaita Bhedabheda Dvaita Nimbarka Sampradaya Shuddhadvaita Vishishtadvaita Navya-Nyāya Islamic Aristotelianism Averroism Avicennism Illuminationism ʿIlm al-Kalām Sufi Jewish Judeo-Islamic Modern Anarchism Classical Realism Collectivism Conservatism Determinism Dualism Edo neo-Confucianism Empiricism Existentialism Foundationalism Historicism Holism Humanism Anti- Idealism Absolute British German Objective Subjective Transcendental Individualism Kokugaku Liberalism Materialism Modernism Monism Naturalism Natural law Nihilism New Confucianism Neo-scholasticism Pessimism Pragmatism Phenomenology Positivism Reductionism Rationalism Social contract Socialism Transcendentalism Utilitarianism People Cartesianism Kantianism Neo Kierkegaardianism Krausism Hegelianism Marxism Newtonianism Nietzscheanism Spinozism Contemporary Analytic Applied ethics Analytic feminism Analytical Marxism Communitarianism Consequentialism Critical rationalism Experimental philosophy Falsificationism Foundationalism / Coherentism Internalism and externalism Logical positivism Legal positivism Meta-ethics Moral realism Quinean naturalism Normative ethics Ordinary language philosophy Postanalytic philosophy Quietism Rawlsian Reformed epistemology Systemics Scientism Scientific realism Scientific skepticism Transactionalism Contemporary utilitarianism Vienna Circle Wittgensteinian Continental Critical theory Deconstruction Existentialism Feminist Frankfurt School Hermeneutics Neo-Marxism New Historicism Phenomenology Posthumanism Postmodernism Post-structuralism Social constructionism Structuralism Western Marxism Miscellaneous Kyoto School Objectivism Postcritique Russian cosmism By region By region African Bantu Egyptian Ethiopian Africana Eastern Buddhist Chinese Indian Indonesian Japanese Korean Taiwanese Vietnamese Middle Eastern Iranian Islamic Jewish Pakistani Turkish Western ( Analytic / Continental ) American Australian British Scottish Canada Czech Danish Dutch Finland French German Greek Italian Maltese Polish Slovene Spanish Miscellaneous Amerindian Aztec Romanian Russian Yugoslav Philosophy portal Category v t e Catholic philosophy Ethics Cardinal virtues Divine command Just price Just war Probabilism Natural law Personalism Seven virtues Social teaching Option for the poor Social mortgage Theological virtues Virtue ethics Schools Medieval Augustinianism Scholasticism Thomism Scotism Occamism Modern Salamanca Christian humanism Cartesianism Molinism Neo-scholasticism Analytical Thomism Universals Augustinian realism Nominalism Conceptualism Moderate realism Scotistic realism Other Theological intellectualism Theological voluntarism Foundationalism Philosophers Abelard Adler Albertus Alcuin Anscombe Anselm Aquinas Augustine Bacon Boethius Bonaventure Chateaubriand Chesterton Clement Cusa Descartes Dionysius Erasmus Eriugena Ficino Gassendi Isidore Krasicki Llull Lombard MacIntyre Maistre Malebranche Maritain Montaigne More Newman Occam Pascal Pico Rahner Ratzinger Scheler Scotus Stein Suárez Wojtyła Concepts Actus Essendi Actus primus Actus purus Aevum Augustinian values Cardinal virtues Cartesian dualism Cogito, ergo sum Dehellenization Differentia Disputation Divine illumination Double truth Evil demon Formal distinction Guardian angel Haecceity Head of a pin Homo unius libri Infused righteousness Memento mori Occam's razor Ontological argument Pascal's wager Peripatetic axiom Principle of double effect Quiddity Quinque viae Rota Fortunae Seven deadly sins Theodicy Augustinian Irenaean Trademark argument Univocity Utopia Related Catholic theology Platonism Aristotelianism Neoplatonism Islamic philosophy Doctor of the Church Renaissance Rationalism Empiricism Phenomenology Catholicism portal Philosophy portal v t e Worldview Related terms Basic beliefs / Beliefs Collective consciousness / Collective unconscious Conceptual system Context Conventional wisdom Conventions Cultural movement Epic poetry / National epics / World folk-epics Facts and factoids Framing Ideology Life stance Lifestyle Memes / Memeplex Mental model Metanarrative Mindset Norms Paradigm Philosophical theory Point of view Presuppositions Primal world beliefs Reality tunnel Schemata School of thought Set Social reality Theory of everything Umwelt Value system Aspects Biases Academic Attentional Attitude polarization Belief Cognitive list Collective narcissism Confirmation Congruence Cryptomnesia Cultural Ethnocentrism Filter bubble Homophily In-group favoritism Magical thinking Media Observational error Observer-expectancy Selective exposure Selective perception Self-deception Self-fulfilling prophecy Clever Hans effect placebo effect wishful thinking Status quo Stereotyping ethnic Change and maintenance Activism Argument Argumentum ad populum Attitude change Brainwashing Censorship Charisma Circular reporting Cognitive dissonance Critical thinking Crowd manipulation Cultural dissonance Deprogramming Echo chamber Education religious values Euphemism Excommunication Fearmongering Historical revisionism negationism Ideological repression Indoctrination Manipulation (psychology) Media manipulation Media regulation Missionaries Moral entrepreneurship Persuasion Polite fiction Political engineering Propaganda Propaganda model Proselytism Psychological warfare Religious conversion forced Religious persecution Religious uniformity Revolutions Rhetoric Self-censorship Social change Social control Social engineering Social influence Social progress Suppression of dissent Systemic bias Woozle effect Culture Anthropology cultural social Calendars Ceremonies Coronations Cross-cultural psychology Cultural psychology Doctrine Employment / Serfdom / Slavery Families Funerals / Burial Games Holidays Hygiene ritual Identity (philosophy) cultural Institutions Liminality Liturgy Marriage Myth and ritual Oaths Pilgrimages Play Rites of passage secular Rituals Social class / Social status / Caste Symbols Symbolic boundaries Worship Groupthink Abilene paradox Bandwagon effect Collectives Collective behavior animal Collective effervescence Collective intelligence Conformity Consensus theory Crowd psychology Cults Culture-bound syndromes Deindividuation Doublethink Emergence Emotional contagion Entitativity False consensus effect Folie à deux Group action Group cohesiveness Group dynamics Group emotion Group polarization Groupshift Herd behavior Holism Hysterical contagion Information cascade In-group and out-group Invisible hand Lynching Majoritarianism / Mob rule Mass action Mass psychogenic illness Milieu control Mobbing Moral panic Peer pressure Pluralistic ignorance Political correctness Pseudoconsensus Scapegoating Self-organization Social action Social behavior Social emotions Social exclusion Social facilitation animal Social group Social proof Social psychology Sociology Spontaneous order Status quo Stigmergy Swarm behaviour System justification Viral phenomena Knowledge Axioms tacit assumptions Conceptual framework Epistemology outline Evidence anecdotal scientific Explanations Faith fideism Gnosis Intuition Meaning-making Memory Meta-knowledge Methodology Observation Observational learning Perception Reasoning fallacious logic Revelation Testimony Tradition folklore Truth consensus theory criteria World disclosure Metaphysics Ætiology Afterlife Anima mundi Causality Concepts Consciousness mind–body problem Cosmogony Cosmology religious Creation myth Deities existence Destiny Eschatology Everything / Nothing Evolution Existence Fiction / Nonfiction Free will Future History Ideas Idios kosmos Illusions Incarnation Information Intelligence Magic Matter Miracles Mythology comparative National mythoi Nature philosophical Ontology Origin myths political Otherworlds axes mundi Physics natural philosophy Problem of evil Reality Souls Spirit Supernature Teleology Theology Time Unobservables Value Aesthetic taste Aesthetic Almsgiving / Charity Altruism Autonomy Beauty Codes of conduct Comedy Common good Conscience Consent Creativity Disgust Duty Economics Ecstasy emotional religious Elegance Emotions Aesthetic Entertainment Eroticism Ethics Étiquette Family values Food and drink prohibitions unclean animals Golden Rule Guilt / Culpability Happiness Harmony Honour Human rights Judgement Justice Law jurisprudence religious Liberty political freedom Love Magnificence Maxims Meaning of life Morality public Obligations Peace Piety Praxeology Principles Punishment Qualities Repentance Reverence Rights Sexuality ethics Sin Social stigma Stewardship Styles Sublime, The Suffering Sympathy Taboo Theodicy Trust Unspoken rules Virtues and Vices Works of art Wrongdoing Examples Attitudes Misanthropy Optimism Pessimism Reclusion Weltschmerz Economic and political ideologies Anarchism Authoritarianism Capitalism Christian democracy Collectivism Colonialism Communalism Communism Communitarianism Conservatism Constitutionalism Distributism Environmentalism Extremism Fanaticism Fascism Feminism Fundamentalism Globalism Green politics Imperialism Individualism Industrialisation Intellectualism Islamism Liberalism Libertarianism Masculism Militarism Monarchism Nationalism Pacifism Progressivism Radicalism Reformism Republicanism Sentientism Social democracy Socialism Utilitarianism Veganism Religions African traditional religions Baháʼí Buddhism Caodaism Cheondoism Chinese folk religion Christianity Eastern Orthodox Church Ethnic religions Hinduism Hòa Hảo Islam Jainism Judaism Korean shamanism Modern paganism Rastafari Secularity / Irreligion / Agnosticism / Atheism Shinto Sikhism Spiritism Taoism Tenrikyo Unitarian Universalism Zoroastrianism Schools of philosophy Agriculturalism Aristotelianism Atomism Averroism Cartesianism Cārvāka Collectivism Confucianism / New Confucianism Critical theory Cynicism Cyrenaics Determinism Dualism Eleatics Empiricism Epicureanism Eretrian school Existentialism Fatalism Foundationalism Hedonism Hegelianism Hermeneutics Historicism / New historicism Holism Humanism / Renaissance humanism Idealism Illuminationism ʿIlm al-Kalām Individualism Ionian Kantianism / Neo-Kantianism Kokugaku Legalism Logicians Materialism Megarian school Modernism / Postmodernism Mohism Monism Natural law Naturalism (Chinese) Naturalism (Western) Nihilism Peripatetic Phenomenology Platonism / Neoplatonism Pluralism Positivism Pragmatism Pre-Socratic Pyrrhonism Pythagoreanism / Neopythagoreanism Rationalism Reductionism Scholasticism / Neo-scholasticism Sentientism Social constructionism Sophism Spinozism Stoicism Structuralism / Post-structuralism Thomism Transcendentalism Utilitarianism Yangism Authority control databases : National France BnF data Czech Republic NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐cqxvm
Cached time: 20250817222545
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.817 seconds
Real time usage: 1.073 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 4918/1000000
Revision size: 34929/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 323504/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 5541/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 11/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 124498/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.421/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 8934203/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  751.094      1 -total
 26.88%  201.886      1 Template:Reflist
 21.16%  158.922     15 Template:Navbox
 14.22%  106.838      1 Template:Aristotelianism
 13.00%   97.669      3 Template:Cite_SEP
 12.70%   95.420      3 Template:Cite_encyclopaedia
  8.48%   63.694      1 Template:Short_description
  7.30%   54.843      1 Template:Commonscat
  6.93%   52.066      1 Template:Sister_project
  6.69%   50.240      1 Template:Side_box Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:309909:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817222545 and revision id 1303517230. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Aristotelianism&oldid=1303517230 " Categories : Aristotelianism Philosophical schools and traditions Hidden categories: CS1 German-language sources (de) CS1: long volume value CS1 French-language sources (fr) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2010 All accuracy disputes Articles with disputed statements from April 2022 Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 31 July 2025, at 12:56 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Aristotelianism 44 languages Add topic

