Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Nomenclature Toggle Nomenclature subsection 1.1 Mammal order 1.2 Carnivorous diet 1.3 Subcategories of carnivory 2 Obligate carnivores 3 Characteristics of carnivores 4 Prehistory of carnivory Toggle Prehistory of carnivory subsection 4.1 Proterozoic origin 4.2 Paleozoic 4.3 Mesozoic 4.4 Cenozoic 5 See also 6 References 7 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Carnivore 91 languages Afrikaans العربية Asturianu Aymar aru Azərbaycanca Basa Bali বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Беларуская Български Bosanski Català Čeština ChiShona Cymraeg Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Føroyskt Français Frysk Gaeilge Gaelg Galego ગુજરાતી 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia IsiXhosa Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa کٲشُر Kernowek Kreyòl ayisyen Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Ligure Limburgs Lingua Franca Nova Luganda Magyar മലയാളം Malti मराठी مصرى Bahasa Melayu Nederlands नेपाली नेपाल भाषा 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Nouormand Oromoo Polski Português Runa Simi Русский संस्कृतम् Shqip Simple English Soomaaliga کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt Walon Winaray 吴语 粵語 Zazaki 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Carnivorous ) Organism that eats mostly or exclusively animal tissue This article is about the general concept of a meat-eating animal. For the mammal order, see Carnivora . For other uses, see Carnivore (disambiguation) .

"Carnivorous" redirects here. For the Hawkwind album, see Carnivorous (album) .

Lions are obligate carnivores consuming only animal flesh for their nutritional requirements.

A carnivore / ˈ k ɑːr n ɪ v ɔːr / , or meat-eater ( Latin , caro , genitive carnis , meaning meat or flesh and vorare meaning "to devour"), is an animal or plant whose nutrition and energy requirements are met by consumption of animal tissues (mainly muscle , fat and other soft tissues ) as food , whether through predation or scavenging .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Nomenclature [ edit ] Mammal order [ edit ] The technical term for mammals in the order Carnivora is carnivoran , and they are so-named because most member species in the group have a carnivorous diet, but the similarity of the name of the order and the name of the diet causes confusion.

Many but not all carnivorans are meat eaters; a few, such as the large and small cats ( Felidae ) are obligate carnivores whose diet requires nutrients found only in animal flesh. Other classes of carnivore are highly variable. The ursids (bears), for example: while the Arctic polar bear eats meat almost exclusively (more than 90% of its diet is meat), almost all other bear species are omnivorous , and one species, the giant panda , is nearly exclusively herbivorous .

[ 3 ] Dietary carnivory is not a distinguishing trait of the order . Many mammals with highly carnivorous diets are not members of the order Carnivora.

Cetaceans , for example, all eat other animals, but are paradoxically members of the almost exclusively plant-eating hooved mammals .

Carnivorous diet [ edit ] Animals that depend solely on animal flesh for their nutrient requirements in nature are called hypercarnivores or obligate carnivores , whilst those that also consume non-animal food are called mesocarnivores , or facultative carnivores , or omnivores (there are no clear distinctions).

[ 2 ] A carnivore at the top of the food chain (adults not preyed upon by other animals) is termed an apex predator , regardless of whether it is an obligate or facultative carnivore. In captivity or domestic settings, obligate carnivores like cats and crocodiles can, in principle, get all their required nutrients from processed food made from plant and synthetic sources.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] Members of the plant kingdom can live on meat too, such as the Venus flytrap , a carnivorous plant .

Outside the animal kingdom, there are several genera containing carnivorous plants (predominantly insectivores), several phyla containing carnivorous fungi (preying mostly on microscopic invertebrates , such as nematodes , amoebae , and springtails ) and carnivorous protists .

Subcategories of carnivory [ edit ] Carnivores are sometimes characterized by their type of prey . For example, animals that eat mainly insects and similar terrestrial arthropods are called insectivores , while those that eat mainly soft-bodied invertebrates are called vermivores . Those that eat mainly fish are called piscivores .

Carnivores may alternatively be classified according to the percentage of meat in their diet. The diet of a hypercarnivore consists of more than 70% meat, that of a mesocarnivore 30–70%, and that of a hypocarnivore less than 30%, with the balance consisting of non-animal foods, such as fruit , other plant material, or fungi .

Omnivores also consume both animal and non-animal food, and apart from their more general definition, there is no clearly defined ratio of plant vs. animal material that distinguishes a facultative carnivore from an omnivore .

[ 6 ] Obligate carnivores [ edit ] The Bengal tiger's large canines and strong jaws reveal its place as an apex predator .

Lions are voracious carnivores; they require more than 7 kilograms of meat daily. A major component of their diet is the meat of large mammals , such as this buffalo .

Obligate or "true" carnivores are those whose diet in the wild requires nutrients found only in animal flesh. While obligate carnivores might be able to ingest small amounts of plant matter, they lack the necessary physiology required to fully digest it. Some obligate carnivorous mammals will ingest vegetation as an emetic , a food that upsets their stomachs, to self-induce vomiting.

[ 7 ] Obligate carnivores are diverse. The amphibian axolotl consumes mainly worms and larvae in its environment, but if necessary will consume algae. All wild felids , including feral domestic cats , require a diet of primarily animal flesh and organs.

[ 8 ] Specifically, cats have high protein requirements and their metabolisms appear unable to synthesize essential nutrients such as retinol , arginine , taurine , and arachidonic acid ; thus, in nature, they must consume flesh to supply these nutrients.

[ 9 ] Characteristics of carnivores [ edit ] This king cobra is preying on a smaller snake. Such snakes as king cobras use venom to kill prey.

Characteristics commonly associated with carnivores include strength, speed, and keen senses for hunting, as well as teeth and claws for capturing and tearing prey. However, some carnivores do not hunt and are scavengers , lacking the physical characteristics to bring down prey; in addition, most hunting carnivores will scavenge when the opportunity arises. Carnivores have comparatively short digestive systems, as they are not required to break down the tough cellulose found in plants.

Many hunting animals have evolved eyes facing forward, enabling depth perception. This is almost universal among mammalian predators, while most reptile and amphibian predators have eyes facing sideways.

Some carnivores use powerful venom to immobilize and kill prey. Such animals include snakes , spiders , scorpions , and some wasps .

Prehistory of carnivory [ edit ] Main articles: Predation § Evolutionary history , and Evolutionary history of life Predation (the eating of one living organism by another for nutrition ) predates the rise of commonly recognized carnivores by hundreds of millions (perhaps billions) of years. It began with single-celled organisms that phagocytozed and digested other cells, and later evolved into multicellular organisms with specialized cells that were dedicated to breaking down other organisms. Incomplete digestion of the prey organisms, some of which survived inside the predators in a form of endosymbiosis , might have led to symbiogenesis that gave rise to eukaryotes and eukaryotic autotrophs such as green and red algae .

Proterozoic origin [ edit ] The earliest predators were microorganisms , which engulfed and "swallowed" other smaller cells (i.e.

phagocytosis ) and digested them internally . Because the earliest fossil record is poor, these first predators could date back anywhere between 1 and over 2.7 bya (billion years ago).

[ 10 ] The rise of eukaryotic cells at around 2.7 bya, the rise of multicellular organisms at about 2 bya, and the rise of motile predators (around 600 Mya – 2 bya, probably around 1 bya) have all been attributed to early predatory behavior, and many very early remains show evidence of boreholes or other markings attributed to small predator species.

[ 10 ] The sudden disappearance of the precambrian Ediacaran biota at the end-Ediacaran extinction , who were mostly bottom-dwelling filter feeders and grazers , has been hypothetized to be partly caused by increased predation by newer animals with hardened skeleton and mouthparts.

[ 11 ] Paleozoic [ edit ] The degradation of seafloor microbial mats due to the Cambrian substrate revolution led to increased active predation among animals, likely triggering various evolutionary arms races that contributed to the rapid diversification during the Cambrian explosion .

Radiodont arthropods , which produced the first apex predators such as Anomalocaris , quickly became the dominant carnivores of the Cambrian sea. After their decline due to the Cambrian-Ordovician extinction event , the niches of large carnivores were taken over by nautiloid cephalopods such as Cameroceras and later eurypterids such as Jaekelopterus during the Ordovician and Silurian periods.

The first vertebrate carnivores appeared after the evolution of jawed fish , especially armored placoderms such as the massive Dunkleosteus . The dominance of placoderms in the Devonian ocean forced other fish to venture into other niches, and one clade of bony fish , the lobe-finned fish , became the dominant carnivores of freshwater wetlands formed by early land plants . Some of these fish became better adapted for breathing air and eventually giving rise to amphibian tetrapods . These early tetrapods were large semi-aquatic piscivores and riparian ambush predators that hunt terrestrial arthropods (mainly arachnids and myriopods ), and one group in particular, the temnospondyls , became terrestrial apex predators that hunt other tetrapods.

[ 12 ] The dominance of temnospondyls around the wetland habitats throughout the Carboniferous forced other amphibians to evolve into amniotes that had adaptations that allowed them to live farther away from water bodies. These amniotes began to evolve both carnivory, which was a natural transition from insectivory requiring minimal adaptation; and herbivory , which took advantage of the abundance of coal forest foliage but in contrast required a complex set of adaptations that was necessary for digesting on the cellulose - and lignin -rich plant materials.

[ 12 ] After the Carboniferous rainforest collapse , both synapsid and sauropsid amniotes quickly gained dominance as the top terrestrial animals during the subsequent Permian period. Some scientists assert that sphenacodontoid synapsids such as Dimetrodon "were the first terrestrial vertebrate to develop the curved, serrated teeth that enable a predator to eat prey much larger than itself".

[ 13 ] Mesozoic [ edit ] In the Mesozoic , some theropod dinosaurs such as Tyrannosaurus rex are thought probably to have been obligate carnivores.

Though the theropods were the larger carnivores, several carnivorous mammal groups were already present. Most notable are the gobiconodontids , the triconodontid Jugulator , the deltatheroidans and Cimolestes . Many of these, such as Repenomamus , Jugulator and Cimolestes , were among the largest mammals in their faunal assemblages, capable of attacking dinosaurs.

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] [ 16 ] Cenozoic [ edit ] In the early-to-mid-Cenozoic, the dominant predator forms were mammals: hyaenodonts , oxyaenids , entelodonts , ptolemaiidans , arctocyonids and mesonychians , representing a great diversity of eutherian carnivores in the northern continents and Africa . In South America , sparassodonts were dominant, while Australia saw the presence of several marsupial predators, such as the dasyuromorphs and thylacoleonids . From the Miocene to the present, the dominant carnivorous mammals have been carnivoramorphs .

Most carnivorous mammals, from dogs to deltatheridiums , share several dental adaptations, such as carnassial teeth, long canines and even similar tooth replacement patterns.

[ 17 ] Most aberrant are thylacoleonids , with a diprodontan dentition completely unlike that of any other mammal; and eutriconodonts like gobiconodontids and Jugulator , with a three-cusp anatomy which nevertheless functioned similarly to carnassials.

[ 14 ] [ 18 ] See also [ edit ] Mesocarnivore References [ edit ] ^ Ullrey, Duane E. "Nutrient".

Encyclopedia of Animal Science .

^ a b Ullrey, Duane E. "Carnivores".

Encyclopedia of Animal Science . Mammals.

^ "What do pandas eat?" .

panda.org .

World Wide Fund for Nature . Retrieved 6 December 2021 .

^ Devlin, Hannah; correspondent, Hannah Devlin Science (13 September 2023).

"Cats may get health benefits from vegan diet, study suggests" .

The Guardian .

ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved 6 April 2024 .

{{ cite news }} : |last2= has generic name ( help ) ^ "Crocodiles in Zimbabwe fed vegetarian diet to make better handbags" .

The Telegraph . 8 April 2014 . Retrieved 6 April 2024 .

^ Ullrey, Duane E. "Omnivores".

Encyclopedia of Animal Science . Mammals.

^ Armstrong, P. Jane; Gross, Kathy L.; Becvarova, Iveta; Debraekeleer, Jacques (2010).

"Introduction to Feeding Normal Cats" (PDF) .

Small Animal Clinical Nutrition . pp.

371– 372.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 12 May 2021 . Retrieved 17 January 2022 .

Because grass is not digested within the cat's gastrointestinal (GI) tract, it acts as a local irritant and sometimes stimulates vomiting. Thus, grass eating may serve as a purgative to eliminate hair or other indigestible material.

^ Velegrand-Defretin, Veronique (1994).

"Differences between cats and dogs: A nutritional view" .

Proceedings of the Nutrition Society .

53 (1): 15– 24.

doi : 10.1079/pns19940004 .

PMID 8029223 .

^ Ullrey, D.E. (2004).

"Carnivores" . In Pond, Wilson (ed.).

Encyclopedia of Animal Science . Mammals. CRC Press. p. 591.

ISBN 978-0-8247-5496-9 .

Ullrey, D.E. (2004).

"Nutrient requirements: Carnivores" .

Encyclopedia of Animal Science . CRC Press. p. 670.

ISBN 9780824754969 .

^ a b Bengtson, Stefan (October 2002).

"Origins and early evolution of predation" (PDF) .

The Paleontological Society Papers .

8 . Cambridge University Press: 289– 318.

doi : 10.1017/S1089332600001133 .

ISSN 1089-3326 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 10 September 2008.

^ Stanley, S. M. (1973).

"An ecological theory for the sudden origin of multicellular life in the Late Precambrian" .

PNAS .

70 (5): 1486– 1489.

Bibcode : 1973PNAS...70.1486S .

doi : 10.1073/pnas.70.5.1486 .

PMC 433525 .

PMID 16592084 .

^ a b Sahney, S.; Benton, M.J.; Falcon-Lang, H.J. (2010). "Rainforest collapse triggered Pennsylvanian tetrapod diversification in Euramerica".

Geology .

38 (12): 1079– 1082.

Bibcode : 2010Geo....38.1079S .

doi : 10.1130/G31182.1 .

^ Foley, James A. (7 February 2014).

"Carnivorous, pre-dinosaur predator was first to evolve steak knife-like teeth" .

Nature World News . Retrieved 3 May 2014 .

^ a b Kielan-Jaworowska, Zofia; Cifelli, Richard L.; Luo, Zhe-Xi (2004). "Chapter 12: Metatherians".

Mammals from the Age of Dinosaurs: Origins, evolution, and structure . New York, NY: Columbia University Press. pp.

425– 262.

ISBN 0-231-11918-6 .

^ Fox, Richard C. (2015). "A revision of the late Cretaceous–Paleocene eutherian mammal Cimolestes (Marsh, 1889) ".

Canadian Journal of Earth Sciences .

52 (12): 1137– 1149.

Bibcode : 2015CaJES..52.1137F .

doi : 10.1139/cjes-2015-0113 .

^ Cifelli, Richard L.; Madsen, Scott K. (1998). "Triconodont mammals from the medial Cretaceous of Utah".

Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology .

18 (2): 403– 411.

Bibcode : 1998JVPal..18..403C .

doi : 10.1080/02724634.1998.10011068 .

^ de Muizon, Christian; Lange-Badré, Brigitte (1997). "Carnivorous dental adaptations in tribosphenic mammals and phylogenetic reconstruction".

Lethaia .

30 (4): 353– 366.

Bibcode : 1997Letha..30..353D .

doi : 10.1111/j.1502-3931.1997.tb00481.x .

^ "Animales carnivoros. Ejemplos, alimentacion y curiosidades" .

Que Come (in Spanish). Eating Encyclopedia. 2 February 2017. Archived from the original on 24 February 2019.

Further reading [ edit ] Glen, Alistair & Dickman, Christopher, eds. (2014).

Carnivores of Australia . Melbourne, AU: CSIRO Publishing.

ISBN 978-0-643-10310-8 .

v t e Inter-species biological interactions Amensalism Commensalism Competition Deception in animals Tactical Inquilinism Mimicry Mutualism Neutralism Synnecrosis Parasitism Behavior-altering parasite Brood parasitism Host–parasite coevolution Hyperparasite Kleptoparasitism Parasitic castration Parasitoid Predation Carnivore Intraguild Symbiosis Cleaning symbiosis Mycorrhiza v t e Feeding behaviours Carnivores adult Arachnophagy Avivore Corallivore Durophagy Egg predation Entomophagy Hematophagy Insectivore Lepidophagy Man-eating animal Molluscivore Mucophagy Myrmecophagy Ophiophagy Piscivore Spongivore Vermivore reproductive Oophagy Paedophagy Placentophagy Breastfeeding Weaning cannibalistic Human cannibalism Autocannibalism Sexual cannibalism Herbivores Folivore Florivore Frugivore Graminivore Seed predation Nectarivore Mellivory Palynivore Xylophagy Osteophagy Cellular Phagocytosis Myzocytosis Others Microbivory Bacterivore Fungivore Coprophagia Detritivore Geophagia Omnivore Planktivore Saprophagy Xenophagy Lithotroph Plastivore Pica Methods Predation Ambush predator Apex predator Egg predator Intraguild predator Pursuit predator Aquatic predation Lunge feeder Pivot feeder Ram feeder Suction feeder Bait balls Bottom feeder Feeding frenzy Filter feeder Browsing Cattle feeding Fodder Grazing Forage Hypercarnivore Hypocarnivore Mesocarnivore Parasitism Kleptoparasitism Scavenger Surplus killing Trophallaxis Antipredator adaptation Carnivorous plant Carnivorous fungus Carnivorous protist Category:Eating behaviors v t e Ecology : Modelling ecosystems : Trophic components General Abiotic component Abiotic stress Behaviour Biogeochemical cycle Biomass Biotic component Biotic stress Carrying capacity Competition Ecosystem Ecosystem ecology Ecosystem model Green world hypothesis Keystone species List of feeding behaviours Metabolic theory of ecology Productivity Resource Restoration Producers Autotrophs Chemosynthesis Chemotrophs Foundation species Kinetotrophs Mixotrophs Myco-heterotrophy Mycotroph Organotrophs Photoheterotrophs Photosynthesis Photosynthetic efficiency Phototrophs Primary nutritional groups Primary production Consumers Apex predator Bacterivore Carnivores Chemoorganotroph Foraging Generalist and specialist species Intraguild predation Herbivores Heterotroph Heterotrophic nutrition Insectivore Mesopredators Mesopredator release hypothesis Omnivores Optimal foraging theory Planktivore Predation Prey switching Decomposers Chemoorganoheterotrophy Decomposition Detritivores Detritus Microorganisms Archaea Bacteriophage Lithoautotroph Lithotrophy Marine Microbial cooperation Microbial ecology Microbial food web Microbial intelligence Microbial loop Microbial mat Microbial metabolism Phage ecology Food webs Biomagnification Ecological efficiency Ecological pyramid Energy flow Food chain Trophic level Example webs Lakes Rivers Soil Tritrophic interactions in plant defense Marine food webs cold seeps hydrothermal vents intertidal kelp forests North Pacific Gyre San Francisco Estuary tide pool Processes Ascendency Bioaccumulation Cascade effect Climax community Competitive exclusion principle Consumer–resource interactions Copiotrophs Dominance Ecological network Ecological succession Energy quality Energy systems language f-ratio Feed conversion ratio Feeding frenzy Mesotrophic soil Nutrient cycle Oligotroph Paradox of the plankton Trophic cascade Trophic mutualism Trophic state index Defense, counter Animal coloration Anti-predator adaptations Camouflage Deimatic behaviour Herbivore adaptations to plant defense Mimicry Plant defense against herbivory Predator avoidance in schooling fish v t e Ecology : Modelling ecosystems : Other components Population ecology Abundance Allee effect Consumer-resource model Depensation Ecological yield Effective population size Intraspecific competition Logistic function Malthusian growth model Maximum sustainable yield Overpopulation Overexploitation Population cycle Population dynamics Population modeling Population size Predator–prey (Lotka–Volterra) equations Recruitment Small population size Stability Resilience Resistance Random generalized Lotka–Volterra model Species Biodiversity Density-dependent inhibition Ecological effects of biodiversity Ecological extinction Endemic species Flagship species Gradient analysis Indicator species Introduced species Invasive species / Native species Latitudinal gradients in species diversity Minimum viable population Neutral theory Occupancy–abundance relationship Population viability analysis Priority effect Rapoport's rule Relative abundance distribution Relative species abundance Species diversity Species homogeneity Species richness Species distribution Species–area curve Umbrella species Species interaction Antibiosis Biological interaction Commensalism Community ecology Ecological facilitation Interspecific competition Mutualism Parasitism Storage effect Symbiosis Spatial ecology Biogeography Cross-boundary subsidy Ecocline Ecotone Ecotype Disturbance Edge effects Foster's rule Habitat fragmentation Ideal free distribution Intermediate disturbance hypothesis Insular biogeography Land change modeling Landscape ecology Landscape epidemiology Landscape limnology Metapopulation Patch dynamics r / K selection theory Resource selection function Source–sink dynamics Niche Ecological trap Ecosystem engineer Environmental niche modelling Guild Habitat Marine Semiaquatic Terrestrial Limiting similarity Niche apportionment models Niche construction Niche differentiation Ontogenetic niche shift Other networks Assembly rules Bateman's principle Bioluminescence Ecological collapse Ecological debt Ecological deficit Ecological energetics Ecological indicator Ecological threshold Ecosystem diversity Emergence Extinction debt Kleiber's law Liebig's law of the minimum Marginal value theorem Thorson's rule Xerosere Other Allometry Alternative stable state Balance of nature Biological data visualization Ecological economics Ecological footprint Ecological forecasting Ecological humanities Ecological stoichiometry Ecopath Ecosystem based fisheries Endolith Evolutionary ecology Functional ecology Industrial ecology Macroecology Microecosystem Natural environment Regime shift Sexecology Systems ecology Urban ecology Theoretical ecology Outline of ecology Authority control databases National Germany Czech Republic Latvia Other Encyclopedia of Modern Ukraine Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐api‐ext.codfw.main‐647cb4546b‐l6wxf
Cached time: 20250813210430
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.558 seconds
Real time usage: 0.695 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2280/1000000
Revision size: 20895/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 110090/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 2077/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 8/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 112301/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.340/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 6413540/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  534.098      1 -total
 40.74%  217.593      1 Template:Reflist
 21.92%  117.097      5 Template:Navbox
 21.86%  116.780      8 Template:Cite_book
 18.77%  100.252      1 Template:Biological_interaction-footer
 12.09%   64.565      1 Template:Short_description
  9.32%   49.755      7 Template:Cite_journal
  7.58%   40.471      2 Template:Pagetype
  7.35%   39.261      1 Template:Authority_control
  4.70%   25.118      1 Template:IPAc-en Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:6543:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250813210430 and revision id 1304226461. Rendering was triggered because: unknown Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Carnivore&oldid=1304226461 " Categories : Biological interactions Carnivory Animals by eating behaviors Ethology Meat Hidden categories: CS1 errors: generic name CS1 Spanish-language sources (es) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from May 2024 This page was last edited on 4 August 2025, at 19:34 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Carnivore 91 languages Add topic

