Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Design and construction Toggle Design and construction subsection 1.1 Specifications 1.1.1 Operational limits 1.1.2 Principal dimensions 1.1.3 Masses, weights and volumes 1.1.4 Buoyancy 1.1.5 Structure 1.1.6 Performance 1.1.7 Power 1.1.8 Propulsion 1.2 Manipulator 1.3 Ergonomics, safety, and life support 1.4 Deployment and recovery 1.5 Name 2 Sale 3 Expeditions as DSV Limiting Factor Toggle Expeditions as DSV Limiting Factor subsection 3.1 Five Deeps Expedition 3.2 USS Johnston 3.3 USS Samuel B. Roberts 3.4 French submarine Minerve 4 Expeditions as DSV Bakunawa Toggle Expeditions as DSV Bakunawa subsection 4.1 Nova Canton Expedition 5 Gallery 6 See also 7 References Toggle References subsection 7.1 Citations 7.2 Bibliography 8 External links Toggle the table of contents DSV Limiting Factor 4 languages Deutsch Eesti 日本語 Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Crewed full ocean depth rated submersible DSV Limiting Factor History United States Name Limiting Factor [ 1 ] Builder Triton Submarines LLC In service 2018 Status In service General characteristics Class & type Triton 36000/2 crewed full ocean depth deep-submergence vehicle Displacement 12,500 kg (27,600 lb) all up weight Propulsion 10 ducted propeller fixed thrusters Speed Lateral: 2–3 kn (3.4–5.1 ft/s; 1.0–1.5 m/s), Vertical: 1–2 kn (1.7–3.4 ft/s; 0.51–1.03 m/s) [ 2 ] Endurance 96 hours normal operations [ 2 ] Test depth 14,000 msw (46,000 fsw) [ 2 ] Complement Pilot and observer Limiting Factor , known as Bakunawa since its sale in 2022, and designated Triton 36000/2 by its manufacturer, is a crewed deep-submergence vehicle (DSV) manufactured by Triton Submarines and owned and operated since 2022 by Gabe Newell 's Inkfish ocean-exploration research organization.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] It currently holds the records for the deepest crewed dives in all five oceans.

Limiting Factor was commissioned by Victor Vescovo for $37 million and operated by his marine research organization, Caladan Oceanic, between 2018 and 2022.

[ 5 ] It is commercially certified by DNV for dives to full ocean depth, and is operated by a pilot, with facilities for an observer.

The vessel was used in the Five Deeps Expedition , becoming the first crewed submersible to reach the deepest point in all five oceans.

[ 6 ] Over 21 people have visited Challenger Deep , the deepest area on Earth, in the DSV.

Limiting Factor was used to identify the wrecks of the destroyers USS Johnston at a depth of 6,469 m (21,224 ft), and USS Samuel B. Roberts at 6,865 m (22,523 ft), in the Philippine Trench , the deepest dives on wrecks.

[ 7 ] It has also been used for dives to the French submarine Minerve (S647) at about 2,350 m (7,710 ft) in the Mediterranean sea, and RMS Titanic at about 3,800 m (12,500 ft) in the Atlantic.

Design and construction [ edit ] The submersible is based on a spherical titanium pressure hull for two occupants, seated side by side, which has three wide angle acrylic viewports in front of the crew, one in front of each seat, and one below and between them. If the bow is defined as the side in which the viewports are mounted, the vessel is wider than it is long.

[ 2 ] The vessel is equipped with a manipulator arm on the starboard side of the pressure hull, a system to drop ballast , and a cluster of five, fixed direction, ducted propeller , marine thrusters at each of the port and starboard ends of the outer hull for propulsion and maneuvering, as can be seen in the photographs. These thrusters provide three axis translational motion and two axis (yaw and roll) rotation.

[ 2 ] The vessel is commercially certified for unlimited full ocean depth operations by DNV .

[ 8 ] The Limiting Factor normally operates from a dedicated support vessel, DSSV Pressure Drop , but can also be operated from other suitably equipped vessels.

[ 8 ] Limiting Factor CAD rendering cutaway view The titanium pressure hull during construction, with the acrylic viewports installed and the manipulator arm partly installed.

View of the port side Detail of the Limiting Factor ' s port thruster group.

Specifications [ edit ] Operational limits [ edit ] The vessel is certified by DNV for a maximum dive depth of 11,000 m (36,000 ft), exceeding that of the Challenger Deep , the ocean's deepest known point. It can withstand a tested pressure of 14,000 msw (46,000 fsw, 1,400 bar, 20,000 psi), significantly exceeding the certified pressure and affording a large margin of safety.

[ 2 ] The 36000/2 is commercially rated for repeated dives to full ocean depth.

Principal dimensions [ edit ] The vessel is unusual in that it can travel on three primary axes, and in practice does a large amount of traveling vertically. If one uses the direction in which the occupants look out on the surroundings through physical windows to define the bow, it is wider than it is long. Alternatively it may be considered to have a bow at either end of the long axis, depending on the direction of motion at the time, like a proa . The long horizontal axis is 4.6 m (15 ft), while the short horizontal axis extent is only 1.9 m (6 ft 3 in). The height is 3.7 m (12 ft).

[ 2 ] Masses, weights and volumes [ edit ] Mass = 12,500 kg (27,600 lb) [ 2 ] Dry weight = 11,700 kg (25,800 lb) [ 2 ] Variable ballast = up to 500 kg (1,100 lb) dive weights, and 100 kg (220 lb) trim weights [ 2 ] Payload = approximately 220 kg (490 lb) [ 2 ] The vessel is operated by a pilot, and has seating for an observer [ 2 ] Buoyancy [ edit ] Surface ballast = 2,150 L (76 cu ft) [ 2 ] Syntactic foam buoyancy is used [ 9 ] Structure [ edit ] The pressure hull is a 1,500 mm (59 in) inside diameter by 90 mm (3.5 in) thick grade 5 titanium [ 10 ] ( Ti-6Al-4V ELI) alloy sphere machined to within 99.933% of spherical (for enhanced buckling stability). The sphere was built as two forged titanium domes that interlock with o-ring seals.

[ 10 ] The structure is certified for repeated dives to full ocean depth.

[ 2 ] [ 9 ] The hydrodynamic fairing of the outer surface shell is non-structural and removable for access to equipment.

Performance [ edit ] Endurance = 16 hours +96 hours on emergency systems [ 2 ] Speed = 1 to 2 kn (1.7 to 3.4 ft/s; 0.5 to 1.0 m/s) vertical, 2 to 3 kn (3.4 to 5.1 ft/s; 1.0 to 1.5 m/s) lateral [ 2 ] Hull form configuration has been optimized for vertical travel, as much of the traveling time will be spent ascending and descending through the water column [ 2 ] Power [ edit ] The vessel is operated from a dual 24 V battery power supply and emergency supply, which can be jettisoned in an emergency. The main battery stores 65 kW·h.

[ 2 ] [ 11 ] Propulsion [ edit ] There are 4 × 5.5 kW (7.4 hp) horizontal propulsion thrusters (main thrusters), 4 × 5.5 kW vertical thrusters, and 2 × 5.5 kW maneuvering thrusters, mounted in two clusters at the opposite extremes of the long dimension. These can each be jettisoned if they become fouled on an obstruction, allowing the vessel to break free in an emergency.

[ 11 ] Manipulator [ edit ] The DSV is fitted with a single Kraft Telerobotics "Raptor" hydraulically powered 7-function manipulator with force feedback, at the starboard side of the pressure hull.

[ 9 ] Ergonomics, safety, and life support [ edit ] The lower viewport and CTD probe Detail view of the dive weight release mechanism and one of the LED light panels The forward and downward view through the three ultra-wide angle acrylic viewports is unobstructed by structure or appendages, and illuminated by ten externally mounted high output LED lighting panels of 20,000 lumens each. The limited direct field of view through the ports is augmented by an array of four full ocean depth capable low-light cameras. Four high definition cameras are also provided to record missions.

[ 2 ] Maneuvering is by control joystick , touch screen and manual override.

[ 11 ] The cabin is temperature and humidity controlled, and the life support system uses carbon dioxide scrubbers and oxygen replenishment. Emergency life support is rated for 96 hours.

[ 2 ] All routine maintenance can be done using standard tools.

[ 2 ] Emergency release systems are provided for the batteries, so they can be jettisoned if they fail dangerously, and for the thrusters and manipulator arm, in case they get snagged on an obstacle which could prevent the vessel from surfacing.

[ 2 ] Deployment and recovery [ edit ] Launch and recovery from DSSV Pressure Drop is by a hydraulic luffing (tilting) A-frame over the transom. The vessel is stowed on deck in a cradle.

[ 2 ] Name [ edit ] The naming of these vessels is a large tip of the hat to, and with no small amount of admiration for, Iain M Banks' brilliant "Culture" science fiction series.

— Victor Vescovo [ 12 ] In Iain M. Banks' novel The Player of Games , the General Offensive Unit (demilitarised) Limiting Factor is the sapient warship provided to the main character Jernau Morat Gurgeh for transport to the Empire of Azad to take part in a board game tournament. It is nominally demilitarised, but retains part of its main armament.

After the sale of the submersible to the research group Inkfish in 2022, it was renamed Bakunawa after the Filipino mythological creature Bakunawa .

[ 13 ] Sale [ edit ] The DSV and support vessel DSSV Pressure Drop were sold in 2022 for an undisclosed amount to Gabe Newell 's Inkfish ocean-exploration research organisation . The sale included a Kongsberg EM124 multibeam echo-sounder and three robot landers.

[ 3 ] Inkfish plans to use the HES system to continue exploring the ocean depths, led by Prof Alan Jamieson of the University of Western Australia, who was chief scientist on most of Vescovo's expeditions.

[ 3 ] The DSV was renamed to Bakunawa and the support vessel to Dagon .

[ 13 ] Expeditions as DSV Limiting Factor [ edit ] Five Deeps Expedition [ edit ] See also: Five Deeps Expedition In 2018, Victor Vescovo launched the Five Deeps Expedition, with the objective of visiting the deepest points of all five of the world's oceans, and mapping the vicinity, by the end of September 2019.

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] This expedition was filmed in the documentary television series Expedition Deep Ocean .

[ 16 ] This objective was achieved one month ahead of schedule, and the expedition's team carried out biological samplings and depth confirmations at each location. Besides the deepest points of the five world oceans, the expedition also made dives in the Horizon Deep and the Sirena Deep , and mapped the Diamantina fracture zone .

Limiting Factor at the surface after a dive into the Puerto Rico Trench In December 2018, the Limiting Factor became the first piloted vessel to reach the deepest point of the Atlantic Ocean, [ 17 ] 8,376 m (27,480 ft) below the ocean surface to the bottom of the Puerto Rico Trench , an area subsequently referred to by world media as Brownson Deep .

[ 18 ] DSV Limiting Factor at South Georgia Island Flags on the side of DSV Limiting Factor . Clockwise from upper left: Flags of the United States, Texas , Albania, the United Nations .

On 4 February 2019, Vescovo piloted Limiting Factor to the bottom of the South Sandwich Trench , the deepest part of the Southern Ocean , becoming the first person and first vessel to reach that point.

[ 19 ] In preparation for this dive, the expedition used a Kongsberg EM124 multibeam sonar system for accurate mapping of the trench.

On 16 April 2019, Vescovo piloted Limiting Factor to the bottom of the Sunda Trench south of Bali , Indonesia, reaching the deepest point of the Indian Ocean. The team reported sightings of what they believed to be previously unknown species, including a hadal snailfish and a gelatinous organism believed to be a stalked ascidian .

[ 20 ] The same dive was later undertaken by Patrick Lahey, President of Triton Submarines , and the expedition's chief scientist, Dr.

Alan Jamieson . This dive was organised subsequent to the scanning of the Diamantina Fracture Zone using multibeam sonar, confirming that the Sunda Trench was deeper and settling the debate about where the deepest point in the Indian Ocean is.

Dawn Wright and Victor Vescovo on a dive at Challenger Deep On 28 April 2019, Vescovo descended nearly 11 km (7 mi) in Limiting Factor to the deepest place in the World – the Challenger Deep in the Pacific Ocean's Mariana Trench . On his first descent, he piloted the DSV Limiting Factor to a depth of 10,928 m (35,853 ft), a world record by 16 m (52 ft).

[ 21 ] Diving for a second time on 1 May, he became the first person to dive the Challenger Deep twice, finding "at least three new species of marine animals" and "some sort of plastic waste ".

[ 22 ] [ 23 ] Among the underwater creatures Vescovo encountered were a snailfish at 26,250 ft (8,000 m) and a spoon worm at nearly 23,000 ft (7,000 m), the deepest level at which the species had ever been encountered.

[ 24 ] On 7 May 2019, Vescovo and Jamieson, in Limiting Factor , made the first human-occupied deep submersible dive to the bottom of the Sirena Deep, the third deepest point in the ocean, about 128 mi (206 km) northeast of Challenger Deep. They spent 176 minutes at the bottom, and among the samples they retrieved was a piece of mantle rock from the western slope of the Mariana Trench.

[ 25 ] [ 26 ] On 10 June 2019, Vescovo piloted Limiting Factor to the bottom of the Horizon Deep in the Tonga Trench , confirming that it is the second deepest point of the World ocean and the deepest in the Southern Hemisphere at 10,823 m (35,509 ft). In doing so, Vescovo and Limiting Factor had descended to the first, second, and third deepest points in the ocean. Unlike the Sunda and Mariana Trenches, no signs of human contamination were found at Horizon Deep, which was described by the expedition as "completely pristine".

[ 27 ] Vescovo completed the Five Deeps Expedition on 24 August 2019 when he piloted Limiting Factor to a depth of 5,550 m (18,210 ft) at the bottom of the Molloy Deep in the Arctic Ocean.

[ 28 ] USS Johnston [ edit ] Main article: USS Johnston (DD-557) Starboard bow of the wreck of USS Johnston (DD-557) USS Johnston (DD-557) was a Fletcher -class destroyer built for the United States Navy during World War II . On 25 October 1944, while assigned as part of the escort to six escort carriers , Johnston , two other Fletcher -class destroyers, and four destroyer escorts were engaged by a large Imperial Japanese Navy flotilla. In what became known as the Battle off Samar , Johnston and the other escort ships charged the Japanese ships to protect nearby US carriers and transport craft. After engaging several Japanese capital ships and a destroyer squadron, Johnston was sunk by gunfire, with 187 dead. The wreck was discovered on 30 October 2019 but was not properly identified until March 2021. Lying more than 20,000 ft (3.8 mi; 6,100 m) below the surface of the ocean, it was the deepest shipwreck ever surveyed until the discovery of USS Samuel B. Roberts on 22 June 2022.

On 30 October 2019, the Petrel , a research vessel belonging to Vulcan Inc.

, discovered the remains of what was believed to be Johnston near the bottom of the Philippine Trench . The remains consisted of a deck gun, a propeller shaft, and some miscellaneous debris that could not be used to identify the wreck, [ 29 ] but additional debris was observed lying deeper than the ship's ROV could go.

[ 30 ] On 31 March 2021, the Limiting Factor piloted by Victor Vescovo, [ 31 ] surveyed and photographed the deeper wreckage and definitively identified it as Johnston . The wreck lies upright and is well preserved at a depth of 21,180 ft (4.011 mi; 6,460 m). Until Samuel B. Roberts was discovered on 22 June 2022, Johnston was the deepest identified shipwreck in the world.

[ 30 ] [ 32 ] [ 33 ] USS Samuel B. Roberts [ edit ] Main article: USS Samuel B. Roberts (DE-413) Pilot house and 40 mm gun mount Pennant number 413 still visible USS Samuel B. Roberts (DE-413) was a destroyer escort of the United States Navy that served in World War II and was sunk in the Battle off Samar, in which a small force of U.S. warships prevented a superior Imperial Japanese Navy force from attacking the amphibious invasion fleet off the Philippine island of Leyte . The ship was part of a relatively light flotilla of destroyers , destroyer escorts, and escort carriers called "Taffy 3" which was inadvertently left to fend off a fleet of heavily armed Japanese battleships , cruisers , and destroyers off the island of Samar during the Battle off Samar, one of the engagements making up the larger Battle of Leyte Gulf of October 1944.

[ 34 ] Steaming through incoming shells , Samuel B. Roberts scored one torpedo hit and several shell hits on larger enemy warships before she was sunk.

[ 34 ] As of June 2022, it is the deepest shipwreck discovered.

[ 35 ] An exploration team led by Victor Vescovo and made up of personnel of Caladan Oceanic and EYOS Expeditions discovered the wreck of Samuel B. Roberts in June 2022.

[ 36 ] [ 37 ] The team found, identified, and surveyed the wreck during a series of six dives from 17 to 24 June 2022.

[ 37 ] The team found that the wreck reached the seabed in one piece, although it hit the sea floor bow first and with enough force to cause some buckling, and observed that the ship's stern had separated from the rest of the hull by about 5 m (16 ft).

[ 37 ] They reported that they had found evidence of damage to the ship inflicted by a Japanese battleship shell , including the vessel's fallen mast .

[ 37 ] The wreck lies at a depth of 6,865 m (22,523 ft; 4.266 mi), making it the deepest wreck ever identified. It exceeds the previous record of 6,469 m (21,224 ft; 4.020 mi), set in March 2021 when Vescovo's team found and identified the wreck of the destroyer USS Johnston , which was sunk in the same battle.

[ 7 ] French submarine Minerve [ edit ] Main article: French submarine Minerve (S647) Victor Vescovo (right), and Admiral Jean-Louis Barbier (French Navy, retired), investigating the wreck of SS Minerve in February 2020 Photograph taken by an exterior high-definition camera on the DSSV Limiting Factor during its dive on the wreck of the French submarine Minerve (S647). The piece of wreckage is from the sail, showing the letters "MIN" and partial letters "E" and "R" that positively identify the wreck.

The French Daphne -class diesel–electric submarine Minerve was lost with all hands in bad weather while returning to her home port of Toulon in January 1968.

Minerve was one of four submarines lost to unknown causes in 1968 along with the Soviet submarine K-129 , the American USS Scorpion , and Israeli submarine INS Dakar . The French government started a new search for Minerve on 4 July 2019 in deep waters about 45 km (28 mi) south of Toulon.

[ 38 ] The location of the wreck was found on 21 July 2019 [ 39 ] by the company Ocean Infinity using the search ship Seabed Constructor .

[ 40 ] The wreck was found at a depth of 2,350 m (7,710 ft), broken into three main pieces scattered over 300 m (980 ft) along the seabed. Although Minerve ' s sail was damaged, it was possible to positively identify the wreckage. as the letters "MINE" and "S" (from Minerve and S647, respectively) were still readable on the hull.

[ 41 ] In December 2019, Vescovo proposed a dive on the wreck of the Minerve in the Limiting Factor . On the first dive, 1 February 2020, Vescovo dived with retired French Rear Admiral Jean-Louis Barbier, to gather new information on the cause of the loss.

[ 42 ] [ 43 ] On the second dive, 2 February, Vescovo piloted while Hervé Fauve, the son of the submarine's commanding officer, sat in the second seat. At the bottom they placed a granite memorial plaque on a section of Minerve ' s hull at a depth of over 2,370 m (7,780 ft) [ 44 ] Expeditions as DSV Bakunawa [ edit ] Nova Canton Expedition [ edit ] On 16 April, 2024, pilot Kate Wawatai and Heather Stewart, in Bakunawa , made the first all-woman deep submersible dive to a depth of 8,000 m (26,000 ft) at the bottom of the Nova-Canton Trough, part of the Clarion-Clipperton zone . During the 10-hour dive, the team studied how geological features such as fracture zones act as pathways for deep ocean currents.

[ 45 ] Gallery [ edit ] Aerial view of the mothership and the submersible during the Bahama trials Limiting Factor being prepared for a dive into the Atlantic Ocean Rear view of Limiting Factor stowed in its cradle on deck See also [ edit ] Oceans portal Challenger expedition – Oceanographic research expedition (1872–1876) Deep-sea exploration – Investigation of ocean conditions beyond the continental shelf Submersible – Small watercraft able to navigate under water Deep-submergence vehicle – Self-propelled deep-diving crewed submersible Trieste (bathyscaphe) – Deep sea scientific submersible Deepsea Challenger – Submersible that traveled to the Challenger Deep Timeline of diving technology – Chronological list of notable events in the history of underwater diving equipment References [ edit ] Citations [ edit ] ^ Struwe, Jonathan (2019-05-04).

Confirmation of Prelim. Maximum Diving Depth .

G155103 (Report). DNV-GL . Retrieved 2023-01-16 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t u v w "Triton 36000/2: Full Ocean Depth" .

fivedeeps.com . Retrieved 2023-01-16 .

^ a b c "Deepest diver Vescovo sells up to Inkfish" .

divernet.com . 2022-11-03 . Retrieved 24 January 2023 .

^ Espindle, Mike.

"Famed Explorer Taps Triton Subs For Latest Challenge...But That's Only Half The Story" .

Forbes . Retrieved 2025-08-10 .

^ "Limiting Factor Submersible Is in a League of Its Own" .

Hackaday . 2020-04-22 . Retrieved 2022-08-14 .

^ "Oceans' extreme depths measured in precise detail" . BBC News. 2021-05-11 . Retrieved 2022-08-14 .

^ a b "Deepest shipwreck dive by a crewed vessel" .

guinnessworldrecords.com . 2022 . Retrieved 24 January 2023 .

^ a b "Technology" .

fivedeeps.com . Retrieved 2023-01-16 .

^ a b c "Frequently Asked Questions" .

fivedeeps.com . Retrieved 2023-01-16 .

^ a b Michael C. Gabriele (July 2022).

"As a Material of Choice, Titanium Allows Submersible to Reach 'Full-Ocean Depth' " .

Titanium Today . No. 6 (2022 All Markets ed.). International Titanium Association. pp.

14– 15 . Retrieved 25 June 2023 .

Initially, Triton and ATI considered using nickel steels, Inconel 718 nickel-based super alloy, aluminum alloys, and titanium Grade 23 to build the Triton sub, but eventually selected titanium Grade 5 (Ti 6Al-4V), the workhorse aerospace alloy.

^ a b c "Technical details" (PDF) .

tritonsubs.com . Retrieved 2023-01-18 .

^ "What's in a name?" .

fivedeeps.com . Retrieved 2023-01-16 .

^ a b "Deepest ever fish caught on camera off Japan" . BBC News. 2023-04-01 . Retrieved 2023-06-20 .

^ "Home" .

fivedeeps.com . Retrieved 2019-01-09 .

^ "Pacific Ocean Live Updates" .

Five Deeps Expedition . Retrieved 2019-05-13 .

^ "Expedition Deep Ocean" .

Atlantic Productions . 2021. Archived from the original on 2023-06-22 . Retrieved 2023-01-16 .

^ "Atlantic Productions film Victor Vescovo as be becomes the first human to dive to the deepest point of the Indian Ocean: the Java Trench" .

Atlantic Productions . Retrieved 2019-05-13 .

^ Neate, Rupert (2018-12-22).

"Wall Street trader reaches bottom of Atlantic in bid to conquer five oceans" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 2018-12-22 .

^ "Explorer completes another historic submersible dive" .

For The Win . 2019-02-06 . Retrieved 2019-02-11 .

^ "Deep sea pioneer makes history again as first human to dive to the deepest point in the Indian Ocean, the Java Trench" (PDF) .

^ "Deepest Submarine Dive in History, Five Deeps Expedition Conquers Challenger Deep" (PDF) . Retrieved 2019-05-14 .

^ Thebault, Reis (2019-05-14).

"He went where no human had gone before. Our trash had already beaten him there" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved 2019-05-23 .

^ Street, Francesca (2019-05-13).

"Deepest ever manned dive finds plastic bag" . CNN . Retrieved 2019-05-14 .

^ Osborne, Hannah (2019-05-13).

"Meet Victor Vescovo, who just broke the world record by diving 35,853 feet into the deepest part of the ocean" .

Newsweek . Retrieved 2019-05-14 .

^ "Deepest Ever Submarine Dive Made by Five Deeps Expedition" .

The Maritime Executive . 2019-05-14 . Retrieved 2019-06-15 .

^ "Victor Vescovo Makes Deepest Submarine Dive in History" .

ECO Magazine . Retrieved 2019-06-15 .

^ "Confirmed: Horizon Deep Second Deepest Point on the Planet" (PDF) .

^ Amos, Jonathan (2019-09-09).

"US adventurer reaches deepest points in all oceans" . BBC News . Retrieved 2019-09-10 .

^ Werner, Ben (2019-10-31).

"Wreck of Famed WWII Destroyer USS Johnston May Have Been Found" .

USNI News . Retrieved 2022-01-27 .

^ a b Morelle, Rebecca (2021-04-02).

"USS Johnston: Sub dives to deepest-known shipwreck" . BBC . Retrieved 2021-01-27 .

^ "Wreckage Confirmed as Heroic USS Johnstion (DD 557)" .

Naval History and Heritage Command News .

Naval History and Heritage Command . 1 April 2021. Archived from the original on 2021-12-14 . Retrieved 2021-12-31 .

^ "US Navy ship sunk nearly 80 years ago reached in world's deepest shipwreck dive" .

The Guardian .

Agence France-Presse . 2021-04-04 . Retrieved 2021-04-04 .

^ Buckley, Julia (2022-06-24).

"Explorers find the world's deepest shipwreck four miles under the Pacific" . CNN . Retrieved 2022-06-24 .

^ a b Wukovits, John (2013).

For Crew and Country: The Inspirational True Story of Bravery and Sacrifice Aboard the USS Samuel B. Roberts . St. Martin's Press. p. 6.

ISBN 978-0312681890 .

^ "USS Samuel B Roberts: World's deepest shipwreck discovered" . BBC News . Retrieved 2022-06-24 .

^ Amos, Jonathan (2022-06-24).

"USS Samuel B Roberts: World's deepest shipwreck discovered" . BBC News.

Archived from the original on 2024-05-24 . Retrieved 2022-06-24 .

^ a b c d Suleman, Adela (2022-06-25).

"World's deepest shipwreck, the Sammy B, is discovered by explorers" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved 2022-06-27 .

^ Andrésy, Diane (2019-07-14).

"A la recherche de "La Minerve", tombeau de 52 sous-mariniers" [In search of "La Minerve", tomb of 52 submariners].

Le Parisien (in French) . Retrieved 2019-07-16 .

^ "French Minerve submarine is found after disappearing in 1968" . BBC News. 2019-07-22 . Retrieved 2019-07-22 .

^ Willsher, Kim (2019-07-22).

"French submarine found 50 years after disappearance" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 2019-09-17 .

^ Guibert, Nathalie (2019-07-22).

"La " Minerve ", le sous-marin disparu il y a cinquante ans, a été retrouvé au large de Toulon" .

Le Monde (in French) . Retrieved 2019-07-22 .

^ "Founder of the Five Deeps Expedition Launches New 2020 Voyage" .

hydro-international.com . Retrieved 2020-08-12 .

^ Diane, Par (2020-02-04).

"Une plaque posée sur l'épave du sous-marin la Minerve, dans le Var" .

leparisien.fr (in French) . Retrieved 2020-08-12 .

^ "Minerve : nouvelles plongées et plaque commémorative posée sur l'épave" .

Mer et Marine (in French). 2020-02-03 . Retrieved 2020-08-12 .

^ McKinnon, Morven.

"Record dive 'like climbing Everest under water' " .

BBC News .

Bibliography [ edit ] Bliss, Dominic (2020).

"The incredible engineering behind the submarine that plumbed the deepest depths" .

Professional Engineering Magazine (3): 24– 27.

ISSN 0953-6639 .

Jamieson, Alan J.

; Ramsey, John; Lahey, Patrick (2019).

"Hadal Manned Submersible" (PDF) .

Sea Technology .

60 (9): 22– 24.

ISSN 0093-3651 .

Young, Josh (2020).

Expedition Deep Ocean: The First Descent to the Bottom of All Five Oceans . New York: Pegasus Books.

ISBN 978-1-6431-3676-9 .

External links [ edit ] Media related to Limiting Factor (submersible) at Wikimedia Commons v t e Underwater diving Diving activities Diving modes Atmospheric pressure diving Freediving Saturation diving Scuba diving Snorkeling Surface oriented diving Surface-supplied diving Unmanned diving Diving equipment Cleaning and disinfection of personal diving equipment Human factors in diving equipment design List of diving equipment manufacturers Basic equipment Diving mask Snorkel Swimfin Breathing gas Bailout gas Bottom gas Breathing air Decompression gas Emergency gas supply Heliox Hydreliox Hydrox Nitrox Oxygen Travel gas Trimix Buoyancy and trim equipment Avelo diving system Buoyancy compensator Power inflator Dump valve Variable buoyancy pressure vessel Diving weighting system Ankle weights Integrated weights Trim weights Weight belt Decompression equipment Decompression buoy Decompression chamber Decompression cylinder Decompression trapeze Dive computer Diving bell Diving shot Diving stage Jersey upline Jonline Diving suit Atmospheric diving suit JIM suit Newtsuit Dry suit Sladen suit Standard diving suit Rash vest Wetsuit Dive skins Hot-water suit Helmets and masks Anti-fog Diving helmet Free-flow helmet Lightweight demand helmet Orinasal mask Reclaim helmet Shallow water helmet Standard diving helmet Diving mask Band mask Full-face mask Half mask Instrumentation Bottom timer Depth gauge Dive computer Dive timer Diving watch Helium release valve Electro-galvanic oxygen sensor Pneumofathometer Submersible pressure gauge Mobility equipment Diver propulsion vehicle Human torpedo Wet sub Diving bell Closed bell Wet bell Diving stage Swimfin Monofin PowerSwim Towboard Safety equipment Alternative air source Octopus regulator Pony bottle Bolt snap Buddy line Dive light Diver's cutting tool Diver's knife Diver's telephone Through-water communications Underwater acoustic communication Diving bell Diving safety harness Emergency gas supply Bailout block Bailout bottle Lifeline Screw gate carabiner Emergency locator beacon Rescue tether Safety helmet Shark-proof cage Snoopy loop Navigation equipment Distance line Diving compass Dive reel Line marker Surface marker buoy Silt screw Underwater breathing apparatus Atmospheric diving suit Diving cylinder Burst disc Scuba cylinder valve Diving helmet Reclaim helmet Diving regulator Mechanism of diving regulators Regulator malfunction Regulator freeze Single-hose regulator Twin-hose regulator Full-face diving mask Open-circuit scuba Scuba set Bailout bottle Decompression cylinder Independent doubles Manifolded twin set Scuba manifold Pony bottle Scuba configuration Sidemount Sling cylinder Diving rebreathers Carbon dioxide scrubber Carleton CDBA Clearance Divers Life Support Equipment Cryogenic rebreather CUMA DSEA Dolphin Halcyon PVR-BASC Halcyon RB80 IDA71 Interspiro DCSC LAR-5 LAR-6 LAR-V LARU Mark IV Amphibian Porpoise Ray Siebe Gorman CDBA Salvus Siva Surface-supplied diving equipment Air line Diver's umbilical Diving air compressor Gas panel Hookah Scuba replacement Snuba Standard diving dress Diving equipment manufacturers AP Diving Apeks Aqua Lung America Aqua Lung/La Spirotechnique Beuchat René Cavalero Cis-Lunar Cressi-Sub Dacor DESCO Dive Xtras Divex Diving Unlimited International Drägerwerk Faber Fenzy Maurice Fernez Technisub Oscar Gugen Heinke HeinrichsWeikamp Johnson Outdoors Mares Morse Diving Nemrod Oceanic Worldwide Porpoise Shearwater Research Siebe Gorman Submarine Products Suunto Diving support equipment Access equipment Boarding stirrup Diver lift Diving bell Diving ladder Diving platform (scuba) Diving stage Downline Jackstay Launch and recovery system Messenger line Moon pool Breathing gas handling Air filtration Activated carbon Hopcalite Molecular sieve Silica gel Booster pump Carbon dioxide scrubber Cascade filling system Diver's pump Diving air compressor Diving air filter Water separator High pressure breathing air compressor Low pressure breathing air compressor Gas blending Gas blending for scuba diving Gas panel Gas reclaim system Gas storage bank Gas storage quad Gas storage tube Helium analyzer Nitrox production Membrane gas separation Pressure swing adsorption Oxygen analyser Electro-galvanic oxygen sensor Oxygen compatibility Decompression equipment Air-lock Built-in breathing system Decompression tables Diving bell Bell cursor Closed bell Clump weight Launch and recovery system Wet bell Diving chamber Diving stage Recreational Dive Planner Saturation system Platforms Dive boat Canoe and kayak diving Combat rubber raiding craft Liveaboard Subskimmer Diving support vessel HMS Challenger (K07) Underwater habitat Aquarius Reef Base Continental Shelf Station Two Helgoland Habitat Scott Carpenter Space Analog Station SEALAB Tektite habitat Remotely operated underwater vehicles 8A4-class ROUV ABISMO Atlantis ROV Team COTSBot CURV Deep Drone Épaulard Global Explorer ROV Goldfish-class ROUV Kaikō ROV Kaşif ROUV Long-Term Mine Reconnaissance System Mini Rover ROV OpenROV ROV KIEL 6000 ROV PHOCA Scorpio ROV Sea Dragon-class ROV Seabed tractor Seafox drone SeaPerch SJT-class ROUV T1200 Trenching Unit VideoRay UROVs Safety equipment Diver down flag Diving shot ENOS Rescue-System Hyperbaric lifeboat Hyperbaric stretcher Jackstay Jonline Reserve gas supply General Diving spread Air spread Saturation spread Hot water system Sonar Underwater acoustic positioning system Underwater acoustic communication Freediving Activities Aquathlon Apnoea finswimming Freediving Haenyeo Pearl hunting Ama Snorkeling Spearfishing Underwater football Underwater hockey Underwater rugby Underwater target shooting Competitions Nordic Deep Vertical Blue Disciplines Constant weight (CWT) Constant weight bi-fins (CWTB) Constant weight without fins (CNF) Dynamic apnea (DYN) Dynamic apnea without fins (DNF) Free immersion (FIM) No-limits apnea (NLT) Static apnea (STA) Skandalopetra diving Variable weight apnea (VWT) Variable weight apnea without fins Equipment Diving mask Diving suit Hawaiian sling Polespear Snorkel (swimming) Speargun Swimfins Monofin Water polo cap Freedivers Deborah Andollo Simone Arrigoni Peppo Biscarini Michael Board Sara Campbell Derya Can Göçen Goran Čolak Carlos Coste Robert Croft Mandy-Rae Cruickshank Yasemin Dalkılıç Leonardo D'Imporzano Flavia Eberhard Şahika Ercümen Emma Farrell Francisco Ferreras Pierre Frolla Flavia Eberhard Mehgan Heaney-Grier Elisabeth Kristoffersen Andriy Yevhenovych Khvetkevych Loïc Leferme Enzo Maiorca Jacques Mayol Audrey Mestre Karol Meyer Kate Middleton Stéphane Mifsud Alexey Molchanov Natalia Molchanova Dave Mullins Patrick Musimu Guillaume Néry Herbert Nitsch Umberto Pelizzari Liv Philip Annelie Pompe Stig Severinsen Tom Sietas Martin Štěpánek Walter Steyn Tanya Streeter William Trubridge Devrim Cenk Ulusoy Fatma Uruk Danai Varveri Alessia Zecchini Nataliia Zharkova Kateryna Sadurska Hazards Barotrauma Drowning Freediving blackout Deep-water blackout Shallow-water blackout Hypercapnia Hypothermia Historical Ama Octopus wrestling Swimming at the 1900 Summer Olympics – Men's underwater swimming Organisations AIDA International Scuba Schools International Australian Underwater Federation British Freediving Association Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins Performance Freediving International Professional diving Occupations Ama Commercial diver Commercial offshore diver Hazmat diver Divemaster Diving instructor Diving safety officer Diving superintendent Diving supervisor Haenyeo Media diver Police diver Public safety diver Scientific diver Underwater archaeologist Military diving Army engineer diver Canadian Armed Forces Divers Clearance diver Frogman Minentaucher Royal Navy ships diver United States military divers U.S. Navy diver U.S.Navy master diver Military diving units 7th Marine Brigade Clearance Diving Branch (RAN) Commando Hubert Combat Divers Service (Lithuania) Comando Raggruppamento Subacquei e Incursori Teseo Tesei Decima Flottiglia MAS Frogman Corps (Denmark) Fuerzas Especiales Fukuryu GRUMEC Grup Gerak Khas Jagdkommando JW Formoza JW GROM JW Komandosów Kommando Spezialkräfte Marine KOPASKA MARCOS Marine Commandos Marinejegerkommandoen Marine Raider Regiment Minedykkerkommandoen Namibian Marine Corps Operational Diving Unit Naval Diving Unit (Singapore) Naval Service Diving Section Naval Special Operations Command Operational Diving Division (SA Navy) Royal Engineers Russian commando frogmen Sappers Divers Group Shayetet 13 Special Air Service Special Air Service Regiment Special Actions Detachment Special Boat Service Special Boat Squadron (Sri Lanka) Special Forces Command (Turkey) Special Forces Group (Belgium) Special Operations Battalion (Croatia) Special Service Group (Navy) Special Warfare Diving and Salvage Tactical Divers Group US Marine Corps Force Reconnaissance US Marine Corps Reconnaissance Battalions US Navy SEALs Underwater Construction Teams Underwater Demolition Command Underwater Demolition Team Underwater Offence (Turkish Armed Forces) UNGERIN Underwater work Commercial offshore diving Dive leader Diver training Recreational diver training Hazmat diving Hyperbaric welding Marine construction Offshore construction Underwater construction Media diving Pearl hunting Police diving Potable water diving Public safety diving Scientific diving Ships husbandry Sponge diving Submarine pipeline Underwater archaeology Archaeology of shipwrecks Underwater cutting and welding Underwater demolition Underwater inspection Nondestructive testing Underwater logging Underwater photography Underwater search and recovery Underwater searches Underwater videography Underwater survey Salvage diving SS Egypt Kronan La Belle SS Laurentic RMS Lusitania Mars Mary Rose USS Monitor HMS Royal George Vasa Diving contractors COMEX Helix Energy Solutions Group International Marine Contractors Association Tools and equipment Abrasive waterjet Airlift Baited remote underwater video In-water surface cleaning Brush cart Cavitation cleaning Pressure washing Pigging Hot stab Lifting bag Remotely operated underwater vehicle Thermal lance Tremie Water jetting Underwater weapons Limpet mine Speargun Hawaiian sling Polespear Underwater firearm Gyrojet Mk 1 Underwater Defense Gun Powerhead Underwater pistols Heckler & Koch P11 SPP-1 underwater pistol Underwater revolvers AAI underwater revolver Underwater rifles ADS amphibious rifle APS underwater rifle ASM-DT amphibious rifle QBS-06 Recreational diving Recreational dive sites Index of recreational dive sites List of wreck diving sites Outline of recreational dive sites Specialties Altitude diving Cave diving Deep diving Ice diving Muck diving Open-water diving Rebreather diving Sidemount diving Solo diving Technical diving Underwater photography Wreck diving Diver organisations British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Cave Divers Association of Australia (CDAA) Cave Diving Group (CDG) Comhairle Fo-Thuinn (CFT) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas (FEDAS) Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins (FFESSM) International Association for Handicapped Divers (IAHD) Quintana Roo Speleological Survey (QRSS) Woodville Karst Plain Project (WKPP) Diving tourism industry Dive center Diving in Timor-Leste Diving in the Maldives Environmental impact of recreational diving Scuba diving tourism Scuba diving in the Cayman Islands Shark tourism Sinking ships for wreck diving sites Underwater diving in Guam Diving events and festivals Diversnight Underwater Bike Race Diving safety Human factors in diving equipment design Human factors in diving safety Life-support system Safety-critical system Scuba diving fatalities Underwater diving emergency Water safety Water surface searches Diving hazards List of diving hazards and precautions Environmental Current Delta-P Entanglement hazard Overhead Silt out Wave action Equipment Freeflow Use of breathing equipment in an underwater environment Failure of diving equipment other than breathing apparatus Single point of failure Physiological Cold shock response Decompression Nitrogen narcosis Oxygen toxicity Seasickness Uncontrolled decompression Diver behaviour and competence Incompetence Overconfidence effect Panic Task loading Trait anxiety Willful violation Consequences Barotrauma Decompression sickness Drowning Hypothermia Hypoxia Hypercapnia Hyperthermia Non-freezing cold injury Diving procedures Ascending and descending Emergency ascent Boat diving Canoe and kayak diving Buddy diving buddy check Decompression Decompression practice Pyle stop Ratio decompression Dive briefing Dive log Dive planning Rule of thirds Scuba gas planning Diver communications Diver rescue Diver training Doing It Right Drift diving Gas blending for scuba diving Night diving Rebreather diving Scuba gas management Solo diving Wall diving Risk management Checklist Hazard identification and risk assessment Hazard analysis Job safety analysis Risk assessment Hyperbaric evacuation and rescue Risk control Hierarchy of hazard controls Incident pit Lockout–tagout Permit To Work Redundancy Safety data sheet Situation awareness Diving team Bellman Chamber operator Diver medical technician Diver's attendant Diving supervisor Diving systems technician Gas man Life support technician Stand-by diver Equipment safety Breathing gas quality Testing and inspection of diving cylinders Hydrostatic test Sustained load cracking Diving regulator Breathing performance of regulators Occupational safety and health Association of Diving Contractors International International Marine Contractors Association Code of practice Contingency plan Diving regulations Emergency response plan Diving safety officer Diving superintendent Diving supervisor Operations manual Standard operating procedure Diving medicine Diving disorders List of signs and symptoms of diving disorders Cramp Motion sickness Surfer's ear Pressure related Alternobaric vertigo Barostriction Barotrauma Air embolism Aerosinusitis Barodontalgia Dental barotrauma Middle ear barotrauma Pulmonary barotrauma Compression arthralgia Decompression illness Dysbarism Oxygen Freediving blackout Hyperoxia Hypoxia Oxygen toxicity Inert gases Avascular necrosis Decompression sickness Dysbaric osteonecrosis Inner ear decompression sickness Isobaric counterdiffusion Taravana High-pressure nervous syndrome Hydrogen narcosis Nitrogen narcosis Carbon dioxide Hypercapnia Hypocapnia Breathing gas contaminants Carbon monoxide poisoning Immersion related Asphyxia Drowning Hypothermia Immersion diuresis Instinctive drowning response Laryngospasm Salt water aspiration syndrome Swimming-induced pulmonary edema Treatment Demand valve oxygen therapy First aid Hyperbaric medicine Hyperbaric treatment schedules In-water recompression Oxygen therapy Therapeutic recompression Personnel Diving Medical Examiner Diving Medical Practitioner Diving Medical Technician Hyperbaric nursing Screening Atrial septal defect Effects of drugs on fitness to dive Fitness to dive Psychological fitness to dive Research Researchers in diving physiology and medicine Arthur J. Bachrach Albert R. Behnke Peter B. Bennett Paul Bert George F. Bond Robert Boyle Alf O. Brubakk Albert A. Bühlmann John R. Clarke Guybon Chesney Castell Damant Kenneth William Donald William Paul Fife John Scott Haldane Robert William Hamilton Jr.

Henry Valence Hempleman Leonard Erskine Hill Brian Andrew Hills Felix Hoppe-Seyler Christian J. Lambertsen Simon Mitchell Charles Momsen Neal W. Pollock John Rawlins Charles Wesley Shilling Edward D. Thalmann Jacques Triger Diving medical research organisations Aerospace Medical Association Divers Alert Network (DAN) Diving Diseases Research Centre (DDRC) Diving Medical Advisory Council (DMAC) European Diving Technology Committee (EDTC) European Underwater and Baromedical Society (EUBS) National Board of Diving and Hyperbaric Medical Technology Naval Submarine Medical Research Laboratory Royal Australian Navy School of Underwater Medicine Rubicon Foundation South Pacific Underwater Medicine Society (SPUMS) Undersea and Hyperbaric Medical Society (UHMS) United States Navy Experimental Diving Unit (NEDU) Law Civil liability in recreational diving Diving regulations Duty of care List of legislation regulating underwater diving Investigation of diving accidents Convention on the Protection of the Underwater Cultural Heritage History of underwater diving History of decompression research and development History of dive computers History of Diving Museum History of scuba diving List of researchers in underwater diving Lyons Maritime Museum Man in the Sea Museum Timeline of atmospheric diving suits Timeline of diving technology Pearling in Western Australia US Navy decompression models and tables Archeological sites SS Commodore USS Monitor Queen Anne's Revenge Whydah Gally Underwater art and artists The Diver Jason deCaires Taylor Engineers and inventors Jerónimo de Ayanz y Beaumont William Beebe Georges Beuchat Giovanni Alfonso Borelli Joseph-Martin Cabirol John R. Clarke Jacques Cousteau Charles Anthony Deane John Deane Louis de Corlieu Auguste Denayrouze Ted Eldred Henry Fleuss Émile Gagnan Karl Heinrich Klingert Peter Kreeft Christian J. Lambertsen Yves Le Prieur John Lethbridge Ernest William Moir Joseph Salim Peress Auguste Piccard Joe Savoie Willard Franklyn Searle Gordon Smith Augustus Siebe Pierre-Marie Touboulic Jacques Triger Historical equipment Aqua-Lung RV Calypso SP-350 Denise Magnesium torch Nikonos Porpoise regulator Standard diving dress Sub Marine Explorer Vintage scuba Diver propulsion vehicles Advanced SEAL Delivery System Cosmos CE2F series Dry Combat Submersible Human torpedo Motorised Submersible Canoe Necker Nymph R-2 Mala-class swimmer delivery vehicle SEAL Delivery Vehicle Shallow Water Combat Submersible Siluro San Bartolomeo Welfreighter Wet Nellie Military and covert operations Raid on Alexandria (1941) Sinking of the Rainbow Warrior Scientific projects 1992 cageless shark-diving expedition Mission 31 Awards and events Hans Hass Award International Scuba Diving Hall of Fame London Diving Chamber Dive Lectures NOGI Awards Women Divers Hall of Fame Incidents Dive boat incidents Sinking of MV Conception Diver rescues Alpazat cave rescue Tham Luang cave rescue Early diving John Day (carpenter) Charles Spalding Ebenezer Watson Freediving fatalities Stephen Keenan Loïc Leferme Audrey Mestre Nicholas Mevoli Natalia Molchanova Offshore diving incidents Byford Dolphin diving bell accident Drill Master diving accident Star Canopus diving accident Stena Seaspread diving accident Venture One diving accident Waage Drill II diving accident Wildrake diving accident Professional diving fatalities Roger Baldwin John Bennett Victor F. Guiel Jr.

Francis P. Hammerberg Craig M. Hoffman Peter Henry Michael Holmes Johnson Sea Link accident Edwin Clayton Link Gerard Anthony Prangley Per Skipnes Robert John Smyth Albert D. Stover Richard A. Walker Lothar Michael Ward Joachim Wendler Bradley Westell Arne Zetterström Scuba diving fatalities 1973 Mount Gambier cave diving accident Ricardo Armbruster Allan Bridge David Bright Berry L. Cannon Cotton Coulson Cláudio Coutinho E. Yale Dawson Deon Dreyer Milan Dufek Sheck Exley Maurice Fargues Fernando Garfella Palmer Guy Garman Steve Irwin death Jim Jones Henry Way Kendall Artur Kozłowski Yuri Lipski Kirsty MacColl Linnea Mills Agnes Milowka François de Roubaix Chris and Chrissy Rouse Dave Shaw Wesley C. Skiles Dewey Smith Rob Stewart Esbjörn Svensson Josef Velek Publications Manuals NOAA Diving Manual U.S. Navy Diving Manual Basic Cave Diving: A Blueprint for Survival Underwater Handbook Bennett and Elliott's physiology and medicine of diving Encyclopedia of Recreational Diving The new science of skin and scuba diving Professional Diver's Handbook Basic Scuba Standards and Codes of Practice Code of Practice for Scientific Diving (UNESCO) DIN 7876 IMCA Code of Practice for Offshore Diving ISO 24801 Recreational diving services — Requirements for the training of recreational scuba divers General non-fiction The Darkness Beckons Goldfinder The Last Dive Shadow Divers The Silent World: A Story of Undersea Discovery and Adventure Research List of Divers Alert Network publications Dive guides Training and registration Diver training Competence and assessment Competency-based learning Refresher training Skill assessment Diver training standard Diving instructor Diving school Occupational diver training Commercial diver training Military diver training Public safety diver training Scientific diver training Recreational diver training Introductory diving ISO training standards Teaching method Muscle memory Overlearning Stress exposure training Skills Combat sidestroke Diver navigation Diver trim Ear clearing Frenzel maneuver Valsalva maneuver Finning techniques Scuba skills Buddy breathing Low impact diving Diamond Reef System Surface-supplied diving skills Underwater searches Recreational scuba certification levels Core diving skills Advanced Open Water Diver Autonomous diver CMAS* scuba diver CMAS** scuba diver Introductory diving Low Impact Diver Master Scuba Diver Open Water Diver Supervised diver Leadership skills Dive leader Divemaster Diving instructor Master Instructor Specialist skills Rescue Diver Solo diver Diver training certification and registration organisations European Underwater Federation (EUF) International Diving Regulators and Certifiers Forum (IDRCF) International Diving Schools Association (IDSA) International Marine Contractors Association (IMCA) List of diver certification organizations National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) Nautical Archaeology Society Recreational diver course referral World Recreational Scuba Training Council (WRSTC) Commercial diver certification authorities Australian Diver Accreditation Scheme (ADAS) Commercial diver registration in South Africa Divers Institute of Technology Health and Safety Executive (HSE) Department of Employment and Labour Commercial diving schools Divers Academy International Norwegian diver school Free-diving certification agencies AIDA International (AIDA) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Performance Freediving International (PI) Scuba Schools International (SSI) Recreational scuba certification agencies American Canadian Underwater Certifications (ACUC) American Nitrox Divers International (ANDI) Association nationale des moniteurs de plongée (ANMP) British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Comhairle Fo-Thuinn (CFT) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas (FEDAS) Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins (FFESSM) Federazione Italiana Attività Subacquee (FIAS) Global Underwater Explorers (GUE) International Association for Handicapped Divers (IAHD) International Association of Nitrox and Technical Divers (IANTD) International Life Saving Federation (ILS) Israeli Diving Federation (TIDF) National Academy of Scuba Educators (NASE) National Association of Underwater Instructors (NAUI) Nederlandse Onderwatersport Bond (NOB) Professional Association of Diving Instructors (PADI) Professional Diving Instructors Corporation (PDIC) Professional Technical and Recreational Diving (ProTec) Rebreather Association of International Divers (RAID) Sub-Aqua Association (SAA) Scuba Diving International (SDI) Scuba Educators International (SEI) Scuba Schools International (SSI) Türkiye Sualtı Sporları Federasyonu (TSSF) United Diving Instructors (UDI) YMCA SCUBA Program Scientific diver certification authorities American Academy of Underwater Sciences (AAUS) CMAS Scientific Committee Technical diver certification agencies American Nitrox Divers International (ANDI) British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Diving Science and Technology (DSAT) Federazione Italiana Attività Subacquee (FIAS) International Association of Nitrox and Technical Divers (IANTD) Professional Association of Diving Instructors (PADI) Professional Diving Instructors Corporation (PDIC) Professional Technical and Recreational Diving (ProTec) Rebreather Association of International Divers (RAID) Trimix Scuba Association (TSA) Technical Extended Range (TXR) Cave diving Cave Divers Association of Australia (CDAA) Cave Diving Group (CDG) Global Underwater Explorers (GUE) National Speleological Society#Cave Diving Group (CDG) National Association of Underwater Instructors (NAUI) Technical Diving International (TDI) Military diver training centres Defence Diving School Navy Diving Salvage and Training Center Underwater Escape Training Unit Military diver training courses United States Marine Corps Combatant Diver Course Underwater sports Surface snorkeling Finswimming Snorkeling/breath-hold Spearfishing Underwater football Underwater hockey Australia Turkey Underwater rugby Colombia United States Underwater target shooting Breath-hold Aquathlon Apnoea finswimming Freediving Open Circuit Scuba Immersion finswimming Sport diving Underwater cycling Underwater orienteering Underwater photography Rebreather Underwater photography Sports governing organisations and federations International AIDA International Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques ) National AIDA Hellas Australian Underwater Federation British Freediving Association British Octopush Association British Underwater Sports Association Comhairle Fo-Thuinn Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins South African Underwater Sports Federation Türkiye Sualtı Sporları Federasyonu Underwater Society of America ) Competitions 14th CMAS Underwater Photography World Championship Underwater Hockey World Championships Underwater Orienteering World Championships Underwater Rugby World Championships Underwater divers Pioneers of diving Eduard Admetlla i Lázaro Aquanaut Mary Bonnin Amelia Behrens-Furniss James F. Cahill Jacques Cousteau Billy Deans Dottie Frazier Trevor Hampton Hans Hass Hannes Keller Dick Rutkowski Teseo Tesei Arne Zetterström Underwater scientists archaeologists and environmentalists Michael Arbuthnot Robert Ballard George Bass Mensun Bound Louis Boutan Jeffrey Bozanic Hugh Bradner Cathy Church Eugenie Clark James P. Delgado Sylvia Earle John Christopher Fine George R. Fischer Anders Franzén Honor Frost Fernando Garfella Palmer David Gibbins Graham Jessop Swietenia Puspa Lestari Pilar Luna Robert F. Marx Anna Marguerite McCann Innes McCartney Charles T. Meide Mark M. Newell Lyuba Ognenova-Marinova John Peter Oleson Mendel L. Peterson Richard Pyle Andreas Rechnitzer William R. Royal Margaret Rule Gunter Schöbel Stephanie Schwabe Myriam Seco E. Lee Spence Robert Sténuit Peter Throckmorton Cristina Zenato Scuba record holders Pascal Bernabé Jim Bowden Mark Ellyatt Sheck Exley Nuno Gomes Claudia Serpieri Krzysztof Starnawski Underwater filmmakers and presenters Samir Alhafith David Attenborough Ramón Bravo Jean-Michel Cousteau Richie Kohler Paul Rose Andy Torbet Ivan Tors Andrew Wight James Cameron Underwater photographers Doug Allan Tamara Benitez Georges Beuchat Adrian Biddle Jonathan Bird Eric Cheng Neville Coleman Jacques Cousteau John D. Craig Ben Cropp Bernard Delemotte David Doubilet Candice Farmer John Christopher Fine Rodney Fox Ric Frazier Stephen Frink Peter Gimbel Monty Halls Hans Hass Henry Way Kendall Rudie Kuiter Joseph B. MacInnis Luis Marden Agnes Milowka Noel Monkman Pete Oxford Steve Parish Zale Parry Pierre Petit Leni Riefenstahl Peter Scoones Brian Skerry Wesley C. Skiles E. Lee Spence Philippe Tailliez Ron Taylor Valerie Taylor Albert Tillman John Veltri Stan Waterman Michele Westmorland John Ernest Williamson J. Lamar Worzel Underwater explorers Caves Graham Balcombe Sheck Exley Martyn Farr Jochen Hasenmayer Jill Heinerth Jarrod Jablonski Brian Kakuk William Hogarth Main Tom Mount Jack Sheppard Bill Stone Reefs Arthur C. Clarke Wrecks Leigh Bishop John Chatterton Clive Cussler Bill Nagle Valerie van Heest Aristotelis Zervoudis Aquanauts Andrew Abercromby Joseph M. Acaba Clayton Anderson Richard R. Arnold Serena Auñón-Chancellor Michael Barratt (astronaut) Robert A. Barth Robert L. Behnken Randolph Bresnik Timothy J. Broderick Justin Brown Berry L. Cannon Scott Carpenter Gregory Chamitoff Steve Chappell Catherine Coleman Robin Cook Craig B. Cooper Fabien Cousteau Philippe Cousteau Timothy Creamer Jonathan Dory Pedro Duque Sylvia Earle Jeanette Epps Sheck Exley Albert Falco Andrew J. Feustel Michael Fincke Satoshi Furukawa Ronald J. Garan Jr.

Michael L. Gernhardt Christopher E. Gerty David Gruber Chris Hadfield Jeremy Hansen José M. Hernández John Herrington Paul Hill Akihiko Hoshide Mark Hulsbeck Emma Hwang Norishige Kanai Les Kaufman Scott Kelly Karen Kohanowich Timothy Kopra Dominic Landucci Jon Lindbergh Kjell N. Lindgren Michael López-Alegría Joseph B. MacInnis Sandra Magnus Thomas Marshburn Matthias Maurer K. Megan McArthur Craig McKinley Jessica Meir Simone Melchior Dorothy Metcalf-Lindenburger Andreas Mogensen Karen Nyberg John D. Olivas Takuya Onishi Luca Parmitano Nicholas Patrick Tim Peake Thomas Pesquet Marc Reagan Garrett Reisman Kathleen Rubins Dick Rutkowski Tara Ruttley David Saint-Jacques Josef Schmid Robert Sheats Dewey Smith Steve Squyres Heidemarie Stefanyshyn-Piper Robert Sténuit Hervé Stevenin Nicole Stott James Talacek Daniel M. Tani Robert Thirsk Bill Todd Mark T. Vande Hei Koichi Wakata Rex J. Walheim Shannon Walker John Morgan Wells Joachim Wendler Douglas H. Wheelock Peggy Whitson Dafydd Williams Jeffrey Williams Sunita Williams Reid Wiseman Kimiya Yui Writers and journalists Michael C. Barnette Victor Berge Philippe Diolé Gary Gentile Bret Gilliam Bob Halstead Hillary Hauser Trevor Jackson Steve Lewis John Mattera Rescuers Craig Challen Richard Harris Rick Stanton John Volanthen Frogmen Lionel Crabb Ian Edward Fraser Sydney Knowles James Joseph Magennis Commercial salvors Keith Jessop Science of underwater diving List of researchers in underwater diving Diving physics Metre sea water Neutral buoyancy Underwater acoustics Modulated ultrasound Underwater vision Underwater computer vision Diving physiology Blood shift Cold shock response Diving reflex Equivalent narcotic depth Maximum operating depth Physiological response to water immersion Thermal balance of the underwater diver Underwater vision Work of breathing Decompression theory Decompression models: Bühlmann decompression algorithm Haldane's decompression model Reduced gradient bubble model Thalmann algorithm Thermodynamic model of decompression Varying Permeability Model Equivalent air depth Oxygen window Physiology of decompression Diving environments Underwater exploration Deep-sea exploration Classification List of diving environments by type Altitude diving Benign water diving Confined water diving Deep diving Inland diving Inshore diving Muck diving Night diving Open-water diving Black-water diving Blue-water diving Penetration diving Cave diving Torricellian chamber Ice diving Wreck diving Recreational dive sites Underwater environment Underwater diving environment Impact Environmental impact of recreational diving Low impact diving Other Bathysphere Defense against swimmer incursions Diver detection sonar Offshore survey Rugged compact camera Underwater domain awareness Underwater vehicle Deep-submergence vehicle Aluminaut DSV Alvin American submarine NR-1 Bathyscaphe Archimède FNRS-2 FNRS-3 Harmony class bathyscaphe Sea Pole -class bathyscaphe Trieste II Deepsea Challenger Ictineu 3 JAGO Jiaolong Konsul -class submersible Limiting Factor Russian submarine Losharik Mir Nautile Pisces -class deep submergence vehicle DSV Sea Cliff DSV Shinkai DSV Shinkai 2000 DSV Shinkai 6500 DSV Turtle DSV-5 Nemo Submarine rescue International Submarine Escape and Rescue Liaison Office Submarine Escape and Rescue system (Royal Swedish Navy) McCann Rescue Chamber Submarine rescue ship Deep-submergence rescue vehicle LR5 LR7 MSM-1 Mystic -class deep-submergence rescue vehicle DSRV-1 Mystic DSRV-2 Avalon NATO Submarine Rescue System Priz -class deep-submergence rescue vehicle Russian deep submergence rescue vehicle AS-28 Russian submarine AS-34 ASRV Remora SRV-300 Submarine Rescue Diving Recompression System Type 7103 DSRV URF (Swedish Navy) Submarine escape Escape trunk Submarine escape training facility Submarine Escape Training Facility (Australia) Escape set Davis Submerged Escape Apparatus Momsen lung Steinke hood Submarine Escape Immersion Equipment Special interest groups Artificial Reef Society of British Columbia CMAS Europe Coral Reef Alliance Divers Alert Network Green Fins Finger Lakes Underwater Preserve Association Karst Underwater Research Nautical Archaeology Program Nautical Archaeology Society Naval Air Command Sub Aqua Club PADI AWARE Reef Check Reef Life Survey Rubicon Foundation Save Ontario Shipwrecks SeaKeys Sea Research Society Society for Underwater Historical Research Society for Underwater Technology Underwater Archaeology Branch, Naval History & Heritage Command Neutral buoyancy facilities for Astronaut training Neutral Buoyancy Laboratory Neutral buoyancy pool Neutral buoyancy simulation as a training aid Neutral Buoyancy Simulator Space Systems Laboratory Yuri Gagarin Cosmonaut Training Center Other Nautilus Productions Helicopter Aircrew Breathing Device Scuba diving therapy Seabed mining Category Commons Glossary Indexes: Dive sites Divers Diving Outline Portal NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐5667c77bf8‐dbpr4
Cached time: 20250818132348
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.398 seconds
Real time usage: 1.745 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 6784/1000000
Revision size: 40956/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 582357/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 3543/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 11/100
Expensive parser function count: 10/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 192731/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.763/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 21885454/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1256.266      1 -total
 31.15%  391.313      1 Template:Reflist
 15.67%  196.808      1 Template:Underwater_diving
 15.23%  191.335      1 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
 14.78%  185.720      7 Template:Annotated_link
  9.37%  117.769     23 Template:Cite_web
  9.17%  115.252     35 Template:Navbox
  8.49%  106.600     19 Template:Cite_news
  7.53%   94.548      1 Template:Cite_report
  6.56%   82.459     44 Template:Cvt Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:71521958:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818132348 and revision id 1305457723. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=DSV_Limiting_Factor&oldid=1305457723 " Category : Deep-submergence vehicles Hidden categories: CS1 French-language sources (fr) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Pages using multiple image with auto scaled images Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 12 August 2025, at 04:58 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents DSV Limiting Factor 4 languages Add topic

