Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Economic aspects 3 Conversion of landforms Toggle Conversion of landforms subsection 3.1 Conversion to building land 3.2 Conversion to farmland 3.3 Restoration 3.4 Environmental issues 3.5 Biodiversity impacts 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Land development 9 languages العربية Čeština فارسی 한국어 Igbo Bahasa Indonesia Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Land conversion ) Landscape alteration Subdivision land development Since their invention, heavy equipment such as bulldozers have been useful for earthmoving in land development.

Land development is the alteration of landscape in any number of ways, such as: Changing landforms from a natural or semi-natural state for a purpose such as agriculture or housing Subdividing real estate into lots , typically for the purpose of building homes Real estate development or changing its purpose, for example by converting an unused factory complex into a condominium History [ edit ] Land development has a history dating to Neolithic times around 8,000 BC. From the dawn of civilization, the process of land development has elaborated the progress of improvements on a piece of land based on codes and regulations, particularly housing complexes.

Economic aspects [ edit ] In an economic context, land development is also sometimes advertised as land improvement or land amelioration . It refers to investment making land more usable by humans. For accounting purposes, it refers to any variety of projects that increase the value of the process . Most are depreciable, but some land improvements are not able to be depreciated because a useful life cannot be determined.

Home building and containment [ clarification needed ] are two of the most common and the oldest types of development.

Scraper pan pickup and drop off to level the terrain In an urban context, land development furthermore includes: Road construction Access roads , walkways , and parking lots Bridges Landscaping Clearing , terracing ,  or land levelling Land preparation (development) for gardens Setup of fences and, to a lesser degree, hedges Service connections to municipal services and public utilities Drainage , canal systems External lighting ( street lamps etc.) A landowner or developer of a project of any size will often want to maximise profits , minimise risk , and control cash flow . This "profitable energy" means identifying and developing the best scheme for the local marketplace, whilst satisfying the local planning process.

Development analysis puts development prospects and the development process itself under the microscope, identifying where enhancements and improvements can be introduced. These improvements aim to align with best design practice, political sensitivities, and the inevitable social requirements of a project, with the overarching objective of increasing land values and profit margins on behalf of the landowner or developer.

[ 1 ] Development analysis can add significantly to the value of land and development, and as such is a crucial tool for landowners and developers. It is an essential step in Kevin A. Lynch 's 1960 book The Image of the City , and is considered to be essential to realizing the value potential of land.

[ 2 ] The landowner can share in additional planning gain (significant value uplift) via an awareness of the land's development potential . This is done via a residual development appraisal or residual valuation. The residual appraisal calculates the sale value of the end product (the gross development value or GDV) and hypothetically deducts costs, including planning and construction costs, finance costs and developer's profit. The "residue", or leftover proportion, represents the land value. Therefore, in maximizing the GDV (that which one could build on the land), land value is concurrently enhanced.

Land value is highly sensitive to supply and demand (for the end product), build costs, planning and affordable housing contributions, and so on. Understanding the intricacies of the development system and the effect of "value drivers" can result in massive differences in the landowner's sale value.

Conversion of landforms [ edit ] Land development places more emphasis on the expected economic development as a result of the process; "land conversion" tries to focus on the general physical and biological aspects of the land use change . "Land improvement" in the economic sense can often lead to land degradation from the ecological perspective. Land development and the change in land value does not usually take into account changes in the ecology of the developed area. While conversion of (rural) land with a vegetation carpet to building land may result in a rise in economic growth and rising land prices , the irreversibility of lost flora and fauna because of habitat destruction , the loss of ecosystem services and resulting decline in environmental value is only considered a priori in environmental full-cost accounting .

Conversion to building land [ edit ] Motorway construction in Ireland Conversion to building land is as a rule associated with road building , which in itself already brings topsoil abrasion, [ 3 ] soil compaction [ 4 ] and modification of the soil's chemical composition through soil stabilization , creation of impervious surfaces and, subsequently, (polluted) surface runoff water.

Building construction Construction activity often effectively seals off a larger part of the soil from rainfall and the nutrient cycle , so that the soil below buildings and roads is effectively "consumed" and made infertile .

With the notable exception of attempts at rooftop gardening and hanging gardens in green buildings (possibly as constituents of green urbanism ), vegetative cover of higher plants is lost to concrete and asphalt surfaces, complementary interspersed garden and park areas notwithstanding.

[ citation needed ] Conversion to farmland [ edit ] In Argentina and Bolivia, the Chaco thorn forest (A) is being felled at a rate considered among the highest in the world (B), to give way to soybean cultivation (C).

New creation of farmland (or 'agricultural land conversion') will rely on the conversion and development of previous forests , savannas or grassland . Recreation of farmland from wasteland , deserts or previous impervious surfaces is considerably less frequent because of the degraded or missing fertile soil in the latter. Starting from forests, land is made arable by assarting or slash-and-burn .

Agricultural development furthermore includes: Hydrological measures (land levelling, drainage, irrigation , sometimes landslide and flood control ) Soil improvement ( fertilization , establishment of a productive chemical balance).

Road construction Oil palm plantation and rainforest fragment on Borneo Because the newly created farmland is more prone to erosion than soil stabilized by tree roots , such a conversion may mean irreversible crossing of an ecological threshold .

See also: Horton overland flow The resulting deforestation is also not easily compensated for by reforestation or afforestation . This is because plantations of other trees as a means for water conservation and protection against wind erosion ( shelterbelts ), as a rule, lack the biodiversity of the lost forest, especially when realized as monocultures .

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] [ 8 ] These deforestation consequences may have lasting effects on the environment, including soil stabilization and erosion control measures that may not be as effective in preserving topsoil as the previous intact vegetation .

Restoration [ edit ] Massive land conversion without proper consideration of ecological and geological consequences may lead to disastrous results , such as: General soil degradation Catastrophic soil salination and solonchak formation, e.g., in Central Asia , as a consequence of irrigation by saline groundwater Desertification , soil erosion and ecological shifts due to drainage Leaching of saline soils Habitat loss for the wildlife.

While deleterious effects can be particularly visible when land is developed for industrial or mining usage, agro-industrial and settlement use can also have a massive and sometimes irreversible impact on the affected ecosystem.

[ 9 ] Examples of land restoration / land rehabilitation counted as land development in the strict sense are still rare. However, renaturation , reforestation and stream restoration may all contribute to a healthier environment and quality of life, especially in densely populated regions. The same is true for planned vegetation like parks and gardens , but restoration plays a particular role, because it reverses previous conversions to built and agricultural areas.

Environmental issues [ edit ] The environmental impact of land use and development is a substantial consideration for land development projects. On the local level an environmental impact report (EIR) may be necessary.

[ definition needed ] In the United States, federally funded projects typically require preparation of an environmental impact statement (EIS). The concerns of private citizens or political action committees (PACs) [ further explanation needed ] can influence the scope, or even cancel, a project based on concerns like the loss of an endangered species’ habitat.

[ citation needed ] In most cases, the land development project will be allowed to proceed if mitigation requirements are met.

[ citation needed ] Mitigation banking is the most prevalent example, and necessitates that the habitat will have to be replaced at a greater rate than it is removed.  This increase in total area helps to establish the new ecosystem, though it will require time to reach maturity.

[ citation needed ] Further information: land recycling , soil conservation , soil salinity control , environmental remediation , and urban climate Biodiversity impacts [ edit ] The extent, and type of land use directly affects wildlife habitat and thereby impacts local and global biodiversity .

[ 10 ] Human alteration of landscapes from natural vegetation (e.g.

wilderness ) to any other use can result in habitat loss , degradation , and fragmentation , all of which can have devastating effects on biodiversity.

[ 11 ] Land conversion is the single greatest cause of extinction of terrestrial species .

[ 12 ] An example of land conversion being a chief cause of the critically endangered status of a carnivore is the reduction in habitat for the African wild dog , Lycaon pictus .

[ 13 ] Deforestation is also the reason for loss of a natural habitat , with large numbers of trees being cut down for residential and commercial use.

Urban growth has become a problem for forests and agriculture, the expansion of structures prevents natural resources from producing in their environment.

[ 14 ] To prevent the loss of wildlife the forests must maintain a stable climate and the land must remain unaffected by development.

[ citation needed ] Furthermore, forests can be sustained by different forest management techniques such as reforestation and preservation.

Reforestation is a reactive approach designed to replant previously logged trees within the forest boundary in attempts to re-stabilize this ecosystem.

Preservation , on the other hand, is a proactive idea that promotes the concept of leaving the forest without using this area for its ecosystem goods and services.

[ 15 ] Both of these methods to mitigate deforestation are being used throughout the world.

[ citation needed ] The U.S. Forest Service predicts that urban and developing terrain in the U.S. will expand by 41 percent in 2060.

[ 16 ] These conditions can cause displacement for the wildlife and limited resources for the environment to maintain a sustainable balance.

[ 17 ] See also [ edit ] Agricultural expansion – Growth of agricultural land in the 21st century Built-up area – Human settlement with high population density and infrastructure of built environment Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Colonization – Establishment and development of settlements by people or animals Manifest destiny – Cultural belief of 19th-century American expansionists Developed environments – Community of any size, in which people live Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Developmentalism – Economic theory Environmental impact statement – Assessment required under US environmental law Illegal construction – Type of construction work Infrastructure – Facilities and systems serving society Land consumption – Expansion of built-up area Land development bank – Special kind of development bank in India Land grabbing – Large-scale acquisition of land (over 1,000 ha) whether by purchase, leases or other means Land management – Processes of managing land Land reclamation – Creating new land from oceans, seas, riverbeds or lakes Land recycling – Reuse of abandoned buildings or sites Landscape ecology – Relationships between ecological processes in the environment and particular ecosystems Land-use conflict Leopold matrix – Environmental impact assessment method Mitigation banking – Market-based system to compensate for environmental impacts to wetlands Ocean development – Establishing of human activities at sea and use of the ocean Political action committee – American political organization Real estate development – Process that creates or renovates new or existing spaces Subdivision (land) – Divided piece of land Subsurface drainage – A system by which water is drained on Sustainable agriculture – Farming approach that balances environmental, economic and social factors in the long term Urban planning – Technical process of land use and urban design Urban renewal – Land redevelopment in cities Watertable control – Use of drainage to control the groundwater level in an area References [ edit ] ^ Johnson, David E. (2008). "4. Marketing Studies and Market Considerations".

Fundamentals of Land Development . Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons.

ISBN 9780471778936 .

^ Lynch, Kevin (1960).

The Image of the City . Cambridge MA: MIT Press .

OL 5795447M .

^ Top soil is removed from the new road bed (Video). Dayton, TN: Bryan College. 2009-09-03.

Archived from the original on 2021-12-12.

^ Urban Soil Compaction (PDF) (Report). Soil Quality – Urban Technical Note No. 2. Auburn, AL: U.S. Natural Resources Conservation Service, Soil Quality Instsitute. March 2000. Archived from the original (PDF) on April 23, 2015.

^ Wilson, Sarah Jane (2014-08-14).

"Not All Forests Are Created Equal: Reforesting the Tropics for People, Biodiversity, and Carbon" .

The Equation (Blog) . Cambridge, Massachusetts: Union of Concerned Scientists.

^ Boucher, Doug (June 2011).

The Root of the Problem: What's Driving tropical Deforestation today?

(PDF) (Report). Tropical Forest and Climate Initiative. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Union of Concerned Scientists. p. 85. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2019-09-26 . Retrieved 2016-03-01 .

^ "Monocultures" . Barcelona, Spain: Carbon Trade Watch. Archived from the original on 2016-07-16 . Retrieved 2016-08-28 .

^ Brockerhoff, E.G.; Jactel, H.; Parrotta, J.; Quine, C.P.; Sayer, J. (2008-04-09). "Plantation forests and biodiversity: oxymoron or opportunity?".

Biodiversity and Conservation .

17 (5): 925– 951.

Bibcode : 2008BiCon..17..925B .

doi : 10.1007/s10531-008-9380-x .

S2CID 40051432 .

^ Lóczy, Dénes; Gyenizse, Péter (2010-10-01).

"Human impact on topography in an urbanised mining area: Pécs, Southwest Hungary" .

Géomorphologie: Relief, processus, environnement .

16 (3): 287– 300.

doi : 10.4000/geomorphologie.7989 .

ISSN 1266-5304 .

^ Landscape ecology and wildlife habitat evaluation: critical information for ecological risk assessment, land-use management activities, and biodiversity enhancement . Kapustka, Lawrence. West Conshohocken, PA: ASTM International. 2004.

ISBN 0-8031-3476-2 .

OCLC 55488045 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: others ( link ) ^ Habitat loss: causes, impacts on biodiversity and reduction strategies . Devore, Bronson. New York: Nova. 2014.

ISBN 978-1-63117-231-1 .

OCLC 867765925 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: others ( link ) ^ Bierregaard, Richard; Claude Gascon; Thomas E. Lovejoy; Rita Mesquita, eds. (2001).

Lessons from Amazonia: The Ecology and Conservation of a Fragmented Forest . Yale University Press.

ISBN 0-300-08483-8 .

^ C. Michael Hogan. 2009.

Painted Hunting Dog: Lycaon pictus , GlobalTwitcher.com, ed. N. Stromberg Archived 2010-12-09 at the Wayback Machine ^ Ehrhardt-Martinez, Karen (Aug 16, 2003).

"Demographics, Democracy, Development, Disparity and Deforestation: A Crossnational Assessment of the Social Causes of Deforestation" .

American Sociological Association . Archived from the original on 2008-12-10.

^ Lund, H. Gyde (2006).

Definitions of Forest, Deforestation, Afforestation, and Reforestation . Gainesville, VA: Forest Information Services.

^ "Forest Service report forecasts natural resource management trends and challenges for next 50 years | US Forest Service" .

www.fs.usda.gov . 17 April 2013. Archived from the original on August 19, 2020 . Retrieved 2020-04-22 .

^ National Conference of State Legislature."State Forest Carbon Incentives and Policies".Jocelyn Durkay and Jennifer Schultz..22 March 2016. Web.25 April 2015.

http://www.ncsl.org/research/environment-and-natural-resources/state-forest-carbon-incentives-and-policies.aspx R.J. Oosterbaan, International Institute for Land Reclamation and Improvement, Wageningen, The Netherlands.

"Improvement of waterlogged and saline soils." Free downloads of software and articles on land drainage.

Kone, D. Linda (2006).

Land Development (10th ed.). Washington, D.C.: National Association of Home Builders.

ISBN 9780867186093 .

Dewberry & Davis (2008).

Land Development Handbook (3rd ed.). New York: McGraw-Hill Professional.

ISBN 9780071640930 .

Colley, Barbara C. (2005).

Practical Manual of Land Development (4th ed.). McGraw-Hill.

ISBN 0071448667 .

v t e Land use General Degradation Development/Conversion Planning Conflict Land management Landscaping Integrated landscape management Land grabbing Land consumption Land loss Habitat destruction Illegal construction Land reclamation Land rehabilitation Landscape ecology Rangeland management Environmental planning Leopold matrix Watertable control Developed environments Built-up area Locally unwanted land use Property Property Subdivision (land) Real estate development Land development bank Land (economics) Customary land Related fields Soil Soil science Soil compaction Soil contamination Alkali soil Pollution Deforestation Urban planning Agriculture Drainage system (agriculture) Land change modeling Categories: Land use NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐mw65c
Cached time: 20250816111900
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.725 seconds
Real time usage: 0.971 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 7020/1000000
Revision size: 21582/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 68738/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 5708/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 13/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 70913/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.485/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 20929171/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  872.518      1 -total
 35.37%  308.640     28 Template:Annotated_link
 22.58%  196.998      1 Template:Reflist
 14.83%  129.433      8 Template:Cite_book
 10.38%   90.558      1 Template:Land_use
  9.96%   86.865      1 Template:Navbox
  8.10%   70.664      1 Template:Short_description
  5.70%   49.719      8 Template:Fix
  5.42%   47.256      6 Template:Citation_needed
  4.70%   41.051      2 Template:Pagetype Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:1535090:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250816111900 and revision id 1303204539. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Land_development&oldid=1303204539 " Categories : Construction Urban planning Earthworks (engineering) Land management Real estate Hidden categories: CS1 maint: others Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia articles needing clarification from April 2022 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2024 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from July 2020 Articles with unsourced statements from July 2020 Articles with unsourced statements from February 2020 Articles with unsourced statements from April 2020 Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets via Module:Annotated link This page was last edited on 29 July 2025, at 16:53 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Land development 9 languages Add topic

