Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Types Toggle Types subsection 1.1 Ga 1.2 Gb 2 See also 3 References Toggle the table of contents Gulf low 1 language Français Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia The trajectory of a Gulf low is the most southeastern one on the map.

A Gulf low or Texas Low is a low pressure area that forms or intensifies over the Gulf of Mexico and moves northeast on the western side of the Appalachian Mountains and sometimes on the Atlantic coast to become a nor'easter . Because they move from over or near the Gulf of Mexico, these storm systems are capable of transporting copious amounts of moisture with them.  At their strongest, these storm systems are even more potent snowfall producers than panhandle hooks , primarily because of the mixing of Atlantic Ocean moisture into the storm system once they cross the Appalachian Mountains. Because of the general west to east movement of weather systems in the mid latitudes of the northern hemisphere, Gulf Lows rarely affect areas west of the Mississippi River .  One such exception was the Halloween Blizzard of 1991.

Types [ edit ] There are two types of "Gulf Lows": West and East Gulf Cyclones or Types Ga and Gb.

[ 1 ] As western storms ( Alberta clippers , North and South Pacific and Rocky Mountain) move eastward, a trailing frontal remnant is often left in the Gulf of Mexico or the adjacent coastal states.  When the frontal trough from a new cyclone enters this area, cyclogenesis often occurs on the Gulf front. This newly formed Gulf wave that moves northeastward and dominates the weather over the eastern United States and Canada. One of the basic differences between the two types is that the Ga track is west of the Appalachians and the Gb track is east of the Appalachians.

Ga [ edit ] The Ga type is characterized by an upper-level trough in the central and eastern part of the United States which steers the newly formed wave north and northeast over the western side of the Appalachians accompanied by widespread precipitation to the north. This type is most frequently observed in the winter and early spring.

Gb [ edit ] The 1993 North American Storm Complex started out as a Gulf Low (East Gulf Low or Gb) before it eventually evolved into a nor'easter .  It initially formed in the western Gulf of Mexico and moved towards Florida before turning to the north and becoming a nor'easter.  Another large gulf low storm was the Great Blizzard of 1978 , which brought one of the lowest non-tropical barometric pressures recorded in the United States .

See also [ edit ] Alberta clipper Colorado low Nor'easter Panhandle hook References [ edit ] ^ as per the California Institute of Technology (CIT) v t e Cyclones and anticyclones of the world ( centers of action ) Concepts Anticyclonic storm Storm High-pressure area Low-pressure area Rapid intensification Explosive cyclogenesis Central dense overcast Annular tropical cyclone Bar (tropical cyclone) Superstorm Hypercane Tropical cyclones and climate change Post-tropical cyclone Sting jet List Rainband Anticyclone Northern Hemisphere North Polar High Siberian High Azores High North American High North Pacific High Ridiculously Resilient Ridge Subtropical ridge Southern Hemisphere South Polar High South Atlantic High South Pacific High Kalahari High Australian High Subtropical ridge Cyclone Synoptic scale Surface-based Polar North Polar low South Polar low Great Arctic Cyclone of 2012 Extratropical North America Continental Lee Cyclone Alberta clipper Colorado low Great Basin low Bighorn Low Other Panhandle hook November gale Oceanic Aleutian Low Hatteras low Nor'easter Gulf low Pacific Northwest windstorm Europe Icelandic Low Genoa low European windstorm Asia Asiatic Low Western Disturbance Continental North Asian storms East Asian-northwest Pacific storms Southern Hemisphere Southern Ocean cyclone Sudestada Subtropical Kona storm Australian east coast low Black nor'easter Lake Huron cyclone Mediterranean tropical-like cyclone Thermal Tropical ( Outline ) Northern Hemisphere Atlantic hurricane Cape Verde hurricane Pacific hurricane Typhoon North Indian Ocean tropical cyclone Mediterranean tropical-like cyclone Black Sea tropical-like cyclone Southern Hemisphere South-West Indian Ocean tropical cyclone Australian region tropical cyclone South Pacific tropical cyclone South Atlantic tropical cyclone Upper level Cold-core low Cut-off low Polar vortex Upper tropospheric cyclonic vortex Mesoscale Mesoscale ocean eddies Catalina eddy Haida Eddies Mesoscale convective system Wake Low Mesohigh Mesoscale convective vortex Line echo wave pattern Whirlwind Major Mesocyclone Supercell Low-topped supercell Wall cloud Funnel cloud Tornado Multiple-vortex tornado Satellite tornado Anticyclonic tornado Landspout Waterspout Minor Gustnado Dust devil Steam devil Fire whirl Tropical cyclones portal Tornadoes portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Gulf_low&oldid=1267285468 " Category : Extratropical cyclones This page was last edited on 4 January 2025, at 12:07 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Gulf low 1 language Add topic

