Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Two-dimensional semantic analysis 2 Impact Toggle Impact subsection 2.1 In the philosophy of mind 3 Criticism 4 See also 5 References 6 Sources 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Two-dimensionalism 2 languages Deutsch 日本語 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Approach to semantics in analytic philosophy Two-dimensionalism is an approach to semantics in analytic philosophy . It is a theory of how to determine the sense and reference of a word and the truth-value of a sentence . It is intended to resolve the puzzle: How is it possible to discover empirically that a necessary truth is true ? Two-dimensionalism provides an analysis of the semantics of words and sentences that makes sense of this possibility. The theory was first developed by Robert Stalnaker , but it has been advocated by numerous philosophers since, including David Chalmers .

Two-dimensional semantic analysis [ edit ] According to two-dimensionalism, any statement, for example "Water is H 2 O", is taken to express two distinct propositions , often referred to as a primary intension and a secondary intension , which together compose its meaning .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] The primary intension of a word or sentence is its sense , i.e., is the idea or method by which we find its referent. In other words, it's how we identify something in any possible world before knowing its actual nature. The primary intension of "water" might be a description, such as watery stuff or "the clear, drinkable liquid that fills oceans and lakes." The entity identified by this intension could vary in different hypothetical worlds. In the twin Earth thought experiment , for example, inhabitants might use "water" to mean their equivalent of water, even if its chemical composition is not H 2 O but XYZ. Thus, for that world, "water" does not refer to H 2 O.

[ 1 ] The secondary intension of "water" is whatever "water" refers to in this world. It's determined after we discover water's actual composition in our world. So, if we assign "water" the primary intension watery stuff , then the secondary intension of "water" is H 2 O, since H 2 O is watery stuff in this world. The secondary intension of "water" in our world is H 2 O, which is H 2 O in every world because unlike watery stuff it is impossible for H 2 O to be other than H 2 O. When considered according to its secondary intension, "Water is H 2 O" is true in every world. This explains how "water is XYZ" can be conceivable (using the primary intension) but not possible (using the secondary intension).

[ 1 ] Impact [ edit ] If two-dimensionalism is workable it solves some very important problems in the philosophy of language.

Saul Kripke has argued that "Water is H 2 O" is an example of a necessary truth which is true a posteriori , since we had to discover that water was H 2 O, but given that it is true (which it is) it cannot be false. It would be absurd to claim that something that is water is not H 2 O, for these are known to be identical .

However, this contention that one and the same proposition can be both a posteriori and necessary is considered absurd by some philosophers (as is Kripke's paired claim that the same proposition can be both a priori and contingent ).

For example, Robert Stalnaker's account of knowledge represents knowledge as a relation on possible worlds , which entails that it is impossible for a proposition to fail to be a priori given that it is necessary. This can be proven as follows: If a proposition P is necessary it is true in all possible worlds. If P is true at all possible worlds and what we know are sets of possible worlds, then it is not possible not to know that P , for P is the case at all possible worlds in the set of worlds that we know. So if P is necessary then we know it necessarily, and ipso facto we know it a priori.

[ 3 ] Under two-dimensionalism, the problem disappears. The primary intension of "Water is H 2 O" is the a posteriori component, since it is contingent that the referent of "water" is H 2 O, while the secondary intension is the necessary component of the sentence, since it is necessary that the stuff we in fact call water is H 2 O. Neither intension gives us both a necessary and an a posteriori component. But one gets the false impression that the sentence expresses a necessary a posteriori proposition because this single sentence expresses two propositions, one a posteriori and one necessary .

[ 3 ] In the philosophy of mind [ edit ] Two-dimensional semantics has been used by David Chalmers to counter objections to the various arguments against materialism in the philosophy of mind . Specifically, Chalmers deploys two-dimensional semantics to "bridge the (gap between) epistemic and modal domains" in arguing from knowability or epistemic conceivability to what is necessary or possible (modalities).

[ 4 ] The reason Chalmers employs two-dimensional semantics is to avoid objections to conceivability implying possibility. For instance, it's claimed that we can conceive of water not having been H 2 O , but it's not possible that water isn't H 2 O . Chalmers replies that it is 1-possible that water wasn't H 2 O because we can imagine another substance XYZ with watery properties, but it's not 2-possible. Hence, objections to conceivability implying possibility are unfounded when these words are used more carefully.

[ 4 ] Chalmers then advances the following "two-dimensional argument against materialism".

[ 4 ] Define P as all physical truths about the universe and Q as a truth about phenomenal experience , such as that someone is conscious. Let "1-possible" refer to possibility relative to primary intension and "2-possible" relative to secondary intension.

P&~Q is conceivable [i.e., zombies are conceivable] If P&~Q is conceivable, then P&~Q is 1-possible If P&~Q is 1-possible, then P&~Q is 2-possible or Russellian monism is true.

If P&~Q is 2-possible, materialism is false.

Materialism is false or Russellian monism is true.

Criticism [ edit ] Scott Soames is a notable opponent of two-dimensionalism, which he sees as an attempt to revive Russelian – Fregean descriptivism and to overturn what he sees as a "revolution" in semantics begun by Kripke and others.

[ 5 ] Soames argues that two-dimensionalism stems from a misreading of passages in Kripke (1980) as well as Kaplan (1989).

[ 6 ] See also [ edit ] David Kaplan References [ edit ] ^ a b c Chalmers, David (2006).

"Two-Dimensional Semantics" .

The Oxford Handbook to the Philosophy of Language . Oxford University Press.

^ for a fuller explanation see Chalmers, David.

The Conscious Mind . Oxford UP: 1996. Chapter 2, section 4.

^ a b Stalnaker, Robert. "Propositions." Issues in the Philosophy of Language . Yale UP, 1976.

^ a b c David J. Chalmers (2010). "The Two-Dimensional Argument Against Materialism".

The Character of Consciousness . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0195311112 . Retrieved 4 September 2014 .

^ Soames, Scott (2007).

Reference and Description . Princeton: Princeton University Press.

ISBN 978-0-691-13099-6 .

^ Almog, Joseph; Perry, John; Wettstein, Howard K.; Kaplan, David (1989).

Themes from Kaplan . New York: Oxford University Press. pp.

481– 564.

ISBN 0-19-505217-X .

Sources [ edit ] Garcia-Carpintero, Manuel (2006).

Two-Dimensional Semantics . Oxford: Clarendon Press.

ISBN 0-19-927202-6 .

The Character of Consciousness (Philosophy of Mind) . Oxford University Press, USA. 2010.

ISBN 978-0-19-531110-5 .

External links [ edit ] Two-Dimensional Semantics ( Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy ) Two-Dimensional Semantics (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy) Assertion by Robert Stalnaker Two dimensional semantics--the basics Christian Nimtz The Case of Hyper-intensionality in Two-Dimensional Modal Semantics: Alexandra Arapinis Two-Dimensionalism and Kripkean A Posteriori Necessity Kai-Yee Wong Sentence-Relativity and the Necessary A Posteriori Kai-Yee Wong Two Dimensional Semantics by David Chalmers The Foundations of Two Dimensional Semantics by David Chalmers The Two Dimensional Argument against Materialism by David Chalmers Two Dimensional Modal Logic by Gary Hardegree v t e Formal semantics (natural language) Central concepts Compositionality Denotation Entailment Extension Generalized quantifier Intension Logical form Presupposition Proposition Reference Scope Speech act Syntax–semantics interface Truth conditions Topics Areas Anaphora Ambiguity Binding Conditionals Definiteness Disjunction Evidentiality Focus Indexicality Lexical semantics Modality Negation Propositional attitudes Tense–aspect–mood Quantification Vagueness Phenomena Antecedent-contained deletion Cataphora Coercion Conservativity Counterfactuals Crossover effects Cumulativity De dicto and de re De se Deontic modality Discourse relations Donkey anaphora Epistemic modality Exhaustivity Faultless disagreement Free choice inferences Givenness Homogeneity (linguistics) Hurford disjunction Inalienable possession Intersective modification Logophoricity Mirativity Modal subordination Opaque contexts Performatives Polarity items Privative adjectives Quantificational variability effect Responsive predicate Rising declaratives Scalar implicature Sloppy identity Subsective modification Subtrigging Telicity Temperature paradox Veridicality Formalism Formal systems Alternative semantics Categorial grammar Combinatory categorial grammar Discourse representation theory (DRT) Dynamic semantics Generative grammar Glue semantics Inquisitive semantics Intensional logic Lambda calculus Mereology Montague grammar Segmented discourse representation theory (SDRT) Situation semantics Supervaluationism Type theory TTR Concepts Autonomy of syntax Context set Continuation Conversational scoreboard Downward entailing Existential closure Function application Meaning postulate Monads Plural quantification Possible world Quantifier raising Quantization Question under discussion Semantic parsing Squiggle operator Strawson entailment Strict conditional Type shifter Universal grinder See also Cognitive semantics Computational semantics Distributional semantics Formal grammar Inferentialism Logic translation Linguistics wars Philosophy of language Pragmatics Semantics of logic v t e Philosophy of language Philosophers Confucius Gorgias Cratylus Plato Aristotle Eubulides Diodorus Chrysippus Zhuangzi Xunzi Averroes Ibn Khaldun Hobbes Wilkins Arnauld Lancelot Leibniz Berkeley Herder von Humboldt Mauthner Ricœur de Saussure Frege Boas Tillich Sapir Bloomfield Bergson Vygotsky Wittgenstein Russell Carnap Derrida Whorf Austin Chomsky Gadamer Kripke Ayer Anscombe Hintikka Dummett Davidson Grice Ryle Strawson Quine Putnam Lewis Searle Watzlawick Theories Causal theory of reference Contrast theory of meaning Contrastivism Conventionalism Cratylism Deconstruction Descriptivism Direct reference theory Dramatism Dynamic semantics Expressivism Inquisitive semantics Linguistic determinism Mediated reference theory Nominalism Non-cognitivism Phallogocentrism Relevance theory Semantic externalism Semantic holism Situation semantics Structuralism Supposition theory Symbiosism Theological noncognitivism Theory of descriptions ( Definite description ) Theory of language Unilalianism Verification theory Concepts Ambiguity Cant Class Concept Categories Family resemblance Intension Language Linguistic relativity Logical form Mental representation Metalanguage Modality (natural language) Presupposition Principle of compositionality Property Proposition Sense and reference Sentence Set Sign Speech act Statement Symbol Truth-bearer Use–mention distinction more...

Works Cratylus (n.d.) Port-Royal Grammar (1660) De Arte Combinatoria (1666) An Essay Towards a Real Character, and a Philosophical Language (1668) Alciphron (1732) " On Denoting " (1905) Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus (1921) Language, Truth, and Logic (1936) Two Dogmas of Empiricism (1951) Philosophical Investigations (1953) Of Grammatology (1967) Naming and Necessity (1980) Wittgenstein on Rules and Private Language (1982) Limited Inc (1988) Related articles Analytic philosophy Philosophy of information Philosophical logic Linguistics Pragmatics Rhetoric Scholasticism School of Names Semantics Formal semantics Semiotics Category Task Force Discussion Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Two-dimensionalism&oldid=1258098519 " Categories : Modal logic Semantics Theories of language Modal metaphysics Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 18 November 2024, at 03:35 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Two-dimensionalism 2 languages Add topic

