Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 See also 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Additive color 28 languages Afrikaans العربية Беларуская Bosanski Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Español فارسی Français Frysk Hrvatski Italiano עברית Nederlands Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Polski Русский Shqip Simple English Svenska Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Model for predicting color created by mixing visible light Red, green, and blue lights combining by reflecting from a white wall: secondary colors yellow, cyan, and magenta are found at the intersections of red and green, green and blue, and blue and red. The intersection of all three primary colors together yields white.

James Clerk Maxwell , with his color top that he used for investigation of color vision and additive color Additive color or additive mixing is a property of a color model that predicts the appearance of colors made by coincident component lights , i.e. the perceived color can be predicted by summing the numeric representations of the component colors.

[ 1 ] Modern formulations of Grassmann's laws [ 2 ] describe the additivity in the color perception of light mixtures in terms of algebraic equations. Additive color predicts perception and not any sort of change in the photons of light themselves. These predictions are only applicable in the limited scope of color matching experiments where viewers match small patches of uniform color isolated against a gray or black background.

Additive color models are applied in the design and testing of electronic displays that are used to render realistic images containing diverse sets of color using phosphors that emit light of a limited set of primary colors . Examination with a sufficiently powerful magnifying lens will reveal that each pixel in CRT , LCD , and most other types of color video displays is composed of red, green, and blue light-emitting phosphors which appear as a variety of single colors when viewed from a normal distance.

Additive color, alone, does not predict the appearance of mixtures of printed color inks, dye layers in color photographs on film , or paint mixtures. Instead, subtractive color is used to model the appearance of pigments or dyes , such as those in paints and inks .

The combination of two of the common three additive primary colors in equal proportions produces an additive secondary color — cyan , magenta or yellow . Additive color is also used to predict colors from overlapping projected colored lights often used in theatrical lighting for plays, concerts, circus shows, and night clubs.

[ 3 ] The full gamut of color available in any additive color system is defined by all the possible combinations of all the possible luminosities of each primary color in that system. In chromaticity space, a gamut is a plane convex polygon with corners at the primaries. For three primaries, it is a triangle .

History [ edit ] The first permanent color photograph, taken by Thomas Sutton, under the direction of James Clerk Maxwell in 1861 Systems of additive color are motivated by the Young–Helmholtz theory of trichromatic color vision , which was articulated around 1850 by Hermann von Helmholtz , based on earlier work by Thomas Young . For his experimental work on the subject, James Clerk Maxwell is sometimes credited as being the father of additive color.

[ 4 ] He had the photographer Thomas Sutton photograph a tartan ribbon on black-and-white film three times, first with a red, then green, then blue color filter over the lens. The three black-and-white images were developed and then projected onto a screen with three different projectors, each equipped with the corresponding red, green, or blue color filter used to take its image. When brought into alignment, the three images (a black-and-red image, a black-and-green image and a black-and-blue image) formed a full-color image, thus demonstrating the principles of additive color.

[ 5 ] See also [ edit ] Additive color mixing with CD covers Color mixing Color space Color theory Color motion picture film Kinemacolor Prizma Color RGB color model Subtractive color Technicolor William Friese-Greene References [ edit ] ^ MacEvoy, Bruce.

"handprint : colormaking attributes" .

www.handprint.com . Retrieved February 26, 2019 .

^ MacEvoy, Bruce.

"handprint : colormaking attributes" .

www.handprint.com . Retrieved February 26, 2019 .

^ David Briggs (2007).

"The Dimensions of Color" .

Archived from the original on September 28, 2015 . Retrieved November 23, 2011 .

^ "James Clerk Maxwell" .

Inventor's Hall of Fame, Rochester Institute of Technology Center for Imaging Science .

Archived from the original on September 18, 2010.

^ Robert Hirsch (2004).

Exploring Colour Photography: A Complete Guide . Laurence King Publishing.

ISBN 1-85669-420-8 .

Archived from the original on February 25, 2017.

External links [ edit ] RGB and CMYK Colour systems.

http://www.edinphoto.org.uk/1_P/1_photographers_maxwell.htm - Photos and stories from the James Clerk Maxwell Foundation.

Stanford University CS 178 interactive Flash demo comparing additive and subtractive color mixing.

v t e Color topics Color science Color physics Electromagnetic spectrum Light Rainbow Visible Spectral colors Chromophore Structural coloration Animal coloration Color of chemicals Water Spectral power distribution Colorimetry Color perception Chromesthesia Sonochromatism Color blindness Achromatopsia Dichromacy Color calibration Color constancy Color task Color code Color temperature Color vision test Evolution of color vision Impossible colors Metamerism Opponent process Afterimage Unique hues Tetrachromacy The dress Color psychology Color symbolism Color preferences Lüscher color test Kruithof curve Political color National colors Chromophobia Chromotherapy Color reproduction Color photography Color balance Color cast Digital image processing Color management Color printing Multi-primary color display Quattron Color model additive RGB subtractive CMYK Color space Color mapping Color philosophy Color scheme Color tool Monochromatic colors Black-and-white Grisaille Complementary colors Analogous colors Achromatic colors (Neutral) Polychromatic colors Light-on-dark Web colors Tinctures in heraldry Color theory Color mixing Primary color Secondary color Chromaticity Color solid Color wheel Color triangle Color analysis (fashion) Color realism (art style) On Vision and Colours (Schopenhauer) Theory of Colours (Goethe) Color terms Basic English terms Red Orange Yellow Green Blue Purple Pink Brown White Gray Black Cultural differences Linguistic relativity and the color naming debate Blue–green distinction in language Color history Black-and-white dualism Blue in culture Color in Chinese culture Traditional colors of Japan Human skin color Color dimensions Hue Dichromatism Colorfulness Pastel colors Luminance Lightness Darkness Brightness Iridescence Fluorescence Grayscale Tint, shade and tone Color organizations Pantone Color Marketing Group Color Association of the United States International Colour Authority International Commission on Illumination (CIE) International Color Consortium International Colour Association Names Lists List of colors: A–F List of colors: G–M List of colors: N–Z List of colors (compact) List of colors by shade List of color palettes List of color spaces List of Crayola crayon colors history Color chart List of RAL colors List of web colors Shades of: Red Orange Yellow Green Cyan Blue Violet Purple Magenta Pink Brown White Gray Black Related Vision Contrast Qualia Lighting Category Index Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Additive_color&oldid=1253180504 " Categories : Color space Color Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use mdy dates from September 2021 Use American English from October 2020 All Wikipedia articles written in American English This page was last edited on 24 October 2024, at 18:42 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Additive color 28 languages Add topic

