Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Background 1.2 19th century 1.2.1 Jacksonian Era 1.2.2 U.S. Civil War 1.2.3 Reconstruction and Redemption 1.3 20th century 1.3.1 Progressive era 1.3.2 1930s–1960s and the rise of the New Deal coalition 1.3.3 1960s–1980s and the collapse of the New Deal coalition 1.3.4 1990s and Third Way centrism 1.4 21st century 1.4.1 2000s–2010s and the Obama era 1.4.2 2020s and opposition to Trumpism 1.4.3 Current status 2 Name and symbols 3 Structure Toggle Structure subsection 3.1 National committee 3.2 State parties 3.3 Major party committees and groups 4 Political positions Toggle Political positions subsection 4.1 Economic issues 4.1.1 Fiscal policy 4.1.2 Minimum wage 4.1.3 Health care 4.1.4 Education 4.1.5 Environment 4.1.6 Renewable energy and fossil fuels 4.1.7 Trade 4.2 Social issues 4.2.1 Equal opportunity 4.2.2 Voting rights 4.2.3 Abortion and reproductive rights 4.2.4 Immigration 4.2.5 LGBT rights 4.2.6 Status of Puerto Rico and D.C.

4.3 Legal issues 4.3.1 Gun control 4.3.2 Death penalty 4.3.3 Torture 4.3.4 Privacy 4.4 Foreign policy issues 4.4.1 Iran sanctions 4.4.2 Invasion of Afghanistan 4.4.3 Israel 4.4.4 Europe, Russia, and Ukraine 5 Demographics Toggle Demographics subsection 5.1 Age 5.2 Race 5.3 Gender and sexual minorities 5.4 Region 5.5 Population density 5.6 Income and wealth 5.7 Education 6 Factions Toggle Factions subsection 6.1 Liberals 6.2 Moderates 6.3 Progressives 7 Democratic presidents 8 Recent electoral history Toggle Recent electoral history subsection 8.1 In congressional elections: 1950–present 8.2 In presidential elections: 1828–present 9 See also 10 Notes 11 References 12 Further reading 13 External links Toggle the table of contents Democratic Party (United States) 121 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch አማርኛ العربية ܐܪܡܝܐ Asturianu Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه Basa Bali বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Bikol Central Български Boarisch Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Чӑвашла Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Føroyskt Français Frysk Gaeilge Gaelg Galego 客家語 / Hak-kâ-ngî 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hornjoserbsce Hrvatski Ido Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa Къарачай-малкъар ქართული Қазақша Kernowek Kiswahili Kurdî Кыргызча ລາວ Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Ligure Lombard Magyar Македонски മലയാളം मराठी მარგალური مصرى مازِرونی Bahasa Melayu 閩東語 / Mìng-dĕ̤ng-ngṳ̄ Монгол မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands नेपाली 日本語 Nordfriisk Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی پښتو Polski Português Română Русский Scots Shqip Sicilianu සිංහල Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Татарча / tatarça తెలుగు ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська اردو Vèneto Tiếng Việt Winaray 吴语 ייִדיש Yorùbá 粵語 Zazaki 中文 Betawi Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikinews Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American political party For the 1792–1824 party, see Democratic-Republican Party .

Democratic Party Chairperson Ken Martin Governing body Democratic National Committee [ 1 ] [ 2 ] Senate Minority Leader Chuck Schumer House Minority Leader Hakeem Jeffries Founders Andrew Jackson Martin Van Buren Founded January 8, 1828 ; 197 years ago ( 1828-01-08 ) [ 3 ] Baltimore , Maryland, U.S.

Preceded by Democratic-Republican Party Headquarters 430 South Capitol St.

SE, Washington, D.C., U.S.

Student wing High School Democrats of America College Democrats of America Youth wing Young Democrats of America Women's wing National Federation of Democratic Women Overseas wing Democrats Abroad Ideology Liberalism ( US ) [ 7 ] Factions : Centrism [ 14 ] Progressivism ( US ) [ 16 ] Political position Center-left [ 22 ] Caucuses Blue Dog Coalition New Democrat Coalition Congressional Progressive Caucus Colors Blue Senate 45 / 100 [ a ] House of Representatives 212 / 435 State governors 23 / 50 State upper chambers 832 / 1,973 State lower chambers 2,385 / 5,413 Territorial governors 2 / 5 Seats in Territorial upper chambers 21 / 97 Seats in Territorial lower chambers 9 / 91 Election symbol Website democrats .org Politics of the United States Political parties Elections The Democratic Party is a center-left political party in the United States . One of the major parties of the U.S., it was founded in 1828, making it the world's oldest active political party. Its main rival since the 1850s has been the Republican Party , and the two have since dominated American politics .

The Democratic Party was founded in 1828 from remnants of the Democratic-Republican Party . Senator Martin Van Buren played the central role in building the coalition of state organizations which formed the new party as a vehicle to help elect Andrew Jackson as president that year. It initially supported Jacksonian democracy , agrarianism , and geographical expansionism , while opposing a national bank and high tariffs . Democrats won six of the eight presidential elections from 1828 to 1856, losing twice to the Whigs . In 1860, the party split into Northern and Southern factions over slavery . The party remained dominated by agrarian interests, contrasting with Republican support for the big business of the Gilded Age . Democratic candidates won the presidency only twice [ b ] between 1860 and 1908 though they won the popular vote two more times in that period. During the Progressive Era , some factions of the party supported progressive reforms, with Woodrow Wilson being elected president in 1912 and 1916.

In 1932, Franklin D. Roosevelt was elected president after campaigning on a strong response to the Great Depression . His New Deal programs created a broad Democratic coalition which united White southerners, Northern workers, labor unions , African Americans , Catholic and Jewish communities , progressives, and liberals . From the late 1930s, a conservative minority in the party's Southern wing joined with Republicans to slow and stop further progressive domestic reforms.

[ 23 ] After the civil rights movement and Great Society era of progressive legislation under Lyndon B. Johnson , who was often able to overcome the conservative coalition in the 1960s, many White southerners switched to the Republican Party as the Northeastern states became more reliably Democratic.

[ 24 ] [ 25 ] The party's labor union element has weakened since the 1970s amid deindustrialization , and during the 1980s it lost many White working-class voters to the Republicans under Ronald Reagan . The election of Bill Clinton in 1992 marked a shift for the party toward centrism and the Third Way , shifting its economic stance toward market-based policies .

[ 26 ] [ 27 ] [ 28 ] Barack Obama oversaw the party's passage of the Affordable Care Act in 2010.

[ 29 ] [ 30 ] In the 21st century, the Democratic Party's strongest demographics are urban voters , college graduates (especially those with graduate degrees ), African Americans , women, younger voters , irreligious voters, the unmarried and LGBTQ people .

[ 31 ] On social issues, it advocates for abortion rights , [ 32 ] LGBTQ rights , [ 33 ] action on climate change , [ 34 ] and the legalization of marijuana . On economic issues, the party favors healthcare reform , paid sick leave , paid family leave and supporting unions .

[ 35 ] [ 36 ] [ 37 ] [ 38 ] [ 39 ] In foreign policy, the party supports liberal internationalism as well as tough stances against China and Russia .

[ 40 ] [ 41 ] [ 42 ] History Main article: History of the Democratic Party (United States) Political parties' derivation in the United States. A dotted line denotes an unofficial connection.

Democratic Party officials often trace its origins to the Democratic-Republican Party , founded by Thomas Jefferson , James Madison and other influential opponents of the conservative Federalists in 1792.

[ 43 ] [ 44 ] That party died out before the modern Democratic Party was organized; [ 45 ] the Jeffersonian party also inspired the Whigs and modern Republicans.

[ 46 ] Historians argue that the modern Democratic Party was first organized in the late 1820s with the election of war hero Andrew Jackson [ 47 ] of Tennessee, making it the world's oldest active political party.

[ 48 ] [ 49 ] [ 47 ] It was predominately built by Martin Van Buren , who assembled a wide cadre of politicians in every state behind Jackson.

[ 48 ] [ 47 ] Since the nomination of William Jennings Bryan in 1896, the party has generally positioned itself to the left of the Republican Party on economic issues. Democrats have been more liberal on civil rights since 1948, although conservative factions within the Democratic Party that opposed them persisted in the South until the 1960s. On foreign policy, both parties have changed positions several times.

[ 50 ] Background Andrew Jackson was the seventh president (1829–1837) and the first Democratic president.

The Democratic Party evolved from the Jeffersonian Republican or Democratic-Republican Party organized by Jefferson and Madison in opposition to the Federalist Party.

[ 51 ] The Democratic-Republican Party favored republicanism , a weak federal government , states' rights , agrarian interests (especially Southern planters), and strict adherence to the Constitution. The party opposed a national bank and Great Britain .

[ 52 ] After the War of 1812 , the Federalists virtually disappeared and the only national political party left was the Democratic-Republicans, which was prone to splinter along regional lines.

[ 53 ] The era of one-party rule in the United States, known as the Era of Good Feelings , lasted from 1816 until 1828, when Andrew Jackson became president. Jackson and Martin Van Buren worked with allies in each state to form a new Democratic Party on a national basis. In the 1830s, the Whig Party coalesced into the main rival to the Democrats.

When exactly the Democratic party formed is still debated among Historians, with many putting forth the 1828 date of the creation of a federal structure for the various Jacksonian movements as the foundation date, however, it could also be argued that the foundation of these Jacksonian groups could be the foundation date. In that case the Democratic Party would be formed on December 23, 1823 when the Greensburg Committee, the first verifiably "Jacksonian" organization, read the Greensburg Resolution outside the Westmoreland County courthouse in Greensburg , Pennsylvania . The committee consisted of five of Greensburg's most prominent political figures, the brothers Jacob M. Wise (state senator), John H. Wise (state representative and brigadier general), and Frederick A. Wise (owner and editor of the Westmoreland Republican ), alongside David Marchand (state representative), and James Clarke (state representative). The Greensburg Resolution was the first published call for Jackson to run for President with the committee being the first overtly "Jacksonian" organization, dubbed the 'origin' of the Jackson movement that turned into the Democratic party.

[ 54 ] The event that transformed the Jacksonians from just another faction of the Democratic-Republican party into a divergent political force would be the so-called " corrupt bargain " of 1824, where, despite winning the most popular and electoral votes, the House of Representatives did not confirm Jackson as the newly elected president, instead Henry Clay , who was both a candidate and the speaker of the house, whipped his supporters in congress to vote for the runner-up, John Quincy Adams , in exchange for Adams naming Clay the Secretary of State. Jackson and his followers began to more seriously coalesce into a structured party for the next election in 1828.

Before 1860, the Democratic Party supported expansive presidential power , [ 55 ] the interests of slave states , [ 56 ] agrarianism , [ 57 ] and expansionism , [ 57 ] while opposing a national bank and high tariffs .

[ 57 ] 19th century Jacksonian Era Further information: Second Party System and Third Party System Martin Van Buren was the eighth president (1837–1841).

The Democratic-Republican Party split over the choice of a successor to President James Monroe .

[ 58 ] The faction that supported many of the old Jeffersonian principles , led by Andrew Jackson and Martin Van Buren, became the modern Democratic Party.

[ 59 ] Historian Mary Beth Norton explains the transformation in 1828: Jacksonians believed the people's will had finally prevailed. Through a lavishly financed coalition of state parties, political leaders, and newspaper editors, a popular movement had elected the president. The Democrats became the nation's first well-organized national party ... and tight party organization became the hallmark of nineteenth-century American politics.

[ 60 ] James K. Polk was the 11th president (1845–1849). He significantly extended the territory of the United States.

Behind the platforms issued by state and national parties stood a widely shared political outlook that characterized the Democrats: The Democrats represented a wide range of views but shared a fundamental commitment to the Jeffersonian concept of an agrarian society. They viewed the central government as the enemy of individual liberty. The 1824 "corrupt bargain" had strengthened their suspicion of Washington politics. ... Jacksonians feared the concentration of economic and political power. They believed that government intervention in the economy benefited special-interest groups and created corporate monopolies that favored the rich. They sought to restore the independence of the individual—the artisan and the ordinary farmer—by ending federal support of banks and corporations and restricting the use of paper currency, which they distrusted. Their definition of the proper role of government tended to be negative, and Jackson's political power was largely expressed in negative acts. He exercised the veto more than all previous presidents combined. ... Nor did Jackson share reformers' humanitarian concerns. He had no sympathy for American Indians, initiating the removal of the Cherokees along the Trail of Tears .

[ 61 ] Opposing factions led by Henry Clay helped form the Whig Party. The Democratic Party had a small yet decisive advantage over the Whigs until the 1850s when the Whigs fell apart over the issue of slavery. In 1854, angry with the Kansas–Nebraska Act , anti-slavery Democrats left the party and joined Northern Whigs to form the Republican Party .

[ 62 ] [ 63 ] Martin van Buren also helped found the Free Soil Party to oppose the spread of slavery, running as its candidate in the 1848 presidential election , before returning to the Democratic Party and staying loyal to the Union.

[ 64 ] U.S. Civil War Stephen A. Douglas was a United States senator for Illinois.

The Democrats split over slavery, with Northern and Southern tickets in the election of 1860 , in which the Republican Party gained ascendancy.

[ 65 ] The radical pro-slavery Fire-Eaters led walkouts at the two conventions when the delegates would not adopt a resolution supporting the extension of slavery into territories even if the voters of those territories did not want it. These Southern Democrats nominated the pro-slavery incumbent vice president, John C. Breckinridge of Kentucky, for president and General Joseph Lane , of Oregon, for vice president. The Northern Democrats nominated Senator Stephen A. Douglas of Illinois for president and former Georgia Governor Herschel V. Johnson for vice president. This fracturing of the Democrats led to a Republican victory and Abraham Lincoln was elected the 16th president of the United States.

[ 66 ] As the American Civil War broke out, Northern Democrats were divided into War Democrats and Peace Democrats . The Confederate States of America deliberately avoided organized political parties. Most War Democrats rallied to Republican President Abraham Lincoln and the Republicans' National Union Party in the election of 1864 , which featured Andrew Johnson on the Union ticket to attract fellow Democrats. Johnson replaced Lincoln in 1865, but he stayed independent of both parties.

[ 67 ] Reconstruction and Redemption The Democrats benefited from white Southerners' resentment of Reconstruction after the war and consequent hostility to the Republican Party. After Redeemers ended Reconstruction in the 1870s and following the often extremely violent disenfranchisement of African Americans led by such white supremacist Democratic politicians as Benjamin Tillman of South Carolina in the 1880s and 1890s, the South, voting Democratic, became known as the " Solid South ". Although Republicans won all but two presidential elections, the Democrats remained competitive. The party was dominated by pro-business Bourbon Democrats led by Samuel J. Tilden and Grover Cleveland , who represented mercantile, banking, and railroad interests; opposed imperialism and overseas expansion; fought for the gold standard ; opposed bimetallism ; and crusaded against corruption, high taxes and tariffs. Cleveland was elected to non-consecutive presidential terms in 1884 and 1892 .

[ 68 ] 20th century Further information: Fourth Party System , Fifth Party System , and Sixth Party System Progressive era Leaders of the Democratic Party during the first half of the 20th century on in 1913: William Jennings Bryan, Josephus Daniels , Woodrow Wilson , Breckinridge Long , William Phillips , and Franklin D. Roosevelt Agrarian Democrats demanding free silver , drawing on Populist ideas, overthrew the Bourbon Democrats in 1896 and nominated William Jennings Bryan for the presidency (a nomination repeated by Democrats in 1900 and 1908). Bryan waged a vigorous campaign attacking Eastern moneyed interests, but he lost to Republican William McKinley .

[ 69 ] The Democrats took control of the House in 1910, and Woodrow Wilson won election as president in 1912 (when the Republicans split) and 1916. Wilson effectively led Congress to put to rest the issues of tariffs, money, and antitrust, which had dominated politics for 40 years, with new progressive laws. He failed to secure Senate passage of the Versailles Treaty (ending the war with Germany and joining the League of Nations).

[ 70 ] The weakened party was deeply divided by issues such as the KKK and prohibition in the 1920s. However, it did organize new ethnic voters in Northern cities.

[ 71 ] After World War I ended and continuing through the Great Depression , the Democratic and Republican Parties both largely believed in American exceptionalism over European monarchies and state socialism that existed elsewhere in the world.

[ 72 ] 1930s–1960s and the rise of the New Deal coalition Franklin D. Roosevelt and Harry S. Truman, the 32nd and 33rd presidents (1933–1945; 1945–1953), featured on a campaign poster for the 1944 presidential election ; note the rooster logo of the Democratic Party (see Names and Symbols below) The Great Depression in 1929 that began under Republican President Herbert Hoover and the Republican Congress set the stage for a more liberal government as the Democrats controlled the House of Representatives nearly uninterrupted from 1930 until 1994, the Senate for 44 of 48 years from 1930, and won most presidential elections until 1968.

Franklin D. Roosevelt , elected to the presidency in 1932, came forth with federal government programs called the New Deal . New Deal liberalism meant the regulation of business (especially finance and banking) and the promotion of labor unions as well as federal spending to aid the unemployed, help distressed farmers and undertake large-scale public works projects. It marked the start of the American welfare state.

[ 73 ] The opponents, who stressed opposition to unions, support for business and low taxes, started calling themselves "conservatives".

[ 74 ] Until the 1980s, the Democratic Party was a coalition of two parties divided by the Mason–Dixon line: liberal Democrats in the North and culturally conservative voters in the South, who though benefitting from many of the New Deal public works projects, opposed increasing civil rights initiatives advocated by northeastern liberals. The polarization grew stronger after Roosevelt died. Southern Democrats formed a key part of the bipartisan conservative coalition in an alliance with most of the Midwestern Republicans. The economically activist philosophy of Franklin D. Roosevelt, which has strongly influenced American liberalism , shaped much of the party's economic agenda after 1932.

[ 75 ] From the 1930s to the mid-1960s, the liberal New Deal coalition usually controlled the presidency while the conservative coalition usually controlled Congress.

[ 76 ] 1960s–1980s and the collapse of the New Deal coalition See also: Civil Rights Movement Issues facing parties and the United States after World War II included the Cold War and the civil rights movement . Republicans attracted conservatives and, after the 1960s, white Southerners from the Democratic coalition with their use of the Southern strategy and resistance to New Deal and Great Society liberalism. Until the 1950s, African Americans had traditionally supported the Republican Party because of its anti-slavery civil rights policies. Following the passage of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and Voting Rights Act of 1965 , the Southern states became more reliably Republican in presidential politics, while Northeastern states became more reliably Democratic.

[ 77 ] [ 78 ] [ 79 ] [ 80 ] Studies show that Southern whites, which were a core constituency in the Democratic Party, shifted to the Republican Party due to racial backlash and social conservatism .

[ 81 ] [ 82 ] [ 83 ] John F. Kennedy , the 35th president (1961–1963) Lyndon B. Johnson , the 36th president (1963–1969) The election of President John F. Kennedy from Massachusetts in 1960 partially reflected this shift. In the campaign, Kennedy attracted a new generation of younger voters. In his agenda dubbed the New Frontier , Kennedy introduced a host of social programs and public works projects, along with enhanced support of the space program , proposing a crewed spacecraft trip to the moon by the end of the decade. He pushed for civil rights initiatives and proposed the Civil Rights Act of 1964 , but with his assassination in November 1963, he was not able to see its passage.

[ 84 ] Kennedy's successor Lyndon B. Johnson was able to persuade the largely conservative Congress to pass the Civil Rights Act of 1964, and with a more progressive Congress in 1965 passed much of the Great Society , including Medicare and Medicaid , which consisted of an array of social programs designed to help the poor, sick, and elderly. Kennedy and Johnson's advocacy of civil rights further solidified black support for the Democrats but had the effect of alienating Southern whites who would eventually gravitate toward the Republican Party, particularly after the election of Ronald Reagan to the presidency in 1980. Many conservative Southern Democrats defected to the Republican Party , beginning with the passage of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and the general leftward shift of the party.

[ 85 ] [ 79 ] [ 80 ] [ 82 ] The United States' involvement in the Vietnam War in the 1960s was another divisive issue that further fractured the fault lines of the Democrats' coalition. After the Gulf of Tonkin Resolution in 1964, President Johnson committed a large contingency of combat troops to Vietnam, but the escalation failed to drive the Viet Cong from South Vietnam, resulting in an increasing quagmire , which by 1968 had become the subject of widespread anti-war protests in the United States and elsewhere. With increasing casualties and nightly news reports bringing home troubling images from Vietnam, the costly military engagement became increasingly unpopular, alienating many of the kinds of young voters that the Democrats had attracted in the early 1960s. The protests that year along with assassinations of Martin Luther King Jr.

and Democratic presidential candidate Senator Robert F. Kennedy (younger brother of John F. Kennedy) climaxed in turbulence at the hotly-contested Democratic National Convention that summer in Chicago (which amongst the ensuing turmoil inside and outside of the convention hall nominated Vice President Hubert Humphrey ) in a series of events that proved to mark a significant turning point in the decline of the Democratic Party's broad coalition.

[ 86 ] Jimmy Carter , the 39th president (1977–1981) Republican presidential nominee Richard Nixon was able to capitalize on the confusion of the Democrats that year, and won the 1968 election to become the 37th president. He won re-election in a landslide in 1972 against Democratic nominee George McGovern , who like Robert F. Kennedy, reached out to the younger anti-war and counterculture voters, but unlike Kennedy, was not able to appeal to the party's more traditional white working-class constituencies. During Nixon's second term, his presidency was rocked by the Watergate scandal, which forced him to resign in 1974. He was succeeded by vice president Gerald Ford , who served a brief tenure.

Watergate offered the Democrats an opportunity to recoup, and their nominee Jimmy Carter won the 1976 presidential election. With the initial support of evangelical Christian voters in the South, Carter was temporarily able to reunite the disparate factions within the party, but inflation and the Iran Hostage Crisis of 1979–1980 took their toll, resulting in a landslide victory for Republican presidential nominee Ronald Reagan in 1980, which shifted the political landscape in favor of the Republicans for years to come. The influx of conservative Democrats into the Republican Party is often cited as a reason for the Republican Party's shift further to the right during the late 20th century as well as the shift of its base from the Northeast and Midwest to the South.

[ 87 ] [ 88 ] 1990s and Third Way centrism Bill Clinton , the 42nd president (1993–2001) With the ascendancy of the Republicans under Ronald Reagan, the Democrats searched for ways to respond yet were unable to succeed by running traditional candidates, such as former vice president and Democratic presidential nominee Walter Mondale and Massachusetts Governor Michael Dukakis , who lost to Reagan and George H.W. Bush in the 1984 and 1988 presidential elections , respectively. Many Democrats attached their hopes to the future star of Gary Hart , who had challenged Mondale in the 1984 primaries running on a theme of "New Ideas"; and in the subsequent 1988 primaries became the de facto front-runner and virtual "shoo-in" for the Democratic presidential nomination before a sex scandal ended his campaign. The party nevertheless began to seek out a younger generation of leaders, who like Hart had been inspired by the pragmatic idealism of John F. Kennedy.

[ 89 ] Arkansas governor Bill Clinton was one such figure, who was elected president in 1992 as the Democratic nominee. The Democratic Leadership Council was a campaign organization connected to Clinton that advocated a realignment and triangulation under the re-branded " New Democrat " label.

[ 90 ] [ 26 ] [ 27 ] The party adopted a synthesis of neoliberal economic policies with cultural liberalism , with the voter base after Reagan having shifted considerably to the right .

[ 90 ] In an effort to appeal both to liberals and to fiscal conservatives, Democrats began to advocate for a balanced budget and market economy tempered by government intervention ( mixed economy ), along with a continued emphasis on social justice and affirmative action . The economic policy adopted by the Democratic Party, including the former Clinton administration , has been referred to as " Third Way ".

The Democrats lost control of Congress in the 1994 elections to the Republicans. However, in 1996 , Clinton was re-elected; he wae the first Democratic president since Franklin D. Roosevelt to win a second full term.

[ 91 ] Clinton's vice president Al Gore ran to succeed him as president, and won the popular vote , but after a controversial election dispute over a Florida recount settled by the U.S. Supreme Court (which ruled 5–4 in favor of Bush ), he lost the 2000 election to Republican opponent George W. Bush in the Electoral College .

[ 92 ] 21st century Barack Obama , the 44th president (2009–2017) In the wake of the 2001 terrorist attacks on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon as well as the growing concern over global warming , some of the party's key issues in the early 21st century have included combating terrorism while preserving human rights, expanding access to health care, labor rights , and environmental protection. Democrats regained majority control of both the House and the Senate in the 2006 elections .

Barack Obama won the Democratic Party's nomination and was elected as the first African American president in 2008. Under the Obama presidency, the party moved forward reforms including an economic stimulus package, the Dodd–Frank financial reform act and, in its biggest impact, reshaped the nation's healthcare with the Affordable Care Act .

[ 93 ] [ 94 ] 2000s–2010s and the Obama era In the 2010 midterm elections , the Democratic Party lost control of the House as well as its majorities in several state legislatures and governorships. The 2010 elections also marked the end of the Democratic Party's electoral dominance in the Southern United States .

[ 95 ] In the 2012 elections , President Obama was re-elected, but the party remained in the minority in the House of Representatives and lost control of the Senate in the 2014 midterm elections . After the 2016 election of Donald Trump , who lost the popular vote to Democratic nominee Hillary Clinton , the Democratic Party transitioned into the role of an opposition party and held neither the presidency nor Congress for two years.

[ 96 ] However, the party won back the House in the 2018 midterm elections under the leadership of Nancy Pelosi .

Democrats were extremely critical of President Trump, particularly his policies on immigration, healthcare, and abortion, as well as his response to the COVID-19 pandemic .

[ 97 ] [ 98 ] [ 99 ] In December 2019, Democrats in the House of Representatives impeached Trump , although he was acquitted in the Republican-controlled Senate.

[ 100 ] 2020s and opposition to Trumpism Joe Biden , the 46th president (2021–2025) In November 2020, Democrat Joe Biden defeated Trump to win the 2020 presidential election .

[ 101 ] After Trump attempted to challenge the election , he began his term with extremely narrow Democratic majorities in the U.S. House and Senate.

[ 102 ] [ 103 ] During the Biden presidency, the party had been characterized as adopting an increasingly progressive economic agenda .

[ 20 ] In 2022, Biden appointed Ketanji Brown Jackson , the first Black woman on the Supreme Court . However, she was replacing liberal justice Stephen Breyer , thus she did not alter the court's 6–3 split between conservatives (the majority) and liberals.

[ 104 ] [ 105 ] [ 106 ] [ 107 ] After Dobbs v. Jackson (decided June 24, 2022), which led to abortion bans in much of the country , the Democratic Party rallied behind abortion rights .

[ 32 ] In the 2022 midterm elections , Democrats dramatically outperformed historical trends and a widely anticipated red wave did not materialize.

[ 108 ] [ 109 ] The party only narrowly lost its majority in the U.S. House and expanded its majority in the U.S. Senate, [ 110 ] [ 111 ] [ 112 ] along with several gains at the state level.

[ 113 ] [ 114 ] [ 115 ] [ 116 ] In July 2024, after a series of age and health concerns , Biden became the first incumbent president since Lyndon B. Johnson in 1968 to withdraw from running for reelection, the first since the 19th century to withdraw after serving only one term, [ c ] and the only one to ever withdraw after already winning the primaries .

[ 117 ] [ 119 ] Vice President Kamala Harris —who became Biden's replacement on the ballot after his withdrawal from the race—became the first black woman to be nominated by a major party, but she was defeated in the 2024 election by Donald Trump. Harris lost the electoral college 312–226 (including all seven of the anticipated swing states ) as well as the popular vote, becoming the first Democratic candidate to do so since John Kerry in 2004, amid what was a global anti-incumbent backlash.

[ 120 ] [ 121 ] [ 122 ] [ 123 ] Current status As of 2025, Democrats hold 23 state governorships , 17 state legislatures , 15 state government trifectas , and the mayorships in the majority of the country's major cities.

[ 124 ] Three of the nine current U.S. Supreme Court justices were appointed by Democratic presidents. By registered members, the Democratic Party is the largest party in the U.S. and the fourth largest in the world . All totaled, 16 Democrats have served as president of the United States.

[ 4 ] Name and symbols It has been suggested that mascots be split out  into another article. ( Discuss ) (August 2024) "A Live Jackass Kicking a Dead Lion" by Thomas Nast, Harper's Weekly , January 19, 1870 The donkey party logo remains a well-known symbol for the Democratic Party despite not being the official logo of the party.

In use since 2010, the letter "D" enclosed in a circle has been one of the Democratic Party's main symbols.

The Democratic-Republican Party splintered in 1824 into the short-lived National Republican Party and the Jacksonian movement which in 1828 became the Democratic Party. During the Jacksonian era, the term "The Democracy" was in use by the party, but the name "Democratic Party" was eventually settled upon [ 125 ] and became the official name in 1844.

[ 126 ] Members of the party are called "Democrats" or "Dems".

The most common mascot symbol for the party has been the donkey, or jackass.

[ 127 ] Andrew Jackson 's enemies twisted his name to "jackass" as a term of ridicule regarding a stupid and stubborn animal. However, the Democrats liked the common-man implications and picked it up too, therefore the image persisted and evolved.

[ 128 ] Its most lasting impression came from the cartoons of Thomas Nast from 1870 in Harper's Weekly . Cartoonists followed Nast and used the donkey to represent the Democrats and the elephant to represent the Republicans.

In many states, the logo of the Democratic Party was a rooster, for instance, in Alabama: Logo of the Alabama Democratic Party , 1904–1966 (left) and 1966–1996 (right) [ 129 ] [ 130 ] In the early 20th century, the traditional symbol of the Democratic Party in Indiana, Kentucky, Oklahoma and Ohio was the rooster, as opposed to the Republican eagle.

[ 131 ] The rooster was also adopted as an official symbol of the national Democratic Party.

[ 132 ] In 1904, the Alabama Democratic Party chose, as the logo to put on its ballots, a rooster with the motto "White supremacy – For the right." [ 133 ] The words "White supremacy" were replaced with "Democrats" in 1966.

[ 134 ] [ 129 ] In 1996, the Alabama Democratic Party dropped the rooster, citing racist and white supremacist connotations linked with the symbol.

[ 130 ] The rooster symbol still appears on Oklahoma, Kentucky, Indiana, and West Virginia ballots .

[ 131 ] In New York, the Democratic ballot symbol is a five-pointed star.

[ 135 ] Although both major political parties (and many minor ones) use the traditional American colors of red, white, and blue in their marketing and representations, since election night 2000 blue has become the identifying color for the Democratic Party while red has become the identifying color for the Republican Party. That night, for the first time all major broadcast television networks used the same color scheme for the electoral map: blue states for Al Gore (Democratic nominee) and red states for George W. Bush (Republican nominee). Since then, the color blue has been widely used by the media to represent the party. This is contrary to common practice outside of the United States where blue is the traditional color of the right and red the color of the left.

[ 136 ] In 2025, a new logo was introduced, which incorporates a white donkey facing to the right instead of the left, with three blue stars in the center instead of four, on a blue background. The modified donkey design has been characterized by some as resembling a piñata .

[ 137 ] Jefferson-Jackson Day is the annual fundraising event (dinner) held by Democratic Party organizations across the United States.

[ 138 ] It is named after Presidents Thomas Jefferson and Andrew Jackson , whom the party regards as its distinguished early leaders.

The song " Happy Days Are Here Again " is the unofficial song of the Democratic Party. It was used prominently when Franklin D. Roosevelt was nominated for president at the 1932 Democratic National Convention and remains a sentimental favorite for Democrats. For example, Paul Shaffer played the theme on the Late Show with David Letterman after the Democrats won Congress in 2006. " Don't Stop " by Fleetwood Mac was adopted by Bill Clinton 's presidential campaign in 1992 and has endured as a popular Democratic song. The emotionally similar song " Beautiful Day " by the band U2 has also become a favorite theme song for Democratic candidates.

John Kerry used the song during his 2004 presidential campaign and several Democratic congressional candidates used it as a celebratory tune in 2006.

[ 139 ] [ 140 ] As a traditional anthem for its presidential nominating convention, Aaron Copland 's " Fanfare for the Common Man " is traditionally performed at the beginning of the Democratic National Convention.

Structure Democratic National Headquarters (2024) National committee The Democratic National Committee (DNC) is responsible for promoting Democratic campaign activities. While the DNC is responsible for overseeing the process of writing the Democratic Platform, the DNC is more focused on campaign and organizational strategy than public policy . In presidential elections, it supervises the Democratic National Convention . The national convention is subject to the charter of the party and the ultimate authority within the Democratic Party when it is in session, with the DNC running the party's organization at other times. Since February 1, 2025, the DNC has been chaired by Ken Martin .

[ 141 ] State parties Main article: List of state parties of the Democratic Party (United States) Each state also has a state committee, made up of elected committee members as well as ex officio committee members (usually elected officials and representatives of major constituencies), which in turn elects a chair. County, town, city, and ward committees generally are composed of individuals elected at the local level. State and local committees often coordinate campaign activities within their jurisdiction, oversee local conventions, and in some cases primaries or caucuses, and may have a role in nominating candidates for elected office under state law. Rarely do they have much direct funding, but in 2005 DNC Chairman Dean began a program (called the "50 State Strategy") of using DNC national funds to assist all state parties and pay for full-time professional staffers.

[ 142 ] In addition, state-level party committees operate in the territories of American Samoa , Guam , and Virgin Islands , the commonwealths of Northern Mariana Islands and Puerto Rico , and the District of Columbia , with all but Puerto Rico being active in nominating candidates for both presidential and territorial contests, while Puerto Rico's Democratic Party is organized only to nominate presidential candidates. The Democrats Abroad committee is organized by American voters who reside outside of U.S. territory to nominate presidential candidates. All such party committees are accorded recognition as state parties and are allowed to elect both members to the National Committee as well as delegates to the National Convention.

Major party committees and groups Then-Senator Obama speaking to College Democrats of America in 2007 The Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee (DCCC) assists party candidates in House races and is chaired by Representative Suzan DelBene of Washington . Similarly, the Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee (DSCC), chaired by Senator Gary Peters of Michigan, raises funds for Senate races. The Democratic Legislative Campaign Committee (DLCC), chaired by Majority Leader of the New York State Senate Andrea Stewart-Cousins , is a smaller organization that focuses on state legislative races. The Democratic Governors Association (DGA) is an organization supporting the candidacies of Democratic gubernatorial nominees and incumbents. Likewise, the mayors of the largest cities and urban centers convene as the National Conference of Democratic Mayors .

[ 143 ] The DNC sponsors the College Democrats of America (CDA), a student-outreach organization with the goal of training and engaging a new generation of Democratic activists.

Democrats Abroad is the organization for Americans living outside the United States. They work to advance the party's goals and encourage Americans living abroad to support the Democrats. The Young Democrats of America (YDA) and the High School Democrats of America (HSDA) are young adult and youth-led organizations respectively that attempt to draw in and mobilize young people for Democratic candidates but operates outside of the DNC.

Political positions Main article: Political positions of the Democratic Party (United States) This graph shows the real median US household income by race: 1967 to 2011, in 2011 dollars.

[ 144 ] The 21st century Democratic Party differs from other center-left parties around the world in its ideological orientation, in part due to its heterogenous demographic composition. In particular, the Democratic Party's ideology derives from being supported by both racial minorities, particularly African Americans , as well as White voters with high educational attainment .

[ 145 ] [ 146 ] This makes the Democratic Party different, because it is a big tent party , neither a classically liberal nor a social democratic party ideologically. Its voting demographics are heavily educationally and racially-polarized, but not income polarized.

[ 147 ] The Democratic Party is weakest among White voters without college degrees in the 21st century.

[ 148 ] Higher educational attainment is strongly correlated with higher income and wealth, and also strongly correlated with increased ideological support for the Democratic Party's positions among White voters.

[ 149 ] This derives in part from unique regional characteristics of the United States, particularly the Southern United States . Racial polarization is extremely high in the Southern United States, with Black Southerners almost entirely voting for the Democratic Party, and White Southerners almost entirely voting for the Republican Party.

[ 150 ] [ 151 ] Also, White Southerners with college degrees are strongly Republican, unlike in most of the rest of the country.

[ 152 ] African Americans continue to have the lowest incomes of any racial group in the United States.

[ 144 ] The Democratic Party's contemporary liberalism has its origins in the Puritans of New England , with their emphasis on education and science dating back to the colonial era and the Scientific Revolution . This liberalism is older than the classical liberalism or social democracy of the 19th century.

[ 153 ] The Democratic party's social positions derive from those of the New Left , that is cultural liberalism . These include feminism , LGBT rights, drug policy reforms , and environmentalism .

[ 154 ] [ 155 ] [ 156 ] [ 157 ] The party's platform favors a generous welfare state and a greater measure of social and economic equality.

[ 158 ] On social issues, it advocates for the continued legality of abortion , [ 32 ] the legalization of marijuana , [ 159 ] and LGBT rights .

[ 33 ] Economic issues The social safety net and strong labor unions have been at the heart of Democratic economic policy since the New Deal in the 1930s.

[ 158 ] The Democratic Party's economic policy positions, as measured by votes in Congress, tend to align with those of the middle class.

[ 160 ] [ 161 ] [ 162 ] [ 163 ] [ 164 ] Democrats support a progressive tax system, higher minimum wages , equal opportunity employment , Social Security , universal health care , public education , and subsidized housing .

[ 158 ] They also support infrastructure development and clean energy investments to achieve economic development and job creation.

[ 165 ] Since the 1990s, the party has at times supported centrist economic reforms that cut the size of government and reduced market regulations.

[ 166 ] The party has generally rejected both laissez-faire economics and market socialism , instead favoring Keynesian economics within a capitalist market-based system.

[ 167 ] Fiscal policy Democrats support a more progressive tax structure to provide more services and reduce economic inequality by making sure that the wealthiest Americans pay more in taxes.

[ 168 ] Democrats and Republicans traditionally take differing stances on eradicating poverty. Brady said "Our poverty level is the direct consequence of our weak social policies, which are a direct consequence of weak political actors".

[ 169 ] They oppose the cutting of social services, such as Social Security , Medicare , and Medicaid , [ 170 ] believing it to be harmful to efficiency and social justice . Democrats believe the benefits of social services in monetary and non-monetary terms are a more productive labor force and cultured population and believe that the benefits of this are greater than any benefits that could be derived from lower taxes, especially on top earners, or cuts to social services. Furthermore, Democrats see social services as essential toward providing positive freedom , freedom derived from economic opportunity. The Democratic-led House of Representatives reinstated the PAYGO (pay-as-you-go) budget rule at the start of the 110th Congress .

[ 171 ] Minimum wage See also: Minimum wage in the United States The Democratic Party favors raising the minimum wage . The Fair Minimum Wage Act of 2007 was an early component of the Democrats' agenda during the 110th Congress . In 2006, the Democrats supported six state-ballot initiatives to increase the minimum wage and all six initiatives passed.

[ 172 ] In 2017, Senate Democrats introduced the Raise the Wage Act which would raise the minimum wage to $15 an hour by 2024.

[ 173 ] In 2021, Democratic president Joe Biden proposed increasing the minimum wage to $15 by 2025.

[ 174 ] In many states controlled by Democrats, the state minimum wage has been increased to a rate above the federal minimum wage.

[ 175 ] Health care President Obama signing the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act into law in 2010 Democrats call for "affordable and quality health care" and favor moving toward universal health care in a variety of forms to address rising healthcare costs. Progressive Democrats politicians favor a single-payer program or Medicare for All , while liberals prefer creating a public health insurance option .

[ 36 ] The Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act , signed into law by President Barack Obama on March 23, 2010, has been one of the most significant pushes for universal health care. As of December 2019, more than 20 million Americans have gained health insurance under the Affordable Care Act.

[ 176 ] Education Democrats favor improving public education by raising school standards and reforming the Head Start program . They also support universal preschool , expanding access to primary education, including through charter schools , and are generally opposed to school voucher programs. They call for addressing student loan debt and reforms to reduce college tuition.

[ 177 ] Other proposals have included tuition-free public universities and reform of standardized testing . Democrats have the long-term aim of having publicly funded college education with low tuition fees (like in much of Europe and Canada), which would be available to every eligible American student. Alternatively, they encourage expanding access to post-secondary education by increasing state funding for student financial aid such as Pell Grants and college tuition tax deductions .

[ 178 ] Environment Main article: Environmental policy of the United States Democrats and Republicans have diverged on the seriousness of the threat posed by climate change, with Democrats' assessment rising significantly in the mid-2010s.

[ 179 ] The sharp divide over the existence of and responsibility for global warming and climate change falls largely along political lines. Overall, 60% of those surveyed said oil and gas companies were "completely or mostly responsible" for climate change.

[ 180 ] Opinion about human causation of climate change increased substantially with education among Democrats, but not among Republicans.

[ 181 ] Conversely, opinions favoring becoming carbon neutral declined substantially with age among Republicans, but not among Democrats.

[ 181 ] A broad range of policies to reduce greenhouse gas emissions has been proposed. Democrats' support for such policies consistently exceeds that of Republicans.

[ 182 ] Acceptance of wind and solar facilities in one's community is stronger among Democrats (blue), while acceptance of nuclear power plants is stronger among Republicans (red).

[ 183 ] Democrats believe that the government should protect the environment and have a history of environmentalism. In more recent years, this stance has emphasized renewable energy generation as the basis for an improved economy, greater national security , and general environmental benefits.

[ 184 ] The Democratic Party is substantially more likely than the Republican Party to support environmental regulation and policies that are supportive of renewable energy.

[ 185 ] [ 186 ] The Democratic Party also favors expansion of conservation lands and encourages open space and rail travel to relieve highway and airport congestion and improve air quality and the economy as it "believe[s] that communities, environmental interests, and the government should work together to protect resources while ensuring the vitality of local economies. Once Americans were led to believe they had to make a choice between the economy and the environment. They now know this is a false choice".

[ 187 ] The foremost environmental concern of the Democratic Party is climate change . Democrats, most notably former Vice President Al Gore , have pressed for stern regulation of greenhouse gases . On October 15, 2007, Gore won the Nobel Peace Prize for his efforts to build greater knowledge about man-made climate change and laying the foundations for the measures needed to counteract it.

[ 188 ] Renewable energy and fossil fuels Democrats have supported increased domestic renewable energy development, including wind and solar power farms, in an effort to reduce carbon pollution. The party's platform calls for an "all of the above" energy policy including clean energy, natural gas and domestic oil, with the desire of becoming energy independent.

[ 172 ] The party has supported higher taxes on oil companies and increased regulations on coal power plants , favoring a policy of reducing long-term reliance on fossil fuels .

[ 189 ] [ 190 ] Additionally, the party supports stricter fuel emissions standards to prevent air pollution.

During his presidency, Joe Biden enacted the Inflation Reduction Act of 2022 , which is the largest allocation of funds for addressing climate change in the history of the United States.

[ 191 ] [ 192 ] [ 193 ] Trade Like the Republican Party, the Democratic Party has taken widely varying views on international trade throughout its history. The Democratic Party has usually been more supportive of free trade than the Republican Party.

The Democrats dominated the Second Party System and set low tariffs designed to pay for the government but not protect industry. Their opponents the Whigs wanted high protective tariffs but usually were outvoted in Congress. Tariffs soon became a major political issue as the Whigs (1832–1852) and (after 1854) the Republicans wanted to protect their mostly northern industries and constituents by voting for higher tariffs and the Southern Democrats , which had very little industry but imported many goods voted for lower tariffs. After the Second Party System ended in 1854 the Democrats lost control and the new Republican Party had its opportunity to raise rates.

[ 194 ] During the Third Party System , Democratic president Grover Cleveland made low tariffs the centerpiece of Democratic Party policies, arguing that high tariffs were an unnecessary and unfair tax on consumers. The South and West generally supported low tariffs, while the industrial North high tariffs.

[ 195 ] During the Fourth Party System , Democratic president Woodrow Wilson made a drastic lowering of tariff rates a major priority for his presidency. The 1913 Underwood Tariff cut rates, and the new revenues generated by the federal income tax made tariffs much less important in terms of economic impact and political rhetoric.

[ 196 ] During the Fifth Party System , the Reciprocal Tariff Act of 1934 was enacted during FDR's administration, marking a sharp departure from the era of protectionism in the United States . American duties on foreign products declined from an average of 46% in 1934 to 12% by 1962.

[ 197 ] After World War II, the U.S. promoted the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) established in 1947 during the Truman administration , to minimize tariffs liberalize trade among all capitalist countries.

[ 198 ] [ 199 ] In the 1990s, the Clinton administration and a number of prominent Democrats pushed through a number of agreements such as the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA).

[ 200 ] Barack Obama signed several free trade agreements during his presidency while Joe Biden did not sign any free trade agreements during his presidency and increased some tariffs on China.

[ 201 ] [ 202 ] During Republican Donald Trump's two terms as president, the Democratic Party has been more in favor of free trade than the Republican Party. The Democratic Party remains supportive of the USMCA free trade agreement with Mexico and Canada.

[ 203 ] [ 204 ] Social issues Shirley Chisholm was the first major-party African American candidate to run nationwide primary campaigns.

The modern Democratic Party emphasizes social equality and equal opportunity . Democrats support voting rights and minority rights , including LGBT rights . Democratic president Lyndon B. Johnson signed the Civil Rights Act of 1964 , which outlawed racial segregation. Carmines and Stimson wrote "the Democratic Party appropriated racial liberalism and assumed federal responsibility for ending racial discrimination." [ 205 ] [ 206 ] [ 207 ] Ideological social elements in the party include cultural liberalism , civil libertarianism , and feminism . Some Democratic social policies are immigration reform, electoral reform , and women's reproductive rights .

Equal opportunity The Democratic Party is a staunch supporter of equal opportunity for all Americans regardless of sex, age, race, ethnicity, sexual orientation , gender identity , religion, creed, or national origin. The Democratic Party has broad appeal across most socioeconomic and ethnic demographics, as seen in recent exit polls.

[ 208 ] Democrats also strongly support the Americans with Disabilities Act to prohibit discrimination against people based on physical or mental disability. As such, the Democrats pushed as well the ADA Amendments Act of 2008 , a disability rights expansion that became law.

[ 209 ] Most Democrats support affirmative action to further equal opportunity. However, in 2020 57% voters in California voted to keep their state constitution's ban on affirmative action, despite Biden winning 63% of the vote in California in the same election.

[ 210 ] Voting rights The party is very supportive of improving "voting rights" as well as election accuracy and accessibility.

[ 211 ] They support extensions of voting time, including making election day a holiday. They support reforming the electoral system to eliminate gerrymandering , abolishing the electoral college , as well as passing comprehensive campaign finance reform .

[ 212 ] Abortion and reproductive rights See also: Abortion in the United States The Democratic position on abortion has changed significantly over time.

[ 213 ] [ 214 ] During the late 1960s and early 1970s, Republicans generally favored legalized abortion more than Democrats, [ 215 ] although significant heterogeneity could be found within both parties.

[ 216 ] During this time, opposition to abortion tended to be concentrated within the political left in the United States. Liberal Protestants and Catholics (many of whom were Democratic voters) opposed abortion, while most conservative Protestants supported legal access to abortion services.

[ 213 ] [ clarification needed ] In its national platforms from 1992 to 2004, the Democratic Party has called for abortion to be "safe, legal and rare"—namely, keeping it legal by rejecting laws that allow governmental interference in abortion decisions and reducing the number of abortions by promoting both knowledge of reproduction and contraception and incentives for adoption. When Congress voted on the Partial-Birth Abortion Ban Act in 2003, congressional Democrats were split, with a minority (including former Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid ) supporting the ban and the majority of Democrats opposing the legislation.

[ 217 ] According to the 2020 Democratic Party platform, "Democrats believe every woman should be able to access high-quality reproductive health care services, including safe and legal abortion." [ 218 ] After Roe v. Wade (1973) was overturned in Dobbs v. Jackson Women's Health Organization (2022), Democratic-controlled states and ballot initiatives were able to ensure access to abortion. The number of abortions in the United States increased after Dobbs , due to the right to travel between states.

[ 219 ] [ 220 ] Immigration See also: Immigration to the United States and Illegal immigration to the United States Apprehensions at the southwest border since 2000 Like the Republican Party, the Democratic Party has taken widely varying views on immigration throughout its history. Since the 1990s, the Democratic Party has been more supportive overall of immigration than the Republican Party.

[ 221 ] Many Democratic politicians have called for systematic reform of the immigration system such that residents that have come into the United States illegally have a pathway to legal citizenship. President Obama remarked in November 2013 that he felt it was "long past time to fix our broken immigration system," particularly to allow "incredibly bright young people" that came over as students to become full citizens.

[ 222 ] In 2013, Democrats in the Senate passed S. 744 , which would reform immigration policy to allow citizenship for illegal immigrants in the United States. The law failed to pass in the House and was never re-introduced after the 113th Congress .

[ 223 ] Opposition to immigration has increased in the 2020s, with a majority of Democrats supporting increasing border security.

[ 224 ] [ 225 ] In the 2024 presidential election , Trump increased his vote share in counties along the Mexico–United States border , including in majority-Hispanic counties .

[ 226 ] [ 227 ] LGBT rights See also: LGBT rights in the United States The Democratic position on LGBT rights has changed significantly over time.

[ 228 ] [ 229 ] Before the 2000s, like the Republicans, the Democratic Party often took positions hostile to LGBT rights. As of the 2020s, both voters and elected representatives within the Democratic Party are overwhelmingly supportive of LGBT rights.

[ 228 ] Support for same-sex marriage has steadily increased among the general public, including voters in both major parties, since the start of the 21st century. An April 2009 ABC News/ Washington Post public opinion poll put support among Democrats at 62%.

[ 230 ] A 2006 Pew Research Center poll of Democrats found that 55% supported gays adopting children with 40% opposed while 70% support gays in the military , with only 23% opposed.

[ 231 ] Gallup polling from May 2009 stated that 82% of Democrats support open enlistment.

[ 232 ] A 2023 Gallup public opinion poll found 84% of Democrats support same-sex marriage, compared to 71% support by the general public and 49% support by Republicans.

[ 233 ] The 2004 Democratic National Platform stated that marriage should be defined at the state level and it repudiated the Federal Marriage Amendment .

[ 234 ] John Kerry , the Democratic presidential nominee in 2004, did not support same-sex marriage in his campaign.

While not stating support of same-sex marriage, the 2008 platform called for repeal of the Defense of Marriage Act , which banned federal recognition of same-sex marriage and removed the need for interstate recognition, supported antidiscrimination laws and the extension of hate crime laws to LGBT people and opposed "don't ask, don't tell".

[ 235 ] [ 236 ] The 2012 platform included support for same-sex marriage and for the repeal of DOMA.

[ 33 ] On May 9, 2012, Barack Obama became the first sitting president to say he supports same-sex marriage.

[ 237 ] [ 238 ] Previously, he had opposed restrictions on same-sex marriage such as the Defense of Marriage Act , which he promised to repeal, [ 239 ] California's Prop 8 , [ 240 ] and a constitutional amendment to ban same-sex marriage (which he opposed saying that "decisions about marriage should be left to the states as they always have been"), [ 241 ] but also stated that he personally believed marriage to be between a man and a woman and that he favored civil unions that would "give same-sex couples equal legal rights and privileges as married couples".

[ 239 ] Earlier, when running for the Illinois Senate in 1996 he said, "I favor legalizing same-sex marriages, and would fight efforts to prohibit such marriages".

[ 242 ] Former presidents Bill Clinton [ 243 ] and Jimmy Carter [ 244 ] along with former Democratic presidential nominees Al Gore [ 245 ] and Michael Dukakis [ 246 ] support same-sex marriage. President Joe Biden has supported same-sex marriage since 2012, when he became the highest-ranking government official to support it. In 2022, Biden signed the Respect for Marriage Act ; the law repealed the Defense of Marriage Act, which Biden had voted for during his Senate tenure.

[ 247 ] Status of Puerto Rico and D.C.

The 2016 Democratic Party platform declares, regarding the status of Puerto Rico: "We are committed to addressing the extraordinary challenges faced by our fellow citizens in Puerto Rico. Many stem from the fundamental question of Puerto Rico's political status. Democrats believe that the people of Puerto Rico should determine their ultimate political status from permanent options that do not conflict with the Constitution, laws, and policies of the United States. Democrats are committed to promoting economic opportunity and good-paying jobs for the hardworking people of Puerto Rico. We also believe that Puerto Ricans must be treated equally by Medicare, Medicaid, and other programs that benefit families. Puerto Ricans should be able to vote for the people who make their laws, just as they should be treated equally. All American citizens, no matter where they reside, should have the right to vote for the president of the United States. Finally, we believe that federal officials must respect Puerto Rico's local self-government as laws are implemented and Puerto Rico's budget and debt are restructured so that it can get on a path towards stability and prosperity".

[ 248 ] Also, it declares that regarding the status of the District of Columbia : "Restoring our democracy also means finally passing statehood for the District of Columbia, so that the American citizens who reside in the nation's capital have full and equal congressional rights as well as the right to have the laws and budget of their local government respected without Congressional interference." [ 248 ] Legal issues Gun control U.S. opinion on gun control issues is deeply divided along political lines, as shown in this 2021 survey.

[ 249 ] With a stated goal of reducing crime and homicide, the Democratic Party has introduced various gun control measures, most notably the Gun Control Act of 1968 , the Brady Bill of 1993 and the Violent Crime Control and Law Enforcement Act (1994). In its national platform for 2008, the only statement explicitly favoring gun control was a plan calling for renewal of the 1994 Assault Weapons Ban .

[ 250 ] In 2022, Democratic president Joe Biden signed the Bipartisan Safer Communities Act , which among other things expanded background checks and provided incentives for states to pass red flag laws .

[ 251 ] The Democratic Party does not oppose gun ownership.

[ 252 ] According to a 2023 Pew Research Center poll, 20% of Democrats owned firearms, compared to 32% of the general public and 45% of Republicans.

[ 253 ] Death penalty See also: Capital punishment in the United States The Democratic position on capital punishment has shifted multiple times over the decades. In 1968,  Attorney General Ramsey Clark , representing the Johnson Administration , asked Congress to abolish the federal death penalty .

[ 254 ] In 1972, the Democratic Party platform called for the abolition of capital punishment.

[ 255 ] In 1988, Democratic Presidential nominee Michael Dukakis 's statement in the 1988 United States presidential debates that he would oppose the death penalty even if his wife were raped and murdered was seen by many viewers as callous and emotionless, and was widely viewed as having contributed to his loss to George H.W. Bush in the general election.

[ 256 ] During his presidential campaign , Bill Clinton sought to distance himself from his party's left flank through his strong support for the death penalty, including by personally supervising the execution of Ricky Ray Rector , a lobotomized African-American man convicted of killing a police officer.

[ 257 ] [ 258 ] During Clinton's presidency , Democrats led the expansion of the federal death penalty. These efforts were manifested in the 1994 Violent Crime Control and Law Enforcement Act , which expanded the federal death penalty to around 60 offenses, and the Antiterrorism and Effective Death Penalty Act of 1996 , which heavily limited appeals in death penalty cases.

[ 259 ] The Democratic Party platforms of 1996 and 2000 supported capital punishment outright, while the Democratic Party platforms of 2008 and 2012 warned against arbitrary application and the execution of innocents.

[ 260 ] In June 2016, the Democratic Platform Drafting Committee unanimously adopted an amendment to abolish the death penalty.

[ 261 ] The 2020 Democratic Party platform reiterated the Party's opposition to capital punishment.

[ 262 ] The 2024 platform is the first since the 2004 platform that does not mention the death penalty, and the first since 2016 not to call for abolition.

[ 263 ] However, on December 23, 2024, President Biden commuted the sentences of 37 out of 40 federal death row inmates to life in prison without parole.

[ 264 ] Torture Many Democrats are opposed to the use of torture against individuals apprehended and held prisoner by the United States military , and hold that categorizing such prisoners as unlawful combatants does not release the United States from its obligations under the Geneva Conventions . Democrats contend that torture is inhumane, damages the United States' moral standing in the world, and produces questionable results. Democrats are largely against waterboarding .

[ 265 ] Torture became a divisive issue in the party after Barack Obama was elected president.

[ 266 ] Privacy The Democratic Party believes that individuals should have a right to privacy . For example, many Democrats have opposed the NSA warrantless surveillance of American citizens .

[ 267 ] [ 268 ] Some Democratic officeholders have championed consumer protection laws that limit the sharing of consumer data between corporations. Democrats have opposed sodomy laws since the 1972 platform which stated that "Americans should be free to make their own choice of life-styles and private habits without being subject to discrimination or prosecution", [ 255 ] and believe that government should not regulate consensual noncommercial sexual conduct among adults as a matter of personal privacy.

[ 269 ] Foreign policy issues In foreign policy, the party supports liberal internationalism as well as tough stances against China and Russia .

[ 40 ] [ 41 ] [ 42 ] The foreign policy of the voters of the two major parties has largely overlapped since the 1990s. A Gallup poll in early 2013 showed broad agreement on the top issues, albeit with some divergence regarding human rights and international cooperation through agencies such as the United Nations.

[ 270 ] In June 2014, the Quinnipiac Poll asked Americans which foreign policy they preferred: A) The United States is doing too much in other countries around the world, and it is time to do less around the world and focus more on our own problems here at home.
B) The United States must continue to push forward to promote democracy and freedom in other countries worldwide because these efforts make our own country more secure.

Democrats chose A over B by 65% to 32%; Republicans chose A over B by 56% to 39%; and independents chose A over B by 67% to 29%.

[ 271 ] Iran sanctions See also: United States sanctions against Iran The Democratic Party has been critical of Iran's nuclear weapon program and supported economic sanctions against the Iranian government. In 2013, the Democratic-led administration worked to reach a diplomatic agreement with the government of Iran to halt the Iranian nuclear weapon program in exchange for international economic sanction relief.

[ 272 ] As of 2014 [update] , negotiations had been successful and the party called for more cooperation with Iran in the future.

[ 273 ] In 2015, the Obama administration agreed to the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action , which provides sanction relief in exchange for international oversight of the Iranian nuclear program . In February 2019, the Democratic National Committee passed a resolution calling on the United States to re-enter the JCPOA, which President Trump withdrew from in 2018.

[ 274 ] Invasion of Afghanistan See also: Afghanistan–United States relations and International public opinion on the war in Afghanistan Democrats in the House of Representatives and in the Senate near-unanimously voted for the Authorization for Use of Military Force Against Terrorists against "those responsible for the recent attacks launched against the United States " in Afghanistan in 2001, supporting the NATO coalition invasion of the nation . Most elected Democrats continued to support the Afghanistan conflict during George W. Bush's presidency.

[ 275 ] [ 276 ] During the 2008 Presidential Election , then-candidate Barack Obama called for a "surge" of troops into Afghanistan.

[ 276 ] After winning the presidency, Obama followed through, sending additional troops to Afghanistan. Troop levels were 94,000 in December 2011 and kept falling, with a target of 68,000 by fall 2012.

[ 277 ] Support for the war among the American people diminished over time. Many Democrats changed their opinion over the course of the war, coming to oppose continuation of the conflict.

[ 278 ] [ 279 ] In July 2008, Gallup found that 41% of Democrats called the invasion a "mistake" while a 55% majority disagreed.

[ 279 ] A CNN survey in August 2009 stated that a majority of Democrats opposed the war. CNN polling director Keating Holland said: "Nearly two thirds of Republicans support the war in Afghanistan. Three quarters of Democrats oppose the war".

[ 278 ] During the 2020 Presidential Election , then-candidate Joe Biden promised to "end the forever wars in Afghanistan and the Middle East." [ 280 ] Biden went on to win the election, and in April 2021, he announced he would withdraw all US troops from Afghanistan by September 11 of that year.

[ 281 ] The last troops left in August, bringing America's 20-year-long military campaign in the country to a close.

[ 282 ] According to a 2023 AP-NORC poll, a majority of Democrats believed that the War in Afghanistan was not worth it.

[ 283 ] Israel See also: Israel–United States relations Israeli prime minister Benjamin Netanyahu meeting with President Obama in 2013 Democrats have historically been a stronger supporter of Israel than Republicans.

[ 284 ] During the 1940s, the party advocated for the cause of an independent Jewish state over the objections of many conservatives in the Old Right , who strongly opposed it.

[ 284 ] In 1948, Democratic President Harry Truman became the first world leader to recognize an independent state of Israel.

[ 285 ] The 2020 Democratic Party platform acknowledges a "commitment to Israel's security, its qualitative military edge, its right to defend itself, and the 2016 Memorandum of Understanding is ironclad" and that "we oppose any effort to unfairly single out and delegitimize Israel, including at the United Nations or through the Boycott, Divestment, and Sanctions Movement ".

[ 286 ] During the Gaza war , the party requested a large-scale military aid package to Israel.

[ 287 ] Biden also announced military support for Israel , condemned the actions of Hamas and other Palestinian militants as terrorism, [ 288 ] and ordered the US military to build a port to facilitate the arrival of humanitarian aid to Palestinian civilians in Gaza .

[ 289 ] However, parts of the Democratic base also became more skeptical of the Israel government.

[ 290 ] The number of Democrats (and Americans in general) who oppose sending arms to Israel has grown as Israel's war in Gaza has continued.

[ 291 ] Experts said support for Israel could have had a negative impact on Democrats in several key states, including Michigan and Pennsylvania, in the 2024 presidential election.

[ 292 ] Late in 2024, twenty Democratic lawmakers requested support for US legislation that would ban arms trade with countries that hinder humanitarian aid.

[ 293 ] According to a Pew Research Center poll conducted in March 2025, 69% of Democrats have an unfavorable view of Israel, compared to 53% in 2022, before the Gaza war.

[ 294 ] By July 2025, about half of the Democratic Senate delegation was opposed to sending arms to Israel.

[ 295 ] Europe, Russia, and Ukraine The 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine was politically and economically opposed by the Biden Administration, who promptly began an increased arming of Ukraine.

[ 296 ] [ 297 ] In October 2023, the Biden administration requested an additional $61.4 billion in aid for Ukraine for the year ahead, [ 298 ] but delays in the passage of further aid by the Republican-controlled House of Representatives inhibited progress, with the additional $61 billion in aid to Ukraine added in April 2024.

[ 299 ] [ 300 ] [ 301 ] Demographics Main article: Demographics of the Democratic Party (United States) Top to bottom: 2020 presidential election by county; Majority-Black Counties in the U.S. as of the 2020 United States Census In the 2024 presidential election , the party performed best among voters who were upper income , [ 302 ] [ 303 ] [ 304 ] lived in urban areas , [ 305 ] [ 306 ] college graduates , [ 307 ] [ 308 ] [ 309 ] [ 310 ] [ 311 ] identified as Atheist , Agnostic , or Jewish ; African Americans , [ 312 ] [ 313 ] LGBT+ , and unmarried .

[ 80 ] [ 160 ] [ 314 ] In particular, Kamala Harris ' two strongest demographic groups in the 2024 presidential election were African Americans (86–13%) and LGBT voters (86–12%).

[ 315 ] Support for the civil rights movement in the 1960s by Democratic presidents John F. Kennedy and Lyndon B. Johnson helped increase the Democrats' support within the African American community. African Americans have consistently voted between 85% and 95% Democratic since the 1960s, making African Americans one of the largest of the party's constituencies.

[ 312 ] [ 313 ] According to the Pew Research Center , 78.4% of Democrats in the 116th United States Congress were Christian.

[ 316 ] However, the vast majority of white evangelical and Latter-day Saint Christians favor the Republican Party .

[ 317 ] The party also receives strong support from non-religious voters.

[ 318 ] [ 319 ] Age Younger Americans have tended to vote mainly for Democratic candidates in recent years, particularly those under the age of 30.

[ 320 ] In the 2024 presidential election, Harris won voters aged 18–29 (54-43%) and 30–39 (51-45%), tied among those aged 40–49 (49-49%), lost those aged 50–64 (43–56%), and narrowly lost those aged 65 and older (49–50%). The median voter is in their 50s.

[ 321 ] One of the main reasons that 18–29 year old voters strongly support Democrats is that they are much less likely to be married. Harris tied with White voters aged 18–29 (49-49%) and won White women aged 18–29 (54-44%).

[ 322 ] Race Top to bottom: White vote in the 2020 presidential election by state and county.

[ 323 ] [ 150 ] Referring to the state map of the White vote, Kamala Harris in 2024 won every state where Joe Biden won the White vote in 2020 . Republican Donald Trump won every state where Joe Biden lost the White vote except for Virginia .

[ 323 ] Virginia is both 20% African American and its White voters are much less Republican than those of other Southern states, because Northern Virginia in the Washington metropolitan area is a Democratic stronghold.

[ 324 ] Referring to the county map of the White vote, Democrats do win White voters in most of New England and the West Coast . Democrats also do well in regions with high Nordic and Scandinavian ancestry . For example, this keeps White voters in Minnesota and Wisconsin much less Republican than in other Midwestern states.

[ 325 ] [ 326 ] Democrats are also relatively competitive among or win White voters in parts of the Northeast , Midwest , and Southwest . Democrats do particularly poorly among White Southerners , as racial polarization is extremely high in the Southern United States.

[ 323 ] In the 2024 presidential election, African Americans supported Kamala Harris 86-13%, while White Southerners supported Donald Trump 67-32%. Even in many urban counties in the Southern United States, Democrats do not win a majority of White voters. Trump won both White Southerners with college degrees (57-41%) and without college degrees (75-24%).

[ 323 ] In the swing states of Georgia and North Carolina, which Harris lost by 2.2% and 3.2%, Whites supported Trump 71-28% and 62-37%. Trump won White voters with college degrees in Georgia 57-43%, and lost White voters with college degrees in North Carolina 47–51%.

White evangelicals supported Trump in Georgia (91-9%) and North Carolina (87-12%), on par with African American support for Harris in Georgia (88-11%) and North Carolina (86-12%).

[ 315 ] New Mexico is half-Hispanic (49.3%), as the most heavily-Hispanic state in the country.

[ 327 ] Of the 19 states and the District of Columbia won by Kamala Harris in the 2024 presidential election, all except New Mexico had above-average educational attainment.

[ 328 ] New Mexico also had the lowest population density and the highest poverty rate of any state carried by Harris.

Gender and sexual minorities Total Fertility Rate by U.S. state in 2021 Since 1980, a "gender gap" has seen stronger support for the Democratic Party among women than among men. Unmarried and divorced women are more likely to vote for Democrats.

[ 329 ] [ 330 ] Although women supported Obama over Mitt Romney by a margin of 55–44% in 2012, Romney prevailed amongst married women, 53–46%.

[ 331 ] Obama won unmarried women 67–31%.

[ 332 ] According to a December 2019 study, "White women are the only group of female voters who support Republican Party candidates for president. They have done so by a majority in all but 2 of the last 18 elections".

[ 333 ] [ 334 ] In the 2024 presidential election, LGBT voters supported Harris 86-12%, on par with African Americans. Harris lost married men (38–60%) and married women (47–52%), tied among unmarried men (48-48%), and won unmarried women (61-38%).

[ 322 ] White women with college degrees do support Democrats somewhat strongly, with Harris winning them 58-41%, likely the best ever modern performance with this demographic. They were one of the few demographic groups that shifted towards Democrats from 2020 to 2024.

[ 335 ] Total fertility rate is strongly negatively correlated with support for the Democratic Party. Specifically, as total fertility increased in states, Democratic vote share decreased.

[ 322 ] Region See also: Solid South Proportion of Americans who are Hispanic or Latino in each U.S. state, DC , and Puerto Rico as of the 2020 United States Census Geographically, the party is strongest in the Northeastern United States , parts of the Great Lakes region and Southwestern United States , and the West Coast . The party is also very strong in major cities , regardless of region.

[ 306 ] The Democratic Party gradually lost its power in the Southern United States since 1964 . Although Richard Nixon carried 49 states in 1972 , including every Southern state, the Republican Party remained quite weak at the local and state levels across the entire South for decades. Republicans first won a majority of U.S. House seats in the South in the 1994 " Republican Revolution ", and only began to dominate the South after the 2010 elections .

[ 95 ] Since the 2010s, White Southerners are the Republican Party's strongest racial demographic, in some Deep South states voting nearly as Republican as African Americans vote Democratic.

[ 150 ] This is partially attributable to religiosity, with White evangelical Christians in the Bible Belt , which covers most of the South, being the Republican Party's strongest religious demographic.

The Democratic Party is particularly strong in the West Coast and Northeastern United States. In particular, the Democratic Party receives its strongest support from White voters in these two regions. This is attributable to the two regions having the highest educational attainment in the country and being part of the " Unchurched Belt ," with the lowest rates of religiosity in the country.

[ 323 ] The Democratic Party's support in the Midwest and Southwest are more mixed, with varying levels of support from White voters in both regions. In the Midwest, the Democratic Party receives varying levels of support, with some states safely Democratic, some swing states , and some safely Republican. In the Southwest, the Democratic Party also relies on Hispanic voters.

[ 336 ] The Democratic Party is particularly weak in the Great Plains and some Mountain states . In particular, the states of Idaho , Utah , Wyoming , North Dakota , South Dakota , Nebraska , [ d ] Kansas , and Oklahoma have not voted for the Democratic Party since the 1964 presidential election .

Montana has not voted for the Democratic Party since the 1992 presidential election .

[ 337 ] White voters have considerable regional variations. In 2024 presidential election, Kamala Harris lost Southern White voters 32–67% and Midwestern White voters 40–59%. Harris tied among White voters in the Northeastern United States 49-49%, and won White voters in the Western United States 52-45%. Harris lost White voters in the country as a whole to Trump 42–57%.

[ 315 ] Population density Main articles: Urban-rural political divide and List of states and territories of the United States by population density The Democratic Party's support is strongly positively correlated with increased population density, consistent with the urban-rural divide observed globally.

[ 338 ] [ 306 ] Notably, in the 2024 presidential election , the swings against Kamala Harris were inversely correlated to population density, shrinking the urban-rural divide slightly.

[ 339 ] Harris still received higher support as population density increased. But relative to 2020, urban areas had the largest swings against Harris, suburban areas had lesser swings against Harris, and rural areas had the smallest swings against Harris.

[ 340 ] Specifically, Harris won voters in urban areas (60-38%), narrowly lost voters in suburban areas (47–51%), and lost voters in rural areas (34–64%). The urban-rural divide holds after controlling for race.

[ 315 ] Harris won White voters in urban areas (53-45%), lost them in suburban areas (41–57%), and lost them in rural areas (31–68%).

Harris won Hispanic voters in urban areas (57-39%) and suburban areas (51-48%), and lost them in rural areas (33–66%).

Harris won African American voters in urban areas (89-10%), suburban areas (86-12%), and rural areas (71-27%).

The only state of the ten least densely populated that Harris won was New Mexico , which is half-Hispanic (49.3%).

In the Southern United States , racial polarization is often stronger than the urban-rural divide. In particular, Democrats lose White voters in many Southern urban areas, while doing extremely well in rural majority-Black counties .

[ 323 ] Income and wealth Higher educational attainment in the US corresponds with higher median household wealth.

[ 341 ] Median U.S. household income per County in 2021, showing the distribution of income geographically in the United States Proportion of Americans living below the poverty line in each county of the fifty states, the District of Columbia, and Puerto Rico Until the 2016 victory of Republican Donald Trump , lower income was strongly correlated to voting for the Democratic Party among the general electorate.

[ 146 ] However, in all three of Trump's elections in 2016, 2020, and 2024, the previous correlation between lower incomes and voting for the Democratic Party was eliminated.

[ 342 ] For White voters, instead higher educational attainment was strongly correlated with higher support for the Democratic Party.

[ 145 ] In the 2024 presidential election, Democratic nominee Kamala Harris did better among higher-income voters than lower-income voters for the first time ever in modern American political history.

[ 303 ] [ 304 ] High-income voters, including high-income White voters and White men with college degrees, are no longer Republican demographic strongholds and voted in line with the national popular vote in 2024.

[ 343 ] Harris only narrowly lost White voters making $100,000 to $199,999 (49–50%), over $200,000 (48–51%), and White men with college degrees (48–50%), all on par with Harris losing the popular vote 48–50%. White men with college degrees are the highest-income demographic group.

[ 302 ] Nate Silver argues that the urban-rural divide , educational polarization, and racial polarization have rendered income irrelevant to voters in the Trump era.

[ 147 ] African Americans continue to be the lowest-income demographic in the United States.

[ 344 ] According to 2024 exit polls, 45% of Black voters made less than $50,000 a year, compared to 27% of the electorate.

[ 315 ] Harris still won most of the lowest-income counties , which are mainly majority-Black counties in the Southern Black Belt .

[ 311 ] Higher educational attainment is strongly correlated to higher income and wealth, and the 2021-2023 inflation surge resulted in lower-income voters losing purchasing power while higher-income voters gained from asset prices increasing due to inflation, including stocks and real estate .

[ 345 ] Among White voters in 2024, income was negatively correlated with support for Kamala Harris. Specifically, Harris lost White voters making less than $30,000 (34–63%), those making between $30,000 to $49,999 (37–62%), and those making $50,000 to $99,999 (42–56%). Harris only narrowly lost White voters making $100,000 to $199,999 (49–50%) and those making more than $200,000 (48–51%).

[ 346 ] Among the electorate as a whole, Harris won those making less than $30,000 (50–46%), lost those making between $30,000 and $99,999 (46–52%), won those making between $100,000 and $199,999 (51–48%), and won those making over $200,000 (52–46%). Harris' strongest income demographic were voters making over $200,000 a year.

[ 315 ] [ 347 ] After controlling for education, there was little difference in White voter support for Harris by annual income. Note than 54% of White voters did not have degrees, and 46% of White voters did have college degrees.

[ 315 ] Harris lost White voters without college degrees making less than $50,000 (30–68%), making between $50,000 and $99,999 (32–67%), and making over $100,000 (33–66%). Among White voters without college degrees, 36% made less than $50,000, 35% made between $50,000 and $99,999, and 30% over $100,000.

Harris won White voters with college degrees making less than $50,000 (54–44%), making between $50,000 and $99,999 (54–45%), and making over $100,000 (53–46%). Among White voters with college degrees, 11% made less than $50,000, 27% made between $50,000 and $99,999, and 62% made over $100,000.

According to a 2022 Gallup poll, roughly equal proportions of Democrats (64-35%) and Republicans (66-34%) had money invested in the stock market .

[ 348 ] Education In the 2020 presidential election, college-educated White voters in all 50 states voted more Democratic than non-college White voters, as displayed in the two maps.

[ 309 ] [ 310 ] As of 2022, over 90% of American adults over the age of 25 have completed high school. However, only 35% have a Bachelor's degree and 17% have a graduate degree.

[ 328 ] Higher educational attainment among White voters corresponds to increased ideological support for the Democratic Party.

[ 149 ] Educational attainment is not the only factor that affects ideology among White voters.

[ 323 ] After controlling for education, there still remain huge variations by state and region.

[ 315 ] Educational polarization is weaker than racial polarization in the South.

[ 152 ] Southern White voters with college degrees remain strongly Republican, with Harris losing them 41–57% in the 2024 presidential election. Harris won White voters with college degrees in the Midwestern United States 50-48%, the Northeastern United States 61-38%, and in the Western United States 67-30%. Harris won White voters with college degrees as a whole 53-45%.

Harris lost White voters without college degrees 24–75% in the Southern United States, 32–67% in the Midwestern United States, 37–61% in the Northeastern United States, and 42–56% in the Western United States. Harris lost White voters without college degrees as a whole 32–66%.

Educational polarization has benefitted Democrats in some well-educated Southern states, because it has not changed African American support for Democrats. Democrats are competitive in Georgia and North Carolina because there is much more room for Democrats to grow among White Southerners with college degrees than ground for Democrats to fall among White Southerners without college degrees. This also keeps Virginia reliably Democratic, despite its White voters voting Republican.

[ 349 ] In the 2024 presidential election, among White voters educational attainment was strongly positively correlated with support for Kamala Harris. Specifically, as educational attainment increased among White voters, so did support for Harris. It wasn't only about having a college degree or not, but rather support for Harris continuously increased as educational attainment increased.

In particular, Harris lost White voters with high school or less 25–73%, an Associate degree 31–67%, and some college 38–61%. Harris tied with Trump among White voters with a Bachelor's degree 49-49%, and won White voters with a graduate degree 58-40%.

[ 315 ] Educational polarization is stronger than gender and marital status among White voters, but weaker than racial polarization in the South.

[ 315 ] Harris won White women with college degrees (58-41%) and lost White men with college degrees (48–50%) by the same as the popular vote.

[ 335 ] Harris lost White women without college degrees (35–63%) and White men without college degrees (29–69%).

According to a Gallup poll in November 2024, unionization rates were positively correlated to increased educational attainment and higher income. In particular, 15% of those with graduate degrees, 8% with bachelor's degrees, 9% with some college, and 5% with high school or less were unionized. Also, 11% of those with household incomes of $100,000 or more, 7% of those with $40,000 to $99,999, and 3% with less than $40,000 were unionized. Also only 6% of those in the private sector were unionized, compared to 28% of government employees.

[ 350 ] Many Democrats without college degrees differ from liberals in their more socially moderate views, and are more likely to belong to an ethnic minority.

[ 351 ] [ 352 ] White voters with college degrees are more likely to live in urban areas.

[ 351 ] There was no difference in support for Harris from African Americans based on education, with Harris winning African Americans with and without a college degree 86-13%.

There was a modest difference in support for Harris among Hispanic voters with a college degree (54-42%) and without a college degree (51-48%). This was far less than the differences among Hispanic voters in urban (57-39%), suburban (51-48%), and rural areas (33–66%).

[ 344 ] Factions Further information: Factions in the Democratic Party (United States) Bar plot of the percentage of the population with a BA or higher in the electoral jurisdictions won by Kamala Harris in the 2024 United States presidential election.

[ 328 ] Upon foundation, the Democratic Party supported agrarianism and the Jacksonian democracy movement of President Andrew Jackson , representing farmers and rural interests and traditional Jeffersonian democrats .

[ 353 ] Since the 1890s, especially in northern states, the party began to favor more liberal positions (the term "liberal" in this sense describes modern liberalism , rather than classical liberalism or economic liberalism ). Historically, the party has represented farmers, laborers, and religious and ethnic minorities as it has opposed unregulated business and finance and favored progressive income taxes.

In the 1930s, the party began advocating social programs targeted at the poor. Before the New Deal , the party had a fiscally conservative , pro-business wing, typified by Grover Cleveland and Al Smith .

[ 354 ] The party was dominant in the Southern United States until President Lyndon B. Johnson signed the Civil Rights Act of 1964 . In foreign policy, internationalism (including interventionism ) was a dominant theme from 1913 to the mid-1960s. The major influences for liberalism were labor unions (which peaked in the 1936–1952 era) and African Americans. Environmentalism has been a major component since the 1970s.

Even after the New Deal, until the 2010s, the party still had a fiscally conservative faction , [ 355 ] such as John Nance Garner and Howard W. Smith .

[ 356 ] The party's Southern conservative wing began shrinking after President Lyndon B. Johnson supported the Civil Rights Act of 1964 , and largely died out in the 2010s, as the Republican Party built up its Southern base.

[ 95 ] [ 150 ] The party still receives support from African Americans and urban areas in the Southern United States.

[ 357 ] [ 358 ] The 21st century Democratic Party is predominantly a coalition of centrists, liberals, and progressives, with significant overlap between the three groups. In 2019, the Pew Research Center found that among Democratic and Democratic-leaning registered voters, 47% identify as liberal or very liberal, 38% identify as moderate, and 14% identify as conservative or very conservative.

[ 359 ] [ 360 ] Political scientists characterize the Democratic Party as less ideologically cohesive than the Republican Party due to the broader diversity of coalitions that compose the Democratic Party.

[ 361 ] [ 362 ] [ 363 ] The party has lost significant ground with voters without college degrees in the 21st century, in line with trends across the developed world.

[ 364 ] The realignment unfolded gradually, first with White voters in the South [ 150 ] [ 151 ] and Midwest , [ 365 ] and later with voters as a whole without college degrees, except for African Americans .

[ 342 ] [ 366 ] Democrats have consistently won voters with graduate degrees since the 1990s, including a majority of White voters with graduate degrees.

[ 307 ] Since the 2010s, the party's main demographic gains have been among White voters with college degrees, which were previously a Republican-leaning group until 2016.

[ 145 ] The party still receives extremely strong support from African Americans , but has lost ground among other racial minorities, including Hispanics , Native Americans , and Asian Americans .

[ 303 ] Liberals See also: Modern liberalism in the United States Top: Percent of self-identified liberals by state in 2018, according to a Gallup poll.

[ 367 ] Bottom: Linear regression of educational attainment vs. liberalism by state, based on the same Gallup data.

[ 367 ] Modern liberals are a large portion of the Democratic base. According to 2018 exit polls, liberals constituted 27% of the electorate, and 91% of American liberals favored the candidate of the Democratic Party.

[ 368 ] White-collar college-educated professionals were mostly Republican until the 1950s, but they had become a vital component of the Democratic Party by the early 2000s.

[ 369 ] According to a 2025 Gallup poll, 37% of American voters identify as "conservative" or "very conservative", 34% as "moderate", and 25% as "liberal" or "very liberal". For Democrats, 9% identified as conservative, 34% as moderate, and 55% as liberal.

[ 370 ] A large majority of liberals favor moving toward universal health care . A majority also favor diplomacy over military action ; stem cell research , same-sex marriage , stricter gun control , environmental protection laws, as well as the preservation of abortion rights . Immigration and cultural diversity are deemed positive as liberals favor cultural pluralism , a system in which immigrants retain their native culture in addition to adopting their new culture. Most liberals oppose increased military spending and the mixing of church and state.

[ 371 ] As of 2020, the three most significant labor groupings in the Democratic coalition were the AFL–CIO and Change to Win labor federations as well as the National Education Association , a large, unaffiliated teachers' union. Important issues for labor unions include supporting unionized manufacturing jobs, raising the minimum wage , and promoting broad social programs such as Social Security and Medicare .

[ 372 ] This ideological group is strongly correlated with high educational attainment. According to the Pew Research Center , 49% were college graduates, the highest figure of any typographical group.

[ 308 ] It was also the fastest growing typological group since the late 1990s to the present.

[ 371 ] Liberals include most of the academia [ 373 ] and large portions of the professional class.

[ 309 ] Moderates See also: New Democrats (United States) , New Democrat Coalition , and Blue Dog Coalition Moderate Democrats, or New Democrats , are an ideologically centrist faction within the Democratic Party that emerged after the victory of Republican George H. W. Bush in the 1988 presidential election .

[ 374 ] Running as a New Democrat, Bill Clinton won the 1992 and 1996 presidential elections.

[ 375 ] They are an economically liberal and " Third Way " faction that dominated the party for around 20 years, until the beginning of Obama's presidency .

[ 355 ] [ 376 ] They are represented by organizations such as the New Democrat Network and the New Democrat Coalition .

The Blue Dog Coalition was formed during the 104th Congress to give members from the Democratic Party representing conservative-leaning districts a unified voice after the Democrats' loss of Congress in the 1994 Republican Revolution .

[ 377 ] [ 378 ] [ 379 ] However, in the late 2010s and early 2020s, the Coalition's focus shifted towards ideological centrism . One of the most influential centrist groups was the Democratic Leadership Council (DLC), a nonprofit organization that advocated centrist positions for the party. The DLC disbanded in 2011.

[ 380 ] Some Democratic elected officials have self-declared as being centrists, including former President Bill Clinton, former Vice President Al Gore , Senator Mark Warner , Kansas governor Laura Kelly , former Senator Jim Webb , and President Joe Biden .

[ 381 ] [ 382 ] The New Democrat Network supports socially liberal and fiscally moderate Democratic politicians and is associated with the congressional New Democrat Coalition in the House.

[ 383 ] Annie Kuster is the chair of the coalition, [ 381 ] and former senator and President Barack Obama was self-described as a New Democrat.

[ 384 ] In the 21st century, some former Republican moderates have switched to the Democratic Party.

[ 385 ] [ 386 ] [ 387 ] Progressives See also: Congressional Progressive Caucus , Progressivism in the United States , and Social democracy Bernie Sanders and Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez during the Fighting Oligarchy Tour Progressives are the most left-leaning faction in the party and support strong business regulations, social programs , and workers' rights .

[ 388 ] [ 389 ] In 2014, progressive Senator Elizabeth Warren set out "Eleven Commandments of Progressivism": tougher regulation on corporations; affordable education; scientific investment and environmentalism; net neutrality ; increased wages; equal pay for women; collective bargaining rights; defending social programs; same-sex marriage ; immigration reform ; and unabridged access to reproductive healthcare.

[ 390 ] The Congressional Progressive Caucus (CPC) is a caucus of progressive Democrats chaired by Greg Casar of Texas .

[ 391 ] [ 392 ] Its members have included Representatives Dennis Kucinich of Ohio , John Conyers of Michigan , Jim McDermott of Washington , Barbara Lee of California, and Senator Paul Wellstone of Minnesota . Senators Tammy Baldwin of Wisconsin , Mazie Hirono of Hawaii, and Ed Markey of Massachusetts were members of the caucus when in the House of Representatives. As of 2024, the CPC is the second-largest ideological caucus in the House Democratic Caucus by voting members, behind the New Democrat Coalition.

[ 393 ] [ 394 ] Senator Bernie Sanders has often been viewed as a leader of the progressive movement; [ 395 ] [ 396 ] [ 397 ] he ran presidential campaigns in 2016 and 2020 .

[ 398 ] Other members of the progressive faction include the Squad .

[ 399 ] Democratic presidents See also: List of presidents of the United States and Republican Party (United States) § Republican presidents As of 2025 [update] , there have been a total of 16 Democratic presidents.

# Name (lifespan) Portrait State Presidency start date Presidency end date Time in office 7 Andrew Jackson (1767–1845) Tennessee March 4, 1829 March 4, 1837 8 years, 0 days [ 400 ] 8 Martin Van Buren (1782–1862) New York March 4, 1837 March 4, 1841 4 years, 0 days [ 401 ] 11 James K. Polk (1795–1849) Tennessee March 4, 1845 March 4, 1849 4 years, 0 days [ 402 ] 14 Franklin Pierce (1804–1869) New Hampshire March 4, 1853 March 4, 1857 4 years, 0 days 15 James Buchanan (1791–1868) Pennsylvania March 4, 1857 March 4, 1861 4 years, 0 days [ 403 ] 17 Andrew Johnson (1808–1875) Tennessee April 15, 1865 [ e ] March 4, 1869 3 years, 323 days 22 Grover Cleveland (1837–1908) New York March 4, 1885 March 4, 1889 8 years, 0 days 24 March 4, 1893 March 4, 1897 28 Woodrow Wilson (1856–1924) New Jersey March 4, 1913 March 4, 1921 8 years, 0 days 32 Franklin D. Roosevelt (1882–1945) New York March 4, 1933 April 12, 1945 [ f ] 12 years, 39 days 33 Harry S. Truman (1884–1972) Missouri April 12, 1945 January 20, 1953 7 years, 283 days 35 John F. Kennedy (1917–1963) Massachusetts January 20, 1961 November 22, 1963 [ f ] 2 years, 306 days [ 404 ] 36 Lyndon B. Johnson (1908–1973) Texas November 22, 1963 January 20, 1969 5 years, 59 days [ 405 ] 39 Jimmy Carter (1924–2024) Georgia January 20, 1977 January 20, 1981 4 years, 0 days [ 406 ] 42 Bill Clinton (born 1946) Arkansas January 20, 1993 January 20, 2001 8 years, 0 days [ 407 ] 44 Barack Obama (born 1961) Illinois January 20, 2009 January 20, 2017 8 years, 0 days [ 408 ] 46 Joe Biden (born 1942) Delaware January 20, 2021 January 20, 2025 4 years, 0 days [ 409 ] Recent electoral history In congressional elections: 1950–present See also: Party divisions of United States Congresses This section may be confusing or unclear to readers .

Please help clarify the section . There might be a discussion about this on the talk page .

( April 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) House of Representatives President Senate Election year No. of seats won +/– No. of seats won +/– Election year 1950 235 / 435 28 Harry S. Truman 49 / 96 5 1950 1952 213 / 435 22 Dwight D. Eisenhower 47 / 96 2 1952 1954 232 / 435 19 49 / 96 2 1954 1956 234 / 435 2 49 / 96 0 1956 1958 283 / 437 49 64 / 98 15 1958 1960 262 / 437 21 John F. Kennedy 64 / 100 1 1960 1962 258 / 435 4 66 / 100 3 1962 1964 295 / 435 37 Lyndon B. Johnson 68 / 100 2 1964 1966 248 / 435 47 64 / 100 3 1966 1968 243 / 435 5 Richard Nixon 57 / 100 5 1968 1970 255 / 435 12 54 / 100 3 1970 1972 242 / 435 13 56 / 100 2 1972 1974 291 / 435 49 Gerald Ford 60 / 100 4 1974 1976 292 / 435 1 Jimmy Carter 61 / 100 0 1976 1978 277 / 435 15 58 / 100 3 1978 1980 243 / 435 34 Ronald Reagan 46 / 100 12 1980 1982 269 / 435 26 46 / 100 1 1982 1984 253 / 435 16 47 / 100 2 1984 1986 258 / 435 5 55 / 100 8 1986 1988 260 / 435 2 George H. W. Bush 55 / 100 1 1988 1990 267 / 435 7 56 / 100 1 1990 1992 258 / 435 9 Bill Clinton 57 / 100 1 1992 1994 204 / 435 54 47 / 100 10 1994 1996 206 / 435 2 45 / 100 2 1996 1998 211 / 435 5 45 / 100 0 1998 2000 212 / 435 1 George W. Bush 50 / 100 5 2000 [ g ] 2002 204 / 435 7 49 / 100 2 2002 2004 202 / 435 2 45 / 100 4 2004 2006 233 / 435 31 51 / 100 6 [ h ] 2006 2008 257 / 435 21 Barack Obama 59 / 100 8 [ h ] 2008 2010 193 / 435 63 53 / 100 6 [ h ] 2010 2012 201 / 435 8 55 / 100 2 [ h ] 2012 2014 188 / 435 13 46 / 100 9 [ h ] 2014 2016 194 / 435 6 Donald Trump 48 / 100 2 [ h ] 2016 2018 235 / 435 41 47 / 100 1 [ h ] 2018 2020 222 / 435 13 Joe Biden 50 / 100 3 [ h ] 2020 [ i ] 2022 213 / 435 9 51 / 100 1 [ h ] 2022 2024 215 / 435 2 Donald Trump 47 / 100 4 [ h ] 2024 In presidential elections: 1828–present See also: List of United States Democratic Party presidential tickets Election year Presidential ticket Votes Vote % Electoral votes +/– Result 1828 Andrew Jackson John C. Calhoun 642,553 56.0 178 / 261 178 Won 1832 Andrew Jackson Martin Van Buren 701,780 54.2 219 / 286 41 Won 1836 Martin Van Buren Richard Mentor Johnson 764,176 50.8 170 / 294 49 Won 1840 Martin Van Buren None [ j ] 1,128,854 46.8 60 / 294 110 Lost 1844 James K. Polk George M. Dallas 1,339,494 49.5 170 / 275 110 Won 1848 Lewis Cass William O. Butler 1,223,460 42.5 127 / 290 43 Lost 1852 Franklin Pierce William R. King 1,607,510 50.8 254 / 296 127 Won 1856 James Buchanan John C. Breckinridge 1,836,072 45.3 174 / 296 80 Won 1860 Stephen A. Douglas Herschel V. Johnson 1,380,202 29.5 12 / 303 162 Lost 1864 George B. McClellan George H. Pendleton 1,812,807 45.0 21 / 233 9 Lost 1868 Horatio Seymour Francis Preston Blair Jr.

2,706,829 47.3 80 / 294 59 Lost 1872 Horace Greeley Benjamin G. Brown [ A ] 2,834,761 43.8 69 / 352 11 Lost 1876 Samuel J. Tilden Thomas A. Hendricks 4,288,546 50.9 184 / 369 115 Lost [ B ] 1880 Winfield Scott Hancock William H. English 4,444,260 48.2 155 / 369 29 Lost 1884 Grover Cleveland Thomas A. Hendricks 4,914,482 48.9 219 / 401 64 Won 1888 Grover Cleveland Allen G. Thurman 5,534,488 48.6 168 / 401 51 Lost [ C ] 1892 Grover Cleveland Adlai Stevenson I 5,556,918 46.0 277 / 444 109 Won 1896 William Jennings Bryan Arthur Sewall 6,509,052 46.7 176 / 447 101 Lost 1900 William Jennings Bryan Adlai Stevenson I 6,370,932 45.5 155 / 447 21 Lost 1904 Alton B. Parker Henry G. Davis 5,083,880 37.6 140 / 476 15 Lost 1908 William Jennings Bryan John W. Kern 6,408,984 43.0 162 / 483 22 Lost 1912 Woodrow Wilson Thomas R. Marshall 6,296,284 41.8 435 / 531 273 Won 1916 Woodrow Wilson Thomas R. Marshall 9,126,868 49.2 277 / 531 158 Won 1920 James M. Cox Franklin D. Roosevelt 9,139,661 34.2 127 / 531 150 Lost 1924 John W. Davis Charles W. Bryan 8,386,242 28.8 136 / 531 9 Lost 1928 Al Smith Joseph T. Robinson 15,015,464 40.8 87 / 531 49 Lost 1932 Franklin D. Roosevelt John Nance Garner 22,821,277 57.4 472 / 531 385 Won 1936 Franklin D. Roosevelt John Nance Garner 27,747,636 60.8 523 / 531 51 Won 1940 Franklin D. Roosevelt Henry A. Wallace 27,313,945 54.7 449 / 531 74 Won 1944 Franklin D. Roosevelt Harry S. Truman 25,612,916 53.4 432 / 531 17 Won 1948 Harry S. Truman Alben W. Barkley 24,179,347 49.6 303 / 531 129 Won 1952 Adlai Stevenson II John Sparkman 27,375,090 44.3 89 / 531 214 Lost 1956 Adlai Stevenson II Estes Kefauver 26,028,028 42.0 73 / 531 16 Lost 1960 John F. Kennedy Lyndon B. Johnson 34,220,984 49.7 303 / 537 230 Won 1964 Lyndon B. Johnson Hubert Humphrey 43,127,041 61.1 486 / 538 183 Won 1968 Hubert Humphrey Edmund Muskie 31,271,839 42.7 191 / 538 295 Lost 1972 George McGovern Sargent Shriver 29,173,222 37.5 17 / 538 174 Lost 1976 Jimmy Carter Walter Mondale 40,831,881 50.1 297 / 538 280 Won 1980 Jimmy Carter Walter Mondale 35,480,115 41.0 49 / 538 248 Lost 1984 Walter Mondale Geraldine Ferraro 37,577,352 40.6 13 / 538 36 Lost 1988 Michael Dukakis Lloyd Bentsen 41,809,074 45.6 111 / 538 98 Lost 1992 Bill Clinton Al Gore 44,909,806 43.0 370 / 538 259 Won 1996 Bill Clinton Al Gore 47,401,185 49.2 379 / 538 9 Won 2000 Al Gore Joe Lieberman 50,999,897 48.4 266 / 538 113 Lost [ D ] 2004 John Kerry John Edwards 59,028,444 48.3 251 / 538 15 Lost 2008 Barack Obama Joe Biden 69,498,516 52.9 365 / 538 114 Won 2012 Barack Obama Joe Biden 65,915,795 51.1 332 / 538 33 Won 2016 Hillary Clinton Tim Kaine 65,853,514 48.2 227 / 538 105 Lost [ E ] 2020 Joe Biden Kamala Harris 81,283,501 51.3 306 / 538 79 Won 2024 Kamala Harris Tim Walz 75,017,613 48.3 226 / 538 80 Lost See also Liberalism portal Politics portal United States portal Democratic Party (United States) organizations List of political parties in the United States List of United States Democratic Party presidential candidates List of United States Democratic Party presidential tickets Political party strength in U.S. states Politics of the United States List of major liberal parties considered left Notes ^ There are 45 senators who are members of the party; however, two independent senators, Angus King and Bernie Sanders , caucus with the Democrats.

^ Grover Cleveland in 1884 and 1892 ^ All three incumbents in the 20th century to withdraw or not seek reelection—Calvin Coolidge, Harry S. Truman, and Lyndon B. Johnson—had succeeded to the presidency when their predecessor died, then won a second term in their own right.

[ 117 ] Three presidents in the 1800s made and kept pledges to serve only one term, most recently Rutherford B. Hayes .

[ 118 ] ^ Three Democrats ( Barack Obama in 2008, Joe Biden in 2020, and Kamala Harris in 2024) have since won an electoral vote from Nebraska's 2nd congressional district , but Johnson remains the last Democrat to carry the state as a whole.

^ Elected as Vice President with the National Union Party ticket in the 1864 presidential election. Ascended to the presidency after the assassination of President Abraham Lincoln in 1865. Rejoined the Democratic Party in 1868.

^ a b Died in office.

^ Republican Vice President Dick Cheney provided a tie-breaking vote , giving Republicans a majority until June 6, 2001, when Jim Jeffords left Republicans to join the Democratic Caucus.

^ a b c d e f g h i j Includes Independents caucusing with the Democrats .

^ Democratic Vice President Kamala Harris provided a tie-breaking vote , giving Democrats a majority throughout the 117th Congress .

^ While there was no official Democratic nominee, the majority of the Democratic electors still cast their electoral votes for incumbent Vice President Richard Mentor Johnson .

^ Greeley and Brown were cross-endorsed by the Liberal Republican Party .

^ Although Tilden won a majority of the popular vote, Republican Rutherford B. Hayes won a majority of votes in the Electoral College.

^ Although Cleveland won a plurality of the popular vote, Republican Benjamin Harrison won a majority of votes in the Electoral College.

^ Although Gore won a plurality of the popular vote, Republican George W. Bush won a majority of votes in the Electoral College.

^ Although Clinton won a plurality of the popular vote, Republican Donald Trump won a majority of votes in the Electoral College.

References ^ "About the Democratic Party" .

Democrats . March 4, 2019.

Archived from the original on April 6, 2022 . Retrieved April 15, 2022 .

For 171 years, [the Democratic National Committee] has been responsible for governing the Democratic Party ^ Democratic Party (September 10, 2022).

"The Charter & The Bylaws of the Democratic Party of the United States" (PDF) . p. 3.

Archived (PDF) from the original on January 22, 2025 . Retrieved March 24, 2025 .

The Democratic National Committee shall have general responsibility for the affairs of the Democratic Party between National Conventions ^ Cole, Donald B. (1970).

Jacksonian Democracy in New Hampshire, 1800–1851 . Harvard University Press. p. 69.

ISBN 978-0-67-428368-8 .

^ a b Arnold, N. Scott (2009).

Imposing values: an essay on liberalism and regulation . Oxford University Press. p. 3.

ISBN 9780495501121 . Archived from the original on October 2, 2020 . Retrieved April 28, 2020 .

Modern liberalism occupies the left-of-center in the traditional political spectrum and is represented by the Democratic Party in the United States.

^ Geismer, Lily (2015).

Don't blame us: suburban liberals and the transformation of the Democratic party . Politics and society in twentieth-century America. Princeton: Princeton University Press.

ISBN 978-0-691-15723-8 .

^ Cebul, Brent; Geismer, Lily, eds. (2025).

Mastery and drift: professional-class liberals since the 1960s . Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.

ISBN 978-0-226-83811-3 .

^ [ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] ^ Bacon, Perry Jr. (March 11, 2019).

"The Six Wings Of The Democratic Party" .

FiveThirtyEight .

Archived from the original on August 15, 2021 . Retrieved October 21, 2021 .

^ Levitz, Eric (October 18, 2018).

"America Already Has a Centrist Party. It's Called the Democrats" .

Intelligencer . Retrieved October 2, 2024 .

^ Ball, Molly (February 7, 2014).

"No, Liberals Don't Control the Democratic Party" .

The Atlantic . Retrieved March 13, 2017 .

^ Gaudiano, Nicole.

"Liberals seek 'ideological shift' in the Democratic Party" .

USA Today . Gannett Satellite Information Network, LLC . Retrieved March 13, 2017 .

^ Alterman, Eric (2008).

Why We're Liberals: A Political Handbook for Post-Bush America . Penguin. p. 339.

ISBN 9780670018604 . Retrieved March 13, 2017 .

Suffice to say that there has not been a huge swing away from the center since the 1970s.

^ a b Chaffin, Joshua; Barrett, Joe (August 3, 2025).

"Not Just NYC: 'Mamdani of Minneapolis' Nods to Widening Rift in Democratic Party" .

wsj.com .

The Wall Street Journal . Retrieved August 4, 2025 .

[...] a widening rift between the party's centrist establishment and a progressive wing [...] ^ [ 8 ] [ 9 ] [ 10 ] [ 11 ] [ 12 ] [ 13 ] ^ Stein, Letita; Cornwell, Susan; Tanfani, Joseph (August 23, 2018).

"Inside the progressive movement roiling the Democratic Party" .

Reuters .

Archived from the original on June 13, 2022 . Retrieved June 13, 2022 .

^ [ 15 ] [ 13 ] ^ Rae, Nicol C. (June 2007). "Be Careful What You Wish For: The Rise of Responsible Parties in American National Politics".

Annual Review of Political Science .

10 (1).

Annual Reviews : 169– 191.

doi : 10.1146/annurev.polisci.10.071105.100750 .

ISSN 1094-2939 .

What are we to make of American parties at the dawn of the twenty-first century? ... The impact of the 1960s civil rights revolution has been to create two more ideologically coherent parties: a generally liberal or center-left party and a conservative party.

^ Cronin, James E.; Ross, George W.; Shoch, James (August 24, 2011). "Introduction: The New World of the Center-Left".

What's Left of the Left: Democrats and Social Democrats in Challenging Times .

Duke University Press .

ISBN 978-0-8223-5079-8 .

Archived from the original on August 20, 2024 . Retrieved August 7, 2024 . pp. 17, 22, 182: Including the American Democratic Party in a comparative analysis of center-left parties is unorthodox, since unlike Europe, America has not produced a socialist movement tied to a strong union movement. Yet the Democrats may have become center-left before anyone else, obliged by their different historical trajectory to build complex alliances with social groups other than the working class and to deal with unusually powerful capitalists ... Taken together, the three chapters devoted to the United States show that the center-left in America faces much the same set of problems as elsewhere and, especially in light of the election results from 2008, that the Democratic Party's potential to win elections, despite its current slide in approval, may be at least equal to that of any center-left party in Europe ... Despite the setback in the 2010 midterms, together the foregoing trends have put the Democrats in a position to eventually build a dominant center-left majority in the United States.

^ Bruner, Christopher (January 1, 2018).

"Center-Left Politics and Corporate Governance: What Is the 'Progressive' Agenda?" .

Brigham Young University Law Review : 267– 338.

While these dynamics have remained have remained important to the Democratic Party's electoral strategy since the 1990s, the finance-driven coalition described above remains high controverisal and unstable, reflecting the fact that core intellectual and ideological tensions in the platform of the U.S. center-left persist.

^ a b Hacker, Jacob S.; Malpas, Amelia; Pierson, Paul; Zacher, Sam (December 27, 2023).

"Bridging the Blue Divide: The Democrats' New Metro Coalition and the Unexpected Prominence of Redistribution" .

Perspectives on Politics .

22 (3).

Cambridge University Press on behalf of the American Political Science Association : 3.

doi : 10.1017/S1537592723002931 .

ISSN 1537-5927 .

We conclude by considering why Democrats have taken this course, why they are not perceived as having done so, and why, at this fraught juncture for American democratic capitalism, political scientists could learn much from closer examination of the rich world's largest center-left party.

^ Zacher, Sam (June 2024).

"Polarization of the Rich: The New Democratic Allegiance of Affluent Americans and the Politics of Redistribution" .

Perspectives on Politics .

22 (2): 338– 356.

doi : 10.1017/S1537592722003310 .

It is clear that the Democratic Party—the center-left United States political party—does enact some forms of a redistributive economic policy agenda.

^ [ 17 ] [ 18 ] [ 19 ] [ 20 ] [ 21 ] ^ Zeitz, Joshua (October 16, 2023).

"The 'Unprecedented' House GOP Meltdown Isn't as Novel as You Think. And There Is a Way Out" .

Archived from the original on October 16, 2023 . Retrieved October 16, 2023 .

^ Zelizer, Julian E. (February 15, 2015).

"How Medicare Was Made" .

The New Yorker .

Archived from the original on March 4, 2015 . Retrieved August 23, 2022 .

^ "Women More Likely to Be Democrats, Regardless of Age" . Gallup. June 12, 2009.

Archived from the original on June 14, 2010 . Retrieved June 17, 2010 .

^ a b Hale, Jon F. (1995).

"The Making of the New Democrats" .

Political Science Quarterly .

110 (2): 207– 232.

doi : 10.2307/2152360 .

ISSN 0032-3195 .

JSTOR 2152360 .

Archived from the original on December 12, 2021 . Retrieved August 24, 2022 .

^ a b Wills, Garry (January 19, 1997).

"The Clinton Principle" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 .

Archived from the original on August 24, 2022 . Retrieved August 24, 2022 .

^ Edsall, Thomas B. (June 28, 1998).

"Clinton and Blair envision a 'Third Way' international movement" .

The Washington Post .

ISSN 0190-8286 .

Archived from the original on November 27, 2020 . Retrieved November 1, 2022 .

^ Dimock, Michael (January 10, 2017).

"How America Changed During Barack Obama's Presidency" .

Pew Research Center . Retrieved August 7, 2025 .

^ Drehle Von, David (December 22, 2016).

"Honor and Effort: What President Obama Achieved in Eight Years" .

Time Magazine . Retrieved August 7, 2025 .

^ Nadeem, Reem (April 9, 2024).

"Changing Partisan Coalitions in a Politically Divided Nation" .

Pew Research Center . Retrieved March 21, 2025 .

^ a b c Traister, Rebecca (March 27, 2023).

"Abortion Wins Elections" .

The Cut .

Archived from the original on April 6, 2023 . Retrieved April 7, 2023 .

^ a b c Migdon, Brooke (June 21, 2023).

"Democrats reintroduce Equality Act amid Pride Month" . Retrieved May 12, 2025 .

^ "Combating the Climate Crisis and Pursuing Environmental Justic" .

Democrats . Democratic National Committee.

Archived from the original on July 17, 2024 . Retrieved July 17, 2024 .

^ Miranda Ollstein, Alice (August 12, 2022).

"A bittersweet health care win for Democrats" .

Politico .

Archived from the original on April 7, 2023 . Retrieved April 7, 2023 .

^ a b Goodnough, Abby; Kaplan, Thomas (June 28, 2019).

"Democrat vs. Democrat: How Health Care Is Dividing the Party" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on July 22, 2020 . Retrieved July 22, 2020 .

^ Mueller, Eleanor; Olander, Olivia (November 27, 2023).

"Paid leave support up ahead of '24" .

POLITICO . Retrieved May 17, 2025 .

^ Levy, Jonah (2006).

The State after Statism: New State Activities in the Age of Liberalization . Harvard University Press. p. 198.

ISBN 9780495501121 .

In the corporate governance area, the center-left repositioned itself to press for reform. The Democratic Party in the United States used the postbubble scandals and the collapse of share prices to attack the Republican Party ... Corporate governance reform fit surprisingly well within the contours of the center-left ideology. The Democratic Party and the SPD have both been committed to the development of the regulatory state as a counterweight to managerial authority, corporate power, and market failure.

^ U.S. Department of State .

"A Mixed Economy: The Role of the Market" . Thoughtco.com. Archived from the original on May 24, 2017.

^ a b Ikenberry, John (2020).

"America's Asia Policy after Trump" .

Global Asia .

^ a b Wong, Edward (September 6, 2022).

"Biden Puts Defense of Democracy at Center of Agenda, at Home and Abroad" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved December 27, 2023 .

^ a b Kimmage, Michael (February 25, 2025).

"The World Trump Wants: American Power in the New Age of Nationalism" .

Foreign Affairs . Retrieved March 18, 2025 .

In the two decades that followed the Cold War's end, globalism gained ground over nationalism. Simultaneously, the rise of increasingly complex systems and networks—institutional, financial, and technological—overshadowed the role of the individual in politics. But in the early 2010s, a profound shift began. By learning to harness the tools of this century, a cadre of charismatic figures revived the archetypes of the previous one: the strong leader, the great nation, the proud civilization. ... They are self-styled strongmen who place little stock in rules-based systems, alliances, or multinational forums. They embrace the once and future glory of the countries they govern, asserting an almost mystical mandate for their rule.

Although their programs can involve radical change, their political strategies rely on strains of conservatism, appealing over the heads of liberal, urban, cosmopolitan elites to constituencies animated by a hunger for tradition and a desire for belonging.

^ The party has claimed a founding date of 1792 as noted in S.2047 which passed in the United States Senate in 1991.

102nd Congress (1991), S.2047 – A bill to establish a commission to commemorate the bicentennial of the establishment of the Democratic Party of the United States.

, archived from the original on February 22, 2021 , retrieved February 20, 2021 "[I]n 1992, the Democratic Party of the United States will celebrate the 200th anniversary of its establishment on May 13, 1792." ^ Larson, Edward (2007).

A Magnificent Catastrophe: The Tumultuous Election of 1800, America's First Presidential Campaign .

Free Press . p. 21.

ISBN 9780743293167 .

The divisions between Adams and Jefferson were exasperated by the more extreme views expressed by some of their partisans, particularly the High Federalists led by Hamilton on what was becoming known as the political right, and the democratic wing of the Republican Party on the left, associated with New York Governor George Clinton and Pennsylvania legislator Albert Gallatin, among others.

^ Ericson, David F. (1964). "The Evolution of the Democratic Party".

The American Historical Review .

70 (1): 22– 43.

^ Banning, Lance (1978).

The Jeffersonian Persuasion: Evolution of a Party Ideology . Cornell University Press. p. 208.

^ a b c Michael Kazin, What It Took to Win: A History of the Democratic Party (2022) pp 5, 12.

^ a b M. Philip Lucas, "Martin Van Buren as Party Leader and at Andrew Jackson's Right Hand." in A Companion to the Antebellum Presidents 1837–1861 (2014): 107–129.

^ "The Democratic Party, founded in 1828, is the world's oldest political party" states Janda, Kenneth; Berry, Jeffrey M.; Goldman, Jerry (2010).

The Challenge of Democracy: American Government in Global Politics . Cengage Learning. p. 276.

ISBN 9780495906186 .

^ Arthur Paulson, Realignment and Party Revival: Understanding American Electoral Politics at the Turn of the Twenty-First Century (2000) pp. 46–72.

^ Berman, Jay (2012).

The Democratic Party: Evolution and America's Longing for a Lasting Majority . Taylor & Francis. p. 8.

^ James Roger Sharp, American Politics in the Early Republic: The New Nation in Crisis (1993).

^ The American Republic Since 1877, Student Edition . McGraw-Hill Education. 2006. p. 193.

^ Phillips, Kim T. (1976).

"The Pennsylvania Origins of the Jackson Movement" .

Political Science Quarterly .

91 (3): 489– 508.

doi : 10.2307/2148938 .

ISSN 0032-3195 .

JSTOR 2148938 . Retrieved June 13, 2025 .

^ Holt, Michael F. (1992).

Political Parties and American Political Development: From the Age of Jackson to the Age of Lincoln .

Louisiana State University Press . pp.

27– 28.

ISBN 978-0807126097 .

Archived from the original on April 5, 2023 . Retrieved March 19, 2023 .

^ Bates, Christopher (2015).

The Early Republic and Antebellum America: An Encyclopedia of Social, Political, Cultural, and Economic History .

Taylor & Francis . p. 293.

ISBN 9781317457404 .

The expansion engineered by Polk rendered the Democratic Party increasingly beholden to Southern slave interests, which dominated the party from 1848 to the Civil War.

^ a b c Staff.

"Jacksonian Democracy: The Democratization of Politics" .

Encyclopædia Britannica .

Archived from the original on July 12, 2022 . Retrieved October 6, 2022 .

By the 1840s, Whig and Democratic congressmen voted as rival blocs. Whigs supported and Democrats opposed a weak executive, a new Bank of the United States, a high tariff, distribution of land revenues to the states, relief legislation to mitigate the effects of the depression, and federal reapportionment of House seats. Whigs voted against and Democrats approved an independent treasury, an aggressive foreign policy, and expansionism. These were important issues, capable of dividing the electorate just as they divided the major parties in Congress.

^ Banning, Lance (1978).

The Jeffersonian Persuasion: Evolution of a Party Ideology . Cornell University Press. p. 253.

^ Traub, James.

"The Ugly Election That Birthed Modern American Politics" .

National Geographic . Archived from the original on July 7, 2018 . Retrieved July 6, 2018 .

^ Mary Beth Norton et al., A People and a Nation, Volume I: to 1877 (Houghton Mifflin, 2007) p. 287.

^ Mary Beth Norton et al., A People and a Nation, Volume I: to 1877 (2007) pp. 287–288.

^ Galbraith Schlisinger, Of the People: The 200 Year History of the Democratic Party (1992) ch. 1–3.

^ Robert Allen Rutland, The Democrats: From Jefferson to Clinton (U. of Missouri Press, 1995) ch. 1–4.

^ Ferrell, Claudine L. (2006).

The Abolitionist Movement . Westport: Greenwood Press. p. 88.

ISBN 978-0-313-33180-0 .

^ Jean H. Baker, Affairs of Party: Political Culture of Northern Democrats in the Mid-nineteenth Century (1983) ^ David M. Potter.

The Impending Crisis, 1848–1861 (1976). ch. 16.

^ Mark E. Neely.

Lincoln and the Democrats: The Politics of Opposition in the Civil War (2017).

^ Rutland, The Democrats: From Jefferson to Clinton (1995) ch. 5–6.

^ Robert W. Cherny, A Righteous Cause: The Life of William Jennings Bryan (1994) ^ H.W. Brands, Woodrow Wilson (2003).

^ Douglas B. Craig, After Wilson: The Struggle for the Democratic Party, 1920–1934 (1993) ^ Davis, Kenneth C.

(2003).

Don't Know Much About History: Everything You Need to Know About American History but Never Learned (1st ed.). New York: HarperCollins. pp. 321, 341.

ISBN 978-0-06-008381-6 .

^ Russell, Ellen (2007).

New Deal Banking Reforms and Keynesian Welfare State Capitalism . Routledge. pp.

3– 4.

ISBN 9781135910655 .

Archived from the original on October 2, 2020 . Retrieved April 28, 2020 .

^ Rutland, The Democrats: From Jefferson to Clinton (1995) ch. 7.

^ David M. Kennedy, Freedom from Fear: The American People in Depression and War, 1929–1945 (2001).

^ Paul Finkelman and Peter Wallenstein, eds.

The Encyclopedia Of American Political History (CQ Press, 2001) pp. 124–126.

^ Bullock, Charles S.; Hoffman, Donna R.; Gaddie, Ronald Keith (2006). "Regional Variations in the Realignment of American Politics, 1944–2004".

Social Science Quarterly .

87 (3): 494– 518.

doi : 10.1111/j.1540-6237.2006.00393.x .

ISSN 0038-4941 .

The events of 1964 laid open the divisions between the South and national Democrats and elicited distinctly different voter behavior in the two regions. The agitation for civil rights by southern blacks continued white violence toward the civil rights movement, and President Lyndon Johnson's aggressive leadership all facilitated passage of the 1964 Civil Rights Act. ... In the South, 1964 should be associated with GOP growth while in the Northeast this election contributed to the eradication of Republicans.

^ Stanley, Harold W. (1988). "Southern Partisan Changes: Dealignment, Realignment or Both?".

The Journal of Politics .

50 (1): 64– 88.

doi : 10.2307/2131041 .

ISSN 0022-3816 .

JSTOR 2131041 .

S2CID 154860857 .

Events surrounding the presidential election of 1964 marked a watershed in terms of the parties and the South (Pomper, 1972). The Solid South was built around the identification of the Democratic party with the cause of white supremacy. Events before 1964 gave white southerners pause about the linkage between the Democratic Party and white supremacy, but the 1964 election, passage of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, and the Voting Rights Act of 1965 altered in the minds of most the positions of the national parties on racial issues.

^ a b Black, Earl; Black, Merle (September 30, 2003).

The Rise of Southern Republicans . Harvard University Press.

ISBN 9780674012486 .

Archived from the original on June 12, 2018 . Retrieved June 9, 2018 .

When the Republican party nominated Arizona Senator Barry Goldwater—one of the few senators who had opposed the Civil Rights Act—as their presidential candidate in 1964, the party attracted many southern whites but permanently alienated African-American voters. Beginning with the Goldwater-versus-Johnson campaign more southern whites voted Republican than Democratic, a pattern that has recurred in every subsequent presidential election. ... Before the 1964 presidential election the Republican party had not carried any Deep South state for eighty-eight years. Yet shortly after Congress passed the Civil Rights Act, hundreds of Deep South counties gave Barry Goldwater landslide majorities.

^ a b c Miller, Gary; Schofield, Norman (2003). "Activists and Partisan Realignment in the United States".

American Political Science Review .

97 (2): 245– 260.

doi : 10.1017/S0003055403000650 .

ISSN 1537-5943 .

S2CID 12885628 .

By 2000, however, the New Deal party alignment no longer captured patterns of partisan voting. In the intervening 40 years, the Civil Rights and Voting Rights Acts had triggered an increasingly race-driven distinction between the parties. ... Goldwater won the electoral votes of five states of the Deep South in 1964, four of them states that had voted Democratic for 84 years (Califano 1991, 55). He forged a new identification of the Republican party with racial conservatism, reversing a century-long association of the GOP with racial liberalism. This in turn opened the door for Nixon's "Southern strategy" and the Reagan victories of the eighties.

^ Issue Evolution . Princeton University Press. September 6, 1990.

ISBN 9780691023311 .

Archived from the original on May 16, 2018 . Retrieved June 9, 2018 .

^ a b Valentino, Nicholas A.

; Sears, David O.

(2005). "Old Times There Are Not Forgotten: Race and Partisan Realignment in the Contemporary South".

American Journal of Political Science .

49 (3): 672– 88.

doi : 10.1111/j.1540-5907.2005.00136.x .

ISSN 0092-5853 .

^ Kuziemko, Ilyana; Washington, Ebonya (2018).

"Why Did the Democrats Lose the South? Bringing New Data to an Old Debate" .

American Economic Review .

108 (10): 2830– 2867.

doi : 10.1257/aer.20161413 .

ISSN 0002-8282 .

^ James T. Patterson, Grand Expectations: The United States, 1945–1974 (1997).

^ Miller, Gary; Schofield, Norman (2008). "The Transformation of the Republican and Democratic Party Coalitions in the U.S.".

Perspectives on Politics .

6 (3): 433– 450.

doi : 10.1017/S1537592708081218 .

ISSN 1541-0986 .

S2CID 145321253 .

1964 was the last presidential election in which the Democrats earned more than 50 percent of the white vote in the United States.

^ Patterson, Grand Expectations: The United States, 1945–1974 (1997).

^ Smyth, David J.; Taylor, Susan Washburn (1992).

"Why Do the Republicans Win the White House More Often than the Democrats?" .

Presidential Studies Quarterly .

22 (3): 481– 491.

ISSN 0360-4918 .

JSTOR 27550992 .

Archived from the original on January 19, 2023 . Retrieved January 19, 2023 .

^ Jr, R. W. Apple (July 12, 1992).

"Donkey's Years; Is There Room At the Top For Democrats?" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 .

Archived from the original on January 19, 2023 . Retrieved January 19, 2023 .

^ James T. Patterson, Restless Giant: The United States from Watergate to Bush v. Gore (2011).

^ a b Geismer, Lily (June 11, 2019).

"Democrats and neoliberalism" .

Vox .

Archived from the original on November 5, 2022 . Retrieved November 5, 2022 .

The version of neoliberalism embedded in these policies understood a distinct role for government to stimulate market-oriented solutions to address social ills such as unemployment and poverty. It thereby aimed not to eradicate the welfare state but rather to reformulate it. It extended the importance of poverty alleviation, which had long served as a benchmark of liberal policy, and had many similarities with the basic ideas of the war on poverty.

^ Patterson.

Restless Giant: The United States from Watergate to Bush v. Gore (2011).

^ Supreme Court of the US (December 12, 2000).

"George W. Bush, et al., Petitioners v. Albert Gore, Jr., et al., 531 U.S. 98 (2000)" .

Cornell Law School .

Archived from the original on October 15, 2007 . Retrieved June 26, 2010 .

^ Lerer, Lisa (December 22, 2010).

"No Congress Since 1960s Has Impact on Public as 111th" . Bloomberg L.P.

Archived from the original on March 29, 2020 . Retrieved April 20, 2016 .

^ Dayen, David (December 2, 2024).

"What Is the Democratic Party?" .

The American Prospect .

The statistic that best defines our politics over the past 20 years is this: Nine of the past ten national elections have resulted in a change in power in at least one chamber of Congress or the White House. (The sole outlier is 2012.) Several of those elections were considered at the time to be realignments that would lead to a sustained majority for one of the major parties. ... After Republicans defeated John Kerry in 2004 and snatched five Senate seats across the South, commentators believed social issues like gay marriage would set an unwinnable trap for Democrats. Hugh Hewitt wrote a book called Painting the Map Red, imagining a permanent conservative majority. Democrats then took the House and Senate in the 2006 midterms. When Barack Obama crushed John McCain in post–financial crisis 2008, Democratic pundits decided they had an enduring majority. The Tea Party thrashed them in 2010. The conventional wisdom was that Obama was toast; he won in 2012. Donald Trump's 2016 victory signaled a changed electorate, until Democrats won the House in 2018 and the presidency in 2020, only to lose both in 2022 and 2024.

^ a b c "The long goodbye" .

The Economist . November 11, 2010 . Retrieved February 20, 2023 .

In 1981 Republicans took control of the Senate for the first time since 1953, but most Southern elected officials remained white Democrats. When Republicans took control of the House in 1995, white Democrats still comprised one-third of the South's tally. ... white Southern Democrats have met their Appomattox: they will account for just 24 of the South's 155 senators and congressmen in the 112th United States Congress.

^ McQuarrie, Michael (November 8, 2017).

"The revolt of the Rust Belt: place and politics in the age of anger" .

The British Journal of Sociology .

68 (S1): S120 – S152 .

doi : 10.1111/1468-4446.12328 .

PMID 29114874 .

S2CID 26010609 .

Today, the Democratic Party is a party of professionals, minorities and the New Economy.

^ York, David Smith Molly Redden in New (April 1, 2016).

"Donald Trump's abortion remarks provoke biggest crisis of his campaign" .

The Guardian .

ISSN 0261-3077 .

Archived from the original on July 29, 2020 . Retrieved June 29, 2020 .

^ McCormick, Stephanie Armour and John (March 14, 2020).

"Democrats Sharpen Criticism of Trump's Health-Care Policy in Coronavirus Pandemic" .

The Wall Street Journal .

ISSN 0099-9660 .

Archived from the original on July 29, 2020 . Retrieved June 29, 2020 .

^ "Trump WHO decision draws criticism from Democrats in US Congress" . Al Jazeera.

Archived from the original on July 29, 2020 . Retrieved June 29, 2020 .

^ Ewing, Philip (February 5, 2020).

" 'Not Guilty': Trump Acquitted On 2 Articles Of Impeachment As Historic Trial Closes" .

NPR .

Archived from the original on February 6, 2020 . Retrieved February 8, 2021 .

^ "Biden defeats Trump for White House, says 'time to heal' " .

AP NEWS . November 7, 2020.

Archived from the original on November 17, 2020 . Retrieved November 7, 2020 .

^ Martin, Jonathan; Fausset, Richard; Epstein, Reid J. (January 6, 2021).

"Georgia Highlights: Democrats Win the Senate as Ossoff Defeats Perdue" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on January 7, 2021 . Retrieved January 11, 2021 .

^ "U.S. House Election Results" .

The New York Times . November 3, 2020.

ISSN 0362-4331 .

Archived from the original on February 20, 2021 . Retrieved February 8, 2021 .

^ Fritze, John (March 6, 2022).

"Judge Ketanji Brown Jackson would add another Protestant voice to heavily Catholic Supreme Court" . Yahoo! News.

Archived from the original on June 30, 2022 . Retrieved June 30, 2022 .

^ de Vogue, Ariane (June 30, 2022).

"Ketanji Brown Jackson to join a Supreme Court in turmoil" . CNN.

Archived from the original on June 29, 2022 . Retrieved June 30, 2022 .

^ "Watch Live: Judge Ketanji Brown Jackson sworn in as first Black woman on Supreme Court" .

PBS NewsHour . June 30, 2022.

Archived from the original on June 30, 2022 . Retrieved June 30, 2022 .

^ "Ketanji Brown Jackson sworn in as first Black woman on US top court" .

BBC News . June 30, 2022.

Archived from the original on July 1, 2022 . Retrieved July 1, 2022 .

^ Tumulty, Karen (November 9, 2022).

"The expected red wave looks more like a puddle" .

The Washington Post .

ISSN 0190-8286 .

Archived from the original on November 12, 2022 . Retrieved November 10, 2022 .

^ Blake, Aaron (November 10, 2022).

"How bad the 2022 election was for the GOP, historically speaking" .

The Washington Post .

ISSN 0190-8286 .

Archived from the original on February 19, 2023 . Retrieved November 13, 2022 .

^ Kinery, Emma (November 9, 2022).

"Midterm results are looking increasingly sunny for Biden as he touts 'strong night' for Democrats" .

CNBC .

Archived from the original on November 9, 2022 . Retrieved November 10, 2022 .

^ Enten, Harry (November 13, 2022).

"How Joe Biden and the Democratic Party defied midterm history" .

CNN .

Archived from the original on November 28, 2022 . Retrieved November 28, 2022 .

^ Crampton, Liz (November 9, 2022).

"Democrats take legislatures in Michigan, Minnesota and eye Pennsylvania" .

Politico .

Archived from the original on January 5, 2023 . Retrieved November 10, 2022 .

^ "State Partisan Composition," Archived July 4, 2023, at the Wayback Machine May 23, 2023, National Conference of State Legislatures . Retrieved July 4, 2023 ^ "Statehouse Democrats Embrace an Unfamiliar Reality: Full Power," Archived June 5, 2023, at the Wayback Machine January 18, 2023, New York Times , retrieved July 4, 2023 ^ Associated Press : "Midterm election trifectas: Democrats won full government control in these states," Archived July 4, 2023, at the Wayback Machine November 10, 2022, Fox News , retrieved July 4, 2023 ^ Cronin, Tom and Bob Loevy: "American federalism: States veer far left or far right," Archived July 4, 2023, at the Wayback Machine , July 1, 2023, updated July 2, 2023, Colorado Springs Gazette , retrieved July 4, 2023 ^ a b Klassen, Thomas (July 21, 2024).

"Biden steps aside, setting in motion an unprecedented period in American politics" .

The Conversation .

Archived from the original on July 22, 2024 . Retrieved July 24, 2024 .

^ Gendler, Alex (July 23, 2024).

"US presidents who did not seek reelection" . Voice of America.

Archived from the original on July 24, 2024 . Retrieved July 24, 2024 .

^ Kenning, Chris; Samuelsohn, Darren.

" 'It's unprecedented': Biden's exit is a history-making moment in the American presidency" .

USA Today .

Archived from the original on July 25, 2024 . Retrieved July 23, 2024 .

^ Burn-Murdoch, John (November 7, 2024).

"Democrats join 2024's graveyard of incumbents" .

Financial Times . Retrieved November 8, 2024 .

^ Burton, Cooper (November 18, 2024).

"Democrats aren't alone — incumbent parties have lost elections all around the world" .

ABC News . Retrieved November 20, 2024 .

^ Benoit, Bertrand; Luhnow, David; Monga, Vipal (December 27, 2024).

"The Progressive Moment in Global Politics is Over" .

The Wall Street Journal . Retrieved December 27, 2024 .

Weak economic growth and record immigration are driving gains by the right, especially populists.

^ Burn-Murdoch, John (November 15, 2024).

"Trump broke the Democrats' thermostat" .

Financial Times . Retrieved November 15, 2024 .

^ "Mayors of the 30 Largest Cities in the U.S." Archived from the original on July 11, 2023 . Retrieved July 11, 2023 .

^ Appleby, Joyce (2003).

Thomas Jefferson . Cambridge University Press. p. 4.

ISBN 978-0-521-64841-7 .

Archived from the original on October 2, 2020 . Retrieved April 28, 2020 .

^ "Democratic Party" .

Encyclopædia Britannica .

Archived from the original on February 17, 2015 . Retrieved January 19, 2015 .

^ see "History of the Democratic Donkey" ^ John William Ward (1962).

Andrew Jackson: Symbol for an Age . Oxford Up. pp.

87 –88.

ISBN 9780199923205 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ a b Ingram, Bob (January 21, 1966).

"Loyalist Faction Wins; 'White Supremacy' Goes" .

Birmingham News . Retrieved July 22, 2017 .

^ a b "Bad symbol removed" .

Times Daily . March 14, 1996. p. 7B.

Archived from the original on May 31, 2022 . Retrieved July 22, 2017 .

^ a b "Barbour County, West Virginia General Election Ballot" (PDF) . November 4, 2008. Archived from the original (PDF) on October 24, 2008.

^ Seidman, Steven (June 12, 2010).

"The Rooster as the Symbol of the U.S. Democratic Party" . Ithaca College. Archived from the original on October 24, 2017.

^ "FACT CHECK: Did a State Democratic Party Logo Once Feature the Slogan 'White Supremacy'?" .

Snopes.com . September 25, 2017.

Archived from the original on September 13, 2024 . Retrieved December 9, 2017 .

^ "Alabama Democratic Party Strikes 'White Supremacy' From Its Motto" .

Ocala Star-Banner . Associated Press. January 23, 1966. p. 1.

Archived from the original on November 28, 2020 . Retrieved July 22, 2017 .

^ Lopez, Tomas (October 23, 2014).

"Poor Ballot Design Hurts New York's Minor Parties ... Again" .

Brennan Center for Justice . Archived from the original on February 7, 2017 . Retrieved February 6, 2017 .

^ Farhi, Paul (November 2, 2004).

"Elephants Are Red, Donkeys Are Blue" .

The Washington Post . p. C01. Archived from the original on May 9, 2008 . Retrieved October 11, 2016 .

^ Foley, Joe (March 16, 2025).

"People are mocking the Democrat's new logo, but a rebrand was needed" . Yahoo! News.

^ Trotter, Bill (February 11, 2008).

"Obama sets sights on November battle" .

Bangor Daily News . Archived from the original on February 28, 2008 . Retrieved February 12, 2008 .

^ Gruss, Michael (November 21, 2006).

"Local roast becomes political pep rally for Democrats" .

The Virginian-Pilot .

Archived from the original on February 25, 2015 . Retrieved April 15, 2007 .

^ Scherer, Michael (November 8, 2006).

"The Democrats are ready to lead" .

Salon.com .

Archived from the original on August 11, 2009 . Retrieved March 18, 2007 .

^ Kamisar, Ben (February 1, 2025).

"Ken Martin wins election as the next chair of the Democratic National Committee" .

NBC News . Retrieved June 15, 2025 .

^ Gilgoff, Dan (July 16, 2006).

"Dean's List" .

U.S. News & World Report . Archived from the original on July 9, 2012 . Retrieved April 26, 2007 .

^ "Home" .

National Conference of Democratic Mayors .

Archived from the original on October 2, 2020 . Retrieved March 21, 2020 .

^ a b DeNavas-Walt, Carmen; Proctor, Bernadette D.; Smith, Jessica C. (September 2012).

"Real Median Household Income by Race and Hispanic Origin: 1967 to 2010" (PDF) .

Income, Poverty, and Health Insurance Coverage in the United States: 2011 . United States Census Bureau. p. 8.

Archived (PDF) from the original on October 9, 2022.

^ a b c Enten, Harry (November 29, 2016).

"Even Among The Wealthy, Education Predicts Trump Support" .

FiveThirtyEight .

First, it's clear from the exit polls that for white voters, every bit of extra education meant less support for Trump. ... Second, education matters a lot even when separating out income levels. ... Third, Trump saw little difference in his support between income levels within each education group.

^ a b Silver, Nate (November 22, 2016).

"Education, Not Income, Predicted Who Would Vote For Trump" .

FiveThirtyEight .

^ a b Silver, Nate (March 28, 2024).

"How culture trumps economic class as the new political fault line" .

Silver Bulletin . Retrieved January 13, 2025 .

^ Cohn, Nate (June 11, 2012).

"Obama's Problem With White, Non-College Educated Voters is Getting Worse" .

The New Republic . Retrieved February 13, 2017 .

^ a b Abramowitz, Alan I. (September 23, 2021).

"Can Democrats Win Back the White Working Class?" .

Sabato's Crystal Ball . Retrieved February 7, 2022 .

The data in Table 3 show that ideology had a powerful influence on vote choice in the 2020 presidential election. Almost all white voters located to the left of center on the ideology scale, regardless of education, voted for Biden, while almost all white voters located to the right of center, regardless of education, voted for Trump. Those in the center, just over one-fifth of white voters, favored Biden overall by a margin of 57% to 43%. However, there is little evidence that economic insecurity had any impact on the candidate preferences of even this group. Finally, it is worth noting that after controlling for ideology, there is almost no remaining difference between the candidate preferences of college and non-college whites. The class divide in candidate preference among white voters in 2020 is almost entirely explained by the fact that non-college white voters are now far more conservative across the board than are white college graduates.

^ a b c d e Cohn, Nate (April 23, 2014).

"Southern Whites' Loyalty to GOP Nearing that of Blacks to Democrats" .

The New York Times .

President Obama's landslide victory in 2008 was supposed to herald the beginning of a new Democratic era. And yet, six years later, there is not even a clear Democratic majority in the country, let alone one poised for 30 years of dominance. It's not because Mr. Obama's so-called new coalition of young and nonwhite voters failed to live up to its potential. They again turned out in record numbers in 2012. The Democratic majority has failed to materialize because the Republicans made large, countervailing and unappreciated gains of their own among white Southerners.

^ a b Kilgore, Ed (November 10, 2014).

"From Yellow Dogs To Blue Dogs To New Dogs" .

Washington Monthly . Retrieved December 24, 2016 .

Even more to the point, once the ancient white Democratic voting habits were broken, there was really no going back. Blue Dogs were a fading echo of the Yellow Dog tradition in the South, in which the Democratic Party was the default vehicle for day-to-day political life, and the dominant presence, regardless of ideology, for state and local politics. ... So Martin's right: the Blue Dog model is gone for good. But I would warn against the very popular assumption that Democrats can simply intone "economic populism" and regain traction among "the economically pressed white voter" of the Deep South. All the reasons Democrats are struggling with non-college-educated white voters nationally are especially strong in the South: racial and religious fears, anti-urbanism, militarism, and mistrust of unions as well as Wall Street. And for a whole host of reasons, including exceptionally weak union affiliation levels and a neo-colonial heritage as a region starved for capital, the Deep South is going to be more "pro-business" than most of the country.

^ a b Jain, Lakshya (January 3, 2022).

"The White Vote and Educational Polarization" .

Split Ticket . Retrieved January 4, 2025 .

Before proceeding, it is worth pointing out that educational attainment, while highly informative, is by no means definitive. As David Shor and Ezra Klein have both said, the metric really serves as a proxy for class polarization, but while it is increasingly predictive, it is not the sole determining factor in a person's vote.

^ Harrison, Peter (2001).

The Bible, Protestantism, and the Rise of Natural Science . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0521000963 .

Archived from the original on April 4, 2023 . Retrieved September 5, 2016 .

^ Carmines, Edward G.

; Layman, Geoffrey C. (1997).

"Issue Evolution in Postwar American Politics" . In Shafer, Byron (ed.).

Present Discontents . NJ: Chatham House Publishers. pp.

92– 93.

ISBN 978-1-56643-050-0 .

^ Kaufman, Cynthia (2003).

Ideas for Action: Relevant Theory for Radical Change .

South End Press .

ISBN 978-0-89608-693-7 – via Google Books .

^ Gitlin, Todd (2001). "The Left's Lost Universalism". In Melzer, Arthur M.; Weinberger, Jerry; Zinman, M. Richard (eds.).

Politics at the Turn of the Century . Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield . pp.

3– 26.

^ Farred, Grant (2000). "Endgame Identity? Mapping the New Left Roots of Identity Politics".

New Literary History .

31 (4): 627– 48.

doi : 10.1353/nlh.2000.0045 .

JSTOR 20057628 .

S2CID 144650061 .

^ a b c Larry E. Sullivan.

The SAGE glossary of the social and behavioral sciences (2009). p. 291: "This liberalism favors a generous welfare state and a greater measure of social and economic equality. Liberty thus exists when all citizens have access to basic necessities such as education, healthcare, and economic opportunities." ^ Gurley, Gabrielle (November 23, 2020).

"Biden at the Cannabis Crossroads" .

The American Prospect .

Archived from the original on August 26, 2022 . Retrieved August 24, 2022 .

^ a b Grossmann, Matt; Mahmood, Zuhaib; Isaac, William (October 1, 2021).

"Political Parties, Interest Groups, and Unequal Class Influence in American Policy" .

The Journal of Politics .

83 (4): 1706– 1720.

doi : 10.1086/711900 .

ISSN 0022-3816 .

S2CID 224851520 .

Archived from the original on October 29, 2021 . Retrieved October 12, 2021 .

^ Bartels, Larry M. (2016).

Unequal Democracy: The Political Economy of the New Gilded Age – Second Edition . Princeton University Press.

ISBN 978-1-4008-8336-3 .

Archived from the original on November 5, 2021 . Retrieved November 5, 2021 .

^ Rhodes, Jesse H.; Schaffner, Brian F. (2017).

"Testing Models of Unequal Representation: Democratic Populists and Republican Oligarchs?" .

Quarterly Journal of Political Science .

12 (2): 185– 204.

doi : 10.1561/100.00016077 .

ISSN 1554-0626 .

Archived from the original on October 29, 2021 . Retrieved November 5, 2021 .

^ Lax, Jeffrey R.; Phillips, Justin H.; Zelizer, Adam (2019).

"The Party or the Purse? Unequal Representation in the US Senate" .

American Political Science Review .

113 (4): 917– 940.

doi : 10.1017/S0003055419000315 .

ISSN 0003-0554 .

S2CID 21669533 .

Archived from the original on October 29, 2021 . Retrieved November 5, 2021 .

^ Hacker, Jacob S.; Pierson, Paul (2020).

Let them Eat Tweets: How the Right Rules in an Age of Extreme Inequality . Liveright Publishing.

ISBN 978-1-63149-685-1 .

^ "Jobs and the Economy" .

Democrats.org . Archived from the original on March 20, 2015 . Retrieved July 14, 2014 .

^ Roberts, Dan (April 19, 2014).

"Wall Street deregulation pushed by Clinton advisers, documents reveal" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on January 6, 2020 . Retrieved December 14, 2016 .

^ Mudge, Stephanie (2018).

Leftism Reinvented: Western Parties from Socialism to Neoliberalism . Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press. pp.

167– 213.

^ "How High Should Taxes Be?" . Economics.about.com. June 12, 2010.

Archived from the original on April 14, 2016 . Retrieved June 17, 2010 .

^ CARBONARO, GIULIA (2023).

"Poverty Is Killing Nearly 200,000 Americans a Year" .

Newsweek .

Archived from the original on June 29, 2023 . Retrieved June 29, 2023 .

^ "The Social Safety Net" . usinfo.state.gov. Archived from the original on April 10, 2008.

^ "Day Two: House passes new budget rules" . Associated Press. January 5, 2007.

Archived from the original on December 4, 2019 . Retrieved January 5, 2007 .

^ a b "The Democratic Party Platform" . Democrats.org. Archived from the original on March 15, 2014 . Retrieved March 18, 2014 .

^ Kulwin, Noah (May 25, 2017).

"Democrats just united on a $15-an-hour minimum wage" .

Vice .

Archived from the original on May 26, 2017 . Retrieved May 29, 2017 .

^ Freking, Kevin (January 30, 2021).

"Biden, Democrats hit gas on push for $15 minimum wage" .

Associated Press News .

Archived from the original on February 19, 2021 . Retrieved February 6, 2021 .

^ Marr, Chris.

"Blue State Minimum Wages Inch Upward, Widening Gap With South" .

Bloomberg Law .

Archived from the original on May 25, 2022 . Retrieved July 24, 2022 .

^ Nova, Annie (December 29, 2019).

"How the Affordable Care Act transformed our health-care system" . CNBC.

Archived from the original on July 27, 2020 . Retrieved July 22, 2020 .

^ "Moving America Forward 2012 Democratic National Platform" (PDF) . presidency.ucsb.edu. September 14, 2012.

Archived (PDF) from the original on August 19, 2018 . Retrieved January 13, 2018 .

^ "Clinton Joins Key Senate Democrats to Release Report on 'The College Cost Crunch' " .

clinton.senate.gov . June 28, 2006. Archived from the original on October 25, 2006 . Retrieved November 25, 2006 .

^ ● "54% of Americans view climate change as a major threat, but the partisan divide has grown" . Pew Research Center. April 18, 2023.

Archived from the original on April 22, 2023.

● Broader discussion by Tyson, Alec; Funk, Cary; Kennedy, Brian (April 18, 2023).

"What the data says about Americans' views of climate change" . Pew Research Center.

Archived from the original on May 12, 2023.

^ McGreal, Chris (October 26, 2021).

"Revealed: 60% of Americans say oil firms are to blame for the climate crisis" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on October 26, 2021.

Source: Guardian/Vice/CCN/YouGov poll. Note: ±4% margin of error.

^ a b Tyson, Alec; Funk, Cary; Kennedy, Brian (March 1, 2022).

"Americans Largely Favor U.S. Taking Steps To Become Carbon Neutral by 2050 / Appendix (Detailed charts and tables)" .

Pew Research .

Archived from the original on April 18, 2022.

^ Jones, Jeffrey M. (April 11, 2022).

"Climate Change Proposals Favored by Solid Majorities in U.S. / Support for Policies Designed to Limit Greenhouse Gases, by Political Party" .

Gallup .

Archived from the original on October 1, 2022.

^ Chiu, Allyson; Guskin, Emily; Clement, Scott (October 3, 2023).

"Americans don't hate living near solar and wind farms as much as you might think" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on October 3, 2023.

^ "Agenda — Environment" . Archived from the original on March 15, 2007 . Retrieved March 18, 2007 .

^ Coley, Jonathan S.; Hess, David J. (2012).

"Green energy laws and Republican legislators in the United States" .

Energy Policy .

48 : 576– 583.

Bibcode : 2012EnPol..48..576C .

doi : 10.1016/j.enpol.2012.05.062 .

ISSN 0301-4215 .

Archived from the original on June 18, 2019 . Retrieved November 7, 2021 .

^ Bergquist, Parrish; Warshaw, Christopher (2020).

"Elections and parties in environmental politics" .

Handbook of U.S. Environmental Policy : 126– 141.

doi : 10.4337/9781788972840.00017 .

ISBN 9781788972840 .

S2CID 219077951 .

Archived from the original on November 7, 2021 . Retrieved November 7, 2021 .

^ "Democratic Party on Environment" .

Archived from the original on July 3, 2019 . Retrieved October 24, 2007 .

^ Nicols, John (October 12, 2007). "Al Gore Wins Nobel Peace Prize".

The Nation .

^ "Energy Independence" .

Democrats.org . Archived from the original on September 20, 2010.

^ Sullivan, Sean (June 2, 2014).

"Coal state Democrats to Obama: Curb emissions? Um, no thanks" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on May 13, 2015 . Retrieved August 22, 2017 .

^ Wells, Joey Garrison and Dylan.

"Sen. Kyrsten Sinema backs Inflation Reduction Act, giving Biden the votes for Senate passage" .

USA Today .

Archived from the original on August 24, 2022 . Retrieved August 24, 2022 .

^ "What The Climate Package Means For A Warming Planet : Consider This from NPR" .

NPR.org .

Archived from the original on August 24, 2022 . Retrieved August 24, 2022 .

^ Nilsen, Ella (July 28, 2022).

"Clean energy package would be biggest legislative climate investment in US history" . CNN.

Archived from the original on February 2, 2023 . Retrieved July 31, 2022 .

^ Taussig, Tariff History pp. 109–24 ^ Joanne R. Reitano, The Tariff Question in the Gilded Age: The Great Debate of 1888 (Penn State Press, 1994) ^ Woodrow Wilson: "Address to a Joint Session of Congress on the Banking System," June 23, 1913. Online by Gerhard Peters and John T. Woolley, The American Presidency Project.

http://www.presidency.ucsb.edu/ws/index.php?pid=65369 Archived October 12, 2018, at the Wayback Machine .

^ Bailey, Michael A.; Goldstein, Weingast (April 1997). "The Institutional Roots of American Trade Policy".

World Politics .

49 (3): 309– 38.

doi : 10.1353/wp.1997.0007 .

S2CID 154711958 .

^ John H. Barton, Judith L. Goldstein , Timothy E. Josling, and Richard H. Steinberg, The Evolution of the Trade Regime: Politics, Law, and Economics of the GATT and the WTO (2008) ^ McClenahan, William (1991). "The Growth of Voluntary Export Restraints and American Foreign Economic Policy, 1956–1969".

Business and Economic History .

20 : 180– 190.

JSTOR 23702815 .

^ "Building A Stronger, Fairer Economy" .

Democrats .

Archived from the original on August 18, 2021 . Retrieved August 10, 2021 .

^ Roberts, Ken (April 26, 2024).

"Biden Could Be 1st President Since Carter To Not Negotiate, Sign FTA" .

Forbes .

Archived from the original on April 27, 2024 . Retrieved April 27, 2024 .

^ Swanson, Ana; Holman, Jordyn (September 13, 2024).

"Biden Administration Ratchets Up Tariffs on Chinese Goods" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved April 30, 2025 .

^ Swan, Jonathan; Haberman, Maggie; Swanson, Ana (March 17, 2025).

"Trump's Unwelcome News to Auto Chiefs: Buckle Up for What's to Come" .

The New York Times .

President Trump's approach to tariffs has unsettled many corporate leaders who believed he would use the levies as a negotiating tool. As it turns out, he sees them as an end in themselves.

^ "Republicans favor Trump tariffs despite anticipated price hikes: poll" . March 6, 2025.

^ Carmines, Edward G.; Stimson, James A. "Racial Issues and The Structure of Mass Belief Systems," Journal of Politics (1982) 44#1 pp 2–20 in JSTOR Archived July 31, 2020, at the Wayback Machine ^ Anderson, Talmadge & James Benjamin Stewart (2007).

Introduction to African American Studies: Transdisciplinary Approaches and Implications . Black Classic Press. p. 205.

ISBN 9781580730396 .

Archived from the original on September 13, 2024 . Retrieved October 16, 2015 .

^ Stonecash, Jeffrey M. (2010).

New Directions in American Political Parties . Routledge. p. 131.

ISBN 9781135282059 .

Archived from the original on September 13, 2024 . Retrieved October 16, 2015 .

^ "Behind Biden's 2020 Victory" .

Pew Research Center . June 30, 2021.

Archived from the original on August 19, 2023 . Retrieved August 19, 2023 .

^ "Civil Rights" .

Democrats.org . Archived from the original on February 9, 2014 . Retrieved February 2, 2014 .

^ Padilla, Alex (November 3, 2020).

"STATEMENT OF VOTE" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on December 14, 2020 . Retrieved March 15, 2024 .

^ White, Deborah.

"Liberalism 101: Democratic Party Agenda on Electoral Reform" .

About .

Archived from the original on March 10, 2016 . Retrieved April 17, 2014 .

^ "Democratic Party on Government Reform" . Ontheissues.org.

Archived from the original on April 30, 2016 . Retrieved January 19, 2015 .

^ a b Williams, Daniel K. (June 2015).

"The Partisan Trajectory of the American Pro-Life Movement: How a Liberal Catholic Campaign Became a Conservative Evangelical Cause" .

Religions .

6 (2): 451– 475.

doi : 10.3390/rel6020451 .

ISSN 2077-1444 .

^ Williams, Daniel K. (May 9, 2022).

"This Really Is a Different Pro-Life Movement" .

The Atlantic .

Archived from the original on May 10, 2022 . Retrieved February 2, 2023 .

This was not merely a geographic shift, trading one region for another, but a more fundamental transformation of the anti-abortion movement's political ideology. In 1973 many of the most vocal opponents of abortion were northern Democrats who believed in an expanded social-welfare state and who wanted to reduce abortion rates through prenatal insurance and federally funded day care. In 2022, most anti-abortion politicians are conservative Republicans who are skeptical of such measures. What happened was a seismic religious and political shift in opposition to abortion that has not occurred in any other Western country.

^ Halpern, Sue (November 8, 2018).

"How Republicans Became Anti-Choice" .

The New York Review of Books .

ISSN 0028-7504 .

Archived from the original on February 4, 2023 . Retrieved February 4, 2023 .

^ Taylor, Justin (May 9, 2018).

"How the Christian Right Became Prolife on Abortion and Transformed the Culture Wars" .

The Gospel Coalition .

Archived from the original on February 4, 2023 . Retrieved February 4, 2023 .

^ "House Votes on 2003-530" . Ontheissues.org. October 2, 2003.

Archived from the original on February 28, 2014 . Retrieved March 18, 2014 .

^ "2020 Democratic Party Platform" (PDF) .

2020 Democratic National Convention . Archived from the original (PDF) on February 16, 2021 . Retrieved January 10, 2021 .

^ Miller, Claire Cain; Sanger-Katz, Margot; Katz, Josh (October 22, 2024).

"Abortions Have Increased, Even for Women in States With Rigid Bans, Study Says" .

The New York Times . Retrieved December 2, 2024 .

^ Cohen, David S.; Joffe, Carole (2025).

After Dobbs: How the Supreme Court Ended Roe but Not Abortion . Beacon Press.

ISBN 978-0807017661 .

When the Supreme Court overturned Roe v. Wade in June 2022, many feared it meant the end of abortion access in the United States. Yet the courageous work of people on the ground has allowed abortion to survive post-Dobbs in ways that no one predicted. ... Taking place across three intervals throughout 2022—pre-Dobbs in early 2022, right after Dobbs, and then six months later—these interviews showcase how nimble thinking on the part of providers, growth and new delivery models of abortion pills, and the never-ending work of those who help with abortion travel and funding have ensured most people who want them are still getting abortions, even without Roe.

^ Peters, Margaret (2017).

Trading Barriers . Princeton University Press. pp.

154– 155.

ISBN 978-0691174471 .

Archived from the original on March 3, 2018.

^ Frumin, Aliyah (November 25, 2013).

"Obama: 'Long past time' for immigration reform" .

MSNBC .

Archived from the original on January 21, 2014 . Retrieved January 26, 2014 .

^ Hackman, Michelle; Zitner, Aaron (February 2, 2024).

"Why Both Parties Have Shifted Right on Immigration—and Still Can't Agree" .

The Wall Street Journal .

^ Jones, Jeffrey M. (July 12, 2024).

"Sharply More Americans Want to Curb Immigration to U.S." Gallup .

Archived from the original on July 20, 2024 . Retrieved August 4, 2024 .

55% want immigration levels reduced, highest since 2001 ^ Chotiner, Isaac (March 3, 2025).

"How Democrats Lost Their Way on Immigration" .

The New Yorker . Retrieved March 3, 2025 .

^ Karma, Rogé (December 10, 2024).

"Why Democrats Got the Politics of Immigration So Wrong for So Long" .

The Atlantic . Retrieved December 10, 2024 .

^ Leonhardt, David (February 24, 2025).

"In an Age of Right-Wing Populism, Why Are Denmark's Liberals Winning?" .

The New York Times . Retrieved February 24, 2025 .

Around the world, progressive parties have come to see tight immigration restrictions as unnecessary, even cruel. What if they're actually the only way for progressivism to flourish?

^ a b Igielnik, Ruth (November 16, 2022).

"Backdrop for Vote on Same-Sex Marriage Rights: A Big Shift in Public Opinion" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on November 16, 2022 . Retrieved November 17, 2022 .

^ Lindberg, Tim (August 2, 2022).

"Congress is considering making same-sex marriage federal law – a political scientist explains how this issue became less polarized over time" .

Kansas Reflector .

Archived from the original on August 23, 2022 . Retrieved August 14, 2022 .

^ "Changing Views on Social Issues" (PDF) . April 30, 2009.

Archived (PDF) from the original on November 10, 2010 . Retrieved May 14, 2009 .

^ Less Opposition to Gay Marriage, Adoption and Military Service Archived March 10, 2011, at the Wayback Machine .

Pew Research Center . March 22, 2006.

^ Morales, Lymari (June 5, 2009).

"Conservatives Shift in Favor of Openly Gay Service Members" .

Gallup.com .

Archived from the original on May 1, 2016 . Retrieved August 25, 2010 .

^ McCarthy, Justin (June 5, 2023).

"U.S. Same-Sex Marriage Support Holds at 71% High" .

Archived from the original on June 5, 2023 . Retrieved June 5, 2023 .

^ "The 2004 Democratic National Platform for America" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on October 13, 2004.

(111 KB) ^ "Gay Support for Obama Similar to Dems in Past Elections" . Law.ucla.edu. November 26, 2008. Archived from the original on December 9, 2009 . Retrieved June 17, 2010 .

^ Garcia, Michelle (April 22, 2012).

"Is This the Year Democrats Embrace Marriage Equality?" . Advocate.com.

Archived from the original on October 4, 2013 . Retrieved October 2, 2013 .

^ "Obama backs same-sex marriage" .

CBS News . May 9, 2012.

Archived from the original on May 10, 2012 . Retrieved May 9, 2012 .

^ Stein, Sam (May 9, 2012).

"Obama Backs Gay Marriage" .

HuffPost . Archived from the original on September 20, 2018 . Retrieved December 6, 2019 .

^ a b "Same-sex Marriage – Issues – Election Center 2008" . CNN.

Archived from the original on April 28, 2016 . Retrieved January 19, 2015 .

^ Obama Opposes Gay Marriage Ban Archived September 26, 2011, at the Wayback Machine .

The Washington Post . By Perry Bacon Jr. July 2, 2008.

^ Obama Statement on Vote Against Constitutional Amendment to Ban Gay Marriage Archived December 8, 2008, at the Wayback Machine .

United States Senate Official Website Archived December 28, 2016, at the Wayback Machine . June 7, 2006.

^ Linkins, Jason (January 13, 2009).

"Obama Once Supported Same-Sex Marriage 'Unequivocally' " .

HuffPost .

Archived from the original on May 12, 2011 . Retrieved June 17, 2010 .

^ "Video: Clinton shifts on gay marriage" . CNN. September 25, 2009. Archived from the original on December 26, 2009 . Retrieved May 1, 2010 .

^ Raushenbush, Paul (March 19, 2012).

"President Jimmy Carter Authors New Bible Book, Answers Hard Biblical Questions" .

HuffPost .

Archived from the original on June 25, 2012 . Retrieved June 26, 2012 .

^ "Gay men and women should have the same rights // Current" . Current.com. January 17, 2008. Archived from the original on November 29, 2009 . Retrieved June 17, 2010 .

^ Israel, Josh (May 16, 2013).

"Mondale and Dukakis Back Marriage Equality" .

ThinkProgress .

Archived from the original on November 4, 2019 . Retrieved November 4, 2019 .

^ Cournoyer, Caroline (May 7, 2012).

"Joe Biden Endorses Gay Marriage" .

Governing .

Archived from the original on February 22, 2021 . Retrieved February 9, 2021 .

^ a b "Democratic Party Platform 2016" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on November 10, 2016 . Retrieved November 11, 2016 .

^ "Amid a Series of Mass Shootings in the U.S., Gun Policy Remains Deeply Divisive" .

PewResearch.org . April 20, 2021.

Archived from the original on May 30, 2022.

^ "The Draft 2008 Democratic National Platform: Renewing America's Promise" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on May 12, 2012 . Retrieved February 4, 2014 .

^ Clyde, Don; Miranda, Shauneen (June 25, 2022).

"Biden signs gun safety bill into law" . NPR.

Archived from the original on September 24, 2022 . Retrieved September 20, 2022 .

^ McWhirter, Cameron; Elinson, Zusha (September 20, 2024).

"The Most Surprising New Gun Owners Are U.S. Liberals" .

The Wall Street Journal . Retrieved September 21, 2024 .

^ Schaeffer, Katherine (September 13, 2023).

"Key facts about Americans and guns" .

Pew Research Center . Retrieved September 19, 2023 .

^ "Statement by Attorney General Ramsey Clark before the Subcommittee on Criminal Laws and Procedures of the Senate Judiciary Committee" (PDF) .

Department of Justice . Retrieved June 25, 2025 .

^ a b "1972 Democratic Party Platform" . July 11, 1972.

Archived from the original on April 8, 2022 – via American Presidency Project.

^ Simon, Roger (April 20, 2007).

"Questions that kill candidates' careers" . Politico . Retrieved June 25, 2025 .

^ Hitchens, Christopher (June 6, 1996).

"A Hard Dog to Keep on the Porch" .

London Review of Books . Vol. 18, no. 11 . Retrieved June 25, 2025 .

^ Edsall, Thomas B. (April 22, 1992).

"Death Penalty Opposition Seen as Impolitic in '92; Strong Public Backing Frustrates Liberal Foes" . The Washington Post.

ProQuest 307529579 . Retrieved July 2, 2025 .

^ "History of the Death Penalty" .

Death Penalty Information Center . Retrieved June 25, 2025 .

^ "Political Party Platforms and the Death Penalty" .

Death Penalty Information Center . Retrieved June 25, 2025 .

^ "Democratic Platform Drafting Meeting Concludes" . DNCC. June 25, 2016. Archived from the original on August 2, 2016 . Retrieved June 29, 2016 .

^ "2020 Democratic Party Platform" .

American Presidency Project . UC Santa Barbara . Retrieved June 25, 2025 .

^ "Democrats Scrubbed An Issue From Their Party Platform — And It's Going Under The Radar" .

HuffPost . August 22, 2024.

^ Berman, Mark; Viser, Matt (December 23, 2024).

"Biden commutes most federal death sentences before Trump takes office" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved December 23, 2024 .

^ Tyson, Alec (January 26, 2017).

"Americans divided in views of use of torture in U.S. anti-terror efforts" .

Archived from the original on March 21, 2020 . Retrieved March 21, 2020 .

^ Walsh, Kenneth T.

"Obama and Democrats' Torture Problem" .

U.S. News & World Report .

Archived from the original on July 6, 2017 . Retrieved August 26, 2017 .

^ "Senate roll call on passage of the PATRIOT Act" . Senate.gov. April 25, 2017.

Archived from the original on December 5, 2017 . Retrieved January 13, 2018 .

^ "House approves Patriot Act renewal" . CNN.

Archived from the original on March 21, 2020 . Retrieved March 21, 2020 .

^ Ashtari, Shadee (November 6, 2013).

"Here's The Medieval-Sounding Sodomy Law That Helped Ken Cuccinelli Lose In Virginia" .

HuffPost .

Archived from the original on March 24, 2019 . Retrieved December 6, 2019 .

^ "Republicans, Democrats Agree on Top Foreign Policy Goals" .

Gallup.com . February 20, 2013.

Archived from the original on March 10, 2016 . Retrieved April 16, 2017 .

^ See "July 3, 2014 – Iraq – Getting In Was Wrong; Getting Out Was Right, U.S. Voters Tell Quinnipiac University National Poll" Quinnipiac University Poll Archived April 2, 2016, at the Wayback Machine item #51 ^ Gordon, Michael R. (November 23, 2013).

"Accord Reached With Iran to Halt Nuclear Program" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on March 26, 2017 . Retrieved February 21, 2017 .

^ "Jewish Democratic donors urge Congress: Back off Iran sanctions" .

Haaretz . February 28, 2014.

Archived from the original on September 24, 2015 . Retrieved March 26, 2014 .

^ Cortellessa, Eric.

"Democratic Party passes resolution calling for US to re-enter Iran nuke deal" .

The Times of Israel .

Archived from the original on February 21, 2019 . Retrieved February 21, 2019 .

^ "Democrats say McCain forgot Afghanistan" .

Boston Globe . July 24, 2008. Retrieved August 23, 2008.

Archived August 20, 2008, at the Wayback Machine ^ a b "John McCain & Barack Obama urge Afghanistan surge" Archived November 13, 2009, at the Wayback Machine .

New York Daily News . July 15, 2008. Retrieved August 23, 2008.

^ "U.S. plans major shift to advisory role in Afghanistan", Los Angeles Times , December 13, 2011 Archived August 19, 2016, at the Wayback Machine ^ a b Most Americans oppose Afghanistan war: poll Archived August 10, 2009, at the Wayback Machine .

The Australian . August 7, 2009. Retrieved August 24, 2009.

^ a b "Afghan War Edges Out Iraq as Most Important for U.S." Archived December 24, 2016, at the Wayback Machine by Frank Newport.

Gallup . July 30, 2008. Retrieved August 24, 2009.

^ "Joe Biden: I Promise To 'End The Forever Wars In Afghanistan And Middle East' As President" . CBS News. July 11, 2019.

Archived from the original on November 19, 2022 . Retrieved November 19, 2022 .

^ "Biden to pull US troops from Afghanistan, end 'forever war' " .

AP NEWS . April 14, 2021.

Archived from the original on November 19, 2022 . Retrieved November 19, 2022 .

^ Gaouette, Nicole; Hansler, Jennifer; Starr, Barbara; Liebermann, Oren (August 30, 2021).

"The last US military planes have left Afghanistan, marking the end of the United States' longest war | CNN Politics" . CNN.

Archived from the original on September 11, 2021 . Retrieved November 19, 2022 .

^ "Republicans and Democrats agree that the Afghanistan war wasn't worth it, an AP-NORC poll shows" .

AP News . October 18, 2023.

Archived from the original on October 18, 2023 . Retrieved October 19, 2023 .

^ a b Cavari, Amnon; Freedman, Guy (2020).

American Public Opinion Toward Israel: From Consensus to Divide .

Taylor & Francis . p. 145.

^ Tenorio, Rich (November 3, 2020).

"How a nascent Israel was a key issue in Truman's stunning 1948 election upset" .

The Times of Israel .

Archived from the original on November 18, 2023 . Retrieved November 1, 2023 .

^ "PARTY PLATFORM" .

Democrats . Democrats.org.

Archived from the original on March 15, 2014 . Retrieved June 17, 2022 .

^ Shear, Michael D. (October 19, 2023).

"Israel-Hamas War: Biden Urges U.S. to Remain 'Beacon to the World' in Aiding Allies at War" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 .

Archived from the original on October 20, 2023 . Retrieved October 20, 2023 .

^ Baker, Peter (October 10, 2023).

"In Unforgiving Terms, Biden Condemns 'Evil' and 'Abhorrent' Attack on Israel" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 .

Archived from the original on October 12, 2023 . Retrieved October 12, 2023 .

^ "Biden Ordering US Military to Build Port in Gaza to Facilitate Aid" . March 7, 2024.

Archived from the original on March 19, 2024 . Retrieved March 23, 2024 .

^ Berg, Matt (April 14, 2024).

"Voters think Biden should be tougher on Israel, new poll finds" .

Politico .

Archived from the original on May 28, 2024 . Retrieved June 16, 2024 .

^ Valdez, Jonah (September 10, 2024).

"Most Americans Want to Stop Arming Israel. Politicians Don't Care" . The Intercept.

^ Stepansky, Joseph (August 17, 2024).

" 'Uncommitted' delegates bring Gaza-war message to Democratic convention" . Al Jazeera.

Archived from the original on September 13, 2024 . Retrieved August 18, 2024 .

^ "US lawmakers urge Biden administration to halt offensive weapons to Israel" . Al Jazeera.

^ Silver, Laura (April 8, 2025).

"How Americans view Israel and the Israel-Hamas war at the start of Trump's second term" .

^ "Senate rejects bid to halt sale of bombs and rifles to Israel, but Democratic opposition grows" .

AP News . July 31, 2025 . Retrieved August 12, 2025 .

^ "Here are the 11 GOP senators who voted against the Ukraine aid bill," Archived August 15, 2023, at the Wayback Machine May 19, 2022, The Hill (magazine) retrieved July 4, 2023 ^ "A Loud Republican Minority Opposes More Ukraine Military Aid," Archived July 4, 2023, at the Wayback Machine May 19, 2023, New York Times retrieved July 4, 2023 ^ Shivaram, Deepa (October 26, 2023).

"The White House is asking for almost $106 billion for Israel, Ukraine and the border" . NPR.

Archived from the original on August 21, 2024 . Retrieved August 2, 2024 .

^ Zengerle, Patricia; Cowan, Richard (April 23, 2024).

"US Congress passes Ukraine aid after months of delay" .

Reuters . Retrieved June 2, 2024 .

^ Williams, Michael; Saenz, Arlette; Liptak, Kevin (April 30, 2024).

"Biden signs foreign aid bill providing crucial military assistance to Ukraine" .

CNN .

Archived from the original on April 24, 2024 . Retrieved June 2, 2024 .

^ Myre, Greg (April 24, 2024).

"Biden signs $95 billion military aid package for Ukraine, Israel and Taiwan" .

NPR .

Archived from the original on June 2, 2024 . Retrieved June 2, 2024 .

^ a b Suss, Joel; Xiao, Eva; Burn-Murdoch, John; Murray, Clara; Vincent, Jonathan (November 9, 2024).

"Poorer voters flocked to Trump — and other data points from the election" .

Financial Times . Retrieved November 12, 2024 .

In contrast to 2020, the majority of lower-income households or those earning less than $50,000 a year voted for Trump this election. Conversely, those making more than $100,000 voted for Harris, according to exit polls.

^ a b c Cohn, Nate (November 25, 2024).

"How Democrats Lost Their Base and their Message" .

The New York Times . Retrieved November 25, 2024 .

Donald Trump's populist pitch bumped Democrats off their traditional place in American politics. ... It has long been clear that the rise of Donald J. Trump meant the end of the Republican Party as we once knew it. It has belatedly become clear that his rise may have meant the end of the Democratic Party as we knew it as well. After three Trump elections, almost every traditional Democratic constituency has swung to the right. In fact, Mr. Trump has made larger gains among Black, Hispanic, Asian American and young voters in his three campaigns since 2016 than he has among white voters without a college degree, according to New York Times estimates. In each case, Mr. Trump fared better than any Republican in decades. ... The overarching pattern is clear. In election after election, Democrats underperformed among traditional Democratic constituencies during the Trump era. Sometimes, it was merely a failure to capitalize on his unpopularity. Other times, it was a staggering decline in support. Together, it has shattered Democratic dreams of building a new majority with the rise of a new generation of young and nonwhite voters. This overarching pattern requires an overarching explanation: Mr. Trump's populist conservatism corroded the foundations of the Democratic Party's appeal. It tapped into many of the issues and themes that once made these voters Democrats.

^ a b Levitz, Eric (September 29, 2021).

"Is America Too Rich for Class Politics?" .

New York . Retrieved December 2, 2024 .

^ McGreal, Chris (November 11, 2018).

"Can Democrats ever win back white, rural America?" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on March 8, 2019 . Retrieved March 7, 2019 .

^ a b c Thompson, Derek (September 13, 2019).

"How Democrats Conquered the City" .

The Atlantic .

Archived from the original on March 7, 2020 . Retrieved March 13, 2020 .

^ a b "Polarisation by education is remaking American politics" .

The Economist . October 13, 2024.

From 1952 to 2000, a majority of white voters with college degrees self-identified as Republicans. Starting with the 2012 election, this affiliation began to weaken. It loosened even more once [Donald] Trump became the Republican standard-bearer in 2016. By 2020, the college-educated called themselves Democrats by a 2:1 margin. And there were many more of them; their share of the electorate rose from 8% in 1952 to 40% in 2020. Had the party held on to the rest of its support, this would have ensured an enduring majority. Yet at the same time, Democrats lost support among whites without college degrees. They now favour Republicans by their own margin of 2:1.

^ a b Grossmann, Matt; Hopkins, David A.

"Polarized by Degrees: How the Diploma Divide and the Culture War Transformed American Politics" .

Cambridge University Press . Retrieved May 23, 2024 .

Democrats have become the home of highly-educated citizens with progressive social views who prefer credentialed experts to make policy decisions, while Republicans have become the populist champions of white voters without college degrees who increasingly distrust teachers, scientists, journalists, universities, non-profit organizations, and even corporations.

^ a b c Levitz, Eric (October 19, 2022).

"How the Diploma Divide Is Remaking American Politics" .

New York Intelligencer .

Archived from the original on October 20, 2022 . Retrieved April 24, 2023 .

^ a b Sosnik, Doug (April 17, 2023).

"The 'Diploma Divide' Is the New Fault Line in American Politics" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on April 24, 2023 . Retrieved April 24, 2023 .

^ a b Badger, Emily; Gebeloff, Robert; Bhatia, Aatish (October 26, 2024).

"They Used to Be Ahead in the American Economy. Now They've Fallen Behind" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on October 27, 2024 . Retrieved October 26, 2024 .

In the data, men working without a college degree of every racial group have fallen well below the average full-time worker (women without a degree have long been at the bottom in income, and college-educated men have consistently been at the top). Workers in coastal states have seen the highest growth, while steep declines have been concentrated in parts of the Midwest that are also likely to decide the election this November.

^ a b Jackson, Brooks (April 18, 2008).

"Blacks and the Democratic Party" . FactCheck.org.

Archived from the original on November 3, 2011 . Retrieved October 30, 2011 .

^ a b Bositis, David.

"Blacks and the 2012 Democratic National Convention; page 9, table 1: black votes in presidential elections, 1936 – 2008" (PDF) .

Joint Center for Political and Economic Studies .

Archived (PDF) from the original on February 22, 2024 . Retrieved March 23, 2024 .

^ "Partisanship by race, ethnicity and education" .

Pew Research Center . April 9, 2024 . Retrieved April 26, 2024 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j "Exit poll results 2024" . CNN. November 6, 2024 . Retrieved November 6, 2024 .

^ "Faith on the Hill: The religious composition of the 116th Congress" .

Pew Research Center . January 3, 2019.

Archived from the original on February 18, 2021 . Retrieved May 18, 2020 .

^ Andre, Michael; et al. (November 3, 2020).

"National Exit Polls: How Different Groups Voted" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 .

Archived from the original on November 10, 2020 . Retrieved December 5, 2020 .

^ "An inaugural first: Obama acknowledges 'non-believers' " .

USA Today . January 22, 2009.

Archived from the original on April 1, 2010 . Retrieved August 22, 2017 .

^ "Party identification among religious groups and religiously unaffiliated voters" .

Pew Research Center . April 9, 2024 . Retrieved May 27, 2024 .

^ "4. Age, generational cohorts and party identification" . Pew Research Center. April 9, 2024.

Archived from the original on August 3, 2024 . Retrieved August 3, 2024 .

^ Yglesias, Matthew (September 22, 2021).

"The median voter is a 50-something white person who didn't go to college" .

Slow Boring . Retrieved April 9, 2024 .

Long story short, if you're going to blow off the median voter, you ought to do it purposefully and with a plan — don't just act like the views of under-40 college grads are typical. ... And I don't think there's a mass delusion where people have come to believe that left-wing cultural politics and student debt relief are the top priorities for 50-something working-class people living outside the top 50 metro areas.

^ a b c Considine, Clare (November 22, 2022).

"Struggling to Attract Single Women? So are Republicans" .

Split Ticket .

It's true—marriage has a conservatizing effect on the political attitudes of women. Married women are associated with lower levels of gender-linked fate, which is itself is associated with ideology, partisanship, and even positional attitudes such as support for abortion. Research tells us that marriage plays a distinct role in structuring legal abortion attitudes for women, particularly among white women. We know that the Dobbs decision created an inflection point in support for Democrats, and it's not an unreasonable to understand why the issue would have outsized salience among unmarried women (86 percent of abortion seekers in the US are unmarried).

^ a b c d e f g Jain, Lakshya; Lavelle, Harrison; Thomas, Armin (March 24, 2023).

"Where Do Democrats Win White Voters?" .

Split Ticket . Retrieved January 13, 2025 .

Educational polarization and urbanization are not the only two lenses through which to analyze the white vote. For all that educational polarization has done to explain shifts in partisanship (as shown by Atlanta and Dallas rocketing left), it cannot fully explain the differences in baseline partisanship nearly as well. To better understand this, it becomes necessary to consider a more comprehensive picture. ... Religious affiliation (i.e. denomination) and religiosity levels, among other factors, explained wide differences in how both non-college whites and college-educated whites voted across regions. Throughout New England and the Pacific Coast, widespread secularism makes both college and non-college whites significantly bluer than the national average. Elsewhere in the Northeast, a comparatively large Catholic population has raised the Democratic floor among whites across the educational attainment spectrum. ... This likely has a good deal to do with southern cultural conservatism, which is elevated relative to the nation thanks in part to marked Protestant religiosity, particularly among white Baptists. For this reason, support for abortion is exceptionally high in the Midwest, but extremely low in the South.

This regional mix of religiosity and racial polarization results in something quite striking: whites in virtually every southern county are significantly more Republican than their northern counterparts.

^ "Without Northern Virginia, Trump would have won the state" .

Inside Nova . Retrieved November 17, 2020 .

^ Bergman, Klas.

Scandinavians in the State House: How Nordic Immigrants Shaped Minnesota Politics ( Minnesota Historical Society Press , 2017) online review .

^ Brøndal, Jørn.

Ethnic Leadership and Midwestern Politics: Scandinavian Americans and the Progressive Movement in Wisconsin, 1890–1914 ( University of Illinois Press , 2004).

^ "U.S. Census Bureau QuickFacts: New Mexico" .

census.gov . Retrieved September 9, 2021 .

^ a b c "EDUCATIONAL ATTAINMENT" . U.S. Census Bureau.

Archived from the original on September 19, 2022 . Retrieved September 18, 2022 .

^ "Unmarried Women in the 2004 Presidential Election" Archived January 1, 2016, at the Wayback Machine ( PDF ). Report by Greenberg Quinlan Rosner Research, January 2005. p. 3: "The marriage gap is one of the most important cleavages in electoral politics. Unmarried women voted for Kerry by a 25-point margin (62 to 37 percent), while married women voted for President Bush by an 11-point margin (55 percent to 44 percent). Indeed, the 25-point margin Kerry posted among unmarried women represented one of the high water marks for the Senator among all demographic groups." ^ "Republicans should worry that unmarried women shun them" .

The Economist . December 14, 2013.

Archived from the original on January 15, 2018 . Retrieved September 18, 2019 .

^ McDonnell, Meg T. (December 3, 2012).

"The Marriage Gap in the Women's Vote" .

Crisis Magazine . Archived from the original on October 31, 2014 . Retrieved December 11, 2014 .

^ Goldenberg, Suzanne (November 9, 2012).

"Single women voted overwhelmingly in favour of Obama, researchers find" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on December 31, 2014 . Retrieved December 11, 2014 .

^ Junn, Jane ; Masuoka, Natalie (2020).

"The Gender Gap Is a Race Gap: Women Voters in US Presidential Elections" .

Perspectives on Politics .

18 (4): 1135– 1145.

doi : 10.1017/S1537592719003876 .

ISSN 1537-5927 .

^ "White Female Voters Continue to Support the Republican Party" .

The Atlantic . November 14, 2016.

Archived from the original on December 15, 2023 . Retrieved January 30, 2021 .

^ a b Kornacki, Steve (March 18, 2025).

"Steve Kornacki: White men, white women, and the gap within the gender gap" . NBC News . Retrieved March 19, 2025 .

New NBC News polling data illustrates the cultural and political gulf separating white men without college degrees and white women with college degrees.

^ Barabak, Mark Z. (November 2023).

"A series on political shifts in the West" .

Los Angeles Times . Retrieved June 4, 2024 .

^ Sullivan, Robert David; ‘How the Red and Blue Map Evolved Over the Past Century’ ; America Magazine in The National Catholic Review ; June 29, 2016 ^ Rachman, Gideon (July 30, 2018).

"Urban-rural splits have become the great global divider" .

Financial Times .

ISSN 0307-1766 .

Archived from the original on February 26, 2021 . Retrieved May 6, 2024 .

^ Kondik, Kyle (January 9, 2025).

"How the Other Half Votes: The Big Counties Versus the Rest of the Country in 2024" .

Sabato's Crystal Ball . Retrieved February 8, 2024 .

^ Lavelle, Harrison; McCall, Max (February 8, 2025).

"America's Demographic Revolution" .

Split Ticket . Retrieved February 8, 2025 .

^ Sullivan, Brianna; Hays, Donald; Bennett, Neil (June 2023).

"The Wealth of Households: 2021 / Current Population Reports / P70BR-183" (PDF) . United States Census Bureau. p. 5 (Figure 2).

Archived (PDF) from the original on May 24, 2024.

^ a b Morris, G. Elliott; Brown, Amina; Marriner, Katie.

"Where Have All The Democrats Gone?" .

FiveThirtyEight . Archived from the original on February 4, 2025.

This all raises questions about Democrats' messaging about the economy, or maybe suggests that the type of people they hypothesize would be helped most by their policies — such as wealth redistribution from progressive and corporate taxation and federal subsidies for companies that invest in underdeveloped areas, especially when it comes to manufacturing — are not as responsive as the party hoped to the type of so-called policy "deliverism" that the Obama and Biden administrations pursued. In a more dire framing for Democrats: If a party that tells itself it stands for working-class voters is systematically losing support with those people, something has gone terribly wrong for them.

^ Cliffe, Jeremy (February 15, 2023).

"The strange death of the centre right" .

New Statesman .

Archived from the original on February 11, 2025 . Retrieved February 5, 2025 .

The traditional centre right of the postwar decades could do so by "bundling" moderate social conservatism (moderate by the standards of its day, at least) with the pro-business economic conservatism favoured by higher earners. But today those two elements are coming apart: richer folk are more likely to have gone to university and be socially liberal, while social conservatism is more associated with poorer groups. That puts centre-right politics in zugzwang: forced to move, but with no good options. It can emphasize its social conservatism and lose pro-business graduates to the centre, or play it down, shore up its support among those voters and lose social conservatives to the radical right.

^ a b Kurtzleben, Danielle (September 24, 2014).

"White high school dropouts are wealthier than Black or Latino college graduates" .

Vox .

^ Parikh, Tej (November 8, 2024).

"This was an election on the US economy. And for many Americans, the economy sucks" .

Financial Times . Retrieved November 8, 2024 .

^ "What does 'working class' even mean?" .

Vox . December 9, 2024 . Retrieved December 9, 2024 .

The criticism that Democrats left America's working class behind surged after the 2024 election. Here's why the term is so hard to define — and why that maters.

^ "Charting the Biden economy: Despite all the growth and jobs, a deeply unpopular president" . CNBC. January 19, 2025.

Joe Biden leaves the presidency with what appears to be a sterling economic record. There's just one problem, and it is one that will forever taint the 46th president's legacy. Inflation and its onerous burden on households, particularly at the lower end of the income spectrum, dwarfed all the other good that happened on Biden's watch.

^ Saad, Lydia; Jones, Jeffrey M. (May 12, 2022).

"What Percentage of Americans Own Stock?" .

Gallup, Inc.

Archived from the original on May 12, 2022 . Retrieved May 12, 2022 .

^ Ruffini, Patrick (September 26, 2023).

"Why Trump lost Georgia" .

The Intersection . Retrieved March 27, 2024 .

But this proximity belies highly racially polarized voting. Black adults outnumber white adults by 1 point and Biden voters Trump voters by a nearly identical 4 points. The Black Belt is one of four regions—including Southern Georgia, the Northern Highlands, and the Metro Borderlands, where the white vote for Republicans ranges upwards of 80 percent. This fact alone helps explain why education polarization in the South hasn't helped Trump: there are few non-college white Democrats to flip, but a lot of upside for Democrats in flipping still very Republican college-educated whites.

^ "What Percentage of U.S. Workers Belong to a Labor Union?" .

Gallup . November 20, 2024 . Retrieved December 13, 2024 .

^ a b Brownstein, Ronald.

"Republicans and Democrats increasingly really do occupy different worlds" . CNN.

Archived from the original on October 24, 2018 . Retrieved October 24, 2018 .

On the one hand, non-college whites almost always expressed more conservative views than did either non-whites or whites with a college degree living in the same kind of geographic area.

^ Teixeira, Ruy (November 6, 2022).

"Democrats' Long Goodbye to the Working Class" .

The Atlantic .

Archived from the original on January 7, 2023 . Retrieved November 8, 2022 .

As we move into the endgame of the 2022 election, the Democrats face a familiar problem. America's historical party of the working class keeps losing working-class support. And not just among White voters. Not only has the emerging Democratic majority I once predicted failed to materialize, but many of the non-White voters who were supposed to deliver it are instead voting for Republicans... From 2012 to 2020, the Democrats not only saw their support among White working-class voters — those without college degrees — crater, they also saw their advantage among non-White working-class voters fall by 18 points. And between 2016 and 2020 alone, the Democratic advantage among Hispanic voters declined by 16 points, overwhelmingly driven by the defection of working-class voters. In contrast, Democrats' advantage among White college-educated voters improved by 16 points from 2012 to 2020, an edge that delivered Joe Biden the White House.

^ John Ashworth, "Agrarians" & "aristocrats": Party political ideology in the United States, 1837–1846 (1983) ^ Susan Dunn, Roosevelt's Purge: How FDR Fought to Change the Democratic Party (2010) pp. 202–213.

^ a b Kane, Paul (January 15, 2014).

"Blue Dog Democrats, whittled down in number, are trying to regroup" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on January 16, 2014 . Retrieved July 23, 2014 .

Four years ago, they were the most influential voting bloc on Capitol Hill, more than 50 House Democrats pulling their liberal colleagues to a more centrist, fiscally conservative vision on issues such as health care and Wall Street reforms.

^ Patterson, James T. (1967).

Congressional Conservatism and the New Deal . University Press of Kentucky. pp.

vii– viii.

ISBN 9780813164045 .

^ Kilgore, Ed (November 9, 2018).

"A Different Kind of Democratic Party Is Rising in the South" .

New York . Retrieved November 9, 2018 .

^ "National Results 2020 President exit polls" .

CNN . Retrieved December 4, 2020 .

^ Gilberstadt, Hannah; Daniller, Andrew (January 17, 2020).

"Liberals make up the largest share of Democratic voters, but their growth has slowed in recent years" .

Pew Research Center .

Archived from the original on January 17, 2020 . Retrieved June 12, 2020 .

^ Brownstein, Ronald (May 9, 2019).

"The Democrats' Coalition Could Fundamentally Change by 2020" .

The Atlantic .

Archived from the original on March 23, 2020 . Retrieved March 13, 2020 .

^ Gidron, Noam; Ziblatt, Daniel (May 11, 2019).

"Center-Right Political Parties in Advanced Democracies" .

Annual Review of Political Science .

22 (1): 17– 35.

doi : 10.1146/annurev-polisci-090717-092750 .

ISSN 1094-2939 .

S2CID 182421002 .

^ Grossman, Matt; Hopkins, David A. (2016).

Asymmetric Politics: Ideological Republicans and Group Interest Democrats . Oxford University Press.

doi : 10.1093/acprof:oso/9780190626594.001.0001 .

ISBN 978-0-19-062659-4 .

Archived from the original on November 28, 2021 . Retrieved November 10, 2021 .

^ Lelkes, Yphtach; Sniderman, Paul M. (2016).

"The Ideological Asymmetry of the American Party System" .

British Journal of Political Science .

46 (4): 825– 844.

doi : 10.1017/S0007123414000404 .

ISSN 0007-1234 .

^ Cite error: The named reference Piketty 2022 was invoked but never defined (see the help page ).

^ Cuenco, Michael (August 21, 2024).

"Is Obama the reason Democrats are now 'underdogs'?" .

UnHerd . Retrieved December 10, 2024 .

Consider that when Obama last ran, the Midwest was still known as an impenetrable Blue Wall, while Florida and Ohio were still purple states. When Bill Clinton gave his acceptance speech in 1996, the Democrats were competitive throughout large swathes of the South. During that period, they had gone on to win not just Clinton's Arkansas and Al Gore's Tennessee, but states such as Kentucky and Louisiana too. The story of the last three decades has been one of political success for Democrats, who have won the popular vote in seven out of the last nine elections. Yet it is also one of narrowing political constituencies and pyrrhic victories, as the party attracted college-educated professionals at the expense of the non-college-educated majority. In particular, non-college-educated whites were lost, but in recent years they have increasingly been joined by significant numbers of non-college-educated minorities.

^ Kondik, Kyle (December 5, 2024).

"The End of the Line for Red State Senate Democrats" .

Sabato's Crystal Ball . Retrieved January 17, 2025 .

As part of capturing the Senate this year, Republicans knocked out the final remaining Democratic senators from a group of 20 states that have consistently voted Republican for president since at least the 2000 election. A quarter-century ago, Democrats held nearly a third of the Senate seats from these 20 states. But that tally was down to just 2 leading into this election, and Republican victories in Montana and West Virginia reduced it to 0.

^ a b Jones, Jeffrey M. (February 22, 2019).

"Conservatives Greatly Outnumber Liberals in 19 U.S. States" .

Gallup . Retrieved December 27, 2021 .

^ "Exit Polls" .

CNN Politics .

Archived from the original on November 14, 2018 . Retrieved July 4, 2020 .

^ Judis, John B. (July 11, 2003).

"The trouble with Howard Dean" .

Salon . Archived from the original on September 21, 2012 . Retrieved July 19, 2007 .

^ Brenan, Megan (January 16, 2025).

"U.S. Political Parties Historically Polarized Ideologically" .

Gallup . Retrieved January 16, 2025 .

^ a b "Pew Research Center. (May 10, 2005). Beyond Red vs. Blue, p. 1 of 8" . May 10, 2005. Archived from the original on July 31, 2012 . Retrieved July 12, 2007 .

^ Lipka, Michael; Smith, Gregory A. (January 31, 2020).

"Among Democrats, Christians lean toward Biden, while 'nones' prefer Sanders" .

Pew Research Center .

Archived from the original on February 11, 2021 . Retrieved November 16, 2020 .

^ Kurtz, Howard (March 29, 2005).

"College Faculties A Most Liberal Lot, Study Finds" .

The Washington Post . Archived from the original on June 4, 2012 . Retrieved July 2, 2007 .

^ "DLC: The New American Choice Resolutions" .

Democratic Leadership Council . Archived from the original on January 11, 2014 . Retrieved February 25, 2013 .

^ Alvarez, R. Michael, and Jonathan Nagler. "Economics, Entitlements, and Social Issues: Voter Choice in the 1996 Presidential Election." American Journal of Political Science 42, no. 4 (1998): 1361.

^ Yglesias, Matthew (July 26, 2016).

"Bill Clinton is still a star, but today's Democrats are dramatically more liberal than his party" .

Vox . Retrieved May 31, 2022 .

^ Dumain, Emma (May 12, 2015).

"20 years in, Blue Dogs not ready to roll over" .

rollcall.com .

^ "History" .

ross.house.gov/BlueDog/ . Blue Dog Coalition. Archived from the original on April 5, 2012 . Retrieved April 10, 2012 .

^ Bendavid, Naftali (July 28, 2009). " 'Blue Dog' Democrats hold health care overhaul at bay".

The Wall Street Journal .

^ "Democratic Leadership Council will fold" .

Politico . February 7, 2011.

Archived from the original on June 26, 2015 . Retrieved September 18, 2011 .

^ a b "Members – New Democrat Coalition" . Archived from the original on September 7, 2016.

^ Hale, Jon F. (January 1, 1995). "The Making of the New Democrats".

Political Science Quarterly .

110 (2): 207– 232.

doi : 10.2307/2152360 .

JSTOR 2152360 .

^ "New Democrat Coalition" .

Archived from the original on March 8, 2022 . Retrieved March 11, 2022 .

^ "Obama: 'I am a New Democrat' " .

Politico . March 10, 2009.

Archived from the original on April 19, 2017 . Retrieved April 16, 2017 .

^ Tatum, Sophie (December 20, 2018).

"3 Kansas legislators switch from Republican to Democrat" . CNN.

Archived from the original on October 30, 2020.

^ Weiner, Rachel.

"Charlie Crist defends party switch" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on February 25, 2021.

^ Davis, Susan (August 23, 2019).

"Meltdown On Main Street: Inside The Breakdown Of The GOP's Moderate Wing" .

NPR .

Archived from the original on June 17, 2022.

^ "Progressivism" . Columbia Encyclopaedia. 2007. Archived from the original on June 29, 2008 . Retrieved January 19, 2015 .

^ "Important Examples of Progressive Reforms" . University of Michigan. Archived from the original on February 12, 2015 . Retrieved April 2, 2014 .

^ "Elizabeth Warren's 11 Commandments of Progressivism" .

National Journal . Archived from the original on October 20, 2014 . Retrieved October 22, 2014 .

^ Desjardins, Lisa (December 18, 2024).

"Rep. Greg Casar outlines progressive caucus efforts to rebrand Democratic Party" .

PBS News .

^ Gerstle, Gary (2022).

The Rise and Fall of the Neoliberal Order: America and the World in the Free Market Era .

Oxford University Press .

ISBN 978-0197519646 .

Archived from the original on June 26, 2022 . Retrieved August 1, 2024 .

The most sweeping account of how neoliberalism came to dominate American politics for nearly a half century before crashing against the forces of Trumpism on the right and a new progressivism on the left. ... As he shows, the neoliberal order that emerged in America in the 1970s fused ideas of deregulation with personal freedoms, open borders with cosmopolitanism, and globalization with the promise of increased prosperity for all.

^ Prokop, Andrew (October 21, 2024).

"The big political shift that explains the 2024 election" .

Vox . Retrieved October 21, 2024 .

^ Weigel, David (October 15, 2024).

"No matter who wins, the US is moving to the right" .

Semafor . Retrieved October 24, 2024 .

^ "Inside Bernie Sanders' decision to run again" .

axios.com . Axios. May 6, 2024 . Retrieved January 21, 2025 .

^ "Bernie Sanders: From small-town mayor to godfather of the progressive left" .

Business Insider . Retrieved January 21, 2025 .

^ "Sanders says next term is likely his last" .

Politico . December 10, 2024 . Retrieved January 21, 2025 .

^ "2020 Bernie Sanders is losing to 2016 Bernie Sanders" . CNN. March 4, 2020 . Retrieved January 24, 2025 .

^ Cornwell, Susan (October 21, 2019).

"Expanding the 'Squad:' U.S. liberals challenge moderate Democrats to move party left" .

Reuters .

Archived from the original on November 13, 2019 . Retrieved November 13, 2019 .

Ocasio-Cortez [...] has since become the face of the 'Squad', freshman Democrats aiming to move the party farther left on issues such as healthcare and climate change.

^ "Andrew Jackson Biography" . The White House Historical Association . Retrieved August 14, 2025 .

^ "Martin Van Buren Biography" . The White House Historical Association . Retrieved August 14, 2025 .

^ "James K. Polk Biography" . The White House Historical Association . Retrieved August 14, 2025 .

^ "James Buchanan Biography" . The White House Historical Association . Retrieved August 14, 2025 .

^ "John F. Kennedy Biography" . The White House Historical Association . Retrieved August 14, 2025 .

^ "Lyndon B. Johnson Biography" . The White House Historical Association . Retrieved August 14, 2025 .

^ "Jimmy Carter Biography" . The White House Historical Association . Retrieved August 14, 2025 .

^ "William J. Clinton Biography" . The White House Historical Association . Retrieved August 14, 2025 .

^ "Barack Obama Biography" . The White House Historical Association . Retrieved August 14, 2025 .

^ "Joseph R. Biden Jr. Biography" . The White House Historical Association . Retrieved August 14, 2025 .

Further reading The Almanac of American Politics 2022 (2022) details on members of Congress, and the governors: their records and election results; also state and district politics; revised every two years since 1975. see The Almanac of American Politics American National Biography (20 volumes, 1999) covers all politicians no longer alive; online at many academic libraries and at Wikipedia Library .

Andelic, Patrick.

Donkey Work: Congressional Democrats in Conservative America, 1974–1994 (2019) online Baker, Jean H.

Affairs of party: The political culture of northern Democrats in the mid-nineteenth century (Fordham UP, 1998).

Bass Jr, Harold F.

Historical dictionary of United States political parties (Scarecrow Press, 2009).

Black, Merle (2004). "The transformation of the southern Democratic Party".

Journal of Politics .

66 (4): 1001– 1017.

doi : 10.1111/j.1468-2508.2004.00287.x .

S2CID 154506701 .

Burner, David.

The Politics of Provincialism: The Democratic Party in Transition, 1918–1932 (Knopf, 1968).

Congressional Quarterly.

National Party Conventions, 1831–2000 (2001).

Congressional Quarterly.

Presidential Elections 1789–2008 (10th edition, 2009) Craig, Douglas. "Newton D. Baker and the Democratic Malaise, 1920–1937." Australasian Journal of American Studies (2006): 49–64.

in JSTOR Archived August 19, 2018, at the Wayback Machine Dowe, Pearl K. Ford, et al.

Remaking the Democratic Party: Lyndon B. Johnson as a Native-Son Presidential Candidate (University of Michigan Press, 2016).

Feller, David. "Politics and Society: Toward a Jacksonian Synthesis" Journal of the Early Republic 10#2 (1990), pp. 135–161 in JSTOR Finkelman, Paul, and Peter Wallenstein, eds.

The encyclopedia of American political history (CQ Press, 2001).

Frymer, Paul.

Black and blue: African Americans, the labor movement, and the decline of the Democratic party (Princeton UP, 2008).

Gerring, John. "A chapter in the history of American party ideology: The nineteenth-century Democratic Party (1828–1892)." Polity 26.4 (1994): 729–768.

online Archived February 2, 2017, at the Wayback Machine Gillon, Steven M.

(1992).

The Democrats' Dilemma: Walter F. Mondale and the Liberal Legacy . New York: Columbia University Press.

ISBN 9780231076302 .

online Greene, Jack B.

Encyclopedia of American Political History (1983) Hilton, Adam.

True Blues: The Contentious Transformation of the Democratic Party (University of Pennsylvania Press, 2021), since 1972.

Kazin, Michael.

What It Took to Win: A History of the Democratic Party (2022) online Kazin, Michael. ed.

The Princeton Encyclopedia of American Political History (2 vol. Princeton UP, 2009) Kazin, Michael. ed.

The Concise Princeton Encyclopedia of American Political History (Princeton UP, 2011) Landis, Michael Todd.

Northern Men with Southern Loyalties: The Democratic Party and the Sectional Crisis . (Cornell UP, 2014).

Lawrence, David G.

The collapse of the democratic presidential majority: Realignment, dealignment, and electoral change from Franklin Roosevelt to Bill Clinton . (Westview Press, 1997).

McGuire, John Thomas (2014). "Beginning an 'Extraordinary Opportunity': Eleanor Roosevelt, Molly Dewson, and the expansion of women's boundaries in the Democratic Party, 1924–1934".

Women's History Review .

23 (6): 922– 937.

doi : 10.1080/09612025.2014.906841 .

S2CID 146773549 .

Maisel, L. Sandy , and Jeffrey M. Berry, eds.

The Oxford handbook of American political parties and interest groups (Oxford UP, 2010).

Maisel, L. Sandy , and Charles Bassett, eds.

Political parties & elections in the United States: an encyclopedia (2 vol, Garland, 1991) Mieczkowski, Yanek, and Mark C Carnes.

The Routledge historical atlas of presidential elections (2001).

Neal, Steven.

Happy Days are Here Again: The 1932 Democratic Convention, the Emergence of FDR—and how America was Changed Forever (HarperCollins, 2010).

Remini, Robert V.

Martin Van Buren and the making of the Democratic Party (Columbia UP, 1961).

Savage, Sean J.

Roosevelt: The Party Leader, 1932–1945 (U Press of Kentucky, 2015).

Savage, Sean J.

JFK, LBJ, and the Democratic Party (SUNY Press, 2012).

Savage, Sean J.

Truman and the Democratic Party (U Press of Kentucky, 2015).

Woods, Randall B.

Prisoners of Hope: Lyndon B. Johnson, the Great Society, and the Limits of Liberalism (Basic Books, 2016).

External links Democratic Party at Wikipedia's sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Textbooks from Wikibooks Data from Wikidata Official website Democratic Party (United States) at the Encyclopædia Britannica v t e Democratic Party History Second Party System Third Party System Fourth Party System Fifth Party System Sixth Party System National conventions , presidential tickets , and presidential primaries 1828 (None) : Jackson / Calhoun 1832 (Baltimore) : Jackson / Van Buren 1835 (Baltimore) : Van Buren / R. Johnson 1840 (Baltimore) : Van Buren / None 1844 (Baltimore) : Polk / Dallas 1848 (Baltimore) : Cass / Butler 1852 (Baltimore) : Pierce / King 1856 (Cincinnati) : Buchanan / Breckinridge 1860 (Charleston/Baltimore) : Douglas / H. Johnson ( Breckinridge / Lane , SD ) 1864 (Chicago) : McClellan / Pendleton 1868 (New York) : Seymour / Blair 1872 (Baltimore) : Greeley / Brown 1876 (St. Louis) : Tilden / Hendricks 1880 (Cincinnati) : Hancock / English 1884 (Chicago) : Cleveland / Hendricks 1888 (St. Louis) : Cleveland / Thurman 1892 (Chicago) : Cleveland / Stevenson I 1896 (Chicago) : W. Bryan / Sewall 1900 (Kansas City) : W. Bryan / Stevenson I 1904 (St. Louis) : Parker / H. Davis 1908 (Denver) : W. Bryan / Kern 1912 (Baltimore) : Wilson / Marshall primaries 1916 (St. Louis) : Wilson / Marshall primaries 1920 (San Francisco) : Cox / Roosevelt primaries 1924 (New York) : J. Davis / C. Bryan primaries 1928 (Houston) : Smith / Robinson primaries 1932 (Chicago) : Roosevelt / Garner primaries 1936 (Philadelphia) : Roosevelt / Garner primaries 1940 (Chicago) : Roosevelt / Wallace primaries 1944 (Chicago) : Roosevelt / Truman primaries 1948 (Philadelphia) : Truman / Barkley primaries 1952 (Chicago) : Stevenson II / Sparkman primaries 1956 (Chicago) : Stevenson II / Kefauver primaries 1960 (Los Angeles) : Kennedy / L. Johnson primaries 1964 (Atlantic City) : L. Johnson / Humphrey primaries 1968 (Chicago) : Humphrey / Muskie primaries 1972 (Miami Beach) : McGovern /( Eagleton , Shriver ) primaries 1976 (New York) : Carter / Mondale primaries 1980 (New York) : Carter / Mondale primaries 1984 (San Francisco) : Mondale / Ferraro primaries 1988 (Atlanta) : Dukakis / Bentsen primaries 1992 (New York) : B. Clinton / Gore primaries 1996 (Chicago) : B. Clinton / Gore primaries 2000 (Los Angeles) : Gore / Lieberman primaries 2004 (Boston) : Kerry / Edwards primaries 2008 (Denver) : Obama / Biden primaries 2012 (Charlotte) : Obama / Biden primaries 2016 (Philadelphia) : H. Clinton / Kaine primaries 2020 (Milwaukee/other locations) : Biden / Harris primaries 2024 (Chicago) : Harris / Walz primaries Presidential administrations Jackson (1829–1837) Van Buren (1837–1841) Polk (1845–1849) Pierce (1853–1857) Buchanan (1857–1861) A. Johnson (1868–1869) Cleveland ( 1885–1889 ; 1893–1897 ) Wilson (1913–1921) Roosevelt ( 1933–1941 ; 1941–1945 ) Truman (1945–1953) Kennedy (1961–1963) L. B. Johnson (1963–1969) Carter (1977–1981) Clinton (1993–2001) Obama (2009–2017) Biden (2021–2025) U.S. House leaders , Speakers , and Caucus chairs A. Stevenson (1827–1834) Bell (1834–1835) Polk (1835–1839) J. W. Jones (1843–1845) Davis (1845–1847) Cobb (1849–1851) Boyd (1851–1855) G. W. Jones (1855–1857) Orr (1857–1859) Houston (1859–1861) Niblack / Randall (1869–1871) Niblack (1873–1875) Kerr (1875–1876) Randall (1876–1881) Carlisle (1883–1889) Holman (1889–1891) Crisp (1891–1895) D. B. Culberson (1895–1897) Richardson (1897–1903) Williams (1903–1909) Clark (1909–1921) Kitchin (1921–1923) Garrett (1923–1929) Garner (1929–1933) Rainey (1933–1934) Byrns (1935–1936) Bankhead (1936–1940) Rayburn (1940–1961) McCormack (1962–1971) Albert (1971–1977) O'Neill (1977–1987) Wright (1987–1989) Foley (1989–1995) Gephardt (1995–2003) Pelosi (2003–2023) Jeffries (2023–present) U.S. Senate leaders and Caucus chairs J. W. Stevenson (1873–1877) Wallace (1877–1881) Pendleton (1881–1885) Beck (1885–1890) Gorman (1890–1898) Turpie (1898–1899) J. K. Jones (1899–1903) Gorman (1903–1906) Blackburn (1906–1907) C. A. Culberson (1907–1909) Money (1909–1911) Martin (1911–1913) Kern (1913–1917) Martin (1917–1919) Hitchcock (1919–1920) Underwood (1920–1923) Robinson (1923–1937) Barkley (1937–1949) Lucas (1949–1951) McFarland (1951–1953) Johnson (1953–1961) Mansfield (1961–1977) Byrd (1977–1989) Mitchell (1989–1995) Daschle (1995–2005) Reid (2005–2017) Schumer (2017–present) Chairs of the DNC Hallett McLane Smalley Belmont Schell Hewitt Barnum Brice Harrity Jones Taggart Mack McCombs McCormick Cummings G. White Hull Shaver Raskob Farley Flynn Walker Hannegan McGrath Boyle McKinney Mitchell Butler Jackson Bailey O'Brien Harris O'Brien Westwood Strauss Curtis J. White Manatt Kirk Brown Wilhelm DeLee Dodd / Fowler Romer / Grossman Rendell / Andrew McAuliffe Dean Kaine Wasserman Schultz Perez Harrison Martin State and territorial parties Alabama Alaska Arizona Arkansas California Colorado Connecticut Delaware Florida Georgia Hawaii Idaho Illinois Indiana Iowa Kansas Kentucky Louisiana Maine Maryland Massachusetts Michigan Minnesota Democratic–Farmer–Labor Party Mississippi Missouri Montana Nebraska Nevada New Hampshire New Jersey New Mexico New York North Carolina North Dakota Democratic–Nonpartisan League Party Ohio Oklahoma Oregon Pennsylvania Rhode Island South Carolina South Dakota Tennessee Texas Utah Vermont Virginia Washington West Virginia Wisconsin Wyoming American Samoa District of Columbia Democratic State Committee Guam Northern Mariana Islands Puerto Rico Virgin Islands Democrats Abroad Affiliated groups Congress Senate Caucus Policy Committee Steering and Outreach Committee House Caucus Factions Blue Dog Coalition Congressional Progressive Caucus Squad Justice Democrats New Democrat Coalition Problem Solvers Caucus Campaign committees Democratic Attorneys General Association Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee Democratic Governors Association Democratic Legislative Campaign Committee Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee National Conference of Democratic Mayors Constituency groups College Democrats of America Democrats Abroad National Federation of Democratic Women Stonewall Democrats Stonewall Young Democrats Young Democrats of America High School Democrats of America Strategic groups National Democratic Redistricting Committee National Democratic Training Committee Related Primaries Presidential candidates Debates Superdelegate Chairmanship elections 2005 2009 2013 2017 2021 2025 House caucus leadership elections 2006 2018 Weekly Democratic Address v t e National political parties in the United States List of political parties in the United States Major parties Democratic Republican Third parties Larger Green Libertarian Smaller African People's Socialist Alliance America American Communist American Freedom American Solidarity Black Socialists Christian Liberty Citizens Communist Constitution Freedom Freedom Road Freedom Socialist Forward Green Mountain Peace and Justice Legal Marijuana Now Liberal National Progressive Progressive Dane Marijuana Peace and Freedom People's Pirate Progressive Labor Prohibition Reform Socialism and Liberation Socialist Party USA Socialist Action Socialist Alternative South Carolina Workers Party Social Democrats, USA Socialist Equality Socialist Labor Socialist Workers Transhumanist Unity Working Class Working Families Workers World World Socialist Defunct parties Major parties Democratic-Republican Federalist National Republican Whig National Union Third parties American (Know Nothing) Americans Elect Anti-Masonic American Nazi American (1924) American (1969) American Vegetarian Black Panther Boston Tea Citizens Communist Workers' Constitution (1952) Constitutional Union Democratic-Republican (1844) Farmer–Labor Free Soil Gold Democrats Greenback Human Rights Party Independence (1906) Independence (2007) Justice Labor (1919) Labor (1996) Liberal Republican Liberty (1840) National Equal Rights Party National Progressives of America National (1917) National Renaissance National Socialist National States' Rights Natural Law New Alliance New Party New Union Nullifier Opposition Patriot Party People's Party Populist (People's) Personal Choice Populist Progressive (1912) Progressive (1924) Progressive (1948) Proletarian Party Radical Democratic Raza Unida Readjuster Red Guards Red Guard Party Renew America Movement Serve America Movement Silver Silver Republican Social Democratic Socialist Party of America States Rights (Dixiecrat) Traditionalist Worker Unconditional Union Union (1850) Union (1861) Union (1936) U.S. Labor White Panthers White Patriot Young Patriots Workers Young Lords Youth International State and local political parties (without national body) Presidential nominating convention ( List ) Politics of the United States Politics portal v t e United States History By period 1776–1789 1789–1815 1815–1849 1849–1865 1865–1917 1917–1945 1945–1964 1964–1980 1980–1991 1991–2016 2016–present By event Pre-colonial era Colonial era Stamp Act Congress Thirteen Colonies Continental Congress Continental Association United Colonies military history Founding Fathers Halifax Resolves Lee Resolution Declaration of Independence American Revolution War Treaty of Paris Articles of Confederation Perpetual Union Confederation period American frontier Constitution drafting and ratification Bill of Rights Federalist Era War of 1812 Territorial evolution Mexican–American War Civil War Reconstruction era Indian Wars Native genocide Gilded Age Progressive Era Women's suffrage Civil rights movement 1865–1896 1896–1954 1954–1968 Spanish–American War Imperialism World War I Roaring Twenties Great Depression World War II home front American Century Cold War Korean War Space Race Feminist Movement LGBTQ Movement Vietnam War Post-Cold War (1991–2016) September 11 attacks War on Terror War in Afghanistan Iraq War Great Recession COVID-19 pandemic By topic Outline of U.S. history Demographic Discoveries Economic Inventions Military Postal Technological and industrial Geography Territory Contiguous United States counties federal district federal enclaves Indian reservations insular zones minor outlying islands populated places states Earthquakes Extreme points Islands Mountains peaks ranges Appalachian Rocky Sierra Nevada National Park Service National Parks Regions East Coast West Coast Great Plains Gulf Mid-Atlantic Midwestern New England Pacific Central Eastern Northern Northeastern Northwestern Southern Southeastern Southwestern Western Longest rivers Arkansas Colorado Columbia Mississippi Missouri Red (South) Rio Grande Yukon Time Water supply and sanitation World Heritage Sites Politics Federal Executive President of the United States powers Executive Office Vice President Cabinet Executive departments Independent agencies Intelligence Community Director of National Intelligence Central Intelligence Agency National Security Agency National Reconnaissance Office Law enforcement ATF CBP Diplomatic Security DEA FBI ICE Marshals Secret Service TSA Inspector generals Civil service Public policy Legislative House of Representatives current members Speaker Senate current members President pro tempore President Capitol Police Library of Congress Congressional Budget Office Government Accountability Office Government Publishing Office Judicial Supreme Court Chief Justice Associate Justices list Courts of appeals list of judges District courts / Territorial courts list of courts list of judges Other tribunals U.S. attorney Law Bill of Rights civil liberties Code of Federal Regulations Constitution federalism preemption separation of powers civil rights United States Code Uniformed Armed Forces Army Marine Corps Navy Air Force Space Force Coast Guard National Guard NOAA Corps Public Health Service Corps State , Federal District , and Territorial Executive Governor list Lieutenant governor list Secretary of state Attorney general Treasurer Auditor/Comptroller Agriculture commissioner Insurance commissioner Public utilities commission State police list Legislative List of legislatures List of legislators Judicial Supreme courts Chief justices District attorney list Law State constitutions Statutory codes Uniform act Comparison of governments Tribal Tribal sovereignty Native American recognition in the United States Federally recognized tribes Federally recognized Alaska Native tribes State-recognized tribes Indian reservation list Hawaiian home land Local County List of counties and county equivalents County executive Sheriff Clerk Cities Consolidated city-county Independent city Coterminous municipality Charter Mayor–council government Council–manager government City commission government Mayor City manager City council Minor divisions Township Town meeting Special district School district list Corruption Democratic backsliding Elections Electoral College Red states and blue states Foreign relations foreign policy Imperial presidency Ideologies Anti-Americanism exceptionalism nationalism Parties Democratic Republican Third parties Scandals Economy By sector Agriculture Banking Communications Companies Energy Insurance Manufacturing Mining Science and technology Tourism Trade by state Currency Exports Federal budget Greenhouse gas emissions by the United States Federal Reserve System Financial position Labor unions Public debt Social welfare programs Taxation Unemployment Wall Street Transport Aviation Driving Public transportation Rail transportation Transportation policy Transportation safety Trucking industry Society Culture Americana Architecture Cinema Crime Cuisine Dance Demographics Economic issues affluence eviction homeownership household income income inequality middle class personal income poverty standard of living wealth working class Education attainment literacy Family Fashion Flag list Folklore Holidays Federal holidays Homelessness Housing Human rights Languages American English Indigenous languages ASL Literature Media journalism internet newspapers radio television Music Names National anthem National symbols Columbia Mount Rushmore Statue of Liberty Uncle Sam People Philosophy Political ideologies Race Religion Sexuality Social class Society Sports history Theater Transportation Video games Visual art Social class Affluence American Dream Educational attainment Homelessness Homeownership Household income Income inequality Middle class Personal income Poverty Standard of living Health Aging Healthcare Abortion Birth control Prenatal care Hospice care Immigrant health care Rationing Health care finance Health insurance costs Health care prices Prescription drug prices Disability Health insurance Food safety Physician shortage Poverty and health Race and health Obesity Medical deserts Women's reproductive health Life expectancy Issues Capital punishment Crime incarceration Criticism of government Discrimination affirmative action antisemitism intersex rights Islamophobia LGBTQ rights racism Native American African American Energy policy Environmental issues Environmental movement Climate change Gun politics Mass shootings Hunger Smoking Human rights Immigration illegal National security Terrorism Opioid epidemic Separation of church and state Xenophobia Outline Index Category v t e Martin Van Buren 8th President of the United States (1837–1841) 8th Vice President of the United States (1833–1837) U.S. Minister to the United Kingdom (1831–1832) 10th United States Secretary of State (1829–1831) 9th Governor of New York (1829) U.S. Senator from New York (1821–1828) Attorney General of New York (1815–1819) Life Bucktails Albany Regency Tammany Hall 1821 United States Senate election in New York United States Senate Committee on the Judiciary Tariff of Abominations Democratic Party History 1828 New York gubernatorial election Petticoat affair Kitchen Cabinet 1832 Democratic National Convention 1832 United States presidential election 1836 United States presidential election 1835 Democratic National Convention Second Party System Seven Buildings Martin Van Buren National Historic Site 1844 Democratic National Convention Barnburners and Hunkers 1848 Democratic National Convention Free Soil Party 1848 United States presidential election Reformed Dutch Church Presidency Inauguration of Martin Van Buren Panic of 1837 Specie Circular Independent Treasury Treaty of New Echota Emerson's letter to Martin Van Buren United States v. The Amistad List of federal judges appointed by Martin Van Buren Gold Spoon Oration 1840 United States presidential election 1840 Democratic National Convention Writings Papers of Martin Van Buren Public image List of memorials to Martin Van Buren Mount Van Buren USS Van Buren (1839) Burr Amistad " The Van Buren Boys " Family Family of Martin Van Buren Abraham Van Buren (son) John Van Buren (son) Abraham Van Buren (father) James I. Van Alen (maternal half-brother) Angelica Singleton Van Buren (daughter-in-law) Historiography Bibliography of Martin Van Buren ← Andrew Jackson William Henry Harrison → ← John C. Calhoun Richard Mentor Johnson → Category Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF 2 FAST National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Australia Czech Republic Spain Israel People Trove Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐x8dhc
Cached time: 20250817182709
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 4.475 seconds
Real time usage: 4.911 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 37024/1000000
Revision size: 347417/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 1090438/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 30252/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 21/100
Expensive parser function count: 67/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 1463475/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 2.649/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 12831696/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 3994.738      1 -total
 61.51% 2457.006      3 Template:Reflist
 25.30% 1010.501    186 Template:Cite_web
 16.57%  661.854     94 Template:Cite_news
  9.37%  374.162    134 Template:Composition_bar
  6.40%  255.726      1 Template:Infobox_political_party
  6.28%  250.849     39 Template:Cite_book
  6.11%  244.204      1 Template:Infobox
  5.13%  204.982     30 Template:Cite_journal
  4.33%  173.072    137 Template:Party_color Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:5043544:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817182709 and revision id 1306294978. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Democratic_Party_(United_States)&oldid=1306294978 " Categories : Democratic Party (United States) 1828 establishments in Maryland Centre-left parties Liberal parties in the United States Political parties established in 1828 Political parties in the United States Social liberal parties in the United States Martin Van Buren Feminist political parties in the United States Progressive parties in the United States Hidden categories: Pages with reference errors Webarchive template wayback links CS1 errors: ISBN date Pages with broken reference names Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Wikipedia pages semi-protected due to dispute Wikipedia pages semi-protected against vandalism Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages Use American English from December 2014 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use mdy dates from August 2024 Pages using multiple image with auto scaled images Articles to be split from August 2024 All articles to be split Wikipedia articles needing clarification from April 2024 Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2014 All articles containing potentially dated statements Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2025 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from April 2025 All Wikipedia articles needing clarification Articles prone to spam from March 2017 Pages using Sister project links with hidden wikidata Articles with Encyclopædia Britannica links This page was last edited on 17 August 2025, at 01:00 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Democratic Party (United States) 121 languages Add topic

