Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Prehistoric 1.2 Ancient history 1.3 Post-classical history 1.4 Modern history 1.4.1 Early modern 1.4.2 World War I 1.4.3 Interwar 1.4.3.1 Criminalizing poison gas 1.4.4 World War II and postwar 1.4.5 Nuclear weapons 2 International arm cooperation 3 Types Toggle Types subsection 3.1 By user 3.2 By function 3.3 By target 4 Manufacture of weapons 5 Legislation Toggle Legislation subsection 5.1 Gun laws 5.2 Arms control laws 5.3 Arms trafficking laws 6 Lifecycle problems 7 In science fiction 8 See also 9 References 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Weapon 142 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch अंगिका Ænglisc العربية Aragonés ܐܪܡܝܐ Armãneashti অসমীয়া Asturianu Avañe'ẽ Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Basa Banyumasan Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български བོད་ཡིག Bosanski Brezhoneg Буряад Català Чӑвашла Čeština ChiShona Cymraeg Dansk الدارجة Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Fiji Hindi Français Frysk Gàidhlig Galego 贛語 ગુજરાતી 한국어 Hausa Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa Kabɩyɛ ಕನ್ನಡ ქართული Қазақша Kernowek Kiswahili Kreyòl ayisyen Kriyòl gwiyannen Kurdî Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Ligure Lingála Lingua Franca Nova Lombard Magyar Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം मराठी მარგალური مصرى Bahasa Melayu Minangkabau 閩東語 / Mìng-dĕ̤ng-ngṳ̄ Mirandés Монгол မြန်မာဘာသာ Na Vosa Vakaviti Nederlands नेपाल भाषा 日本語 Нохчийн Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی پښتو Patois Piemontèis Plattdüütsch Polski Português Qırımtatarca Română Runa Simi Русский Scots Seeltersk Shqip Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Soomaaliga کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் తెలుగు ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська اردو Vèneto Tiếng Việt Võro Winaray 吴语 ייִדיש 粵語 Žemaitėška 中文 Bajau Sama Betawi ꠍꠤꠟꠐꠤ Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Weapons ) Implement or device used to inflict damage, harm, or kill "Weaponry" redirects here. For other uses, see Weaponry (disambiguation) .

For other uses, see Weapon (disambiguation) .

Selection of weapons and replicas collected by security officers at Manchester Airport in 2013 Part of a series on War ( outline ) History Prehistoric Ancient Thermal Gunpowder Timeline Post-classical Castles Early modern Military revolution Pike and shot Napoleonic warfare Late modern Industrial warfare Fourth-gen warfare AI warfare Military Organization Command and control Defense ministry Reserves Ranks Branches: Army Navy Air force Marines Coast guard Border guard Special forces Cyber force Space force Specialties: Staff Engineers Intel Recon Medical Police Diving Pilot Land units: Infantry Armor Cavalry Artillery Special forces Signal corps Naval units: Warships Submarines Aircraft carriers Landing craft Auxiliary ships Air units: Fighters Bombers Command Close air support Electronic-warfare Reconnaissance Combat systems: Fire-control system Fire-control radar Director (military) Combat information center Sonar Radar Historical: Ship gun fire-control Gun data computer Torpedo data computer Development: Basic training Military manoeuvrers Combat training Battlespace Aerospace Aerial Airborne Space Land Cold-region Desert Fortification Jungle Mountain Urban Subterranean Tunnel Sea Amphibious Blue Brown Green Surface Underwater Seabed Cyber Information Weapons Air defence Armor Artillery Barrage Biological Camouflage Cavalry Horses Air cavalry Chemical Combined arms Conventional Cyber Denial Disinformation Drone / Robot Electromagnetic Firearms Infantry Loitering Missile Music Nuclear Psychological Radiological Submarine Unconventional Tactics List of military tactics Aerial Airlift Air assault Airbridge Airdrop Anti-aircraft Anti-sub Anti-tank Battle Cavalry Charge CQC Counterattack Counterinsurgency Convoy Defeat in detail Foxhole Drone Envelopment Formation Guerrilla Naval Rapid dominance Encirclement Investment Siege Swarm Screen Tactical objective Target saturation Trench Withdrawal Operational Military operation Special Operations research Blitzkrieg Expeditionary Deep operation Maneuver Operational manoeuvre group Raid Covert Stay-behind Strategy List of military strategies and concepts Military campaign Anti-access Attrition Commerce raiding Counter-offensive Culminating Defence in depth Fabian Empty fort Mosaic Deception Defensive Depth Goal Nuclear Naval Offensive Scorched earth Grand strategy Asymmetric Blockade Broken-backed Class Cold war Colonial Conquest Containment Divide and conquer Economic Endemic Fleet in being Irregular Liberation Limited Network-centric New generation Perpetual Political Princely Proxy Religious Resource Strategic Succession Technology Theater Total war World war Administrative Branch Policy Staff Training Service Sociology Organization Area of responsibility Chain of command Command and control Doctrine Order of battle Principles of war Economy of force Medicine Engineers Intelligence Ranks Technology and equipment Personnel Recruitment Conscription Draft evasion Mobilization Training Specialism Soldier Morale Volunteer Women Children Transgender Harassment Conscientious objector Conscription and sexism Counter-recruitment Logistics History War economy Arms industry Materiel Supply-chain management Military–industrial complex Base MOB FOB Outpost Science Power projection Loss-of-strength gradient Lanchester's laws Force multiplication Morale Law Belligerent Occupation Armistice Ceasefire Court-martial Desertion Geneva Conventions Geneva Protocol Islamic rules Justice Lawful / Unlawful combatant Perfidy Regular / Irregular Jewish laws on war Right of conquest Right of self-defence Rules of engagement Self-determination Martial law War crime War and genocide War treason Theory Air supremacy Appeasement Command of the sea Deterrence theory Full-spectrum dominance Overmatch Just war theory Principles of war Philosophy of war Security dilemma Tripwire force Wargaming Simulation Exercises Combat effectiveness Center of gravity Non-warfare Arms control Counter-insurgency Deterrence Disaster response Grey-zone Gunboat diplomacy Humanitarian aid Law enforcement Low-intensity conflict Military engineering Peacekeeping Peacebuilding Peace through strength Show of force Culture Awards and decorations Battle cry Warrior War film Military science fiction War novel Anti-war movement Foot drill War song Uniform Wargame Militarization / Militarism Antimilitarism Camp follower Books Seven Military Classics The Art of War De re militari Strategemata Related Women in war War resister War studies Horses in warfare Wartime sexual violence Fifth column Mercenary Pacifism Privateer Private military company Soldiers are murderers Lists Battles Military occupations Military terms Operations Sieges War crimes Wars Weapons Writers v t e A weapon , arm , or armament is any implement or device that is used to deter, threaten, inflict physical damage, harm, or kill . Weapons are used to increase the efficacy and efficiency of activities such as hunting , crime (e.g., murder ), law enforcement , self-defense , warfare , or suicide . In a broader context, weapons may be construed to include anything used to gain a tactical, strategic, material, or mental advantage over an adversary or enemy target.

[ 1 ] While ordinary objects such as rocks and bottles can be used as weapons , many objects are expressly designed for the purpose; these range from simple implements such as clubs and swords to complicated modern firearms , tanks , missiles and biological weapons . Something that has been repurposed, converted, or enhanced to become a weapon of war is termed weaponized , such as a weaponized virus or weaponized laser .

The evolution of weaponry has been closely tied to advancements in technology and societal needs, with historical shifts from rudimentary tools to sophisticated systems reflecting broader changes in warfare and security paradigms.

[ 2 ] History [ edit ] Main article: History of weapons The use of weapons has been a major driver of cultural evolution and human history up to today since weapons are a type of tool that is used to dominate and subdue autonomous agents such as animals and, by doing so, allow for an expansion of the cultural niche, while simultaneously other weapon users (i.e., agents such as humans, groups, and cultures) are able to adapt to the weapons of enemies by learning, triggering a continuous process of competitive technological, skill, and cognitive improvement ( arms race ).

[ 3 ] Prehistoric [ edit ] An array of Neolithic artifacts, including bracelets , axe heads, chisels , and polishing tools.

The use of objects as weapons has been observed among chimpanzees , [ 4 ] leading to speculation that early hominids used weapons as early as five million years ago.

[ 5 ] However, this cannot be confirmed using physical evidence because wooden clubs, spears, and unshaped stones would have left an ambiguous record. The earliest unambiguous weapons to be found are the Schöningen spears , eight wooden throwing spears dating back more than 300,000 years.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] [ 8 ] [ 9 ] [ 10 ] At the site of Nataruk in Turkana, Kenya, numerous human skeletons dating to 10,000 years ago may present evidence of traumatic injuries to the head, neck, ribs, knees, and hands, including obsidian projectiles embedded in the bones that might have been caused by arrows and clubs during conflict between two hunter-gatherer groups.

[ 11 ] But the interpretation of warfare at Nataruk has been challenged due to conflicting evidence.

[ 12 ] Ancient history [ edit ] A four-wheeled ballista drawn by armored cataphract horses, c.

400 The earliest ancient weapons were evolutionary improvements of late Neolithic implements, but significant improvements in materials and crafting techniques led to a series of revolutions in military technology .

The development of metal tools began with copper during the Copper Age (about 3,300 BC) and was followed by the Bronze Age , leading to the creation of the Bronze Age sword and similar weapons.

During the Bronze Age, the first defensive structures and fortifications appeared as well, [ 13 ] indicating an increased need for security. Weapons designed to breach fortifications followed soon after, such as the battering ram , which was in use by 2500 BC.

[ 13 ] The development of ironworking around 1300 BC in Greece had an important impact on the development of ancient weapons. It was not the introduction of early Iron Age swords , however, as they were not superior to their bronze predecessors, but rather the domestication of the horse and widespread use of spoked wheels by c.

2000 BC .

[ 14 ] This led to the creation of the light, horse-drawn chariot , whose improved mobility proved important during this era.

[ 15 ] Spoke-wheeled chariot usage peaked around 1300 BC and then declined, ceasing to be militarily relevant by the 4th century BC.

[ 16 ] Cavalry developed once horses were bred to support the weight of a human.

[ 17 ] The horse extended the range and increased the speed of attacks.

Alexander's conquest saw the increased use of spears and shields in the Middle East and Western Asia; as Greek culture spread, many Greek and other European weapons came to be used in these regions. Many of these weapons were then adapted to fit their new uses in war.

In addition to land-based weaponry, warships , such as the trireme , were in use by the 7th century BC.

[ 18 ] During the first First Punic War , the use of advanced warships contributed to a Roman victory over the Carthaginians.

Post-classical history [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

( December 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Medieval Indian weapons European warfare during post-classical history was dominated by elite groups of knights supported by massed infantry . They were involved in mobile combat and sieges , which involved various siege weapons and tactics. Knights on horseback developed tactics for charging with lances , providing an impact on the enemy formations, and then drawing more practical weapons (such as swords ) once they entered melee. By contrast, infantry, in the age before structured formations, relied on cheap, sturdy weapons such as spears and billhooks in close combat and bows from a distance. As armies became more professional, their equipment was standardized, and infantry transitioned to pikes . Pikes are normally seven to eight feet in length and used in conjunction with smaller sidearms (short swords).

Ancient Chinese cannon displayed in the Tower of London In Eastern and Middle Eastern warfare, similar tactics were developed independent of European influences.

The introduction of gunpowder from Asia at the end of this period revolutionized warfare. Formations of musketeers , protected by pikemen , came to dominate open battles, and the cannon replaced the trebuchet as the dominant siege weapon .
The Ottoman used the cannon to destroy much of the fortifications at Constantinople which would change warfare as gunpowder became more available and technology improved Modern history [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

( December 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Early modern [ edit ] The European Renaissance marked the beginning of the implementation of firearms in western warfare.

Guns and rockets were introduced to the battlefield.

Firearms are qualitatively different from earlier weapons because they release energy from combustible propellants , such as gunpowder , rather than from a counterweight or spring. This energy is released very rapidly and can be replicated without much effort by the user. Therefore, even early firearms such as the arquebus were much more powerful than human-powered weapons. Firearms became increasingly important and effective during the 16th–19th centuries, with progressive improvements in ignition mechanisms followed by revolutionary changes in ammunition handling and propellant. During the American Civil War , new applications of firearms, including the machine gun and ironclad warship , emerged that would still be recognizable and useful military weapons today, particularly in limited conflicts . In the 19th century, warship propulsion changed from sail power to fossil fuel -powered steam engines .

The bayonet is used as both a knife and, when attached to the front of a rifle, a polearm .

Since the mid-18th century North American French-Indian war through the beginning of the 20th century, human-powered weapons were reduced from the primary weaponry of the battlefield to yielding gunpowder-based weaponry. Sometimes referred to as the "Age of Rifles", [ 19 ] this period was characterized by the development of firearms for infantry and cannons for support, as well as the beginnings of mechanized weapons such as the machine gun . Artillery pieces such as howitzers were able to destroy masonry fortresses and other fortifications, and this single invention caused a revolution in military affairs , establishing tactics and doctrine that are still in use today.

World War I [ edit ] See also: Military technology during World War I The Vickers was the successor to the Maxim gun and remained in British military service for 79 consecutive years.

An important feature of industrial age warfare was technological escalation – innovations were rapidly matched through replication or countered by another innovation.

World War I marked the entry of fully industrialized warfare as well as weapons of mass destruction ( e.g.

, chemical and biological weapons ), and new weapons were developed quickly to meet wartime needs. The technological escalation during World War I was profound, including the wide introduction of aircraft into warfare and naval warfare with the introduction of aircraft carriers . Above all, it promised the military commanders independence from horses and a resurgence in maneuver warfare through the extensive use of motor vehicles. The changes that these military technologies underwent were evolutionary but defined their development for the rest of the century.

[ This paragraph needs citation(s) ] Interwar [ edit ] This period of innovation in weapon design continued in the interwar period (between WWI and WWII) with the continuous evolution of weapon systems by all major industrial powers. The major armament firms were Schneider-Creusot (based in France), Škoda Works (Czechoslovakia), and Vickers (Great Britain). The 1920s were committed to disarmament and the outlawing of war and poison gas, but rearmament picked up rapidly in the 1930s. The munitions makers responded nimbly to the rapidly shifting strategic and economic landscape. The main purchasers of munitions from the big three companies were Romania, Yugoslavia, Greece, and Turkey – and, to a lesser extent, Poland, Finland, the Baltic States, and the Soviet Union.

[ 20 ] Criminalizing poison gas [ edit ] Realistic critics understood that war could not really be outlawed, but its worst excesses might be banned.

Poison gas became the focus of a worldwide crusade in the 1920s. Poison gas did not win battles, and the generals did not want it. The soldiers hated it far more intensely than bullets or explosive shells. By 1918, chemical shells made up 35 percent of French ammunition supplies, 25 percent of British, and 20 percent of American stock. The "Protocol for the Prohibition of the Use in War of Asphyxiating, Poisonous, or Other Gases and of Bacteriological Methods of Warfare", also known as the Geneva Protocol , was issued in 1925 and was accepted as policy by all major countries. In 1937, poison gas was manufactured in large quantities but not used except against nations that lacked modern weapons or gas masks.

[ 21 ] [ 22 ] World War II and postwar [ edit ] See also: Military technology during World War II A variety of firearms from the World War II and postwar eras on a firearm rack Many modern military weapons, particularly ground-based ones, are relatively minor improvements to weapon systems developed during World War II. World War II marked perhaps the most frantic period of weapon development in the history of humanity. Massive numbers of new designs and concepts were fielded, and all existing technologies were improved between 1939 and 1945. The most powerful weapon invented during this period was the nuclear bomb ; however, many other weapons influenced the world, such as jet aircraft and radar , but were overshadowed by the visibility of nuclear weapons and long-range rockets.

[ This paragraph needs citation(s) ] Nuclear weapons [ edit ] Main article: Nuclear holocaust Since the realization of mutual assured destruction (MAD), the nuclear option of all-out war is no longer considered a survivable scenario. During the Cold War in the years following World War II, both the United States and the Soviet Union engaged in a nuclear arms race . Each country and their allies continually attempted to out-develop each other in the field of nuclear armaments. Once the joint technological capabilities reached the point of being able to ensure the destruction of the Earth by 100 fold, a new tactic had to be developed. With this realization, armaments development funding shifted back to primarily sponsoring the development of conventional arms technologies for support of limited wars rather than total war .

[ 23 ] International arm cooperation [ edit ] It is essential to highlight the growing relevance of international military cooperation and the global diffusion of deterrence strategies. As outlined in Baizidi's theory on deterrence, the internationalization of deterrence involves the transfer of arms and other military capabilities to aligned states and non-state actors, as a means of amplifying strategic reach and threat credibility.

[ 24 ] In today’s interconnected security environment, the deterrent value of weapons often hinges not only on their technical specifications but also on how they are deployed collaboratively across borders. Missile sharing arrangements, forward-defense networks, and alliance-building exemplify how arm's cooperation has shifted from a purely national doctrine toward a regional and even global concept. Such internationalized deterrence mechanisms, both conventional and unconventional, reshape strategic calculations and expand the zones of influence — redefining the tactical significance of weapons far beyond their immediate geography.

[ 24 ] Types [ edit ] By user [ edit ] – what person or unit uses the weapon Personal weapons (or small arms ) – designed to be used by a single person.

Light weapons – 'man-portable' weapons that may require a small team to operate.

[ 25 ] Heavy weapons – artillery and similar weapons larger than light weapons (see SALW ).

Crew served weapons – larger than personal weapons, requiring two or more people to operate correctly.

Fortification weapons – mounted in a permanent installation or used primarily within a fortification.

Mountain weapons – for use by mountain forces or those operating in difficult terrain.

Vehicle-mounted weapons – to be mounted on any type of combat vehicle .

Railway weapons – designed to be mounted on railway cars, including armored trains.

Aircraft weapons – carried on and used by some type of aircraft , helicopter , or other aerial vehicle.

Naval weapons – mounted on ships and submarines .

Space weapons – are designed to be used in or launched from space.

Autonomous weapons – are capable of accomplishing a mission with limited or no human intervention.

By function [ edit ] – the construction of the weapon and the principle of operation Antimatter weapons (theoretical) – would combine matter and antimatter to cause a powerful explosion.

Archery weapons – operate by using a tensioned string and a bent solid to launch a projectile.

Artillery – firearms capable of launching heavy projectiles over long distances.

Biological weapons – spread biological agents, causing disease or infection.

Blunt instruments – designed to break or fracture bones, produce concussions , create organ ruptures, or crush injuries .

Chemical weapons – poison people and cause reactions.

Edged and bladed weapons – designed to pierce or cut through skin, muscle, or bone and cause internal or external bleeding.

Energy weapons – rely on concentrating forms of energy to attack, such as lasers or sonic attacks.

Explosive weapons – use a physical explosion to create a blast, concussion, or spread shrapnel .

Firearms – use a chemical charge to launch projectiles.

Improvised weapons – common objects reused as weapons, such as crowbars and kitchen knives.

Incendiary weapons – cause damage by fire.

Loitering munitions – designed to loiter over a battlefield, striking once a target is located.

Magnetic weapons – use magnetic fields to propel projectiles or focus particle beams.

Missiles – rockets that are guided to their target after launch. (Also a general term for projectile weapons.) Non-lethal weapons – designed to subdue without killing.

Nuclear weapons – use radioactive materials to create nuclear fission or nuclear fusion detonations Rockets – self-propelled projectiles.

Suicide weapons – exploit the willingness of their operators not surviving the attack.

By target [ edit ] – the type of target the weapon is designed to attack Anti-aircraft weapons – target missiles and aerial vehicles in flight.

Anti-fortification weapons – designed to target enemy installations.

Anti-personnel weapons – designed to attack people, either individually or in numbers.

Anti-radiation weapons – target sources of electronic radiation, particularly radar emitters.

Anti-satellite weapons – target orbiting satellites.

Anti-ship weapons – target ships and vessels on water.

Anti-submarine weapons – target submarines and other underwater targets.

Anti-tank weapons – designed to defeat armored targets.

Area denial weapons – target territory, making it unsafe or unsuitable for enemy use or travel.

Hunting weapons – weapons used to hunt game animals .

Infantry support weapons – designed to attack various threats to infantry units.

Siege engines – designed to break or circumvent heavy fortifications in siege warfare .

Manufacture of weapons [ edit ] Main article: Arms industry Ordnance being produced at Pantex in Amarillo , Texas , United States , during World War II The arms industry is a global industry that involves the sale and manufacture of weaponry. It consists of a commercial industry involved in the research and development , engineering , production, and servicing of military material, equipment, and facilities. Many industrialized countries have a domestic arms industry to supply their own military forces, and some also have a substantial trade in weapons for use by their citizens for self-defense, hunting, or sporting purposes.

Contracts to supply a given country's military are awarded by governments, making arms contracts of substantial political importance. The link between politics and the arms trade can result in the development of a " military–industrial complex ", where the armed forces, commerce, and politics become closely linked.

According to research institute SIPRI, the volume of international transfers of major weapons in 2010–2014 was 16 percent higher than in 2005–2009, [ 26 ] and the arms sales of the world's 100 largest private arms-producing and military services companies totaled $420 billion in 2018.

[ 27 ] Legislation [ edit ] The production, possession, trade, and use of many weapons are controlled. This may be at a local or central government level or by international treaty. Examples of such controls include: The right of self-defense Knife legislation Air gun laws Gun law Arms trafficking laws Arms control treaties Space Preservation Treaty Gun laws [ edit ] Main article: Gun laws All countries have laws and policies regulating aspects such as the manufacture, sale, transfer, possession, modification, and use of small arms by civilians.

Countries that regulate access to firearms will typically restrict access to certain categories of firearms and then restrict the categories of persons who may be granted a license for access to such firearms. There may be separate licenses for hunting, sport shooting (a.k.a. target shooting), self-defense, collecting, and concealed carry, with different sets of requirements, permissions, and responsibilities.

Arms control laws [ edit ] Main article: Arms control International treaties and agreements place restrictions on the development, production, stockpiling, proliferation, and usage of weapons, from small arms and heavy weapons to weapons of mass destruction . Arms control is typically exercised through the use of diplomacy, which seeks to impose such limitations upon consenting participants, although it may also comprise efforts by a nation or group of nations to enforce limitations upon a non-consenting country.

Arms trafficking laws [ edit ] This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( May 2018 ) Main article: Arms trafficking Arms trafficking is the trafficking of contraband weapons and ammunition . What constitutes legal trade in firearms varies widely, depending on local and national laws. In 2001, the United Nations had made a protocol against the manufacturing and trafficking of illicit arms. This protocol made governments dispose illegal arms, and to licence new firearms being produced, to ensure them being legitimate.

[ 28 ] It was signed by 122 parties.

Lifecycle problems [ edit ] There are a number of issues around the potential ongoing risks from deployed weapons, the safe storage of weapons, and their eventual disposal when they are no longer effective or safe.

Ocean dumping of unused weapons such as bombs, ordnance, landmines, and chemical weapons has been common practice by many nations and has created hazards.

[ 29 ] [ 30 ] [ 31 ] [ 32 ] Unexploded ordnance (UXO) are bombs, land mines, naval mines, and similar devices that did not explode when they were employed and still pose a risk for many years or decades.

Demining or mine clearance from areas of past conflict is a difficult process, but every year, landmines kill 15,000 to 20,000 people and severely maim countless more.

[ 33 ] Nuclear terrorism was a serious concern after the fall of the Soviet Union , with the prospect of "loose nukes" being available.

[ 34 ] While this risk may have receded, [ 35 ] similar situations may arise in the future.

In science fiction [ edit ] Main article: Weapons in science fiction Strange and exotic weapons are a recurring feature or theme in science fiction . In some cases, weapons first introduced in science fiction have now become a reality. Other science fiction weapons, such as force fields and stasis fields , remain purely fictional and are often beyond the realms of known physical possibility.

At its most prosaic, science fiction features an endless variety of sidearms , mostly variations on real weapons such as guns and swords . Among the best-known of these are the phaser used in the Star Trek television series, films, and novels, and the lightsaber and blaster featured in the Star Wars movies, comics, novels, and TV series.

In addition to adding action and entertainment value, weaponry in science fiction sometimes becomes a theme when it touches on deeper concerns, often motivated by contemporary issues. One example is science fiction that deals with weapons of mass destruction like doomsday devices .

See also [ edit ] Arms industry Improvised explosive device List of martial arts weapons List of practice weapons Lists of weapons Military technology Offensive weapon Riot control Toy weapon Weapon mount References [ edit ] ^ Geiss, Robin; Melzer, Nils; Devaney, James Gerard; Methymaki, Eleni, eds. (2021).

The Oxford handbook of the international law of global security . Oxford handbooks (First ed.). Oxford: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-882727-6 .

^ Diniz, Júlia.

"Robert L. OConnell Of Arms and Men A History of War Weapons and Aggression Oxford University Press USA" .

{{ cite journal }} : Cite journal requires |journal= ( help ) ^ Löffler, D.; McGraw, J.J.; Johannsen, N.N. (2016).

"Weapons in and as history. On the ontogenerative function of materialized preemption and intelligence in weapons technology" .

Identities .

16 ( 1– 2): 68– 77.

^ Pruetz, J.D.; Bertolani, P. (2007).

"Savanna Chimpanzees, Pan troglodytes verus, Hunt with Tools" .

Current Biology .

17 (5): 412– 417.

Bibcode : 2007CBio...17..412P .

doi : 10.1016/j.cub.2006.12.042 .

PMID 17320393 .

S2CID 16551874 .

^ Weiss, Rick (February 22, 2007) "Chimps Observed Making Their Own Weapons" , The Washington Post ^ Thieme, Hartmut and Maier, Reinhard (eds.) (1995) Archäologische Ausgrabungen im Braunkohlentagebau Schöningen.

Landkreis Helmstedt, Hannover.

^ Thieme, Hartmut (2005). "Die ältesten Speere der Welt – Fundplätze der frühen Altsteinzeit im Tagebau Schöningen".

Archäologisches Nachrichtenblatt .

10 : 409– 17.

^ Baales, Michael; Jöris, Olaf (2003). "Zur Altersstellung der Schöninger Speere".

Erkenntnisjäger: Kultur und Umwelt des Frühen Menschen Veröffentlichungen des Landesamtes für Archäologie Sachsen-Anhalt .

57 : 281– 88.

^ Jöris, O. (2005) "Aus einer anderen Welt – Europa zur Zeit des Neandertalers". In: N.J. Conard et al.

(eds.): Vom Neandertaler zum modernen Menschen . Ausstellungskatalog Blaubeuren. pp. 47–70.

^ Thieme, H. (1997). "Lower Palaeolithic hunting spears from Germany".

Nature .

385 (6619): 807– 10.

Bibcode : 1997Natur.385..807T .

doi : 10.1038/385807a0 .

PMID 9039910 .

S2CID 4283393 .

^ Lahr, M. Mirazón; Rivera, F.; Power, R.K.; Mounier, A.; Copsey, B.; Crivellaro, F.; Edung, J.E.; Fernandez, J.M. Maillo; Kiarie, C. (2016).

"Inter-group violence among early Holocene hunter-gatherers of West Turkana, Kenya" .

Nature .

529 (7586): 394– 398.

Bibcode : 2016Natur.529..394L .

doi : 10.1038/nature16477 .

PMID 26791728 .

S2CID 4462435 .

^ Stojanowski, Christopher M.; Seidel, Andrew C.; Fulginiti, Laura C.; Johnson, Kent M.; Buikstra, Jane E. (2016). "Contesting the massacre at Nataruk".

Nature .

539 (7630): E8 – E10 .

doi : 10.1038/nature19778 .

PMID 27882979 .

S2CID 205250945 .

^ a b Gabriel, Richard A.; Metz, Karen S.

"A Short History of War" .

au.af.mil . Archived from the original on February 26, 2000 . Retrieved 2010-01-08 .

^ Wheel and Axle Summary . BookRags.com. 2010 . Retrieved 2011-06-13 .

^ "History Of The Horse-drawn Carriage" .

www.cookscarriages.com . 28 July 2021 . Retrieved 2024-02-29 .

^ "Science Show: The Horse in History" . abc.net.au. 1999-11-13 . Retrieved 2011-06-13 .

^ Keegan, John (1993).

A History of Warfare . Pimlico.

ISBN 978-0-7126-9850-4 .

^ "The Trireme (1/2)" . Mlahanas.de. Archived from the original on 2011-06-19 . Retrieved 2011-06-13 .

^ Hind, Edward (1860).

My Magazine. Being a Series of Poems, Tales, Sketches, Essays, Orations, Etc . Nottingham: J. and H. Clarke. p. 263.

^ Jonathan A. Grant, Between Depression and Disarmament: The International Armaments Business, 1919–1939 (Cambridge UP,  2018).

Online review ^ Eric Croddy; James J. Wirtz (2005).

Weapons of Mass Destruction: An Encyclopedia of Worldwide Policy, Technology, and History . ABC-CLIO. p. 140.

ISBN 978-1-85109-490-5 .

^ Tim Cook,  "'Against God-Inspired Conscience': The Perception of Gas Warfare as a Weapon of Mass Destruction, 1915–1939." War & Society 18.1 (2000): 47–69.

^ Estabrooks, Sarah (2004).

"Funding for new nuclear weapons programs eliminated" .

The Ploughshares Monitor .

25 (4). Archived from the original on June 20, 2007.

^ a b Baizidi, Rahim (January 2025).

"The Internationalization of Deterrence: The Case Study of Iran's Biaxial Deterrence in the Middle East" .

Digest of Middle East Studies .

34 (1).

doi : 10.1111/dome.12350 .

ISSN 1060-4367 .

^ "1997 Report of the Panel of Governmental Experts on Small Arms" .

un.org . 27 August 1997 . Retrieved 6 August 2012 .

^ Global Arms Industry: US Companies Dominate Top 100 Arm Industry SIPRI. Retrieved 2019-12-18.

^ The SIPRI Top 100 Arms-Producing and Military Service Companies 2018 SIPRI. Retrieved 2019-12-18.

^ "The Firearms Protocol" .

United Nations : Office on Drugs and Crime . Retrieved 2024-08-09 .

^ Wilkinson, Ian (August 2017).

"Chemical Weapon Munitions Dumped at Sea: An Interactive Map" . James Martin Center for Nonproliferation Studies . Retrieved 19 August 2017 .

^ Curry, Andrew.

"Chemical Weapons Dumped in the Ocean After World War II Could Threaten Waters Worldwide" . SMITHSONIAN.COM . Retrieved 19 August 2017 .

^ "Military Ordinance [sic] Dumped in Gulf of Mexico" .

Maritime Executive . August 3, 2015 . Retrieved 4 August 2015 .

^ Edgar B. Herwick III (29 July 2015).

"Explosive Beach Objects – Just Another Example Of Massachusetts' Charm" .

WGBH news . PBS . Retrieved 4 August 2015 .

^ "Demining" . UN . Retrieved 19 August 2017 .

^ "Russia: Threat Of Unsecured Weapons Considered Serious" . 3 October 1997.

^ Allison, Graham (December 29, 2011).

"Washington Can Work: Celebrating Twenty Years With Zero Nuclear Terrorism" .

The Huffington Post . Retrieved July 26, 2012 .

Weapon Specialist – Weapon Expert .

Bevic Huynh, New York, 2012.

. Retrieved July 26, 2012 .

External links [ edit ] The dictionary definition of weapon at Wiktionary Quotations related to Weapon at Wikiquote Media related to Weapons at Wikimedia Commons v t e Weapons History Premodern African Artillery Chinese Early thermal weapons Japanese Medieval Modern Early modern Napoleonic American Indian Wars War of the Pacific Crimean War American Civil War War of the Triple Alliance Spanish–American War Mexican Revolution Antique Pre-20th century firearms World War I Chemical Infantry Australia Austria-Hungary Belgium Bulgaria Canada France Germany Greece India Italy Japan Montenegro New Zealand Portugal Romania Russia Serbia Turkey United Kingdom United States Interwar period Chaco War Spanish Civil War ( Nationalist / Republican ) Second Sino-Japanese War ( Japanese / National Revolutionary Army ) World War II Infantry Australia Austria Belgium Brazil Bulgaria Canada China Croatia Czechoslovakia Denmark Finland France Germany Greece Hungary Italy Japan Mexico Netherlands New Zealand Norway Poland Romania Soviet Union Thailand United Kingdom United States Yugoslavia Cold War Greek Civil War Malayan Emergency First Indochina War Korean War Vietnam War Algerian War Six-Day War Portuguese Colonial War Rhodesian Bush War South African Border War Cambodian Civil War Cambodian–Vietnamese War Iran–Iraq War Laotian Civil War Lebanese Civil War Dominican Civil War Nicaraguan Revolution Salvadoran Civil War Soviet–Afghan War Falklands War Gulf War Post-Cold War Yugoslav Wars Afghanistan War Iraq War Russo-Georgian War Syrian Civil War Russo-Ukrainian War Types Aircraft Anti-aircraft Anti-ballistic Anti-personnel Anti-tank Area denial Artillery Biological Blunt instrument Ceremonial Chemical Conventional Crew-served Cyber Deadly Directed-energy Explosive Depth charge List Firearm Hunting Improvised Incendiary Martial arts Mass destruction Non-lethal Nuclear Offensive Pneumatic Practice Radiological Sonic Space Tectonic Torpedo Toy Vehicle Other Arms industry Arsenal Civilian gun ownership Science fiction Weapon mount Category v t e Technology and related concepts Major technologies Necessities Agriculture Domestication Grafting Working animal Clothing Sewing machine Cooking Beer Bread Cheese Milling Wine Food storage Pottery Sanitation Plumbing Toilet Tool / Equipment Blade Hammer Plough Wedge Weapon Gun Social Accounting Calculation Abacus Calendar Cryptography Lock and key Money Banknote Coin Musical instrument Phonograph Toy Game Video game Writing Book Map Printing press Typewriter Construction Aqueduct Canal Irrigation Arch Bridge Building Fortification Foundation Scaffolding Tower Dam Caisson Stonemasonry Road Tunnel Transport Aircraft Aerostat Airplane Seaplane Compass Elevator Horseback riding Stirrup Jet engine Rocket Motor vehicle Railroad Train Scuba set Spacecraft Satellite Space station Space suit Watercraft Sailing Ship Submarine Manufacturing 3D printing Carpentry Casting Injection moulding Lost-wax casting Mass production Assembly line Interchangeable parts Machine tool Welding Simple machine Axle Bearing Ball bearing Belt Chain Lever Catapult Crane Shadoof Linkage Cam Clutch Four-bar linkage Piston Rack and pinion Pendulum Screw Archimedes' screw Propeller Spring Valve Wheel Block and tackle Flywheel Gear Potter's wheel Pulley Wing Machinery Agricultural machinery Appliance Dishwasher Washing machine Engine Electric motor Internal combustion Turbine Waterwheel Windmill Heavy equipment Hydraulics Cylinder Manifold Pump Mechanism Clock Differential Epicyclic gearing Gimbal Gyroscope Whippletree MEMS Pneumatics Compressor Jackhammer Rivet gun Vacuum pump Robotics Arm Leg Energy Fire Charcoal Oven Energy storage Battery Geothermal power Heat exchanger Heat pump Nuclear Power Weapon Oil drilling Fracking Refrigeration Air conditioning Refrigerator Solar power Photovoltaics Material Cement Concrete Ceramic Brick Chipped stone Glass Masonry Metallurgy Aluminum Bronze Ironworking Steel Nanomaterials Paper Plastic Rammed earth Recycling Rubber Vulcanization Textile Loom Spinning wheel Biotechnology Birth control Blood transfusion Dentistry Genetic engineering CRISPR gene editing Genetic testing PCR Hospital Medical imaging Medication Anesthesia Antibiotic Prosthesis Surgery Vaccine Chemical Cosmetics Detergent Soap Dye Explosive Dynamite Fireworks Gunpowder TNT Fertilizer Haber process Laboratory glassware Pesticide Pigment Separation Chromatography Distillation Filtration Spectrometer Synthesis Electromagnetism Electromagnet Laser Optical disc Lens Eyeglasses Magnetic storage Microwave oven Mirror Optical fiber Optical instrument Microscope Telescope Particle accelerator Photography Camera Motion picture Radar Telecommunications Mobile phone Radio Telegraph Telephone Television Electricity Circuit AC Circuit breaker DC Electrical grid Fuse Generator Switch Transformer Electric light Fluorescent Incandescent LED Neon Electronics Capacitor Circuit board Resistor Inductor Vacuum tube Lightning rod Multimeter Oscilloscope Semiconductor Diode Integrated circuit Transistor Superconductor Computer Artificial intelligence Hardware CPU GPU Modem Motherboard Mouse RAM Router Storage Touchscreen Networking Client–server model Email Internet Peer-to-peer Social media World Wide Web Programming language Software Compiler Database GUI Graphics software Operating system Spreadsheet Web browser Word processor Perspectives Criticism Appropriate technology Low technology Luddite Neo-Luddism Precautionary principle Ecotechnology Environmental technology Clean technology Sustainable design Sustainable engineering Policy & politics Government by algorithm Intellectual property Patent Trade secret Persuasive technology Science policy Strategy of Technology Technology assessment Technorealism Progressivism Futures studies Technology forecasting Technological utopianism Technocracy movement Technological singularity Transhumanism Studies Diffusion of innovations Technology transfer History Timeline of historic inventions Philosophy Social construction of technology Technological determinism Technology acceptance model Related concepts Applied science Agronomy Architecture Construction Engineering Forensics Forestry Logistics Medicine Mining Navigation Surveying Innovation Design High tech Invention Mature technology Research and development Technological convergence Technology lifecycle Category Outline Portal Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Israel Other Historical Dictionary of Switzerland NARA 2 Encyclopedia of Modern Ukraine Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7889cf5cc‐5p58s
Cached time: 20250818095856
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.842 seconds
Real time usage: 1.047 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 4047/1000000
Revision size: 36669/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 257429/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 3944/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 16/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 146158/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.471/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 6962285/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  752.706      1 -total
 36.17%  272.225      1 Template:Reflist
 14.05%  105.765      5 Template:Cite_book
 12.63%   95.037      1 Template:History_of_war
 12.16%   91.545      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
  9.79%   73.656     10 Template:Cite_journal
  8.25%   62.106      1 Template:Short_description
  7.87%   59.275      2 Template:More_citations_needed_section
  7.28%   54.764      3 Template:Ambox
  7.22%   54.308      2 Template:More_citations_needed Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:33496:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818095856 and revision id 1306546217. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Weapon&oldid=1306546217 " Categories : Weapons Military equipment Security War Hidden categories: CS1 errors: missing periodical Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from December 2021 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from December 2021 Articles to be expanded from May 2018 All articles to be expanded Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 18 August 2025, at 09:57 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Weapon 142 languages Add topic

