Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Examples of real scholars 2 Fictitious examples 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Absent-minded professor 6 languages Español עברית Magyar Nederlands Suomi Svenska Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Stock character in film For the 1961 film, see The Absent-Minded Professor .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Absent-minded professor" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( May 2015 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Per Lindroth [ sv ] , 1929, Den tankspridde professorn ( The Thoughtful Professor ) The absent-minded professor is a stock character of popular fiction, usually portrayed as a talented academic whose academic brilliance is accompanied by below-par functioning in other areas, leading to forgetfulness and mistakes. One explanation of this is that highly talented individuals often have unevenly distributed capabilities, being brilliant in their field of choice but below average on other measures of ability. Alternatively, they are considered to be so engrossed in their field of study that they forget their surroundings. The phrase is also commonly used in English to describe people who are so engrossed in their own world that they fail to keep track of their surroundings. It is a common stereotype that professors get so obsessed with their research that they pay little attention to anything else.

The archetype is sometimes mixed with that of the mad scientist , often for comic effect, as in the Jerry Lewis film The Nutty Professor or the Profesor Bacterio in the Mortadelo y Filemón comics and movies. However, a distinction is usually made that absent-minded professors are forgetful and careless rather than maliciously causing harm.

Examples of real scholars [ edit ] " The Astrologer who Fell into a Well " – John Tenniel's illustration from an 1884 edition of Aesop's fables, based on a story about Thales of Miletus The archetype is very old: the ancient Greek biographer Diogenes Laërtius wrote that the philosopher Thales walked at night with his eyes focused on the heavens and, as a result, fell down a well .

[ 1 ] Thomas Aquinas , [ 2 ] Isaac Newton , [ 3 ] Adam Smith , André-Marie Ampère , Jacques Hadamard , Sewall Wright , Nikola Tesla , Norbert Wiener , Archimedes , Pierre Curie [ 4 ] and Albert Einstein [ 3 ] were all scholars considered to be absent-minded – their attention absorbed by their academic studies.

William Archibald Spooner , who gave his name to the spoonerism , was known for his absent-mindedness and eccentricity.

Fictitious examples [ edit ] The fictional absent-minded professor is often a college professor of science or engineering; in the fantasy genre, a similar character may appear as a wizard . Examples of this include the characterisation of Merlin in The Sword in the Stone (particularly in the Disney adaptation ) and Albus Dumbledore in the Harry Potter series. "Doc" Emmett Brown from Back to the Future is an example of an absent-minded scientist-inventor character. He is depicted as strange, eccentric, or insane . Another example is the title character in the film The Absent-Minded Professor and its less successful film remakes, all based on the short story "A Situation of Gravity" by Samuel W. Taylor . Examples in television include Professor Farnsworth in Futurama , Professor Frink in The Simpsons , Walter Bishop in the Fox television series Fringe , and Professor Von Schlemmer in Adventures of Sonic the Hedgehog . Multo, one of the characters in the children's series The Zula Patrol , is another example of an absent-minded professor.

Professor Kokintz in The Mouse That Roared by Leonard Wibberley is an example from literature.

Professor Branestawm , created in the 1930s by Norman Hunter , is an earlier example of the archetype, and Jacques Paganel from the Jules Verne 's 1867 novel In Search of the Castaways is probably the codifier of the archetype in the modern literature. Professor Caractacus Potts in the story of Chitty Chitty Bang Bang qualifies as an absent-minded inventor. Comic strip examples include Professor Calculus in The Adventures of Tintin ; Eli Eon in Little Orphan Annie ; the Professor in British comic Rupert Bear ; and Professor Edgewise, a minor recurring character in Marvel Family stories.

Isaac Kleiner from the Half-Life saga, Professor E. Gadd from the Luigi's Mansion series and Professor Harold MacDougal from Red Dead Redemption are examples in video games.

See also [ edit ] Asperger syndrome Autism Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder predominantly inattentive Creativity and mental illness Savant syndrome Schizophrenia Schizotypal personality disorder Schizotypy Wise old man References [ edit ] ^ Diogenes Laërtius, Lives of the Eminent Philosophers , "Thales" ^ "Happy Feast of St. Louis IX of France – Thomistic Philosophy Page" . 26 August 2020.

^ a b [1] , p.ix ^ [2] , p.76 Listen to this article ( 5 minutes ) This audio file was created from a revision of this article dated 2 November 2024 ( 2024-11-02 ) , and does not reflect subsequent edits.

( Audio help · More spoken articles ) External links [ edit ] v t e Stock characters List Archetype By ethics and morality Heroes Classic hero Action hero Christ figure Chosen One Everyman Folk hero Knight-errant Legacy hero Mythological king Paladin Superhero Youngest son Antihero Byronic hero Man alone Tragic hero Other Cyberhero Super soldier Space marine Rogues Lovable rogue Gentleman detective Jack Trickster Tricky slave Zanni (servants, clowns: Harlequin , Brighella , Scapino , Pulcinella and Pierrot ) Outlaw Bad boy Gentleman thief Pirate Air pirate Space pirate Other Good cop/bad cop Rake Villains Antivillains False hero The mole Double agent Evil twin Terrorist Social Darwinist Dark lord Mad scientist Supervillain Monsters Bug-eyed monster Evil clown Killer robot Killer toy Monster girl Skeleton Slime Swamp monster Vampires Zombie Nazi zombies Zombie animal Other Alazon Archenemy Folk devil Igor Masked villain Miser Vecchio (wealthy old men, Pantalone and Il Dottore ) Il Capitano (self styled captain, braggart) By sex and gender Feminine Love interest Bishōjo Blonde stereotype Farmer's daughter Girl next door Hooker with a heart of gold Ingénue Loosu ponnu Magical girlfriend Catgirl Monster girl Manic Pixie Dream Girl Vixen Hag Cat lady Crone Fairy godmother La Ruffiana Loathly lady Hawksian woman Dragon Lady Femme fatale Tsundere Woman warrior Jungle girl Magical girl Virago Strong female character Queen bee Princesse lointaine Southern belle Valley girl Yamato nadeshiko LGBT Class S Laotong Lady-in-waiting Columbina Mammy stereotype Geek girl Gamer girl Damsel in distress Final girl Princess and dragon Masculine Harlequin Pierrot Scaramouche Father figure Wise old man Elderly martial arts master Young American mappillai Himbo Ivan the Fool Jack Jock Little Johnny Nice guy Nice Jewish boy Superfluous man Prince Charming Bishōnen Knight-errant Primitive Feral child Noble savage Caveman Mountain man LGBT Seme and uke Otokonoko Bad boy Pachuco Black knight Others Adolescent clique Barbarian Clown Dragonslayer Donor Fool Identity formation Imaginary friend Innamorati ("The Lovers") Little green men Magical Negro Mole people Pop icon Redshirt Shoulder angel Sidekick Straight man Tokenism Town drunk Tragic mulatto Truck-kun Village idiot White savior Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Absent-minded_professor&oldid=1301054913 " Categories : Stock characters Abstraction Fictional academics Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from May 2015 All articles needing additional references Articles containing Swedish-language text Articles with hAudio microformats Spoken articles Articles containing Japanese-language text This page was last edited on 17 July 2025, at 21:19 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Absent-minded professor 6 languages Add topic

