Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 See also 3 References 4 Sources 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Ukrainian underground 1 language Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Ukrainian underground was a movement in Ukraine's Soviet period within Soviet nonconformist art from the late 1950s through the early 1990s. This art form was banned by several totalitarian countries of Eastern Europe and the USSR . It was also known under other names, such as unofficial art, nonconformist, and dissident art.
It ended due to the Perestroika reform movement, which led to Ukrainian independence in 1991. After the Soviet Union collapsed, similar counter-cultural processes developed under the names of "alternative" or "marginal" art. The avant-garde ideas of underground art were picked up and developed by the next generation of the Ukrainian New Wave .

"Man and infinity", object by Ukrainian artist F.Tetianych , 1980 Irina Vysheslavska . Self-portrait with Viktor Pivovarov and Eduard Gorokhovsky. 1975 "Underground," in this context, refers to creativity that is directed towards self-expression of the individual or artistic groups, in contrast to the philosophical, ethical, and aesthetic codes of the mainstream.

[ 1 ] Ukrainian underground literature was published by the authors themselves and these dissident publications were known as samizdat . Underground music was performed for a small number of listeners.

History [ edit ] Balcony painting by Anatoly Sumar 1958 Artist Florian Yuriev at his exhibition Painting 1960–70 in the National Art Museum of Ukraine , 2016 M.Trehub. Zonally, color concept. Paper, mixed media.1980 Writer G. Tiutiunnyk by Ukrainian artist Y. Levych.1979.C.,о., 80х60.1979 Nicholas Zalevsky . Once upon the Night.  C., o. 85 x 92 cm. 1974 During the 1960–1980s, Ukrainian underground art was also called "the second wave of the avant-garde", which was consonant with the first wave of Ukrainian avant-garde in the early twentieth century, which held similarly innovative artistic goals.
Underground art exhibition was typically banned. Artists held exhibitions in abandoned buildings, homes of friends, and similar venues.  One of the first apartment exhibitions in Ukraine was held in Odesa in 1956, in the apartment of the artist and art critic Oleg Sokolov.
The underground movement garnered significant publicity after a 1967 exhibition by two young artists under the title "Sychik+Khruschik" ( Stanislav Sychov and Valentin Khrushch ).  The artists hung their paintings on a street fence, drawing a considerable crowd. The exhibition lasted three hours until authorities dispersed the audience.

Subsequently, a powerful group formed consisting of artists and nonconformists who openly opposed Socialist Realism : Alexander Anufriev, Vladimir Strelnikov , Victor Marynyuk, Valery Basanets and his wife Tatiana, Ludmila Yastreb, Andrei Antoniuk, Lucien Dulfan, Oleg Voloshin, Eugene Rakhmanin, Vladimir Tsiupko, Igor Bozhko, Alexander Stovbur, Yuri Egorov, Michael Kowalski, Sergei Knyazev, Vladimir Naumets, Nikolay Stepanov, Alexander Dmitriev, Nadia Haiduk, Vitaly Sazonov, Viktor Rysovych, Eugene Hodenko, and others.

[ 2 ] In 1965, in Kharkiv , a one-day exhibition of nonconformist art was held under the title "Under the arch". It involved such artists as Vagrich Bakhchanyan , Anatoly Krynsky, Michael Basov, Yuri Kuchukov, Anatoly Shulik and others. Some of these individuals studied under famous avant-garde artists who worked in Kharkiv, such as Alexey Shcheglov, Vasyl Yermylov , Borys Kosarev.
A creatively-different atmosphere developed in western Ukraine, since many artists there were educated in the European art tradition, rather than Soviet. In the late 1950s, in Uzhhorod , a circle formed of abstract artists which included Paul Bedzir, Elizabeth Kremnytska, Ferenc (Echi) Seman, and others. At the same time, in Lviv , such artists as Marhit and Roman Selsky gathered in their homes a group of artists including Carlo Zvirynsky, Roman Turin, Omelian Lishchynsky, Daniel Dovboshynsky, Vladimir Patyk, Jaroslav Motyka, Oksana and Vladimir Rybotytski.
In the 1970-1980s, the Lviv circle of informal artists was supplemented by such names as Alexander Aksinin, Nadezhda Ponomarenko, Galina Zhyhulska, Valery Demyanyshyn, Yevhen Zakharov, Michael Green, Vladimir Pinihin, and others.

In 1960–1964 in Kyiv , the "Creative Youth Club" was active [ 3 ] The members consisted of writers, composers, scientists, and actors. Among the artists were Alla Horska and her husband Viktor Zaretsky, Opanas Zalyvakha, Lyudmila Semykina, Galina Sevruk, Galina Zubchenko, Alexander Shkaraputa, and Vladimir Pryadko. The first apartment exhibition in Kyiv (1964) was organized by the artist Anatoly Prevish. His work contained the symbols of the fortitude of the era.

[ 4 ] In the 1970s, the "Rukh"("Movement") formed. Its members included writers, scientists, and artists.  They regularly gathered to discuss the latest artistic trends and to read samizdat . In 1977, they organized an exhibition that included such artists as Yuri Kosin , Nik Niedzelski, Mikola Tregub, Vudon Baklitsky, Nicholas Zalevsky , Alexander Kostetsky , Olena Golub , Vladimir Boguslavsky, Mikhael Zhukov, and others.

[ 5 ] Underground artists typically worked at home without any hope of recognition, supplementing their work by such activities as book illustration. In the late 1970s a certain degree of liberalization in the social system occurred, which led to partial acceptance of the unofficial art. Underground artists were able to participate in a limited number of official exhibitions. These artists included Valery Lamakh, Florian Yuriev, Vilen Barsky , Alexander Dubovik, Feodosiy Tetianych , Ernest Kotkov, Alexander Shuldyzhenko, Gregory Gavrylenko, Anatoly Sumar, Akim Levich, Zoe Lerman, Ivan Marchuk, Irina Vysheslavska , Alexander Pavlov, Julius Sheinis, Michael Weinstein, Anatoly Lymarev, Ada Rybachuk and Volodymyr Melnychenko .

Many underground artists suffered persecution by the authorities for their stances. Some of them died young, while others were forced to leave the country and work in Europe or the USA. Despite the hard times, many artists persevered by performing "quiet resistance" with their brushes and paints, creating innovative and unusual art displays, performances, and installations. Their works are now recognized across the globe and constitute the bulk of collections at museums such as Zimmerli Art Museum at Rutgers University , Museum of Russian Art , National Art Museum of Ukraine , NT-Art Gallery , and others.

Artists V. Basanets and V. Maryniuk at a conference in Kyiv dedicated to Odesa nonconformism 2013 Star Flowers. Painting by V. Baklitskyi 1990 See also [ edit ] Alternative culture Counterculture English underground Notes from Underground Prague Underground Soviet Nonconformist Art Underground culture References [ edit ] ^ in ukr.: Gerasymchuk O.

. Underground.

[1] in Encyclopedia of Modern Ukraine .

^ in ukr.: Sophia Kushch.

«Portraits» of resistance «Portraits» of resistance // Den (the Day) . — 2011. — 8 Apr.

^ in ukr.: L. Tanyuk.

Life in art and politics – in the book: Word, Theater, Life, - Kyiv, 2003. - T. 2. P. - 184.

^ in ukr.: G. Vysheslavsky , O. Sidor Hibelynda . // Terminology of Modern Art, Paris-Kyiv, Terra Incognita, 2010, - P.235-242.

ISBN 978-966-96839-2-2 ^ in Ukr.: Olena Holub . Anniversary of an underground exhibit.// Den (The Day), 2007,  —Dec.5 [2] Sources [ edit ] in ukr: G. Vysheslavsky , O. Sidor Hibelynda . // Terminology of Modern Art, Paris-Kyiv, Terra Incognita, 2010, - P.32-37.

ISBN 978-966-96839-2-2 in ukr: Olena Golub . The Bright and Gloomy Days of Underground Artists//Kyiv, Published House "Antiquary", 2017, ISBN 978-617-7285-11-2 in ukr.:"Lesya Smyrna".

Nonconformism Century in Ukrainian visual art // Kyiv : Phoenix, 2017.

ISBN 978-966-131-499-2 External links [ edit ] Ukrainian unofficial art Ukrainian underground music (in Ukrainian) Odesa art group [3] v t e Ukraine articles History Chronology Scythians Sarmatians Goths Early Slavs East Slavs Kuyaba Kievan Rus' Principality of Kiev Mongol invasion Galicia–Volhynia Grand Duchy of Lithuania Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth Kiev Voivodeship Zaporozhian Cossacks Sich Hetmanate Pereiaslav Agreement Russian Empire Galicia Revolution and War of Independence Ukrainian People's Republic Ukrainian State West Ukrainian People's Republic Makhnovshchina Reichskommissariat Ukraine Ukrainian National Committee Ukrainian SSR Holodomor Eastern Front (World War II) Volhynia massacre Chernobyl disaster Independence Orange Revolution Euromaidan Revolution of Dignity Russo-Ukrainian War Outline 2014 pro-Russian unrest Annexation of Crimea by Russia War in Donbas 2022 Russian invasion By topic Christianity Economic Military Geography National parks Biosphere reserves Seven Natural Wonders of Ukraine Nature reserves Populated places Cities Rivers Mountains Waterfalls Islands and sandbars World Heritage Sites Wildlife Politics Administrative divisions Constitution Flag President Parliament Government Foreign relations Military Political parties Elections Judiciary Law Law enforcement Ukraine–European Union relations Ukraine–NATO relations Economy Hryvnia (currency) Banking Stock exchanges Energy Electricity Science and technology Telecommunications Tourism Transport Society Education Corruption Gender inequality Health Abortion HIV/AIDS Swine flu pandemic (2009–10) COVID-19 pandemic Crime and suicide Human rights Freedom of the press LGBT Human trafficking Languages Minorities Prostitution Religion Culture Animation Architecture Kievan Rus' Baroque Art Nouveau Arts Icon painting Cinema Crafts Motanka Kosiv ceramics Petrykivka painting Pysanka Rushnyk Cuisine Borscht Wine Dance Dress Kobeniak Kozhukh / Kozhushanka Ochipok Sharovary Vyshyvanka Wreath Folklore Kazka Holidays New Year Day of Unity Butter Week Easter Green Week Kupala Night Independence Day Pokrova / Defenders Day Saint Nicholas Day Christmas Malanka Intangible Cultural Heritage Literature Media Music Bandura Duma / Dumka Kobzar Koliadka Shchedrivka Opera Photography Sport Demographics Ukrainian people Rus' people Ruthenians Gente Ruthenus, natione Polonus Diaspora Refugees Immigration to Ukraine Censuses Women Outline Category Portal v t e Culture of Europe Sovereign states Albania Andorra Armenia Austria Azerbaijan Belarus Belgium Bosnia and Herzegovina Bulgaria Croatia Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Estonia Finland France Georgia Germany Greece Hungary Iceland Ireland Italy Kazakhstan Latvia Liechtenstein Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Moldova Monaco Montenegro Netherlands North Macedonia Norway Poland Portugal Romania Russia San Marino Serbia Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden Switzerland Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom England Northern Ireland Scotland Wales Vatican City States with limited recognition Abkhazia Kosovo Northern Cyprus South Ossetia Transnistria Dependencies and other entities Åland Faroe Islands Gibraltar Guernsey Isle of Man Jersey Svalbard Other entities European Union Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ukrainian_underground&oldid=1283480763 " Categories : Culture of Ukraine Soviet nonconformist art Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic History of Ukraine (1918–1991) Ukrainian studies 20th century in Ukraine Modern history of Ukraine Ukrainian contemporary art Ukrainian art movements Art movements in Europe This page was last edited on 1 April 2025, at 19:42 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Ukrainian underground 1 language Add topic

