Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History of the school Toggle History of the school subsection 1.1 Later Cyrenaics 2 Philosophy Toggle Philosophy subsection 2.1 Epistemology 2.2 Ethics 3 Legacy 4 See also 5 Notes 6 References 7 Further reading 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Cyrenaics 36 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Bosanski Català Čeština Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Hrvatski Íslenska Italiano עברית Қазақша Кыргызча Magyar مازِرونی 日本語 Norsk bokmål Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Русский Slovenčina Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Ancient Greek philosophical movement Aristippus of Cyrene The Cyrenaics or Kyrenaics ( Ancient Greek : Κυρηναϊκοί , romanized : Kyrēnaïkoí ), were a sensual hedonist Greek school of philosophy founded in the 4th century BCE , supposedly by Aristippus of Cyrene , although many of the principles of the school are believed to have been formalized by his grandson of the same name, Aristippus the Younger . The school was so called after Cyrene , the birthplace of Aristippus. It was one of the earliest Socratic schools. The Cyrenaics taught that the only intrinsic good is pleasure, which meant not just the absence of pain (as it did for Epicurus ), but positively enjoyable sensations. Of these, momentary pleasures, especially physical ones, are stronger than those of anticipation or memory. Further, they recognized the value of social obligation and that pleasure could be gained from altruistic behaviour. The school died out within a century and was replaced by the philosophy of Epicureanism .

History of the school [ edit ] Part of a series on Hedonism Thinkers Ajita Aristippus Bentham Chandler Epicurus Feldman Gassendi Guisán Jovinian La Mettrie Mill Onfray Pearce Piper Singer Tännsjö Yang Schools of hedonism Axiological hedonism Charvaka Christian hedonism Jovinianism Cyrenaics Epicureanism Ethical hedonism Libertinage Psychological hedonism Utilitarianism Yangism Key concepts Aponia Ataraxia Eudaimonia Felicific calculus Happiness Hedone Pain Pleasure Sensation Suffering Tetrapharmakos Related articles Hedonic treadmill Joie de vivre Paradox of hedonism "Wine, women and song" Zichan v t e The history of the Cyrenaic school begins with Aristippus of Cyrene, who was born around 435 BCE. He came to Athens as a young man and became a pupil of Socrates . We have only limited knowledge of his movements after the execution of Socrates in 399 BCE although he is said to have lived for a time in the court of Dionysius of Syracuse . It is uncertain precisely which doctrines ascribed to the Cyrenaic school were formulated by Aristippus.

[ 1 ] Among Aristippus' pupils was his daughter, Arete of Cyrene , and among her pupils was her son Aristippus the Younger . It was he, according to Aristocles , [ 2 ] who created a comprehensive system.

[ 3 ] At the least, however, it can be said that the foundations of Cyrenaic philosophy were ideas originated by the elder Aristippus, [ 4 ] refined by Arete, and then further refined by Aristippus the Younger.

Other early Cyrenaics included Epitimides , Antipater of Cyrene , Paraebates , Aristotle of Cyrene , [ 5 ] and possibly Dionysius the Renegade and Aristoxenus of Cyrene .

[ 6 ] Later Cyrenaics [ edit ] After the time of the younger Aristippus, the school broke up into different factions, represented by Anniceris , Hegesias , and Theodorus , who all developed rival interpretations of Cyrenaic doctrines, many of which were responses to the new system of hedonistic philosophy laid down by Epicurus .

[ 7 ] For Anniceris, pleasure is achieved through individual acts of gratification that are sought for the pleasure that they produce, [ 1 ] but Anniceris laid great emphasis on the love of family, country, friendship, and gratitude that provide pleasure even when they demand sacrifice.

[ 4 ] For Theodorus, the goal of life is mental pleasure not bodily pleasure, [ 1 ] and he placed greater emphasis on the need for moderation and justice.

[ 8 ] He was also famous for being an atheist .

[ 1 ] To some extent, these philosophers were all trying to meet the challenge laid down by Epicureanism .

[ 9 ] Hegesias believed that eudaimonia is impossible to achieve, [ 1 ] and hence the goal of life becomes the avoidance of pain and sorrow.

[ 4 ] Conventional values such as wealth, poverty, freedom, and slavery are all indifferent and produce no more pleasure than pain.

[ 1 ] For Hegesias, Cyrenaic hedonism was simply the least irrational strategy for dealing with the pains of life.

[ 1 ] Jean-Marie Guyau has compared his teachings to Buddhism.

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] By the middle of the 3rd century BC, the Cyrenaic school was obsolete; Epicureanism had largely displaced its Cyrenaic rivals.

[ 9 ] Philosophy [ edit ] The Cyrenaics were hedonists and held that pleasure was the supreme good in life, especially physical pleasure, which they thought more intense and more desirable than mental pleasures.

[ 1 ] Pleasure is the only good in life and pain is the only evil.

Socrates had held that virtue was the only human good, but he had also accepted a limited role for its utilitarian side, allowing pleasure to be a secondary goal of moral action.

[ 3 ] Aristippus and his followers seized upon this, and made pleasure the sole final goal of life, denying that virtue had any intrinsic value.

Epistemology [ edit ] The Cyrenaics were known for their skeptical theory of knowledge . They reduced logic to a basic doctrine concerning the criterion of truth .

[ 12 ] They believed that we can know with certainty our immediate sense-experiences (for instance, that I am having a sweet sensation now) but can know nothing about the nature of the objects that cause these sensations (for instance, that the honey is sweet).

[ 4 ] They also denied that we can have knowledge of what the experiences of other people are like.

[ 12 ] All knowledge is of one's own immediate sensation. These sensations are motions that are purely subjective, and are painful, indifferent, or pleasant, according as they are violent, tranquil, or gentle.

[ 4 ] [ 1 ] Further, they are entirely individual, and can in no way be described as being of the world objectively. Feeling, therefore, is the only possible criterion of knowledge and of conduct.

[ 4 ] > Our ways of being affected are alone knowable.

[ 13 ] Thus, the sole aim for everyone should be pleasure.

Ethics [ edit ] Cyrenaicism deduces a single, universal aim for all people which is pleasure. Furthermore, all feeling is momentary and homogeneous. It follows that past and future pleasure have no real existence for us, and that among present pleasures, there is no distinction of kind.

[ 1 ] Socrates had spoken of the higher pleasures of the intellect; the Cyrenaics denied the validity of this distinction and said that bodily pleasures, being more simple and more intense, were preferable.

[ 1 ] Momentary pleasure, preferably of a physical kind, is the only good for humans.

[ 14 ] When it comes to pain, the Cyrenaics held the opinion that pain that occurs suddenly is more difficult to endure than pain that can be foreseen.

[ 15 ] However, some actions that give immediate pleasure can create more than their equivalent of pain. The wise person should be in control of pleasures rather than be enslaved to them; otherwise, pain will result, and this ability requires judgement to evaluate the different pleasures of life.

[ 4 ] Regard should be paid to law and custom because even though these things have no intrinsic value on their own, violating them will lead to unpleasant penalties being imposed by others.

[ 1 ] Likewise, friendship and justice are useful because of the pleasure they provide.

[ 1 ] Thus, the Cyrenaics believed in the hedonistic value of social obligation and altruistic behavior. Like many of the leading modern utilitarians , they combined with their psychological distrust of popular judgments of right and wrong, and their firm conviction that all such distinctions are based solely on law and convention. The equally unwavering principle that the wise person who would pursue pleasure logically must abstain from that which is usually thought wrong or unjust. This idea, which occupies a prominent position in systems like those of Jeremy Bentham , [ 1 ] Volney , and even William Paley , was clearly of prime importance to the Cyrenaics.

[ 16 ] Legacy [ edit ] The Cyrenaic ideal was alien to Christianity, and, in general, subsequent thinkers found it an ideal of hopeless pessimism.

[ 16 ] See also [ edit ] Existential nihilism Pleasure principle (psychology) Charvaka Subjective idealism Notes [ edit ] ^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n Annas 1995 , p. 229-235.

^ Aristocles ap. Eusebius, Praeparatio Evangelica , xiv. 18 ^ a b Reale & Catan 1986 , p. 271-272.

^ a b c d e f g Copleston 2003 , p. 121-123.

^ Lampe 2017 , p. 12.

^ Lampe 2017 , pp. 19–20.

^ Long 2005 , p. 633.

^ Long 2005 , p. 637.

^ a b Long 2005 , p. 639.

^ Éric Volant, Culture et mort volontaire , quoted in ^ Historical Dictionary of Ancient Greek Philosophy, Anthony Preus, Rowman & Littlefield, 2015, p.184 ^ a b Reale & Catan 1986 , pp. 274–275.

^ Chisholm 1911 , p. 703.

^ Chisholm 1911 , pp. 703–704.

^ Cicero, Tusc . V.52.

^ a b Chisholm 1911 , p. 704.

References [ edit ] Annas, Julia (1995), The Morality of Happiness , Oxford University Press, ISBN 0-19-509652-5 This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911). " Cyrenaics ".

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 7 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. pp.

703– 704.

Copleston, Frederick Charles (2003), A History of Philosophy: Book 1 , Continuum International , ISBN 0-8264-6895-0 Lampe, Kurt (9 May 2017).

The Birth of Hedonism: The Cyrenaic Philosophers and Pleasure as a Way of Life . Princeton University Press.

ISBN 978-0-691-17638-3 . Retrieved 27 May 2025 .

Long, A. A.

(2005), "The Socratic Legacy", in Algra, Keimpe ; Barnes, Jonathon; Mansfeld, Jaap ; Schofield, Malcolm (eds.), The Cambridge History of Hellenistic Philosophy , Cambridge University Press, ISBN 0-521-61670-0 Reale, Giovanni; Catan, John R. (1986), A History of Ancient Philosophy: From the Origins to Socrates , SUNY Press, ISBN 0-88706-290-3 Further reading [ edit ] Tsouna, Voula (1998).

The Epistemology of the Cyrenaic School , Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 0-521-62207-7 Zilioli, Ugo (2012).

The Cyrenaics , Acumen Publishing.

ISBN 1-84465-290-4 External links [ edit ] Cyrenaics Resource Handbook of Cyrenaic resources, primary and secondary O'Keefe, Tim.

"Cyrenaics" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Herbermann, Charles, ed. (1913).

"Cyrenaic School of Philosophy" .

Catholic Encyclopedia . New York: Robert Appleton Company.

v t e Ancient Greek schools of philosophy Proto-philosophy Epimenides Pherecydes Seven Sages Thales Solon Pittacus Bias Periander Cleobulus Chilon Pre-Socratic ( list ) Ionian Milesian Thales Anaximander Anaximenes Heraclitean Heraclitus Cratylus Diogenes Italian Pythagorean Pythagoras Hippasus Philolaus Archytas Lamiskos Alcmaeon Brontinus Theano Damo Calliphon Hermotimus Metrodorus of Cos Arignote Myia Eurytus more...

Skeptic Xenophanes Xeniades Eleatic Parmenides Zeno Melissus Hippo Pluralist Ionian Anaxagoras Archelaus Metrodorus of Lampsacus Italian Empedocles Acron Pausanias Atomist Leucippus Democritus Sophist Ionian Protagoras Prodicus Hippias Thrasymachus Damon more...

Italian Gorgias Callicles Lycophron Dionysodorus Euthydemus more...

Classical Socrates ( students ) Xenophon Cynic Antisthenes Diogenes Crates Menippus more...

Cyrenaic Aristippus Aristippus the Younger Theodorus the Atheist Hegesias of Cyrene Anniceris more...

Eretrian Phaedo of Elis Menedemus Asclepiades of Phlius Megarian Euclid of Megara Ichthyas Thrasymachus of Corinth Eubulides Stilpo Nicarete Pasicles Bryson Dialecticians Clinomachus Apollonius Cronus Euphantus Dionysius Diodorus Cronus Philo Alexinus Panthoides Platonic Plato Speusippus Xenocrates more...

Peripatetic Aristotle ( Aristotelianism ) Theophrastus Strato of Lampsacus Lyco of Troas Alexander of Aphrodisias more...

Hellenistic Pyrrhonist Pyrrho Timon of Phlius Aenesidemus Agrippa the Skeptic Sextus Empiricus more...

Stoic Zeno of Citium Cleanthes Chrysippus Panaetius Posidonius Seneca Lucius Annaeus Cornutus Musonius Rufus Epictetus Arrian Marcus Aurelius more...

Epicurean Epicurus Metrodorus Zeno of Sidon Philodemus Lucretius Diogenes of Oenoanda more...

Academic Skeptic Arcesilaus Carneades Philo of Larissa Cicero more...

Middle Platonic Antiochus Eudorus of Alexandria Philo of Alexandria Plutarch Gaius Apuleius Alcinous Galen more...

Neopythagorean Nigidius Figulus Apollonius of Tyana Moderatus of Gades Nicomachus Numenius of Apamea more...

Neoplatonist Ammonius Saccas Plotinus students Origen Porphyry Iamblichus Julian Plutarch of Athens Syrianus Proclus Ammonius Hermiae Damascius Simplicius more...

Second Sophistic Nicetes of Smyrna Dio Chrysostom Favorinus Lucian Philostratus more...

v t e Philosophical skepticism Skeptical philosophies Academic Skepticism Ajñana Cartesian Charvaka Humeanism Pyrrhonism Solipsism Skeptical philosophers Sanjaya Belatthiputta Xenophanes Xeniades Metrodorus of Chios Anaxarchus Nausiphanes Pyrrho Timon Academic skeptics Arcesilaus Diocles of Cnidus Lacydes Telecles and Evander Hegesinus Carneades Hagnon of Tarsus Metrodorus of Stratonicea Aristanax Clitomachus Charmadas Aeschines of Neapolis Philo of Larissa Cicero Gaius Aurelius Cotta Dio of Alexandria Aenesidemus Favorinus Agrippa Sextus Empiricus Jayarāśi Bhaṭṭa Nicholas of Autrecourt Montaigne Pierre Charron Francisco Sanches Uriel da Costa William Chillingworth René Descartes Simon Foucher Pierre Bayle David Hume Gottlob Ernst Schulze William Drummond Benson Mates Peter Unger Robert Fogelin Skeptical scenarios Acatalepsy Aporia Brain in a vat Dream argument Epoche Evil demon Five-minute hypothesis Münchhausen trilemma Ignoramus et ignorabimus Problem of the criterion Problem of induction Reductio ad absurdum Regress argument Simulation hypothesis Suspension of judgment Wax argument Responses Here is one hand Semantic externalism Process reliabilism Epistemic closure Contextualism Relativism Skeptical philosophical literature Barhaspatya sutras Academica ( Cicero ) Outlines of Pyrrhonism Against the Dogmatists Against the Mathematicians Essays ( Montaigne ) Discourse on the Method A Treatise of Human Nature Aenesidemus Types of skepticism Radical Local Moral Scientific Religious Jewish skeptics Pseudoskepticism Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Cyrenaics&oldid=1293141183 " Categories : Cyrenaic school Philosophical skepticism Schools and traditions in hellenistic philosophy Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica Articles with Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy links Articles incorporating a citation from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference This page was last edited on 30 May 2025, at 23:32 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Cyrenaics 36 languages Add topic

