Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Reception 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Journal of Controversial Ideas 5 languages العربية Català Nederlands 日本語 Tiếng Việt Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Academic journal Academic journal Journal of Controversial Ideas Discipline Cross-disciplinary Moral philosophy Language English Edited by Francesca Minerva Jeff McMahan Peter Singer Publication details History 2021–present Publisher Foundation for Freedom of Thought and Discussion Frequency Biannual Open access Yes License CC BY 4.0 Standard abbreviations ISO 4 ( alt ) · Bluebook ( alt ) NLM ( alt ) · MathSciNet ( alt ) ISO 4 J. Controv. Ideas Indexing CODEN ( alt ) · JSTOR ( alt ) · LCCN ( alt ) MIAR · NLM ( alt ) · Scopus · W&L ISSN 2694-5991 OCLC no.

1258737330 Links Journal homepage Online archive The Journal of Controversial Ideas is a cross-disciplinary, open access , peer-reviewed academic journal that allows academics to publish using pseudonyms if they request it.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] The first issue of the journal was published on 23 April 2021, and subsequent issues are published annually.

[ 3 ] History [ edit ] The journal was established in November 2018 by academic moral philosophers Francesca Minerva, Jeff McMahan , and Peter Singer .

[ 1 ] [ 4 ] It began accepting submissions in April 2020, [ 5 ] looking for "careful, rigorous, unpolemical discussion of issues that are widely considered controversial, in the sense that certain views about them might be regarded by many people as morally, socially, or ideologically objectionable or offensive", [ 3 ] [ 5 ] and published its first issue in April 2021.

[ 6 ] The idea for the journal started when Minerva received death threats and had difficulty finding employment as a result of a 2012 article she co-wrote on the ethics of child euthanasia in the Journal of Medical Ethics .

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 7 ] Minerva then published a 2014 article in Bioethics titled Why Publishing Pseudonymously Can Protect Academic Freedom that led to discussions with McMahan and Singer that Minerva said gave the core concept: "We thought we should establish this journal where people can send papers they're afraid couldn't be published in other journals." [ 7 ] According to McMahan, JCI "enables people whose ideas might get them in trouble either with the left or with the right or with their own university administration, to publish under a pseudonym".

[ 8 ] Of the ten articles published in the first issue of JCI in 2021, three of the authors used pseudonyms.

[ 3 ] Reception [ edit ] The Editors of Philosophy congratulated the journal for upholding the spirit of John Stuart Mill , but wondered whether the use of anonymity would hamper the quality of academic debate; they also noted the irony of leading academics from some of "the most prestigious universities in the liberal western world" launching what in another era would be known as a Samizdat .

[ 9 ] Tyler Cowen wrote that the journal would highlight the "very real pressures for excess conformity in academia", but could also "ghettoize" ideas.

[ 10 ] Russell Blackford welcomed the journal and said the first issue was "at a level comparable to most well-regarded journals dealing with ethics or public policy"; Russell also noted that while it seeks to be cross-disciplinary, the first issue was very much a "philosophy journal".

[ 3 ] In The Conversation , researchers Haixin Dang and Joshua Habgood-Coote criticized the journal for enabling authors to "choose when to avoid controversy" with a pseudonym, stating that "researchers will be able to publish papers, claim them if they get a positive reaction, and disown them if they do not".

[ 11 ] See also [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Journal of Controversial Ideas .

Academic freedom List of humanities journals References [ edit ] ^ a b Bartlett, Tom (12 November 2018).

"Here Comes 'The Journal of Controversial Ideas.' Cue the Outcry" .

The Chronicle of Higher Education . Retrieved 13 November 2018 .

^ a b Anthony, Andrew (2 December 2018).

"Do we need to hide who we are to speak freely in the era of identity politics?" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on 2 December 2018.

^ a b c d e Blackford, Russell (3 December 2021).

"Oh No, That's Controversial!" .

The Philosophers' Magazine . Retrieved 8 November 2022 .

^ Turner, Camilla (12 November 2018).

" 'Controversial ideas' journal where academics can publish under pseudonyms for fear of backlash" .

Daily Telegraph . Retrieved 8 November 2022 .

^ a b Lim, Woojin; Shin, Daniel (4 May 2020).

"Courting Controversy" .

The Harvard Crimson . Retrieved 10 November 2022 .

^ Whipple, Tom (24 April 2021).

"Journal of Controversial Ideas dares to print the unsayable" .

The Times . Retrieved 8 November 2022 .

^ a b Matthews, Dylan (19 November 2018).

"The Journal of Controversial Ideas is already, well, controversial. Here's a founder's defense" .

Vox . Retrieved 8 November 2022 .

^ Rosenbaum, Martin (12 November 2018).

"Pseudonyms to protect authors of controversial articles" .

BBC News . Retrieved 13 November 2018 .

^ Editorial (January 2019).

"A Journal of Controversial Ideas: Samizdat in Oxford" .

Philosophy .

94 (1): 1– 2.

doi : 10.1017/S0031819118000499 .

S2CID 233319716 .

^ Cowen, Tyler (15 November 2018).

"The Coming Controversy in Academia" .

Bloomberg Opinion . Retrieved 8 November 2022 .

^ Dang, Haixin; Habgood-Coote, Joshua (19 November 2018).

"The Journal of Controversial Ideas: it's academic freedom without responsibility, and that's recklessness" .

The Conversation . Retrieved 26 December 2023 .

External links [ edit ] Official website Peter Singer launches Journal of Controversial Ideas , University Center for Human Values (Princeton, April 2021) v t e Humanities Disciplines Anthropology Archaeology Classical studies History Language arts Literature Poetry Rhetoric Law Performing arts Dance Music Theatre Philosophy Religious studies Visual arts Filmmaking Painting Sculpture Interdisciplinary fields Digital Environmental Health Medical Public Themes Abductive reasoning Aesthetics Antipositivism The arts Beauty Belles-lettres Bildung Creativity Critical theory Criticism Cultural literacy Culture High Pop General knowledge Hermeneutics Historicism Historism Human condition Humanitas Liberal arts education Trivium Quadrivium Metaphysics Ontology Moral character Self-realization Self-reflection Wisdom Work of art Journals American Journal of Archaeology Daedalus History of Humanities Humanitas Humanities and Social Sciences Communications Journal of Controversial Ideas Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society Leonardo Nova Religio Revue des Études Arméniennes Teaching Philosophy more...

Academia Arts and Humanities Research Council Human science Geisteswissenschaft Humanities, arts, and social sciences Master of Humanities Moscow University for the Humanities National Endowment for the Humanities National Humanities Medal Related Antihumanism Philistinism Criticism of mass culture Educational essentialism Humanities in the United States List of people considered a founder in a humanities field Outline of the humanities Renaissance humanism Studia Humanitatis Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Journal_of_Controversial_Ideas&oldid=1304869456 " Categories : Academic freedom Multidisciplinary academic journals English-language journals Academic journals established in 2021 Works published under a pseudonym Creative Commons Attribution-licensed journals Online-only journals Biannual journals Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Biannual journals (infobox) Open access journals (infobox) Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 8 August 2025, at 17:30 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Journal of Controversial Ideas 5 languages Add topic

