Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life and career 2 Philosophical work Toggle Philosophical work subsection 2.1 Induction and "grue" 2.2 Nominalism and mereology 3 Select bibliography 4 See also 5 Notes 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Nelson Goodman 31 languages العربية Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית Кыргызча Nederlands 日本語 Piemontèis Polski Português Русский Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Türkçe 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American philosopher (1906–1998) Nelson Goodman Born Henry Nelson Goodman August 7, 1906 Somerville , Massachusetts , U.S.

Died November 25, 1998 (1998-11-25) (aged 92) Needham , Massachusetts , U.S.

Education Education Harvard University (PhD, 1941) Thesis A Study of Qualities (1941) Doctoral advisor C. I. Lewis Philosophical work Era 20th-century philosophy Region Western philosophy School Analytic Nominalism [ 1 ] Institutions University of Pennsylvania Harvard University Doctoral students Israel Scheffler Notable students Noam Chomsky , Sydney Morgenbesser , Stephen Stich , Hilary Putnam Main interests Logic , induction , counterfactuals , mereology , aesthetics , philosophy of science , philosophy of language Notable ideas New riddle of induction , Goodman–Leonard calculus of individuals, [ 1 ] counterfactual conditional , Goodman's method , languages of art , irrealism Henry Nelson Goodman (7 August 1906 – 25 November 1998) was an American philosopher , known for his work on counterfactuals , mereology , the problem of induction , irrealism , and aesthetics .

Life and career [ edit ] Goodman was born in Somerville , Massachusetts , the son of Sarah Elizabeth (née Woodbury) and Henry Lewis Goodman.

[ 2 ] He was of Jewish origins.

[ 3 ] He graduated from Harvard University , AB , magna cum laude (1928). During the 1930s, he ran an art gallery in Boston , Massachusetts, while studying for a Harvard PhD in philosophy , which he completed in 1941.

[ 4 ] His experience as an art dealer helps explain his later turn towards aesthetics , where he became better known than in logic and analytic philosophy . During World War II , he served as a psychologist in the US Army .

[ 5 ] He taught at the University of Pennsylvania , 1946–1964, where his students included Noam Chomsky , Sidney Morgenbesser , Stephen Stich , and Hilary Putnam . He was a research fellow at the Harvard Center for Cognitive Studies from 1962 to 1963 and was a professor at Brandeis University from 1964 to 1967, before being appointed Professor of Philosophy at Harvard in 1968.

[ 6 ] In 1967, at the Harvard Graduate School of Education, he was the founding director of Harvard Project Zero, a basic research project in artistic cognition and artistic education. He remained the director for four years and served as an informal adviser for many years thereafter.

[ 7 ] Goodman died in Needham , Massachusetts.

Philosophical work [ edit ] Induction and "grue" [ edit ] In his book Fact, Fiction, and Forecast , Goodman introduced the " new riddle of induction ", so-called by analogy with Hume 's classical problem of induction . He accepted Hume's observation that inductive reasoning (i.e. inferring from past experience about events in the future) was based solely on human habit and regularities to which our day-to-day existence has accustomed us. Goodman argued, however, that Hume overlooked the fact that some regularities establish habits (a given piece of copper conducting electricity increases the credibility of statements asserting that other pieces of copper conduct electricity) while some do not (the fact that a given man in a room is a third son does not increase the credibility of statements asserting that other men in this room are third sons).

Hempel 's confirmation theory argued that the solution is to differentiate between hypotheses, which apply to all things of a certain class, and evidence statements, which apply to only one thing.  Goodman's famous counterargument was to introduce the predicate grue , which applies to all things examined before a certain time t just in case they are green, but also to other things just in case they are blue and not examined before time t . If we examine emeralds before time t and find that emerald a is green, emerald b is green, and so forth, each will confirm the hypothesis that all emeralds are green. However, emeralds a, b, c, ..etc. also confirm the hypothesis that all emeralds are grue .  Thus, before time t , the apparently law-like statements "All emeralds are green" and "All emeralds are grue" are equally well confirmed by observation, but obviously "All emeralds are grue" is not a law-like statement.

Goodman's example showed that the difficulty in determining what constitutes law-like statements is far greater than previously thought, and that once again we find ourselves facing the initial dilemma that "anything can confirm anything".

Nominalism and mereology [ edit ] Goodman, along with Stanislaw Lesniewski , is the founder of the contemporary variant of nominalism , which argues that philosophy , logic , and mathematics should dispense with set theory . Goodman's nominalism was driven purely by ontological considerations. After a long and difficult 1947 paper coauthored with W. V. O. Quine , Goodman ceased to trouble himself with finding a way to reconstruct mathematics while dispensing with set theory – discredited as sole foundations of mathematics as of 1913 ( Russell and Whitehead , in Principia Mathematica ).

The program of David Hilbert to reconstruct it from logical axioms was proven futile in 1931 by Gödel .  Because of this and other failures of seemingly fruitful lines of research, Quine soon came to believe that such a reconstruction was impossible, but Goodman's Penn colleague Richard Milton Martin argued otherwise, writing a number of papers suggesting ways forward.

According to Thomas Tymoczko 's afterword in New directions in the philosophy of mathematics , Quine had "urged that we abandon ad hoc devices distinguishing mathematics from science and just accept the resulting assimilation", putting the "key burden on the theories (networks of sentences) that we accept, not on the individual sentences whose significance can change dramatically depending on their theoretical context."  In so doing, Tymoczko claimed, philosophy of mathematics and philosophy of science were merged into quasi-empiricism :  the emphasis of mathematical practice as effectively part of the scientific method , an emphasis on method over result.

The Goodman–Leonard (1940) calculus of individuals is the starting point for the American variant of mereology . While the exposition in Goodman and Leonard invoked a bit of naive set theory, the variant of the calculus of individuals that grounds Goodman's 1951 The Structure of Appearance , a revision and extension of his PhD thesis, makes no mention of the notion of set (while his PhD thesis still did).

[ 8 ] Simons (1987) and Casati and Varzi (1999) show that the calculus of individuals can be grounded in either a bit of set theory, or monadic predicates, schematically employed.  Mereology is accordingly "ontologically neutral" and retains some of Quine's pragmatism (which Tymoczko in 1998 carefully qualified as American Pragmatism ).

Select bibliography [ edit ] "The Calculus of Individuals and Its Uses" (with Henry S. Leonard), Journal of Symbolic Logic 5 (1940): 45–55.

A Study of Qualities ( doctoral thesis ). Diss. Harvard U., 1941. Reprinted 1990, by Garland (New York), as part of its Harvard dissertations in Philosophy Series.

" A Query on Confirmation ", The Journal of Philosophy (1946): Vol.43, No.14, pp. 383–385.

"Steps Toward a Constructive Nominalism" , co-authored with W. V. O. Quine , Journal of Symbolic Logic , 12 (1947): 105–122, Reprinted in Nelson Goodman, Problems and Projects (Bobbs-Merrill, 1972): 173–198.

The Structure of Appearance . Harvard UP, 1951. 2nd ed. Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill, 1966. 3rd ed. Boston: Reidel, 1977.

Fact, Fiction, and Forecast . Cambridge, MA: Harvard UP, 1955. 2nd ed. Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill, 1965. 3rd. ed. Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill, 1973. 4th ed. Cambridge, MA: Harvard UP, 1983.

Languages of Art: An Approach to a Theory of Symbols . Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill, 1968. 2nd ed. Indianapolis: Hackett, 1976.  Based on his 1960–61 John Locke lectures .

Problems and Projects . Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill, 1972.

[ 9 ] Basic Abilities Required for Understanding and Creation in the Arts: Final Report (with David Perkins, Howard Gardner, and the assistance of Jeanne Bamberger et al.) Cambridge: Harvard University, Graduate School of Education: Project No. 9-0283, Grant No. OEG-0-9-310283-3721 (010), 1972.

Ways of Worldmaking . Indianapolis: Hackett, 1978.

ISBN 0915144522 Paperback ISBN 0915144514 Of Mind and Other Matters . Cambridge, MA: Harvard UP, 1984.

[ 10 ] 1984 pbk edition . Harvard University Press. 1984.

ISBN 0-674-63126-9 .

Reconceptions in Philosophy and other Arts and Sciences (with Catherine Elgin ). Indianapolis: Hackett; London: Routledge, 1988. Paperback Edition, London: Routledge, Indianapolis: Hackett, 1990.

Source: Complete International Bibliography [ 11 ] See also [ edit ] American philosophy List of American philosophers Notes [ edit ] ^ a b Nelson Goodman: The Calculus of Individuals in its different versions – Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy ^ John K. Roth, Christina J. Moose, Rowena Wildin (eds.), World Philosophers and Their Works: Freud, Sigmund – Oakeshott, Michael , Salem Press, 2000, p. 735.

^ Daniel Cohnitz & Marcus Rossberg, Nelson Goodman , Routledge (2014), p. 6 ^ "Goodman Dies" .

Harvard University Gazette . Archived from the original on 14 June 2013 . Retrieved 18 January 2014 .

^ Gardner, Howard (2000). "Project Zero: Nelson Goodman's Legacy in Arts Education".

The Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism .

58 (3): 245– 249.

doi : 10.2307/432107 .

ISSN 0021-8529 .

JSTOR 432107 .

^ Cohnitz, Daniel; Rossberg, Marcus (2022), "Nelson Goodman" , in Zalta, Edward N. (ed.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Summer 2022 ed.), Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University , retrieved 2023-06-05 ^ Gardner, H., and Perkins, D. "The Mark of Zero: Project Zero's Identity Revealed." HGSE Alumni Bulletin , December 1994, 39 (1), 2–6.

^ Cohnitz and Rossberg (2003), ch. 5 ^ Wertheimer, Roger (July 1972).

"Review of Problems and Projects by Nelson Goodman" .

Commentary .

^ Nehamas, Alexander (1984).

"Review of Of Mind and Other Matters by Nelson Goodman" .

The Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism .

43 (2). JSTOR: 209– 211.

doi : 10.2307/429995 .

ISSN 0021-8529 .

JSTOR 429995 .

^ "An International Bibliography of Works by and Selected Works about Nelson Goodman" .

homepages.inf.ed.ac.uk . Retrieved 2019-09-17 .

References [ edit ] Casati, R., and Varzi, A., 1999.

Parts and Places: the structures of spatial representation . MIT Press.

Cohnitz, Daniel, and Rossberg, Marcus, 2003.

Nelson Goodman . Chesham: Acumen & Montreal: McGill-Queen's University Press.

Gardner, H., and Perkins, D. "The Mark of Zero: Project Zero's Identity Revealed." HGSE Alumni Bulletin, December 1994 39(1), 2–6.

Shottenkirk, Dena, 2009.

Nominalism and Its Aftermath: The Philosophy of Nelson Goodman . Synthese Library, Vol. 343. Springer, ISBN 978-1-4020-9930-4 .

Simons, Peter , 1987.

Parts: A Study in Ontology . Oxford Univ. Press.

External links [ edit ] Bibliography of the complete primary and selected secondary literatures, by John Lee.

Papers on Nelson Goodman by Catherine Elgin .

Cohnitz, Daniel; Rossberg, Marcus.

"Nelson Goodman" . In Zalta, Edward N.

(ed.).

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Giovannelli, Alessandro.

"Goodman's aesthetics" . In Zalta, Edward N.

(ed.).

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

The Unity of Goodman's Thought by D Cohnitz, 2009.

Nelson Goodman Remembered by Curtis Carter , 1999 Nelson Goodman Interview (1989) - Induction, Worldmaking, Symbols, & Art on YouTube .

v t e Epistemology Epistemologists William Alston Aquinas Robert Audi Augustine A. J. Ayer George Berkeley Laurence BonJour Gilles Deleuze Keith DeRose René Descartes John Dewey Fred Dretske Edmund Gettier Alvin Goldman Nelson Goodman Paul Grice Anil Gupta Susan Haack David Hume Immanuel Kant Søren Kierkegaard Peter Klein Saul Kripke Hilary Kornblith David Lewis John Locke G. E. Moore John McDowell Robert Nozick Alvin Plantinga Plato Duncan Pritchard James Pryor Hilary Putnam W. V. O. Quine Thomas Reid Bertrand Russell Gilbert Ryle Wilfrid Sellars Susanna Siegel Ernest Sosa P. F. Strawson Baruch Spinoza Timothy Williamson Ludwig Wittgenstein Nicholas Wolterstorff Vienna Circle more...

Theories Coherentism Constructivism Contextualism Empiricism Evolutionary epistemology Fallibilism Feminist epistemology Fideism Foundationalism Holism Infinitism Innatism Naïve realism Naturalized epistemology Phenomenalism Positivism Rationalism Reductionism Reliabilism Representational realism Skepticism Transcendental idealism Concepts A priori knowledge A posteriori knowledge Analysis Analytic–synthetic distinction Belief Certainty Common sense Descriptive knowledge Exploratory thought Epistemic injustice Epistemic virtue Gettier problem Induction Internalism and externalism Justification Knowledge Meta Objectivity Privileged access Problem of induction Problem of other minds Perception Procedural knowledge Proposition Regress argument Simplicity Truth Uncertainty Related articles Faith and rationality Formal epistemology Metaepistemology Philosophy of perception Philosophy of science Social epistemology Virtue epistemology Category Outline Portal WikiProject Stubs Discussion v t e Aesthetics Areas Ancient Africa India Japanese Mathematics Medieval Music Nature Science Theology Schools Aestheticism Classicism Fascism Feminism Formalism Historicism Marxism Modernism Postmodernism Psychoanalysis Realism Romanticism Symbolism Theosophy more...

Philosophers Abhinavagupta Adorno Alberti Aristotle Aquinas Balázs Balthasar Baudelaire Baudrillard Baumgarten Bell Benjamin Burke Coleridge Collingwood Coomaraswamy Danto Deleuze Dewey Fry Goethe Goodman Greenberg Hanslick Hegel Heidegger Hume Hutcheson Kant Kierkegaard Klee Langer Lipps Liu Lukács Lyotard Man Marcuse Maritain Merleau-Ponty Nietzsche Ortega y Gasset Orwell Pater Plato Rancière Rand Richards Ruskin Santayana Schiller Schopenhauer Scruton Tagore Tanizaki Vasari Wilde Winckelmann more...

Concepts Appropriation Art for art's sake Art manifesto Artistic merit Avant-garde Beauty Feminine Masculine Camp Comedy Creativity Cuteness Depiction Disgust Ecstasy Elegance Emotions Entertainment Eroticism Fashion Gaze Harmony Humour Interpretation Judgment Kama Kitsch Life imitating art Magnificence Mimesis Perception Picturesque Quality Rasa Recreation Reverence Style Sublime Taste Tragedy Work of art Works Hippias Major (c. 390 BC) Poetics (c. 335 BC) The Literary Mind and the Carving of Dragons (c. 100) On the Sublime (c. 500) On the Sublime and Beautiful (1757) Lectures on Aesthetics (1835) " The Critic as Artist " (1891) In Praise of Shadows (1933) Art as Experience (1934) " The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction " (1935) " Avant-Garde and Kitsch " (1939) Critical Essays (1946) The Aesthetic Dimension (1977) Why Beauty Matters (2009) Related Aestheticization of politics Applied aesthetics Arts criticism Axiology Evolutionary aesthetics Mathematical beauty Neuroesthetics Patterns in nature Philosophy of design Philosophy of film Philosophy of music Psychology of art Theory of art Outline Category Philosophy portal Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Greece Sweden Poland Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii DBLP Artists ULAN People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Nelson_Goodman&oldid=1294700128 " Categories : 1906 births 1998 deaths 20th-century American philosophers 20th-century American essayists American male essayists American male non-fiction writers American philosophy academics Analytic philosophers American epistemologists Harvard Graduate School of Arts and Sciences alumni Harvard University Department of Philosophy faculty Jewish American military personnel Jewish philosophers Ontologists People from Needham, Massachusetts People from Somerville, Massachusetts American philosophers of art American philosophers of language American philosophers of logic American philosophers of mathematics American philosophers of mind American philosophers of social science University of Pennsylvania faculty 20th-century American male writers Corresponding fellows of the British Academy 20th-century American Jews Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with hCards This page was last edited on 9 June 2025, at 08:40 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Nelson Goodman 31 languages Add topic

