Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Description 2 Other explanations for the features 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Raindrop impressions 3 languages العربية Français 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Geological feature Fossil raindrop impressions on the top of a wave-rippled sandstone from the Horton Bluff Formation (Mississippian), near Avonport, Nova Scotia Raindrop impressions are a geological feature characterized by small crater-like pits with slightly raised edges that are the result of the impact of raindrop impacts on soft sediment surfaces.

[ 1 ] Sedimentary structures with similar appearance have been found. They can be considered a type of fossil , but their significance and authenticity has been questioned.

[ 2 ] Description [ edit ] Fossil raindrops Modern raindrop impressions in stream sediments near Hanover, NH Raindrop impressions are only a few millimeters thick and less than 1 centimeter in diameter.

[ 3 ] They can be preserved as widely scattered impressions or in close proximity to one another on the sediment surface.

[ 1 ] Raindrop impressions can appear as small craters or as small raised bumps. If the sample has craters, the top of the sample is being viewed because the rain would have fallen onto it making indentations. If the sample has small raised bumps, the bottom of the sample is being viewed. In this case, the raindrop impressions were created in the sediment, which was then followed by more sediment which filled the impressions, creating, what appear to be, raised bumps on the bottom of the upper layer.

Fossilized raindrop impressions can help scientists determine historical atmospheric pressure .

[ 4 ] Other explanations for the features [ edit ] Rainfall is not the only explanation for the geological feature, and not all "raindrop impressions" are considered to have formed due to the impact of raindrops. Arguments against a raindrop origin include: During shower activity raindrops cover the entire surface, whereas raindrop impressions are generally scattered and few in number.

Because the rain is falling "everywhere," raindrop impressions should occur equally on sand-sized material as well as mud, yet in the geologic record these impressions are largely confined to fine-grained rock.

Even when raindrop impressions form in mud during a shower, further rainfall eventually destroys them, leaving a surface which is not helpful to further preservation of impressions.

Many examples cited as modern or fossil raindrop impressions can be explained by air bubbles rising through the mud.

The characteristics of any impression depend on so many variables they can not be used convincingly to demonstrate those impressions formed specifically by raindrops.

[ 5 ] In order for raindrop impressions to be preserved in the rock record , the impression would have to have occurred towards the end of a rain shower. The decreased number of impacts at this time accounts for the scattered patterns of the impressions, and the specific saturation of the sediment allows for preservation.

It is difficult to differentiate between actual impressions made by rain and other sources such as gas bubbles escaping, or dripping from another surface, because the structures that are preserved have the same characteristics.

See also [ edit ] Petrology References [ edit ] ^ a b Boggs, Sam (2006).

Principles of Sedimentology and Stratigraphy . Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Prentice Hall.

^ Pardi, Richard R.; Brickner, Dorene (1990).

"Modern and Fossil Raindrop Impressions as a Lesson in Interpretation of Ancient Sedimentary Features" .

Journal of Geological Education .

38 (4): 316– 317.

Bibcode : 1990JGeoE..38..316P .

doi : 10.5408/0022-1368-38.4.316 .

ISSN 0022-1368 .

^ Stow, D.A.V. (2005).

Sedimentary Rocks in the Field: a Color Guide . Burlington, MA: Elsevier Academic.

ISBN 978-0123694515 .

^ "Fossil raindrop impressions imply greenhouse gases loaded early atmosphere" .

UW News . Retrieved 2018-08-28 .

^ Metz, Robert (1981). "Why Not Raindrop Impressions?".

Journal of Sedimentary Petrology .

51 (1): 265– 268.

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Raindrop_impressions&oldid=1293509974 " Category : Sedimentary structures Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 2 June 2025, at 03:44 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Raindrop impressions 3 languages Add topic

