Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Origins of the term, etymology, and history 2 Tactics Toggle Tactics subsection 2.1 Examples 3 Criticism 4 See also 5 Citations 6 General and cited references 7 Further reading 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Culture jamming 20 languages العربية Български Català Deutsch Español Esperanto Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית 日本語 Polski Русский Simple English Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Form of protest to subvert media culture This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article may be too technical for most readers to understand .

Please help improve it to make it understandable to non-experts , without removing the technical details.

( April 2020 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article is written like a personal reflection, personal essay, or argumentative essay that states a Wikipedia editor's personal feelings or presents an original argument about a topic.

Please help improve it by rewriting it in an encyclopedic style .

( November 2020 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The neutrality of this article is disputed .

Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page . Please do not remove this message until conditions to do so are met .

( September 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Satirical billboard graffiti in Shoreditch , London, pictured in September 2017 Part of a series on Anti-consumerism Theories and ideas Asceticism Affluenza Alternative culture Anti-capitalism Autonomous building Billboard hacking Buyer's remorse Bioeconomics Buddhist economics Buy Nothing Day Collaborative consumption Collapsology Commodification Commodity fetishism Commune Compulsive buying disorder Conspicuous consumption Consumer capitalism Consumerism Conviviality Criticism of advertising Culture jamming Degrowth Do it yourself Downshifting Durable good Earth Overshoot Day Ecological economics Ecovillage Ethical consumerism Feminist political ecology Food loss and waste Freeganism Gift economy Green consumption Hyperconsumerism Laconophilia Local food Microgeneration Non-possession Overconsumption Planned obsolescence Right to repair Political ecology Post-consumerism Simple living Slow Food Steady-state economy Subvertising Sustainable consumer behaviour Sustainable consumption Notable works Walden The Theory of the Leisure Class Brave New World The Affluent Society One-Dimensional Man The Society of the Spectacle ( book , film ) The Consumer Society: Myths and Structures [ fr ] Steal This Book Small Is Beautiful To Have or to Be?

Future Primitive and Other Essays Fight Club ( novel , film ) Escape from Affluenza No Logo Profit over People: Neoliberalism and Global Order The Cultural Creatives Affluenza: The All-Consuming Epidemic Evasion The Corporation Surplus: Terrorized into Being Consumers So, What's Your Price?

What Would Jesus Buy?

Organizations and groups Adbusters Crass CrimethInc.

Deep Green Resistance Democracy Now!

Earth Liberation Front Fifth Estate Freecycle Green Anarchy Institute for Social Ecology Monthly Review Rage Against the Machine Reverend Billy The Venus Project The Yes Men 350.org People Mauro Bonaiuti Noam Chomsky Erich Fromm Nicholas Georgescu-Roegen Edward Goldsmith Paul Goodman André Gorz Ivan Illich Serge Latouche Donella Meadows Pierre Rabhi John Ruskin E. F. Schumacher Bernard Stiegler Henry David Thoreau Related social movements Alter-globalization Amateurism Anarcho-communism Anarcho-primitivism Anarcho-punk Anti-capitalism Anti-corporate activism Anti-globalization movement Communism Diggers (theater) Ecofeminism Eco-socialism Environmentalism Food Not Bombs Fossil fuel phase-out Green anarchism Green left Green politics Hippie Libertarian socialism Neo-Luddism New Left Occupy Wall Street Postmodernism Punk Situationists Slow movement Social anarchism Social ecology See also Advanced capitalism Advertising Barter Consumer behaviour Consumption (economics) Consumption (sociology) Cooperative Counterculture Disneyfication Ecological economics Economic materialism Economic problems Frugality Green economy Gross National Happiness Heterodox economics HospEx Illth Influence of mass media Informal sector Intentional community Left-wing politics McDonaldization Mutual aid Natural resource economics Non-monetary economy Permaculture Post-materialism Productivism Shopping Subsistence economy Sustainability Sweatshops Veblen good Workaholic v t e Culture jamming (sometimes also guerrilla communication ) [ 1 ] [ 2 ] is a form of protest used by many anti-consumerist social movements [ 3 ] to disrupt or subvert media culture and its mainstream cultural institutions, including corporate advertising . It attempts to "expose the methods of domination" of mass society .

[ 4 ] Culture jamming employs techniques originally associated with Letterist International , and later Situationist International known as détournement .

It uses the language and rhetoric of mainstream culture to subversively critique the social institutions that produce that culture. Tactics include editing company logos to critique the respective companies, products, or concepts they represent, or wearing fashion statements that criticize the current fashion trends by deliberately clashing with them.

[ 5 ] Culture jamming often entails using mass media to produce ironic or satirical commentary about itself, commonly using the original medium's communication method. Culture jamming is also a form of subvertising .

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] Culture jamming aims to highlight and challenge the political assumptions underlying commercial culture , and argues that culture jamming is a response to socially imposed conformity . Prominent examples of culture jamming include the adulteration of billboard advertising by the Billboard Liberation Front and contemporary artists such as Ron English . Culture jamming may involve street parties and protests . While culture jamming usually focuses on subverting or critiquing political and advertising messages, some proponents focus on a different form which brings together artists, designers, scholars, and activists [ 8 ] to create works that transcend the status quo rather than merely criticize it.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] Origins of the term, etymology, and history [ edit ] The term was coined by Don Joyce [ 11 ] of American sound collage band Negativland , with the release of their album JamCon '84 .

[ 12 ] [ 13 ] [ 14 ] The phrase "culture jamming" comes from the idea of radio jamming , [ 13 ] where public frequencies can be pirated and subverted for independent communication, or to disrupt dominant frequencies used by governments. In one of the tracks of the album, Joyce stated: [ 13 ] As awareness of how the media environment we occupy affects and directs our inner life grows, some resist. The skillfully reworked billboard... directs the public viewer to a consideration of the original corporate strategy. The studio for the cultural jammer is the world at large.

According to Vince Carducci , although the term was coined by Negativland, the practice of culture jamming can be traced as far back as the 1950s.

[ 15 ] One particularly influential group that was active in Europe was the Situationist International and was led by Guy Debord . The SI asserted that in the past, humans dealt with life and the consumer market directly. They argued that this spontaneous way of life was slowly deteriorating as a direct result of the new "modern" way of life. Situationists saw everything from television to radio as a threat [ 16 ] and argued that life in industrialized areas, driven by capitalist forces, had become monotonous, sterile, gloomy, linear, and productivity-driven. In particular, the SI argued humans had become passive recipients of the spectacle , a simulated reality that generates the desire to consume, and positions humans as obedient consumerist cogs within the efficient and exploitative productivity loop of capitalism.

[ 10 ] [ 17 ] Through playful activity, individuals could create situations , the opposite of spectacles.  For the SI, these situations took the form of the dérive , or the active drift of the body through space in ways that broke routine and overcame boundaries, creating situations by exiting habit and entering new interactive possibilities.

[ 10 ] The cultural critic Mark Dery traces the origins of culture jamming to medieval carnival , which Mikhail Bakhtin interpreted, in Rabelais and his World and other writings, as an officially sanctioned inversion of the social hierarchy.

[ 18 ] Modern precursors might include: the media-savvy agit-prop of the anti-Nazi photomonteur John Heartfield , the sociopolitical street theater and staged media events of 1960s radicals such as Abbie Hoffman , Joey Skaggs , the German concept of Spaßguerilla , and in the Situationist International (SI) of the 1950s and 1960s.

[ citation needed ] The SI first compared its own activities to radio jamming in 1968, when it proposed the use of guerrilla communication within mass media to sow confusion within the dominant culture.

[ citation needed ] In 1985, the Guerrilla Girls formed to expose discrimination and corruption in the art world .

[ 19 ] Mark Dery's New York Times article on culture jamming, "The Merry Pranksters And the Art of the Hoax" [ 13 ] was the first mention, in the mainstream media, of the phenomenon; Dery later expanded on this article in his 1993 Open Magazine pamphlet, Culture Jamming: Hacking, Slashing, and Sniping in the Empire of the Signs , [ 20 ] a seminal essay that remains the most exhaustive historical, sociopolitical, and philosophical theorization of culture jamming to date.

Adbusters , a Canadian publication espousing an environmentalist critique of consumerism and advertising, began promoting aspects of culture jamming after Dery introduced founder and editor Kalle Lasn to the term through a series of articles he wrote for the magazine. In her critique of consumerism, No Logo , the Canadian cultural commentator and political activist Naomi Klein examines culture jamming in a chapter that focuses on the work of Jorge Rodriguez-Gerada . Through an analysis of the Where the Hell is Matt viral videos, researchers Milstein and Pulos analyze how the power of the culture jam to disrupt the status quo is currently being threatened by increasing commercial incorporation.

[ 10 ] For example, T-Mobile utilized the Liverpool street underground station to host a flashmob to sell their mobile services.

Tactics [ edit ] Graffitied text on billboard in Cambridge , UK Culture jamming is a form of disruption that plays on the emotions of viewers and bystanders. Jammers want to disrupt the unconscious thought process that takes place when most consumers view a popular advertising and bring about a détournement .

[ 16 ] Activists that utilize this tactic are counting on their meme to pull on the emotional strings of people and evoke some type of reaction. The reactions that most cultural jammers are hoping to evoke are behavioral change and political action. There are four emotions that activists often want viewers to feel. These emotions – shock , shame , fear , and anger – are believed to be the catalysts for social change.

[ 21 ] Culture jamming also intersects with forms of legal transgression. Semiotic disobedience, for example, involves both authorial and proprietary disobedience, [ 22 ] while techniques such as coercive disobedience comprise acts of culture jamming combined with a demonstration of the retaliatory actions (legal consequences) handed down by the ruling apparatus.

[ 23 ] One of the earliest American culture jammers, Joey Skaggs began staging elaborate media hoaxes in the 1960s as a form of social critique and performance art. His satirical projects, including the Cathouse for Dogs (a fictitious brothel for canines) and the Comacocoon (a fake sensory-deprivation vacation therapy), targeted institutional authority and exposed the media's susceptibility to sensationalism. Skaggs' interventions are regarded as foundational to the development of culture jamming as a strategy for media activism and public discourse.

[ 24 ] The basic unit in which a message is transmitted in culture jamming is the meme . Memes are condensed images that stimulate visual, verbal, musical, or behavioral associations that people can easily imitate and transmit to others. The term meme was coined and first popularized by geneticist Richard Dawkins , but later used by cultural critics such as Douglas Rushkoff , who claimed memes were a type of media virus .

[ 25 ] Memes are seen as genes that can jump from outlet to outlet and replicate themselves or mutate upon transmission, just like a virus.

[ 26 ] Culture jammers will often use common symbols such as the McDonald's golden arches or Nike swoosh to engage people and force them to think about their eating habits or fashion sense.

[ 27 ] In one example, jammer Jonah Peretti used the Nike symbol to stir debate on sweatshop child labor and consumer freedom. Peretti made public exchanges between himself and Nike over a disagreement. Peretti had requested custom Nikes with the word "sweatshop" placed in the Nike symbol. Nike refused. Once this story was made public, it spread worldwide and contributed to the already robust conversation [ 28 ] about Nike's use of sweatshops, [ 27 ] which had been ongoing for a decade prior to Peretti's 2001 stunt.

Jammers can also organize and participate in mass campaigns. Examples of cultural jamming like Perretti's are more along the lines of tactics that radical consumer social movements would use. These movements push people to question the taken-for-granted assumption that consuming is natural and good and aim to disrupt the naturalization of consumer culture; they also seek to create systems of production and consumption that are more humane and less dominated by global corporate late capitalism .

[ 29 ] Past mass events and ideas have included Buy Nothing Day , virtual sit-ins and protests over the Internet, producing ‘subvertisements' and placing them in public spaces, and creating and enacting ‘place jamming' projects where public spaces are reclaimed and nature is re-introduced into urban places.

[ 30 ] The most effective form of jamming is to use an already widely recognizable meme to transmit the message. Once viewers are forced to take a second look at the mimicked popular meme they are forced out of their comfort zone. Viewers are presented with another way to view the meme and are forced to think about the implications presented by the jammer.

[ 16 ] More often than not, when this is used as a tactic the jammer is going for shock value. For example, to make consumers aware of the negative body image that big-name fashion brands are frequently accused of causing, a subvertisement of Calvin Klein 's 'Obsession' was created and played worldwide. It depicted a young woman with an eating disorder throwing up into a toilet.

[ 31 ] Another way that social consumer movements hope to utilize culture jamming effectively is by employing a metameme. A metameme is a two-level message that punctures a specific commercial image but does so in a way that challenges some larger aspect of the political culture of corporate domination.

[ 27 ] An example would be the "true cost" campaign set in motion by Adbusters . "True cost" forced consumers to compare the human labor cost and conditions and environmental drawbacks of products to the sales costs. Another example would be the "Truth" campaigns that exposed the deception tobacco companies used to sell their products.

Following critical scholars like Paulo Freire , Culture jams are also being integrated into the university classroom "setting in which students and teachers gain the opportunity not only to learn methods of informed public critique but also to collaboratively use participatory communication techniques to actively create new locations of meaning." [ 10 ] For example, students disrupt public space to bring attention to community concerns or utilize subvertisements to engage with media literacy projects.

Examples [ edit ] Main article: List of culture jamming organizations and people Artivist Billboard hacking Broadcast signal intrusion Flash mob Happening Practical joke topics Steal This Album!

Steal This Book Groups Billboard Liberation Front Billboard Utilising Graffitists Against Unhealthy Promotions Crimethinc Guerrilla Girls Merry Pranksters monochrom Operation Mindfuck The Yes Men Youth International Party Criticism [ edit ] Some scholars and activists, such as Amory Starr and Joseph D. Rumbo, have argued that culture jamming is futile because it is easily co-opted and commodified by the market, which tends to "defuse" its potential for consumer resistance.

[ 32 ] [ 33 ] A newer understanding of the term has been called for that would encourage artists, scholars and activists to come together and create innovative, flexible, and practical mobile art pieces that communicate intellectual and political concepts and new strategies and actions.

[ 9 ] See also [ edit ] Anti-corporate activism Banksy Brandalism Counterculture Critical theory Dada Doppelgänger brand image The Firesign Theatre Minority influence Protest art Subvertising Tactical media Citations [ edit ] ^ Fyfe, Nicholas R.

Images of the street: planning, identity, and control in public space . p.

274 – via Google Books.

^ Grindon, Gavin (2008).

Aesthetics and Radical Politics . Cambridge Scholars.

ISBN 9781847189790 – via Google Books.

^ Binay, Ayse (2005).

Investigating the Anti-consumerism Movement in North America: The Case of Adbusters (Thesis). University of Texas.

^ Nomai, Afsheen Joseph (2008).

Culture Jamming: Ideological Struggle and the Possibilities for Social Change (Thesis). The University of Texas at Austin. p. 5 – via Google Books.

^ Boden, Sharon and Williams, Simon J. (2002) "Consumption and Emotion: The Romantic Ethic Revisited", Sociology 36(3):493–512 ^ Cortese, Anthony Joseph Paul (2008).

Provocateur: Images of Women and Minorities in Advertising . Rowman & Littlefield. p. 22.

ISBN 978-0-7425-5539-6 . Retrieved 3 December 2012 .

^ Raoul, Vyvian; Bonner, Matt (2022-11-28).

"Subvertising: Sharing a Different Set of Messages" .

The Commons Social Change Library . Retrieved 2023-03-02 .

^ Bieling, Tom (Ed.) (2019): Design (&) Activism – Perspectives on Design as Activism and Activism as Design. Mimesis, Milano; ISBN 978-8869772412 ^ a b LeVine, Mark (2005).

Why They Don't Hate Us: Lifting the Veil on the Axis of Evil . Oxford: Oneworld Publications.

^ a b c d e Milstein, Tema; Pulos, Alexis (2015-09-01).

"Culture Jam Pedagogy and Practice: Relocating Culture by Staying on One's Toes" .

Communication, Culture & Critique .

8 (3): 395– 413.

doi : 10.1111/cccr.12090 .

hdl : 1959.4/unsworks_77051 .

ISSN 1753-9137 .

^ "Don Joyce (2/9/44 – 7/22/15)" . Negativland. Archived from the original on 2019-08-29 . Retrieved 2015-07-24 .

^ Lloyd, Jan (2003).

"Culture Jamming: Semiotic Banditry in the Streets" . Cultural Studies Department, University of Canterbury . Archived from the original on 2013-05-05.

^ a b c d Dery, Mark (1990) The Merry Pranksters And the Art of the Hoax , NYtimes article, December 23, 1990.

^ Dery, Mark (2010) New Introduction and revisited edition of Culture Jamming: Hacking, Slashing, and Sniping in the Empire of the Signs , October 8, 2010 ^ Carducci, Vince (2006). "Culture Jamming: A Sociological Perspective".

Journal of Consumer Culture .

6 (1): 116– 138.

doi : 10.1177/1469540506062722 .

S2CID 145164048 .

^ a b c Lasn, Kalle (1999).

Culture Jam: How to Reverse America's Suicidal Consumer Binge – And Why We Must . New York: HarperCollins.

^ Debord, Guy (1983).

Society of the spectacle . Detroit: Black and Red.

^ Clark, Katerina; Holquist, Michael (1984).

Mikhail Bakhtin . Cambridge, Massachusetts: Belknap Press. p. 251.

ISBN 0674574176 .

^ Dery, Mark (19 January 1993).

"A Brief Introduction to the 2010 Reprint ( Culture Jamming: Hacking, Slashing, and Sniping in the Empire of Signs )" .

markdery.com . Mark Dery . Retrieved August 24, 2022 .

(open source) ^ Dery, Mark (1993) Culture Jamming: Hacking, Slashing, and Sniping in the Empire of the Signs , in Open Magazine Pamphlet Series , 1993 ^ Summers-Effler, Erika (2002). "The Micro Potential for Social Change: Emotion, Consciousness, and Social Movement Formation".

Sociological Theory .

20 (1): 41– 60.

doi : 10.1111/1467-9558.00150 .

S2CID 16783024 .

^ Katyal, Sonia (2006).

"Semiotic Disobedience" .

Washington University Law Review .

84 (3): 489– 571.

SSRN 1015500 .

Fordham Law Legal Studies Research Paper No. 1015500, 20 September 2007.

^ Steinberg, Monica (2021-07-03).

"Coercive Disobedience: Art and Simulated Transgression" .

Art Journal .

80 (3): 78– 99.

doi : 10.1080/00043249.2021.1920288 .

ISSN 0004-3249 .

S2CID 237576098 .

^ Harold, Christine (2007).

Our space: resisting the corporate control of culture . Minneapolis: University of Minnesota press.

ISBN 978-0-8166-4954-9 .

^ Rushkoff, Douglas (1996).

Media Virus!

. New York: Ballantine.

^ Dawkins, Richard (1989).

The Selfish Gene . Oxford: Oxford University Press.

^ a b c "Culture Jamming" .

washington.edu .

Seattle : Center for Communication and Civic Engagement, University of Washington . Retrieved November 20, 2009 .

^ Nisen, Max (May 9, 2013).

"How Nike Solved Its Sweatshop Problem" .

Business Insider . Retrieved August 24, 2022 .

^ Princen, Thomas; Maniates, Michael; Conca, Ken, eds. (2002).

Confronting Consumption . Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press.

^ Harold, Christine (2004). "Pranking Rhetoric: 'Culture jamming' as Media Activism".

Critical Studies in Media Communication .

21 (3): 189– 211.

doi : 10.1080/0739318042000212693 .

S2CID 55119764 .

^ Bordwell, Marilyn (2002). "Jamming Culture: Adbusters' Hip Media Campaign against Consumerism". In Princen, Thomas; Maniates, Michael; Conca, Ken (eds.).

Confronting Consumption . Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press.

^ Starr, Amory (2013-07-04).

Global Revolt: A Guide to the Movements against Globalization . Zed Books Ltd.

ISBN 978-1-84813-691-5 .

^ Rumbo, Joseph D. (2002) "Consumer Resistance in a World of Advertising Clutter: The Case of Adbusters", Psychology & Marketing 19(2): 127–48.

General and cited references [ edit ] Branwyn, Gareth (1996).

Jamming the Media: A Citizen's Guide—Reclaiming the Tools of Communication . California: Chronicle Books ISBN 9780811817950 Dery, Mark (1993).

Culture Jamming: Hacking, Slashing, and Sniping in the Empire of Signs . Open Magazine Pamphlet Series: NJ.

"Shovelware" . Markdery.com. Archived from the original on 2009-04-22 . Retrieved 2009-07-23 .

ASIN B0006P19L8 King, Donovan (2004). University of Calgary.

Optative Theatre: A Critical Theory for Challenging Oppression and Spectacle Klein, Naomi (2000).

No Logo London: Flamingo.

ISBN 9780312421434 Kyoto Journal: Culture Jammer's Guide to Enlightenment Lasn, Kalle (1999) Culture Jam . New York: Eagle Brook.

ISBN 978-0688178055 LeVine, Mark (2005) Why They Don't Hate Us: Lifting the Veil on the Axis of Evil . Oxford, UK: Oneworld Publications.

ISBN 978-1851683659 LeVine, Mark (2017) "Putting the 'Jamming' into Culture Jamming: Theory, Praxis and Cultural Production During the Arab Spring," in DeLaure, Marilyn; Fink, Moritz; eds. (2017).

Culture Jamming: Activism and the Art of Cultural Resistance . New York University Press.

ISBN 978-1-4798-0620-1 Perini, Julie (2010). "Art as Intervention: A Guide to Today's Radical Art Practices". In Team Colors Collective (ed.).

Uses of a Whirlwind: Movement, Movements, and Contemporary Radical Currents in the United States . AK Press.

ISBN 9781849350167 .

Tietchen, T.

Language out of Language: Excavating the Roots of Culture Jamming and Postmodern Activism from William S. Burroughs' Nova Trilogy Discourse: Berkeley Journal for Theoretical Studies in Media and Culture.

23, Part 3 (2001): 107–130.

ISSN 1536-1810 Chaudhary, Shikher (2 August 2010).

"Culture Jamming" .

helterskelter.in .

Milstein, Tema & Pulos, Alexis (2015). "Culture Jam Pedagogy and Practice: Relocating Culture by Staying on One's Toes".

Communication, Culture & Critique 8 (3): 393–413.

Further reading [ edit ] McIntyre, Iain (2013).

How to Make Trouble and Influence People: Pranks, Protests, Graffiti & Political Mischief-Making from Across Australia . PM Press.

ISBN 978-1-60486-880-7 .

DeLaure, Marilyn; Fink, Moritz; eds. (2017).

Culture Jamming: Activism and the Art of Cultural Resistance . New York University Press.

ISBN 978-1-4798-0620-1 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Culture jamming .

Culture Jamming page from the Center for Communication and Civic Engagement v t e Culture jamming Forms Art intervention Billboard hacking Broadcast signal intrusion Détournement Flash mob Guerrilla communication Hacktivism Media prank Subvertising Tactical frivolity Groups Adbusters Anonymous Barbie Liberation Organization Billboard Liberation Front Billionaires for Bush The Bubble Project Cacophony Society Guerrilla Girls Improv Everywhere Luther Blissett Merry Pranksters monochrom Negativland RTMark Sisters of Perpetual Indulgence Society for Indecency to Naked Animals Space Hijackers Veterans of Future Wars Whirl-Mart Wu Ming The Yes Men Yippies Movements Discordianism Church of the SubGenius Provo Psychogeography Reverend Billy and the Church of Stop Shopping People Alan Abel Banksy Reverend Billy Captain Midnight Captain Crunch Ron English Abbie Hoffman Naomi Klein John Law Malaclypse the Younger Ben Masel Sal Randolph Jerry Rubin Joey Skaggs Ivan Stang Kerry Wendell Thornley Bill Wasik Robert Anton Wilson Peter Lamborn Wilson Works The Illuminatus! Trilogy Schrödinger's Cat Trilogy Principia Discordia Book of the SubGenius Temporary Autonomous Zone No Logo Steal This Book Events Notre-Dame Affair (1950) Saint Stupid's Day Parade (late 1970s) Burning Man (1986) Max Headroom signal hijacking (1987) Grunge speak (1992) K Foundation (1993) SantaCon (1994) Portland Urban Iditarod (2001) Pillow fight flash mob (2008) Related Anti-consumerism Artivist Critique of work List of culture jamming organizations and people Performance art Street art Subculture Surreal humour Operation Mindfuck v t e Guerrilla theatre and derivations Derivations Guerrilla theatre (1965) Semiological guerrilla (1967) Spaßguerilla (1967) Guerrilla television (1971) Invisible theater (1974) Guerrilla marketing (1984) Culture jamming (1985) Tactical media (1996) Flash mob (2003) Groups San Francisco Mime Troupe (1959) Diggers (1966) Yippies (1967) Precursors Theatre of Situations (1947) Situationist prank (1958) Theoreticians Edward Bernays (1891–1995) Jean-Paul Sartre (1905–1980) Guy Debord (1931–1994) Umberto Eco (1932–2016) Jay Conrad Levinson (1933–) Abbie Hoffman (1936–1989) Peter Coyote (1941–) Emmett Grogan (1943–1978) Jerry Rubin (1938–1994) Paul Ryan (1943–) Michael Shamberg (1945–) Mark Dery (1959–) v t e Media culture Media 24-hour news cycle Alternative media Digital media Electronic media Independent media Lost media Mass media Mainstream media Media economics Mobile media New media News broadcasting News media Old media Physical media Social media Influencers State media Streaming media Principles Media development Media policy Media independence Freedom of information Freedom of speech Media pluralism Media transparency Marketplace of ideas Ideology Advanced capitalism American Dream Bipartisanship Consumerism Pensée unique Deception Forms Advertising Propaganda Fake news Public relations Spin Tabloid journalism Techniques Cult of personality Dumbing down Framing Media circus Media event Narcotizing dysfunction Recuperation Sensationalism Viral phenomenon Others Catch and kill Crowd manipulation Managing the news Media manipulation Philosophers Theodor W. Adorno Jean Baudrillard Edward Bernays Noam Chomsky Guy Debord Walter Lippmann Marshall McLuhan Jacques Rancière Counterculture Boycott Call-out culture Cancel culture Civil disobedience Culture jamming Demonstration Graffiti Occupation Political satire Protest Punk Review bomb Strike action In academia Influence of mass media Media studies Mediatization Semiotic democracy The Lonely Crowd Issues Agenda-setting theory Anonymity Concentration of media ownership Exploitation of women Freedom of speech Media bias Privacy Social influence Transparency Violence Synonyms Advanced capitalism Culture industry Mass society Media franchise Post-Fordism Society of the Spectacle v t e Media manipulation Context Bias Crowd psychology Deception Dumbing down False balance Half-truths Media Obfuscation Persuasion Manipulation (psychology) Activism Advocacy group Alternative media Boycott Call-out culture Cancel culture Civil disobedience Culture jamming Demonstrations Deplatforming Grassroots Guerrilla communication Hacktivism Internet Media Occupations Petitions Protests Youth Advertising Advertorial / Native advertising Billboards False Infomercials Mobiles Modeling Radio Sex Slogans Testimonials TV Criticism of advertising Annoyance factor Censorship and mass media regulation Books Broadcast law Burying of scholars Catch and kill Corporate Cover-ups Euphemism Films Historical negationism Internet Political Religious Self Hoaxing Alternative facts April Fools' Deepfake audio Fake news websites Fakelore Fictitious entries Firehose of falsehood Forgery Gaslighting List Literary Lying press Photograph manipulation Racial Urban legend Virus Video manipulation Marketing Branding Loyalty Product Product placement Publicity Research Word of mouth News media Agenda-setting Broadcasting Circus Cycle Emotive conjugation False balance Infotainment Managing Narcotizing dysfunction Newspeak Pseudo-event Scrum Sensationalism Tabloid journalism Political campaigning Advertising Astroturfing Attack ad Canvassing Character assassination Dog whistle Election promises Lawn signs Party platforms (or manifestos) Name recognition Negative Push polling Smear campaign Wedge issue Propaganda Bandwagon Big lie Crowd manipulation Disinformation Fearmongering Framing Indoctrination Loaded language National mythology Rally 'round the flag effect Techniques Psychological warfare Airborne leaflets False flag Fifth column Information (IT) Lawfare Political Public diplomacy Sedition Subversion Public relations Cult of personality Doublespeak Non-apology apology Reputation management Slogans Sound bites Spin Transfer Understatement Weasel words Corporate propaganda Sales Cold calling Door-to-door Pricing Product demonstrations Promotion Spaving Promotional merchandise Telemarketing Related Influence-for-hire Media bias United States Media concentration Media democracy Media ecology Media ethics Media franchise Media influence Media proprietor v t e Street art Culture Activism Aerosol paint Culture jamming Direct action Graffiti ( terminology ) Handstyle Hip hop culture Installation art Propaganda Screenprinting Spray paint art Subway Art Types Guerrilla art Moss graffiti Mural Pieces Poster Reverse graffiti Rock balancing Stencil graffiti Sticker art Tagging Throw ups Yarn bombing Wheatpaste Wildstyle Lists of artists Street Graffiti Stencil Photographers Henry Chalfant Martha Cooper Places Adelaide Atlanta Berlin (Berlin Wall) Brazil ( Southeastern Brazil ( pichação ) , São Paulo (Beco do Batman) ) Hong Kong (Free Ai Weiwei campaign) Kyiv Northern Ireland Melbourne New York City ( 5 Pointz ) Philadelphia San Francisco ( Balmy Alley , Clarion Alley ) Sarajevo Sydney (Newtown area) Tehran Toronto Palestine (West Bank Wall) Events Beton Fest The Cans Festival Living Walls See No Evil Pasadena Chalk Festival Sarajevo Street Art Festival Sarasota Chalk Festival Related Built environment Public art Public space Psychogeography Street party Urban planning Visual arts Vandalism Category: Street art v t e Conformity Enforcement Proscription Damnatio memoriae Dissident / Dissenter Exile Émigré Homo sacer Ostracism Blacklisting Cancel culture Censorship Deplatforming Outcast Outlaw Civil death Vogelfrei Persona non grata Public enemy Enemy of the people Enemy of the state Scapegoating Shunning Governmental pressure Authoritarianism Harmonisation of law Nationalism Left-wing nationalism National conservatism Totalitarianism Tyranny of the majority Group pressure Bandwagon effect Brainwashing Closure (sociology) Collectivism Consensus reality Culture shock Dogma Echo chamber False consensus effect Fear of missing out Groupthink Hazing Herd mentality Identification (psychology) Indoctrination Invented tradition Memory conformity Mere-exposure effect Milieu control Mobbing Normalization Normative social influence Passing (sociology) Patriotism Peer pressure Pluralistic ignorance Propaganda Psychosocial issue Purity spiral Operant conditioning Rally 'round the flag effect Social construction of gender Social contagion Addiction Behavioral Crime Hysterical Suicide Emotional Social influence Social integration Socialization Spiral of silence Teasing Toxic positivity Untouchability Individual pressure Authoritarian personality Authoritarian leadership style Right-wing authoritarianism Control freak Obsessive–compulsive personality disorder Conformity Compliance Communal reinforcement Countersignaling Creeping normality Herd behavior Internalization Normalization of deviance Obedience Preference falsification Social proof Social reality Experiments Asch conformity experiments Breaching experiment Milgram experiment Stanford prison experiment Anticonformity Alternative media Anti-authoritarianism Anti-social behaviour Self-segregation Civil disobedience Cosmopolitanism Counterculture Culture jamming Deviance Devil's advocate Dissent / Defection Political Eccentricity Eclecticism Hermit Idiosyncrasy Individualism Insubordination Pueblo clown Rebellion Red team Satire Shock value Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Culture_jamming&oldid=1306329760 " Categories : Culture jamming Cultural activism Underground culture Anti-corporate activism Practical jokes 1980s neologisms Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia articles that are too technical from April 2020 All articles that are too technical Wikipedia articles with style issues from November 2020 All articles with style issues Wikipedia neutral point of view disputes from September 2024 All Wikipedia neutral point of view disputes Articles with multiple maintenance issues All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2011 Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 17 August 2025, at 05:20 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Culture jamming 20 languages Add topic

