Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Beliefs 2 Twelve agamas (angas) 3 The Śvētāmbara Siddhāntha Toggle The Śvētāmbara Siddhāntha subsection 3.1 List of works 3.1.1 Miscellaneous collections 4 The Digambara Siddhāntha 5 Post-Canonical literature Toggle Post-Canonical literature subsection 5.1 Doctrinal and philosophical works 5.2 Grammar 5.3 Narrative literature and poetry 6 Mathematics 7 Languages 8 Grammatical literature 9 Influence on Indian literature 10 List of Jain texts Toggle List of Jain texts subsection 10.1 Digambara texts 10.2 Shvetambara texts 10.2.1 Agamas 10.2.1.1 11 Angā Agamas 10.2.1.2 34 Anga Bahya Agamas 10.2.2 Major scriptures by acharyas 10.3 Others 10.4 Texts claimed by both the sects 10.5 Other texts 11 See also 12 References Toggle References subsection 12.1 Citations 12.2 Sources 13 Further reading Toggle Further reading subsection 13.1 Jain texts 14 External links Toggle the table of contents Jain literature 10 languages অসমীয়া বাংলা فارسی हिन्दी नेपाली नेपाल भाषा ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی संस्कृतम् اردو Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Jain Agamas (Śvētāmbara) ) Texts related to the religion of Jainism "Aagam" redirects here. For the 2016 Tamil-language film, see Aagam (film) .

Part of a series on Jainism Jains History Timeline Index Philosophy Anekantavada Cosmology Ahimsa Karma Dharma Mokṣa Kevala Jnana Dravya Tattva Brahmacarya Aparigraha Gunasthana Saṃsāra Ethics Ethics of Jainism Mahavratas (major vows) Ahiṃsā (non-violence) Satya (truth) Asteya (non-stealing) Brahmacarya (chastity) Aparigraha (non-possession) Anuvratas (further vows) Sāmāyika Sallekhana Jain prayers Bhaktamara Stotra Micchami Dukkadam Navkar Mantra Ṇamōkāra mantra Jai Jinendra Major figures The 24 Tirthankaras Rishabha Pārśva Mahavira Arihant Ganadhara Kundakunda Siddhasenadivākarasuri Samantabhadra Haribhadra Yashovijaya Major sects Schools and Branches Digambara Śvetāmbara Jain literature Samayasāra (Digambara) Pravachanasara (Digambara) Agama (Śvetāmbara) Tattvartha Sutra Dravyasamgraha (Digambara) Kalpa Sūtra (Śvetāmbara) Uttaradhyayana (Śvetāmbara) Cīvaka Cintāmaṇi Silappatikaram Valayapathi Festivals Diwali Mahavir Janma Kalyanak Paryushana Samvatsari Pilgrimages Tirth Abu Palitana Girnar Shikharji Shravanabelagola Other Ekendriya Temples Jain flag Jain symbols Parasparopagraho Jivanam Topics list Religion portal v t e A 12th-century manuscript of Hemachandra 's Yogaśāstra in Sanskrit. The text is notable for using 1 mm miniaturized Devanagari script.

Jain literature ( Sanskrit : जैन साहित्य ) refers to the literature of the Jain religion . It is a vast and ancient literary tradition, which was initially transmitted orally. The oldest surviving material is contained in the canonical Jain Agamas , which are written in Ardhamagadhi , a Prakrit ( Middle-Indo Aryan ) language. Various commentaries were written on these canonical texts by later Jain monks . Later works were also written in other languages, like Sanskrit and Maharashtri Prakrit .

Jain literature is primarily divided between the canons of the Digambara and Śvētāmbara orders. These two main sects of Jainism do not always agree on which texts should be considered authoritative.

More recent Jain literature has also been written in other languages, like Marathi , Tamil , Rajasthani , Dhundari , Marwari , Hindi , Gujarati , Kannada , Malayalam and more recently in English .

Beliefs [ edit ] Jains believe their religion is eternal, and the teachings of the first tīrthaṅkara , Ṛṣabhanātha , existed millions of years ago.

[ 1 ] It states that the tīrthaṅkaras taught in divine preaching halls called samavasarana and were heard by gods, ascetics, and laypersons. These divine discourses were called śrutajñāna or empirical knowledge. They comprised eleven angas and fourteen purvas , [ 2 ] The discourses are remembered and transmitted by the ganadharas or chief disciples, and is composed of twelve anga s (parts, limbs). It is symbolically represented by a tree with twelve branches.

[ 3 ] The spoken scriptural language is believed to be Magadhi Prakrit by Śvetāmbara Jains, and a form of divine sound or sonic resonance by Digambaras .

[ 4 ] According to the Jain tradition, the divine śrutajñāna or empirical knowledge of a tīrthaṅkara is then converted into a sutta or scripture by disciples, and from such suttas emerge the formal canons.

[ 5 ] The suttas are grouped into "twelve-limbed baskets," which are transmitted orally by the disciples.

[ 4 ] In every universal cycle of Jain cosmology , twenty-four tīrthaṅkaras appear, and so do the Jain scriptures for that cycle.

[ 1 ] [ 4 ] Twelve agamas (angas) [ edit ] Stela depicting Śhrut Jnāna , "the knowledge which is heard" (directly from the omniscient fordmakers) Initially, the canonical scriptures were transmitted through an oral tradition and consisted of teachings of historical Jain leaders like Mahavira codified into various collections.

[ 6 ] Gautama and other Gandhars (the chief disciples of Mahavira) are said to have compiled the original sacred scriptures which were divided into twelve Angas or parts. They are referred to as the eleven Angas and the fourteen Pūrvas , since the twelfth Anga comprises fourteen Pūrvas . These scriptures are said to have contained the most comprehensive and accurate description of every branch of Jain learning.

[ 7 ] The Jain Agamas and their commentaries were composed mainly in Ardhamagadhi Prakrit as well as in Maharashtri Prakrit .

[ 8 ] While some authors date the composition of the Jain Agamas starting from the 6th century BCE, [ 9 ] some western scholars, such as Ian Whicher and David Carpenter, argue that the earliest portions of Jain canonical works were composed around the 4th or 3rd century BCE.

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] According to Johannes Bronkhorst it is extremely difficult to determine the age of the Jain Agamas, however: Mainly on linguistic grounds, it has been argued that the Ācārāṅga Sūtra , the Sūtrakṛtāṅga Sūtra , and the Uttarādhyayana Sūtra are among the oldest texts in the canon.

[ 12 ] Elsewhere, Bronkhorst states that the Sūtrakṛtāṅga "dates from the 2nd century BCE at the very earliest," based on how it references the Buddhist theory of momentariness, which is a later scholastic development.

[ 12 ] During the reign of Chandragupta Maurya ( c.

324 or 321 – c. 297 BCE), Āchārya Bhadrabahu ( c.

367 – c.

298 BCE ), said to have been the last knower of the complete Jain agamas , was the head of Jain community . At this time, a long famine caused a crisis in the community, who found it difficult to keep the entire Jain canon committed to memory. The famine decimated the Jain community, leading to the loss of many canonical texts. According to Śvētāmbara ("white-clad") tradition, the āgamas were collected on the basis of the collective memory of the ascetics in the first council of Pataliputra under the leadership of Sthulabhadra in around to 463–367 BCE. During the council, scriptures called Angas were compiled, [ 13 ] but the twelfth aṅga Dṛṣṭivāda was completely forgotten by the monks who attended the council. Bhadrabāhu, the only knower of 12th aṅga and who was practicing Mahāprāṇa at Nepal, agreed to the request of saṃgha to teach Dṛṣṭivāda.

[ 14 ] Sthulabhadra was the only monk among the five hundred who completed learning the canonical text leading to compilation of twelve aṅgas.

[ 15 ] Another council was later organised in 2nd-century BCE in Udayagiri and Khandagiri Caves , Kalinga (now in Odisha ) during the reign of Kharavela .

[ 16 ] The Śvētāmbara order considers these Jain Agamas as canonical works and sees them as being based on an authentic oral tradition.

[ 4 ] [ 17 ] They consider their collection to represent a continuous tradition, though they accept that their collection is also incomplete because of a lost Anga text and four lost Purva texts.

[ 17 ] However, these texts were rejected by the Digambara (lit. "sky-clad", i.e. naked) order, which hold that Āchārya Bhutabali (1st century CE) was the last ascetic who had partial knowledge of the original canon. According to Digambaras, the Purvas and the original Agamas of Gautama were lost during the Mauryan period crisis and famine.

[ 18 ] This Digambara stance on the loss of the Agamas is one of the disagreements that led to the main schism in Jainism. Digambara masters proceeded to create new scriptures which contained the knowledge of the doctrine that had survived in their community.

[ 19 ] [ 20 ] [ 21 ] As such, Digambaras have a different set of canonical scriptures. According to von Glasenapp, the Digambara texts partially agree with the enumerations and works of older Śvētāmbara texts, but in many cases there are also major differences between the texts of the two major Jain traditions.

[ 22 ] The Śvētāmbara Siddhāntha [ edit ] [Top illustration] Mahavira attains kevala jñāna (complete knowledge) ; [Bottom] a samosarana (divine preaching hall). Folio 60 from Kalpasutra series, loose leaf manuscript, Patan, Gujarat.

c.

1472 .

The Suryaprajnaptisūtra , a 4th or 3rd century BCE Śvētāmbara astronomical and mathematical text.

[ 23 ] The top illustration depicts Mahavira, while the bottom one illustrates his great disciple Gautama .

In 453 or 466 CE, the Śvētāmbara order held another council at Vallabhi . The Śvētāmbaras recompiled the Agamas and recorded them as written manuscripts under the leadership of Acharya Shraman Devardhigani along with other 500 Jain scholars. The existing Śvētāmbara canons are based on the Vallabhi council texts.

[ 16 ] [ 24 ] [ 25 ] From the 15th century onwards, various Śvetāmbara subsects began to disagree on the composition of the canon.

Mūrtipūjaks ("idol-worshippers") accept 45 texts, while the Sthānakavāsins and Terāpanthins only accept 32.

[ 26 ] List of works [ edit ] The canons ( Siddhāntha ) of the Śvētāmbaras are generally composed of the following texts: [ 24 ] [ 27 ] Twelve Angās (limbs) Āyāraṃga ( Jain Prakrit ; Sanskrit: Ācāranga , meaning: 'On monastic conduct') Sūyagaḍa ( Sūtrakṛtāṅga , 'On heretical systems and views') Ṭhāṇaṃga ( Sthānāṅga , 'On different points [of the teaching]') Samavāyaṃga ( Samavāyāṅga , 'On "rising numerical groups"') Viyāha-pannatti / Bhagavaī ( Vyākhyā-prajñapti or Bhagavatī , 'Exposition of explanations' or 'the holy one') Nāyā-dhamma-kahāo ( Jñāta-dharmakathānga , 'Parables and religious stories') Uvāsaga-dasāo ( Upāsaka-daśāḥ ,'Ten chapters on the Jain lay follower') Aṇuttarovavāiya-dasāo ( Antakṛd-daśāḥ , 'Ten chapters on those who put an end to rebirth in this very life') Anuttaraupapātikadaśāh ( Anuttaropapātika-daśāḥ , 'Ten chapters on those who were reborn in the uppermost heavens') Paṇha-vāgaraṇa ( Praśna-vyākaraṇa , 'Questions and explanations') Vivāga-suya ( Vipākaśruta ,'Bad or good results of deeds performed') Diṭhīvāya ( Dṛṣṭivāda ) - this text was lost after 1000 years of Mahavira .

[ 28 ] Twelve Upāṅgas (auxiliary limbs) Uvavāiya-sutta (Sanskrit: Aupapātika-sūtra ,'Places of rebirth') Rāya-paseṇaijja or Rāyapaseṇiya ( Rāja-praśnīya , 'Questions of the king') Jīvājīvābhigama ( Jīvājīvābhigama , 'Classification of animate and inanimate entities') Pannavaṇā ( Prajñāpanā , 'Enunciation on topics of philosophy and ethics') Sūriya-pannatti ( Sūrya-prajñapti , 'Exposition on the sun') Jambūdvīpa-pannatti ( Jambūdvīpa-prajñapti , 'Exposition on the Jambū continent and the Jain universe') Canda-pannatti ( Candra-prajñapti , 'Exposition on the moon and the Jain universe') Nirayāvaliyāo or Kappiya ( Narakāvalikā , 'Series of stories on characters reborn in hells') Kappāvaḍaṃsiāo ( Kalpāvataṃsikāḥ , 'Series of stories on characters reborn in the kalpa heavens') Pupphiāo ( Puṣpikāḥ , 'Flowers' refers to one of the stories') Puppha-cūliāo ( Puṣpa-cūlikāḥ , 'The nun Puṣpacūlā') Vaṇhi-dasāo ( Vṛṣṇi-daśāh , 'Stories on characters from the legendary dynasty known as Andhaka-Vṛṣṇi') Six Chedasūtras (Texts relating to the conduct and behaviour of monks and nuns) Āyāra-dasāo (Sanskrit: Ācāradaśāh , 'Ten [chapters] about monastic conduct', chapter 8 is the famed Kalpa-sūtra .) Bihā Kappa ( Bṛhat Kalpa , '[Great] Religious code') Vavahāra (Vyavahāra, 'Procedure') Nisīha (Niśītha, 'Interdictions') Jīya-kappa ( Jīta-kalpa , Customary rules), only accepted as canonical by Mūrti-pūjaks Mahā-nisīha ( Mahā-niśītha , Large Niśītha), only accepted as canonical by Mūrti-pūjaks Four Mūlasūtras ('Fundamental texts' which are foundational works studied by new monastics) Dasaveyāliya-sutta (Sanskrit: Daśavaikālika-sūtra ), this is memorized by all new Jain mendicants Uttarajjhayaṇa-sutta ( Uttarādhyayana-sūtra ) Āvassaya-sutta ( Āvaśyaka-sūtra ) Piṇḍa-nijjutti and Ogha-nijjutti ( Piṇḍa-niryukti and Ogha-niryukti ), only accepted as canonical by Mūrti-pūjaks Two Cūlikasūtras ("appendixes") Nandī-sūtra – discusses the five types of knowledge Anuyogadvāra-sūtra – a technical treatise on analytical methods, discusses Anekantavada Miscellaneous collections [ edit ] To reach the number 45, Mūrtipūjak Śvētāmbara canons contain a "Miscellaneous" collection of supplementary texts, called the Paiṇṇaya suttas (Sanskrit: Prakīrnaka sūtras , "Miscellaneous"). This section varies in number depending on the individual sub-sect (from 10 texts to over 20). They also often included extra works (often of disputed authorship) named "supernumerary Prakīrṇakas".

[ 29 ] The Paiṇṇaya texts are generally not considered to have the same kind of authority as the other works in the canon. Most of these works are in Jaina Māhārāṣṭrī Prakrit, unlike the other Śvetāmbara scriptures which tend to be in Ardhamāgadhī. They are therefore most likely later works than the Aṅgas and Upāṅgas.

[ 29 ] Mūrtipūjak Jain canons will generally accept 10 Paiṇṇayas as canonical, but there is widespread disagreement on which 10 scriptures are given canonical status. The most widely accepted list of ten scriptures are the following: [ 29 ] Cau-saraṇa (Sanskrit: Catuḥśaraṇa , The 'four refuges') Āura-paccakkhāṇa ( Ātura-pratyākhyāna , 'Sick man's renunciation') Bhatta-parinnā ( Bhakta-parijñā , 'Renunciation of food') Saṃthāraga ( Saṃstāraka , 'Straw bed') Tandula-veyāliya ( Taṇḍula-vaicārika , 'Reflection on rice grains') Canda-vejjhaya ( Candravedhyaka , 'Hitting the mark') Devinda-tthaya ( Devendra-stava , 'Praise of the kings of gods') Gaṇi-vijjā ( Gaṇi-vidyā , 'A Gaṇi's knowledge') Mahā-paccakkhāṇa ( Mahā-pratyākhyāna , 'Great renunciation') Vīra-tthava ( Vīra-stava , 'Great renunciation') The Digambara Siddhāntha [ edit ] Āchārya Pushpadanta, depicted writing down the Ṣaṭkhaṅḍāgama Āchārya Kundakunda , one of the most important Digambara philosophers According to the Digambara tradition, the original scriptures had been lost by about the 2nd century CE.

[ 30 ] Āchārya Bhutabali is considered the last ascetic who had some partial knowledge of the original canon.

[ 31 ] Digambara tradition holds that Āchārya Dharasena (1st century CE), guided Āchārya Pushpadanta and Āchārya Bhutabali to write what remained of the lost teachings down into palm-leaf scriptures. These two Āchāryas wrote the Ṣaṭkhaṅḍāgama (Six Part Scripture), which is held to be one of the oldest Digambara texts. They are dated to between the 2nd to 3rd century CE.

[ 30 ] Around the same time, Āchārya Gunadhar wrote Kaşāyapāhuda (Treatise on the Passions).

[ 31 ] [ 32 ] These two texts are the two main Digambara Agamas.

[ 32 ] The Digambara canon of scriptures includes these two main texts, three commentaries on the main texts, and four (later) Anuyogas (expositions), consisting of more than 20 texts.

[ 33 ] [ 34 ] The great commentator Virasena wrote two commentary texts on the Ṣaṭkhaṅḍāgama , the Dhaval‑tika on the first five volumes and Maha‑dhaval‑tika on the sixth volume of the Ṣaṭkhaṅḍāgama , around 780 CE.

Virasena and his disciple, Jinasena , also wrote a commentary on the Kaşāyapāhuda , known as Jaya‑dhavala‑tika .

[ 32 ] There is no agreement on the canonical Anuyogas ("Expositions"). The Anuyogas were written between the 2nd and the 11th centuries CE , either in Jaina Śaurasenī Prakrit or in Sanskrit .

[ 30 ] The expositions ( Anuyogas ) are divided into four literary categories: [ 33 ] The 'first' ( Prathamānuyoga ) category contains various works such as Jain versions of the Rāmāyaṇa (like the 7th-century Padma-purāṇa by Raviṣeṇa ) and Mahābhārata (like Jinasena's 8th century Harivaṃśa-purāṇa ), as well as 'Jain universal histories' (like Jinasena's 8th-century Ādi-purāṇa ).

The 'calculation' ( Karaṇānuyoga ) expositions are mainly works on Jain cosmology (such as Tiloya-paṇṇatti of Yati Vṛṣabha, dating from the 6th to 7th century) and karma (for example, Nemicandra's Gommaṭa-sāra ). The Gommatsāra of Nemichandra ( fl.

10th century) is one of the most important Digambara works and provides a detailed summary of Digambara doctrine.

[ 35 ] The 'behaviour' ( Caraṇānuyoga ) expositions are texts about proper behaviour, such as Vaṭṭakera's Mūlācāra (on monastic conduct, 2nd century) and the Ratnakaraṇḍaka-Śrāvakācāra by Samantabhadra (5th-century) which focuses on the ethics of a layperson.

[ 36 ] Works in this category also treat the purity of the soul, such as the work of Kundakunda like the Samaya-sāra , the Pancastikayasara , and Niyamasara .

These works by Kundakunda (2nd century CE or later) are highly revered and have been historically influential.

[ 37 ] [ 38 ] [ 39 ] The 'substance' ( Dravyānuyoga ) exposition includes texts about ontology of the universe and self.

Umāsvāmin's comprehensive Tattvārtha-sūtra is the standard work on ontology and Pūjyapāda's (464–524 CE) Sarvārthasiddhi is one of the most influential Digambara commentaries on the Tattvārtha . This collection also includes various works on epistemology and reasoning, such as Samantabhadra's Āpta-mīmāṃsā and the works of Akalaṅka (720–780 CE), such as his commentary on the Apta-mīmāṃsā and his Nyāya-viniścaya.

Post-Canonical literature [ edit ] The Tattvārthsūtra is regarded as the most authoritative book on Jainism, and the only text authoritative in both the Svetambara and Digambara sects Bust of Hemachandra at Hemchandracharya North Gujarat University Doctrinal and philosophical works [ edit ] There are various later Jain works that are considered post-canonical, that is to say, they were written after the closure of the Jain canons, though the different canons were closed at different historical eras, and so this category is ambiguous.

Thus, Umasvāti 's (c. between 2nd-century and 5th-century CE) Tattvarthasūtra ("On the Nature of Reality") is included in the Digambara canon, but not in the Śvētāmbara canons (though they do consider the work authoritative). Indeed, the Tattvarthasūtra is considered the authoritative Jain philosophy text by all traditions of Jainism.

[ 40 ] [ 41 ] [ 42 ] It has the same importance in Jainism as Vedanta Sūtras and Yogasūtras have in Hinduism .

[ 40 ] [ 43 ] [ 44 ] Other non-canonical works include various texts attributed to Bhadrabahu ( c.

300 BCE ) which are called the Niryuktis and Samhitas .

According to Winternitz, after the 8th century or so, Svetambara Jain writers, who had previously worked in Prakrit, began to use Sanskrit. The Digambaras also adopted Sanskrit somewhat earlier.

[ 8 ] The earliest Jain works in Sanskrit include the writings of Siddhasēna Divākara ( c.

650 CE ), who wrote the Sanmatitarka ('The Logic of the True Doctrine') is the first major Jain work on logic written in Sanskrit .

[ 45 ] Other later works and writers include: Jinabhadra (6th–7th century) – author of Avasyaksutra (Jain tenets) Visesanavati and Visesavasyakabhasya (Commentary on Jain essentials).

Mallavadin (8th century) – author of Nayacakra and Dvadasaranayacakra (Encyclopedia of Philosophy) which discusses the schools of Indian philosophy .

[ 46 ] Haribhadra-s ūri (c 8th century) is an important Svetambara scholar who wrote commentaries on the Agamas. He also wrote the Yogadṛṣṭisamuccaya , a key Jain text on Yoga which compares the Yoga systems of Buddhists, Hindus and Jains. Gunaratna ( c.

1400 CE ) wrote a commentary on Haribhadra's work.

Prabhacandra (8th–9th century) – Jain philosopher, composed a 106-Sutra Tattvarthasutra and exhaustive commentaries on two key works on Jain Nyaya, Prameyakamalamartanda , based on Manikyanandi's Parikshamukham and Nyayakumudacandra on Akalanka's Laghiyastraya .

Abhayadeva (1057–1135 CE) –  author of Vadamahrnava (Ocean of Discussions) which is a 2,500 verse tika (Commentary) of Sanmartika and a great treatise on logic.

[ 46 ] Hemachandra ( c.

1088 – c.

1172 CE ) wrote the Yogaśāstra , a textbook on yoga and Adhyatma Upanishad . His minor work Anyayogavyvaccheda gives outlines of the Jaina doctrine in form of hymns. This was later detailed by Mallisena ( c.

1292 CE ) in his work Syadavadamanjari .

Vadideva (11th century) – He was a senior contemporary of Hemacandra and is said to have authored Paramananayatattavalokalankara and its voluminous commentary syadvadaratnakara that establishes the supremacy of doctrine of Syādvāda .

There are also other important commentators on the Agamas, including Abhayadeva-sūri ( c.

11th century ) and Malayagiri (c. the 12th century).

Vidyanandi (11th century) – Jain philosopher, composed the brilliant commentary on Acarya Umasvami's Tattvarthasutra, known as Tattvarthashlokavartika .

Devendrasuri wrote the Karmagrantha which is an exposition of the Jain theory of Karma .

Yaśovijaya (1624–1688) was a Jain scholar of Navya-Nyāya and wrote Vrttis (commentaries) on most of the earlier Jain Nyāya works by Samantabhadra, Akalanka, Manikyanandi, Vidyānandi, Prabhācandra and others in the then-prevalent Navya-Nyāya style. Yaśovijaya has to his credit a prolific literary output – more than 100 books in Sanskrit , Prakrit , Gujarati and Rajasthani . He is also famous for Jnanasara (essence of knowledge) and Adhayatmasara (essence of spirituality).

The Lokaprakasa of Vinayavijaya was written in the 17th century CE.

Srivarddhaeva (aka Tumbuluracarya) wrote a Kannada commentary on Tattvarthadigama-sutra .

Atmasiddhi Shastra is a spiritual treatise in verse, composed in Gujarati by the nineteenth century Jain saint, philosopher poet Shrimad Rajchandraji (1867–1901) which comprises 142 verses explaining the fundamental philosophical truths about the soul and its liberation . It propounds six fundamental truth on soul which are also known as Satapada (six steps).

The Saman Suttam is a compilation of ancient texts and doctrines recognised by all Jain sects, assembled primarily by Jinendra Varni and then examined and approved by monks of different sects and other scholars in 1974.

Grammar [ edit ] Jainendra Vyākaraṇa of Acharya Pujyapada and Śākaṭāyana-vyākaraṇa of Śākaṭāyana (also called Pālyakīrti) [ 47 ] are both works on grammar written in c.

9th century CE .

[ 48 ] Pañcagranthi by Ācārya Buddhisāgarasūri (10th century) in poetic form , complemented with auto-commentary.

[ 49 ] Siddha-Hema-Śabdānuśāsana by Acharya Hemachandra ( c.

12th century CE ) is considered by F. Kielhorn as the best grammar work of the Indian middle ages.

[ 50 ] Hemacandra's book Kumarapalacaritra is also noteworthy.

[ 51 ] [ 52 ] Malayagiri, a contemporary to Hemachandra , also authored a Śabdānuśāsana, accompanied with an auto-commentary.

[ 47 ] Narrative literature and poetry [ edit ] Jaina narrative literature mainly contains stories about sixty-three prominent figures known as Salakapurusa , and people who were related to them. Some of the important works are Harivamshapurana of Jinasena ( c.

8th century CE ), Vikramarjuna-Vijaya (also known as Pampa-Bharata) of Kannada poet named Adi Pampa ( c.

10th century CE ), Pandavapurana of Shubhachandra ( c.

16th century CE ).

Mathematics [ edit ] Jain literature covered multiple topics of mathematics around 150 CE including the theory of numbers, arithmetical operations, geometry, operations with fractions, simple equations, cubic equations, bi-quadric equations, permutations, combinations and logarithms.

[ 53 ] Languages [ edit ] Jains literature exists mainly in Jain Prakrit , Sanskrit , Marathi , Tamil , Rajasthani , Dhundari , Marwari , Hindi , Gujarati , Kannada , Malayalam , Telugu [ 54 ] and more recently in English .

[ 55 ] Jains have contributed to India's classical and popular literature . For example, almost all early Kannada literature and many Tamil works were written by Jains. Some of the oldest known books in Hindi and Gujarati were written by Jain scholars.

[ citation needed ] The first autobiography in the ancestor of Hindi, Braj Bhasha , is called Ardhakathānaka and was written by a Jain, Banarasidasa , an ardent follower of Acarya Kundakunda who lived in Agra . Many Tamil classics are written by Jains or with Jain beliefs and values as the core subject. Practically all the known texts in the Apabhramsha language are Jain works.

[ citation needed ] The oldest Jain literature is in Ardhamagadhi Prakrit [ 56 ] and the Jain Prakrit (the Jain Agamas , Agama-Tulya, the Siddhanta texts, etc.). Many classical texts are in Sanskrit (Tattvartha Sutra, Puranas , Kosh, Sravakacara, mathematics, Nighantus etc.). "Abhidhana Rajendra Kosha" written by Acharya Rajendrasuri , is only one available Jain encyclodaedic dictionary to understand the technical Jain terms in Ardhamagadhi Prakrit and other languages, with specific reference to Jain literature.

[ citation needed ] Jain literature was written in Apabhraṃśa (Kahas, rasas, and grammars), Standard Hindi (Chhahadhala, Moksh Marg Prakashak , and others), Tamil ( Nālaṭiyār , Civaka Cintamani , Valayapathi , and others), and Kannada ( Vaddaradhane and various other texts). Jain versions of the Ramayana and Mahabharata are found in Sanskrit, the Prakrits, Apabhraṃśa and Kannada.

[ citation needed ] Jain Prakrit is a term loosely used for the language of the Jain Agamas (canonical texts). The books of Jainism were written in the popular vernacular dialects (as opposed to Sanskrit ), and therefore encompass a number of related dialects. Chief among these is Ardha Magadhi , which due to its extensive use has also come to be identified as the definitive form of Prakrit . Other dialects include versions of Maharashtri and Sauraseni .

[ 24 ] Grammatical literature [ edit ] Palm leaf manuscript of Tolkappiyam Tamil grammar is extensively described in the oldest available grammar book for Tamil, the Tolkāppiyam (dated between 300 BCE and 300 CE) whose author was a Jain.

[ 57 ] S. Vaiyapuri Pillai suggests that Tolkappiyar was a Jain scholar well-versed in the Aintiram grammatical system and posits a later date, placing him in southern Kerala around the 5th century CE. Notably, Tolkappiyam incorporates several Sanskrit and Prakrit loanwords, reflecting its historical and linguistic context.

[ 58 ] Another grammatical text Naṉṉūl (Tamil: நன்னூல்) is a work on Tamil grammar written by a Jain ascetic Pavananthi Munivar around 13th century CE. It is the most significant work on Tamil grammar after Tolkāppiyam.

[ 59 ] Jain acharya Hemchandra also contributed to grammar. He wrote Siddha-Hema-Śabdanuśāśana , which includes six languages: Sanskrit , the "standard" Prakrit (virtually Mahārāṣṭrī Prākrit ), Śaurasenī , Māgadhī , Paiśācī , the otherwise-unattested Cūlikāpaiśācī and Apabhraṃśa (virtually Gurjar Apabhraṃśa, prevalent in the area of Gujarat and Rajasthan at that time and the precursor of Gujarati language ). He gave a detailed grammar of Apabhraṃśa and also illustrated it with the folk literature of the time for better understanding. It is the only known Apabhraṃśa grammar. He wrote the grammar in the form of rules, with eight adhyayas (chapters) and its auto-commentaries, namely "Tattvaprakāśikā Bṛhadvṛtti" with "Śabdamahārṇava Nyāsa" in one year.

Jayasimha Siddharaja had installed the grammar work in Patan's (historically Aṇahilavāḍa) state library. Many copies were made of it, and many schemes were announced for the study of the grammar. Scholars like Kākala Kāyastha were invited to teach it.

[ 60 ] Moreover, an annual public examination was organized on the day of Jñāna-pañcamī.

[ 61 ] Kielhorn regards this as best grammar of Indian middle ages.

[ 62 ] Hemacandra's grammar text Siddhahemashabdanushasana in Sanskrit The German scholar Georg Buhler wrote, "In grammar, in astronomy as well as in all branches of belles letters the achievements of the Jains have been so great that even their opponents have taken notice of them and that some of their work are of importance for European science even today. In the south where they have worked among the Dravidian peoples, they have also promoted the development of these languages. The Kanarese, Tamil, Telugu literary languages rest on the foundations erected by the Jain monks." [ 63 ] Influence on Indian literature [ edit ] Mangulam inscription dated 3rd century BCE Parts of the Sangam literature in Tamil are attributed to Jains. Tamil Jain texts such as the Cīvaka Cintāmaṇi and Nālaṭiyār are credited to Digambara Jain authors.

[ 64 ] [ 65 ] These texts have seen interpolations and revisions. For example, it is generally accepted now that the Jain nun Kanti inserted a 445-verse poem into Cīvaka Cintāmaṇi in the 12th century.

[ 66 ] [ 67 ] The Tamil Jain literature, according to Dundas, has been "lovingly studied and commented upon for centuries by Hindus as well as Jains".

[ 65 ] The themes of two of the Tamil epics, including the Silapadikkaram , have an embedded influence of Jainism.

[ 65 ] Some scholars believe that the author of the oldest extant work of literature in Tamil (3rd century BCE), Tolkāppiyam , was a Jain.

[ 68 ] S. Vaiyapuri Pillai suggests that Tolkappiyar was a Jain scholar well-versed in the Aintiram grammatical system and posits a later date, placing him in southern Kerala around the 5th century CE. Notably, Tolkappiyam incorporates several Sanskrit and Prakrit loanwords, reflecting its historical and linguistic context.

[ 69 ] A number of Tamil-Brahmi inscriptions have been found in Tamil Nadu that date from the 3rd century BCE. They are regarded to be associated with Jain monks and lay devotees.

[ 70 ] [ 71 ] Some scholars consider the Tirukkural by Valluvar to be the work by a Jain.

[ 72 ] [ 73 ] [ 74 ] It emphatically supports moral vegetarianism (Chapter 26) and states that giving up animal sacrifice is worth more than a thousand offerings in fire (verse 259).

[ 75 ] [ 76 ] Silappatikaram , a major work in Tamil literature, was written by a Samaṇa(jain), Ilango Adigal . It describes the historical events of its time and also of the then-prevailing religions, Jainism,  and Shaivism . The main characters of this work, Kannagi and Kovalan , who have a divine status among Tamils, were Jains.

According to George L. Hart , the legend of the Tamil Sangams or "literary assemblies" was based on the Jain sangham at Madurai : There was a permanent Jaina assembly called a Sangha established about 604 CE in Maturai. It seems likely that this assembly was the model upon which tradition fabricated the cangkam legend." [ 77 ] Jainism began to decline around the 8th century, with many Tamil kings embracing Hindu religions, especially Shaivism . Still, the Chalukya , Pallava and Pandya dynasties embraced Jainism.

Jain scholars also contributed to Kannada literature .

[ 78 ] The Digambara Jain texts in Karnataka are unusual in having been written under the patronage of kings and regional aristocrats. They describe warrior violence and martial valor as equivalent to a "fully committed Jain ascetic", setting aside Jainism's absolute non-violence.

[ 79 ] Jain manuscript libraries called bhandaras inside Jain temples are the oldest surviving in India.

[ 80 ] Jain libraries, including the Śvētāmbara collections at Patan, Gujarat and Jaiselmer, Rajasthan , and the Digambara collections in Karnataka temples, have a large number of well-preserved manuscripts.

[ 80 ] [ 81 ] These include Jain literature and Hindu and Buddhist texts. Almost all have been dated to about, or after, the 11th century CE.

[ 82 ] The largest and most valuable libraries are found in the Thar Desert , hidden in the underground vaults of Jain temples. These collections have witnessed insect damage, and only a small portion have been published and studied by scholars.

[ 82 ] List of Jain texts [ edit ] Digambara texts [ edit ] The Ratna Karanda Sravakachara Shatkhandagama — Acharya Pushpadant, Acharya Bhutabali Samaysar — Acharya Kundkund Niyamasara — Acharya Kundkund Pravachansara — Acharya Kundkund Ashtapahud — Acharya Kundkund Panchastikaya — Acharya Kundkund Rayansara — Acharya Kundkund Dash Bhakti — Acharya Kundkund Varsanuvekkha — Acharya Kundkund Tattvartha Sutra — Acharya Umaswami Aptamimansa — Acharya Samantabhadra Swayambhu Stotra — Acharya Samantabhadra Ratnakaranda Sravakachar — Acharya Samantabhadra Stuti Vidya — Acharya Samantabhadra Yuktyanushasana — Acharya Samantabhadra Tattvasara — Acharya Devsena Aradhana Saar — Acharya Devsen Aalap Paddhati — Acharya Devsen Darshansara — Acharya Devsena Bhavasangrah — Acharya Devsen Laghu Nayachakra — Acharya Devsen Ishtopadesh — Acharya Pujyapad (Devanandi) Samadhi Tantra — Acharya Pujyapada (Devanandi) Sarvarthasiddhi — Acharya Pujyapad (Devanandi) Vaidyaka Shastra — Acharya Pujyapada (Devanandi) Siddhipriya Stotra — Acharya Pujyapad (Devanandi) Jainendra Vyakaran — Acharya Pujyapada (Devanandi) Paramatma Prakash — Acharya Yogindu Dev Yogasara — Acharya Yogindu Dev Naukar Shravakacharya — Acharya Yogindu Dev Tattvartha Tika — Acharya Yogindu Dev Amritashiti — Acharya Yogindu Dev Subhashit Tantra — Acharya Yogindu Dev Adhyatma Sandoha — Acharya Yogindu Dev Sanmati Sutra — Acharya Siddhasena Divakar Kalyan Mandir — Acharya Siddhasen Diwakar Ashtashati — Acharya Akalankadeva Laghiyastraya — Acharya Akalankadeva Nyayavinischaya Savrtti — Acharya Akalankadeva Siddhivinischaya Savrtti — Acharya Akalankadeva Praman Sangrah Savritti — Acharya Akalankdev Tattvartha Rajavartika — Acharya Akalankadeva Harivansh Purana — Acharya Jinsen (first) Adi Purana — Acharya Jinsen Uttarpuran — Acharya Gunbhadra Aatmanushasan — Acharya Gunbhadra Ashtasahastri — Acharya Vidyananda Sloka Vartika — Acharya Vidyananda Aaptpareeksha — Acharya Vidyananda Pramanpareeksha — Acharya Vidyananda Patra Pareeksha — Acharya Vidyanand Kshatriyachudamani — Acharya Vadibhasingh Suri Gadyachintamani — Acharya Vadibhasingh Suri Kartikeya Anupreksha — Acharya Kartikeya Swami Tattvarthasara — Acharya Amritchand PurusharthasiddhiUpaya — Acharya Amritchandra Atmakhyati Tika — Acharya Amritchandra Laghutatvasphot — Acharya Amritchandra Tattvapradipika Tika — Acharya Amritchandra Varang Charitra — Shri Jata Singh Nandi Chandraprabha Charitra — Acharya Veeranandi Kashay Pahud — Acharya Gundhar Gommatasara — Acharya Nemichandra Siddhanta Chakravarti Pashanahchariu — Sage Padmakirti Triloksara — Acharya Nemichandran Siddhant Chakraborty Labdhisar — Acharya Nemichandran Siddhant Chakraborty Kshapanasar — Acharya Nemichandran Siddhant Chakraborty Tiloyapannatti — Acharya Yativrishabha Jambudvipa Pannatti — Acharya Yativrishabha Dhawala Tika — Acharya Veersen Yashstilak Champu — Acharya Somdev Nitivakyamrit — Acharya Somdev Adhyatmatarangini — Acharya Somdev Siddhivinischaya Tika — Brihad Anantavirya Pramanasamgrahabhashya — Brihad Anantavirya Shaktayana Shabdanushasana — Acharya Shaktayana Kevali Bhukti — Acharya Shaktayana Laghu Dravya Sangrah — Acharya Nemichand Vihad Dravya Sangrah — Acharya Nemichandra Prameya-Kamal-Martand — Acharya Prabhachandra Nyay Kumudchandra — Acharya Prabhachandra Tattvartha-vrittipada-vivaranam — Acharya Prabhachandra Shaktayan-Nyas — Acharya Prabhachandra Shabdambhoj Bhaskar — Acharya Prabhachandra Gadyakathakosh — Acharya Prabhachandra Pradyumnacharitra — Acharya Mahasena Bhaktamar Strotra — Acharya Mantung Padmanandi Panchavinshatika — Acharya Padmanandi (II) Mulachara — Swami of Acharya Vattaker Gyanarnav — Shubhachandracharya ji Bhagavati Aradhana — Acharya Shivarya (Shivkoti) Amitgati Sravakacharya — Acharya Amitgati Dharma Pariksha — Acharya Amitgati Subhashit Ratna Sandoh — Acharya Amitgati Tattva Bhavana — Acharya Amitgati Panch Sangrah — Acharya Amitgati Bhavana Dvatrinshatika — Acharya Amitgati Niyamasara Tika — Acharya Padmaprabhamaladharideva Parsvnath Stotra — Acharya Padmaprabhamaladharideva Dharmaamrita — Acharya Nayasena Samayasaratatparyavrttitika — Acharya Jayasena (II) Niyamasaratatparyavrttitika — Acharya Jayasena (II) Panchastikayatatparyavrttitika — Acharya Jayasena (II) Tattvanushasana — Acharya Ramsen Prameyaratnamala — Acharya Laghu Anantavirya Siddhantsaar — Acharya Narendrasen Parīkşāmukha [ 83 ] — Acharya Māņikyanandi Nyayadipika — Acharya Dharmabhushan Yeti Dravya Prakash Nayachakra — Acharya Mayil Dhawal Padma Purana — Acharya Ravishena Mulachara — Swami Acharya Vattaker Ganitasar Sangrah — Acharya Mahavir Shripal Charitra — Acharya Sakalkirti Shantinath Charitra — Acharya Sakalkirti Vardhaman Charitra — Acharya Sakalkirti Mallinath Charitra — Acharya Sakalkirti Yashodhar Charitra — Acharya Sakalkirti Dhanyakumar Charitra — Acharya Sakalkirti Sukmal Charitra — Acharya Sakalkirti Sudarshan Charitra — Acharya Sakalkirti Jambuswamy Charitra — Acharya Sakalkirti Mulachar Pradeep — Acharya Sakalkirti Parsvnath Purana — Acharya Sakalkirti Siddhantasar Deepak — Acharya Sakalkirti Tattvarthasara Deepak — Acharya Sakalkirti Agamasara — Acharya Sakalkirti Meru Mandir Purana — Sri Vamana Muni Ji Praman Granth — Acharya Vajranandi Chaubisi Purana — Acharya Shubhachandra Shrenik Charitra — Acharya Shubhachandra Sri Pandava Purana — Acharya Shubhachandra Sri Shrenik Charitra — Acharya Shubhachandra Chandraprabha Charitra — Acharya Shubhachandra Karakandu Charitra — Acharya Shubhachandra Chandana Charitra — Acharya Shubhchandra Jivandhar Charitr — Acharya Shubhachandra Adhyatmatarangini — Acharya Shubhachandra Prakrit Lakshan — Acharya Shubhachandra Ganitasar Sangrah — Acharya Sridhar Trilokasaratika — Acharya Madhavachand Yogasara Praabhrit — Acharya Amitgati Brihatkathakosha — Acharya Harisena Aradhanasar — Acharya Ravibhadra Acharsar — Acharya Veeranandi Vardhaman Charitra — Acharya Asag Sudansana Chariu — Acharya Nayanandi Ekibhav Stotra — Acharya Vadiraj Puransar collection — Acharya Srichand Vasunandi Sravakacharya — Acharya Vasunandi Bhavana Paddhati — Acharya Padmanandi Angar Dharmaamrita — Pandit Ashadhar Sagar Dharmamrit — Pandit Ashadhar Bharatesh Vaibhav — Mahakavi Ratnakar ji Samaysar Natak — Pandit Banarsidas Brahma Vilas — Bhaiya Bhagwatidas Chhadhala — Pandit Dyantarai Kriya Kosh — Pandit Daulatram (first) Bhav Deepika — Pandit Deepchand Chid Vilas — Pandit Deepchand Parshva Purana — Pandit Bhudhardas Jin Shatak — Pandit Bhudhardas Mokshamarg Prakashak — Pandit Todermal Gommatasara Tika — Pandit Todarmal Labdhisar Tika — Pandit Todermal Kshapanasar Tika — Pandit Todermal Triloksar Tika — Pandit Todermal ?

Purusharthsiddhiupayetika — Pandit Todermal Jain Siddhanta Praveshika — Pandit Gopaldasji Baraiya Chhadhala — Pt. Daulatramji (II) Ratnakaranda Vachanika — Pt. Sadasukhdas Samaysar Vachanika — Pt. Jaichand Chavda Chhadhala — Pandit Budhajan Mahavirashtak Stotra — Pandit Bhagchand Jainendra Siddhanta Kosha — Kshullaka Jinendra Varn Shvetambara texts [ edit ] Agamas are the main scriptures followed by Jains as preached by Tirthankars. Both Shwetambar and Digambar sects believe in 12 Agamas. Both also believe that the 12th Agama Drishtivaad ( Dṛṣṭivāda ) was lost over a period of time and realised the need to turn the oral tradition to written. While Digambaras believed that all the 12 Agamas were lost, Shwetambars believed that the first 11 Agamas were not lost. They compiled them in written format in the 6th century CE in Vallabhi, Gujarat. The list is as follows.

Agamas [ edit ] There are 45 Agamas (11 Angā Agamas and 34 Angā Bahya Agamas).

11 Angā Agamas [ edit ] Āyāraṃga (Sanskrit: Ācāranga, meaning: 'On monastic conduct') Sūyagaḍa (Sūtrakṛtānga, 'On heretical systems and views') Ṭhāṇaṃga (Sthānānga, 'On different points [of the teaching]') Samavāyaṃga (Samavāyānga, 'On rising numerical groups') Viyāha-pannatti / Bhagavaī (Vyākhyā-prajñapti or Bhagavatī, 'Exposition of explanations' or 'the holy one') Nāyā-dhamma-kahāo (Jñāta-dharmakathānga, 'Parables and religious stories') Uvāsaga-dasāo (Upāsaka-daśāḥ, 'Ten chapters on the Jain lay follower') Aṇuttarovavāiya-dasāo (Antakṛd-daśāḥ, 'Ten chapters on those who put an end to rebirth in this very life') Anuttaraupapātikadaśāh (Anuttaropapātika-daśāḥ, 'Ten chapters on those who were reborn in the uppermost heavens') Paṇha-vāgaraṇa (Praśna-vyākaraṇa, 'Questions and explanations') Vivāga-suya (Vipākaśruta, 'Bad or good results of deeds performed') 34 Anga Bahya Agamas [ edit ] The 34 Anga Bahya Agamas consist of 12 Upānga Agamas, 6 Cheda sūtras, 6 Mūla sūtras, and 10 Paiṇṇaya sutras.

Upānga Agamas Uvavāiya-sutta (Sanskrit: Aupapātika-sūtra, 'Places of rebirth') Rāya-paseṇaijja or Rāyapaseṇiya (Rāja-praśnīya, 'Questions of the king') Jīvājīvābhigama (Jīvājīvābhigama, 'Classification of animate and inanimate entities') Pannavaṇā (Prajñāpanā, 'Enunciation on topics of philosophy and ethics') Sūriya-pannatti (Sūrya-prajñapti, 'Exposition on the sun') Jambūdvīpa-pannatti (Jambūdvīpa-prajñapti, 'Exposition on the Jambū continent and the Jain universe') Canda-pannatti (Candra-prajñapti, 'Exposition on the moon and the Jain universe') Nirayāvaliyāo or Kappiya (Narakāvalikā, 'Series of stories on characters reborn in hells') Kappāvaḍaṃsiāo (Kalpāvataṃsikāḥ, 'Series of stories on characters reborn in the kalpa heavens') Pupphiāo (Puṣpikāḥ, 'Flowers' refers to one of the stories') Puppha-cūliāo (Puṣpa-cūlikāḥ, 'The nun Puṣpacūlā') Vaṇhi-dasāo (Vṛṣṇi-daśāh, 'Stories on characters from the legendary dynasty known as Andhaka-Vṛṣṇi') Cheda sūtras (texts relating to the conduct and behaviour of monks and nuns) Āyāra-dasāo (Sanskrit: Ācāradaśāh, 'Ten [chapters] about monastic conduct', chapter 8 is the famed Kalpa-sūtra) Bihā Kappa (Bṛhat Kalpa, '[Great] Religious code') Vavahāra (Vyavahāra, 'Procedure') Nisīha (Niśītha, 'Interdictions') Jīya-kappa (Jīta-kalpa, Customary rules) Mahā-nisīha (Mahā-niśītha, Large Niśītha) Mūla sūtras ('Fundamental texts' which are foundational works studied by new monastics) Dasaveyāliya-sutta (Sanskrit: Daśavaikālika-sūtra), this is memorized by all new Jain mendicants Uttarajjhayaṇa-sutta (Uttarādhyayana-sūtra) Āvassaya-sutta ( Āvaśyaka-sūtra ) Piṇḍa-nijjutti and Ogha-nijjutti (Piṇḍa-niryukti and Ogha-niryukti), Cūlikasūtras ("appendixes") Nandī-sūtra – discusses the five types of knowledge Anuyogadvāra-sūtra – a technical treatise on analytical methods, discusses Anekantavada Paiṇṇaya sutras (Sanskrit: Prakīrnaka sūtras, "Miscellaneous") Cau-saraṇa (Sanskrit: Catuḥśaraṇa, The 'four refuges') Āura-paccakkhāṇa (Ātura-pratyākhyāna, 'Sick man's renunciation') Bhatta-parinnā (Bhakta-parijñā,'Renunciation of food') Saṃthāraga (Saṃstāraka, 'Straw bed') Tandula-veyāliya (Taṇḍula-vaicārika,'Reflection on rice grains') Canda-vejjhaya (Candravedhyaka, 'Hitting the mark') Devinda-tthaya (Devendra-stava, 'Praise of the kings of gods') Gaṇi-vijjā (Gaṇi-vidyā,'A Gaṇi's knowledge') Mahā-paccakkhāṇa (Mahā-pratyākhyāna,'Great renunciation') Vīra-tthava (Vīra-stava,'Great renunciation') Major scriptures by acharyas [ edit ] Major scriptures by Acharya Umaswati (1st–2nd Century CE) Tattvartha Sutra (On the Nature [artha] of Reality [tattva]) Prasamarati (guide for the aspirant on the path of peace and liberation from karmic bondage) Major scriptures by Acharya Vimalsuri (3rd Century CE) Paumchariya (Jain Ramayan) Major scriptures by Acharya Haribhadrasuri (8th Century CE) Anekāntajayapatākā [The Victory Banner of Anekantavada (Relativism)] – which puts forward arguments about Anekantavada Anekāntavādapraveśa , discusses Jain Philosophy Anekāntasiddhi – establishes the concept of non-absolutism (anekānta) Ātmasiddhi (Realization of Self), a work about the Soul Upadeśapada , collection of stories which depicts how difficult it is to secure a human birth Daṃsaṇasuddhi , text deals with Samyagdarśana (right faith) and its purity Darisaṇasattari , another work on Samyagdarśana Dhammasangahaṇi , work on Dharma Lokatattvanirṇaya , a work of comparative religion where he talks about Hindu Gods Saṃsāradāvānalastuti , a work praising Thirtankaras Samarāiccakahā , a collection of stories Sambohapayaraṇa , a work on philosophy Ashtakaprakarana (The Eightfold Explanation) Dharmabindu – which outlines the duties of the laity, outlines rules for mendicants, and describes the bliss of moksha Dhūrtākhyāna (The Rogue's Stories) Pañcāśaka – a Prakrit work on rituals and spiritual matters Ṣaḍdarśanasamuccaya (Compendium of Six Philosophies) – which compares Jainism with other schools of Indian philosophy Samarāiccakahā (The Story of Samarāicca) – a narrative which outlines the effects of karma in a story about the enmity of its characters which endures over several reincarnations Sāstravārtāsamuccaya (The Array of Explanatory Teachings Yogabindu (The Seeds of Yoga) – a work on yoga Yogadṛṣṭisamuccaya (An Array of Views on Yoga) – another work on yoga Yogaśataka – a third work on yoga. In these three volumes, he compares the yoga of Jainism with the other varieties of yoga prevalent in India at the time.

Major scriptures by Kalikalsarvagna Acharya Hemachandra (12th Century CE) Triśaṣṭi-śalākā-puruṣa-carita ("Deeds of the 63 Illustrious Men") Pariśiṣṭaparvan (Sthaviravali) Siddha-Hema-Śabdanuśāśana (grammar) Abhidhan-Chintamani (lexicon) Arhanniti , a work on politics from a Jain perspective Kāvyānuśāsana (a work on poetics) Chandonuśāsana (a work on prosody) Pramāṇa-mimaṁsa (epistemology) Vītarāga-Stotra Deśī-Nāmamālā (lexicon of non-Sanskrit origin words) Nighāṇṭuśeṣa (botanical lexicon) Major scriptures by Acharya Ratnashekharsuri (15th Century CE) Siri-Sirivala-Kaha Śrāddha Vidhi Prakaraṇa Major scriptures by Mahopādhyāya Yashovijaya (17th Century CE) Ashtasahasri Tatparyavivarana Tika Adhyatmasara Adhyatmopanisatprakarana Dharmapariksa Jaina Nyayakhandakhadya Jaina Tarkabhasa Jnanasara Commentary on Jnanarnava Shripal raja no Ras Others [ edit ] This list is incomplete ; you can help by adding missing items .

( September 2019 ) Yogaśāstra Siddha-Hema-Śabdanuśāśana Trishashthi-Shalaka-Purusha-Charitra Bhadrabahu Samhita Jnanarnava or the Yogapradipadhikara Pramana-mimansa (logic) Texts claimed by both the sects [ edit ] Tattvartha Sutra - first Jain text written in Sanskrit Other texts [ edit ] Ajitha purana Antakrddaasah Aupapātika Anuttaraupapātikadaśāh Atma Siddhi Aupapatika Bahuriband Cīvaka Cintāmaṇi Drstivada Jnatrdharmakathah Kalpa Sūtra Līlāvatīsāra Lokavibhaga Nālaṭiyār Neelakesi Nishitha Nivvāṇalīlāvaīkahā Palamozhi Naanuru Prasnavyakaranani Purvas Samavayanga Sutra Acaranga Sutra Shantinatha Charitra Silappatikaram Sirupanchamoolam Sthananga Sutra Sutrakritanga Upasakadasah Vaddaradhane Valayapathi Varangacharita Vikramarjuna Vijaya Vipakasruta Vyākhyāprajñapti See also [ edit ] Literature portal Champat Rai Jain A.N. Upadhye Bal Patil Agama (Hinduism) Āgama (Buddhism) References [ edit ] Citations [ edit ] ^ a b von Glasenapp 1925 , pp. 109–110.

^ Champat Rai Jain 1929b , p. 135.

^ Champat Rai Jain 1929b , p. 136.

^ a b c d Dundas 2002 , pp. 60–61.

^ Dundas 2002 , p. 61.

^ Natubhai Shah 2004 , pp. 39–40.

^ Vijay K. Jain 2012 , p. xi.

^ a b Winternitz 1972 , p. 427.

^ Nagendra Kr. Singh. (2001). Encyclopedia of Jainism (Edited by Nagendra Kr. Singh). New Delhi: Anmol Publications.

ISBN 81-261-0691-3 page 4308 ^ Yoga: The Indian Tradition. Edited by Ian Whicher and David Carpenter. London: Routledgecurzon, 2003.

ISBN 0-7007-1288-7 page 64 ^ C. Chappie (1993) Nonviolence to Animals, Earth and Self in Asian Traditions. Albany: State University of New York Press.

ISBN 0-7914-1497-3 page 5 ^ a b Bronkhorst, Johannes.

"The Formative Period of Jainism (c. 500 BCE – 200 CE)" (PDF) .

Brill's Encyclopedia of Jainism Online . Denison University University of Edinburgh University of Bergen University of California, Berkeley John E. Cort, Paul Dundas, Knut A. Jacobsen, Kristi L. Wiley.

doi : 10.1163/2590-2768_BEJO_COM_047082 .

^ Jacobi, Hermann (1884).

F. Max Müller (ed.).

The Ācāranga Sūtra .

Sacred Books of the East vol.22, Part 1 . Oxford: The Clarendon Press.

ISBN 0-7007-1538-X .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) p. xlii ^ Leumann, Ernst (2010).

An outline of the Āvaśyaka literature . L. D. Institute of Indology. p. 69.

ISBN 978-81-85857-32-9 .

^ Hiralal Rasikdas Kapadia (1941).

A History Of The Canonical Literature Of The Jainas .

^ a b Natubhai Shah 2004 , p. 40.

^ a b von Glasenapp 1925 , pp. 112–113.

^ Upinder Singh 2016 , p. 444.

^ Vijay K. Jain 2016 , p. xii.

^ Jaini 1998 , p. 78–81.

^ von Glasenapp 1925 , p. 124.

^ von Glasenapp 1925 , pp. 121–122.

^ "Suryaprajnapti Sūtra" . The Schoyen Collection.

Archived from the original on 15 June 2017.

^ a b c Upinder Singh 2016 , p. 26.

^ von Glasenapp 1925 , pp. 110–111.

^ Balbir, Nalini.

"Śvetāmbara canon" .

JAINpedia .

^ Winternitz 1972 , pp. 428–430.

^ Burgess, Jas (1888).

Indian antiquary a journal of oriental research vol.17 .

^ a b c Balbir, Nalini.

"Prakīrṇaka-sūtras" .

JAINpedia .

^ a b c Balbir, Nalini.

"Digambara canon" .

JAINpedia .

^ a b Vijay K. Jain 2012 , p. xii.

^ a b c Sagarmal Jain, Shreeprakash Pandey (1998) Jainism in a Global Perspective p. 239. Collection of Jain papers of 1993 Parliament of World Religions, Chicago. Parshwanath Vidyapith Pubs.

^ a b Dundas 2002 , p. 80.

^ Vijay K. Jain 2012 , p. xi–xii.

^ Jaini 1927 , p. 5.

^ Jaini 1991 , p. 32–33.

^ Finegan 1989 , p. 221.

^ Balcerowicz 2003 , pp. 25–34.

^ Chatterjee 2000 , p. 282–283.

^ a b Jones & Ryan 2007 , pp. 439–440.

^ Umāsvāti 1994 , p. xi–xiii, Quote: "That Which Is, known as the Tattvartha Sūtra to Jains, is recognized by all four Jain traditions as the earliest, most authoritative and comprehensive summary of their religion.".

^ Dundas 2006 , pp. 395–396.

^ Umāsvāti 1994 , p. xiii.

^ Johnson 1995 , pp. 46–51, 91–96.

^ Qvarnström, Olle; Jainism and Early Buddhism: Essays in Honor of Padmanabh S. Jaini, page 154.

^ a b Jaini 1998 , p. 85 ^ a b Hartmut Scharfe (1977).

Grammatical Literature .

^ Deshpande, Madhav M. (1975), "Non-Pāṇinian Grammars on Savarṇa" , Critical Studies in Indian Grammarians I , The Theory of Homogeneity (Savar?ya), University of Michigan Press, pp.

109– 126, doi : 10.3998/mpub.19360 , ISBN 978-0-89148-052-5 , JSTOR 10.3998/mpub.19360 , retrieved 2 March 2025 ^ Bollée, Willem (2006).

"Review of Pañcagranthī Vyākaraṇa of Buddhisāgarsūri. A Critical Edition. [B. L. Series 18]" .

Wiener Zeitschrift für die Kunde Südasiens / Vienna Journal of South Asian Studies .

50 : 211– 212.

ISSN 0084-0084 .

JSTOR 24007750 .

^ Kielhorn, F. (1888).

"A brief account of Hêmachandras Sanskrit Grammar" .

Wiener Zeitschrift für die Kunde des Morgenlandes .

2 : 18– 24.

ISSN 0084-0076 .

JSTOR 23861252 .

^ Board, Pratiyogita Darpan Editorial.

Pratiyogita Darpan Extra Issue Series-3 Indian History . Upkar Prakashan.

^ Barodia, U. D. (1909).

History and Literature of Jainism . Jain Graduates' Association.

^ Gheverghese 2016 , p. 23.

^ Banerjee, Satya Ranjan (2005).

Prolegomena to Prakritica et Jainica .

The Asiatic Society . p. 61.

^ "Jaina Sutras, Part II (SBE45) Index" .

sacred-texts.com . Retrieved 2 March 2025 .

^ Clark, Walter Eugene (1924).

"Māgadhī and Ardhamāgadhī" .

Journal of the American Oriental Society .

44 : 81– 121.

doi : 10.2307/593543 .

ISSN 0003-0279 .

JSTOR 593543 .

^ Hartmut Scharfe (1977).

Grammatical Literature .

^ Prof. S. Vaiyapuri Pillai (1956).

History of Tamil Language and Literature (Beginning to 1000 A.D.) . p. 62-68.

^ Sadasivan, M. P. (13 January 2011).

"Nannūl" (in Malayalam).

State Institute of Encyclopaedic Publications .

Archived from the original on 20 August 2014 . Retrieved 20 August 2014 .

^ 'Prastaavna', Haim Sanskrit Praveshika by Pandit Shivlal Nemchand Shah, Bhadrankar Prakashan.

^ Buhler, g (1936).

The Life Of Hemacandracarya .

^ Kielhorn, F. (1888). "A brief account of Hêmachandras Sanskrit Grammar".

Wiener Zeitschrift für die Kunde des Morgenlandes .

2 : 18– 24.

JSTOR 23861252 .

^ Sailendra Nath Sen (1999).

Ancient Indian History and Civilization . New Age International. p. 74.

ISBN 978-81-224-1198-0 .

^ Cort 1998 , p. 163.

^ a b c Dundas 2002 , p. 116–117.

^ Zvelebil 1992 , pp. 37–38.

^ Spuler 1952 , pp. 24–25, context: 22–27.

^ Singh, Narendra (2001).

Encyclopaedia of Jainism . Anmol Publications. p. 3144.

ISBN 978-81-261-0691-2 .

^ Prof. S. Vaiyapuri Pillai (1956).

History of Tamil Language and Literature (Beginning to 1000 A.D.) . p. 62-68.

^ Early Tamil epigraphy from the earliest times to the sixth century A.D. Iravatham Mahadevan, Harvard University Press, 2003 ^ http://jainsamaj.org/rpg_site/literature2.php?id=595&cat=42 Recent Discoveries of Jaina Cave Inscriptions in Tamilnadu by Iravatham Mahadevan ^ Tirukkural, Vol. 1,  S.M. Diaz, Ramanatha Adigalar Foundation, 2000, ^ Tiruvalluvar and his Tirukkural, Bharatiya Jnanapith, 1987 ^ The Kural, P. S. Sundaram, Penguin Classics, 1987 ^ Das, G. N. (1997).

Readings from Thirukkural . Abhinav Publications. pp.

11– 12.

ISBN 8-1701-7342-6 .

^ A. A. Manavalan (2009).

Essays and Tributes on Tirukkural (1886–1986 AD) (1 ed.). Chennai: International Institute of Tamil Studies. p. 128.

^ The Milieu of the Ancient Tamil Poems, Prof. George Hart ^ Cort 1998 , p. 164.

^ Dundas 2002 , pp. 118–120.

^ a b Dundas 2002 , p. 83.

^ Guy, John (January 2012), "Jain Manuscript Painting" , The Metropolitan Museum of Art , Heilburnn Timeline of Art History, archived from the original on 2 April 2013 , retrieved 25 April 2013 ^ a b Dundas 2002 , pp. 83–84.

^ Jain, Vijay K. (2021).

Ācārya Māņikyanandi's Parīkşāmukha Sūtra – आचार्य माणिक्यनन्दि विरचित परीक्षामुख सूत्र . Dehradun: Vikalp Printers.

ISBN 978-81-932726-9-5 .

Sources [ edit ] Balcerowicz, Piotr (2003), Essays in Jaina Philosophy and Religion , Motilal Banarsidass , ISBN 978-81-208-1977-1 Chatterjee, Asim Kumar (2000), A Comprehensive History of Jainism: From the Earliest Beginnings to AD 1000 , Munshiram Manoharlal, ISBN 978-81-215-0931-2 Cort, John E., ed. (1998), Open Boundaries: Jain Communities and Cultures in Indian History , SUNY Press, ISBN 978-0-7914-3785-8 Cort, John E.

(2010) [1953], Framing the Jina: Narratives of Icons and Idols in Jain History , Oxford University Press , ISBN 978-0-19-538502-1 Cush, Denise; Robinson, Catherine; York, Michael (2012), Encyclopedia of Hinduism , Routledge, ISBN 978-1-135-18978-5 Dalal, Roshen (2010) [2006], The Religions of India: A Concise Guide to Nine Major Faiths , Penguin books, ISBN 978-0-14-341517-6 Dundas, Paul (2002) [1992], The Jains (2nd ed.), London and New York: Routledge, ISBN 978-0-415-26605-5 Dundas, Paul (2006), Olivelle, Patrick (ed.), Between the Empires : Society in India 300 BCE to 400 CE , Oxford University Press, ISBN 978-0-19-977507-1 Finegan, Jack (1989), An Archaeological History of Religions of Indian Asia , Paragon House, ISBN 978-0-913729-43-4 Gheverghese, Joseph George (2016), Indian Mathematics: Engaging With The World From Ancient To Modern Times , World Scientific, ISBN 9781786340603 Jain, Champat Rai (1929), Risabha Deva - The Founder of Jainism , Allahabad : The Indian Press Limited, This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

Jain, Champat Rai (1929), The Practical Dharma , The Indian Press Ltd., This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

Jain, Vijay K.

(2011), Acharya Umasvami's Tattvarthsutra (1st ed.), Uttarakhand : Vikalp Printers , ISBN 978-81-903639-2-1 , This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

Jain, Vijay K.

(2012), Acharya Amritchandra's Purushartha Siddhyupaya: Realization of the Pure Self, With Hindi and English Translation , Vikalp Printers , ISBN 978-81-903639-4-5 , This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

Jain, Vijay K. (2016), Ācārya Samantabhadra's Ratnakarandaka-śrāvakācāra: The Jewel-casket of Householder's Conduct , Vikalp Printers , ISBN 978-81-903639-9-0 , This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

Jaini, Jagmandar-lāl (1927), Gommatsara Jiva-kanda Alt URL Jaini, Padmanabh S.

(1991), Gender and Salvation: Jaina Debates on the Spiritual Liberation of Women , University of California Press, ISBN 978-0-520-06820-9 Jaini, Padmanabh S. (1998) [1979], The Jaina Path of Purification , Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass , ISBN 978-81-208-1578-0 Johnson, W.J. (1995), Harmless Souls: Karmic Bondage and Religious Change in Early Jainism with Special Reference to Umāsvāti and Kundakunda , Motilal Banarsidass, ISBN 978-81-208-1309-0 Jones, Constance; Ryan, James D. (2007), Encyclopedia of Hinduism , Infobase Publishing, ISBN 978-0-8160-5458-9 Melton, J. Gordon ; Baumann, Martin, eds. (2010), Religions of the World: A Comprehensive Encyclopedia of Beliefs and Practices , Vol. One: A-B (2nd ed.), ABC-CLIO , ISBN 978-1-59884-204-3 Shah, Natubhai (2004) [First published in 1998], Jainism: The World of Conquerors , vol. I, Motilal Banarsidass , ISBN 978-81-208-1938-2 Singh, Upinder (2016), A History of Ancient and Early Medieval India: From the Stone Age to the 12th Century , Pearson Education , ISBN 978-93-325-6996-6 Spuler, Bertold (1952), Handbook of Oriental Studies , Brill, ISBN 978-90-04-04190-5 {{ citation }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) Umāsvāti, Umaswami (1994), That which is (Translator: Nathmal Tatia) , Rowman & Littlefield, ISBN 978-0-06-068985-8 von Glasenapp, Helmuth (1925), Jainism: An Indian Religion of Salvation [ Der Jainismus: Eine Indische Erlosungsreligion ], Shridhar B. Shrotri (trans.), Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass (Reprint: 1999), ISBN 978-81-208-1376-2 {{ citation }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) Winternitz, Maurice (1972), A History of Indian Literature Vol. II. Buddhist Literature and Jaina Literature (2nd ed.), University of Calcutta Zvelebil, Kamil (1992), Companion Studies to the History of Tamil Literature , Brill Academic, ISBN 978-90-04-09365-2 Further reading [ edit ] Rishabhanatha, in Encyclopaedia Britannica , Editors of the Encyclopaedia Britannica, 2010 Dalal, Roshen (2010), Hinduism: An Alphabetical Guide , Penguin Books, ISBN 978-0-14-341421-6 Dalal, Roshen (2010), The Religions of India: A Concise Guide to Nine Major Faiths , Penguin books , ISBN 978-0-14-341517-6 Stevenson, John (1848), The Kalpa Sutra and Nava Tatva (tr. from Magadhi) , Bernard Quaritch, London Thomas, Edward (1877), Jainism , London, Trübner & co.

Jacobi, Hermann (1884), Jaina Sutras Part I (Akaranga Sutra & Kalpa Sutra) , Oxford, The Clarendon press Jacobi, Hermann (1884), Jaina Sutras Part II (Uttarâdhyayana Sutra & Sutrakritanga Sutra) , Oxford, The Clarendon press Stevenson, Sinclair (1915), The Heart of Jainism , H. Milford: Oxford University Press M. S. Ramaswami Ayyangar; B. Seshagiri Rao (1922), Studies in South Indian Jainism , Premier Press, Madras Jain texts [ edit ] Bibliography of Sanskrit and Prakrit Jain texts (primary sources), from Dundas (2002): Haribhadra .

Anekāntajayapatākā , ed. H.R. Kapadia, 2 vols, Baroda, 1940 and 1947.

Āśādhara.

Anagāradharmāmṛta , ed. K. Shastri, New Delhi, 1975.

Jinasena .

Ādipurāṇa , ed. Pannalal Jain, 2 vols, Kashi, 1964 and 1965.

Ācārāṅgasūtra with Śīlāṅka’s commentary, in Muni Jambūvijaya (ed.).

Ācārāṅgasūtram and Sūtrakṛtāṅgasūtram (re-edition of Āgamodaya Samiti edition), Delhi, 1978.

Haribhadra .

Aṣṭakaprakaraṇa , Ahmedabad, 1918.

Uvavāiya Suttam , ed. G. Lalwani with English trans. by K. C. Lalwani, Jaipur, 1988.

Jinadāsa.

Āvaśyakacūrṇi , 2 vols, Ratlam, 1928 and 1929.

Bhadrabāhu .

Āvaśyakaniryukti with Haribhadra ’s commentary (reprint of Āgamodaya Samiti edition), vol. 1, Bombay, 1981.

Āvaśyakasūtra in Dasaveyāliyasuttaṃ, Uttarajjhayaṇāiṃand Āvassayasuttaṃ , ed. Muni Puṇyavijaya and A. M. Bhojak (Jaina Āgama Series 15), Bombay, 1977.

Viyāhapaṇṇatti (Bhagavaī) , in Pupphabhikkhū (ed.), Suttāgame , vol. 1, Gurgaon, 1953.

Śivārya.

Bhagavatī Ārādhanā with Aparājita Sūri’s commentary, ed. K. Siddhantashastri, Sholapur, 1978.

Siddhicandra.

Bhānucandragaṇicarita , ed. M. D. Desai, Ahmedabad/Calcutta, 1941.

Hariṣeṇa .

Bṛhatkathākoṣa , ed.

A. N. Upadhye , Bombay, 1943.

Śīlāṅka.

Cauppannamahāpurisacariyaṃ , ed. A. M. Bhojak, Varanasi, 1961.

Haribhadra .

Dhūrtākhyāna , ed.

A. N. Upadhye , Bombay, 1944.

Udayaprabha Sūri .

Dharmābhyudayamahākāvya , ed. Muni Caturavijaya and Muni Puṇyavijaya, Bombay, 1949.

Jayasiṃha Sūri.

Dharmopadeśamālāvivaraṇa , ed. P. L. B. Gandhi, Bombay, 1940.

Bhāskaranandi.

Dhyānastava , ed. S. Ohira, New Delhi, 1973.

Devasena .

Darśanasāra , ed.

A. N. Upadhye , Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental Institute 15 (1935):198–206.

Siddhasena Divākara .

Dvātriṃśikā , in A. N. Upadhye (1971).

Daśavaikālikasūtra , ed. E. Leumann and trans. W. Schubring, in Schubring (1977).

Jinadatta Sūri .

Gaṇadharasārdhaśataka , ed. Gandhi, Three Apabhraṃśa Works.

Jinabhadra .

Gaṇadharavāda , ed. and trans. E. A. Solomon, Ahmedabad, 1966.

Punnāta Jinasena.

Harivaṃśapurāṇa , ed. P. Jain, Kashi, 1962.

Isibhāsiyāiṃ : A Jaina Text of Early Period , ed. W. Schubring, Ahmedabad, 1974.

Śubhacandra.

Jñānārṇava , ed. H. L. Jain, Kailashchandra Siddhantacharya and A. N. Upadhye , Sholapur, 1977.

Jñātādharmakathāḥ , in Pupphabhikkhū (ed.), Suttāgame , vol. 1, Gurgaon, 1953.

Yaśovijaya .

Jñānasāra , ed. G. P. Shah, Bombay, 1986.

Jainaśilālekhasaṃgraha , vol. 1, Bombay, 1928.

Svāmikumāra.

Kārttikeyānuprekṣā , ed.

A. N. Upadhye , Agas, 1978.

Jinapāla.

Kharataragacchabṛhadgurvāvalī , ed. Muni Jinavijaya, Bombay, 1956.

Kharataragacchapaṭṭāvalīsaṃgraha , ed. Muni Jinavijaya, Calcutta, 1932.

Kundakunda-Bhāratī , ed. Pannalal Sahityacarya, Phaltan, 1970.

Jineśvara Sūri.

Kathākoṣaprakaraṇa , ed. Muni Jinavijaya, Bombay, 1949.

Guṇadhara.

Kaṣāyapāhuḍa with Vīrasena’s Jayadhavalā commentary, vol. 1, ed. Phulcandra, Mahendrakumar and Kailashcandra, Mathura, 1974.

Bhadrabāhu .

Kalpasūtra , ed. H. Jacobi, Leipzig, 1879.

Haribhadra .

Lalitavistarā , ed. Muni Bhānuvijaya, Ahmedabad, 1963.

Vaṭṭakera .

Mūlācāra , ed. K. Shastri, J. Shastri and P. Jain, 2 vols, New Delhi, 1984 and 1986.

Pradyumna Sūri.

Mūlaśuddhiprakaraṇa with Devacandra Sūri’s commentary, vol. 1, ed. A. M. Bhojak, Ahmedabad, 1971.

Niśīthasūtra with bhāṣya and cūrṇi , ed. Amaramuni and Muni Kanhaiyalal, 4 vols, Agra, 1957–60.

Kundakunda .

Niyamasāra , ed. and trans. U. Sain, Lucknow, 1931.

Prabhācandra .

Nyāyakumudacandra , ed. M. K. Jain, Bombay, 1941.

Kakka Sūri.

Nābhinandanajinoddhāraprabandha , ed. B. Harakchand, Ahmedabad, 1928.

Nandisuttaṃand Aṇuogaddārāiṃ , ed. Muni Puṇyavijaya, D. Malvania and A. M. Bhojak (Jaina Āgama Series 1), Bombay, 1968.

Devavācaka.

Nandisūtram with Haribhadra ’s commentary, ed. Muni Puṇyavijaya, Varanasi/Ahmedabad, 1966.

Raviṣeṇa .

Padmapurāṇa , ed. P. Jain, 3 vols, Kashi, 1958–9.

Hemacandra .

Sthavirāvalīcarita or Pariśiṣṭaparvan , ed. H. Jacobi, Calcutta, 1883; trans. Fynes (1998).

Yogīndu.

Paramātmaprakāśa , ed.

A. N. Upadhye , Bombay, 1937.

Prabhācandra .

Prabhāvakacarita , ed. Jinavijaya, Ahmedabad/Calcutta, 1940.

Paiṇṇayasuttaṃ : Part 1 , ed. Muni Puṇyavijaya and Amritlal Mohanlal Bhojak (Jaina Āgama Series 17.1), Bombay, 1984.

Dharmasāgara.

Pravacanaparīkṣā , Surat, 1937.

Purātanaprabandhasaṃgraha , ed. Jinavijaya, Shantiniketan, 1936.

Paṇṇavaṇāsuttaṃ , ed. Muni Punyavijaya, D. Malvania and A. M. Bhojak (Jaina Āgama Series 9.2), Bombay, 1971.

Kundakunda .

Pravacanasāra with Amṛtacandra’s commentary, ed.

A. N. Upadhye , Bombay, 1935.

Rājapraśnīyasūtra , in Pupphabhikkhū (ed.), Suttāgame , vol. 2, Gurgaon, 1954.

Samavāyāṅgasūtram , in Muni Jambūvijaya (ed.), Sthānāṅga Sūtram and Samavāyāṅga Sūtram with Abhayadeva Sūri’s commentary (re-edition of Āgamodaya Samiti Series edition), Delhi, 1985.

Haribhadra .

Samarāiccakahā , ed. H. Jacobi, Calcutta, 1926.

Sūtrakṛtāṅgasūtram , in Muni Jambūvijaya (ed.), Ācārāṅgasūtram and Sūtrakṛtāṅgam with Śīlāṅka’s commentary (re-edition of Āgamodaya Samiti Series edition), Delhi, 1978.

Ṣaṭkhaṇḍāgama , vols 2 and 3, ed. H. Jain, A. N. Upadhye and K. Siddhantashastri, Sholapur, 1976 and 1980.

Sūrimantrakalpasamuccaya anekapūrvācāryapraṇīta , pt. 2, ed. Muni Jambūvijaya, Bombay, 1977.

Śākaṭāyana .

Strīnirvāṇakevalibhuktiprakaraṇe , ed. Muni Jambūvijaya, Bhavnagar, 1974.

Jinavallabha Sūri.

Saṅghapaṭṭaka , in Gandhi, Three Apabhraṃśa Works.

Ṣaṭprābhṛtādisaṃgraha , ed. P. Soni, Bombay, 1920.

Indranandi.

Śrutāvatāra , in M. Shastri (ed.), Tattvānuśāsanādisaṃgrahaḥ , Bombay, 1918.

Samayasundara.

Sāmācārīśataka , Surat, 1939.

Kundakunda .

Samayasāra , text, trans. and comm. by A. Chakravarti, Banaras, 1930.

Sthānāṅgasūtram , in Muni Jambūvijaya (ed.), Sthānāṅga Sūtram and Samavāyāṅga Sūtram with Abhayadeva Sūri’s commentary (re-edition of Āgamodaya Samiti Series edition), Delhi, 1985.

Anantavīrya.

Siddhiviniścayaṭīkā , ed. M. K. Jain, Varanasi, 1959.

Dharmasāgara.

Sūtravyākhyānavidhiśataka , ed. Muni Lābhasāgara, Kapadvanj, 1961.

Umāsvāti .

Tattvarthasūtra , in Sanghvi, S. (1974).

Pt. Sukhlalji’s Commentary on Tattvārthasūtra of Vācaka Umāsvāti , trans. K. K. Dixit. Ahmedabad.

Akalaṅka .

Tattvārthavārttikā ( Rājavārttikam ) , ed. Mahendrakumar, 2 vols, Kashi, 1953 and 1957.

Upāsakadaśāḥ , text and trans. in Hoernle, A. F. R. (1890).

The Uvāsagadasāo or the Religious Experience of an Uvāsaga . Calcutta.

Uttarādhyayanasūtra , in Pupphabhikkhū (ed.), Suttāgame , vol. 2, Gurgaon, 1954.

Asaga .

Vardhamānacarita , ed. P. Jain, Sholapur, 1974.

Saṅghadāsa.

Vasudevahiṇḍi , ed. Muni Caturavijaya and Muni Puṇyavijaya, Gandhinagar, 1989.

Jinabhadra .

Viśeṣāvaśyakabhāṣya , ed. D. Malvania, 3 vols, Ahmedabad, 1966–8.

Hemavijaya.

Vijayapraśasti , ed. Hargovinddas and Bechardas, Benares, 1911.

Jinaprabha Sūri.

Vidhimārgaprapā nāma Suvihitasāmācārī , ed. Muni Jinavijaya, Bombay, 1941.

Vipākaśrutasūtra , in Pupphabhikkhū (ed.), Suttāgame , vol. 1, Gurgaon, 1953.

Jinaprabha Sūri.

Vividhatīrthakalpa , ed. Muni Jinavijaya, Shantiniketan, 1934.

Bhāvasena .

Viśvatattvaprakāśa , ed. V. Johrapurkar, Sholapur, 1964.

Haribhadra .

Yogabindu , ed. and trans. K. K. Dixit, Ahmedabad, 1968.

Haribhadra .

Yogadṛṣṭisamuccaya , ed. and trans. K. K. Dixit, Ahmedabad, 1970.

Hemacandra .

Yogaśāstra , ed. Muni Jambūvijaya, 3 vols, Bombay, 1977–86.

External links [ edit ] Jainism books – Wisdom Library Jain eLibrary – Online collection of Jain Literature Jain Quantum - Jain Literature Search Engine Jain Shastras "Jain Agams" .

JainWorld.com .

Archived from the original on 14 February 2015.

Clay Sanskrit Library Archived 7 July 2019 at the Wayback Machine "Sacred texts (Jainism)" .

The British Library . Archived from the original on 12 July 2023 . Retrieved 9 October 2019 .

v t e Jain literature Fourteen Purvas (The Prior Knowledge – considered totally lost ) Śvetāmbara Canonical Texts Angāgama Ācārāṅga Sūtra Sutrakritanga Sthananga Sutra Samavayanga Sutra Vyākhyāprajñapti Jnatrdharmakathah Upasakadasah Antakrddaasah Anuttaraupapātikadaśāh Prasnavyakaranani Vipakasutra Drstivada (now extinct) Upanga āgamas Aupapatika Rājapraśnīya Jīvājīvābhigama Prajñāpana Sūryaprajñapti Jambūdvīpaprajñapti Candraprajñapti Nirayārvalī Kalpāvatamsikāh Puṣpikāh Puṣpacūlikāh Vrasnidaśāh Chedasūtra Ācāradaśāh Brhatkalpa Vyavahāra Nishitha Mahāniśītha Jītakalpa Kalpa Sūtra Mūlasūtra Daśavaikālika Uttaradhyayana Āvaśyaka Pindaniryukyti Prakīrnaka sūtra Catuhśarana Āturapratyākhyanā Bhaktaparijñā Samstāraka Tandulavaicarika Candravedhyāka Devendrastava Ganividyā Mahāpratyākhyanā Vīrastava Cūlikasūtra Nandī-sūtra Anuyogadvāra-sūtra Others Uvasaggaharam Stotra Bhaktamara Stotra Namokar Mantra Ratnakar Pachisi Bruhad Shanti Stotra Digambara Texts Agamas Satkhandagama Kasayapahuda Pratham -ānuyoga Mahapurana Ādi purāṇa Uttarapurana Harivamsa Purana Carnānuyoga Mulachara Trivarnācāra Tattvartha Sutra † Ratnakaranda śrāvakācāra Puruṣārthasiddhyupāya Karnánuyoga Gommatsāra Sūryaprajñapti Jayadhavalātikā Tiloya Panatti Lokavibhaga Dravyānuyoga Niyamasara Pancastikayasara Pravachanasara Samayasāra Aptamimamsa Dravyasamgraha Jnanarnava Commentary Sarvārthasiddhi (commentary on Tattvārthasūtra) Others Siribhoovalaya Bhaktamara Stotra Jinvani Namokar Mantra † Tattvartha Sutra is accepted by both Digambara and Śvetāmbara as their texts, although Śvetāmbaras do not include it under canonical texts.

v t e Jainism topics Gods Arihant Ganadhara Tirthankara Mahavira Rishabhanatha Philosophy Five Vows Ahimsa Anekantavada Cosmology Deva Naraka Siddhashila Death Dravya Jīva Ajiva Pudgala Dharma Epistemology Kevala Jnana Gunasthana Karma Causes Types Kashaya Ratnatraya Samsara Tattva Asrava Bandha Moksha Nirjara Samvara Branches Digambara Bispanthi Kanji Panth Mula Sangha Balatkara Gana Kashtha Sangha Taran Panth Terapanth Svetambara Murtipujaka Gaccha Kharatara Tapa Tristutik Sthanakavasi Practices Fasting Festivals Paryushana Kshamavani Mahamastakabhisheka Meditation Monasticism Pratikramana Samayika Rituals Sallekhana Tapas Upadhan Vegetarianism Literature Agama Aptamimamsa Bhaktamara Stotra Civaka Cintamani Culamani Kalpa Sūtra Kasayapahuda Naga Kumara Kaviyam Neelakesi Namokar Mantra Pravachanasara Samayasāra Shatkhandagama Tattvartha Sutra Uttaradhyayana Udayana Kumara Kaviyam Valayapathi Yashodhara Kaviyam Symbols Ashtamangala Auspicious dreams Jain flag Siddhachakra Shrivatsa Nandavarta Swastika Ascetics Acharya Aryika Digambara monk Kshullak Pattavali Scholars Bal Patil Champat Rai Jain Chandabai Colette Caillat Hampana Hermann Jacobi Jeffery D. Long John E. Cort Nalini Balbir Padmanabh Jaini Paul Dundas Virchand Gandhi Community Sravaka Sarak Tamil Jain Organisations Digambar Jain Mahasabha JAINA Vishwa Jain Sangathan Jainism in India Bundelkhand Delhi Goa Gujarat Haryana Karnataka North Kerala Maharashtra Mumbai Rajasthan Tamil Nadu Uttar Pradesh West Bengal Overseas Africa Australia Belgium Canada Europe Hong Kong Japan Pakistan Singapore Southeast Asia United States Jainism and Buddhism Hinduism Islam Non-creationism Sikhism Dynasties and empires Chalukya Ganga Hoysala Ikshvaku Kadamba Kalinga Maurya Pandya Rashtrakuta Santara Related Art Ekendriya History Timeline Law Mathematics Panca-Paramesthi Nigoda Panch Kalyanaka Pratima Salakapurusa Samavasarana Sexual differences Statue of Ahimsa Sculpture Stupa Temple Terms and concepts Tirtha Vira Nirvana Samvat Samvatsari Lists Jains Jain temples Jain ascetics Digambar Topics Navboxes Gods Literature Monks & nuns Scholars Temples America Bengal Religion portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Jain_literature&oldid=1300080313 " Categories : Jain literature Religious literature Jain texts Hidden categories: CS1 errors: ISBN date CS1 Malayalam-language sources (ml) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from June 2016 Use Indian English from June 2016 All Wikipedia articles written in Indian English Articles containing Sanskrit-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2016 Incomplete lists from September 2019 Source attribution Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 12 July 2025, at 05:22 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Jain literature 10 languages Add topic

