Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Origins 2 Characteristics 3 Freudian approach 4 Further developments Toggle Further developments subsection 4.1 Jung 4.2 Ferenczi 4.3 Lacan 4.4 20th century 5 Criticism 6 Coda 7 See also 8 References 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Free association (psychology) 30 languages العربية Български Català Čeština Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Kurdî Latviešu മലയാളം 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Technique used in psychoanalysis Medical intervention Free association (psychology) MeSH D005608 [ edit on Wikidata ] Free association is the expression (as by speaking or writing) of the content of consciousness without censorship as an aid in gaining access to unconscious processes.

[ 1 ] The technique is used in psychoanalysis (and also in psychodynamic theory ) which was originally devised by Sigmund Freud out of the hypnotic method of his mentor and colleague, Josef Breuer .

Freud described it as such: "The importance of free association is that the patients spoke for themselves, rather than repeating the ideas of the analyst; they work through their own material, rather than parroting another's suggestions." [ 2 ] Origins [ edit ] Freud developed the technique as an alternative to hypnosis , because he perceived the latter as subjected to more fallibility, and because patients could recover and comprehend crucial memories while fully conscious . However, Freud felt that despite a subject's effort to remember, a certain resistance kept him or her from the most painful and important memories . He eventually came to the view that certain items were completely repressed , cordoned off and relegated only to the unconscious realm of the mind. The new technique was also encouraged by his experiences with "Miss Elisabeth", one of his early clients who protested against interruptions of her flow of thought , that was described by his official biographer Ernest Jones as "one of the countless examples of a patient's furthering the physician's work".

[ 3 ] "There can be no exact date for the discovery of the 'free association' method... it developed very gradually between 1892 and 1895, becoming steadily refined and purified from the adjutants - hypnosis, suggestion, pressing, and questioning - that accompanied it at its inception".

[ 4 ] Subsequently, in The Interpretation of Dreams , Freud cites as a precursor of free association a letter from Schiller , the letter maintaining that, "where there is a creative mind, Reason - so it seems to me - relaxes its watch upon the gates, and the ideas rush in pell-mell".

[ 5 ] Freud would later also mention as a possible influence an essay by Ludwig Börne , suggesting that to foster creativity "you write down, without any falsification or hypocrisy, everything that comes into your head".

[ 6 ] Other potential influences in the development of this technique include Husserl 's version of epoche [ 7 ] and the work of Sir Francis Galton . It has been argued that Galton is the progenitor of free association, and that Freud adopted the technique from Galton's reports published in the journal Brain , of which Freud was a subscriber.

[ 8 ] Free association also shares some features with the idea of stream of consciousness , employed by writers such as Virginia Woolf and Marcel Proust : "all stream-of-consciousness fiction is greatly dependent on the principles of free association".

[ 9 ] Freud called free association "this fundamental technical rule of analysis... We instruct the patient to put himself into a state of quiet, unreflecting self-observation, and to report to us whatever internal observations he is able to make" - taking care not to "exclude any of them, whether on the ground that it is too disagreeable or too indiscreet to say, or that it is too unimportant or irrelevant , or that it is nonsensical and need not be said".

[ 10 ] The psychoanalyst James Strachey (1887-1967) considered free association as 'the first instrument for the scientific examination of the human mind'.

[ 11 ] Characteristics [ edit ] In free association, psychoanalytic patients are invited to relate whatever comes into their minds during the analytic session, and not to censor their thoughts. This technique is intended to help the patient learn more about what he or she thinks and feels, in an atmosphere of non-judgmental curiosity and acceptance. Psychoanalysis assumes that people are often conflicted between their need to learn about themselves, and their (conscious or unconscious) fears of and defenses against change and self-exposure. The method of free association has no linear or preplanned agenda, but works by intuitive leaps and linkages which may lead to new personal insights and meanings: "the logic of association is a form of unconscious thinking".

[ 12 ] When used in this spirit, free association is a technique in which neither therapist nor patient knows in advance exactly where the conversation will lead, but it tends to lead to material that matters very much to the patient. "In spite of the seeming confusion and lack of connection...meanings and connections begin to appear out of the disordered skein of thoughts...some central themes".

[ 13 ] The goal of free association is not to unearth specific answers or memories, but to instigate a journey of co-discovery which can enhance the patient's integration of thought, feeling, agency, and selfhood.

Free association is contrasted with Freud's "fundamental rule" of psychoanalysis. Whereas free association is one of many techniques (along with dream interpretation and analysis of parapraxis ), the fundamental rule is a pledge undertaken by the client.

[ 14 ] Freud [ 15 ] used the following analogy to describe free association to his clients: "Act as though, for instance, you were a traveler sitting next to the window of a railway carriage and describing to someone inside the carriage the changing views which you see outside." The fundamental rule is something the client agrees to at the beginning of analysis, and it is an underlying oath that is intended to continue throughout analysis: the client must promise to be honest in every respect. The pledge to the fundamental rule was articulated by Freud: "Finally, never forget that you have promised to be absolutely honest, and never leave anything out because, for some reason or other, it is unpleasant to tell it." [ 16 ] Freudian approach [ edit ] Freud's eventual practice of psychoanalysis focused not so much on the recall of these memories as on the internal mental conflicts which kept them buried deep within the mind. However, the technique of free association still plays a role today in therapeutic practice and in the study of the mind.

The use of free association was intended to help discover notions that a patient had developed, initially, at an unconscious level, including: Transference - unwittingly transferring feelings about one person to become applied to another person Projection - projecting internal feelings or motives, instead ascribing them to other things or people Resistance - holding a mental block against remembering or accepting some events or ideas The mental conflicts were analyzed from the viewpoint that the patients, initially, did not understand how such feelings were occurring at a subconscious level, hidden inside their minds. "It is free association within language that is the key to representing the prohibited and forbidden desire...to access unconscious affective memory".

[ 17 ] Further developments [ edit ] Jung [ edit ] Jung and his Zurich colleagues 'devised some ingenious association tests which confirmed Freud's conclusions about the way in which emotional factors may interfere with recollection': [ 18 ] they were published in 1906. As Freud himself put it, 'in this manner Bleuler and Jung built the first bridge from experimental psychology to psychoanalysis'.

[ 19 ] Ferenczi [ edit ] Freud, at least initially, saw free association as a relatively accessible method for patients.

Ferenczi disagreed, with the famous aphorism: "The patient is not cured by free-associating, he is cured when he can free-associate".

[ 20 ] Lacan [ edit ] Lacan took up the point. "Free association is really a labour - so much so that some have gone so far as to say that it requires an apprenticeship, even to the point of seeing in such an apprenticeship its true formative value".

[ 21 ] 20th century [ edit ] By the late twentieth century, "analysts today don't expect the free-association process to take hold until well into the analysis; in fact, some regard the appearance of true free association as a signal to terminate the analysis".

[ 22 ] As time went on, other psychologists created tests that exemplified Freud's idea of free association including Rorschach's Inkblot Test and The Thematic Apperception Test (TAT) by Christina Morgan and Henry of Harvard University.

[ 23 ] Although Rorschach's test has been met with significant criticism over the years, the TAT is still used today, especially with children.

Robert Langs helped to bring Freud's earliest work back to the forefront, which depended on free association and insight rather than decoding by the psychotherapist.

Criticism [ edit ] As object relations theory came to place more emphasis on the patient/analyst relationship, and less on the reconstruction of the past, so too did the criticism emerge that Freud never quite freed himself from some use of pressure. For example, "he still advocated the 'fundamental rule' of free association...[which] could have the effect of bullying the patient, as if to say: 'If you do not associate freely - we have ways of making you'." [ 24 ] A further problem may be that, "through overproduction, the freedom it offers sometimes becomes a form of resistance to any form of interpretation".

[ 25 ] Some studies suggest a lack of relevance or validity of this method.

[ 26 ] Coda [ edit ] Adam Phillips suggests that "the radical nature of Freud's project is clear if one imagines what it would be like to live in a world in which everyone was able - had the capacity - to free-associate, to say whatever came into their mind at any given moment...like a collage".

[ 27 ] See also [ edit ] Association of ideas Associationism Epoche Internal monologue Stream of consciousness writing Stream of consciousness Structuralism References [ edit ] ^ "Definition of FREE ASSOCIATION" .

www.merriam-webster.com . Retrieved 2018-11-09 .

^ Pamela Thurschwell, Sigmund Freud (2009) p. 24 ^ Ernest Jones, The Life and Works of Sigmund Freud (Penguin 1964) p. 216 ^ Ernest Jones, The Life and Works of Sigmund Freud (Penguin 1964) p. 214 ^ Quoted in Janet Malcolm, Psychoanalysis: The Impossible Profession (London 1988) p. 17 ^ Quoted in Jones, p. 219 ^ Peter Koestenbaum, Introductory essay to The Paris Lectures by Husserl, 1998 ^ Eysenck, Hans (1991).

Decline and Fall of the Freudian Empire . Penguin Books Ltd., p. 23–24.

^ Robert Humphrey, Stream of Consciousness in the Modern Novel (1954), Berkeley and Los Angeles, University of California Press, 1959. P.43.

^ Sigmund Freud, Introductory Lectures on Psycho-Analysis (PFL 1) p. 328 ^ James Strachey, "Sigmund Freud", in Sigmund Freud, On Sexuality (PFL 7) p. 20 ^ Christopher Bollas, The Evocative Object World (2008) p. 21 ^ Eric Berne, A Layman's Guide to Psychiatry and Psychoanalysis (1976) p. 269 ^ Thompson, M. Guy (1994).

The Ethic of Honesty: The Fundamental Rule of Psychoanalysis . Rodopi.

ISBN 90-420-1118-1 .

^ Freud, Sigmund (1913).

On the beginning of treatment . p. 135.

^ Freud, Sigmund (1913).

On the beginning of treatment .

^ Jan Campbell, Psychoanalysis and the Time of Life (2006) p. 58 ^ Jones, p. 326 ^ Freud, Introductory Lectures p. 139 ^ Quoted in Adam Phillips, On Flirtation (London 1994) p. 67 ^ Jacques Lacan, Écrits: A Selection (London 1997) p. 41 ^ Janet Malcolm, p. 17, 2011 ^ Kaplan, Robert; Saccuzzo, Dennis (2009).

Psychological Testing (8th ed.). Wadsworth, Cengage Learning. pp.

386 , 400.

ISBN 9780495095552 .

^ Patrick Casement, Further Learning from the Patient (London 1990) p. 160 ^ "Alain de Mijolla, "Free Association" " . Enotes.com. 1908-02-26 . Retrieved 2013-07-25 .

^ Frank Cioffi , « [Commentary on Macmillan 2001b] The rationale for psychoanalytic interpretation », in Psychological Inquiry, 12, 2001, p. 161-166.

^ Adam Phillips, On Flirtation (London 1994) p. 67 External links [ edit ] An example of free association.

v t e Psychotherapy Schools Psychodynamic Adlerian therapy Analytical therapy Mentalization-based treatment Psychoanalysis Transference focused psychotherapy Cognitive and behavioral Clinical behavior analysis Acceptance and commitment therapy Functional analytic psychotherapy Cognitive behavioral therapy Cognitive therapy Dialectical behavior therapy Mindfulness-based cognitive therapy Rational emotive behavior therapy Humanistic Emotionally focused therapy Existential therapy Focusing Gestalt therapy Logotherapy Person-centered therapy Other Art therapy Dance therapy Feminist therapy Music therapy Narrative therapy Play therapy Reality therapy Systemic therapy Transactional analysis List Integrative Eclectic psychotherapy Multimodal therapy Transtheoretical model Approaches Brief psychotherapy Counseling Online therapy Telephone therapy Residential treatment Self-help Support group Research Clinical formulation Clinical pluralism Common factors theory Discontinuation History Practitioner–scholar model Techniques Behaviour therapy Aversion therapy Chaining Contingency management Shaping Stimulus control Token economy Counterconditioning Desensitization / Exposure therapy Systematic desensitization Other individual therapy Autogenic training Biofeedback Clean language Cognitive restructuring Emotion regulation Affect labeling Free association Homework Hypnotherapy Modeling Group psychotherapy Co-therapy Couples therapy Family therapy Psychodrama Sensitivity training People Philippe Pinel Josef Breuer Sigmund Freud Pierre Janet Alfred Adler Sándor Ferenczi Carl Jung Ludwig Binswanger Melanie Klein Otto Rank Karen Horney Harry Stack Sullivan Fritz Perls Anna Freud Donald Winnicott Wilhelm Reich Milton H. Erickson Jacques Lacan Erik Erikson Carl Rogers Viktor Frankl George Kelly Rollo May Virginia Axline Carl Whitaker Albert Ellis Silvano Arieti James Bugental Joseph Wolpe Virginia Satir Aaron Beck Salvador Minuchin Paul Watzlawick Haim Ginott Ogden Lindsley Paul Watzlawick Arthur Janov Eugene Gendlin R. D. Laing Jean Baker Miller Otto F. Kernberg Nathan Azrin Irvin D. Yalom Arnold Lazarus Lorna Smith Benjamin Marsha M. Linehan Vittorio Guidano Les Greenberg William R. Miller Steven C. Hayes Michael White Jeffrey Young Peter Fonagy Associations Association for the Advancement of Psychotherapy Association for Applied Psychophysiology and Biofeedback Association for Behavioral and Cognitive Therapies Association for Behavior Analysis International European Association for Psychotherapy Society for Psychotherapy Research World Council for Psychotherapy Category v t e Sigmund Freud Books On Aphasia (1891) Studies on Hysteria (1895) The Interpretation of Dreams (including On Dreams ) (1899) The Psychopathology of Everyday Life (1901) Jokes and Their Relation to the Unconscious (1905) Totem and Taboo (1913) Introduction to Psychoanalysis (1916–17) The History of the Psychoanalytic Movement (1917) Group Psychology and the Analysis of the Ego (1921) The Ego and the Id (1923) The Question of Lay Analysis (1926) The Future of an Illusion (1927) Civilization and Its Discontents (1930) Moses and Monotheism (1939) Essays " The Aetiology of Hysteria " (1896) Three Essays on the Theory of Sexuality (1905) Delusion and Dream in Jensen's Gradiva (1907) Creative Writers and Day-Dreaming (1908) Leonardo da Vinci, A Memory of His Childhood (1910) On Narcissism (1914) The History of the Psychoanalytic Movement (1914) Some Character-Types Met with in Psycho-Analytic Work (1915) Thoughts for the Times on War and Death (1916) Mourning and Melancholia (1918) Beyond the Pleasure Principle (1920) Medusa's Head (1922) Dostoevsky and Parricide (1928) Case studies "Dora" (Ida Bauer) Emma Eckstein Herbert Graf ("Little Hans") Irma's injection "Anna O." ( Bertha Pappenheim ) "Rat Man" Sergei Pankejeff ("Wolfman") Daniel Paul Schreber Original concepts Psychoanalysis Id, ego and superego Libido Preconscious Ego ideal censorship Free association Transference Psychosexual development Oral stage Anal stage Phallic stage Latency stage Genital stage Oedipus complex Father complex Deferred obedience Reality principle Seduction theory Related Bibliography complete works Archives Vienna home and museum London home and museum 1971 statue Interment Freudian slip Humor Inner circle Neo-Freudianism Views on homosexuality Religious views Cultural depictions Freud: The Secret Passion (1962 film) The Visitor (1993 play) Mahler on the Couch (2010 film) A Dangerous Method (2011 film) Freud (2020 TV series) Freud's Last Session (2023 film) Family Martha Bernays (wife) Anna Freud (daughter) Ernst L. Freud (son) Clement Freud (grandson) Lucian Freud (grandson) Walter Freud (grandson) Amalia Freud (mother) Jacob Freud (father) Edward Bernay (nephew) Jofi (dog) Prizes Sigmund Freud Prize Authority control databases : National Latvia Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Free_association_(psychology)&oldid=1275551091 " Category : Psychoanalysis Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 13 February 2025, at 18:20 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Free association (psychology) 30 languages Add topic

