Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Education Toggle Education subsection 2.1 Specialization 3 Employment 4 Professional designation 5 Professional Societies 6 See also 7 References Toggle the table of contents Geologist 46 languages العربية Banjar Беларуская Brezhoneg Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge Gàidhlig ગુજરાતી 한국어 हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Kernowek Latviešu Magyar Македонски 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan پښتو Polski Português Română Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog ไทย Türkçe Тыва дыл Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Geologists ) Scientist who studies geology For the member of Animal Collective , see Geologist (musician) .

Geologist The Geologist by Carl Spitzweg , c.

1860 Occupation Names Geologist Occupation type Profession Activity sectors Government Mining Petroleum industry Engineering Description Related jobs Seismologist Volcanologist Geophysicist Geoscientists A geologist is a scientist who studies the structure, composition, and history of Earth . Geologists incorporate techniques from physics , chemistry , biology , mathematics , and geography to perform research in the field and the laboratory . Geologists work in the energy and mining sectors to exploit natural resources . They monitor environmental hazards such as earthquakes , volcanoes , tsunamis and landslides . Geologists are also important contributors to climate change discussions.

History [ edit ] Scotsman James Hutton, father of modern geology James Hutton is often viewed as the first modern geologist.

[ 1 ] In 1785 he presented a paper entitled Theory of the Earth to the Royal Society of Edinburgh . In his paper, he explained his theory that the Earth must be much older than had previously been supposed to allow enough time for mountains to be eroded and for sediments to form new rocks at the bottom of the sea, which in turn were raised up to become dry land. Hutton published a two-volume version of his ideas in 1795 ( Vol. 1 , Vol. 2 ).
Followers of Hutton were known as Plutonists because they believed that some rocks were formed by vulcanism , which is the deposition of lava from volcanoes, as opposed to the Neptunists , led by Abraham Werner , who believed that all rocks had settled out of a large ocean whose level gradually dropped over time.

"Geologists at work" from the U.S. Geological and Geographic Survey of the Territories (1874 - 06/30/1879). Photographer: William Henry Jackson The first geological map of the United States was produced in 1809 by William Maclure .

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] In 1807, Maclure commenced the self-imposed task of making a geological survey of the United States. Almost every state in the Union was traversed and mapped by him; the Allegheny Mountains being crossed and recrossed some 50 times.

[ 4 ] The results of his unaided labors were submitted to the American Philosophical Society in a memoir entitled Observations on the Geology of the United States explanatory of a Geological Map , and published in the Society's Transactions , together with the nation's first geological map.

[ 5 ] This antedates William Smith 's geological map of England by six years, although it was constructed using a different classification of rocks.

Sir Charles Lyell first published his famous book, Principles of Geology , [ 6 ] in 1830. This book, which influenced the thought of Charles Darwin , successfully promoted the doctrine of uniformitarianism . This theory states that slow geological processes have occurred throughout the Earth's history and are still occurring today. In contrast, catastrophism is the theory that Earth's features formed in single, catastrophic events and remained unchanged thereafter. Though Hutton believed in uniformitarianism, the idea was not widely accepted at the time.

Education [ edit ] A young geologist learns about flow banding For an aspiring geologist, training typically includes significant coursework in physics , mathematics , and chemistry , in addition to classes offered through the geology department; historical and physical geology, igneous and metamorphic petrology and petrography, hydrogeology , sedimentology , stratigraphy , mineralogy , palaeontology , physical geography and structural geology are among the many required areas of study. Most geologists also need skills in GIS and other mapping techniques. Geology students often spend portions of the year, especially the summer though sometimes during a January term, living and working under field conditions with faculty members (often referred to as "field camp"). Many non-geologists often take geology courses or have expertise in geology that they find valuable to their fields; this is common in the fields of geography , engineering , chemistry , urban planning , environmental studies , among others.

Specialization [ edit ] A geologist working in the Arctic Geologists exploring Jurassic sedimentary rocks in Makhtesh Gadol , Negev Desert, Israel Geologist explaining the importance of volcanic ash layers to students on field in Iceland Geologists, can be generally identified as a specialist in one or more of the various geoscience disciplines, such as a geophysicist or geochemist. Geologists may concentrate their studies or research in one or more of the following disciplines: Economic geology : the study of ore genesis , and the mechanisms of ore creation, geostatistics .

Engineering geology : application of the geologic sciences to engineering practice for the purpose of assuring that the geologic factors affecting the location, design, construction, operation and maintenance of engineering works are recognized and adequately provided for; Geophysics : the applied branch deals with the application of physical methods such as gravity, seismicity, electricity, magnetic properties to study the earth.

Geochemistry : the applied branch deals with the study of the chemical makeup and behaviour of rocks, and the study of the behaviour of their minerals.

Geochronology : the study of isotope geology specifically toward determining the date within the past of rock formation, metamorphism , mineralization and geological events (notably, meteorite impacts ).

Geomorphology : the study of landforms and the processes that create them.

Hydrogeology : the study of the origin, occurrence and movement of groundwater water in a subsurface geological system.

Igneous petrology : the study of igneous processes such as igneous differentiation , fractional crystallization , intrusive and volcanological phenomena.

Isotope geology : the case of the isotopic composition of rocks to determine the processes of rock and planetary formation.

Metamorphic petrology: the study of the effects of metamorphism on minerals and rocks.

Marine geology : the study of the seafloor; involves geophysical, geochemical, sedimentological and paleontological investigations of the ocean floor and coastal margins. Marine geology has strong ties to physical oceanography and plate tectonics.

Mineralogy : the study of the chemistry, crystal structure , and physical (including optical) properties of minerals and mineralized artifacts. Specific studies within mineralogy include the processes of mineral origin and formation, classification of minerals, their geographical distribution, as well as their utilization.

Palaeoclimatology : the application of geological science to determine the climatic conditions present in the Earth's atmosphere within the Earth's history.

Palaeontology : the classification and taxonomy of fossils within the geological record and the construction of a palaeontological history of the Earth.

Pedology : the study of soil, soil formation, and regolith formation.

Petroleum geology : the study of sedimentary basins applied to the search for hydrocarbons ( oil exploration ).

Planetary geology : the study of geosciences as it relates to other celestial bodies, namely planets and their moons . This includes the subdisciplines of lunar geology, selenology , and martian geology, areology .

Sedimentology : the study of sedimentary rocks , strata , formations, eustasy and the processes of modern-day sedimentary and erosive systems.

Seismology : the study of earthquakes .

Structural geology : the study of folds , faults , foliation and rock microstructure to determine the deformational history of rocks and regions.

Volcanology : the study of volcanoes , their eruptions, lavas , magma processes and hazards.

Employment [ edit ] "Picturesque camp made by a lone geologist on the cinders of Inferno". This photo was taken during a U.S. Department of the Interior Geological Survey in 1921.

Professional geologists may work in the mining industry or in the associated area of mineral exploration .

[ 7 ] They may also work in oil and gas industry.

[ 7 ] Some geologists also work for a wide range of government agencies, private firms, and non-profit and academic institutions. They are usually hired on a contract basis or hold permanent positions within private firms or official agencies (such as the Geological Survey and Mineral Exploration of Iran ).

[ citation needed ] Local, state, and national governments hire geologists to work on geological projects that are of interest to the public community. The investigation of a country's natural resources is often a key role when working for government institutions; the work of the geologist in this field can be made publicly available to help the community make more informed decisions related to the exploitation of resources, management of the environment and the safety of critical infrastructure - all of which is expected to bring greater wellbeing to the country.

[ 8 ] This 'wellbeing' is often in the form of greater tax revenues from new or extended mining projects or through better infrastructure and/or natural disaster planning.

[ citation needed ] Geologist mud logging , common in petroleum and water-well drilling An engineering geologist is employed to investigate geologic hazards and geologic constraints for the planning, design and construction of public and private engineering projects, forensic and post-mortem studies, and environmental impact analysis .

Exploration geologists use all aspects of geology and geophysics to locate and study natural resources. In many countries or U.S. states without specialized environmental remediation licensure programs, the environmental remediation field is often dominated by professional geologists, particularly hydrogeologists, with professional concentrations in this aspect of the field.

Petroleum and mining companies use mudloggers , and large-scale land developers use the skills of geologists and engineering geologists to help them locate oil and minerals, adapt to local features such as karst topography or earthquake risk, and comply with environmental regulations.

[ citation needed ] Geologists in academia usually hold an advanced degree in a specialized area within their geological discipline and are employed by universities.

[ citation needed ] Professional designation [ edit ] The rock hammer and hand lens (or loupe ) are two of the most characteristic tools carried by geologists in the field.

In Canada, National Instrument 43-101 requires reports containing estimates of mineral resources and reserves to be prepared by, or under the supervision of, a Qualified Person (QP) who has at least five years of experience with the reported minerals and is a member of a professional association. The QP accepts personal liability for the professional quality of the report and underlying work.

[ 9 ] The rules and guidelines codified in National Instrument 43-101 were introduced after a scandal in 1997 where Bre-X geologists salted drill core samples at a gold exploration property in Busang, Indonesia. The falsified drilling results misled Bre-X investors and upon discovery of the fraud, the company collapsed in the largest gold mining scam in history.

[ 10 ] In Europe exists the professional title of EurGeol (European Geologist [ 11 ] ) awarded by the European Federation of Geologists .

Professional Societies [ edit ] Main article: List of geoscience organizations Geologists may belong to a number of professional societies promoting research, networking, and professional development within the field.

American Association of Petroleum Geologists (AAPG) American Geosciences Institute (AGI) American Geophysical Union (AGU) European Association of Geoscientists and Engineers ( EAGE ) – Professional organization for geoscientists and engineers European Federation of Geologists (EFG) European Geosciences Union ( EGU ) – International science society Geological Society of America (GSA) Geological Society of London (GSL) International Commission on Stratigraphy (ICS) International Union of Geological Sciences (IUGS) Mineralogical Society of America (MSA) Society for Sedimentary Geology (SEPM) Society of Economic Geologists (SEG) See also [ edit ] List of geologists Petroleum geologist References [ edit ] ^ James Hutton: The Founder of Modern Geology Archived March 3, 2016, at the Wayback Machine , American Museum of Natural History ^ William Maclure (1817).

Observations on the Geology of the United States of America: With Some Remarks on the Effect Produced on the Nature and Fertility of Soils, by the Decomposition of the Different Classes of Rocks; and an Application to the Fertility of Every State in the Union, in Reference to the Accompanying Geological Map ...

author.

^ "Title Page: Observations on the geology of the United States of America" .

davidrumsey.com .

^ Page 39 in Greene, J.C. and Burke, J.G. (1978) The Science of Minerals in the Age of Jefferson. Transactions of the American Philosophical Society, New Series, Vol. 68, No. 4, pp. 1–113 ^ "Map of the United States of America" .

davidrumsey.com .

^ Charles Lyell. (1991).

Principles of geology . Chicago: University of Chicago Press .

ISBN 978-0-226-49797-6 .

^ a b Berkman, D.A. (1980). "Trends in the training and employment of geoscientists in Australia from 1967 to 1978".

Journal of the Geological Society of Australia .

27 ( 1– 2): 83– 88.

Bibcode : 1980AuJES..27...83B .

doi : 10.1080/00167618008729121 .

^ Geoscience Australia, Our Role , December 16, 2010, Accessed: May 12, 2011 ^ "AIPG - American Institute of Professional Geologists" .

aipg.org .

^ Grundhauser, Eric (21 August 2015).

"The $6 Billion Gold Mine That Wasn't There" .

Slate . Retrieved 21 September 2015 .

^ Banjac, Nenad; Savić, Ljubinko; Maran, Aleksandra; Cukavac, Milena; Ganić, Meri; Nikić, Zoran (2011-09-12).

The Geology in Digital Age: Proceedings of the 17th Meeting of the Association of European Geological Societies . Serbian Geological Society.

ISBN 978-86-86053-10-7 .

v t e Geology Overviews Outline of geology Glossary of geology History of geology Index of geology articles History of geology Geochronology Geological history of Earth Timeline of geology Composition and structure Cosmochemistry Crystallography Geochemistry Mineralogy Petrology Sedimentology Historical geology Stratigraphy Paleontology Paleoclimatology Palaeogeography Dynamic Earth Structural geology Geodynamics Plate tectonics Geomorphology Volcanology Water Glaciology Hydrogeology Marine geology Geodesy Cartography Earth's orbit Geodetic astronomy Geomatics Gravity of Earth Planetary geodesy Remote sensing Geopositioning Geophysics Geomagnetism Geophysical survey Planetary geophysics Seismology Tectonophysics Applications Biogeology Economic geology Engineering geology Environmental geology Planetary geology Geobiology Geologic modelling Forensic geology Forensic geophysics Meteoritics Mining geology Mineral physics Occupations Geologist Petroleum geologist Volcanologist Geology portal Geology Geology Authority control databases National Germany 2 United States France BnF data Czech Republic 2 Israel Other NARA Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐hj8fc
Cached time: 20250817053934
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.606 seconds
Real time usage: 0.867 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 3059/1000000
Revision size: 17627/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 55493/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 4958/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 5/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 46839/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.406/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 23890935/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  764.968      1 -total
 22.41%  171.450      1 Template:Reflist
 22.16%  169.540      4 Template:Citation_needed
 16.56%  126.672      2 Template:Annotated_link
 14.29%  109.340      3 Template:Cite_book
 12.21%   93.404      1 Template:Geology
 11.93%   91.268      1 Template:Navbox
  9.64%   73.767      4 Template:Fix
  9.01%   68.919      1 Template:Short_description
  6.68%   51.131      1 Template:Authority_control Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:21171418:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817053934 and revision id 1286898812. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Geologist&oldid=1286898812 " Categories : Geologists Science occupations Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from November 2024 This page was last edited on 22 April 2025, at 17:56 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Geologist 46 languages Add topic

