Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Author and audience 2 Manuscripts 3 Contents 4 Possible identification 5 References 6 Bibliography 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Epistle to Diognetus 20 languages Asturianu Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Français Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano ქართული Latina Magyar Nederlands Polski Português Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Türkçe 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiquote Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 2nd century Christian apologetic text Part of a series on New Testament apocrypha First page of the Gospel of Judas (page 33 of Codex Tchacos ) Apostolic Fathers 1 Clement 2 Clement Epistles of Ignatius Polycarp to the Philippians Martyrdom of Polycarp Didache Barnabas Diognetus The Shepherd of Hermas Apocryphal gospels Jewish–Christian gospels Ebionites Hebrews Nazarenes Infancy gospels James Thomas Arabic Pseudo-Matthew History of Joseph the Carpenter Gnostic gospels Judas Mary Philip Truth Secret Mark The Saviour Other gospels Thomas Marcion Nicodemus Peter Barnabas Lost gospels Bartholomew Matthias Cerinthus Basilides Mani Gospel of the Hebrews Apocalypses Paul Peter Pseudo-Methodius Thomas Stephen 1 James 2 James 2 John Epistles Apocryphon of James Apocryphon of John Epistula Apostolorum Pseudo-Titus Peter to Philip Paul and Seneca Lost epistles Alexandrians Laodiceans Acts Andrew Andrew and Bartholomew Barnabas John Mar Mari The Martyrs Paul Peter Peter and Andrew Peter and Paul Peter and the Twelve Philip Pilate Thaddeus Thomas Timothy Xanthippe, Polyxena, and Rebecca Miscellany Other apocrypha Clementine literature Diatessaron Doctrine of Addai Pilate cycle Prayer of the Apostle Paul Questions of Bartholomew Resurrection of Jesus Christ Related topics Nag Hammadi library Christianity portal v t e The Epistle to Diognetus [ 1 ] ( Greek : Πρὸς Διόγνητον Ἐπιστολή ) is an example of Christian apologetics , writings defending Christianity against the charges of its critics. The Greek writer and recipient are not otherwise known. Estimates of dating based on the language and other textual evidence have ranged from AD 130 [ 2 ] (which would make it one of the earliest examples of apologetic literature), to the general era of Melito of Sardis , Athenagoras of Athens , and Tatian .

[ 3 ] Author and audience [ edit ] Sometimes the epistle is assigned the title 'Epistle of Mathetes to Diognetus'. The text itself does not identify the author. The word "mathetes" is the Greek word for "student" or "disciple," and it appears only once in the text, when the author calls himself a "student of the Apostles" (ἀποστόλων γενομένος μαθητής). Hence it is not a proper name at all, and its use in the title is strictly conventional. The writer, whoever he or she was, sounds to many like a Johannine Christian , inasmuch as he uses the word "Logos" as a substitute for "Christ" or "Jesus." [ 4 ] Scholars have suggested individuals who could be the addressee of the Letter to Diognetus, one implausible (one of the emperor Marcus Aurelius ' tutors), [ 5 ] the other quite possible (an Alexandrian procurator, Tiberios Claudios Diognetos, c.200). Charles E. Hill cites an inscription from Smyrna, probably from the second century, by ‘Diognetos, son of Apollonius, son of Diognetos, archon’. This is evidence of an aristocratic family in Smyrna during the time of Polycarp , of which at least two members bore the name Diognetos. At least one of these two was a member of the city council, a status that would make the term κράτιστος, used of the addressee of the Letter to Diognetus, very appropriate.

[ 6 ] It is entirely possible, without verification of the author, that we have a fictitious character, since the name "Diognetus," means "God-born" in Greek.

[ 7 ] Manuscripts [ edit ] The epistle survived only in one manuscript , initially discovered in 1436 being used as wrapping paper in a fish market in Constantinople .

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] It was part of a 13th-century codex that included writings ascribed to Justin Martyr .

[ 10 ] The manuscript was mostly intact, exhibiting damage only in one place, several lines in the middle of the text.

It was first published in 1592, and attributed to Justin Martyr because of the context of its discovery. Unfortunately the original was subsequently destroyed in a fire during the Franco-Prussian War in 1870, [ 10 ] but numerous transcriptions of the letter survive today.

Oddly, there is no evidence that any Apostolic Father or Church Father knew of its existence, even though it has been esteemed by many modern readers as a gem of early Christian apologetics. It has been suggested that the Epistle should be identified  with the Apology of Quadratus of Athens , mentioned by Eusebius in his Church History , [ 11 ] but this is disputed among scholars (see below).

Contents [ edit ] The Epistle has twelve chapters: Chapter I: Occasion of the Epistle.

Chapter II: The Vanity of Idols.

Chapter III: Superstitions of the Jews.

Chapter IV: The Other Observances of the Jews.

Chapter V: The Manners of the Christians.

Chapter VI: The Relation of Christians to the World.

Chapter VII: The Manifestation of Christ.

Chapter VIII: The Miserable State of Men Before the Coming of the Word.

Chapter IX: Why the Son Was Sent So Late.

Chapter X: The Blessings that Will Flow from Faith.

Chapter XI: These Things are Worthy to Be Known and Believed.

Chapter XII: The Importance of Knowledge to True Spiritual Life.

The 10th chapter breaks off in mid thought. When the text resumes, the epistolary style has been abandoned and the final two chapters resemble a peroration . They are often considered to be later additions from the 3rd-century. Some have attributed them to Hippolytus , based on similarities of thought and style. J.B. Lightfoot suggested that the final two chapters may have been written by Pantaenus in the mid-late second century.

[ 12 ] Possible identification [ edit ] In 1947 Paulus Andriessen suggested that the Epistle to Diognetus is to be identified with the Apology of Quadratus of Athens , mentioned by Eusebius in his Church History.

[ 13 ] [ 11 ] Eusebius not only mentions this Apology , but also provides a fragment of its contents. This fragment is not present in the text of the Epistle which has survived. The manuscript of this text, however, does not show the full text but has a gap. In 1966 Edgar J. Goodspeed wrote that the identification of the Epistle with the Apology mentioned by Eusebius is an ingenious theory. Goodspeed considered it improbable however, also stating that the fragment does not fit the gap.

[ 14 ] More recently, Michael W. Holmes has called Andriessen's proposal "intriguing": while admitting that Epistle to Diognetus does not contain the only quotation known from Quadratus's work, Holmes defends this identification by noting "there is a gap between 7.6 and 7.7 into which it would fit very well." [ 15 ] References [ edit ] ^ The Epistle of Mathetes to Diognetus by Catholic Encyclopedia ^ Richardson, Cyril C. (1953), Early Christian Fathers , pp.

206– 10 .

^ Norris, Richard A Jr (2004), "The Apologists", in Young, Frances; Ayres, Lewis; Louth, Andrew (eds.), The Cambridge History of Early Christian Literature , p. 43 .

^ "Diognetus" , Early Christian Writings .

^ Antoninus, Marcus Aurelius, "Meditations" , Classics , MIT, 1.6 .

^ Richard Bauckham. (2009). [Review of] Charles E. Hill, From the Lost Teaching of Polycarp: Identifying Irenaeus’ Apostolic Presbyter and the Author of Ad Diognetum. The Journal of Theological Studies, Volume 60, Issue 2, October 2009, Pages 674–676, https://doi.org/10.1093/jts/flp055 .

^ "Letter to Diognetus" , Britannica .

^ Smith, Geoffrey S.; Landau, Brent C. (2023-03-21).

The Secret Gospel of Mark: A Controversial Scholar, a Scandalous Gospel of Jesus, and the Fierce Debate over Its Authenticity . Yale University Press.

ISBN 978-0-300-27181-2 .

^ Jefford, Clayton N. (2012-12-01).

Reading the Apostolic Fathers: A Student's Introduction . Baker Books.

ISBN 978-1-4412-4037-8 .

^ a b Foster, Paul (2007). "The Epistle to Diognetus".

The Expository Times .

118 (4): 162– 168.

doi : 10.1177/0014524606074317 .

^ a b Eusebius, Historia Ecclesiae , Book IV, Chapter 3 ^ Lightfoot, J.B.

The Apostolic Fathers . pp.

488– 489.

^ Andriessen, Dom P. (1947).

"The Authorship of the Epistula ad Diognetum" .

Vigiliae Christianae .

1 (2): 129– 136.

doi : 10.2307/1582642 .

ISSN 0042-6032 .

JSTOR 1582642 .

^ Goodspeed, Edgar J. (1966).

A History of Early Christian Literature . Chicago: University of Chicago Press. pp. 97.

ISBN 0226303861 .

^ Michael W. Holmes, The Apostolic Fathers in English (Grand Rapids: Baker Academic, 2006), p. 290 Bibliography [ edit ] Crowe, Brandon D. 2011 "O Sweet Exchange! The Soteriological Significance of the Incarnation in the Epistle to Diognetus." Zeitschrift für die neutestamentliche Wissenschaft und die Kunde der älteren Kirche 102, no. 1: 96–109.

Foster, Paul 2007. "The Epistle to Diognetus." Expository Times 118, no. 4: 162–68.

Jefford, Clayton N. 2013 The Epistle to Diognetus (with Fragments of Quadratus): Introduction, Text and Commentary .

Oxford Apostolic Fathers series.  Oxford: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19921274-3 Lienhard, Joseph T. 1970 "Christology of the Epistle to Diognetus." Vigiliae Christianae 24, no. 4: 280–89.

Lona, Horacio E. 2001 "An Diognet", Übersetzt und erklärt , ed. by N. Brox, K. Niederwimmer, H. E. Lona, F. R. Prostmeier, and J. Ulrich.

Kommentar zu frühchristlichen Apologeten series, KfA, Vol. 8. Verlag Herder: Freiburg u.a.

ISBN 3-451-27679-8 Nielsen, Charles Merritt 1970. "Epistle to Diognetus: Its Date and Relationship to Marcion." Anglican Theological Review 52, no. 2: 77–91.

External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Epistle to Diognetus .

English Wikisource has original text related to this article: Epistle to Diognetus Greek text of Epistle to Diognetus Early Christian Writings: Epistle of Mathetes to Diognetus e-text and commentaries Arabic text of Epistle to Diognetus - Another Arabic translation v t e Theology Conceptions of God Theism Forms Deism Dystheism Henotheism Hermeticism Kathenotheism Nontheism Monolatry Monotheism Urmonotheismus Mysticism Panentheism Pandeism Pantheism Polydeism Polytheism Spiritualism Theistic finitism Theopanism Concepts Deity Divinity Gender of God and gods Goddess Numen Singular god theologies By faith Abrahamic religions Baháʼí Faith Judaism Christianity Islam Buddhism Hinduism Jainism Sikhism Tenrikyo Zoroastrianism Concepts Absolute Brahman Emanationism Logos Supreme Being God as Time Good ( Ahura Mazda , Father of Greatness ) Trinitarianism Athanasian Creed Comma Johanneum Consubstantiality Homoousian Homoiousian Hypostasis Perichoresis Shield of the Trinity Trinitarian formula Trinity Trinity of the Church Fathers Trinitarian universalism Eschatology Afterlife Apocalypticism Fate of the unlearned Fitra Heaven / Hell By religion Buddhist Christian Hindu Islamic Jewish Taoist Zoroastrian Feminist Buddhism Christianity Hinduism Islam Judaism Mormonism Goddesses Other concepts Attributes of God in Christianity / in Islam Binitarianism Demiurge Divine simplicity Divine presence Egotheism Exotheology Hermeneutics Holocaust Godhead in Christianity Latter Day Saints Great Architect of the Universe Great Spirit Apophatic theology Olelbis Open theism Personal god Phenomenological definition Philo's view Process Tian Unmoved mover Names of God in Christianity Hinduism Islam Jainism Judaism By faith Christian History Outline Biblical canon Glossary Paterology Christology Pneumatology Cosmology Ecclesiology Eschatology Ethics Hamartiology Messianism Philosophy Political Practical Public Sophiology Soteriology Hindu Ayyavazhi theology Krishnology Islamic Oneness of God Prophets Holy Scriptures Angels Predestination Last Judgment Jewish Abrahamic prophecy Aggadah Denominations Kabbalah Philosophy Pagan Slavic Native Faith Wiccan East Asian Tenrikyo Religion portal Authority control databases International VIAF National Germany United States France BnF data Norway Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Other IdRef Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Epistle_to_Diognetus&oldid=1300604218 " Categories : 2nd-century Christian texts Apostolic Fathers Christian apologetic works Ancient Christian anti-Judaism Texts in Koine Greek Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Greek-language text This page was last edited on 15 July 2025, at 09:22 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Epistle to Diognetus 20 languages Add topic

