Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Greek and Roman World 1.2 Middle Ages and Renaissance 2 See also 3 References 4 Literature 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Astrarium 12 languages Беларуская Català Español Français Հայերեն Македонски Bahasa Melayu Русский Türkçe Українська اردو Vepsän kel’ Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Timepiece and astronomical prediction device The astrarium made by Giovanni Dondi dell'Orologio showed hour, year calendar, movement of the planets, Sun and Moon. Reconstruction, Museo Nazionale Scienza e Tecnologia Leonardo da Vinci , Milan.

An astrarium , also called a planetarium , is a medieval astronomical clock made in the 14th century by Italian engineer and astronomer Giovanni Dondi dell'Orologio . The Astrarium was modeled after the Solar System and, in addition to counting time and representing calendar dates and holidays, showed how the planets moved around the celestial sphere in one timepiece.

[ 1 ] This was its main task, in comparison with the astronomical clock, the main task of which is the actual reading of time. A complex mechanism, it combined the functions of a modern planetarium, clock, and calendar into a singular constructive device. Devices that perform this function were known to have been created prior to the design of Dondi, though relatively little is known about them. It is occasionally erroneously claimed by the details of some sources that the Astrarium was the first mechanical device showing the movements of the planets.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] History [ edit ] Greek and Roman World [ edit ] The Antikythera mechanism (main fragment) The first astraria were mechanical devices.

Archimedes is said [ by whom?

] to have used a primitive version that could predict the positions of the Sun , the Moon , and the planets [ citation needed ] . On May 17, 1902, an archaeologist named Valerios Stais discovered that a lump of oxidated material, which had been recovered from a shipwreck near the Greek island of Antikythera , held within it a mechanism with cogwheels . This mechanism, known as the Antikythera mechanism , was recently redated to end of the 2nd century BCE.

[ 4 ] Extensive study of the fragments, using X-rays, has revealed enough details (gears, pinions, crank) to enable researchers to build partial replicas of the original device.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] Engraved on the major gears are the names of the planets, which leaves little doubt as to the intended use of the mechanism.

By the collapse of the Roman Empire , the know-how and science behind this piece of clockwork was lost.

Middle Ages and Renaissance [ edit ] According to historians Bedini and Maddison , the earliest astrarium clock with an "almost complete description and incontestable documentation" to have survived is the astrarium completed in 1364 by Giovanni de' Dondi (1318–1388), a scholar and physician of the Middle Ages .

[ 8 ] The original clock, consisting of 107 wheels and pinions , has been lost, perhaps during the sacking of Mantua in 1630, but de' Dondi left detailed descriptions, which have survived, enabling a reconstruction of the clock. It displays the mean time, sidereal (or star) time and the motions of the Sun, Moon and the five then-known planets Venus , Mars , Saturn , Mercury , and Jupiter . It was conceived according to a Ptolemaic conception of the Solar System. De' Dondi was inspired by his father Jacopo who designed the astronomical clock in the Piazzi dei Signori, Padua , in 1344 – one of the first of its type.

In later ages, more astraria were built. A famous example is the Eise Eisinga Planetarium , built in 1774 by Eise Eisinga from Dronrijp, Friesland, the Netherlands. It displayed all the planets and was fixed to the ceiling in a house in Franeker , where it can still be visited.

In modern times, the astrarium has grown into a tourist attraction as a commercially exploited planetarium -showing in IMAX theaters, with such presentations as The History of the Universe , as well as other astronomical phenomena.

See also [ edit ] Astronomical clock Orrery Planetarium References [ edit ] ^ Museo Galileo — Multimedia — Mechanical clocks ^ Harris, Judith. (2009-03-22).

"Celebrating Galileo in Florence — California Literary Review" . California Literary Review.

^ "Image of de dondi's 'astrarium', the world's first astronomical clock, 1364" .

Inventory No.: 1974-0386 . Science & Society Picture Library . Retrieved 2023-02-22 .

^ "Antikythera Mechanism Research Project" .

www.antikythera-mechanism.gr . Archived from the original on 2012-10-05 . Retrieved 2008-03-17 .

^ "Solid Models of the Antikythera Mechanism | Antikythera Mechanism Research Project" .

www.antikythera-mechanism.gr . Archived from the original on 2008-03-15 . Retrieved 2008-03-17 .

^ "Archived copy" . Archived from the original on 2006-12-06 . Retrieved 2006-11-29 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: archived copy as title ( link ) ^ "Archived copy" . Archived from the original on 2008-02-16 . Retrieved 2006-11-29 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: archived copy as title ( link ) ^ Bedini, Silvio A.

; Maddison, Francis R.

(1966). "Mechanical Universe: The Astrarium of Giovanni de' Dondi".

Transactions of the American Philosophical Society .

56 (5): 1– 69.

doi : 10.2307/1006002 .

JSTOR 1006002 .

S2CID 134817598 .

Literature [ edit ] Giovanni Dondi dell'Orologio – " Tractatus astarii " External links [ edit ] Annosphere An electro-mechanical model of the Earth/Sun relationship.

Science and Society Picture Library : - a picture of De Dondi’s "Astrarium", the world’s first astronomical clock, 1364.

de Dondi's Astrarium Hi-Tech, 14th Century style Het Eise Eisinga Planetarium Solar tempometer An astrarium clock running to the Sun.

v t e Solar System models Devices Antikythera mechanism Armillary sphere Astrarium Astronomical clock Orrery Eise Eisinga Planetarium Tellurion Models Akaa Solar System Scale Model (Akaa, Finland) Gravity Discovery Centre (Gingin, Australia) Kystagerparken (Hvidovre, Denmark) Monument to the Sun (Zadar, Croatia) Nine Views (Zagreb, Croatia) Pajamäki Solar System Scale Model (Helsinki and Espoo, Finland) Planet Lofoten (Lofoten, Norway) Sagan Planet Walk (Ithaca, New York) Somerset Space Walk (Somerset, England) Sweden Solar System Related Solar System Kirkhill Astronomical Pillar Historical models of the Solar System Numerical model of the Solar System v t e Time Key concepts Past Present Future Eternity Measurement and standards Chronometry UTC Universal Time TAI Unit of time Orders of magnitude (time) Measurement systems Italian six-hour clock Thai six-hour clock 12-hour clock 24-hour clock Relative hour Daylight saving time Chinese Decimal Hexadecimal Hindu Metric Roman Sidereal Solar Time zone Calendars Main types Solar Lunar Lunisolar Gregorian Julian Hebrew Islamic Solar Hijri Chinese Hindu Panchang Maya List Clocks Main types astronomical astrarium atomic quantum hourglass marine sundial watch 24-hour wristwatch mechanical stopwatch water-based Cuckoo clock Digital clock Grandfather clock History Timeline Chronology History Astronomical chronology Big History Calendar era Deep time Periodization Regnal year Timeline Philosophy of time A series and B series B-theory of time Chronocentrism Duration Endurantism Eternal return Eternalism Event Moving spotlight theory Perdurantism Presentism Temporal finitism Temporal parts The Unreality of Time Religion Mythology Ages of Man Destiny Immortality Dreamtime Kāla Time and fate deities Father Time Wheel of time Kalachakra Human experience and use of time Chronemics Generation time Mental chronometry Music tempo time signature Rosy retrospection Tense–aspect–mood Time management Yesterday – Today – Tomorrow Time in science Geology Geological time age chron eon epoch era period Geochronology Geological history of Earth Physics Absolute space and time Arrow of time Chronon Coordinate time Instant Proper time Spacetime Theory of relativity Time domain Time translation symmetry Time reversal symmetry Other fields Chronological dating Chronobiology Circadian rhythms Clock reaction Glottochronology Time geography Related Leap year Memory Moment Six-hour day Space System time Tempus fugit Time capsule Time immemorial Time travel Category Commons v t e Time measurement and standards Chronometry Orders of magnitude Metrology International standards Coordinated Universal Time offset UT ΔT DUT1 International Earth Rotation and Reference Systems Service ISO 31-1 ISO 8601 International Atomic Time 12-hour clock 24-hour clock Barycentric Coordinate Time Barycentric Dynamical Time Civil time Daylight saving time Geocentric Coordinate Time International Date Line IERS Reference Meridian Leap second Solar time Terrestrial Time Time zone 180th meridian Obsolete standards Ephemeris time Greenwich Mean Time Prime meridian Time in physics Absolute space and time Spacetime Chronon Continuous signal Coordinate time Cosmological decade Discrete time and continuous time Proper time Theory of relativity Time dilation Gravitational time dilation Time domain Time-translation symmetry T-symmetry Horology Clock Astrarium Atomic clock Complication History of timekeeping devices Hourglass Marine chronometer Marine sandglass Radio clock Watch stopwatch Water clock Sundial Dialing scales Equation of time History of sundials Sundial markup schema Calendar Gregorian Hebrew Hindu Holocene Islamic (lunar Hijri) Julian Solar Hijri Astronomical Dominical letter Epact Equinox Intercalation Julian day Leap year Lunar Lunisolar Solar Solstice Tropical year Weekday determination Weekday names Archaeology and geology Chronological dating Geologic time scale International Commission on Stratigraphy Astronomical chronology Galactic year Nuclear timescale Precession Sidereal time Other units of time Instant Flick Shake Jiffy Second Minute Moment Hour Day Week Fortnight Month Year Olympiad Lustrum Decade Century Saeculum Millennium Related topics Chronology Duration music Mental chronometry Decimal time Metric time System time Time metrology Time value of money Timekeeper Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Astrarium&oldid=1299178011 " Categories : Astronomical clocks Historical scientific instruments Astronomical instruments History of astronomy Hidden categories: CS1 maint: archived copy as title Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from February 2022 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2022 This page was last edited on 6 July 2025, at 23:27 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Astrarium 12 languages Add topic

