Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Classification 2 Definitions and theoretical approaches 3 Signals of unreliable narration 4 See also 5 References 6 Further reading 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Unreliable narrator 21 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Deutsch Ελληνικά Español فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Nederlands 日本語 Português Русский Simple English ไทย Türkçe Українська 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Narrator whose credibility is compromised Illustration by Gustave Doré of Baron Munchausen 's tale of being swallowed by a whale.

Tall tales , such as those of the Baron, often feature unreliable narrators.

In literature , film , and other such arts , an unreliable narrator is a narrator who cannot be trusted, one whose credibility is compromised.

[ 1 ] They can be found in a wide range from children to mature characters.

[ 2 ] While unreliable narrators are almost by definition first-person narrators , arguments have been made for the existence of unreliable second- and third-person narrators , especially within the context of film and television, but sometimes also in literature.

[ 3 ] The term "unreliable narrator" was coined by Wayne C. Booth in his 1961 book The Rhetoric of Fiction .

[ 4 ] James Phelan expands on Booth's concept by offering the term "bonding unreliability" to describe situations in which the unreliable narration ultimately serves to approach the narrator to the work's envisioned audience, creating a bonding communication between the implied author and this "authorial audience".

[ 5 ] Sometimes the narrator's unreliability is made immediately evident. For instance, a story may open with the narrator making a plainly false or delusional claim or admitting to being severely mentally ill, or the story itself may have a frame in which the narrator appears as a character, with clues to the character's unreliability. A more dramatic use of the device delays the revelation until near the story's end. In some cases, the reader discovers that in the foregoing narrative, the narrator had concealed or greatly misrepresented vital pieces of information. Such a twist ending forces readers to reconsider their point of view and experience of the story. In some cases the narrator's unreliability is never fully revealed but only hinted at, leaving readers to wonder how much the narrator should be trusted and how the story should be interpreted.

Classification [ edit ] Attempts have been made at a classification of unreliable narrators. William Riggan analysed in a 1981 study four discernible types of unreliable narrators, focusing on the first-person narrator as this is the most common kind of unreliable narration.

[ 6 ] Riggan provides the following definitions and examples to illustrate his classifications: The Pícaro The first-person narrator of a picaresque novel ; an antihero serving as "an embodiment of the obstinacy of sin", whose "behavior is marked by rebelliousness", resentment, and aggression, and whose "world view is characterized by resignation and pessimism".

[ 6 ] : 40-41 A gap exists between the pícaro's "whimsical and entertaining account and his self-indulgent explanations and morality on the one hand, and the perceptions of the more sensitive author and reader on the other". The pícaro is the "unwitting butt" of this narrative irony.

[ 6 ] : 42-43 Riggan gives the following examples of pícaro narrators: Apuleius in The Golden Ass ; [ 6 ] : 45 Lázaro in Lazarillo de Tormes ; [ 6 ] : 48 Guzmán in Guzmán de Alfarache ; [ 6 ] : 51 Don Pablos in El Buscón ; [ 6 ] : 54 Simplicius in Simplicius Simplicissimus ; [ 6 ] : 57 Moll in Moll Flanders ; [ 6 ] : 61 Augie March in The Adventures of Augie March ; [ 6 ] : 64 Felix Krull in Confessions of Felix Krull [ 6 ] : 70 The Clown A narrator in the tradition of the fool , the court jester and the sotie , whose unreliable narration includes "irony, variations of meaning, ambiguities of definition, and possibilities for reversal and counter-reversal".

[ 6 ] : 79-83 Riggan gives the following examples of clown narrators: Folly in In Praise of Folly [ 6 ] : 82 ; Tristram Shandy in The Life and Opinions of Tristram Shandy, Gentleman ; [ 6 ] : 84 Humbert Humbert in Lolita ; [ 6 ] : 89 Oskar Matzerath in The Tin Drum [ 6 ] : 98 The Madman A narrator who is untrustworthy due to an "unbalanced mind" whose narration serves as a case study in the pathology of insanity. The literary madman frequently exhibits traits such as being "insignificant, petty, withdrawn, defensive, dreaming, spiteful, perversely logical, self-deluding, ultimately more of a type than a genuine individual, and a speaker who is soon if not immediately perceived as possessing all these traits and therefore of questionable trustworthiness in the presentation of his own account".

[ 6 ] : 110 Riggan gives the following examples of madman narrators: Poprishchin in Diary of a Madman ; [ 6 ] : 111 the narrator of Notes from Underground ; [ 6 ] : 118 the first person narratives of Edgar Allan Poe 's short stories; [ 6 ] : 129 the narrator of The Blind Owl [ 6 ] : 135 The Naïf A narrator whose nature is revealed through their own narration and without their conscious awareness.

[ 6 ] : 158 The naïf narrator lacks the experience "to deal in any far-reaching manner with the moral, ethical, emotional, and intellectual questions which arise from his first ventures into the world and from his account of those ventures." [ 6 ] : 169 Riggan gives the following examples of naïf narrators: Huckleberry Finn in Adventures of Huckleberry Finn ; [ 6 ] : 144 Holden Caulfield in The Catcher in the Rye [ 6 ] : 159 It remains a matter of debate whether and how a non-first-person narrator can be unreliable, though the deliberate restriction of information to the audience can provide instances of unreliable narrative , even if not necessarily of an unreliable narrator . For example, in the three interweaving plays of Alan Ayckbourn 's The Norman Conquests , each confines the action to one of three locations during the course of a weekend.

[ citation needed ] Kathleen Wall argues that in The Remains of the Day , for the "unreliability" of the main character (Mr Stevens) as a narrator to work, we need to believe that he describes events reliably, while interpreting them in an unreliable way.

[ 7 ] Definitions and theoretical approaches [ edit ] Wayne C. Booth was among the first critics to formulate a reader-centered approach to unreliable narration and to distinguish between a reliable and unreliable narrator on the grounds of whether the narrator's speech violates or conforms with general norms and values. He writes, "I have called a narrator reliable when he speaks for or acts in accordance with the norms of the work (which is to say the implied author 's norms), unreliable when he does not." [ 4 ] Peter J. Rabinowitz criticized Booth's definition for relying too much on facts external to the narrative, such as norms and ethics, which must necessarily be tainted by personal opinion. He consequently modified the approach to unreliable narration.

There are unreliable narrators (c.f. Booth). An unreliable narrator however, is not simply a narrator who 'does not tell the truth' – what fictional narrator ever tells the literal truth? Rather an unreliable narrator is one who tells lies, conceals information, misjudges with respect to the narrative audience – that is, one whose statements are untrue not by the standards of the real world or of the authorial audience but by the standards of his own narrative audience. ... In other words, all fictional narrators are false in that they are imitations. But some are imitations who tell the truth, some of people who lie.

[ 8 ] Rabinowitz's main focus is the status of fictional discourse in opposition to factuality. He debates the issues of truth in fiction, bringing forward four types of audience who serve as receptors of any given literary work: "Actual audience" (= the flesh-and-blood people who read the book) "Authorial audience" (= hypothetical audience to whom the author addresses his text) "Narrative audience" (= imitation audience which also possesses particular knowledge) "Ideal narrative audience" (= uncritical audience who accepts what the narrator is saying) Rabinowitz suggests that "In the proper reading of a novel, then, events which are portrayed must be treated as both 'true' and 'untrue' at the same time. Although there are many ways to understand this duality, I propose to analyze the four audiences which it generates." [ 8 ] Similarly, Tamar Yacobi has proposed a model of five criteria ('integrating mechanisms') which determine if a narrator is unreliable.

[ 9 ] Instead of relying on the device of the implied author and a text-centered analysis of unreliable narration, Ansgar Nünning gives evidence that narrative unreliability can be reconceptualized in the context of frame theory and of readers' cognitive strategies.

... to determine a narrator's unreliability one need not rely merely on intuitive judgments. It is neither the reader's intuitions nor the implied author's norms and values that provide the clue to a narrator's unreliability, but a broad range of definable signals. These include both textual data and the reader's preexisting conceptual knowledge of the world. In sum whether a narrator is called unreliable or not does not depend on the distance between the norms and values of the narrator and those of the implied author but between the distance that separates the narrator's view of the world from the reader's world-model and standards of normality.

[ 10 ] Unreliable narration in this view becomes purely a reader's strategy of making sense of a text, i.e., of reconciling discrepancies in the narrator's account (c.f.

signals of unreliable narration ). Nünning thus effectively eliminates the reliance on value judgments and moral codes which are always tainted by personal outlook and taste. Greta Olson recently debated both Nünning's and Booth's models, revealing discrepancies in their respective views.

Booth's text-immanent model of narrator unreliability has been criticized by Ansgar Nünning for disregarding the reader's role in the perception of reliability and for relying on the insufficiently defined concept of the implied author. Nünning updates Booth's work with a cognitive theory of unreliability that rests on the reader's values and her sense that a discrepancy exists between the narrator's statements and perceptions and other information given by the text.

and offers "an update of Booth's model by making his implicit differentiation between fallible and untrustworthy narrators explicit". Olson then argues "that these two types of narrators elicit different responses in readers and are best described using scales for fallibility and untrustworthiness." [ 11 ] She proffers that all fictional texts that employ the device of unreliability can best be considered along a spectrum of fallibility that begins with trustworthiness and ends with unreliability. This model allows for all shades of grey in between the poles of trustworthiness and unreliability. It is consequently up to each individual reader to determine the credibility of a narrator in a fictional text.

Signals of unreliable narration [ edit ] Whichever definition of unreliability one follows, there are a number of signs that constitute or at least hint at a narrator's unreliability. Nünning has suggested to divide these signals into three broad categories.

[ 12 ] Intratextual signs such as the narrator contradicting her or himself, having gaps in memory, or lying to other characters Extratextual signs such as contradicting the reader's general world knowledge or impossibilities (within the parameters of logic) Reader's literary competence. This includes the reader's knowledge about literary types (e.g., stock characters that reappear over centuries), knowledge about literary genres and its conventions or stylistic devices See also [ edit ] Frame story Play within a play Rashomon effect , different narrators providing different accounts or stories of the same narrative events Tall tale References [ edit ] ^ Frey, James N.

(1931).

How to Write a Damn Good Novel, II: Advanced Techniques for Dramatic Storytelling (1st ed.). New York: St. Martin's Press. p. 107.

ISBN 978-0-312-10478-8 . Archived from the original on 12 December 2013 . Retrieved 20 April 2013 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ Nünning, Vera (2015).

Unreliable Narration and Trustworthiness: Intermedial and Interdisciplinary Perspectives . Gruyter. p. 1.

ISBN 9783110408263 .

^ Unreliable Third Person Narration? The Case of Katherine Mansfield , Journal of Literary Semantics, Vol. 46, Issue 1, April 2017 ^ a b Booth, Wayne C.

(1961).

The Rhetoric of Fiction . Univ. of Chicago Press. pp.

158–159 .

^ Phelan, James (May 2007).

"Estranging Unreliability, Bonding Unreliability, and the Ethics of Lolita" .

Narrative .

15 (2): 222– 238.

doi : 10.1353/nar.2007.0012 .

ISSN 1538-974X .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t u v w x y Riggan, William (1981).

Pícaros, Madmen, Naīfs, and Clowns: The Unreliable First-person Narrator . Univ. of Oklahoma Press: Norman.

ISBN 978-0806117140 .

^ Wall, Kathleen (1994). "The Remains of the Day and Its Challenges to Theories of Unreliable Narration". The Journal of Narrative Technique. 24 (1): 18–42. ISSN 0022-2925. JSTOR 30225397. ProQuest [1] .

^ a b Rabinowitz, Peter J.: Truth in Fiction: A Reexamination of Audiences.

In: Critical Inquiry.

Nr. 1, 1977, S. 121–141.

^ "Living Handbook of Narratology" . Archived from the original on 16 January 2013 . Retrieved 1 December 2016 .

^ Nünning, Ansgar: But why will you say that I am mad?: On the Theory, History, and Signals of Unreliable Narration in British Fiction.

In: Arbeiten zu Anglistik und Amerikanistik.

Nr. 22, 1997, S. 83–105.

^ Olson, Greta: Reconsidering Unreliability: Fallible and Untrustworthy Narrators.

In: Narrative.

Nr. 11, 2003, S. 93–109.

^ Nünning, Ansgar (ed.): Unreliable Narration : Studien zur Theorie und Praxis unglaubwürdigen Erzählens in der englischsprachigen Erzählliteratur, Wissenschaftlicher Verlag: Trier (1998).

Further reading [ edit ] Heiler, Lars (2010).

"Against Censorship: Literature, Transgression, and Taboo from a Diachronic Perspective" .

Taboo and Transgression in British Literature from the Renaissance to the Present . New York: Palgrave Macmillan. pp.

49– 74.

ISBN 9780230105997 .

Shen, Dan: " Unreliability ", in Peter Hühn (ed.): The Living Handbook of Narratology, Hamburg: Hamburg University Press. (retrieved 8. March 2021) Smith, M. W. (1991).

Understanding Unreliable Narrators . Urbana, IL: National Council of Teachers of English.

External links [ edit ] Look up unreliable narrator in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Media related to Fiction with unreliable narrators at Wikimedia Commons Henry Sutton's top 10 unreliable narrators v t e Narrative Character Antagonist Archenemy Character arc Character flaw Characterization Confidant Deuteragonist False protagonist Focal character Foil Gothic double Hamartia Hero Anti Byronic Tragic Narrator Protagonist Stock character Straight man Supporting character Title character Tritagonist Villain Plot Ab ovo Action Backstory Origin story Chekhov's gun Cliché Cliffhanger Conflict Deus ex machina Dialogue Dramatic structure Eucatastrophe Foreshadowing Flashback Flashforward Frame story In medias res Kishōtenketsu MacGuffin Pace Plot device Plot twist Poetic justice Red herring Reveal Self-insertion Shaggy dog story Stereotype Story arc Story within a story Subplot Suspense Trope Setting Alternate history Backstory Crossover Dreamworld Dystopia Fictional location city country universe parallel Utopia Worldbuilding Theme Irony Leitmotif Metaphor Moral Moral development Motif Deal with the Devil Conflict between good and evil Self-fulfilling prophecy Time travel Style Allegory Bathos Comic relief Diction Figure of speech Imagery Mode Mood Narration Narrative techniques Hook Show, don't tell Stylistic device Suspension of disbelief Symbolism Tone Structure Act Act structure Three-act structure Freytag's Pyramid Exposition / Protasis Rising action/Epitasis Climax / Peripeteia Falling action/Catastasis Denouement/Catastrophe Linear narrative Nonlinear narrative films television series Premise Types of fiction with multiple endings Form Drama Fabliau Flash fiction Folklore Fable Fairy tale Legend Myth Tall tale Gamebook Narrative art Narrative poetry Epic poetry Novel Novella Parable Short story Vignette Genre ( List ) Fiction Action fiction Adventure Comic Crime Docu Epistolary Ergodic Erotic Historical Western Mystery Nautical Paranoid Philosophical Picaresque Political Pop culture Psychological Religious Rogue Romance Chivalric Prose Saga Satire Speculative fiction Fantasy Gothic Southern Horror Magic realism Science Hard Utopian and dystopian Underwater Superhero Theological Thriller Urban Nonfiction Autobiography Biography Novel Creative Narration Diegesis First-person Second-person Third-person Third-person omniscient narrative Subjectivity Unreliable narrator Multiple narrators Stream of consciousness Stream of unconsciousness Tense Past Present Future Related Dominant narrative Fiction writing Continuity Canon Reboot Retcon Parallel novel Prequel / Sequel Genre List Literary science Literary theory Narrative identity Narrative paradigm Narrative therapy Narratology Metafiction Political narrative Rhetoric Glossary Screenwriting Series of works Storytelling Tellability Verisimilitude NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐api‐ext.codfw.main‐647cb4546b‐gcgll
Cached time: 20250814061508
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.430 seconds
Real time usage: 0.483 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 10936/1000000
Revision size: 17357/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 68131/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 6766/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 15/100
Expensive parser function count: 0/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 44922/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.206/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 6228103/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  424.213      1 -total
 35.86%  152.102     24 Template:R
 34.19%  145.058     24 Template:R/ref
 23.82%  101.062     24 Template:R/superscript
 21.90%   92.910      1 Template:Reflist
 17.66%   74.897      5 Template:Cite_book
 14.90%   63.190      1 Template:Narrative_modes
 14.52%   61.599      1 Template:Navbox
 11.74%   49.801     72 Template:R/where
  8.47%   35.940      1 Template:Short_description Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:435180:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814061508 and revision id 1305808735. Rendering was triggered because: unknown Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Unreliable_narrator&oldid=1305808735 " Categories : Fiction with unreliable narrators Film theory Style (fiction) Point of view Narrative techniques 1960s neologisms Hidden categories: CS1 errors: ISBN date Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from November 2015 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from November 2023 Commons category link is locally defined This page was last edited on 14 August 2025, at 06:14 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Unreliable narrator 21 languages Add topic

