Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Controlling pollution 2 Governance 3 Environmental law 4 See also 5 References 6 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Watershed management 7 languages العربية Deutsch Español فارسی ಕನ್ನಡ தமிழ் Tiếng Việt Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Type of natural resources management Watershed management is the study of the relevant characteristics of a watershed aimed at the sustainable distribution of its resources and the process of creating and implementing plans, programs and projects to sustain and enhance watershed functions that affect the plant , animal , and human communities within the watershed boundary.

[ 1 ] Features of a watershed that agencies seek to manage to include water supply , water quality , drainage , stormwater runoff , water rights and the overall planning and utilization of watersheds.

Landowners , land use agencies, stormwater management experts, environmental specialists, water use surveyors and communities all play an integral part in watershed management.

Controlling pollution [ edit ] In agricultural systems, common practices include the use of buffer strips , grassed waterways, the re-establishment of wetlands , and forms of sustainable agriculture practices such as conservation tillage , crop rotation and inter-cropping . After certain practices are installed, it is important to continuously monitor these systems to ensure that they are working properly in terms of improving environmental quality.

[ 2 ] In urban settings, managing areas to prevent soil loss and control stormwater flow are a few of the areas that receive attention. A few practices that are used to manage stormwater before it reaches a channel are retention ponds , filtering systems and wetlands. It is important that storm-water is given an opportunity to infiltrate so that the soil and vegetation can act as a "filter" before the water reaches nearby streams or lakes. In the case of soil erosion prevention, a few common practices include the use of silt fences, landscape fabric with grass seed and hydroseeding . The main objective in all cases is to slow water movement to prevent soil transport.

Governance [ edit ] The 2nd World Water Forum held in The Hague in March 2000 raised some controversies that exposed the multilateral nature and imbalance the demand and supply management of freshwater . While donor organizations, private and government institutions backed by the World Bank , believe that freshwater should be governed as an economic good by appropriate pricing, NGOs however, held that freshwater resources should be seen as a social good .

[ 3 ] The concept of network governance where all stakeholders form partnerships and voluntarily share ideas towards forging a common vision can be used to resolve this clash of opinion in freshwater management. Also, the implementation of any common vision presents a new role for NGOs because of their unique capabilities in local community coordination, thus making them a valuable partner in network governance .

[ 4 ] Watersheds replicate this multilateral terrain with private industries and local communities interconnected by a common watershed. Although these groups share a common ecological space that could transcend state borders, their interests, knowledge and use of resources within the watershed are mostly disproportionate and divergent, resulting to the activities of a specific group adversely impacting on other groups. Examples being the Minamata Bay poisoning that occurred from 1932 to 1968, killing over 1,784 individuals and the Wabigoon River incidence of 1962. Furthermore, while some knowledgeable groups are shifting from efficient water resource exploitation to efficient utilization, net gain for the watershed ecology could be lost when other groups seize the opportunity to exploit more resources .

Moreover, the need to create partnerships between donor organizations, private and government institutions and community representatives like NGOs in watersheds is to enhance an "organizational society" among stakeholders.

[ 5 ] Several riparian states have adopted this concept in managing the increasingly scarce resources of watersheds. These include the nine Rhine states, with a common vision of pollution control , [ 6 ] the Lake Chad and river Nile Basins, whose common vision is to ensure environmental sustainability .

[ 7 ] As a partner in the commonly shared vision, NGOs has adopted a new role in operationalizing the implementation of regional watershed management policies at the local level. For instance, essential local coordination and education are areas where the services of NGOs have been effective.

[ 8 ] This makes NGOs the "nuclei" for successful watershed management.

[ 4 ] Recently, artificial Intelligence techniques such as neural networks have been utilized to address the problem of watershed management.

[ 9 ] Environmental law [ edit ] Main article: Environmental law Environmental laws often dictate the planning and actions that agencies take to manage watersheds. Some laws require that planning be done, others can be used to make a plan legally enforceable and others set out the ground rules for what can and cannot be done in development and planning. Most countries and states have their own laws regarding watershed management.

Those concerned about aquatic habitat protection have a right to participate in the laws and planning processes that affect aquatic habitats. By having a clear understanding of whom to speak to and how to present the case for keeping our waterways clean a member of the public can become an effective watershed protection advocate.

See also [ edit ] Water portal Biomanipulation Integrated landscape management Integrated water resources management Source water protection References [ edit ] ^ "California Watershed Program" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2017-01-20 . Retrieved 2008-04-05 .

^ "SWAT | Soil & Water Assessment Tool" .

swat.tamu.edu . Retrieved 2023-02-22 .

^ Oweyegha-Afunaduula, F.C., I. Afunaduula and M. Balunywa (2003). NGO-sing the Nile Basin Initiative: a myth or reality? Paper at 3rd World Water Forum, Japan, March 2003 ^ a b Evans J: Environmental governance (2012), Routledge, Chapter 4 ISBN 978-0415589826 ^ Ewalt, J. G. 2001. Theories of Governance and New Public Management: Links to Understanding Welfare Policy Implementation. Paper Presented at the Annual Conference of the American Society for Public Administration. Also available at: http://unpan1.un.org/intradoc/groups/public/documents/aspa/unpan000563.pdf Archived 2018-11-23 at the Wayback Machine .

^ 8.	Transboundary River Basin Management Regimes: the Rhine basin case study, Newater, pp1-37. Also available at: http://www.tudelft.nl/live/binaries/9229ebc0-66d0-47ca-9d25-5ab2184c85f4/doc/D131_Rhine_Final.pdf Archived 2012-03-10 at the Wayback Machine ^ "Nile Basin Initiative" . Archived from the original on 2018-02-21 . Retrieved 2011-04-07 .

^ 7.	Prabhakar K, Lavanya K, and Papa Rao A (2010); NGOs and Farmers Participation in Watershed Development Programme in Prakasam District, Asia-Pacific Journal of Social Science, Volume II (1) Pages173-182. Also available at: http://www.socialsciences-ejournal.org/3.9.%20Prabhakar.pdf Archived 2012-03-22 at the Wayback Machine .

^ Mason, Karl; Duggan, Jim; Howley, Enda (2018). "A Meta Optimisation Analysis of Particle Swarm Optimisation Velocity Update Equations for Watershed Management Learning".

Applied Soft Computing .

62 : 148– 161.

doi : 10.1016/j.asoc.2017.10.018 .

Further reading [ edit ] Erickson, J.D.

, Messner, F. and I. Ring, eds. (2007).

Economics of Sustainable Watershed Management . Elsevier, Amsterdam, the Netherlands.

Sabatier, P. A. (2005).

Swimming Upstream: Collaborative Approaches to Watershed Management . The MIT Press.

Wagner, W., Gawel, J., Furumai, H., De Souza, M. P., Teixeira, D., Rios, L., et al. (2002). Sustainable watershed management: an international multi-watershed case study.

Ambio , 2–13.

Authority control databases International FAST National United States Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Watershed_management&oldid=1304821864 " Categories : Freshwater ecology Hydrology Water and the environment Fisheries protection Natural resource management Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 8 August 2025, at 10:35 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Watershed management 7 languages Add topic

