Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Processes 2 Current status 3 Substances that biomagnify Toggle Substances that biomagnify subsection 3.1 Novel organic substances 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Biomagnification 24 languages العربية Català Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 Hausa Italiano ಕನ್ನಡ Nederlands Polski Português Русский Simple English Suomi Svenska தமிழ் Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Process of progressive accumulation in food chain Biomagnification is a process causing the concentration of a substance (crosses) to increase at higher levels of the food chain.

In this scenario, a pond has been contaminated with toxic waste. Further up the food chain, the concentration of the contaminant increases, sometimes resulting in the top consumer dying.

Biomagnification , also known as bioamplification or biological magnification , is the increase in concentration of a substance, e.g a pesticide, in the tissues of organisms at successively higher levels in a food chain .

[ 1 ] This increase can occur as a result of: Persistence – where the substance cannot be broken down by environmental processes.

Food chain energetics – where the substance's concentration increases progressively as it moves up a food chain.

Low or non-existent rate of internal degradation or excretion of the substance – mainly due to water-insolubility.

Biomagnification is the buildup of concentration of a substance (x) in a food chain.  For example the DDT concentration in parts per million increases with trophic level. Concentrations build up in organism's fat and tissue. Predators accumulate higher levels than prey.

Biological magnification often refers to the process whereby  substances such as pesticides or heavy metals work their way into lakes, rivers and the ocean, and then move up the food chain in progressively greater concentrations as they are incorporated into the diet of aquatic organisms such as zooplankton , which in turn are eaten perhaps by fish, which then may be eaten by bigger fish, large birds, animals, or humans. The substances become increasingly concentrated in tissues or internal organs as they move up the chain. Bioaccumulants are substances that increase in concentration in living organisms as they take in contaminated air, water, or food because the substances are very slowly metabolized or excreted.

Processes [ edit ] Although sometimes used interchangeably with " bioaccumulation ", an important distinction is drawn between the two, and with bioconcentration.

Bioaccumulation occurs within a trophic level , and is the increase in the concentration of a substance in certain tissues of organisms' bodies due to absorption from food and the environment.

Bioconcentration is defined as occurring when uptake from the water is greater than excretion.

[ 2 ] Thus, bioconcentration and bioaccumulation occur within an organism, and biomagnification occurs across trophic (food chain) levels.

Biodilution is also a process that occurs to all trophic levels in an aquatic environment; it is the opposite of biomagnification, thus when a pollutant gets smaller in concentration as it progresses up a food web.

[ 3 ] Many chemicals that bioaccumulate are highly soluble in fats ( lipophilic ) and insoluble in water ( hydrophobic ).

[ 4 ] For example, though mercury is only present in small amounts in seawater , it is absorbed by algae (generally as methylmercury ). Methylmercury is one of the most harmful mercury molecules. It is efficiently absorbed, but only very slowly excreted by organisms.

[ 5 ] Bioaccumulation and bioconcentration result in buildup in the adipose tissue of successive trophic levels: zooplankton , small nekton , larger fish, etc. Anything which eats these fish also consumes the higher level of mercury the fish have accumulated. This process explains why predatory fish such as swordfish and sharks or birds like osprey and eagles have higher concentrations of mercury in their tissue than could be accounted for by direct exposure alone. For example, herring contains mercury at approximately 0.01 parts per million (ppm) and shark contains mercury at greater than 1 ppm.

[ 6 ] DDT is a pesticide known to biomagnify, which is one of the most significant reasons it was deemed harmful to the environment by the EPA and other organizations. DDT is one of the least soluble chemicals known and accumulates progressively in adipose tissue, and as the fat is consumed by predators, the amounts of DDT biomagnify. A well known example of the harmful effects of DDT biomagnification is the significant decline in North American populations of predatory birds such as bald eagles and peregrine falcons due to DDT caused eggshell thinning in the 1950s.

[ 4 ] [ 7 ] DDT is now a banned substance in many parts of the world.

[ 8 ] Current status [ edit ] In a review, a large number of studies, Suedel et al.

[ 9 ] concluded that although biomagnification is probably more limited in occurrence than previously thought, there is good evidence that DDT , DDE , PCBs , toxaphene , and the organic forms of mercury and arsenic do biomagnify in nature. For other contaminants, bioconcentration and bioaccumulation account for their high concentrations in organism tissues. More recently, Gray [ 10 ] reached a similar substances remaining in the organisms and not being diluted to non-threatening concentrations. The success of top predatory-bird recovery ( bald eagles , peregrine falcons ) in North America following the ban on DDT use in agriculture is testament to the importance of recognizing and responding to biomagnification.

[ 4 ] Substances that biomagnify [ edit ] Two common groups that are known to biomagnify are chlorinated hydrocarbons , also known as organochlorines, and inorganic compounds like methylmercury or heavy metals .

[ 4 ] Both are lipophilic and not easily degraded. Novel organic substances like organochlorines are not easily degraded because organisms lack previous exposure and have thus not evolved specific detoxification and excretion mechanisms, as there has been no selection pressure from them. These substances are consequently known as " persistent organic pollutants " or POPs.

[ 11 ] Metals are not degradable because they are chemical elements . Organisms, particularly those subject to naturally high levels of exposure to metals, have mechanisms to sequester and excrete metals. Problems arise when organisms are exposed to higher concentrations than usual, which they cannot excrete rapidly enough to prevent damage. Persistent heavy metals , such as lead , cadmium , mercury , and arsenic , can have a wide variety of adverse health effects across species.

[ 12 ] Novel organic substances [ edit ] Further information: Persistent organic pollutant DDT (dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane).

Hexachlorobenzene (HCB).

PCBs (polychlorinated biphenyls).

Toxaphene .

Monomethylmercury .

See also [ edit ] Mercury in fish Methylmercury Dichlorodiphenyldichloroethylene Toxaphene References [ edit ] ^ Silvy, Nova J., ed. (2012).

The Wildlife Techniques Manual: Research . Vol. 1 (7th ed.). Baltimore, Maryland: The Johns Hopkins University Press. pp.

154– 155.

ISBN 978-1-4214-0159-1 .

^ Landrum, PF and SW Fisher, 1999. Influence of lipids on the bioaccumulation and trophic transfer of organic contaminants in aquatic organisms. Chapter 9 in MT Arts and BC Wainman. Lipids in fresh water ecosystems. Springer Verlag, New York.

^ Campbell, Linda M.; Norstrom, Ross J.; Hobson, Keith A.; Muir, Derek C. G.; Backus, Sean; Fisk, Aaron T. (2005-12-01).

"Mercury and other trace elements in a pelagic Arctic marine food web (Northwater Polynya, Baffin Bay)" .

Science of the Total Environment . Contaminants in Canadian Arctic Biota and Implications for Human Health.

351– 352: 247– 263.

Bibcode : 2005ScTEn.351..247C .

doi : 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2005.02.043 .

ISSN 0048-9697 .

PMID 16061271 .

^ a b c d Freedman, Bill (2021). Nemeh, Katherine H.; Longe, Jacqueline L. (eds.).

The Gale Encyclopedia of Science . Vol. 1 (6th ed.). Gale. pp.

594– 597.

ISBN 978-0-02-867717-0 .

^ Croteau, M., S. N. Luoma, and A. R Stewart. 2005. Trophic transfer of metals along freshwater food webs: Evidence of cadmium biomagnification in nature. Limnol. Oceanogr. 50 (5): 1511-1519.

^ EPA (U.S. Environmental Protection Agency). 1997. Mercury Study Report to Congress. Vol. IV: An Assessment of Exposure to Mercury in the United States . EPA-452/R-97-006. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Office of Air Quality Planning and Standards and Office of Research and Development.

^ Edwards, Clive A. (2004). Stapleton (ed.).

Pollution A to Z (Richard M. ed.). New York, NY: Gale. pp.

118– 200.

ISBN 978-0-02-865700-4 .

^ "DDT Ban Takes Effect" .

United States Environmental Protection Agency . 1972-12-31. Archived from the original on 2014-08-12 . Retrieved 2014-08-10 .

^ Suedel, B.C., Boraczek, J.A., Peddicord, R.K., Clifford, P.A. and Dillon, T.M., 1994. Trophic transfer and biomagnification potential of contaminants in aquatic ecosystems . Reviews of Environmental Contamination and Toxicology 136: 21–89.

^ Gray, J.S., 2002. Biomagnification in marine systems: the perspective of an ecologist. Mar. Pollut. Bull. 45: 46–52.

^ "Persistent Organic Pollutants" (PDF) .

United Nations Environment Programme . 2007-09-26. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2007-09-26 . Retrieved 2022-12-08 .

^ Ali, Hazrat; Khan, Ezzat (2019-08-18).

"Trophic transfer, bioaccumulation, and biomagnification of non-essential hazardous heavy metals and metalloids in food chains/webs—Concepts and implications for wildlife and human health" .

Human and Ecological Risk Assessment .

25 (6): 1353– 1376.

Bibcode : 2019HERA...25.1353A .

doi : 10.1080/10807039.2018.1469398 .

ISSN 1080-7039 .

S2CID 90028179 .

External links [ edit ] Fisk AT, Hoekstra PF, Borga K, and DCG Muir, 2003. Biomagnification. Mar. Pollut. Bull. 46 (4): 522-524 v t e Ecology : Modelling ecosystems : Trophic components General Abiotic component Abiotic stress Behaviour Biogeochemical cycle Biomass Biotic component Biotic stress Carrying capacity Competition Ecosystem Ecosystem ecology Ecosystem model Green world hypothesis Keystone species List of feeding behaviours Metabolic theory of ecology Productivity Resource Restoration Producers Autotrophs Chemosynthesis Chemotrophs Foundation species Kinetotrophs Mixotrophs Myco-heterotrophy Mycotroph Organotrophs Photoheterotrophs Photosynthesis Photosynthetic efficiency Phototrophs Primary nutritional groups Primary production Consumers Apex predator Bacterivore Carnivores Chemoorganotroph Foraging Generalist and specialist species Intraguild predation Herbivores Heterotroph Heterotrophic nutrition Insectivore Mesopredators Mesopredator release hypothesis Omnivores Optimal foraging theory Planktivore Predation Prey switching Decomposers Chemoorganoheterotrophy Decomposition Detritivores Detritus Microorganisms Archaea Bacteriophage Lithoautotroph Lithotrophy Marine Microbial cooperation Microbial ecology Microbial food web Microbial intelligence Microbial loop Microbial mat Microbial metabolism Phage ecology Food webs Biomagnification Ecological efficiency Ecological pyramid Energy flow Food chain Trophic level Example webs Lakes Rivers Soil Tritrophic interactions in plant defense Marine food webs cold seeps hydrothermal vents intertidal kelp forests North Pacific Gyre San Francisco Estuary tide pool Processes Ascendency Bioaccumulation Cascade effect Climax community Competitive exclusion principle Consumer–resource interactions Copiotrophs Dominance Ecological network Ecological succession Energy quality Energy systems language f-ratio Feed conversion ratio Feeding frenzy Mesotrophic soil Nutrient cycle Oligotroph Paradox of the plankton Trophic cascade Trophic mutualism Trophic state index Defense, counter Animal coloration Anti-predator adaptations Camouflage Deimatic behaviour Herbivore adaptations to plant defense Mimicry Plant defense against herbivory Predator avoidance in schooling fish v t e Ecology : Modelling ecosystems : Other components Population ecology Abundance Allee effect Consumer-resource model Depensation Ecological yield Effective population size Intraspecific competition Logistic function Malthusian growth model Maximum sustainable yield Overpopulation Overexploitation Population cycle Population dynamics Population modeling Population size Predator–prey (Lotka–Volterra) equations Recruitment Small population size Stability Resilience Resistance Random generalized Lotka–Volterra model Species Biodiversity Density-dependent inhibition Ecological effects of biodiversity Ecological extinction Endemic species Flagship species Gradient analysis Indicator species Introduced species Invasive species / Native species Latitudinal gradients in species diversity Minimum viable population Neutral theory Occupancy–abundance relationship Population viability analysis Priority effect Rapoport's rule Relative abundance distribution Relative species abundance Species diversity Species homogeneity Species richness Species distribution Species–area curve Umbrella species Species interaction Antibiosis Biological interaction Commensalism Community ecology Ecological facilitation Interspecific competition Mutualism Parasitism Storage effect Symbiosis Spatial ecology Biogeography Cross-boundary subsidy Ecocline Ecotone Ecotype Disturbance Edge effects Foster's rule Habitat fragmentation Ideal free distribution Intermediate disturbance hypothesis Insular biogeography Land change modeling Landscape ecology Landscape epidemiology Landscape limnology Metapopulation Patch dynamics r / K selection theory Resource selection function Source–sink dynamics Niche Ecological trap Ecosystem engineer Environmental niche modelling Guild Habitat Marine Semiaquatic Terrestrial Limiting similarity Niche apportionment models Niche construction Niche differentiation Ontogenetic niche shift Other networks Assembly rules Bateman's principle Bioluminescence Ecological collapse Ecological debt Ecological deficit Ecological energetics Ecological indicator Ecological threshold Ecosystem diversity Emergence Extinction debt Kleiber's law Liebig's law of the minimum Marginal value theorem Thorson's rule Xerosere Other Allometry Alternative stable state Balance of nature Biological data visualization Ecological economics Ecological footprint Ecological forecasting Ecological humanities Ecological stoichiometry Ecopath Ecosystem based fisheries Endolith Evolutionary ecology Functional ecology Industrial ecology Macroecology Microecosystem Natural environment Regime shift Sexecology Systems ecology Urban ecology Theoretical ecology Outline of ecology v t e Toxicology Fields Aquatic toxicology Ecotoxicology Occupational toxicology Entomotoxicology Environmental toxicology Forensic toxicology Medical toxicology In vitro toxicology Toxicogenomics Concepts Acceptable daily intake Acute toxicity Bioaccumulation Biomagnification Fixed-dose procedure Lethal dose Poison Toxic capacity Toxicity class Toxin Venom Treatments Activated carbon Antidote Cathartic Chelation therapy Gastric lavage Hemodialysis Hemoperfusion Whole bowel irrigation Incidents 1858 Bradford sweets poisoning 2007 pet food recalls Bhopal disaster Minamata disease Niigata Minamata disease Poisoning of Alexander Litvinenko Seveso disaster Consumption of Tide Pods Visakhapatnam gas leak 2022 Aqaba toxic gas leak List of poisonings Related topics Biological warfare Carcinogen Food safety Hazard symbol List of extremely hazardous substances Mutagen Occupational safety and health Category Commons WikiProject Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Biomagnification&oldid=1294825847 " Categories : Ecotoxicology Food chains Pollution Hidden categories: CS1: long volume value Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 10 June 2025, at 01:18 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Biomagnification 24 languages Add topic

