Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Scientific contribution 3 Memberships in scientific organisations 4 References Toggle the table of contents Anna Schober 1 language Deutsch Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Austrian historian Anna Schober (also known as Anna Schober-de Graaf) (born 1966 in Wolfsberg, Carinthia ) is an Austrian historian and University Professor of Visual Culture at the Institute for Cultural Analysis of the Alpen-Adria University Klagenfurt .

[ 1 ] Biography [ edit ] Schober studied history, art history and political science in Vienna , Frankfurt and Colchester . In 2009 she got her postdoctoral habilitation at the University of Vienna with a thesis on aesthetic tactics as a means of political emancipation in modernity and the present.

[ 2 ] [ 1 ] Schober completed a number of international research stays for example at the Center for Theoretical Studies in the Humanities and Social Sciences at the University of Essex , Colchester (2000-2003) and at the Jan Van Eyck Academie in Maastricht (2003). At the University of Vienna she directed the FWF projects "Aesthetic tricks as a means of political emancipation " (2003-2006) [ 3 ] and "City Squats: The Cinema as a space for political action" (2006-2009).

[ 4 ] From 2009 to 2011, Schober was Marie Curie Fellow and Visiting Professor at the University of Verona , where she carried out the project "Picturing Gender ".

[ 5 ] In 2011 she took over a Mercator Visiting Professorship at the Institute of Sociology of the University of Giessen , where she also worked as a deputy professor and head of a DFG research project until 2016.

[ 6 ] Since September 2016 Anna Schober is Professor of Visual Culture at the Alpen-Adria-Universität Klagenfurt.

[ 1 ] Scientific contribution [ edit ] In her dissertation "Blue Jeans. An artificial mythology ", Schober reconstructs how myths about the Blue Jeans have constituted in different visual worlds (silent films, documentary photography, Hollywood films and youth subcultures) as well as in various consumer milieus in the USA and Western Europe since the end of the 19th century and how these myths have been transnationally transmitted and transformed.

[ 7 ] In her postdoctoral habilitation, Schober explores the invention of an avant-garde and neo-avant-garde tradition in Western and Southeastern Europe, connected with a history of protest movements in the 20th and 21st centuries. The goal was to create a critical genealogy of these practices in order to re-evaluate aesthetic intervention into the public sphere, emphasizing the incalculability of these endeavors and their contingent participation on the constitution of aesthetic-political hegemonies.

[ 2 ] Schober continues her genealogical research in the project "Everybody - a transnational iconography " funded by DFG and writes a genealogy and iconography of "everybodies" - anthropomorphic iconic figures addressing and involving the audience.

[ 6 ] [ 8 ] In a research project on cinema as a movement in Central and Southeastern Europe, Schober examined how since the 1960s cinema spectators became cinema makers through such practices as squatting in existing cinema spaces, organizing cinema "events," writing about film, and making films themselves. Drawing on a corpus of interviews with cinema activists, Schober compares the activities and artistic productions they staged in urban environments in Germany, Austria, and the former Yugoslavia. This study focuses on differences and similarities in the development of political public culture in countries with pluralist-democratic, one-party socialist, and post-socialist traditions.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] Memberships in scientific organisations [ edit ] Schober is a member of various scientific associations. For the periods 2014-2018 and 2018-2022 she is on the Scientific Board of the Research Committee (RC57) of the International Sociological Association (ISA) .

[ 11 ] References [ edit ] ^ a b c "Univ.-Prof. Dr. Anna Schober-de Graaf, Curriculum Vitae" . University of Klagenfurt . Retrieved 25 April 2019 .

^ a b Schober, Anna (2009). Ironie, Montage, Verfremdung. Aesthetische Taktiken und die politische Gestalt der Demokratie. München: Wilhelm Fink.

^ "Aesthetic tricks as a means of political emancipation" . FWF - der Wissenschaftsfond . Retrieved 25 April 2019 .

^ "City-Squats: The Cinema as a space for political action" . FWF - der Wissenschaftsfond . Retrieved 25 April 2019 .

^ Schober, Anna (2016). Gender ins Bild gesetzt. Kollektive Imagination und öffentliche Auseinandersetzung im postmodernen Europa. In: Schober, Anna und Langenohl, Andreas (eds.) (2016). Metamorphosen von Kultur und Geschlecht. Genealogien, Praktiken, Imaginationen. München: Wilhelm Fink Verlag, 2016, 169 – 201.

^ a b "Everybody: A Transnational Iconography" . DFG . Retrieved 25 April 2019 .

^ Schober, Anna (2001). Blue Jeans. Vom Leben in Stoffen und Bildern. Frankfurt/ New York: Campus.

^ Schober, Anna (2019). Popularisation and Populism in the Visual Arts: Attraction Images, London and New York: Routledge (Arts and Visual Culture Series).

^ Schober, Anna (2013). The Cinema Makers. Public life and the exhibition of difference in south-eastern and central Europe since the 1960s, Exeter: Intellect books.

^ "Schober (2013): The Cinema Makers. Public life and the exhibition of difference in south-eastern and central Europe since the 1960s" .

University of Vienna . Retrieved 22 September 2019 .

^ "RC57 Visual Sociology" . International Sociological Association (ISA) . Retrieved 25 April 2019 .

Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National Germany United States Czech Republic Israel Artists FID People DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Anna_Schober&oldid=1133037134 " Categories : 1966 births Academic staff of the University of Klagenfurt Gender studies academics Austrian women historians University of Vienna alumni Living people 20th-century Austrian historians 21st-century Austrian historians Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 12 January 2023, at 00:36 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Anna Schober 1 language Add topic

