Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Historical ports 2 Modern ports 3 Types Toggle Types subsection 3.1 Inland port 3.2 Seaport 3.2.1 Cargo port 3.2.2 Cruise port 3.2.3 Port of call 3.3 Fishing port 3.4 Marina 3.5 Warm-water port 3.6 Dry port 3.7 Smart port 4 Environmental issues Toggle Environmental issues subsection 4.1 Dredging 4.2 Invasive species 4.3 Air pollution 4.4 Water quality 4.4.1 Spills, pollution and contamination 4.5 Climate change and sea level rise 4.6 Reducing impact 5 World's major ports Toggle World's major ports subsection 5.1 Africa 5.2 Asia 5.3 Europe 5.4 North America 5.5 Oceania 5.6 South America 6 See also Toggle See also subsection 6.1 Other logistics hubs 6.2 Lists 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Port 116 languages Afrikaans Аԥсшәа العربية Aragonés ܐܪܡܝܐ Asturianu Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه Basa Bali বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Беларуская भोजपुरी Български Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Cebuano Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Gaeilge Gaelg Gàidhlig Galego 客家語 / Hak-kâ-ngî 한국어 हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Italiano עברית Jawa ಕನ್ನಡ ქართული Қазақша Kiswahili Kurdî ລາວ Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Limburgs Lingála Lombard Magyar Македонски Malagasy मराठी მარგალური مصرى Bahasa Melayu Minangkabau Монгол မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands नेपाली 日本語 Nordfriisk Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Nouormand Occitan ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی Plattdüütsch Polski Português Română Romani čhib Runa Simi Русиньскый Русский संस्कृतम् Scots Shqip Sicilianu Simple English سنڌي Slovenčina Slovenščina Ślůnski Soomaaliga کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Татарча / tatarça ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt Walon 文言 Winaray 吴语 ייִדיש 粵語 Zazaki 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Seaport ) Maritime facility where ships may dock to load and discharge passengers and cargo This article is about the facility for ships. For other uses, see Port (disambiguation) .

The Port of New York and New Jersey , U.S., grew from the original harbor at the convergence of the Hudson River and the East River at the Upper New York Bay .

A port is a maritime facility comprising one or more wharves or loading areas, where ships load and discharge cargo and passengers. Although usually situated on a sea coast or estuary, ports can also be found far inland, such as Hamburg , Manchester and Duluth ; these access the sea via rivers or canals . Because of their roles as ports of entry for immigrants as well as soldiers in wartime, many port cities have experienced dramatic multi-ethnic and multicultural changes throughout their histories.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Ports are extremely important to the global economy; 70% of global merchandise trade by value passes through a port.

[ 3 ] For this reason, ports are also often densely populated settlements that provide the labor for processing and handling goods and related services for the ports. Today by far the greatest growth in port development is in Asia, the continent with some of the world's largest and busiest ports , such as Singapore and the Chinese ports of Shanghai and Ningbo-Zhoushan . As of 2020, the busiest passenger port in Europe is the Port of Helsinki in Finland .

[ 4 ] Nevertheless, countless smaller ports do exist that may only serve their local tourism or fishing industries.

Ports can have a wide environmental impact on local ecologies and waterways, most importantly water quality, which can be caused by dredging, spills and other pollution . Ports are heavily affected by changing environmental factors caused by climate change as most port infrastructure is extremely vulnerable to sea level rise and coastal flooding .

[ 3 ] Internationally, global ports are beginning to identify ways to improve coastal management practices and integrate climate change adaptation practices into their construction.

[ 3 ] Historical ports [ edit ] Main article: Historical ports The ancient Port of Genoa , Italy Wherever ancient civilisations engaged in maritime trade, they tended to develop sea ports. One of the world's oldest known artificial harbors is at Wadi al-Jarf on the Red Sea .

[ 5 ] Along with the finding of harbor structures, ancient anchors have also been found.

Other ancient ports include Guangzhou during Qin dynasty China and Canopus , the principal Egyptian port for Greek trade before the foundation of Alexandria . In Ancient Greece , Athens' port of Piraeus was the base for the Athenian fleet which played a crucial role in the Battle of Salamis against the Persians in 480 BCE. In ancient India from 3700 BCE, Lothal was a prominent city of the Indus valley civilisation, located in the Bhal region of the modern state of Gujarāt .

[ 6 ] Ostia Antica was the port of ancient Rome with Portus established by Claudius and enlarged by Trajan to supplement the nearby port of Ostia. In Japan, during the Edo period , the island of Dejima was the only port open for trade with Europe and received only a single Dutch ship per year, whereas Osaka was the largest domestic port and the main trade hub for rice.

Remains of the port of Ostia Antica , Italy Ostia Antica ( lit.

' Ancient Ostia ' ) is an ancient Roman city and the port of Rome located at the mouth of the Tiber . It is near modern Ostia , 25 km (16 mi) southwest of Rome . Due to silting and the invasion of sand, the site now lies 3 km (2 mi) from the sea.

[ 7 ] The name Ostia (the plural of ostium ) derives from Latin os 'mouth'. Ostia is now a large archaeological site noted for the excellent preservation of its ancient buildings, magnificent frescoes and impressive mosaics . The city's decline after antiquity led to harbor deterioration, marshy conditions, and reduced population. Sand dunes covering the site aided its preservation. Its remains provide insights into a city of commercial importance. As in Pompeii , Ostia's ruins provide details about Roman urbanism that are not accessible within the city of Rome itself.

[ 8 ] Post-classical Swahili kingdoms are known to have had trade port islands and trade routes [ 9 ] with the Islamic world and Asia. They were described by Greek historians as "metropolises".

[ 10 ] Famous African trade ports such as Mombasa , Zanzibar , Mogadishu and Kilwa [ 11 ] were known to Chinese sailors such as Zheng He and medieval Islamic historians such as the Berber Islamic voyager Abu Abdullah ibn Battuta .

[ 12 ] Many of these ancient sites no longer exist or function as modern ports. Even in more recent times, ports sometimes fall out of use.

Rye, East Sussex , was an important English port in the Middle Ages, but the coastline changed and it is now 2 miles (3.2 km) from the sea, while the ports of Ravenspurn and Dunwich have been lost to coastal erosion .

A map with the locations and coats of arms of the maritime republics of medieval Italy : Amalfi , Genoa , Pisa , and Venice , Noli , Ancona , Ragusa , Gaeta .

The maritime republics ( Italian : repubbliche marinare ), also called merchant republics ( Italian : repubbliche mercantili ), were Italian thalassocratic port cities which, starting from the Middle Ages , enjoyed political autonomy and economic prosperity brought about by their maritime activities. The term, coined during the 19th century, generally refers to four Italian cities, whose coats of arms have been shown since 1947 on the flags of the Italian Navy and the Italian Merchant Navy: [ 13 ] Amalfi , Genoa , Pisa , and Venice . In addition to the four best known cities, Ancona , [ 14 ] [ 15 ] Gaeta , [ 16 ] Noli , [ 17 ] [ 18 ] [ 19 ] and, in Dalmatia , Ragusa , are also considered maritime republics; in certain historical periods, they had no secondary importance compared to some of the better known cities.

Uniformly scattered across the Italian peninsula, the maritime republics were important not only for the history of navigation and commerce: in addition to precious goods otherwise unobtainable in Europe, new artistic ideas and news concerning distant countries also spread. From the 10th century, they built fleets of ships both for their own protection and to support extensive trade networks across the Mediterranean, giving them an essential role in reestablishing contacts between Europe , Asia , and Africa , which had been interrupted during the early Middle Ages. They also had an essential role in the Crusades and produced renowned explorers and navigators such as Marco Polo and Christopher Columbus .

[ 20 ] Over the centuries, the maritime republics — both the best known and the lesser known but not always less important — experienced fluctuating fortunes. In the 9th and 10th centuries, this phenomenon began with Amalfi and Gaeta, which soon reached their heyday. Meanwhile, Venice began its gradual ascent, while the other cities were still experiencing the long gestation that would lead them to their autonomy and to follow up on their seafaring vocation. After the 11th century, Amalfi and Gaeta declined rapidly, while Genoa and Venice became the most powerful republics. Pisa followed and experienced its most flourishing period in the 13th century, and Ancona and Ragusa allied to resist Venetian power. Following the 14th century, while Pisa declined to the point of losing its autonomy, Venice and Genoa continued to dominate navigation, followed by Ragusa and Ancona, which experienced their golden age in the 15th century. In the 16th century, with Ancona's loss of autonomy, only the republics of Venice, Genoa, and Ragusa remained, which still experienced great moments of splendor until the mid-17th century, followed by over a century of slow decline that ended with the Napoleonic invasion.

Modern ports [ edit ] An Evergreen ship loading at Container Terminal Altenwerder , port of Hamburg, Germany Whereas early ports tended to be just simple harbours, modern ports tend to be multimodal distribution hubs , with transport links using sea, river, canal, road, rail and air routes. Successful ports are located to optimize access to an active hinterland , such as the London Gateway . Ideally, a port will grant easy navigation to ships, and will give shelter from wind and waves. Ports are often on estuaries, where the water may be shallow and may need regular dredging . Deep water ports such as Milford Haven are less common, but can handle larger ships with a greater draft, such as super tankers , Post-Panamax vessels and large container ships . Other businesses such as regional distribution centres , warehouses and freight-forwarders, canneries and other processing facilities find it advantageous to be located within a port or nearby. Modern ports will have specialised cargo -handling equipment, such as gantry cranes , reach stackers and forklift trucks .

Ports usually have specialised functions: some tend to cater mainly for passenger ferries and cruise ships ; some specialise in container traffic or general cargo; and some ports play an important military role for their nation's navy. Some third world countries and small islands such as Ascension and St Helena still have limited port facilities, so that ships must anchor off while their cargo and passengers are taken ashore by barge or launch (respectively).

In modern times, ports survive or decline, depending on current economic trends. In the UK, both the ports of Liverpool and Southampton were once significant in the transatlantic passenger liner business. Once airliner traffic decimated that trade, both ports diversified to container cargo and cruise ships. Up until the 1950s the Port of London was a major international port on the River Thames , but changes in shipping and the use of containers and larger ships have led to its decline.

Thamesport , [ 21 ] a small semi-automated container port (with links to the Port of Felixstowe , the UK's largest container port) thrived for some years, but has been hit hard by competition from the emergent London Gateway port and logistics hub.

In mainland Europe, it is normal for ports to be publicly owned, so that, for instance, the ports of Rotterdam and Amsterdam are owned partly by the state and partly by the cities themselves.

[ 22 ] Even though modern ships tend to have bow-thrusters and stern-thrusters, [ citation needed ] many port authorities still require vessels to use pilots and tugboats for manoeuvering large ships in tight quarters. For instance, ships approaching the Belgian port of Antwerp , an inland port on the River Scheldt , are obliged to use Dutch pilots when navigating on that part of the estuary that belongs to the Netherlands.

Ports with international traffic have customs facilities.

Types [ edit ] The terms "port" and "seaport" are used for different types of facilities handling ocean-going vessels, and river port is used for river traffic, such as barges and other shallow-draft vessels.

Inland port [ edit ] Main article: Inland port The Darsena, Milan [ it ] , Italy, the inland port of the city An inland port is a port on a navigable lake, river ( fluvial port), or canal with access to a sea or ocean, which therefore allows a ship to sail from the ocean inland to the port to load or unload its cargo. An example of this is the St. Lawrence Seaway which allows ships to travel from the Atlantic Ocean several thousand kilometers inland to Great Lakes ports like Toronto , Duluth-Superior , and Chicago .

[ 23 ] The term inland port is also used for dry ports .

Seaport [ edit ] A seaport is a port located on the shore of a sea or ocean. It is further categorized as commercial and non-commercial: [ 24 ] Commercial ones includes " cruise ports " and " cargo ports ". Additionally, "cruise ports" are also known as a "home port" or a "port of call"; and "cargo port" is also further categorized into a "bulk" or "break bulk port" or as a "container port".

Non-commercial seaports are marina and fishing ports .

Cargo port [ edit ] Cargo ports are quite different from cruise ports, because each handles very different cargo, which has to be loaded and unloaded by a variety of mechanical means.

Bulk cargo ports may handle one particular type of cargo or numerous cargoes, such as grains, liquid fuels, liquid chemicals, wood, automobiles, etc. Such ports are known as the "bulk" or "break bulk ports".

Ports that handle containerized cargo are known as container ports .

Most cargo ports handle all sorts of cargo, but some ports are very specific as to what cargo they handle. Additionally, individual cargo ports may be divided into different operating terminals which handle the different types of cargoes, and may be operated by different companies, also known as terminal operators, or stevedores .

[ 25 ] Cruise port [ edit ] A cruise home port is the port where cruise ship passengers board (or embark ) to start their cruise and disembark the cruise ship at the end of their cruise. It is also where the cruise ship's supplies are loaded for the cruise, which includes everything from fresh water and fuel to fruits, vegetables, champagne, and any other supplies needed for the cruise. "Cruise home ports" are very busy places during the day the cruise ship is in port, because off-going passengers debark their baggage and on-coming passengers board the ship in addition to all the supplies being loaded. Cruise home ports tend to have large passenger terminals to handle the large number of passengers passing through the port. The busiest cruise home port in the world is the Port of Miami , Florida .

Port of call [ edit ] A port of call is an intermediate stop for a ship on its sailing itinerary. At these ports, cargo ships may take on supplies or fuel, as well as unloading and loading cargo while cruise liners have passengers get on or off ship.

Fishing port [ edit ] A fishing port is a port or harbor for landing and distributing fish. It may be a recreational facility, but it is usually commercial. A fishing port is the only port that depends on an ocean product, and depletion of fish may cause a fishing port to be uneconomical.

Marina [ edit ] Izola Marina, Slovenia A marina is a port for recreational boating.

Warm-water port [ edit ] A warm-water port (also known as an ice-free port) is one where the water does not freeze in winter. This is mainly used in the context of countries with mostly cold winters where parts of the coastline freezes over every winter. Because they are available year-round, warm-water ports can be of great geopolitical or economic interest . Such settlements as Narvik in Norway, Dalian in China, Murmansk , Novorossiysk , Petropavlovsk-Kamchatsky and Vostochny Port [ 26 ] in Russia, Odesa in Ukraine, Kushiro in Japan and Valdez at the terminus of the Alaska Pipeline owe their very existence to being ice-free ports. The Baltic Sea and similar areas have ports available year-round beginning in the 20th century thanks to icebreakers , but earlier access problems prompted Russia to expand its territory to the Black Sea .

[ citation needed ] Dry port [ edit ] Main article: Dry port A dry port is an inland intermodal terminal directly connected by road or rail to a seaport and operating as a centre for the transshipment of sea cargo to inland destinations.

[ 27 ] Smart port [ edit ] Main article: Smart port A smart port uses technologies, including the Internet of Things (IoT) and artificial intelligence (AI) to be more efficient at handling goods.

[ 28 ] Smart ports usually deploy cloud-based software as part of the process of greater automation to help generate the operating flow that helps the port work smoothly.

[ 29 ] At present, most of the world's ports have somewhat embedded technology, if not for full leadership. However, thanks to global government initiatives and exponential growth in maritime trade, the number of intelligent ports has gradually increased. A report by business intelligence provider Visiongain assessed that Smart Ports Market spending would reach $1.5 bn in 2019.

[ 30 ] Environmental issues [ edit ] Further information: Environmental impact of shipping Ports and their operation are often a cause of environmental issues, such as sediment contamination and spills from ships and are susceptible to larger environmental issues, such as human caused climate change and its effects.

[ 31 ] Dredging [ edit ] Main article: Dredging Every year 100 million cubic metres of marine sediment are dredged to improve waterways around ports. Dredging, in its practice, disturbs local ecosystems, brings sediments into the water column, and can stir up pollutants captured in the sediments.

[ 31 ] Invasive species [ edit ] Invasive species are often spread by the bilge water and species attached to the hulls of ships.

[ 31 ] It is estimated that there are over 7000 invasive species transported in bilge water around the world on a daily basis [ 32 ] Invasive species can have direct or indirect interactions with native sea life. Direct interaction such as predation, is when a native species with no natural predator is all of a sudden prey of an invasive specie. Indirect interaction can be diseases or other health conditions brought by invasive species.

[ 33 ] A ship pumping bilge water into a harbor Air pollution [ edit ] Ports are also a source of increased air pollution as a result of ships and land transportation at the port. Transportation corridors around ports have higher exhaust emissions and this can have related health effects on local communities.

[ 31 ] Water quality [ edit ] Water quality around ports is often lower because of both direct and indirect pollution from the shipping, and other challenges caused by the port's community, such as trash washing into the ocean.

[ 31 ] Spills, pollution and contamination [ edit ] Sewage from ships, and leaks of oil and chemicals from shipping vessels can contaminate local water, and cause other effects like nutrient pollution in the water.

[ 31 ] Climate change and sea level rise [ edit ] Ports and their infrastructure are very vulnerable to climate change and sea level rise, because many of them are in low-lying areas designed for status quo water levels.

[ 3 ] Variable weather, coastal erosion, and sea level rise all put pressure on existing infrastructure, resulting in subsidence , coastal flooding and other direct pressures on the port.

[ 3 ] Reducing impact [ edit ] Port of Koper in Slovenia .

There are several initiatives to decrease negative environmental impacts of ports.

[ 34 ] [ 35 ] [ 36 ] The World Port Sustainability Program points to all of the Sustainable Development Goals as potential ways of addressing port sustainability.

[ 37 ] These include SIMPYC , the World Ports Climate Initiative , the African Green Port Initiative , EcoPorts and Green Marine .

[ 36 ] [ 38 ] World's major ports [ edit ] Main article: Lists of ports Africa [ edit ] The port of Tangier Med is the largest port on the Mediterranean and in Africa by capacity and went into service in July 2007.

The busiest port in Africa is Port Said in Egypt.

Asia [ edit ] See also: List of East Asian ports and List of ports and harbours of the Indian Ocean The port of Visakhapatnam in Andhra Pradesh , India The port of Shanghai is the largest port in the world in both cargo tonnage and activity. It regained its position as the world's busiest port by cargo tonnage and the world's busiest container port in 2009 and 2010, respectively. It is followed by the ports of Singapore , Hong Kong and Kaohsiung , Taiwan , all of which are in East and Southeast Asia .

The port of Singapore is the world's second-busiest port in terms of total shipping tonnage, it also transships a third of the world's shipping containers , half of the world's annual supply of crude oil , and is the world's busiest transshipment port .

Europe [ edit ] See also: List of busiest ports in Europe The Port of Trieste , Italy , the main port of the northern Adriatic and starting point of the Transalpine Pipeline Europe's busiest container port and biggest port by cargo tonnage by far is the Port of Rotterdam , in the Netherlands. It is followed by the Belgian Port of Antwerp or the German Port of Hamburg , depending on which metric is used.

[ 39 ] In turn, the Spanish Port of Valencia is the busiest port in the Mediterranean basin, while the Portuguese Port of Sines is the busiest atlantic port. The Port of Trieste , Italy , is the main port of the northern Adriatic and starting point of the Transalpine Pipeline .

North America [ edit ] See also: List of North American ports and Ports of the United States The largest ports include the Port of South Louisiana , a vast sprawling port centered in the New Orleans area, Houston , Port of New York/New Jersey , Los Angeles in the U.S., Manzanillo in Mexico and Vancouver in Canada.

[ citation needed ] Panama also has the Panama Canal that connects the Pacific and Atlantic Ocean, and is a key conduit for international trade.

Oceania [ edit ] The largest port in Oceania is the Port of Melbourne .

South America [ edit ] According to ECLAC 's "Maritime and Logistics Profile of Latin America and the Caribbean", the largest ports in South America are the Port of Santos in Brazil, Cartagena in Colombia, Callao in Peru, Guayaquil in Ecuador, and the Port of Buenos Aires in Argentina.

[ 40 ] See also [ edit ] Anchorage (shipping) Megaproject Marina – port for recreational boating Port management Port operator Ship transport Port of Nantes Other logistics hubs [ edit ] Airport Altiport Heliport Spaceport STOLport Wayport Hoverport Outport Seaplane base Port of entry Lists [ edit ] Lists of ports List of busiest cruise ports by passengers References [ edit ] ^ Caves, R. W. (2004).

Encyclopedia of the City . Routledge. pp.

528 .

ISBN 9780415252256 .

^ John Gerring; Brendan Apfeld; Tore Wig; Andreas Forø Tollefsen (2022).

The Deep Roots of Modern Democracy: Geography and the Diffusion of Political Institutions . Cambridge University Press. p. 45.

^ a b c d e Asariotis, Regina; Benamara, Hassiba; Mohos-Naray, Viktoria (December 2017).

Port Industry Survey on Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation (PDF) (Report). UN Conference on Trade and Development.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 2020-11-25.

^ "Maritime ports freight and passenger statistics" (PDF) .

Eurostat .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 2017-07-22 . Retrieved 18 June 2020 .

^ Rossella Lorenzi (12 April 2013).

"Most Ancient Port, Hieroglyphic Papyri Found" .

Discovery News . Archived from the original on 14 April 2013 . Retrieved 21 April 2013 .

^ Rao, S. R. Rao (1985).

Lothal . Archeological Survey of India.

^ Ostia-Introduction http://www.ostia-antica.org/intro.htm Archived 2017-09-03 at the Wayback Machine ^ Gates, Charles (2011).

Ancient cities: the archaeology of urban life in the ancient Near East and Egypt, Greece and Rome (2nd ed.). London [u.a]: Routledge. pp.

367– 370.

ISBN 978-0-203-83057-4 .

^ "Eastern and Southern Africa 500–1000 AD" . Metmuseum.org. Archived from the original on 4 October 2001 . Retrieved 21 April 2009 .

^ "Tanzanian dig unearths ancient secret by Tira Shubart" .

BBC News . 17 April 2002. Archived from the original on 20 December 2002 . Retrieved 21 April 2009 .

^ Newitt, M.D.D. (1995).

A History of Mozambique . Indiana University Press.

ISBN 9780253340061 .

^ "Ibn Battuta: Travels in Asia and Africa 1325–1354" . Fordham.edu. 21 February 2001. Archived from the original on 13 May 2011 . Retrieved 21 April 2009 .

^ "La Bandiera della Marina Militare" .

Marina Militare (in Italian). Ministero della Difesa. Archived from the original on December 27, 2013 . Retrieved July 29, 2023 .

^ The International Geographic Encyclopedia and Atlas , Ancona (p. 27), Springer, 1979. ISBN 9781349050024.

^ Peris Persi, in Conoscere l'Italia , vol. Marche, Istituto Geografico De Agostini, Novara 1982 (p. 74); AA.VV.

Meravigliosa Italia, Enciclopedia delle regioni , edited by Valerio Lugoni, Aristea, Milano; Guido Piovene, in Tuttitalia , Casa Editrice Sansoni, Firenze & Istituto Geografico De Agostini, Novara (p. 31); Pietro Zampetti, in Itinerari dell'Espresso , vol. Marche, edited by Neri Pozza, Editrice L'Espresso, Rome, 1980 ^ Touring Club Italiano, Lazio Touring Editore, 1981 (p. 743); Giovanna Bergamaschi, Arte in Italia: guida ai luoghi ed alle opere dell'Italia artistica , Electa, 1983 (p. 243); Salvatore Aurigemma, Angelo de Santis, Gaeta, Formia, Minturno .

^ Giovanni Murialdo, Dinamiche territoriali e commerciali nella Noli signorile e comunale...

, in: Mauro Darchi, Francesca Bandini, La repubblica di Noli e l'importanza dei porti minori del Mediterraneo nel Medioevo , Firenze, All'Insegna del Giglio, 2004 (p. 9) ^ Bohun Lynch, The Italian Riviera: Its Scenery, Customs, and Food, with Notes Upon the Maritime Alps , Doubleday, Doran, 1927 (p. 159).

^ AA. VV., Medioevo latino, bollettino bibliografico della cultura europea da Boezio a Erasmo (secoli VI – XV), volume 28 , Sismel Edizioni del Galluzzo, 2007, (p. 1338); Giuseppe Gallo, La Repubblica di Genova tra nobili e popolari (1257–1528) , edizioni De Ferrari, 1997, p. 44 ^ "Trade in Medieval Europe" .

World History Encyclopedia .

Archived from the original on 20 June 2021 . Retrieved 2021-06-02 .

^ "Welcome" .

London Thamesport . Retrieved 6 September 2018 .

^ "Organisation" .

Port of Rotterdam . 2015-06-15 . Retrieved 2020-10-07 .

^ "Seaway System" .

greatlakes-seaway.com .

^ "Different types of Ports" .

Fulcrum .

Archived from the original on Dec 17, 2023.

^ Khan, Khalil U. (15 September 2014).

"Stevedoring & The Role of Stevedores in Shipping" . International Institute of Marine Surveying . Retrieved 7 April 2021 .

^ "Vostochny Port JSC, Geography, Location" .

Vostochny Port website . 2007. Archived from the original on 29 November 2012 . Retrieved 13 December 2012 .

Vostochny Port is located in the south of Primorsky Region, in the southeast of Nakhodka bay, in Vrangel bay. This is unique natural harbor is no ice restrictions even in severe winters.

^ "Feasibility Study on the network operation of Hinterland Hubs (Dry Port Concept) to improve and modernise ports' connections to the hinterland and to improve networking" (PDF) . InLoc. January 2007. Archived from the original on 2008-04-13 . Retrieved 2008-03-10 .

^ "Smart Ports of the Future: A Digital Tomorrow" .

Port Technology International . 2019-09-17. Archived from the original on 2019-10-11 . Retrieved 2019-10-11 .

^ "Ports in the Cloud: The Next Step in Automation?" .

Port Technology International . 2018-11-09.

Archived from the original on 11 October 2019 . Retrieved 2019-10-11 .

^ " 'Smart Ports Market spending will reach $1.5bn in 2019', says Visiongain" .

Visiongain (Press release). 2019-09-05 . Retrieved 2019-09-09 .

^ a b c d e f OECD (2011-02-17). Braathen, Nils Axel (ed.).

Environmental Impacts of International Shipping: The Role of Ports . OECD.

doi : 10.1787/9789264097339-en .

ISBN 978-92-64-09682-0 .

^ "What are California Marine Invasive Species?" .

wildlife.ca.gov . Retrieved 2021-05-13 .

^ "Invasive and Exotic Marine Species" .

NOAA Fisheries . NOAA. 2021-05-07 . Retrieved 2021-05-13 .

^ Hossain, Tahazzud; Adams, Michelle; Walker, Tony R. (2020).

"Role of sustainability in global seaports" .

Ocean & Coastal Management .

202 : 105435.

doi : 10.1016/j.ocecoaman.2020.105435 .

^ Hossain, Tahazzud; Adams, Michelle; Walker, Tony R. (2019). "Sustainability initiatives in Canadian ports".

Marine Policy .

106 : 103519.

doi : 10.1016/j.marpol.2019.103519 .

S2CID 164819617 .

^ a b Walker, Tony R. (2016). "Green Marine: An environmental program to establish sustainability in marine transportation".

Marine Pollution Bulletin .

105 (1): 199– 207.

Bibcode : 2016MarPB.105..199W .

doi : 10.1016/j.marpolbul.2016.02.029 .

PMID 26899158 .

^ "Areas of Interest – World Port Sustainability Program" .

sustainableworldports.org . Retrieved 2020-12-19 .

^ EOS magazine, 6, 2012 ^ "World Port Rankings 2011" (PDF) .

Agência Nacional de Transportes Aquaviários . Antaq, Brazil. 2011.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 2012-12-02 . Retrieved 6 September 2018 .

^ "Los 10 mayores puertos de América Latina y Caribe en tráfico de contenedores" .

Revista de Ingeniería Naval (in Spanish).

Madrid , Spain: Asociación de Ingenieros Navales y Oceánicos de España. September 28, 2016 . Retrieved May 3, 2017 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Ports and harbours .

Port Industry Statistics, American Association of Port Authorities Information on yachting facilities at ports around the world from Noonsite.com Social & Economic Benefits of PORTS from "NOAA Socioeconomics" website initiative Antunes, Cátia: Early Modern Ports, 1500–1750 , European History Online , Mainz: Institute of European History , 2011, retrieved: November 2, 2011.

v t e Ports and harbors Types Shore facility Home port Fuelling station Inland harbor Inland port Landing Outport Port of entry Trust port Dry port Anchorage Wharf Naval base Rankings World's busiest port Busiest container ports Busiest by tonnage Busiest by cruise passengers Countries by container port traffic Locations Arctic Atlantic Indian Pacific Southern Port management Maritime transport Port authority Port state control Harbour engineer Port operator Security Port operations simulator Terminal Operating System Conventions SOLAS MARPOL 73/78 STCW Ballast Water Management Convention Transport portal Category Commons Wiktionary "Port" Wiktionary "Harbor" WikiProject v t e Public infrastructure Assets and facilities Airports Bridges Broadband Canals Critical infrastructure Dams Electricity generation Energy development Hazardous waste Hospitals Levees Lighthouses Municipal solid waste Parks Ports Public housing Public spaces Public transport Public utilities Public works Rail transport Roads Sewage State schools Telecommunications Town square Wastewater treatment Water supply network Wind power Concepts Appropriation Infrastructure asset management Build–operate–transfer Design–build Earmark Engineering contracts Externality Fixed cost Government debt Infrastructure bond Life-cycle assessment Lindahl tax Maintenance, repair, and operations Natural monopoly Property tax Public capital Public finance Public good Public sector Public–private partnership Renovation Spillover Supply chain Taxation Upgrade Issues and ideas Air traffic control Brownfield land Bus rapid transit Carbon footprint Congestion pricing Containerization Ethanol fuel Fuel efficiency Fuel tax Groundwater High-speed rail Hybrid vehicles Land-use planning Mobile data terminal Pork barrel Recycling Renewable resources Reverse osmosis Smart grid Smart growth Stormwater Sustainable urban infrastructure Traffic congestion Transit-oriented development Urban sprawl Waste-to-energy Weatherization Wireless Fields of study Architecture Civil engineering Electrical engineering Mechanical engineering Public economics Public policy Urban planning Examples Akashi Kaikyō Bridge Autobahn Brooklyn Bridge Bus rapid transit systems Channel Tunnel Controlled-access highway systems Electric power transmission High-speed trains Hong Kong International Airport Hoover Dam Humber Bridge Kansai International Airport Millau Viaduct Nuclear power Offshore wind farms Panama Canal Port of Shanghai San Francisco–Oakland Bay Bridge Suez Canal Solar power Three Gorges Dam Trans-Alaska pipeline Transcontinental railroads v t e Real estate developments Commercial Airport Business park Bus station Commercial area Mixed-use development Office building Port inland Power center Retail park Riverfront Shopping center ( Shopping mall ) Train station Shopping streets and districts Industrial Business cluster Industrial district Industrial park Technology centers Residential Agrihood Boarding house Bungalow court City block Closed community Company town Conservation community Executive home Golf course community Gated community Housing estate Intentional community Luxury apartment McMansion Mixed-use development Model dwellings for the poor Multifamily residential Penthouse apartment Private community Public housing Residential airpark Residential area Retirement community Revenue house Rooming house Single-room occupancy Subdivision Tract housing Disability Assisted living Behavior modification facility Residential treatment center Therapeutic boarding school Elderly care Age-restricted community Nursing home Retirement home Senior living Science/education Akademgorodok Atomgrad Campus Research park Satellite campus Science park Municipal Arcology Civic center Garden city movement Model village Planned cities Planned community Urban green space parks Buildings ( types ) Apartment House types Skyscraper Tower block Villa Miscellaneous Brownfield land Cemetery Residential cluster development Construction Context theory Eminent domain Greenfield land Greyfield land Groundscraper Land-use planning Nonbuilding NIMBY Park Parking ( Multistorey car park ) Planning permission Playground Redevelopment Regional planning Urban design Urban planning YIMBY Zoning Housing portal Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic Spain Israel Other Historical Dictionary of Switzerland Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐api‐ext.codfw.main‐d49c7db49‐2pj4r
Cached time: 20250814220354
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.852 seconds
Real time usage: 1.052 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 3736/1000000
Revision size: 38084/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 124215/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 3349/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 20/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 153761/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.536/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 21515605/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  871.316      1 -total
 34.02%  296.425      1 Template:Reflist
 13.22%  115.175      6 Template:Cite_book
 13.04%  113.638      4 Template:Navbox
 11.56%  100.743      2 Template:Langx
 10.91%   95.086      1 Template:Ports_and_harbors
 10.75%   93.656     19 Template:Cite_web
  8.89%   77.494      1 Template:Short_description
  7.17%   62.463      1 Template:Commons_category
  6.95%   60.582      1 Template:Sister_project Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:97169:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814220354 and revision id 1294091721. Rendering was triggered because: unknown Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Port&oldid=1294091721#Seaport " Categories : Ports and harbours Nautical terminology Infrastructure Industrial buildings and structures Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1 Italian-language sources (it) CS1: unfit URL CS1 Spanish-language sources (es) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Italian-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2021 Articles with unsourced statements from January 2024 Articles with unsourced statements from February 2021 Commons category link is locally defined This page was last edited on 5 June 2025, at 14:36 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Port 116 languages Add topic

