Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Practices Toggle Practices subsection 1.1 Privatization 1.2 Mass incarceration 1.3 Financialization 1.4 Management and manipulation of crises 1.5 State redistributions 2 Examples 3 Relation to Marxism 4 Contemporary movements against accumulation by dispossession 5 See also 6 References Toggle References subsection 6.1 Works cited 7 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Accumulation by dispossession 6 languages Català Español Esperanto Français Português 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Accumulation by dispossession" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( February 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Policies to centralize wealth and power Accumulation by dispossession is a concept presented by the Marxist geographer David Harvey . It defines neoliberal capitalist policies that result in a centralization of wealth and power in the hands of a few by dispossessing the public and private entities of their wealth or land. Such policies are visible in many western nations from the 1970s and to the present day.

[ 1 ] Harvey argues these policies are guided mainly by four practices: privatization , financialization , management and manipulation of crises, and state redistributions.

Practices [ edit ] Privatization [ edit ] Privatization and commodification of public assets have been among the most criticized and disputed aspects of neoliberalism . Summed up, they could be characterized by the process of transferring property from public ownership to private ownership. According to Marxist theory , this serves the interests of the capitalist class , or bourgeoisie , as it moves power from the nation's governments to private parties. At the same time, privatization generates a means for profit for the capitalist class; after a transaction they can then sell or rent to the public what used to be commonly owned, or use it as capital through the capitalist mode of production to generate more capital.

The 2022 World Inequality Report , a four-year research project organized by the economists Lucas Chancel , Thomas Piketty , Emmanuel Saez , and Gabriel Zucman , shows that "the world is marked by a very high level of income inequality and an extreme level of wealth inequality" and that these inequalities "seem to be about as great today as they were at the peak of western imperialism in the early 20th century." According to the report, the bottom half of the population owns 2% of global wealth, while the top 10% owns 76% of it. The top 1% owns 38%.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] Mass incarceration [ edit ] Several scholars have linked mass incarceration of the poor in the United States with the rise of neoliberalism.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] [ 8 ] Sociologist Loïc Wacquant and Marxist economic geographer David Harvey have argued that the criminalization of poverty and mass incarceration is a neoliberal policy for dealing with social instability among economically marginalized populations.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] According to Wacquant, this situation follows the implementation of other neoliberal policies, which have allowed for the retrenchment of the social welfare state and the rise of punitive workfare , whilst increasing gentrification of urban areas, privatization of public functions, the shrinking of collective protections for the working class via economic deregulation and the rise of underpaid, precarious wage labor .

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] By contrast, it is extremely lenient in dealing with those in the upper echelons of society, in particular when it comes to economic crimes of the upper class and corporations such as fraud , embezzlement , insider trading , credit and insurance fraud , money laundering and violation of commerce and labor codes.

[ 9 ] [ 13 ] According to Wacquant, neoliberalism does not shrink government, but instead sets up a "centaur state" with little governmental oversight for those at the top and strict control of those at the bottom.

[ 9 ] [ 14 ] Financialization [ edit ] The wave of financialization that set in the 1980s is facilitated by governmental deregulation which has made the financial system one of the main centers of redistributive activity. Stock promotions, Ponzi schemes , structured asset destruction through inflation , asset stripping through mergers and acquisitions , dispossession of assets (raiding of pension funds and their decimation by stock and corporate collapses) by credit and stock manipulations, are, according to Harvey, central features of the post-1970s capitalist financial system.

[ 15 ] That aspect relies entirely on the fact that the quantity of money in circulation and therefore demand levels and price levels are controlled by the boards of directors of privately owned banks.

Those boards of directors are also on boards of corporations and any number of other legal vehicles who are also profiting from asset price swings. At the heart of accumulation by dispossession is the private control of the quantity of money supply that can be manipulated for private gain, which includes creating unemployment or restive conditions in the population. This process is well documented in English history as far back as prior to the founding of the Bank of England and before that in the Netherlands. The process works well with or without a central bank and with or without gold backing. The details are also manipulated from time to time as needed to satisfy popular rage or apathy.

[ 16 ] Management and manipulation of crises [ edit ] See also: Fragile state , Economic crisis , Constitutional crisis , and The Shock Doctrine By creating and manipulating crises , such as by suddenly raising interest rates , poorer nations can be forced into bankruptcy , and agreeing to such deals like that of the structural adjustment programs can yield more damages to those nations.  Harvey reasoned that this is authorized by parties such as the U.S. Treasury , World Bank and the International Monetary Fund .

State redistributions [ edit ] The neoliberal nation-state is one of the most important agents of redistributive policies . Even when privatization or commodification appear to be profitable to the lower class, in the long run it can affect the economy negatively. The state seeks redistributions through a variety of things, like changing  the tax code to profit returns on investment rather than incomes and wages (of the lower classes).

Examples [ edit ] Margaret Thatcher 's program for the privatization of social housing in Britain was initially seen as beneficial for the lower classes which could now move from rental to ownership at a relatively low cost, gain control over assets and increase their wealth . However, housing speculation took over following the transfers (particularly in the prime central locations), and low-income populations were forced out to the periphery.

[ 17 ] Ultimately, the new homeowners were also borrowers and paid portions of their yearly income as interest on long-term mortgages, effectively transferring a portion of their wealth to the owners of banks with licenses to create debt money from fractional reserves. Thatcher's council privatization scheme increased the potential number of borrowers in the UK by up to 20% of UK residents who lived in council housing at the end of the 1970s.

[ 18 ] Contemporary examples include attempts to deprive people of land in places like Nandigram in India and eMacambini in South Africa .

Privatization is the process of transferring public assets from the state to the private companies. Productive assets include natural resources, such as earth, forest, water, and air. Such are assets that states have used to hold in trust for the people it represents. To privatize them away and sell them as stock to private companies is what Harvey calls accumulation by dispossession.

State redistributions can be in the form of contracts given to power groups: for large infrastructures, services paid by the state and carried out by private enterprise, defense developments, research projects. One would have to find out if those contracts serve public good in a fair way or if they sustain a power structure. Also, the granting of licenses for all sorts of state sanctioned activities can turn out as unfair wealth distribution. Another important redistribution channel is by State supported financing of private enterprise activities.

Relation to Marxism [ edit ] Harvey links these practices to what Karl Marx called original or primitive accumulation , and ties these to examples from the real world. He therefore draws on the theory of ongoing primitive accumulation by Rosa Luxemburg as laid out in The Accumulation of Capital . The neoliberal modernity is, according to Harvey, a modernity in which dispossession plays a large role and in which the capital class is gaining power at the expense of the labour class .

Contemporary movements against accumulation by dispossession [ edit ] Abahlali baseMjondolo in South Africa The Bhumi Uchhed Pratirodh Committee in India The EZLN in Mexico Fanmi Lavalas in Haiti The Homeless Workers' Movement in Brazil The Landless Peoples Movement in South Africa The Landless Workers' Movement in Brazil Movement for Justice en el Barrio in the United States Narmada Bachao Andolan in India The Western Cape Anti-Eviction Campaign in South Africa Occupy Homes in the United States Take Back the Land in the United States See also [ edit ] Asset poverty – Economic and social condition Bagholder – Slang for shareholder left holding worthless stocks Capital accumulation – Dynamic that motivates pursuit of profit, central tenet of capitalism Causes of poverty Common land – Land owned collectively Dispossession, oppression, and depression – State of low mood and aversion to activity Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Economic abuse – Form of abuse Economic inequality – Distribution of income or wealth between different groups Essential facilities doctrine – Type of claim of monopolization made under competition laws Institutional abuse – Mistreatment of a person from a system of power Kitchen sink realism – British social realist artistic movement Mutualism (economic theory) – Anarchist school of thought and socialist economic theory Mutualism (movement) – Social movement Precarious work – Type of non-standard or temporary employment Property is theft!

– French philosopher, economist, anarchist and socialist (1809–1865) Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Socialist accumulation – Counterpart to the process of the primitive accumulation of capital Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Tacit collusion – Collusion between competitors The internal contradictions of capital accumulation Redistribution of income and wealth – Political philosophy Wage slavery – Dependence on wages or salary v t e Property By owner Collective Common Communal Community Crown Customary Cooperative Private Public Self Social State Unowned By nature Croft Estate (landed) Intangible Intellectual indigenous Personal Tangible real Commons Common land Common-pool resource Digital Global Information Knowledge Theory Bundle of rights Commodity fictitious commodities Common good (economics) Excludability First possession appropriation homestead principle Free-rider problem Game theory Georgism Gift economy Labor theory of property Law of rent rent-seeking Legal plunder Natural rights Ownership Property rights primogeniture usufruct women's Right to property Rivalry Tragedy of the commons anticommons Applications Acequia (watercourse) Ejido (agrarian land) Estate legal literary real Forest types Huerta Inheritance executor Land tenure Property law alienation easement restraint on alienation real estate title Rights Air Fishing Forest-dwelling (India) Freedom to roam Grazing pannage Hunting Land aboriginal indigenous squatting Littoral Mineral Bergregal Right of way Water prior-appropriation riparian Disposession / redistribution Bioprospecting biopiracy Collectivization Eminent domain Enclosure Eviction Expropriation Farhud Forced migration population transfer repatriation Illegal fishing Illegal logging Land Back Land reform Legal plunder Piracy Poaching Primitive accumulation Privatization Regulatory taking Slavery bride buying human trafficking spousal husband-selling wife selling wage Tax inheritance poll progressive property Theft Scholars ( key work ) Frédéric Bastiat The Law Ronald Coase Friedrich Engels The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State Henry George Progress and Poverty Garrett Hardin David Harvey John Locke Two Treatises of Government Karl Marx Das Kapital Marcel Mauss The Gift John Stuart Mill Elinor Ostrom Karl Polanyi The Great Transformation Pierre-Joseph Proudhon What Is Property?

David Ricardo Murray N. Rothbard The Ethics of Liberty Jean-Jacques Rousseau The Social Contract Adam Smith The Wealth of Nations Categories: Property Property law by country v t e High wealth Concepts Capital accumulation Overaccumulation Economic inequality Wealth distribution Income distribution Consumption distribution History of economic inequality International inequality Elite Oligarchy Overclass Plutocracy Plutonomy Broligarchy Primitive accumulation of capital Upper class Nouveau riche (new money) Vieux riche (old money) Luxury goods Veblen goods Conspicuous consumption Conspicuous leisure Luxury beliefs People Billionaire Captain of industry High-net-worth individual Magnate Business Millionaire Oligarch Business Russian Ukrainian Robber baron Wealth Concentration Distribution Effect Geography Inheritance Dynastic Estate planning Management National Paper Religion Tax Lists People Forbes list of billionaires List of centibillionaires Female billionaires Richest royals Wealthiest Americans Wealthiest families Organizations Largest companies by revenue Largest corporate profits and losses Largest corporations by market capitalization Largest financial services companies by revenue Largest manufacturing companies by revenue Largest software companies by revenue Largest technology companies by revenue Religious organizations Charities Philanthropists Universities Endowment size Number of billionaire alumni Other Cities by number of billionaires Countries by number of billionaires Countries by total wealth Countries by wealth inequality Wealth inequality in the United States Income inequality in the United States Most expensive items by category Wealthiest animals Related Diseases of affluence Affluenza Acquired situational narcissism Argumentum ad crumenam Prosperity theology Philanthropy Gospel of Wealth The Giving Pledge Philanthrocapitalism Venture philanthropy Sayings The rich get richer and the poor get poorer Socialism for the rich and capitalism for the poor Too big to fail Media Das Kapital Plutus Greek god of wealth Superclass List The Theory of the Leisure Class Wealth The Wealth of Nations Category by country References [ edit ] ^ Harvey, D. (2004).

"The 'new' imperialism: accumulation by dispossession" .

Socialist Register .

40 : 63– 87.

^ Kaplan, Juliana; Kiersz, Andy (December 7, 2021).

"A huge study of 20 years of global wealth demolishes the myth of 'trickle-down' and shows the rich are taking most of the gains for themselves" .

Business Insider . Retrieved December 8, 2021 .

^ Elliott, Larry (December 7, 2021).

"Global inequality 'as marked as it was at peak of western imperialism' " .

The Guardian . Retrieved December 8, 2021 .

^ "World Inequality Report 2022" . Retrieved December 8, 2021 .

^ Haymes, Vidal de Haymes & Miller (2015) , pp. 3, 346.

^ Aviram, Hadar (September 7, 2014).

"Are Private Prisons to Blame for Mass Incarceration and its Evils? Prison Conditions, Neoliberalism, and Public Choice" .

Fordham Urban Law Journal .

Fordham University School of Law .

SSRN 2492782 . Retrieved December 27, 2014 .

^ Gerstle (2022) , pp. 130–132.

^ Gottschalk, Marie (2014).

Caught: The Prison State and the Lockdown of American Politics .

Princeton University Press . p.

10 .

ISBN 978-0691164052 .

^ a b c Wacquant (2009) , pp. 125–126, 312.

^ Harvey (2005) .

^ Wacquant (2009) , pp. 53–54.

^ Shaw, Devin Z. (September 29, 2010).

"Loïc Wacquant: "Prisons of Poverty" " .

The Notes Taken .

^ Wacquant, Loïc (August 1, 2011).

"The punitive regulation of poverty in the neoliberal age" .

openDemocracy . Archived from the original on September 25, 2018 . Retrieved July 17, 2018 .

^ Mora, Richard; Christianakis, Mary.

"Feeding the School-to-Prison Pipeline: The Convergence of Neoliberalism, Conservativism, and Penal Populism" .

Journal of Educational Controversy . Woodring College of Education, Western Washington University . Retrieved February 23, 2014 .

^ David Harvey (2003).

The New Imperialism . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 0-19-926431-7 .

^ Hollis, Christopher (1935).

Two Nations: A Financial Analysis of English History . London: George Routledge and Sons.

^ Harvey, David (2003).

The New Imperialism . Oxford: Oxford University Press. p.

158 .

ISBN 978-0-19-926431-5 .

^ Jones, Owen (2011).

Chavs: The Demonization of the Working Class . London New York: Verso . p. 34.

Works cited [ edit ] Gerstle, Gary (2022).

The Rise and Fall of the Neoliberal Order: America and the World in the Free Market Era . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0197519646 .

Harvey, David (2005).

A Brief History of Neoliberalism . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-928326-2 .

Haymes, Stephen; Vidal de Haymes, Maria; Miller, Reuben, eds. (2015).

The Routledge Handbook of Poverty in the United States . London: Routledge.

ISBN 978-0415673440 .

Wacquant, Loïc (2009).

Punishing the Poor: The Neoliberal Government of Social Insecurity . Durham NC: Duke University Press.

ISBN 9780822392255 .

OCLC 404091956 .

Further reading [ edit ] Harvey, David (2003).

The New Imperialism . Oxford: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-926431-5 .

Harvey, D. 2004.

The 'new' imperialism: accumulation by dispossession .

Socialist Register 40: 63-87.

David Harvey , Reading Marx's Capital Reading Marx’s Capital – Class 12, Chapters 26-33, The Secret of Primitive Accumulation (video lecture) NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐4b2tr
Cached time: 20250817211812
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.691 seconds
Real time usage: 0.902 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 5143/1000000
Revision size: 16674/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 115548/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 2461/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 8/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 80262/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.471/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 20345832/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  795.414      1 -total
 30.56%  243.050     20 Template:Annotated_link
 20.03%  159.306      1 Template:Reflist
 14.85%  118.118      6 Template:Navbox
 13.13%  104.467      1 Template:Property_navbox
 10.86%   86.397      3 Template:Cite_journal
  9.65%   76.722      1 Template:More_citations_needed
  8.08%   64.259      1 Template:Ambox
  6.94%   55.176      1 Template:Short_description
  6.21%   49.358     10 Template:Cite_book Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:743475:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817211812 and revision id 1236917695. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Accumulation_by_dispossession&oldid=1236917695 " Categories : Marxian economics Socialism Neoliberalism Hidden categories: Articles needing additional references from February 2023 All articles needing additional references Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use mdy dates from September 2021 Use American English from March 2019 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets via Module:Annotated link This page was last edited on 27 July 2024, at 06:36 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Accumulation by dispossession 6 languages Add topic

