Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Federal SoSP effort 2 Science of Science and Innovation Policy program 3 See also 4 References 5 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Science of science policy 4 languages العربية فارسی Українська Tiếng Việt Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Interdisciplinary research area Not to be confused with SOSP .

Science of science policy ( SoSP ) is an emerging interdisciplinary research area that seeks to develop theoretical and empirical models of the scientific enterprise . This scientific basis can be used to help government, and society in general, make better R&D management decisions by establishing a scientifically rigorous, quantitative basis from which policy makers and researchers may assess the impacts of the nation's scientific and engineering enterprise, improve their understanding of its dynamics, and assess the likely outcomes. Examples of research in the science of science policy include models to understand the production of science, qualitative , quantitative and computational methods to estimate the impact of science, and processes for choosing from alternative science portfolios.

[ 1 ] : 5 Federal SoSP effort [ edit ] The federal government of the United States has long been a supporter of SoSP. In 2006, in response to Office of Science and Technology Policy Director John H. Marburger 's challenge for a new "science of science policy," the National Science and Technology Council 's Subcommittee on Social, Behavioral and Economic Sciences (SBE) established an Interagency Task Group on Science of Science Policy (ITG) to serve as part of the internal deliberative process of the Subcommittee. In 2008, the SoSP ITG developed and published The Science of Science Policy: A Federal Research Roadmap, which outlined the Federal efforts necessary for the long-term development of a science of science policy, and presented this Roadmap to the SoSP Community. The ITG's subsequent work has been guided by the questions outlined in the Roadmap and the action steps developed at the workshop. Furthermore, since 2007, the National Science Foundation , in support of academic research to advance the field, has awarded grants from the Science of Science and Innovation Policy (SciSIP) program. The SciSIP research supports and complements the Federal SoSP efforts by providing new tools with immediate relevance to policymakers.

Science of Science and Innovation Policy program [ edit ] The Science of Science and Innovation Policy (SciSIP) program was established at the National Science Foundation in 2005 in response to a call from John Marburger for a "specialist scholarly community" to study the science of science policy. The program has three major goals: advancing evidence-based science and innovation policy decision making; building a scientific community to study science and innovation policy; and leveraging the experience of other countries.

Between 2007 and 2011, over one hundred and thirty awards were made in five rounds of funding. The awardees include economists , sociologists , political scientists , and psychologists . Some of these awards are already showing results in the form of papers, presentations, software, and data development.

See also [ edit ] Metascience Evidence-based policy Evidence-based practices References [ edit ] ^ The Science of Science Policy: A Federal Research Roadmap. Report on the Science of Science Policy to the Subcommittee on Social, Behavioral and Economic Sciences, Committee on Science, National Science and Technology Council, Office of Science and Technology Policy (PDF) (Report). National Science and Technology Council. November 2008. DOE/SC-106.

Archived (PDF) from the original on April 19, 2021.

Further reading [ edit ] Fealing, Kaye Husbands; Lane, Julia; Marburger III, John H.; Shipp, Stephanie S., eds. (2011).

The science of science policy : a handbook (2nd ed.). Stanford, California: Stanford Business Books.

ISBN 978-0804770781 .

v t e Science and technology studies Economics Economics of science Economics of scientific knowledge History History and philosophy of science History of science and technology History of technology Languages of science Scientific language Philosophy Anthropocene Antipositivism Empiricism Fuzzy logic Neo-Luddism Philosophy of science Philosophy of social science Philosophy of technology Positivism Postpositivism Religion and science Scientism Social constructivism Social epistemology Transhumanism Sociology Actor–network theory Social construction of technology shaping of technology Sociology of knowledge scientific Sociology of scientific ignorance Sociology of the history of science Sociotechnology Strong programme Science studies Academic bias Antiscience Bibliometrics Boundary-work Consilience Criticism of science Demarcation problem Double hermeneutic Logology Mapping controversies Metascience Paradigm shift black swan events Pseudoscience Psychology of science Science citizen communication education normal Neo-colonial post-normal rhetoric wars Scientific community consensus controversy dissent enterprise literacy method misconduct priority skepticism Scientocracy Scientometrics Team science Traditional knowledge ecological Unity of science Women in science STEM Technology studies Co-production Cyborg anthropology Design studies Dematerialization Digital anthropology Digital media use and mental health Early adopter Engineering studies Financial technology Hype cycle Innovation diffusion disruptive linear model system user Leapfrogging Normalization process theory Media studies Reverse salient Skunkworks project Sociotechnical system Technical change Technocracy Technoscience feminist Technological change convergence determinism revolution transitions Technology and society criticism of dynamics theories of transfer Women in engineering Policy Academic freedom Digital divide Evidence-based policy Factor 10 Funding of science Horizon scanning Politicization of science Regulation of science Research ethics Right to science Science policy history of science of Technology assessment Technology policy Transition management Portals Science History of science Technology Category Associations Journals Scholars Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Science_of_science_policy&oldid=1172632084 " Categories : Politics of science Science policy Metascience Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 28 August 2023, at 09:01 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Science of science policy 4 languages Add topic

