Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Works Toggle Works subsection 2.1 Prophetic exegesis 2.2 Apologetics 2.3 Other works 3 Later heritage 4 See also 5 References 6 Sources 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Lactantius 43 languages العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca Български Brezhoneg Català Čeština الدارجة Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Latina Lietuvių Magyar مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Română Русский Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Roman Christian author (c. 250 – c. 325) For the 4th-century author, see Lactantius Placidus .

Lactantius Fourth-century mural possibly depicting Lactantius Born Lucius Caecilius Firmianus Lactantius c.

250 Possibly Cirta , Numidia Died c.

325 (aged c.

75 ) Citizenship Roman Notable works Institutiones Divinae Lucius Caecilius Firmianus Lactantius ( c.

250 – c.

325 ) was an early Christian author who became an advisor to Roman emperor Constantine I , guiding his Christian religious policy in its initial stages of emergence, [ 1 ] and a tutor to his son Crispus . His most important work is the Institutiones Divinae ("The Divine Institutes"), an apologetic treatise intended to establish the reasonableness and truth of Christianity to pagan critics.

He is best known for his apologetic works, widely read during the Renaissance by humanists , who called Lactantius the "Christian Cicero ". Also often attributed to Lactantius is the poem The Phoenix , which is based on the myth of the phoenix from Egypt and Arabia.

[ 2 ] Though the poem is not clearly Christian in its motifs, modern scholars have found some literary evidence in the text to suggest the author had a Christian interpretation of the eastern myth as a symbol of resurrection.

[ 3 ] Biography [ edit ] Lactantius was of Punic [ 4 ] or Berber [ 5 ] [ 6 ] origin, born into a family that had not converted to Christianity. He was a pupil of Arnobius who taught at Sicca Veneria , an important city in Numidia (corresponding to today's city of El Kef in Tunisia ). In his early life, he taught rhetoric in his native town, which may have been Cirta in Numidia, where an inscription mentions a certain "L. Caecilius Firmianus".

[ 7 ] Lactantius had a successful public career at first. At the request of the Roman emperor Diocletian , he became an official professor of rhetoric in Nicomedia ; the voyage from Africa is described in his poem Hodoeporicum (now lost).

[ 8 ] There, he associated in the imperial circle with the administrator and polemicist Sossianus Hierocles and the Neoplatonic philosopher Porphyry ;  he first met Constantine , and Galerius , whom he cast as villain in the persecutions .

[ 9 ] Having converted to Christianity, he resigned his post [ 10 ] before Diocletian's purging of Christians from his immediate staff and before the publication of Diocletian's first "Edict against the Christians" (February 24, 303).

[ 11 ] As a Latin rhetor in a Greek city, he subsequently lived in poverty according to Saint Jerome and eked out a living by writing until Constantine I became his patron . The persecution forced him to leave Nicomedia, perhaps re-locating to North Africa.  The emperor Constantine appointed the elderly Lactantius Latin tutor to his son Crispus in 309–310 who was probably 10–15 years old at the time.

[ 12 ] Lactantius followed Crispus to Trier in 317, when Crispus was made Caesar (subordinate co-emperor) and sent to the city. Crispus was put to death by order of his father Constantine I in 326.  The time and circumstances of Lactantius's death are unknown.

[ 13 ] Works [ edit ] Like many of the early Christian authors, Lactantius depended on classical models.

Saint Jerome praised his writing style while faulting his ability as a Christian apologist, saying: "Lactantius has a flow of eloquence worthy of Tully : would that he had been as ready to teach our doctrines as to pull down those of others!" [ 14 ] Similarly, the early humanists called him the "Christian Cicero " ( Cicero Christianus ).

[ 13 ] A translator of the Divine Institutes wrote: "Lactantius has always held a very high place among the Christian Fathers, not only on account of the subject-matter of his writings, but also on account of the varied erudition, the sweetness of expression, and the grace and elegance of style, by which they are characterized." [ 15 ] Prophetic exegesis [ edit ] Beginning of Lactantius' Divinae institutiones in a Renaissance manuscript written in Florence ca. 1420–1430 by Guglielmino Tanaglia Like many writers in the first few centuries of the early church, Lactantius took a premillennialist view, holding that the second coming of Christ will precede a millennium or a thousand-year reign of Christ on earth. According to Charles E. Hill, "With Lactantius in the early fourth century we see a determined attempt to revive a more 'genuine' form of chiliasm." [ 16 ] Lactantius quoted the Sibyls extensively (although the Sibylline Oracles are now considered to be pseudepigrapha ). Book VII of The Divine Institutes indicates a familiarity with Jewish, Christian, Egyptian and Iranian apocalyptic material.

[ 17 ] Attempts to determine the time of the End were viewed as in contradiction to Acts 1:7: "It is not for you to know the times or seasons that the Father has established by his own authority," [ 17 ] and Mark 13:32: "But of that day or hour, no one knows, neither the angels in heaven, nor the Son, but only the Father." Apologetics [ edit ] He wrote apologetic works explaining Christianity in terms that would be palatable to educated people who still practiced the traditional religions of the Empire . He defended Christian beliefs against the criticisms of Hellenistic philosophers . His Divinae Institutiones ("Divine Institutes") were an early example of a systematic presentation of Christian thought.

De Opificio Dei ("On the Workmanship of God"), an apologetic work, written in 303 or 304 during Diocletian's persecution and dedicated to a former pupil, a rich Christian named Demetrianius. The apologetic principles underlying all the works of Lactantius are well set forth in this treatise.

[ 13 ] Institutiones Divinae ("The Divine Institutes"), written between 303 and 311.

[ 13 ] This is the most important of the writings of Lactantius. It was "one of the first books printed in Italy and the first dated Italian imprint." [ 18 ] As an apologetic treatise, it was intended to point out the futility of pagan beliefs and to establish the reasonableness and truth of Christianity as a response to pagan critics. It was also the first attempt at a systematic exposition of Christian theology in Latin and was planned on a scale sufficiently broad to silence all opponents.

[ 19 ] Patrick Healy argues that "The strengths and the weakness of Lactantius are nowhere better shown than in his work. The beauty of the style, the choice and aptness of the terminology, cannot hide the author's lack of grasp on Christian principles and his almost utter ignorance of Scripture." [ 13 ] Included in this treatise is a quote from the nineteenth of the Odes of Solomon , one of only two known texts of the Odes until the early twentieth century.

[ 20 ] However, his mockery of the idea of a round Earth [ 21 ] was criticised by Copernicus as "childish".

[ 22 ] De mortibus persecutorum ("On the Deaths of the Persecutors") has an apologetic character but given Lactantius's presence at the court of Diocletian in Nicomedia and the court of Constantine in Gaul, it is considered a valuable primary source for the events it records. Lactantius describes the goal of the work as follows: "I relate all those things on the authority of well-informed persons, and I thought it proper to commit them to writing exactly as they happened, lest the memory of events so important should perish, and lest any future historian of the persecutors should corrupt the truth." [ 23 ] The point of the work is to describe the deaths of the persecutors of Christians before Lactantius ( Nero , Domitian , Decius , Valerian , Aurelian ) as well as those who were the contemporaries of Lactantius himself: Diocletian, Maximian , Galerius , Maximinus and Maxentius . This work is taken as a chronicle of the last and greatest of the persecutions in spite of the moral point that each anecdote has been arranged to tell. Here, Lactantius preserves the story of Constantine's vision of the Chi Rho before his conversion to Christianity. The full text is found in only one manuscript, which bears the title Lucii Caecilii liber ad Donatum Confessorem de Mortibus Persecutorum .

[ 13 ] Page from the Opera , a manuscript from 1465, featuring various colours of pen-work An Epitome of the Divine institutes is a summary treatment of the subject.

[ 15 ] Other works [ edit ] De ira Dei ("On the Wrath of God" or "On the Anger of God"), directed against the Stoics and Epicureans .

[ 15 ] Widely attributed to Lactantius although it shows only cryptic signs of Christianity, the poem The Phoenix ( de Ave Phoenice ) tells the story of the death and rebirth of that mythical bird . That poem in turn appears to have been the principal source for the famous Old English poem to which the modern title The Phoenix is given.

Later heritage [ edit ] For unclear reasons, he became considered somewhat heretical after his death. The Gelasian Decree of the 6th century condemns his work as apocryphal and not to be read.

[ 24 ] Renaissance humanists took a renewed interest in him, more for his elaborately rhetorical Latin style than for his theology. His works were copied in manuscript several times in the 15th century and were first printed in 1465 by the Germans Arnold Pannartz and Konrad Sweynheim at the Abbey of Subiaco . This edition was the first book printed in Italy to have a date of printing, as well as the first use of a Greek alphabet font anywhere, which was apparently produced in the course of printing, as the early pages leave Greek text blank. It was probably the fourth book ever printed in Italy. A copy of this edition was sold at auction in 2000 for more than $1 million.

[ 25 ] See also [ edit ] Problem of evil References [ edit ] ^ His role is examined in detail in Elizabeth DePalma Digeser , The Making of a Christian Empire: Lactantius and Rome , Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 2000.

^ Shumaker, Heather.

"The Phoenix through the Ages" .

Swarthmore College Bulletin . Retrieved 17 Nov 2022 .

^ White, Carolinne (2000).

Early Christian Latin Poets . Routledge.

ISBN 9780415187824 .

^ Thompson, James Westfall; Holm, Bernard J. (1967).

A History of Historical Writing: From the earliest times to the end of the seventeenth century . P. Smith.

^ Annales de la Société d'histoire et d'archéologie de l'arrondissement de Saint-Malo (in French). 1957. p. 83.

^ Dérives (in French). 1985. p. 15.

^ Harnack, Chronologie d. altchr. Lit.

, II,416 ^ Conte, Gian Biagio (1999).

Latin Literature: A History . Baltimore: JHU Press. p. 640.

ISBN 0-8018-6253-1 . Retrieved August 29, 2016 .

^ Paul Stephenson, Constantine, Roman Emperor, Christian Victor , 2010:104.

^ Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 7 (15th ed.). 1993.

^ Stephenson 2010:106.

^ Barnes, Timothy, Constantine: Dynasty, Religion and Power in the Later Roman Empire, 2011, p. 177-8.

^ a b c d e f One or more of the preceding sentences incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Healy, Patrick (1910). " Lucius Caecilius Firmianus Lactantius ". In Herbermann, Charles (ed.).

Catholic Encyclopedia . Vol. 8. New York: Robert Appleton Company.

^ Lactantius. Lord Hailes (transl.) (2021) On the Deaths of the Persecutors: A Translation of De Mortibus Persecutorum by Lucius Cæcilius Firmianus Lactantius Evolution Publishing, Merchantville, NJ ISBN 978-1-935228-20-2 , p. xviii.

^ a b c W. Fletcher (1871).

The Works of Lactantius .

^ Hill, Charles E., "Why the Early Church Finally Rejected Premillennialism", Modern Reformation , Jan/Feb 1996, p. 16 ^ a b McGinn, Bernard.

Visions of the End , Columbia University Press, 1998 ISBN 9780231112574 ^ The Rubrics of the First Book of Lactantius Firmianus's On the Divine Institutes Against the Pagans Begin . 2011-10-17 . Retrieved 2014-03-01 .

{{ cite book }} : |work= ignored ( help ) ^ Lactantius The Divine Institutes , translated by Mary Francis McDonald Catholic University of America Press (1964) ^ Charlesworth, James Hamilton, The Odes of Solomon ,  Oxford: Oxford UP, 1973, pp. 1, 82 ^ Lactantius, Divine Institutes, Book III Chapter XXIV ^ Nicholas Copernicus (1543), The Revolutions of the Heavenly Spheres ^ Lactantius.

On the Deaths of the Persecutors , p. xix.

^ Gelasian Decree ^ "Lot 65 Sale 6417 LACTANTIUS, Lucius Coelius Firmianus (c. 240–c. 320). Opera" . Retrieved 2010-12-29 .

Sources [ edit ] Kerr, R.M. (2019).

"Laktanz: Ein Laktosfreier Punier?" .

Manuscripta Orientalia (in German).

25 : 3– 8.

External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Lactantius .

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Lucius Caecilius Firmianus Lactantius .

Lactantius : links to primary texts and secondary sources Lactantius : text, concordances and frequency list Opera Omnia Bibliography of Lactantius : compiled by Jackson Bryce Lactantius, The Divine Institutes Lactantius. Lord Hailes (transl.) (2021) On the Deaths of the Persecutors: A Translation of De Mortibus Persecutorum by Lucius Cæcilius Firmianus Lactantius Evolution Publishing, Merchantville, NJ ISBN 978-1-935228-20-2 , The Works of Lactantius , Volume I & II . Translated by William Fletcher.

Google Books .

Works by Lactantius at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) v t e Social philosophy Concepts Agency Anomie Convention Cosmopolitanism Customs Cultural heritage Culturalism Inter Mono Multi Culture Counter Familialism History Honour Human nature Identity Formation Ideology Institutions Invisible hand Loyalty Modernity Morality Public Mores National character Natural law Personhood Reification Ressentiment Rights Sittlichkeit Social alienation Social norms Spontaneous order Stewardship Traditions Values Family Volksgeist Worldview Schools Budapest School Catholic social teaching Distributism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Social Frankfurt School Personalism Philosophers Ancient Confucius Laozi Mencius Mozi Xunzi Medieval Alpharabius Aquinas Avempace Bruni Ibn Khaldun Maimonides Ibn Tufayl Early modern Calvin Erasmus Guicciardini Locke Luther Milton Montaigne Müntzer 18th and 19th centuries Arnold Bentham Bonald Burke Carlyle Comte Condorcet Emerson Engels Fichte Fourier Franklin Hegel Helvétius Herder Hume Jefferson Kant Kierkegaard Le Bon Le Play Marx Mill Nietzsche Owen Renan Rousseau Royce Ruskin Smith Spencer de Staël Stirner Taine Thoreau Tocqueville Vico Vivekananda Voltaire 20th and 21st centuries Adorno Agamben Arendt Aron Badiou Baudrillard Bauman Benoist Berlin Butler Camus de Beauvoir Debord Deleuze Dewey Du Bois Durkheim Eco Evola Foucault Fromm Gandhi Gehlen Gentile Gramsci Guénon Habermas Han Heidegger Hoppe Irigaray Kirk Kołakowski Kropotkin Land Lasch MacIntyre Marcuse Maritain Negri Niebuhr Nussbaum Oakeshott Ortega Pareto Polanyi Radhakrishnan Röpke Santayana Scruton Shariati Simmel Skinner Sombart Sowell Spengler Strauss Taylor Voegelin Walzer Weber Weil Zinn Žižek Works De Officiis (44 BC) Oration on the Dignity of Man (1486) A Vindication of Natural Society (1756) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Civilization and Its Discontents (1930) The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction (1935) The Second Sex (1949) One-Dimensional Man (1964) The Society of the Spectacle (1967) The History of Sexuality (1976) The Culture of Narcissism (1979) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) Gender Trouble (1990) The Malaise of Modernity (1991) Intellectuals and Society (2010) See also Agnotology Axiology Critical theory Cultural criticism Cultural pessimism Ethics Historism Historicism Humanities Philosophy of culture Philosophy of education Philosophy of history Political philosophy Social criticism Social science Social theory Sociology Category v t e Political philosophy Terms Authority Citizenship‎ Duty Elite Emancipation Freedom Government Hegemony Hierarchy Justice Law Legitimacy Liberty Monopoly Nation Obedience Peace People Pluralism Power Progress Propaganda Property Regime Revolution Rights Ruling class Society Sovereignty‎ State Utopia War Government Aristocracy Oligarchy Autocracy Bureaucracy Dictatorship Democracy Ochlocracy Gerontocracy Meritocracy Monarchy Tyranny Plutocracy Technocracy Theocracy Ideologies Agrarianism Anarchism Capitalism Christian democracy Colonialism Communism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Corporatism Distributism Environmentalism Fascism Feminism Feudalism Imperialism Islamism Liberalism Libertarianism Localism Marxism Monarchism Multiculturalism Nationalism Nazism Populism Republicanism Social Darwinism Social democracy Socialism Third Way Concepts Balance of power Bellum omnium contra omnes Body politic Clash of civilizations Common good Consent of the governed Divine right of kings Family as a model for the state Monopoly on violence Natural law Negative and positive rights Night-watchman state Noble lie Noblesse oblige Open society Ordered liberty Original position Overton window Separation of powers Social contract State of nature Statolatry Supermajority Tyranny of the majority Philosophers Antiquity Aristotle Chanakya Cicero Confucius Han Fei Lactantius Mencius Mozi Plato political philosophy Polybius Shang Sun Tzu Thucydides Xenophon Middle Ages Al-Farabi Aquinas Averroes Bruni Dante Gelasius al-Ghazali Ibn Khaldun Marsilius Muhammad Nizam al-Mulk Ockham Plethon Wang Early modern period Boétie Bodin Bossuet Calvin Campanella Filmer Grotius Guicciardini Hobbes political philosophy James Leibniz Locke Luther Machiavelli Milton More Müntzer Pufendorf Spinoza Suárez 18th and 19th centuries Bakunin Bastiat Beccaria Bentham Bolingbroke Bonald Burke Carlyle Comte Condorcet Constant Cortés Engels Fichte Fourier Franklin Godwin Haller Hegel Herder Hume Iqbal Jefferson Kant political philosophy Le Bon Le Play Madison Maistre Marx Mazzini Mill Montesquieu Nietzsche Owen Paine Renan Rousseau Sade Saint-Simon Smith Spencer de Staël Stirner Taine Thoreau Tocqueville Tucker Voltaire 20th and 21st centuries Agamben Ambedkar Arendt Aron Badiou Bauman Benoist Berlin Bernstein Burnham Chomsky Dmowski Du Bois Dugin Dworkin Evola Foucault Fromm Fukuyama Gandhi Gentile Gramsci Guénon Habermas Hayek Hoppe Huntington Kautsky Khomeini Kirk Kropotkin Laclau Lenin Luxemburg Mansfield Mao Marcuse Maurras Michels Mises Mosca Mouffe Negri Nozick Nussbaum Oakeshott Ortega Pareto Popper Qutb Rand Rawls Röpke Rothbard Russell Sartre Schmitt Scruton Shariati Sorel Spann Spengler Strauss Sun Taylor Voegelin Walzer Weber Works Republic (c. 375 BC) Politics (c. 350 BC) On the Republic (51 BC) Treatise on Law (c. 1274) Monarchy (1313) The Prince (1532) Leviathan (1651) Two Treatises of Government (1689) The Spirit of Law (1748) The Social Contract (1762) Reflections on the Revolution in France (1790) Rights of Man (1791) Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1820) Democracy in America (1835–1840) The Communist Manifesto (1848) On Liberty (1859) The Revolt of the Masses (1929) The Road to Serfdom (1944) The Open Society and Its Enemies (1945) The Origins of Totalitarianism (1951) A Theory of Justice (1971) The End of History and the Last Man (1992) Related Authoritarianism Collectivism and individualism Conflict theories Contractualism Critique of political economy Egalitarianism Elite theory Elitism History of political thought Institutional discrimination Jurisprudence Justification for the state Political ethics Political spectrum Left-wing politics Centrism Right-wing politics Political theology Political violence Separation of church and state Separatism Social justice Statism Totalitarianism Category:Political philosophy Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF 2 3 FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Greece Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Finland Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii Artists ULAN People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC RISM Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Lactantius&oldid=1298117797 " Categories : 3rd-century births 325 deaths 3rd-century Christian theologians 3rd-century writers in Latin 3rd-century Romans 4th-century Punic people 4th-century Berber people 4th-century writers in Latin 4th-century Romans Ancient Roman writers Berber Christians Berber writers Caecilii Christian apologists Christian writers Christianity in Algeria Church Fathers Converts to Christianity from ancient Roman religions Flat Earth proponents Post–Silver Age Latin writers Tunisian writers Tunisian religious leaders Tunisian Christians Hidden categories: CS1 French-language sources (fr) Articles incorporating a citation from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference Articles incorporating text from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference CS1 errors: periodical ignored Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Latin-language text CS1 German-language sources (de) Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles with LibriVox links Articles containing French-language text Articles containing German-language text This page was last edited on 30 June 2025, at 15:59 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Lactantius 43 languages Add topic

