Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Peripatetic biographical criticism 2 Recognition of otherness 3 Connections to other modes of criticism 4 Assessments of biographical criticism and literary biography 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Biographical criticism 2 languages Suomi Tiếng Việt Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Form of literary criticism Samuel Johnson's Lives of the Poets (1779–81) was possibly the first thorough-going exercise in a biographical criticism.

[ 1 ] Biographical criticism is a form of literary criticism which analyzes a writer's biography to show the relationship between the author's life and their literary works.

[ 2 ] Biographical criticism is often associated with historical-biographical criticism , [ 3 ] a critical method that "sees a literary work chiefly, if not exclusively, as a reflection of its author's life and times".

[ 4 ] This longstanding critical method dates back at least to the Renaissance period, [ 5 ] and was employed extensively by Samuel Johnson in his Lives of the Poets (1779–81).

[ 6 ] Like any critical methodology, biographical criticism can be used with discretion and insight or employed as a superficial shortcut to understanding the literary work on its own terms through such strategies as Formalism .  Hence 19th century biographical criticism came under disapproval by the so-called New Critics of the 1920s, who coined the term " biographical fallacy " [ 7 ] [ 8 ] to describe criticism that neglected the imaginative genesis of literature.

Notwithstanding this critique, biographical criticism remained a significant mode of literary inquiry throughout the 20th century, particularly in studies of Charles Dickens and F. Scott Fitzgerald , among others. The method continues to be employed in the study of such authors as John Steinbeck , [ 2 ] Walt Whitman [ 3 ] and William Shakespeare .

[ 9 ] Peripatetic biographical criticism [ edit ] In The Cambridge history of literary criticism: Classical criticism , in a chapter titled "Peripatetic Biographical Criticism", George Alexander Kennedy notes that in the Hellenistic age, "The works of authors were read as sources of information about their lives, personalities and interests. Some of this material was then used by other commentators and critics to explain passages in their works. The process became a circular one in that, though Peripatetic biographers utilized external evidence where available, they had little to go on and quarried the texts for hints".

[ 10 ] Recognition of otherness [ edit ] Jackson J. Benson describes the form as a "'recognition of 'otherness'—that there is an author who is different in personality and background from the reader—appears to be a simple-minded proposition. Yet as a basic prerequisite to the understanding and evaluation of a literary text it is often ignored even by the most sophisticated literary critics. The exploration of otherness is what literary biography and biographical criticism can do best, discovering an author as a unique individual, a discovery that puts a burden on us to reach out to recognize that uniqueness before we can fully comprehend an author's writings.'" [ 2 ] Connections to other modes of criticism [ edit ] Biographical criticism shares in common with New Historicism an interest in the fact that all literary works are situated in specific historical and biographical contexts from which they are generated. Biographical Criticism, like New Historicism, rejects the concept that literary studies should be limited to the internal or formal characteristics of a literary work, and insists that it properly includes a knowledge of the contexts in which the work was created. Biographical criticism stands in ambiguous relationship to Romanticism . It has often been argued that it is a development from Romanticism, but it also stands in opposition to the Romantic tendency to view literature as manifesting a "universal" transcendence of the particular conditions of its genesis.

[ citation needed ] Assessments of biographical criticism and literary biography [ edit ] In The Art of Literary Biography (1995), John Worthen writes: 'The fact that we want an emergent sense of the inevitable development suggests the enormously soothing quality which biographies have come to have in our age. Not only do biographies suggest that things as difficult as human lives can – for all their obvious complexity – be summed up, known, comprehended: they reassure us that, while we are reading, a world will be created in which there are few or no unclear motives, muddled decisions, or (indeed) loose ends.' [ 11 ] See also [ edit ] Biography in literature References [ edit ] ^ "Criticism" .

^ a b c Benson, Jackson J. (1989). "Steinbeck: A Defense of Biographical Criticism".

College Literature .

16 (2): 107– 116.

JSTOR 25111810 .

^ a b Knoper, Randall K. (2003).

"Walt Whitman and New Biographical Criticism" .

College Literature .

30 (1): 161– 168.

doi : 10.1353/lit.2003.0010 .

Project MUSE 39025 .

^ Wilfred L. Guerin, A handbook of critical approaches to literature, Edition 5, 2005, page 51, 57-61; Oxford University Press, University of Michigan ^ Stuart, Duane Reed (1922). "Biographical Criticism of Vergil since the Renaissance".

Studies in Philology .

19 (1): 1– 30.

JSTOR 4171815 .

^ http://encyclopedia2.thefreedictionary.com/criticism "Samuel Johnson's Lives of the Poets (1779–81) was the first thorough-going exercise in biographical criticism, the attempt to relate a writer's background and life to his works." ^ Lees, Francis Noel (1967) "The Keys Are at the Palace: A Note on Criticism and Biography" pp. 135-149 In Damon, Philip (editor)  (1967) Literary Criticism and Historical Understanding: Selected Papers from the English Institute Columbia University Press, New York, OCLC 390148 ^ Discussed extensively in Frye, Herman Northrop (1947) Fearful Symmetry: A Study of William Blake Princeton University Press, Princeton, New Jersey,  page 326 and following, OCLC 560970612 ^ Schiffer, James (ed), Shakespeare's Sonnets: Critical Essays (1999), pp. 19-27, 40-43, 45, 47, 395 ^ George Alexander Kennedy, The Cambridge history of literary criticism: Classical criticism, page 205, Cambridge University Press, 1989 ^ John Worthen, 'The Necessary Ignorance of a Biographer,' in John Batchelor (ed.) The Art of Literary Biography , Clarendon Press, Oxford 1995 pp.227-244, p.231 External links [ edit ] SEGRILLO, Angelo.

Confessions of a Biographer: Reflections upon the Theory of Biography . LEA Working Paper Series, no. 5, March 2019 v t e Literary criticism Literary theory Archetypal criticism Biographical criticism Chicago school Cultural materialism Darwinian criticism Deconstruction Descriptive poetics Ecocriticism Feminist criticism Formalism Geneva school Geocriticism Marxist criticism New Criticism New historicism Postcolonial criticism Postcritique Psychoanalytic criticism Reader-response criticism Russian formalism Semiotic criticism Sociological criticism Source criticism Thing theory Theorists and critics Plato Aristotle Horace Longinus Plotinus St. Augustine Boethius Aquinas Dante Boccaccio de Pizan Valmiki Lu Ji Sidney Tasso Bacon Hobbes Corneille Dryden Boileau-Despréaux Locke Pope Addison Vico Burke (Edmund) Hume Johnson Young Lessing Reynolds Diderot Kant Wollstonecraft Blake Schiller Schlegel Wordsworth de Staël Schelling Coleridge von Humboldt Keats Schopenhauer Peacock Shelley von Goethe Hegel Leopardi De Sanctis Carlyle Mill Emerson Sainte-Beuve Lowell Poe Arnold Taine Baudelaire Marx Kierkegaard Nietzsche Pater Zola France Wilde Mallarmé Tolstoy Croce Gramsci Eco Freud de Saussure Lévi-Strauss Hulme Benjamin Shklovsky Eliot Jung Trotsky Woolf Richards Bakhtin Bataille Ransom Lacan Lukács Valéry Burke (Kenneth) Cassirer Brooks Mukařovský Sartre de Beauvoir Adorno Jakobson Frye Bachelard Gombrich Heidegger Chomsky Derrida Barthes Foucault Poulet Williams Trilling Kristeva de Man Bloom Achebe Said Deleuze Guattari Girard Cixous Iser White Gadamer Ricoeur Abrams Geertz Marinetti Tzara Breton Loy de Andrade Hu Paz Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Biographical_criticism&oldid=1300383947 " Categories : Criticism Biography (genre) Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2021 This page was last edited on 14 July 2025, at 01:22 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Biographical criticism 2 languages Add topic

