Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Functions 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents W. E. B. Du Bois Research Institute Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Academic institute in Harvard University This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article relies excessively on references to primary sources .

Please improve this article by adding secondary or tertiary sources .

Find sources: "W. E. B. Du Bois Research Institute" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( October 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The topic of this article may not meet Wikipedia's general notability guideline .

Please help to demonstrate the notability of the topic by citing reliable secondary sources that are independent of the topic and provide significant coverage of it beyond a mere trivial mention. If notability cannot be shown, the article is likely to be merged , redirected , or deleted .

Find sources: "W. E. B. Du Bois Research Institute" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( October 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The W. E. B. Du Bois Research Institute , formerly the W. E. B. Du Bois Institute for African and African-American Research , is part of the Hutchins Center for African and African American Research located at Harvard University . Its main work is in the provision of fellowships to scholars studying a wide variety of topics relating to its central concerns, which are African and African American studies .

History [ edit ] The W. E. B. Du Bois Institute for African and African-American Research was established in 1975. It is named after W. E. B. Du Bois , who was the first African American to receive a Ph.D. from Harvard University (1895).

[ 1 ] The center was the basis for the foundation of the Hutchins Center for African & African American Research, and became one of several institutes under the umbrella of this center.

[ 2 ] Functions [ edit ] The Institute awards up to twenty fellowships annually to scholars at various stages in their careers in the fields of African and African American studies to facilitate the writing of doctoral dissertations. The appointed fellows conduct individual research for a semester or two in fields broadly related to African and African American Studies. It has as of 2020 [update] supported more than 300 Fellows.

[ 3 ] The institute co-hosts the W. E. B. Du Bois Society, an academic and cultural enrichment program for African American secondary school students, along with Ella J. Baker House in Dorchester , Boston. The society was founded by Jacqueline and Rev. Eugene C. Rivers, and its director as of 2020 [update] is Jacqueline O. Cooke Rivers.

[ 4 ] Henry Louis Gates Jr.

is the director of the institute.

[ 5 ] In 2013 the institute alongside the Hip-Hop Archive and Research Institute established the Nasir Jones Hip-Hop Fellowship as a scholarship for the arts.

[ 6 ] References [ edit ] ^ "The Rise and Fall of Jim Crow: Jim Crow Stories: W.E.B. Du Bois - PBS" .

Thirteen . Retrieved December 12, 2020 .

^ "W. E. B. Du Bois Research Institute" .

The Hutchins Center for African and African American Research . Retrieved December 12, 2020 .

^ "Fellowship Program" .

The Hutchins Center for African & African American Research . May 10, 2018 . Retrieved December 12, 2020 .

^ "W. E. B. Du Bois Society" .

The Hutchins Center for African & African American Research . May 10, 2018 . Retrieved December 12, 2020 .

^ "Henry Louis Gates, Jr" .

The Hutchins Center for African & African American Research . 2019 . Retrieved December 12, 2020 .

^ Coulehan, Erin (July 16, 2013).

"Harvard Establishes a Nas Hip-Hop Fellowship" .

Rolling Stone . Retrieved February 14, 2025 .

External links [ edit ] Official website v t e Harvard University History John Harvard statue President Alan Garber Board of Overseers President and Fellows Provost John Manning Library Arts and Sciences Dean Hopi Hoekstra College Dean Rakesh Khurana Radcliffe College Freshman dormitories Upperclass houses Adams Cabot Currier Dudley Dunster Eliot Kirkland Leverett Lowell Mather Pforzheimer Quincy Winthrop Undergraduate organizations Hasty Pudding Theatricals The Harvard Advocate The Harvard Crimson The Harvard Independent The Harvard Lampoon Continuing Education Dean Nancy Coleman Extension School Extension School history Summer School Engineering and Applied Sciences Dean David C. Parkes Lyman Laboratory of Physics Graduate School Dean Emma Dench Libraries Cabot Harvard-Yenching Houghton Harvard Review Lamont Pusey Widener Harry Elkins Widener Eleanor Elkins Widener Grossman Centers, institutes, and societies Asia Center Center for African and African American Research Du Bois Institute Center for Astrophysics Center for Chinese Studies Center for European Studies Center for Visual Arts Center for Hellenic Studies Dumbarton Oaks Harvard Forest Rowland Institute Ukrainian Research Institute Business Dean Srikant Datar Baker Library/Bloomberg Center Harvard Business Publishing Harvard Business Review Harvard Business School RFC Spangler Center Design Dean Sarah Whiting Harvard Design Magazine Center for Housing Studies Divinity Dean David N. Hempton Education Dean Bridget Terry Long Government Dean Jeremy M. Weinstein Ash Center Belfer Center Carr Center Center for American Political Studies Center for Ethics Center for Housing Studies Center for Nonprofit Organizations Center for Public Leadership Institute of Politics Rappaport Institute Shorenstein Center The Journalist's Resource Law Dean John F. Manning Berkman Klein Center Civil Rights-Civil Liberties Law Review International Law Journal Journal of Law & Technology Journal on Legislation Law Record Law Review Medicine Dean George Q. Daley Broad Institute Medical Library Anatomical Museum Program in Health Sciences School of Dental Medicine Public Health Dean Michelle Ann Williams Museums and arboretum Arnold Arboretum Harvard Art Museums Archaeology and Ethnology Museum Busch–Reisinger Museum Fogg Museum Sackler Museum Collection of Scientific Instruments Glass Flowers Mineralogical Museum General Artemas Ward House Natural History Museum Comparative Zoology Museum Herbaria Museum of the Ancient Near East Cambridge campus Boylston Hall Bradley Memorial Discobolus Gates of Harvard Yard Graduate Center Harvard Hall Memorial Church Choir Harvard Yard Massachusetts Hall Memorial Hall Night Wall I Peabody Terrace President's House Science Center Smith Campus Center University Hall Centers and institutes Harvard Innovation Labs Computing Center Harvard Radcliffe Institute Schlesinger Library Institute for Advanced Theater Training Nieman Foundation for Journalism Real Colegio Complutense Villa I Tatti Wyss Institute People List of Harvard University people Non-graduate alumni Athletics Teams Baseball Men's basketball Women's basketball Fencing Football Men's ice hockey Women's ice hockey Men's lacrosse‎ Men's rugby Women's rugby Men's soccer Women's soccer Men's squash Men's volleyball Women's volleyball Venues Bright-Landry Hockey Center Harvard Stadium Jordan Field Lavietes Pavilion Ohiri Field Malkin Athletic Center Newell Boathouse Weld Boathouse Rivalries Cornell (hockey) Yale (football) Miscellaneous Anti-Vietnam War protests Alma mater Commencement traditions Academic regalia Graduate Students Union Heraldry Tercentenary celebration Harvard Magazine Harvard University Press Lionel de Jersey Harvard Math 55 Society of Fellows University Professor Harvard–Adam Dziewonski Observatory Excellence Without a Soul Category Commons v t e W. E. B. Du Bois Life W.E.B. Du Bois Boyhood Homesite Atlanta Conference of Negro Problems Atlanta Sociological Laboratory The Exhibit of American Negroes (1900) First Pan-African Conference (1900) Niagara Movement NAACP (co-founder) The Crisis magazine The Brownies' Book magazine Freedom newspaper Pan-African Congress Fisk University protest (1924–1925) W. E. B. Du Bois Memorial Centre for Pan African Culture (home, burial site, and memorial) Concepts Talented Tenth Color line Double consciousness Non-fiction The Suppression of the African Slave-trade to the United States of America (1894) The Study of the Negro Problems (1898) The Philadelphia Negro (1899) The Souls of Black Folk (1903) The Negro in the South (1907) John Brown (1909) The Negro (1915) Darkwater: Voices from Within the Veil (1920) Black Reconstruction in America (1935) Dusk of Dawn (1940) Fiction " The Comet " (1920) Dark Princess (1928) Honors W. E. B. Du Bois Library W.E.B. Du Bois Career of Distinguished Scholarship Award W. E. B. Du Bois Research Institute Related Shirley Graham Du Bois (second wife) Yolande Du Bois (daughter) Encyclopedia Africana The Negro Problem (1903 book) W.E.B. Du Bois Clubs of America African American founding fathers of the United States Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National United States 2 Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=W._E._B._Du_Bois_Research_Institute&oldid=1275722984 " Categories : Harvard University research institutes 1969 establishments in Massachusetts Research institutes established in 1969 Black studies organizations W. E. B. Du Bois Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use mdy dates from November 2022 Articles lacking reliable references from October 2021 All articles lacking reliable references Articles with topics of unclear notability from October 2021 All articles with topics of unclear notability Articles with multiple maintenance issues Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2020 All articles containing potentially dated statements This page was last edited on 14 February 2025, at 18:06 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents W. E. B. Du Bois Research Institute Add languages Add topic

