Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Name 2 Description 3 Use 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Woomera (spear-thrower) 5 languages Deutsch Polski Русский Svenska Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Australian Aboriginal spear-throwing device For other uses, see Woomera .

The woomera in this picture is the wooden object at left.

Mokare with spear and woomera. Another woomera lies at his feet.

A woomera is an Australian Aboriginal wooden spear -throwing device.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] Similar to an atlatl , it serves as an extension of the human arm, enabling a spear to travel at a greater speed and force than possible with only the arm.

Name [ edit ] The word woomera comes from the Dharug language of the Eora people of the Sydney basin. The name was adopted for the town of Woomera, South Australia , founded in 1947 as the home of the Anglo-Australian Long Range Weapons Establishment, also known as the "Woomera Rocket Range" and now called RAAF Woomera Range Complex .

[ 4 ] Description [ edit ] The woomera is between 61 and 91 cm (24 and 36 in) in length. It is a left-handed tool.

[ 5 ] Like many Australian Aboriginal tools, there is much diversity in design. Some versions have one end that is 7.6 cm (3.0 in) wide and possessing a hollow, curved cross-section not unlike an airfoil, while the other is more pointed and has a hook. Other versions used in northern Australia are less than 2.5 cm (0.98 in) wide, made of flat wood, with a wooden point angled back along the flat length of the woomera, fixed with wax from Spinifex grass seeds. Some woomera were traditionally decorated with incised or painted designs that indicated belonging to a particular linguistic group that it may be returned to if found abandoned.

[ citation needed ] Use [ edit ] A sharp stone attached to the end of the handle Records show that the implement began to be used about 5,000 years ago, [ 6 ] although the Mungo Man remains from at least 43,000 years ago show severe osteoarthritis in the left elbow associated with the use of a woomera.

[ 7 ] It is still used today in some remote areas of Australia. Like spears and boomerangs , woomeras were traditionally used only by men. Some woomeras, especially those used in the central and western Australian deserts , [ 8 ] were multi-purpose tools.

[ 9 ] Often shaped like long narrow bowls, they could be used for carrying water-soaked vegetable matter (which would not spill and could later be sucked for its moisture) as well as small food items such as little birds or seeds. Many woomeras had a sharp stone cutting edge called a tula adze [ 10 ] attached to the end of the handle with black gum from the triodia plant. This sharp tool had many uses, such as cutting up game or other food and wood. It is supposed that the woomera could be used as a shield for protection against spears and boomerangs.  The woomera is held in one hand while the other hand places the butt of the spear on the woomera's hook; the hollow curved shape facilitates this alignment without looking. The woomera effectively lengthens the thrower's arm, greatly increasing the velocity of the spear. Correcting for the game animal's lateral dodging is accomplished by tilting the wing-shape woomera during the throw for last-second corrections. The kinetic energy of a spear launched from a woomera has been calculated as four times that of an arrow launched from a compound bow .

[ 6 ] [ unreliable source?

] Different Aboriginal groups had different shapes and styles of woomera.

[ 11 ] For example, the woomera of the central desert tend to be very wide and slightly bowl-shaped whereas those of the Kimberley are flat long and narrow.

[ 12 ] References [ edit ] ^ Phyllis Mary Kaberry, Aboriginal Woman, Sacred and Profane.

Gregg International, Westmead, Kent 1970. p14  "The Aborigines generally use a spear-thrower (noslal) and a shovel-spear (djinad), the fashioning of which is a long and delicate process. The blade made of iron, mudagandji, must be welded into an oval shape varying from three to five ..." ^ Mitchell Rolls, Murray Johnson, Historical Dictionary of Australian Aborigines, Scarecrow Press, 2010. p157  "SPEAR-THROWER. It is made of Mulga Wood. A wooden implement that has a projection peg either carved into or secured to the butt, the spear-thrower greatly increased the range and accuracy of spears hurled by Aboriginal hunters. It could also be used for a ..." ^ Linley Erin Hall, The Laws of Motion: An Anthology Of Current Thought , 2005. p66, "In Australia the spear thrower is popularly called a woomera, one of the many Aboriginal names for a spear thrower" ^ RAAF Base Woomera Retrieved 15 July 2017.

^ Earp, G. Butler (1852).

The Gold Colonies of Australia . London: Geo. Routledge & Co. p.

126 .

^ a b "Extinction's group theory" .

The Sydney Morning Herald . Fairfax Media. 25 June 2004 . Retrieved 21 October 2011 .

^ Lawrence, Helen (2006).

Mungo over millennia : the Willandra landscape and its people . Sorell, Tas: Maygog Publishing. p. 42.

ISBN 0-9758199-1-7 .

^ Gould, Richard A. (Richard Allan) (1970). Spears and spear throwers of the Western Desert Aborigines of Australia. American Museum of Natural History, New York ^ Cundy, B. J. (1989). Formal variation in Australian spear and spearthrower technology (Vol. 546). British Archaeological Reports Ltd. Chicago ^ Clark, Grahame (December 15, 1977).

World Prehistory: In New Perspective . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0-521-29178-1 – via Google Books.

^ "aboriginal spear thrower | aboriginal spearthrower | sell aboriginal spear thrower" .

Aboriginal Bark Paintings . 2017-09-01 . Retrieved 2019-12-17 .

^ Aboriginal Australia . Cooper, Carol., National Gallery of Victoria., Australian Gallery Directors' Council. Sydney: Australian Gallery Directors Council. 1981.

ISBN 0-642-89689-5 .

OCLC 8487510 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: others ( link ) External links [ edit ] Look up woomera in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Aboriginal technology Archived 2008-07-20 at the Wayback Machine A drawing of a woomera Archived 2016-09-16 at the Wayback Machine , from the book Boy Scouts Beyond the Seas: "My World Tour" by Sir Robert Baden-Powell , 1913 v t e Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islanders Peoples Aboriginal Australians Communities Aboriginal groups Tasmanians Torres Strait Islanders Victorians Western Australians Individuals Activists Musicians People from politics and public service Performing artists Sportspeople Visual artists Writers Culture Astronomy Bora Corroboree Country Deadly Awards Deities The Dreaming Enumeration Elders Flags Aboriginal Torres Strait Islander Kinship Kurdaitcha Literature of Indigenous Australians Marn Grook Message stick NAIDOC Week National Indigenous Human Rights Awards Outstation movement Religion and mythology Riji Seasons Sacred sites Smoking ceremony Songlines Traditional custodianship Tjurunga Torres Strait Islands Language(s) Avoidance speech Australian Aboriginal English Macro-Gunwinyguan languages Australian Creole Language groups Loanwords into English Palawa Pama–Nyungan languages Placenames Sign languages Taboo on the dead Torres Strait English Torres Strait Island languages Organisations ATSIC Aboriginal Medical Service Aborigines Advancement League Aborigines Progressive Association AIATSIS Australian Aboriginal Progressive Association Australian Aborigines' League Mass media National Congress of Australia's First Peoples National Indigenous Council Office of the Registrar of Indigenous Corporations Politics Registered Aboriginal Party Reconciliation Australia National Reconciliation Week Sorry Day TSRA Land councils Central Land Council Kimberley Land Council Maralinga Tjarutja Metropolitan Local Aboriginal Land Council NSW Aboriginal Land Council Northern Land Council South West Aboriginal Land and Sea Council Tiwi Land Council Bushcraft Boomerang Buka Bush bread Bush tucker Bush medicine Coolamon Dugout canoe Fibrecraft Fire-stick farming Food groups Humpy Possum-skin cloak Scarred tree Soaks Spinifex resin Sweets Waddy Woomera Arts Artefacts Bark painting Contemporary visual art Dance Didgeridoo Dreaming Music Music groups Rock NATSIA Award Papunya Tula Sandpainting Vibe Visual art Yininmadyemi History Aboriginal Land Rights Act 1976 Australian Frontier Wars Bathurst War Hawkesbury and Nepean Wars Caledon Bay crisis Cummeragunja walk-off Day of Mourning Gurindji Strike Historical figures History Prehistory Australian history wars King plates Massacres Black War Missions Native police Native Title Act 1993 New Deal for Aborigines Pilbara strike Pintupi Nine Stolen Generations Apology Tent embassy Western Australia Issues 1967 Referendum Constitutional recognition Crime Health Land rights Native title Protected Area Media portrayal Northern Territory National Emergency Response Self-determination Reconciliation Stolen Generations Half-Caste Act Uluru Statement from the Heart Treaty Truth Voice Voting rights Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Woomera_(spear-thrower)&oldid=1304135947 " Categories : Throwing weapons Australian Aboriginal bushcraft Australian inventions Australian Aboriginal words and phrases Weapons of Australia Hidden categories: CS1 maint: others Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from October 2011 All articles lacking reliable references Articles lacking reliable references from January 2025 Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 4 August 2025, at 05:49 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Woomera (spear-thrower) 5 languages Add topic

