Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Specification and measurement 2 Tests 3 Expected performance 4 Factors influencing stereoacuity 5 Perceptual training in stereopsis 6 See also 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Stereoscopic acuity Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Measure of vision Stereoscopic acuity , also stereoacuity , is the smallest detectable depth difference that can be seen in binocular vision.

Specification and measurement [ edit ] Howard-Dolman test.

Stereoacuity [ 1 ] is most simply explained by considering one of its earliest test, a two-peg device, named Howard-Dolman test after its inventors: [ 2 ] The observer is shown a black peg at a distance of 6m (=20 feet). A second peg, below it, can be moved back and forth until it is just detectably nearer than the fixed one. Stereoacuity is defined as the minimum angle detectable, calculated as the difference between the angles subtended by both positions, A and B. Stereoacuity is possible due to binocular disparity , i.e., the difference in their binocular parallax .

Taking into account that a small angle expressed in radians can be approximated by its tangent, the formula to calculate stereoacuity dγ is this: d γ γ = c a d z / ( z ( z − − d z ) ) {\displaystyle d\gamma =c\,a\,dz/(z\,(z-dz))} where a is the interocular separation of the observer, z the distance of the fixed peg from the eye and dz the position difference.  To transfer dγ into the usual unit of minutes of arc, a multiplicative constant c is inserted whose value is 3437.75 (1 radian in arcminutes ).  In the calculation a , dz and z must be in the same units, say, feet, inches, cm or meters. Note: some authors have added another approximation to this formula, considering dz neglectable compared with z , i.e. dividing by z 2 {\displaystyle z^{2}} instead of by (z-dz) . This induces apreciable errors when calculating coarse stereoacuity at far distance.

For the average interocular distance of 6.5 cm, a target distance of 6m and a typical stereoacuity of 0.5 minute of arc, the just detectable depth interval is  8 cm.  As targets come closer, this interval gets smaller by the inverse square of the distance, so that an equivalent detectable depth interval at ¼ meter is 0.01 cm or the depth of impression of the head on a coin.  These very small values of normal stereoacuity, expressed in differences of either object distances, or angle of disparity, makes it a hyperacuity .

Tests [ edit ] See also: Stereopsis test Example of a Snellen-like depth test Since the Howard-Dolman test described above is cumbersome, stereoacuity is usually measured using a stereogram in which separate panels are shown to each eye by superimposing them in a stereoscope using prisms or goggles with color or polarizing filters or alternating occlusion.

[ 3 ] A good procedure is a chart, analogous to the familiar Snellen visual acuity chart, in which one letter in each row differs in depth (front or behind) sequentially increasing in difficulty. For children the fly test is ideal: the image of a fly is transilluminated by polarized light; wearing polarizing glasses the wing appears at a different depth and allows stereopsis to be demonstrated by trying to pull on it.

[ 4 ] Expected performance [ edit ] There is no equivalent in stereoacuity of the normal 20/20 visual acuity standard. In every case, the numerical score, even if expressed in disparity angle, depends to some extent on the test being used. Superior observers under ideal conditions can achieve 0.1 arc min or even better.

The distinction between screening for the presence of stereopsis and a measurement of stereoacuity is valuable.  To ascertain that depth can be seen in a binocular views, a test must be easily administered and not subject to deception. The random-dot stereogram is used widely for this purpose and has the advantage that for the uninitiated the object shape is unknown.  It is made of random small pattern elements;  depth can be created only in multiples of elements and therefore may not reach the small threshold disparity which is the purpose of stereoacuity measurements.

A population study revealed a surprisingly high incidence of good stereoacuity.

[ 5 ] Out of 188 biology students, 97.3% could perform at 2.3 minutes of arc or better.

Factors influencing stereoacuity [ edit ] Optimum stereoacuity requires that the following mitigating factors be avoided: Low contrast [ 6 ] Short duration exposures (less than 500 milliseconds) [ 7 ] Fuzzy or closely spaced pattern elements.

[ 7 ] Uncorrected or unequally corrected refractive errors ( monovision ) Perceptual training in stereopsis [ edit ] More than other such visual capabilities, the limits of stereopsis depend on the observer's familiarity with the situation.  Stereo thresholds almost always improve, often several-fold, with training [ 8 ] and involve perceptual factors, differing in their particulars for each test.

[ 9 ] This is most vividly evident in the time it takes to "solve" a random-dot stereogram rapidly decreases between the first exposure and subsequent views [ 10 ] See also [ edit ] Computer vision Visual acuity References [ edit ] ^ Howard IP, Rogers BJ (2002) Seeing in Depth . Vol. 1I. Chapter 19 Porteous, Toronto ^ Howard HJ (1919) A test for the judgment of distance.

Amer. J. Ophthalmol.

, 2, 656-675 ^ Westheimer Gerald (2011) "Three-dimensional displays and stereo vision" , Proc. R. Soc. B.2782241–2248 ^ Kalloniatis, Michael (1995).

"Perception of Depth" .

WEBVISION: The Organization of the Retina and Visual System . University of Utah.

PMID 21413376 . Retrieved 9 April 2012 .

^ Coutant  BE(1993) Population distribution of stereoscopic ability.

Ophthalmic Physiol Opt , 13, 3-7.

^ Westheimer G, Pettet MW (1990) Contrast and duration of exposure differentially affect vernier and stereoscopic acuity.

Proc R Soc Lond B Biol Sci , 241, 42-6 ^ a b The Ferrier Lecture (1994) Seeing depth with two eyes: stereopsis.

Proc R Soc Lond B Biol Sci , 257, 205-14 ^ Fendick M, Westheimer G. (1983) Effects of practice and the separation of test targets on foveal and peripheral stereoacuity.

Vision Research , 23, 145-50 ^ McKee SP, Taylor DG (2010) The precision of binocular and monocular depth judgments in natural settings.

J. Vision , 10, 5 ^ Harwerth RS, Rawlings SC (1977) Viewing time and stereoscopic threshold with random-dot stereograms.

Am J Optom Physiol Opt , 54, 452-457.

External links [ edit ] Review of 3D displays and stereo vision v t e Stereoscopy and 3D display Perception 3D stereo view Binocular rivalry Binocular vision Chromostereopsis Convergence insufficiency Correspondence problem Peripheral vision Depth perception Epipolar geometry Kinetic depth effect Stereoblindness Stereopsis Stereopsis recovery Stereoscopic acuity Vergence-accommodation conflict Display technologies Active shutter 3D system Anaglyph 3D Autostereogram Autostereoscopy Bubblegram Head-mounted display Holography Integral imaging Lenticular lens Multiscopy Parallax barrier Parallax scrolling Polarized 3D system Specular holography Stereo display Stereoscope Vectograph Virtual retinal display Volumetric display Wiggle stereoscopy Other technologies 2D to 3D conversion 2D plus Delta 2D-plus-depth Computer stereo vision Multiview Video Coding Parallax scanning Pseudoscope Stereo photography techniques Stereoautograph Stereoscopic depth rendition Stereoscopic rangefinder Stereoscopic spectroscopy Stereoscopic video coding Product types 3D camcorder 3D film 3D television 3D-enabled mobile phones 4D film Blu-ray 3D Digital 3D Stereo camera Stereo microscope Stereoscopic video game Virtual reality headset Notable products AMD HD3D Dolby 3D Fujifilm FinePix Real 3D Infitec MasterImage 3D Nintendo 3DS New 3DS Nvidia 3D Vision Panavision 3D RealD 3D Sharp Actius RD3D View-Master XpanD 3D Miscellany Stereographer Stereoscopic Displays and Applications Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Stereoscopic_acuity&oldid=1162200774 " Categories : Stereoscopy Ophthalmology Optometry 3D computer graphics Vision Eye Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 27 June 2023, at 16:22 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Stereoscopic acuity Add languages Add topic

