Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Setting 2 Definitions by contrast 3 History 4 References 5 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Space Western 18 languages العربية Български Čeština Deutsch Español فارسی Français Frysk 한국어 ქართული 日本語 Polski Português Русский کوردی Svenska Türkçe Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Subgenre Early space Western print media (1952).

Part of a series on Westerns Media Film Television Literature Visual arts Dime novels Comics Wild West shows Subgenres Acid Western Australian Western Contemporary Western Dacoit Western Epic Western Fantasy Western Florida Western Gothic Western Horror Western Northern Ostern Revisionist Western Science fiction Western Singing cowboy Space Western Spaghetti Western Weird Western Western romance Zapata Western Lists Lists of Western films List of Western fiction authors List of Western television series Golden Boot Awards Terms Old West Cowboy culture Cowboy Gunfighter Outlaw Quick draw Saloon Manifest destiny Space Western is a subgenre of science fiction that uses the themes and tropes of Westerns within science-fiction stories in an outer space setting.

[ 1 ] Subtle influences may include exploration of new, lawless frontiers , while more overt influences may feature actual cowboys in outer space who use rayguns and ride robotic horses. Although initially popular, a strong backlash against perceived hack writing caused the genre to become a subtler influence until the 1980s, when it regained popularity. A further critical reappraisal occurred during the 2000s due to critical acclaim for Firefly .

Setting [ edit ] The space Western is a science fiction story that contains Western genre elements within an outer space setting.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] : 1–3 These Western themes can be explicit, such as cowboys in outer space, or they can be a more subtle influence in space opera .

[ 2 ] : 3–4 The genre can be contrasted with science fiction Western , which generally relies on traditional Western frontier settings.

[ 1 ] while the space Western, having its roots in science fiction, contains plots, tropes, or archetypes of the Western genre, but is generally set in outer space in a futuristic setting.

[ 3 ] : 1 [ 4 ] Gene Roddenberry described Star Trek: The Original Series as a space Western (or, more poetically, as " Wagon Train to the stars").

[ 5 ] Firefly and its cinematic follow-up Serenity literalized the Western aspects of the genre popularized by Star Trek : it used frontier towns, horses, and the styling of classic John Ford Westerns.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] Worlds that have been terraformed may be depicted as presenting similar challenges as that of a frontier settlement in a classic Western.

[ 8 ] Six-shooters and horses may be replaced by ray guns and rockets.

[ 9 ] The idea is that the vast distances of space have formed barriers, forcing people to become independent or even restricted. Popular themes within the genre are new frontiers in the galaxy and trying to "control" the vast expanse of space. The stories focus on the hardship and adventure of the unexplored space frontier.

[ 10 ] Definitions by contrast [ edit ] Space Westerns sometimes intertwine with space opera and military science fiction [ 2 ] : 1–3 and are generally placed within the space warfare in science fiction sub-genre thematic. Specifically written space Western fiction, movies and TV series are sometimes based on established space opera franchises with the expanded universes of Star Wars and Star Trek.

[ 11 ] They often consider and view an interstellar war and oppression of a galactic empire as a backdrop, with a focus on lone gunslingers in space wielding a raygun with fantastic fictional technologies in a futuristic space-frontier setting.

[ 12 ] History [ edit ] Rear cover of first issue of Galaxy featuring criticism of the space Western subgenre Westerns influenced early science-fiction pulp magazines . Writers would submit stories in both genres, [ 13 ] and science-fiction magazines sometimes mimicked Western cover art to showcase parallels.

[ 2 ] In the 1930s, C. L. Moore created one of the first space Western heroes, Northwest Smith .

[ 2 ] Buck Rogers and Flash Gordon were also early influences.

[ 9 ] After superhero comics declined in popularity in 1940s United States, Western comics and horror comics replaced them. When horror comics became untenable with the Comics Code Authority in the mid-1950s, science-fiction themes and space Westerns grew more popular.

[ 2 ] : 10 By the mid-1960s, classic Western films fell out of favor and revisionist Westerns supplanted them. Science-fiction series such as Lost in Space [ 14 ] and Star Trek presented a new frontier to be explored.

Peter Hyams , director of Outland , said that studio heads in the 1980s were unwilling to finance a Western, so he made a space Western instead.

[ 15 ] Outland took the plot directly from High Noon (1952) and placed it on Jupiter's moon Io.

[ 13 ] Space operas such as the Star Wars film series took strong cues from Westerns.

Boba Fett , Han Solo and the Mos Eisley cantina, in particular, were based on Western themes.

George Lucas attributes the character of Boba Fett to the Man with No Name in the DVD commentary on The Empire Strikes Back .

[ 16 ] Han Solo's original costume and charming rogue gunslinger mannerisms also reflects the Western's influence on Star Wars . These science fiction films and television series offered the themes and morals that Westerns previously did.

[ 17 ] This frontier view of the future is only one of many ways to look at space exploration, and not one embraced by all science-fiction writers. The Turkey City Lexicon, a document produced by the Turkey City science-fiction writers' workshop , condemns the space Western as the "most pernicious" form of a pre-established background that avoids the necessity of creating a fresh world.

[ 18 ] Galaxy Science Fiction ran an advertisement on its back cover, "You'll never see it in Galaxy ", which gave the beginnings of make-believe parallel Western and science-fiction stories featuring a character named Bat Durston.

[ 19 ] The genre of space Westerns has been informally—and often derisively—known as "Bat Durston" stories since.

[ 20 ] Such scathing attacks on the subgenre, along with further attacks on space operas, caused a perception that all space Westerns were by definition hack writing and not "true" science fiction.

[ 9 ] Although the underlying themes remained influential, this bias persisted until the 1980s, when the release of the film Outland and children's cartoons such as BraveStarr and The Adventures of the Galaxy Rangers re-popularized explicit themes of cowboys in space.

[ 9 ] BraveStarr chronicles the adventures of the Space Marshal, as he seeks to uphold law and order in the 23rd century.

[ 21 ] The opening trailer of The Adventures of the Galaxy Rangers shows Texas Rangers –like heroes riding across a prairie landscape on robotic horses. Spaceships and six-guns both feature prominently throughout.

[ 22 ] In the 1990s, Japanese manga and anime series such as Trigun (1995 debut), Outlaw Star (1996 debut) and Cowboy Bebop (1997 debut) explored the genre.  Several years later, Firefly won acclaim, further causing a critical reassessment of space Westerns.

[ 9 ] Games such as StarCraft , [ 23 ] [ 24 ] The Outer Worlds , [ 25 ] and the Borderlands series [ 26 ] have popularized the space Western theme.  Films like The Chronicles of Riddick have continued the space Western theme.

[ 27 ] References [ edit ] ^ a b c Broughton, Lee (September 19, 2016).

Critical Perspectives on the Western: From A Fistful of Dollars to Django Unchained . Rowman & Littlefield. p. 29.

ISBN 978-1-4422-7243-9 .

^ a b c d e f Green, Paul (2009).

Encyclopedia of Weird Westerns: Supernatural and Science Fiction Elements in Novels, Pulps, Comics, Films, Television and Games, 2d ed .

McFarland Publishing .

ISBN 9780786458004 .

^ Marotta, Melanie A. (January 17, 2020).

Women's Space: Essays on Female Characters in the 21st Century Science Fiction Western . McFarland.

ISBN 978-1-4766-3672-6 .

^ Blichert, Frederick (March 19, 2018).

Joss Whedon's Big Damn Movie: Essays on Serenity . McFarland. p. 70.

ISBN 978-1-4766-3269-8 .

^ "A First Showing for 'Star Trek' Pilot" .

The New York Times . July 22, 1986 . Retrieved March 13, 2014 .

^ Murray, Noel; Bowman, Donna (June 1, 2012).

"Firefly: "Serenity" " .

The A.V. Club . Retrieved March 13, 2014 .

^ Franich, Darren (September 24, 2013).

"The Simultaneous Deconstruction and Reconstruction of Clichés" .

Entertainment Weekly . Archived from the original on January 22, 2014 . Retrieved March 13, 2014 .

^ Sawyer, Andy (2009). Bould, Mark; Butler, Andrew; Roberts, Adam; et al. (eds.).

The Routledge Companion to Science Fiction .

Routledge . p. 508.

ISBN 9781135228361 .

^ a b c d e Lilly, Nathan E. (November 30, 2009).

"The Emancipation of Bat Durston" .

Strange Horizons . Archived from the original on March 14, 2014 . Retrieved March 14, 2014 .

^ nitya.shukla (July 3, 2018).

"What Is A Space Western?" . Toistudent.timesofindia.indiatimes.com . Retrieved September 4, 2022 .

^ "Tabletop RPGS with Settings Like Firefly or the Outer Worlds" .

Screen Rant . March 10, 2021.

^ Palmer, Christopher (1999).

"Galactic Empires and the Contemporary Extravaganza: Dan Simmons and Iain M. Banks" .

Science Fiction Studies .

26 (1): 73– 90.

JSTOR 4240753 .

^ a b Westfahl, Gary , ed. (2005).

The Greenwood Encyclopedia of Science Fiction and Fantasy .

Greenwood Publishing Group . p. 888.

ISBN 9780313329524 .

^ Abbott, Jon (2006).

Irwin Allen Television Productions, 1964–1970: A Critical History of Voyage to the Bottom of the Sea, Lost in Space, The Time Tunnel and Land of the Giants . Jefferson, N.C: McFarland Publishing. p. 131.

ISBN 0786486627 .

^ Williams, Owen (July 24, 2014).

"Peter Hyams Film By Film" .

Empire . Retrieved July 3, 2019 .

^ The Empire Strikes Back DVD Commentary ^ Steinberg, Don (July 22, 2011).

"Hollywood Frontiers: Outer Space and the Wild West" .

The Wall Street Journal . Retrieved March 15, 2014 .

^ Sterling, Bruce (June 18, 2009).

Shiner, Lewis (ed.).

"A Primer for SF Workshops" .

Science Fiction and Fantasy Writers of America . Retrieved March 14, 2014 .

^ "You'll Never See It in Galaxy ".

Galaxy Science Fiction .

1 (1). October 1950.

^ "The Emancipation of Bat Durston" . Archived from the original on March 14, 2014 . Retrieved April 19, 2010 .

^ "The Best of BraveStarr: 15 Amazing Episodes" . November 25, 2017.

^ "Starlog Magazine Issue 121" .

^ N.E. Lilly (October 25, 2009).

"10 Most Influential Space Westerns" . SpaceWesterns.com.

^ Nick Cowen (January 23, 2013).

"Battle.net Championship wows the masses as gamers play to the crowds | Technology" .

The Guardian . Retrieved December 27, 2016 .

^ "How the Space Western Evolved from Star Trek to the Outer Worlds" . November 2, 2019.

^ "Borderlands 2: the cult hit space western game returns" .

The Week . September 18, 2012 . Retrieved October 22, 2014 .

^ " 'Riddick': Sci-fi Western" . September 24, 2013.

Further reading [ edit ] Abbott, Carl, Frontiers Past and Future: Science Fiction and the American West , University Press of Kansas , 2006.

Katerberg, William H., Future West: Utopia and Apocalypse in Frontier Science Fiction , University Press of Kansas , 2008.

Mogen, David, Wilderness Visions: The Western Theme in Science Fiction Literature , Borgo Press , 1993.

Müller, Sebastian.

Neo-Frontier Spaces in Science Fiction Television , McFarland & Company , 2023.

Westfahl, Gary , Space and Beyond: The Frontier Theme in Science Fiction , Greenwood Press , 2000.

v t e Science fiction Outline Authors Definitions Anthropological Hard Scientific romance Soft History Pulp era Golden Age New Wave Timeline Subgenres Apocalyptic and post-apocalyptic Comedy Sitcoms Feminist Grimdark Inner space Mecha Anime and manga Mundane Space warfare Military Space opera Space Western Parallel universes Isekai Science fantasy Dying Earth Planetary romance Superhero Sword and planet Social Climate fiction Christian Libertarian Utopian and dystopian Tech noir Spy-Fi Techno-thriller Tokusatsu Kaiju Underwater Cyberpunk derivatives Cyberpunk Japanese Biopunk Dieselpunk Nanopunk Solarpunk Steampunk Culture Conventions Fandom Fanzines ISFDB Libraries and museums Science Fiction Museum Studies Women in SF Worldcon Region Australian Bengali Brazilian Canadian Chilean Chinese Croatian Czech Estonian French Hungarian Japanese Korean Norwegian Polish Romanian Russian Serbian Spanish Yugoslav Awards Cinematic Jules Verne Saturn Literary, art, and audio Astounding Aurealis BSFA Campbell Memorial Chesley Clarke Crook Deutscher Dick Ditmar Endeavor FantLab Galaxy Gaughan Geffen Golden Duck Grand Master Grand Prix Harland Heinlein Ignotus Kitschies Lambda Laßwitz Locus Nautilus Nebula Nommo Norton Parsec Prometheus Rhysling SFERA Sidewise Skylark Sturgeon Sunburst Tähtivaeltaja TBD Tiptree Tour-Apollo Translation Urania Vogel Writers and Illustrators of the Future Zajdel Multimedia Aurora Chandler Dragon Hugo Seiun Spectrum Media Film Film history Films Indian Japanese Anime Tokusatsu Literature Comics Magazines Novels Publishers Short stories Stage Opera Theatre Television List of TV shows Australasian British Canadian European Japanese Anime Live-action U.S.

Themes Architectural Dyson sphere Ecumenopolis Matrioshka brain Space stations and habitats Stellar engine Terraforming Topopolis Biological Biological warfare Evolution Extraterrestrials List Gender Genetic engineering Invisibility Nanotechnology Organ transplantation Parasitism Sex and sexuality Symbiosis Physical Black holes Extrasolar planets Multiverse Parallel universes Portable hole Space travel Stars Tachyons Teleportation Time travel Time viewer Wormhole Psychological Group mind Mind uploading Psionics Simulated consciousness Social Africanfuturism Afrofuturism Alien invasion Alien language Ancient astronauts Black Evil corporation First contact Frankenstein complex Galactic empire LGBT Message from space Transhumanism Uplift Xenoarchaeology Technological Ansible Artificial intelligence AI takeover Astroengineering Force field Holography Hyperspace Inertialess Robots and Cyborgs Self-replicating machines Simulated reality Spacecraft Stargate Warp drive Weapons Religious Christian science fiction Related Alternate history Fantasy Fictional astronauts Fictional technology Future history Horror Magic realism Museum of Science Fiction Rubber science Science and technology studies Sense of wonder Speculative fiction Supernatural Technology and society Weird Category Portal v t e Western genre Western subgenres Acid Western Australian Western Contemporary Western Dacoit Western Epic Western Fantasy Western Florida Western Gothic Western Horror Western Northern Ostern Revisionist Western Science fiction Western Singing cowboy Space Western Spaghetti Western Weird Western Western romance Zapata Western v t e Film genres By style Action Heroic bloodshed Hong Kong action Adventure Art Biographical Comedy Action Black Commedia all'italiana Sexy Dramedy Gross out Horror Parody Mo lei tau Remarriage Romantic Sex Screwball Silent Slapstick Cyberpunk Japanese Documentary Animated City symphony Direct cinema Docudrama Mockumentary Mondo Pseudo Semi Travel Video essay Drama Calligrafismo Dramedy Historical Legal Erotic Category III films Commedia sexy all'italiana Pink Sexploitation Thriller Educational Social guidance Epic Sword-and-sandal Experimental Exploitation see Exploitation film template Fantasy Comedy Contemporary Fantastique High Historical Magic realism Science Film noir Neo-noir Pulp noir Tech noir Gothic Romance Southern Space Suburban Urban Horror Arthouse Black Body Cannibal Chinese horror Christmas horror Comedy Eco Fantastique Found footage German underground Ghost Giallo List of films Holiday Japanese horror Korean horror Lovecraftian Melodrama Korean Natural New French Extremity Psycho-biddy Psychological Science fiction Slasher Splatter Satanic Maximalist film Minimalist film Mumblecore Musical Arthouse Backstage Jukebox Musicarello Operetta Sceneggiata Mystery Detective Occult detective Whodunit Giallo Crossover Pornographic Hardcore pornography Softcore pornography ( Malayalam ) Propaganda Reality Romantic Comedy Bromantic Fantasy Gothic Paranormal Thriller Science fiction Art Comedy Fantastique Fantasy Gothic Horror Military New Wave Space opera Steampunk Tokusatsu Western Slice of life Iyashikei Slow cinema Survival Thriller Comedy Erotic Financial Giallo Legal New French Extremity Political Psychological Romantic Techno Transgressive Cinema of Transgression Extreme cinema New French Extremity Trick By theme Animals Beach party Body swap Buddy Buddy cop Female Cabrito Cannibal Chicano Colonial Coming-of-age Concert Crime Detective Gangster Gentleman thief Gokudō Gong'an Heist Heroic bloodshed Hood Mafia Mafia comedy Mumbai underworld Poliziotteschi Yakuza Cute Girls Doing Cute Things Dance Disaster Apocalyptic Drug Psychedelic Stoner Dystopian Ecchi Ero guro Ethnographic Exploitation Blaxploitation Mexploitation Turksploitation Extraterrestrial Food and drink Gendai-geki Ghost Goona-goona epic Gothic Romance Space Suburban Girls with guns Harem Hentai Lolicon Shotacon Tentacle erotica Homeland Isekai Jidaigeki Samurai Kaitō LGBTQ Yaoi Yuri Luchador Magical girl Martial arts Bruceploitation Chopsocky Gun fu Kung fu Ninja Wuxia Mecha Anime Monster Giant monster Kaiju Mummy Vampire Zombie Zombie comedy Mountain Mouth of Garbage Muslim social Nature Environmental issues Opera Outlaw biker Ozploitation Partisan film Prison Women Race Rape and revenge Road Rubble Rumberas Sageuk Sexploitation Bavarian porn Commedia sexy all'italiana Mexican sex comedy Nazi exploitation Pornochanchada Nunsploitation Sex report Shoshimin-eiga Slavery Slice of life Snuff South Seas Sports Spy Eurospy Superhero Surfing Swashbuckler Sword-and-sandal Sword and sorcery Travel imaginary voyage Trial Vigilante War Anti-war Euro War Submarine Western Acid Contemporary Western Dacoit Western Fantasy Florida Horror Meat pie Northern Ostern Revisionist Science fiction Singing cowboy Space Spaghetti Weird Western Zapata Western By movement or period Absolute American eccentric cinema Australian New Wave Auteur films Berlin School Bourekas Brighton School British New Wave Kitchen sink realism Budapest school Calligrafismo Cannibal boom Cinéma du look Cinema Novo Cinema of Moral Anxiety Cinema of Transgression Cinéma pur Commedia all'italiana Czechoslovak New Wave Documentary Film Movement Dogme 95 Erra Cinema European art cinema Film d'art Film gris Free Cinema French Impressionist French New Wave German Expressionist German underground horror Golden Age of Argentine cinema Golden Age of Mexican Cinema Golden Age of Nigerian Cinema Grupo Cine Liberación Heimatfilm Hollywood on the Tiber Hong Kong New Wave Indiewood Iranian New Wave Italian futurist Italian neorealist Japanese New Wave Kammerspielfilm L.A. Rebellion Lettrist Modernist film Mumblecore Neorealist New French Extremity New German New generation New Hollywood New Nollywood New Objectivity New Queer No Wave Nuevo Cine Mexicano Pan-Indian film Parallel cinema Persian Film Philippine New Wave Poetic realist Polish Film School Poliziotteschi The Prague film school Prussian film Pure Film Movement Remodernist Romanian New Wave Slow cinema Spaghetti Western Socialist realist Social realist Kitchen sink realism Soviet parallel Structural Surrealist Sword-and-sandal Taiwan New Cinema Telefoni Bianchi Thai New Wave Third Cinema Toronto New Wave Vulgar auteurism Yugoslav Black Wave By demographic Adult Black Children and family Anime Men Seinen Stag Teen Shōnen Shōjo Women Chick flick Josei By format, technique, approach, or production 3D Actuality Animation Anime Art Cartoon Computer Stop-motion Traditional Anthology Art B movie Behind-the-scenes Black-and-white Blockbuster Cinéma vérité Classical Hollywood cinema Collage Color Compilation Composite Computer screen Cult midnight movie Database cinema Direct-to-video ONA OVA Docufiction Ethnofiction Experimental Abstract Feature Featurette Film à clef Film-poem Found footage High concept Hyperlink cinema Independent Guerrilla filmmaking List of American independent films Interstitial art Live action animation Low-budget Major film studios Masala Maximalist film Message picture Meta-film Minimalist film Mockbuster Modernist film Musical short Mythopoeia Neorealist No-budget One-shot Paracinema Participatory Poetry Postmodernist Reverse motion Satire Sceneggiata Semidocumentary Serial Shinpa Short Silent Slow cinema Socialist realist Sound Television film Underground Video nasty Vulgar auteurism Z movie Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Space_Western&oldid=1306350095 " Categories : Space Westerns Film genres Science fiction genres Television genres Western (genre) films by genre Western (genre) subgenres Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use American English from July 2021 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use mdy dates from July 2021 This page was last edited on 17 August 2025, at 08:08 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Space Western 18 languages Add topic

