Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Selected publications 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents David N. Hempton Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Northern Irish historian and academic David N. Hempton FRHistS Born David Neil Hempton ( 1952-02-19 ) February 19, 1952 (age 73) Northern Ireland Title Harvard University Distinguished Service Professor and Alonzo L. McDonald Family Professor of Evangelical Theological Studies, Harvard Divinity School Academic background Alma mater Queen's University Belfast University of St Andrews Academic work Discipline History Sub-discipline History of Christianity Institutions Queen's University Belfast Boston University Harvard University Main interests Evangelicalism David Neil Hempton FRHistS (born 1952) is a Northern Irish historian of evangelicalism , Harvard University Distinguished Service Professor and Alonzo L. McDonald Family Professor of Evangelical Theological Studies at Harvard Divinity School , and fellow of the Royal Historical Society .

[ 1 ] Biography [ edit ] Hempton was born on 19 February 1952, [ 2 ] in Northern Ireland.

[ 3 ] He earned his Bachelor of Arts degree (1974) from the Queen's University Belfast and his Doctor of Philosophy degree (1977) from the University of St Andrews .

[ 4 ] Hempton began teaching at Queen's University in 1979, where he was professor of modern history and director of the school of history.

[ 4 ] He joined the faculty of Boston University in 1998, where he was professor of the history of Christianity, and in 2008 named "Outstanding Teacher of the Year" at the divinity school.

[ 3 ] In 2007, he was appointed as the first Alonzo L. McDonald Family Professor of Evangelical Theological Studies at Harvard Divinity School , [ 4 ] and in 2012 it was announced he would succeed William A. Graham as dean of the school.

[ 3 ] In 2020 he was admitted as a member of the Royal Irish Academy .

[ 5 ] He retired as HDS dean at the end of the 2022-23 academic year, but remains on the faculty.

[ 6 ] Selected publications [ edit ] Methodism and Politics in British Society, 1750–1850 , winner of The Whitfield Prize [ 7 ] (1984) ISBN 041555571X The Religion of the People: Methodism and Popular Religion C. 1750–1900 (1996) ISBN 0415077141 Religion and Political Culture in Britain and Ireland: From the Glorious Revolution to the Decline of Empire (1996) ISBN 0521479258 Methodism: Empire of the Spirit , winner of the Jesse Lee Prize [ 8 ] (2005) ISBN 0300119763 Evangelical Disenchantment: Nine Portraits of Faith and Doubt (2008) ISBN 030014282X The Church in the Long Eighteenth Century , winner of the Albert C. Outler Prize [ 9 ] (2011) ISBN 184511440X References [ edit ] ^ "Fellows of the Royal Historical Society" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 14 June 2013.

^ "Hempton, David" . from Library of Congress Name Authority File.

^ a b c "Hempton named Divinity School dean" .

Harvard Gazette . 30 March 2012.

^ a b c "Hempton named first McDonald Family Professor" .

Harvard Gazette . 24 August 2006.

^ "29 New Members Admitted" .

Royal Irish Academy . 22 May 2020 . Retrieved 27 November 2021 .

^ "Hempton to Step Down as HDS Dean" .

Harvard Divinity School . 27 October 2022 . Retrieved 13 November 2023 .

^ "Previous Winners of the Whitfield Prize" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 8 January 2013.

^ "The Jesse Lee Prize" . Archived from the original on 10 October 2012.

^ "David Hempton Awarded Outler Prize" . Harvard Divinity School. 7 December 2012.

External links [ edit ] Hempton's faculty page at Harvard Divinity School Academic offices Preceded by William A. Graham Dean of Harvard Divinity School 2012–2023 Succeeded by Marla F. Frederick v t e Harvard University History John Harvard statue President Alan Garber Board of Overseers President and Fellows Provost John Manning Library Arts and Sciences Dean Hopi Hoekstra College Dean Rakesh Khurana Radcliffe College Freshman dormitories Upperclass houses Adams Cabot Currier Dudley Dunster Eliot Kirkland Leverett Lowell Mather Pforzheimer Quincy Winthrop Undergraduate organizations Hasty Pudding Theatricals The Harvard Advocate The Harvard Crimson The Harvard Independent The Harvard Lampoon Continuing Education Dean Nancy Coleman Extension School Extension School history Summer School Engineering and Applied Sciences Dean David C. Parkes Lyman Laboratory of Physics Graduate School Dean Emma Dench Libraries Cabot Harvard-Yenching Houghton Harvard Review Lamont Pusey Widener Harry Elkins Widener Eleanor Elkins Widener Grossman Centers, institutes, and societies Asia Center Center for African and African American Research Du Bois Institute Center for Astrophysics Center for Chinese Studies Center for European Studies Center for Visual Arts Center for Hellenic Studies Dumbarton Oaks Harvard Forest Rowland Institute Ukrainian Research Institute Business Dean Srikant Datar Baker Library/Bloomberg Center Harvard Business Publishing Harvard Business Review Harvard Business School RFC Spangler Center Design Dean Sarah Whiting Harvard Design Magazine Center for Housing Studies Divinity Dean David N. Hempton Education Dean Bridget Terry Long Government Dean Jeremy M. Weinstein Ash Center Belfer Center Carr Center Center for American Political Studies Center for Ethics Center for Housing Studies Center for Nonprofit Organizations Center for Public Leadership Institute of Politics Rappaport Institute Shorenstein Center The Journalist's Resource Law Dean John F. Manning Berkman Klein Center Civil Rights-Civil Liberties Law Review International Law Journal Journal of Law & Technology Journal on Legislation Law Record Law Review Medicine Dean George Q. Daley Broad Institute Medical Library Anatomical Museum Program in Health Sciences School of Dental Medicine Public Health Dean Michelle Ann Williams Museums and arboretum Arnold Arboretum Harvard Art Museums Archaeology and Ethnology Museum Busch–Reisinger Museum Fogg Museum Sackler Museum Collection of Scientific Instruments Glass Flowers Mineralogical Museum General Artemas Ward House Natural History Museum Comparative Zoology Museum Herbaria Museum of the Ancient Near East Cambridge campus Boylston Hall Bradley Memorial Discobolus Gates of Harvard Yard Graduate Center Harvard Hall Memorial Church Choir Harvard Yard Massachusetts Hall Memorial Hall Night Wall I Peabody Terrace President's House Science Center Smith Campus Center University Hall Centers and institutes Harvard Innovation Labs Computing Center Harvard Radcliffe Institute Schlesinger Library Institute for Advanced Theater Training Nieman Foundation for Journalism Real Colegio Complutense Villa I Tatti Wyss Institute People List of Harvard University people Non-graduate alumni Athletics Teams Baseball Men's basketball Women's basketball Fencing Football Men's ice hockey Women's ice hockey Men's lacrosse‎ Men's rugby Women's rugby Men's soccer Women's soccer Men's squash Men's volleyball Women's volleyball Venues Bright-Landry Hockey Center Harvard Stadium Jordan Field Lavietes Pavilion Ohiri Field Malkin Athletic Center Newell Boathouse Weld Boathouse Rivalries Cornell (hockey) Yale (football) Miscellaneous Anti-Vietnam War protests Alma mater Commencement traditions Academic regalia Graduate Students Union Heraldry Tercentenary celebration Harvard Magazine Harvard University Press Lionel de Jersey Harvard Math 55 Society of Fellows University Professor Harvard–Adam Dziewonski Observatory Excellence Without a Soul Category Commons Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Australia Czech Republic Netherlands Norway Croatia Korea Poland Israel Belgium Academics CiNii People Trove Other IdRef Yale LUX This article about a British historian or genealogist is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it .

v t e Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=David_N._Hempton&oldid=1300740426 " Categories : Harvard Divinity School faculty Fellows of the Royal Historical Society Historians from Northern Ireland Reformation historians Boston University faculty Academic staff of Queen's University at Kingston Queen's University at Kingston alumni Alumni of the University of St Andrews Male non-fiction writers from Northern Ireland Members of the Royal Irish Academy Living people 1952 births British historian stubs Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from April 2022 Articles with hCards Use Oxford spelling from August 2019 Place of birth missing (living people) All stub articles This page was last edited on 16 July 2025, at 04:09 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents David N. Hempton Add languages Add topic

