Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Interpretations of the term 2 Difficulties which hamper the assessment of degradation 3 Causes 4 Remedies to forest degradation 5 Initiatives against forest degradation 6 See also 7 Sources 8 References 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Forest degradation 9 languages العربية Español فارسی Français Bahasa Indonesia Madhurâ Suomi Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Loss of biological wealth of a forest Degraded forest in Lahnberge , Germany: the soil is being washed out due to lack of vegetal cover, some trees are losing ground and they appear to be sick (photo by Andreas Trepte).

Forest degradation is a process in which the biological wealth of a forest area is permanently diminished by some factor or by a combination of factors. "This does not involve a reduction of the forest area, but rather a quality decrease in its condition." The forest is still there, but with fewer trees, or fewer species of trees, plants or animals, or some of them affected by plagues.

[ 1 ] This degradation makes the forest less valuable and may lead to deforestation . Forest degradation is a type of the more general issue of land degradation . Deforestation and forest degradation continue to take place at alarming rates, which contributes significantly to the ongoing loss of biodiversity .

[ 2 ] Interpretations of the term [ edit ] Drivers of deforestation and forest degradation by region, 2000–2010, from the Food and Agriculture Organization publication The State of the World's Forests 2020. Forests, biodiversity and people – In brief [ 3 ] Deforestation is much worse than forest degradation, but it is clear and visible. On the contrary, forest degradation may start and go on without showing clear effects. It is difficult to measure and even the very term is controversial. In a paper [ 4 ] submitted to the XII World Forestry Congress , 2003, Jean-Paul Lanly states: "The situation is even less satisfactory regarding forest degradation due in particular to the imprecision and multiple, and often subjective, interpretations of the term". In 2009 Lund [ 5 ] identified more than 50 definitions of forest degradation.

Previously to this August 2017 editing, the Wikipedia page Forest degradation was redirected to Secondary forest , a forest which has re-grown after a timber harvest. This is a confusion: a secondary forest may be perfectly healthy, and a primary forest may be suffering degradation.

The term "permanently" also poses some difficulties: a forest affected by a mild seasonal drought may experience a loss of its biological wealth, but if it is seasonally reversed, then it is not considered degradation. On the contrary, a severe prolonged drought may seriously degrade a forest and make human intervention advisable to limit damages.

Difficulties which hamper the assessment of degradation [ edit ] According to Lanly, [ 4 ] there are three difficulties: the different choices of the initial state of reference or baseline; the chosen criteria: health, biodiversity, production capacity; and the opinion on the evolution prospects: will the final result of the process be desirable or undesirable?

For mapping forest degradation in Bolivia , Müller et al.

[ 5 ] consider areas where only between 30% and 70% of the original forest cover remains. If less than 30% remains, the area is considered as deforested, and if more than 70% remains, the forest is considered intact.

Davidar et al.

[ 6 ] also think that "Loss of dense and moderately dense forest cover is suggestive of forest degradation", but for the moment no parameter exists "that indicates at what speed forests become degraded and how long it will take for the ecosystem to degrade beyond the point of recovery." Causes [ edit ] Forest loss by driver and region The Dominican Center for Agricultural and Forest Development [ 7 ] lists the following causes of forest degradation: Excessive extraction of forest products like timber, charcoal or resin.

Road building : after it has been built, the road favours soil erosion .

Open mining : the area where extraction takes place is, of course, completely deforested, but also the surrounding zone suffers a degradation of its fauna and flora.

Expansion of urban areas ( urban sprawl ).

Davidar et al.

[ 6 ] add another: Livestock grazing : goats or sheep eat tree seedlings, thus slowing natural forest regeneration .

Earth Eclipse, [ 8 ] a platform of environment research articles, adds the following causes: Acid rain Pests and diseases Air pollution . Degradation for this cause is specifically called [ citation needed ] Waldsterben (German word) or forest death.

Forest fragmentation : a large forest is broken up in smaller woods, which destroys the habitat of large animals.

Land pollution Soil erosion ( see image above ) and sedimentation Finally as an additional cause: [ citation needed ] Excessive or unrespectful tourism Remedies to forest degradation [ edit ] Generally, any measure to prevent deforestation will also reduce forest degradation. Specifically for degradation, Greenpeace [ 9 ] proposes: Attaining a responsible forest products industry Sustainable forest management Curbing emissions of sulfur dioxide (to combat acid rain) would also reduce forest degradation for this cause. If a coal-fired power plant uses low-quality coal (with a high sulfur contents), this may be alleviated by flue-gas desulfurization .

Initiatives against forest degradation [ edit ] Reducing emissions from deforestation and forest degradation (REDD+) is an international voluntary climate change mitigation approach to curb deforestation and forest degradation. This mechanism makes part of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) since 2005.

The United Nations Programme on Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation (or UN-REDD Programme) is a collaborative programme created in 2008 by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP). It should not be confused with REDD+. The UN-REDD Programme supports [ 10 ] its partner countries (more than 60) through direct funding and technical support to national REDD+ programmes and technical capacity enhancing.

See also [ edit ] Afforestation Deforestation Reforestation Sustainable forest management Sources [ edit ] This article incorporates text from a free content work. Licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0 ( license statement/permission ). Text taken from The State of the World’s Forests 2020. In brief – Forests, biodiversity and people​ , FAO & UNEP, FAO & UNEP.

References [ edit ] ^ "Plague" .

www.who.int . Retrieved 2023-08-04 .

^ The State of the World's Forests 2020. In brief – Forests, biodiversity and people . Rome: FAO & UNEP. 2020. p. 9.

doi : 10.4060/ca8985en .

ISBN 978-92-5-132707-4 .

^ The State of the World's Forests 2020. Forests, biodiversity and people – In brief . Rome: FAO & UNEP. 2020.

doi : 10.4060/ca8985en .

ISBN 978-92-5-132707-4 .

^ a b Lanly, Jean-Paul (2003).

"DEFORESTATION AND FOREST DEGRADATION FACTORS" .

Proceedings of the XII World Forestry Congress . Retrieved 23 August 2017 .

^ a b Müller, Robert; Pacheco, Pablo; Montero, Juan Carlos (2014).

El contexto de la deforestación y degradación de los bosques en Bolivia (PDF) . Bolivia: CIFOR.

ISBN 978-602-1504-29-1 . Retrieved 23 August 2017 .

^ a b Davidar, Priya; Sashoo, Sasmita; Mammen, Pratheesh C.; Acharya, Prashanth; Puyravaud, Jean-Philippe; Arjunan, M.; Garrigues, Jean Pierre; Roessingh, Krista (15 May 2010).

"Assessing the extent and causes of forest degradation in India: Where do we stand?" .

Biological Conservation .

143 (12): 2937– 2944.

Bibcode : 2010BCons.143.2937D .

doi : 10.1016/j.biocon.2010.04.032 . Retrieved 23 August 2017 .

^ Ovalles, P.

"Causas de la deforestación y degradación de bosques en la República Dominicana" (PDF) .

CEDAF . Archived from the original (PDF) on 5 July 2016 . Retrieved 23 August 2017 .

^ Eclipse, Earth.

"What is Forest Degradation?" .

Earth Eclipse . Retrieved 23 August 2017 .

^ "Solutions to Deforestation" .

Greenpeace . 22 June 2015 . Retrieved 23 August 2017 .

^ PROGRAMME, UN-REDD.

"About the UN-REDD Programme" .

UN-REDD . United Nations . Retrieved 23 August 2017 .

External links [ edit ] Scholia has a profile for forest degradation (Q11882336) .

v t e Forestry Index Forest areas Ministries Research institutes Colleges Journals Arbor Day Types Agroforestry dehesa Analog forestry Bamboo forestry Close to nature forestry Community forestry Ecoforestry Energy forestry Mycoforestry Permaforestry Plantation forestry Social forestry Sustainable forestry Urban forest Urban forestry Ecology and management Arboriculture Controlled burn Debris coarse driftwood large log jam slash Dendrology Ecological thinning Even-aged management Fire ecology Forest dynamics informatics IPM inventory governance law Global Forest Information Service old-growth pathology protection restoration secondary stand transition Trillion Tree Campaign Forest certification ATFS CFS FSC PEFC SFI SmartWood Woodland Carbon Code Forestation afforestation reforestation Formally designated Glade Growth and yield modelling Horticulture GM trees i-Tree urban Multipurpose tree Silviculture Sustainable management Tree allometry breeding Tree measurement crown girth height volume Environmental topics Acid rain Carbon sequestration Clearcutting Deforestation Ecosystem services Forest degradation Forest dieback Forest fragmentation Ghost forest Great Green Wall (Africa) Great Green Wall (China) High grading Illegal logging timber mafia Invasive species wilding Million Tree Initiative REDD Shifting cultivation chitemene slash-and-burn slash-and-char svedjebruk Timber recycling Tree hugging Urban forest inequity Wildfire Industries Coppicing Forest farming Forest gardening Logging Manufacturing lumber plywood pulp and paper sawmilling Products biochar biomass charcoal non-timber palm oil rayon rubber tanbark Rail transport Tree farm Christmas trees Wood engineered fuel mahogany spruce-pine-fir teak Woodworking green woodworking Occupations Forester Arborist Bucker Choker setter Ecologist Feller Firefighter handcrew hotshot lookout smokejumper River driver Truck driver Log scaler Lumberjack Ranger Resin tapper Rubber tapper Shingle weaver Timber cruiser Tree planter Wood process engineer WikiProject Climate change portal Earth sciences portal Ecology portal Environment portal Plants portal Trees portal Category Outline v t e Forestry tools and equipment Tree planting , afforestation Caulk boots Hoedad (hoedag) Groasis Waterboxx Mattock Pottiputki Root trainer Seed trap Tree planting bar (dibble bar) Tree shelter (Tuley tube) Tree spade Mensuration 3D scanner Angle gauge Biltmore stick Chain Cruising rod Diameter tape Hemispherical photography Inclinometer Increment borer Rangefinder laser Microtome Relascope Tree caliper Wedge prism Fire suppression Aerial firefighting DC-10 UAVs Driptorch Fire flapper Fire rake Fire retardant Helitack McLeod (rakehoe) Pulaski Axes Billhook Broadaxe Brush hook Froe (shake axe) Hatchet Labrys Log splitter Marking axe Splitting maul Tomahawk Saws Bow saw Bucksaw Chainsaw safety clothing safety features Crosscut saw Dragsaw Hacksaw Head saw Lumber edger Polesaw Portable sawmill Resaw Two-man saw Whipsaw Logging Cant hook Feller buncher Forwarder Go-devil Harvester Helicopter Log truck Lombard Steam Log Hauler Peavey Pickaroon Pike pole Skid cone Skidder Washington Winch Steam donkey Yarder swing Other Denailer Firewood processor Forest railway Forestry mulcher Hand compass Hand hook Hydraulic debarker Log house moulder Log pond Log flume Machete Stump grinder Chainsaw mill Tree tyer Tsakat Whoopie sling Wood-drying kiln Woodchipper Categories tools equipment Commons tools equipment WikiProject Forestry Types of tools Cleaning Cutting and abrasive Forestry Garden Hand Kitchen Machine and metalworking Masonry Measuring and alignment Mining Power Textile Woodworking v t e Conservation of species Index of conservation articles Conservation biology Biodiversity Captive breeding Compassionate conservation Conservation behavior Conservation-dependent species Conservation genetics Conservation-induced extinction Conservation status Endemism Ex-situ conservation Extinction threshold In-situ conservation Latent extinction risk Marine conservation Mutualisms and conservation Nature conservation Nuisance wildlife Pest Vermin Conservation biology of parasites Species translocation Conservation welfare Threatened species Vulnerability and susceptibility Approaches Conservation agriculture Conservation development Conservation finance Conservation grazing Conservation management system Conservation movement Conservation photography Conservation psychology Conspicuous conservation Community-based conservation Ecoregion conservation status Environmental protection Evidence-based conservation Flagship species Forest management Forest protection Tropical rainforest conservation Integrated Conservation and Development Project Other effective area-based conservation measures Riparian buffer Roadless area conservation Roadside conservation Site-based conservation Wetland conservation Protected areas Conservation designation Conservation district Conservation easement Conservation reserve Gap analysis Habitat conservation High conservation value area Landscape-scale conservation Marine protected area Marxan Open space reserve Wildlife corridor 30 by 30 target Key issues Conservation refugee Fortress conservation Habitat fragmentation Human–wildlife conflict Restoration Assisted natural regeneration Ecosystem restoration Island restoration Reforestation afforestation Rewilding marine Species reintroduction By taxon Arthropod Bird Hawaiian honeycreeper Raptor Golden eagle Fungi Land mammal American bison Arabian oryx Bear Polar bear Cheetah Elephant Indian elephant Slow loris Tiger Bengal Tiger Wolf Marine Dolphin Gray nurse shark Manatee Painted turtle Salmon Sea otter Plant Seed bank Cryopreservation By country Angola Australia Belize Brazil Canada Central African Republic Costa Rica Hong Kong Iceland India Indonesia Ireland Italy Malaysia Mauritius Namibia New Zealand Pakistan Papua New Guinea South Sudan Sweden Uganda United Kingdom Scotland United States forests Related Conservation officer De-extinction Planetary boundaries IUCN Red List NatureServe conservation status Special Area of Conservation Soil conservation List of conservation issues List of organisations List of people Category v t e Deforestation and desertification Deforestation Assarting Deforestation Deforestation and climate change Deforestation by region Illegal logging Mountaintop removal Slash-and-burn Slash-and-char Desertification Aridification Historic desertification Moisture recycling Soil retrogression and degradation Water scarcity By region: China Gobi Desert Lebanon Libya Mali Mauritania Mongolia Sahel Yemen Mitigation Afforestation Arid Lands Information Network Biochar Conservation grazing Desert greening Ecoforestry Ecological engineering Farmer-managed regeneration Flexible Mechanisms Great Green Wall (Africa) Great Green Wall (China) Managed intensive rotational grazing Oasification Reforestation United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification Related articles Forest Landscape Integrity Index Forestry Intact forest landscape Land surface effects on climate Land use, land-use change and forestry List of global issues Natural landscape Terra preta Wilderness Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Forest_degradation&oldid=1263592791 " Categories : Deforestation Forest ecology Habitat management equipment and methods Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from December 2019 Free-content attribution Free content from FAO & UNEP This page was last edited on 17 December 2024, at 15:01 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Forest degradation 9 languages Add topic

