Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Development 2 Climate impacts 3 Extents and mapping 4 Forest modeling 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Land use, land-use change, and forestry 9 languages العربية বাংলা فارسی Français Gaeilge Italiano Norsk bokmål Suomi 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Greenhouse gas inventory sector This article is about the greenhouse gas inventory category. For more general information, see Land use , Land-use change , and Forestry .

The period since 1950 has brought "the most rapid transformation of the human relationship with the natural world in the history of humankind".

[ 1 ] Almost one-third of the world's forests, and almost two-thirds of its grassland, have been lost to human agriculture—which now occupies almost half the world's habitable land.

[ 2 ] Land use, land-use change, and forestry ( LULUCF ), also referred to as Forestry and other land use ( FOLU ) or Agriculture, Forestry and Other Land Use ( AFOLU) , [ 3 ] [ 4 ] : 65 is defined as a " greenhouse gas inventory sector that covers emissions and removals of greenhouse gases resulting from direct human-induced land use such as settlements and commercial uses, land-use change , and forestry activities." [ 5 ] LULUCF has impacts on the global carbon cycle and as such, these activities can add or remove carbon dioxide (or, more generally, carbon ) from the atmosphere, influencing climate .

[ 6 ] LULUCF has been the subject of two major reports by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), but is difficult to measure.

[ 7 ] : 12 Additionally, land use is of critical importance for biodiversity .

[ 8 ] Development [ edit ] The United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) Article 4(1)(a) requires all Parties to "develop, periodically update, publish and make available to the Conference of the Parties" as well as "national inventories of anthropogenic emissions by sources" "removals by sinks of all greenhouse gases not controlled by the Montreal Protocol ." Under the UNFCCC reporting guidelines, human-induced greenhouse emissions must be reported in six sectors: energy (including stationary energy and transport); industrial processes; solvent and other product use; agriculture; waste; and land use, land use change and forestry (LULUCF).

[ 9 ] The rules governing accounting and reporting of greenhouse gas emissions from LULUCF under the Kyoto Protocol are contained in several decisions of the Conference of Parties under the UNFCCC.

LULUCF has been the subject of two major reports by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC).

[ 10 ] The Kyoto Protocol article 3.3 thus requires mandatory LULUCF accounting for afforestation (no forest for last 50 years), reforestation (no forest on 31 December 1989) and deforestation, as well as (in the first commitment period) under article 3.4 voluntary accounting for cropland management, grazing land management, revegetation and forest management (if not already accounted under article 3.3).

[ 11 ] This decision sets out the rules that govern how Kyoto Parties with emission reduction commitments (so-called Annex 1 Parties) account for changes in carbon stocks in land use, land-use change and forestry.

[ 12 ] It is mandatory for Annex 1 Parties to account for changes in carbons stocks resulting from deforestation , reforestation and afforestation (B Article 3.3) [ 13 ] and voluntary to account for emissions from forest management, cropland management, grazing land management and revegetation (B. Article 3.4).

[ 12 ] The flexibility mechanisms under the Kyoto Protocol, including the Clean Development Mechanism (CDM) and Joint Implementation (JI), also include provisions for LULUCF projects, further enhancing the integration of land use considerations into climate change mitigation strategies.

Climate impacts [ edit ] Per capita greenhouse gas emissions by country including land-use change, in the year 2000 according to World Resources Institute Land-use change can be a factor in CO 2 (carbon dioxide) atmospheric concentration, and is thus a contributor to global climate change .

[ 14 ] IPCC estimates that land-use change (e.g. conversion of forest into agricultural land) contributes a net 1.6 ± 0.8 Gt carbon per year to the atmosphere. For comparison, the major source of CO 2 , namely emissions from fossil fuel combustion and cement production, amount to 6.3 ± 0.6 Gt carbon per year.

[ 15 ] In 2021 the Global Carbon Project estimated annual land-use change emissions were 4.1 ± 2.6 Gt CO 2 (CO 2 not carbon: 1 Gt carbon = 3.67 Gt CO 2 [ 16 ] ) for 2011–2020.

[ 17 ] The land-use sector is critical to achieving the aim of the Paris Agreement to limit global warming to 2 °C (3.6 °F).

[ 18 ] Land-use change alters not just atmospheric CO 2 concentration but also land surface biophysics such as albedo and evapotranspiration , both of which affect climate.

[ 19 ] The impact of land-use change on the climate is also more and more recognized by the climate modeling community. On regional or local scales, the impact of LUC can be assessed by Regional climate models (RCMs). This is however difficult, particularly for variables, which are inherently noisy, such as precipitation. For this reason, it is suggested to conduct RCM ensemble simulations.

[ 20 ] Extents and mapping [ edit ] Share of the total land surface without and with consideration of multiple changes between six major land use/cover categories (urban area, cropland, pasture/rangeland, forest, unmanaged grass/shrubland, non-/sparsely vegetated land) in 1960–2019.

[ 21 ] A 2021 study estimated, with higher resolution data, that land-use change has affected 17% of land in 1960–2019, or when considering multiple change events 32%, "around four times" previous estimates. They also investigate its drivers, identifying global trade affecting agriculture as a main driver.

[ 22 ] [ 21 ] Forest modeling [ edit ] Earth system modeling has traditionally been used to analyze forests for climate projections. However, in recent years, there has been a shift away from this modeling towards more mitigation and adaptation projections.

[ 23 ] These projections can give researchers a better understanding of future forest management practices to employ. Furthermore, this new modeling approach also allows for land management practices to be analyzed in the model. Land management practices include forest harvest, tree species selection, grazing, and crop harvest. Land management practices produce biophysical and biogeochemical effects on the forest, and following the model can increase the likelihood of success. Where there is a lack of available data for these practices, further monitoring and data collecting are needed to improve the models' accuracy.

[ 24 ] See also [ edit ] Agricultural expansion – Growth of agricultural land in the 21st century Deforestation and climate change – Interactions between deforestation and climate change Land change science – Interdisciplinary study of changes in climate, land use, and land cover Land change modeling – Geographic and ecological field of study Land use – Classification of land resources based on what can be built and on its use Satoyama – Japanese term for the area between flat coastal plains and interior mountain foothills Special Report on Climate Change and Land – IPCC report References [ edit ] ^ Steffen, Will; Sanderson, Angelina; Tyson, Peter; Jäger, Jill; et al. (2004).

"Global Change and the Climate System / A Planet Under Pressure" (PDF) . International Geosphere-Biosphere Programme (IGBP). pp. 131, 133.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 19 March 2017.

Fig. 3.67(j): loss of tropical rainforest and woodland, as estimated for tropical Africa, Latin America and South and Southeast Asia.

^ "Deforestation and Forest Loss / Humanity destroyed one third of the world's forests by expanding agricultural land" . Our World in Data (OWID).

Archived from the original on 7 November 2022.

Data: Historical data on forests from Williams (2003) - Deforesting the Earth. Historical data on agriculture from The History Database of Global Environment (HYDE). Modern data from the FAO ^ "Agriculture, Forestry and Other Land Use (AFOLU) — IPCC" . Retrieved 2023-10-26 .

^ M. Pathak, R. Slade, P.R. Shukla, J. Skea, R. Pichs-Madruga, D. Ürge-Vorsatz,2022: Technical Summary . In: Climate Change 2022: Mitigation of Climate Change. Contribution of Working Group III to the Sixth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [P.R. Shukla, J. Skea, R. Slade, A. Al Khourdajie, R. van Diemen, D. McCollum, M. Pathak, S. Some, P. Vyas, R. Fradera, M. Belkacemi, A. Hasija, G. Lisboa, S. Luz, J. Malley, (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK and New York, NY, USA. doi: 10.1017/9781009157926.002.

^ "Glossary of climate change acronyms and terms" .

UNFCCC . Retrieved 2020-04-06 .

^ Brown, Daniel G., ed. (2013).

Land use and the carbon cycle : advances in integrated science, management, and policy . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 9781107648357 .

OCLC 823505307 .

^ "2022: Emissions Trends and Drivers".

IPCC, 2022: Climate Change 2022: Mitigation of Climate Change. Contribution of Working Group III to the Sixth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (PDF) . 2022.

doi : 10.1017/9781009157926.004 .

^ Towards Sustainable Land Use: Aligning Biodiversity, Climate and Food Policies. (2020). France: OECD Publishing.

^ Department of the Environment and Heritage (DEH) 2006, National Greenhouse Gas Inventory 2004: Accounting for the 108% Target, Commonwealth of Australia, Canberra.

^ Good Practice Guidance for Land Use, Land Use Change and Forestry (Report).

Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change . 2003.

ISBN 4887880030 .

^ Hohne N, Wartmann S, Herold A, Freibauer A (2007). "The rules for land use, land use change and forestry under the Kyoto Protocol—lessons learned for the future climate negotiations".

Environmental Science and Policy .

10 (4): 353– 69.

Bibcode : 2007ESPol..10..353H .

doi : 10.1016/j.envsci.2007.02.001 .

at p. 354 ^ a b "Reporting on LULUCF activities under the Kyoto Protocol" .

unfccc.int . Retrieved 2020-04-22 .

^ "Microsoft Word - kpcmp8a3.doc" (PDF) . Retrieved 2010-04-29 .

^ Ochoa-Hueso, R; Delgado-Baquerizo, M; King, PTA; Benham, M; Arca, V; Power, SA (February 2019). "Ecosystem type and resource quality are more important than global change drivers in regulating early stages of litter decomposition".

Soil Biology and Biochemistry .

129 : 144– 152.

Bibcode : 2019SBiBi.129..144O .

doi : 10.1016/j.soilbio.2018.11.009 .

hdl : 10261/336676 .

S2CID 92606851 .

^ "IPCC Special Reports: Land Use, Land-Use Change and Forestry" .

ipcc.ch . Retrieved 2020-10-19 .

^ "Comparing CO 2 emissions to CO 2 levels" .

Sceptical science . Retrieved 26 January 2020 .

^ Friedlingstein, Pierre; Jones, Matthew W.; O'Sullivan, Michael; Andrew, Robbie M.; Bakker, Dorothee C. E.; Hauck, Judith; Le Quéré, Corinne; Peters, Glen P.; Peters, Wouter; Pongratz, Julia; Sitch, Stephen (2021-11-04).

"Global Carbon Budget 2021" .

Earth System Science Data Discussions .

14 (4): 1917– 2005.

doi : 10.5194/essd-2021-386 .

ISSN 1866-3508 .

^ "Land use and forestry regulation for 2021-2030" .

Climate Action - European Commission . 2016-11-23 . Retrieved 2020-04-06 .

^ Kaiguang, Zhao; Jackson, Robert B. (2014).

"Biophysical forcings of land-use changes from potential forestry activities in North America" (PDF) .

Ecological Monographs .

84 (2): 329-353.

Bibcode : 2014EcoM...84..329Z .

doi : 10.1890/12-1705.1 .

^ Laux, Patrick (2016).

"How many RCM ensemble members provide confidence in the impact of land-use land cover change?" (PDF) .

International Journal of Climatology .

37 (4): 2080– 2100.

doi : 10.1002/joc.4836 .

^ a b Winkler, Karina; Fuchs, Richard; Rounsevell, Mark; Herold, Martin (2021-05-11).

"Global land use changes are four times greater than previously estimated" .

Nature Communications .

12 (1): 2501.

Bibcode : 2021NatCo..12.2501W .

doi : 10.1038/s41467-021-22702-2 .

ISSN 2041-1723 .

PMC 8113269 .

PMID 33976120 .

Available under CC BY 4.0 .

^ "Nearly a fifth of Earth's surface transformed since 1960" .

phys.org . Retrieved 13 June 2021 .

^ National Research Council (U.S.). Committee on a National Strategy for Advancing Climate Modeling. (2012).

A national strategy for advancing climate modeling . National Research Council (U.S.). Board on Atmospheric Sciences and Climate., National Research Council (U.S.). Division on Earth and Life Studies. Washington, D.C.: National Academies Press.

ISBN 978-0-309-25978-1 .

OCLC 824780474 .

^ "5. Improving Data Collection across the Health Care System" .

www.ahrq.gov . Retrieved 2023-10-19 .

External links [ edit ] Land Use, Land-Use Change and Forestry (LULUCF) at UNFCCC IPCC Special Report on Land Use, Land-Use Change, and Forestry v t e Climate change Overview Causes of climate change Effects of climate change Climate change mitigation Climate change adaptation By country and region Causes Overview Climate system Greenhouse effect ( Carbon dioxide in Earth's atmosphere ) Scientific consensus on climate change Sources Deforestation Fossil fuel Greenhouse gases Greenhouse gas emissions Carbon accounting Carbon footprint Carbon leakage from agriculture from wetlands World energy supply and consumption History History of climate change policy and politics History of climate change science Svante Arrhenius James Hansen Charles David Keeling United Nations Climate Change conferences Years in climate change 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 Effects and issues Physical Abrupt climate change Anoxic event Arctic methane emissions Arctic sea ice decline Atlantic meridional overturning circulation Drought Extreme weather Flood Coastal flooding Heat wave Marine Urban heat island Oceans acidification deoxygenation heat content sea surface temperature stratification temperature Ozone depletion Permafrost thaw Retreat of glaciers since 1850 Sea level rise Season creep Climate sensitivity Tipping points in the climate system Tropical cyclones Water cycle Wildfires Flora and fauna Biomes Mass mortality event Birds Extinction risk Forest dieback Invasive species Marine life Plant biodiversity Social and economic Agriculture Livestock Multi-breadbasket failure In the United States Children Cities Civilizational collapse Crime Depopulation of settlements Destruction of cultural heritage Disability Economic impacts U.S. insurance industry Fisheries Gender Health Mental health In the United Kingdom In the Philippines Human rights Indigenous peoples Infectious diseases Migration Poverty Psychological impacts Security and conflict Urban flooding Water scarcity Water security By country and region Africa Americas Antarctica Arctic Asia Australia Caribbean Europe Middle East and North Africa Small island countries by individual country Mitigation Economics and finance Carbon budget Carbon emission trading Carbon offsets and credits Gold Standard (carbon offset standard) Carbon price Carbon tax Climate debt Climate finance Climate risk insurance Co-benefits of climate change mitigation Economics of climate change mitigation Fossil fuel divestment Green Climate Fund Low-carbon economy Net zero emissions Energy Carbon capture and storage Energy transition Fossil fuel phase-out Nuclear power Renewable energy Sustainable energy Preserving and enhancing carbon sinks Blue carbon Carbon dioxide removal Carbon sequestration Direct air capture Carbon farming Climate-smart agriculture Forest management afforestation forestry for carbon sequestration REDD and REDD+ reforestation Land use, land-use change, and forestry (LULUCF and AFOLU) Nature-based solutions Other Individual action on climate change Geoengineering Society and adaptation Society Business action Climate action Climate emergency declaration Climate movement School Strike for Climate Denial Ecological grief Governance Justice Litigation Politics Public opinion Women Adaptation Adaptation strategies on the German coast Adaptive capacity Disaster risk reduction Ecosystem-based adaptation Flood control Loss and damage Managed retreat Nature-based solutions Resilience Risk Vulnerability The Adaptation Fund National Adaptation Programme of Action Communication Climate Change Performance Index Climate crisis (term) Climate spiral Education Media coverage Popular culture depictions art fiction video games Warming stripes International agreements Glasgow Climate Pact Kyoto Protocol Paris Agreement Cooperative Mechanisms under Article 6 of the Paris Agreement Nationally determined contributions Sustainable Development Goal 13 United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change Background and theory Measurements Global surface temperature Instrumental temperature record Proxy Satellite temperature measurement Theory Albedo Carbon cycle atmospheric biologic oceanic permafrost Carbon sink Climate sensitivity Climate variability and change Cloud feedback Cloud forcing Fixed anvil temperature hypothesis Cryosphere Earth's energy budget Extreme event attribution Feedbacks Global warming potential Illustrative model of greenhouse effect on climate change Orbital forcing Radiative forcing Research and modelling Climate change scenario Climate model Coupled Model Intercomparison Project Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) IPCC Sixth Assessment Report Paleoclimatology Representative Concentration Pathway Shared Socioeconomic Pathways Climate change portal Category Glossary Index v t e Forestry Index Forest areas Ministries Research institutes Colleges Journals Arbor Day Types Agroforestry dehesa Analog forestry Bamboo forestry Close to nature forestry Community forestry Ecoforestry Energy forestry Mycoforestry Permaforestry Plantation forestry Social forestry Sustainable forestry Urban forest Urban forestry Ecology and management Arboriculture Controlled burn Debris coarse driftwood large log jam slash Dendrology Ecological thinning Even-aged management Fire ecology Forest dynamics informatics IPM inventory governance law Global Forest Information Service old-growth pathology protection restoration secondary stand transition Trillion Tree Campaign Forest certification ATFS CFS FSC PEFC SFI SmartWood Woodland Carbon Code Forestation afforestation reforestation Formally designated Glade Growth and yield modelling Horticulture GM trees i-Tree urban Multipurpose tree Silviculture Sustainable management Tree allometry breeding Tree measurement crown girth height volume Environmental topics Acid rain Carbon sequestration Clearcutting Deforestation Ecosystem services Forest degradation Forest dieback Forest fragmentation Ghost forest Great Green Wall (Africa) Great Green Wall (China) High grading Illegal logging timber mafia Invasive species wilding Million Tree Initiative REDD Shifting cultivation chitemene slash-and-burn slash-and-char svedjebruk Timber recycling Tree hugging Urban forest inequity Wildfire Industries Coppicing Forest farming Forest gardening Logging Manufacturing lumber plywood pulp and paper sawmilling Products biochar biomass charcoal non-timber palm oil rayon rubber tanbark Rail transport Tree farm Christmas trees Wood engineered fuel mahogany spruce-pine-fir teak Woodworking green woodworking Occupations Forester Arborist Bucker Choker setter Ecologist Feller Firefighter handcrew hotshot lookout smokejumper River driver Truck driver Log scaler Lumberjack Ranger Resin tapper Rubber tapper Shingle weaver Timber cruiser Tree planter Wood process engineer WikiProject Climate change portal Earth sciences portal Ecology portal Environment portal Plants portal Trees portal Category Outline v t e Deforestation and desertification Deforestation Assarting Deforestation Deforestation and climate change Deforestation by region Illegal logging Mountaintop removal Slash-and-burn Slash-and-char Desertification Aridification Historic desertification Moisture recycling Soil retrogression and degradation Water scarcity By region: China Gobi Desert Lebanon Libya Mali Mauritania Mongolia Sahel Yemen Mitigation Afforestation Arid Lands Information Network Biochar Conservation grazing Desert greening Ecoforestry Ecological engineering Farmer-managed regeneration Flexible Mechanisms Great Green Wall (Africa) Great Green Wall (China) Managed intensive rotational grazing Oasification Reforestation United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification Related articles Forest Landscape Integrity Index Forestry Intact forest landscape Land surface effects on climate Land use, land-use change and forestry List of global issues Natural landscape Terra preta Wilderness Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Land_use,_land-use_change,_and_forestry&oldid=1279565200 " Categories : Biodiversity Climate change and the environment Environmental issues with forests Land use Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 9 March 2025, at 08:01 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Land use, land-use change, and forestry 9 languages Add topic

