Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Background 1.2 Establishment 1.3 1970s 1.4 1980s 1.5 1990s 1.6 2000s 1.7 2010s 1.8 2020–2024 1.9 2025 2 Organization Toggle Organization subsection 2.1 Offices 2.2 Regions 3 Legal authority Toggle Legal authority subsection 3.1 Related legislation 4 Programs Toggle Programs subsection 4.1 Core programs 4.1.1 Air quality and radiation protection 4.1.1.1 Ambient standards 4.1.1.2 Stationary air pollution source standards 4.1.1.3 Mobile source standards 4.1.1.4 Radiation protection 4.1.2 Water quality 4.1.2.1 Science and regulatory standards 4.1.2.2 Infrastructure financing 4.1.3 Land, waste and cleanup 4.1.4 Chemical approval, manufacture and usage 4.1.5 Enforcement 4.2 Additional programs 4.3 Past programs 5 Controversies Toggle Controversies subsection 5.1 Scope and fulfillment of agency's authority 5.2 Environmental justice 5.3 Freedom of Information Act processing performance 5.4 Pebble Mine 5.5 Water quality in East Palestine, Ohio 6 See also 7 References 8 Further reading 9 External links Toggle the table of contents United States Environmental Protection Agency 40 languages العربية Български Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español فارسی Français Gaeilge 한국어 Hausa हिन्दी Igbo Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית Magyar Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Simple English Slovenčina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikinews Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 38°53′38″N 77°01′44″W ﻿ / ﻿ 38.8939°N 77.0289°W ﻿ / 38.8939; -77.0289 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from EPA ) U.S. federal government agency "EPA" and "Environmental Protection Agency" redirect here. For other uses, see EPA (disambiguation) and Environmental Protection Agency (disambiguation) .

United States Environmental Protection Agency Seal Logo Flag Agency overview Formed December 2, 1970 Jurisdiction United States Headquarters William Jefferson Clinton Federal Building 38°53′38″N 77°01′44″W ﻿ / ﻿ 38.8939°N 77.0289°W ﻿ / 38.8939; -77.0289 Employees 14,592 Annual budget $9,559,485,000 [ 1 ] Agency executives Lee Zeldin , Administrator David Fotouhi , Deputy Administrator Website epa .gov Agency ID 6800 The Environmental Protection Agency ( EPA ) is an independent agency of the United States government tasked with environmental protection matters.

[ 2 ] President Richard Nixon proposed the establishment of EPA on July 9, 1970; it began operation on December 2, 1970, after Nixon signed an executive order .

[ 3 ] The order establishing the EPA was ratified by committee hearings in the House and Senate.

The agency is led by its administrator , who is appointed by the president and approved by the Senate .

[ 3 ] Since January 29, 2025, the administrator is Lee Zeldin . The EPA is not a Cabinet department, but the administrator is normally given cabinet rank . The EPA has its headquarters in Washington, D.C.

There are regional offices for each of the agency's ten regions, as well as 27 laboratories around the country.

[ 4 ] The agency conducts environmental assessment , research, and education. It has the responsibility of maintaining and enforcing national standards under a variety of U.S. environmental laws , in consultation with state, tribal, and local governments. EPA enforcement powers include fines, sanctions , and other measures.

It delegates some permitting, monitoring, and enforcement responsibility to U.S. states and the federally recognized tribes . The agency also works with industries and all levels of government in a wide variety of voluntary pollution prevention programs and energy conservation efforts.

The agency's budgeted employee level in 2023 was 16,204.1 full-time equivalent (FTE).

[ 5 ] More than half of EPA's employees are engineers, scientists, and environmental protection specialists; other employees include legal, public affairs, financial, and information technologists.

History [ edit ] Background [ edit ] Stacks emitting smoke from burning discarded automobile batteries, photo taken in Houston in 1972 by Marc St. Gil , official photographer of recently founded EPA Same smokestacks in 1975 after the plant was closed in a push for greater environmental protection Beginning in the late 1950s and through the 1960s, Congress reacted to increasing public concern about the impact that human activity could have on the environment.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] [ 8 ] Senator James E. Murray introduced a bill, the Resources and Conservation Act (RCA) of 1959, in the 86th Congress . The bill would have established a Council on Environmental Quality in the Executive Office of the President , declared a national environmental policy, and required the preparation of an annual environmental report. The conservation movement was weak at the time and the bill did not pass Congress.

[ 9 ] The 1962 publication of Silent Spring , a best-selling book by Rachel Carson , alerted the public about the detrimental effects on animals and humans of the indiscriminate use of pesticide chemicals.

[ 10 ] In the years following, Congress discussed possible solutions. In 1968, a joint House–Senate colloquium was convened by the chairmen of the Senate Committee on Interior and Insular Affairs, Senator Henry M. Jackson , and the House Committee on Science and Astronautics, Representative George P. Miller , to discuss the need for and means of implementing a national environmental policy. Congress enacted the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969 (NEPA) and the law was based on ideas that had been discussed in the 1959 and subsequent hearings.

[ 11 ] [ 9 ] The Richard Nixon administration made the environment a policy priority in 1969–1971 and created two new agencies, the Council on Environmental Quality (CEQ) and EPA.

[ 12 ] Nixon signed NEPA into law on January 1, 1970. The law established the CEQ in the Executive Office of the President. NEPA required that a detailed statement of environmental impacts be prepared for all major federal actions significantly affecting the environment. The "detailed statement" would ultimately be referred to as an environmental impact statement (EIS).

[ 6 ] Establishment [ edit ] Ruckelshaus sworn in as first EPA administrator On July 9, 1970, Nixon proposed an executive reorganization that consolidated many environmental responsibilities of the federal government under one agency, a new Environmental Protection Agency.

[ 13 ] This proposal included merging pollution control programs from a number of departments, such as the combination of pesticide programs from the United States Department of Agriculture and the United States Department of the Interior .

[ 14 ] : 5 After conducting hearings during that summer, the House and Senate approved the proposal. The EPA was created 90 days before it had to operate, [ 14 ] : 11 and officially opened its doors on December 2, 1970. The agency's first administrator, William Ruckelshaus , took the oath of office on December 4, 1970.

[ 8 ] EPA's primary predecessor was the former Environmental Health Divisions of the U.S. Public Health Service (PHS), and its creation caused one of a series of reorganizations of PHS that occurred during 1966–1973. From PHS, EPA absorbed the entire National Air Pollution Control Administration, as well as the Environmental Control Administration's Bureau of Solid Waste Management, Bureau of Water Hygiene, and part of its Bureau of Radiological Health. It also absorbed the Federal Water Quality Administration, which had previously been transferred from PHS to the Department of the Interior in 1966. A few functions from other agencies were also incorporated into EPA: the formerly independent Federal Radiation Council was merged into it; pesticides programs were transferred from the Department of the Interior, Food and Drug Administration , and Agricultural Research Service ; and some functions were transferred from the Council on Environmental Quality and Atomic Energy Commission .

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] Upon its creation, EPA inherited 84 sites spread across 26 states, of which 42 sites were laboratories. The EPA consolidated these laboratories into 22 sites.

[ 17 ] 1970s [ edit ] In its first year, the EPA had a budget of $1.4 billion and 5,800 employees.

[ 14 ] : 5 At its start, the EPA was primarily a technical assistance agency that set goals and standards. Soon, new acts and amendments passed by Congress gave the agency its regulatory authority.

[ 14 ] : 9 A major expansion of the Clean Air Act was approved in December 1970.

[ 18 ] EPA staff recall that in the early days there was "an enormous sense of purpose and excitement" and the expectation that "there was this agency which was going to do something about a problem that clearly was on the minds of a lot of people in this country," leading to tens of thousands of resumes from those eager to participate in the mighty effort to clean up America's environment.

[ 19 ] When EPA first began operation, members of the private sector felt strongly that the environmental protection movement was a passing fad. Ruckelshaus stated that he felt pressure to show a public which was deeply skeptical about government's effectiveness, that EPA could respond effectively to widespread concerns about pollution.

[ 20 ] The burning Cuyahoga River in Cleveland, Ohio, in 1969 led to a national outcry and criminal charges against major steel companies. The US Justice Department in late 1970 began pollution control litigation in cooperation with the new EPA.  Congress enacted the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, better known as the Clean Water Act (CWA).

[ 21 ] The CWA established a national framework for addressing water quality, including mandatory pollution control standards, to be implemented by the agency in partnership with the states.

[ 22 ] Congress amended the Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act (FIFRA) in 1972, requiring EPA to measure every pesticide's risks against its potential benefits.

[ 23 ] [ 24 ] In 1973 President Nixon appointed Russell E. Train to be the next EPA administrator.

[ 25 ] In 1974 Congress passed the Safe Drinking Water Act , requiring EPA to develop mandatory federal standards for all public water systems , which serve 90% of the US population. The law required EPA to enforce the standards with the cooperation of state agencies.

[ 26 ] [ 27 ] In October 1976, Congress passed the Toxic Substances Control Act (TSCA) which, like FIFRA, related to the manufacture, labeling and usage of commercial products rather than pollution.

[ 28 ] [ 29 ] This act gave the EPA the authority to gather information on chemicals and require producers to test them, gave it the ability to regulate chemical production and use (with specific mention of PCBs ), and required the agency to create the National Inventory listing of chemicals.

[ 29 ] Congress also enacted the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA) in 1976, significantly amending the Solid Waste Disposal Act of 1965 .

[ 30 ] It tasked the EPA with setting national goals for waste disposal, conserving energy and natural resources, reducing waste, and ensuring environmentally sound management of waste. Accordingly, the agency developed regulations for solid and hazardous waste that were to be implemented in collaboration with states.

[ 31 ] President Jimmy Carter appointed Douglas M. Costle as EPA administrator in 1977.

[ 32 ] To manage the agency's expanding legal mandates and workload, by the end of 1979 the budget grew to $5.4 billion and the workforce size increased to 13,000.

[ 1 ] 1980s [ edit ] In 1980, following the discovery of many abandoned or mismanaged hazardous waste sites such as Love Canal , Congress passed the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act , nicknamed "Superfund." The new law authorized EPA to cast a wider net for parties responsible for sites contaminated by previous hazardous waste disposal and established a funding mechanism for assessment and cleanup.

[ 33 ] In a dramatic move to the right, President Ronald Reagan in 1981 appointed Anne Gorsuch as EPA administrator.

[ 34 ] Gorsuch based her administration of EPA on the New Federalism approach of downsizing federal agencies by delegating their functions and services to the individual states.

[ 35 ] She believed that EPA was over-regulating business and that the agency was too large and not cost-effective. During her 22 months as agency head, she cut the budget of the EPA by 22%, reduced the number of cases filed against polluters, relaxed Clean Air Act regulations, and facilitated the spraying of restricted-use pesticides. She cut the total number of agency employees, and hired staff from the industries they were supposed to be regulating.

[ 36 ] Environmentalists contended that her policies were designed to placate polluters, and accused her of trying to dismantle the agency.

[ 37 ] Assistant Administrator Rita Lavelle was fired by Reagan in February 1983 because of her mismanagement of the Superfund program.

[ 38 ] Gorsuch had increasing confrontations with Congress over Superfund and other programs, including her refusal to submit subpoenaed documents. Gorsuch was cited for contempt of Congress and the White House directed EPA to submit the documents to Congress. Gorsuch and most of her senior staff resigned in March 1983.

[ 38 ] [ 39 ] Reagan then appointed William Ruckelshaus as EPA administrator for a second term. As a condition for accepting his appointment, Ruckleshaus obtained autonomy from the White House in appointing his senior management team. He then appointed experienced competent professionals to the top management positions, and worked to restore public confidence in the agency.

[ 40 ] Lee M. Thomas succeeded Ruckelshaus as administrator in 1985.

[ 41 ] In 1986 Congress passed the Emergency Planning and Community Right-to-Know Act , which authorized the EPA to gather data on toxic chemicals and share this information with the public.

[ 29 ] EPA also researched the implications of stratospheric ozone depletion. Under Administrator Thomas, EPA joined with several international organizations to perform a risk assessment of stratospheric ozone, which helped provide motivation for the Montreal Protocol, which was agreed to in August 1987.

[ 42 ] : 14 In 1988, during his first presidential campaign, George H. W. Bush was vocal about environmental issues. Following his election victory, he appointed William K. Reilly , an environmentalist, as EPA administrator in 1989.

[ 32 ] Under Reilly's leadership, the EPA implemented voluntary programs and initiated the development of a "cluster rule" for multimedia regulation of the pulp and paper industry.

[ 43 ] At the time, there was increasing awareness that some environmental issues were regional or localized in nature, and were more appropriately addressed with sub-national approaches and solutions. This understanding was reflected in the 1990 amendments to the Clean Air Act and in new approaches by the agency, such as a greater emphasis on watershed -based approaches in Clean Water Act programs.

[ 44 ] 1990s [ edit ] In 1992 EPA and the Department of Energy launched the Energy Star program, a voluntary program that fosters energy efficiency.

[ 45 ] Carol Browner was appointed EPA administrator by President Bill Clinton and served from 1993 to 2001.

[ 46 ] Major projects during Browner's term included: Initiation of the Brownfields pilot program in 1995 [ 47 ] Initial hazardous air pollution standards for petroleum refineries in 1995 [ 48 ] Initial lead paint abatement regulations under TSCA in 1996 [ 49 ] Update of the National Ambient Air Quality Standards for particulate matter and ozone in 1997.

[ 50 ] Since the passage of the Superfund law in 1980, an excise tax had been levied on the chemical and petroleum industries, to support the cleanup trust fund. Congressional authorization of the tax was due to expire in 1995. Although Browner and the Clinton Administration supported continuation of the tax, Congress declined to reauthorize it. Subsequently, the Superfund program was supported only by annual appropriations, greatly reducing the number of waste sites that are remediated in a given year.

[ 51 ] (In 2021 Congress reauthorized an excise tax on chemical manufacturers.

[ 52 ] ) Major legislative updates during the Clinton Administration were the Food Quality Protection Act [ 53 ] and the 1996 amendments to the Safe Drinking Water Act.

[ 54 ] 2000s [ edit ] President George W. Bush appointed Christine Todd Whitman as EPA administrator in 2001. Whitman was succeeded by Mike Leavitt in 2003 and Stephen L. Johnson in 2005.

[ 32 ] In March 2005 nine states (California, New York, New Jersey, New Hampshire, Massachusetts, Maine, Connecticut, New Mexico and Vermont) sued the EPA. The EPA's inspector general had determined that the EPA's regulation of mercury emissions did not follow the Clean Air Act, and that the regulations were influenced by top political appointees.

[ 55 ] [ 56 ] The EPA had suppressed a study it commissioned by Harvard University which contradicted its position on mercury controls.

[ 57 ] The suit alleged that the EPA's rule exempting coal-fired power plants from "maximum available control technology" was illegal, and additionally charged that the EPA's system of cap-and-trade to lower average mercury levels would allow power plants to forego reducing mercury emissions, which they objected would lead to dangerous local hotspots of mercury contamination even if average levels declined.

[ 58 ] Several states also began to enact their own mercury emission regulations. Illinois's proposed rule would have reduced mercury emissions from power plants by an average of 90% by 2009.

[ 59 ] In 2008—by which point a total of fourteen states had joined the suit—the U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia ruled that the EPA regulations violated the Clean Air Act.

[ 60 ] In response, EPA announced plans to propose such standards to replace the vacated Clean Air Mercury Rule, and did so on March 16, 2011.

[ 61 ] In July 2005 there was a delay in the issuance of an EPA report showing that auto companies were using loopholes to produce less fuel-efficient cars. The report was supposed to be released the day before a controversial energy bill was passed and would have provided backup for those opposed to it, but the EPA delayed its release at the last minute.

[ 62 ] EPA initiated its voluntary WaterSense program in 2006 to encourage water efficiency through the use of a special label on consumer products.

[ 63 ] In 2007 the state of California sued the EPA for its refusal to allow California and 16 other states to raise fuel economy standards for new cars.

[ 64 ] EPA Administrator Stephen Johnson claimed that the EPA was working on its own standards, but the move has been widely considered an attempt to shield the auto industry from environmental regulation by setting lower standards at the federal level, which would then preempt state laws.

[ 65 ] [ 66 ] California governor Arnold Schwarzenegger , along with governors from 13 other states, stated that the EPA's actions ignored federal law, and that existing California standards (adopted by many states in addition to California) were almost twice as effective as the proposed federal standards.

[ 67 ] It was reported that Johnson ignored his own staff in making this decision.

[ 68 ] In 2007 it was reported that EPA research was suppressed by career managers.

[ 69 ] Supervisors at EPA's National Center for Environmental Assessment required several paragraphs to be deleted from a peer-reviewed journal article about EPA's integrated risk information system , which led two co-authors to have their names removed from the publication, and the corresponding author, Ching-Hung Hsu, to leave EPA "because of the draconian restrictions placed on publishing".

[ 70 ] The 2007 report stated that EPA subjected employees who author scientific papers to prior restraint , even if those papers are written on personal time.

[ 71 ] In December 2007 EPA administrator Johnson approved a draft of a document that declared that climate change imperiled the public welfare—a decision that would trigger the first national mandatory global-warming regulations. Associate Deputy Administrator Jason Burnett e-mailed the draft to the White House. White House aides—who had long resisted mandatory regulations as a way to address climate change—knew the gist of what Johnson's finding would be, Burnett said. They also knew that once they opened the attachment, it would become a public record, making it controversial and difficult to rescind. So they did not open it; rather, they called Johnson and asked him to take back the draft. Johnson rescinded the draft; in July 2008, he issued a new version which did not state that global warming was danger to public welfare. Burnett resigned in protest.

[ 72 ] Further information: Regulation of greenhouse gases under the Clean Air Act In April 2008, the Union of Concerned Scientists said that more than half of the nearly 1,600 EPA staff scientists who responded online to a detailed questionnaire reported they had experienced incidents of political interference in their work. The survey included chemists, toxicologists, engineers, geologists and experts in other fields of science. About 40% of the scientists reported that the interference had been more prevalent in the last five years than in previous years.

[ 73 ] President Barack Obama appointed Lisa P. Jackson as EPA administrator in 2009.

[ 32 ] 2010s [ edit ] In 2010 it was reported that a $3 million mapping study on sea level rise was suppressed by EPA management during both the Bush and Obama administrations, and managers changed a key interagency report to reflect the removal of the maps.

[ 74 ] Between 2011 and 2012, some EPA employees reported difficulty in conducting and reporting the results of studies on hydraulic fracturing due to industry and governmental pressure, and were concerned about the censorship of environmental reports .

[ 75 ] [ 76 ] [ 77 ] [ 78 ] [ 79 ] President Obama appointed Gina McCarthy as EPA administrator in 2013.

[ 32 ] In 2014, the EPA published its "Tier 3" standards for cars, trucks and other motor vehicles, which tightened air pollution emission requirements and lowered the sulfur content in gasoline.

[ 80 ] In 2015, the EPA discovered extensive violations by Volkswagen Group in its manufacture of Volkswagen and Audi diesel engine cars, for the 2009 through 2016 model years. Following notice of violations and potential criminal sanctions, Volkswagen later agreed to a legal settlement and paid billions of US dollars in criminal penalties, and was required to initiate a vehicle buyback program and modify the engines of the vehicles to reduce illegal air emissions.

[ 81 ] [ 82 ] In August 2015, the EPA finalized the Clean Power Plan to regulate emissions from power plants, projecting a 15-year cut of 32%, or 789 million metric tons of carbon dioxide.

[ 83 ] In 2019 it was voided and replaced by the Affordable Clean Energy rule under the Trump administration, [ 84 ] and in 2022 its constitutionality was ruled out by the Supreme Court.

[ 85 ] In August 2015, the 2015 Gold King Mine waste water spill occurred when EPA contractors examined the level of pollutants such as lead and arsenic in a Colorado mine, [ 86 ] and accidentally released over three million gallons of waste water into Cement Creek and the Animas River .

[ 87 ] In 2015, the International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC), a branch of the World Health Organization , cited research linking glyphosate , an ingredient of the weed killer Roundup manufactured by the chemical company Monsanto , to non-Hodgkin's lymphoma . In March 2017, the presiding judge in a litigation brought about by people who claim to have developed glyphosate-related non-Hodgkin's lymphoma opened Monsanto emails and other documents related to the case, including email exchanges between the company and federal regulators. According to The New York Times , the "records suggested that Monsanto had ghostwritten research that was later attributed to academics and indicated that a senior official at the Environmental Protection Agency had worked to quash a review of Roundup's main ingredient, glyphosate, that was to have been conducted by the United States Department of Health and Human Services ." The records show that Monsanto was able to prepare "a public relations assault" on the finding after they were alerted to the determination by Jess Rowland , the head of the EPA's cancer assessment review committee at that time, months in advance. Emails also showed that Rowland "had promised to beat back an effort by the Department of Health and Human Services to conduct its own review." [ 88 ] [ 89 ] [ 90 ] On February 17, 2017, President Donald Trump appointed Scott Pruitt as EPA administrator.

[ 32 ] The Democratic Party saw the appointment as a controversial move, as Pruitt had spent most of his career challenging environmental regulations and policies. He did not have previous experience in the environmental protection field and had received financial support from the fossil fuel industry.

[ 91 ] In 2017, the Presidency of Donald Trump proposed a 31% cut to the EPA's budget to $5.7 billion from $8.1 billion and to eliminate a quarter of the agency jobs.

[ 92 ] However, this cut was not approved by Congress. Pruitt resigned from the position on July 5, 2018, citing "unrelenting attacks" due to ongoing ethics controversies.

[ 93 ] President Trump appointed Andrew R. Wheeler as EPA administrator in 2019.

[ 32 ] Trump promised to eliminate EPA "in almost every form" leaving "only tidbits" intact.

[ 94 ] On July 17, 2019, EPA management prohibited the agency's Scientific Integrity Official, Francesca Grifo , from testifying at a House committee hearing. EPA offered to send a different representative in place of Grifo and accused the committee of "dictating to the agency who they believe was qualified to speak." The hearing was to discuss the importance of allowing federal scientists and other employees to speak freely when and to whom they want to about their research without having to worry about any political consequences.

[ 95 ] In September 2019 air pollution standards in California were once again under attack, as the Trump administration attempted to revoke a waiver issued to the state which allowed more stringent standards for auto and truck emissions than the federal standards.

[ 96 ] 2020–2024 [ edit ] President Joe Biden appointed Michael S. Regan to be administrator in 2021. Regan began serving on March 11, 2021.

[ 97 ] In October 2021 EPA announced its "PFAS Strategic Roadmap." PFASs are organofluorine chemical compounds referred to as " forever chemicals ". The roadmap is a "whole-of-EPA" strategy and the agency will consider the full life cycle of PFAS, including preventing PFAS from entering the environment, holding polluters accountable, and remediation of contaminated sites. It also will include drinking water monitoring and risk assessment for PFOA and PFOS in biosolids (processed sewage sludge used as fertilizer).

[ 98 ] In December 2021 EPA issued new greenhouse gas standards for passenger cars and light trucks. The standards, which will reduce climate pollution and improve public health, became effective for the 2023 vehicle model year.

[ 99 ] In March 2022 the Biden administration allowed California to again set stricter auto emissions standards.

[ 100 ] In August 2022 the EPA was allotted a listed ~$53.216 billion in funding pursuant to the Inflation Reduction Act (IRA). The EPA listed 24 total initiatives, the most notable among them being greenhouse gas reduction and monitoring, a superfund petroleum tax, replacing current heavy-duty vehicles with zero-emission vehicles , and a methane incentive program.

[ 101 ] On February 3, 2023, more than 100 train cars were derailed in East Palestine , and around half of those cars containing chemicals like butyl acrylate , vinyl chloride , and ethylhexyl acrylate .

[ 102 ] Subsequently, the chemicals combusted into a flame being seen from miles around and the fumes filled the air with residents reporting animals falling ill and a burning sensation in their eyes and nose. The EPA monitered the situation and experts recommended that local residents take part in the EPA's at-home air screening.

[ 103 ] [ 104 ] In March 2024, EPA published regulations for tailpipe emissions standards that accelerate the transition to electric vehicles (EVs). The standards require at least two-thirds of all new cars sold in the United States to be zero-emissions vehicles by 2032, in order to reduce air pollution and climate change. The agency projected that the regulations would cut emissions by 7 billion metric tons, or 56% of 2026 levels, by 2032.

[ 105 ] In April 2024, EPA finalized new standards for power plant carbon emissions, projecting cuts of 65,000 tons by 2028 and 1.38 billion tons by 2047.

[ 106 ] The agency also issued final drinking water standards for six PFAS compounds.

[ 107 ] [ 108 ] In December, 2024 the EPA announced it approved California's plan to end the sale of gasoline-only vehicles by 2035. EPA Administrator Michael Regan granted a waiver under the Clean Air Act to California to implement the plan which was first announced in 2020. It required that by 2035 at least 80% of new cars sold be electric and up to 20% plug-in hybrid models. California's rules were adopted by 11 other states including New York, Massachusetts and Oregon.

[ 109 ] 2025 [ edit ] With the second presidential term of Donald Trump , Lee Zeldin began serving as administrator on January 29, 2025.

[ 110 ] On February 27, 2025, EPA received a White House memo issued by Russell Vought to prepare for mass layoffs. Hours earlier, Trump had said that there would be a 65 percent reduction in its roughly 17,000 personnel, which was later corrected to 65 percent overall agency budget cuts.

[ 94 ] In March 2025 the EPA dropped a lawsuit against Denka , a chemical company, which was intended to reduce emissions of chloroprene at its plant in LaPlace, Louisiana .

[ 111 ] After the Supreme Court of the United States overturned an injunction against termination of government employees in AFGE v. Trump , the EPA announced in July 2025 that it would be eliminating its Office of Research and Development. The agency had previously denied plans to do so after a leaked memo indicating plans to do so was reported on in March.

[ 112 ] The EPA released a new proposed rule in July 2025 to repeal the previous endangerment finding that had been established in 2009 that greenhouse gases posed a risk to human health, a basis used in many of the EPA's regulations supporting the Clean Air Act. Zeldin asserted that the impact of these existing regulations was harming American citizens through increases costs as a rationale for eliminating the endangerment finding.

[ 113 ] Organization [ edit ] Headquarters of the EPA at the William Jefferson Clinton Federal Building The EPA is led by the administrator, appointed following nomination by the president and approval from Congress.

Offices [ edit ] Office of the Administrator (OA). As of October 2020 [update] , the office consisted of 12 divisions: [ 114 ] Office of Administrative and Executive Services Office of Children's Health Protection Children's Health Protection Advisory Committee Office of Civil Rights Office of Congressional and Intergovernmental Relations Office of Continuous Improvement Office of the Executive Secretariat Office of Homeland Security Office of Policy [ 115 ] Office of Public Affairs Office of Public Engagement and Environmental Education Office of Small and Disadvantaged Business Utilization Science Advisory Board Office of Air and Radiation (OAR) [ 116 ] Office of Chemical Safety and Pollution Prevention (OCSPP) [ 117 ] Office of the Chief Financial Officer (OCFO) [ 118 ] Office of Environmental Justice and External Civil Rights [ 119 ] Office of Enforcement and Compliance Assurance (OECA) [ 120 ] Office of General Counsel (OGC) [ 121 ] Office of Inspector General (OIG) [ 122 ] Office of International and Tribal Affairs (OITA) [ 123 ] Office of Mission Support (OMS) [ 124 ] Office of Resources and Business Operations (ORBO) Environmental Appeals Board Office of Federal Sustainability Office of Administrative Law Judges Office of Acquisition Solutions (OAS) Office of Administration (OA) Office of Human Resources (OHR) Office of Grants and Debarment (OGD) Office of Customer Advocacy, Policy and Portfolio Management (OCAPPM) Office of Digital Services and Technical Architecture (ODSTA) Office of Information Management (OIM)Office of Information Security and Privacy (OISP) Office of Enterprise Information Programs (OEIP) Office of IT Operations (OITO) The Andrew W. Breidenbach Environmental Research Center in Cincinnati is EPA's second-largest R&D center.

[ 125 ] Office of Research and Development (ORD), which as of November 2021 [update] , consisted of: [ 126 ] [ 127 ] Immediate Office of the Assistant Administrator Office of Science Advisor, Policy, and Engagement (OSAPE) Office of Science Information Management (OSIM) Office of Resource Management Center for Computational Toxicology and Exposure (CCTE) Center for Environmental Measurement and Modeling (CEMM) Center for Public Health and Environmental Assessment (CPHEA) Center for Environmental Solutions and Emergency Response (CESER) Office of Land and Emergency Management (OLEM), which as of March 2017 [update] , consisted of: [ 128 ] Office of Superfund Remediation and Technology Innovation Office of Resource Conservation and Recovery Office of Underground Storage Tanks Office of Brownfields and Land Revitalization Office of Emergency Management Federal Facilities Restoration and Reuse Office Office of Water (OW) [ 129 ] which, as of March 2017 [update] , consisted of: [ 130 ] Office of Ground Water and Drinking Water (OGWDW) Office of Science and Technology (OST) Office of Wastewater Management (OWM) Office of Wetlands, Oceans and Watersheds (OWOW) Regions [ edit ] The administrative regions of the United States Environmental Protection Agency Creating 10 EPA regions was an initiative that came from President Richard Nixon.

[ 131 ] See Standard Federal Regions .
Each EPA regional office is responsible within its states for implementing the agency's programs, except those programs that have been specifically delegated to states.

Region 1: responsible within the states of Connecticut , Maine , Massachusetts , New Hampshire , Rhode Island , and Vermont ( New England ).

Region 2: responsible within the states of New Jersey and New York . It is also responsible for the US territories of Puerto Rico , and the U.S. Virgin Islands .

Region 3: responsible within the states of Delaware , Maryland , Pennsylvania , Virginia , West Virginia , and the District of Columbia .

Region 4: responsible within the states of Alabama , Florida , Georgia , Kentucky , Mississippi , North Carolina , South Carolina , and Tennessee .

Region 5: responsible within the states of Illinois , Indiana , Michigan , Minnesota , Ohio , and Wisconsin .

Region 6: responsible within the states of Arkansas , Louisiana , New Mexico , Oklahoma , and Texas .

Region 7: responsible within the states of Iowa , Kansas , Missouri , and Nebraska .

Region 8: responsible within the states of Colorado , Montana , North Dakota , South Dakota , Utah , and Wyoming .

Region 9: responsible within the states of Arizona , California , Hawaii , Nevada , the territories of Guam and American Samoa , and the Navajo Nation .

[ 132 ] Region 10: responsible within the states of Alaska , Idaho , Oregon , and Washington .

Each regional office also implements programs on Indian Tribal lands , except those programs delegated to tribal authorities.

Legal authority [ edit ] The Environmental Protection Agency can only act pursuant to statutes —the laws passed by Congress.

Appropriations statutes authorize how much money the agency can spend each year to carry out the approved statutes. The agency has the power to issue regulations . A regulation interprets a statute, and EPA applies its regulations to various environmental situations and enforces the requirements. The agency must include a rationale of why a regulation is needed. ( See Administrative Procedure Act .) Regulations can be challenged in federal courts, either district court or appellate court , depending on the particular statutory provision.

[ 133 ] Related legislation [ edit ] See also: List of federal environmental statutes in the United States EPA has principal implementation authority for the following federal environmental laws: [ citation needed ] Clean Air Act Clean Water Act Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act ("Superfund") Emergency Planning and Community Right-to-Know Act Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act Resource Conservation and Recovery Act Safe Drinking Water Act Toxic Substances Control Act Frank R. Lautenberg Chemical Safety for the 21st Century Act There are additional laws where EPA has a contributing role or provides assistance to other agencies. Among these laws are: [ citation needed ] Endangered Species Act Energy Independence and Security Act Energy Policy Act Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act Food Quality Protection Act National Environmental Policy Act Oil Pollution Act Pollution Prevention Act Programs [ edit ] EPA scientists conducting a stream survey on the Merrimack River in Massachusetts EPA established its major programs pursuant to the primary missions originally articulated in the laws passed by Congress. Additional programs have been developed to interpret the primary missions. Some of the newer programs have been specifically authorized by Congress.

[ 134 ] Former administrator William Ruckelshaus observed in 2016 that a danger for EPA was that air, water, waste and other programs would be unconnected, placed in "silos", a problem that persists more than 50 years later, albeit less so than at the start.

[ 135 ] Core programs [ edit ] Air quality and radiation protection [ edit ] The Office of Air and Radiation (OAR) describes itself as the official authority in charge of "developing national programs, policies, and regulations for controlling air pollution and radiation exposure." The OAR is responsible for enforcing the Clean Air Act , the Atomic Energy Act , the Waste Isolation Pilot Plant Land Withdrawal Act, and other applicable laws. The OAR is in charge of the Offices of Air Quality Planning and Standards, Atmospheric Protection, Transportation and Air Quality, and the Office of Radiation and Indoor Air.

[ 116 ] Ambient standards [ edit ] National Ambient Air Quality Standards (NAAQS) State Implementation Plans (SIPs) Stationary air pollution source standards [ edit ] New Source Performance Standards National Emissions Standards for Hazardous Air Pollutants (NESHAPs) Permits for industrial and commercial sources Mobile source standards [ edit ] Testing automobile emissions at an EPA laboratory in Ann Arbor, Michigan On-road vehicles regulation Non-road vehicle regulation (including aircraft, locomotives, marine transport, stationary engines) Transportation fuel controls National Vehicle Fuel and Emissions Laboratory (NVFEL) Radiation protection [ edit ] The Radiation Protection Program comprises seven project groups.

[ 136 ] Radioactive Waste [ 137 ] Emergency Preparedness and Response Programs [ 138 ] Protective Action Guides And Planning Guidance for Radiological Incidents: EPA developed a manual as guideline for local and state governments to protect the public from a nuclear accident , [ 139 ] the 2017 version being a 15-year update.

EPA's Role in Emergency Response – Special Teams [ 140 ] Technologically Enhanced Naturally Occurring Radioactive Materials (TENORM) Program [ 141 ] Radiation Standards for Air and Drinking Water Programs [ 142 ] Federal Guidance for Radiation Protection [ 143 ] Water quality [ edit ] Science and regulatory standards [ edit ] The National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit program addresses water pollution by regulating point sources which discharge to US waters. Created in 1972 by the Clean Water Act, the NPDES permit program authorizes state governments to perform its many permitting, administrative, and enforcement aspects.

[ 144 ] As of 2025 [update] , the EPA has approved 47 states to administer all or portions of the permit program.

[ 145 ] EPA regional offices manage the program in the remaining areas of the country.

[ 144 ] The Water Quality Act of 1987 extended NPDES permit coverage to industrial stormwater dischargers and municipal separate storm sewer systems.

[ 146 ] In 2016, there were 6,700 major point source NPDES permits in place and 109,000 municipal and industrial point sources with general or individual permits.

[ 22 ] See also: United States regulation of point source water pollution Effluent guidelines (technology based standards) for industrial point sources [ 147 ] and Water quality standards (risk-based standards) for water bodies, [ 148 ] under Title III of the CWA Nonpoint source pollution programs [ 149 ] The CWA Section 404 Program regulates the discharge of dredged or fill material into waters of the United States. Permits are issued by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and reviewed by EPA, and may be denied if they would cause unacceptable degradation or if an alternative does not exist that does not also have adverse impacts on waters. Permit holders are typically required to restore or create wetlands or other waters to offset losses that cannot be avoided.

[ 150 ] EPA ensures safe drinking water for the public, by setting standards for more than 148,000 public water systems nationwide.

[ 151 ] EPA oversees states, local governments and water suppliers to enforce the standards under the Safe Drinking Water Act .

[ 152 ] The program includes regulation of injection wells to protect underground sources of drinking water.

[ 153 ] Infrastructure financing [ edit ] The Clean Water State Revolving Fund provides grants to states which, along with matching state funds, are loaned to municipalities for sewage treatment projects and development of green infrastructure at below-market interest rates.

[ 22 ] These loans are expected to be paid back, creating revolving loan funds . Cumulative assistance from the revolving fund has surpassed US$172 billion as of 2023 [update] .

[ 154 ] The revolving fund replaced the Construction Grants Program, which was phased out in 1990.

The Drinking Water State Revolving Fund (DWSRF) provides financial assistance to local drinking water utilities.

[ 155 ] The total appropriation of DWSRF funds available to states, which allocate funds to individual utilities, was US$3.5 billion in 2024.

[ 156 ] Land, waste and cleanup [ edit ] Regulation of solid waste (non-hazardous) and hazardous waste under RCRA.

To implement the 1976 law, EPA published standards in 1979 for "sanitary" landfills that receive municipal solid waste .

[ 157 ] The agency published national hazardous waste regulations and established a nationwide permit and tracking system for managing hazardous waste. The system is largely managed by state agencies under EPA authorization. Standards were issued for waste treatment, storage and disposal facilities (TSDFs), and ocean dumping of waste was prohibited.

[ 158 ] : 2–4 In 1984 Congress passed the Hazardous and Solid Waste Amendments (HSWA) which expanded several aspects of the RCRA program: [ 159 ] The Land Disposal Restrictions Program sets treatment requirements for hazardous waste before it may be disposed on land.

[ 160 ] EPA began issuing treatment methods and levels of requirements in 1986 and these are continually adapted to new hazardous wastes and treatment technologies. The stringent requirements it sets and its emphasis on waste minimization practices encourage businesses to plan to minimize waste generation and prioritize reuse and recycling . From the start of the program in 1984 to 2004, the volume of hazardous waste disposed in landfills had decreased 94% and the volume of hazardous waste disposed of by underground injection had decreased 70%.

[ 31 ] The RCRA Corrective Action Program requires TSDFs to investigate and clean up hazardous releases at their own expense.

[ 31 ] In the 1980s, EPA estimated that the number of sites needing cleanup was three times more than the number of sites on the national Superfund list.

[ 158 ] : 6 The program is largely implemented through permits and orders.

[ 161 ] As of 2016 [update] , the program has led to the cleanup of 18 million acres of land, of which facilities were primarily responsible for cleanup costs. The goal of EPA and states is to complete final remedies by 2020 at 3,779 priority facilities out of 6,000 that need to be cleaned up, according to EPA.

[ 31 ] [ needs update ] Beginning in the mid-1980s EPA developed standards for small quantity generators of hazardous waste, pursuant to HSWA.

[ 162 ] EPA was mandated to conduct a review of landfill conditions nationwide. The agency reported in 1988 that the effectiveness of environmental controls at landfills varied nationwide, which could lead to serious contamination of groundwater and surface waters. EPA published a national plan in 1989 calling for state and local governments to better integrate their municipal solid waste management practices with source reduction and recycling programs.

[ 158 ] : 8 Regulation of Underground Storage Tanks . The Underground Storage Tank (UST) Program was launched in 1985 and covers about 553,000 active USTs containing petroleum and hazardous chemicals. Since 1984, 1.8 million USTs have been closed in compliance with regulations.

[ 31 ] 38 states, the District of Columbia and Puerto Rico manage UST programs with EPA authorization.

[ 163 ] When the program began, EPA had only 90 staff to develop a system to regulate more than 2 million tanks and work with 750,000 owners and operators. The program relies more on local operations and enforcement than other EPA programs.

[ 164 ] Today, the program supports the inspection of all federally regulated tanks, cleans up old and new leaks, minimizes potential leaks, and encourages sustainable reuse of abandoned gas stations.

[ 165 ] Hazardous site cleanup.

In the late 1970s, the need to clean up sites such as Love Canal that had been highly contaminated by previous hazardous waste disposal became apparent. However the existing regulatory environment depended on owners or operators to perform environmental control. While the EPA attempted to use RCRA's section 7003 to perform this cleanup, it was clear a new law was needed. In 1980, Congress passed the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act (CERCLA), commonly known as "Superfund".

[ 166 ] This law enabled the EPA to cast a wider net for responsible parties, including past or present generators and transporters as well as current and past owners of the site to find funding. The act also established some funding and a tax mechanism on certain industries to help fund such cleanup. Congress did not renew the Superfund tax in the 1990s, and subsequently funding for cleanup actions was supported only by general appropriations. Congress restored an excise tax on chemical manufacturers in 2021, which will eventually increase the available budget for site cleanups.

[ 52 ] Today, due to restricted funding, most cleanup activities are performed by responsible parties under the oversight of the EPA and states. As of 2016 [update] , more than 1,700 sites had been put on the cleanup list since the creation of the program. Of these, 370 sites have been cleaned up and removed from the list, cleanup is underway at 535, cleanup facilities have been constructed at 790 but need to be operated in the future, and 54 are not yet in cleanup stage.

[ 33 ] [ needs update ] EPA's oil spill prevention program includes the Spill Prevention, Control, and Countermeasure (SPCC) and the Facility Response Plan (FRP) rules. The SPCC Rule applies to all facilities that store, handle, process, gather, transfer, refine, distribute, use or consume oil or oil products. Oil products includes petroleum and non-petroleum oils as well as: animal fats, oils and greases; fish and marine mammal oils; and vegetable oils. It mandates a written plan for facilities that store more than 1,320 gallons of fuel above ground or more than 42,000 gallons below-ground, and which might discharge to navigable waters (as defined in the Clean Water Act) or adjoining shorelines.

Secondary spill containment is mandated at oil storage facilities and oil release containment is required at oil development sites.

[ 167 ] Chemical approval, manufacture and usage [ edit ] EPA regulates pesticides under the Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act (FIFRA) and the Food Quality Protection Act .

[ 24 ] The agency assesses, registers, regulates, and regularly reevaluates all pesticides legally sold in the United States. A few challenges this program faces are transforming toxicity testing, screening pesticides for endocrine disruptors, and regulating biotechnology and nanotechnology.

[ 24 ] EPA approves and regulates new chemicals issuing "safety reviews".

[ 168 ] TSCA required EPA to create and maintain a national inventory of all existing chemicals in U.S. commerce. When the act was passed in 1976, there were more than 60,000 chemicals on the market that had never been comprehensively cataloged. To do so, the EPA developed and implemented procedures that have served as a model for Canada, Japan, and the European Union. For the inventory, the EPA also established a baseline for new chemicals that the agency should be notified about before being commercially manufactured. Today, this rule keeps the EPA updated on volumes, uses, and exposures of around 7,000 of the highest-volume chemicals via industry reporting.

[ 29 ] The Toxics Release Inventory (TRI) is a resource established by the Emergency Planning and Community Right-to-Know Act specifically for the public to learn about toxic chemical releases and pollution prevention activities reported by industrial and federal facilities.

[ 29 ] TRI data support informed decision-making by communities, government agencies, companies, and others.

[ 169 ] Annually, the agency collects data from more than 20,000 facilities.

[ 29 ] The EPA has generated a range of tools to support the use of this inventory, including interactive maps and online databases such as ChemView.

[ 29 ] Enforcement [ edit ] This section needs expansion with: program summaries. You can help by adding to it .

( July 2020 ) Civil enforcement and criminal enforcement programs. EPA develops and prosecutes administrative civil and judicial cases and provides legal support for cases and investigations initiated in its regional offices. Federal judicial actions (formal lawsuits) are filed by the U.S. Department of Justice on behalf of EPA.

[ 170 ] Compliance assistance . EPA identifies, prevents, and reduces noncompliance and environmental risks by establishing enforcement initiatives and ensuring effective monitoring and assessment of compliance.

[ 171 ] Federal facilities enforcement Environmental Justice program In 2019 the Environmental Data & Governance Initiative, "a network of academics, developers, and non-profit professionals", published a report which compared EPA enforcement statistics over time.

[ 172 ] The number of civil cases filed by EPA have gradually decreased, and in 2018 the criminal and civil penalties from EPA claims dropped over four times their amounts in 2013, 2016, and 2017.

[ 173 ] In 2016 EPA issued $6,307,833,117 in penalties due to violations of agency requirements, [ 174 ] and in 2018 the agency issued $184,768,000 in penalties.

[ 175 ] EPA's inspections and evaluations have steadily decreased from 2015 to 2018.

[ 175 ] Enforcement activity has decreased partially due to budget cuts within the agency.

[ 176 ] Additional programs [ edit ] The EPA Safer Choice label, previously known as the " Design for the Environment " (since the 1990s) label, helps consumers and commercial buyers identify and select products with safer chemical ingredients, without sacrificing quality or performance. When a product has the Safer Choice label, it means that every intentionally added ingredient in the product has been evaluated by EPA scientists. Only the safest possible functional ingredients are allowed in products with the Safer Choice label.

[ citation needed ] Through the Safer Detergents Stewardship Initiative , [ 177 ] EPA's Design for the Environment (DfE) recognizes environmental leaders who voluntarily commit to the use of safer surfactants . Safer surfactants are the ones that break down quickly to non-polluting compounds and help protect aquatic life in both fresh and salt water.

Nonylphenol ethoxylates , commonly referred to as NPEs, are an example of a surfactant class that does not meet the definition of a safer surfactant. The Safer Choice program identified safer alternative surfactants through partnerships with industry and environmental advocates. These alternatives are comparable in cost and are readily available. The CleanGredients website [ 178 ] is an information source about safer surfactants.

The Energy Star program, initiated in 1992, motivated major companies to retrofit millions of square feet of building space with more efficient lighting.

[ 179 ] As of 2006 [update] , more than 40,000 Energy Star products were available including major appliances, office equipment, lighting, home electronics, and more. In addition, the label can also be found on new homes and commercial and industrial buildings. In 2006, about 12 percent of new housing in the US displayed an Energy Star label.

[ 180 ] EPA estimates that the program saved about $14 billion in energy costs in 2006 alone. The program has helped spread the use of LED traffic lights , efficient fluorescent lighting , power management systems for office equipment, and low standby energy use.

[ 181 ] EPA's Smart Growth Program began in 1998 and was created to help communities improve their land development practices and get the type of development they want. Together with local, state, and national experts, EPA encourages development strategies that protect human health and the environment, create economic opportunities, and provide attractive and affordable neighborhoods for people of all income levels.

[ 182 ] The Brownfields Program started as a pilot program in the 1990s and was authorized by law in 2002. The program provides grants and tools to local governments for the assessment, cleanup, and revitalization of brownfields . As of September 2015 [update] , the EPA estimates that program grants have resulted in 56,442 acres of land readied for reuse and leveraged 116,963 jobs and $24.2 billion to do so. Agency studies also found that property values around assessed or cleaned-up brownfields have increased 5.1 to 12.8 percent.

[ 33 ] EPA's Indoor air quality Tools for Schools Program helps schools to maintain a healthy environment and reduce exposures to indoor environmental contaminants. It helps school personnel identify, solve, and prevent indoor air quality problems in the school environment. Through the use of a multi-step management plan and checklists for the entire building, schools can lower their students' and staff's risk of exposure to asthma triggers .

[ 183 ] The National Environmental Education Act of 1990 requires EPA to provide national leadership to increase environmental literacy. EPA established the Office of Environmental Education to implement this program.

[ 184 ] [ 185 ] Clean School Bus USA is a national partnership to reduce children's exposure to diesel exhaust by eliminating unnecessary school bus idling, installing effective emission control systems on newer buses and replacing the oldest buses in the fleet with newer ones. Its goal is to reduce both children's exposure to diesel exhaust and the amount of air pollution created by diesel school buses.

[ 186 ] The Green Chemistry Program encourages the development of products and processes that follow green chemistry principles.

[ 29 ] It has recognized more than 100 winning technologies.

[ 187 ] These reduce the use or creation of hazardous chemicals, save water, and reduce greenhouse gas release.

[ 29 ] The Beaches Environmental Assessment and Coastal Health (BEACH) Act, was authorized in a 2000 amendment to the Clean Water Act. The program focus is on coastal recreational waters, and requires EPA to develop criteria to test and monitor waters and notify public users of any concerns.

[ 188 ] The program involves states, local beach resource managers, and the agency in assessing risks of stormwater and wastewater overflows and enables better sampling, analytical methods, and communication with the public.

[ 22 ] The EPA has also established specific geographic programs for particular water resources such as the Chesapeake Bay Program , the National Estuary Program , and the Gulf of Mexico Program.

[ 22 ] Advance identification , or ADID, is a planning process used by the EPA to identify wetlands and other bodies of water and their respective suitability for the discharge of dredged and fill material. The EPA conducts the process in cooperation with the U.S.

Army Corps of Engineers and local states or Native American Tribes . As of February 1993 [update] , 38 ADID projects had been completed, and 33 were ongoing.

[ 189 ] EPA's "One Cleanup Program" initiative was designed to improve coordination across different agency programs that have a role in cleanup at a particular site. The coordination efforts apply to the brownfields, federal facilities, USTs, RCRA and Superfund programs.

[ 190 ] EPA reviews environmental impact statements prepared by other agencies and maintains a national EIS filing system.

[ 115 ] Past programs [ edit ] The former Construction Grants Program distributed federal grants for the construction of municipal wastewater treatment works from 1972 to 1990. While such grants existed before the 1972, the 1972 CWA expanded these grants dramatically. They were distributed through 1990, when the program and funding were replaced with the State Revolving Loan Fund Program.

[ 22 ] In 1991 under Administrator William Reilly, the EPA implemented its voluntary 33/50 program .

[ 191 ] This was designed to encourage, recognize, and celebrate companies that voluntarily found ways to prevent and reduce pollution in their operations.

[ 192 ] Specifically, it challenged industry to reduce Toxic Release Inventory emissions of 17 priority chemicals by 33% in one year and 50% in four years.

[ 29 ] These results were achieved before the commitment deadlines.

[ 29 ] Launched in 2006, the voluntary 2010/2015 PFOA Stewardship Program worked with eight major companies to voluntarily reduce their global emissions of certain types of perfluorinated chemicals by 95% by 2010 and eliminate these emissions by 2015.

[ 29 ] [ 193 ] OSV Bold docked at Port Canaveral, Florida In March 2004, the U.S. Navy transferred USNS Bold (T-AGOS-12) , a Stalwart class ocean surveillance ship , to the EPA. The ship had been used in anti-submarine operations during the Cold War , was equipped with sidescan sonar, underwater video, water and sediment sampling instruments used in study of ocean and coastline. One of the major missions of the Bold was to monitor for ecological impact sites where materials were dumped from dredging operations in U.S. ports.

[ 194 ] In 2013, the General Services Administration sold the Bold to Seattle Central Community College (SCCC), which demonstrated in a competition that they would put it to the highest and best purpose, at a nominal cost of $5,000.

[ 195 ] Controversies [ edit ] Scope and fulfillment of agency's authority [ edit ] Congress enacted laws such as the Clean Air Act, the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act, and CERCLA with the intent of preventing and reconciling environmental damages. Beginning in 2018 under Administrator Andrew Wheeler , EPA revised some pollution standards that resulted in less overall regulation.

[ 196 ] Furthermore, the CAA's discretionary application [ 197 ] [ 198 ] has caused a varied application of the law among states. In 1970, Louisiana deployed its Comprehensive Toxic Air Pollutant Emission Control Program to comply with federal law.

[ 199 ] This program does not require pollution monitoring that is equivalent to programs in other states.

[ 200 ] Environmental justice [ edit ] The EPA has been criticized for its lack of progress towards environmental justice . Administrator Christine Todd Whitman was criticized for her changes to President Bill Clinton's Executive Order 12898 during 2001, removing the requirements for government agencies to take the poor and minority populations into special consideration when making changes to environmental legislation, and therefore defeating the spirit of the Executive Order.

[ 201 ] In a March 2004 report, the inspector general of the agency concluded that the EPA "has not developed a clear vision or a comprehensive strategic plan, and has not established values, goals, expectations, and performance measurements" for environmental justice in its daily operations. Another report in September 2006 found the agency still had failed to review the success of its programs, policies, and activities toward environmental justice.

[ 202 ] Studies have also found that poor and minority populations were underserved by the EPA's Superfund program, and that this situation was worsening.

[ 201 ] In August 2022 the EPA was allotted a listed ~42.8 billion in funding from the Inflation Reduction Act (IRA) towards what the EPA classifies as "Advancing Environmental Justice", and published the statement "Through the Inflation Reduction Act, EPA will improve the lives of millions of Americans by reducing pollution in neighborhoods where people live, work, play, and go to school; accelerating environmental justice efforts in communities overburdened by pollution for far too long; and tackling our biggest climate challenges while creating jobs and delivering energy security." [ 203 ] In September 2022 EPA announced the creation of a new Office of Environmental Justice and External Civil Rights that reports directly to the EPA administrator.

[ 204 ] The new office has an expanded budget and staff with broader responsibilities than under the previous organizational arrangement.

[ 119 ] Freedom of Information Act processing performance [ edit ] In the latest Center for Effective Government analysis of 15 federal agencies which receive the most Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) requests, published in 2015 (using 2012 and 2013 data, the most recent years available), the EPA earned a D by scoring 67 out of a possible 100 points, i.e. did not earn a satisfactory overall grade.

[ 205 ] Pebble Mine [ edit ] Pebble Mine is a copper and gold mining project located in the southwest region of Alaska in the Bristol Bay region organized by Northern Dynasty Minerals.

[ 206 ] In 2014 the EPA released its statement on the impacts that mining would have on Bristol Bay and its tributaries. Among many things, the statement assesses geological , topographic , ecological , hydrological , and economic data and determined that mining could negatively impact the salmon population.

[ 207 ] Seeing as Bristol Bay and its watershed provides around 46% of the world's sockeye salmon, the EPA did not want to risk an ecological disaster.

[ 208 ] In July 2014, before Northern Dynasty Minerals had submitted its EIS, EPA's Region 10 office proposed restrictions pursuant to section 404(c) of the Clean Water Act, restrictions that would effectively prohibit the project.

[ 209 ] [ 210 ] Northern Dynasty Minerals protested this decision and on July 18, 2014, in a published statement, Pebble Partnership CEO Tom Collier said that the project would continue its litigation against EPA; noted that the EPA's action was under investigation by the EPA inspector general and by the House Committee on Oversight and Government Reform ; and noted that two bills were pending in Congress seeking to clarify that EPA did not have the authority to preemptively veto or otherwise restrict development projects prior to the onset of federal and state permitting. Collier's statement also said that EPA's proposal was based on outdated mining scenarios that were not part of the project's approach.

[ 210 ] Multiple journalists and organizations have reported on the controversy including the Natural Resources Defense Council in support of the cancelation of the project and John Stossel in support of the development of the mine. As of 2023 [update] , the mine remains a controversial topic.

[ 211 ] On January 30, 2023, the EPA vetoed the mine.

[ 212 ] Water quality in East Palestine, Ohio [ edit ] Ohio governor Mike DeWine and administrator of the EPA Michael Regan drank tap water in East Palestine , Ohio, on February 3, 2023, after a train derailment to show that the water was safe.

[ 213 ] The derailment caused a fire and the release of toxic chemicals into the air and water making locals and environmental groups concerned for the quality of water in the area. Despite the EPA's assurance that the water is safe some residents do not trust the quality of the water and question its long-term effects.

[ 214 ] See also [ edit ] Environmental history of the United States Environmental policy of the United States Environmental policy of the Donald Trump administration List of EPA whistleblowers References [ edit ] ^ a b "EPA's Budget and Spending" . Washington, D.C.: U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). May 16, 2022.

Archived from the original on January 13, 2017 . Retrieved January 12, 2017 .

^ "Our Mission and What We Do" . EPA. January 21, 2017.

Archived from the original on March 28, 2017 . Retrieved March 28, 2017 .

^ a b "Reorganization Plan No. 3 of 1970" . EPA.

Archived from the original on February 12, 2018 . Retrieved July 21, 2020 .

^ "EPA Regional Laboratories Unique Analytical Capabilities and Services by Region" . EPA. September 12, 2017. Archived from the original on April 4, 2018 . Retrieved April 3, 2018 .

^ "FY 2023 EPA Budget in Brief" (PDF) . EPA. March 1, 2022.

Archived (PDF) from the original on December 29, 2022 . Retrieved January 11, 2023 .

^ a b Rinde, Meir (2017).

"Richard Nixon and the Rise of American Environmentalism" .

Distillations . Vol. 3, no. 1. Philadelphia, PA: Science History Institute . pp.

16– 29.

Archived from the original on April 5, 2018.

^ "EPA History: Clean Air Act of 1970/1977" . EPA. October 18, 2016. Archived from the original on February 25, 2020 . Retrieved March 28, 2017 .

^ a b "The Guardian: Origins of the EPA" . EPA Historical Publication. EPA. Spring 1992.

Archived from the original on March 29, 2017 . Retrieved March 28, 2017 .

^ a b Luther, Linda (November 16, 2005).

The National Environmental Policy Act: Background and Implementation (PDF) (Report). Washington, D.C.: Congressional Research Service (CRS). p. CRS-3. RL33152. Archived from the original (PDF) on August 1, 2017.

^ Griswold, Eliza (September 21, 2012).

"How 'Silent Spring' Ignited the Environmental Movement" .

The New York Times Magazine .

Archived from the original on September 14, 2017 . Retrieved September 17, 2017 .

^ United States. National Environmental Policy Act of 1969.

Pub. L.

91–290 , Approved January 1, 1970.

42 U.S.C.

§ 4321 et seq.

^ Weiland, Paul S. (Spring 1997).

"Amending the National Environmental Policy Act: Federal Environmental Protection in the Twenty-First Century" (PDF) .

Journal of Land Use & Environmental Law : 275– 301. Archived from the original (PDF) on July 12, 2007.

^ Reorganization Plans Nos. 3 and 4 of 1970. Message from the President of the United States to the House of Representatives (PDF) (Report). House of Representatives, 91st Congress, 2d Session. July 9, 1970. Document no. 91-366.

Archived (PDF) from the original on April 26, 2017 . Retrieved March 28, 2017 .

^ a b c d "Behind the Scenes at the Creation of EPA: An interview with Chuck Elkins" (PDF) . Oral History Program. EPA Alumni Association. October 2013.

Archived (PDF) from the original on August 21, 2018.

^ "Records of the Environmental Protection Agency [EPA]" .

National Archives . August 15, 2016. Section 412.2.

Archived from the original on April 19, 2021 . Retrieved April 23, 2021 .

^ "Reorganization Plan No. 3 of 1970" .

U.S. Environmental Protection Agency .

Archived from the original on February 12, 2018 . Retrieved April 23, 2021 .

^ Williams, Dennis C. (March 1, 1993).

"Why Are Our Regional Offices and Labs Located Where They Are? A Historical Perspective on Siting" . EPA.

Archived from the original on May 10, 2020 . Retrieved April 23, 2021 .

^ United States. Clean Air Amendments of 1970.

Pub. L.

91–604 Approved December 31, 1970.

^ EPA Alumni Association: EPA Administrator Bill Ruckelshaus and some of his closest aides recall the opening months of the new agency in 1970, = 16 Video Archived October 11, 2016, at the Wayback Machine }, = 2 Transcript = 2 Archived October 11, 2016, at the Wayback Machine (see p. 2).

^ EPA Alumni Association: EPA Administrator Bill Ruckelshaus and some of his closest aides recall the opening months of the new agency in 1970, = 16 Video Archived October 11, 2016, at the Wayback Machine , = 4 Transcript = 4 Archived October 11, 2016, at the Wayback Machine (see p. 4).

^ United States. Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972.

Pub. L.

92–500 Approved 1972-10-18.

^ a b c d e f Jim Hanlon, Mike Cook, Mike Quigley, Bob Wayland.

"Water Quality: A Half Century of Progress." Archived April 12, 2019, at the Wayback Machine EPA Alumni Association. March 2016.

^ United States. Federal Environmental Pesticide Control Act.

Pub. L.

92–516 Approved 1972-10-21.

^ a b c Susan Wayland and Penelope Fenner-Crisp.

"Reducing Pesticide Risks: A Half Century of Progress." Archived April 12, 2019, at the Wayback Machine EPA Alumni Association. March 2016.

^ J. Brooks Flippen, Conservative Conservationist: Russell E. Train and the Emergence of American Environmentalism (LSU Press, 2006).

^ United States. Safe Drinking Water Act.

Pub. L.

93–523 Approved 1974-12-16.

^ "Information about Public Water Systems" .

Drinking Water Requirements for States and Public Water Systems . EPA. March 8, 2017.

Archived from the original on July 27, 2020 . Retrieved July 26, 2020 .

^ United States. Toxic Substances Control Act.

Pub. L.

94–469 Approved 1976-10-11.

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l Auer, Charles, Frank Kover, James Aidala, Marks Greenwood.

"Toxic Substances: A Half Century of Progress" .

Archived April 12, 2019, at the Wayback Machine . EPA Alumni Association. March 2016.

^ United States. Resource Conservation and Recovery Act.

Pub. L.

94–580 Approved 1976-10-21.

^ a b c d e Horinko, Marianne, Cathryn Courtin. " Waste Management: A Half Century of Progress Archived October 22, 2016, at the Wayback Machine ." EPA Alumni Association. March 2016.

^ a b c d e f g "EPA's Administrators" . EPA. March 23, 2022.

Archived from the original on April 11, 2022 . Retrieved April 11, 2022 .

^ a b c Thomas Voltaggio and John Adams.

"Superfund: A Half Century of Progress." Archived April 12, 2019, at the Wayback Machine EPA Alumni Association. March 2016.

^ Richard Lazarus and Andrew Slottje, "Justice Gorsuch and the Future of Environmental Law." Stanford Environmental Law Journal 43 (2023) pp.2–3.

online .

^ "Views from the Former Administrators" . EPA. November 1985. Archived from the original on September 25, 2015.

^ Sullivan, Patricia (July 22, 2004).

"Anne Gorsuch Burford, 62, Dies; Reagan EPA Director" .

The Washington Post . Archived from the original on August 12, 2017.

^ Martin, Douglas (July 22, 2004).

"Anne Gorsuch Burford, 62, Reagan E.P.A. Chief, Dies" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on November 14, 2013 . Retrieved December 2, 2013 .

^ a b "Chronology of Events in the E.P.A. Dispute" .

The New York Times . March 10, 1983.

Archived from the original on January 22, 2021 . Retrieved January 17, 2021 .

^ Hoffman, David; Peterson, Cass (March 10, 1983).

"Burford Quits as EPA Administrator" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on January 22, 2021 . Retrieved January 17, 2021 .

^ McFadden, Robert D. (November 27, 2019).

"William Ruckelshaus, who quit in 'Saturday Night Massacre,' dies at 87" .

The New York Times . Archived from the original on December 3, 2019.

^ "EPA History (1970-1985)" . EPA. September 6, 2016.

Archived from the original on January 7, 2021 . Retrieved January 17, 2021 .

^ "Interview with Lee Thomas" (PDF) . EPA Alumni Association. April 19, 2012.

Archived (PDF) from the original on April 12, 2019 . Retrieved September 25, 2018 .

^ EPA (1993-12-17). "Effluent Limitations Guidelines, Pretreatment Standards, and New Source Performance Standards: Pulp, Paper, and Paperboard Category; National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air Pollutants for Source Category: Pulp and Paper Production." Proposed rules.

Federal Register, 58 FR 66078 ^ Former Deputy Administrator Hank Habicht talks about management at EPA. An Interview with Hank Habicht = 17 Video Archived January 31, 2024, at the Wayback Machine , = 7 Transcript = 7 Archived April 12, 2019, at the Wayback Machine (see pp. 7, 10). December 21, 2012.

^ "What is Energy Star" . EPA and U.S. Department of Energy.

Archived from the original on January 2, 2021 . Retrieved June 12, 2021 .

^ "Chronology of EPA Administrators" . EPA. March 11, 2021.

Archived from the original on October 13, 2020 . Retrieved October 13, 2020 .

^ "Overview of EPA's Brownfields Program" . EPA. July 26, 2021. Archived from the original on October 20, 2023 . Retrieved August 18, 2021 .

^ EPA (1995-08-18). "National Emission Standards for Hazardous Air Pollutants: Petroleum Refineries." Final rule.

Federal Register, 60 FR 43244 .

^ EPA (1996-08-29). "Lead; Requirements for Lead-Based Paint Activities in Target Housing and Child-Occupied Facilities." Final rule.

Federal Register, 61 FR 45778 .

^ EPA (1997-07-18). "National Ambient Air Quality Standards for Particulate Matter." Final rule.

Federal Register, 62 FR 38652 ; "National Ambient Air Quality Standards for Ozone." Final rule. 62 FR 38856 .

^ Superfund: Trends in Federal Funding and Cleanup of EPA's Nonfederal National Priorities List Sites (PDF) (Report). Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Accountability Office. September 2015. GAO-15-812.

Archived (PDF) from the original on March 4, 2016.

^ a b United States. Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act.

Pub. L.

117–58 (text) (PDF) Section 80201. Approved November 15, 2021.

^ United States. Food Quality Protection Act of 1996.

Pub. L.

104–170 (text) (PDF) 1996-08-03.

^ United States. Safe Drinking Water Act Amendments of 1996.

Pub. L.

104–182 (text) (PDF) 1996-08-06.

^ Pianin, Eric (January 31, 2004).

"Proposed Mercury Rules Bear Industry Mark" .

The Washington Post . Archived from the original on December 29, 2019 . Retrieved July 21, 2020 .

^ Vedantam, Shankar (February 4, 2005).

"EPA Inspector Finds Mercury Proposal Tainted" .

The Washington Post . Archived from the original on May 27, 2020 . Retrieved July 21, 2020 .

^ New EPA Mercury Rule Omits Conflicting Data Archived January 6, 2017, at the Wayback Machine , The Washington Post , March 22, 2005 ^ Bustillo, Miguel.

States Sue EPA Over Mercury Emissions , Los Angeles Times , March 30, 2005 ^ Governor Blagojevich and Illinois EPA Propose Aggressive Mercury Controls For Illinois Power Plants Archived July 10, 2007, at the Wayback Machine , Environmental Progress , Spring 2006, page 12 ^ Baltimore, Chris (February 8, 2008).

"EPA must rewrite utility mercury rule: U.S. court" .

Reuters .

Archived from the original on March 22, 2018 . Retrieved February 1, 2017 .

^ "History of the MATS Regulation" . EPA. November 11, 2015. Archived from the original on February 2, 2017 . Retrieved February 1, 2017 .

^ Danny Hakim (July 28, 2005).

"E.P.A. Holds Back Report on Car Fuel Efficiency" .

New York Times .

Archived from the original on May 9, 2015 . Retrieved February 20, 2017 .

^ "Accomplishments and History" .

WaterSense . EPA. June 14, 2022.

Archived from the original on June 13, 2021 . Retrieved June 13, 2021 .

^ Keim, Brandon.

"Governor Arnie to EPA: Hasta La Vista, Bureaucratic Delay Monkeys | Wired Science" .

Wired . Archived from the original on March 7, 2008 . Retrieved January 28, 2017 .

^ Maynard, Micheline (December 19, 2007). "E.P.A. Denies California Emission's Waiver".

The New York Times .

^ "Absurdity at the EPA: Denying California emissions plan a new low" . Editorials.

The Dallas Morning News . January 1, 2008.

Archived from the original on October 25, 2008 . Retrieved November 21, 2009 .

^ "Text of Letter from Gov. Schwarzenegger and 13 other Governors Regarding U.S. EPA's Denial of California's Tailpipe Emissions Waiver Request" . State of California, Office of the Governor. Archived from the original on November 24, 2009 . Retrieved November 21, 2009 .

^ Wilson, Janet (December 21, 2007).

"EPA chief is said to have ignored staff" .

Los Angeles Times . Archived from the original on April 7, 2022.

^ Stedeford, Todd (2007).

"Prior restraint and censorship: acknowledged occupational hazards for government scientists" .

William and Mary Environmental Law and Policy Review .

31 (3): 725– 745.

Archived from the original on May 19, 2015 . Retrieved May 17, 2015 .

^ Stedeford (2007) , p. 738, note 95 ^ Stedeford (2007) , pp. 736–740 ^ Shiffman, John; Sullivan, John (December 2, 2008).

"An Eroding Mission at EPA" .

The Philadelphia Inquirer . Archived from the original on December 25, 2022.

^ The Scientific Integrity Program of the Union of Concerned Scientists (April 2008).

Interference at the EPA (PDF) (Report). UCS Publications.

Archived (PDF) from the original on October 8, 2022 . Retrieved July 12, 2022 .

^ Josh Harkinson and Kate Sheppard (April 27, 2010).

"Coastal Collapse" .

Slate .

Archived from the original on June 6, 2010 . Retrieved June 1, 2010 .

^ Urbina, Ian (March 3, 2011).

"Pressure Limits Efforts to Police Drilling for Gas" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on January 8, 2012 . Retrieved February 23, 2012 .

More than a quarter-century of efforts by some lawmakers and regulators to force the federal government to police the industry better have been thwarted, as E.P.A. studies have been repeatedly narrowed in scope and important findings have been removed ^ DiCosmo, Bridget (May 15, 2012).

"SAB Pushes To Advise EPA To Conduct Toxicity Tests In Fracking Study" .

Inside EPA . Inside Washington Publishers.

(subscription required) . Retrieved May 19, 2012 .

But some members of the chartered SAB are suggesting that the fracking panel revise its recommendation that the agency scale back its planned toxicity testing of chemicals used in the hydraulic fracturing, or fracking, process, because of the limited resources and time frame ... Chesapeake Energy supported the draft recommendation, saying that "an in-depth study of toxicity, the development of new analytical methods and tracers are not practical given the budget and schedule limitation of the study." ^ "The Debate Over the Hydrofracking Study's Scope" .

The New York Times . March 3, 2011.

Archived from the original on May 2, 2012 . Retrieved May 1, 2012 .

While environmentalists have aggressively lobbied the agency to broaden the scope of the study, industry has lobbied the agency to narrow this focus ^ "Natural Gas Documents" .

The New York Times . February 27, 2011.

Archived from the original on May 2, 2012 . Retrieved May 5, 2012 .

The Times reviewed more than 30,000 pages of documents obtained through open records requests of state and federal agencies and by visiting various regional offices that oversee drilling in Pennsylvania. Some of the documents were leaked by state or federal officials.

^ Satterfield, John (June 30, 2011).

"Letter from Chesapeake Energy to EPA" (PDF) .

Inside EPA . Retrieved May 19, 2012 .

Flowback and Produced water ... Chesapeake agrees that an in-depth study of toxicity, the development of new analytic methods and tracers are not practical given the budget and schedule limitations of the study ... Wastewater Treatment and Waste Disposal ... Chesapeake believes there was unjustified emphasis on the surface disposal of produced water to treatment plants in the SAB's Review ... Chesapeake disagrees with the inclusion of water distribution network corrosion and burden of analyzing for contaminants by POTW's into the study.

^ EPA (2014-04-18). "Control of Air Pollution From Motor Vehicles: Tier 3 Motor Vehicle Emission and Fuel Standards." Final rule.

Federal Register, 79 FR 23414 ^ Bomey, Nathan (October 25, 2016).

"Judge approves $15B Volkswagen settlement" .

USA Today .

Archived from the original on June 6, 2022 . Retrieved June 6, 2022 .

^ "Learn About Volkswagen Violations" . EPA. October 18, 2021.

Archived from the original on June 10, 2022 . Retrieved June 6, 2022 .

^ "Clean Power Plan" .

US EPA . January 19, 2017 . Retrieved May 27, 2024 .

^ "Affordable Clean Energy Rule" .

US EPA . May 10, 2019 . Retrieved May 27, 2024 .

^ Soronen, Lisa (July 1, 2022).

"Supreme Court Strikes Down Clean Power Plan" .

National League of Cities . Retrieved May 27, 2024 .

^ Schlanger, Zoë (August 7, 2015).

"EPA Causes Massive Spill of Mining Waste Water in Colorado, Turns Animas River Bright Orange" .

Archived from the original on August 9, 2015 . Retrieved August 10, 2015 .

^ Kolb, Joseph J. (August 10, 2015).

" 'They're not going to get away with this': Anger mounts at EPA over mining spill" .

Archived from the original on August 10, 2015 . Retrieved August 10, 2015 .

^ Hakim, Danny (March 15, 2017).

"Monsanto Weed Killer Roundup Faces New Doubts on Safety in Unsealed Documents" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on August 9, 2018.

^ Yan, Holly (May 15, 2017).

"Patients: Roundup gave us cancer as EPA official helped the company" .

CNN .

Archived from the original on August 18, 2018.

^ Nelson, Arthur (May 24, 2017).

"EU declared Monsanto weedkiller safe after intervention from controversial US official" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on August 17, 2018 . Retrieved August 17, 2018 .

^ "EPA's Scott Pruitt haunted by corruption allegations, old and new" .

MSNBC .

Archived from the original on April 25, 2018 . Retrieved April 25, 2018 .

^ Tabuchi, Hiroko (April 10, 2017).

"What's at Stake in Trump's Proposed E.P.A. Cuts" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on April 17, 2017.

^ Jeremy Diamond ; Eli Watkins; Juana Summers.

"EPA chief Scott Pruitt resigns amid ethics scandals" .

CNN .

Archived from the original on July 5, 2018 . Retrieved July 6, 2018 .

^ a b Friedman, Lisa (February 26, 2025).

"Trump Says E.P.A. Layoffs Will Cut Staff by 65 Percent" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved February 27, 2025 .

^ "Top EPA Scientific Integrity Official Not Allowed To Testify At House Hearing" .

NPR .

Archived from the original on July 18, 2019 . Retrieved July 18, 2019 .

^ Liptak, Kevin (September 18, 2019).

"Trump revokes waiver for California to set higher auto emissions standards" . CNN.

Archived from the original on October 24, 2022 . Retrieved October 24, 2022 .

^ "Michael S. Regan Sworn in as 16th EPA Administrator" . EPA. March 11, 2021. News Release.

Archived from the original on March 22, 2021 . Retrieved March 22, 2021 .

^ "PFAS Strategic Roadmap: EPA's Commitments to Action 2021-2024" . EPA. October 14, 2021.

Archived from the original on September 14, 2022 . Retrieved March 29, 2022 .

^ "EPA Finalizes Greenhouse Gas Standards for Passenger Vehicles, Paving Way for a Zero-Emissions Future" . December 20, 2021. News Release.

Archived from the original on December 26, 2022 . Retrieved December 26, 2022 .

^ Davenport, Coral (March 9, 2022).

"Biden Restores California's Power to Set Stringent Tailpipe Rules" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on October 22, 2022 . Retrieved October 24, 2022 .

^ "Inflation Reduction Act" . EPA. December 7, 2022.

Archived from the original on January 10, 2023 . Retrieved January 10, 2023 .

^ "Train 32N - East Palestrine" (PDF) . EPA. February 13, 2023.

Archived (PDF) from the original on February 17, 2023 . Retrieved February 14, 2023 .

^ "Health concerns grow in East Palestine, Ohio, after train derailment" . NPR. February 14, 2023.

Archived from the original on February 14, 2023 . Retrieved February 14, 2023 .

^ "Residents not yet allowed to return to homes near site of fiery train derailment in Ohio" . CNN. February 7, 2023.

Archived from the original on February 14, 2023 . Retrieved February 14, 2023 .

^ Daly, Matthew; Krisher, Tom (March 20, 2024).

"EPA issues new auto rules aimed at cutting carbon emissions, boosting electric vehicles and hybrids" .

AP News .

^ "Biden-Harris Administration Finalizes Suite of Standards to Reduce Pollution from Fossil Fuel-Fired Power Plants" . EPA. April 25, 2024. News release.

^ EPA (2024-04-26). "PFAS National Primary Drinking Water Regulation." Federal Register, 89 FR 32532 ^ "Final PFAS National Primary Drinking Water Regulation" . EPA. May 22, 2024.

^ "US EPA approves California plan to ban sale of gas-only cars starting in 2035" . December 18, 2024.

^ "Lee M. Zeldin Sworn in as 17th EPA Administrator" . EPA. January 30, 2025.

^ Friedman, Lisa (March 4, 2025).

"Trump Administration Said to Drop Lawsuit Over Toxic Chemical" .

The New York Times .

^ Friedman, Lisa; Joselow, Maxine (July 18, 2025).

"E.P.A. Says It Will Eliminate Its Scientific Research Arm" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved July 19, 2025 .

^ Gelles, David; Joselow, Maxine (August 3, 2025).

"Inside the 'Radical Transformation' of America's Environmental Role" .

The New York Times . Retrieved August 3, 2025 .

^ "About the Office of the Administrator" . EPA. October 26, 2017.

Archived from the original on January 5, 2011 . Retrieved February 18, 2017 .

^ a b "About the Office of Policy" . EPA. February 7, 2023.

Archived from the original on February 13, 2023 . Retrieved February 13, 2023 .

^ a b "About the Office of Air and Radiation" . EPA. July 13, 2022.

Archived from the original on March 13, 2017 . Retrieved March 20, 2017 .

^ "About the Office of Chemical Safety and Pollution Prevention" . EPA. May 13, 2014.

Archived from the original on June 3, 2014 . Retrieved May 19, 2014 .

^ "About the Office of the Chief Financial Officer" . EPA. January 20, 2017.

Archived from the original on October 13, 2016 . Retrieved November 6, 2016 .

^ a b "About the Office of Environmental Justice and External Civil Rights" . EPA. October 6, 2022.

Archived from the original on October 24, 2022 . Retrieved October 24, 2022 .

^ "About the Office of Enforcement and Compliance Assurance" . EPA. November 17, 2010.

Archived from the original on March 29, 2017 . Retrieved March 20, 2017 .

^ "About the Office of General Counsel" . EPA. November 17, 2010. Archived from the original on May 1, 2012 . Retrieved April 22, 2012 .

^ "About EPA" . EPA. January 18, 2013. Archived from the original on May 10, 2012.

^ "About the Office of International and Tribal Affairs" . EPA. November 17, 2010.

Archived from the original on March 29, 2017 . Retrieved March 20, 2017 .

^ "EPA Organization Chart" . EPA. January 29, 2013.

Archived from the original on July 10, 2019 . Retrieved July 8, 2019 .

^ "Andrew W. Breidenbach Environmental Research Center (AWBERC)" . EPA. September 18, 2015.

Archived from the original on May 29, 2019 . Retrieved May 29, 2019 .

^ "EPA's Office of Research and Development Reorganizes to Better Support EPA's Mission" . EPA. April 8, 2019.

Archived from the original on November 6, 2021 . Retrieved November 6, 2021 .

^ "Organization Chart for the Office of Research and Development" . EPA. January 29, 2013.

Archived from the original on November 6, 2021 . Retrieved November 6, 2021 .

^ "About the Office of Land and Emergency Management" . EPA. November 17, 2010.

Archived from the original on January 27, 2016 . Retrieved January 27, 2016 .

^ "About the Office of Water" . EPA. November 17, 2010. Archived from the original on May 1, 2012 . Retrieved April 22, 2012 .

^ "About the Office of Water" . EPA. January 29, 2013.

Archived from the original on March 20, 2017 . Retrieved March 20, 2017 .

^ EPA Alumni Association: Former EPA Administrator William Ruckelshaus and his senior assistants discuss integrating 10 regional offices into the fledgling agency.

= 16 Video Archived October 11, 2016, at the Wayback Machine , = 6 Transcript = 6 Archived October 11, 2016, at the Wayback Machine (see pp. 6, 9).

^ Memorandum Of Agreement between The Navajo Nation and The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency Regions 6, 8, and 9 regarding the Implementation of Environmental Standards and Regulations on the Navajo Nation, October 9, 1991 ^ Garvey, Todd (March 27, 2017).

A Brief Overview of Rulemaking and Judicial Review (PDF) (Report). Washington, D.C.: U.S. Congressional Research Service. R41546.

Archived (PDF) from the original on July 27, 2020 . Retrieved July 4, 2020 .

^ FY 2013 Annual Performance Plan and President's Budget (Report). EPA. 2012. EPA 190-R-12-005.

Archived from the original on October 30, 2020 . Retrieved July 30, 2020 .

^ EPA Alumni Association: EPA Administrator William Ruckelshaus comments on the "silos" problem that has dogged EPA from the start.

= 16 Video Archived October 11, 2016, at the Wayback Machine , = 11 Transcript = 11 Archived October 11, 2016, at the Wayback Machine (see p. 11).

^ "Radiation Protection" . EPA. March 29, 2022.

Archived from the original on September 14, 2023 . Retrieved July 9, 2011 .

^ "Radioactive Waste" . EPA. July 11, 2022.

Archived from the original on December 7, 2022 . Retrieved December 26, 2022 .

^ "Radiological Emergency Response" . EPA. July 27, 2016.

Archived from the original on March 15, 2017 . Retrieved March 13, 2017 .

^ "EPA Protective Action Guide" (PDF) . EPA. January 11, 2017. p. 86.

Archived (PDF) from the original on March 15, 2017 . Retrieved March 13, 2017 .

^ "Chemical, Biological, Radiological, and Nuclear Consequence Management" .

Emergency Response . EPA. December 19, 2022.

Archived from the original on March 30, 2017 . Retrieved March 14, 2017 .

^ "Naturally-Occurring Radiation Program" . EPA. July 5, 2022.

Archived from the original on March 15, 2017 . Retrieved March 14, 2017 .

^ "Radiation Regulations and Laws, Standards for Air and Drinking Water" . EPA. January 19, 2017. Archived from the original on September 7, 2015 . Retrieved March 13, 2017 .

^ "Federal Guidance for Radiation Protection" . EPAaccess-date = March 13, 2017. September 1, 2016.

Archived from the original on March 15, 2017.

^ a b "NPDES Permit Basics" . EPA. June 3, 2025.

^ "NPDES State Program Authority" . EPA. February 24, 2025.

^ Clean Water Act section 402(p); 33 U.S.C.

§ 1342(p) .

^ "Effluent Guidelines" . EPA. July 1, 2025.

^ "What are Water Quality Standards?" . EPA. June 3, 2025.

^ "Polluted Runoff: Nonpoint Source (NPS) Pollution" . EPA. May 8, 2025.

^ "Section 404 of the Clean Water Act: Permitting Discharges of Dredge or Fill Material" . EPA. July 10, 2025.

^ "Information about Public Water Systems" . EPA. October 30, 2024.

^ "Primacy Enforcement Responsibility for Public Water Systems" . EPA. October 30, 2024.

^ "Protecting Underground Sources of Drinking Water from Underground Injection" . EPA. June 13, 2025.

^ "Clean Water State Revolving Fund Infographic" . EPA. January 30, 2024.

^ "Drinking Water State Revolving Fund" . EPA. July 10, 2024.

^ "Fiscal Year 2024 Allotments for the State Revolving Fund Provisions of the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law and Base Program Funding. Attachment A." (PDF) .

Drinking Water State Revolving Fund . EPA. April 3, 2024.

^ EPA (1979-09-13). "Criteria for Classification of Solid Waste Disposal Facilities and Practices; Final rule." Federal Register, 44 FR 53438 ^ a b c 25 Years of RCRA: Building on Our Past To Protect Our Future (Report). EPA. April 2002. EPA 530-K-02-027.

Archived from the original on April 16, 2021 . Retrieved March 21, 2021 .

^ United States. Hazardous and Solid Waste Amendments of 1984.

Pub. L.

98–616 Approved November 8, 1984.

^ "Land Disposal Restrictions for Hazardous Waste" . EPA. February 22, 2023.

Archived from the original on March 20, 2021 . Retrieved March 21, 2021 .

^ "Learn about Corrective Action" . EPA. January 22, 2016.

Archived from the original on December 23, 2018 . Retrieved December 22, 2018 .

^ "Categories of Hazardous Waste Generators" . EPA. May 22, 2022.

Archived from the original on March 19, 2021 . Retrieved March 21, 2021 .

^ "UST Program Facts" . EPA. May 2018.

Archived from the original on August 25, 2018 . Retrieved August 27, 2018 .

^ "Interview with Ron Brand re the Underground Storage Tank Program" (PDF) . EPA Alumni Association. April 24, 2013. Archived from the original (PDF) on August 27, 2018 . Retrieved August 26, 2018 .

^ "Learn About Underground Storage Tanks" . EPA. August 23, 2022.

Archived from the original on March 23, 2021 . Retrieved March 21, 2021 .

^ United States. Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980.

Pub. L.

96–510 , approved December 11, 1980.

42 U.S.C.

§ 9601 et seq.

^ "Oil Spills Prevention and Preparedness Regulations" . EPA. March 7, 2017.

Archived from the original on March 14, 2017 . Retrieved March 14, 2017 .

^ Tabuchi, Hiroko (February 26, 2025).

"She Lobbied for Formaldehyde. Now She's at E.P.A. Approving New Chemicals" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved February 27, 2025 .

^ "Toxics Release Inventory (TRI) Program" . EPA. February 13, 2017.

Archived from the original on March 10, 2017 . Retrieved March 14, 2017 .

^ "Basic Information on Enforcement" . EPA. November 2, 2022.

Archived from the original on February 13, 2023 . Retrieved February 13, 2023 .

^ "National Enforcement and Compliance Initiatives" . EPA. January 19, 2023.

Archived from the original on February 13, 2023 . Retrieved February 13, 2023 .

^ "A Sheep In The Closet: The Erosion of Enforcement at the EPA" (PDF) . Environmental Data & Governance Initiative (EDGI). May 2019. Archived from the original (PDF) on May 22, 2023 . Retrieved April 13, 2021 .

^ "Update of Sheep in the Closet Report; EPA Enforcement Record in the Trump Administration through Fiscal Year 2018" . EDGI. June 11, 2019.

Archived from the original on April 16, 2021 . Retrieved April 13, 2021 .

^ "Enforcement Annual Results for Fiscal Year 2016" . EPA. February 8, 2018. Archived from the original on February 9, 2018 . Retrieved April 6, 2021 .

^ a b "Fiscal Year 2018 EPA Enforcement and Compliance Annual Results" (PDF) . February 8, 2019.

Archived (PDF) from the original on January 31, 2024 . Retrieved April 13, 2021 .

^ "Historical Planning, Budget, and Results Reports" . EPA. February 8, 2013.

Archived from the original on April 13, 2021 . Retrieved April 6, 2021 .

^ "Safer Detergents Stewardship Initiative" . EPA. December 22, 2008. Archived from the original on September 3, 2011 . Retrieved July 16, 2011 .

^ "CleanGredients Home Page" . Cleangredients.org.

Archived from the original on July 25, 2011 . Retrieved July 16, 2011 .

^ Former Deputy Administrator Hank Habicht talks about management at EPA. An Interview with Hank Habicht = 17 Video Archived January 31, 2024, at the Wayback Machine , = 10 Transcript = 10 Archived April 12, 2019, at the Wayback Machine (see p 7, 10). December 21, 2012.

^ EPA.

"2006 Annual Report: Energy Star and Other Climate Protection Partnerships." Archived February 21, 2017, at the Wayback Machine . Retrieved March 1, 2008.

^ EnergyStar.gov, = about.ab_history "History: Energy Star." Archived March 27, 2012, at the Wayback Machine . Retrieved March 1, 2008.

^ "Smart Growth" . EPA. April 5, 2013.

Archived from the original on January 28, 2017 . Retrieved January 28, 2017 .

^ "Creating Healthy Indoor Air Quality in Schools" . EPA. November 28, 2016.

Archived from the original on March 15, 2017 . Retrieved March 14, 2017 .

^ Bearden, David M. (September 5, 2008).

National Environmental Education Act of 1990: Overview, Implementation, and Issues for Congress (PDF) (Report). CRS. 97-97.

^ "Environmental Education" . EPA. July 11, 2024.

^ "Clean School Bus; Clean Diesel and DERA Funding" . EPA. October 24, 2016.

Archived from the original on January 28, 2017 . Retrieved January 28, 2017 .

^ "Information about the Green Chemistry Challenge" . EPA. February 13, 2013.

Archived from the original on December 21, 2018 . Retrieved December 20, 2018 .

^ "About the BEACH Act" . EPA. February 28, 2013.

Archived from the original on December 25, 2018 . Retrieved December 24, 2018 .

^ "EPA – Wetlands – Wetlands Fact Sheet" . EPA. June 28, 2006. Archived from the original on February 16, 2012 . Retrieved July 16, 2011 .

^ "One Cleanup Program" . EPA. February 21, 2016.

Archived from the original on December 16, 2020 . Retrieved July 30, 2020 .

^ Former Deputy Administrator Hank Habicht talks about management at EPA. An Interview with Hank Habicht = 17 Video Archived January 31, 2024, at the Wayback Machine , = 7 Transcript = 7 Archived April 12, 2019, at the Wayback Machine (see p7). December 21, 2012.

^ "33/50 Program" (PDF) . EPA.

Archived (PDF) from the original on September 17, 2018 . Retrieved September 16, 2018 .

^ "Fact Sheet: 2010/2015 PFOA Stewardship Program" . EPA. May 10, 2016.

Archived from the original on December 8, 2018 . Retrieved December 20, 2018 .

^ "About the OSV Bold" . EPA. EPA 842-F-05-004. Archived from the original on February 24, 2009 . Retrieved January 17, 2009 .

^ Long, Katherine.

"What a $5,000 deal: Seattle Central gets former Navy ship | Local News" .

The Seattle Times . Archived from the original on October 12, 2013 . Retrieved December 2, 2013 .

^ "Update of Sheep in the Closet Report—EPA Enforcement Record in the Trump Administration through Fiscal Year 2018" .

Environmental Data and Governance Initiative . June 11, 2019.

Archived from the original on April 16, 2021 . Retrieved April 6, 2021 .

^ Kapp, Robert (2005), "Clean Air Act", Encyclopedia of Toxicology , Elsevier, pp.

616– 618, doi : 10.1016/b0-12-369400-0/00242-8 , ISBN 978-0-12-369400-3 ^ S., Carruth, Russelyn (December 17, 2013).

Environmental Health Law: An Introduction . Wiley.

ISBN 978-1-118-41944-1 .

OCLC 1058564715 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ "RS 30:2060; Toxic air pollutant emission control program" .

Louisiana State Laws . Baton Rouge, LA: Louisiana State Legislature.

Archived from the original on April 13, 2021 . Retrieved April 6, 2021 .

^ Flatt, Victor Byers (2006). "Gasping for Breath: The Administrative Flaws of the Federal Hazardous Air Pollutant Program".

SSRN Electronic Journal .

doi : 10.2139/ssrn.929211 .

ISSN 1556-5068 .

S2CID 111813069 .

^ a b O'Neil, S. G. (2007).

Superfund: Evaluating the Impact of Executive Order 12898 Archived March 26, 2009, at the Wayback Machine . Environmental Health Perspectives, Volume 115, Number 7, pp. 1087–93 ^ Bullard, Robert (July 25, 2007).

Subcommittee on Superfund and Environmental Health of the Senate Environment and Public Works Committee Regarding Environmental Justice .

^ "Advancing Environmental Justice" . EPA. December 19, 2022. Archived from the original on January 11, 2023 . Retrieved January 11, 2023 .

^ Dennis, Brady (September 24, 2022).

"EPA unveils new office to place environmental justice at agency's core" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on September 28, 2022 . Retrieved October 24, 2022 .

^ Making the Grade: Access to Information Scorecard 2015 Archived August 11, 2019, at the Wayback Machine March 2015, 80 pages, Center for Effective Government , retrieved March 21, 2016 ^ "History and Location" .

Pebble Project . Vancouver, BC: Northern Dynasty Minerals Ltd.

Archived from the original on January 6, 2023 . Retrieved January 7, 2023 .

^ Bristol Bay Assessment - Final Report (Report). EPA. 2014. EPA 910-R-14-001ES. Archived from the original on January 6, 2023 . Retrieved January 6, 2023 .

^ "About Bristol Bay" . EPA. September 8, 2022.

Archived from the original on January 6, 2023 . Retrieved January 6, 2023 .

^ "Proposed Determination of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency Region 10 Pursuant to Section 404(c) of the Clean Water Act Pebble Deposit Area, Southwest Alaska" (PDF) . Seattle, WA: EPA. July 2014. p. 14.

Archived (PDF) from the original on July 14, 2021 . Retrieved November 25, 2014 .

^ a b "EPA Continues to Deny Pebble Due Process" .

Alaska Business Monthly . Anchorage, AK: Alaska Business. July 18, 2014.

Archived from the original on January 28, 2018 . Retrieved July 28, 2014 .

^ "Bristol Bay" . Seattle, WA: EPA. December 22, 2022.

Archived from the original on January 6, 2023 . Retrieved January 6, 2023 .

^ "EPA Blocks Pebble Mine with Rare Veto. What Happens Next?" . January 31, 2023.

Archived from the original on April 10, 2023 . Retrieved April 10, 2023 .

^ "EPA administrator, Ohio Gov. DeWine visit East Palestine residents' homes, sip tap water" . ABC news. March 21, 2023.

Archived from the original on April 4, 2023 . Retrieved April 4, 2023 .

^ "East Palestine, Ohio, residents concerned about water, air despite assurances both are safe" . wbur. March 20, 2023.

Archived from the original on April 4, 2023 . Retrieved April 4, 2023 .

Further reading [ edit ] Balint, Peter J.; James K. Conant.

The life cycles of the Council on Environmental Quality and the Environmental Protection Agency: 1970–2035 (Oxford Univ Press, 2016).

Bosso, Christopher.

Environment, Inc.: From Grassroots to Beltway . Lawrence, KS: University of Kansas Press, 2005 Bosso, Christopher; Deborah Guber. "Maintaining Presence: Environmental Advocacy and the Permanent Campaign." pp. 78–99 in Environmental Policy: New Directions for the Twenty First Century , 6th ed., eds. Norman Vig and Michael Kraft. Washington, DC: CQ Press, 2006.

Brooks, Karl Boyd (ed.).

The Environmental Legacy of Harry S. Truman (Truman State University Press, 2009).

Carter, Neil.

The Politics of the Environment: Ideas, Activism, Policy , 2nd ed. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 2007 Davies, Kate.

The Rise of the U.S. Environmental Health Movement Archived November 18, 2022, at the Wayback Machine (2013). Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield Demortain, David, The Science of Bureaucracy: Risk Decision-Making and the US Environmental Protection Agency . The MIT Press, 2020 doi : 10.7551/mitpress/12248.001.0001 .

Freedman, Jeri.

The Establishment of the Environmental Protection Agency (Cavendish Square. 2017) Gottlieb, Robert (August 1, 1993).

Forcing the spring: the transformation of the American environmental movement . Island Press.

ISBN 1-55963-123-6 .

Hays, Samuel P.

A history of environmental politics since 1945 (2000) Hays, Samuel P.

Beauty, Health, and Permanence: Environmental Politics in the United States, 1955–1985 (1989) online Mintz, Joel A.

Enforcement at the EPA: High Stakes and Hard Choices (2nd ed. U of Texas Press, 2012).

Portney, Paul R. "EPA and the Evolution of Federal Regulation." in Public policies for environmental protection (Routledge, 2010) pp. 11–30.

online Richardson, Elmo.

Dams, Parks and Politics: Resource Development and Preservation the Truman-Eisenhower Era (1973).

Ruckelshaus, William D. "Environmental Regulation: The Early Days at EPA" EPA Journal (March 1988) online Strong, Douglas Hillman (1988).

Dreamers & Defenders: American Conservationists . University of Nebraska Press.

ISBN 978-0-8032-9156-0 .

Suter, Glenn W. "Ecological risk assessment in the United States Environmental Protection Agency: A historical overview." Integrated environmental assessment and management 4.3 (2008): 285–289.

online EPA Alumni Association, "Protecting the Environment, A Half Century of Progress" Archived October 6, 2016, at the Wayback Machine – an overview of EPA's environmental protection efforts over 50 years EPA Alumni Association individual Half Century of Progress reports for air, water, pesticides, drinking water, waste management, Superfund, and toxic substances Archived March 11, 2022, at the Wayback Machine External links [ edit ] United States Environmental Protection Agency at Wikipedia's sister projects Media from Commons News from Wikinews Texts from Wikisource Official website Environmental Protection Agency in the Federal Register Environmental Protection Agency on USAspending.gov Environmental Protection Agency apportionments on OpenOMB v t e United States government agencies involved in environmental science Environmental Protection Agency Global Change Research Program National Aeronautics and Space Administration National Science Foundation Smithsonian Institution Department of the Interior Bureau of Indian Affairs Bureau of Land Management Bureau of Ocean Energy Management Bureau of Reclamation National Park Service United States Fish and Wildlife Service United States Geological Survey Office of the Assistant Secretary for Insular and International Affairs Office of Surface Mining, Reclamation, and Enforcement Department of Commerce National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration Geodetic Survey Marine Fisheries Service Ocean Service Oceanic and Atmospheric Research UxSRTO Weather Service Department of Energy Office of Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy Office of Environmental Management Office of Science National Laboratories and Technology Centers Department of Agriculture Agricultural Research Service Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service Farm Service Agency Food and Nutrition Service Foreign Agricultural Service Natural Resources Conservation Service ( National Water and Climate Center ) Rural Utilities Service Forest Service Department of Homeland Security Science and Technology Directorate United States Coast Guard Department of Health and Human Services Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry Centers for Disease Control and Prevention National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences Department of Defense Air Force Research Laboratory Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency Joint Typhoon Warning Center Office of Naval Research Combat Capabilities Development Command Executive Office of the President Climate Policy Office Clean Energy Innovation and Implementation U.S. Special Presidential Envoy for Climate Council on Environmental Quality Defunct Environmental Science Services Administration United States Fish Commission United States Coast and Geodetic Survey White House Office of Energy and Climate Change Policy v t e Federal research and development agencies of the United States ( list ) Independent agencies National Science Foundation (NSF) National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) Environmental Protection Agency Office of Research and Development Intelligence Advanced Research Projects Activity (IARPA) Smithsonian Institution research centers and programs Agriculture Agricultural Research Service (ARS) National Institute of Food and Agriculture (NIFA) Economic Research Service (ERS) United States Forest Service Research and Development (R&D) Commerce National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) Defense Army Army Combat Capabilities Development Command (CCDCOM) Army Research Laboratory (ARL) Combat Capabilities Development Command Soldier Center (CCDCSC) CCDC Armaments Center (CCDCAC) Picatinny Arsenal Benét Laboratories Watervliet Arsenal Test and Evaluation Command (ATEC) United States Army Medical Research and Development Command (USAMRDC) Engineer Research and Development Center (ERDC) Marine Corps Marine Corps Combat Development Command (MCCDC) Marine Corps Warfighting Laboratory (MCWL) Marine Corps Operational Test and Evaluation Activity (MCOTEA) Navy Office of Naval Research (ONR) Naval Research Laboratory (NRL) Naval Medical Research Center (NMRC) Naval Warfare Centers Air (NAWC) Surface (NSWC) Undersea (NUWC) Command, Control and Ocean Surveillance (NCCOSC) Naval Air Weapons Station China Lake (NAWS) Naval Postgraduate School (NPS) Operational Test and Evaluation Force (OPTEVFOR) Air Force Air Force Materiel Command (AFMC) Air Armament Center (AAC) Air Force Research Laboratory (AFRL) Air Force Life Cycle Management Center (AFLCMC) Air Force Nuclear Weapons Center (NWC) Air Force Institute of Technology (AFIT) Air Force Operational Test and Evaluation Center (AFOTEC) Space Force Space Systems Command (SSC) Other Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences (USU) Education Institute of Education Sciences (IES) National Institute on Disability, Independent Living, and Rehabilitation Research (NIDILRR) Energy Office of Science (DOE SC) Advanced Research Projects Agency–Energy (ARPA-E) National Laboratories Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health (NIH) National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) Food and Drug Administration science and research programs Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ) Biomedical Advanced Research and Development Authority (BARDA) Center for Medicare and Medicaid Innovation (CMMI) Advanced Research Projects Agency for Health (ARPA-H) Homeland Security Science and Technology Directorate (S&T) Coast Guard Research and Development Center (CG RDC) Interior United States Geological Survey (USGS) Justice National Institute of Justice (NIJ) FBI Science and Technology Branch Transportation Research and Innovative Technology Administration Federal Aviation Administration Research, Engineering, and Development Federal Highway Administration Research and Technology Treasury Office of Financial Research (OFR) Veterans Affairs Veterans Health Administration Office of Research and Development (ORD) Executive Office of the President Office of Science and Technology Policy (OSTP) U.S. Global Change Research Program (USGCRP) Networking and Information Technology Research and Development Program (NITRD) National Nanotechnology Initiative (NNI) Legislative branch House Committee on Science, Space, and Technology Senate Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation Office of Technology Assessment (OTA) (defunct) Judicial branch Federal Judicial Center v t e Federal law enforcement agencies of the United States Commerce Office of Export Enforcement National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration - Fisheries: Office of Law Enforcement Office of Security Defense Defense Criminal Investigative Service Department of Defense police Defense Logistics Agency Police Pentagon Force Protection Agency ( Pentagon Police ) National Security Agency Police Department of the Army Intelligence and Security Command Criminal Investigation Division Military Police Corps Army Department Police Corrections Command Navy Criminal Investigative Service Marine Corps Criminal Investigation Division Master-at-Arms Navy Police Marine Corps Police Naval Academy Police Air Force Office of Special Investigations Security Forces Department of the Air Force Police Health and Human Services United States Food and Drug Administration ( Office of Criminal Investigations ) National Institutes of Health Police Homeland Security Federal Law Enforcement Training Centers Citizenship and Immigration Services United States Coast Guard Investigative Service Coast Guard Police Customs and Border Protection Border Patrol Federal Protective Service Immigration and Customs Enforcement United States Secret Service Uniformed Division Transportation Security Administration Office of Law Enforcement/Federal Air Marshal Service Interior Bureau of Indian Affairs Police Bureau of Land Management: Office of Law Enforcement Hoover Dam Police National Park Service Rangers United States Park Police Fish and Wildlife Service: Office of Law Enforcement National Wildlife Refuge System: Division of Refuge Law Enforcement Justice Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives Drug Enforcement Administration Federal Bureau of Investigation FBI Police Federal Bureau of Prisons United States Marshals Service State Bureau of Diplomatic Security Diplomatic Security Service Office of Foreign Missions Treasury Alcohol and Tobacco Tax and Trade Bureau Bureau of Engraving and Printing Financial Crimes Enforcement Network Internal Revenue Service, Criminal Investigation United States Mint Police Others (executive) Agriculture : US Forest Service: Law Enforcement & Investigations Energy : Office of Secure Transportation Transportation : United States Merchant Marine Academy Department of Public Safety Veterans Affairs : Department of Veterans Affairs Police Congress Sergeant at Arms of the House of Representatives Sergeant at Arms of the Senate United States Capitol Police Government Publishing Office Police Judicial U.S. Probation and Pretrial Services System Marshal of the United States Supreme Court ( Supreme Court Police ) Others (federal law) Amtrak Police Department Central Intelligence Agency: Security Protective Service Environmental Protection Agency: Office of Enforcement and Compliance Assurance Federal Reserve Police Metropolitan Police Department of the District of Columbia Postal Inspection Service ( U.S. Postal Police ) Smithsonian Institution Office of Protection Services ( National Zoological Park Police ) v t e United States environmental law Supreme Court decisions Missouri v. Holland (1920) Sierra Club v. Morton (1972) Vermont Yankee v. NRDC (1978) Hughes v. Oklahoma (1979) Lujan v. National Wildlife Federation (1990) Friends of the Earth v. Laidlaw Environmental Services (2000) BP P.L.C. v. Mayor and City Council of Baltimore (2021) NEPA cases United States v. SCRAP (1973) Metropolitan Edison Co. v. People Against Nuclear Energy (1983) Baltimore Gas & Electric Co. v. Natural Resources Defense Council (1983) Department of Transportation v. Public Citizen (2004) Norton v. Southern Utah Wilderness Alliance (2004) Winter v. Natural Resources Defense Council (2008) Monsanto Co. v. Geertson Seed Farms (2010) CAA cases Train v. Natural Resources Defense Council (1975) Chevron v. Natural Resources Defense Council (1984) Whitman v. American Trucking Associations (2001) Alaska Department of Environmental Conservation v. EPA (2004) Department of Transportation v. Public Citizen (2004) Massachusetts v. EPA (2007) Environmental Defense v. Duke Energy Corp.

(2007) American Electric Power Co. v. Connecticut (2011) Utility Air Regulatory Group v. EPA (2014) Michigan v. EPA (2015) HollyFrontier Cheyenne Refining v. Renewable Fuels Association (2021) West Virginia v. EPA (2022) RCRA cases City of Philadelphia v. New Jersey (1978) Southern Union Co. v. United States (2012) ESA cases Tennessee Valley Authority v. Hill (1978) Lujan v. Defenders of Wildlife (1992) Babbitt v. Sweet Home Chapter of Communities for a Great Oregon (1995) National Association of Home Builders v. Defenders of Wildlife (2007) Weyerhaeuser Company v. United States Fish and Wildlife Service (2018) United States Fish and Wildlife Service v. Sierra Club (2021) CWA cases United States v. Riverside Bayview (1985) SWANCC v. Army Corps of Engineers (2001) South Florida Water Management District v. Miccosukee Tribe (2004) S. D. Warren Co. v. Maine Board of Environmental Protection (2006) Rapanos v. United States (2006) National Association of Home Builders v. Defenders of Wildlife (2007) Entergy Corp. v. Riverkeeper Inc.

(2009) Coeur Alaska, Inc. v. Southeast Alaska Conservation Council (2009) Sackett v. EPA I (2012) Los Angeles County Flood Control District v. Natural Resources Defense Council (2013) Army Corps of Engineers v. Hawkes Co.

(2016) National Association of Manufacturers v. Department of Defense (2018) County of Maui v. Hawaii Wildlife Fund (2020) Sackett v. EPA II (2023) CERCLA cases United States v. Bestfoods (1998) Guam v. United States (2021) Major federal legislation , treaties, and lower court decisions Yellowstone National Park Protection Act (1872) Forest Service Organic Administration Act (1897) Rivers and Harbors Act (1899) Refuse Act Lacey Act (1900) Weeks Act (1911) North Pacific Fur Seal Convention of 1911 (1911) Weeks–McLean Act (1913) Migratory Bird Treaty Act (1918) Clarke–McNary Act (1924) Oil Pollution Act (1924) McSweeney-McNary Act (1928) Fish and Wildlife Coordination Act (1934) Watershed Protection and Flood Prevention Act (1954) Air Pollution Control Act (1955) Fish and Wildlife Act (1956) Oil Pollution Act (1961) Clean Air Act (1963, 1970, 1977, 1990) Acid Rain Program Scenic Hudson Preservation Conference v. Federal Power Commission (2nd Cir. Court of Appeals, 1965) Solid Waste Disposal Act (1965) Endangered Species Act (1969) Environmental Quality Improvement Act (1970) National Environmental Policy Act (1970) Clean Water Act (1972, 1977, 1987, 2014) Coastal Zone Management Act (1972) Coastal Zone Management Program Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act (1972) Marine Protection, Research, and Sanctuaries Act (1972) Noise Control Act (1972) Endangered Species Act (1973) Oil Pollution Act (1973) Safe Drinking Water Act (1974, 1986, 1996) Water Resources Development Act ( 1974 , 1976 , 1986 , 1988 , 1990 , 1992 , 1996 , 1999 , 2000 , 2007 , 2014, 2016, 2022) Federal Noxious Weed Act (1975) Hazardous Materials Transportation Act (1975) Magnuson–Stevens Act (1976) Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (1976) Toxic Substances Control Act (1976) Surface Mining Control and Reclamation Act (1977) Uranium Mill Tailings Radiation Control Act (1978) CERCLA (Superfund) (1980) Emergency Planning and Community Right-to-Know Act (1986) Emergency Wetlands Resources Act (1986) Global Change Research Act (1990) National Environmental Education Act (1990) Oil Pollution Act (1990) Alien Species Prevention and Enforcement Act of 1992 Food Quality Protection Act (1996) Energy Policy Act (2005) Energy Independence and Security Act (2007) Coalition for Responsible Regulation, Inc. v. EPA (D.C. Cir. Court of Appeals, 2012) Lautenberg Chemical Safety Act (2016) America's Water Infrastructure Act (2018) Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act (2021) Louisiana v. Biden (5th Cir. Court of Appeals, 2022) CHIPS and Science Act (2022) Inflation Reduction Act (2022) Federal agencies Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry Council on Environmental Quality National Highway Traffic Safety Administration Office of Surface Mining United States Environmental Protection Agency United States Fish and Wildlife Service U.S. Global Change Research Program Regulations and concepts Best available technology Citizen suit Clean Power Plan Corporate average fuel economy Discharge Monitoring Report Effluent guidelines Environmental crime Environmental impact statement Environmental justice Executive Order 13432 (2007) Executive Order 13990 (2022) LDV Rule (2010) Maximum contaminant level National Ambient Air Quality Standards National Climate Assessment National Emissions Standards for Hazardous Air Pollutants National Priorities List New Source Performance Standards New Source Review Not-To-Exceed (NTE) PACE financing Presidential Climate Action Plan Renewable Fuel Standard Right to know Section 608 Certification Significant New Alternatives Policy State of the Climate Tailoring Rule (2010) Total maximum daily load Toxicity category rating Uranium Mill Tailings Remedial Action v t e Richard Nixon 37th President of the United States (1969–1974) 36th Vice President of the United States (1953–1961) U.S. Senator from California (1950–1953) U.S. Representative for CA–12 (1947–1950) Presidency Transition First inauguration Second inauguration Nixon Doctrine " Bring Us Together " Economic policies Nixon shock Tar Baby Option Environmental Protection Agency creation National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration Space exploration 1971 National Cancer Act Vietnam War Cambodian bombing Paris Peace Accords " Peace with Honor " Vietnamization Silent majority Cold War period Linkage policy Drug  Abuse Prevention and Control Act 1970 Lincoln Memorial visit 1972 visit to China Shanghai Communiqué Détente 1972 Moscow Summit Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty SALT I Treaty Prevention of Nuclear War Agreement Threshold Test Ban Treaty Endangered Species Act National Commission on Marihuana and Drug Abuse War on drugs Drug Enforcement Administration Cannabis policy Enemies List list of opponents Operation CHAOS Watergate timeline White House tapes United States v. Nixon Senate Watergate Committee impeachment process " I am not a crook " Resignation speech Pardon State of the Union Address 1970 1971 1972 1973 1974 Wilson desk Judicial appointments Supreme Court controversies Executive Orders Presidential Proclamations Life and politics Richard Nixon Foundation Presidential Library and Museum Birthplace and boyhood home Checkers speech 1958 motorcade attack Kitchen Debate Operation 40 "Last press conference" Florida White House " La Casa Pacifica " Nixon Center Nixon v. General Services Administration Death and state funeral Books Six Crises (1962) Bibliography Elections U.S. House of Representatives: 1946 1948 U.S. Senate: 1950 California gubernatorial election: 1962 GOP presidential primaries: 1960 1964 1968 1972 GOP national conventions: 1952 1956 1960 campaign 1968 campaign 1972 campaign Presidential elections: 1952 transition 1956 1960 debates Kennedy transition 1968 1972 Popular culture " Nixon goes to China " Millhouse (1971 film) An Evening with Richard Nixon (1972 play) Richard (1972 film) Another Nice Mess (1972 film) Four More Years (1972 film) Impeach the President (1973 song) The Werewolf of Washington (1973 film) White House Madness (1975 film) All the President's Men (1976 film) The Public Burning (1977 novel) Washington: Behind Closed Doors (1977 miniseries) Secret Honor (1984 film) Nixon in China (1987 opera) The Final Days (1989 film) Nixon (1995 film) Elvis Meets Nixon (1997 film) Futurama (1999 TV series) Dick (1999 film) Nixon's China Game (2000 film) Dark Side of the Moon (2002 film) The Assassination of Richard Nixon (2004 film) Frost–Nixon interviews ( 2006 play , 2008 film ) Black Dynamite (2009 film) " The Impossible Astronaut " (2011 TV episode) Our Nixon (2013 film) X-Men: Days of Future Past (2014 film) Crooked (2015 novel) Elvis & Nixon (2016 film) The Post (2017 film) Watergate (2019 board game) U.S. postage stamp Related Presidential Recordings and Materials Preservation Act Presidential Townhouse Richard Nixon mask Nixon diamond Staff Jack Brennan (aide de camp) Murray Chotiner (early campaign manager) Manolo Sanchez (valet) Rose Mary Woods (secretary) Family Thelma "Pat" Ryan Nixon (wife) Tricia Nixon Cox (daughter) Julie Nixon Eisenhower (daughter) Christopher Nixon Cox (grandson) Jennie Eisenhower (granddaughter) Francis A. Nixon (father) Hannah Milhous Nixon (mother) Donald Nixon (brother) Edward Nixon (brother) ← Lyndon B. Johnson Gerald Ford → Category Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF 2 National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Norway 2 Latvia Korea Sweden Poland Israel Catalonia Academics CiNii Artists ULAN Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Portals : Environment Politics United States NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐nn7dx
Cached time: 20250817225846
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 2.365 seconds
Real time usage: 2.714 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 19066/1000000
Revision size: 157362/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 601706/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 16701/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 23/100
Expensive parser function count: 24/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 709950/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.485/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 12217911/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 2315.920      1 -total
 61.04% 1413.550      1 Template:Reflist
 29.99%  694.467    115 Template:Cite_web
 10.14%  234.937     36 Template:Cite_news
  8.17%  189.270      1 Template:Infobox_government_agency
  7.93%  183.587      1 Template:Infobox
  4.84%  112.195      8 Template:Navbox
  4.36%  100.934      2 Template:Harvp
  4.04%   93.657     28 Template:Webarchive
  3.20%   74.143      1 Template:Short_description Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:58666:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817225846 and revision id 1305534333. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=United_States_Environmental_Protection_Agency&oldid=1305534333 " Categories : United States Environmental Protection Agency Environmental agencies in the United States Environmental protection agencies Environment of the United States 1970 establishments in Washington, D.C.

1970 in the environment Government agencies established in 1970 Independent agencies of the United States government Regulators of biotechnology products Federal law enforcement agencies of the United States Environmental policies organizations Environmental policy in the United States Organizations based in Washington, D.C.

Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Webarchive template wayback links Pages containing links to subscription-only content CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use mdy dates from July 2018 Coordinates on Wikidata Articles containing potentially dated statements from October 2020 All articles containing potentially dated statements Articles containing potentially dated statements from November 2021 Articles containing potentially dated statements from March 2017 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from May 2023 Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2025 Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2023 Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2016 Wikipedia articles in need of updating from March 2023 All Wikipedia articles in need of updating Articles to be expanded from July 2020 All articles to be expanded Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2006 Articles containing potentially dated statements from September 2015 Articles containing potentially dated statements from 1993 This page was last edited on 12 August 2025, at 16:31 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents United States Environmental Protection Agency 40 languages Add topic

