Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Ancient physiognomy before the Physiognomonics 2 The treatise Toggle The treatise subsection 2.1 Structure and content 2.2 Connections to Aristotle 2.3 Influence 3 Notes 4 References 5 Further reading 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Physiognomonics 8 languages العربية Español Français Íslenska Italiano 日本語 Português Suomi Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Ancient Greek treatise on physiognomy attributed to Aristotle Physiognomonics ( Greek : Φυσιογνωμονικά ; Latin : Physiognomonica ) is an Ancient Greek pseudo-Aristotelian treatise on physiognomy attributed to Aristotle (and part of the Corpus Aristotelicum ). It is a Peripatetic work, [ 1 ] dated to the 4th/3rd century BC.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Ancient physiognomy before the Physiognomonics [ edit ] Although Physiognomonics is the earliest work surviving in Greek devoted to the subject, texts preserved on clay tablets provide evidence of physiognomy manuals from the First Babylonian dynasty , containing divinatory case studies of the ominous significance of various bodily dispositions.  At this point physiognomy is "a specific, already theorized, branch of knowledge" and the heir of a long-developed technical tradition.

[ 4 ] While loosely physiognomic ways of thinking are present in Greek literature as early as Homer , physiognomy proper is not known before the classical period .  The term physiognomonia first appears in the fifth-century BC Hippocratic treatise Epidemics (II.5.1).  Physiognomy was mentioned in a work by Antisthenes on the Sophists , which provides evidence of its recognition as an art ( techne ).

[ 4 ] In Aristotle's time, physiognomics was acknowledged as an art ( techne ) with its own skilled practitioners ( technitai ), as we see from a reference in Generation of Animals (IV.3): [ 4 ] Then people say that the child has the head of a ram or a bull, and so on with other animals, as that a calf has the head of a child or a sheep that of an ox. All these monsters result from the causes stated above, but they are none of the things they are said to be; there is only some similarity, such as may arise even where there is no defect of growth. Hence often jesters compare someone who is not beautiful to a goat breathing fire, or again to a ram butting, and a certain physiognomist reduced all faces to those of two or three animals, and his arguments often prevailed on people. (trans. Pratt rev.

Barnes ) Already in antiquity, physiognomy's pretensions to a "scientific" foundation were questioned and debated.  It had connections to medicine , but also to magic and divination .

[ 4 ] The treatise [ edit ] Structure and content [ edit ] The treatise is divided into sections on theory (805a1-808b10) and method (808b11-814b9).  The connections between bodily features and character are treated in detail, cataloguing, for example, twelve kinds of nose, and the distinctive features of the cinaedus .

[ 5 ] Connections to Aristotle [ edit ] The pseudo-Aristotelian treatise begins with an allusion to Aristotle's Prior Analytics (II.27, on the body-soul correlation), and many of the physiognomic connections discussed are mentioned specifically in the History of Animals .

[ 5 ] Influence [ edit ] The author's systematic scheme of physiognomic relationships was not adopted by later writers on the subject; the proliferation of incompatible teachings had "the cumulative effect of undermining the authority of the profession as a whole." [ 5 ] Notes [ edit ] ^ Ahonen, Marke (2014), Knuuttila, Simo; Sihvola, Juha (eds.), "Ancient Physiognomy" , Sourcebook for the History of the Philosophy of Mind: Philosophical Psychology from Plato to Kant , Studies in the History of Philosophy of Mind, vol. 12, Dordrecht: Springer Netherlands, pp.

623– 631, doi : 10.1007/978-94-007-6967-0_38 , ISBN 978-94-007-6967-0 , retrieved 2024-03-30 ^ Evans, Elizabeth C. (1969).

"Physiognomics in the Ancient World" .

Transactions of the American Philosophical Society .

59 (5): 1– 101.

doi : 10.2307/1006011 .

ISSN 0065-9746 .

JSTOR 1006011 .

^ Porter, Martin (2005).

Windows of the Soul: Physiognomy in European Culture 1470-1780 . Oxford University Press. p. 121.

ISBN 978-0-19-153483-6 .

^ a b c d Raina, Introduction.

^ a b c Brennan.

References [ edit ] T. Corey Brennan , "Review: [Aristoteles] Physiognomonica, edited by S. Vogt", Classical World 99.2 (2006), pp. 202-203.

Giampiera Raina (trans. and comm.), Pseudo Aristotele: Fisiognomica; Anonimo Latino: Il trattato di fisiognomica , 2nd ed., Milan: Biblioteca Universale Rizzoli, 1994.

Further reading [ edit ] Sabine Vogt (trans. and comm.), Aristoteles: Physiognomonica , Berlin: Akademie Verlag, 1999, ISBN 3-05-003487-4 External links [ edit ] Greek Wikisource has original text related to this article: Φυσιογνωμονικά Greek texts: Immanuel Bekker 's text available via Greco interattivo ; Richard Foerster's 1893 Teubner edition via Google Books Opuscula public domain audiobook at LibriVox English translation of E.S. Forster and T. Loveday in The Works of Aristotle , Oxford, 1913 v t e Aristotelianism Overview Aristotle Works Lyceum Ideas and interests Logic Apodicticity Category of being Future contingents Genus–differentia Irrelevant conclusion Syllogism Physics accident Active intellect Antiperistasis Essence Eternity of the world Four causes Hexis Horror vacui Hylomorphism Hypokeimenon Minima naturalia Ousia Passive intellect Potentiality and actuality Substance theory Substantial form Sublunary sphere Theory of universals Unmoved mover Biology Rational animal Ethics Akrasia Arete Eudaimonia Eutrapelia Golden mean Magnanimity Nemesis Philia Phronesis Pleonexia Practical syllogism Politics Mixed government Natural slavery Rhetoric Lexis Paradeigma Poetics Anagnorisis Catharsis Classical unities Diegesis Hamartia Mimesis Mythos Opsis Peripeteia Telos Tragic hero Works Organon Categories On Interpretation Prior Analytics Posterior Analytics Topics Sophistical Refutations Physics Physics On the Heavens On Generation and Corruption Meteorology On the Soul On Animals History Parts Movement Progression Generation Metaphysics Metaphysics Ethics and politics Nicomachean Ethics Eudemian Ethics Politics Constitution of the Athenians Rhetoric and poetics Rhetoric Poetics Parva Naturalia Sense and Sensibilia On Memory On Sleep On Dreams On Divination in Sleep On Length and Shortness of Life On Youth, Old Age, Life and Death, and Respiration Lost Protrepticus Pseudepigrapha On Breath On Colors On Plants On Indivisible Lines On Melissus, Xenophanes, and Gorgias On the Universe On Things Heard Physiognomonics On Marvellous Things Heard Mechanics Problems The Situations and Names of Winds On Virtues and Vices Economics Rhetoric to Alexander Magna Moralia Related topics Transmission of the Greek Classics Commentaries on Aristotle Conimbricenses Metabasis paradox Views on women Wheel paradox Mathematical realism List of writers influenced by Aristotle Category Philosophy portal Authority control databases International VIAF 2 National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Poland Vatican Israel Other IdRef Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Physiognomonics&oldid=1291951939 " Categories : Physiognomy Ancient Greek pseudepigrapha Works by Aristotle Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Greek-language text Articles containing Latin-language text Articles with LibriVox links This page was last edited on 24 May 2025, at 10:49 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Physiognomonics 8 languages Add topic

