Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Determining the particle number 2 Particle number density 3 In quantum mechanics 4 In air quality 5 References Toggle the table of contents Particle number 10 languages العربية Català Deutsch Español فارسی 한국어 Norsk bokmål Română 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Number of particles in a thermodynamic system Conjugate variables of thermodynamics Pressure Volume ( Stress ) ( Strain ) Temperature Entropy Chemical potential Particle number In thermodynamics , the particle number (symbol N ) of a thermodynamic system is the number of constituent particles in that system.

[ 1 ] The particle number is a fundamental thermodynamic property which is conjugate to the chemical potential . Unlike most physical quantities , the particle number is a dimensionless quantity , specifically a countable quantity . It is an extensive property , as it is directly proportional to the size of the system under consideration and thus meaningful only for closed systems .

A constituent particle is one that cannot be broken into smaller pieces at the scale of energy k·T involved in the process (where k is the Boltzmann constant and T is the temperature ). For example, in a thermodynamic system consisting of a piston containing water vapour , the particle number is the number of water molecules in the system. The meaning of constituent particles, and thereby of particle numbers, is thus temperature-dependent.

Determining the particle number [ edit ] The concept of particle number plays a major role in theoretical considerations. In situations where the actual particle number of a given thermodynamical system needs to be determined, mainly in chemistry , it is not practically possible to measure it directly by counting the particles. If the material is homogeneous and has a known amount of substance n expressed in moles , the particle number N can be found by the relation : N = n N A {\displaystyle N=nN_{A}} ,
where N A is the Avogadro constant .

[ 1 ] Particle number density [ edit ] A related intensive system parameter is the particle number density （or particle number concentration PNC), a quantity of kind volumetric number density obtained by dividing the particle number of a system by its volume . This parameter is often denoted by the lower-case letter n .

In quantum mechanics [ edit ] In quantum mechanical processes, the total number of particles may not be preserved. The concept is therefore generalized to the particle number operator , that is, the observable that counts the number of constituent particles.

[ 2 ] In quantum field theory , the particle number operator (see Fock state ) is conjugate to the phase of the classical wave (see coherent state ).

In air quality [ edit ] One measure of air pollution used in air quality standards is the atmospheric concentration of particulate matter . This measure is usually expressed in μg/m 3 ( micrograms per cubic metre). In the current EU emission norms for cars, vans, and trucks and in the upcoming EU emission norm for non-road mobile machinery, particle number measurements and limits are defined, commonly referred to as PN , with units [#/km] or [#/kWh]. In this case, PN expresses a quantity of particles per unit distance (or work).

References [ edit ] ^ a b Benenson, Walter; Harris, John; Stöcker, Horst (2002).

Handbook of Physics . Springer.

ISBN 0-387-95269-1 .

^ Schumacher, Benjamin; Westmoreland, Michael (2010).

Quantum Processes, Systems, and Information .

Cambridge University Press .

Bibcode : 2010qpsi.book.....S .

v t e Mole concepts Constants Avogadro constant Boltzmann constant Gas constant Faraday constant Molar mass constant Physical quantities Mass concentration Molar concentration Molality Mass Volume Density Mole fraction Mass fraction Amount of substance Molar mass Atomic mass Particle number Pressure Thermodynamic temperature Molar volume Specific volume Laws Charles's law Boyle's law Gay-Lussac's law Combined gas law Avogadro's law Ideal gas law Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Particle_number&oldid=1298227240 " Categories : Thermodynamics Dimensionless numbers of thermodynamics Countable quantities State functions Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 1 July 2025, at 06:36 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Particle number 10 languages Add topic

