Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Name 2 Theory 3 Analysis Toggle Analysis subsection 3.1 Equipment 4 See also 5 References Toggle References subsection 5.1 Works cited 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Scythian archers 4 languages Ελληνικά Italiano Русский Suomi Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Supposed police force of Classical Athens Law enforcement agency Scythian archers Speusinioi Σπευσίνιοι An Attic red-figure vase-painting of a Scythian archer by Epiktetos , 520–500 BC Agency overview Formed 5th century BC Dissolved 4th century BC Employees 300–1,200 [ 1 ] [ 2 ] Legal personality Government agency Jurisdictional structure National agency Classical Athens Operations jurisdiction Classical Athens General nature Local civilian police Operational structure Headquarters Tents or wooden barracks in the Agora and later on the Areopagus [ 3 ] Elected officer responsible The Eleven [ 4 ] Notables Person Speusinos, for allegedly establishing the force The Scythian archers were a hypothesized police force of 5th- and early 4th-century BC Athens that is recorded in some Greek artworks and literature. The force is said to have consisted of 300 armed Scythians (a nomadic Iranic people living in the Eurasian Steppe ) who were public slaves in Athens. They acted on behalf of a group of eleven elected Athenian magistrates "who were responsible for arrests and executions and for some aspects of public order" in the city. Despite being called "archers", the Scythian police probably did not use bows and arrows.

One of Aristophanes's comedies has a Scythian archer as a character, and he speaks broken Greek with an accent.

Name [ edit ] The Scythian archers were called toxotai ( τοξόται , literally "[the] archers"), Skythai ( Σκύθαι , literally "[the] Scythians "), and Speusinioi ( Σπευσίνιοι ), which was named after a certain Speusinos, the alleged founder of the force.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] Theory [ edit ] The theory regarding the "police force" role of the Scythian archers in 5th- and early 4th-century BC Athens is mainly based on some possible evidence from Attic vase paintings and the works of the ancient Athenian playwright Aristophanes . The force is said to have consisted of 300 public slaves ( demosioi ), who wore Scythian dress and were equipped with bows and arrows in gorytos (the Scythian people were skilled archers). As portrayed on Attic vase paintings, the Scythian archers were distinguished by high pointed headdresses and wide trousers.

[ 7 ] They were said to have been used to maintain order in the Assembly and the council, though they had little authority themselves.

[ 5 ] [ 8 ] [ 9 ] [ 10 ] They acted for the Eleven ( οἱ ἕνδεκα ), a group of eleven elected magistrates in Athens, "who were responsible for arrests and executions and for some aspects of public order".

[ 4 ] Analysis [ edit ] Scholars [ who?

] agree that a Scythian police force of some sort existed in Athens in the 5th century, although no one knows when it was first established or how long it lasted.

[ 8 ] The evidence for Scythian archers as early as the 6th century BC is inconclusive.

[ 11 ] The Scythian archers that appear to be attending to the hoplites on the Attic vase paintings of the 6th century BC are not necessarily related to the Scythian "police force" of the 5th century BC.

[ 2 ] [ 12 ] The police force, the number of which is said to have swelled to 1,200 at some point, may have been involved in wartime conflicts as well.

[ 2 ] Balbina Bäbler points to archeological evidence for Scythians in the 4th century, including the stele of Getes, buried Scythian arrowheads , and other Greek-style grave stelae.

[ 8 ] It is impossible to know whether these Scythians represent a continuation of the police force known earlier or whether Scythian women also lived in Athens.

[ 8 ] Scholars are unsure why Athenians would employ "barbarians", although it's possible that foreign slaves far from home would compose a more faithful police force than locals would.

[ 8 ] It is also not clear why bows and arrows were appropriate weapons for the cramped city of Athens.

[ 8 ] In the comedy works of Aristophanes , the dialects of various Greek people are imitated. In his Thesmophoriazusae , the Scythian archer speaks broken Greek, consistently omitting the final -s ( -ς ) and -n ( ν ), using the lenis in place of the aspirate , and once using x ( ξ ) in place of s ( σ ). These have been noted by John William Donaldson to discuss the largely unknown Scythian languages .

[ 13 ] Equipment [ edit ] Despite their name and the presence of archers in Athenian art, researchers have questioned whether the Scythian police would have actually used bows and arrows. Archery expert Mike Loades argued that the Athenian vase paintings do not depict realistic Scythian composite bows , quivers, and clothing, especially compared to those known from original Scythian art. Accordingly, he has described the vase paintings as "fantasy 'dress-up ' " by artists who wanted to depict the Scythians as exotic, but had probably never seen a Scythian bow beforehand. In this case, the term "archers" for the Athenian police force would be a byword for the police's ethnic composition, not its actual equipment.

[ 14 ] To support this view, Loades points out that all ancient literary references to the "Scythian archers" describe them as beating up people, and never as them using bows.

[ 15 ] Archaeological evidence also points at the Scythian police having used horse-whips with wooden handles on duty, similar to those used by some modern police units.

[ 16 ] See also [ edit ] Mamluks Peloponnesian War References [ edit ] ^ Wickramasinghe, Chandima S. M. (2005).

Slavery from known to unknown : a comparative study of slavery in ancient Greek poleis and ancient Sri Lanka . John and Erica Hedges. p. 16.

ISBN 9781841717302 .

^ a b c Vos, M. F. (1963).

Scythian Archers in Archaic Attic Vase-painting . J. B. Wolters. p. 68.

^ Braund, David (2005).

Scythians and Greeks: Cultural Interactions in Scythia, Athens and the Early Roman Empire (sixth Century BC - First Century AD) . University of Exeter Press. p. 120.

ISBN 9780859897464 .

^ a b Hunter, Virginia J. (2019).

Policing Athens: Social Control in the Attic Lawsuits, 420-320 B.C . Princeton University Press. pp. 146, 186.

ISBN 9780691194608 .

^ a b Rhodes, Peter J.

(Durham), “Scythians”, in: Brill's New Pauly, Antiquity volumes edited by: Hubert Cancik and Helmuth Schneider, English Edition by: Christine F. Salazar, Classical Tradition volumes edited by: Manfred Landfester, English Edition by: Francis G. Gentry. Consulted online on 13 January 2019 < https://dx.doi.org/10.1163/1574-9347_bnp_e1115610 > ^ "Demosii" .

Harpers Dictionary of Classical Antiquities (1898) . Retrieved 13 January 2019 .

^ Fields, Nic (2008).

Syracuse 415-413 BC . Bloomsbury USA. p.

35 .

ISBN 978-1-84603-258-5 .

^ a b c d e f Bäbler, Balbina (2004).

"Bobbies or Boobies? The Scythian Police Force in Classical Athens" . In Braund, David (ed.).

Scythians and Greeks: cultural interactions in Scythia, Athens and the early Roman Empire (sixth century BC-first century AD) . Exeter: University of Exeter Press. pp.

114– 122.

ISBN 085989746X . Retrieved 13 January 2019 .

^ Hornblower, Simon ; Spawforth, Antony; Eidinow, Esther (2012).

The Oxford Classical Dictionary . OUP Oxford. p. 1169b.

ISBN 9780199545568 .

^ Long, Timothy (1986).

Barbarians in Greek comedy . Southern Illinois University Press. p. 105.

ISBN 9780809312481 .

^ Slater, William J. (1991).

Dining in a Classical Context . University of Michigan Press. p. 61.

ISBN 9780472101948 .

^ Ivantchik, Askold (1 December 2006). " 'Scythian' Archers on Archaic Attic Vases: Problems of Interpretation".

Ancient Civilizations from Scythia to Siberia .

12 (3): 197– 271.

doi : 10.1163/157005706779851408 .

^ Donaldson, John William (1844).

Varronianus: A Critical and Historical Introduction to the Philological Study of the Latin Language . J. and J. J. Deighton. p.

32 .

^ Loades 2019 , p. 221.

^ Loades 2019 , pp. 221–222.

^ Loades 2019 , p. 222.

Works cited [ edit ] Loades, Mike (2019).

War Bows . Oxford; New York City: Osprey Publishing.

ISBN 978-1-4728-2553-7 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Scythian archers in art .

Scythian Archers , stoa.org v t e Ancient Greece Timeline History Geography Periods Cycladic civilization Minoan civilization Mycenaean Greece Greek Dark Ages Archaic Greece Classical Greece Hellenistic Greece Roman Greece Geography Aegean Sea Aeolis Crete Cyrenaica Cyprus Doris Epirus Hellespont Ionia Ionian Sea Macedonia Magna Graecia Peloponnesus Pontus Taurica Ancient Greek colonies City states Politics Military City states Argos Athens Byzantion Chalcis Corinth Ephesus Miletus Pergamon Eretria Kerkyra Larissa Megalopolis Thebes Megara Rhodes Samos Sparta Lissus (Crete) Kingdoms Bithynia Cappadocia Epirus Greco-Bactrian Kingdom Indo-Greek Kingdom Macedonia Pergamon Pontus Ptolemaic Kingdom Seleucid Empire Federations / Confederations Doric Hexapolis ( c.

1100 – c.

560 BC ) Italiote League ( c.

800 –389 BC) Ionian League (c. 650–404 BC) Peloponnesian League ( c.

550 –366 BC) Amphictyonic League ( c.

595 –279 BC) Acarnanian League (c. 500–31 BC) Hellenic League (499–449 BC) Delian League (478–404 BC) Chalcidian League (430–348 BC) Boeotian League (c. 424–c. 395 BC) Aetolian League (c. 400–188 BC) Second Athenian League (378–355 BC) Thessalian League (374–196 BC) Arcadian League (370–c. 230 BC) Epirote League (370–168 BC) League of Corinth (338–322 BC) Euboean League (c. 300 BC–c. 300 AD) Achaean League (280–146 BC) Politics Boule Free city Koinon Proxeny Stasis Tagus Tyrant Athenian Agora Areopagus Ecclesia Graphe paranomon Heliaia Ostracism Spartan Ekklesia Ephor Gerousia Macedon Synedrion Koinon Military Wars Athenian military Scythian archers Antigonid Macedonian army Army of Macedon Ballista Cretan archers Hellenistic armies Hippeis Hoplite Hetairoi Macedonian phalanx Military of Mycenaean Greece Phalanx Peltast Pezhetairos Sarissa Sacred Band of Thebes Sciritae Seleucid army Spartan army Strategos Toxotai Xiphos Xyston People List of ancient Greeks Rulers Kings of Argos Archons of Athens Kings of Athens Kings of Commagene Diadochi Kings of Macedonia Kings of Paionia Attalid kings of Pergamon Kings of Pontus Ptolemaic dynasty Seleucid dynasty Kings of Sparta Tyrants of Syracuse Artists & scholars Astronomers Geographers Historians Mathematicians Philosophers Playwrights Poets Seven Sages Writers Philosophers Anaxagoras Anaximander Anaximenes Antisthenes Aristotle Democritus Diogenes of Sinope Empedocles Epicurus Gorgias Heraclitus Hypatia Leucippus Parmenides Plato Protagoras Pythagoras Socrates Thales Zeno Authors Aeschylus Aesop Alcaeus Archilochus Aristophanes Bacchylides Euripides Herodotus Hesiod Hipponax Homer Ibycus Lucian Menander Mimnermus Panyassis Philocles Pindar Plutarch Polybius Sappho Simonides Sophocles Stesichorus Theognis Thucydides Timocreon Tyrtaeus Xenophon Others Athenian statesmen Lawgivers Olympic victors Tyrants By culture Ancient Greek tribes Thracian Greeks Ancient Macedonians Society Culture Society Agriculture Calendar Clothing Coinage Cuisine Economy Education Emporium Euergetism Festivals Folklore Homosexuality Law Olympic Games Pederasty Philosophy Prostitution Religion Slavery Warfare Wedding customs Wine Arts and science Architecture Greek Revival architecture Astronomy Literature Mathematics Medicine Music Musical system Pottery Sculpture Technology Theatre Religion Funeral and burial practices Mythology Deities Temple Twelve Olympians Underworld Sacred places Eleusis Delphi Delos Dion Dodona Mount Olympus Olympia Structures Athenian Treasury Lion Gate Long Walls Philippeion Theatre of Dionysus Tunnel of Eupalinos Temples Aphaea Artemis Athena Nike Erechtheion Hephaestus Hera, Olympia Parthenon Samothrace Zeus, Olympia Language Proto-Greek Mycenaean Homeric Dialects Aeolic Arcadocypriot Attic Doric Epirote Ionic Locrian Macedonian Pamphylian Koine Writing Linear A Linear B Cypriot syllabary Greek alphabet Greek numerals Attic numerals Greek colonisation Magna Graecia Mainland Italy Alision Brentesion Caulonia Chone Croton Cumae Elea Heraclea Lucania Hipponion Hydrus Krimisa Laüs Locri Medma Metauros Metapontion Neápolis Pandosia (Lucania) Poseidonia Pixous Rhegion Scylletium Siris Sybaris Sybaris on the Traeis Taras Terina Thurii Sicily Akragas Akrai Akrillai Apollonia Calacte Casmenae Catana Gela Helorus Henna Heraclea Minoa Himera Hybla Gereatis Hybla Heraea Kamarina Leontinoi Megara Hyblaea Messana Naxos Segesta Selinous Syracuse Tauromenion Thermae Tyndaris Aeolian Islands Didyme Euonymos Ereikousa Hycesia Lipara/Meligounis Phoenicusa Strongyle Therassía Cyrenaica Balagrae Barca Berenice Cyrene ( Apollonia ) Ptolemais Iberian Peninsula Akra Leuke Alonis Emporion Helike Hemeroscopion Kalathousa Kypsela Mainake Menestheus's Limin Illicitanus Limin/Portus Illicitanus Rhode Salauris Zacynthos Illyria Aspalathos Apollonia Aulon Epidamnos Epidauros Issa Melaina Korkyra Nymphaion Orikon Pharos Tragurion Thronion Black Sea basin North coast Akra Borysthenes Charax Chersonesus Dioscurias Gorgippia Hermonassa Kalos Limen Kepoi Kerkinitis Kimmerikon Myrmekion Nikonion Nymphaion Olbia Pantikapaion Phanagoria Pityus Tanais Theodosia Tyras Tyritake South coast Abonoteichos Amisos Anchialos Apollonia Athina Bathus Dionysopolis Cotyora Cytorus Eupatoria Heraclea Kerasous Mesambria Odessos Oinòe Phasis Polemonion Rhizos Salmydessus Sesamus Sinope Thèrmae Tium Trapezous Tripolis Zaliche Lists Cities in Epirus People Place names Stoae Temples Theatres Category Portal Outline v t e Scythia Peoples Achaei Agathyrsi Amardi Amazons Androphagi Arimaspi Budini Cercetae Cimmerians Cyrtians Dahae Parni Gelonians Melanchlaeni Saka Amyrgians Massagetae Indo-Scythians Sarmatians / Sauromatians Agaragantes Alans Aorsi Cissianti Limigantes Phoristae Rimphaces Roxolani Serboi Siraces Spondolici Yancai Iazyges Scythians Abii Cadusii Dareitai Gelae Hamaxobii Legae Sindi Spali Pazyryk culture Tagar culture Tapurei Tapuri Tauri Thyssagetae Uxii Zygii Scythian and related populations Culture Art Jewellery Culture Horizon Languages Religion Regions Kazakh Steppe Sistan Sakasene Alania Scythia Minor Crimea Lower Danube Sarmatia Pontic–Caspian steppe Related Iranian peoples History of the western steppe History of the Scythians Bosporan Kingdom Sarmatism Iranian origin hypotheses of Croats and Serbs Scythian archers Category:Scythia , Category:Populated places in ancient Scythia Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Scythian_archers&oldid=1290319383 " Categories : Classical Athens Crime in Athens Military archers Slave soldiers Government of ancient Athens Ancient Greek vase painting Scythian people Historical law enforcement occupations 5th-century BC establishments in Greece 4th-century BC disestablishments in Greece 5th-century BC Greek art 5th-century BC Athenians 4th-century BC Athenians 5th century BC in law 4th century BC in law Ancient soldiers Expatriate military units and formations Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Pages using law enforcement agency with local civilian police general nature All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from November 2024 Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 14 May 2025, at 02:23 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Scythian archers 4 languages Add topic

