Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Removal from ICD 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Sexual relationship disorder 5 languages العربية বাংলা Français Português 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Medical condition Sexual relationship disorder Specialty Psychiatry Sexual orientation Sexual orientations Asexual Bisexual Heterosexual Homosexual Gay men Lesbian Related terms Achillean & Sapphism Allosexual Androphilia & Gynephilia Bi-curious Fictosexual Gray asexual Aegosexual Demisexual Monosexual Non-heterosexual Pansexual Plurisexual Queer Queer heterosexual Research Biological Birth order Epigenetic Handedness Neuroscientific Prenatal hormones Demographics Environment Female Male Kinsey scale Klein Grid Queer studies Sexology Timeline Transgender sexuality Non-human animals Animal sexual behavior Non-reproductive Homosexual List Related topics Aromanticism Criminalization Rights by country Men who have sex with men Questioning Rights Romantic orientation Sexual fluidity Situational Split attraction model Women who have sex with women Category v t e Sexual relationship disorder was listed in the tenth edition of the World Health Organization 's (WHO) International Classification of Diseases , the ICD-10 , the most widely used diagnostic manual by psychiatrists and psychologists worldwide.

[ 1 ] It was described as a disorder where a person has difficulties forming or maintaining a sexual relationship because of their gender identity or sexual orientation . In 2014, it was determined that there was no justification for the existence of this mental disorder category, and the diagnosis was not included in the ICD-11 , which went into effect in January 2022.

[ 2 ] History [ edit ] Sexual relationship disorder, along with ego-dystonic sexual orientation and sexual maturation disorder , was introduced to the ICD in 1990, replacing the ICD-9 diagnosis of homosexuality.

[ 3 ] The following note was applied to the entirety of part F66, the section in which these three diagnoses appeared: "Sexual orientation by itself is not to be regarded as a disorder." [ 4 ] Removal from ICD [ edit ] As part of the development of the ICD-11, the WHO appointed a Working Group on the Classification of Sexual Disorders and Sexual Health to make recommendations on the disease categories related to sexual orientation (part F66). The working group recommended the entire part F66 be deleted due to a lack of clinical utility, a lack of usefulness in public health data, and the potential for negative consequences, including the risk that these categories might lend support to "ineffective and unethical treatment" such as conversion therapy .

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] It noted that there is no evidence that non-heterosexual sexual orientation is itself a cause of distress; instead, there is robust empirical evidence that psychological symptoms in non-heterosexual people are the product of discrimination, social rejection , and stigma.

[ 2 ] [ 1 ] In reference to sexual relationship disorder specifically, the working group noted that difficulties in sexual relationships are common and have many causes, and concluded that "there is no justification for creating a mental disorder category that is specifically based on the co-occurrence of relationship problems with sexual orientation or gender identity issues" when no other causes of relationship difficulties receive a diagnostic category.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] Accordingly, the ICD-11 does not include any diagnostic categories that can be applied to people on the basis of sexual orientation, bringing the ICD in line with the DSM-5 .

[ 1 ] See also [ edit ] Ego-dystonic sexual orientation Homosexuality and psychology Mixed-orientation marriage Homosexuality in the DSM References [ edit ] ^ a b c Robles, Rebeca; Real, Tania; Reed, Geoffrey M. (2021).

"Depathologizing Sexual Orientation and Transgender Identities in Psychiatric Classifications" .

Consortium Psychiatricum .

2 (2): 45– 53.

doi : 10.17816/CP61 .

ISSN 2713-2919 .

PMC 11272317 .

PMID 39070736 .

S2CID 241240350 .

^ a b Reed, Geoffrey M.; Drescher, Jack; Krueger, Richard B.; Atalla, Elham; Cochran, Susan D.; First, Michael B.; Cohen-Kettenis, Peggy T.; Arango-de Montis, Iván; Parish, Sharon J.; Cottler, Sara; Briken, Peer (2016).

"Disorders related to sexuality and gender identity in the ICD-11: revising the ICD-10 classification based on current scientific evidence, best clinical practices, and human rights considerations" .

World Psychiatry .

15 (3): 205– 221.

doi : 10.1002/wps.20354 .

ISSN 1723-8617 .

PMC 5032510 .

PMID 27717275 .

^ Drescher, Jack (2015).

"Queer diagnoses revisited: The past and future of homosexuality and gender diagnoses in DSM and ICD" .

International Review of Psychiatry .

27 (5): 386– 395.

doi : 10.3109/09540261.2015.1053847 .

ISSN 0954-0261 .

PMID 26242413 .

S2CID 8669636 .

^ ICD-10 : See part F66.

^ a b Cochran, Susan D; Drescher, Jack; Kismödi, Eszter; Giami, Alain; García-Moreno, Claudia; Atalla, Elham; Marais, Adele; Vieira, Elisabeth Meloni; Reed, Geoffrey M (2014).

"Proposed declassification of disease categories related to sexual orientation in theInternational Statistical Classification of Diseases and Related Health Problems(ICD-11)" .

Bulletin of the World Health Organization .

92 (9): 672– 679.

doi : 10.2471/blt.14.135541 .

ISSN 0042-9686 .

PMC 4208576 .

PMID 25378758 .

^ a b Cochran, Susan D.; Drescher, Jack; Kismödi, Eszter; Giami, Alain; García-Moreno, Claudia; Atalla, Elham; Marais, Adele; Meloni Vieira, Elisabeth; Reed, Geoffrey M. (2020).

"Proposed Declassification of Disease Categories Related to Sexual Orientation in the International Statistical Classification of Diseases and Related Health Problems (ICD-11)" .

FOCUS .

18 (3): 351– 357.

doi : 10.1176/appi.focus.18303 .

ISSN 1541-4094 .

PMC 7587922 .

PMID 33343245 .

External links [ edit ] Classification D ICD - 10 : F66.2 v t e Mental disorders ( Classification ) Adult personality and behavior Sexual Ego-dystonic sexual orientation Paraphilia Fetishism Voyeurism Sexual anhedonia Sexual anorexia Sexual maturation disorder Sexual relationship disorder Other Factitious disorder Munchausen syndrome Fear of intimacy Gender dysphoria Intermittent explosive disorder Dermatillomania Kleptomania Pyromania Trichotillomania Personality disorder Childhood and learning Emotional and behavioral ADHD Conduct disorder ODD Emotional and behavioral disorders Separation anxiety disorder Movement disorders Stereotypic Social functioning DAD RAD Selective mutism Speech Cluttering Stuttering Tic disorder Tourette syndrome Intellectual disability X-linked intellectual disability Lujan–Fryns syndrome Psychological development ( developmental disabilities ) Pervasive Specific Mood (affective) Bipolar Bipolar I Bipolar II Bipolar NOS Cyclothymia Depression Atypical depression Dysthymia Major depressive disorder Melancholic depression Seasonal affective disorder Mania Neurological and symptomatic Autism spectrum Autism Asperger syndrome High-functioning autism PDD-NOS Savant syndrome Dementia AIDS dementia complex Alzheimer's disease Creutzfeldt–Jakob disease Frontotemporal dementia Huntington's disease Mild cognitive impairment Parkinson's disease Pick's disease Sundowning Vascular dementia Wandering Other Delirium Organic brain syndrome Post-concussion syndrome Neurotic , stress -related and somatoform Adjustment Adjustment disorder with depressed mood Anxiety Phobia Agoraphobia Childhood phobia Social anxiety Social phobia Anthropophobia Specific social phobia Specific phobia Claustrophobia Other Generalized anxiety disorder OCD Panic attack Panic disorder Paranoia Stress Acute stress reaction PTSD Dissociative Depersonalization-derealization disorder Dissociative identity disorder Dissociative amnesia Dissociative fugue Dissociative disorder not otherwise specified Other specified dissociative disorder Somatic symptom Body dysmorphic disorder Conversion disorder Ganser syndrome Globus pharyngeus Psychogenic non-epileptic seizures False pregnancy Hypochondriasis Mass psychogenic illness Nosophobia Psychogenic pain Somatization disorder Physiological and physical behavior Eating Anorexia nervosa Bulimia nervosa Rumination syndrome Other specified feeding or eating disorder Nonorganic sleep Hypersomnia Insomnia Parasomnia Night terror Nightmare REM sleep behavior disorder Postnatal Postpartum depression Postpartum psychosis Sexual desire Hypersexuality Hypoactive sexual desire disorder Psychoactive substances, substance abuse and substance-related Drug overdose Hallucinogen persisting perception disorder Intoxication Physical dependence Rebound effect Stimulant psychosis Substance dependence Substance-induced psychosis Withdrawal Schizophrenia , schizotypal and delusional Delusional Delusional disorder Folie à deux Psychosis and schizophrenia-like Brief reactive psychosis Schizoaffective disorder Schizophreniform disorder Schizophrenia Childhood schizophrenia Disorganized (hebephrenic) schizophrenia Pseudoneurotic schizophrenia Simple-type schizophrenia Other Catatonia Symptoms and uncategorized Impulse-control disorder Klüver–Bucy syndrome Psychomotor agitation Stereotypy Caregiver burden Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Sexual_relationship_disorder&oldid=1292577125 " Categories : Anxiety disorders Sexual orientation and psychology Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 27 May 2025, at 18:56 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Sexual relationship disorder 5 languages Add topic

