Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Articles and columns 3 Popularity 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Astronomy (magazine) 8 languages العربية فارسی Français 日本語 Română Русский Suomi 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American monthly magazine For other uses, see Astronomy (disambiguation) .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Astronomy" magazine – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( October 2009 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Astronomy January 2020 cover of Astronomy Editor David J. Eicher Categories Amateur Astronomy Frequency Monthly Circulation 84,490 Publisher Kevin Keefe First issue August 1973 ; 52 years ago ( 1973-08 ) Company Firecrown Media Country United States Based in Brookfield, Wisconsin , U.S.

Language English Website astronomy.com ISSN 0091-6358 Astronomy is a monthly American magazine about astronomy . Targeting amateur astronomers , it contains columns on sky viewing, reader-submitted astrophotographs , and articles on astronomy and astrophysics for general readers.

History [ edit ] Astronomy is a magazine about the science and hobby of astronomy . Based near Milwaukee in Brookfield, Wisconsin , it was produced by Kalmbach Publishing .

Astronomy ’s readers include those interested in astronomy and those who want to know about sky events, observing techniques, astrophotography, and amateur astronomy in general.

Astronomy was founded in 1973 by Stephen A. Walther, a graduate of the University of Wisconsin–Stevens Point and amateur astronomer. The first issue, August 1973, consisted of 48 pages with five feature articles and information about what to see in the sky that month. Issues contained astrophotos and illustrations created by astronomical artists. Walther had worked part time as a planetarium lecturer at the University of Wisconsin–Milwaukee and developed an interest in photographing constellations at an early age. Although even in childhood he was interested to obsession in astronomy, he did so poorly in mathematics that his mother despaired that he would ever be able to earn a living. However he graduated in Journalism from the University of Wisconsin-Stevens Point , and as a senior class project he created a business plan for a magazine for amateur astronomers. With the help of his brother David, he was able to bring the magazine to fruition. He died in 1977.

[ 1 ] AstroMedia Corp., the company Walther had founded to publish Astronomy in Milwaukee, brought in Richard Berry as editor. Berry also created the offshoot Odyssey , aimed at young readers, and the specialized Telescope Making . In 1985, Milwaukee hobby publisher Kalmbach bought Astronomy .

In 1992, Richard Berry left the magazine and Robert Burnham took over as chief editor. Kalmbach discontinued Deep Sky and Telescope Making magazines and sold Odyssey . In 1996 Bonnie Gordon, now a professor at Central Arizona College, assumed the editorship. David J. Eicher, the creator of "Deep Sky," became chief editor in 2002.

[ 1 ] The Astronomy staff also produces other publications. These have included Explore the Universe ; Beginner’s Guide to Astronomy ; Origin and Fate of the Universe ; Mars: Explore the Red Planet's Past, Present, and Future ; Atlas of the Stars ; Cosmos ; and 50 Greatest Mysteries of the Universe . There also was, for a time in the mid-2000s, a Brazilian edition – published by Duetto Editora – called Astronomy Brasil . However, due mainly to low circulation numbers, Duetto ceased its publication in September 2007.

The magazine along with Kalmbach Media's railroad interest magazines, was sold to Firecrown Media in 2024.

[ 2 ] Articles and columns [ edit ] Astronomy publishes articles about the hobby and science of astronomy . Generally, the front half of the magazine reports on professional science, while the back half of the magazine presents items of interest to hobbyists. Science articles cover such topics as cosmology, space exploration, exobiology , research conducted by professional-class observatories, and individual professional astronomers. Each issue of Astronomy contains a foldout star map showing the evening sky for the current month and the positions of planets , and some comets .

The magazine has regular columnists. They include science writer Bob Berman , who writes a column called “Bob Berman’s Strange Universe”.

Stephen James O'Meara writes “Stephen James O’Meara’s Secret Sky,” which covers observing tips and stories relating to deep-sky objects, planets, and comets.

Glenn Chaple writes "Glenn Chaple’s Observing Basics", a beginner's column.

Phil Harrington writes "Phil Harrington’s Binocular Universe", about observing with binoculars. "Telescope Insider" interviews people who are a part of the telescope-manufacturing industry.

In each issue of Astronomy magazine, readers will find star and planet charts, telescope observing tips and techniques, and advice on taking photography of the night sky.

[ 3 ] The magazine also publishes reader-submitted photos in a gallery, lists astronomy-related events, letters from readers, news, and announcements of new products.

Astronomy may include special sections bound into the magazine, such as booklets or posters. Recent examples have included a Messier Catalog booklet, poster showing comet C/2006 P1 (McNaught) and historical comets, a Skyguide listing upcoming sky events, a Telescope Buyer's Guide; a poster titled "Atlas of Extrasolar Planets"; and a poster showing the life cycles of stars.

Popularity [ edit ] Astronomy is the largest circulation astronomy magazine, with monthly circulation of 84,490. The majority of its readers are in the United States, but it is also circulated in Canada and internationally.

[ 4 ] Its major competitor is Sky & Telescope magazine with a total circulation of 62,234 (2020).

[ 5 ] See also [ edit ] Amateur astronomy Amateur telescope making References [ edit ] ^ a b David Eicher (April 9, 2013).

"Astronomy magazine: 40 years and counting" .

Astronomy.com . Archived from the original on August 30, 2022 . Retrieved January 20, 2021 .

^ Fuller, Craig (May 1, 2024).

"Firecrown Media Grows Again with Addition of 'Trains,' 'Astronomy' " .

flyingmag.com . Firecrown Media . Retrieved May 1, 2024 .

^ "Astronomy Magazine" . Science & Nature Magazines . Retrieved April 23, 2014 .

^ "Astronomy (subscription page)" . Kevin Keefe . Retrieved December 29, 2009 .

^ "Sky and Telescope 2021 overview" (PDF) .

External links [ edit ] Official website v t e Kalmbach Media Art Jewelry Astronomy Bead&Button Classic Toy Trains Classic Trains Discover Fine Scale Modeler Garden Railways Model Railroader Scale Auto Trains Portals : Astronomy Stars Spaceflight Outer space Solar System Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Astronomy_(magazine)&oldid=1280365891 " Categories : 1973 establishments in Wisconsin Amateur astronomy Astronomy magazines Magazines established in 1973 Magazines published in Wisconsin Science and technology magazines published in the United States Monthly magazines published in the United States Mass media in Milwaukee Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from October 2009 All articles needing additional references Use mdy dates from March 2025 This page was last edited on 14 March 2025, at 05:17 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Astronomy (magazine) 8 languages Add topic

