Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Applications 2 History 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Flint glass 20 languages العربية Català Čeština Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Français Gaeilge Italiano Magyar Nederlands Polski Русский Slovenščina Svenska தமிழ் Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Type of optical glass This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Flint glass" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( December 2016 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) An Abbe diagram, also known as 'the glass veil',  plots the Abbe number against refractive index for a range of different glasses (red dots). Glasses are classified using the Schott Glass letter-number code to reflect their composition and position on the diagram.

Flint glass is optical glass that has relatively high refractive index and low Abbe number (high dispersion ).  Flint glasses are arbitrarily defined as having an Abbe number of 50 to 55 or less.   The currently known flint glasses have refractive indices ranging between 1.45 and 2.00.

Traditionally, flint glasses were lead glasses containing around 4–60% lead(II) oxide ; however, the manufacture and disposal of these glasses were sources of pollution .

In many modern flint glasses, lead oxides are replaced with other metal oxides such as titanium dioxide and zirconium dioxide without significantly altering the optical properties of the glass.

Applications [ edit ] An achromatic doublet , which combines crown glass and flint glass .

A concave lens of flint glass is commonly combined with a convex lens of crown glass to produce an achromatic doublet lens because of their compensating optical properties , which reduces chromatic aberration (colour defects).

History [ edit ] With respect to glass, the term flint derives from the flint nodules found in the chalk deposits of southeast England that were used as a source of high purity silica by George Ravenscroft , c.

1662 , to produce a potash lead glass that was the precursor to English lead crystal .

See also [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Flint glass .

Crown glass (optics) Chromatic aberration Cup plate References [ edit ] Kurkjian, Charles R.; Prindle, William R. (1998). "Perspectives on the History of Glass Composition".

Journal of the American Ceramic Society .

81 (4): 795– 813.

doi : 10.1111/j.1151-2916.1998.tb02415.x .

v t e Glass science topics Basics Glass Glass transition Supercooling Formulation AgInSbTe Bioglass Borophosphosilicate glass Borosilicate glass Ceramic glaze Chalcogenide glass Cobalt glass Cranberry glass Crown glass Flint glass Fluorosilicate glass Fused quartz GeSbTe Gold ruby glass Lead glass Milk glass Phosphosilicate glass Photochromic lens glass Silicate glass Soda–lime glass Sodium hexametaphosphate Soluble glass Tellurite glass Thoriated glass Ultra low expansion glass Uranium glass Vitreous enamel Wood's glass ZBLAN Glass-ceramics Bioactive glass CorningWare Glass-ceramic-to-metal seals Macor Zerodur Preparation Annealing Chemical vapor deposition Glass batch calculation Glass forming Glass melting Glass modeling Ion implantation Liquidus temperature sol–gel technique Viscosity Vitrification Optics Achromat Dispersion Gradient-index optics Hydrogen darkening Optical amplifier Optical fiber Optical lens design Photochromic lens Photosensitive glass Refraction Transparent materials Surface modification Anti-reflective coating Chemically strengthened glass Corrosion Dealkalization DNA microarray Hydrogen darkening Insulated glazing Porous glass Self-cleaning glass sol–gel technique Tempered glass Diverse topics Conservation and restoration of glass objects Glass-coated wire Safety glass Glass databases Glass electrode Glass fiber reinforced concrete Glass ionomer cement Glass microspheres Glass-reinforced plastic Glass cloth Glass-to-metal seal Porous glass Pre-preg Prince Rupert's drops Radioactive waste vitrification Windshield Glass fiber Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Flint_glass&oldid=1241137298 " Categories : Glass compositions Diamond simulants Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from December 2016 All articles needing additional references Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 19 August 2024, at 14:56 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Flint glass 20 languages Add topic

