Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Background 3 Gemological instruments 4 General identification of gems Toggle General identification of gems subsection 4.1 Identification by refractive index 4.2 Identification by specific gravity 4.3 Identification by spectroscopy 4.4 Identification by inclusions 4.5 Identification by flaws and striations 5 Institutes, laboratories, schools, and publications Toggle Institutes, laboratories, schools, and publications subsection 5.1 Institutes 5.2 Commercial laboratories 5.3 Publications 6 Footnotes 7 References Toggle the table of contents Gemology 43 languages العربية Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Қазақша Lietuvių Magyar Македонски മലയാളം Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Română Русский Саха тыла Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt Winaray 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Science dealing with natural and artificial gemstone materials Examining a pink sapphire under a gemmological microscope Gemology or gemmology is the science dealing with natural and artificial gemstone materials. It is a specific interdisciplinary branch of mineralogy . Some jewelers (and many non-jewelers) are academically trained gemologists and are qualified to identify and evaluate gems.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] History [ edit ] Rudimentary education in gemology for jewellers and gemologists began in the nineteenth century, but the first qualifications were instigated after the National Association of Goldsmiths of Great Britain (NAG) set up [ 3 ] as an Education Committee for this purpose in 1908. The committee emerged as a distinct branch of NAG (named the Gemmological Association) in 1931, shortly after the incorporation of the Gemological Institute of America (GIA).

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] In 1938 the branch was renamed as the Gemmological Association of Great Britain , before being incorporated in 1847.

[ 4 ] The organisation is now an educational charity and accredited awarding body with its courses taught worldwide.

The first US graduate of Gem-A's diploma course, in 1929, was Robert Shipley , who then established both the Gemological Institute of America and the American Gem Society . There are now several professional schools and associations of gemologists and certification programs around the world.

The first gemological laboratory serving the jewelry trade was established in London in 1925, prompted by the influx of the newly developed "cultured pearl" and advances in the synthesis of rubies and sapphires.

[ 6 ] There are now numerous gem laboratories around the world requiring ever more advanced equipment and experience to identify the new challenges – such as treatments to gems, new synthetics, and other new materials.

Background [ edit ] It is often difficult to obtain an expert judgement from a neutral laboratory. Analysis and estimation in the gemstone trade usually have to take place on site. Professional gemologists and gemstone buyers use mobile laboratories, which pool all necessary instruments in a travel case. Such so-called travel labs even have their own current supply, which makes them independent from infrastructure. They are also suitable for gemological expeditions.

Gemstones are basically categorized based on their crystal structure , specific gravity , refractive index , and other optical properties, such as pleochroism . The physical property of "hardness" is defined by the irregular Mohs scale of mineral hardness .

Gemologists study these factors while valuing or appraising cut and polished gemstones. Gemological microscopic study of the internal structure is used to determine whether a gem is synthetic or natural by revealing natural fluid inclusions or partially melted exogenous crystals that are evidence of heat treatment to enhance color.

The spectroscopic analysis of cut gemstones also allows a gemologist to understand the atomic structure and identify its origin, which is a major factor in valuing a gemstone. For example, a ruby from Myanmar (Burma) will have definite internal and optical activity variance from a Thai ruby.

When the gemstones are in a rough state, the gemologist studies the external structure; the host rock and mineral association; and natural and polished color. Initially, the stone is identified by its color, refractive index, optical character, specific gravity, and examination of internal characteristics under magnification.

Gemological instruments [ edit ] Gemologists use a variety of tools and equipment which allow for the accurate tests to be performed in order to identify a gemstone by its specific characteristics and properties.

Gemmological travel lab KA52KRS These include: Corrected 10× loupe Microscope Refractometer Polarising filter Magnifying eyepiece Contact liquid for RI ( refractive index ) up to 1.81 Polariscope Optic figure sphere Dichroscope Spectroscope (handheld or desktop) Penlight Tweezers Stone cloth Color filter Immersion cell Ultraviolet lamp General identification of gems [ edit ] A selection of ornamental, non-precious stones made by tumbling rough pebbles with abrasive grit in a rotating drum. The biggest pebble here is 40 millimetres (1.6 in) long.

Gem identification is basically a process of elimination. Gemstones of similar color undergo non-destructive optical testing until there is only one possible identity.

Any single test is nearly always only indicative. For example: The specific gravity of ruby is 4.00, glass is 3.15–4.20, and cubic zirconia is 5.6–5.9 . So one can easily tell the difference between cubic zirconia and the other two; however, there is overlap between ruby and glass.

As with all naturally occurring materials, no two gems are identical. The geological environment they are created in influences the overall process so that although the basics can be identified, the presence of chemical "impurities", and substitutions along with structural imperfections create "individuals".

Identification by refractive index [ edit ] Traditional handheld refractometer One test to determine the gem's identity is to measure the refraction of light in the gem. Essentially, when light passes from one medium to another, it bends. Blue light bends more than red light. How much the light bends will vary depending on the gem mineral.

Every material has a critical angle , above which point light is reflected back internally. This can be measured and thus used to determine the gem's identity. Typically this is measured using a refractometer , although it is possible to measure it using a microscope.

Identification by specific gravity [ edit ] Specific gravity , also known as relative density, varies depending upon the chemical composition and crystal structure type. Heavy liquids with a known specific gravity are used to test loose gemstones.

Specific gravity is measured by comparing the weight of the gem in air with the weight of the gem suspended in water.

Identification by spectroscopy [ edit ] This method uses a similar principle to how a prism works to separate white light into its component colors. A gemological spectroscope is employed to analyze the selective absorption of light in the gem material. Coloring agents or chromophores show bands in the spectroscope and indicate which element is responsible for the gem's color.

Identification by inclusions [ edit ] Three inclusion phases in rock crystal quartz Inclusions can help gemologists to determine whether or not a gemstone is natural, synthetic or treated (i.e. fracture-filled or heated).

Identification by flaws and striations [ edit ] The curvature observed in this synthetic color-change sapphire is due to a process known as the Verneuil process or, flame fusion.

During the Verneuil process for synthesizing gems, a fine crushed material is heated at extremely high temperatures. The powdered gem mineral is then melted (or a metallic mixture directly burned in an oxygen flame) the residue of which then drips through a furnace onto a boule. The boule where the corundum or spinel cools down and crystallizes, spins and thus causes the curved striations, which are diagnostic for a lab-created gem: Natural corundum does not show curved striations.

Likewise, natural stones, particularly beryl minerals, show small flaws – short planar cracks where the direction of the crystalline orientation in the gem abruptly changes. The natural formation of gemstones tends to layer the minerals in regular crystalline sheets, whereas many synthetically produced gems have an amorphous structure, like glass. Synthetics made by the Verneuil process either do not show flaws at all, or if any flaws are present, show curvy, undulating surfaces rather than flat ones.

Institutes, laboratories, schools, and publications [ edit ] Institutes [ edit ] American Gem Society – AGS Asian Institute of Gemological Sciences – AIGS Canadian Gemmological Association – CGA Canadian Institute of Gemmology – CIG Gemological Science International – GSI Gemmological Association of Australia – GAA Gemmological Association of Great Britain – Gem-A Gemological Institute of America – GIA German Gemmological Association – DGemG Guild Education Gemology Institut National de Gemmologie – ING International School of Gemology – ISG Hoge Raad voor Diamant – HRD International Gemological Institute – IGI Italian Gemmological Institute – IGI Institute of Gem Trading – IGT [ 7 ] Gemmological Institute of India – GII Center of Gemological of Indonesia – COG Swiss Gemmological Institute – SSEF World Gem Foundation Commercial laboratories [ edit ] Advanced Gem Testing Laboratory – AGTL American Gemological Laboratories – AGL European Gemological Laboratory – EGL Gübelin Gem Lab – GGL Guild Gem Laboratories Laboratoire français de gemmologie – LFG Professional gemstone testing laboratory – PGTL Himalaya gem testing laboratory – HGTL Universal Gemological Laboratories – GCI Publications [ edit ] The Journal of Gemmology [ a ] Gems & Gemology Gemology Frontier Footnotes [ edit ] ^ The Journal of Gemmology publishes original research articles on all aspects of gemmology, including natural stones and their treatments, synthetics and simulated gemstones. The Journal is currently published by Gemmological Association of Great Britain (Gem-A) in collaboration with the Swiss Gemmological Institute (SSEF) and with support from American Gemological Laboratories (AGL).

[ 8 ] References [ edit ] ^ "Gemologist" .

Dictionary of occupational titles . Photius Coutsoukis and Information Technology Associates. 2003 . Retrieved 2009-11-08 .

^ "An introduction to gemology" .

International Gem Society . Retrieved 2017-08-28 .

^ "History" .

Gemmological Association of Great Britain (Gem-A) .

^ a b "Sixty years of gemmology in Great Britain" (PDF) .

The Journal of Gemmology .

11 (3): 71. 1968.

^ Overlin, Stuart; Dirlam, Dona (2009).

"Celebrating 75 years of Gems & Gemology" (PDF) .

Gems & Gemology .

45 (2): 80.

doi : 10.5741/GEMS.45.2.80 .

ISSN 0016-626X .

^ Read, Peter G. (2005).

Gemmology . Butterworth-Heinemann.

ISBN 9780750664493 .

^ "Institute of Gem Trading" .

Institute of Gem Trading . Thailand . Retrieved 2019-10-13 .

^ "The Journal of Gemmology" .

Gemmological Association of Great Britain (Gem-A) (subscription page).

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Diploma in Basic Techniques of Jewellery .

Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐49qb4
Cached time: 20250811235203
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.285 seconds
Real time usage: 0.391 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1434/1000000
Revision size: 12583/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 23173/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 2393/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 1/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 36093/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.191/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 7055235/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  343.463      1 -total
 36.58%  125.651      2 Template:Reflist
 23.64%   81.197      1 Template:Authority_control
 23.23%   79.790      5 Template:Cite_web
 16.81%   57.743      1 Template:Short_description
  9.83%   33.766      1 Template:Commons
  9.31%   31.984      1 Template:Sister_project
  8.98%   30.833      2 Template:Pagetype
  8.87%   30.480      1 Template:Side_box
  7.84%   26.934      1 Template:Notelist Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:60767:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250811235203 and revision id 1296306060. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Gemology&oldid=1296306060 " Categories : Gemology Mineralogy Gemological laboratories Jewellery Types of jewellery Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Commons link is locally defined This page was last edited on 19 June 2025, at 05:29 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Gemology 43 languages Add topic

