Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Colonial racism Toggle Colonial racism subsection 1.1 Non-racialism in the Cape Colony 2 Apartheid racism Toggle Apartheid racism subsection 2.1 Governmental racism under Apartheid 2.1.1 Healthcare 3 Post-Apartheid racism Toggle Post-Apartheid racism subsection 3.1 Racism against black Africans 3.1.1 Penny Sparrow 3.1.2 Coffin case 3.1.3 Vicki Momberg 3.2 Racism against White Africans 3.2.1 Coligny riots 3.2.2 Anti-White hate-speech 3.3 Racism against Asian Africans 3.4 Racism against Jewish Africans 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Racism in South Africa 6 languages IsiXhosa Sesotho Sesotho sa Leboa Setswana SiSwati Tshivenda Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Anti-Asian racism in post-Apartheid South Africa ) Part of a series on Discrimination Forms Institutional Reverse Structural Statistical Systemic Taste-based Attributes Age Caste Class Disability Economic Genetic Hair texture Height Language Dialect Looks Mental disorder Nationality or citizenship Race / Ethnicity Reverse Skin color Scientific racism Rank Sex Reverse Sexual orientation Species Size Viewpoint Social Arophobia Anti-albinism Acephobia Adultism Anti-altruistic Anti-autism Anti-homelessness Anti-drug addicts Anti-intellectualism Anti-intersex Anti-left handedness Anti-Masonry Aporophobia Audism Biphobia Clannism Elitism Endophobia Ephebiphobia Health mental in poverty Fatphobia Gayphobia Gerontophobia Heterosexism HIV/AIDS stigma Hypergamy Homophobia In-group Leprosy stigma Lesbophobia Against men Misandry Misogyny Misogynoir Nepotism Outgroup Perpetual foreigner Pregnancy Sectarianism Supremacism Aryanism Black Hutu Chauvinism Han Female Human Nordicism Male Ultranationalism White Transphobia Non-binary Transmisogyny Trans men Vegaphobia Xenophilia Xenophobia Religious Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Race or ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people Manifestations Algorithmic bias Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Blood libel Bullying Cancel culture Capital punishment for homosexuality Carnism Compulsory sterilization Corrective rape Counter-jihad Cultural genocide Defamation Democide Dog whistle Domicide Economic Education Academic In curricula Sexism Eliminationism Eliminationist antisemitism Employment Enemy of the people Environmental racism Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnocide Excellence Gender-based dress codes Cosmetics policy High heel policy Forced conversion Freak show Gay bashing Gendercide Transgender genocide Genital modification and mutilation Circumcision Female genital mutilation Intersex medical interventions Genocide examples Glass ceiling Hate crime Disability hate crime Violence against LGBTQ people Violence against transgender people Hate group Hate speech Institutional discrimination Institutional racism Homeless dumping Housing Hypergamy Age disparity Indian rolling International inequality Kill Haole Day Lavender scare LGBTQ+ grooming conspiracy theory Linguicide Lynching Media bias Minority stress Moral exclusion Mortgage Native American mascots Braves Blackhawks Chiefs Occupational Apartheid Inequality Injustice Segregation Opposition to immigration Paper genocide Persecution Pogrom Political Political repression Ideological repression Purge Racialization Religious persecution Religious terrorism Religious violence Religious war Scapegoating Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Sentencing disparity Sexual harassment Sex-selective abortion Slut-shaming Structural abuse Structural discrimination Structural evil Structural inequality Structural violence Untermensch Trans bashing Victimisation Violence against women White flight White genocide conspiracy theory Wife selling Witch hunt Policies Algorithmic wage discrimination Age of candidacy Apartheid in South Africa in Israel Blood purity Blood quantum Breadwinner model Conscription and sexism Disabilities Catholic Jewish Disparate impact Fagging Gender pay gap Gender roles Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Gerontocracy Gerrymandering Ghetto benches Internment Jewish quota Opposition to LGBTQ rights MSM blood donation restrictions No kid zone Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota) One-drop rule Racial quota Racial steering Redlining Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting) Segregation age racial Jim Crow laws Nuremberg Laws Segregation academy religious sexual in Islam Social exclusion Sodomy law State atheism State religion Ugly law Voter suppression White Australia policy Countermeasures Affirmative action Anti-discrimination law Anti-racism Audit study Autism rights movement Gender-blind Blind audition Constitutional colorblindness Cross-sex friendship Cultural assimilation Cultural pluralism Diversity, equity, and inclusion Diversity training Empowerment Fat acceptance movement Feminism Fighting Discrimination Golden Rule Hate speech laws by country Human rights Intersex human rights Korenizatsiia LGBTQ rights Mad pride Music in the movement against apartheid Racial integration Reappropriation Rock Against Sexism Self-determination Social integration Stop Murder Music Toleration Transgender rights movement Universal suffrage Women's rights Related topics Allophilia Amatonormativity Bias Capital punishment for homosexuality Cisnormativity Civil liberties Criminalization of homosexuality Dehumanization Diseases of despair Ethnic penalty Figleaf Heteronormativity Historical eugenics Internalized oppression Intersectionality Masculism Oikophobia Oppression Police brutality Polyculturalism Power distance Prejudice Prisoner abuse Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racism by country Racial color blindness Religious intolerance Second-generation gender bias Snobbery Social equity Social exclusion Social model of disability Social privilege Christian male white Social stigma Speciesism Stereotype The talk v t e Racism in South Africa can be traced back to the earliest historical accounts of interactions between African, Asian, and European peoples along the coast of Southern Africa .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] It has existed throughout several centuries of the history of South Africa , [ 1 ] [ 2 ] dating back to the Dutch colonization of Southern Africa , which started in 1652.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Before universal suffrage was achieved in 1994 , White South Africans , especially Afrikaners during the period of Apartheid , enjoyed various legally or socially sanctioned privileges and rights that were denied to the indigenous African peoples.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] Examples of systematic racism over the course of South Africa's history include forced removals, racial inequality and segregation , uneven resource distribution , and disenfranchisement .

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Racial controversies and politics remain major phenomena in the country.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] Colonial racism [ edit ] Main article: History of South Africa Further information: Dutch Empire § Southern Africa The region that would become modern-day South Africa was located in a position of advantage for European merchants who were seeking to organize and carry out trade in the East Indies , primarily Portuguese and Dutch colonists.

[ 1 ] In 1652, the Dutch East India Company founded the Cape Colony at the Cape of Good Hope .

[ 1 ] The purpose of the colony was to ensure that Dutch ships sailing to and from Batavia would have a source of fresh provisions, as death by starvation claimed a large number of passengers. During the period of Dutch rule, Dutch settlers (eventually known as Boers ) began to migrate to the colony, instituting settlements throughout the region.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] The region attracted Dutch slave traders , who imported slaves for wheat farming and viticulture to serve the various Dutch settlements.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Many slaves escaped their masters by fleeing inland and joining existing groups such as the Xhosa or forming groups that were headed by warlords such as those of the Bloem, Kok, and Barends families. By the late 18th century, Arabs and European merchants traded beads, brass, cloth, alcohol, and firearms in exchange for slaves, ivory, gold, wax, cattle, and skins. The profits from these trades encouraged the warlords to hunt elephants and slaves by raiding local communities such as Rolong, Tlhaping, Huruthshe, and Ngwaketse. During the Mfecane , the Zulu under Shaka overran many smaller tribes and enslaved them.

[ 5 ] Many Indians were brought to the colony as slaves. The practice of importing slaves from India stretches back to the 1600s, when the Dutch bought non-Muslim slaves from various kingdoms of India that were ruled by Muslims. By the early part of the 18th century, 80% of the slaves were South Asians, who were not just from the Indian subcontinent but also those South Asians who were living in south-east Asian regions such as Java . A slave-trading station was established in Delagoa Bay (present-day Maputo) in 1721 but was abandoned in 1731. Between 1731 and 1765, many Madagascan slaves were bought from Madagascar .

[ 6 ] The Dutch colonial law defined slaves as property that could be traded, bought, and sold, a form of slavery known as ' chattel slavery '. There are many examples of discriminatory practices toward slaves during the colonial period, such as whipping, starvation, being forced to work for long hours, laborers having to carry passes, being subject to high taxation, not being able to walk on the sidewalks, and being banned from living, entering, or working in certain areas, such as the Orange Free State.

[ 6 ] Other examples include the allocation of rations during the Siege of Ladysmith .

For Whites—Biscuit, 1/4 lb.; Maize meal, 3 oz.

For Indians and Kaffirs—Maize meal, 8 oz.

Europeans—Fresh meat, 1 lb.

Kaffirs—Fresh meat, 1-1/4 lbs. (Chiefly horseflesh.) For White men—Coffee or tea, 1/12 oz.; pepper, 1/64 oz.; salt, 1/3 oz.; sugar, 1 oz.; mustard, 1/20 oz.; Vinegar, 1/12 gill.

For Indians—a little rice.

— H. W. Nevinson [ 7 ] The word " Kaffir " was used with apparently derogatory connotations during the period of European colonial rule until the early 20th century.

[ 8 ] Non-racialism in the Cape Colony [ edit ] See also: Cape Qualified Franchise From 1853, the Cape Colony had a representative democracy that granted suffrage to all men regardless of color; policies the emerged from the Representative government and Responsible government movements notably during the administration of Cape Prime Minister John Molteno .

[ 9 ] However, beginning in 1887, the Cape government of Prime Minister Gordon Sprigg began to change voting laws in order to impede black votes with the adoption of the Cape Parliamentary Registration Act .

[ 10 ] The erosion of non-White voting rights would continue during the government of Cecil Rhodes culminating in the Glen Grey Act of 1894 [ 11 ] [ 12 ] before the Union of South Africa was formed in 1910.

Apartheid racism [ edit ] See also: Apartheid Apartheid (Afrikaans pronunciation: [aˈpartɦɛit] ; an Afrikaans word meaning "separateness", or "the state of being apart", literally "apart-hood") was a system of racial segregation in South Africa enforced through legislation by the National Party (NP), the governing party from 1948 to 1994. Under apartheid, the rights, associations, and movements of the majority black inhabitants and other ethnic groups were curtailed, and white minority rule was maintained. Apartheid was developed after World War II by the Afrikaner -dominated National Party and Broederbond organizations. The ideology was also enforced in South West Africa, which was administered by South Africa under a League of Nations mandate (revoked in 1966 via United Nations Resolution 2145) until it gained independence as Namibia in 1990. By extension, the term is currently used for forms of systematic segregation established by the state authority in a country against the social and civil rights of a certain group of citizens due to ethnic prejudices.

The Indian community has been subject to Zulu racist attacks dating back to the arrival of indentured labor in South Africa, which ultimately resulted in the Durban Riots , of 1949 followed by riots in 1985 where homes for 1500 Indians were set on fire.

[ 13 ] Governmental racism under Apartheid [ edit ] The first example of apartheid legislation was the Population Registration Act . This act was the first to force citizens to be registered under their race, and this set the stage for later racial tension. One example of apartheid legislation was the Promotion of Bantu Self-Government Act , which was passed into law in 1959. This law resulted in the forced relocation of black people, reserving much less land for the black citizens to live on, despite making up a large majority of the population.

[ 14 ] The way the South African government did this at the time was by reserving off pieces of land called Bantustans and forcing the black South Africans onto these pieces of land. The Bantustans were a series of ten distinct territories created in South Africa for different "ethnic groups." Black South Africans who relocated to these areas forfeited their status as South African citizens and were designated as permanent residents of the reserves. The expectation was that they would establish and operate their own governments. These regions were underdeveloped and received minimal economic support from the South African government. Residents of the Bantustans had to travel long distances to find work in industrial areas on the borders of their territories. Despite the South African government's efforts to keep the Bantustans viable, In the 1970s, four of these Bantustans gained independence and seceded from the South African government, which was the original purpose of their creation: to segregate black South Africans from the rest of the country.

[ 15 ] Another example of restricting legislation in South Africa is the Natives (Abolition of Passes and Coordination of Documents) Act of 1952 . This act forced black South African citizens to carry their passbooks with them at all times. If someone was found without their passbook, they could be arrested for no reason other than that. This caused immense anger within the black community, which would eventually spark the defiance campaign of 1952.

[ 16 ] These apartheid laws sparked some resistance within the black South African community, and several oppositional groups were formed. One of these groups that emerged was the ANC ( African National Congress ), a group that eventually became involved in many resistance activities. One movement the ANC got involved in was a defiance campaign in the black suburb of Sharpeville. This eventually led to the Sharpeville massacre , where 69 black South Africans were killed and 180 more were injured. This event resulted in the apartheid protest that South Africa would see, and in that moment, the black South African community was horrified. In response, the following week was full of demonstrations, protests, and marches. Because of this, the South African government saw fit to declare a state of emergency and arrest thousands of people who had been protesting. Numbers had approached 10,000 by May, and many of these people were not released for months afterwards. Also in the fallout of the Sharpeville massacre, the South African government banned any organizations that were considered a threat to public safety or order. This included organizations such as the ANC and the PAC (another organization that was committed to activism for black South Africans through peaceful protesting).

[ 17 ] Under apartheid, black women were affected to an extreme degree due to discriminatory racial and gender laws. There were not many opportunities for women to become  political leaders, as many organizations allowed only male membership, so not many women got very involved with politics. There were several organizations that let women join or had entirely separate organizations for women to join, one of which was the ANCWL, or ANC Women's League. In a protest of the Natives (Abolition of Passes and Coordination of Documents) Act of 1952 , as mentioned above, and several other pieces of legislation, many women participated in movements against the government for the first time in the form of the Defiance campaign.

[ 18 ] The defiance campaign was a movement organized in part by the ANC because of new apartheid legislation from the government. Women were not the only people to take part in this campaign, but the inclusion of women is noteworthy because this was the first campaign to see major participation from women. The movement itself involved thousands of black citizens doing nonviolent things that would normally be considered as civil disobedience, such as going into areas that only White people were allowed to go into or burning their pass books. The idea behind the movement was that if enough black people flooded the South African prison and judicial systems, it would force the government to reform the apartheid laws. Thousands of people were arrested in a matter of months, but the campaign did not accomplish its goal of achieving radical change. However, it did capture the attention of the global community and that of the United Nations. In time, the UN would launch an investigation into the apartheid policy.

[ 19 ] In the 1980s, resistance to apartheid became extreme. The United Democratic Front was formed in order to try and unite people all over to join in the fight against government oppression. The leader of the front, Allan Boesak , called on organizations all over South Africa to help him. This included churches, civic associations, trade unions, student organizations, and sports bodies. The UDF became extremely popular among the black community and helped unite everyone who was fighting for equality, something that had not happened in the past. The government's response was to declare another national emergency, and again, South Africa saw thousands of arrests and hundreds of killings. However, by 1990, the burden of public violence was too much. The government began losing its iron grip on the country, and eventually the state president, F.W. de Klerk , decided that reform was absolutely necessary.

[ 20 ] Healthcare [ edit ] The government's provision of public healthcare was far more comprehensive in white areas, compromising the ability of black people to access such services, and a growing for-profit private healthcare sector among the white population further exacerbated this racial disparity.

[ 21 ] In 1987, white areas had one dentist per 2,000 residents, and black areas had one per 2,000,000. In 1990, white areas had one doctor per 900 residents, and black areas had one per 4,100.

[ 22 ] Spending Per Capita in Rands by Race Group, 1985 and 1987 Race Group 1985 1987 Blacks R115 R137 Coloureds R245 R340 Indians R249 R356 Whites R451 R597 Benatar in The New England Journal of Medicine used three health outcome statistics to demonstrate the inequality in healthcare between white and black South Africans at the end of apartheid: In 1990, the mortality rate was 7.4 per 1000 live births among white people and 48.3 per 1000 among black people; infectious diseases accounted for 13 percent of all deaths among black people and only 2 percent among white people; and life expectancy at birth was 60 years and 67 years for black male infants and female infants, respectively, compared to 69 years and 76 years, respectively, for white infants.

[ 23 ] Post-Apartheid racism [ edit ] This section may lend undue weight to certain ideas, incidents, or controversies .

Please help improve it by rewriting it to create a more balanced presentation . Discuss and resolve this issue before removing this message.

( July 2025 ) Milton Shain, emeritus professor in the Department of Historical Studies at the University of Cape Town, noted that Indian, colored, and white minorities are increasingly scapegoated by the ANC "in an attempt to cement cracks among the majority (insiders) and paper over class divisions." [ 24 ] In 2001 former South African president, Nelson Mandela ,  criticized growing racial intolerance by black South Africans in their attitudes towards South Africans from other racial groups.

[ 25 ] [ 26 ] Whilst Afrobarometer research has indicated that perceptions of discrimination have increased significantly among citizens from minority race groups since 2011, especially among those who are of Indian background.

[ 27 ] Some believe the African National Congress (ANC)'s legally mandated racial representation is racist legislation. In June 2021, Democratic Alliance (DA) politician Helen Zille courted controversy when she commented that "There are more racist laws today than there were under apartheid".

[ 28 ] Dr. Duncan Du Bois, a historian and political analyst, supported Helen Zille's assertion. He pointed out that, based on research by political analyst James Myburgh, [ 29 ] the pro-Apartheid National Party government passed 59 pieces of race-based legislation over a period of seventy years, whereas the post-Apartheid government led by the ANC had passed 90 laws with racial representativity  mandates over a smaller time period of 25 years.

[ 30 ] James Myburgh himself considered Helen Zille's comments "hyperbolic" but "not (far) wrong".

[ 29 ] According to Myburgh, modern South Africa's nationalism is replacing another. He argues that because this "is a morally discomforting [idea] for outsiders", "as a result much Western analysis of South Africa [turns] a blind eye to the ... implementation of the ANC's historic racial nationalist agenda." [ 31 ] The South African Institute for Race Relations also considers the ANC to be pursuing a black nationalist agenda and believes that this pursuit endangers not only ethnic minorities but also immigrants.

[ 32 ] Racism against black Africans [ edit ] In 2019, a University of Cape Town report by an independent commission looked into allegations that institutional practices were racist. The commission found "systematic suppression of Black excellence in recent years" at the university. Submissions to the commission from students, staff, and the public were "rife with stories of better qualified Black academics being passed over for employment and promotion in favour of White academics". The report concluded that racism exists at UCT, "abetted by poor management systems" that "discriminate on a racial basis". Black staff members still remain under-represented in the university's senior decision-making bodies.

Ahmed Essop , an education specialist at the University of Johannesburg, co-authored a 2008 report for the country's education department that concluded that racism and sexism are pervasive in the nation's institutions.

[ 33 ] A group of white men allegedly verbally abused and humiliated staff at a restaurant near Stellenbosch. In response to this, a black student claimed their response was that anyone who did not speak Afrikaans was an alien in the area. He said that "they were whistling at them like they were whistling at dogs. They even jumped over the counter, and they were patting them like they were dogs. After he decided to leave the restaurant, the three white men and four other young white men allegedly followed him outside and proceeded to hit him.

[ 34 ] [ 35 ] Thabang Mosiako , a black athlete, had his head smashed onto the pavement at a bus stop. The attack was allegedly performed by a group of white students, whom Moisiako said attacked him when he criticized their racist remarks to another man. The attack was allegedly racially motivated and caused Moisiako to be hospitalized due to his injuries.

[ 36 ] A black gas station attendant was attacked in an apparent racially motivated attack that was caught on camera. The incident began when the petrol attendant asked two white men not to smoke next to the petrol pumps, then later asked them to move to another pump because the one they were using did not have the grade of petrol they needed. The men then began to retaliate with racial slurs, and the altercation soon escalated into a physical fight, which saw over four white men attacking the gasoline attendant before his colleagues and eventually police intervened.

[ 37 ] [ 38 ] Mr. Nathan Maluleke, a sixty-year-old golf instructor, was brutally attacked with a golf club in 2013, and this vicious assault left him with head injuries and fighting for his life in the hospital. The incident started over racial abuse and escalated into an attack. Mr. Maluleke had noticed a group that was making a lot of noise and using vulgar language, including the term Kaffir , repeatedly. He put his golf bag in the boot of his car, approached the woman walking behind two young men in the group, apparently the woman using the language, to ask her to tone it down as the language being used was not good for the integrity of the place and was generally offensive, and as he was speaking to the woman, one of the two men, Matthew van der Walt, turned back and started attacking Maluleke. He ended up on the ground bleeding after being hit over the head with a golf club, and van der Walt admitted to having continued hitting him and punching him while on the ground as he showed off his hands to other people.

[ 39 ] [ 40 ] A 38-year-old man, Ron Rambebu, was attacked and called the slur Kaffir at a petrol station while he was sitting in his car on Kingfisher Road in Horizon Park, Roodepoort, on the West Rand. In the video, the father of three is seen being approached by the attacker. It does not seem like any words are exchanged before the attacker punches Rambebu multiple times through the vehicle's window. Rambebu does not appear to be retaliating during the attack, but he attempts to drive off before parking his vehicle and chasing his attacker with a spanner. His attacker is then seen boarding a white Ford Mustang and driving off with his associate.

[ 41 ] Samora Mangesi, a South African entertainment news broadcaster and presenter, came across a car accident. Mangesi inquired after the status of the passengers, to which inquiry he and his passengers were called "monkey" and "black bitches". A heated argument ensued, and an unidentified person stole up behind Mangesi and hit him on the head with an unknown object, sending him to the hospital.

[ 42 ] [ 43 ] [ 44 ] The South African Human Rights Commission found a public school guilty of hate speech toward black and mixed-race pupils. After an 18-month investigation, staff and the head teacher were found to have exposed pupils to dehumanizing and racist treatment. The Free State Department of Education, responsible for the school, says it will study the report and conduct its own investigation before taking any potential disciplinary action.

[ 45 ] In 2008, Johan Nel , a white man, armed himself with a rifle and proceeded to go to the community of Skierlik, in the North West, and then went on a killing spree. On a Monday afternoon, while most Skierlik inhabitants were at work, Johan, dressed in camouflage fatigues, walked down a dirt road in an informal settlement and randomly started shooting at people with a hunting rifle while shouting racist invective. He killed three people, severely injured another 11 people, and disappeared onto a nearby farm.

[ 46 ] [ 47 ] Penny Sparrow [ edit ] In January 2016, Penny Sparrow, a white woman who lived in the coastal city of Durban, compared littering black beachgoers to monkeys.

[ 48 ] She consequently apologized for her remarks but defended them as being taken out of context. She faced various legal consequences: the Equality  Court considered Sparrow's words to be hate speech in terms of Section 10 of the Promotion of Equality and Prevention of Unfair Discrimination Act and fined her R150 000; [ 49 ] [ 50 ] [ 51 ] and in the magistrate's court, she was found guilty of crimen injuria and fined R5000.

[ 52 ] Professor ME Marais of the University of the Free State considers the case of crimen injuria against Sparrow to be unconstitutional since her comments targeted a group and not an individual; crimen injuria presupposes that the target is an individual.

[ 53 ] Coffin case [ edit ] Two white men, Willem Oosthuizen and Theo Jackson, were put behind bars in 2016 for a racially motivated assault on a black man after they alleged he had trespassed. In 2019, their sentences and convictions were adjusted, finding the pair guilty of assault with intent to do grievous bodily harm and kidnapping. Jackson was also sentenced for defeating the ends of justice by burning evidence.

[ 54 ] [ 55 ] [ 56 ] Vicki Momberg [ edit ] Vicki Momberg, a white woman, was sentenced to three years in prison and one suspended on four counts of crimen injuria for racist remarks she made to a black police officer in Johannesburg. She was the victim of a smash-and-grab incident, and a black police officer approached her to assist her. She responded by verbally abusing him, making racial remarks about the "low caliber of black people in Johannesburg," and using the slur Kaffir 48 times, which was recorded on video. She received a two-year prison sentence and an additional, suspended one-year prison sentence.

[ 57 ] [ 58 ] [ 59 ] [ 49 ] [ 60 ] [ 61 ] Racism against White Africans [ edit ] Democratic Alliance MP Gwen Ngwenya has pointed out that racism aimed at white people is often overlooked compared to racism aimed at black people, noting that racism aimed at white people elicits little reaction from the populace.

[ 62 ] A comparative study by the trade union Solidarity confirmed that South African media give more attention to white-on-black racism; it also found that the South African Human Rights Commission is much more likely to self-initiate investigations into white-on-black racism and is more lenient in cases of black-on-white racism.

[ 63 ] The FW de Klerk Foundation reported that there are social media posts inciting extreme violence against white South Africans, and these posts come mostly from black South Africans. It appealed to the South African Human Rights Commission to intervene on the issue of racism and hate speech against white South Africans. Its complaint to the commission detailed "45 social media postings that incite extreme violence against White South Africans." The foundation also said "an analysis of Facebook and Twitter messages shows that by far the most virulent and dangerous racism – expressed in the most extreme and violent language – has come from disaffected Black South Africans. The messages are replete with threats to kill all whites – including children; to rape white women or to expel all whites from South Africa." [ 64 ] Coligny riots [ edit ] After a black person was allegedly killed by two white people, businesses and properties owned by white people and other minorities in Coligny were targeted for destruction by members of the black community.

[ 65 ] [ 66 ] Anti-White hate-speech [ edit ] A Gauteng government official, Velaphi Khumalo, stated on Facebook "White people in South Africa deserve to be hacked and killed like Jews. [You] have the same venom. Look at Palestine. [You] must be [burnt] alive and skinned and your [offspring] used as garden fertiliser".

[ 67 ] A complaint was lodged at the Human Rights Commission , and a charge of crimen injuria was laid at the Equality Court. In October 2018, he was found guilty of hate speech by the court, for which he was ordered to issue an apology.

[ 68 ] In March 2018, a screenshot depicting EFF Ekurhuleni leader Mampuru Mampuru calling for racial violence on Facebook began to circulate on social media. The post read, "We need to unite as black People, there are less than 5 million whites in South Africa vs 45 million of us. We can kill all this white within two weeks. We have the army and the police. If those who are killing farmers can do it what are you waiting for. Shoot the boer, kill the farmer." [sic]. Mampuru claims the screenshot was fabricated in an attempt to discredit the EFF, further adding that "Without white people in the country‚ we are not going to have a Rainbow Nation." [ 69 ] After 76-year-old white professor Cobus Naude was murdered in 2018, black senior SANDF officer Major M.V. Mohlala posted a comment on Facebook in reaction to Naude's murder, stating "It is your turn now, white people… [he] should have had his eyes and tongue cut out so that the faces of his attackers would be the last thing he sees".

[ 70 ] Mohlala received a warning of potential future disciplinary action by the SANDF.

[ 71 ] Subsequently, Ernst Roets of AfriForum contrasted Mohlala's punishment against that of convicted white racist Vicki Momberg, stating, "The inconsistency being applied in this country regarding minorities has reached the level of absurdity... The reality in South Africa is that a white person who insults a black person goes to prison, while a senior officer in the defence force who says white people's eyes and tongues must be stabbed out is simply asked nicely not to repeat it." [ 72 ] A photograph emerged of a University of Cape Town student who wore a shirt that read "Kill All Whites" in a residence dining hall during early 2016.

[ 73 ] The university later identified the wearer as Slovo Magida and reported the matter to SAPS and HRC .

[ 74 ] During a parliamentary debate on racism, Pieter Mulder of the FF+ read out the contents of the shirt, to which some MPs shouted "Yes! Yes!".

[ 75 ] As of 2018, no further action against Magida has been taken.

During April 2018, a Judicial Services Commission tribunal found that 'drunk judge' Nkola Motala 's racist comments could justify his removal as a judge. Motala crashed into a wall while driving under the influence of alcohol in 2007. After the accident, Motala swore at a white onlooker, Richard Baird, and referred to him as a 'boer'.

[ 76 ] Julius Malema , leader of the third-largest party, Economic Freedom Fighters , stated at a political rally in 2016 that "we [the EFF] are not calling for the slaughter of white people ‚ at least for now". When asked for comment by a news agency, the ANC spokesperson, Zizi Kodwa, stated that there would be no comment from the ANC, as "[h]e [Malema] was addressing his own party supporters." This received backlash from many South Africans of all races.

[ 77 ] While still the ANCYL leader, Malema was taken to the Equality Court by AfriForum for repeatedly singing " dubul' ibhunu ", which literally translates as "shoot the boer [white farmer]." In context, this was sung as a struggle (against apartheid) song. At another political rally in 2018, he stated,  "Go after a white Man... We are cutting the throat of whiteness." This was in reference to the removal of Athol Trollip, a white mayor, from office in Port Elizabeth .

[ 78 ] The opposition Democratic Alliance has accused the EFF leader of racism.

[ 79 ] In September 2018, Black First Land First (BLF) Spokesperson Lyndsay Maasdorp told The Citizen reporter Daniel Friedman that, as a white person, his existence is "a crime". Maasdorp also posted on his now-suspended Twitter account in 2018: "I have aspirations to kill white people, and this must be achieved!".

[ 80 ] In December 2018, in response to comments made by Johann Rupert in support of the South African taxi industry, Mngxitama asserted at a BLF rally that "For each one person that is being killed by the taxi industry , we will kill five white people", [ 81 ] giving rise to the BLF slogan " 1:5 ".

[ 82 ] Mngxitama went on to say, "You kill one of us, we will kill five of you. We will kill their children, we will kill their women, we will kill anything that we find on our way." [ 83 ] The comments were criticized by many, including the African National Congress , with an ANC spokesperson claiming that "[Mngxitama's] comments clearly incite violence in South Africa" and urging the South African Human Rights Commission to investigate.

[ 81 ] The Congress of the People and Democratic Alliance also criticized the statements and filed criminal charges against Mngxitama for incitement of violence. Mngxitama's Twitter account was also suspended as a result.

[ 84 ] In response, the BLF’s deputy president, Zanele Lwana, responded that Mngxitama's comments were made in the context of self-defense and that "The only sin committed by BLF president is defending black people. President Mngxitama correctly stated that for every one black life taken, five whites would be taken!" [ 84 ] In March 2022, the Equality Court of South Africa ordered BLF members Lindsay Maasdorp and Zwelakhe Dubasi to pay R200,000 in damages and make a public apology for “celebrat[ing] the tragic deaths” [ 85 ] of four children on social media in statements that were judged to be hate speech.

[ 85 ] The four children, all of whom were white, died when a walkway collapsed at Hoërskool Driehoek in Vanderbijlpark .

[ 85 ] The Black First Land First party does not allow white people in the party.

[ 86 ] Racism against Asian Africans [ edit ] There are over 1.2 million South Africans of Indian descent , with the majority living in the province of KwaZulu-Natal .

The 2001 Zulu language song AmaNdiya by Mbongeni Ngema was banned as hate speech for being racially derogatory towards the Indian community and promoting anti-Indian sentiment; [ 87 ] [ 88 ] by blaming the Indian community of oppressing and dispossessing ethnic Zulus whilst making a number of sweeping generalisations.

[ 89 ] Ngema defended singing the song by claiming that it represented the views of many black South Africans.

[ 90 ] In 2015, Phumlani Mfeka, a KwaZulu-Natal businessman and the spokesman for the radical Mazibuye African Forum, tweeted "A good Indian is a dead Indian".

[ 91 ] [ 92 ] [ 93 ] He published a letter in the city press claiming that South Africans of Indian origin have no right to citizenship or property in South Africa. Mfeka also claimed there is a "ticking time bomb of a deadly confrontation" between Africans and Indians in KwaZulu-Natal. The South African court barred him from making anti-Indian remarks in November 2015.

[ 94 ] In 2017, political leader Julius Malema stated during a rally in KwaZulu-Natal, "They are ill-treating our people. They are worse than Afrikaners were. This is not an anti-Indian statement, it's the truth. Indians who own shops don't pay our people, but they give them food parcels," and accused local politicians of being in the pockets of Indian businesspeople.

[ 95 ] Malema also said that the success of Indian businesses in the province was due to their strategies of exploitation and monopolization of the economy.

[ 96 ] Malema also referred to Indians in 2011 as ' coolies ,' which is considered a strongly offensive pejorative term in contemporary South Africa.

[ 97 ] Complaints of attacks on the ethnic Chinese community on social media have led to charges being filed against certain white individuals.

The Chinese Association of Gauteng planned to also file a complaint with the South African Human Rights Commission .

[ 98 ] Racism against Jewish Africans [ edit ] See also: Antisemitism in South Africa The vigilante group PAGAD is believed to be responsible for bombings targeted at synagogues between 1998 and 2000.

[ 99 ] PAGAD's leaders became known for their antisemitic statements. A 1997 incendiary bomb attack on a Jewish bookshop owner was found by police to have been committed with the same material PAGAD used in other attacks.

[ 100 ] In May 1998, Radio 786, a Cape Town community radio station run by a Muslim organization and aimed at Muslims, broadcast a program that denied the Holocaust and engaged in antisemitic stereotypes, which the South African Jewish Board of Deputies subsequently reported as hate speech. Radio 786 refused to apologize for the broadcast. Although an out-of-court settlement was eventually reached, the Supreme Court of Appeal found that that complaint had to be referred again to the Independent Communications Authority of South Africa .

[ 101 ] The matter was finally resolved sixteen years later, when the two parties released a joint statement, accepting that the program had caused offense to the Jewish community but that no offense had been intended by the Muslim station.

[ 102 ] The 2001 Durban Conference against Racism (CAR) meeting was marked by disagreements over the Middle East and the legacy of slavery and coincided with harsh criticism and demonstrations directed at Israel at a parallel conference of non-governmental organizations.

[ 103 ] Canada, followed by the U.S. and Israel, walked out midway through the 2001 conference over a draft resolution that, in their opinion, singled out Israel for criticism and likened Zionism to racism.

[ 104 ] In 2009, South Africa's deputy foreign minister, Fatima Hajaig , claimed that "Jewish money controls America and most Western countries." Her comments prompted criticism by Foreign Minister Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma and a reported "dressing down" by President Kgalema Motlanthe .

[ 105 ] She subsequently apologized on two occasions for her remarks.

[ 106 ] In 2013, ANC Western Cape leader Marius Fransman claimed 98% of land and property owners in Cape Town are "white" and "Jewish." The allegation turned out to be false.

[ 107 ] See also [ edit ] Cape Qualified Franchise Intra-African migration Racism in Africa Xenophobia in South Africa References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e f g h Houston, Gregory (2022). "Racial Privilege in Apartheid South Africa". In Houston, Gregory; Kanyane, Modimowabarwa; Davids, Yul Derek (eds.).

Paradise Lost: Race and Racism in Post-apartheid South Africa . Africa-Europe Group for Interdisciplinary Studies. Vol. 28.

Leiden and Boston : Brill Publishers . pp.

35– 72.

doi : 10.1163/9789004515949_003 .

ISBN 978-90-04-51594-9 .

ISSN 1574-6925 .

^ a b c d e f g h Bradshaw, Debbie; Norman, Rosana; Laubscher, Ria; Schneider, Michelle; Mbananga, Nolwazi; Steyn, Krisela (2004). "Chapter 19: An Exploratory Investigation into Racial Disparities in the Health of Older South Africans". In Anderson, N. B.; Bulatao, R. A.; Cohen, B. (eds.).

Critical Perspectives on Racial and Ethnic Differences in Health in Late Life .

Washington, D.C.

: National Academies Press on behalf of the National Research Council Panel on Race, Ethnicity, and Health in Later Life. pp.

703– 736.

doi : 10.17226/11086 .

ISBN 978-0-309-16570-9 .

PMID 20669464 . NBK25536.

^ a b c "Race in South Africa: 'We haven't learnt we are human beings first' " .

BBC News .

London . 21 January 2021.

Archived from the original on 5 November 2022 . Retrieved 10 November 2022 .

^ Kaziboni, Anthony (2022). "Apartheid Racism and Post-apartheid Xenophobia: Bridging the Gap". In Rugunanan, Pragna; Xulu-Gama, Nomkhosi (eds.).

Migration in Southern Africa: IMISCOE Regional Reader . IMISCOE Research Series.

Cham, Switzerland : Springer Nature . pp.

201– 213.

doi : 10.1007/978-3-030-92114-9_14 .

ISBN 978-3-030-92114-9 .

ISSN 2364-4095 .

^ a b "South Africa - Growth of the colonial economy" .

Britannica.com . 25 June 2023.

^ a b c "History of slavery and early colonisation in South Africa | South African History Online" .

www.sahistory.org.za .

^ Ladysmith, The Diary of a Siege by Henry W. Nevinson at Project Gutenberg ^ Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911).

"Kaffirs" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 15 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. pp.

627– 629, first para.

....The name is also loosely applied to any negro inhabitant of South Africa ^ M.Plaut: Promise and Despair: The First Struggle for a Non-racial South Africa . Jacana, Cape Town. 2016.

ISBN 978-1-4314-2375-0 . pp.19-20.

^ "1887. Cape Parliamentary Registration Act - The O'Malley Archives" .

omalley.nelsonmandela.org . Retrieved 10 May 2023 .

^ "1894. Glen Grey Act - The O'Malley Archives" .

omalley.nelsonmandela.org . Retrieved 10 May 2023 .

^ "The Struggle for Liberation in South Africa" . Anc.org.za. Archived from the original on 22 May 2012 . Retrieved 6 July 2012 .

^ International, United Press (9 August 1985).

"Zulus Attack Indians Near Durban; Death Toll Mounts" – via LA Times.

^ sahoboss (6 May 2016).

"A history of Apartheid in South Africa" .

South African History Online . Retrieved 28 February 2019 .

^ Phillips, Laura (27 July 2017).

"History of South Africa's Bantustans" .

Oxford Research Encyclopedia of African History .

doi : 10.1093/acrefore/9780190277734.013.80 .

ISBN 9780190277734 .

^ sahoboss (21 March 2011).

"Pass laws in South Africa 1800-1994" .

South African History Online . Retrieved 28 February 2019 .

^ "Sharpeville Massacre • BlackPast" .

BlackPast . 22 February 2009 . Retrieved 28 February 2019 .

^ "Women and the struggle against Apartheid | South African History Online" .

www.sahistory.org.za .

^ Anonymous (21 March 2011).

"Defiance Campaign 1952" .

South African History Online . Retrieved 28 February 2019 .

^ tinashe (30 March 2011).

"United Democratic Front (UDF)" .

South African History Online . Retrieved 28 February 2019 .

^ Zwarenstein, M. (March 1994). "The structure of South Africa's health service".

Africa Health (Spec No): 3– 4.

ISSN 0141-9536 .

PMID 12345506 .

^ "Public Inquiry: Access to Health Care Services" (PDF) .

Johannesburg . p. 12.

^ Benatar, S.R. (1997).

"Health Care Reform in the New South Africa" .

The New England Journal of Medicine .

336 (12): 891– 895.

doi : 10.1056/NEJM199703203361224 .

PMID 9062099 .

^ Shain, Milton (August 2017).

"Racial and Populist Nationalism in South Africa: the Global Nexus" (PDF) .

The Journal of the Helen Suzman Foundation .

80 .

^ "Mandela accuses ANC of racism and corruption" .

The Telegraph . 3 March 2001 . Retrieved 23 March 2024 .

^ "Mandela says ANC racist and corrupt" .

Irish Independent . 3 March 2001 . Retrieved 23 March 2024 .

^ Lekalake, Rorisang; Nkomo, Sibusiso (20 April 2016).

"South Africans generally tolerant but report racial discrimination by employers and courts" (PDF) .

The Institute for Justice and Reconciliation .

84 : 1.

^ Madisa, Kgothatso (24 June 2020).

"DA leaders distance themselves from Zille's tweet on racist laws" .

SowetanLIVE . Retrieved 6 July 2020 .

^ a b "James Myburgh: ANC race laws revolution. MUST READ!" .

BizNews.com . 15 July 2020 . Retrieved 23 July 2021 .

^ "Letter: There are more race based laws now than under apartheid" .

www.iol.co.za . Retrieved 23 July 2021 .

^ "Western myths about South Africa - PARTY | Politicsweb" .

www.politicsweb.co.za . Retrieved 24 July 2021 .

^ "ANC's 'racial nationalism' creates environment for xenophobia: IRR" .

TimesLIVE . Retrieved 24 July 2021 .

^ Nordling, Linda (2019).

"Racism rife at top South African university, says report" .

Nature .

568 (7751): 151– 152.

Bibcode : 2019Natur.568..151N .

doi : 10.1038/d41586-019-01129-2 .

PMID 30967677 .

S2CID 205129555 .

^ "Series of racist incidents in South Africa" .

Los Angeles Times .

^ "Race row hits Maties" .

TimesLIVE .

^ "SA athletic champion severely beaten in alleged racial attack in Potch" .

News24 . Retrieved 24 February 2018 .

^ "Engen condemns attack on petrol attendant" .

mg.co.za . 4 December 2014 . Retrieved 4 December 2014 .

^ "Racist or a biker who just likes using the K word?" .

mg.co.za . 3 December 2014 . Retrieved 3 December 2014 .

^ "Arrest after alleged racist golf club attack" .

news24.com . Retrieved 15 January 2013 .

^ "Ban those racist golfers from any SA golf course" . Retrieved 25 January 2013 – via PressReader.

^ "Man attacked at garage for wearing EFF cap" .

sowetanlive.co.za . Retrieved 25 June 2019 .

^ "TV presenter Samora Mangesi allegedly beaten up and called 'monkey' in 'racially motivated attack' " .

news24.com . Retrieved 14 March 2019 .

^ "Samora Mangesi: South African presenter 'victim of racist attack' " .

BBC News . 14 March 2019 . Retrieved 14 March 2019 .

^ "A Black Newscaster Just Wanted To Help. Instead He Was Called "A Monkey" And Attacked" .

buzzfeednews.com . 14 March 2019 . Retrieved 14 March 2019 .

^ "South Africa teachers 'racially abused pupils' " .

BBC News . 24 July 2014 . Retrieved 24 July 2014 .

^ Smith, Janet (14 January 2016).

"Skierlik: a reminder that racism's not dead" .

The Star .

IOL . Archived from the original on 16 January 2016 . Retrieved 14 January 2016 .

^ Berger, Sebastien (17 November 2008).

"White teenage racist admits South Africa killing spree" .

The Telegraph . Retrieved 17 November 2008 .

^ "Penny Sparrow calls black people 'monkeys' " .

The Citizen . 4 January 2016 . Retrieved 21 July 2021 .

^ a b "SA estate agent jailed for racist abuse" .

BBC News . 28 March 2018.

^ Gqirana, Thulani (4 January 2016).

"DA to suspend Penny Sparrow over racist comments" .

Mail & Guardian . Retrieved 28 March 2018 .

^ Evans, Jenni (12 September 2016).

"Penny Sparrow back in court on criminal charges for racist comments" .

City Press .

News24 . Retrieved 28 March 2018 .

^ Lebitse, Palesa (20 January 2017).

"Oliphant in the room: How is she different to Penny Sparrow?" .

Mail & Guardian . Retrieved 21 July 2021 .

^ Marais, ME (2017).

"A constitutional perspective on the Sparrow judgements" .

Journal for Juridical Science . 42(2):25-6.

^ "Coffin court case: Growing calls for severe punishment" .

www.enca.com . Retrieved 7 January 2018 .

^ "Coffin case sparked public outrage in SA" .

www.sabcnews.com . 28 December 2017 . Retrieved 28 December 2017 .

^ " 'Coffin case' pair's prison sentences cut to 5 years after SCA ruling" .

news24.com . Retrieved 2 December 2019 .

^ "Momberg denied bail, pending leave to appeal" .

Daily Maverick . 28 March 2018.

^ "Vicki Momberg gets two years for her racist tirade" .

BusinessLIVE .

^ "K-word rant lands Vicki Momberg in jail" .

TimesLIVE .

^ "Fugitive racist Vicki Momberg arrested" .

www.sowetanlive.co.za . Retrieved 6 November 2019 .

^ "VICKI MOMBERG BACK BEHIND BARS AFTER BAIL REFUSED" .

ewn.co.za . Retrieved 7 November 2019 .

^ Ngwenya, Gwen (7 January 2016).

" 'Racist' black South Africans who kept their jobs?" .

The Mail & Guardian . Retrieved 12 April 2017 .

^ Brink, Eugene; Mulder, Connie (5 April 2017).

"How the response to black and white racism differs – Solidarity" .

Politicsweb . Retrieved 12 April 2017 .

^ " 'Blacks more racist than whites' | IOL News" . Retrieved 19 April 2018 .

^ News24, Jeanette Chabalala.

" 'I don't own anything of my own' - Coligny woman who lost home in protests" .

News24 . Retrieved 22 July 2021 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list ( link ) ^ Malan, Rian.

"Coligny: The shape of things to come?" .

News24 . Retrieved 22 July 2021 .

^ "Khumalo in firing line over 'white genocide' | Cape Times" . Retrieved 3 April 2018 .

^ Makhafola, Getrude (5 October 2018).

"ANALYSIS: Velaphi Khumalo found guilty of hate speech | Weekend Argus" .

IOL .

African News Agency . Retrieved 2 July 2019 .

^ "EFF councillor 'loves' his white friends and would never call for their genocide" . Retrieved 10 April 2018 .

^ "FF Plus gunning for SANDF Major, after racist rant – SA Breaking News" .

SA Breaking News . 30 March 2018 . Retrieved 10 April 2018 .

^ "SANDF fails to act against murderously anti-white major – Kobus Marais – POLITICS | Politicsweb" .

www.politicsweb.co.za . Retrieved 10 April 2018 .

^ "Victory against racism | Saturday Star" . Retrieved 10 April 2018 .

^ "UCT: 'Kill all whites' T-shirt is hate speech" .

News24 . Retrieved 11 April 2018 .

^ " 'Kill all whites' T-shirt culprit identified – UCT" .

News24 . Retrieved 11 April 2018 .

^ " 'Kill all whites' drama in SA National Assembly" .

BusinessTech . Retrieved 11 April 2018 .

^ " 'Drunk judge' Motata faces impeachment over racism' lack of integrity" . Retrieved 19 April 2018 .

^ "Malema slammed for comments on whites" . ENCA. 8 November 2016. Archived from the original on 17 April 2017 . Retrieved 30 May 2017 .

^ " 'We are cutting the throat of whiteness' – Malema on plans to remove Trollip" .

^ "South Africans don't share Malema's racist views – Maimane | IOL News" . Retrieved 11 March 2018 .

^ Friedman, Daniel.

"White existence is a crime, says BLF spokesperson" .

The Citizen . Retrieved 19 September 2018 .

^ a b Gous, Nico.

"Mngxitama trying to take SA back to 'dark ages of apartheid' says ANC" .

SowetanLIVE . Sowetan Live . Retrieved 16 December 2018 .

^ Friedman, Daniel (20 December 2018).

"Mngxitama rejoins Twitter only to be banned within a day" .

The Citizen . Retrieved 13 January 2019 .

^ Pijoos, Iavan (10 December 2018).

" 'You kill one black person, we kill five white people' – BLF president" .

Sunday Times . Retrieved 16 December 2018 .

^ a b Nemakonde, Vhahangwele (11 December 2018).

"Twitter suspends Mngxitama's account after 'kill whites' threats, IEC assessing what to do" . The Citizen . Retrieved 16 December 2018 .

^ a b c GroundUp, Tania Broughton for (7 March 2022).

"GROUNDUP: Court orders Black First Land First to pay up for hate speech social media posts that vilified white people" .

Daily Maverick . Retrieved 10 March 2022 .

^ BLF Back | Whites still not allowed in the party: Mngxitama , 5 February 2021 , retrieved 23 May 2022 ^ "Mbongeni Ngema dies: Tributes paid to South African theatre legend" .

BBC News . 28 December 2023 . Retrieved 29 April 2025 .

^ "Ngema 'regrets' public ban of AmaNdiya" .

IOL . 20 June 2002 . Retrieved 29 April 2025 .

^ "Ngema 'regrets' public ban of AmaNdiya" .

IOL . 20 June 2002 . Retrieved 29 April 2025 .

^ McGreal, Chris (5 June 2002).

"Black composer rejects Mandela's call to apologise for racist lyrics" .

The Guardian .

ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved 29 April 2025 .

^ "Phumlani ka Mfeka on Twitter" .

^ Olifant, Nathi; Mthethwa, Bongani (25 October 2015).

"Anti-Indian crusader vows to defy court ban on inciting racial hatred" .

Sunday Times .

Archived from the original on 20 July 2023 . Retrieved 10 August 2023 – via PressReader .

^ "Calls for racist Mfeka to be punished - Public Eye" . 30 October 2015.

[ permanent dead link ] ^ "South African court bars radical leader Phumlani Mfeka from making anti-Indian remarks" .

The Economic Times . 5 November 2015.

^ "#EFFTurns4: Malema attack enrages Indians | IOL News" . Retrieved 3 April 2018 .

^ " 'Indians who own shops don't pay our people' – Malema's racial remarks condemned" .

TimesLIVE . Retrieved 10 May 2018 .

^ "Malema's remarks on Indians 'has the possibility to incite racial hatred' " .

News24 . Retrieved 3 April 2018 .

^ "South Africa: Chinese Association Lays Charges Over Xenophobic Facebook Comments" . Retrieved 30 March 2018 .

^ "BBC News | AFRICA | Pagad: Vigilantes or terrorists?" .

news.bbc.co.uk . Retrieved 19 April 2018 .

^ "Stephen Roth Institute: Antisemitism And Racism" . 4 August 2007. Archived from the original on 4 August 2007 . Retrieved 19 April 2018 .

^ "Icasa hears decade-old racist row | News | National | Mail & Guardian" . Mg.co.za. 14 December 2012 . Retrieved 18 February 2014 .

^ "Settlement with Radio 786 reached 16 years on - SAJBD - POLITICS | Politicsweb" .

www.politicsweb.co.za . Retrieved 22 July 2021 .

^ "Daily Highlights – World Conference against Racism" . 8 September 2001.

^ "Search" .

Times Higher Education (THE) . Retrieved 19 April 2018 .

^ Staff Reporter (4 February 2009).

"President raps Hajaig's knuckles" .

^ "Jewish board satisfied with Hajaig apology" .

Mail & Guardian . 5 February 2009.

^ Allison, Simon (16 October 2013).

"Africa Check: No evidence to support ANC leader's claim that 98% of property owners in Cape Town are 'white' and 'Jewish' " .

Daily Maverick . Retrieved 18 February 2014 .

v t e Racism Types of racism Aversive Colorism Covert Cultural Cyber Environmental Formal Gendered Institutional Internalized Patent Laissez-faire Linguistic Neocolonial Romantic Scientific Societal Substantive Symbolic Manifestations of racism Anti-miscegenation laws Apartheid Biological determinism Discrimination based on nationality Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic jokes Ethnic slurs Ethnic stereotype Hate crime Hate speech Hate group Hypodescent / Hyperdescent Racial capitalism Racialization Racial hierarchy Racial nationalism Racial profiling Racial segregation Racism by region Global apartheid Africa South Africa Zimbabwe Asia China Japan North Korea South Korea Thailand Vietnam Arab world Libya Saudi Arabia Sudan Australia Europe Denmark France Germany Italy Poland Portugal Russia Soviet Union Spain Ukraine United Kingdom Middle East Iran Israel Palestine Turkey North America Canada United States Mexico South America Argentina Brazil Chile Racism by target Arab Asians Chinese Chinese Americans Zainichi Chinese Japanese Japanese Americans Japanese Koreans Korean Zainichi Koreans Vietnamese Black African Americans Arab Women Mexican Native Americans Jewish Anti-racism Jewish Americans In Jewish communities LGBT Middle Eastern Muslim Romani Slavic Wine industry Racial supremacy Black supremacy White supremacy White Related topics Ableism Alt-right Anti-racism Casteism Ethnic plastic surgery Go back to where you came from Herrenvolk democracy Interminority racism in the United States Hispanics/Latinos Lynching Passing Perpetual foreigner Psychometrics of racism Race and sexuality Race card Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racial misrepresentation Racial figleaf Racial integration Racial quota Racism in sport in Australia Reverse racism Sociology of race and ethnic relations Xenophobia Category Commons Index v t e Discrimination Forms Institutional Reverse Structural Statistical Systemic Taste-based Attributes Age Caste Class Disability Economic Genetic Hair texture Height Language Dialect Looks Mental disorder Nationality or citizenship Race / Ethnicity Reverse Skin color Scientific racism Rank Sex Reverse Sexual orientation Species Size Viewpoint Social Arophobia Anti-albinism Acephobia Adultism Anti-altruistic Anti-autism Anti-homelessness Anti-drug addicts Anti-intellectualism Anti-intersex Anti-left handedness Anti-Masonry Aporophobia Audism Biphobia Clannism Elitism Endophobia Ephebiphobia Health mental in poverty Fatphobia Gayphobia Gerontophobia Heterosexism HIV/AIDS stigma Hypergamy Homophobia In-group Leprosy stigma Lesbophobia Against men Misandry Misogyny Misogynoir Nepotism Outgroup Perpetual foreigner Pregnancy Sectarianism Supremacism Aryanism Black Hutu Chauvinism Han Female Human Nordicism Male Ultranationalism White Transphobia Non-binary Transmisogyny Trans men Vegaphobia Xenophilia Xenophobia Religious Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Race / Ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people Manifestations Algorithmic bias Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Blood libel Bullying Cancel culture Capital punishment for homosexuality Carnism Compulsory sterilization Corrective rape Counter-jihad Cultural genocide Defamation Democide Dog whistle Domicide Economic Education Academic In curricula Sexism Eliminationism Eliminationist antisemitism Employment Enemy of the people Environmental racism Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnocide Excellence Gender-based dress codes Cosmetics policy High heel policy Forced conversion Freak show Gay bashing Gendercide Transgender genocide Genital modification and mutilation Circumcision Female genital mutilation Intersex medical interventions Genocide examples Glass ceiling Hate crime Disability hate crime Violence against LGBTQ people Violence against transgender people Hate group Hate speech Institutional discrimination Institutional racism Homeless dumping Housing Hypergamy Age disparity Indian rolling International inequality Kill Haole Day Lavender scare LGBTQ+ grooming conspiracy theory Linguicide Lynching Media bias Minority stress Moral exclusion Mortgage Native American mascots Braves Blackhawks Chiefs Occupational Apartheid Inequality Injustice Segregation Opposition to immigration Paper genocide Persecution Pogrom Political Political repression Ideological repression Purge Racialization Religious persecution Religious terrorism Religious violence Religious war Scapegoating Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Sentencing disparity Sexual harassment Sex-selective abortion Slut-shaming Structural abuse Structural discrimination Structural evil Structural inequality Structural violence Untermensch Trans bashing Victimisation Violence against women White flight White genocide conspiracy theory Wife selling Witch hunt Discriminatory policies Algorithmic wage discrimination Age of candidacy Apartheid in South Africa in Israel Blood purity Blood quantum Breadwinner model Conscription and sexism Disabilities Catholic Jewish Disparate impact Fagging Gender pay gap Gender roles Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Gerontocracy Gerrymandering Ghetto benches Internment Jewish quota Opposition to LGBTQ rights MSM blood donation restrictions No kid zone Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota) One-drop rule Racial quota Racial steering Redlining Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting) Segregation age racial Jim Crow laws Nuremberg Laws Segregation academy religious sexual in Islam Social exclusion Sodomy law State atheism State religion Ugly law Voter suppression White Australia policy Countermeasures Affirmative action Anti-discrimination law Anti-racism Audit study Autism rights movement Gender-blind Blind audition Constitutional colorblindness Cross-sex friendship Cultural assimilation Cultural pluralism Diversity, equity, and inclusion Diversity training Empowerment Fat acceptance movement Feminism Fighting Discrimination Golden Rule Hate speech laws by country Human rights Intersex human rights Korenizatsiia LGBTQ rights Mad pride Music in the movement against apartheid Racial integration Reappropriation Rock Against Sexism Self-determination Social integration Stop Murder Music Toleration Transgender rights movement Universal suffrage Women's rights Related topics Allophilia Amatonormativity Bias Capital punishment for homosexuality Cisnormativity Civil liberties Criminalization of homosexuality Dehumanization Diseases of despair Ethnic penalty Figleaf Heteronormativity Historical eugenics Internalized oppression Intersectionality Masculism Oikophobia Oppression Police brutality Polyculturalism Power distance Prejudice Prisoner abuse Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racism by country Racial color blindness Religious intolerance Second-generation gender bias Snobbery Social equity Social exclusion Social model of disability Social privilege Christian male white Social stigma Speciesism Stereotype The talk Category Commons v t e South Africa articles History Timeline Years Early history Kingdom of Mapungubwe Kingdom of Mutapa Kaditshwene Dutch Cape Colony Mthethwa Paramountcy Ndwandwe Cape Colony Zulu Kingdom Orange Free State Transvaal Republic First Boer War Second Boer War Great Depression World War II Apartheid Border War Democratic South Africa By topic Economy Military Geography Biodiversity Climate Climate change Districts Earthquakes Estuaries Forests Islands Lakes Mountain ranges Municipalities National parks Populated places Provinces Rivers Wildlife Politics Constitution Courts Corruption Elections Foreign relations Government Human rights Intergovernmental relations Law Law enforcement Military Parliament Political parties President timeline Public administration State security Traditional leaders Economy Agriculture Banking Companies Communications Economic history Energy Foreign trade Income inequality Mining industry Rand (currency) State-owned enterprises Stock exchange Taxation Tourism Trade unions Transport Water and sanitation Wealth inequality Society Cannabis Crime Disability Education Feminism Health Healthcare Immigration Intersex Land invasion Languages LGBT Life expectancy Poverty Racism Religion Sexual violence Slum clearance Smoking Social issues Social movements Women Xenophobia Culture Architecture Art Cinema Cuisine ( wine ) HIV/AIDS Homelessness Flag Literature Media Music National symbols Public holidays Sports World Heritage Sites heritage sites Demographics South African Bantu-speaking peoples Ndebele Pedi Sotho Swazi Tsonga Tswana Venda Xhosa Zulu Khoisan Khoekhoe San people Whites Afrikaners British Coloureds Cape Coloureds Cape Malays Griquas Indians Chinese Outline Index Category Portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Racism_in_South_Africa&oldid=1304278412#Racism_against_Asian_Africans " Category : Racism in South Africa Hidden categories: Articles with Project Gutenberg links Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference CS1: long volume value CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from July 2025 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from August 2023 Articles with excerpts Pages with Afrikaans IPA Wikipedia neutral point of view disputes from July 2025 All Wikipedia neutral point of view disputes This page was last edited on 5 August 2025, at 02:23 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Racism in South Africa 6 languages Add topic

