Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Background 2 Objective 3 Living modified organisms (LMOs) 4 Precautionary approach 5 Application 6 Parties and non-parties 7 Relationship with the WTO 8 Main features Toggle Main features subsection 8.1 Overview of features 8.2 Procedures for moving LMOs across borders 8.2.1 Advance Informed Agreement 8.2.2 LMOs intended for food or feed, or for processing 8.3 Handling, transport, packaging and identification 8.4 Biosafety Clearing-House 9 See also 10 References 11 External links Toggle the table of contents Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety 11 languages العربية Čeština Deutsch Eesti Español Français Hausa Italiano Português Українська Tiếng Việt Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 2003 international agreement on biosafety This article may rely excessively on sources too closely associated with the subject , potentially preventing the article from being verifiable and neutral .

Please help improve it by replacing them with more appropriate citations to reliable, independent sources .

( December 2015 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety to the Convention on Biological Diversity Type Environmental Drafted 29 January 2000 Signed 16 May 2000 [ 1 ] Location Montreal, Quebec , Canada (originally scheduled for 1999 at Cartagena, Colombia ) Effective 11 September 2003 Signatories 103 Parties 173 [ 2 ] Depositary Secretary-General of the United Nations Languages Arabic, Chinese, English, French, Russian, and Spanish Part of a series on Genetic engineering Genetically modified organisms Bacteria Viruses Animals Mammals Fish Insects Plants Maize/corn Rice Soybean Potato History and regulation History Regulation Substantial equivalence Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety Process Techniques Molecular cloning Recombinant DNA Gene delivery Transformation Transfection Transduction Genome editing TALEN CRISPR Applications Genetically modified crops food Gene therapy Designer baby Controversies Genetically modified food controversies GMO conspiracy theories Pusztai affair Séralini affair StarLink corn recall He Jiankui affair v t e The Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety to the Convention on Biological Diversity is an international agreement on biosafety as a supplement to the Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD) effective since 2003. The Biosafety Protocol seeks to protect biological diversity from the potential risks posed by genetically modified organisms resulting from modern biotechnology .

The Biosafety Protocol makes clear that products from new technologies must be based on the precautionary principle and allow developing nations to balance public health against economic benefits. It will for example let countries ban imports of genetically modified organisms if they feel there is not enough scientific evidence that the product is safe and requires exporters to label shipments containing genetically altered commodities such as corn or cotton.

The required number of 50 instruments of ratification/accession/approval/acceptance by countries was reached in May 2003. In accordance with the provisions of its Article 37, the Protocol entered into force on 11 September 2003. As of July 2020, the Protocol had 173 parties, which includes 170 United Nations member states , the State of Palestine , Niue , and the European Union .

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] Background [ edit ] The Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety, also known as the Biosafety Protocol, was adopted in January 2000, after a CBD Open-ended Ad Hoc Working Group on Biosafety had met six times between July 1996 and February 1999. The Working Group submitted a draft text of the Protocol, for consideration by Conference of the Parties at its first extraordinary meeting, which was convened for the express purpose of adopting a protocol on biosafety to the CBD. After a few delays, the Cartagena Protocol was eventually adopted on 29 January 2000 [ 5 ] The Biosafety Protocol seeks to protect biological diversity from the potential risks posed by living modified organisms resulting from modern biotechnology.

[ 6 ] Objective [ edit ] In accordance with the precautionary approach , contained in Principle 15 of the Rio Declaration on Environment and Development , the objective of the Protocol is to contribute to ensuring an adequate level of protection in the field of the safe transfer, handling and use of 'living modified organisms resulting from modern biotechnology' that may have adverse effects on the conservation and sustainable use of biological diversity, taking also into account risks to human health, and specifically focusing on transboundary movements (Article 1 of the Protocol, SCBD 2000).

Living modified organisms (LMOs) [ edit ] The protocol defines a 'living modified organism' as any living organism that possesses a novel combination of genetic material obtained through the use of modern biotechnology, and 'living organism' means any biological entity capable of transferring or replicating genetic material, including sterile organisms, viruses and viroids.

[ 7 ] 'Modern biotechnology' is defined in the Protocol to mean the application of in vitro nucleic acid techniques, or fusion of cells beyond the taxonomic family, that overcome natural physiological reproductive or recombination barriers and are not techniques used in traditional breeding and selection.

[ 7 ] 'Living modified organism (LMO) Products' are defined as processed material that are of living modified organism origin, containing detectable novel combinations of replicable genetic material obtained through the use of modern biotechnology. Common LMOs include agricultural crops that have been genetically modified for greater productivity or for resistance to pests or diseases. Examples of modified crops include tomatoes, cassava, corn, cotton and soybeans.

[ 8 ] 'Living modified organism intended for direct use as food or feed, or for processing (LMO-FFP)' are agricultural commodities from GM crops.

[ 7 ] Overall the term 'living modified organisms' is equivalent to genetically modified organism – the Protocol did not make any distinction between these terms and did not use the term 'genetically modified organism.' [ 9 ] Precautionary approach [ edit ] One of the outcomes of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development (also known as the Earth Summit) held in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, in June 1992, was the adoption of the Rio Declaration on Environment and Development , which contains 27 principles to underpin sustainable development. Commonly known as the precautionary principle , Principle 15 states that "In order to protect the environment, the precautionary approach shall be widely applied by States according to their capabilities. Where there are threats of serious or irreversible damage, lack of full scientific certainty shall not be used as a reason for postponing cost-effective measures to prevent environmental degradation ." Elements of the precautionary approach are reflected in a number of the provisions of the Protocol, such as: The preamble, reaffirming "the precautionary approach contained in Principle 15 of the Rio Declaration on environment and Development"; Article 1, indicating that the objective of the Protocol is "in accordance with the precautionary approach contained in Principle 15 of the Rio Declaration on Environment and Development "; Article 10.6 and 11.8, which states "Lack of scientific certainty due to insufficient relevant scientific information and knowledge regarding the extent of the potential adverse effects of an LMO on biodiversity, taking into account risks to human health, shall not prevent a Party of import from taking a decision, as appropriate, with regard to the import of the LMO in question, in order to avoid or minimize such potential adverse effects."; and Annex III on risk assessment, which notes that "Lack of scientific knowledge or scientific consensus should not necessarily be interpreted as indicating a particular level of risk, an absence of risk, or an acceptable risk." Application [ edit ] The Protocol applies to the transboundary movement, transit, handling and use of all living modified organisms that may have adverse effects on the conservation and sustainable use of biological diversity, taking also into account risks to human health (Article 4 of the Protocol, SCBD 2000).

Parties and non-parties [ edit ] The governing body of the Protocol is called the Conference of the Parties to the Convention serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Protocol (also the COP-MOP). The main function of this body is to review the implementation of the Protocol and make decisions necessary to promote its effective operation. Decisions under the Protocol can only be taken by Parties to the Protocol. Parties to the Convention that are not Parties to the Protocol may only participate as observers in the proceedings of meetings of the COP-MOP.

The Protocol addresses the obligations of Parties in relation to the transboundary movements of LMOs to and from non-Parties to the Protocol. The transboundary movements between Parties and non-Parties must be carried out in a manner that is consistent with the objective of the Protocol. Parties are required to encourage non-Parties to adhere to the Protocol and to contribute information to the Biosafety Clearing-House.

Relationship with the WTO [ edit ] A number of agreements under the World Trade Organization (WTO), such as the Agreement on the Application of Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures (SPS Agreement) and the Agreement on Technical Barriers to Trade (TBT Agreement), and the Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPs), contain provisions that are relevant to the Protocol. This Protocol states in its preamble that parties: Recognize that trade and environment agreements should be mutually supportive; Emphasize that the Protocol is not interpreted as implying a change in the rights and obligations under any existing agreements; and Understand that the above recital is not intended to subordinate the Protocol to other international agreements.

Main features [ edit ] Overview of features [ edit ] The Protocol promotes biosafety by establishing rules and procedures for the safe transfer, handling, and use of LMOs, with specific focus on transboundary movements of LMOs. It features a set of procedures including one for LMOs that are to be intentionally introduced into the environment called the advance informed agreement procedure, and one for LMOs that are intended to be used directly as food or feed or for processing .

Parties to the Protocol must ensure that LMOs are handled, packaged and transported under conditions of safety. Furthermore, the shipment of LMOs subject to transboundary movement must be accompanied by appropriate documentation specifying, among other things, identity of LMOs and contact point for further information. These procedures and requirements are designed to provide importing Parties with the necessary information needed for making informed decisions about whether or not to accept LMO imports and for handling them in a safe manner.

The Party of import makes its decisions in accordance with scientifically sound risk assessments. The Protocol sets out principles and methodologies on how to conduct a risk assessment. In case of insufficient relevant scientific information and knowledge, the Party of import may use precaution in making their decisions on import. Parties may also take into account, consistent with their international obligations, socio-economic considerations in reaching decisions on import of LMOs.

Parties must also adopt measures for managing any risks identified by the risk assessment, and they must take necessary steps in the event of accidental release of LMOs.

To facilitate its implementation, the Protocol establishes a Biosafety Clearing-House for Parties to exchange information, and contains a number of important provisions, including capacity-building, a financial mechanism, compliance procedures, and requirements for public awareness and participation.

Procedures for moving LMOs across borders [ edit ] Advance Informed Agreement [ edit ] The "Advance Informed Agreement" (AIA) procedure applies to the first intentional transboundary movement of LMOs for intentional introduction into the environment of the Party of import. It includes four components: notification by the Party of export or the exporter, acknowledgment of receipt of notification by the Party of import, the decision procedure, and opportunity for review of decisions. The purpose of this procedure is to ensure that importing countries have both the opportunity and the capacity to assess risks that may be associated with the LMO before agreeing to its import. The Party of import must indicate the reasons on which its decisions are based (unless consent is unconditional). A Party of import may, at any time, in light of new scientific information, review and change a decision. A Party of export or a notifier may also request the Party of import to review its decisions.

However, the Protocol's AIA procedure does not apply to certain categories of LMOs: LMOs in transit; LMOs destined for contained use; LMOs intended for direct use as food or feed or for processing While the Protocol's AIA procedure does not apply to certain categories of LMOs, Parties have the right to regulate the importation on the basis of domestic legislation. There are also allowances in the Protocol to declare certain LMOs exempt from application of the AIA procedure.

LMOs intended for food or feed, or for processing [ edit ] LMOs intended for direct use as food or feed, or processing (LMOs-FFP) represent a large category of agricultural commodities. The Protocol, instead of using the AIA procedure, establishes a more simplified procedure for the transboundary movement of LMOs-FFP. Under this procedure, A Party must inform other Parties through the Biosafety Clearing-House , within 15 days, of its decision regarding domestic use of LMOs that may be subject to transboundary movement.

Decisions by the Party of import on whether or not to accept the import of LMOs-FFP are taken under its domestic regulatory framework that is consistent with the objective of the Protocol . A developing country Party or a Party with an economy in transition may, in the absence of a domestic regulatory framework, declare through the Biosafety Clearing-House that its decisions on the first import of LMOs-FFP will be taken in accordance with risk assessment as set out in the Protocol and time frame for decision-making.

Handling, transport, packaging and identification [ edit ] The Protocol provides for practical requirements that are deemed to contribute to the safe movement of LMOs. Parties are required to take measures for the safe handling, packaging and transportation of LMOs that are subject to transboundary movement. The Protocol specifies requirements on identification by setting out what information must be provided in documentation that should accompany transboundary shipments of LMOs. It also leaves room for possible future development of standards for handling, packaging, transport and identification of LMOs by the meeting of the Parties to the Protocol.

Each Party is required to take measures ensuring that LMOs subject to intentional transboundary movement are accompanied by documentation identifying the LMOs and providing contact details of persons responsible for such movement. The details of these requirements vary according to the intended use of the LMOs, and, in the case of LMOs for food, feed or for processing, they should be further addressed by the governing body of the Protocol. (Article 18 of the Protocol, SCBD 2000).

The first meeting of the Parties adopted decisions outlining identification requirements for different categories of LMOs (Decision BS-I/6, SCBD 2004). However, the second meeting of the Parties failed to reach agreement on the detailed requirements to identify LMOs intended for direct use as food, feed or for processing and will need to reconsider this issue at its third meeting in March 2006.

Biosafety Clearing-House [ edit ] The Protocol established a Biosafety Clearing-House (BCH), in order to facilitate the exchange of scientific, technical, environmental and legal information on, and experience with, living modified organisms; and to assist Parties to implement the Protocol (Article 20 of the Protocol, SCBD 2000). It was established in a phased manner, and the first meeting of the Parties approved the transition from the pilot phase to the fully operational phase, and adopted modalities for its operations (Decision BS-I/3, SCBD 2004).

See also [ edit ] Biosafety Clearing-House Substantial equivalence Nagoya Protocol , another supplementary protocol adopted by the CBD References [ edit ] ^ First signed by Kenya ^ "UNTC" . Archived from the original on 5 March 2014 . Retrieved 4 March 2014 .

.

^ "United Nations Treaty Collection" . United Nations. Archived from the original on 5 March 2014 . Retrieved 24 July 2020 .

^ Unit, Biosafety (13 November 2019).

"The Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety" .

The Biosafety Clearing-House (BCH) . Retrieved 2 December 2019 .

^ "About the Protocol" .

Convention on Biological Diversity . Retrieved 17 September 2020 .

^ "Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety to the Convention on Biological Diversity" (PDF) .

cbd.int . Secretariat of the Convention on Biological Diversity. 2000 . Retrieved 15 July 2020 .

^ a b c "Glossary" .

^ "Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs) on the Cartagena Protocol" .

Convention on Biological Diversity . United Nations Environment Programme. 29 February 2012 . Retrieved 10 December 2017 .

^ "WHO 20 Questions on biotechnology" .

Secretariat of the Convention on Biological Diversity (2000) Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety to the Convention on Biological Diversity: text and annexes . Montreal, Quebec, Canada.

ISBN 92-807-1924-6 Secretariat of the Convention on Biological Diversity (2004) Global Biosafety – From concepts to action: Decisions adopted by the first meeting of the Conference of the Parties to the Convention on Biological Diversity serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety . Montreal, Quebec, Canada.

External links [ edit ] Wikibooks has a book on the topic of: Genes, Technology and Policy Biosafety Protocol Homepage Ratifications at depositary Biosafety Clearing-House Central Portal Text of the Protocol Map showing the state of the ratification of the Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety.

[ usurped ] Introductory note by Laurence Boisson de Chazournes, procedural history note and audiovisual material on the Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety to the Convention on Biological Diversity in the Historic Archives of the United Nations Audiovisual Library of International Law v t e Genetic engineering Genetically modified organisms Crops Maize/corn MON 810 MON 863 StarLink List of varieties of genetically modified maize/corn Potato Amflora Rice Golden rice Soybean Roundup ready soybean Vistive Gold Tomato Flavr Savr Cotton Bt cotton Wheat HB4 Other Apple Arabidopsis Brinjal Canola Papaya Rose SmartStax Sugar beet Tobacco Trees Mustard Animals Mammals Mouse Knockout mouse Oncomouse Woolly mouse Enviropig Herman the Bull Knockout rat Rabbit Ruppy Wolves Other animals Insects Fish GloFish Salmon Birds Frogs Bacteria and viruses Ice-minus bacteria Hepatitis B vaccine Oncolytic virus Processes Inserting DNA Agrobacteria Biolistics Electroporation Genetic transduction Lipofection Microinjection Somatic cell nuclear transfer Transfection Types Recombinant DNA Transgenesis Cisgenesis Uses In agriculture Genetically modified food Controversies Pharming Companies BASF Bayer Dow AgroSciences DuPont Pioneer Monsanto Syngenta In humans and diagnostics Gene therapy Genetic enhancement Genetic testing In research Gene knockout Gene knockdown Gene targeting Related articles Transgene Detection of genetically modified organisms Genetic pollution Genetics in fiction Human enhancement Reverse transfection Transhumanism Genetic use restriction technology Regulation Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety Geography Europe Africa Asia North America ( US ) South America Oceania Similar fields Eugenics Cloning Stem cell research Synthetic biology Biology Genetics Biotechnology Bioethics v t e Pollution History Air Acid rain Air quality index Air pollution measurement Atmospheric dispersion modeling Chlorofluorocarbon Combustion Biofuel Biomass Coal Joss paper Open burning of waste Construction Renovation Demolition Exhaust gas Diesel exhaust Haze Smoke Indoor air quality Internal combustion engine Global dimming Global distillation Mining Ozone depletion Particulates Asbestos Oil refining Polluting cooking fuels Persistent organic pollutant Smelting Smog Soot Black carbon Volatile organic compound Waste Biological Biological hazard Genetic pollution Introduced species Invasive species Digital Information pollution Electromagnetic Light Ecological light pollution Overillumination Radio spectrum pollution Natural Ozone Radium and radon in the environment Volcanic ash Wildfire Noise Transportation Land Water Air Rail Sustainable transport Urban Sonar Marine mammals and sonar Industrial Military Abstract Noise control Radiation Actinides Bioremediation Nuclear fission Nuclear fallout Plutonium Poisoning Radioactivity Uranium Electromagnetic radiation and health Radioactive waste Soil Agricultural pollution Herbicides Manure waste Pesticides Land degradation Bioremediation Open defecation Electrical resistance heating Soil guideline values Phytoremediation Solid waste Advertising mail Biodegradable waste Brown waste Electronic waste Battery recycling Foam food container Food waste Green waste Hazardous waste Biomedical waste Chemical waste Construction waste Lead poisoning Mercury poisoning Toxic waste Industrial waste Lead smelting Litter Mining Coal mining Gold mining Surface mining Deep sea mining Mining waste Uranium mining Municipal solid waste Garbage Nanomaterials Plastic pollution Microplastics Packaging waste Post-consumer waste Waste management Landfill Thermal treatment Space Satellite Visual Air travel Clutter (advertising) Traffic signs Overhead power lines Vandalism War Chemical warfare Herbicidal warfare ( Agent Orange ) Nuclear holocaust ( Nuclear fallout - nuclear famine - nuclear winter ) Scorched earth Unexploded ordnance War and environmental law Water Agricultural wastewater Biological pollution Diseases Eutrophication Firewater Freshwater Groundwater Hypoxia Industrial wastewater Marine debris Monitoring Nonpoint source pollution Nutrient pollution Ocean acidification Oil exploitation Oil exploration Oil spill Pharmaceuticals Sewage Septic tanks Pit latrine Shipping Stagnation Sulfur water Surface runoff Thermal Turbidity Urban runoff Water quality Topics Pollutants Heavy metals Paint Brain health and pollution Misc Area source Debris Dust Garbology Legacy pollution Midden Point source Waste Responses Cleaner production Industrial ecology Pollution haven hypothesis Pollutant release and transfer register Polluter pays principle Pollution control Waste minimisation Zero waste Lists Diseases Law by country Most polluted cities Least polluted cities by PM 2.5 Most polluted countries Most polluted rivers Treaties Categories ( by country ) Commons WikiProject Environment WikiProject Ecology Environment portal Ecology portal Authority control databases International VIAF National Germany United States Israel Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Cartagena_Protocol_on_Biosafety&oldid=1279214733 " Categories : Health risk Biodiversity Environmental treaties United Nations treaties Treaties concluded in 2000 Treaties entered into force in 2003 2003 in the environment Treaties of Afghanistan Treaties of Albania Treaties of Algeria Treaties of Angola Treaties of Antigua and Barbuda Treaties of Argentina Treaties of Armenia Treaties of Austria Treaties of Azerbaijan Treaties of the Bahamas Treaties of Bahrain Treaties of Bangladesh Treaties of Barbados Treaties of Belarus Treaties of Belgium Treaties of Belize Treaties of Benin Treaties of Bhutan Treaties of Bolivia Treaties of Bosnia and Herzegovina Treaties of Botswana Treaties of Brazil Treaties of Bulgaria Treaties of Burkina Faso Treaties of Burundi Treaties of Cambodia Treaties of Cameroon Treaties of Cape Verde Treaties of the Central African Republic Treaties of Chad Treaties of the People's Republic of China Treaties of Colombia Treaties of the Comoros Treaties of the Republic of the Congo Treaties of Costa Rica Treaties of Ivory Coast Treaties of Croatia Treaties of Cuba Treaties of Cyprus Treaties of the Czech Republic Treaties of North Korea Treaties of the Democratic Republic of the Congo Treaties of Denmark Treaties of Djibouti Treaties of Dominica Treaties of the Dominican Republic Treaties of Ecuador Treaties of Egypt Treaties of El Salvador Treaties of Eritrea Treaties of Estonia Treaties of the Transitional Government of Ethiopia Treaties of Fiji Treaties of Finland Treaties of France Treaties of Gabon Treaties of the Gambia Treaties of Georgia (country) Treaties of Germany Treaties of Ghana Treaties of Greece Treaties of Grenada Treaties of Guatemala Treaties of Guinea Treaties of Guinea-Bissau Treaties of Guyana Treaties of Honduras Treaties of Hungary Treaties of India Treaties of Indonesia Treaties of Iran Treaties of Iraq Treaties of Ireland Treaties of Italy Treaties of Jamaica Treaties of Japan Treaties of Jordan Treaties of Kazakhstan Treaties of Kenya Treaties of Kiribati Treaties of Kyrgyzstan Treaties of Laos Treaties of Latvia Treaties of Lebanon Treaties of Lesotho Treaties of Liberia Treaties of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya Treaties of Lithuania Treaties of Luxembourg Treaties of Madagascar Treaties of Malawi Treaties of Malaysia Treaties of the Maldives Treaties of Mali Treaties of Malta Treaties of the Marshall Islands Treaties of Mauritania Treaties of Mauritius Treaties of Mexico Treaties of Mongolia Treaties of Montenegro Treaties of Morocco Treaties of Mozambique Treaties of Myanmar Treaties of Namibia Treaties of Nauru Treaties of the Netherlands Treaties of New Zealand Treaties of Nicaragua Treaties of Niger Treaties of Nigeria Treaties of Norway Treaties of Oman Treaties of Pakistan Treaties of Palau Treaties of Palestine Treaties of Panama Treaties of Papua New Guinea Treaties of Paraguay Treaties of Peru Treaties of the Philippines Treaties of Poland Treaties of Portugal Treaties of Qatar Treaties of South Korea Treaties of Moldova Treaties of Romania Treaties of Rwanda Treaties of Samoa Treaties of Saudi Arabia Treaties of Senegal Treaties of Serbia and Montenegro Treaties of Seychelles Treaties of Slovakia Treaties of Slovenia Treaties of the Solomon Islands Treaties of the Transitional Federal Government of Somalia Treaties of South Africa Treaties of Spain Treaties of Sri Lanka Treaties of Saint Kitts and Nevis Treaties of Saint Lucia Treaties of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Treaties of the Republic of the Sudan (1985–2011) Treaties of Suriname Treaties of Eswatini Treaties of Sweden Treaties of Switzerland Treaties of Syria Treaties of Tajikistan Treaties of Thailand Treaties of North Macedonia Treaties of Togo Treaties of Tonga Treaties of Trinidad and Tobago Treaties of Tunisia Treaties of Turkey Treaties of Turkmenistan Treaties of Uganda Treaties of Ukraine Treaties of the United Arab Emirates Treaties of the United Kingdom Treaties of Tanzania Treaties of Uruguay Treaties of Venezuela Treaties of Vietnam Treaties of Yemen Treaties of Zambia Treaties of Zimbabwe Treaties entered into by the European Union Treaties of Niue 2000 in Canada Treaties extended to Hong Kong Treaties extended to Gibraltar Convention on Biological Diversity Treaties of Kuwait Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles lacking reliable references from December 2015 All articles lacking reliable references Use dmy dates from May 2022 This page was last edited on 7 March 2025, at 05:37 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety 11 languages Add topic

