Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life and education 2 Career Toggle Career subsection 2.1 Mises Institute and John Randolph Club 2.2 Property and Freedom Society 3 Views Toggle Views subsection 3.1 On democracy 3.2 Covenant communities and discrimination 3.3 Support for immigration restrictions 4 Remarks about homosexuals and academic investigation 5 Argumentation ethics 6 Influence 7 Personal life 8 Selected works Toggle Selected works subsection 8.1 Books (authored) 8.2 Books (edited) 8.3 Book contributions 8.4 Articles 8.5 Book reviews 8.6 Collected works 9 See also 10 References 11 External links Toggle the table of contents Hans-Hermann Hoppe 33 languages العربية تۆرکجه Български Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Español فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Italiano עברית Lietuvių Lombard مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Română Русский Shqip Slovenčina Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska தமிழ் Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia German-American anarcho-capitalist academic (born 1949) Hans-Hermann Hoppe Hoppe in 2024 Born ( 1949-09-02 ) 2 September 1949 (age 75) Peine , West Germany Movement Anarcho-capitalism Cultural conservatism Paleolibertarianism Spouse(s) Gülçin Imre Hoppe [ 3 ] Margaret Rudelich (div.) [ 4 ] Academic background Alma mater Goethe University Frankfurt Influences Kant Haller Molinari Mises Jouvenel Kuehnelt-Leddihn Lorenzen Apel Rothbard Habermas Academic work Discipline Politics Economics Epistemology Philosophy and economics Culture School or tradition Austrian School Continental philosophy Institutions Business school of University of Nevada, Las Vegas Mises Institute Property and Freedom Society Notable ideas Argumentation ethics Capitalist critique of democracy Awards The Gary G. Schlarbaum Prize (2006) [ 1 ] Franz Cuhel Memorial Prize (Prague Conference on Political Economy 2009) [ 2 ] [ independent source needed ] Website http://www.hanshoppe.com Signature This article is part of a series on Libertarianism in the United States Schools Agorism Anarcho-capitalism Austro Authoritarian Autarchism Bleeding-heart Christian Conservative Consequentialist Feminist Fusionism Geo Green Market anarchism Minarchism Natural-rights Neo Paleo Panarchism Paternalist Propertarianism Socialist Techno Transhumanist Voluntaryism Principles Anti-imperialism Civil libertarianism Constitutionalism Counter-economics Decentralization Departurism Economic freedom Evictionism Free banking Free market Free-market environmentalism Free migration Free trade Free will Freedom of association Freedom of contract Freedom of speech Homestead principle Individuality Individualism Liberty Limited government Localism Marriage privatization Natural rights and legal rights Non-aggression principle Non-interventionism Non-politics Non-voting Open border Polycentric law Private defense agency Private property Public choice theory Restorative justice Right to bear arms Right to privacy Rugged Individualism Self-ownership Single tax Small government Spoiled ballot Spontaneous order Stateless society Tax resistance Title-transfer theory of contract Voluntary association Voluntary society History Age of Enlightenment Abolitionism in the United States Classical liberalism Anti-Federalists Transcendentalism Individualist anarchism in the United States Old Right New Left New Right Freedom School Economics Austrian School Economic liberalism Fiscal conservatism Georgism Laissez-faire Neoliberalism Supply-side economics Intellectuals Andrews Barnett Block Boudreaux Brennan Caplan Carson Chamberlain Chartier Chodorov Cowen Ebeling Epstein Franklin D. Friedman M. Friedman P. Friedman R. Friedman Galambos Garrett George Griffin Gordon Harper Hazlitt Heinlein Hess Hoppe Hospers Huemer Jefferson Kinsella Konkin R. Lane Liggio LeFevre Machan Mencken Menger Mises Nock Nozick Paterson Rand Raico Read Robertson Rockwell Rothbard Samuels Schulman Sciabarra Scott Skousen Smith Spooner Somin Sowell Sumner Sutton Stephenson Szasz Taleb Thoreau Tuccille Tucker Volokh Wilder Williams Wilson (Clyde) Wilson (Robert) Politicians Amash Barr Brakey Burt Chafee Cleveland Flake Goldwater Jacobs Johnson Jorgensen Lee Massie McAfee Nolan Oliver Paul (Rand) Paul (Ron) Polis Sanford Sarwark Sununu Ventura Weld Wu Commentators Chamberlain Gillespie Gutfeld Jones Kauffman McElroy Miller Napolitano Postrel Pugsley Rogan Smith Soave Stone Stossel Welch Will Woods Activists Ben Garrison Jillette Koch (Charles) Koch (David) Reitman Kubrick Smith Prince Teller Thiel Literature The Anarchist Cookbook Anarchy, State, and Utopia The Betrayal of the American Right The Case Against Education Civil Disobedience Conceived in Liberty The Creature from Jekyll Island Defending the Undefendable The Discovery of Freedom End the Fed The Ethics of Liberty For a New Liberty Free to Choose The Future and Its Enemies The God of the Machine It Usually Begins with Ayn Rand Liberty The Machinery of Freedom Man, Economy and State The Moon is a Harsh Mistress The Mainspring of Human Progress The Market for Liberty The Myth of the Rational Voter No, They Can't No Treason New Libertarian Manifesto Our Enemy, the State The Problem of Political Authority Progress and Poverty Protection or Free Trade Radicals for Capitalism Seeing Like a State To Serve and Protect The Unconstitutionality of Slavery Issues Abortion Capital punishment Criticism Foreign affairs Immigration Intellectual property Internal debates LGBT rights Objectivism Political parties Politics State Theories of law Symbols Come and take it Gadsden flag Idols Ron Swanson Patrick Bateman Walter White Organizations Cato Institute Federalist Society Free State Project Foundation for Economic Education International Alliance of Libertarian Parties Libertarian Party Liberty International Mises Institute Reason Foundation Reason (magazine) Students for a Democratic Society Students for Liberty Young Americans for Liberty Movements American militia movement Boogaloo movement Dark Enlightenment Objectivist movement Objectivism Sovereign citizen movement Comparable Libertarianism in Hong Kong Libertarianism in the United Kingdom ( England ) Related Conservatism in the United States Left-libertarianism Liberalism in the United States Libertarian Democrat Libertarian Republican Libertarian science fiction On Democracy in America Outline of libertarianism Right-libertarianism Liberalism portal Conservatism portal Libertarianism portal United States portal v t e This article is part of a series on Conservatism in the United States Schools Compassionate Fiscal Fusion Liberal Classical Libertarian Moderate Movement Nationalist Christian Neo- Paleo- Postliberal Populist Progressive Social Straussian Traditionalist Ultra- Principles American exceptionalism Anti-communism Christian Zionism Communitarianism Constitutionalism Familialism Family values Federalism States' rights Subsidiarity Gender essentialism Judeo-Christian values Individualism Law and order Limited government Meritocracy Natural aristocracy Militarism Peace through strength Moral absolutism Natalism Pro-life Natural law Ordered liberty Patriotism Property rights Republicanism Right to bear arms Rule of law Supply-side economics Tradition History Loyalists Federalist Era Southern chivalry Redeemers Boston Brahmins Solid South New Humanism Dunning School Southern Agrarians Old Right Conservative Manifesto Conservative coalition America First Committee McCarthyism Goldwater campaign New Right Reagan era Reagan Doctrine Reaganomics Republican Revolution W. Bush presidency Tea Party movement Neo- vs. paleoconservatism Trump era First term Second term Agenda 47 Intellectuals Adams Anton Babbitt Bacevich Bell Bellow Bloom Boorstin Bradford Buckley Burgess Burnham Calhoun Chambers Conquest Deneen Eliot Francis Genovese Gottfried Hanson Hardin Hazony Himmelfarb Hoppe Hurston Jaffa Kimball Kirk Kirkpatrick Kreeft Kristol Kuehnelt-Leddihn Lind Lovecraft Loury Lukacs Luntz Mansfield Mencken Meyer Molnar Murray Nisbet Pangle Ransom Reno Rieff Santayana Schaeffer Sowell Strauss Vermeule Viereck Voegelin Wattenberg Weaver Wolfe Politicians Abbott Adams Boehner Bolton Buchanan Bush (George H. W.) Bush (George W.) Calhoun Clay Cheney Cleveland Coolidge Cruz DeSantis Dirksen Dole Eisenhower Gingrich Goldwater Harding Hamilton Helms Hoover (Herbert) Huckabee Johnson Kissinger Lodge Luce Madison McCain McCarthy (Joseph) McCarthy (Kevin) McConnell McKinley Meese Nixon Palin Paul (Rand) Paul (Ron) Pence Pierce Randolph Reagan Romney Rubio Rumsfeld Ryan Sessions Sherman Taft (Robert) Taft (William) Thurmond Trump Vance Wallace Wolfowitz Jurists Alito Barrett Bork Burger Colson Field Frelinghuysen Fuller George Goldsmith Gorsuch Harlan Kavanaugh Kennedy Luttig O'Connor Parker Rehnquist Roberts (John) Sanford Scalia Sessions Sutherland Taft (William) Thomas (Clarence) Whittaker Commentators Beck Bongino Breitbart Buchanan (Pat) Buckley Caldwell Carlson Cass Chodorov Coulter D'Souza Derbyshire Dreher Elder Goldberg Grant Griffin Van den Haag Hannity Hart Herberg Hoover (Margaret) Ingraham Jones Kelly Knowles Krauthammer Lahren Levin Limbaugh Mac Donald Neuhaus Ngo North Novak O'Reilly Owens Podhoretz Pool Portnoy Possony Prager Robertson Shapiro Shlaes Sullivan Walsh Watters Weyl Will Wintrich Woods Activists Abramoff Agostinelli Andreessen Atwater Bannon Bennett Bezmenov Bozell Cohn Dans Dobson Drudge Falwell Feulner Flynn Gabriel Hegseth Horowitz Kirk Krikorian Kristol LaHaye Lindell Lindbergh Leo McEntee Mercer (Rebekah) Mercer (Robert) Miller Murdoch Musk political views O'Keefe Park Phillips Posobiec Powell Raichik Reed Regnery Roberts (Kevin) Rove Rufo Scaife Schlafly (Andrew) Schlafly (Phyllis) Stone Thiel Thomas (Ginni) Weyrich Wiles Wood Literature The Federalist Papers (1788) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Notes on Democracy (1926) I'll Take My Stand (1930) Our Enemy, the State (1935) The Managerial Revolution (1941) Ideas Have Consequences (1948) God and Man at Yale (1951) The Conservative Mind (1953) The Conscience of a Conservative (1960) A Choice Not an Echo (1964) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) The Death of the West (2001) Hillbilly Elegy (2016) The Benedict Option (2017) Why Liberalism Failed (2018) The Age of Entitlement (2020) Parties Active American Party American Independent Party Conservative Party NY state Constitution Party Republican Party Defunct Anti-Masonic Party Constitutional Union Party Democratic Party ( historically, factions ) Boll weevils Bourbon Democrats Conservative Democrats Dixiecrats Reagan Democrats Southern Democrats Rhode Island Suffrage Party Federalist Party National Republican Party Native American Party Whig Party Think tanks Acton Institute AdTI AEI AFP CSP CfNI Claremont Institute CEI CSPC EPPC FRI Gatestone Institute Heartland Institute The Heritage Foundation Heritage Action Mandate for Leadership Project Esther Project 2025 Hoover Institution Hudson Institute ISI James Madison Program Leadership Institute Manhattan Institute Mises Institute PRI PNAC (Defunct) Ripon Society R Street Institute Rockford Institute SPN Sutherland Institute Tax Foundation Witherspoon Institute Media Newspapers Chicago Tribune The Epoch Times New Hampshire Union Leader The Jewish Voice The New York Observer New York Post The Remnant The Wall Street Journal (editorial board) The Washington Times Journals American Affairs The American Conservative The American Spectator American Thinker City Journal Claremont Review of Books Commentary Compact Chronicles The Dispatch First Things The Imaginative Conservative Jewish World Review Modern Age National Affairs The National Interest National Review The New American The New Atlantis The New Criterion Policy Review (defunct) Public Discourse Southern Partisan Spectator USA Tablet Taki's Magazine Telos Washington Examiner The Weekly Standard (defunct) TV channels CBN Fox Business Fox News Newsmax TV One America News Network Real America's Voice VOZ Websites 1819 News Babylon Bee Breitbart News The Bulwark Campus Reform The Center Square Conservative Review Daily Caller Daily Signal Daily Wire Discover the Networks The Federalist FrontPage Magazine Front Porch Republic Gateway Pundit Hot Air Human Events Independent Journal Review InfoWars Jihad Watch LifeZette NewsBusters PJ Media Rare RedState The Dispatch Townhall Twitchy Washington Examiner The Washington Free Beacon The Western Journal WorldNetDaily Other Blaze Media Encounter Books Evie Magazine The First Imprimis The Political Cesspool Passage Publishing PragerU RealClearPolitics Red Scare Regnery Publishing RSBN The Rubin Report Sinclair Broadcast Group Other organizations Congressional caucuses Second Amendment Caucus RSC Liberty Caucus Freedom Caucus Republican Main Street Partnership Republican Governance Group Blue Dog Coalition Economics ATR Club for Growth FreedomWorks (defunct) NFIB NTU Tea Party Patriots USCC Gun rights GOA NAGR NRA Identity politics ACT!

CWA Council of Conservative Citizens GAG IWF LCR Moms for Liberty Nativist CIS FAIR Immigration Restriction League NumbersUSA Patriot Prayer Proud Boys Oath Keepers Three Percenters Religion ADF Court cases ACLJ AFA The American TFP Chalcedon Foundation CCA Christian Voice Eagle Forum FCR The Fellowship FFC Focus on the Family Foundation for Moral Law Liberty Counsel Moral Majority (defunct) NOM NRLC PTMC Susan B. Anthony Pro-Life America Thomas More Law Center Watchdog groups AIM Econ Journal Watch Franklin News Foundation JW MRC O'Keefe Media Group Project Veritas Youth/student groups NJC TPUSA Young Americans for Freedom Young America's Foundation YAL Social media Gab Gettr Parler The Right Stuff Miscellaneous The 85 Fund AHI ACU AFPAC Bradley Foundation TCC CNP CPAC Hillsdale College IFF JBS John M. Olin Foundation (defunct) Liberty Fund LU NAS Philadelphia Society Regent University Russell Kirk Center for Cultural Renewal TPPF Other AFL Atlas Network CN ConservAmerica Donors Trust FedSoc NCPAC PJI Turning Point Action SACR YRNF Ziklag Movements Asian and Pacific Islander Black Christian right Reconstructionism Classical education movement Paideia Dark Enlightenment Election denial movement 2020 election disputes Female Green Hispanic and Latino LGBTQ Libertarian republicans Militia movement Monarchism Mormon White Horse Prophecy Theodemocracy New Apostolic Reformation Parental rights movement Fathers' rights Patriot movement Christian Radical right Reactionary feminism Right-libertarianism Paleolibertarianism Secessionism Neo-Confederates in Texas Trumpism Never Trump Related Barstool conservatism Bibliography of US conservatism Conservative talk radio GOP factions List of American conservatives NatCon Timeline of modern American conservatism Conservatism portal United States portal v t e Part of a series on Anarcho-capitalism Origins Aristotelianism Austrian school of economics Marginalism School of Salamanca Subjective theory of value Objectivism Classical liberalism French liberal school Homestead principle Labor theory of property Physiocracy Individualist anarchism Concepts Anti-statism Civil rights Corporate governance Counter-economics Decentralization Departurism Deregulation Economic liberalism Evictionism Free market Free-market roads Free trade Freedom of contract Individualism Jurisdictional arbitrage Laissez-faire Land tenure Market anarchism Natural law Non-aggression principle Polycentric law Private defense ( Army ( Company / list ), Intelligence , Investigator , Police , Security ) Private property Privatization Propertarianism Property rights Right to property Self-ownership Spontaneous order Title-transfer theory of contract Voluntaryism People Benson Block Caplan Casey de Jasay Friedman Hoppe Huemer Kinsella Land Malice Milei Murphy McElroy Rockwell Rothbard Salerno Tucker Woods Works The Market for Liberty (1970) For a New Liberty (1973) The Machinery of Freedom (1973) Defending the Undefendable (1976) The Ethics of Liberty (1982) To Serve and Protect (1998) Democracy: The God That Failed (2001) The Myth of the Rational Voter (2007) The Voluntary City (2002) The Problem of Political Authority (2012) Issues Abortion Anarchism Capital punishment Criticism Foreign affairs Immigration Inheritance Intellectual property Internal debates LGBT rights Minarchism Objectivism Political parties Politics Theories of law Related topics Accelerationism Agorism Dark Enlightenment Paleo-libertarianism Right-libertarianism Libertarianism in the United States Left-libertarianism Ultraliberalism Anarchism portal Capitalism portal Politics portal v t e Part of a series on the Austrian School Principal works Capital and Interest Human Action Individualism and Economic Order Man, Economy, and State Principles of Economics Origins School of Salamanca Classical economics French liberal school School of Brentano Methodenstreit Theories and ideologies Austrian business cycle Catallactics Creative destruction Economic calculation problem View of inflation Right-libertarianism Libertarianism in the United States Malinvestment Marginalism Methodological individualism Praxeology Roundaboutness Spontaneous order Subjective theory of value Theory of interest Organizations, universities, and think tanks Cato Institute University of Chicago George Mason University Foundation for Economic Education The Independent Institute Liberty Fund Mises Institute Mercatus Center Property and Freedom Society Reason Foundation People Amonn Böhm-Bawerk Bastos Block Bloom Boettke Boudreaux Caldwell DiLorenzo Epstein Ebeling Fetter Garrison Haberler Hayek Harper Hazlitt Heydel Higgs Holcombe Hoselitz Hoppe Horwitz Hülsmann Huerta de Soto Kaufmann Kirzner Konkin III Lachmann Lavoie Leeson Machlup Menger Milei Mises Morgenstern Moss Murphy North Peterson Powell Philippovich Reed Robbins Rodan Rothbard Rizzo Sabrin Sax Salerno Schumpeter Schlesinger Sennholz Skousen Strigl Stringham Wieser Yeager Variants and related topics Anarcho-capitalism Economic freedom Perspectives on capitalism Business and economics portal v t e Hans-Hermann Hoppe ( / ˈ h ɒ p ə / ; [ 5 ] German: [ˈhɔpə] ; born 2 September 1949) is a German-American academic associated with Austrian School economics, anarcho-capitalism , right-wing libertarianism , and opposition to democracy .

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] [ 8 ] [ 9 ] [ 10 ] He is professor emeritus of economics at the University of Nevada, Las Vegas (UNLV), senior fellow of the Mises Institute think tank, and the founder and president of the Property and Freedom Society .

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] Hoppe has written extensively in opposition to democracy, notably in his 2001 book Democracy: The God That Failed .

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] [ 10 ] The book favors exclusionary "covenant communities" that are "founded for the purpose of protecting family and kin".

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] A section of the book favoring exclusion of democrats and homosexuals from society helped popularize Hoppe on the far-right .

[ 13 ] [ 17 ] [ 18 ] Hoppe was a protégé of Murray Rothbard , who established him at UNLV, where Hoppe taught from 1986 to 2008.

[ 19 ] [ 7 ] [ 6 ] In 2004, a student's complaint about Hoppe's lecture comments regarding homosexuals and time preference led to an investigation and non-disciplinary letter to Hoppe by UNLV, [ 20 ] which was subsequently withdrawn after a controversy over academic freedom .

[ 18 ] [ 21 ] Hoppe founded the Property and Freedom Society in 2006; among the speakers at the organization's conferences in Turkey, some have been white nationalists .

[ 22 ] [ 23 ] [ 24 ] [ 13 ] Early life and education Murray Rothbard , whom Hoppe called his mentor and master Hoppe was born in Peine , West Germany .

[ 25 ] Hoppe completed his undergraduate studies at Saarland University [ 25 ] and received his MA and PhD degrees in Philosophy from Goethe University Frankfurt .

[ 12 ] He studied under Jürgen Habermas , a leading German intellectual of the post-WWII era, but came to reject Habermas's ideas and European leftism generally.

[ 26 ] He was a post-doctoral fellow at the University of Michigan , in Ann Arbor , from 1976 to 1978 and earned his habilitation in Foundations of Sociology and Economics from the University of Frankfurt in 1981.

Career Afterward he taught in West Germany and Italy.

[ 6 ] From 1986 [ 13 ] until his retirement in 2008, [ 6 ] Hoppe was a professor in the School of Business at University of Nevada, Las Vegas . He is a Distinguished Fellow of the Mises Institute , a libertarian think tank that is publisher of much of his work, and was editor of various Mises Institute periodicals.

[ 27 ] Hoppe has said that Murray Rothbard was his "principal teacher, mentor and master".

[ 28 ] Hoppe came to the United States through Rothbard on a scholarship from the Center for Libertarian Studies , and Rothbard also established Hoppe at UNLV.

[ 19 ] Hoppe said he was "working and living side-by-side with him, in constant and immediate personal contact," and said that from 1985 until Rothbard's 1995 death, he considered Rothbard his "dearest fatherly friend".

[ 29 ] Mises Institute and John Randolph Club The Mises Institute was founded in 1982 by Lew Rockwell , Burton Blumert , and Murray Rothbard, [ 30 ] following a split between the Cato Institute and Rothbard, who had been one of the founders of the Cato Institute.

[ 31 ] [ non-primary source needed ] After Rothbard's death in 1996, Hoppe was a leading anarcho-capitalist figure at the Mises Institute.

[ 7 ] Hoppe was active in the John Randolph Club , a far-right alliance of paleolibertarians and paleoconservatives that was organized by Rothbard and associated with the Rockford Institute .

[ 13 ] The club was known for promoting secessionist and neo-Confederate views in the 1990s.

[ 13 ] Property and Freedom Society Main article: Property and Freedom Society In 2006, Hoppe founded The Property and Freedom Society (PFS), with annual conferences in Bodrum, Turkey . It and the Mises Institute represent a paleolibertarian challenge to the Mont Pelerin Society and Atlas Network of think tanks.

[ 8 ] [ 32 ] [ 10 ] Figures of the European New Right and the American alt-right have attended PFS conferences.

[ 10 ] Quinn Slobodian and Dieter Plehwe describe Hoppe as a "racialist right-wing libertarian", and Slobodian writes that the conferences have included members of the former John Randolph Club along with "new advocates of stateless libertarianism and racial secession".

[ 8 ] [ 13 ] On the fifth anniversary of PFS, Hoppe reflected on its goals: "On the one hand, positively, it was to explain and elucidate the legal, economic, cognitive and cultural requirements and features of a free, state-less natural order. On the other hand, negatively, it was to unmask the State and showcase it for what it really is: an institution run by gangs of murderers, plunderers and thieves, surrounded by willing executioners, propagandists, sycophants, crooks, liars, clowns, charlatans, dupes and useful idiots – an institution that dirties and taints everything it touches." [ 33 ] Hoppe was criticized for inviting white nationalist speakers such as Jared Taylor and neo-Nazi Richard B. Spencer to speak at the PFS.

[ 22 ] [ 34 ] [ 24 ] Describing the PFS, the Southern Poverty Law Center said in 2016 that "in Hoppe one can see the connection between the ultra-Libertarians and white nationalists".

[ 24 ] Intelligencer in 2017 described the annual PFS meeting as "Davos, but for racists".

[ 23 ] Slobodian wrote in 2023 that "prophets of racial and social breakdown share the stage with investment advisors and financial consultants" at the conferences.

[ 13 ] Views On democracy Main article: Democracy: The God That Failed Hoppe's book Democracy: The God That Failed , published in 2001, argues that democracy is a cause of civilizational decline.

[ 35 ] Passages in the book oppose universal suffrage and favor "natural elites".

[ 13 ] In the book, Hoppe blames democratic forms of government for various social and economic problems, and attributes democracy's failures to pressure groups which seek to increase government expenditures and regulations. Hoppe proposes alternatives and remedies, including secession , decentralization of government, and "complete freedom of contract, occupation, trade and migration".

[ 36 ] Hoppe argues that monarchy would preserve individual liberty more effectively than democracy.

[ 14 ] The book helped popularize Hoppe in the far-right , particularly a section of the book that called for the exclusion of political rivals.

[ 13 ] [ 17 ] Janek Wasserman writes that Hoppe "reimagined the Austrian legacy as one of authoritarianism, conservatism, antidemocracy, and anti-Enlightenment".

[ 10 ] Steven Horwitz called the approaches of Hoppe and his Mises Institute colleague Joseph Salerno "a fascist fist in a libertarian glove".

[ 10 ] The political scientist George Hawley writes that Hoppe "may be the most important bridge between libertarianism and the Alt-Right".

[ 37 ] Hawley notes that Hoppe has argued that "libertarians must actually be radical conservatives", and that libertarians must favor a right to discrimination , including on the basis of race .

[ 9 ] In Hoppe's view, Wasserman writes, "the successes of the fin-de-siecle age—and the Austrian school—were not the product of liberal predominance or cosmopolitan virtues but of the ancien régime and its restrictive social order".

[ 10 ] Regarding democracy and the arts, Hoppe argued in 2013 that "democracy leads to the subversion and ultimately disappearance of the notion of beauty and universal standards of beauty. Beauty is swamped and submerged by so-called ' modern art '." [ 38 ] Reviewing Democracy: The God That Failed , Walter Block , a colleague of Hoppe's at the Mises Institute , wrote that Hoppe's arguments shed light "on historical occurrences, from wars to poverty to inflation to interest rates to crime". While Hoppe concedes that 21st-century democracies are more prosperous than the monarchies of old, Hoppe argues that if nobles and kings replaced today's political leaders, their ability to take a long-term view of a country's well-being would "improve matters", Block wrote. Block shared what he called minor criticisms of Hoppe's theses regarding time preferences , immigration and the gap between libertarianism and conservatism.

[ 39 ] Alberto Benegas-Lynch Jr., a professor of economics at the University of Buenos Aires who is associated with the libertarian Cato Institute , [ 40 ] criticized Hoppe's thesis that monarchy is preferable to democracy.

[ 41 ] Benegas-Lynch provided evidence that modern monarchies tend to be far poorer than modern democracies. In response, Hoppe argued that comparing mostly African monarchies with mostly European democracies led to a distortion.

[ 42 ] [ independent source needed ] Asked by The Intercept in 2021 about his incorporation into far-right internet memes celebrating political murder, Hoppe responded that the question was ignorant, writing, "I have been an intellectual champion of private property right, free markets, freedom of contract and association, and peace", and, "What do I know? There are lots of crazy people out there!" [ 17 ] Covenant communities and discrimination In Democracy: The God That Failed, Hoppe argues in favor of property owners' right to establish communities with exclusive criteria for admission and acceptance.

[ 43 ] [ 44 ] Hoppe describes a society of " covenant communities " made up of residents who have signed an agreement defining the nature of that community. Hoppe believes that these covenant communities should have the right to certain forms of discrimination, including the physical separation of people whose lifestyle is deemed incompatible with the norms of that community.

[ citation needed ] He writes that "There would be little or no 'tolerance' and 'openmindedness' so dear to left-libertarians . Instead, one would be on the right path toward restoring the freedom of association and exclusion implied in the institution of private property ".

[ 45 ] [ 16 ] Hoppe writes: "In a covenant concluded among proprietor and community tenants for the purpose of protecting their private property, no such thing as a right to free (unlimited) speech exists, ... naturally no one is permitted to advocate ideas contrary to the very purpose of the covenant of preserving and protecting private property, such as democracy and communism. There can be no tolerance toward democrats and communists in a libertarian social order. They will have to be physically separated and expelled from society. Likewise, in a covenant founded for the purpose of protecting family and kin, there can be no tolerance toward those habitually promoting lifestyles incompatible with this goal. They – the advocates of alternative, non-family and kin-centered lifestyles such as, for instance, individual hedonism, parasitism, nature-environment worship, homosexuality, or communism – will have to be physically removed from society, too, if one is to maintain a libertarian order." [ 43 ] [ 18 ] Commenting on this passage, Martin Snyder of the American Association of University Professors said Hoppe's words will disturb "[t]hose with a better memory than Hoppe for segregation, apartheid, internment facilities and concentration camps, for yellow stars and pink triangles".

[ 18 ] Walter Block describes Hoppe as calling for homosexuals and others to be banned from polite society, and says of Hoppe's statement: "it is stark, it is well written, it is radical...it is still exceedingly difficult to reconcile with libertarianism." [ 46 ] Critics such as Phillip Magness have argued that Hoppe's cultural conservative views were not derived from Mises's Austrian economics, but rather from outside philosophical traditions such as other right-wing political thought and the Frankfurt School.

[ 47 ] Support for immigration restrictions Part of a series on Capitalism Concepts Austerity Business Business cycle Businessperson Capital Capital accumulation Capital markets Company Corporation Competition Competition law Definitions Economic interventionism Economic liberalism Economic surplus Entrepreneurship Fictitious capital Financial market Free price system Free market Goods and services Investor Invisible hand Visible hand Liberalization Marginalism Money Private property Privatization Profit Rent seeking Supply and demand Surplus value Value Wage labour Economic systems Anglo-Saxon Authoritarian Corporate Dirigist Free-market Humanistic Laissez-faire Liberal Libertarian Market Mercantilist Mixed Monopoly National Neoliberal Nordic Private Raw Regulated market Regulatory Rhine Social Political State State-sponsored Welfare Economic theories American Austrian Chartalism MMT Chicago Classical Institutional Keynesian Neo- New Post- Market monetarism Critique of political economy Critique of work Marxist Monetarist Neoclassical New institutional Supply-side Ideologies Anarcho Authoritarian Classical liberalism Democratic Dirigisme Eco Gladstonian Humanistic Inclusive Liberal Liberalism Libertarian Neo Neoliberalism Objectivism Ordoliberalism Privatism Right-libertarianism Third Way Origins Age of Enlightenment Capitalism and Islam Commercial Revolution Feudalism Industrial Revolution Mercantilism Primitive accumulation Physiocracy Simple commodity production Development Advanced Consumer Community Corporate Crony Finance Global Illiberal Late Marxist Merchant Progressive Rentier State monopoly Technological Intellectuals Smith Bentham Malthus Say Ricardo Mill (James) Bastiat Mill (John Stuart) Marx Walras Marshall Pareto Veblen Weber von Mises Schumpeter Keynes Hayek Rand Weaver Coase Friedman Rothbard Sowell Becker Hoppe Related topics Anti-capitalism Capitalist propaganda Capitalist realism Capitalist state Consumerism Crisis theory Criticism of capitalism Critique of political economy Critique of work Cronyism Culture of capitalism Evergreening Exploitation of labour Globalization History History of theory Market economy Periodizations of capitalism Perspectives on capitalism Post-capitalism Speculation Spontaneous order Venture philanthropy Wage slavery Capitalism portal Business portal Economics portal v t e Although a self-described anarcho-capitalist who favors abolishing the nation-state, Hoppe also garners controversy due to his support for governmental enforcement of immigration laws , which critics argue is at odds with libertarianism and anarcho-capitalism.

[ 48 ] [ 34 ] Hoppe argues that as long as states exist, they should impose some restrictions on immigration. He has equated free immigration to "forced integration" which violates the rights of native peoples, since if land were privately owned, immigration would not be unhindered but would only occur with the consent of private property owners.

[ 49 ] Hoppe's Mises Institute colleague Walter Block has characterized Hoppe as an "anti-open immigration activist" who argues that, though all public property is "stolen" by the state from taxpayers , "the state compounds the injustice when it allows immigrants to use [public] property, thus further "invading" the private property rights of the original owners".

[ 50 ] However, Block rejects Hoppe's views as incompatible with libertarianism.

[ 51 ] He argues that Hoppe's logic implies that flagrantly unlibertarian laws such as regulations on prostitution and drug use "could be defended on the basis that many tax-paying property owners would not want such behavior on their own private property".

[ 52 ] Another libertarian author, Simon Guenzl, writing for Libertarian Papers, argues that: "supporting a legitimate role for the state as an immigration gatekeeper is inconsistent with Rothbardian and Hoppean libertarian anarchism, as well as with the associated strategy of advocating always and in every instance reductions in the state's role in society." [ 48 ] In terms of specific immigration restrictions, Hoppe argued that an appropriate policy will require immigrants to the United States to display proficiency in English in addition to "superior (above-average) intellectual performance and character structure as well as a compatible system of values".

[ 53 ] He suggested that these criteria would lead to a "systematic pro-European immigration bias". Jacob Hornberger of the Future of Freedom Foundation argued that the immigration test Hoppe advocated would probably be prejudiced against Latin American immigrants to the United States.

[ 54 ] [ independent source needed ] Remarks about homosexuals and academic investigation This article may contain an excessive amount of intricate detail that may only interest a particular audience .

Specifically, details of the chronology should be summarized .

Please help by  removing excessive detail that may be against Wikipedia's inclusion policy .

( September 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Hoppe at an event in New York City in 2017.

Hoppe's statements and ideas concerning race and homosexuality have repeatedly provoked controversy among his libertarian peers and his colleagues at UNLV. Following a 4 March 2004, lecture on time preference at the University of Nevada, Las Vegas (UNLV), a student complained that Hoppe created a hostile classroom environment by asserting that homosexuals tend to be more shortsighted than heterosexuals in their ability to save money and plan economically, in part because they tend not to have children.

[ 55 ] Hoppe also suggested that John Maynard Keynes 's homosexuality might explain his economic views, with which Hoppe disagreed.

[ clarification needed ] [ 56 ] Hoppe also stated that very young and very old people, and couples without children, were less likely to plan for the future. Hoppe told a reporter that the comments lasted only 90 seconds of a 75-minute class, no students questioned the comments, and that in 18 years of giving the lecture he had not received a complaint about them. At the request of university officials, Hoppe apologized to the class. He said, "Italians tend to eat more spaghetti than Germans, and Germans tend to eat more sauerkraut than Italians" and said that he was speaking in generalities. Thereafter, Hoppe told the reporter, the student alleged that Hoppe did not take the complaint seriously and filed a formal complaint. Hoppe told the reporter that he felt as if he was the victim in the incident and that the student should have been told to "grow up".

[ 57 ] An investigation was conducted, and the university's provost, Raymond W. Alden III , issued Hoppe a non-disciplinary letter of instruction on 9 February 2005, with a finding that he had "created a hostile or intimidating educational environment in violation of the University's policies regarding discrimination as to sexual orientation". Alden also instructed Hoppe to "... cease mischaracterizing opinion as objective fact" and said that Hoppe's opinion was not supported by peer-reviewed academic literature.

[ 58 ] [ independent source needed ] Hoppe appealed the decision, saying the university had "blatantly violated its contractual obligations" toward him, and described the action as "frivolous interference with my right to academic freedom".

[ 59 ] He was represented by the American Civil Liberties Union , which threatened legal action.

[ 60 ] [ 57 ] The Nevada ACLU executive director said, "We don't subscribe to Hans' theories and certainly understand why some students find them offensive ... But academic freedom means nothing if it doesn't protect the right of professors to present scholarly ideas that are relevant to their curricula".

[ 57 ] Alden's decision was picked up by Fox News and several blogs and libertarians organized a campaign to contact the university.

[ 60 ] The university received two weeks of bad publicity and the Interim Chancellor ( Nevada System of Higher Education ) Jim Rogers expressed concerns about "any attempts to thwart free speech".

[ 61 ] Jim Rogers rejected Hoppe's request for a one-year paid sabbatical.

[ 62 ] UNLV President Carol Harter acted upon Hoppe's appeal on 18 February 2005, deciding that Hoppe's views, even if non-mainstream or controversial, should not be cause for reprimanding him. She dismissed the discrimination complaint against Hoppe, and the non-disciplinary letter was withdrawn from Hoppe's personnel file.

[ 18 ] She wrote, "In the balance between freedoms and responsibilities, and where there may be ambiguity between the two, academic freedom must, in the end, be foremost." [ 63 ] [ independent source needed ] Hoppe later wrote about the incident and the UNLV investigation in an article entitled "My Battle With the Thought Police".

[ 64 ] Martin Snyder of the American Association of University Professors wrote that he should not be "punished for freely expressing his opinions".

[ 18 ] Various controversies about academic freedom , including the Hoppe matter and remarks made by Harvard University President Lawrence Summers , prompted the University of Nevada, Las Vegas, to hold a conference on academic freedom in October 2005.

[ 65 ] In 2009 UNLV proposed a new policy that included the encouragement of reporting by people who felt that they had encountered bias.

[ 66 ] The proposed policy was criticized by the Nevada ACLU and some faculty members who remembered the Hoppe incident as adverse to academic freedom.

[ 66 ] [ 67 ] Argumentation ethics Hoppe in 2005 This section may rely excessively on sources too closely associated with the subject , potentially preventing the article from being verifiable and neutral .

Please help improve it by replacing them with more appropriate citations to reliable, independent sources .

( July 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) In the September 1988 issue of Liberty , [ 68 ] Hoppe attempted to establish an a priori and value-neutral justification for libertarian ethics by devising a new theory which he named argumentation ethics .

[ 69 ] Hoppe asserted that any argument which in any respect purports to contradict libertarian principles is logically incoherent.

[ 70 ] Hoppe argued that, in the course of having an argument about politics (or indeed any subject), people assume certain norms of argumentation, including a prohibition on initiating violence. Hoppe then extrapolated this argument to political life in general, arguing that the norms governing argumentation should apply in all political contexts. Hoppe claimed that, of all political philosophies, only anarcho-capitalist libertarianism prohibits the initiation of aggressive violence (the non-aggression principle ); therefore, any argument for any political philosophy other than anarcho-capitalist libertarianism is logically incoherent.

[ independent source needed ] In the following issue, Liberty published comments by ten libertarians, [ 71 ] followed by a rejoinder from Hoppe.

[ 69 ] In his comment for Liberty , Hoppe's friend and Mises Institute supervisor Murray Rothbard wrote that Hoppe's theory was "a dazzling breakthrough for political philosophy in general and for libertarianism in particular" and that Hoppe "has managed to transcend the famous is/ought , fact/value dichotomy that has plagued philosophy since the days of the Scholastics , and that had brought modern libertarianism into a tiresome deadlock".

[ 69 ] However, the majority of Hoppe's colleagues surveyed by Liberty rejected his theory.

[ 72 ] [ 73 ] In his response, Hoppe derided his critics as " utilitarians ".

[ 69 ] [ independent source needed ] Mises Institute Senior Fellow Roderick T. Long stated that Hoppe's a priori formulation of libertarianism denied the fundamental principle of Misesean praxeology . On the issue of utilitarianism, Long wrote, "Hoppe's argument, if it worked, would commit us to recognizing and respecting libertarian rights regardless of what our goals are – but as a praxeologist, I have trouble seeing how any practical requirement can be justified apart from a means-end structure." [ 74 ] Libertarian philosopher Jason Brennan rejected Hoppe's argument, saying, "Hoppe's argument illicitly conflates a liberty right with a claim right , and so fails." [ 75 ] [ independent source needed ] J. Mikael Olsson argued that Hoppe had not provided any non-circular reasons why we "have to regard moral values as something that must be regarded as being established through (consensual) argument instead of 'mere' subjective preferences for situations turning out in certain ways". In other words, the theory relies "on the existence [of] certain intuitions, the acceptance of which cannot itself be the result of 'value-free' reasoning." [ 76 ] [ 77 ] [ independent source needed ] According to commentators, his original appropriation theory based on argumentation ethics initially tended toward the labor theory of property , but later moved toward the first possession theory of property perspective.

[ 78 ] [ 79 ] Influence Hoppe was an influence on the neoreactionary monarchist blogger Curtis Yarvin , also known by the pen name Mencius Moldbug.

[ 80 ] [ 81 ] Javier Milei , the president of Argentina, has cited Hoppe as one of his major influences and has recommended his bibliography in the past, despite recent grievances between both about the ideologic purity of Milei's administration and the praxis for a libertarian on a democratic system.

[ 82 ] [ 83 ] Personal life Hoppe resides in Turkey with his wife Gülçin Imre Hoppe, an Austrian school economist and hotelier.

[ 11 ] [ 84 ] [ 13 ] Selected works Books (authored) German Handeln und Erkennen [ Action and Cognition ] (in German). Bern (1976).

ISBN 978-3261019004 .

OCLC 2544452 .

Kritik der kausalwissenschaftlichen Sozialforschung [ Critique of Causal Scientific Social Research ] (in German). Opladen: Westdeutscher Verlag (1983).

ISBN 978-3531116242 .

OCLC 10432202 .

Eigentum, Anarchie und Staat Property, Anarchy, and the State (in German). Opladen: Westdeutscher Verlag (1987).

ISBN 978-3531118116 .

OCLC 18226538 .

English A Theory of Socialism and Capitalism .

Kluwer Academic Publishers (1988).

ISBN 0898382793 .

Archived from the original.

Audiobook Archived 24 July 2022 at the Wayback Machine narrated by Jim Vann.

Economic Science and the Austrian Method .

Auburn, AL: Ludwig von Mises Institute (1995).

ISBN 094546620X .

Audiobook Archived 24 July 2022 at the Wayback Machine , narrated by Gennady Stolyarov II.

Democracy: The God That Failed: The Economics and Politics of Monarchy, Democracy and Natural Order.

New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction Publishers (2001).

ISBN 0765808684 .

OCLC 46384089 .

The Economics and Ethics of Private Property .

Auburn, AL: Ludwig von Mises Institute , 2006. [2nd ed.] ISBN 0945466404 .

Economy, Society, & History.

Auburn, AL: Mises Institute, 2021.

[ 85 ] Books (edited) The Myth of National Defense: Essays on the Theory and History of Security Production .

Ludwig von Mises Institute (2003).

ISBN 978-0945466376 .

OCLC 53401048 .

Book contributions "Introduction." [1998]. In: The Ethics of Liberty , by Murray N. Rothbard .

New York University Press (1998).

ISBN 978-1610166645 .

Audiobook available.

"Government and the Private Production of Defense." In: The Myth of National Defense: Essays on the Theory and History of Security Production .

Auburn, AL: Ludwig von Mises Institute (2003), pp. 335–368.

ISBN 978-0945466376 .

OCLC 53401048 .

Audiobook narrated by George Pickering.

Articles This section may contain unverified or indiscriminate information in embedded lists .

Please help clean up the lists by removing items or incorporating them into the text of the article.

( June 2023 ) "On the Ultimate Justification of the Ethics of Private Property." Liberty , vol. 2, no. 1 (September 1988): 20–22.

"Symposium: Breakthrough or Buncombe?" Liberty , vol. 2, no. 2 (November 1988): 44–54. Symposium proceedings featuring Murray N. Rothbard , D. Friedman, L. Yeager, D. Gordon and D. Rasmussen.

"Socialism: A Property or Knowledge Problem?" Review of Austrian Economics , vol. 9 (March 1996): 143–149.

doi : 10.1007/BF01101888 .

"Small is Beautiful and Efficient: The Case for Secession." Telos , vol. 107 (Spring 1996).

"The Libertarian Case for Free Trade and Restricted Immigration." Journal of Libertarian Studies , vol. 13, no. 2 (Summer 1998).

Center for Libertarian Studies .

"On Property and Exploitation," with Walter Block .

International Journal of Value-Based Management , vol. 15 (2002): 225–236.

"My Battle with the Thought Police." Mises Daily (12 April 2005).

Ludwig von Mises Institute .

Book reviews "In Defense of Extreme Rationalism: Thoughts on D. McCloskey's The Rhetoric of Economics ." Review of The Rhetoric of Economics by Donald McCloskey .

Review of Austrian Economics , vol. 3 (1989): 179–214.

Collected works Jacob, Thomas (editor).

Hoppe Unplugged: Ansichten, Einsichten und Provokationen aus Interviews und Reden von Prof. Hans-Hermann Hoppe [in German]. Hamburg: tredition GmbH (2021).

Online supplement.

"Views, insights and provocations from interviews and speeches by Prof. Hans-Hermann Hoppe." See also Anarchism portal Economics portal Libertarianism portal Politics portal Anti-democratic thought Argumentation theory Austrian School of Economics Criticism of democracy Dark Enlightenment Dialectic Market anarchism Propertarianism Right-libertarianism Soft despotism Totalitarian democracy Tyranny of the majority Voluntaryism References ^ Kanopiadmin (18 August 2014).

"The Gary G. Schlarbaum Prize" .

Mises Institute Awards . Ludwig von Mises Institute.

Archived from the original on 10 November 2014 . Retrieved 13 September 2014 .

^ History of PCPE Archived 25 May 2015 at the Wayback Machine , CEVRO Institute , Prague ^ Deist, Jeff (March–April 2020).

"Vol 6, No 2" (PDF) .

The Austrian . Auburn, AL: Mises Institute. p. 12.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 18 November 2021 . Retrieved 18 January 2022 .

^ Block, Walter E.; Futerman, Alan G. (May 2024).

"Rejoined to Hoppe on Israel Versus Hamas" (PDF) .

MEST Journal : 1– 57.

doi : 10.12709/mest.12.12.01.01 . Retrieved 8 May 2024 .

Hoppe is himself divorced. This, presumably, renders him 'abnormal and perverse.' Also, this is hypocrisy.

^ "Hans-Hermann Hoppe: Why Democracy Fails" Archived 25 June 2017 at the Wayback Machine ^ a b c d Dieterle, David A. (2013).

Economic Thinkers: A Biographical Encyclopedia . Greenwood. p. 145.

ISBN 978-0313397462 .

^ a b c Olsen, Niklas; Slobodian, Quinn (April 2022).

"Locating Ludwig von Mises: Introduction" .

Journal of the History of Ideas .

83 (2): 257– 267.

doi : 10.1353/jhi.2022.0012 .

ISSN 1086-3222 .

PMID 35603613 .

S2CID 248987154 .

Archived from the original on 31 May 2022 . Retrieved 31 August 2023 .

^ a b c Plehwe, Dieter; Slobodian, Quinn (2020).

Nine Lives of Neoliberalism . London: Verso. p. 16.

ISBN 978-1788732550 .

^ a b Hawley, George (2017).

Right-Wing Critics of American Conservatism . United States: University Press of Kansas. pp.

167– 170.

ISBN 978-0700625796 .

In order to restore private property rights and truly erode the state, libertarians must actually be "radical and uncompromising conservatives". He insisted that libertarians must always favor the right to discriminate, even on the basis of race, and further argued that as long as states exist, states should have the right to restrict or completely ban foreign immigration.

^ a b c d e f g Wasserman, Janek (2019).

The Marginal Revolutionaries . Yale University Press. p. 281.

doi : 10.2307/j.ctvnwbxwf .

ISBN 978-0300249170 .

S2CID 203312066 .

^ a b "Hans-Hermann Hoppe" .

Ludwig von Mises Institute . 20 June 2014.

Archived from the original on 13 November 2019 . Retrieved 22 August 2016 .

^ a b "UNLV Catalog" (PDF) . p. 47.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 5 June 2010 . Retrieved 19 April 2013 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k Slobodian, Quinn (2023).

Crack-Up Capitalism: Market Radicals and the Dream of a World Without Democracy (1st ed.). New York: Metropolitan Books, Henry Holt and Company.

ISBN 978-1250753908 .

^ a b David Gordon , Review of Hans-Hermann Hoppe, Democracy: The God that Failed Archived 19 September 2014 at the Wayback Machine , "The Mises Review" of Ludwig von Mises Institute , Volume 8, Number 1, Spring 2002; Volume 8, Number 1.

^ Jensen, Jacob (April 2022).

"Repurposing Mises: Murray Rothbard and the Birth of Anarchocapitalism" .

Journal of the History of Ideas .

83 (2): 332.

doi : 10.1353/jhi.2022.0015 .

ISSN 1086-3222 .

PMID 35603616 .

S2CID 248985277 .

Archived from the original on 12 July 2022 . Retrieved 17 April 2023 .

^ a b Block, Walter (2007).

"Plumb-Line Libertarianism: A Critique of Hoppe" Archived 1 June 2023 at the Wayback Machine . Reason Papers.

^ a b c Ketcham, Christopher (4 February 2021).

"What the Far-Right Fascination With Pinochet's Death Squads Should Tell Us" .

The Intercept .

Archived from the original on 3 July 2023 . Retrieved 13 August 2023 .

^ a b c d e f Snyder, Martin D. (2005).

"State of the Profession: Birds of a Feather?" .

Academe .

91 (2): 127.

doi : 10.2307/40253419 .

ISSN 0190-2946 .

JSTOR 40253419 .

In his 2001 book Democracy: The God That Failed, the Chronicle of Higher Education reports, Hoppe maintains that in a libertarian Utopia dissidents would be unwelcome: "There can be no tolerance toward democrats and communists in a libertarian social order. They will have to be physically separated and removed from society.

^ a b Slobodian, Quinn; Plehwe, Dieter (2019). "Neoliberals Against Europe". In William Callison, Zachary Manfredi (ed.).

Mutant Neoliberalism: Market Rule and Political Rupture . United Kingdom: Fordham University Press. p. 2019.

ISBN 978-0823285730 .

^ Hoppe, Hans-Hermann (12 April 2005).

"My Battle With The Thought Police" .

Mises Institute . Retrieved 4 August 2025 .

^ Beito, David ; Luker, Ralph ; Johnson, Robert David (May 2005).

"Consulting All Sides on "Speech Codes" " (PDF) .

Organization of American Historians . Archived from the original on 5 July 2023.

^ a b Mower, Lawrence (May 11, 2007).

"Researchers tied to hate groups get invitations." Las Vegas Review-Journal ^ a b Read, Simon Van Zuylen-Wood, Noreen Malone, Max (30 April 2017).

"Beyond Alt: Understanding the New Far Right" .

Intelligencer .

Archived from the original on 16 August 2022 . Retrieved 28 August 2023 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ a b c Piggott, Stephen (9 June 2016).

"PayPal Co-Founder Peter Thiel to Address White Nationalist-Friendly "Property and Freedom Society" Conference in September" .

Southern Poverty Law Center .

Archived from the original on 2 February 2017 . Retrieved 30 August 2023 .

^ a b Jeff Tucker interviews Hans-Hermann Hoppe Archived 3 October 2011 at the Wayback Machine (1 October 2011) ^ Lew Rockwell , introduction to Hoppe's A Short History of Man (2015), Auburn, Mississippi: Mises Institute, p. 9 ^ Hans Herman Hoppe, The Economics and Ethics of Private Property Archived 26 November 2013 at the Wayback Machine , 2nd Ed., Mises Institute , p. xii, ISBN 978-0945466406 .

^ Wile, Anthony (27 March 2011).

"Dr. Hans-Hermann Hoppe on the Impracticality of One-World Government and the Failure of Western-style Democracy" . The Daily Bell.

Archived from the original on 12 September 2015 . Retrieved 26 March 2015 .

^ Hoppe, Hans-Hermann (1995). L. Rockwell (Ed.), from Murray Rothbard, In Memoriam Archived 23 January 2014 at the Wayback Machine . Auburn, AL: Ludwig von Mises Institute. pp. 33–37 ^ "The Story of the Mises Institute" . Ludwig von Mises Institute. 19 September 2018.

Archived from the original on 23 August 2020 . Retrieved 30 January 2022 .

^ "Think Tanks and Liberty" . Ludwig von Mises Institute. 27 April 2012.

Archived from the original on 26 August 2023 . Retrieved 30 January 2022 .

^ Slobodian, Quinn; Plehwe, Dieter, eds. (2022).

Market Civilizations . Zone Books.

doi : 10.2307/j.ctv1vbd2mv .

ISBN 978-1942130680 .

S2CID 249073465 .

^ Hoppe, Hans Hermann.

"The Property And Freedom Society – Reflections After Five Years" . lewrockwell.com.

Archived from the original on 28 June 2017 . Retrieved 6 September 2013 .

^ a b Ganz, John (19 September 2017).

"Perspective – Libertarians have more in common with the alt-right than they want you to think" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on 7 August 2019 . Retrieved 16 October 2017 .

^ Sedgwick, Mark, ed. (2019). "Mencius Moldbug and Neoreaction".

Key Thinkers of the Radical Right: Behind the New Threat to Liberal Democracy . United States: Oxford University Press. p. 191.

ISBN 978-0190877606 .

^ R.M. Pearce, Book Review: Democracy: the God That Failed Archived 28 August 2023 at the Wayback Machine , The National Observer (Australia) , No. 56, Autumn 2003.

^ Hawley, George (2017).

Making Sense of the Alt-Right . United States: Columbia University Press.

^ Fonseca, Joel (1 August 2013).

"The Brazilian Philosophy Magazine Dicta & Contradicta Interviews Hans-Hermann Hoppe" Archived 4 July 2022 at the Wayback Machine . Mises Institute Brazil ^ Walter Block , Review of Democracy: The God that Failed: The Economics and Politics of Monarchy, Democracy, and Natural Order , The American Journal of Economics and Sociology , Vol. 61, No. 3, July 2002.

^ "Alberto Benegas Lynch." Archived 28 August 2023 at the Wayback Machine Cato.org ^ Hoppe, Hans-Hermann (1997).

"On Theory and History. Reply to Benegas-Lynch Jr." Archived 24 March 2023 at the Wayback Machine . Published in Gerard Radnitzky, ed., Values and the Social Order , Vol. 3 (Aldershot: Avebury, 1997).

^ Hoppe, Hans-Hermann (1997).

"On Theory and History. Reply to Benegas-Lynch Jr" (PDF) .

Values and the Social Order .

3 : 1– 8.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 24 March 2023 . Retrieved 26 February 2014 – via HansHoppe.com.

^ a b Hoppe, Democracy: The God That Failed , pp. 216–218 ^ kanopiadmin (11 April 2005).

"My Battle With The Thought Police" .

Mises Institute .

Archived from the original on 26 September 2018 . Retrieved 16 October 2017 .

^ Hoppe, Hans-Hermann (2001).

Democracy: The God That Failed: The Economics and Politics of Monarchy, Democracy and Natural Order , Transaction Publishers, p. 211.

ISBN 1412815290 ^ Walter Block ( Loyola University New Orleans ), "Libertarianism is unique; it belongs neither to the right nor the left: a critique of the views of Long, Holcombe, and Baden on the left, Hoppe, Feser and Paul on the right" Archived 21 October 2014 at the Wayback Machine , undated, published at Ludwig von Mises Institute website, pp. 22–23.

^ "Magness, P.W. (2019). Racial Determinism and Immigration in the Works of Ludwig von Mises: A Critique of Slobodian's Alt-Right Thesis. Social & Political Philosophy eJournal.

https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3490778 ^ a b Guenzl, Simon (23 June 2016). "Public Property and the Libertarian Immigration Debate".

Libertarian Papers .

8 .

I conclude that supporting a legitimate role for the state as an immigration gatekeeper is inconsistent with Rothbardian and Hoppean libertarian anarchism, as well as with the associated strategy of advocating always and in every instance reductions in the state's role in society.

^ Hans Hoppe, On Free Immigration and Forced Integration Archived 28 August 2023 at the Wayback Machine , LewRockwell.com , 1999.

^ Anthony Gregory and Walter Block On Immigration: Reply to Hoppe Archived 17 August 2014 at the Wayback Machine , Journal of Libertarian Studies , Volume 21, No. 3, Fall 2007, pp. 25–42.

^ Block, Walter (2011).

"Rejoinder to Hoppe on Immigration" (PDF) .

Journal of Libertarian Studies .

22 (1): 771– 792.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 13 March 2022 . Retrieved 22 April 2025 .

^ Block, Walter (2008).

Labor Economics From A Free Market Perspective: Employing The Unemployable . World Scientific. p. 225.

ISBN 978-9814475860 . Retrieved 13 July 2018 .

^ Walter Block and Gene Callahan, Is There a Right to Immigration?: A Libertarian Perspective Archived 10 May 2023 at the Wayback Machine , Human Rights Review , October–December 2003.

^ Jacob Hornberger, Let's Stick with Traditional American Values!

Archived 17 October 2022 at the Wayback Machine , The Future of Freedom Foundation, 1 February 2000.

^ Snyder, Martin. "Birds of a Feather?".

Academe . Vol. 91, no. 2. p. 127.

ISSN 0190-2946 .

So what ignited the controversy in Nevada? In March 2004, a student formally accused Hoppe of creating a hostile classroom environment during a lecture on time preference, a notion in economics identifying individuals' varying degrees of willingness to defer the immediate consumption of goods in favor of saving and investment. Hoppe opined that certain demographic groups, for instance homosexuals, tend to be more shortsighted in their economic outlook than those who have children.

^ Snyder, Martin. "Birds of a Feather?".

Academe . Vol. 91, no. 2. p. 127.

ISSN 0190-2946 .

He also suggested that the economic theories of John Maynard Keynes might be explained by Keynes's reputed homosexuality.

^ a b c Richard Lake, "UNLV accused of limiting free speech" . Archived from the original on 9 February 2005 . Retrieved 15 May 2013 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown ( link ) Las Vegas Review-Journal , 5 February 2005.

^ Alden, III, Raymond W.

(9 February 2005).

"Findings and non-disciplinary letter of instruction" (PDF) .

Mises Institute .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 14 January 2013 . Retrieved 13 September 2014 .

^ Justin Chomintra, Professor, ACLU may sue UNLV Archived 3 September 2013 at the Wayback Machine , The Rebel Yell , 10 February 2005; reprinted by Stephen Kinsella at Mises.org, 10 February 2005.

^ a b "Efforts to punish UNLV professor gains exposure" .

Las Vegas Sun . 8 February 2005.

Archived from the original on 1 February 2014 . Retrieved 23 May 2013 .

^ "Exoneration sought for UNLV professor" .

Las Vegas Sun . 21 February 2005.

Archived from the original on 1 February 2014 . Retrieved 23 May 2013 .

^ "Rogers nixes Hoppe sabbatical" .

Las Vegas Sun . 23 February 2005.

Archived from the original on 9 April 2014 . Retrieved 23 May 2013 .

^ Carol Harter (18 February 2005).

"Statement of Dr. Carol Harter, President of UNLV, regarding Professor Hans-Hermann Hoppe" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 31 March 2005 . Retrieved 13 September 2014 .

^ Hans-Hermann Hoppe, "My Battle With the Thought Police" , Ludwig von Mises Institute web site, 12 April 2005.

^ The role of academic tenure was included during the conference.

"Teachers' tenure on front burner" .

Las Vegas Sun . 13 October 2005.

Archived from the original on 31 October 2013 . Retrieved 23 May 2013 .

^ a b The proposed policy defined "bias incidents" as "'verbal, written, or physical acts of intimidation, coercion, interference, frivolous claims, discrimination, and sexual or other harassment motivated, in whole or in part, by bias" based on characteristics including actual or perceived race, religion, sex (including gender identity or gender expression or a pregnancy-related condition), physical appearance and political affiliation.' Hsu, Charlotte (25 April 2009).

"ACLU airs free speech concerns on bias policy: Faculty express concern; UNLV official says proposal would encourage expression" .

Las Vegas Sun .

Archived from the original on 31 October 2013 . Retrieved 23 May 2013 .

^ Policy on Bias Incidents and Hate Crimes (Final draft) Archived 29 October 2013 at the Wayback Machine , University of Nevada, Las Vegas , Office of the Vice President for Student Affairs, Department of Police Services, Office of the Vice President for Diversity and Inclusion Policy on Bias Incidents and Hate Crimes.

^ Hoppe, Hans-Hermann (September 1988).

"The Ultimate Justification of the Private Property Ethic" (PDF) .

Liberty .

2 (1): 20– 22.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 December 2017 . Retrieved 16 July 2013 .

The mere fact that an individual argues presupposes that he owns himself and has a right to his own life and property. This provides a basis for libertarian theory radically different from both natural rights theory and utilitarianism.

^ a b c d Symposium (November 1988).

"Hans-Hermannn Hoppe's Argumentation Ethics: Breakthrough or Buncombe?" (PDF) .

Liberty .

2 (2): 44– 54. Archived from the original (PDF) on 12 October 2017.

^ Murphy, Robert; Callahan, Gene (2006).

"Hans-Hermann Hoppe's Argumentation Ethic: A Critique" (PDF) .

Journal of Libertarian Studies .

20 (2): 53– 64.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 31 July 2014 . Retrieved 24 June 2025 – via Wayback Machine .

Relevant text on Page 3: "Therefore, [Hoppe] concludes that the libertarian view of property rights is the only one that can possibly be defended by rational argument." ^ Kinsella, Stephan (13 March 2009).

"Revisiting Argumentation Ethics" .

Mises Economics Blog .

Ludwig von Mises Institute .

Archived from the original on 28 August 2023 . Retrieved 11 September 2022 .

[A] number of thinkers weighed in, including Rothbard , ...

Conway , ...

D. Friedman , ...

Machan , ...

Lomasky , ...

Yeager , ...

Rasmussen , and others....

^ Friedman, David D. (November 1988).

"The Trouble with Hoppe" .

Liberty . p. 44.

Archived from the original on 31 January 2025 . Retrieved 12 June 2025 .

^ Murphy, Robert; Callahan, Gene (2006).

"Hans-Hermann Hoppe's Argumentation Ethic: A Critique" (PDF) .

Journal of Libertarian Studies .

20 (2): 53– 64.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 31 July 2014 . Retrieved 24 June 2025 – via Wayback Machine .

^ Long, Roderick T.

"The Hoppriori Argument" .

Archived from the original on 24 October 2018 . Retrieved 26 August 2013 .

^ Jason Brennan (12 December 2013).

"Hoppe's Argumentation Ethics Argument Refuted in Under 60 Seconds" . Bleeding Heart Libertarians.

Archived from the original on 18 February 2022 . Retrieved 27 December 2019 .

^ J. Mikael Olsson, Austrian Economics as Political Philosophy Archived 31 January 2021 at the Wayback Machine , Stockholm Studies in Politics 161, pp. 157, 161.

^ Van der Linden, Niels (26 January 2012).

"A Critique of Hoppean Ethics" .

Tumblr . Archived from the original on 25 July 2012 . Retrieved 17 June 2025 .

^ Dominiak, Łukasz. (2023). Mixing Labor, Taking Possession, and Libertarianism: Response to Walter Block. Studia Z Historii Filozofii, 14(3), 169–195.

^ Kinsella, Stephan. 2008. Against Intellectual Property. Auburn: Mises Institute.

^ Tait, Joshua (2019). "Mencius Moldbug and Neoreaction". In Sedgwick, Mark (ed.).

Key thinkers of the radical right: behind the new threat to liberal democracy . New York, NY: Oxford University Press. pp.

187– 203.

ISBN 978-0190877606 .

^ Lanard, Noah (7 September 2022).

"Newly uncovered emails show Blake Masters' long history of hating democracy" .

Mother Jones .

Archived from the original on 7 September 2022 . Retrieved 13 August 2023 .

^ Agra, Rubén Folguera (14 April 2024).

" "Mi norte son Rothbard y Hoppe": Javier Milei se reafirma en sus convicciones libertarias" .

Libre Mercado (in European Spanish) . Retrieved 15 October 2024 .

^ "Dura crítica de Hans- Hermann Hoppe a Javier Milei: lo tildó de "showman y payaseco" " .

www.ambito.com . Retrieved 15 October 2024 .

^ Salihovic, Elnur (2015). Major Players in the Muslim Business World. Universal Publishers.

^ Judy (22 July 2021).

"Economy, Society, and History" .

Mises Institute . Retrieved 30 September 2023 .

External links Wikiquote has quotations related to Hans-Hermann Hoppe .

Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Hans-Hermann Hoppe ( category ) Official website Hans-Hermann Hoppe, The Mises Institute The Property & Freedom Society Hoppe's archives at LewRockwell.com Links to related articles v t e Anarcho-capitalism Origins Aristotelianism Austrian school of economics Marginalism School of Salamanca Subjective theory of value Objectivism Classical liberalism French liberal school Homestead principle Labor theory of property Physiocracy Individualist anarchism Concepts Anti-statism Civil rights Corporate governance Counter-economics Decentralization Departurism Deregulation Economic liberalism Evictionism Free market Free-market roads Free trade Freedom of contract Individualism Jurisdictional arbitrage Laissez-faire Land tenure Market anarchism Natural law Non-aggression principle Polycentric law Private defense ( Army ( Company / list ), Intelligence , Investigator , Police , Security ) Private property Privatization Propertarianism Property rights Right to property Self-ownership Spontaneous order Title-transfer theory of contract Voluntaryism People Bruce L. Benson Walter Block Bryan Caplan Gerard Casey Anthony de Jasay David D. Friedman Hans-Hermann Hoppe Michael Huemer Stephan Kinsella Nick Land Michael Malice Javier Milei Robert P. Murphy Wendy McElroy Lew Rockwell Murray Rothbard Joseph Salerno Jeffrey Tucker Tom Woods Works The Market for Liberty (1970) For a New Liberty (1973) The Machinery of Freedom (1973) Defending the Undefendable (1976) The Ethics of Liberty (1982) To Serve and Protect (1998) Democracy: The God That Failed (2001) The Myth of the Rational Voter (2007) The Voluntary City (2002) The Problem of Political Authority (2012) Issues Abortion Anarchism Capital punishment Criticism Foreign affairs Immigration Inheritance Intellectual property Internal debates LGBT rights Minarchism Objectivism Political parties Politics Theories of law Related topics Accelerationism Agorism Paleo-libertarianism Right-libertarianism Libertarianism in the United States Left-libertarianism Ultraliberalism Category v t e Austrian school economics Influences Classical economics French liberal school Frédéric Bastiat Jean-Baptiste Say Gustave de Molinari School of Salamanca Physiocracy Founders Eugen von Böhm-Bawerk Friedrich Hayek Carl Menger Ludwig von Mises Friedrich von Wieser Other contributors Bruce L. Benson Walter Block Peter Boettke Thomas DiLorenzo Frank Fetter Roger Garrison Gottfried Haberler Henry Hazlitt Robert Higgs Hans-Hermann Hoppe Steven Horwitz Jesús Huerta de Soto Israel Kirzner Ludwig Lachmann Peter Leeson Fritz Machlup Robert Murphy William H. Peterson David Prychitko Larry Reed George Reisman Richard Ritter von Strigl Murray Rothbard Joseph Salerno Mark Skousen Gerhard Tintner See also List of Austrian-school economists The Use of Knowledge in Society v t e Libertarianism Origins Age of Enlightenment Anarchism Aristotelianism Liberalism classical radical Schools Libertarian capitalism ( Right-libertarianism ) Anarcho-capitalism Autarchism Fusionism Libertarianism bleeding-heart christian consequentialist conservative feminism geo green natural-rights neo paleo paternalism techno crypto transhumanism Libertarian authoritarianism neo-reactionary Minarchism Neo-classical liberalism Objectivism Propertarianism Voluntaryism Libertarian socialism ( Left-libertarianism ) Anarchism black collectivist communist feminism free-market agorism green individualist egoist insurrectionary libertarian communism mutualism pacifist philosophical queer social syndicalist Autonomism Communalism Guild socialism Libertarian Marxism communization mao-spontex Syndicalism Concepts Anti-capitalism Anti-statism Civil libertarianism Crypto-anarchism Counter-economics Decentralization Departurism Evictionism Expropriative anarchism Federalism (anarchist) Free association (Marxism and anarchism) Free market Free-market environmentalism Freedom of association Freedom of choice Freedom of contract Gift economy Homestead principle Illegalism Individualism Individualist feminism Individual reclamation Liberty Libertarianism (metaphysics) Localism Natural law Natural rights and legal rights Night-watchman state Non-aggression principle Participatory economics Property is theft!

Refusal of work Self-ownership Single tax Spontaneous order Stateless society Voluntary association Voluntary society Workers' councils Workers' self-management Philosophers Left-wing Bakunin Bookchin Camus Chomsky Cleyre Déjacque Fourier Godwin Goldman Guérin Hodgskin Kropotkin Marcuse Öcalan Proudhon Warren Tucker Right-wing Bastiat Block Brennan Emerson D. Friedman M. Friedman R. Friedman Goldwater Hayek Herbert Hoppe Jillette Kinsella Korwin-Mikke Lane Locke von Mises de Molinari Nock Nozick Paterson Rand Read Rothbard Simon Spencer Stossel Other George Hess Konkin de La Boétie McElroy Paine Spooner Stirner Szasz Thoreau Politicians Cleveland Coolidge Farage Gandhi Johnson Jorgensen Korwin-Mikke Milei Paul Sarwark Issues Abortion Affirmative action Anarcho-capitalism and minarchism Capital punishment Foreign intervention Immigration Intellectual property Internal debates LGBT rights Objectivism Political alliances Political parties Theories of law War on Drugs Works Atlas Shrugged (1957) The Market for Liberty (1970) For a New Liberty: The Libertarian Manifesto (1973) Law, Legislation and Liberty (1973–1979) Anarchy, State, and Utopia (1974) Free to Choose (1980) Related Abolitionism Anti-collectivism Anti-communism Anti-fascism Anti-socialism Austro-libertarianism Center for Libertarian Studies Civil libertarianism Classical liberalism Conscientious objector Constitutionalism Cultural liberalism Economic liberalism Freeman on the land movement Fusionism Geolibertarianism Georgism Green libertarianism Libertarian conservatism Libertarian Democrats Libertarian socialism Libertarian Republicans Libertarian science fiction Libertarianism in the United Kingdom Libertarianism in the United States Objectivism Public choice theory Small government Sovereign citizen movement Technolibertarianism Libertarianism portal Outline of libertarianism v t e Social philosophy Concepts Agency Anomie Convention Cosmopolitanism Customs Cultural heritage Culturalism Inter Mono Multi Culture Counter Familialism History Honour Human nature Identity Formation Ideology Institutions Invisible hand Loyalty Modernity Morality Public Mores National character Natural law Personhood Reification Ressentiment Rights Sittlichkeit Social alienation Social norms Spontaneous order Stewardship Traditions Values Family Volksgeist Worldview Schools Budapest School Catholic social teaching Distributism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Social Frankfurt School Personalism Philosophers Ancient Confucius Laozi Mencius Mozi Xunzi Medieval Alpharabius Aquinas Avempace Bruni Ibn Khaldun Maimonides Ibn Tufayl Early modern Calvin Erasmus Guicciardini Locke Luther Milton Montaigne Müntzer 18th and 19th centuries Arnold Bentham Bonald Burke Carlyle Comte Condorcet Emerson Engels Fichte Fourier Franklin Hegel Helvétius Herder Hume Jefferson Kant Kierkegaard Le Bon Le Play Marx Mill Nietzsche Owen Renan Rousseau Royce Ruskin Smith Spencer de Staël Stirner Taine Thoreau Tocqueville Vico Vivekananda Voltaire 20th and 21st centuries Adorno Agamben Arendt Aron Badiou Baudrillard Bauman Benoist Berlin Butler Camus de Beauvoir Debord Deleuze Dewey Du Bois Durkheim Eco Evola Foucault Fromm Gandhi Gehlen Gentile Gramsci Guénon Habermas Han Heidegger Hoppe Irigaray Kirk Kołakowski Kropotkin Land Lasch MacIntyre Marcuse Maritain Negri Niebuhr Nussbaum Oakeshott Ortega Pareto Polanyi Radhakrishnan Röpke Santayana Scruton Shariati Simmel Skinner Sombart Sowell Spengler Strauss Taylor Voegelin Walzer Weber Weil Zinn Žižek Works De Officiis (44 BC) Oration on the Dignity of Man (1486) A Vindication of Natural Society (1756) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Civilization and Its Discontents (1930) The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction (1935) The Second Sex (1949) One-Dimensional Man (1964) The Society of the Spectacle (1967) The History of Sexuality (1976) The Culture of Narcissism (1979) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) Gender Trouble (1990) The Malaise of Modernity (1991) Intellectuals and Society (2010) See also Agnotology Axiology Critical theory Cultural criticism Cultural pessimism Ethics Historism Historicism Humanities Philosophy of culture Philosophy of education Philosophy of history Political philosophy Social criticism Social science Social theory Sociology Category v t e Political philosophy Terms Authority Citizenship‎ Duty Elite Emancipation Freedom Government Hegemony Hierarchy Justice Law Legitimacy Liberty Monopoly Nation Obedience Peace People Pluralism Power Progress Propaganda Property Regime Revolution Rights Ruling class Society Sovereignty‎ State Utopia War Government Aristocracy Oligarchy Autocracy Bureaucracy Dictatorship Democracy Ochlocracy Gerontocracy Meritocracy Monarchy Tyranny Plutocracy Technocracy Theocracy Ideologies Agrarianism Anarchism Capitalism Christian democracy Colonialism Communism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Corporatism Distributism Environmentalism Fascism Feminism Feudalism Imperialism Islamism Liberalism Libertarianism Localism Marxism Monarchism Multiculturalism Nationalism Nazism Populism Republicanism Social Darwinism Social democracy Socialism Third Way Concepts Balance of power Bellum omnium contra omnes Body politic Clash of civilizations Common good Consent of the governed Divine right of kings Family as a model for the state Monopoly on violence Natural law Negative and positive rights Night-watchman state Noble lie Noblesse oblige Open society Ordered liberty Original position Overton window Separation of powers Social contract State of nature Statolatry Supermajority Tyranny of the majority Philosophers Antiquity Aristotle Chanakya Cicero Confucius Han Fei Lactantius Mencius Mozi Plato political philosophy Polybius Shang Sun Tzu Thucydides Xenophon Middle Ages Al-Farabi Aquinas Averroes Bruni Dante Gelasius al-Ghazali Ibn Khaldun Marsilius Muhammad Nizam al-Mulk Ockham Plethon Wang Early modern period Boétie Bodin Bossuet Calvin Campanella Filmer Grotius Guicciardini Hobbes political philosophy James Leibniz Locke Luther Machiavelli Milton More Müntzer Pufendorf Spinoza Suárez 18th and 19th centuries Bakunin Bastiat Beccaria Bentham Bolingbroke Bonald Burke Carlyle Comte Condorcet Constant Cortés Engels Fichte Fourier Franklin Godwin Haller Hegel Herder Hume Iqbal Jefferson Kant political philosophy Le Bon Le Play Madison Maistre Marx Mazzini Mill Montesquieu Nietzsche Owen Paine Renan Rousseau Sade Saint-Simon Smith Spencer de Staël Stirner Taine Thoreau Tocqueville Tucker Voltaire 20th and 21st centuries Agamben Ambedkar Arendt Aron Badiou Bauman Benoist Berlin Bernstein Burnham Chomsky Dmowski Du Bois Dugin Dworkin Evola Foucault Fromm Fukuyama Gandhi Gentile Gramsci Guénon Habermas Hayek Hoppe Huntington Kautsky Khomeini Kirk Kropotkin Laclau Lenin Luxemburg Mansfield Mao Marcuse Maurras Michels Mises Mosca Mouffe Negri Nozick Nussbaum Oakeshott Ortega Pareto Popper Qutb Rand Rawls Röpke Rothbard Russell Sartre Schmitt Scruton Shariati Sorel Spann Spengler Strauss Sun Taylor Voegelin Walzer Weber Works Republic (c. 375 BC) Politics (c. 350 BC) On the Republic (51 BC) Treatise on Law (c. 1274) Monarchy (1313) The Prince (1532) Leviathan (1651) Two Treatises of Government (1689) The Spirit of Law (1748) The Social Contract (1762) Reflections on the Revolution in France (1790) Rights of Man (1791) Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1820) Democracy in America (1835–1840) The Communist Manifesto (1848) On Liberty (1859) The Revolt of the Masses (1929) The Road to Serfdom (1944) The Open Society and Its Enemies (1945) The Origins of Totalitarianism (1951) A Theory of Justice (1971) The End of History and the Last Man (1992) Related Authoritarianism Collectivism and individualism Conflict theories Contractualism Critique of political economy Egalitarianism Elite theory Elitism History of political thought Institutional discrimination Jurisprudence Justification for the state Political ethics Political spectrum Left-wing politics Centrism Right-wing politics Political theology Political violence Separation of church and state Separatism Social justice Statism Totalitarianism Category:Political philosophy Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Czech Republic Spain Netherlands Norway Croatia Korea Poland Israel Academics CiNii Scopus People DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Hans-Hermann_Hoppe&oldid=1304202755 " Categories : 1949 births Living people 20th-century American economists 20th-century American essayists 20th-century American male writers 20th-century American philosophers 20th-century German male writers 20th-century German non-fiction writers 20th-century German philosophers 21st-century American economists 21st-century American essayists 21st-century American male writers 21st-century American non-fiction writers 21st-century American philosophers 21st-century German male writers 21st-century German non-fiction writers 21st-century German philosophers American anarcho-capitalists American ethicists American founders American libertarians American male non-fiction writers American political philosophers American political writers Austrian School economists American free speech activists Classical liberal economists Criticism of democracy Emigrants from West Germany to the United States German anti-communists German economists German ethicists German founders German libertarians German male non-fiction writers German political philosophers German political writers Goethe University Frankfurt alumni Libertarian economists Libertarian theorists Mises Institute people People from Peine (district) Philosophers of law Saarland University alumni University of Nevada, Las Vegas faculty University of Michigan fellows Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown CS1 European Spanish-language sources (es-es) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pages Use dmy dates from August 2020 Pages using infobox person with multiple spouses All articles lacking reliable references Articles lacking reliable references from September 2023 Biography with signature Articles with hCards Pages with German IPA All pages needing factual verification Wikipedia articles needing factual verification from June 2023 Articles lacking reliable references from June 2023 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from May 2024 Wikipedia articles that are excessively detailed from September 2023 All articles that are excessively detailed Wikipedia articles with style issues from September 2023 All articles with style issues Wikipedia articles needing clarification from June 2025 Articles lacking reliable references from July 2023 Articles needing cleanup from June 2023 All pages needing cleanup Wikipedia list cleanup from June 2023 Articles containing French-language text Articles containing German-language text Articles containing Latin-language text This page was last edited on 4 August 2025, at 16:22 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Hans-Hermann Hoppe 33 languages Add topic

