Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Background 2 Barker 3 Gibson 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Ecological psychology 9 languages العربية Français 한국어 Қазақша 日本語 Português Русский Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Scientific study For the academic journal, see Ecological Psychology (journal) .

This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article may be too technical for most readers to understand .

Please help improve it to make it understandable to non-experts , without removing the technical details.

( July 2020 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Ecological psychology" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( July 2020 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Ecological psychology is the scientific study of the relationship between perception and action, grounded in a direct realist approach. This school of thought is heavily influenced by the writings of Roger Barker and James J. Gibson and stands in contrast to the mainstream explanations of perception offered by cognitive psychology . Ecological psychology is primarily concerned with the interconnectedness of perception, action and dynamical systems. A key principle in this field is the rejection of the traditional separation between perception and action, emphasizing instead that they are inseparable and interdependent.

Background [ edit ] In ecological psychology, perceptions are shaped by an individual's ability to engage with their emotional experiences in relation to the environment. This emotional engagement influences action, fostering collective processing, building social capital , and promoting pro-environmental behavior.

[ 1 ] Ecological psychology is informed from the theoretical frameworks of pragmatism , behaviorism, phenomenology, and Gestalt Theory. Contemporary trends in ecological psychology are also informed by dynamic touch, affordances, development and learning, social coordination, and sport.

[ 2 ] Barker [ edit ] Roger Barker 's work was based on his empirical work at the Midwest Field Station. He wrote later: "The Midwest Psychological Field Station was established to facilitate the study of human behavior and its environment in situ by bringing to psychological science the kind of opportunity long available to biologists: easy access to phenomena of the science unaltered by the selection and preparation that occur in laboratories." [ 3 ] The study of environmental units ( behavior settings ) grew out of this research.  In his classic work "Ecological Psychology" (1968) he argued that human behaviour was radically situated : in other words, you couldn't make predictions about human behaviour unless you know what situation or context or environment the human in question was in. For example, there are certain behaviours appropriate to being in church, attending a lecture, working in a factory etc., and the behaviour of people in these environments is more similar than the behaviour of an individual person in different environments. Barker later developed these theories in a number of books and articles.

[ 4 ] Gibson [ edit ] James J. Gibson , too, stressed the importance of the environment, in particular, the (direct) perception of how the environment of an organism affords various actions to the organism. Thus, an appropriate analysis of the environment was crucial for an explanation of perceptually guided behaviour. He argued that animals and humans stand in a ' systems ' or ' ecological ' relation to the environment , such that to adequately explain some behaviour it was necessary to study the environment or niche in which the behaviour took place and, especially, the information that 'epistemically connects' the organism to the environment.

It is Gibson's emphasis that the foundation for perception is ambient, ecologically available information – as opposed to peripheral or internal sensations – that makes Gibson's perspective unique in perceptual science in particular and cognitive science in general.

[ 5 ] The aphorism : "Ask not what's inside your head, but what your head's inside of" captures that idea.

[ 6 ] Gibson's theory of perception is information-based rather than sensation-based and to that extent, an analysis of the environment (in terms of affordances), and the concomitant specificational information that the organism detects about such affordances, is central to the ecological approach to perception. Throughout the 1970s and up until his death in 1979, Gibson increased his focus on the environment through development of the theory of affordances - the real, perceivable opportunities for action in the environment, that are specified by ecological information .

Gibson rejected outright indirect perception , in favour of ecological realism , his new form of direct perception that involves the new concept of ecological affordances. He also rejected the emerging constructivist , information processing and cognitivist views that assume and emphasize internal representation and the processing of meaningless, physical sensations ('inputs') in order to create meaningful, mental perceptions ('output'), all supported and implemented by a neurological basis (inside the head).

His approach to perception has often been criticised and dismissed when compared to widely publicised advances made in the fields of neuroscience and visual perception by the computational and cognitive approaches .

[ 7 ] However, developments in cognition studies which consider the role of embodied cognition and action in psychology can be seen to support his basic position.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] [ 10 ] Given that Gibson's tenet was that "perception is based on information, not on sensations", his work and that of his contemporaries today can be seen as crucial for keeping prominent the primary question of what is perceived (i.e., affordances, via information) – before questions of mechanism and material implementation are considered. Together with a contemporary emphasis on dynamical systems theory and complexity theory as a necessary methodology for investigating the structure of ecological information, the Gibsonian approach has maintained its relevance and applicability to the larger field of cognitive science.

See also [ edit ] Action-specific perception Ambient optic array Community psychology Conservation psychology Ecopsychiatry Embodied cognition Environmental Design Research Association Evolutionary psychology Information ecology Situated cognition Urie Bronfenbrenner References [ edit ] ^ Kieft, J.; Bendell, J (2021).

"The responsibility of communicating difficult truths about climate influenced societal disruption and collapse: an introduction to psychological research" .

Institute for Leadership and Sustainability (IFLAS) Occasional Papers .

7 : 1– 39.

^ Lobo, Lorena; Heras-Escribano, Manuel; Travieso, David (2018-11-27).

"The History and Philosophy of Ecological Psychology" .

Frontiers in Psychology .

9 : 2228.

doi : 10.3389/fpsyg.2018.02228 .

ISSN 1664-1078 .

PMC 6280920 .

PMID 30555368 .

^ Barker 1968 .

^ Barker, R. G. (1968).

Ecological psychology: Concepts and methods for studying the environment of human behavior . Stanford, Ca.: Stanford University Press.

Barker, R. G. (1979).  Influence of the frontier environment on behavior.  In J. O. Steffen (Ed.), The American West (pp. 61-92). Norman, OK:  University of Oklahoma Press.

Barker, R. G. (1987).  Prospecting in environmental psychology.  In D. Stokols & Altman (Eds.), Handbook of environmental psychology, Vol. 2.  (pp. 1413-1432).  New York:  Wiley.

Barker, R. G. & Associates. (1978). Habitats, environments, and human behavior. Studies in ecological psychology and eco-behavioral science from the Mid¬west Psychological Field Station, 1947-1972. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.

Barker, R. G. & Schoggen, P. (1973). Qualities of community life: Methods of measuring environment and behavior applied to an American and an English town. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.

Schoggen, P. (1989). Behavior settings: A revision and extension of Roger G.Barker's ecological psychology. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.

^ Gibson, James J. (1966). The Senses Considered as Perceptual Systems, Boston: Hughton Mifflin, p. 21.

^ Mace, W. M. (1977). James J. Gibson's strategy for perceiving: Ask not what's inside your head, but what your head's inside of. In R. E. Shaw & J. Bransford (Eds.), Perceiving, acting, and knowing. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.

^ Bruce, V.

, Green, P. & Georgeson, M. (1996).

Visual perception: Physiology, psychology and ecology (3rd ed.). LEA. p. 110.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ Clark, A., (2008), Supersizing the Mind, Oxford, Oxford University Press.

^ Clark, A. and D. Chalmers, (1998), "The Extended Mind." in Analysis, 58(1): 10-23.

^ Noë, A., Out of Our Heads (2009) and Action In Perception (MIT Press, 2004) External links [ edit ] Viridis Graduate Institute Ecological Psychology Information International Society for Ecological Psychology Centre for the Ecological Study of Perception and Action Teaching Psychology for Sustainability Direct Perception ; An early classic and a good introduction to the theoretical background and available research (circa 1980) on ecological psychology and direct perception; by Claire Michaels and Claudia Carello.

Ecological Psychology in Context YouTube channel PERCEIVINGACTING A collection of video and audio resources in ecological psychology, direct perception, coordination, and related topics.

Environmental Psychologist and Wellbeing Consultant Authority control databases Encyclopedia of Modern Ukraine Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ecological_psychology&oldid=1304583554 " Categories : Environmental psychology Psychological schools Enactive cognition Hidden categories: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia articles that are too technical from July 2020 All articles that are too technical Articles needing additional references from July 2020 All articles needing additional references Articles with multiple maintenance issues This page was last edited on 6 August 2025, at 23:07 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Ecological psychology 9 languages Add topic

