Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Definition 2 History 3 List of strategies 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Subsistence economy 29 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Català Чӑвашла Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Қазақша Latviešu Lietuvių Nederlands Русский Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska தமிழ் Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Economy directed to basic subsistence "Subsistence" redirects here. For other uses, see Subsistence (disambiguation) .

Part of a series on Economic systems Major types Capitalism Socialism By ideology Associative Capitalist Corporate Democratic Laissez-faire Mercantilist Neo- Neoliberal Social market State Welfare Democratic Developmentalism Distributist Fascist Feminist Freiwirtschaft Georgist Green Nationalist Protectionist Religious Buddhist economics Christian Sabbath economics Islamic Socialist Communist Market socialist Mutualist Participatory Socialist market Socialist-oriented market State Syndicalist Social credit Traditionalist Corporatist Feudalism By coordination Closed (autarky) Decentralized Digital Dirigist Dual Gift Informal Market Mixed Natural Open Planned Robinson Crusoe Sharing Subsistence Underground Vertical archipelago Virtual By regional model Asian East Asian Chinese Singaporean Keralan European Anglo-Saxon German Nordic Dutch Rhenish Soviet Latin America Socialism of the 21st century Sectors Common ownership Private Public Voluntary Property types Collective ownership Commons ( Common ownership ) Private property State ownership Social ownership Transition Collectivization Communization Corporatization Demutualization Deregulation Expropriation Financialization Liberalization Marketization Municipalization Mutualization Nationalization Privatization Socialization Marxist Coordination Barter Market Free Open Regulated Planning In kind Cybernetics Indicative Material balancing Price Self-managed Peer-to-peer Sharing Open access Other types Attention Commons-based peer production Expeditionary Hunter-gatherer Inclusive Democracy Information Manorialism Newly industrialized Palace Plantation Plutonomy Post-capitalist Post-industrial Post-scarcity Resource-based Token Traditional Transition World Business portal Economics portal v t e A subsistence economy is an economy directed to basic subsistence (the provision of food, clothing and shelter) rather than to the market.

Definition [ edit ] "Subsistence" is understood as supporting oneself and family at a minimum level. Basic subsistence is the provision of food, clothing, shelter. A subsistence economy is an economy directed to one's subsistence rather than to the market.

[ 1 ] Often, the subsistence economy is moneyless and relies on natural resources to provide for basic needs through hunting, gathering, and agriculture . In a subsistence economy, economic surplus is minimal and only used to trade for basic goods, and there is no industrialization .

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] In hunting and gathering societies, resources are often, if not typically underused.

[ 4 ] The subsistence system is maintained through sharing, feasting, ritual observance and associated norms.

[ 5 ] Harvesting is an important indicator of social capital .

[ 6 ] Subsistence embodies cultural perspectives of relationships to places, people and animals.

[ 7 ] History [ edit ] In human history , before the first cities , all humans lived in a subsistence economy.

[ citation needed ] As urbanization , civilization , and division of labor spread, various societies moved to other economic systems at various times.

[ citation needed ] Some remain relatively unchanged, ranging from uncontacted peoples , to marginalized areas of developing countries , to some cultures that choose to retain a traditional economy .

[ citation needed ] List of strategies [ edit ] Hunting and gathering techniques, also known as foraging : Artisan fishing —  a term which particularly applies to coastal or island ethnic groups using traditional techniques for subsistence fishing.

Aboriginal whaling , including the subsistence hunting of the bowhead whale in the Arctic.

Agriculture: Subsistence agriculture — agricultural cultivation involving continuous use of arable (crop) land , and is more labor-intensive than horticulture.

Horticulture — plant cultivation, based on the use of simple tools.

Pastoralism , the raising of grazing animals: Pastoral nomadism — all members of the pastoral society follow the herd throughout the year.

Transhumance or agro-pastoralism — part of the society follows the herd, while the other part maintains a home village.

Ranch agriculture — non-nomadic pastoralism with a defined territory.

Distribution and exchange : Redistribution Reciprocity — exchange between social equals.

Potlatching — a widely studied ritual in which sponsors (helped by their entourages) gave away resources and manufactured wealth while generating prestige for themselves.

LETS — Local Exchange Trading Systems.

A parasitical society, subsisting on the produce of a separate host society: Raiding Conquest Garbage picking , when subsisting in a larger economy See also [ edit ] Amish Anthropological theories of value Back-to-the-land movement Lasse Nordlund Mahatma Gandhi Natural economy Poverty Shakers Simple living Staple food Society Subsistence crisis Tiny house movement References [ edit ] ^ 'Subsistence agriculture' in: Alan Barnard and Jonathan Spencer, eds. (1996) Encyclopedia of Social and Cultural Anthropology, London and New York: Routledge, p.624.

^ "What is subsistence economy? definition and meaning" .

BusinessDictionary.com .

Archived from the original on 1 November 2017 . Retrieved 7 April 2018 .

^ "Subsistence Economy" .

Archived from the original on 2008-10-07 . Retrieved 2009-11-01 .

Chief Seattle to President Pierce regarding sale of land ^ Marshall Sahlins (1972) Stone Age Economics, Chicago and New York: Aldine-Atherton, passim e.g. pp.17,34,42,50.

^ Amanda D. Boyd, Cynthia G. Jardine,Christopher M. Furgal (2010).

"A Social and Cultural Capital Approach to Understanding Traditional Activities on the Land in Two Northern Dene Communities" (PDF) .

The Canadian Journal of Native Studies .

XXX (2): 267– 287.

{{ cite journal }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ Ready, Elspeth (2018-12-03).

"Sharing-based social capital associated with harvest production and wealth in the Canadian Arctic" .

PLOS ONE .

13 (3): e0193759.

Bibcode : 2018PLoSO..1393759R .

doi : 10.1371/journal.pone.0193759 .

ISSN 1932-6203 .

PMC 5846769 .

PMID 29529040 .

^ F. Berkes , P. J. George, R. J. Preston, A. Hughes, J. Turner, B. D. Cummins; George, P. J.; Preston, R. J.; Hughes, A.; Turner, J.; Cummins, B. D. (1994).

"Wildlife Harvesting and Sustainable Regional Native Economy in the Hudson and James Bay Lowland, Ontario" .

Arctic .

47 (4): 350– 360.

doi : 10.14430/arctic1308 .

ISSN 0004-0843 .

JSTOR 40511596 .

{{ cite journal }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) Authority control databases International FAST National United States France BnF data Czech Republic Latvia Israel Other IdRef NARA Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Subsistence_economy&oldid=1292275014 " Categories : Economic systems Agricultural economics Hidden categories: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from December 2023 This page was last edited on 26 May 2025, at 03:46 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Subsistence economy 29 languages Add topic

