Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 Architecture Toggle Architecture subsection 2.1 Greek 2.2 Roman baths 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Palaestra 36 languages Български Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara Français 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Ido Қазақша Latina Lietuvių Magyar Nederlands 日本語 Occitan Polski Português Русский Shqip Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Ancient wrestling school For the mythological characters, see Palaestra (mythology) . For the sports arena in Philadelphia, see The Palestra .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Palaestra" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( April 2017 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The palaestra at Olympia, Greece A palaestra ( / p ə ˈ l iː s t r ə / or /- ˈ l aɪ -/ ; [ 1 ] also (chiefly British) palestra ; Ancient Greek : παλαίστρα ) [ 2 ] was any site of a Greek wrestling school in antiquity. Events requiring little space, such as boxing and wrestling, occurred there.

Palaistrai functioned both independently and as a part of public gymnasia ; a palaestra could exist without a gymnasium, but no gymnasium existed without a palaestra.

Etymology [ edit ] Look up palaestra in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Compare ancient Greek palaiein - "to wrestle" and palē - "wrestling".

A palaestrophylax or palaistrophulax ( παλαιστροφύλαξ ) was the guardian or the director of a Palaestra.

[ 3 ] The spelling is notable because it is usually spelled palestra in the United Kingdom, while in the United States, it is spelled palaestra . This is a reverse of the usual rule for such words, where the ae / oe is used in British spelling but appears as e in American spelling.

Architecture [ edit ] Greek [ edit ] Plan of the palaestra at Olympia (left) and reconstruction of Vitruvius' description of the palaestra (right), from a 1914 translation of Vitruvius. The plan on the left incorporates guesswork, as the west side has been eroded by a river (the oblique angle is forced by the wider layout of the sanctuary). The xysta are also guesswork. On the right, the letters indicate: Exedrae (A), ephebeum (B), punching-bag room (C), conisterium (D), cold washing room (E), oil storeroom (F), cold bath room (G), furnace room (H), sauna (I), Laconicum (K), hot bath (L).

The architecture of the palaestra, although allowing for some variation, followed a distinct, standard plan. The palaestra essentially consisted of a rectangular court surrounded by colonnades with adjoining rooms. These rooms might house a variety of functions: bathing, ball playing, undressing and storage of clothes, seating for socializing, observation, or instruction, and storage of oil, dust or athletic equipment. Good examples of this building type come from two major Greek sites: Olympia and Delphi .

Vitruvius , through his text De architectura , is an important ancient source about this building type and provides a description of the Palaestra, "as constructed by the Greeks" in Book 5, chapter 11. Although the specifics of his descriptions do not always correspond to the architectural evidence, probably because he was a Roman author primarily interested in Italian architecture, his account provides insight into the general design and uses of this type of space. As Vitruvius describes it, the palaestra was square or rectangular in shape with colonnades along all four sides creating porticoes , with a total internal perimeter of two stadia (the length of the diaulos race , thus modern scholars sometimes refer to this whole structure as a diaulos ). The portico on the northern side of the palaestra was of double depth to protect against the weather. Rounded halls with seats ( exedrae , ἐξέδραι) were built along the single depth sides of the palaestra for the use of philosophers, orators, and other scholars. The double-depth side was divided into three sections. In the centre was a larger exedra ( ephebeum ) for use by the ephebes (young adult men undergoing state-run education/military training). On the left there was a punching bag room ( coryceum , κωρυκεῖον), a storeroom for sand/powder used to improve wrestlers' grip ( conisterium , κονιστἠριον), and a room for cold bathing ( loutrón , λουτρόν ). On the right there was an oil storeroom ( elaeothesium , ἐλαιοθέσιον), a cold pool ( frigidarium ), a furnace ( propnigeum , προπνίγειον), a vaulted sauna ( sudatio ), a dry sweating-room ( laconicum ), and a hot bath . To the north of the palaestra was a second courtyard, surrounded by porticoes on three sides, but open on the north. One of these porticoes was double-width and contained a covered wrestling arena ( ξυστός , Romanised as "xystus") for use during inclement weather. The space between the three porticoes contained walkways lined with trees ( xysta to the Romans, παραδρομίδες, "paradromides" to the Greeks).

[ 4 ] Roman baths [ edit ] During the Roman Imperial period the palaestra was often combined with, or joined to, a full bathing complex .

[ citation needed ] When the Arabs and the Turks adopted the tradition of Roman baths as the hammam , they did not continue the tradition of the attached palaestra.

[ citation needed ] See also [ edit ] Palaestra at Olympia Palaestra at Delphi References [ edit ] ^ Article title ^ παλαίστρα .

Liddell, Henry George ; Scott, Robert ; A Greek–English Lexicon at the Perseus Project .

^ Nuttall, P. Austin (1840).

A Classical and Archaeological Dictionary of the Manners, Customs, Laws, Institutions, Arts, Etc. of the Celebrated Nations of Antiquity, and of the Middle Ages: To which is Prefixed A Synoptical and Chronological View of Ancient History . Whittaker and Company. p.

358 .

^ "Vitruvius on Architecture: Book V, chapter 11" .

LacusCurtius . Retrieved 3 January 2022 .

External links [ edit ] "Palaestra" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Perseus Digital Library, Olympia Perseus Digital Library, Delphi Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Palaestra&oldid=1305715445 " Categories : Architecture in Greece Sports venues Sport in ancient Greece Pankration Hidden categories: Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from April 2017 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2022 Articles with Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy links This page was last edited on 13 August 2025, at 17:45 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Palaestra 36 languages Add topic

