Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life Toggle Life subsection 1.1 Early life and education 1.2 Revolution and exile 1.3 Bourbon Restoration and political career 1.4 Peerage and later life 2 Philosophy Toggle Philosophy subsection 2.1 Politics 2.2 Economics 2.3 Religion 2.4 Metaphysics 3 Influence 4 Works Toggle Works subsection 4.1 Complete works 4.2 Writings in English translation 5 See also 6 Notes 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Louis de Bonald 28 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Български Català Čeština Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Ido Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk پښتو Polski Português Русский Slovenčina Slovenščina Suomi Svenska Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia French philosopher (1754–1840) Louis de Bonald OSL Born Louis Gabriel Ambroise de Bonald ( 1754-10-02 ) 2 October 1754 Le Monna, Millau , Rouergue (now Aveyron ), Kingdom of France Died 23 November 1840 (1840-11-23) (aged 86) Le Monna, Kingdom of France Philosophical work Era 18th-century philosophy Region Western philosophy School Conservatism Counter-Enlightenment Ultramontanism Traditionalism Ultra-royalists Main interests Political philosophy Notable ideas Divine origin of language Social fact Louis Gabriel Ambroise, Vicomte de Bonald ( French: [lwi də bɔnald] ; 2 October 1754 – 23 November 1840) was a French counter-revolutionary [ 1 ] philosopher and politician . He is mainly remembered for developing a theoretical framework from which French sociology would emerge.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] Life [ edit ] Early life and education [ edit ] The College of Juilly , where Bonald attended school as a boy.

Bonald came from an ancient noble family of Provence. Louis was born in the chateau of Le Monna, a modest estate that served as the family seat ; the only son in his family, Louis was heir to the family estate. Le Monna is situated just east of the market town of Millau , overlooking the Dourbie river . His father, Antoine Sébastien de Bonald, died when Louis was four years old and the young boy would be brought up by his pious mother Anne née de Boyer du Bosc de Périe. Like many in the provincial nobility of the time, Anne was influenced by the Jansenists and brought up her son with a stern Catholic piety. De Bonald was tutored at Le Monna until the age of eleven, when he was sent to boarding school in Paris. He would then move to the Oratorian College of Juilly at age fifteen at the behest of his mother.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] [ 8 ] The Oratorians were known for their rigor and grounded de Bonald in the classics , as well as in mathematics, philosophy, and especially history. The headmaster of the school, Father Mandar, was a friend of Swiss philosopher Jean-Jacques Rousseau , and de Bonald was most likely acquainted with the writings of the philosophes early on.

He left Juilly in 1772 and entered the musketeers the following year. His unit was attached to King Louis XV at Versailles before being disbanded in 1776. After leaving the military, de Bonald returned to his estates in his native region of Rouergue. He assumed the life of a country gentleman, and took an interest in growing his properties and making them as productive as possible. He married a country nobleman’s daughter, Elisabeth-Marguerite de Guibal de Combescure, and the two had seven children, four of whom lived past childhood. One of their sons, Louis Jacques Maurice de Bonald , would go on to become the Cardinal-Archbishop of Lyon. His other son, Victor , would have a writing career of his own and would write a biography of his father.

[ 7 ] Revolution and exile [ edit ] He was elected to the town council of Millau in 1782 and was appointed mayor by the province's royal governor in 1785. He was popular as mayor and after the introduction of election for local officials in 1789, rather than appointment, he easily won reelection in February 1790. He was elected as a deputy to the departmental assembly later that year. De Bonald was at first supportive of the French Revolution and its initial decentralizing tendencies, and hoped the nobility would recover powers lost during the centralization of the 17th century. He even lead the citizens of Millau in drafting a letter of congratulations to the National Assembly , King Louis XVI , and to finance minister Jacques Necker , expressing the wish that "this sacred title of citizen [and] the spirit of concord and fraternity" would lead to a new sense of solidarity. He managed to quell the Great Fear in his region and would earn the thanks of the National Assembly, and he would be elected president of the departmental assembly soon after. However he soured on the Revolution with the enactment of the Civil Constitution of the Clergy in July 1790. Feeling unable to carry out the decrees of the Constitution in good conscience, he resigned from his post in January 1791.

[ 7 ] [ 9 ] Fearing that his position as a former public official would make him the target of reprisals, he emigrated with his two eldest sons – leaving behind his wife, mother, and his remaining children – in October 1791 and joined the army of the Prince of Condé . He was within earshot of the Battle of Jemappes in November 1792. He soon settled in Heidelberg and later moved to Switzerland. There he wrote his first important work, the highly conservative Theorie du Pouvoir Politique et Religieux dans la Societe Civile Demontree par le Raisonnement et l'Histoire (3 vols., 1796; new ed., Paris, 1854, 2 vols.), which the Directory condemned. His exile would separate him from his family for more than a decade, with only a brief reunion in 1797.

[ 10 ] [ 9 ] He returned to France in 1797 and largely spent the next five years in Paris in a sort of internal exile.

Napoleon was an admirer of de Bonald's writings and had him removed from the list of proscribed émigrés in 1802. This amnesty granted de Bonald a greater degree of freedom to travel and publish his writings. He moved within literary and political circles, and would make the acquittance of writers such as La Harpe , Lacretelle , and, most importantly, François-René de Chateaubriand . During this time he wrote a critical review of The Wealth of Nations by Adam Smith , arguing that the true common good of a nation lies in a shared life of law-abiding virtue and not simply in material prosperity. He would strike up a long correspondence and friendship with the conservative Savoyard philosopher Joseph de Maistre , however the two would never meet.

[ 7 ] [ 9 ] In 1806, he, along with Chateaubriand and Joseph Fiévée , edited the Mercure de France . Two years later, he was appointed counsellor of the Imperial University , which he had often attacked previously.

[ 11 ] Bourbon Restoration and political career [ edit ] The French Chamber of Deputies, where de Bonald was a deputy from 1815 to 1823.

The Bourbon Restoration saw de Bonald's political fortunes increase. He was made a member of the Royal Council for Public Instruction , [ 12 ] and in 1816 was appointed to the French Academy by Louis XVIII .

[ 10 ] From 1815 to 1823, de Bonald served as an elected deputy for Aveyron in the Chamber of Deputies . A member of the Ultra-royalist faction (also known as "Ultras"), his speeches were extremely conservative and he vigorously sought to undo the legislation passed in the wake of the Revolution. He opposed the Charter of 1814 , seeing it as giving too many concessions to the revolutionaries and enfeebling the government.

[ 7 ] He sought strong protections for the traditional family and in 1815 successfully argued for the repeal of laws passed during the Revolution permitting divorce , which afterwards remained illegal in France until 1884.

[ 9 ] The Revolution had abolished the remainder of the medieval trade guilds , affording little protection to workers. The Le Chapelier Law of 1791 forbade workers the right to form workers' associations and prohibited strike actions .

[ 13 ] De Bonald worked to reverse the Le Chapelier Law and reintroduce guilds but his efforts were unsuccessful, [ 9 ] and the right to form workers' associations would not be reintroduced in France until 1864.

[ 13 ] He also continued his writing career during this time, and his intellectual pursuits led to him visit many of Paris' Salons . Both de Bonald and Chateaubriand frequented the salon of Juliette Récamier , who drew from the leading literary and political circles of her day. He, along with Chateaubriand, contributed to various newspapers and journals, including The Correspondant , a journal of French and British thinkers, as well as Conservateur , a newspaper dedicated to defending the position of the Ultras. 1817 saw the publication of his Thoughts on Various Subjects , and his Observations on Madame de Staël 's Considerations on the Principle Events of the French Revolution in the following year .

[ 7 ] Peerage and later life [ edit ] Portrait of de Bonald by an unknown artist.

In 1822, de Bonald was made Minister of State, and in the following year, he was raised to the peerage by Louis XVIII, a dignity which he had lost by refusing to take the required oath in 1803. This entitled de Bonald to sit in the Chamber of Peers , the upper house of the French Parliament during the Bourbon Restoration. In 1825, he argued strongly in favor of the Anti-Sacrilege Act , including its prescription of the death penalty under certain conditions.

[ 10 ] In 1826, de Bonald briefly stepped away from politics due to the death of his wife.

In 1826, the Prime Minister and leader of the Ultras, Joseph de Villèle , introduced a bill reestablishing the law of primogeniture , at least for owners of large estates, unless they chose otherwise.

[ 14 ] The Revolution had radically changed inheritance law by mandating partitive inheritance , where property is dispersed equally among heirs, in order to break up aristocratic holdings.

[ 15 ] The proposed law was met with fierce opposition from the liberal Doctrinaires , the press, and even from Dissident Ultras , such as Chateaubriand.

[ 14 ] De Bonald's On the Agricultural Family, the Industrial Family, and the Right of Primogeniture was written in defense of primogeniture, agrarianism , and the proposed law.

[ 9 ] The government tried to manage popular outrage by attempting to pass a bill in December of that year curtailing the press, having largely withdrawn censorship in 1824. This only inflamed tensions and the proposed changes to inheritance were dropped by the government.

[ 14 ] In 1827, Charles X created a commission on censorship and tasked de Bonald with presiding over it.

[ 16 ] [ 9 ] This position would lead to the end of his long friendship with Chateaubriand, who opposed literary censorship. De Bonald's own attitudes towards censorship were somewhat mixed; he was in favor of taking a hard line on books since objectionable material in this form would be harder to take out of circulation, however he felt newspapers and periodicals should enjoy a greater degree of freedom. He felt that offending journalists and publishers should be first given a warning and then face legal prosecution if they continued to publish material detrimental to the public order. Bonald felt that the censorship practices of the 17th century would be anachronistic in the 19th century, and that the best way to combat error would be through the " marketplace of ideas ." Bonald himself had voted against a proposed censorship law in 1817 as giving too much power to the government.

[ 7 ] He retired from the Chamber of Peers in 1829. Following the July Revolution and the institution of the liberal July Monarchy in 1830, he retired from public life for good and spent the remainder of his days on his estate at Le Monna.

Philosophy [ edit ] Part of a series on Conservatism in France Ideologies Bonapartism Christian democracy Gaullism Integralism nationalist Legitimism Maurrassisme Nouvelle Droite Orléanism Révolution nationale Royalism Sarkozysm Ultramontanism Principles Anti-communism Counter-revolution Dirigisme Elitism Meritocracy Noblesse oblige Ethnopluralism Family values French culture Imperialism Monarchism Metapolitics Nationalism Nativism Natural order Patriotism Social hierarchy Social order Souverainisme Traditional authority History Ancien Régime Monarchiens Feuillant Catholic and Royal Armies War in the Vendée Thermidorian Reaction Chouannerie Chouan First White Terror Companions of Jehu Muscadins Second White Terror Bourbon Restoration Ultra-royalists Dreyfus affair Second French Empire Philippe Daudet affair Vichy France Algiers putsch of 1961 2024 The Republicans alliance crisis Intellectuals Ballanche Bainville Barbey d'Aurevilly Barruel Barrès Baudelaire de Benoist Blanc de Saint-Bonnet de Bonald Boutang Bruckner Brunetière Brague Cau de Chateaubriand Fustel de Coulanges Cochin Daudet Delsol Dumézil Faguet Faye Freund Girardet Guénon de Gobineau Houellebecq de Jouvenel Lamennais (early) Le Bon Lefebvre Lemaître Le Play Lugan Madiran de Maistre Morel Maffesoli Massis Maurras Maulnier Marcel Nimier Poulat Rémond Renan de Rivarol Rohmer Rueff Siegfried Taine de Tocqueville Thibon Literature Considerations on France (1796) Memoirs Illustrating the History of Jacobinism (1797) The Genius of Christianity (1802) The Pope (1819) St Petersburg Dialogues (1821) Democracy in America (1835) The Ancient City (1864) " What Is a Nation?

" (1882) The Crowd (1895) Inquiry into the Monarchy (1900) "The Future of the Intelligentsia" (1905) My Political Ideas (1937) The Reign of Quantity (1945) The Opium of the Intellectuals (1955) Violence and the Sacred (1972) The Camp of the Saints (1973) The Tyranny of Guilt (2006) The French Suicide (2014) Submission (2015) Politicians Bardella Bellamy de Bonald Boulanger Cathelineau de Chateaubriand Ciotti Flandin Fouéré de Gaulle Holeindre Juppé de Kérillis Le Pen (Jean-Marie) Le Pen (Marine) Maurras Malraux MacMahon Maréchal Messiha Messmer Pécresse Pétain Peyrefitte Pichegru Poincaré Poisson de Polignac Pompidou Retailleau de La Rocque de La Tour du Pin Sarkozy Schuman de Vaublanc de Villèle de Villiers Zemmour Commentators Barbier Buisson Camus Cassen Jean Giesbert de Girardin d'Escufon Jamet Lasserre Lévy Marmin Massis Maulnier Ménard Mougeotte Nay Obertone d'Orcival d'Ornellas Pauwels Pujo Sastre Sérant Tasin Venner Parties Active Alliance Royale Debout la France French Future The Nationalists National Republican Movement Future with Confidence National Centre of Independents & Peasants National Rally Reconquête The Republicans Senate Republicans Soyons libres VIA, the Way of the People Defunct Democratic Republican Alliance Feuillants French Agrarian and Peasant Party French Social Party Movement for France Independent Radicals Independent Republicans Party of Order Rally of the French People Popular Liberal Action Rally for France Rally for the Republic Republican Federation Resistance Party Union for a Popular Movement Union for the New Republic Organisations Active Action Française Carrefour de l'Horloge Cité catholique Groupement de Recherche et d'Études pour la Civilisation Européenne Initiative and Liberty Movement La Manif pour tous Les Identitaires March for Life Nouvelle Action Royaliste Rassemblement national de la jeunesse Student Cockade UDR group Union Nationale Inter-universitaire Defunct Action Française (pre Liberation) Camelots du Roi Cercle Proudhon Civitas Croix-de-Feu Independent Republicans Hussards Service d'Action Civique Media Active Atlantico CNews Éléments Famille chrétienne L'Écho du Sud La Croix Le Figaro Le Figaro Magazine Le Point Nouvelle École Radio Courtoisie Valeurs actuelles Defunct La Liberté La Presse La Nation française Le Quotidien de Paris Minute Présent Related topics Archeofuturism Clerical philosophers European New Right Far-right movements in France France profonde French–German enmity French Revolution " Islamo-leftism " List of French conservatives Maurrassisme in Argentina Ligues d'extrême droite Politics of France Remigration Sinistrisme Sovereigntist Right Tocqueville effect Conservatism portal France portal v t e Part of a series on Catholic philosophy Aquinas , Scotus and Ockham Ethics Cardinal virtues Just price Just war Principle of Double Effect Casuistry Probabilism Natural law Personalism Social teaching Liberation theology Christian humanism Virtue ethics Works of mercy Metaphysics Conceptualism Realism Moderate realism Nominalism Quiddity ( essence / nature ) Haecceity Quinque Viae Predestination Theological determinism Compatibilism Divine Attributes Schools Augustinianism Victorines Lullism Cartesianism Christian Neoplatonism Friends of God Molinism Ressourcement Occamism Scholasticism Second scholasticism Neo Scotism Thomism Analytic Salamanca Philosophers Ancient Ambrose Athenagoras Athanasius Augustine Benedict Boethius Clement Cyprian Cyril Gregory (of Nazianzus) Gregory (of Nyssa) Irenaeus Jerome Cassian Chrysostom Climacus John of Damascus Justin Maximus Dionysius Origen Paul Tertullian Medieval Abelard Albert Alcuin Alexander Anselm Autrecourt Aquinas Bacon Bede Berengar Bernard Bonaventure Buridan Catherine Cusa Eckhart Eriugena Giles Gregory I Grosseteste Gundissalinus Hildegard Hugh Isidore Llull Lombard Martin Ockham Oresme Paschasius Roscellinus Scotus Siger Symeon Thierry Modern Arnauld Ávila Azpilcueta Bellarmine Bonald Bossuet Brentano Botero Cajetan Chateaubriand Cortés Descartes Erasmus Fénelon Gracián Kołłątaj Krasicki La Mennais Liguori Maistre Malebranche Mariana Meinong Mercado Molina More Newman Pascal Rosmini Sales Soto Suárez Vico Vitoria Caramuel Contemporary Adler Anscombe Balthasar Barron Benedict XVI Blondel Chesterton Congar Copleston Finnis Garrigou-Lagrange Geach Gilson Girard Gutiérrez Dávila Guardini Haldane Hildebrand John Paul II Lonergan Lubac MacIntyre Marcel Marion Maritain McLuhan Mounier Pieper Rahner Stein Taylor Catholic Church portal Philosophy portal v t e Politics [ edit ] Part of a series on Integralism Principles Anti-communism Anti-liberalism Anti-Masonry Anti-Zionism Catholic social teaching Common good Confessionalism Consistent life ethic Corporatism Counter-revolution Decentralization ( Fueros ) Medievalism ( Medieval Church-State Estamentalism Manorialism Feudal duties Medieval Communalism ) Organicism Doctrine of the two swords Distributism ( Cooperativism Guildism ) By the Grace of God ( Deposing power ) Ecclesiastical court " Error has no rights " Familialism Gelasian Diarchy Integral Education Integral nationalism Integral state Monarchism ( Accidentalism ) Natural law Panhispanism Patriotism Political traditionalism Res publica Christiana Sun and Moon allegory Social Kingship Solidarity Traditionalist Catholicism Ultramontanism Variants Brazilian Neo- Catholic French Lusitano Spanish Thinkers Ambrose Aquinas Augustine Balmes Barbey d'Aurevilly Billot Blanc de Bonald Chesterton Castellani de Chateaubriand Corrêa de Oliveira Cuesta Delassus Donoso Cortés Eyzaguirre Ezcurra Feser Fita Fontcuberta Gago Gaume Gelasius I Genta Gómez Gómez Davila González Groulx Hahn Koneczny Madiran Maeztu Maurras Meinvielle Menéndez y Pelayo Ousset Pemán Pie Pius IX Pius X le Play Raposo Reale Salgado Salvany dos Santos Sardinha Solana Taparelli Urquiza Valdivieso Vázquez de Mella Vermeule Veuillot Politicians Abascal Ahimeir Barroso Charlemagne Clavarana Constantine I Estévanez Fernández García Gomar Gómez Lamamié (José) Lamamié (Juan) Larraín Louis IX Maurras Moreno Nocedal Olazábal du Pin Pujo Quiroga Rocamora Sánchez Santamaria dos Santos Senante Theodosius I de Villèle Works Catholic Bible The City of God De regno, ad regem Cypri Treatise on Law El liberalismo es pecado Papal documents ( Famuli vestrae pietatis Mirari Vos Quanta Cura Immortale Dei Rerum novarum Pascendi Dominici Gregis ) El Siglo Futuro Mes idées politiques O que é o Integralismo Organizations Action Française Acción Española Brazilian Patrianovist Imperial Action Brazilian Integralist Action Brazilian Integralist Front Catalan Patriotic Movement Catholic and Royal Army Cristeros Integrist Party Milícia Catalana Palmarian Catholic Church Los TECOS El Yunque Popular Representation Party Sanfedisti Spanish Catholic Movement Viva Maria Related Ad maiorem Dei gloriam Traditionalism Legitimism Federales Carlism Christ the King Deus vult Miguelism Neocatólicos Sodalitium Pianum Clerico-nationalism Clerical fascism ( Estado Novo Falangism Francoism Tacuara ) Nacionalismo Person Dignity Theory Orthodox Peronism Third Position Common good constitutionalism Gremialismo High Tory Politics portal v t e Bonald's political philosophy rests on the assumptions of humanity's fallenness , the need for strong government to repress man's evil tendencies, and the belief that humans are inherently social creatures. He opposed the individualistic and atomistic tendencies of the Enlightenment and the French Revolution. At the heart of his political thought was the idea that the family was the basis of society and that institutions should work to protect it in its traditional form. For this reason he opposed the secularization of marriage , divorce, and partitive inheritance. He was also critical of the Industrial Revolution because of its negative effects on traditional patterns of family life.

[ 9 ] The sharing of power, as in a democracy, seemed ludicrous to Bonald, and the doctrine of the separation of powers tended towards anarchy. The monarch rules for the good of society and thus represents the general will , contrary to Rousseau; whereas a multitude of individual wills, even when united in purpose, do not constitute the general will.

[ 7 ] [ 10 ] Economics [ edit ] Bonald was also an early critic of laissez-faire economics. In 1806, he wrote a treatise critical of usury , or the practice of lending at interest , and in 1810 he wrote a critical review of the French edition of The Wealth of Nations . He was likewise critical of Louis XVI's finance minister, Anne-Robert-Jacques Turgot , a physiocrat who liberalised France's grain trade and supported the suppression of the trade guilds. Bonald criticised Turgot as a "fanatical partisan of a materialistic politics." Elsewhere he says, "[w]heat was not given to man to be an object of commerce, but to nourish him." Shaped by Tacitus and his condemnations of Roman decadence, Bonald felt that economic liberalism and unrestrained wealth would undermine the Christian character of the French people, and would lead men to become less generous and more self-centered.

[ 17 ] Religion [ edit ] Bonald was one of the leading writers of the theocratic or traditionalist school , [ 18 ] [ 19 ] which included Maistre, Lamennais , Ballanche and Ferdinand d'Eckstein .

[ 20 ] The traditionalist school, in reaction to the rationalists , believed that human reason was incapable of even arriving at natural religion , and that tradition, the result of a primitive revelation, was necessary to know both natural religion as well as the truths of supernatural revelation.

[ 21 ] Bonald believed that the principles of good governance could be deduced from history and sacred scripture. His political thought is closely tied to his theory of the divine origin of language . Since man learns to speak through imitation, he believed that the first man must have learned to speak from God, who announced all moral principles to this first man. In his own words, "L'homme pense sa parole avant de parler sa pensée" (man thinks his speech before saying his thought); the first language contained the essence of all truth. These moral truths were then codified in Holy Scripture . From this he deduces the existence of God , the divine origin and consequent supreme authority of the Holy Scriptures, and the infallibility of the Catholic Church .

[ 7 ] [ 10 ] Bonald published an anti-Semitic text during the post-French Revolutionary period, Sur les juifs , in which he described Jews an alien race, describing them with the same racialized language he used to attack the recently emancipated Black slaves in the colonies.

[ 22 ] In it, the philosophes are condemned for fashioning the intellectual tools used to justify Jewish emancipation during the Revolution. Bonald accused French Jews of not becoming "authentic" French citizens and of being a disruptive force in traditional society.

[ 22 ] Bonald called for the reversal of Jewish emancipation and endorsed new discriminatory measures, such as a distinctive mark which Jews would be forced to wear to identify them in public.

[ 22 ] Metaphysics [ edit ] While this thought lies at the root of all his speculations, there is a formula of constant application. All relations may be stated as the triad of cause, means and effect, which he sees repeated throughout nature and society. Thus, in the universe , he finds the First Cause as mover, movement as the means, and bodies as the result; in the state, power as the cause, ministers as the means, and subjects as the effects; in the family, the same relation is exemplified by father, mother and children; and in political society, the monarch as cause, ministers/nobility as means, and the subjects as effect. These three terms bear specific relations to one another; the first is to the second as the second to the third. Thus, in the great triad of the religious world—God, the Mediator, and Man—God is to the God-Man as the God-Man is to Man. On this basis, he constructed a system of political absolutism .

Influence [ edit ] Bonald's writings exercised a great deal of influence over conservative and French Catholic thought throughout the 19th century. The French writer Honoré de Balzac considered himself to be an intellectual heir of Bonald and took up many Bonaldian themes in his writings, once declaring that "when it beheaded Louis XVI, the Revolution beheaded in his person all fathers of families." Bonald's influence carried on throughout the counter-revolutionary tradition in the writings of Spanish conservative Juan Donoso Cortés , Italian philosopher Monaldo Leopardi and the ultramontane French journalist Louis Veuillot . His writings also exerted a great influence over the corporatist philosophical tradition through Frédéric le Play and René de La Tour du Pin , and through them he had an influence on the development of the principle of solidarity in Catholic social thought .

Bonald's direct influence fell into decline after World War I, especially outside of French Catholic circles. Since then he has generally suffered neglect at the hands of economic historians and historians of Catholic thought. Bonald's thought has often drawn more positive attention from historians working within the Marxist or socialist tradition.

[ 8 ] Works [ edit ] 1796: Théorie du Pouvoir Politique et Religieux.

[ 23 ] 1800: Essai Analytique sur les Lois Naturelles de l’Ordre Social.

[ 23 ] 1801: Du Divorce: Considéré au XIX e , Impr. d'A. Le Clere.

1802: Législation Primitive (3 volumes).

1815: Réflexions sur l’Intérêt Général de l’Europe.

[ 23 ] 1817: Pensées sur Divers Sujets.

[ 23 ] 1818: Recherches Philosophiques sur les Premiers Objets des Connaissances Morales.

[ 23 ] 1818: Observations sur un Ouvrage de Madame de Staël.

1819: Mélanges Littéraires, Politiques et Philosophiques.

[ 23 ] 1821: Opinion sur la Loi Relative à la Censure des Journaux.

1825: De la Chrétienté et du Christianisme.

1826: De la Famille Agricole et de la Famille Industrielle.

1830: Démonstration Philosophique du Principe Constitutif de la Société.

[ 23 ] 1834: Discours sur la Vie de Jésus-Christ.

Complete works [ edit ] Œuvres de M. de Bonald, 1817-1843 (A. Le Clere, 14 vols. in-8°).

Œuvres de M. de Bonald, 1847-1859 (A. Le Clere, 7 vols. in-8° gr.).

Œuvres Complètes de M. de Bonald, 1858 (Jacques-Paul Migne, 3 vols. in-4°).

Œuvres Complètes, Archives Karéline, 2010 (facsimile of the Migne edition).

Writings in English translation [ edit ] In Menczer, Béla, 1962.

Catholic Political Thought, 1789-1848, University of Notre Dame Press.

"The Unity of Europe," pp. 79–89.

"On Domestic Society," pp. 89–95.

On Divorce, Transaction Publishers, 1992.

In Blum, Christopher Olaf, editor and translator, 2004.

Critics of the Enlightenment . Wilmington DE: ISI Books.

1815: "On Bossuet , Bishop of Meaux ," pp. 43–70.

1817: "Thoughts on Various Subjects," pp. 71–80.

1818: "Observations on Madame de Staël's Considerations on the Principle Events of the French Revolution ," pp. 81–106.

1826: "On the Agricultural Family, the Industrial Family, and the Right of Primogeniture," pp. 107–32.

The True and Only Wealth of Nations: Essays on Family, Society and Economy, trans. by Christopher Blum. Ave Maria University Press, 2006.

ISBN 1-932589-31-7 In Blum, Christopher O., editor and translator, 2020.

Critics of the Enlightenment . Providence, RI: Cluny Media.

1810: "On the Wealth of Nations," pp. 25–34.

1815: "A Proposal to Abolish Divorce," pp. 35–44.

1817: "Thoughts on Various Subjects," pp. 45–52.

1826: "On the Agricultural Family, the Industrial Family, and the Right of Primogeniture," pp. 53–71.

See also [ edit ] Biography portal Conservatism portal Anti-Sacrilege Act Antoine Blanc de Saint-Bonnet Paternalism Notes [ edit ] ^ Beum, Robert (1997). "Ultra-Royalism Revisited: An Annotated Bibliography with a Preface," Modern Age , Vol. 39, No. 3, p. 302.

^ Nisbet, Robert A. (1943). "The French Revolution and the Rise of Sociology in France," The American Journal of Sociology , Vol. 49, No. 2, pp. 156–164.

^ Nisbet, Robert A. (1944). "De Bonald and the Concept of the Social Group," Journal of the History of Ideas , Vol. 5, No. 3, pp. 315–331.

^ Reedy, W. Jay (1979).

"Conservatism and the Origins of the French Sociological Tradition: A Reconsideration of Louis de Bonald's Science of Society," Proceedings of the Sixth Annual Meeting for the Western Society for French History, Vol. 6, pp. 264–273.

^ Reedy, W. Jay (1994). "The Historical Imaginary of Social Science in Post-Revolutionary France: Bonald, Saint-Simon, Comte," History of the Human Sciences , Vol. 7 no. 1, pp. 1–26.

^ Simpson, Marin (2005). "Bonald, Louis de (1754–1840)." In: Encyclopedia of Nineteenth-century Thought.

London & New York: Routledge, p. 58.

^ a b c d e f g h i Quinlan, Mary Hall (1953).

The Historical Thought of the Vicomte De Bonald . Washington, D. C.: The Catholic University of America Press. pp.

1– 13.

ISBN 9781258646974 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ a b Blum, Christopher Olaf, ed. (2006).

The True & Only Wealth of Nations: Essays on Family, Economy & Society . Naples, Florida: Sapientia Press. pp.

2– 11.

ISBN 9781932589313 .

^ a b c d e f g h Blum, Christopher O. (2020).

Critics of the Enlightenment . Providence, RI: Cluny Media. pp.

xiv– xvii.

ISBN 978-1952826160 .

^ a b c d e EB 1911 .

^ Simpson (2005), p. 58.

^ Dorschel, Andreas (2008). "Aufgeklärte Gegenaufklärung", Süddeutsche Zeitung , No. 25, p. 16.

^ a b Vardi, Liana (1988).

"The Abolition of the Guilds during the French Revolution" .

French Historical Studies .

15 (4): 704– 717.

doi : 10.2307/286554 .

ISSN 0016-1071 .

JSTOR 286554 .

^ a b c Tombs, Robert (1996).

France 1814-1914 . London: Routledge. pp.

344– 345.

ISBN 0582493145 .

^ Boring, Nicolas (March 2015).

"France: Inheritance Laws in the 19th and 20th Centuries" .

loc.gov . Retrieved 30 April 2021 .

^ Kent, Sherman (1975).

The Election of 1827 in France . Harvard University Press. pp.

81– 83.

ISBN 0-674-24321-8 .

^ de Bonald, Louis (2006).

The True & Only Wealth of Nations: Essays on Family, Economy & Society . Translated by Blum, Christopher Olaf. Naples, FL: Sapientia Press. pp.

4– 5.

ISBN 978-1-932589-31-3 .

^ Godechot, Jacques (1982).

The Counter-Revolution: Doctrine and Action, 1789–1804.

Princeton University Press.

^ Blum, Christopher Olaf (2006).

"On Being Conservative: Lessons from Louis de Bonald," The Intercollegiate Review , Vol. 41, No. 1, pp. 23–31.

^ Masseau, Didier (2000).

Les Ennemis des Philosophes . Editions Albin Michel.

^ Latourelle, René (1966).

Theology of Revelation . New York: Alba House. pp.

256– 257.

ISBN 978-1608991426 .

^ a b c Battini, Michele (2016).

Socialism of Fools: Capitalism and Modern Anti-Semitism . Columbia University Press. pp.

30– 36.

^ a b c d e f g Sauvage 1907 .

References [ edit ] Sauvage, George (1907), "Louis-Gabriel-Ambroise, Vicomte de Bonald" , in Herbermann, Charles (ed.), Catholic Encyclopedia , vol. 2, New York: Robert Appleton Company This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911), " Bonald, Louis Gabriel Ambroise ", Encyclopædia Britannica , vol. 4 (11th ed.), Cambridge University Press, pp.

191– 192 External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Louis de Bonald .

Wikiquote has quotations related to Louis de Bonald .

"Louis Gabriel Ambroise, Vicomte de Bonald" , Encyclopædia Britannica , vol. 4 (9th ed.), 1878, p. 27 Works by Louis de Bonald , at Gallica Works by or about Louis de Bonald at the Internet Archive Works by Louis de Bonald , at Hathi Trust Louis-Ambroise Vicomte de Bonald (1754-1840) Louis de Bonald's Univocity of Being: The Mythos of the Fait Sociale and the Rise of French Sociology Cultural offices Preceded by Jean Jacques Régis de Cambacérès Seat 30 Académie Française 1816-1840 Succeeded by Jacques-François Ancelot v t e Conservatism Schools by region International Authoritarian Corporatist Cultural Fiscal Green Liberal Moderate National Paternalistic Populist Pragmatic Progressive Reactionary Religious Social Traditionalist Ultra Asia China Chiangism Confucianism Neo New Dai Jitao Thought Neoauthoritarianism Iran Khomeinism Monarchist Principlist Israel Fundamentalist Jewish Kahanism Zionism Neo Religious Revisionist Japan Minzoku Neo Nippon Kaigi Shōwa Statism State Shinto South Korea Ilminism New Right Turkey Democratic Erdoğanism Neo-Ottomanism Other Bangladesh Hong Kong India Malaysia Pakistan Ziaism Singapore Taiwan Chiangism Europe France Action Française Bonapartism Gaullism Integral nationalism Legitimism Maurrassisme Nouvelle Droite Orléanism Révolution nationale Sarkozysm Ultra-royalism Germany Agrarian Hegelian Historical School Neue Rechte Ordoliberalism Prussianism Cameralistic Socialist Revolutionary Young Ritter School Romanticism State Socialism Völkisch Italy Berlusconism Historical Right Italian school of elitism Neo-Bourbonism Sanfedismo Poland Golden Liberty Kaczyzm Monarchist National Democracy Sarmatism Russia Duginism Eurasianism Monarchist Black-hundredism Tsarism Putinism Slavophilia Pochvennichestvo Spain Alfonsism Carlism Carloctavismo Carlo-francoism Francoism National Catholicism Integrism Mellismo Maurism Neocatholicism Noucentisme United Kingdom Cameronism Civic Compassionate Muscular liberalism Jacobitism Neo-Jacobite Revival Neo One-nationism Powellism Thatcherism Toryism High Red Social Other Austria Belgium Rexism Denmark Finland Georgia Monarchist Greece Metaxism Populist Hungary Iceland Luxembourg Netherlands Norway Portugal Miguelist Integralismo Lusitano Romania Monarchist Serbia Monarchist Sweden Switzerland Ukraine Latin America Argentina Federal Peronism Maurrasismo Menemism Nacionalismo Orthodox Peronism Brazil Bolsonarism Coronelism Integralism Janismo Monarchist Patrianovism Populism Chile Gremialismo Pinochetism Other Belize Colombia Rojismo Uribism Cuba Guatemala Mexico Cristero Panama Peru Fujimorism Odriismo Uruguay Herrerism Riverism Ruralismo Venezuela Perezjimenismo North America Canada Populism Trumpism Clerico-nationalism Social Toryism Blue Red Pink United States Compassionate Libertarian Fusionism Paleo Tea Party Movement Neo Old Right Paleo Reaganism Social Traditionalist Trumpism Oceania Australia Centre Right National Right New Zealand Philosophy Principles Ancestral worship Authority Traditional Class collaboration Consociationalism Clericalism Collective identity Confessionalism Cultural assimilation Cultural heritage Cultural values Culture of life Pro-Life Discipline Duty Elitism Aristocracy Meritocracy Noblesse oblige Ethical order Familialism Family values Fundamentalism Gender role Complementarianism Honour Imperialism Loyalty Monarchism Royalist Natural law Natural Order Norms Conventions Customs Mores Ordered liberty Organicism Organized religion Orthodoxy Patriotism Nationalism Personalism Philosophical realism Moral realism Private property Protectionism Public morality Rule of law Social hierarchy Social institutions Social order Solidarity Sovereignty State religion Stewardship Subsidiarity Tradition Intellectuals Bainville Barruel Belloc Bonald Buckley Jr.

Burke Burnham Carlyle Chateaubriand Chesterton Coleridge Comte Cortés Dávila Dostoevsky Eliot Evola Fardid Gentz Haller Hitchens Hume Iorga Johnson Jünger Karamzin Kirk Kuehnelt-Leddihn La Mennais Le Bon Le Play Leontiev Lewis Maistre Mansfield Maurras Menéndez More Müller Newman Nisbet Novalis Oakeshott Corrêa de Oliveira Peterson Ranke Renan Rivarol Röpke Santayana Savigny Schlegel Schmitt Scruton Solzhenitsyn Sowell Spann Spengler Stahl Strauss Taine Tocqueville Uvarov Voegelin Politics Organisations European Conservatives and Reformists Party European People's Party Identity and Democracy International Democrat Union International Monarchist League Muslim Brotherhood Tradition, Family, Property Politicians Abe Adams Adenauer Andreotti Berlusconi Bismarck Bolsonaro GW Bush Canning Chiang Churchill Diefenbaker Disraeli Dmowski Dollfuss Erdoğan Franco Fujimori de Gaulle Harper Horthy John Paul II Kaczyński Khamenei Khomeini Kohl Le Pen Lee Macdonald Mannerheim Marcos Maurras Menzies Metaxas Metternich Mobutu Modi Netanyahu Orbán Park Pérez Jiménez Pinochet Pitt Powell Prat de la Riba Putin Reagan Salazar Salisbury Smith Stolypin Suharto Thatcher Trujillo Trump Vajpayee de Valera Zia Zemmour Religion Christian democracy Christian politics Theonomy Christian right Theoconservatism Confucianism Hindutva Jewish conservatism Religious Zionism Islamism Islamic economics Theravada Buddhist economics Traditionalist Catholicism Catholic social teaching Distributism Integralism Ultramontanism Traditionalist School Historical background Ancien régime Bourbon Restauration Congress of Vienna Concert of Europe Conservative Order Counter-Enlightenment German Romanticism Holy Alliance Ultra-royalism Related Ideologies Agrarianism Clerical fascism Communitarianism Conservative liberalism Corporatism Localism Anti-communism Anti-gender movement Anti-Masonry Aristocracy Black conservatism United States Desecularization Postsecularism Conservative feminism Conservative wave Counter-revolutionary Elite theory Ethnopluralism Hispanic and Latino conservatism in the United States LGBTQ conservatism Neo-feudalism Neo-medievalism Opposition to LGBTQ rights Para-fascism Political Evangelicalism in Latin America Political theology Radical right Europe United States Reactionary Neo- Right realism Right-wing politics Authoritarianism New European Small-c conservatives Conservatism portal Politics portal v t e Social philosophy Concepts Agency Anomie Convention Cosmopolitanism Customs Cultural heritage Culturalism Inter Mono Multi Culture Counter Familialism History Honour Human nature Identity Formation Ideology Institutions Invisible hand Loyalty Modernity Morality Public Mores National character Natural law Personhood Reification Ressentiment Rights Sittlichkeit Social alienation Social norms Spontaneous order Stewardship Traditions Values Family Volksgeist Worldview Schools Budapest School Catholic social teaching Distributism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Social Frankfurt School Personalism Philosophers Ancient Confucius Laozi Mencius Mozi Xunzi Medieval Alpharabius Aquinas Avempace Bruni Ibn Khaldun Maimonides Ibn Tufayl Early modern Calvin Erasmus Guicciardini Locke Luther Milton Montaigne Müntzer 18th and 19th centuries Arnold Bentham Bonald Burke Carlyle Comte Condorcet Emerson Engels Fichte Fourier Franklin Hegel Helvétius Herder Hume Jefferson Kant Kierkegaard Le Bon Le Play Marx Mill Nietzsche Owen Renan Rousseau Royce Ruskin Smith Spencer de Staël Stirner Taine Thoreau Tocqueville Vico Vivekananda Voltaire 20th and 21st centuries Adorno Agamben Arendt Aron Badiou Baudrillard Bauman Benoist Berlin Butler Camus de Beauvoir Debord Deleuze Dewey Du Bois Durkheim Eco Evola Foucault Fromm Gandhi Gehlen Gentile Gramsci Guénon Habermas Han Heidegger Hoppe Irigaray Kirk Kołakowski Kropotkin Land Lasch MacIntyre Marcuse Maritain Negri Niebuhr Nussbaum Oakeshott Ortega Pareto Polanyi Radhakrishnan Röpke Santayana Scruton Shariati Simmel Skinner Sombart Sowell Spengler Strauss Taylor Voegelin Walzer Weber Weil Zinn Žižek Works De Officiis (44 BC) Oration on the Dignity of Man (1486) A Vindication of Natural Society (1756) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Civilization and Its Discontents (1930) The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction (1935) The Second Sex (1949) One-Dimensional Man (1964) The Society of the Spectacle (1967) The History of Sexuality (1976) The Culture of Narcissism (1979) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) Gender Trouble (1990) The Malaise of Modernity (1991) Intellectuals and Society (2010) See also Agnotology Axiology Critical theory Cultural criticism Cultural pessimism Ethics Historism Historicism Humanities Philosophy of culture Philosophy of education Philosophy of history Political philosophy Social criticism Social science Social theory Sociology Category v t e Political philosophy Terms Authority Citizenship‎ Duty Elite Emancipation Freedom Government Hegemony Hierarchy Justice Law Legitimacy Liberty Monopoly Nation Obedience Peace People Pluralism Power Progress Propaganda Property Regime Revolution Rights Ruling class Society Sovereignty‎ State Utopia War Government Aristocracy Oligarchy Autocracy Bureaucracy Dictatorship Democracy Ochlocracy Gerontocracy Meritocracy Monarchy Tyranny Plutocracy Technocracy Theocracy Ideologies Agrarianism Anarchism Capitalism Christian democracy Colonialism Communism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Corporatism Distributism Environmentalism Fascism Feminism Feudalism Imperialism Islamism Liberalism Libertarianism Localism Marxism Monarchism Multiculturalism Nationalism Nazism Populism Republicanism Social Darwinism Social democracy Socialism Third Way Concepts Balance of power Bellum omnium contra omnes Body politic Clash of civilizations Common good Consent of the governed Divine right of kings Family as a model for the state Monopoly on violence Natural law Negative and positive rights Night-watchman state Noble lie Noblesse oblige Open society Ordered liberty Original position Overton window Separation of powers Social contract State of nature Statolatry Supermajority Tyranny of the majority Philosophers Antiquity Aristotle Chanakya Cicero Confucius Han Fei Lactantius Mencius Mozi Plato political philosophy Polybius Shang Sun Tzu Thucydides Xenophon Middle Ages Al-Farabi Aquinas Averroes Bruni Dante Gelasius al-Ghazali Ibn Khaldun Marsilius Muhammad Nizam al-Mulk Ockham Plethon Wang Early modern period Boétie Bodin Bossuet Calvin Campanella Filmer Grotius Guicciardini Hobbes political philosophy James Leibniz Locke Luther Machiavelli Milton More Müntzer Pufendorf Spinoza Suárez 18th and 19th centuries Bakunin Bastiat Beccaria Bentham Bolingbroke Bonald Burke Carlyle Comte Condorcet Constant Cortés Engels Fichte Fourier Franklin Godwin Haller Hegel Herder Hume Iqbal Jefferson Kant political philosophy Le Bon Le Play Madison Maistre Marx Mazzini Mill Montesquieu Nietzsche Owen Paine Renan Rousseau Sade Saint-Simon Smith Spencer de Staël Stirner Taine Thoreau Tocqueville Tucker Voltaire 20th and 21st centuries Agamben Ambedkar Arendt Aron Badiou Bauman Benoist Berlin Bernstein Burnham Chomsky Dmowski Du Bois Dugin Dworkin Evola Foucault Fromm Fukuyama Gandhi Gentile Gramsci Guénon Habermas Hayek Hoppe Huntington Kautsky Khomeini Kirk Kropotkin Laclau Lenin Luxemburg Mansfield Mao Marcuse Maurras Michels Mises Mosca Mouffe Negri Nozick Nussbaum Oakeshott Ortega Pareto Popper Qutb Rand Rawls Röpke Rothbard Russell Sartre Schmitt Scruton Shariati Sorel Spann Spengler Strauss Sun Taylor Voegelin Walzer Weber Works Republic (c. 375 BC) Politics (c. 350 BC) On the Republic (51 BC) Treatise on Law (c. 1274) Monarchy (1313) The Prince (1532) Leviathan (1651) Two Treatises of Government (1689) The Spirit of Law (1748) The Social Contract (1762) Reflections on the Revolution in France (1790) Rights of Man (1791) Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1820) Democracy in America (1835–1840) The Communist Manifesto (1848) On Liberty (1859) The Revolt of the Masses (1929) The Road to Serfdom (1944) The Open Society and Its Enemies (1945) The Origins of Totalitarianism (1951) A Theory of Justice (1971) The End of History and the Last Man (1992) Related Authoritarianism Collectivism and individualism Conflict theories Contractualism Critique of political economy Egalitarianism Elite theory Elitism History of political thought Institutional discrimination Jurisprudence Justification for the state Political ethics Political spectrum Left-wing politics Centrism Right-wing politics Political theology Political violence Separation of church and state Separatism Social justice Statism Totalitarianism Category:Political philosophy Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF 2 FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Greece Argentina Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii People Sycomore Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐nsszm
Cached time: 20250817051310
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.281 seconds
Real time usage: 1.558 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 9060/1000000
Revision size: 29408/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 317330/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 14522/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 8/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 177456/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.710/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 20286989/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1137.446      1 -total
 19.44%  221.093      4 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 15.54%  176.746      1 Template:Infobox_philosopher
 14.82%  168.571      1 Template:Conservatism_in_France
 11.18%  127.219      1 Template:Reflist
  9.44%  107.362      1 Template:IPA
  7.05%   80.168      8 Template:Cite_book
  5.78%   65.772      1 Template:Conservatism_navbox
  5.48%   62.322      1 Template:Short_description
  5.30%   60.265     12 Template:Sfn Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:629224:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817051310 and revision id 1304226038. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Louis_de_Bonald&oldid=1304226038 " Categories : 1754 births 1840 deaths 18th-century French male writers 18th-century French philosophers 18th-century Roman Catholics 19th-century French male writers 19th-century French philosophers 19th-century Roman Catholics Antisemitism in France Catholic philosophers Conservatism in France French counter-revolutionaries French male non-fiction writers French monarchists French nationalists French Roman Catholic writers French Ultra-royalists Late modern Christian antisemitism Members of the Académie Française People from Millau People of the Bourbon Restoration Anti-Masonry Hidden categories: CS1 errors: ISBN date Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from January 2022 Articles with hCards Pages with French IPA Articles containing French-language text Pages using sidebar with the child parameter Articles incorporating a citation from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica Commons category link is on Wikidata Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from EB9 Articles with Internet Archive links Articles containing German-language text Articles containing Italian-language text Articles containing Latin-language text This page was last edited on 4 August 2025, at 19:31 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Louis de Bonald 28 languages Add topic

