Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Description 3 Water features 4 Water follies 5 Stream gardens 6 Aquatic flora Toggle Aquatic flora subsection 6.1 Algae 7 Fauna Toggle Fauna subsection 7.1 Fish 7.2 Crustacean 7.3 Snails 7.4 Herpetofauna 7.5 Bird 7.6 Predators 8 See also Toggle See also subsection 8.1 Index categories 9 References 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Water garden 17 languages العربية বাংলা Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Español فارسی Français 한국어 עברית മലയാളം 日本語 Português Simple English Suomi 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Garden with water as a main feature For other uses, see Watergardens .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Water garden" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( March 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) A small pond or water garden in a private residence Water garden or aquatic garden , is a term sometimes used for gardens , or parts of gardens, where any type of water feature (particularly garden ponds ) is a principal or dominant element. The primary focus is on plants, but they will sometimes also house waterfowl , or ornamental fish , in which case it may be called a fish pond . They vary enormously in size and style.

Water gardening is gardening that is concerned with growing plants adapted to lakes, rivers and ponds , often specifically to their shallow margins. Although water gardens can be almost any size or depth, they are often small and relatively shallow, perhaps less than twenty inches (51 cm) in depth. This is because most aquatic plants are depth sensitive and require a specific water depth in order to thrive; this can be helped by planting them in baskets raised off the bottom. A water garden may include a bog garden for plants that enjoy a waterlogged soil. Sometimes their primary purpose is to grow a particular species or group of aquatic plants , for example water lilies .

History [ edit ] Water gardens, and water features in general, have been a part of public and private gardens since ancient Persian gardens and Chinese gardens . For instance, the (c. 304) Nanfang Caomu Zhuang records cultivating Chinese spinach on floating gardens. Water features have been present and well represented in every era and in every culture that has included gardens in their landscape and architectural environments. Up until the rise of the industrial age , when the modern water pump was introduced, water was not recirculated but was diverted from rivers and springs into the water garden, from which it exited into agricultural fields or natural watercourses. Historically, water features were used to enable plant and fish production both for food purposes and for ornamental aesthetics.

Description [ edit ] Red Oranda (Wen) goldfish reared in a small outdoor pond with water-lilies.

When the aquatic flora and fauna are balanced, an aquatic ecosystem is created that will support sustainable water quality and clarity. Elements such as fountains , statues , artificial waterfalls , boulders , underwater lighting , lining treatments, edging details, watercourses, and in-water and bankside planting can add visual interest and help to integrate the water garden with the local landscape and environment.

Water features [ edit ] Main article: Water feature In landscape architecture and garden design , a water feature is one or more items from a range of fountains , jeux d'eau , pools, ponds , rills , artificial waterfalls , and streams . Modern water features are typically self-contained, meaning that they do not require water to be plumbed in; rather water is recycled from either a pond or a hidden reservoir , also known as a sump .

Waterfall and pool in Bushy Park Water Gardens Bosquet of the baths of Apollo , in the gardens of Versailles The Vanderbilt Mansion pond Ulm–Friedrichsau gardens Singapore Botanic Gardens Water follies [ edit ] The sixteenth century in Europe saw a renewed interest in Greek thought and philosophy, including the works of Hero of Alexandria about hydraulics and pneumatics . His devices, such as temple doors operated by invisible weights or flowing liquids, and mechanical singing birds powered by steam, motivated several European palaces to create similar clever devices to enhance their public image.

In Italy several royal houses constructed large water gardens incorporating mechanical devices in water settings. The best-known is the Villa d'Este at Tivoli , constructed in 1550 AD. A hill cascaded with many fountains and grottoes , some with water-driven figures that moved or spouted water. Popularity spread across Europe with the well-known water garden at Hellbrunn Palace built with many water-powered human and animal performing figures and puppet theaters , and folly fountains that erupted without notice to surprise visitors.

[ 1 ] A water folly/tea-pavilion in Mannheim's Chinese garden Duojingyuan Partial view the garden of Villa d'Este in Tivoli (Italy) Partial view of the garden of Hellbrunn Palace in Salzburg (Austria) Stream gardens [ edit ] On a constructed stream , placing rocks in the path of the water makes small patterns, rapids and waterfalls . The rocks disrupt the waterflow, causing splashing and bubbles that can make pleasant sounds and micro-habitats for plants, fish, and wildlife. Well-placed rocks can create splashing water that adds oxygen to prevent hypoxia : the more bubbles, the more dissolved oxygen in the water.

Stream Garden Trengwainton Singapore Botanic Gardens Scrape Burn, Dawyck Botanic Gardens Stepping stones, Tollymore Aquatic flora [ edit ] Lotus Nelumbo nucifera bud Zilker Botanical Garden, waterlilies Water garden plants are divided into three main categories: submerged, marginal, and floating.

Submerged plants are those which live almost completely under the water, sometimes with leaves or flowers that grow to the surface such as with the water lily. These plants are placed in a pond or container usually 1–2 ft (0.30–0.61 m) below the water surface. Some of these plants act as oxygenators as they create oxygen for any animals which live in a pond. Examples of submerged plants are: Hornwort ( Ceratophyllum demersum ) Water-lilies ( Nymphaeaceae ) Lotus ( Nelumbo spp.) Featherfoil ( Hottonia palustris ) Eurasian water milfoil ( Myriophyllum spicatum ) Shining pondweed ( Potamogeton lucens ) Bladderwort ( Utricularia spp.) Marginal plants are those which live with their roots under the water but the rest of the plant above the surface. These are usually placed so that the top of the pot is at or barely below the water level. Examples of these are: Iris or flag ( Iris spp.) Water-plantain ( Alisma spp.

) Bulrush ( Scirpus lacustris ) Cattail ( Typha latifolia ) Taro ( Colocasia esculenta ) Arrowhead ( Sagittaria latifolia ) Bog-arum ( Calla palustris ) Pickerelweed ( Pontederia cordata ) Floating plants are those that are not anchored to the soil at all, but are free-floating on the surface. In water gardening, these are often used as a provider of shade to reduce algae growth in a pond. These are often extremely fast growing/multiplying. Examples of these are: Mosquito ferns ( Azolla spp.) Water-spangle ( Salvinia spp.) Frogbit ( Hydrocharis morsus-ranae ) Water lettuce ( Pistia stratiotes ) Water hyacinth ( Eichhornia crassipes ) Some areas of the United States do not allow certain of these plants to be sold or kept, as they have become invasive species in warmer areas of the country, such as Florida and California .

Algae [ edit ] Algae are found in almost all ponds. There are hundreds of species of algae that can grow in garden ponds, but they are usually noticed only when they become abundant. Algae often grow in very high densities in ponds because of the high nutrient levels that are typical of garden ponds. Generally, algae attaches itself to the sides of the pond and remains innocuous. Some species of algae, such as " blanket weed ", can grow up to a foot a day under ideal conditions and can rapidly clog a garden pond. On the other hand, free floating algae are microscopic and are what cause pond water to appear green. Blanket weed, although unsightly, is actually a sign that the water is clean and well-balanced. Green water (free floating algae) means there are too many nutrients in the water, usually from rotting vegetation or too many fish for the space. Killing the free floating algae with chemicals will often cause it to die, rot, and then make the problem even worse as more nutrients enter the water. Adding more floating or submerged (unpotted) plants can help with the green water, as they can take the nutrients out of the water. There are also filters that can be installed to remove the nutrients and all types of algae from the water. Many ponds naturally go green early in the spring and then clear up.

Fauna [ edit ] Fish [ edit ] Koi fish Fishpond with stepping stones and stream Hatchet Pond, New Forest , England Fish in a pond in Yuyuan Garden, Shanghai Often the reason for having a pond in a garden is to keep fish , often koi , though many people keep goldfish . Both are hardy, colorful fish which require no special heating, provided the pond is located in an area which does not have extremes of temperature that would affect the fish. If fish are kept, pumps and filtration devices are usually needed in order to keep enough oxygen in the water to support them. In winter, a small heater may need to be used in cold climates to keep the water from freezing solid. Examples of common pond fish include: Ricefish ( Himedaka ) Mosquitofish Rosy Red minnows White Cloud Mountain minnows Common minnows Goldfish (Common, Comet, Shubunkin varieties, Wakin and the Fantail varieties. With the possible exception of some of the fantail varieties, the fancy goldfish are not suited to pond life.) Crucian carp Koi (Nishikigoi, Butterfly Koi and Ghost Koi) Mirror carp Common carp (In multiple countries, including the United States of America and Australia, carp are considered an invasive fish and it is illegal to release them into waterways and/or imported or transported.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] ) Grass carp Weather loach Stone loach Golden orfe Golden tench Golden rudd Gudgeon Red shiner Three-spined sticklebacks Eel Channel catfish Bluegill Pumpkinseed Black bass Sturgeon Snakehead Goby Crustacean [ edit ] Crayfish Freshwater prawn Snails [ edit ] River snail Small aquatic snails are usually found in ponds that contain plants. Some people purchase apple snails to keep in their water garden. "Melantho snails" of the genus Lymnaea are also used.

Herpetofauna [ edit ] Ponds located in suburban and rural areas often attract amphibians such as Common Frogs and Fire Salamanders and reptiles such as turtles , lizards , and snakes .

Bird [ edit ] Wild duck Domestic duck Predators [ edit ] Garden ponds can attract attention from predators such as (in North America) raccoons , herons , snakes, and domestic cats . These predators can be a danger to fish. Owners of koi are often particularly careful to create protected areas as some varieties are very expensive.

See also [ edit ] Water plants cultivated in the Yangzhuanghe Canal in Yangzhou , China List of garden types Landscape architecture Aquascaping , arranging plants in an aquarium Rain garden Biochemical oxygen demand Chemical oxygen demand Wastewater quality indicators Biotope Aquaponics Index categories [ edit ] Category: Natural pools References [ edit ] ^ Burke, James (1995).

Connections (Rev. ed.). Boston: Little, Brown and Co. p. 106.

ISBN 0316116726 .

OCLC 32431088 .

^ "Carp" .

Department of Agriculture and Fisheries of Queensland . Archived from the original on March 28, 2015 . Retrieved Nov 22, 2018 .

^ "Asian Carp Prevention and Control Act" .

Library of Congress . 14 December 2010 . Retrieved May 26, 2023 .

External links [ edit ] Dugout Pond Aeration Flash Animation Archived 2005-06-23 at the Wayback Machine North American Water Garden Society Archived 2018-10-10 at the Wayback Machine Pond Conservation: Advice on garden ponds for wildlife v t e Garden features Artificial waterfall Avenue Aviary Borrowed scenery Bosquet Belvedere Cascade Deck Exedra Folly Fountain Garden buildings Garden pond Garden railway Garden room Gazebo Gloriette Greenhouse Green wall Grotto Shell grotto Ha-ha Hedge Herbaceous border Jeux d'eau Labyrinth / Maze Hedge Turf Lawn Monopteros Moon bridge Moon gate Mound Nymphaeum Orangery Parterre Patio Pavilion Pergola Reflecting pool Shed Stepping stones Stumpery Sylvan theater Terrace Topiary Trellis Water feature Water garden Zig-zag bridge v t e Horticulture and gardening Gardening Allotment Arboretum Butterfly Climate-friendly gardening Community Forest Foodscaping French intensive Garden Garden design computer-aided Groundskeeping Garden tool Green wall Guerrilla Historic conservation History Native Parterre Proplifting Raised bed Square foot Sustainable Xeriscaping Types of gardens Alpine Ancient Egypt Australian Back Baroque Biblical Bog Botanical Bottle Butterfly Byzantine Cactus Colonial Color Communal Garden square Community Container Cottage Dutch East Asian Chinese Suzhou Cantonese Japanese Roji Zen Korean Vietnamese English Sharawadgi Fernery Floating Flower Formal French formal landscape Renaissance Front German Greek Greenhouse Hanging Islamic Italian Renaissance Keyhole Kitchen Knot Market Mary Medieval Monastic Mughal Orchard Indonesian home garden Persian Bāgh Charbagh Paradise Physic Pleasure Prairie Pollinator Rain Rock Roman Roof Rose Sacred School Scottish Sculpture Sensory Shade Shakespeare Shrubbery Spanish Tea Therapeutic Trial Tropical Victory Walled Water Wildlife Winter Zoological Horticulture Agriculture Permaculture stock-free sustainable urban Arboriculture Bonsai Saikei Botany Companion planting Crop most valuable Cutting Flora Floriculture Canada Taiwan Hügelkultur Fruticulture Genetically modified tree Hydroculture Indigenous Intercropping Landscape architecture Olericulture Plant breeding cuttings free-flowering propagation drought tolerance hardiness Pomology Postharvest physiology Roguing Tropical Urban agriculture horticulture forestry reforestation Viticulture Monoculture Organic Biodynamic agriculture Grafting List of organic gardening and farming topics Vegan organic agriculture Plant protection Fungicide Herbicide Index of pesticide articles List of fungicides List of insecticides Pesticide Plant disease forecasting Pruning Weed control Aquamog weed remover Related articles Community orchard Features Floral design Floristry Ikebana Groundskeeping Garden centre Garden tourism List of gardens Lists of plants Perennial Plant collecting Turf management Gardening portal Category Commons WikiProject v t e Aquatic ecosystems General components and freshwater ecosystems General Acoustic ecology Algal bloom Anoxic waters Aquatic adaptation Aquatic animal Insect Mammal Water bird Aquatic biomonitoring Aquatic plant Aquatic population dynamics Aquatic predation Aquatic respiration Aquatic science Aquatic toxicology Benthos Bioluminescence Biomass Cascade effect Colored dissolved organic matter Dead zone Ecohydrology Eutrophication Fisheries science Food chain Food web GIS and aquatic science Hydrobiology Hypoxia Macrobenthos Meiobenthos Microbial ecology Microbial food web Microbial loop Nekton Neuston Particle Pelagic zone Photic zone Phytoplankton Plankton Pleuston Productivity Ramsar Convention Sediment trap Semiaquatic Shoaling and schooling Siltation Spawn Stable isotope analysis in aquatic ecosystems Stream metabolism Substrate Thermal pollution Trophic level Underwater camouflage Water column Zooplankton Freshwater Freshwater biology Freshwater biome Freshwater environmental quality parameters Freshwater fish Hyporheic zone Limnology Lake ecosystem Lake stratification Macrophyte Pond Fish pond Rheotaxis River Ecosystem Stream bed Stream pool Trophic state index Upland and lowland Water garden Wetland Bog Brackish marsh Fen Freshwater marsh Freshwater swamp forest Ecoregions List of freshwater ecoregions (WWF) Africa and Madagascar Latin America and the Caribbean List of marine ecoregions Specific examples Everglades Maharashtra North Pacific Subtropical Gyre San Francisco Estuary Marine ecosystems ( components ) General Deep scattering layer Diel vertical migration f-ratio Iron fertilization Large marine ecosystem Marine biology Marine chemistry Marine food web Marine primary production Marine snow Ocean fertilization Oceanic physical-biological process Ocean turbidity Photophore Thorson's rule Upwelling Viral shunt Whale fall Marine life Census of Marine Life Deep-sea community Deep-water coral Marine fungi Marine invertebrates Marine larval ecology Seagrass Seashore wildlife Wild fisheries Microorganisms Marine bacteriophage Marine prokaryotes Marine protists Marine viruses Paradox of the plankton Vertebrates Marine mammal Marine reptile Saltwater fish Coastal fish Coral reef fish Deep-sea fish Demersal fish Pelagic fish Seabird Marine habitats Bay mud Marine coastal ecosystem Coastal biogeomorphology Cold seep Coral reef Davidson Seamount § Ecology Estuary Intertidal ecology Intertidal wetland Kelp forest Hydrothermal vent Lagoon Mangrove Marine biomes Mudflat Oyster reef Rocky shore Salt marsh Salt pannes and pools Seagrass meadow Sponge ground Sponge reef Tide pool Conservation Coral bleaching Ecological values of mangroves Fisheries and climate change HERMIONE Human impact on marine life Marine conservation activism Marine pollution Marine protected area Lakes portal Oceans portal Category Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐5xvrg
Cached time: 20250812031142
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.395 seconds
Real time usage: 0.574 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1067/1000000
Revision size: 14654/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 99021/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 795/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 9/100
Expensive parser function count: 7/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 53454/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.207/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 7495456/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  398.050      1 -total
 21.57%   85.874      1 Template:Reflist
 21.33%   84.914      5 Template:Navbox
 16.59%   66.023      1 Template:Cite_book
 15.19%   60.479      1 Template:Garden_features
 13.31%   52.969      1 Template:More_citations_needed
 13.13%   52.250      1 Template:Short_description
 12.29%   48.927      1 Template:Ambox
  7.70%   30.646      2 Template:Pagetype
  5.59%   22.256      1 Template:Horticulture_and_gardening Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:513692:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812031142 and revision id 1304627418. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Water_garden&oldid=1304627418 " Categories : Water gardens Garden features Bodies of water Landscape architecture Aquatic plants Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from March 2021 All articles needing additional references Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 7 August 2025, at 05:34 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Water garden 17 languages Add topic

