Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Zonation 2 Low tide zone (lower littoral) 3 Ecology 4 Legal issues 5 Threats 6 Gallery 7 See also 8 References 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Intertidal zone 33 languages العربية 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí भोजपुरी Български Català Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Қазақша Kreyòl ayisyen Кыргызча മലയാളം Bahasa Melayu Nederlands Norsk bokmål Polski Português Română සිංහල Simple English Slovenščina Türkçe Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Vertical zonation ) Area of coast exposed only at low tide "Foreshore" redirects here. For the area in Cape Town, South Africa, see Foreshore, Cape Town .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Intertidal zone" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( May 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The rocky shoreline of Saint-Malo , northwestern France, with a stripe of the black lichen Hydropunctaria maura at the high tide line Marine habitats Coastal habitats Littoral zone Intertidal zone Estuaries Mangrove forests Seagrass meadows Kelp forests Coral reefs Continental shelf Neritic zone Ocean surface Surface microlayer Epipelagic zone Open ocean Pelagic zone Oceanic zone Sea floor Seamounts Hydrothermal vents Cold seeps Demersal zone Benthic zone Marine sediment v t e The intertidal zone or foreshore is the area above water level at low tide and underwater at high tide; in other words, it is the part of the littoral zone within the tidal range . This area can include several types of habitats with various species of life , such as sea stars , sea urchins , and many species of coral with regional differences in biodiversity. Sometimes it is referred to as the littoral zone or seashore , although those can be defined as a wider region.

The intertidal zone also includes steep rocky cliffs , sandy beaches , bogs or wetlands (e.g., vast mudflats ). This area can be a narrow strip, such as in Pacific islands that have only a narrow tidal range, or can include many meters of shoreline where shallow beach slopes interact with high tidal excursion. The peritidal zone is similar but somewhat wider, extending from above the highest tide level to below the lowest. Organisms in the intertidal zone are well-adapted to their environment, facing high levels of interspecific competition and the rapidly changing conditions that come with the tides .

[ 1 ] The intertidal zone is also home to several species from many different phyla ( Porifera , Annelida , Coelenterata , Mollusca , Arthropoda , etc.).

The water that comes with the tides can vary from brackish waters , fresh with rain , to highly saline and dry salt , with drying between tidal inundations.

Wave splash can dislodge residents from the littoral zone. With the intertidal zone's high exposure to sunlight , the temperature can range from very hot with full sunshine to near freezing in colder climates. Some microclimates in the littoral zone are moderated by local features and larger plants such as mangroves .

Adaptations in the littoral zone allow the utilization of nutrients supplied in high volume on a regular basis from the sea , which is actively moved to the zone by tides. The edges of habitats, in this case the land and sea, are themselves often significant ecosystems , and the littoral zone is a prime example.

A typical rocky shore can be divided into a spray zone or splash zone (also known as the supratidal zone ), which is above the spring high-tide line and is covered by water only during storms, and an intertidal zone, which lies between the high and low tidal extremes. Along most shores , the intertidal zone can be clearly separated into the following subzones: high tide zone, middle tide zone, and low tide zone. The intertidal zone is one of a number of marine biomes or habitats , including estuaries , the neritic zone , the photic zone , and deep zones .

Zonation [ edit ] Tide pools at Pillar Point showing zonation on the edge of the rock ledge A rock, seen at low tide, exhibiting typical intertidal zonation, Kalaloch, Washington , western United States Marine biologists divide the intertidal region into three zones (low, middle, and high), based on the overall average exposure of the zone.

[ 2 ] The low intertidal zone, which borders on the shallow subtidal zone, is only exposed to air at the lowest of low tides and is primarily marine in character. The mid intertidal zone is regularly exposed and submerged by average tides. The high intertidal zone is only covered by the highest of the high tides, and spends much of its time as terrestrial habitat. The high intertidal zone borders on the splash zone (the region above the highest still-tide level, but which receives wave splash). On shores exposed to heavy wave action , the intertidal zone will be influenced by waves, as the spray from breaking waves will extend the intertidal zone.

Depending on the substratum and topography of the shore, additional features may be noticed. On rocky shores , tide pools form in depressions that fill with water as the tide rises. Under certain conditions, such as those at Morecambe Bay , quicksand may form.

[ 3 ] Low tide zone (lower littoral) [ edit ] This subregion is mostly submerged – it is only exposed at the point of low tide and for a longer period of time during extremely low tides. This area is teeming with life; [ 2 ] the most notable difference between this subregion and the other three is that there is much more marine vegetation, especially seaweeds . There is also a great biodiversity. Organisms in this zone generally are not well adapted to periods of dryness and temperature extremes. Some of the organisms in this area are abalone , sea anemones , brown seaweed , chitons , crabs , green algae , hydroids , isopods , limpets , mussels , nudibranchs , sculpin , sea cucumber , sea lettuce , sea palms , starfish , sea urchins , shrimp , snails , sponges , surf grass , tube worms , and whelks . Creatures in this area can grow to larger sizes because there is more available energy in the localized ecosystem. Also, marine vegetation can grow to much greater sizes than in the other three intertidal subregions due to the better water coverage. The water is shallow enough to allow plenty of sunlight to reach the vegetation to allow substantial photosynthetic activity, and the salinity is at almost normal levels. This area is also protected from large predators such as fish because of the wave action and the relatively shallow water.

Ecology [ edit ] Main article: Intertidal ecology See also: Intertidal fish and Tide pool A California tide pool in the low tide zone The intertidal region is an important model system for the study of ecology , especially on wave-swept rocky shores. The region contains a high diversity of species, and the zonation created by the tides causes species ranges to be compressed into very narrow bands. This makes it relatively simple to study species across their entire cross-shore range, something that can be extremely difficult in, for instance, terrestrial habitats that can stretch thousands of kilometres. Communities on wave-swept shores also have high turnover due to disturbance, so it is possible to watch ecological succession over years rather than decades.

The burrowing invertebrates that make up large portions of sandy beach ecosystems are known to travel relatively great distances in cross-shore directions as beaches change on the order of days, semilunar cycles, seasons, or years. The distribution of some species has been found to correlate strongly with geomorphic datums such as the high tide strand and the water table outcrop.

Since the foreshore is alternately covered by the sea and exposed to the air, organisms living in this environment must be adapted to both wet and dry conditions. Intertidal zone biomass reduces the risk of shoreline erosion from high intensity waves.

[ 4 ] Typical inhabitants of the intertidal rocky shore include sea urchins , sea anemones , barnacles , chitons , crabs , isopods , mussels , starfish , and many marine gastropod molluscs such as limpets and whelks . Sexual and asexual reproduction varies by inhabitants of the intertidal zones.

[ 5 ] Humans have historically used intertidal zones as foraged food sources during low tide. Migratory birds also rely on intertidal species for feeding areas because of low water habitats consisting of an abundance of mollusks and other marine species.

[ 4 ] Legal issues [ edit ] See also: Public trust doctrine As with the dry sand part of a beach, legal and political disputes can arise over the ownership and use of the foreshore. One recent example is the New Zealand foreshore and seabed controversy . In legal discussions, the foreshore is often referred to as the wet-sand area .

Beach fishing in Edgartown, Massachusetts For privately owned beaches in the United States , some states such as Massachusetts use the low-water mark as the dividing line between the property of the State and that of the beach owner; however the public still has fishing, fowling, and navigation rights to the zone between low and high water. Other states such as California use the high-water mark.

In the United Kingdom , the foreshore is generally deemed to be owned by the Crown , with exceptions for what are termed several fisheries , which can be historic deeds to title, dating back to King John 's time or earlier, and the Udal Law , which applies generally in Orkney and Shetland .

In Greece , according to the L. 2971/01, the foreshore zone is defined as the area of the coast that might be reached by the maximum climbing of the waves on the coast (maximum wave run-up on the coast) in their maximum capacity (maximum referring to the "usually maximum winter waves" and of course not to exceptional cases, such as tsunamis ). The foreshore zone, a part of the exceptions of the law, is public, and permanent constructions are not allowed on it. In Italy, about half the shoreline is owned by the government but leased to private beach clubs called lidos.

[ 6 ] In the East African and West Indian Ocean, intertidal zone management is often neglected of being a priority due to there being no intent for collective economic productivity.

[ 7 ] According to workshops performing questionaries, it is stated that eighty-six percent of respondents believe mismanagement of mangrove and coastal ecosystems are due to lack of knowledge to steward the ecosystems, yet forty-four percent of respondents state that there is a fair amount of knowledge used in those regions for fisheries.

[ citation needed ] Threats [ edit ] See also: Effects of climate change on oceans Nutrition ( Eutrophic ) Pollution in Assateague Island National Seashore, Maryland Intertidal zones are sensitive habitats with an abundance of marine species that can experience ecological hazards associated with tourism and human-induced environmental impacts . A variety of other threats that have been summarized by scientists include nutrient pollution , overharvesting , habitat destruction , and climate change .

[ 8 ] Habitat destruction is advanced through activities including harvesting fisheries with drag nets and a neglect of the sensitivity of intertidal zones.

[ 9 ] Gallery [ edit ] Mussels in the intertidal zone in Cornwall , England Barnacles and limpets in the intertidal zone near Newquay, Cornwall, England A tidal pool in the intertidal zone during low tide, Sunrise-on-Sea, South Africa Unexplained crumbs of sand that appear to have been deposited around stone by escaping air Rocks in intertidal zone completely covered by mussels, at Bangchuidao Scenic Area, Dalian , Liaoning Province , China See also [ edit ] Ballantine Scale Ecological forecasting Littoral series NaGISA Shorezone Tidelands References [ edit ] ^ US Department of Commerce, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration.

"What is the intertidal zone?" .

oceanservice.noaa.gov . Retrieved 2022-11-29 .

^ a b "What is the Intertidal Zone?" .

WorldAtlas . 10 January 2018 . Retrieved 2019-09-17 .

^ "Why is Morecambe Bay so dangerous?" .

The Guardian . 2004-02-12.

^ a b "Intertidal Zone" .

National Geographic Society . 2019-10-10 . Retrieved 2022-04-06 .

^ "Intertidal Ecology" (PDF) . USF College of Marine Science. 2002 . Retrieved 31 May 2023 .

^ Willem Marx (September 14, 2024).

"An EU law upsets local tradition on Italy's beaches" . NPR.

^ Nordlund, Lina Mtwana; de la Torre-Castro, Maricela; Erlandsson, Johan; et al. (2013-12-28).

"Intertidal Zone Management in the Western Indian Ocean: Assessing Current Status and Future Possibilities Using Expert Opinions" .

Ambio .

43 (8): 1006– 1019.

doi : 10.1007/s13280-013-0465-8 .

ISSN 0044-7447 .

PMC 4235897 .

PMID 24375399 .

^ "Climate Change Impacts on Intertidal Zone Populations" .

NCCOS Coastal Science Website . Retrieved 2022-04-03 .

^ Nordlund, Lina Mtwana; de la Torre-Castro, Maricela; Erlandsson, Johan; Conand, Chantal; Muthiga, Nyawira; Jiddawi, Narriman; Gullström, Martin (December 2014).

"Intertidal Zone Management in the Western Indian Ocean: Assessing Current Status and Future Possibilities Using Expert Opinions" .

Ambio .

43 (8): 1006– 1019.

Bibcode : 2014Ambio..43.1006N .

doi : 10.1007/s13280-013-0465-8 .

ISSN 0044-7447 .

PMC 4235897 .

PMID 24375399 .

External links [ edit ] Watch the online documentary The Intertidal Zone v t e Coastal geography Landforms Anchialine pool Archipelago Atoll Avulsion Ayre Barrier island Bay Bight Bodden Brackish marsh Cape Channel Cliff Coast Coastal plain Coastal waterfall Continental margin Continental shelf Coral reef Cove Dune cliff-top Estuary Firth Fjard Fjord Freshwater marsh Fundus Gat Geo Gulf Gut Hapua Headland Inlet Intertidal wetland Island Islet Isthmus Liman Lagoon Machair Mudflat Natural arch Peninsula Reef Ria Salt marsh Shoal Skerry Sound Spit Stack Strait Strand plain Submarine canyon Tidal island Tidal marsh Tide pool Tied island Tombolo Waituna Windwatt Beaches Beach cusps Beach evolution Beach ridge Beach wrack Beaches in estuaries and bays Beachrock Coastal morphodynamics Pocket beach Raised beach Recession Shell beach Shingle beach Storm beach Wash margin River mouths Debouch Mouth bar River delta mega regressive Processes Blowhole Cliffed coast Coastal biogeomorphology Coastal erosion Concordant coastline Current Cuspate foreland Discordant coastline Emergent coastline Feeder bluff Flat coast Graded shoreline Ingression coast Large-scale coastal behaviour Longshore drift Marine regression Marine transgression Raised shoreline Rip current Rocky shore Sea cave Sea foam Shoal peresyp Steep coast Submergent coastline Surf break Surf zone Surge channel Swash Undertow Volcanic arc Wave-cut platform Wave shoaling Wind fetch Wind wave Management Accretion Coastal management Integrated coastal zone management Submersion Related Bulkhead line Coastal engineering Grain size boulder clay cobble granule gravel pebble sand shingle silt Intertidal zone Littoral zone Physical oceanography Region of freshwater influence River plume Category v t e Biogeographic regions Biomes Terrestrial biomes Polar/montane Tundra Taiga Montane grasslands and shrublands Alpine tundra Temperate Coniferous forests Broadleaf and mixed forests Deciduous forests Grasslands, savannas, and shrublands Tropical and subtropical Coniferous forests Cloud forest Moist broadleaf forests list Dry broadleaf forests Grasslands, savannas, and shrublands Dry Mediterranean forests, woodlands, and scrub Deserts and xeric shrublands Steppe Wet Flooded grasslands and savannas Riparian Wetland Mangroves Aquatic biomes Pond Littoral Intertidal Kelp forests Coral reefs Neritic zone Pelagic zone Benthic zone Hydrothermal vents Cold seeps Demersal zone Other biomes Endolithic zone Biogeographic realms Terrestrial Afrotropical Antarctic Australasian Holarctic Nearctic Palearctic Indomalayan Neotropical Oceanian Marine Antarctic/Southern Ocean Arctic Central Indo-Pacific Eastern Indo-Pacific Temperate Australasia Temperate Northern Atlantic Temperate Northern Pacific Temperate South America Temperate Southern Africa Tropical Atlantic Tropical Eastern Pacific Western Indo-Pacific Subdivisions Biogeographic provinces Bioregions Ecoregions Lists of ecoregions Global 200 ecoregions See also Altitudinal zonation Ecological classification Floristic kingdoms Vegetation classifications Wallace Line Zoogeography NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐dqhmg
Cached time: 20250812022416
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.403 seconds
Real time usage: 0.559 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1490/1000000
Revision size: 15703/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 88271/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 1137/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 10/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 68905/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.245/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 6350517/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  440.879      1 -total
 29.78%  131.289      1 Template:Reflist
 19.74%   87.035      5 Template:Cite_web
 17.33%   76.424      1 Template:Ocean_habitat_topics
 16.99%   74.887      1 Template:Sidebar
 13.01%   57.349      1 Template:Short_description
 12.16%   53.625      1 Template:More_citations_needed
 11.28%   49.725      1 Template:Ambox
 10.71%   47.206      5 Template:Navbox
  8.12%   35.779      1 Template:Coastal_geography Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:3112575:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812022416 and revision id 1302660094. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Intertidal_zone&oldid=1302660094 " Categories : Aquatic ecology Tides Marine biology Habitats Coastal geography Coastal and oceanic landforms Fisheries science Physical oceanography Oceanographical terminology Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from May 2023 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2024 This page was last edited on 26 July 2025, at 20:36 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Intertidal zone 33 languages Add topic

