Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Terminology 2 Formation 3 "Wintry showers" or "wintry mixes" 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Rain and snow mixed 39 languages العربية Bosanski Català Corsu Cymraeg Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge Gàidhlig 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Íslenska Italiano עברית Lietuvių Македонски Bahasa Melayu 日本語 Norsk nynorsk Português Shqip Simple English Slovenščina Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Türkçe 文言 吴语 粵語 Žemaitėška 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Form of precipitation consisting of rain and melting snow "Rain and snow" redirects here. For the folk song, see Rain and Snow .

Part of a series on Weather Temperate and polar seasons Winter Spring Summer Autumn Tropical seasons Dry season Harmattan Wet season Storms Cloud Cumulonimbus cloud Arcus cloud Downburst Microburst Heat burst Derecho Lightning Volcanic lightning Thunderstorm Air-mass thunderstorm Thundersnow Dry thunderstorm Mesocyclone Supercell Tornado Anticyclonic tornado Landspout Waterspout Dust devil Fire whirl Anticyclone Cyclone Polar low Extratropical cyclone European windstorm Nor'easter Subtropical cyclone Tropical cyclone Atlantic hurricane Typhoon Storm surge Dust storm Simoom Haboob Monsoon Amihan Gale Sirocco Firestorm Winter storm Ice storm Blizzard Ground blizzard Snow squall Precipitation Drizzle Freezing Graupel Hail Megacryometeor Ice pellets Diamond dust Rain Freezing Cloudburst Snow Rain and snow mixed Snow grains Snow roller Slush Topics Air pollution Atmosphere Chemistry Convection Physics River Climate Cloud Physics Fog Mist Season Cold wave Heat wave Jet stream Meteorology Severe weather List Extreme Severe weather terminology Canada Japan United States Weather forecasting Weather modification Glossaries Meteorology Climate change Tornado terms Tropical cyclone terms Weather portal v t e Rain and snow mixed ( American English ) or sleet ( Commonwealth English ) is precipitation composed of a mixture of rain and partially melted snow . Unlike ice pellets , which are hard, and freezing rain , which is fluid until striking an object where it fully freezes, this precipitation is soft and translucent , but it contains some traces of ice crystals from partially fused snowflakes, also called slush . In any one location, it usually occurs briefly as a transition phase from rain to snow or vice-versa, but hits the surface before fully transforming. Its METAR code is RASN or SNRA .

[ 1 ] Terminology [ edit ] This precipitation type is commonly known as sleet in most Commonwealth countries.

[ 2 ] However, the United States National Weather Service uses the term sleet to refer to ice pellets instead.

[ 3 ] Formation [ edit ] This precipitation occurs when the temperature in the lowest part of the atmosphere is slightly above the freezing point of water (0 °C or 32 °F).

The depth of low-level warm air (below the freezing level) needed to melt snow falling from above to rain varies from about 230–460 m (750–1,500 ft) and depends on the mass of the flakes and the lapse rate of the melting layer. Rain and snow typically mix when the melting layer depth falls between these values as rain starts forming when in that range.

[ 4 ] Rain-snow-mix soundings; left diagram shows typical skew-T appearance, while right diagram shows variations which result in mixtures of rain and snow "Wintry showers" or "wintry mixes" [ edit ] Wintry showers is a somewhat informal meteorological term, used primarily in the United Kingdom , to refer to various mixtures of rain, graupel and snow at once. Though there is no "official" definition of the term, in the United Kingdom it is not used when there is any significant accumulation of snow on the ground. It is often used when the temperature of the ground surface is above 0 °C (32 °F), preventing snow from accumulating even if the air temperature near the surface is slightly below 0 °C (32 °F); but even then, the falling precipitation must generally have something else other than exclusively snow.

In the United States , wintry mix generally refers to a mixture of freezing rain , ice pellets , and snow.

[ 5 ] In contrast to the usage in the United Kingdom, in the United States it is usually used when both air and ground temperatures are below 0 °C (32 °F). Additionally, it is generally used when some surface accumulation of ice and snow is expected to occur. During winter, a wide area can be affected by the multiple mixed precipitation types typical of a wintry mix during a single winter storm, as counterclockwise winds around a storm system bring warm air northwards ahead of the system, and then bring cold air back southwards behind it. Most often, it is the region ahead of the approaching storm system which sees the wintry mix, as warm air moves northward and above retreating cold air in a warm front , causing snow to change into ice pellets, freezing rain and finally rain. The reverse transition can occur behind the departing low-pressure system, though it is more common for precipitation to freeze directly from rain to snow, or for it to stop before a transition back.

See also [ edit ] Freezing rain Ice pellets Sleet (disambiguation) Slush Winter weather References [ edit ] ^ "Rain and snow mixed - AMS Glossary" . Glossary.ametsoc.org. 2012-01-26 . Retrieved 2019-06-13 .

^ "SLEET | meaning in the Cambridge English Dictionary" . Dictionary.cambridge.org . Retrieved 2019-06-13 .

^ "Glossary - NOAA's National Weather Service" . W1.weather.gov. 2009-06-25. Archived from the original on 2013-09-22 . Retrieved 2019-06-13 .

^ "Determining Winter Precipitation Type" .

National Weather Service: Louisville, KY Weather Forecast Office . National Oceanographic and Atmospheric Administration. Archived from the original on 17 November 2009.

^ "wintry mix - Definition of wintry mix in English by Lexico Dictionaries" .

Lexico Dictionaries - English . Archived from the original on August 15, 2019.

External links [ edit ] AMS Glossary Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Rain_and_snow_mixed&oldid=1302966088 " Categories : Precipitation Snow or ice weather phenomena Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 28 July 2025, at 11:03 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Rain and snow mixed 39 languages Add topic

