Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Personal history 2 Academic career 3 Research and publications 4 Non-academic projects 5 Education 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Robert Cooter 5 languages Español Français עברית مصرى Русский Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American economist and legal scholar Robert D. Cooter Born ( 1945-05-02 ) May 2, 1945 (age 80) Nationality American Academic background Alma mater Harvard University (Ph.D.) Oxford University (M.A.) Swarthmore College (B.A.) Academic work Discipline private law , constitutional law and economics, law and economic development School or tradition Law and Economics Institutions University of California, Berkeley, School of Law Robert D. Cooter (born May 2, 1945) is the Herman F. Selvin Professor of Law at the University of California, Berkeley, School of Law .

Cooter works in the field of law and economics . He is co-editor of the International Review of Law and Economics , and was among those convened by George Mason University Law School dean, Henry Manne , in January, 1990, to discuss organizing a professional association, prior to formation of the American Law and Economics Association ; Cooter was subsequently elected as a founding board member, then served as its president for 1994.

[ 1 ] In 1999 he was elected to the American Academy of Arts and Sciences .

"Not the Power to Destroy: An Effects Theory of the Tax Power," a paper Cooter coauthored with Neil S. Siegel (Duke Law professor), provided the legal framework for the Supreme Court ruling on the Affordable Care Act in 2012.

[ 2 ] Personal history [ edit ] Cooter was born on May 2, 1945. He is married and has three grown children with his wife Blair. Cooter graduated from Swarthmore College in 1967 and attended Oxford University as a Fulbright Scholar from 1967 to 1969, graduating with a degree in philosophy, politics, and economics. He earned a Ph.D. in economics from Harvard University in 1975. Cooter is the 2018 recipient of the Ronald H. Coase medal recognizing his contributions to the field of law & economics.

Academic career [ edit ] Cooter began teaching in the Department of Economics at University of California, Berkeley in 1975, joining the Berkeley Law faculty in 1980. He has been a visiting member of the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton and a recipient of various awards and fellowships, including Guggenheim, the Jack N. Pritzker Visiting Research Professorship at Northwestern Law School, and, the Max Planck Research Prize. He was an Olin visiting professor at the University of Virginia School of Law and lectured at the University of Cologne in 1989.

[ 3 ] Research and publications [ edit ] Recent publications include the sixth edition of the textbook "Law and Economics" (co-authored with Thomas Ulen ), and "Solomon's Knot: How Law Can End the Poverty of Nations" (co-authored with Hans-Bernd Schäfer ).

Books Robert D. Cooter and Hans-Bernd Schäfer. Solomon's Knot: How Law Can End the Poverty of Nations. Princeton University Press, 2012.

Robert D. Cooter and Thomas Ulen. Law and Economics. Pearson Series in Economics, 6th edition, 2012.

Selected Articles Robert D. Cooter. "Maturing into Normal Science: The Effect of Empirical Legal Studies on Law and Economics," University of Illinois Law Review, October 2011, Number 5, page 1475.

Robert D. Cooter and Michael D. Gilbert. "A Theory of Direct Democracy and the Single Subject Rule" A Theory of Direct Democracy and the Single Subject Rule 110 (2010): 687.

Robert D. Cooter and Brian Broughman. "Charity and Information: Correcting the Failure of a Disjunctive Social Norm" Michigan Journal of Law Reform 43 (2010): 871.

Robert D. Cooter and Neil Siegel. "Collective Action Federalism: A General Theory of Article I, Section 8" Stanford Law Review 63 (2010): 115–185.

In October 2012, Cooter delivered the keynote address at the Eighth Annual Friedrich A. von Hayek Lecture, "Freedom, Innovation, and Intellectual Property," sponsored by the New York University Journal of Law and Liberty .

Non-academic projects [ edit ] In 1999 Cooter joined two U.C. Berkeley economics professors, Aaron Edlin and Benjamin Hermalin, to create the online publishing platform called Berkeley Electronic Press, or Bepress. The current portfolio of Bepress includes ten peer-reviewed electronic journals, a platform called SelectedWorks for academics to create online professional pages, and the online law review paid submission program ExpressO.

Education [ edit ] B.A., Swarthmore College (1967) M.A., Oxford University (1969) Ph.D., Harvard University (1975) References [ edit ] ^ "A Brief History of the Founding of the American Law and Economics Association" . American Law and Economics Association . Retrieved 18 October 2022 .

^ Cohen, Andrew (2012-07-18).

"Professors Provide Roadmap for Supreme Court Healthcare Ruling" . UC Berkeley School of Law . Retrieved March 10, 2016 .

^ "Robert Cooter" .

Berkeley Law . Retrieved 2018-12-17 .

External links [ edit ] Official website Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Netherlands Latvia Korea Poland Israel Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Robert_Cooter&oldid=1283942716 " Categories : 21st-century American economists Law and economics scholars Swarthmore College alumni Alumni of the University of Oxford Harvard Graduate School of Arts and Sciences alumni UC Berkeley School of Law faculty Living people 1945 births Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles with hCards This page was last edited on 4 April 2025, at 16:38 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Robert Cooter 5 languages Add topic

