Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Historiography and nature of Golden Age 2 Birth of the Golden Age 3 End of the Golden Age 4 Notable figures 5 See also 6 Notes 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Golden age of Jewish culture in Spain 17 languages العربية Беларуская Български Deutsch Español فارسی Français Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Ladino مصرى Polski Português Русский Türkçe Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Aspect of Jewish history For the period of Spanish cultural flourishing in the 17th century, see Spanish Golden Age .

For broader coverage of this topic, see History of the Jews in Spain and History of the Jews in Portugal .

History of al-Andalus Muslim conquest (711–732) Battle of Guadalete Siege of Córdoba Battle of Toulouse Battle of Tours Fihrids Umayyad state of Córdoba (756–1031) Abd al-Rahman I Abd al-Rahman III Almanzor First Taifa period (1009–1110) Almoravid rule (1085–1145) Conquest Battle of Sagrajas Second Taifa period (1140–1203) Almohad rule (1147–1238) Battle of Las Navas de Tolosa Third Taifa period (1232–1287) Emirate of Granada (1232–1492) Nasrid dynasty Battle of the Strait Granada War Related articles Iberian Peninsula Reconquista ( Portugal ) Convivencia v t e Part of a series on Jews and Judaism Etymology Who is a Jew?

Jewish studies Religion God in Judaism ( names ) Principles of faith Mitzvot ( 613 ) Halakha Shabbat Holidays Prayer Tzedakah Land of Israel Brit Bar and bat mitzvah Marriage Bereavement Baal teshuva Philosophy Ethics Kabbalah Messiah Claimants Customs Rites Synagogue Rabbi Texts Tanakh Torah Nevi'im Ketuvim Talmud Mishnah Gemara Rabbinic Midrash Tosefta Targum Beit Yosef Mishneh Torah Tur Shulchan Aruch Zohar History General Timeline Land of Israel Name "Judea" Antisemitism Anti-Judaism Persecution Leaders Modern historiography Historical population comparisons Ancient Israel Twelve Tribes of Israel Kingdom of Judah Kingdom of Israel Jerusalem ( in Judaism timeline ) Temple in Jerusalem ( First Second ) Assyrian captivity Babylonian captivity Second Temple period Yehud Medinata Maccabean Revolt Hasmonean dynasty Sanhedrin Schisms ( Pharisees , Sadducees , Essenes , Zealots , Sicarii ) Second Temple Judaism ( Hellenistic Judaism ) Jewish–Roman wars ( Great Revolt , Diaspora , Bar Kokhba ) Rabbinic period and Middle Ages Rabbinic Judaism History of the Jews in the Byzantine Empire Christianity and Judaism ( Jews and Christmas ) Hinduism and Judaism Islamic–Jewish relations Middle Ages Golden Age Expulsion from Spain Modern era Haskalah Sabbateans Hasidism Jewish atheism Emancipation Old Yishuv Zionism Soviet Union The Holocaust Israel Arab–Israeli conflict Communities Ashkenazim Galician Litvak Mizrahim Sephardim Teimanim (Yemenite Jews) Beta Israel Gruzinim (Georgian Jews) Juhurim (Mountain Jews) Bukharim Italkim Romanyotim Cochinim Bene Israel Berber Crimean Karaites Krymchaks Kaifeng Jews Related groups Bnei Anusim Lemba Igbo Jews Samaritans Crypto-Jews Anusim Dönmeh Marranos Neofiti Xueta Mosaic Arabs Subbotniks Noahides Population Judaism by country Lists of Jews Diaspora Historical population by country Population by city Genetic studies Israel and Palestine Old Yishuv New Yishuv Israeli Jews Palestinian Jews Africa Algeria Angola Bilad-el-Sudan Botswana Cameroon Cape Verde Benin Democratic Republic of the Congo Djibouti Egypt Ethiopia Beta Israel Eritrea Eswatini Gabon Gambia Ghana Guinea Guinea-Bissau Ivory Coast Kenya Libya Madagascar Malawi Mali Mauritius Morocco Mozambique Namibia Nigeria ( Igbo ) Republic of the Congo São Tomé and Príncipe Sierra Leone Somalia South Africa Sudan Tanzania Tunisia Uganda ( Abayudaya ) Zambia Zimbabwe Asia Afghanistan Bahrain Cambodia China Hong Kong India Indonesia Iran Iraq Israel Japan Jordan Kazakhstan Kurdistan Kuwait Kyrgyzstan Lebanon Malaysia Mongolia Myanmar Nepal Oman Pakistan Philippines Qatar Saudi Arabia South Korea Singapore Sri Lanka Syria Tajikistan Taiwan Thailand Turkey United Arab Emirates Uzbekistan Vietnam Yemen Europe Albania Armenia Austria Azerbaijan Belarus Belgium Bosnia Bulgaria Croatia Cyprus Czechia Denmark Estonia Finland France Georgia Germany Greece Romaniote Hungary Iceland Ireland Italy Italkim Latvia Liechtenstein Lithuania Luxembourg Moldova Montenegro Netherlands North Macedonia Norway Poland Portugal Romania Russia Soviet Union Serbia Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sephardim Sweden Switzerland Ukraine United Kingdom England Scotland Wales Northern America Canada United States Greenland Latin America and Caribbean Argentina Bolivia Brazil Chile Colombia Costa Rica Cuba Dominican Republic Ecuador El Salvador Guatemala Guyana Haiti Honduras Jamaica Mexico Nicaragua Panama Paraguay Peru Puerto Rico Suriname Uruguay Venezuela Oceania Australia Fiji Guam New Zealand Palau Denominations Orthodox Modern Haredi Hasidic Reform Conservative Karaite Reconstructionist Renewal Science Haymanot Humanistic Culture Customs Minyan Wedding Clothing Niddah Pidyon haben Kashrut Shidduch Zeved habat Conversion to Judaism Aliyah Hiloni Music Religious Secular Art Ancient Yiddish theatre Dance Humour Cuisine American Ashkenazi Bukharan Ethiopian Israeli Israelite Mizrahi Sephardic Literature Israeli Yiddish Judeo-Tat American Surnames Ashkenazi Mizrahi Sephardic Languages Hebrew Biblical Mishnaic Medieval Modern Bukharian Ghardaïa Sign Jewish Koine Greek Judeo-Arabic Judeo-Aramaic Judeo-Berber Judeo-Gascon Judaeo-Georgian Judaeo-Iranian Judeo-Italian Judeo-Malayalam Judaeo-Spanish Judeo-Tat Knaanic Shassi Yeshivish Yevanic Yiddish Zarphatic Politics Jewish political movements Autonomism Bundism Feminism Leftism Secularism Territorialism World Agudath Israel Zionism General Green Labor Kahanism Maximalism Neo-Zionism Religious Revisionist Post-Zionism Category Portal v t e The Golden Age of Jewish culture in Spain refers to a period (roughly from the 10th to the 12th century) during which Jewish life flourished under Muslim rule in Al-Andalus (Muslim-ruled Iberia). During this time, Jews experienced relative tolerance, prosperity, and cultural integration within the broader Islamic society. Notable figures from this era include Hasdai ibn Shaprut , Samuel ha-Nagid , Solomon ibn Gabirol , and Judah Halevi .

Under Muslim rule, Jews were designated as dhimmi ("protected people")—non-Muslim subjects granted religious freedom and legal protection in exchange for paying a special tax and accepting certain social restrictions. Although they held a second-class status, this framework allowed for a relatively stable coexistence that enabled Jewish religious, cultural, and economic life to flourish. Jews occupied prominent positions in government, medicine, philosophy, science, and diplomacy, and played a key role in the transmission of classical knowledge from the Islamic world to Medieval Christian Europe . The period also saw remarkable achievements in Hebrew poetry , religious scholarship, grammar, and philosophy.

The nature and length of this "Golden Age" has been debated, as there were at least three periods during which non-Muslims were oppressed. A few scholars give the start of the Golden Age as 711–718, the Muslim conquest of Iberia . Others date it from 912, during the rule of Abd al-Rahman III . The end of the age is variously given as 1031, when the Caliphate of Córdoba ended; 1066, the date of the Granada massacre ; 1090, when the Almoravids invaded; or the mid-12th century, when the Almohads invaded.

Historiography and nature of Golden Age [ edit ] Image of a cantor reading the Passover story in Al-Andalus , from the 14th century Haggadah of Barcelona .

Having invaded southern Spain and coming to rule in a matter of seven years, Islamic rulers were confronted with many questions relating to the implementation of Islamic rule of a non-Islamic society. The coexistence of Muslims, Jews, and Christians during this time is revered by many writers.

Al-Andalus was a key center of Jewish life during the early Middle Ages .

María Rosa Menocal , a specialist in Iberian literature at Yale University , claims  that "tolerance was an inherent aspect of Andalusian society".

[ 1 ] Menocal's 2003 book, The Ornament of the World , argues that the Jewish dhimmis living under the Caliphate were allowed fewer rights than Muslims but were still better off than in the Christian parts of Europe. Jews from other parts of Europe made their way to al-Andalus , where in parallel to Christian sects regarded as heretical by Catholic Europe, they were not just tolerated, but where opportunities to practise faith and trades were open without restriction save for the prohibitions on proselytisation and, sometimes, on synagogue construction.

Bernard Lewis takes issue with this view, calling it ahistorical and exaggerated. He argues that Islam traditionally did not offer equality or even pretend that it did and argues that it would have been both a "theological as well as a logical absurdity." [ 2 ] However, he also states: Generally, the Jewish people were allowed to practice their religion and live according to the laws and scriptures of their community. Furthermore, the restrictions to which they were subject were social and symbolic rather than tangible and practical in character. That is to say, these regulations served to define the relationship between the two communities, and not to oppress the Jewish population.

[ 2 ] Mark R. Cohen , Professor of Near Eastern Studies at Princeton University , in his Under Crescent and Cross , calls the idealized interfaith utopia a "myth" that was first promulgated by Jewish historians such as Heinrich Graetz in the 19th century as a rebuke to Christian countries for their treatment of Jews.

[ 3 ] This myth was met with the "counter-myth" of the "neo-lachrymose conception of Jewish-Arab history" by Bat Ye'or and others, [ 3 ] which also "cannot be maintained in the light of historical reality".

[ 4 ] Birth of the Golden Age [ edit ] Prior to 589, the Jewish population of Spain was tolerated by its Arian Visigoth rulers and placed on equal footing with the other ethnic and religious communities of the region. The Arians may have preferred the Jewish population to the Catholic one, as they did not fear political enmity from the Jews.

[ 5 ] The Visigoths were mainly indifferent towards Jews and allowed them to grow and prosper. After the Visigoths joined the Catholic Church , they placed ever greater economic burdens on the Jewish population, and later persecuted them severely. It is possible that Jews welcomed the Muslim Arab and mainly- Berber conquerors in the 8th century.

A period of tolerance dawned for the Jews of the Iberian Peninsula . Their number was considerably augmented by immigration from North Africa in the wake of the Muslim conquest.

[ citation needed ] Immigrants from North Africa and the Middle East bolstered the Jewish population and made Muslim Spain probably the largest centre of contemporary Jews. Especially after 912, during the reign of Abd al-Rahman III and his son, Al-Hakam II , the Jews prospered culturally, and some notable figures held high posts in the Caliphate of Córdoba . Jewish philosophers, mathematicians, astronomers, poets and rabbinical scholars composed highly-rich cultural and scientific work. Many devoted themselves to the study of the sciences and philosophy, composing many of the most valuable texts of Jewish philosophy . Jews took part in the overall prosperity of Muslim Al-Andalus . Jewish economic expansion was unparallelled. In Toledo, after the Christian reconquest in 1085, Jews were involved in translating Arabic texts to the romance languages in the so-called Toledo School of Translators , as they had been previously in translating Greek and Hebrew texts to Arabic. Jews also contributed to botany, geography, medicine, mathematics, poetry and philosophy.

[ 6 ] 'Abd al-Rahman's court physician and minister was Hasdai ibn Shaprut , the patron of Menahem ben Saruq , Dunash ben Labrat and other Jewish scholars and poets. In following centuries, Jewish thought flourished under famous figures such as Samuel Ha-Nagid , Moses ibn Ezra , Solomon ibn Gabirol and Judah Halevi .

[ 6 ] During 'Abd al-Rahman's term of power, the scholar Moses ben Hanoch was appointed rabbi of Córdoba , and as a consequence al-Andalus became the center of Talmudic study, and Córdoba the meeting-place of Jewish savants.

It was a time of partial Jewish autonomy. As " dhimmis ", "protected non-Muslims", Jews in the Islamic world paid the jizya , which was administered separately from the zakat paid by Muslims. The jizya has been viewed variously as a head tax, as payment for non-conscription in the military (as non-Muslims were normally prohibited from bearing arms or receiving martial training) or as a tribute. Jews had their own legal system and social services .

Monotheist religions of the People of the Book were tolerated but conspicuous displays of faith, such as bells and processions, were discouraged.

[ 7 ] Comparing the treatment of Jews in the medieval Islamic world and medieval Christian Europe , the Jews were far more integrated in the political and economic life of Islamic society , [ 8 ] and usually faced far less violence from Muslims, but there were some instances of persecution in the Islamic world as well from the 11th century.

[ 9 ] The Islamic world classified Jews and Christians as dhimmis and allowed Jews to practice their religion more freely than they could in Christian Europe.

[ 10 ] Other authors criticize the modern notion of Al-Andalus being a tolerant society of equal opportunities for all religious groups as a "myth".

[ 11 ] Jews were living in an uneasy coexistence with Muslims and Catholics, and the relationship between the groups was more often than not marked by segregation and mutual hostility. In the 1066 Granada massacre of much of the Jewish population of the city, the Jewish death toll was higher than in the much-publicized Christian pogroms in the Rhineland slightly later.

[ 11 ] The notable Jewish philosopher Moses Maimonides (1135–1204) was forced to flee from Al-Andalus to avoid conversion by the Almohads. In Letter to Yemen , Maimonides wrote: Dear brothers, because of our many sins Hashem has cast us among this nation, the Arabs, who are treating us badly. They pass laws designed to cause us distress and make us despised.... Never has there been a nation that hated, humiliated and loathed us as much as this one.

[ 12 ] End of the Golden Age [ edit ] With the death of Al-Hakam II in 976, the caliphate began to dissolve, and the position of the Jews became more precarious under the various smaller kingdoms.

[ citation needed ] The first major persecution was the 1066 Granada massacre, which occurred on 30 December in which a Muslim mob stormed the royal palace in Granada , crucified the Jewish Vizier Joseph ibn Naghrela and massacred many of the Jewish population of the city. According to one source, "more than 1,500 Jewish families, numbering 4,000 persons, fell in one day".

[ 13 ] It was the first persecution of Jews on the Peninsula under Islamic rule .

Manuscript page by Maimonides , one of the greatest Jewish scholars of Al Andalus, born in Córdoba , in Arabic in the Hebrew script .

Beginning in 1090, the situation deteriorated further with the invasion of the Almoravids , a puritan Muslim dynasty from Morocco . Even under the Almoravids, some Jews prospered although far more so under Ali III , than under his father, Yusuf ibn Tashfin . Among those who held the title of " vizier " or " nasi " in Almoravid times were the poet and physician Abu Ayyub Solomon ibn al-Mu'allam , Abraham ibn Meïr ibn Kamnial , Abu Isaac ibn Muhajar and Solomon ibn Farusal . The Almoravids were ousted from the peninsula in 1148, but the region was again invaded, this time by the even more puritanical Almohads .

During the reign of the Berber dynasties, many Jewish and even Muslim scholars left the Muslim-controlled portion of Iberia for the city of Toledo , which had been conquered in 1085 by Castille .

The major Jewish presence in Iberia continued until the Jews were forced to leave or to convert to Christianity in the Alhambra Decree of 1492 and a similar decree by Portugal in 1496.

Jewish Street ( Toledo , Spain) Notable figures [ edit ] Kaula al Yahudi , military commander appointed by Tariq ibn Ziyad during the Muslim conquest of Hispania Abu al-Fadl ibn Hasdai , philosopher, vizier at Taifa of Zaragoza Joseph ibn Hasdai , poet, father of Abu al-Fadl ibn Hasdai Yekutiel ben Isaac ibn Hassan , poet, talmudist and vizier at Taifa of Zaragoza, fell from favor, executed.

Abu Ruiz ibn Dahri fought in the war against the Almohades .

Ibrahim ibn Yaqub , traveller, probably a merchant.

Amram ben Isaac ibn Shalbib , scholar and diplomat in the service of Alfonso VI of Castile Bahya ibn Paquda , philosopher and author of Chovot HaLevavot Bishop Bodo -Eleazar; according to the Jewish Encyclopedia , "a convert to Judaism ... [who]... went to Córdoba , where he is said to have endeavored to win proselytes for Judaism from among the Spanish Christians." Dunash ben Labrat (920–990), poet Isaac Albalia , astronomer and rabbi at Granada Jehiel ben Asher , poet Joseph ibn Migash , diplomat for Granada Maimonides , also known by the acronym 'Rambam', author of Mishnah Torah, Guide to the Perplexed, and commentator on the Mishnah, rabbi, scholar,  physician, and philosopher Menahem ben Saruq , philologist Nachmanides , also referred to by the acronym Ramban, scholar, rabbi, philosopher, physician, kabbalist, and biblical commentator.

Solomon ibn Gabirol , poet and philosopher Moses ben Enoch , rabbi and Talmudic scholar Yehuda Halevi , poet and philosopher Samuel ha-Levi , treasurer of king Pedro I "the Cruel" of Castile Abraham ibn Ezra , rabbi and poet Moses ibn Ezra , philosopher and poet Benjamin of Tudela , traveler and explorer Samuel ibn Naghrillah , king's minister at Taifa of Granada and poet Joseph ibn Naghrillah , king's minister, son of Samuel ibn Naghrillah Hasdai ibn Shaprut , royal physician and statesman Judah ben Saul ibn Tibbon , translator and physician Joseph ibn Tzaddik , rabbi, poet and philosopher.

Abraham ibn Daud , astronomer, historian, and philosopher. He is sometimes known by the abbreviation Rabad I or Ravad I.

See also [ edit ] Spain portal Judaism portal Society portal Al-Andalus History of the Jews in Poland - Between c.

1025 – c.

1700 AD , called Paradisus Judaeorum ( Latin for " Paradise of the Jews") History of the Jews in Portugal History of the Jews in Spain History of Portugal History of Spain Judeo-Islamic philosophies (800–1400) La Convivencia Reconquista Sephardim under Islam Spanish Inquisition and repression of the Jews Timeline of Portuguese history Timeline of the Muslim presence in the Iberian Peninsula Notes [ edit ] ^ "Press Release: The Ornament of the World by María Rosa Menocal" . August 28, 2005. Archived from the original on 2005-08-28.

^ a b Lewis, Bernard W (1984).

The Jews of Islam ^ a b Cohen, Mark R. (October 1995).

Under Crescent and Cross . Princeton University Press.

ISBN 0-691-01082-X .

^ Daniel J. Lasker (1997). "Review of Under Crescent and Cross. The Jews in the Middle Ages by Mark R. Cohen".

The Jewish Quarterly Review .

88 (1/2): 76– 78.

doi : 10.2307/1455066 .

JSTOR 1455066 .

^ Arianism , Kaufmann Kohler, Samuel Krauss, Jewish Encyclopedia ^ a b Sephardim by Rebecca Weiner.

^ Fred J. Hill et al., A History of the Islamic World 2003 ISBN 0-7818-1015-9 , p.73 ^ Mark R. Cohen (1995), Under Crescent and Cross: The Jews in the Middle Ages , Princeton University Press, pp. 66–7 & 88, ISBN 0-691-01082-X , retrieved 2010-04-10 ^ Mark R. Cohen (1995), Under Crescent and Cross: The Jews in the Middle Ages , Princeton University Press, pp. xvii, xix, 22, 163, 169, ISBN 0-691-01082-X , retrieved 2010-04-10 ^ Mark R. Cohen (1995), Under Crescent and Cross: The Jews in the Middle Ages , Princeton University Press, ISBN 0-691-01082-X , retrieved 2010-04-10 ^ a b Darío Fernández-Morera: "The Myth of the Andalusian Paradise" , The Intercollegiate Review , Fall 2006, pp. 23–31 ^ Avraham Yaakov Finkel (translator): "Rambam: Selected Letters of Maimonides", Yeshivat Beit Moshe, Scranton, Pennsylvania, 1994, ISBN 0-9626226-3-X , p. 58 ^ Granada by Richard Gottheil, Meyer Kayserling , Jewish Encyclopedia . 1906 ed.

References [ edit ] Esperanza Alfonso, Islamic culture through Jewish eyes : al-Andalus from the tenth to twelfth century , 2007 ISBN 978-0-415-43732-5 Mark Cohen, Under Crescent and Cross: The Jews in the Middle Ages 1995 ISBN 0-691-01082-X Joel Kraemer, "Comparing Crescent and Cross," The Journal of Religion, Vol. 77, No. 3. (Jul., 1997), pp. 449–454. (Book review) "The Myth of the Andalusian Paradise" by Darío Fernández-Morera – critique of view of Al-Andalus as tolerant society External links [ edit ] Jewish Encyclopedia article on Spain Excerpt from Farewell Espana: The World of the Sephardim Remembered by Howard M. Sachar, at MyJewishLearning The Musical Legacy of Al-Andalus an interview between Banning Eyre (Afropop Worldwide) and Dwight Reynolds, Associate Professor in the Department of Religious Studies, Director of the Center for Middle East Studies, and Chair of Islamic and Near Eastern Studies at the University of California, Santa Barbara Medieval Hebrew Poetry The Sephardim v t e Sephardi Jewish topics Origins Sepharad Roman Empire Golden Age Expulsion from Spain Alhambra Decree Expulsion from Portugal Conversos Degredados Lançados Marranos Megorashim Maghrebi Jews New Christian Dispersion Eastern Mediterranean Albanian Bosnian Bulgarian Croatian Ragusan Splicani Egyptian Alexandrian Greek Rhodian Thessalonian Hungarian Macedonian Monastir Ottoman Palestinian Romanian Serbian Syrian Turkish Istanbulite Symirniote North Africa Algerian Gibraltarian Libyan Moroccan Tetuani Tunisian Western Europe and overseas American Dutch Aruba Curaçao Suriname New Amsterdam English French Hamburger Indian Paradesi Jews Italian Livornese Crypto-Sephardim Amazonian Belmonte Jews Xuetas Modern history History of the Jews under Muslim rule Antisemitism in the Arab world Antisemitism in Islam Jewish exodus from Arab and Muslim countries Languages Judeo-Berber Sephardi Hebrew Judeo-Arabic Judaeo-Portuguese Judaeo-Spanish Haketia Tetuani Ladino Judeo-Gascon Bagitto Religion and culture Cuisine Music Rite and customs Sephardi chief rabbi Haredim Politics Black Panthers Shas Sephardim and Oriental Communities Major communal organizations American Sephardi Federation Sephardi Community Council v t e Jewish history Overviews Historiography Jewish history in the Land of Israel Population history Military history Genetic history Languages Expulsions and exoduses Schisms Political movements Timeline Ancient Israel and Judah Timeline of ancient Israel and Judah Israelites Highland settlement Origins of Judaism Kingdom of Judah Kingdom of Israel Assyrian Captivity Judah's revolts against Babylon Babylonian captivity Babylonian Yehud Second Temple period Timeline of the Second Temple period Second Temple Judaism Hellenistic Judaism Yehud Medinata Hasmonean kingdom Herodian kingdom Roman Judaea Wars and revolts Maccabean Revolt Judean Civil War Jewish–Roman Wars First Jewish–Roman War Battle of Beth Horon Galilee campaign Siege of Masada Diaspora Revolt Kitos War Bar Kokhba revolt Diaspora Roman Empire Byzantine Empire Greece Carthage Egypt Persia Mesopotamia Rabbinic period Rabbinic Judaism Synagogal Judaism Nasi Sanhedrin Chazal Tannaim Amoraim Savoraim Geonim Talmudic academies in Babylonia Revolt against Gallus Revolt against Heraclius Middle Ages Mohammedan Wars Siege of Banu Qurayza Siege of Banu Qaynuqa Battle of Khaybar Invasion of Banu Nadir Under Muslim rule Sephardic Golden Age Kairouan Byzantium Crusades Expulsion of Jews from Spain Anusim Ottoman Empire Medieval antisemitism Modern Jewish question Disabilities Emancipation Enlightenment Reform Judaism Zionism Soviet Union United States World War II The Holocaust Resistance Israeli history New Yishuv See also WP:Jewish history Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Golden_age_of_Jewish_culture_in_Spain&oldid=1300310274 " Categories : Jewish culture of al-Andalus Golden ages (metaphor) Jewish Spanish history Jewish political status Jewish Portuguese history Medieval Jewish history Medieval history of Spain Sephardi Jewish culture in Europe Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2018 Articles with unsourced statements from August 2018 This page was last edited on 13 July 2025, at 15:39 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Golden age of Jewish culture in Spain 17 languages Add topic

