Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 See also 3 References 4 Further reading 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Manuel Chrysoloras 27 languages Brezhoneg Català Cymraeg Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Latina مصرى Nederlands Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Română Русский Slovenščina Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Byzantine Greek scholar, diplomat, and professor (c. 1350–1415) This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .

Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( August 2011 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Manuel Chrysoloras Manuel Chrysoloras portrayed by Paolo Uccello in 1408. Drawing currently preserved in the Louvre Museum , Paris.

Born c. 1350 [ 1 ] Constantinople , Byzantine Empire [ 1 ] Died 15 April 1415 Free imperial city of Constance (modern-day Konstanz , Germany ) Nationality Byzantine Greek [ 1 ] Occupation(s) Diplomat, educator, scholar, and professor [ 1 ] Years active 1390–1415 Known for Translating works of Homer , Aristotle , and Plato into Latin Notable work Erotemata Civas Questiones Manuel (or Emmanuel ) Chrysoloras ( Greek : Μανουὴλ Χρυσολωρᾶς ; c. 1350 [ 1 ] – 15 April 1415) was a Byzantine Greek classical scholar , humanist , philosopher , professor , and translator of ancient Greek texts during the Renaissance .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Serving as the ambassador for the Byzantine emperor Manuel II Palaiologos in medieval Italy , he became a renowned teacher of Greek literature and history in the republics of Florence and Venice , and today he's widely regarded as a pioneer in the introduction of ancient Greek literature to Western Europe during the Late Middle Ages .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Biography [ edit ] Jacopo d'Angelo 's Latin translation of Ptolemy 's Geography ( c.

1411–1427); scan from the Nancy Library.

Chrysoloras was born in Constantinople , at the time capital of the Byzantine Empire , to a distinguished Greek Orthodox family. In 1390, he led an embassy sent to the Republic of Venice by the Byzantine emperor Manuel II Palaiologos to ask the aid of the Christian princes of Medieval Europe against the invasions of the Byzantine Empire by the Muslim Ottoman Turks .

Roberto de' Rossi of Florence met him in Venice, and, in 1395, Rossi's acquaintance Jacopo d'Angelo set off for Constantinople to study Greek with Chrysoloras. In 1396, Coluccio Salutati , the Chancellor of Florence , invited him to Florence to teach Greek grammar and literature .

[ 3 ] In a letter to Poggio Bracciolini, quoting the Roman lawyer and statesman Cicero , Salutati wrote: "The verdict of our own Cicero confirms that we Romans either made wiser innovations than theirs by ourselves or improved on what we took from them, but of course, as he himself says elsewhere with reference to his own day: "Italy is invincible in war, Greece in culture." For our part, and we mean no offence, we firmly believe that both Greeks and Latins have always taken learning to a higher level by extending it to each other's literature." [ 4 ] Chrysoloras arrived in the winter of 1397, an event remembered by one of his most famous pupils, the Italian humanist scholar Leonardo Bruni , [ 1 ] as a great new opportunity: there were many teachers of law, but no one had studied Greek in northern Italy for 700 years. Another very famous pupil of Chrysoloras was Ambrogio Traversari , who became general of the Camaldolese order . Chrysoloras remained only a few years in Florence, from 1397 to 1400, teaching Greek, starting with the rudiments. He moved on to teach in Bologna , and later in Venice and Rome . Though he taught widely, a handful of his chosen students remained a close-knit group, among the first humanists of the Renaissance . Among his pupils were numbered some of the foremost figures of the revival of Greek studies in Renaissance Italy.

[ 1 ] Aside from Bruni, d'Angelo, and Ambrogio Traversari , they included Guarino da Verona , Coluccio Salutati , Roberto Rossi, Niccolò de' Niccoli , Carlo Marsuppini , Pier Paolo Vergerio , Uberto Decembrio , Palla Strozzi , and many others.

[ 1 ] Having visited Milan and Pavia , and having resided for several years in Venice, he went to Rome on the invitation of Bruni, who was then secretary to Pope Gregory XII . In 1408, he was sent to Paris on an important mission from the Byzantine emperor Manuel II Palaiologos . In 1413, he went to Germany on an embassy to the Holy Roman Emperor Sigismund , the object of which was to fix a place for the church council that later assembled at Constance . Chrysoloras was on his way there, having been chosen to represent the Greek Church, when he died suddenly. His death gave rise to commemorative essays of which Guarino da Verona made a collection in Chrysolorina .

Chrysoloras translated the works of Homer , Aristotle , and Plato 's Republic into Latin. His own works, which circulated in manuscript in his lifetime, include brief works on the Procession of the Holy Ghost, and letters to his brothers, to Bruni , Guarino , Traversari , and to Strozzi , as well as two which were eventually printed, his Erotemata ( Questions ) which was the first basic Greek grammar in use in Western Europe, first published in 1484 and widely reprinted, and which enjoyed considerable success not only among his pupils in Florence, but also among later leading humanists, being immediately studied by Thomas Linacre at Oxford and by Desiderius Erasmus at Cambridge ; and Epistolæ tres de comparatione veteris et novæ Romæ ( Three Letters on the Comparison of Old and New Rome, i.e. a comparison of Rome and Constantinople). Many of his treatises on morals and ethics and other philosophical subjects came into print in the 17th and 18th centuries, because of their antiquarian interest. He was chiefly influential through his teaching in familiarizing men such as Leonardo Bruni , Coluccio Salutati , Jacopo d'Angelo , Roberto de' Rossi , Carlo Marsuppini , Pietro Candido Decembrio , Guarino da Verona , with the masterpieces of Western philosophy and ancient Greek literature .

[ 1 ] See also [ edit ] Byzantine art Cretan School Byzantine science Greek College Greek scholars in the Renaissance Hellenic Institute of Byzantine and Post-Byzantine Studies List of Byzantine scholars Renaissance humanism References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e f g h i j k Arabatzis, George (2011). "Manuel Chrysoloras". In Lagerlund, Henrik (ed.).

Encyclopedia of Medieval Philosophy: Philosophy between 500 and 1500 .

Dordrecht : Springer Verlag . pp.

709– 711.

doi : 10.1007/978-1-4020-9729-4 .

ISBN 978-1-4020-9729-4 .

Manuel Chrysoloras (c. 1350–1415) was a Byzantine writer and scholar better known as professor of Greek language in Florence after 1397, the first one to hold public teaching office of Greek in Italy. His audience included famous Italian humanists like Guarino da Verona (his most loyal pupil), Jacopo Angeli da Scarperia , Coluccio Salutati , Roberto Rossi , Niccolò Niccoli , Leonardo Bruni , Carlo Marsuppini , Pier Paolo Vergerio , Uberto Decembrio, and others. After 1400, Chrysoloras left his teaching position and carried out mainly diplomatic missions in the service of the Byzantine emperor Manuel II Palaiologos .

^ a b "Manuel Chrysoloras | Greek scholar" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Retrieved 20 July 2021 .

^ Salutati, Coluccio; Novati, Francesco (1891).

Epistolario di Coluccio Salutati . PIMS – University of Toronto. Roma : Forzani E.C. Tipografidel Senato. pp. vol. 3, p. 119 ff.

^ Salutati, Coluccio; Novati, Francesco (1891).

Epistolario di Coluccio Salutati . PIMS – University of Toronto. Roma : Forzani E.C. Tipografidel Senato. pp. vol. 4, par. 1, p. 132.

Further reading [ edit ] Chrysoloras's Erotemata are edited by A. Rollo, Gli Erotemata tra Crisolora e Guarino (Percorsi dei classici 21), Messina 2012.

Chrysoloras's letters can be found in Patrologia Graeca , ed.

J.-P. Migne , vol, 156, Paris 1866.

M. Baxandall, 'Guarino, Pisanello and Manuel Chrysoloras', Journal of the Warburg and Courtauld Institutes 28 (1965), 183–204.

Émile Legrand : Notice biographique sur Manuel Chrysoloras , Paris 1894.

Jonathan Harris, Greek Émigrés in the West, 1400–1520 , Camberley UK: Porphyrogenitus, 1995.

ISBN 1-871328-11-X S. Mergiali-Sahas, S., 'Manuel Chrysoloras: an ideal model of a scholar ambassador', Byzantine Studies/Etudes Byzantines , 3 (1998), 1–12 I. Thompson, 'Manuel Chrysoloras and the early Italian Renaissance', Greek, Roman and Byzantine Studies , 7 (1966), 63–82 Lydia Thorn-Wikkert, Manuel Chrysoloras (ca. 1350–1415): Eine Biographie des byzantinischen Intellektuellen vor dem Hintergrund der hellenistischen Studien in der italienischen Renaissance , Frankfurt am Main, 2006.

N.G. Wilson, From Byzantium to Italy. Greek Studies in the Italian Renaissance , London, 1992.

ISBN 0-7156-2418-0 External links [ edit ] Manuel Chrysoloras at the Mathematics Genealogy Project Michael D. Reeve, "On the role of Greek in Renaissance scholarship.' Jonathan Harris, 'Byzantines in Renaissance Italy'.

Richard L.S. Evans, "Chrysoloras' Greek: The Pedagogy of Cultural Transformation." Herbermann, Charles, ed. (1913).

"Manuel Chrysoloras" .

Catholic Encyclopedia . New York: Robert Appleton Company.

This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911). " Chrysoloras, Manuel ".

Encyclopædia Britannica (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press.

Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF 2 3 4 FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Greece Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics Mathematics Genealogy Project Artists ULAN People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Manuel_Chrysoloras&oldid=1287334848 " Categories : 1350s births 1415 deaths 14th-century Byzantine writers 14th-century Greek educators 14th-century Greek philosophers 14th-century writers in Latin 14th-century translators 15th-century Byzantine writers 15th-century Greek educators 15th-century Greek philosophers 15th-century writers in Latin 15th-century translators Ambassadors of the Byzantine Empire to the Republic of Venice Constantinopolitan Greeks Eastern Orthodox Christians from Greece Eastern Orthodox Christians from the Byzantine Empire Eastern Orthodox philosophers Grammarians from the Byzantine Empire Greek–Latin translators Greek expatriates in Italy Greek Latinists Greek Renaissance humanists Immigrants to the Holy Roman Empire Immigrants to the Republic of Venice Renaissance writers Translators of Ancient Greek texts Translators of Homer Writers from Constantinople Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from January 2025 Articles lacking in-text citations from August 2011 All articles lacking in-text citations Articles with hCards Articles containing Greek-language text Articles incorporating a citation from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia without Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica This page was last edited on 25 April 2025, at 15:13 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Manuel Chrysoloras 27 languages Add topic

