Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Social life and the Lather 3 Notable alumni 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Mather House (Harvard College) Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 42°22′06″N 71°06′55″W ﻿ / ﻿ 42.3682°N 71.1154°W ﻿ / 42.3682; -71.1154 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Residential House of Harvard College Mather House Harvard University Mather House viewed from across the Charles River Shield Location 10 Cowperthwaite Street Coordinates 42°22′06″N 71°06′55″W ﻿ / ﻿ 42.3682°N 71.1154°W ﻿ / 42.3682; -71.1154 Established 1970 Named for Increase Mather Sister college Morse College Faculty Deans Lakshminarayanan and Amala Mahadevan Dean Luke Leafgren Website mather .harvard .edu Mather House is one of twelve undergraduate residential Houses at Harvard University . Opened in 1970, it is named after Increase Mather , a Puritan in the Massachusetts Bay Colony who served as President of Harvard University from 1681 to 1701. Mather's Faculty Deans are Lakshminarayanan Mahadevan and Amala Mahadevan.

[ 1 ] Mather is known for its nineteen-story concrete tower built in a Brutalist style. Mather's blocky concrete architecture reflects the anti-uprising style of the day of its construction.

Mather residents are guaranteed single bedrooms for all three years of their residency. Mather's second building, a low-rise surrounding a courtyard , has suites with large common rooms and small bedrooms, whereas suites in the high-rise have large bedrooms and no common rooms. Other than houses in the Radcliffe Quadrangle , Mather is the house farthest from Harvard Yard , but the school provides regular shuttle service between the Yard and Mather's courtyard.

Mather House was a favorite choice for hard-partying varsity athletes before housing assignments were randomized by the school. The house is known among students for its social life and a spacious, newly remodeled dining hall with a view of the Charles River .

Mather's sister college is Morse College at Yale University .

History [ edit ] Portrait of Increase Mather , namesake of Mather House, by Joan van der Spriet .

Opened in 1970, Mather House is the most recently constructed of Harvard's houses. It takes its name from Increase Mather , a Harvard alumnus and prominent Puritan minister in the Massachusetts Bay Colony who served as the University's president from 1685 to 1692. The architectural firm that designed Mather House, Shepley Bulfinch Richardson and Abbott , is also responsible for the Art Institute of Chicago , the original campus of Stanford University (along with Frederick Law Olmsted ), the Ames Building , and the completion of Boston's Trinity Church .

Social life and the Lather [ edit ] Mather Tower The open architecture of Mather's common spaces makes it easy to host social events. Mather's Housing Committee hosts happy hours every two weeks. In addition, the House hosts formal dances twice a year, as well as student-faculty dinners once a semester.  Most prominent among Mather social gatherings is the Mather Lather, a College-wide foam party that takes place every spring in the dining hall. Since its first run in 2003, the Lather has grown in scope and fame, earning the attention of the Boston media and The New York Times .

[ 2 ] The Louie Cup is a year-long Olympics -like tournament of games that takes place in the House. Generally, an event is held every week in which one or more representatives of each team (comprising a group of 4-6, usually roommates) competes. The games include a pancake-eating contest, foosball, a dining hall version of Iron Chef , and hot pepper-eating, as well as a wiffle ball home run derby, ping pong, Wii sports, dodgeball, and boggle. The events are open to the campus but tend to take place in Mather.  The tournament is named after Louie's Superette, a convenience store across the street from Mather House, and a large quantity of alcohol is awarded to the winning team at the end of the spring semester.

The house's well-known rivalry with Kirkland House has sparked heated exchanges of practical jokes and pranks. While Mather is generally seen as the instigator and aggressor, the rivalry began when a number of Mather students transferred to Kirkland House .

[ 3 ] Mather won the Harvard Green Campus Initiative Green Cup in 2006 and 2011 and the Greenest HoCo award in 2008. Mather House has recently won the Straus Cup in both the 2018-19 and 2019-20 academic years, Harvard's intramural sports championship prize.

[ 4 ] Notable alumni [ edit ] Cornel West Jeff Zucker John Palfrey Conan O'Brien John D. Trasviña Other notable alumni include Michael Kinsley , [ 5 ] David Laibson , Nicholas Ciarelli , Sarah Haskins , Kimberly Marten , and Luis Ubiñas .

References [ edit ] ^ "New faculty deans for Harvard College's Dunster, Mather Houses" .

Harvard Gazette . 2017-04-25 . Retrieved 2017-12-28 .

^ Aviv, Rachel (2007).

"Togas? They Are So Last Century" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 2017-12-28 .

^ "War, What Is It Good For? | News | The Harvard Crimson" .

www.thecrimson.com . Retrieved 2017-12-28 .

^ "Predicting the 2020 Straus Cup Champion" .

Harvard Open Data Project . 2020 . Retrieved 2020-11-04 .

^ Jacobs, Samuel P. (June 30, 2006).

"Kinsley Forgoes Harvard for Guardian Editorship" .

The Harvard Crimson .

Harvard University .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Mather House .

Mather House official site Mather Connect for Alums and Students v t e Residential houses of Harvard Adams House Cabot House Currier House Dudley House Dunster House Eliot House Kirkland House Leverett House Lowell House Mather House Pforzheimer House Quincy House Winthrop House v t e Harvard University History John Harvard statue President Alan Garber Board of Overseers President and Fellows Provost John Manning Library Arts and Sciences Dean Hopi Hoekstra College Dean Rakesh Khurana Radcliffe College Freshman dormitories Upperclass houses Adams Cabot Currier Dudley Dunster Eliot Kirkland Leverett Lowell Mather Pforzheimer Quincy Winthrop Undergraduate organizations Hasty Pudding Theatricals The Harvard Advocate The Harvard Crimson The Harvard Independent The Harvard Lampoon Continuing Education Dean Nancy Coleman Extension School Extension School history Summer School Engineering and Applied Sciences Dean David C. Parkes Lyman Laboratory of Physics Graduate School Dean Emma Dench Libraries Cabot Harvard-Yenching Houghton Harvard Review Lamont Pusey Widener Harry Elkins Widener Eleanor Elkins Widener Grossman Centers, institutes, and societies Asia Center Center for African and African American Research Du Bois Institute Center for Astrophysics Center for Chinese Studies Center for European Studies Center for Visual Arts Center for Hellenic Studies Dumbarton Oaks Harvard Forest Rowland Institute Ukrainian Research Institute Business Dean Srikant Datar Baker Library/Bloomberg Center Harvard Business Publishing Harvard Business Review Harvard Business School RFC Spangler Center Design Dean Sarah Whiting Harvard Design Magazine Center for Housing Studies Divinity Dean David N. Hempton Education Dean Bridget Terry Long Government Dean Jeremy M. Weinstein Ash Center Belfer Center Carr Center Center for American Political Studies Center for Ethics Center for Housing Studies Center for Nonprofit Organizations Center for Public Leadership Institute of Politics Rappaport Institute Shorenstein Center The Journalist's Resource Law Dean John F. Manning Berkman Klein Center Civil Rights-Civil Liberties Law Review International Law Journal Journal of Law & Technology Journal on Legislation Law Record Law Review Medicine Dean George Q. Daley Broad Institute Medical Library Anatomical Museum Program in Health Sciences School of Dental Medicine Public Health Dean Michelle Ann Williams Museums and arboretum Arnold Arboretum Harvard Art Museums Archaeology and Ethnology Museum Busch–Reisinger Museum Fogg Museum Sackler Museum Collection of Scientific Instruments Glass Flowers Mineralogical Museum General Artemas Ward House Natural History Museum Comparative Zoology Museum Herbaria Museum of the Ancient Near East Cambridge campus Boylston Hall Bradley Memorial Discobolus Gates of Harvard Yard Graduate Center Harvard Hall Memorial Church Choir Harvard Yard Massachusetts Hall Memorial Hall Night Wall I Peabody Terrace President's House Science Center Smith Campus Center University Hall Centers and institutes Harvard Innovation Labs Computing Center Harvard Radcliffe Institute Schlesinger Library Institute for Advanced Theater Training Nieman Foundation for Journalism Real Colegio Complutense Villa I Tatti Wyss Institute People List of Harvard University people Non-graduate alumni Athletics Teams Baseball Men's basketball Women's basketball Fencing Football Men's ice hockey Women's ice hockey Men's lacrosse‎ Men's rugby Women's rugby Men's soccer Women's soccer Men's squash Men's volleyball Women's volleyball Venues Bright-Landry Hockey Center Harvard Stadium Jordan Field Lavietes Pavilion Ohiri Field Malkin Athletic Center Newell Boathouse Weld Boathouse Rivalries Cornell (hockey) Yale (football) Miscellaneous Anti-Vietnam War protests Alma mater Commencement traditions Academic regalia Graduate Students Union Heraldry Tercentenary celebration Harvard Magazine Harvard University Press Lionel de Jersey Harvard Math 55 Society of Fellows University Professor Harvard–Adam Dziewonski Observatory Excellence Without a Soul Category Commons Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Mather_House_(Harvard_College)&oldid=1224972666 " Categories : Harvard Houses Brutalist architecture in Massachusetts Residential skyscrapers in Massachusetts Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Coordinates on Wikidata Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 21 May 2024, at 16:15 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Mather House (Harvard College) Add languages Add topic

