Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview 2 History Toggle History subsection 2.1 Middle Ages 2.2 Baroque period and Reformation 2.3 Birth of manualism 2.4 Contemporary 3 Approaches 4 See also 5 References 6 Further reading Toggle Further reading subsection 6.1 Manualism Toggle the table of contents Catholic moral theology 11 languages العربية বাংলা Беларуская Dansk Español Français Bahasa Indonesia Latina Bahasa Melayu Norsk bokmål Português Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Major category of doctrine in the Catholic Church, equivalent to a religious ethics This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Catholic moral theology" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( June 2015 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a series on the Catholic Church St. Peter's Basilica , Vatican City Overview Pope : Leo XIV Hierarchy History ( timeline ) Theology Liturgy Sacraments Mary Background Jesus Christ Crucifixion Resurrection Ascension Early Christianity Peter Paul Fathers History of the Catholic Church History of the papacy Ecumenical councils Magisterium Four Marks of the Church One true church Apostolic succession Organisation Holy See Roman Curia College of Cardinals Ecumenical councils Episcopal polity Latin Church Eastern Churches Canon law Theologies Doctrine God Trinity Father Son Holy Ghost Consubstantialitas Filioque Divinum illud munus Divine law Decalogus Ex Cathedra Deificatio Realms beyond the States of the Church Heaven Purgatory Limbo Hell Paschal mystery Passion of Jesus Crucifixion of Jesus Harrowing of Hell Resurrection of Jesus Ascension of Jesus Blessed Virgin Mary Mariology Veneration Immaculate Conception Mater Dei Perpetual virginity Assumption Dormition Titles Queen Apparition Mediatrix Salvation Baptism of desire Baptism of blood Divine grace Outside the Church there is no salvation Infused righteousness Invincible ignorance Justification Means of grace Merit Mortal sin Satisfaction Moral influence Sanctification Synergism Venial sin Ecclesiology College of Bishops Deposit of faith Infallibility of the Church Mystical Body of Christ Papal primacy People of God Perfect community Subsistit in Other teachings Josephology Morality Body Sexuality Apologetics Amillennialism Original sin Hypostatic union Predestination Seven deadly sins Beatific vision Saints Dogma Texts Bible Old Testament New Testament Official Bible Vulgate Sixtine Vulgate Sixto-Clementine Vulgate Nova Vulgata Peshitta Apostles' Creed Nicene Creed Athanasian Creed Catechism of the Catholic Church Papal bull Apostolic exhortation Epistula Encyclica Philosophy Cardinal virtues Just war Natural law Catholic ethics Personalism Probabilism Social teaching Philosophy of canon law Philosophers Virtue ethics Schools Augustinianism Scholasticism Thomism Scotism Occamism Christian humanism Molinism Neo-scholasticism Traditionalist Catholicism Sedevacantism Worship Liturgy Eastern Catholic liturgy Mass Divine Liturgy Holy Qurbana Holy Qurobo Liturgy of the Hours Liturgical year Sacraments Baptism Penance Eucharist Confirmation Anointing of the Sick Matrimony Holy orders Prayer Devotions Bible Biblical canon Rites Latin liturgy : Roman Post-Vatican II Tridentine Use of Sarum Anglican Use Zaire Use Gallican Ambrosian Braga Mozarabic Eastern Catholic liturgy : Alexandrian Antiochene West Syriac Malankara East Syriac Armenian Byzantine Miscellaneous Antipopes Anti-Catholicism Criticism Deism / Pandeism Ecumenism Monasticism Relations with: Islam Judaism ( Zionism ) Orthodoxy Protestantism Societal issues Art Evolution Health care HIV/AIDS Homosexuality Sexual abuse Music Nazi Germany Politics ( in the United States ) Role in civilization Science Sex and gender roles Slavery the Age of Discovery Links and resources Index Outline Glossary Category Media Templates WikiProject Vatican City portal Catholic Church portal v t e Part of a series on Catholic philosophy Aquinas , Scotus and Ockham Ethics Cardinal virtues Just price Just war Principle of Double Effect Casuistry Probabilism Natural law Personalism Social teaching Liberation theology Christian humanism Virtue ethics Works of mercy Metaphysics Conceptualism Realism Moderate realism Nominalism Quiddity ( essence / nature ) Haecceity Quinque Viae Predestination Theological determinism Compatibilism Divine Attributes Schools Augustinianism Victorines Lullism Cartesianism Christian Neoplatonism Friends of God Molinism Ressourcement Occamism Scholasticism Second scholasticism Neo Scotism Thomism Analytic Salamanca Philosophers Ancient Ambrose Athenagoras Athanasius Augustine Benedict Boethius Clement Cyprian Cyril Gregory (of Nazianzus) Gregory (of Nyssa) Irenaeus Jerome Cassian Chrysostom Climacus John of Damascus Justin Maximus Dionysius Origen Paul Tertullian Medieval Abelard Albert Alcuin Alexander Anselm Autrecourt Aquinas Bacon Bede Berengar Bernard Bonaventure Buridan Catherine Cusa Eckhart Eriugena Giles Gregory I Grosseteste Gundissalinus Hildegard Hugh Isidore Llull Lombard Martin Ockham Oresme Paschasius Roscellinus Scotus Siger Symeon Thierry Modern Arnauld Ávila Azpilcueta Bellarmine Bonald Bossuet Brentano Botero Cajetan Chateaubriand Cortés Descartes Erasmus Fénelon Gracián Kołłątaj Krasicki La Mennais Liguori Maistre Malebranche Mariana Meinong Mercado Molina More Newman Pascal Rosmini Sales Soto Suárez Vico Vitoria Caramuel Contemporary Adler Anscombe Balthasar Barron Benedict XVI Blondel Chesterton Congar Copleston Finnis Garrigou-Lagrange Geach Gilson Girard Gutiérrez Dávila Guardini Haldane Hildebrand John Paul II Lonergan Lubac MacIntyre Marcel Marion Maritain McLuhan Mounier Pieper Rahner Stein Taylor Catholic Church portal Philosophy portal v t e Catholic moral theology is a major category of doctrine in the Catholic Church , equivalent to a religious ethics . Moral theology encompasses Catholic social teaching , Catholic medical ethics , sexual ethics , and various doctrines on individual moral virtue and moral theory. It can be distinguished as dealing with "how one is to act", in contrast to dogmatic theology which proposes "what one is to believe".

Overview [ edit ] Sources of Catholic moral theology include both the Old Testament and the New Testament , and philosophical ethics such as natural law that are seen as compatible with Catholic doctrine. Moral theology was mostly undifferentiated from theology in general during the patristic era , and is found in the homilies , letters and commentaries on Scripture of the early Church fathers.

Examples of Catholic moral theologians include St. Alphonsus Liguori (author of Theologia Moralis ), Bartolomé Medina (originator of Probabilism ), Dominic Prümmer ( Compensationism ), Bernhard Häring (Dialogical Ethics), Servais Pinckaers ( Nouvelle théologie ), Germain Grisez and John Finnis ( New Natural Law ).

Moral theology tends to be advanced most authoritatively through official statements of doctrine, such as papal encyclicals , which are based on the dogmatic pronouncements of Ecumenical Councils (e.g., Vatican II ), Sacred Scriptures , and Sacred Tradition . In addition, moral theologians publish their own works and write in a variety of journals devoted in whole, or in part to moral theology. These scholarly journals are helpful in making the theology of the Church more clear and accessible to others, and serve as a forum in which scholarly discussion of understanding and application of issues occurs. However, these journals per se do not add or remove anything from Catholic teaching.

The curriculum for formation of priests commonly includes required and elective courses in Catholic moral theology.

History [ edit ] Middle Ages [ edit ] During the Middle Ages , moral theology developed in precision and scope through scholasticism . Much of the Catholic Church's current moral theology, especially regarding natural law, is based in the Summa Theologica by St. Thomas Aquinas , which is regarded as one of the best treatises of Catholic moral theology.

[ 1 ] Baroque period and Reformation [ edit ] Although many theologians found inspiration in Aquinas from his death onwards, moral theology did not become its own separate field of scholarship until after the council of Trent at the dawn of the baroque period and the reformation , one of the wishes of the council fathers was to set out the more rigorous training of priests which would lead to the genesis of seminaries . Through the renewal of learning in the Church specialisation would begin to take root in the curriculum , with theology becoming fragmented into different 'fields' such as dogmatic , moral, spiritual theology and so on. This would lead to the birth of the genre of the 'Manual'.

Birth of manualism [ edit ] Manualism designates an approach to Christian ethics , especially in Catholic moral theology, [ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] [ 8 ] associated with Alphonsus Liguori [ 9 ] [ 10 ] and the tradition of "moral manuals" (instruction manuals teaching explicitly right and wrong) [ 11 ] [ 12 ] [ 13 ] [ 14 ] which came from him.

[ 15 ] Alphonsus Liguori The manualist tradition has an ambivalent relationship with scholasticism .

[ 16 ] [ 17 ] [ 13 ] [ 18 ] David Bentley Hart [ 12 ] among others [ 10 ] [ 13 ] [ 18 ] state that much of contemporary Thomism has more manualism than Aquinas himself.

The manualist tradition is related to casuistry – Reasoning by extrapolation.

[ 14 ] Manualism is associated with the theology surrounding artificial birth control.

[ 19 ] The first manual of moral theology was written by the Jesuit , Juan Azor in three volumes, his Institutionum Moralium published in the 17th century .

Although claiming patrimony to Aquinas, nominalism was most prolific at the time among the intellectual elite which seems to have influenced Azor's outlook in his work, instead of focusing on the beatitudes and virtues in the moral life as Aquinas in his Summa , nominalism emphasises the obligatory and legal nature of God's commands as a result of the arbitrary will of God and a person's conscience before the law, many would follow Azor's model with few modifications and this outlook would influence the whole manualist tradition of moral theology which would become less dominant after Vatican II , during this period it became more common for alternative approaches or attempts to return to a biblical, patristic or scholastic approach before the influence of nominalism and outgrowth of casuistry which was characteristic of the tridentine period.

Contemporary [ edit ] Contemporary Catholic moral theology is developed by acts of the Magisterium , by the Pope , other bishops , and by the works of lay Catholic moral theologians, which include magisterial teachings, as well as (in some matters) theological opinions.

Approaches [ edit ] In a deontological approach, morality takes the form of a studying of "how one is to act" in relation to the laws established by the faith. See also Casuistry .

In a teleological approach, "how one is to act" is related to the ultimate end which is again established by the faith. See also Virtue Ethics In a dialogical approach , morality follows the pattern of faith directly, the "how one is to act" is related to an encounter with God through faith.

[ 20 ] Moral living is response to the Logos or Word of God. "Faith in the Logos ...understands moral values as responsibility, as a response to the Word, and thus gives them their intelligibility as well as their essential orientation." [ 21 ] See also [ edit ] Catholic teachings on sexual morality Catholicism Christian theology Ten Commandments in Catholic theology Traditionalist Catholic References [ edit ] ^ Lehmkuhl, Augustinus (1912).

"Moral Theology" . In Herbermann, Charles (ed.).

Catholic Encyclopedia . Vol. 14. New York: Robert Appleton Company.

^ The Oxford Handbook of Theological Ethics - Page 508
Gilbert Meilaender, William Werpehowski · 2007
FOUND INSIDE – PAGE 508
the manualists: 'no period is more important in the history of moral theology than the late 16th, 17th, and early 18th centuries'. But he then added, 'this is perhaps less a criticism of M. than a reXection on our almost complete ...

^ Boersma, Hans (2012). "Nature and the Supernatural in la nouvelle théologie: The Recovery of a Sacramental Mindset".

New Blackfriars .

93 (1043): 34– 46.

doi : 10.1111/j.1741-2005.2011.01434.x .

JSTOR 43251594 .

^ Hart, David Bentley (2020).

Theological Territories: A David Bentley Hart Digest . University of Notre Dame Press.

doi : 10.2307/j.ctv19m638q.15 .

ISBN 978-0-268-10717-8 .

JSTOR j.ctv19m638q .

[ page needed ] ^ Genilo, Eric Marcelo O. (2007).

John Cuthbert Ford, SJ: Moral Theologian at the End of the Manualist Era . Georgetown University Press.

ISBN 978-1-58901-181-6 .

JSTOR j.ctt2tt41x .

[ page needed ] ^ Senz, Nicholas.

"Shifting Away From Manualism: On Forming Consciences" .

Church Life Journal . Retrieved 2023-03-13 .

^ Engelhardt, H. Tristram (November 2011). "Orthodox Christian Bioethics: Some Foundational Differences from Western Christian Bioethics".

Studies in Christian Ethics .

24 (4): 487– 499.

doi : 10.1177/0953946811415018 .

S2CID 147395651 .

the Counter-Reformation, the manualist tradition produced a wealth of reflections between ^ Wicks, Jared (1986). "Review of Foundational Theology. Jesus and the Church".

Gregorianum .

67 (2): 374– 376.

JSTOR 23577203 .

^ Haddorff, David W. "Relying on Aquinas, Prudently." (1998): 562-564.
position of Alphonsus Liguori. It was not only Liguori's manualist method of applying...

^ a b KROM, MICHAEL P.

"Review" (PDF) .

Journal of Moral Theology .

manualist tradition's focus on the distinction between material and formal cooperation with evil as well as on the intention of those who so cooperate is at least implicit in our modes of argumentation.

Flannery begins by showing the inadequacies of the approach to cooperation with evil found in St. Alphonsus Liguori and the subsequent manualist tradition. Most pointedly, Liguori uses Aquinas's theory of morally indifferent acts in order to clarify his own position on material cooperation and yet, as becomes even clearer in the later manualists, this ends up revealing the problems with his own analysis. In chapter 2, Flannery finds the answer to these problems by focusing on Aquinas's account of how circumstances factor into the morality of indifferent acts. Rather than focus on the intention of the cooperator, Aquinas looks at the broader issues of whether or not an action is consistent with reason, justice, and charity. Chapter 3 helps to clarify all of this via the issue of scandal: Alphonsus ignores all others affected by acts of cooperation as well as "how the actions performed relate to the ultimate end and order of the moral universe" (122).

^ Thomas Worcester (2017).

The Cambridge Encyclopedia of the Jesuits .

After the Council of Trent until the twentieth century, moral theology was shaped by the moral manuals used in seminaries to form future confessors. Manualist moral theology was concerned with avoidance of sin and obedience ^ a b Hart, David Bentley (2015-06-01).

"Romans 8:19-22" .

First Things (254). Institute on Religion and Public Life: 72– 74.

In theological circles, the term "Thomism" (or "traditional Thomism" or "manualist Thomism" or "two-tier Thomism") typically refers not to the writings of Thomas himself, or even to any given scholar [...] who happens to study Thomas's thought, but to a particular faction of Baroque neoscholasticism, which began in the sixteenth century, principally with Domingo Banez , and which largely died out in the twentieth, principally with Reginald Garrigou-Lagrange .

This was the tradition that produced the infamous Thomist "manuals," and that a succession of Catholic scholars [...] assailed as an impoverished early modern distortion of the medieval synthesis, ^ a b c "A brief history of the Catholic Church's teaching on mercy and sin" .

America Magazine . 2022-12-15 . Retrieved 2023-03-12 .

In fact, scholasticism and not manualism better conveys the tradition's long-term interests and purpose.

^ a b McDermott, John (2014).

"The Collapse of the Manualist Tradition" .

Faith Magazine .

Since manualist moralists sought to uphold universal norms even while exercising casuistry for difficult cases, it became fashionable to denounce casuistry and leave individual choices to the individual's informed conscience. For that, manuals were superfluous, especially once proportionalism was introduced into Catholic morality. Universal concepts no longer satisfied.

^ Atkinson, Gary M. "Cooperation with Evil: Thomistic Tools of Analysis." American Catholic Philosophical Quarterly 95.2 (2021): 337-339.

^ Flanagan, Patrick (2013). "James F. Keenan, A History of Catholic Moral Theology in the Twentieth Century: From Confessing Sins to Liberating Consciences (New York: Continuum, 2010), pp. viii + 248, £17.99, ISBN 978-0-8264-2929-2 (pbk)".

International Journal of Public Theology .

7 (2): 229– 230.

doi : 10.1163/15697320-12341290 .

neo-scholastic Manualist tradition in the second chapter ^ Breckenridge, Robert L (March 1993).

"Gallagher, John A., 'Time Past, Time Future: An Historical Study of Catholic Moral Theology' (Book Review)" .

Church History .

62 (1): 101.

neo-Thomist manualist tradition ^ a b Curran, Charles (1995).

"Thomas Joseph Bouquillon: Americanist, Neo-Scholastic, or Manualist?" .

Proceedings of the Catholic Theological Society of America .

His [ Thomas Bouquillon 's] neo-scholastic adherence to Thomas Aquinas served as the ultimate basis for his criticism of the manuals.

^ Petri, Thomas. Aquinas and the Theology of the Body. CUA Press, 2016.
|quote=... in response to the manualist tradition rather than to Aquinas's ... successively shown the shift
of manualist theology away from the work of ... of the manualist tradition that the birth control de- ...

^ Bernhard Häring , Free and faithful in Christ . Moral Theology for priests and laity, I/General Moral Theology. For freedom Christ has set us free (Gal 5,1), Slough 1978, focus on chapter 3 ^ Ratzinger, Joseph Cardinal ( Pope Benedict XVI ). Introduction To Christianity, 2nd Edition (Communio Books) (Kindle Locations 304-306). Ignatius Press.

Further reading [ edit ] Pinckaers O.P, Servais, (1995), The Sources of Christian Ethics , Catholic University of America Press Prümmer O.P, Dominic (1956) Handbook of Moral Theology.

The Mercier Press Ltd.

Slater S.J., Thomas (1925).

A manual of moral theology for English-speaking countries . Burns Oates & Washbourne Ltd.

Grisez, Germain (2008).

The Way of the Lord Jesus . Franciscan Herald Press.

Häring CSsR, Bernhard (1978).

Free and Faithful in Christ (3. Vols.) St. Paul Publications Lehmkuhl, Augustinus (1912).

"Moral Theology" . In Herbermann, Charles (ed.).

Catholic Encyclopedia . Vol. 14. New York: Robert Appleton Company.

Manualism [ edit ] Kennedy, David. The presence of Christ in the Eucharist: a strange neglect of the Resurrection?. MS thesis.

Mary Immaculate College , University of Limerick, 2015.

Reno, R R .

"Theology After the Revolution | R. R. Reno" .

First Things . Retrieved 2023-03-14 .

v t e Seven virtues in Christian ethics Four cardinal virtues Prudence ( Prudentia ) Justice ( Iustitia ) Fortitude ( Fortitudo ) Temperance ( Temperantia ) Sources: Plato Republic , Book IV Cicero Ambrose Augustine of Hippo Thomas Aquinas Faith, Hope and Love, as portrayed by Mary Lizzie Macomber (1861–1916) Three theological virtues Faith ( Fides ) Hope ( Spes ) Love ( Caritas ) Sources: Paul the Apostle 1 Corinthians 13 Seven lively virtues versus Seven deadly sins Chastity ( Castitas ) Temperance ( Temperantia ) Charity ( Caritas ) Diligence ( Diligentia ) Kindness ( Humanitas ) Patience ( Patientia ) Humility ( Humilitas ) Lust ( Luxuria ) Gluttony ( Gula ) Greed ( Avaritia ) Sloth ( Acedia ) Wrath ( Ira ) Envy ( Invidia ) Pride ( Superbia ) Source: Prudentius , Psychomachia People: Evagrius Ponticus John Cassian Pope Gregory I Dante Alighieri Peter Binsfeld Related concepts Ten Commandments Great Commandment Eschatology Sin Original sin Old Covenant Hamartiology Christian philosophy v t e History of Catholic theology Key figures General History of the Catholic Church Timeline History of the papacy Papal primacy Ecumenical councils Catholic Bible Vulgate Biblical canon History of Christian theology Early Church Paul Clement of Rome First Epistle of Clement Didache Ignatius of Antioch Polycarp Epistle of Barnabas The Shepherd of Hermas Aristides of Athens Justin Martyr Epistle to Diognetus Irenaeus Montanism Tertullian Origen Antipope Novatian Cyprian Constantine to Pope Gregory I Eusebius Athanasius of Alexandria Arianism Pelagianism Nestorianism Monophysitism Ephrem the Syrian Hilary of Poitiers Cyril of Jerusalem Basil of Caesarea Gregory of Nazianzus Gregory of Nyssa Ambrose John Chrysostom Jerome Augustine of Hippo John Cassian Orosius Cyril of Alexandria Peter Chrysologus Pope Leo I Boethius Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite Pope Gregory I Early Middle Ages Isidore of Seville John Climacus Maximus the Confessor Monothelitism Ecthesis Bede John of Damascus Iconoclasm Transubstantiation dispute Predestination disputes Paulinus II of Aquileia Alcuin Benedict of Aniane Rabanus Maurus Paschasius Radbertus John Scotus Eriugena High Middle Ages Roscellinus Gregory of Narek Berengar of Tours Peter Damian Anselm of Canterbury Joachim of Fiore Peter Abelard Decretum Gratiani Bernard of Clairvaux Peter Lombard Anselm of Laon Hildegard of Bingen Hugh of Saint Victor Dominic de Guzmán Robert Grosseteste Francis of Assisi Anthony of Padua Beatrice of Nazareth Bonaventure Albertus Magnus Boetius of Dacia Henry of Ghent Thomas Aquinas Siger of Brabant Thomism Roger Bacon Mysticism and reforms Ramon Llull Duns Scotus Dante Alighieri William of Ockham Richard Rolle John of Ruusbroec Catherine of Siena Bridget of Sweden Meister Eckhart Johannes Tauler Walter Hilton The Cloud of Unknowing Heinrich Seuse Geert Groote Devotio Moderna Julian of Norwich Thomas à Kempis Nicholas of Cusa Marsilio Ficino Girolamo Savonarola Giovanni Pico della Mirandola Reformation Counter-Reformation Erasmus Thomas Cajetan Thomas More John Fisher Johann Eck Francisco de Vitoria Thomas of Villanova Ignatius of Loyola Francisco de Osuna John of Ávila Francis Xavier Teresa of Ávila Luis de León John of the Cross Peter Canisius Luis de Molina ( Molinism ) Robert Bellarmine Francisco Suárez Lawrence of Brindisi Francis de Sales Baroque period to French Revolution Tommaso Campanella Pierre de Bérulle Pierre Gassendi René Descartes Mary of Jesus of Ágreda António Vieira Jean-Jacques Olier Louis Thomassin Jacques-Bénigne Bossuet François Fénelon Cornelius Jansen ( Jansenism ) Blaise Pascal Nicolas Malebranche Giambattista Vico Alphonsus Liguori Louis de Montfort Maria Gaetana Agnesi Alfonso Muzzarelli Johann Michael Sailer Clement Mary Hofbauer Bruno Lanteri 19th century Joseph Görres Félicité de La Mennais Luigi Taparelli Antonio Rosmini Ignaz von Döllinger John Henry Newman Henri Lacordaire Jaime Balmes Gaetano Sanseverino Giovanni Maria Cornoldi Wilhelm Emmanuel Freiherr von Ketteler Giuseppe Pecci Joseph Hergenröther Tommaso Maria Zigliara Matthias Joseph Scheeben Émile Boutroux Modernism Neo-scholasticism Léon Bloy Désiré-Joseph Mercier Friedrich von Hügel Vladimir Solovyov Marie-Joseph Lagrange George Tyrrell Maurice Blondel Thérèse of Lisieux 20th century G. K. Chesterton Reginald Garrigou-Lagrange Joseph Maréchal Pierre Teilhard de Chardin Jacques Maritain Étienne Gilson Ronald Knox Georges Bernanos Dietrich von Hildebrand Gabriel Marcel Marie-Dominique Chenu Romano Guardini Edith Stein Fulton Sheen Henri de Lubac Dorothy Day Henri Daniel-Rops Jean Guitton Josemaría Escrivá Nouvelle théologie Karl Rahner Yves Congar Bernard Lonergan Emmanuel Mounier Jean Daniélou Hans Urs von Balthasar Marcel Lefebvre Frederick Copleston Alfred Delp Edward Schillebeeckx Thomas Merton René Girard Hans Küng Johann Baptist Metz Jean Vanier Henri Nouwen 21st century Pope John Paul II Alice von Hildebrand Carlo Maria Martini Pope Benedict XVI Gustavo Gutiérrez Alasdair MacIntyre Walter Kasper Raniero Cantalamessa Michał Heller Peter Kreeft Jean-Luc Marion Tomáš Halík Aidan Nichols Scott Hahn Catholicism portal v t e Christian theology Systematic Scripture Inspiration Preservation Canonics Biblical studies Exegesis Law and Gospel Hermeneutics God Attributes Paterology Christology Pneumatology Theocentricism Theology proper Immutability Impassibility Perichoresis Social trinitarianism Trinity Father Son ( Hypostatic union Jesus Logos Christocentric Incarnation Resurrection Ascension ) Holy Spirit Cosmology Creation Angels Angelic hierarchy Humanity Fallen angels Satan Theodicy Soteriology Absolution Adoption Assurance Atonement Baptism Calling Conditional security Conversion Divinization Election Eternal life extra Ecclesiam nulla salus Faith Forgiveness Glorification Grace Irresistible Prevenient Imputation Justification Means of grace Monergism Mortification Ordo salutis Perseverance Predestination Recapitulation Reconciliation Redemption Regeneration Repentance Resurrection Salvation Sanctification Synergism Theosis Union with Christ Worship Blessing Hamartiology Adam Anthropology The Fall Incurvatus in se Occasion of sin Original sin Sin Theodicy Total depravity Ecclesiology Church Free National Sacrament Confession Eucharist Missiology Polity ( Congregational Episcopal Presbyterian ) Bishop Historical Minister Synod Conciliarity Koinonia Full communion Church discipline Shunning Eschatology Historicism Idealism Dispensationalism Futurism Preterism Millenarianism ( Pre- / Post- / A-millennialism ) Adventism Antichrist Apocalypse Apocalypticism Covenant / New Covenant theology End times Four last things Heaven Hell Last Judgment Millennialism New Jerusalem Rapture Second Coming Soul sleep Tribulation War in Heaven Historical History of Christian theology Orthodoxy Calvinist–Arminian debate Apostolic Age Canon Patristics Caesaropapism Semipelagianism Iconoclasm Scholasticism Thomism Conciliarism Renaissance Reformation Counter-Reformation Pietism Great Awakenings Practical Apologetics Biblical law Education Ethics Homiletics Liturgics Missiology Moral Pastoral Polemics Political Public By tradition Catholic Church Absolution Apostolic succession Assumption of Mary Dogmatic Christian humanism Traditionalism Ecumenical Councils Filioque Immaculate Conception Indulgences Infant baptism Josephology Liturgy Mariology Mass Modernism Natural law Papal infallibility Priesthood Purgatory Quartodecimanism Real presence Sacerdotalism Sacrament Sainthood Scotism Thomism Transubstantiation Ultramontanism Veneration Eastern Orthodox Church Apophatic theology Cataphatic theology Economy Essence–energies Gnomic will Metousiosis Phronema Phyletism Proskynesis Sobornost Symphonia Tabor Light Theoria Theosis Theotokos Oriental Orthodoxy Miaphysitism Monophysitism Monoenergism Monothelitism Aphthartodocetism Protestantism General Adiaphora Christian views on the Old Covenant Covenant theology Dispensationalism Supersessionism Evangelicalism Evangelical theology Five solae ( Sola fide Sola gratia Sola scriptura Soli Deo gloria Solus Christus ) Fundamentalism Protestant ecclesiology Priesthood of all believers Church covenant Protestant Soteriology Assurance Conditional election Conditional preservation of the saints Prevenient grace Total depravity Unlimited atonement Anglican Anglo-Catholicism Branch theory Broad church Center church High church Low church Baptist Believer's baptism Immersion baptism Separation of church and state Lutheran Confessional Lutheranism Evangelical Catholic Haugean Loci Theologici Lutheran orthodoxy Lutheran scholasticism Neo-Lutheranism Pietism Theology of the Cross Two kingdoms Pentecostal Baptism with the Holy Spirit Faith healing Glossolalia Prosperity theology Reformed (Calvinist) Christian reconstructionism TULIP Lordship salvation Predestination Wesleyan Christian perfection Imparted righteousness Second work of grace Wesleyan Quadrilateral Other Adventism Anabaptism Arminianism Free Grace Messianic Judaism Restorationism See also Attributes of God in Christianity Christian universalism Divine mercy Grace in Christianity Love of God in Christianity Love of God Omnibenevolence Omnipotence Omnipresence Omniscience Problem of evil Problem of Hell Sacred mysteries Unlimited atonement Lists of Christian theologians Outline of Christian theology Christianity portal Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Spain Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Catholic_moral_theology&oldid=1293334375 " Categories : Catholic moral theology Catholic theology and doctrine Christian ethics Hidden categories: Articles incorporating a citation from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from May 2023 Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from June 2015 All articles needing additional references Pages using sidebar with the child parameter This page was last edited on 1 June 2025, at 04:15 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Catholic moral theology 11 languages Add topic

