Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Description Toggle Description subsection 1.1 Longest 2 Etymology 3 Uses 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Petiole (botany) 41 languages العربية Aragonés Asturianu Bikol Central Bosanski Català Чӑвашла Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Latina Lietuvių Malagasy മലയാളം Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Română Русский Slovenčina Suomi தமிழ் తెలుగు Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Stalk attaching a leaf to a plant For the narrow waist of some hymenopteran insects, see Petiole (insect anatomy) .

Leaf of Pyrus calleryana with petiole In botany, the petiole ( / ˈ p iː t i .

oʊ l / or / ˈ p ɛ t i .

oʊ l / ), commonly known as the leaf stem or leaf stalk , is the stalk that attaches the leaf to the twigs, branches or stems of a plant. The terms petiolate and apetiolate are applied, respectively, to leaves with and without petioles.

Description [ edit ] Harvested rhubarb petioles with leaf blades attached Acacia koa with phyllode between the branch and the compound leaves Pulvini at both ends of the petioles of Elaeocarpus multiflorus The petiole is a stalk that attaches a leaf to the rest of a plant.

[ 1 ] : 87 [ 2 ] : 171 In some species, it is able to twist the leaf to face the sun, thus optimizing its exposure to sunlight.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] In petiolate leaves, the leaf stalk may be long (as in the leaves of celery and rhubarb) or short (e.g. basil). When completely absent, the blade attaches directly to the stem and is said to be sessile or apetiolate. Subpetiolate leaves have an extremely short petiole and may appear sessile.

[ 2 ] : 157 The broomrape family, Orobanchaceae , is an example of a taxon in which the leaves are always sessile.

[ 5 ] : 639 In some other plant groups, such as the speedwell genus Veronica , petiolate and sessile leaves may occur in different species.

[ 5 ] : 584 In the grasses ( Poaceae ), the leaves are apetiolate, but the leaf blade may be narrowed at the junction with the leaf sheath to form a pseudopetiole , as in Pseudosasa japonica .

[ 6 ] : 391 In plants with compound leaves , the leaflets are attached to a continuation of the petiole called the rachis .

[ 1 ] : 98 Each leaflet may be attached to the rachis by a short stalk called the petiolule.

[ 1 ] : 87 There may be swollen regions at either end of the petiole known as pulvina (singular = pulvinus ) [ 1 ] : 97 that are composed of a flexible tissue that allows leaf movement. Pulvina are common in the bean family Fabaceae and the prayer plant family Marantaceae . A pulvinus on a petiolule is called a pulvinulus.

In some plants, the petioles are flattened and widened to become phyllodes (also known as phyllodia or cladophylls) and the true leaves may be reduced or absent. Thus, the phyllode comes to serve the functions of the leaf. Phyllodes are common in the genus Acacia , especially the Australian species, at one time put in Acacia subgenus Phyllodineae .

In Acacia koa , the phyllodes are leathery and thick, allowing the tree to survive stressful environments. The petiole allows partially submerged hydrophytes to have leaves floating at different depths, the petiole being between the node and the stem.

Longest [ edit ] The longest known petiole is that of the royal waterlily or iaupê jaçanã Victoria amazonica which is up to 23 ft (7.0 m) in length.

[ 7 ] Etymology [ edit ] 'Petiole' comes from Latin petiolus , or 'little foot', 'stem', an alternative diminutive of 'pes', 'foot'. The regular diminutive 'pediculus' is also used for 'foot stalk'.

Uses [ edit ] In plants such as rhubarb ( Rheum rhabarbarum ), celery ( Apium graveolens ), artichokes , and cardoons ( Cynara cardunculus ), the petioles are cultivated as edible crops. The petiole of rhubarb grows directly from the rhizome and produces the leaf at its end. Botanically, it is categorized as a vegetable but, culinarily, it is more often used as a fruit.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] See also [ edit ] Hyponastic response Pedicel Stipule References [ edit ] ^ a b c d Beentje, H. (2010).

The Kew plant glossary . London: Kew Publishing.

ISBN 9781842464229 .

^ a b Mauseth, James D (2003).

Botany: An Introduction to Plant Biology . Jones & Bartlett Learning.

ISBN 0-7637-2134-4 .

^ Capon, Brian (July 2022).

Botany for Gardeners: An Introduction to the Science of Plants (4 ed.). Portland: Timber Press.

ISBN 978-1643261430 .

Archived from the original on 2023-09-27 . Retrieved 2023-09-27 .

^ "Parts of a leaf" .

TAFE NSW . New South Wales Government. Archived from the original on 2020-06-23 . Retrieved 2020-06-22 .

^ a b Stace, C. A.

(2010).

New Flora of the British Isles (Third ed.). Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 9780521707725 .

^ Heywood, V.H.; Brummitt, R.K.; Culham, A.; Seberg, O. (2007).

Flowering plant families of the world . New York: Firefly Books.

ISBN 9781554072064 .

^ Decker, Joao S. (1936).

Aspectos Biologicos da Flora Brasiliera . Sao Leopoldo, Brazil: Rottermund and Co. p. 49.

Archived from the original on 2023-03-10 . Retrieved 2023-03-10 .

^ Foust, Clifford M. (1992).

Rhubarb: The Wondrous Drug . Princeton: Princeton University Press.

ISBN 0-691-08747-4 .

^ "High Altitude Rhubarb" .

Highaltituderhubarb.com .

Archived from the original on 30 May 2022 . Retrieved 9 June 2022 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to petioles .

"Petiole" .

Collier's New Encyclopedia . 1921.

v t e Botany History Outline Subdisciplines Archaeobotany Astrobotany Bryology Dendrology Ethnobotany Paleobotany Phycology Phytochemistry Phytogeography Geobotany Plant anatomy Plant ecology Plant intelligence Plant pathology Plant physiology Plant groups Algae Archaeplastida Bryophyte Non-vascular plants Vascular plants Fern Lycophyte Spermatophytes Gymnosperm Angiosperm Plant anatomy Plant morphology ( glossary ) Plant cells Cell wall Phragmoplast Plastid Plasmodesma Vacuole Tissues Cork Ground tissue Mesophyll Meristem Storage organs Vascular tissue Vascular bundle Wood Vegetative Bulb Root Rhizoid Rhizome Shoot Bud Leaf Cataphyll Petiole Sessility Stem Reproductive (incl. Flower) Archegonium Antheridium Androecium Pollen Stamen Anther Filament Staminode Tapetum Flower Aestivation Flower development Floral diagram Floral formula Floral symmetry Whorl Fruit Anatomy Berry Capsule Nut Pyrena Seed Dispersal Endosperm Gametophyte Gynandrium Gynoecium Carpel Ovary Locule Ovule Stigma Style Hypanthium (Floral cup) Inflorescence Bract Pedicellate Raceme Umbel Perianth Tepal Petal Sepal Plant embryo Receptacle Sporophyll Sporophyte Surface structures Cuticle Epicuticular wax Epidermis Nectar Stoma Thorns, spines, and prickles Trichome Plant physiology Materials Aleurone Apical dominance Bulk flow Cellulose Nutrition Photosynthesis Chlorophyll Phytomelanin Plant hormones Respiration Gas Exchange Cellular respiration Sap Starch Sugar Transpiration Turgor pressure Plant growth and habit Habit Cushion plants Rosettes Shrubs Prostrate shrubs Subshrubs Succulent plants Trees Vines Lianas Herbaceous plants Secondary growth Woody plants Reproduction Evolution Ecology Alternation of generations Double fertilization Evolutionary development Evolutionary history timeline Flora Germination Pollination Artificial Pollinators Pollen tube Self Sporangium Microsporangia Microspore Megasporangium Megaspore Spore Plant taxonomy Biological classification Botanical nomenclature Botanical name Correct name Author citation International Code of Nomenclature (ICN) ICN for Cultivated Plants (ICNCP) Cultivated plant taxonomy Citrus taxonomy Cultigen Cultivar Group Grex History of plant systematics Herbarium International Association for Plant Taxonomy (IAPT) Plant taxonomy systems Taxonomic rank Practice Agronomy Floriculture Forestry Horticulture Phytochemical Lists Related Botanical terms Botanists by author abbreviation Botanical expeditions Individual trees Oldest trees Superlative trees Tallest trees Plants Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Petiole_(botany)&oldid=1300077737 " Category : Leaf morphology Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Commons category link is on Wikidata Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from Collier's Encyclopedia This page was last edited on 12 July 2025, at 05:02 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Petiole (botany) 41 languages Add topic

