Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Ideology Toggle Ideology subsection 2.1 Ideological communitarianism 2.2 Pluralism 2.3 Free market 2.4 International relations 3 Criticism 4 Relation to other ideologies Toggle Relation to other ideologies subsection 4.1 Postliberal feminism 5 Impact on politics 6 Prominent figures Toggle Prominent figures subsection 6.1 Writers 6.2 Politicians 7 See also 8 References Toggle the table of contents Postliberalism 7 languages Afrikaans Ελληνικά Español Français Italiano Português Suomi Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Emergent political paradigm critical of liberalism This article is part of a series on Conservatism in the United States Schools Compassionate Fiscal Fusion Liberal Classical Libertarian Moderate Movement Nationalist Christian Neo- Paleo- Postliberal Populist Progressive Social Straussian Traditionalist Ultra- Principles American exceptionalism Anti-communism Christian Zionism Communitarianism Constitutionalism Familialism Family values Federalism States' rights Subsidiarity Gender essentialism Judeo-Christian values Individualism Law and order Limited government Meritocracy Natural aristocracy Militarism Peace through strength Moral absolutism Natalism Pro-life Natural law Ordered liberty Patriotism Property rights Republicanism Right to bear arms Rule of law Supply-side economics Tradition History Loyalists Federalist Era Southern chivalry Redeemers Boston Brahmins Solid South New Humanism Dunning School Southern Agrarians Old Right Conservative Manifesto Conservative coalition America First Committee McCarthyism Goldwater campaign New Right Reagan era Reagan Doctrine Reaganomics Republican Revolution W. Bush presidency Tea Party movement Neo- vs. paleoconservatism Trump era First term Second term Agenda 47 Intellectuals Adams Anton Babbitt Bacevich Bell Bellow Bloom Boorstin Bradford Buckley Burgess Burnham Calhoun Chambers Conquest Deneen Eliot Francis Genovese Gottfried Hanson Hardin Hazony Himmelfarb Hoppe Hurston Jaffa Kimball Kirk Kirkpatrick Kreeft Kristol Kuehnelt-Leddihn Lind Lovecraft Loury Lukacs Luntz Mansfield Mencken Meyer Molnar Murray Nisbet Pangle Ransom Reno Rieff Santayana Schaeffer Sowell Strauss Vermeule Viereck Voegelin Wattenberg Weaver Wolfe Politicians Abbott Adams Boehner Bolton Buchanan Bush (George H. W.) Bush (George W.) Calhoun Clay Cheney Cleveland Coolidge Cruz DeSantis Dirksen Dole Eisenhower Gingrich Goldwater Harding Hamilton Helms Hoover (Herbert) Huckabee Johnson Kissinger Lodge Luce Madison McCain McCarthy (Joseph) McCarthy (Kevin) McConnell McKinley Meese Nixon Palin Paul (Rand) Paul (Ron) Pence Pierce Randolph Reagan Romney Rubio Rumsfeld Ryan Sessions Sherman Taft (Robert) Taft (William) Thurmond Trump Vance Wallace Wolfowitz Jurists Alito Barrett Bork Burger Colson Field Frelinghuysen Fuller George Goldsmith Gorsuch Harlan Kavanaugh Kennedy Luttig O'Connor Parker Rehnquist Roberts (John) Sanford Scalia Sessions Sutherland Taft (William) Thomas (Clarence) Whittaker Commentators Beck Bongino Breitbart Buchanan (Pat) Buckley Caldwell Carlson Cass Chodorov Coulter D'Souza Derbyshire Dreher Elder Goldberg Grant Griffin Van den Haag Hannity Hart Herberg Hoover (Margaret) Ingraham Jones Kelly Knowles Krauthammer Lahren Levin Limbaugh Mac Donald Neuhaus Ngo North Novak O'Reilly Owens Podhoretz Pool Portnoy Possony Prager Robertson Shapiro Shlaes Sullivan Walsh Watters Weyl Will Wintrich Woods Activists Abramoff Agostinelli Andreessen Atwater Bannon Bennett Bezmenov Bozell Cohn Dans Dobson Drudge Falwell Feulner Flynn Gabriel Hegseth Horowitz Kirk Krikorian Kristol LaHaye Lindell Lindbergh Leo McEntee Mercer (Rebekah) Mercer (Robert) Miller Murdoch Musk political views O'Keefe Park Phillips Posobiec Powell Raichik Reed Regnery Roberts (Kevin) Rove Rufo Scaife Schlafly (Andrew) Schlafly (Phyllis) Stone Thiel Thomas (Ginni) Weyrich Wiles Wood Literature The Federalist Papers (1788) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Notes on Democracy (1926) I'll Take My Stand (1930) Our Enemy, the State (1935) The Managerial Revolution (1941) Ideas Have Consequences (1948) God and Man at Yale (1951) The Conservative Mind (1953) The Conscience of a Conservative (1960) A Choice Not an Echo (1964) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) The Death of the West (2001) Hillbilly Elegy (2016) The Benedict Option (2017) Why Liberalism Failed (2018) The Age of Entitlement (2020) Parties Active American Party American Independent Party Conservative Party NY state Constitution Party Republican Party Defunct Anti-Masonic Party Constitutional Union Party Democratic Party ( historically, factions ) Boll weevils Bourbon Democrats Conservative Democrats Dixiecrats Reagan Democrats Southern Democrats Rhode Island Suffrage Party Federalist Party National Republican Party Native American Party Whig Party Think tanks Acton Institute AdTI AEI AFP CSP CfNI Claremont Institute CEI CSPC EPPC FRI Gatestone Institute Heartland Institute The Heritage Foundation Heritage Action Mandate for Leadership Project Esther Project 2025 Hoover Institution Hudson Institute ISI James Madison Program Leadership Institute Manhattan Institute Mises Institute PRI PNAC (Defunct) Ripon Society R Street Institute Rockford Institute SPN Sutherland Institute Tax Foundation Witherspoon Institute Media Newspapers Chicago Tribune The Epoch Times New Hampshire Union Leader The Jewish Voice The New York Observer New York Post The Remnant The Wall Street Journal (editorial board) The Washington Times Journals American Affairs The American Conservative The American Spectator American Thinker City Journal Claremont Review of Books Commentary Compact Chronicles The Dispatch First Things The Imaginative Conservative Jewish World Review Modern Age National Affairs The National Interest National Review The New American The New Atlantis The New Criterion Policy Review (defunct) Public Discourse Southern Partisan Spectator USA Tablet Taki's Magazine Telos Washington Examiner The Weekly Standard (defunct) TV channels CBN Fox Business Fox News Newsmax TV One America News Network Real America's Voice VOZ Websites 1819 News Babylon Bee Breitbart News The Bulwark Campus Reform The Center Square Conservative Review Daily Caller Daily Signal Daily Wire Discover the Networks The Federalist FrontPage Magazine Front Porch Republic Gateway Pundit Hot Air Human Events Independent Journal Review InfoWars Jihad Watch LifeZette NewsBusters PJ Media Rare RedState The Dispatch Townhall Twitchy Washington Examiner The Washington Free Beacon The Western Journal WorldNetDaily Other Blaze Media Encounter Books Evie Magazine The First Imprimis The Political Cesspool Passage Publishing PragerU RealClearPolitics Red Scare Regnery Publishing RSBN The Rubin Report Sinclair Broadcast Group Other organizations Congressional caucuses Second Amendment Caucus RSC Liberty Caucus Freedom Caucus Republican Main Street Partnership Republican Governance Group Blue Dog Coalition Economics ATR Club for Growth FreedomWorks (defunct) NFIB NTU Tea Party Patriots USCC Gun rights GOA NAGR NRA Identity politics ACT!

CWA Council of Conservative Citizens GAG IWF LCR Moms for Liberty Nativist CIS FAIR Immigration Restriction League NumbersUSA Patriot Prayer Proud Boys Oath Keepers Three Percenters Religion ADF Court cases ACLJ AFA The American TFP Chalcedon Foundation CCA Christian Voice Eagle Forum FCR The Fellowship FFC Focus on the Family Foundation for Moral Law Liberty Counsel Moral Majority (defunct) NOM NRLC PTMC Susan B. Anthony Pro-Life America Thomas More Law Center Watchdog groups AIM Econ Journal Watch Franklin News Foundation JW MRC O'Keefe Media Group Project Veritas Youth/student groups NJC TPUSA Young Americans for Freedom Young America's Foundation YAL Social media Gab Gettr Parler The Right Stuff Miscellaneous The 85 Fund AHI ACU AFPAC Bradley Foundation TCC CNP CPAC Hillsdale College IFF JBS John M. Olin Foundation (defunct) Liberty Fund LU NAS Philadelphia Society Regent University Russell Kirk Center for Cultural Renewal TPPF Other AFL Atlas Network CN ConservAmerica Donors Trust FedSoc NCPAC PJI Turning Point Action SACR YRNF Ziklag Movements Asian and Pacific Islander Black Christian right Reconstructionism Classical education movement Paideia Dark Enlightenment Election denial movement 2020 election disputes Female Green Hispanic and Latino LGBTQ Libertarian republicans Militia movement Monarchism Mormon White Horse Prophecy Theodemocracy New Apostolic Reformation Parental rights movement Fathers' rights Patriot movement Christian Radical right Reactionary feminism Right-libertarianism Paleolibertarianism Secessionism Neo-Confederates in Texas Trumpism Never Trump Related Barstool conservatism Bibliography of US conservatism Conservative talk radio GOP factions List of American conservatives NatCon Timeline of modern American conservatism Conservatism portal United States portal v t e This article is part of a series on Conservatism in Hungary Ideologies Authoritarian conservatism Horthyism Christian democracy Christian right Liberal conservatism National liberalism Monarchism National conservatism Orbánism Postliberalism Illiberalism Principles Anti-communism Anti-LGBT anti-gender movement laws Anti-Masonry Aristocracy Hungarian nobility Euroscepticism Huxit Familialism Family policies Natalism Nationalism Christian Neo- Hungarian culture Hungarian irredentism Trianon syndrome Székely autonomy movement Illiberal democracy Nativism Anti-immigration Hungarian border barrier Sovereignty History Austria-Hungary White Terror Horthy era Hungarian Revolution of 1956 End of communism Antall Government Intellectuals Apponyi Furedi Habsburg-Lothringen Kolnai Lezsák Mannheim Maszak Mindszenty Molnar Pappin Tisza Wass Politicians Andrássy Antall Apponyi Bethlen Csurka Friedrich Gömbös Horthy Huszár von Klebelsberg Lezsák Márki-Zay Orbán Slachta Teleki Tildy Tisza Toroczkai Volner Vona Zichy Parties Active Christian Democratic People's Party Civic Response Everybody's Hungary People's Party Fidesz National Self-Government of Germans in Hungary New Start Our Homeland Movement Jobbik Defunct Catholic People's Party Christian National Union Party Conservative Party Freedom Party Hungarian Democratic Forum Hungarian Independence Party Hungarian Justice and Life Party Independent Smallholders Party Unity Party Organisations Danube Institute Fidelitas Fidesz–KDNP Media Central European Press and Media Foundation Figyelő Hír TV Magyar Nemzet Mandiner Origo Szabad Föld Világgazdaság Echo TV Hetek Heti Válasz Magyar Demokrata Magyar Hírlap The European Conservative Related topics Liberalism and radicalism in Hungary Diet of Hungary Szeged Idea The War Against the West (1928) Conservatism portal Hungary portal v t e Postliberalism is a political ideology that critiques and opposes liberalism , particularly as it developed in the late 20th and early 21st centuries. Proponents argue that liberalism, with its emphasis on individual rights , free markets , and limited government , has failed to adequately address issues such as a perceived erosion of familial , community , and social cohesion , as well as income inequality .

Postliberals advocate for a communitarian approach that emphasizes social conservatism and social solidarity , often drawing on traditionalist conservative and religious frameworks. They are generally skeptical of liberal individualism , instead viewing individuals as being connected to networks of obligations within families, communities, tribes , and religious institutions. Postliberal thinkers support a greater role for the state in influencing culture and reinforcing shared values. The movement is associated with ideas such as economic nationalism , localism , and criticism of liberal democracy .

[ 1 ] History [ edit ] Postliberalism emerged in the United Kingdom from a movement within the Labour Party called Blue Labour .

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Early British theorists included John Gray , Maurice Glasman , Phillip Blond , Adrian Pabst , John Milbank , and Jon Cruddas .

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] Initially, British postliberalism developed as a center-left ideology with roots in Christian socialism .

In the United States, postliberalism gained influence primarily among conservatives critical of fusionism . Figures associated with this perspective include Patrick Deneen , Rod Dreher , and Adrian Vermeule , as well as the Israeli-American philosopher Yoram Hazony .

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] Ideology [ edit ] Ideological communitarianism [ edit ] Postliberalism contends that liberalism, in both its economic and social forms, weakens social and communal bonds that contribute to human well-being. A central idea in postliberal thought is that individuals are shaped by their social and cultural contexts rather than existing as purely autonomous agents. Postliberals argue that the liberal emphases on individual rights and freedoms have diminished the roles of community, family, and tradition in fostering meaning and belonging. They posit that a stable society requires a shared sense of purpose and commitment to the common good, which they claim liberalism has not sufficiently provided.

Postliberals reference social contract theorists such as Thomas Hobbes and John Locke , as well as figures like John Stuart Mill and John Rawls , to argue that liberalism promotes an individualism that they see as incompatible with human sociability.

[ 8 ] Patrick Deneen contends that liberalism encourages individuals to approach commitments and relationships with flexibility, treating them as interchangeable and subject to renegotiation, leading to weaker social ties.

[ 9 ] Pluralism [ edit ] Postliberals critique the liberal conception of the state as a neutral mediator, arguing instead that it should actively promote an ideal vision of social well-being grounded in the values and traditions of the community it serves. They promote political opposition to immigration and cultural diversity while advocating for conservative institutions like the nuclear family and religion. Postliberals reject a value-free state, arguing it should actively foster social cohesion and the common good.

[ 10 ] Liberal theorists such as John Rawls have framed liberalism as a system in which the state remains neutral on personal values. In contrast, Deneen argues that neutrality is an illusion, asserting that every social order is built on fundamental beliefs and commitments.

[ 11 ] Postliberals emphasize a political approach centered on the common good , seeking to balance individual and group rights with social responsibilities. Some critique economic liberalism, advocating for greater regulation and social embeddedness , while others emphasize the role of cultural traditions and national identity in maintaining social cohesion.

Free market [ edit ] Postliberal critics of economic liberalism argue that economic liberalism has contributed to the concentration of wealth and power among a small segment of society, leading to economic stratification between elites and the working class . They advocate for market intervention by the state, including protectionist policies and measures aimed at reducing economic inequality, protecting labor rights , and community development .

John Gray has argued that free markets and globalization have weakened the foundations of modern market economies. Similarly, Patrick Deneen contends that liberalism leads to a cycle of state expansion to manage social fragmentation , requiring legal and administrative mechanisms to replace communal institutions such as schools , healthcare, and charitable organizations , ultimately diminishing a shared sense of community and collective identity .

[ 11 ] International relations [ edit ] Postliberal perspectives on international relations and global politics have been developed by scholars such as John Milbank , Adrian Pabst , and Patrick  Deneen.

[ 3 ] Postliberalism attributes contemporary challenges in international relations to what it sees as an intensification of liberalism. In contrast to John Ikenberry 's view that the liberal international order is threatened by illiberal forces and requires further liberalization to counteract these challenges, postliberals interpret the rise of illiberal movements as a reaction to what they perceive as contradictions within liberalism itself.

[ 3 ] Pabst suggests that the emergence of populism and civilizational states reflects a response to global politics that, in this view, prioritizes utopian ideals over national and local concerns, emphasizing individual identity at the expense of collective belonging. From this perspective, liberalism no longer advances a substantive common good, resulting in ambiguity that both promotes individual freedoms and struggles to manage their broader consequences at national and international levels.

[ 8 ] Some scholars argue that the United States-led liberal order, established after World War II , follows a trajectory similar to domestic liberalism. Milbank and Pabst argue that U.S. imperialism promotes liberal principles to nation-states, influenced by American individualism and voluntaryism , and is pursued through imperial means to achieve national objectives. They argue that since the 1970s, global governance has strengthened state power and expanded individual freedoms while reducing local decision-making and distancing authority from national democratic institutions. According to their analysis, " Enlightenment liberalism" has the potential to frame conflict as an unlimited struggle against perceived enemies of civilization—an idea associated with Carl Schmitt .

[ 3 ] [ 8 ] They suggest that this universalist liberal expansion has contributed to the formation of civilizational blocs.

[ 3 ] [ 8 ] Criticism [ edit ] Critics of postliberalism argue that defining a common good in pluralistic societies presents challenges. Liberal critics argue that more statist versions of postliberalism risk unduly restricting individual liberty by using state power to enforce a particular vision of the good, while some postliberals advocate for a more pluralistic approach.

[ 12 ] Critics from the political left oppose the socially reactionary positions of postliberalism.

Socialist historian Chris Wright asserts that the political right primarily serves the interests of the ruling class, capitalism, and businesses rather than the common good. He contends that "because of its alleged interest in the public good but its conservative ( Republican ) orientation, postliberalism is ultimately incoherent".

[ 13 ] Similarly, socialist critic J. J. Porter argues that postliberalism undermines its own foundations, stating that "it wants to preserve many of the fruits of liberalism while doing away with the structure from which they grow".

[ 14 ] Critics from the free-market right argue that postliberalism's support for economic planning , regulation, and skepticism toward free markets could damage economic growth .

[ 15 ] Other conservative critics maintain that postliberalism underestimates the significance of individual freedom and the economic advantages of market capitalism.

[ 16 ] Relation to other ideologies [ edit ] Elements of postliberal political thought have been integral to the development of national conservatism and the ideology of various factions within the Conservative Party of the United Kingdom.

[ 17 ] [ 18 ] [ 19 ] Analysts have also identified Catholic social teaching as a significant influence on postliberalism.

[ 20 ] [ 21 ] Some scholars have noted the impact of Christopher Lasch on postliberal thought.

[ 3 ] [ 13 ] Postliberal feminism [ edit ] Reactionary feminists aligned with postliberalism, including Louise Perry , Nina Power , Christine Emba , and Mary Harrington , argue that the sexual ethics and norms emphasizing individual autonomy , reproductive rights , and sexual freedom—emerging from the sexual revolution of the 1960s—have led to negative consequences for women.

[ 3 ] [ 22 ] [ 23 ] [ 24 ] [ 25 ] Impact on politics [ edit ] Hungarian Prime Minister Viktor Orbán and his political party, Fidesz , have been described as postliberal and national conservative.

[ 20 ] [ 26 ] In a speech on September 14, 2023, Orbán stated: "The postliberal era we look forward to, which will replace the current progressive-liberal era, will not come automatically. Someone has to make it happen. And who will make it happen, if not us?" [ 27 ] In the United Kingdom, members of the New Conservatives faction of the Conservative Party, including Danny Kruger and Miriam Cates , have either identified with postliberalism or been associated with it. The Blue Labour tradition has included figures such as Jon Cruddas and Maurice Glasman . Writers Adrian Pabst and Sebastian Milbank have suggested that Labour Party leader and Prime Minister Keir Starmer has shown some interest in policies associated with Blue Labour.

[ 28 ] [ 29 ] In the United States, several Republican politicians have been linked to postliberal and national conservative ideas, including Vice President JD Vance [ 30 ] and Senators Josh Hawley and Marco Rubio .

[ 31 ] [ 32 ] [ 33 ] Prominent figures [ edit ] Writers [ edit ] John Gray [ 18 ] Patrick Deneen [ 18 ] John Milbank Adrian Pabst [ 18 ] Yoram Hazony Sohrab Ahmari Frank Furedi Adrian Vermeule Christine Emba Robert Heinlein Politicians [ edit ] Viktor Orbán Balázs Orbán Jon Cruddas Maurice Glasman Danny Kruger Miriam Cates JD Vance [ 33 ] Josh Hawley [ 33 ] Marco Rubio [ 33 ] Ryszard Legutko [ 34 ] See also [ edit ] Blue Labour National conservatism Neo-nationalism Illiberal democracy Syncretic politics Radical orthodoxy Integralism Common good constitutionalism References [ edit ] ^ Pabst, Adrian (2 May 2017).

"Postliberalism: The New Centre Ground of British Politics" (PDF) .

The Political Quarterly .

88 (3): 500– 509.

doi : 10.1111/1467-923X.12363 .

^ Kruger, Danny (25 August 2021).

"The Future of Postliberalism" .

The New Statesman . Retrieved 8 May 2024 .

^ a b c d e f g h Borg, Stefan (10 April 2024).

"In search of the common good: The postliberal project Left and Right" .

European Journal of Social Theory .

27 (1): 3– 21.

doi : 10.1177/13684310231163126 .

ISSN 1368-4310 .

^ Gray, John (1996).

Post-liberalism: Studies in Political Thought . London: Routledge.

ISBN 978-0-415-13553-5 .

^ Klein, Ezra (13 May 2022).

"What Does the 'Post-liberal Right' Actually Want?" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 8 May 2024 .

^ Schneider, Suzanne (29 April 2023).

"Dangerous minds" .

The New Statesman . Retrieved 8 May 2024 .

^ Dreher, Rod (20 October 2021).

"Further Thoughts on Postliberalism" .

The American Conservative . Retrieved 8 May 2024 .

^ a b c d Milbank, John ; Pabst, Adrian (2016).

The Politics of Virtue: Post-liberalism and the Human Future .

Rowman & Littlefield International .

ISBN 978-1-78348-648-9 .

^ Deneen, Patrick J.

(2018).

Why Liberalism Failed . New Haven (Conn.): Yale University Press .

ISBN 978-0-300-22344-6 .

^ Eudaimonia (1 June 2023).

"What is Postliberalism?" .

The American Postliberal . Retrieved 9 May 2024 .

^ a b Deneen, Patrick ; Baker, Gerry (3 August 2023).

"A Postliberal Future? - Opinion: Free Expression - WSJ Podcasts" .

The Wall Street Journal . Retrieved 9 May 2024 .

^ Szalai, Jennifer (7 June 2023).

"When 'Regime Change' Means Returning America to an Idealized Past" .

The New York Times .

^ a b Wright, Chris (16 October 2023).

"Postliberalism: A Dangerous "New" Conservatism" .

The Philosophical Salon .

^ Porter, J. J. (10 May 2023).

"Conservative Postliberalism Is a Complete Dead End" .

Jacobin .

^ Bourne, Ryan (20 April 2023).

"National Conservatism Is a Danger to the UK Economy" .

The Cato Institute .

^ Whyte, Jamie (22 September 2022).

"Taking Liberties: Why postliberals are wrong about personal freedom" .

Institute for Economic Affairs .

^ Jones, Tom (13 May 2023).

"Anglicising National Conservatism" .

The Critic Magazine . Retrieved 8 May 2024 .

^ a b c d Kelly, Paul (24 April 2024).

"Postliberalism could reshape the Conservative party" .

London School of Economics . Retrieved 8 May 2024 .

^ West, Ed (5 October 2023).

"Can post-liberalism save the Conservative party?" .

The Spectator . Retrieved 8 May 2024 .

^ a b Zerofsky, Elisabeth (19 October 2021).

"How the American Right Fell in Love With Hungary" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 .

^ Pabst, Adrian (17 May 2021).

"How Christian is PostLiberalism?" .

Together for the Common Good . Retrieved 8 May 2024 .

^ Fraser, Giles (22 November 2019).

"A Post-liberal Reading List" .

UnHerd . Retrieved 9 May 2024 .

^ Hinsliff, Gaby (14 June 2022).

"The Case Against the Sexual Revolution: liberal feminism under attack" .

The New Statesman . Retrieved 8 May 2024 .

^ Harrington, Mary (26 March 2020).

"How to Find Meaning When Everything is Power" .

Palladium Magazine . Retrieved 8 May 2024 .

^ Hanman, Natalie (16 January 2010).

"One Dimensional Woman by Nina Power" .

The Guardian .

ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved 9 May 2024 .

^ Dreher, Rod (19 October 2021).

"Viktor Orban & The Postliberal Right" .

The American Conservative .

^ Orbán, Viktor (14 September 2023).

"Speech by Prime Minister Viktor Orbán at the 5th Budapest Demographic Summit" .

About Hungary . Retrieved 8 May 2024 .

^ Pabst, Adrian (28 September 2022).

"Keir Starmer finally goes Blue Labour" .

UnHerd . Retrieved 8 May 2024 .

^ Milbank, Sebastian (6 October 2023).

"Labour's blues: Leftish economics allied to moderate social conservatism offers a compelling route to power for Sir Keir Starmer" .

The Critic . Retrieved 8 May 2024 .

^ Ward, Ian (13 September 2024).

"Is There More to JD Vance's MAGA Alliance Than Meets the Eye?" .

Politico . Retrieved 14 September 2024 .

^ McManus, Matt (14 December 2023).

"National Conservatives, Postliberals and the Nietzschean Right: Meet Today's Terrifying GOP" .

In These Times . Retrieved 8 May 2024 .

^ Bradley, J. Colin (21 August 2023).

"No Masters: The limits of post-liberalism" .

The Point . Retrieved 8 May 2024 .

^ a b c d Ward, Ian (8 June 2023).

" 'I Don't Want to Violently Overthrow the Government. I Want Something Far More Revolutionary.' " .

Politico . Retrieved 8 May 2024 .

^ Anderson, Ryan (1 February 2023).

"Book Review: Return of the Strong Gods by R R Reno - The Mallard" .

The Mallard . Retrieved 18 July 2024 .

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Postliberalism&oldid=1293811192 " Categories : Communitarianism Conservatism Reactionary Democratic backsliding Josh Hawley Marco Rubio JD Vance Viktor Orbán Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from February 2024 This page was last edited on 3 June 2025, at 20:35 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Postliberalism 7 languages Add topic

