Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview 2 See also 3 Notes 4 References Toggle the table of contents Liberal naturalism 3 languages Français Igbo Shqip Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Heterodox form of philosophical naturalism Liberal naturalism is a heterodox form of philosophical naturalism that rejects both scientific (or reductive) naturalism and supernaturalism . It allows that one can respect the explanations and results of the successful sciences without supposing that the sciences are the only resource for understanding humanity and dealings with the world and each other.

Overview [ edit ] The term "liberal naturalism" was defined and popularized in 2004 by Mario De Caro & David Macarthur [ 1 ] and, independently, by Gregg Rosenberg .

[ 2 ] This form of naturalism was later ascribed to Immanuel Kant .

[ 3 ] In De Caro's work, liberal naturalism is developed as a mild metaphysical realism; whereas in Macarthur's work liberal naturalism is associated with metaphysical quietism and opens into a philosophy of the manifest image.

For a liberal naturalist, many things in our everyday world that are not explicable (or not fully explicable) by science are, nonetheless, presupposed by science—e.g., tables, persons, artworks, institutions, rational norms and values. Explaining such things might require non-scientific, non- supernatural resources according to this form of naturalism . So, rather than tailoring their ontology to the posits of the successful sciences, as scientific naturalists do, liberal naturalists recognise the prima facie irreducible reality of everyday objects that are part of what Wilfrid Sellars called "the manifest image".

[ 4 ] Liberal naturalism is a "liberal" [ 5 ] or " catholic " [ 6 ] naturalism for several reasons each of which contrasts with scientific naturalist orthodoxy : It does not limit its ontological commitments to the explanatory posits of the successful sciences.

It acknowledges the existence of non-scientific modes of knowing and/or understanding such things as the value of artworks, the moral dimension of persons, and the relations between reasons of different kinds; [ 7 ] It allows for distinctively 1st-personal aspects of rational agency such as making up one's mind , taking responsibility for one's actions , and self-consciousness ; [ 8 ] It attempts to provide a non-reductive, non-supernatural account of the rational or conceptual normativity to which people are responsive in theoretical and practical reasoning, e.g., by appeal to the Hegelian or pragmatist idea of mutual acknowledgement in a community; [ 9 ] It challenges the widely influential Quinean thesis that philosophy , when properly naturalized, must limit itself to the methods of the successful sciences.

[ 10 ] See also [ edit ] Emergentism History of naturalism Poetic naturalism Hylomorphism Notes [ edit ] ^ De Caro, M. & Macarthur, D.

Naturalism in Question (Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press, April 2004), p. 1.

^ Rosenberg, Gregg, A Place for Consciousness: Probing the Deep Structure of the Natural World (Oxford: Oxford University Press, November 2004), p. 77.

^ Hanna, Robert, Kant, Science, and Human Nature . Clarendon Press, 2006, p. 16.

^ Sellars, W.

Science, Perception & Reality (London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1963), ch. 1.

^ McDowell, J.

Mind, Value and Reason (Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press, 1998), ch. 9.

^ Strawson, P.

Skepticism and Naturalism: Some Varieties (New York: Columbia University Press, 1985).

^ Putnam, H. "Pragmatism and Nonscientific Knowledge" in Hilary Putnam: Pragmatism and Realism , ed. Urszula M. Zeglen and James Conant (London and New York: Routledge, 2002), 14-24 ^ McDowell, J.

Mind and World (Cambridge Mass: Harvard University Press, 2004).

^ Macarthur, D. "Pragmatism, Metaphysical Quietism and the Problem of Normativity" in Philosophical Topics , vol 36 no. 1 (2008).

^ Quine, W. V. O.

Theories and Things (Cambridge Mass: Harvard University Press, 1981), ch. 7.

References [ edit ] De Caro, M. & Macarthur, D. (eds.), Naturalism in Question (Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press, 2004/2008).

De Caro, M. & Macarthur, D. (eds.), Naturalism and Normativity (New York: Columbia University Press, 2010) De Caro, M. & Macarthur, D. (eds.), The Handbook of Liberal Naturalism (London: Routledge, 2022).

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Liberal_naturalism&oldid=1295768621 " Categories : Metaphysics of science Naturalism (philosophy) Supernatural Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 15 June 2025, at 19:08 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Liberal naturalism 3 languages Add topic

