Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Catholic Church 2 See also 3 References Toggle References subsection 3.1 Works cited Toggle the table of contents Divine illumination 7 languages العربية Català Esperanto فارسی Italiano Polski Svenska Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Human thought aided by divine grace Not to be confused with Illuminationism .

Part of a series on Spirituality Outline Religion History Timeline Traditional Elite religion Jewish Merkabah Kabbalah Hasidism Christian Catholic Mysticism Sufism Folk religion Modern Buddhist modernism New religious movement Secular spirituality " Spiritual but not religious " Syncretism Spiritual experience Lived religion List of substances used in rituals Mystical or religious experience Oceanic feeling Religious ecstasy Spiritual practice Spiritual development Divine embodiment Ego death Entheogen History Archaeological record Aztec Maya Cannabis Individuation No-mind Self-actualization Spiritual activism Influences Western General Divine illumination Pantheism Panentheism Antiquity Divinity Gnosticism Hermeticism Neoplatonism Western esotericism Medieval Mysticism Early modern Perennial philosophy Jakob Böhme Emanuel Swedenborg Pietism Modern Romanticism Transcendentalism Universalism New Thought Theosophy Anthroposophy Occultism Spiritualism Esoteric Christianity New Age Orientalist Comparative religion Neo-Advaita Nonduality Orientalism Theosophical Society Asian Pre-historic Proto-Indo-Iranian religion Iran Zoroastrianism India Advaita Vedanta Buddha-nature Enlightenment Kevala jnana Madhyamaka Moksha Neo-Vedanta Tantra Yoga Yogachara East-Asia Taoism Other non-Western Animism Shamanism Totemism Psychological Humanistic psychology Mindfulness Positive psychology Self-help Self-realization True self and false self Research Neurological Mystical psychosis Cognitive science of religion Neuroscience of religion Geschwind syndrome Evolutionary psychology of religion Category v t e According to divine illumination , the process of human thought needs to be aided by divine grace . It is the oldest and most influential alternative to naturalism in the theory of mind and epistemology .

[ 1 ] It was an important feature of ancient Greek philosophy , Neoplatonism , medieval philosophy , and the Illuminationist school of Islamic philosophy .

Catholic Church [ edit ] Socrates Plato quotes Socrates in The Apology as saying that he had a divine or spiritual sign that began when he was a child. It was a voice that turned him away from something he was about to do, although it never encouraged him to do anything.

Apuleius later suggested the voice was of a friendly daemon [ 2 ] and that Socrates deserved this help as he was the most perfect of human beings.

The early Christian philosopher Augustine (354–430) also emphasised the role of divine illumination in human thought, saying that "The mind needs to be enlightened by light from outside itself, so that it can participate in truth, because it is not itself the nature of truth. You will light my lamp, Lord," [ 3 ] and "You hear nothing true from me which you have not first told me." [ 4 ] According to Augustine, God does not give people certain information, but rather gives them insight into the truth of the information they received for themselves.

If we both see that what you say is true, and we both see that what I say is true, then where do we see that? Not I in you, nor you in me, but both of us in that unalterable truth that is above our minds.

[ 5 ] Augustine Augustine's theory was defended by Christian philosophers of the later Middle Ages, particularly Franciscans such as Bonaventure and Matthew of Aquasparta . According to Bonaventure: Things have existence in the mind, in their own nature ( proprio genere ), and in the eternal art. So the truth of things as they are in the mind or in their own nature – given that both are changeable – is sufficient for the soul to have certain knowledge only if the soul somehow reaches things as they are in the eternal art.

[ 6 ] The doctrine was criticised by John Pecham and Roger Marston .

Thomas Aquinas is often seen as a harsh critiс of this doctrine; but his position is more nuanced. As Robert Pasnau observes, "Thomas Aquinas is often thought of as the figure most responsible for putting an end to the theory of divine illumination. Although there is some truth to this view, as we will see, it seems more accurate to regard Aquinas as one of the last defenders of the theory, as a proponent of innate Aristotelian illumination." [ 1 ] Undoubtedly, Aquinas denied that in this life people have divine ideas as an object of thought, and that divine illumination is sufficient on its own, without the senses, for natural knowledge. He also denied that there is a special continuing divine influence on human thought. People have sufficient capacity for thought on their own, without needing "new illumination added onto their natural illumination." [ 7 ] But this natural illumination, which Aquinas distinguishes from the supernatural illumination required for knowledge of intelligible things above human strengths (it is the case of faith and of prophecy), [ 8 ] is, nevertheless, divine illumination, according to Aquinas; indeed, he writes that "The material sun sheds its light outside us; but the intelligible Sun, Who is God, shines within us. Hence the natural light bestowed upon the soul is God's enlightenment, whereby we are enlightened to see what pertains to natural knowledge; and for this there is required no further knowledge, but only for such things as surpass natural knowledge." [ 9 ] Aquinas asserted also that "the intellectual light that is in us is nothing other than a certain likeness of the uncreated light, obtained through participation, in which the eternal reasons are contained." [ 10 ] For this reason, he concluded that, in this life, people know things in the divine ideas as in the principle of knowledge. He also claimed that his position was the right interpretation of Augustine's doctrine on divine illumination; [ 11 ] some scholars, as Lydia Schumacher, maintain that his claim is right.

[ 12 ] On the other hand, Henry of Ghent defended a different version of the theory, which, according to Henry himself and to various scholars, would be closer to the Augustinian one. Henry argued against Aquinas that Aristotle 's theory of abstraction is not enough to explain how people can acquire infallible knowledge of the truth, and must be supplemented by divine illumination. A thing has two exemplars against which it can be compared. The first is a created exemplar which exists in the soul through abstraction. The second is an exemplar which exists outside the soul, and which is uncreated and eternal. But no comparison to a created exemplar can give one infallible truth. Since the dignity of man requires that people can acquire such truth, it follows that they have access to the exemplar in the divine mind.

[ 13 ] Henry's defence of divine illumination was strongly criticised by the Franciscan theologian Duns Scotus , who argued that Henry's version of the theory led to scepticism and presented his own version, according to which there are "four senses in which the human intellect sees infallible truths in the divine light . In each sense, the divine light acts not on us but on the objects of our understanding." [ 1 ] See also [ edit ] Body of light Energy being Divine spark Luminous mind Enlightenment in Buddhism References [ edit ] This article needs more complete citations for verification .

Please help add missing citation information so that sources are clearly identifiable.

( December 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ^ a b c "Divine Illumination" entry  by Robert Pasnau in the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

^ De deo Socratis , XVII–XIX) ^ Confessions IV.xv.25 ^ Confessions X.ii.2 ^ Confessions XII.xxv.35 ^ De scientia Christi , q.4 resp ^ Summa theologiae 1a2ae 109.1c ^ See ibidem ^ Summa theologiae 1a2ae 109.1ad2 ^ Summa theologiae 1a 84.5c ^ See Summa theologiae 1a 84.5c ^ Schumacher (2011) , pp. 173–178.

^ Gracia & Noone (2008) .

Works cited [ edit ] Gracia, Jorge J. E.; Noone, Timothy B., eds. (2008).

A Companion to Philosophy in the Middle Ages . Wiley.

ISBN 978-0470997321 .

Schumacher, Lydia (2011).

Divine Illumination: The History and Future of Augustine's Theory of Knowledge . Malden-Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell.

v t e Catholic philosophy Ethics Cardinal virtues Divine command Just price Just war Probabilism Natural law Personalism Seven virtues Social teaching Option for the poor Social mortgage Theological virtues Virtue ethics Schools Medieval Augustinianism Scholasticism Thomism Scotism Occamism Modern Salamanca Christian humanism Cartesianism Molinism Neo-scholasticism Analytical Thomism Universals Augustinian realism Nominalism Conceptualism Moderate realism Scotistic realism Other Theological intellectualism Theological voluntarism Foundationalism Philosophers Abelard Adler Albertus Alcuin Anscombe Anselm Aquinas Augustine Bacon Boethius Bonaventure Chateaubriand Chesterton Clement Cusa Descartes Dionysius Erasmus Eriugena Ficino Gassendi Isidore Krasicki Llull Lombard MacIntyre Maistre Malebranche Maritain Montaigne More Newman Occam Pascal Pico Rahner Ratzinger Scheler Scotus Stein Suárez Wojtyła Concepts Actus Essendi Actus primus Actus purus Aevum Augustinian values Cardinal virtues Cartesian dualism Cogito, ergo sum Dehellenization Differentia Disputation Divine illumination Double truth Evil demon Formal distinction Guardian angel Haecceity Head of a pin Homo unius libri Infused righteousness Memento mori Occam's razor Ontological argument Pascal's wager Peripatetic axiom Principle of double effect Quiddity Quinque viae Rota Fortunae Seven deadly sins Theodicy Augustinian Irenaean Trademark argument Univocity Utopia Related Catholic theology Platonism Aristotelianism Neoplatonism Islamic philosophy Doctor of the Church Renaissance Rationalism Empiricism Phenomenology Catholicism portal Philosophy portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Divine_illumination&oldid=1301440874 " Categories : Theory of mind Epistemological theories Epistemology of religion Theism Light and religion Divinity Hidden categories: Articles with Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles with incomplete citations from December 2023 All articles with incomplete citations All pages needing cleanup This page was last edited on 19 July 2025, at 21:36 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Divine illumination 7 languages Add topic

