Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Definition 2 Criticism 3 Bibliography of Subaltern Studies 4 People associated with Subaltern Studies 5 See also 6 References 7 Further reading 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Subaltern Studies 14 languages العربية অসমীয়া Català Deutsch Español Esperanto فارسی Français हिन्दी עברית ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی Português 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Group of South Asian scholars of postcolonial and post-imperial underclasses The Subaltern Studies Group ( SSG ) or Subaltern Studies Collective is a group of South Asian scholars interested in postcolonial and post- imperial societies.

[ 1 ] The term Subaltern Studies is sometimes also applied more broadly to others who share many of their views.  Subaltern Studies is often considered to be "exemplary of postcolonial studies" and as one of the most influential movements in the field.

[ 2 ] Their anti- essentialist approach [ 3 ] is one of history from below , focused more on what happens among the masses at the base levels of society than among the elite.

Definition [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

( December 2019 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The term " subaltern " in this context is an allusion to the work of Italian Marxist Antonio Gramsci (1891–1937). The term's semantic range has evolved from its first usage by Ranajit Guha , following Gramsci, to refer solely to peasants who had not been integrated into the industrial capitalist system. It now refers to any person or group of inferior rank or station, whether because of race , class , gender , sexual orientation , ethnicity , or religion .

The SSG arose in the 1980s, influenced by the scholarship of Eric Stokes and Ranajit Guha, to attempt to formulate a new narrative of the history of India and South Asia. The group started at the University of Sussex , then continued and spread, mainly through Guha's students.

[ 4 ] This narrative strategy was inspired by the writings of Gramsci was explicated in the writings of their mentor Ranajit Guha, most clearly in his "manifesto" in Subaltern Studies I and also in his classic monograph The Elementary Aspects of Peasant Insurgency . Although they are, in a sense, on the left , they are very critical of the traditional Marxist narrative of Indian history , in which semi- feudal India was colonized by the British , became politicized, and earned its independence . In particular, they are critical of the focus of this narrative on the political consciousness of elites, who in turn inspire the masses to resistance and rebellion against the British.

Instead, they focus on non-elites, subalterns, as agents of political and social change. They have had a particular interest in the discourses and rhetoric of emerging political and social movements, as against only highly visible actions like demonstrations and uprisings.

Criticism [ edit ] One of the group's early contributors, Sumit Sarkar , later began to critique it. He entitled one of his essays "Decline of the Subaltern in Subaltern Studies", criticizing the turn to Foucauldian studies of power-knowledge that left behind many of the empiricist and Marxist efforts of the first two volumes of Subaltern Studies . He writes that the socialist inspiration behind the early volumes led to a greater impact in India itself, while the later volumes' focus on western discourse reified the subaltern-colonizer divide and then rose in prominence mainly in western academia.

[ 5 ] Even Gayatri Spivak , one of the most prominent names associated with the movement, has called herself a critic of " metropolitan post-colonialism".

[ 6 ] American sociologist Vivek Chibber has criticized the premise of Subaltern Studies for its obfuscation of class struggle and class formation in its analysis and accused it of excising class exploitation from the story of the oppression of the subaltern.

[ 7 ] His critique, explained in his book Postcolonial Theory and the Specter of Capital , is focused on the works of two Indian scholars: Ranajit Guha and Dipesh Chakrabarty . According to Chibber, subaltern scholars tend to recreate the Orient as a place where cultural differences negate analyses based on Western experience.

Bibliography of Subaltern Studies [ edit ] Edition Publication date Editors Title Pages Publisher 1 1982 Ranajit Guha Writings on South Asian History and Society 231 Delhi: Oxford University Press 2 1983 Ranajit Guha Writings on South Asian History and Society 358 Delhi: Oxford University Press 3 1984 Ranajit Guha Writings on South Asian History and Society 327 Delhi: Oxford University Press 4 1985 Ranajit Guha Writings on South Asian History and Society 383 Delhi: Oxford University Press 5 1987 Ranajit Guha Writings on South Asian History and Society 296 Delhi: Oxford University Press 6 1989 Ranajit Guha Writings on South Asian History and Society 335 Delhi: Oxford University Press 7 1993 Partha Chatterjee and Gyanendra Pandey Writings on South Asian History and Society 272 Delhi: Oxford University Press 8 1994 David Arnold and David Hardiman Writings on South Asian History and Society 240 Delhi: Oxford University Press 9 1996 Shahid Amin and Dipesh Chakrabarty Writings on South Asian History and Society 248 Delhi: Oxford University Press 10 1999 Gautam Bhadra, Gyan Prakash, and Susie Tharu Writings on South Asian History and Society 252 Delhi:  Oxford University Press 11 2000 Partha Chatterjee and Pradeep Jeganathan Community, Gender and Violence 347 New York: Columbia University Press 12 2005 Shail Mayaram, M. S. S. Pandian, and Ajay Skaria Muslims, Dalits, and the Fabrications of History 322 New Delhi: Permanent Black and Ravi Dayal Publisher Note: [ 8 ] People associated with Subaltern Studies [ edit ] Scholars associated with Subaltern Studies include: David Arnold Gautam Bhadra Dipesh Chakrabarty Partha Chatterjee Ranajit Guha David Hardiman Sudipta Kaviraj Gyanendra Pandey Gyan Prakash Sarojini Sahoo Ajay Skaria Gayatri Chakravorty Spivak Susie Tharu See also [ edit ] Latin American subaltern studies Latino philosophy Orientalism Edward Said Howard Zinn References [ edit ] ^ "Subaltern Studies : The Encyclopedia of Postcolonial Studies : Blackwell Reference Online" . Archived from the original on 2018-05-19 . Retrieved 2018-05-18 .

^ Connell, Raewyn (2005).

Southern Theory .

^ Atabaki, Touraj (2003).

Beyond Essentialism: Who Writes Whose Past in the Middle East and Central Asia? Inaugural lecture, 13 December 2002 (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 22 August 2016 . Retrieved 29 April 2013 .

^ "Ranajit Guha and Subaltern Studies" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 2018-05-19.

^ Sumit Sarkar, "The Decline of the. Subaltern in Subaltern Studies" in his Writing Sggial History. Delhi, Oxford University Press, 1997.

^ Gayatri_Chakravorty_Spivak, A Critique of Postcolonialism , Harvard University Press ^ "How does the subaltern speak?" . jacobinmag.

Archived from the original on 2016-02-08 . Retrieved 2016-01-21 .

^ "Subaltern Studies: Bibliography of articles and reviews and listing of table of contents of the series of books" .

asianstudies.github.io .

Archived from the original on 2018-12-01 . Retrieved 2019-10-23 .

Further reading [ edit ] Young, Robert, White Mythologies . Routledge, 1990, reissued 2004. Several associated ISBNs, including ISBN 0-415-31181-0 , ISBN 0-415-31180-2 .

Ludden, David, ed., Reading Subaltern Studies. Critical History, Contested Meaning and the Globalization of South Asia ,  London 2001.

Chaturvedi, Vinayak, ed., Mapping Subaltern Studies and the Postcolonial . London and New York 2000.

Cronin, Stephanie, ed., "Subalterns and Social Protest: History from Below in the Middle East and North Africa" . Routledge, 2008. US & Canada.

External links [ edit ] Tim Spurgin's notes on Subaltern Studies Archived 2004-12-17 at the Wayback Machine and other topics in postcolonialism A Bibliography of Subaltern Studies – the books, articles, and reviews v t e Historiography Historians list / by area of study History historians historicity history theories of history Historical sources Types Primary sources Secondary sources Tertiary sources Sources Annals Archives Artifacts Archaeological site Chronicles Codices Deeds Facsimiles Features Hieroglyphs Historical documents Logbooks Manuscripts Illuminated Oral tradition Papyri Religious texts Scrolls War diaries Service records Fields of study By scale Big History World history Human history Local history Microhistory By source Archival science / Library and information science ( template ) Books / Writing systems Chorography Chronology dating Diplomatics Encyclopaedistics Epigraphy Genealogy Heraldry Numismatics (Money) Onomastics Oral history preservation Phaleristics Philology Postage stamps Prosopography Sigillography Toponymy Vexillology By topic Anthropology / Paleoanthropology Cultural Ecology / Environment / Geography Economic Business Capitalism Perspectives on capitalism by school of thought Thought Intellectual Geistesgeschichte Linguistics Maritime Medieval churches Military Political Constitutional Diplomatic Social Feminism Gender Indigenous Labour LGBTQ Rural Quantitative Urban Women Methodology Case study Periodization Historical eras Tarikh Three-age system Approaches, schools Annales school History of mentalities Nouvelle histoire Historiometry / Cliometrics Comparative historical research Critical Decoloniality Feminist Historical anthropology Historical determinism Historism Historical-critical method Humanistic Indiscipline of history [ pt ] Leninist Marxist Historical materialism Nationalist Ancestral civilisation Nationalization of history People's history Subaltern Studies Pop history Quantitative history Revisionist Transnational Whig Great Man theory Concepts General Change and continuity Historic preservation Historic recurrence Historical significance Historicity Historiology [ es ] Theory of history [ de ] Philosophy Specific Black legend Coloniality and decolonization of knowledge Dark Ages Historical negationism Historian's fallacy / Presentism Invented tradition Modernisation theory Narratives Paradigm shift Pax list Thirty-year rule Transhistoricity Translatio imperii / Translatio studii Vaticinium ex eventu Periodization of modern history Age of Discovery Age of Enlightenment European Civil War / Second Thirty Years' War Long 18th / 19th century Renaissance Continuity thesis By country or region Africa African historiography Egypt Pyramid construction techniques Black Egypt Thesis [ es ] Ethiopia Morocco Greater Morocco Rwanda Double genocide theory Maafa Americas Canada Metropolitan-hinterland thesis Residential schools Staples thesis Indigenous population history Latin America Argentina May Revolution / Causes Revisionist [ es ] Peru Iquicha Royalism Colonial Spanish America Casta United States African-American history Nadir of American race relations Neoabolitionism Reconstruction era Consensus history Cyclical theory Frontier thesis Political history Eras Progressive-era historians Eurasia Albania Dealbanisation Austria Habsburg myth Balhae Belarus Litvinism Bulgaria Byzantine Empire [ de ] Early [ ru ] Croatia Europe Ancient [ ru ] Medieval [ ru ] New Age [ ru ] Georgia Aryan Kartli Greek Ages of Man Iran 2,500-year celebration Japan Korea Nationalist Goguryeo controversies North Macedonia Philippines Early settlements Portugal [ pt ] Lusotropicalism Romania Great Union Serbia Kosovo Myth Sweden Götaland theory Switzerland Taiwan Ukraine Executed Renaissance Vietnam Nam tiến Trưng sisters Ancient Rome Catilinarian conspiracy Christianization Constantinian shift Expansion Fall of Western Rome Prosopography Succession Byzantine succession Moscow, third Rome Ottoman claim Problem of two emperors China 5000-year civilization assertion Archaeology Wunu School [ zh ] Century of humiliation Conquest dynasty "Chineseness" debate New Qing History Golden ages Hua–Yi distinction Four Barbarians Sinocentrism Self-Strengthening Movement Sprouts of capitalism Tibetan sovereignty debate France Cordon sanitaire Frankish Interregnum [ fr ] Grand Siècle Legendary Saracen [ fr ] Location of Alésia [ fr ] Lyon [ fr ] Historiography of Vichy France Germany Alltagsgeschichte Borussian myth Historikerstreit Sonderweg Strukturgeschichte [ de ] Sybel-Ficker controversy Vergangenheitsbewältigung India Greater Magadha Indocentrism Indigenous Aryanism Ireland Great Famine " More Irish than the Irish themselves " Revisionism Revolutionary period Italy Fascist Italy Fourth Italian War of Independence Historiae Patriae Monumenta Historical Series of the Bank of Italy Italians, the good people Rerum italicarum scriptores Revisionism of Risorgimento Southern question Neo-Bourbonism Poland Golden Liberty Sarmatism Deluge Partitions Polish People's Republic [ pl ] Russia Anti-Normanism Pre-Revolutionary Russia [ ru ] Skeptic School [ ru ] Soviet Union October Revolution Soviet famine of 1930–1933 Causes of the Holodomor Holodomor genocide question Holodomor in modern politics Spain Black legend / White legend Hispanism Carlism in the Francoist era Convivencia Inquisition Limpieza de sangre controversy [ es ] Reconquista Islamic revolution of Spain [ es ] Revisionist Colonies or Provinces Spanish decline [ es ] Ser de España [ es ] Turkey Kemalist Ottoman Empire Ghaza thesis Decline thesis United Kingdom Poor Laws Scotland Kingdom of Alba Westminster Stone Storm over the gentry Suffragette Campaign Tudor myth Ricardians Winter of Discontent British Empire Cambridge School Porter–MacKenzie debate Second colonial occupation Oceania Colonial Australia By war, conflict v t e Military historiography Military history List of military museums Pre-18th century conflicts Albigensian Crusade Catharism debate Crusades Islamic views Eighty Years' War Origins Fall of Babylon Gallic Wars Late Bronze Age collapse Dorian invasion Sea Peoples Peloponnesian War 18th and 19th century conflicts Coalition Wars (1792–1815) French Revolution Causes War in the Vendée Napoleonic era Invasion of Russia Waterloo American Civil War Origins Turning point Franco-Prussian War Causes Paris Commune Great Game Indian Rebellion of 1857 Causes Paraguayan War War of 1812 Origins War of the Pacific Causes World War I Causes ( Color books / Fischer thesis ) Late Ottoman genocides ( Causes of the Armenian genocide ) Patriotic consent Persian famine of 1917–1919 Powder keg of Europe Schlieffen Plan Spirit of 1914 / 1917 Treaty of Brest-Litovsk , Germany imposed this on Russia in 1918 Treaty of Versailles Reparations War guilt question Article 231 Reichstag inquiry Interwar period Burning of Smyrna Polish–Soviet War Causes Spanish Civil War Background World War II Causes "Blitzkrieg" concept Broad vs. narrow front German resistance to Nazism Nazi foreign policy debate Eastern Front Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact Soviet offensive plans Soviets and the Warsaw Uprising Massacres of Poles in Volhynia and Eastern Galicia Winter War Background Spirit The Holocaust Auschwitz bombing debate Awareness in Nazi Germany and German-occupied Europe Functionalism–intentionalism debate In relation to the Armenian genocide / Nakba Pope Pius XII and the Holocaust Pius Wars "Polish death camp" Responsibility Slovakia Uniqueness Pacific War Atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki "Battle for Australia" Bengal famine Second Sino-Japanese War Nanjing Massacre Western Front Battle of France Guilty Men Résistancialisme Vichy France Cold War Origins 1948 Palestine war Palestinian expulsion and flight / Ongoing Nakba Zionism as settler colonialism New Historians Malayan Emergency Causes Algerian War Six-Day War Origins Iranian revolution Causes Iran–Iraq War Falklands War Sovereignty dispute Sri Lankan civil war Origins Post-Cold War Russo-Georgian War Background Responsibility Syrian revolution Causes Related Conflict thesis Gunpowder and gun transmission War and genocide Category By person Political leaders Adolf Hitler Alexander the Great Amin al-Husseini Aurangzeb Cato the Younger Che Guevara Chiang Ching-kuo [ zh ] Chiang Kai Shek [ zh ] Constantine the Great Gregory Palamas Horatio Nelson Hypatia Jiang Zemin [ zh ] Joseph Stalin [ ru ] José de San Martín Juan Manuel de Rosas Klemens von Metternich Leonid Brezhnev Louis Riel Mao Zedong [ zh ] Muammar Gaddafi Napoleon Neville Chamberlain Pedro II of Brazil Simon Bolivar Cult of personality [ es ] Bolivarianism Saladin Sun Yat-sen [ zh ] Thomas Aquinas Thomas Jefferson Ulysses S. Grant Warren G. Harding Yuan Shikai [ zh ] Zhou Enlai [ zh ] Zhuge Liang [ zh ] Historical rankings Australia Canada Modern Germany Netherlands United Kingdom United States Others The Beatles Charles Darwin Friedrich Nietzsche H. P. Lovecraft Jane Austen Muhammed Historicity Judaism Medieval Christian Jesus Historicity Resurrection Religious perspectives Christianity Judaism Islam J. R. R. Tolkien The Lord of the Rings Madonna Robert Falcon Scott Socrates Søren Kierkegaard William Shakespeare Other topics Bears in antiquity Crisis of historiography [ pt ] Feudalism Library of Alexandria Nationalism in the Middle Ages Professionalization and institutionalization of history Salons Western European colonialism and colonization Desacralization of knowledge Economics Industrial Revolution Great Recession Great Depression School of Thoughts Historical school of economics English historical school of economics Religion Avestan geography Early Christianity Background Historical reliability of the Gospels Primacy of Peter Opposition to Papal supremacy Proto-orthodox Christianity Early Islam Criticism of the Quran Succession to Muhammad Islamic golden age Kharijites Ecclesiastical history of the Catholic Church Second Vatican Council Hermeneutics of Vatican Council II [ it ] Hesychast controversy Protestant Reformation Proto-Protestantism Criticism of Protestantism Protestant work ethic Jesuit historiography Modern Jewish history Wissenschaft des Judentums Schools of thought Biblical criticism Catholic theology Panbabylonism Urreligion Perennial Religionsgeschichtliche Schule Roman Revisionist school of Islamic studies Science / Technology Merton thesis Protestant Ethic and Capitalism Heroic theory of invention and scientific development Gunpowder and gun transmission Torsion mangonel myth Organizations, publications Heritage registers Historical society ( list ) History institutes History journals template Related Commemorative plaque Documentary film Hagiography Historical fiction Historical realism Historiographic metafiction Historical geographic information system Category Multimedia Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Subaltern_Studies&oldid=1299463593 " Categories : Historiography of India Fields of history Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from December 2019 All articles needing additional references Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 8 July 2025, at 15:11 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Subaltern Studies 14 languages Add topic

