Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Symbols and traditions 3 Membership 4 Notable members 5 See also 6 References Toggle the table of contents Aleph Samach Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American collegiate society Aleph Samach אס The Aleph Samach Seal, 1900 Founded 1893 ; 132 years ago ( 1893 ) Cornell University Type Honor Affiliation Independent Status Defunct Defunct date After 1985 Emphasis Juniors Scope Local Pillars Leadership, Loyalty, Service, and Honor Chapters 1 Headquarters Ithaca , New York United States Aleph Samach ( אס ) was a junior honor society at Cornell University in Ithaca, New York that existed from 1893 until 1981.

History [ edit ] Aleph Samach (sometimes spelled Aleph Samech) was founded in 1893 at Cornell University as an honorary secret society for men of the junior class.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Aleph Samach sought to recognize those men of distinct character who were emerging leaders on campus. While senior members played an advisory role within the society, Aleph Samach's primary goal was "to promote the greater good of the Cornell community by connecting junior leaders, cultivating their leadership skills, and developing their commitment to campus service." The society remained strong in its early decades and was an influential organization on campus. Along with some of the other class societies, most notably Quill and Dagger and Sphinx Head , it promoted campus-wide agendas; some of the more notable results being the creation of what would become Slope Day .

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] By 1896, The New York Times listed Aleph Samach as the junior class society at Cornell, alongside the Chancery (senior law), Sphinx Head (senior), Quill and Dagger (senior), and Theta Nu Epsilon (sophomore) [ 5 ] societies.

[ 6 ] The turn of the century saw Aleph Samach integrated into the senior honorary societies system of campus-wide governance. Aleph Samach was a stepping stone to Sphinx Head and Quill and Dagger.

During the "club war" of 1913–1914, Aleph Samach allied itself with The Cornell Daily Sun , Sphinx Head , and Quill and Dagger to suppress the growing influence of the following "social clubs" or drinking societies at Cornell: Majura, Beth l'Amed, Kappa Beta Phi, Bench and Board, Gemel Kharm, Yonan, Mermaid, Krug and Tafel, and the Climax. The three honorary societies and the Sun would not allow any member of the drinking societies to be tapped into their organizations.

[ 7 ] In 1917, Aleph Samach was the uncontested honorary society of the junior class.

[ 8 ] After the creation of a unified Student Council following the First World War , the honorary societies remained an active force. In the fall of 1920, Aleph Samach joined with the Student Council, Sphinx Head, and Quill and Dagger to petition the Cornell Board of Trustees to elevate the popular Acting President to the position of president until the university chose a new head.

[ 9 ] In 1939, Aleph Samach was listed as a junior class co-honorary society along with the Red Key Society.

[ 10 ] Aleph Samach can document its operational status as late as AY 1964-1965, AY 1978-79, AY 1980–81 and AY 1985-1986.

[ 11 ] Aleph Samach was active until 1981.

Symbols and traditions [ edit ] " Aleph " and " Samach " are letters of the Hebrew language. Most of the rituals of Aleph Samach were secret. It was founded on four pillars: leadership, loyalty, service, and honor.

Membership [ edit ] Students were tapped for membership in Aleph Samach in the spring of their sophomore year or fall of their junior year. Selection was based on participation in extra-curricular activities.

[ 12 ] Aleph Samach was an all-male institution. Cornell had a separate but equal honorary society for junior women, Raven and Serpent .

[ 13 ] Notable members [ edit ] Sandy Berger , US National Security Advisor [ 14 ] Gib Cool , All-American football player Harry Livingston French , architect Charles Moore , gold medalist in the 400 metre hurdles in the 1952 Summer Olympics Bernard O'Rourke , football player and coach Sam Roberts , journalist with The New York Times John L. Senior , sports administrator Willard Dickerman Straight , investment banker, publisher, and diplomat [ 15 ] Kurt Vonnegut , author [ 16 ] E. B. White , author of children's books [ 17 ] See also [ edit ] Collegiate secret societies in North America List of Cornell University fraternities and sororities References [ edit ] ^ "Fraternities at Cornell" .

Newspapers.com . Boston Evening Transcript. 1900-12-20. p.

11 pt. 1 , 11 pt. 2 . Retrieved 2024-10-24 .

^ Shepard, Francis W., ed. (1927).

Baird's Manual of American College Fraternities (11th ed.) . Menasha, Wisconsin: George Banta Publishing Company. p. 531 – via Google Books.

^ "Student Body to Be Canvassed for Athletic Association", Ithaca Daily News (June 24, 1916) at 8 .(listed as an honorary society alongside Sphinx Head and Quill and Dagger).

^ Hewett, Waterman Thomas, Frank R. Holmes, and Lewis A. Williams. "Student Life." Cornell University, a History. [Whitefish, MT]: Kessinger Pub., 2007. 31-32. Print.

^ By 1910, the sophomore honorary society was called "Dunstan".

^ " Cornell University Topics; The Fencer's Club in the League - Greek Fraternities ", The New York Times (March 12, 1896).

^ "Senior Societies Elect Nine Men", Ithaca Daily News (Oct. 14, 1913) at 8 .

^ Oscar Dietrich von Engeln, Concerning Cornell (1917) at 279 .

^ "Appointment of Smith as President is Urged", Syracuse Post-Standard (Nov. 18, 1920) at 15 ; see also, "Educational News", Journal of Education (Nov. 25, 1920) at 533 .

^ "Locals", The Journal and Republican (Lowville, N.Y.)(Nov. 16, 1939) at 5 .

^ "Hennings Attend Son's Graduation", DeWitt News-Times (July 8, 1965) at 3 ; "Advertisement", Cornell Daily Sun (95:20)(Sept. 27, 1978) at 11 ; Cornell Daily Sun (97:29)(Oct. 7, 1980) at 11 ; Cornell Daily Sun (102:70)(Dec. 6, 1985) at [1] ^ "New Paltz", The Kingston Daily Freeman (Nov. 10, 1930) at 6 ).

^ Chilton's Jeweler's Circular ( 1937 ).

^ Jill Goetz, "Samuel R. Berger, Cornell University alumnus, is appointed national security adviser by President Bill Clinton" ^ Cornell Daily Sun, Volume XIX, Issue 174, 3 June 1899, Page 1 .

^ "The Cornell Daily Sun 29 October 1942 — The Cornell Daily Sun" .

cdsun.library.cornell.edu . Retrieved 2017-12-25 .

^ White, Elwyn Brooks., Dorothy Lobrano. Guth, and Martha White. "Cornell and the Open Road." Letters of E. B. White. New York, NY: Harper Collins, 2006. 17-19. Print.

v t e Cornell University Located in : Ithaca, NY and New York City Colleges Agriculture and Life Sciences NYS Architecture, Art, and Planning Arts and Sciences Business Management Hotel Admin.

Applied Economics Computing and Information Science Engineering Graduate Human Ecology NYS Industrial and Labor Relations NYS Public Policy Law Medicine Medical Sciences Tri-Institutional Qatar Veterinary NYS Athletics Teams Baseball Basketball ( Men's , Women's ) Football Ice hockey ( Men's , Women's ) Men's lacrosse Men's soccer Men's squash Wrestling Venues Barton Hall Berman Field Hoy Field Jones Golf Course Lynah Rink Newman Arena Schoellkopf Field Culture All Sports Competition Give My Regards to Davy Harvard (hockey) rivalry Touchdown (mascot) Campus Campuses Central North Tech West Buildings A.D. White House Arboretum Art Museum Bailey Hall Balch Hall Barnes Hall Botanic Gardens Bradfield Hall Brain Collection Caldwell Hall Center for Advanced Computing Computing and Communications Center Comstock Hall Dairy Deke Fernow Hall Fuertes Observatory Goldwin Smith Hall Libraries Llenroc Hartung–Boothroyd Observatory McGraw Tower Morrill Hall Olin Library Ornithology Lab Press Rice Hall Risley Residential College Sage Chapel Sage Hall Statue of Ezra Cornell Stimson Hall Synchrotron Telluride House Thompson Institute Uris Library Straight Hall History People Ezra Cornell Henry W. Sage Andrew Dickson White Former Stone Hall Roberts Hall East Roberts Hall Cornell gorge suicides Irving Literary Society Morrill Land-Grant Acts New York State College of Forestry at Cornell Cornelliana Chimes Club of New York Dragon Day Far Above Cayuga's Waters Slope Day Songs People Alumni Faculty Presidents Trustees Publications Administrative Science Quarterly arXiv Cornell Chronicle Cornell Lunatic Cornell Policy Review Cornell Review Daily Sun Diacritics Epoch ILR Review International Affairs Review International Law Journal Journal of Empirical Legal Studies Journal of Law and Public Policy Law Review Legal Information Institute Oyez Project New German Critique Philosophical Review Student life Catholic Community Chorus Fraternities and sororities Aleph Samach Quill and Dagger Sphinx Head Glee Club Hotel Ezra Cornell Marching Band Messenger Lectures Pep Band WVBR-FM Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Aleph_Samach&oldid=1303681507 " Categories : Cornell University student organizations 1893 establishments in New York (state) Collegiate secret societies Student societies in the United States Student organizations established in 1893 Defunct fraternities and sororities Local fraternities and sororities Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Hebrew-language text Pages using infobox fraternity with missing member badge Pages using infobox fraternity with missing members Pages using infobox fraternity with missing colors This page was last edited on 1 August 2025, at 12:35 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Aleph Samach Add languages Add topic

