Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Usage by Marxists 2 Current usage 3 See also 4 References 5 Bibliography Toggle the table of contents Rentier capitalism 10 languages Català Deutsch Español Italiano Nederlands پنجابی Português سرائیکی اردو 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Capitalism featuring rent-seeking without wealth creation For other uses of "Rentier", see Rentier (disambiguation) .

Part of a series on Capitalism Concepts Austerity Business Business cycle Businessperson Capital Capital accumulation Capital markets Company Corporation Competition Competition law Definitions Economic interventionism Economic liberalism Economic surplus Entrepreneurship Fictitious capital Financial market Free price system Free market Goods and services Investor Invisible hand Visible hand Liberalization Marginalism Money Private property Privatization Profit Rent seeking Supply and demand Surplus value Value Wage labour Economic systems Anglo-Saxon Authoritarian Corporate Dirigist Free-market Humanistic Laissez-faire Liberal Libertarian Market Mercantilist Mixed Monopoly National Neoliberal Nordic Private Raw Regulated market Regulatory Rhine Social Political State State-sponsored Welfare Economic theories American Austrian Chartalism MMT Chicago Classical Institutional Keynesian Neo- New Post- Market monetarism Critique of political economy Critique of work Marxist Monetarist Neoclassical New institutional Supply-side Ideologies Anarcho Authoritarian Classical liberalism Democratic Dirigisme Eco Gladstonian Humanistic Inclusive Liberal Liberalism Libertarian Neo Neoliberalism Objectivism Ordoliberalism Privatism Right-libertarianism Third Way Origins Age of Enlightenment Capitalism and Islam Commercial Revolution Feudalism Industrial Revolution Mercantilism Primitive accumulation Physiocracy Simple commodity production Development Advanced Consumer Community Corporate Crony Finance Global Illiberal Late Marxist Merchant Progressive Rentier State monopoly Technological Intellectuals Smith Bentham Malthus Say Ricardo Mill (James) Bastiat Mill (John Stuart) Marx Walras Marshall Pareto Veblen Weber von Mises Schumpeter Keynes Hayek Rand Weaver Coase Friedman Rothbard Sowell Becker Hoppe Related topics Anti-capitalism Capitalist propaganda Capitalist realism Capitalist state Consumerism Crisis theory Criticism of capitalism Critique of political economy Critique of work Cronyism Culture of capitalism Evergreening Exploitation of labour Globalization History History of theory Market economy Periodizations of capitalism Perspectives on capitalism Post-capitalism Speculation Spontaneous order Venture philanthropy Wage slavery Capitalism portal Business portal Economics portal v t e Rentier capitalism is a concept in Marxist and heterodox economics to refer to rent-seeking and exploitation by companies in capitalist systems.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] The term was developed by Austrian social geographer Hans Bobek [ 4 ] describing an economic system that was widespread in antiquity and still widespread in the Middle East, where productive investments are largely lacking and the highest possible share of income is skimmed off from ground-rents , leases and rents . Consequently, in many developing countries, rentier capitalism is an obstacle to economic development. A rentier is someone who earns income from capital without working. This is generally done through ownership of assets that generate yield (cash generated by assets), such as rental properties , shares in dividend -paying companies, or bonds that pay interest .

[ 5 ] Part of a series on Marxism Outline Theoretical works Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844 The Condition of the Working Class in England The German Ideology Wage Labour and Capital The Communist Manifesto The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte Grundrisse Capital Critique of the Gotha Programme Dialectics of Nature The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State What Is to Be Done?

The Accumulation of Capital Philosophical Notebooks Terrorism and Communism The State and Revolution Essays on Marx's Theory of Value History and Class Consciousness Prison Notebooks The Black Jacobins On Practice Dialectic of Enlightenment A Critique of Soviet Economics The Long Revolution Guerrilla Warfare The Wretched of the Earth Reading Capital The Society of the Spectacle Pedagogy of the Oppressed Ideology and Ideological State Apparatuses Ways of Seeing How Europe Underdeveloped Africa Social Justice and the City Women, Race and Class Marxism and the Oppression of Women Imagined Communities Hegemony and Socialist Strategy The Sublime Object of Ideology Time, Labor and Social Domination The Age of Extremes The Origin of Capitalism Empire Late Victorian Holocausts Change the World Without Taking Power Caliban and the Witch An Introduction to the Three Volumes of Karl Marx's Capital Capitalist Realism Capital in the Anthropocene Philosophy Alienation Dialectical materialism Ideology Philosophy of nature Philosophy in the Soviet Union Reification Marxist ethics Critique of political economy Capital ( accumulation ) Crisis theory Commodity Concrete and abstract labor Factors of production Falling profit-rate tendency Means of production Mode of production Capitalist Socialist Productive forces Scientific socialism State monopoly capitalism Surplus product Socially necessary labour time Value-form Wage labour Sociology Base and superstructure Bourgeoisie Class Class consciousness Classless society Commodity fetishism Communist society Critical theory Cultural hegemony Democracy Dictatorship of the proletariat Soviet Radical Democratic centralism Exploitation False consciousness Human nature Immiseration Imperialism Lumpenproletariat Metabolic rift Proletariat Private property Relations of production State theory Working class History Class struggle Historical determinism Primitive accumulation Proletarian revolution World revolution Theory of historical trajectory Aspects Aesthetics Archaeology Criminology Cultural Marxism Cultural Studies Ethics Film theory Geography Historiography Literary criticism Marxism and religion Sociology Philosophy Common variants Structural Autonomist Marxism–Leninism Guevarism Maoism Neo-Gramscianism Regulation school Third-worldist Titoism Trotskyism Hegelian Budapest School Frankfurt School Humanist Neue Marx-Lektüre Open Praxis School Both Black Classical Communization Feminist Leninism Neo Post Western Other variants Analytical Austromarxism Hispanic marxism Centrist Eurocommunism Instrumental Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Nkrumaism Political Revisionist Situationist Socialism with Chinese characteristics Wertkritik People Marx Engels Morris Lafargue Rubin Kautsky Plekhanov Du Bois Connolly Lenin Luxemburg Liebknecht Kollontai Stalin Trotsky Grossman Zinoviev Bloch Lukács Korsch Bukharin Ho Serge Gramsci Pashukanis Bordiga Benjamin Mao Basu Mariátegui Horkheimer Dutt Brecht Marcuse Kalecki Fromm Cox Lefebvre James Adorno Padmore Sartre Deutscher Beauvoir Sombart Nkrumah Sweezy Emmanuel Hill Bettelheim Draper Jones Hobsbawm Althusser Hinton Williams Freire Cunhal Lara Mandel Sivanandan Miliband Cabral Thompson Bauman Fanon Berger Castro Guevara Liebman Heller Guattari Mészáros O'Connor Wallerstein Mies Tronti Debord Amin Hall Nairn Parenti Negri Jameson Dussel Harvey Laclau Bahro Poulantzas Vattimo Badiou Harnecker Altvater Ismail Anderson Löwy Vogel Sison Easthope Rancière Berman Przeworski Cohen Therborn Losurdo Postone Rodney Bannerji Spivak Newton Wood Federici Wolff Balibar Eagleton Kurz Rowbotham Mouffe Geras Brenner Davis Massey Cleaver Bishop Haraway Panitch Clarke Jessop Davis Wright Fraser Burawoy Holloway Rose Screpanti Tamás Hampton Cano Žižek Berardi Sankara Hennessy McDonnell Douzinas Roediger Foster West Ghandy Marcos Heinrich Prashad Kelley Dean Lordon Linera Fisher Li Prestes Coulthard Malm Seymour Toscano Bhattacharya Moufawad-Paul Srnicek Horvat Hamza Saito Journals Antipode Capital & Class Capitalism Nature Socialism Constellations Critique: Journal of Socialist Theory Historical Materialism Mediations Monthly Review New Left Review Race & Class Rethinking Marxism Science & Society Socialist Register Related topics 21st-century communist theorists Anarchism Creative destruction Conflict theory Criticism of Marxism Communism Communalism Economic determinism History of communism Left-wing politics Marxian economics New Left Old Left Municipalism Political ecology Socialism Authoritarian Democratic Market Reformist Revolutionary Social Utopian Left-wing populism Universal class Vulgar Marxism Economism Worker cooperative Workers' council Communism portal Economics portal Philosophy portal Politics portal Socialism portal v t e Usage by Marxists [ edit ] Although the combination of words " rentier capitalism " was never used by Karl Marx himself, it is compatible with the Marxist idea of surplus value extraction. In his early works, Karl Marx juxtaposed the terms "rentier" and "capitalist" to argue that a rentier tends to exhaust his profits, whereas a capitalist must perforce re-invest most of the surplus value in order to survive competition. He wrote, "Therefore, the means of the extravagant rentier diminish daily in inverse proportion to the growing possibilities and temptations of pleasure. He must, therefore, either consume his capital himself, and in doing so bring about his own ruin, or become an industrial capitalist".

[ 6 ] Later in life, including in the manuscript later published Das Capital, Vol. 3 Marx tended to further distinguish so-called rentiers into interest-bearing (finance) capitalists and a separate class of landowners, arguing that the interest from invested capital and rent from private land were economically different.

[ 7 ] He did however in various places, including a letter to Friedrich Engels acknowledge that at some point finance capital might come to own all land and in doing so eliminate the separate landlord class.

[ 8 ] It is a matter of ongoing debate as to whether or not this has come to pass.

[ 9 ] Vladimir Lenin asserted that the growth of a stratum of idle rentiers under capitalism was inevitable and accelerated due to imperialism: Hence the extraordinary growth of a class, or rather, of a stratum of rentiers, i.e., people who live by 'clipping coupons' [in the sense of collecting interest payments on bonds], who take no part in any enterprise whatever, whose profession is idleness. The export of capital, one of the most essential economic bases of imperialism, still more completely isolates the rentiers from production and sets the seal of parasitism on the whole country that lives by exploiting the labour of several overseas countries and colonies.

[ 10 ] Current usage [ edit ] Current usage of the term 'rentier capitalism' describes the gaining of 'rentier' income from ownership or control of assets that generate economic rents rather than from capital or labour used for production in a free competitive market.

[ 11 ] The term rentier state is mainly used not in its original meaning, as an imperialistic state thriving on labor of other countries and colonies, but as a state which derives all or a substantial portion of its national revenues from the rent of indigenous resources to external clients.

Guy Standing has claimed rentier capitalism has become predominant in capitalistic economies since the 1980s.

[ 12 ] Brett Christophers of Uppsala University , Sweden has asserted that rentier capitalism has been the foundation of the United Kingdom's economic policy from the 1970s onwards.

[ 13 ] With the return of high inflation to the United Kingdom in 2022, political economist William Davies surveys recent British economic events in light of rentier capitalism.

[ 14 ] See also [ edit ] Crony capitalism Financialization Parasitism (social offense) Rentier state Rent-seeking Georgism References [ edit ] ^ Peter Frase (7 July 2011).

"Slouching towards rentier capitalism" .

^ Monbiot, George (29 August 2011).

"Academic publishers make Murdoch look like a socialist" .

The Guardian .

^ Dariush M. Doust (January–February 2010).

"Rentier capitalism and the Iranian puzzle" (PDF) .

Radical Philosophy (159): 45– 49.

^ https://ideas.repec.org/h/pal/palchp/978-1-349-05417-6_2.html Developed in the late 1950s by the Austrian geographer Hans Bobek in connection with a theory of ‘the main stages in socio-economic evolution from a geographical point of view.

^ Aligica, Paul Dragos; Tarko, Vlad (2014). "Crony Capitalism: Rent Seeking, Institutions and Ideology: Crony Capitalism".

Kyklos .

67 (2): 156– 176.

doi : 10.1111/kykl.12048 .

S2CID 154030054 .

^ Marx, Karl (1932). "Third Manuscript: Private Property and Labor".

The Economic and Philosophical Manuscripts . Moscow: Marx–Engels Institute – via Marxists Internet Archive.

See also the article Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844 .

^ Marx, Karl (1991).

Capital: Volume 3 . London: Penguin Classics. pp.

759– 761.

^ Marx, Karl; Engels, Frederick (2010).

Marx & Engels Collected Works, Volume 41: Letters 1860-1864 . London: Lawrence & Wishart. p. 398.

^ Manning, F.T.C. (2022).

"A Defence of the Concept of the Landowning Class as the Third Class" .

Historical Materialism .

30 (3): 79– 115.

^ Lenin, Vladimir Ilyich (1963).

"Imperialism, the Highest Stage of Capitalism" .

Lenin's Selected Works . Vol. 1. Moscow: Progress. pp.

667– 766 – via Marxists Internet Archive.

^ Birch, Kean (6 February 2019).

"Technoscience Rent: Toward a Theory of Rentiership for Technoscientific Capitalism" .

Science, Technology, & Human Values .

45 : 3– 33.

doi : 10.1177/0162243919829567 .

^ Standing, Guy.

The Corruption of Capitalism: Why Rentiers Thrive and Work Does Not Pay , London: Biteback (2016) ^ Christophers, Brett (12 August 2020).

"The PPE debacle shows what Britain is built on: rentier capitalism" .

The Guardian . London, United Kingdom.

ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved 27 December 2020 .

^ Davies, William (30 May 2022).

"This age of inflation reveals the sickness ailing Britain's economy: rentier capitalism" .

The Guardian . London, United Kingdom.

ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved 30 May 2022 .

Bibliography [ edit ] Robert Pollin, "Resurrection of the Rentier", in New Left Review 46, July–August 2007, pp. 140–153.

Michael Hudson .

Financial Capitalism v. Industrial Capitalism .

The Other Canon Conference on Production Capitalism vs. Financial Capitalism (Oslo, 3–4 September 1998) .

Karl Marx , "The Economic and Philosophical Manuscripts", Institute of Marxism–Leninism in the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, 1932.

The Economic and Philosophical Manuscripts Karl Marx , "Theories of Surplus-Value", Progress Publishers, 1863.

Economic Manuscripts: Theories of Surplus-Value by Karl Marx 1863 Vladimir Lenin , "Imperialism, the Highest Stage of Capitalism", Lenin's Selected Works, Progress Publishers, 1963, Moscow, Volume 1, pp. 667–766.

Lenin: Imperialism, the Highest Stage of Capitalism ' Ahmed Henni, Le capitalisme de rente: De la société du travail industriel à la société des rentiers . Paris: Harmattan, 2012.

Guy Standing , The Corruption of Capitalism Why rentiers thrive and work does not pay (2016) Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Rentier_capitalism&oldid=1300204215 " Categories : Capitalism Marxist terminology Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from February 2019 This page was last edited on 12 July 2025, at 22:28 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Rentier capitalism 10 languages Add topic

