Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History and characteristics 2 Families 3 Residences 4 See also 5 Further reading 6 References Toggle the table of contents Magnates of Poland and Lithuania 5 languages Polski Русский Simple English Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Painting, by Jan Matejko , of Polish magnates (1697–1795).  See their names here .

A Polish lord's journey during the reign of King August III , by Jan Chełmiński , 1880 Possessions of Polish-Lithuanian magnates in 16th–17th centuries The magnates of Poland and Lithuania ( Polish : magnateria , Lithuanian : magnatai ) were an aristocracy of Polish-Lithuanian nobility ( szlachta ) that existed in the Crown of the Kingdom of Poland , in the Grand Duchy of Lithuania and, from the 1569 Union of Lublin , in the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth , until the Third Partition of Poland in 1795.

[ 1 ] The magnate social class arose around the 16th century and, over time, gained more and more control over Commonwealth politics. The most powerful magnates were known as "little kings" due to the extent of their power and independence. Their influence diminished with the Third Partition of Poland (1795), which ended the Commonwealth's independent existence, and came to an end with the Second World War and the communist -ruled People's Republic of Poland .

Famous magnate families in the territories of the Crown of Poland included the Czartoryski , Kalinowski , Koniecpolski , Krasinski , Ostrogski , Potocki , Tarnowski , Wiśniowiecki , Zasławski and Zamoyski families ; and in the Grand Duchy of Lithuania , the Kieżgajłow , Olelkowicz , Radziwiłł , Pac and Sapieha families .

History and characteristics [ edit ] The magnates arose as the wealthiest and most politically powerful social class , part of the nobility ( szlachta ), of the Kingdom of Poland and Grand Duchy of Lithuania , around 16th century.

[ 1 ] Some traced their ancestry to Gediminas , a Grand Duke of Lithuania from 1316, the Gediminids . Their powers waned after the Commonwealth loss of independence following its final partition in 1795, but they would remain a significant power in the culture, politics and economy of the Polish territories until World War II .

[ 1 ] Magnates (or higher nobility) vied for political power with the lesser and middle nobility ( Ruch egzekucyjny in the late 16th century, and the reform movement of the Great Sejm in the late 18th century) and the King .

[ 1 ] To be counted among the magnates, one should have a large estate, and political influence at least on the scale of a province , if not national.

[ 1 ] Regional differences abounded, with the estates being much larger in the east, where the wealthier magnates were also much more likely to have their own private armies .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] The eastern territories were more independent from the central power, and the large estates there, known as latifundia , with private cities and armies of the magnates, gave rise there to the term królewięta ("little kings") used for the wealthiest of them - the developing aristocracy .

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] The magnates in the Royal Prussia had their fortunes build not around their own lands, but the royal grants ( królewszczyzny ).

[ 1 ] The magnates tried to avoid splitting up of their lands, and some of the wealthiest families were able to protect their lands from division through the ordynacja system.

[ 1 ] Magnate residences often became cultural and economic centers for a given region.

[ 1 ] Social mobility was present, in a limited fashion, as while the magnates preferred to marry within their own ranks, particularly wealthy of famous lesser nobles were able to join their ranks over time; this was the case with the Koniecpolski family , Ossoliński family and the Zamoyski family .

[ 1 ] From the late 16th century the influence of the magnates on Commonwealth politics rose sharply, through their participation in the administrative system (see offices of the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth ) and their control over the lesser nobility, which allowed them to influence the parliaments (local sejmiks and the national sejm walny ) of the country.

[ 1 ] From the second half of the 17th century, the magnates emerged as the victors in the struggle for power in the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth , leading some scholar to refer to this period as a time of the magnate oligarchy .

[ 1 ] As Norman Davies noted, at that time "political life [of Poland] was reduced to the feuds, fortunes, and the follies of a few families".

[ 5 ] Faced with the weakness of the king and parliament, the magnates were even able on occasion to start border wars ( Magnate Moldavian Wars , the Dimitriads ) or civil wars (Radziwiłł's rebellion during The Deluge , and the Sapieha's-centered Lithuanian Civil War of 1700 ).

[ 1 ] Some magnates were also elected as kings of the Commonwealth ; namely Michał Korybut Wiśniowiecki and Stanisław August Poniatowski (a relative of the Czartoryski family).

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] All members of the szlachta were equal under the law, therefore  " magnate " ( Polish : magnat , Lithuanian : magnatas ) was not an official title but rather a position of social class , based on wealth .

[ 4 ] [ 8 ] [ 9 ] Several magnates held high feudal titles or peerage ranks such as prince or count .

[ 4 ] [ 8 ] With few exceptions, mostly dating from the Union of Lublin , and special privileges permitting some Lithuanian magnates to use them, such titles were forbidden by law. Titles from the offices in Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth however were very popular.

[ 4 ] [ 8 ] The wealthiest of magnates would wear crimson and scarlet items of clothing, leading to a nickname for that elite group, karmazyni (the "crimson ones").

[ 10 ] Families [ edit ] Famous magnate families from the Crown of Poland territories included: the Czartoryski , Kalinowski , Koniecpolski , Ossoliński , Ostrogski , Potocki , Wiśnowiecki , Zasławski , Zamoyski , [ 1 ] Krasiński , Mielżyński , and Branicki families.

From the Grand Duchy of Lithuania , notable families included: the Alšėniškis , Astikai , Goštautai , Kęsgaila , Manvydas , Olelkovich , Pac , Radziwiłł , Sapieha , and Tyszkiewicz families.

[ 11 ] [ 1 ] [ 12 ] Residences [ edit ] Major magnate residences, usually in the form of dwórs or dvaras and even outright palaces were found in: Pawłowice , Iwno , Biržai , Kėdainiai , Nesvizh , Slutsk , Kletsk , Slonim , Białystok , Sieraków , Leszno , Rydzyna , Gołuchów , Bieżuń , Jabłonna , Siedlce , Nieborów , Otwock , Pawłowice , Iwno , Vowchyn (Voŭčyn), Biała , Kodeń , Puławy , Białaczów , Końskie , Ujazd , Opole , Rytwiany , Baranów , Zamość , Chervonohrad , Łańcut , Ruzhany , Przeworsk , Zhovkva , Wiśnicz , Rzeszów , Dukla , Krasiczyn , Ivano-Frankivsk , Zolochiv , Brody , Pidhirtsi , Vyshnivets , Olyka , Korets , Ostroh , Iziaslav , Buchach , Zbarazh , Bila Tserkva , Sieniawa , Korsun-Shevchenkivskyi and Tulchyn .

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] See also [ edit ] List of szlachta (this article lists the families of the magnate class, or higher nobility).

Golden Liberty Polish heraldry Sarmatism Princely Houses of Poland Paradisus Judaeorum Further reading [ edit ] Rosman, Murray Jay (1990).

The Lords' Jews : Magnate-Jewish Relations in the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth during the Eighteenth Century . Harvard University Press for the Center for Jewish Studies, Harvard University and the Harvard Ukrainian Research Institute.

References [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Nobility of Poland .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o "Magnaci (Magnates)" .

Encyklopedia PWN . 2010. Archived from the original on 11 April 2016 . Retrieved 2012-12-12 .

^ Richard Brzezinski (1 June 1988).

Polish Armies 1569-1696 (2) . Osprey Publishing. pp.

12– 13.

ISBN 978-0-85045-744-5 .

^ Piotr Stefan Wandycz (1980).

The United States and Poland . Harvard University Press. p. 18.

ISBN 978-0-674-92685-1 .

^ a b c d Aleksander Gella (1989).

Development of Class Structure in Eastern Europe: Poland & Her Southern Neighbors . SUNY Press. pp.

92– 94.

ISBN 978-0-88706-833-1 .

^ Norman Davies (24 February 2005).

God's Playground A History of Poland: Volume 1: The Origins to 1795 . Oxford University Press. p. 379.

ISBN 978-0-19-925339-5 .

^ Daniel Stone (2001).

The Polish-Lithuanian State: 1386-1795 . University of Washington Press. p. 233.

ISBN 978-0-295-98093-5 .

^ Andrejs Plakans (24 February 2011).

A Concise History of the Baltic States . Cambridge University Press. p. 120.

ISBN 978-0-521-83372-1 .

^ a b c Richard Brzezinski (23 April 1987).

Polish Armies 1569-1696 (1) . Osprey Publishing. pp. 6–.

ISBN 978-0-85045-736-0 .

^ Jeannie Labno (1 May 2011).

Commemorating the Polish Renaissance Child: Funeral Monuments and Their European Context . Ashgate Publishing, Ltd. pp. 26–.

ISBN 978-0-7546-6825-1 .

^ Klub Kostiumologii i Tkaniny Artystycznej (Warsaw, Poland). Sesja; Stowarzyszenie Historyków Sztuki. Oddział Warszawski (1994).

Ubiory w Polsce . Kopia. p. 183.

^ "Žymiausios LDK didikų giminės" .

vle.lt . LNB Mokslo ir enciklopedijų leidybos centras . Retrieved 21 January 2025 .

^ S. J. Starykoń-Kasprzycki, Polska Encyklopedia Szlachecka. Warszawa: Instytutu Kultury Historycznej, 1935-1938. Print.

^ Tadeusz Cegielski, Katarzyna Zielińska: Historia. Dzieje nowożytne. Podręcznik dla klasy II liceum ogólnokształcącego. Warszawa: Wydawnictwa Szkole i Pedagogiczne, 1998, p. 191.

ISBN 83-02-04757-0 .

^ Michael Pratt. The Great Country Houses of Poland. New York: Abbeville, 2007. Print.

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Magnates_of_Poland_and_Lithuania&oldid=1304177595 " Categories : Polish nobility Lithuanian nobility Ruthenian nobility of the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth Social class in Poland Social history of the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth Ukrainian nobility Social history of Ukraine Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description with empty Wikidata description Articles containing Polish-language text Articles containing Lithuanian-language text Commons category link is locally defined This page was last edited on 4 August 2025, at 12:49 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Magnates of Poland and Lithuania 5 languages Add topic

