Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 African Toggle African subsection 1.1 Ancient Egyptian 1.2 Yoruba 2 Native American Toggle Native American subsection 2.1 Aztec 2.2 Inca 2.3 Inuit 2.4 Mayan 2.5 Muiscan 2.6 Taíno 2.7 Vodou 3 Asian Toggle Asian subsection 3.1 Arabian 3.2 Armenian 3.3 Canaanite 3.4 Chinese 3.5 Filipino 3.6 Vietnamese 3.7 Hittite/Hurrian 3.8 Indian 3.9 Iranian 3.10 Phoenician 3.11 Japanese 3.12 Mesopotamian 3.13 Turco-Mongol 4 European Toggle European subsection 4.1 Albanian 4.2 Baltic 4.3 Celtic 4.4 Etruscan 4.5 Finno-Ugric 4.6 Germanic 4.7 Greek 4.8 Irish 4.9 Roman 4.10 Sami 4.11 Slavic 5 Oceanian Toggle Oceanian subsection 5.1 Hawaiian 5.2 Indigenous Australian 6 See also 7 References Toggle the table of contents List of fertility deities 9 languages Español Euskara فارسی Français Bahasa Indonesia ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Русский Scots Türkçe Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Fertility deity ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "List of fertility deities" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( September 2016 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Statue of a goddess of fertility, Copenhagen A fertility deity is a god or goddess associated with fertility , sex , pregnancy , childbirth , and crops . In some cases these deities are directly associated with these experiences; in others they are more abstract symbols.

Fertility rites may accompany their worship. The following is a list of fertility deities.

African [ edit ] Ala , Igbo goddess of fertility Asase Ya , Ashanti earth goddess of fertility Deng , Dinka sky god of rain and fertility Mbaba Mwana Waresa , Zulu goddess of fertility, rainbows, agriculture, rain, and bees Orie , Ohafia goddess of fertility Oshun (known as Ochún or Oxúm in Latin America ) also spelled Ọṣun , is an orisha , a spirit, a deity, or a goddess that reflects one of the manifestations of God in the Ifá and Yoruba religions. She is one of the most popular and venerated orishas. Oshun is the deity of the river and fresh water, luxury and pleasure, sexuality and fertility, and beauty and love. She is connected to destiny and divination .

Ancient Egyptian [ edit ] Min , ancient Egyptian god of fertility and lettuce Amun , creator-god, associated with fertility Bastet , cat goddess sometimes associated with fertility Hathor , goddess of music, beauty, love, sexuality and fertility Heqet , frog-goddess of fertility Heryshaf , god of creation and fertility Isis , goddess of motherhood, magic and fertility Knum , Creator of the human body, source of the Nile, associated with fertility/ creation of life Mesenet , goddess of childbirth Min , god of fertility and reproduction Osiris , god of the afterlife, the dead, and the underworld agency that granted all life, including sprouting vegetation and the fertile flooding of the Nile River Renenutet , goddess of the true name, the harvest and fertile fields Sobek , god of the river, warfare and fertility Sopdet , goddess of the fertility of the soil Tawaret , goddess of fertility and childbirth Tefnut , goddess of water and fertility Yoruba [ edit ] Eshu Oya Native American [ edit ] Atahensic , Iroquois goddess associated with marriage, childbirth, and feminine endeavors Kokopelli , Hopi trickster god associated with fertility, childbirth and agriculture Hanhepi Wi, Lakota goddess associated with the moon, motherhood, family and femininity Aztec [ edit ] Chimalma , goddess of fertility, life, death, and rebirth.

Tonacatecuhtli , god of sustenance.

Tonacacihuatl , goddess of sustenance.

Tonantzin Coatlicue , goddess of fertility, life, death, and rebirth.

Xochipilli , god of love, art, games, beauty, dance, flowers, maize, fertility, and song.

Xochiquetzal , goddess of fertility, beauty, female sexual power, protection of young mothers, pregnancy, childbirth, and women's crafts.

Quetzalcoatl , god of fertility, wind, water, and chocolate.

Inca [ edit ] Mama Ocllo , mother goddess, associated with fertility Sara Mama , goddess of grain Pachamama , fertility goddess who presides over planting and harvesting and causes earthquakes Inuit [ edit ] Akna , goddess of fertility and childbirth Pukkeenegak , goddess of children, pregnancy, childbirth and the making of clothes Mayan [ edit ] Akna , goddess of motherhood and childbirth Goddess I , goddess of eroticism, female fertility, and marriage Ixchel , jaguar goddess of midwifery and medicine Maya maize god , gods of maize Maximón , a Mayan god and modern folk saint associated with crops, death, and fertility and Sight Muiscan [ edit ] Chaquén , god of sports and fertility in the religion of the Muisca Taíno [ edit ] Atabey (goddess) , mother goddess of fresh waters and fertility (of people).

Yúcahu , masculine spirit of fertility (of crops such as Yucca) along with his mother Atabey who was his feminine counterpart.

Vodou [ edit ] Ayida-Weddo , loa of fertility, rainbows and snakes Gede , family of spirits that embody the powers of death and fertility Asian [ edit ] Arabian [ edit ] Attar (god) Armenian [ edit ] Anahit ,  goddess of fertility, healing, wisdom, and water Aramazd , generous king and creator god of fertility, rain, and abundance Canaanite [ edit ] Hadad , storm (and thus rain) god responsible for crops growing, also known as Adad and Ba'al Nikkal , goddess of fruits Tanit , consort of Baʿal Hammon at Carthage Chinese [ edit ] Chū Shèng Niángniáng, Goddess of Fertility Jiutian Xuannü , a fertility goddess as well as a deity of war and long life [ 1 ] Yúnxiāo Niángniáng , goddess of childbirth Qióngxiāo Niángniáng , goddess of childbirth Bìxiāo Niángniáng , goddess of childbirth Chén Jìnggū , goddess of childbirth [ 2 ] Filipino [ edit ] Main article: List of Philippine mythological figures Lakapati: the hermaphrodite Tagalog deity and protector of sown fields, sufficient field waters, and abundant fish catch; [ 3 ] a major fertility deity; [ 4 ] deity of vagrants and waifs; [ 5 ] a patron of cultivated lands and husbandry [ 6 ] Ikapati: the Sambal goddess of cultivated land and fertility [ 7 ] Lakan-bakod: the Tagalog god of the fruits of the earth who dwells in certain plants; [ 8 ] the god of crops; [ 9 ] the god of rice whose hollow statues have gilded eyes, teeth, and genitals; food and wine are introduced to his mouth to secure a good crop; [ 10 ] the protector of fences [ 11 ] Kukarog: the Bicolano giant who was swept by waters into the sea, where his genital can be seen as a rock jutting from the ocean [ 12 ] Ibabasag: the Bukidnon goddess of pregnant women [ 13 ] Vietnamese [ edit ] Bà mụ , consisting of twelve goddesses responsible for creating each part of the child Hittite/Hurrian [ edit ] Hutellurra, Irsirra, and Tawara , goddesses of midwifery and nursing children Shaushka , goddess of fertility, war, and healing Indian [ edit ] Parvati is a goddess, a female deity associated with the earth and fertility.

Banka-Mundi , goddess of the hunt and fertility Bhavani , goddess of fertility Bhumi , goddess of the earth and associated with fertility Lajja Gauri , goddess associated with abundance and fertility Lakshmi , goddess of prosperity, wealth, fortune, and fertility Manasa , snake goddess associated with fertility and prosperity Matrikas , a group of 7-16 goddesses who are associated with fertility and motherly power.

Parvati , goddess of the Himalayan Mountains, fertility, beauty, food and power Prithvi Vedic-goddess of the earth and associated with fertility Rankini , goddess of protection, strength and fertility Sinivali , goddess associated with fecundity and easy birth Yogamaya , goddess of fertility and maya (illusion) Saraswati , Vedic-goddess of knowledge, music, arts, wealth, abundance and fertility Mariamman , goddess of rain, fertility and cure for small pox Iranian [ edit ] Anahita : or Anahit , the divinity of "the Waters" and hence associated with fertility, healing, and wisdom Spenta Armaiti : or Sandaramet , female divinity associated with earth and Mother Nature Ashi : a divinity of fertility and fortune [ 14 ] Phoenician [ edit ] Asherah , Mother Goddess of nature, groves & trees (exiled by Hezekiah) Japanese [ edit ] Dosojin , Minor gods of boundaries, fertility, health and protection.

Kichijōten , goddess of happiness, fertility, and beauty Kuebiko , god of agriculture and knowledge Inari Ōkami , deity of fertility, rice, agriculture, foxes, and industry; this deity is of ambiguous gender and may be portrayed as male, female, or ambiguous Shinda , fertility god of the Ainu people Mesopotamian [ edit ] Asherah , Ancient semitic goddess of motherhood and fertility Ashratum , the wife of Amurru. Ašratum (glorified one), a cognate of Athirat Dumuzid / Tammuz , Mesopotamian dying-&-rising god, Dumuzid-sipad (the Shepherd), husband of Inanna Gatumdag , Sumerian fertility goddess and tutelary mother goddess of Lagash Nanshe , Sumerian goddess of social justice, prophecy, fertility, and fishing Sharra Itu , Identified with Asratum, later Ašrat-aḫītu (Ašratum the foreigner) or (the other Ašratum) Inanna / Ishtar , Mesopotamian goddess of love, beauty, sex, desire, fertility, war, justice, and political power. Her symbols were lions, doves & the 8-pointed star, wife of Dumuzid Turco-Mongol [ edit ] Umay , goddess of fertility and reproduction, believed to have saved two children (one boy and one girl) from a massacre. She is believed to have offered protection and guidance to the children, who managed to raise the Turkic communities. In the form of a deer, she is accepted by the Turks to be the protective power of the race, and therefore she is called in many texts as "Mother Umay".

European [ edit ] Albanian [ edit ] Prende , goddess of love, beauty and fertility Baltic [ edit ] Laima , goddess of luck and fate, associated with childbirth, pregnancy, marriage, and death Zemes māte , goddess of the earth, associated with fertility Celtic [ edit ] Brigid , Irish goddess associated with fertility, spring, healing, smithing, and poetry Cernunnos , horned god associated with the fertility of animals and nature Damara , fertility goddess worshiped in Britain Damona , Gaulish fertility goddess Epona , goddess of horses, mules, donkeys, and the fertility of these animals Hooded Spirits , a group of deities theorised to be fertility spirits Nantosuelta , goddess of nature, the earth, fire, and fertility Onuava , goddess of fertility Rosmerta , Gallo-Roman goddess of fertility and abundance Etruscan [ edit ] Fufluns , god of plant life, happiness, health, and growth in all things, equivalent to the Greek Dionysus Thesan , goddess of the dawn, associated with the generation of life Turan , goddess of love, fertility and vitality Finno-Ugric [ edit ] Äkräs , Finnish god of fertility Rauni or Raun, Finnish- Estonian goddess of fertility Peko or Pellon-Pekko, Karelian - Seto god of fertility Metsik, West Estonian spirit of fertility Norovava, Mordovian goddess of fertility Šun-Šočõnava, Mari goddess of fertility and birth Mu-Kyldyśin, Udmurt god of fertility and earth Zarni-Ań, Komi goddess of fertility, represented by a golden woman Babba or Aranyanya, Hungarian goddess fertility, represented by a golden woman Kalteš-Ekwa , Ob-Ugric goddess of fertility, represented by a golden woman Germanic [ edit ] Ēostre , spring and fertility goddess; in earlier times probably a dawn goddess as her name is cognate to Eos Freyr , god associated with peace, marriages, rain, sunshine, and fertility, both of the land and people Freyja , a goddess associated with fertility and sister of the above god Frigg , goddess associated with prophecy, marriage, and childbirth; in one myth, she also demonstrates a more direct connection with fertility, as a king and queen pray to her for a child Gefjun , Danish goddess of ploughing and possibly fertility Nerthus , earth goddess associated with fertility Njörðr , since his name is cognate with the above goddess, it's possible he was originally an earth/fertility deity before transforming into a sea god thanked for a bountiful catch Thor , associated with the bringing of rain Greek [ edit ] Aphrodite , goddess of beauty, love, pleasure, sexuality and procreation.

Aphaea , local goddess associated with fertility and the agricultural cycle Artemis , goddess of the hunt, the wilderness, wild animals, the Moon, chastity and childbirth Demeter , goddess of the harvest, agriculture, fertility and sacred law Dionysus , god of wine, grapes, and festivity, associated with fertility, particularly that of the vine and males Priapus , Greek god of fertility, gardens and male genitalia Hermes , messenger of the gods, possibly associated with male fertility Hera , goddess of marriage, women, women's fertility, childbirth Heracles , god of strength and athletes, had an association with male fertility as well as agriculture.

Ilithyia , (also called Eileithyia) goddess of childbirth and midwifery Pan , god of shepherds and flocks, associated with fertility, particularly that of animals Phanes , primeval deity of procreation and new life Priapus , rustic god of fertility, protection of livestock, fruit plants, gardens, and male genitalia Tychon , minor daemon of fertility Phales , daemon, incarnation of the Phallus, associated with Dionysus Irish [ edit ] Dagda Roman [ edit ] Bacchus , Roman version of Dionysus, identified with Roman Liber , god of agricultural and male fertility Bona Dea , goddess of fertility, healing, virginity, and women Candelifera , goddess of childbirth Carmenta , goddess of childbirth and prophecy Domidicus, the god who leads the bride home Domitius, the god who installs the bride Fascinus , embodiment of the divine phallus Fecunditas , goddess of fertility Feronia , goddess associated with fertility and abundance Flora , goddess of flowers and springtime Inuus , god of sexual intercourse Jugatinus, the god who joins the pair in marriage Juno , goddess of marriage and childbirth, equivalent to the Greek goddess Hera; has the epithet Lucina [ 15 ] Liber , god of viniculture, wine, and male fertility, equivalent to Greek Dionysus ; in archaic Lavinium , a phallic deity Libera , female equivalent of Liber, also identified with Proserpina Romanised form of Greek Persephone Manturna, the goddess who kept the bride at home Mater Matuta , deity of female maturation also protector in childbirth.

Mutunus Tutunus , phallic marriage deity associated with the Greek god Priapus Partula , goddess of childbirth, who determined the duration of each pregnancy Pertunda, goddess who enables sexual penetration of the virgin bride; an epithet of Juno [ 16 ] Picumnus , god of fertility, agriculture, matrimony, infants, and children Prema, goddess who made the bride submissive, allowing penetration;  also an epithet of Juno , who has the same function [ 17 ] Robigus , fertility god who protects crops against disease Subigus, the god who subdues the bride to the husband's will Venus , goddess of beauty, love, desire, sex and fertility Virginiensis, the goddess who unties the girdle of the bride.

Sami [ edit ] Beiwe , goddess of fertility and sanity Rana Niejta , goddess of spring and fertility Slavic [ edit ] Dzydzilelya , Polish goddess of love, marriage, sexuality and fertility Jarilo , god of fertility, spring, the harvest and war Kostroma , goddess of fertility Mokoš , Old Russian goddess of fertility, the Mother Goddess, protector of women's work and women's destiny Siebog , god of love and marriage Svetovid , god of war, fertility, and abundance Živa , goddess of love and fertility Oceanian [ edit ] Gedi (mythology) , Fijian god of fertility, who taught mankind the use of fire Makemake , Rapa Nui creator-god, associated with fertility Tagroa Siria , Fijian god associated with fertility Sido/Soido, Melanesian god associated with fertility Tangaroa , Rarotongan god of the sea and creation, associated with fertility Hawaiian [ edit ] Haumea , goddess of fertility and childbirth Kamapua'a , demi-god of fertility Laka , patron of the hula dance and god of fertility Lono , god associated with fertility, agriculture, rainfall, and music Nuakea , goddess of lactation Indigenous Australian [ edit ] Anjea , goddess or spirit of fertility Birrahgnooloo , Kamilaroi goddess of fertility Dilga , Karadjeri goddess of fertility and growth Julunggul , Yolngu rainbow snake goddess associated with fertility, initiation, rebirth and the weather Kunapipi , mother goddess and the patron deity of many heroes Rainbow Serpent , creator god and god of rain and fertility Ungud , snake god or goddess associated with rainbows and the fertility and erections of the tribe's shaman Wollunqua , snake god of rain and fertility See also [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Fertility deities .

The Dinner Party -this artwork features a place setting for Fertile Goddess.

[ 18 ] Fertility rite Fertility and religion Earth Mother Religion and agriculture Agricultural spiritualism Lists of deities in Sanamahism Earth goddess Fall of man#Agricultural revolution References [ edit ] ^ Liu, Peng (2016). " "Conceal my Body so that I can Protect the State": The Making of the Mysterious Woman in Daoism and Water Margin".

Ming Studies .

2016 (74): 48– 71.

doi : 10.1080/0147037X.2016.1228876 .

S2CID 164447144 .

^ Berthier, Brigitte. (2008) The Lady of Linshu: A Chinese female cult. California : Stanford University Press.

^ San Buenaventura, P. (1613). Vocabulario de Lengua Tagala.

^ Scott, W. H. (1994). Barangay: Sixteenth-century Philippine Culture and Society. Ateneo University Press.

^ Pardo, F. (1686–1688). Carte [...] sobre la idolatria de los naturales de la provincia de Zambales, y de los del pueblo de Santo Tomas y otros cicunvecinos [...]. Sevilla, Spain: Archivo de la Indias.

^ Plasencia, J. (1589). Relacion de las Costumbres de Los Tagalos.

^ Jocano, F. L. (1969). Philippine Mythology. Quezon City: Capitol Publishing House Inc.

^ Demetrio, F. R., Cordero-Fernando, G., & Zialcita, F. N. (1991). The Soul Book. Quezon City: GCF Books.

^ Jocano, F. L. (1969). Philippine Mythology. Quezon City: Capitol Publishing House Inc.

^ Souza, G. B., Turley, J. S. (2016). The Boxer Codex: Transcription and Translation of an Illustrated Late Sixteenth-century Spanish Manuscript Concerning the Geography, Ethnography and History of the Pacific, South-East Asia and East Asia. Brill.

^ Potet, J. P. G. (2017). Ancient Beliefs and Customs of the Tagalogs. Morrisville, North Carolina: Lulu Press.

^ "Archived copy" . Archived from the original on 2021-01-18 . Retrieved 2020-09-08 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: archived copy as title ( link ) ^ Jocano, F. L. (1969). Philippine Mythology. Quezon City: Capitol Publishing House Inc.

^ Taheri, Sadreddin (2014).

"Goddesses in Iranian Culture and Mythology" . Tehran: Roshangaran va Motale’at-e Zanan Publications.

Archived from the original on 2018-07-15 . Retrieved 2018-07-24 .

^ Ovid, Fasti II, 425-452 ^ Augustine, The City of God , 6.9.3; Arnobius, Adversus Nationes , 4,.7 ^ Augustine, The City of God , 6.9.3 ^ Place Settings Archived 2021-05-03 at the Wayback Machine . Brooklyn Museum. Retrieved on 2015-08-06.

v t e Lists of mythological figures By geography African Albanian Arabian Armenian Australian Aboriginal Aztec Balkan Basque Batak Canaanite Catalan Celtic List Chahta Chinese Efik Egyptian Index List Elamite Estonian Etruscan Finnish Georgian Germanic Anglo-Saxon Greek Deities Mortals Mycenaean deities Guanche Haudenosaunee Hawaiian Hebridean Indian-origin religions Hindu List Rigvedic Buddhist China Japan Jain List Meitei List Sylhet Hittite Hungarian Hurrian Indonesian Inuit Irish Japanese Kassite Komi Korean Lakota Lithuanian Māori Māʻohi Maya Mesopotamian Micronesian Muskogee Myanmar Native American Zapotec Ossetian Persian Philippine Purépecha Roman Sami Samoan Slavic Turkic Tuvaluan Ugaritic Vainakh Yoruba By association Agriculture Art Beauty Chaos Dawn Creator Death Earth Fate and Time Fertility Fire Fortune Health Household Hunting King of the gods Knowledge Light Liminal Love and Lust Moon List Nations Nature Night Psychopomp Rain Resurrection Sky Smithing Sun List Thunder Tree Trickery List Tutelary Vegetation Volcano War Water Weather Wind Portal Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=List_of_fertility_deities&oldid=1304060600 " Categories : Fertility deities Mythological archetypes Lists of deities Hidden categories: CS1 maint: archived copy as title Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from September 2016 All articles needing additional references Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 3 August 2025, at 18:39 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents List of fertility deities 9 languages Add topic

