Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Death and veneration Toggle Death and veneration subsection 2.1 Feast days 3 Works 4 See also 5 References 6 Bibliography 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Peter Chrysologus 32 languages Asturianu Беларуская Català Čeština Deutsch Español Français Gaeilge Հայերեն Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Kiswahili Latina Magyar مصرى Nederlands Norsk bokmål Polski Português Română Русский Sardu Shqip Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Bishop of Ravenna Saint Peter Chrysologus Bishop, Confessor, and Doctor of the Church Born c. 380 Imola , Aemilia , Roman Empire Died 31 July 450 Imola, Aemilia, Roman Empire Venerated in Catholic Church , Eastern Orthodox Church , Anglicanism Canonized Pre-Congregation Feast 30 July 4 December ( General Roman Calendar 1729–1969) [ 1 ] Saints Peter Chrysologus, Romuald and Peter Damian by Giuseppe Milani in Ravenna Cathedral Peter Chrysologus ( Greek : Ἅγιος Πέτρος ὁ Χρυσολόγος , Petros Chrysologos , "Peter the Golden-worded"; c. 380 – c. 450 [ 2 ] ) was an Italian Christian prelate who served as Bishop of Ravenna from about 433 until his death.

[ 3 ] He is known as the " Doctor of Homilies " for the concise but theologically rich reflections he delivered during his time as the Bishop of Ravenna.

He is revered as a saint by the Catholic Church and the Eastern Orthodox Church ; he was declared a Doctor of the Church by Pope Benedict XIII in 1729.

Life [ edit ] Peter was born in Imola , where the local bishop Cornelius baptized him, educated him, and ordained him a deacon . He was made an archdeacon through the influence of Emperor Valentinian III .

Pope Sixtus III appointed Peter as Bishop of Ravenna circa 433, apparently rejecting the candidate whom the people of the city of Ravenna elected. At that time Ravenna was the capital of the West, [ 4 ] and there are indications that Ravenna held the rank of metropolitan before this time.

[ 5 ] The traditional account, as recorded in the Roman Breviary , is that Sixtus had a vision of Pope Peter the Apostle and Apollinaris of Ravenna , the first bishop of that see, who showed Peter, a young man, the next Bishop of Ravenna. When a group from Ravenna arrived, including Cornelius and his archdeacon Peter from Imola, Sixtus recognized Peter as the young man in his vision and consecrated him as a bishop.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] Saint Peter Chrysologus, Diocesan Museum, Imola People knew Peter Chrysologus, the Doctor of Homilies , for his very simple and short but inspired sermons, for he was afraid of fatiguing the attention of his hearers.

[ 7 ] His piety and zeal won universal admiration. After hearing oratory of his first homily as bishop, Roman Empress Galla Placidia supposedly gave him the surname Chrysologus , meaning "golden-worded." His sermons are historically significant in that they reveal Christian life in fifth-century Ravenna.

[ 4 ] The Emperor's mother, Galla Placidia, patronized many projects of Bishop Peter.

[ 8 ] In his extant homilies, Bishop Peter explained Biblical texts briefly and concisely.  He also condemned Arianism and Monophysitism as heresies and explained the Apostles' Creed , the mystery of the Incarnation , and other topics in simple and clear language. He dedicated a series of homilies to John the Baptist and the Mary, mother of Jesus .  Peter advocated daily reception of Eucharist . He urged his listeners to confide in the forgiveness offered through Christ.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] [ 11 ] His surviving works attest to the Catholic Church's traditional beliefs about Mary's perpetual virginity, the penitential value of Lent, Christ's Eucharistic presence, and the primacy of St. Peter and his successors. He shared the confidence of Pope Leo I the Great (440-461), another Doctor of the Church.

A synod held in Constantinople in 448 condemned Eutyches for Monophysitism ; Eutyches then appealed to Peter Chrysologus but failed in his endeavour to win the support of the Bishop. The Acts of the Council of Chalcedon (451) preserves the text of letter of Peter Chrysologus in response to Eutyches; Peter admonishes Eutyches to accept the ruling of the synod and to give obedience to the Bishop of Rome as the successor of Peter the Apostle .

Archbishop Felix of Ravenna in the early eighth century collected and preserved 176 of his homilies.

[ 8 ] Various authors edited and translated these works into numerous languages.

Death and veneration [ edit ] St Peter died circa 450 during a visit to Imola, the town of his birth. Older reference books say he died on 2 December, but a more recent interpretation of the ninth-century "Liber Pontificalis Ecclesiae Ravennatis" indicated that he died on 31 July.

[ 1 ] When in 1729 he was declared a Doctor of the Church , his feast day , not already included in the Tridentine calendar , was inserted in the General Roman Calendar for celebration on 4 December. In 1969 his feast was moved to 30 July, as close as possible to the day of his death, 31 July, the feast day of Ignatius of Loyola .

[ citation needed ] A contemporary portrait of Peter Chrysologus, found in the mosaics of the Church of San Giovanni Evangelista in Ravenna, depicts him among the members of the eastern and western imperial family, showing his extraordinary influence.

[ 12 ] Feast days [ edit ] 30 July – main commemoration, 2 December – death anniversary (older tradition), 3 December – orthodox commemoration 4 December – Traditional catholic commemoration Works [ edit ] There are three volumes of "selected sermons" in the "Fathers of the Church" series (17, 109 and 110), published by the Catholic University of America Press.  Despite the title, this includes all the genuine sermons.  There is also a recent 2020 volume from Routledge containing a number of his sermons, translated by David Vincent Meconi Jr.

See also [ edit ] Saint Peter Chrysologus, patron saint archive References [ edit ] ^ a b "Calendarium Romanum" (Libreria Editrice Vaticana, 1969), p. 98 ^ The Liturgy of the Hours, Vol. III, pp. 1562.

^ Michael Walsh, ed. "Butler's Lives of the Saints", New York: HarperCollins Publishers, 1991.

^ a b Foley OFM, Leonard. "St. Peter Chrysologus", Saint of the Day , (revised by Pat McCloskey OFM), Franciscan Media ^ Smith, Ignatius. "St. Peter Chrysologus." The Catholic Encyclopedia. Vol. 11. New York: Robert Appleton Company, 1911. 17 March 2015 ^ "December 4" .

Roman Breviary . Confraternity of Sts. Peter and Paul. Archived from the original on 2010-11-24 . Retrieved 2010-06-28 .

^ a b Fr. Paolo O. Pirlo, SHMI (1997). "St. Peter Chrysologus".

My First Book of Saints . Sons of Holy Mary Immaculate – Quality Catholic Publications. p. 163.

ISBN 971-91595-4-5 .

^ a b " "St. Peter Chrysologus", Catholic News Agency" . Archived from the original on 2017-09-03 . Retrieved 2015-03-17 .

^ Sermon 58, On the Creed, par. 13 ^ Sermon 30, on Matthew 9:9ff, par. 5 ^ Sermon 168 par. 3 ^ "Jul 30 – St Peter Chrysologus (d. 450) Bishop" .

Catholic Ireland . Retrieved 30 Nov 2022 .

Bibliography [ edit ] Otto Bardenhewer , Patrology , tr. Shanan, pp. 526 ff.

Dapper, Der hl. Petrus von Ravenna Chrysologus , Posen, 1871 Looshorn, Der hl. Petrus Chrysologus und seine Schriflen in Zeitschrift f. kathol. Theol.

, III, 1879, pp. 238 ff.

Wayman, Zu Petrus Chrysologus in Philologus , LV (1896), pp. 464 ff.

San Pietro Crisologo, Sermoni , two volumes, Città Nuova, Roma 1997 External links [ edit ] St. Peter Chrysologus Patron Saints Index: Saint Peter Chrysologus Saint of the Day: 30 July v t e Saints of the Catholic Church Dicastery for the Causes of Saints Stages of canonization : Servant of God → Venerable → Blessed → Saint Virgin Mary Mother of God (Theotokos) Immaculate Conception Perpetual virginity Assumption Marian apparition Titles of Mary Joseph (husband) Apostles Andrew Barnabas Bartholomew James of Alphaeus James the Great John Jude Matthew Matthias Paul Peter Philip Simon Thomas Archangels Gabriel Michael in the Catholic Church Raphael Confessors Anatolius Anthony of Kiev Athanasius the Confessor Chariton the Confessor Dominic Edward the Confessor Francis of Assisi Francis Borgia Homobonus John Henry Newman Lazarus Zographos Louis Bertrand Martin de Porres Martin of Tours Maximus the Confessor Michael of Synnada Paphnutius the Confessor Paul I of Constantinople Peter Claver Salonius Sergius of Radonezh Theophanes the Confessor Pio of Pietrelcina Disciples Apollos Mary of Bethany Mary Magdalene Priscilla and Aquila Silvanus Stephen Timothy Titus Seventy disciples Doctors of the Church Gregory the Great Ambrose Augustine of Hippo Jerome John Chrysostom Basil of Caesarea Gregory of Nazianzus Athanasius of Alexandria Cyril of Alexandria Cyril of Jerusalem John of Damascus Bede the Venerable Ephrem the Syrian Thomas Aquinas Bonaventure Anselm of Canterbury Isidore of Seville Peter Chrysologus Leo the Great Peter Damian Bernard of Clairvaux Hilary of Poitiers Alphonsus Liguori Francis de Sales Peter Canisius John of the Cross Robert Bellarmine Albertus Magnus Anthony of Padua Lawrence of Brindisi Teresa of Ávila Catherine of Siena Thérèse of Lisieux John of Ávila Hildegard of Bingen Gregory of Narek Irenaeus John Henry Newman Evangelists Matthew Mark Luke John Church Fathers Alexander of Alexandria Alexander of Jerusalem Ambrose of Milan Anatolius Athanasius of Alexandria Augustine of Hippo Caesarius of Arles Caius Cappadocian Fathers Clement of Alexandria Clement of Rome Cyprian of Carthage Cyril of Alexandria Cyril of Jerusalem Damasus I Desert Fathers Desert Mothers Dionysius of Alexandria Dionysius of Corinth Dionysius Ephrem the Syrian Epiphanius of Salamis Fulgentius of Ruspe Gregory the Great Gregory of Nazianzus Gregory of Nyssa Hilary of Poitiers Hippolytus of Rome Ignatius of Antioch Irenaeus of Lyons Isidore of Seville Jerome of Stridonium John Chrysostom John of Damascus Maximus the Confessor Melito of Sardis Quadratus of Athens Papias of Hierapolis Peter Chrysologus Polycarp of Smyrna Theophilus of Antioch Victorinus of Pettau Vincent of Lérins Zephyrinus Martyrs Abda and Abdisho Boris and Gleb Charles de Foucauld Canadian Martyrs Carthusian Martyrs Child Martyrs of Tlaxcala Christina of Persia Dominguito del Val Devasahayam Pillai Dismas the Good Thief Forty Martyrs of England and Wales Four Crowned Martyrs Gerard of Csanád Great Martyr The Holy Innocents Irish Martyrs John Fisher Korean Martyrs Lorenzo Ruiz Martyrs of Lübeck Luigi Versiglia Martyrology Martyrs of Albania Martyrs of Algeria Martyrs of Cajonos Martyrs of Compiègne Martyrs of Drina Martyrs of China Martyrs of Gorkum Martyrs of Japan 21 Martyrs of Libya Martyrs of La Rioja Martyrs of Damascus Martyrs of Laos Martyrs of Natal Martyrs of Otranto Martyrs of Prague Martyrs of Sandomierz Martyrs of the Spanish Civil War Martyrs of Zenta Maximilian Kolbe Óscar Romero Pedro Calungsod Perpetua and Felicity Peter Chanel Pietro Parenzo Philomena Saints of the Cristero War Stephen Teresa Benedicta of the Cross Titus Brandsma 17 Thomasian Martyrs Thomas Becket Thomas More Three Martyrs of Chimbote Ulma Family Uganda Martyrs Vietnamese Martyrs Valentine of Rome Victor and Corona Zanitas and Lazarus of Persia Missionaries Ansgar Augustine of Canterbury Boniface Cyril and Methodius Damien of Molokai Evermode of Ratzeburg Francis Xavier François de Laval Gregory the Illuminator Junípero Serra Nino of Georgia Patrick of Ireland Remigius Sava of Serbia Patriarchs Adam Abel Abraham Isaac Jacob Joseph Joseph (father of Jesus) David Noah Solomon Matriarchs Popes Adeodatus I Adeodatus II Adrian III Agapetus I Agatho Alexander I Anacletus Anastasius I Anicetus Anterus Benedict II Boniface I Boniface IV Caius Callixtus I Celestine I Celestine V Clement I Cornelius Damasus I Dionysius Eleuterus Eugene I Eusebius Eutychian Evaristus Fabian Felix I Felix III Felix IV Gelasius I Gregory I Gregory II Gregory III Gregory VII Hilarius Hormisdas Hyginus Innocent I John I John XXIII John Paul II Julius I Leo I Leo II Leo III Leo IV Leo IX Linus Lucius I Marcellinus Marcellus I Mark Martin I Miltiades Nicholas I Paschal I Paul I Paul VI Peter Pius I Pius V Pius X Pontian Sergius I Silverius Simplicius Siricius Sixtus I Sixtus II Sixtus III Soter Stephen I Stephen IV Sylvester I Symmachus Telesphorus Urban I Victor I Vitalian Zachary Zephyrinus Zosimus Prophets Agabus Amos Anna Baruch ben Neriah David Elijah Ezekiel Habakkuk Haggai Hosea Isaiah Jeremiah Job Joel John the Baptist Jonah Judas Barsabbas Malachi Melchizedek Micah Moses Nahum Obadiah Samuel Seven Maccabees and their mother Simeon Zechariah (prophet) Zechariah (NT) Zephaniah Virgins Agatha of Sicily Agnes of Rome Angela of the Cross Æthelthryth Bernadette Soubirous Catherine of Bologna Brigid of Kildare Catherine Labouré Catherine of Siena Cecilia Clare of Assisi Eulalia of Mérida Euphemia Faustina Kowalska Faustina and Liberata of Como Genevieve Hiltrude of Liessies Joan of Arc Josephine Bakhita Kateri Tekakwitha Lucy of Syracuse Maria Goretti María de las Maravillas de Jesús Narcisa de Jesús Patricia of Naples Rosalia Rose of Lima Teresa of the Andes Teresa of Calcutta Trasilla and Emiliana Ubaldesca Taccini See also Calendar of saints Four Holy Marshals Fourteen Holy Helpers Martyr of charity Military saints Athleta Christi Miles Christianus Church Militant Seven Champions Venerated couples Virtuous pagan Catholic Church portal Saints portal Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF 2 3 4 5 6 FAST National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Australia Czech Republic Portugal Netherlands Norway Croatia Poland Vatican Israel Catalonia Belgium People Trove Italian People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Peter_Chrysologus&oldid=1303692978 " Categories : 380 births 450 deaths 5th-century Christian saints 5th-century Italian bishops 5th-century writers in Latin Bishops of Ravenna Church Fathers Doctors of the Church Italian male non-fiction writers Italian religious writers Italian Roman Catholic writers Italian saints Letter writers in Latin People from Imola Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Greek-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from November 2024 This page was last edited on 1 August 2025, at 14:12 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Peter Chrysologus 32 languages Add topic

