Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 McTaggart's series Toggle McTaggart's series subsection 2.1 A series 2.2 B series 2.3 Distinctions 3 Relation to other ideas in the philosophy of time 4 See also 5 Notes 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents A series and B series 8 languages Español Français 한국어 Latina Português Русский Српски / srpski 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from A-series and B-series ) Philosophical descriptions of the temporal ordering of events This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "A series and B series" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( June 2015 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) In metaphysics , the A series and the B series are two different descriptions of the temporal ordering relation among events . The two series differ principally in their use of tense to describe the temporal relation between events and the resulting ontological implications regarding time.

John McTaggart introduced these terms in 1908, in an argument for the unreality of time . They are now commonly used by contemporary philosophers of time .

History [ edit ] Metaphysical debate about temporal orderings reaches back to the ancient Greek philosophers Heraclitus and Parmenides . Parmenides thought that reality is timeless and unchanging.

[ further explanation needed ] Heraclitus, in contrast, believed that the world is a process of ceaseless change , flux and decay. Reality for Heraclitus is dynamic and ephemeral , in a state of constant flux, as in his famous statement that it is impossible to step twice into the same river (since the river is flowing).

McTaggart's series [ edit ] McTaggart distinguished the ancient conceptions as a set of relations. According to McTaggart, there are two distinct modes in which all events can be ordered in time.

A series [ edit ] In the first mode, events are ordered as future , present , and past . Futurity and pastness allow of degrees, while the present does not. When we speak of time in this way, we are speaking in terms of a series of positions which run from the remote past through the recent past to the present, and from the present through the near future all the way to the remote future. The essential characteristic of this descriptive modality is that one must think of the series of temporal positions as being in continual transformation , in the sense that an event is first part of the future, then part of the present, and then part of the past. Moreover, the assertions made according to this modality correspond to the temporal perspective of the person who utters them. This is the A series of temporal events.

Although originally McTaggart defined tenses as relational qualities, i.e. qualities that events possess by standing in a certain relation to something outside of time (that does not change its position in time), [ 1 ] today it is popularly believed that he treated tenses as monadic properties. Later philosophers [ clarification needed ] have independently inferred that McTaggart must have understood tense as monadic because English tenses are normally expressed by the non-relational singular predicates "is past", "is present" and "is future", as noted by R. D. Ingthorsson.

[ 2 ] B series [ edit ] Main article: B-theory of time From a second point of view, events can be ordered according to a different series of temporal positions by way of two-term relations that are asymmetric , irreflexive and transitive (forming a strict partial order ): "earlier than" (or precedes) and "later than" (or follows).

An important difference between the two series is that while events continuously change their position in the A series, their position in the B series does not. If an event ever is earlier than some events and later than the rest, it is always earlier than and later than those very events. Furthermore, while events acquire their A series determinations through a relation to something outside of time, their B series determinations hold between the events that constitutes the B series. This is the B series, and the philosophy that says all truths about time can be reduced to B series statements is the B-theory of time .

Distinctions [ edit ] The logic and the linguistic expression of the two series are radically different. The A series is tensed and the B series is tenseless . For example, the assertion "today it is raining" is a tensed assertion because it depends on the temporal perspective—the present—of the person who utters it, while the assertion "It rained on 16 August 2025" is tenseless because it does not so depend. From the point of view of their truth-values , the two propositions are identical (both true or both false) if the first assertion is made on 16 August 2025. The non-temporal relation of precedence between two events, say "E precedes F", does not change over time
(excluding from this discussion the issue of the relativity of temporal order of causally disconnected events in the theory of relativity). On the other hand, the character of being "past, present or future" of the events "E" or "F" does change with time. In the image of McTaggart the passage of time consists in the fact that terms ever further in the future pass into the present...or that the present advances toward terms ever farther in the future. If we assume the first point of view, we speak as if the B series slides along a fixed A series. If we assume the second point of view, we speak as if the A series slides along a fixed B series.

Relation to other ideas in the philosophy of time [ edit ] There are two principal varieties of the A-theory, presentism and the growing block universe .

[ 3 ] Both assume an objective present, but presentism assumes that only present objects exist, while the growing block universe assumes both present and past objects exist, but not future ones. Views that assume no objective present and are therefore versions of the B-theory include eternalism and four-dimensionalism .

Vincent Conitzer argues that A-theory is related to Benj Hellie's vertiginous question and Caspar Hare's ideas of egocentric presentism and perspectival realism . He argues that A-theory being true and "now" being metaphysically distinguished from other moments of time implies that the "I" is also metaphysically distinguished from other first-person perspectives.

[ 4 ] See also [ edit ] Endurantism New riddle of induction Perdurantism The Unreality of Time Notes [ edit ] ^ McTaggart, J. M. E. (1927).

The Nature of Existence, Vol. II . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. pp. § 326.

It seems quite clear to me that [tenses] are not qualities but relations, though of course, like other relations, they will generate relational qualities in each of their terms ^ Ingthorsson, R. D. (2016).

McTaggart's Paradox . New York: Routledge. p. 45.

ISBN 978-1-138-67724-1 .

^ Presentism and the Space-Time Manifold by Dean Zimmerman, p. 7 ^ Conitzer, Vincent (30 Aug 2020). "The Personalized A-Theory of Time and Perspective".

arXiv : 2008.13207v1 [ physics.hist-ph ].

References [ edit ] Craig, William Lane, The Tensed Theory of Time , Springer, 2000.

Craig, William Lane, The Tenseless Theory of Time , Springer, 2010.

Ingthorsson, R. D., "McTaggart's Paradox", Routledge, 2016.

McTaggart, J. E., 'The Unreality of Time', Mind , 1908.

McTaggart, J. E., The Nature of Existence , vols. 1-2, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1968.

Bradley, F. H.

, The Principles of Logic , Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1922.

External links [ edit ] "Notes on McTaggart, 'The Unreality of Time ' " . Seminar on Philosophy and Time, Trinity University , 2005.

Zalta, Edward N.

(ed.).

"McTaggart's A series and B series" .

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

v t e Time Key concepts Past Present Future Eternity Measurement and standards Chronometry UTC Universal Time TAI Unit of time Orders of magnitude (time) Measurement systems Italian six-hour clock Thai six-hour clock 12-hour clock 24-hour clock Relative hour Daylight saving time Chinese Decimal Hexadecimal Hindu Metric Roman Sidereal Solar Time zone Calendars Main types Solar Lunar Lunisolar Gregorian Julian Hebrew Islamic Solar Hijri Chinese Hindu Panchang Maya List Clocks Main types astronomical astrarium atomic quantum hourglass marine sundial watch 24-hour wristwatch mechanical stopwatch water-based Cuckoo clock Digital clock Grandfather clock History Timeline Chronology History Astronomical chronology Big History Calendar era Deep time Periodization Regnal year Timeline Philosophy of time A series and B series B-theory of time Chronocentrism Duration Endurantism Eternal return Eternalism Event Moving spotlight theory Perdurantism Presentism Temporal finitism Temporal parts The Unreality of Time Religion Mythology Ages of Man Destiny Immortality Dreamtime Kāla Time and fate deities Father Time Wheel of time Kalachakra Human experience and use of time Chronemics Generation time Mental chronometry Music tempo time signature Rosy retrospection Tense–aspect–mood Time management Yesterday – Today – Tomorrow Time in science Geology Geological time age chron eon epoch era period Geochronology Geological history of Earth Physics Absolute space and time Arrow of time Chronon Coordinate time Instant Proper time Spacetime Theory of relativity Time domain Time translation symmetry Time reversal symmetry Other fields Chronological dating Chronobiology Circadian rhythms Clock reaction Glottochronology Time geography Related Leap year Memory Moment Six-hour day Space System time Tempus fugit Time capsule Time immemorial Time travel Category Commons v t e Philosophy of time Concepts in time Time A priori and a posteriori A series and B series Action Duration Eternal return Eternity Event Aevum Imaginary time Multiple time dimensions Temporal parts Temporality Theories of time A-theory of time B-theory of time Endurantism Eternalism Four-dimensionalism Fatalism Finitism Growing block universe Perdurantism Presentism Related articles Etiology Metaphysics Post hoc ergo propter hoc Teleology " The Unreality of Time " The Singular Universe and the Reality of Time An Experiment with Time Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=A_series_and_B_series&oldid=1296370971 " Categories : Concepts in metaphysics Philosophy of physics Philosophy of time Theories of time Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from June 2015 All articles needing additional references Wikipedia articles needing clarification from June 2020 This page was last edited on 19 June 2025, at 15:58 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents A series and B series 8 languages Add topic

