Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Causes 2 Treatment 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Lightheadedness 9 languages العربية Deutsch Español فارسی Bahasa Indonesia 日本語 Slovenščina Српски / srpski 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Sensation of dizziness or that one may faint This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Lightheadedness" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( November 2016 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Medical condition Lightheadedness Other names Pre-syncope Specialty Cardiology Neurology Symptoms Feeling faint; feeling as though their head is weightless; perceiving the room as spinning ( vertigo ) Duration Momentary, although recurring for some patients Causes Hypotension , hypoglycaemia , arrhythmia , anaemia , hypokalaemia , thrombosis , water intoxication , dehydration Risk factors Poor dietary or diabetic management, genetic predisposition to cardiac arrhythmia Diagnostic method Based on symptoms. Some thrombotic pre-syncope may be indicated by a troponin serum level.

Treatment Dependent on the cause. May include IV fluids, Ringer's Lactate, glucose replacement therapy, thrombolytics, or simply sitting down/resting.

Lightheadedness is a common and typically unpleasant sensation of dizziness [ 1 ] or a feeling that one may faint . The sensation of lightheadedness can be short-lived, prolonged, or, rarely, recurring . In addition to dizziness, the individual may feel as though their head is weightless. The individual may also feel as though the room is "spinning" or moving ( vertigo ). Most causes of lightheadedness are not serious and either cure themselves quickly or are easily treated.

Keeping a sense of balance requires the brain to process a variety of information received from the eyes , the nervous system , and the inner ears . If the brain is unable to process these signals, such as when the messages are contradictory, or if the sensory systems are improperly functioning, an individual may experience lightheadedness or dizziness.

Lightheadedness is very similar to pre-syncope . Pre-syncope is the immediate stage before syncope (fainting), particularly in cases of temporary visual field loss (i.e. vision getting "dark" or "closing in").

[ 2 ] Causes [ edit ] Lightheadedness can be simply (and most commonly) an indication of a temporary shortage of blood or oxygen to the brain due to a drop in blood pressure , rapid dehydration from vomiting , diarrhea , or fever . Other causes are: altitude sickness , low blood sugar , hyperventilation , postural orthostatic tachycardia syndrome (increase in heart rate upon sitting up or standing), panic attacks , and anemia . It can also be a symptom of many other conditions, some of them serious, such as heart problems (including abnormal heart rhythm or heart attack ), respiratory problems such as pulmonary hypertension or pulmonary embolism , and also stroke , bleeding, and shock . If any of these serious disorders are present, the individual will usually have additional symptoms such as chest pain , a feeling of a racing heart, loss of speech or a change in vision.

Many people, especially as they age, experience lightheadedness if they arise too quickly from a lying or seated position. Lightheadedness often accompanies the flu , hypoglycaemia , common cold , or allergies .
Dizziness could be provoked by the use of antihistamine drugs, like levocetirizine , or by some antibiotics or SSRIs .

Nicotine or tobacco products can cause lightheadedness for inexperienced users.

Narcotic drugs, such as codeine , can also cause lightheadedness.

Treatment [ edit ] Treatment for lightheadedness depends on the cause or underlying problem. Treatment may include drinking plenty of water or other fluids (unless the lightheadedness is the result of water intoxication in which case drinking water is quite dangerous). If a patient is unable to keep fluids down from nausea or vomiting, they may need intravenous fluids such as Ringer's lactate solution . They should try eating something sugary and lying down or sitting and reducing the elevation of the head relative to the body (for example, by positioning the head between the knees).

Other simple remedies include avoiding sudden changes in posture when sitting or lying and avoiding bright lights.

Several essential electrolytes are excreted when the body perspires. When people experience unusual or extreme heat for a long time, sweating excessively can cause a lack of some electrolytes, which in turn can cause lightheadedness.

See also [ edit ] Clouding of consciousness Dizziness Greyout Orthostatic hypotension Vasovagal response Vertigo References [ edit ] ^ "Chapter 14: Evaluation of the Dizzy Patient" . Retrieved 2009-08-06 .

^ Joel A. Goebel (2008).

Practical Management of the Dizzy Patient . Lippincott Williams & Wilkins. p. 299.

ISBN 978-0-7817-6562-6 .

External links [ edit ] Classification D ICD - 11 : MB48.3 ICD - 10 : R42 ICD - 9-CM : 780.4 MeSH : D013575 DiseasesDB : 27303 The MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia v t e Signs and symptoms relating to the perception , emotion and behaviour Cognition Confusion Delirium Psychosis Delusion Amnesia Anterograde amnesia Retrograde amnesia Convulsion Dizziness Disequilibrium Presyncope / Lightheadedness Vertigo Emotion Anger Anxiety Depression Fear Paranoia Hostility Irritability Suicidal ideation Behavior Verbosity Russell's sign Perception Sensory processing disorder Hallucination Auditory Tactile Visual Synesthesia Sight Blindness Diplopia Scotoma Colorblindness Nyctalopia Hearing Deafness Spatial hearing loss Smell Anosmia Hyposmia Dysosmia Parosmia Phantosmia Hyperosmia Taste Ageusia Hypogeusia Dysgeusia Hypergeusia Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Lightheadedness&oldid=1301325300 " Category : Symptoms and signs of mental disorders Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from November 2016 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 19 July 2025, at 06:20 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Lightheadedness 9 languages Add topic

