Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Internal combustion engine 3 Alternative claims for internal combustion engines 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents François Isaac de Rivaz 16 languages العربية Català Deutsch Esperanto فارسی Français Italiano Malagasy مصرى Nederlands Occitan Polski Português Русский Suomi Türkçe Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Swiss inventor and politician Isaac de Rivaz Isaac de Rivaz Born ( 1752-12-19 ) December 19, 1752 Paris , Kingdom of France Died July 30, 1828 (1828-07-30) (aged 75) Sion, Switzerland Nationality French Occupation(s) Politician, engineer Known for The world's first automobile powered by an 'internal combustion engine' Father Pierre de Rivaz François Isaac de Rivaz (December 19, 1752, in Paris – July 30, 1828, in Sion ) was a French-born Swiss inventor and a politician. He invented a hydrogen-powered internal combustion engine with electric ignition and described it in a French patent published in 1807. In 1808 he fitted it into a primitive working vehicle – "the world's first internal combustion powered automobile ".

[ 1 ] Biography [ edit ] Isaac was born in Paris to a family from the Valais , now the canton of Valais in Switzerland . His father, Pierre de Rivaz , born in Saint-Gingolph , had moved to Paris in 1748 and established himself as a clockmaker and industrialist.

[ 2 ] In 1763 the family settled in Moûtiers in Savoy ( Kingdom of Sardinia ). The last two boys, Anne-Joseph and Isaac, came to settle in Saint-Gingolph. It is not known at which schools he studied, but he became fluent in Latin plus mastering mathematics and geometry , whilst continuing his study of mechanics throughout his life. He qualified as both a surveyor and notary and worked for the state of Valais.

[ 3 ] Isaac had many interests plus an intuitive and extremely curious mind which was driven by the demon of discovery . His experimental work was overflowing. He experimented with steam-powered vehicles in the late 18th century.

[ 3 ] He also studied the ignition of combustible gases.

[ 3 ] Internal combustion engine [ edit ] Main article: de Rivaz engine After retirement from the Army, living in Switzerland, he invented a primitive internal combustion engine which he constructed in 1807.

[ 1 ] It was powered by a mixture of hydrogen and oxygen manually ignited by electric spark, but the engine neither involved the in-cylinder compression, the crank , nor the connecting rod .

[ 1 ] A year later, Isaac built an early automobile for his new engine to power.

[ 1 ] Alternative claims for internal combustion engines [ edit ] Coincidentally, in 1807 Nicéphore Niépce installed his 'moss, coal-dust and resin'-fueled Pyréolophore internal combustion engine in a boat and powered up the river Saone in France to be granted a patent by the Emperor Napoleon Bonaparte . The discrete, virtually simultaneous, implementations of these two designs of internal combustion in different modes of transport means that the de Rivaz engine can be correctly described as "the world's first use of an internal combustion engine in an auto-mobile (in 1808)", whilst the "Pyréolophore (in 1807) was the world's first use of an internal combustion engine in a ship".

[ citation needed ] Although de Rivaz's early work is credited as the first use of the internal combustion engine in an automobile, the further development and mass production of the invention never truly began until the late nineteenth century.

In 1824, the French physicist Nicolas Léonard Sadi Carnot scientifically established the thermodynamic theory of idealized heat engines . This highlighted [ citation needed ] the shortcoming of these pioneering designs, whereby they needed a compression mechanism to increase the difference between the upper and lower working temperatures and potentially unlock sufficient power and efficiency.

Gasoline was not used for internal combustion engines until 1870 when carburetors were invented to convert non-combustible liquid fuels into a combustible gaseous mixture form.

See also [ edit ] De Rivaz engine Timeline of transportation technology Timeline of hydrogen technologies History of the internal combustion engine Pyréolophore Nicéphore Niépce References [ edit ] ^ a b c d Eckermann, Erik (2001).

World History of the Automobile . Warrendale, PA: Society of Automotive Engineers.

ISBN 0-7680-0800-X .

^ David Rey.

"Pierre de Rivaz" .

Historical Dictionary of Switzerland (in French).

^ a b c Michelet, Henri (1965).

L'inventeur Isaac de Rivaz: 1752 - 1828 . Editions Saint-Augustin . Retrieved 2011-05-28 .

In French External links [ edit ] 1807 Francois Isaac de Rivaz - internal combustion engine Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States Netherlands People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Historical Dictionary of Switzerland Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=François_Isaac_de_Rivaz&oldid=1286745515 " Categories : 1752 births 1828 deaths People associated with the internal combustion engine 19th-century Swiss inventors Engineers from Paris 19th-century Swiss engineers 19th-century Swiss politicians Immigrants to the Kingdom of Sardinia Hidden categories: CS1 French-language sources (fr) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with hCards All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from May 2011 This page was last edited on 21 April 2025, at 18:45 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents François Isaac de Rivaz 16 languages Add topic

