Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Scholarship program 2 Foreign involvement 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Friedrich Naumann Foundation 16 languages العربية Asturianu Български Deutsch Español Français 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी ქართული Norsk bokmål Polski Русский Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia German foundation for liberal politics This article contains promotional content .

Please help improve it by removing promotional language and inappropriate external links , and by adding encyclopedic text written from a neutral point of view .

( April 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Friedrich Naumann Foundation for Freedom Friedrich Naumann Stiftung für die Freiheit Formation 1958 Founder Theodor Heuss Legal status Foundation (nonprofit) Purpose The work of the foundation shall be based on the principles of Liberalism . It shall be nonprofit in nature.

Location Potsdam , Germany Chairperson Karl-Heinz Paque Website Freiheit.org The Friedrich Naumann Foundation for Freedom ( German : Friedrich-Naumann-Stiftung für die Freiheit e.V.

; Abbreviation: FNF ) is a German foundation for liberal politics, related to the Free Democratic Party and funded by the Federal Ministry of Education and Research . Established in 1958 by Theodor Heuss , the first president of the Federal Republic of Germany , it promotes individual freedom and classical liberalism . Usually still referred to as the Friedrich Naumann Foundation ( Friedrich-Naumann-Stiftung ), the foundation supplemented its name in 2007 with the words "for Freedom" ( für die Freiheit ).

The foundation follows the ideals of the Protestant theologian, Friedrich Naumann , except his Christian socialist views. At the beginning of the last century, Naumann was a leading German liberal thinker and politician. He resolutely backed the idea of civic education . Naumann believed that a functioning democracy needs politically informed and educated citizens . According to him, civic education is a prerequisite for political participation and thus for democracy.

The foundation is an agent of organized liberalism. It promotes this through civic education, international political dialogues, and political counselling. The foundation has numerous offices in Europe, Africa, America, and Asia. It also has close links to Germany's Free Democratic Party (FDP) and Liberal International (LI).

The foundation's activities in the field of civic education consist of seminars, conferences and publications aimed at promoting liberal values and principles. The international political dialogue program provides a discussion forum for a wide range of liberal issues. The foundation's counselling programs focus on candidates for political office, liberal political parties and other democratic organizations.

Scholarship program [ edit ] The Friedrich Naumann Foundation, together with other foundations of different philosophical, political, and ideological orientation and the non-political German National Academic Foundation , acts as an instrument for the promotion of excellence in German tertiary education. This scholarship system is funded by the Federal Government.
Around 1% of university students in Germany hold one of these federally funded merit scholarships.

[ 1 ] Currently, the Friedrich Naumann Foundation provides scholarships to approximately 800 students, among those 175 PhD students (as of 2009 [ 2 ] ). Scholarships are granted after a competitive multi-stage admission process. The selection is based on grades, letters of recommendation, leadership potential, community service, and a visible commitment to liberal values. Around 20% of the scholarships are held by foreign students studying at a university in Germany.

Foreign involvement [ edit ] In Peru , the foundation was involved in a misunderstanding on a meeting related to the some members of the Congress. The Peru Office Director testified before the Peruvian Congress to clear the misunderstanding.

[ 3 ] The North America Regional Office in Washington, D.C. runs two programs. The Transatlantic Dialogue Program encourages discussions between the US, Canada, and Germany on various fronts, while the World Order and Globalization Hub enhances global economic understanding. Both aim to foster knowledge exchange and promote global social and economic progress.

[ 4 ] Shortly after the invasion of Ukraine in 2022, the foundation's work in Moscow was stopped and the Moscow office's registration was revoked.

In April 2024, the Friedrich Naumann Foundation was declared an undesirable organization in Russia .

[ 5 ] See also [ edit ] Archive of Liberalism Contributions to liberal theory Liberal democracy Liberalism worldwide Desiderius Erasmus Foundation ( AfD ) Friedrich Ebert Foundation ( SPD ) Hanns Seidel Foundation ( CSU ) Heinrich Böll Foundation ( Die Grünen ) Konrad Adenauer Foundation ( CDU ) Rosa Luxemburg Foundation ( Die Linke ) German National Academic Foundation (non-political and non-denominational) References [ edit ] ^ "Begabtenförderungswerke - BMBF" .

Bundesministerium für Bildung und Forschung - BMBF (in German) . Retrieved 23 August 2022 .

^ Publication Archived 2011-07-18 at the Wayback Machine of the Federal Ministry of Education and Research (Germany) : ^ PERÚ, NOTICIAS EL COMERCIO (18 February 2022).

"Fundación Friedrich Naumann sobre reunión con congresistas: "Se debió invitar a todos los partidos" María del Carmen Alva Pedro Castillo RMMN | POLITICA" .

El Comercio (in Spanish) . Retrieved 10 March 2023 .

^ "Friedrich Naumann Foundation: North America" .

Friedrich Naumann Foundation For Freedom . Retrieved 4 August 2023 .

^ "«Нежелательными организациями» признали украинскую правозащитную организацию и два немецких фонда" .

OVD-Info (in Russian). 17 April 2024. Archived from the original on 17 April 2024 . Retrieved 17 April 2024 .

External links [ edit ] Homepage of the Friedrich Naumann Foundation (Engl) Instituto Friedrich Naumann para a Liberdade - *[https://web.archive.org/web/20090716193343/http://www.ffn-brasil.org.br/novo/?secao=Atualidades   Instituto Friedrich Naumann para a Liberdade - Brasil Friedrich Naumann Foundation for Liberty, Jerusalem Office (Engl, Hebrew, Arabic) [ usurped ] Scholarship Funds and Foundations in Germany [ permanent dead link ] I v t e Free Democratic Party President of Germany Theodor Heuss Walter Scheel Federal chairmen Heuss Blücher Dehler Maier Mende Scheel Genscher Bangemann Lambsdorff Kinkel Gerhardt Westerwelle Rösler Lindner Dürr Leaders in the Bundestag Heuss Schäfer Euler Schäfer Dehler Becker Mende Kühlmann-Stumm Mischnick Solms Gerhardt Westerwelle Homburger Brüderle Lindner Governments Adenauer I Adenauer II Adenauer IV Adenauer V Erhard I Erhard II Kiesinger Brandt I Brandt II Schmidt I Schmidt II Schmidt III Kohl I Kohl II Kohl III Kohl IV Kohl V Merkel II Scholz Merz Affiliated organisations Federal Association of Liberal Students Groups Friedrich Naumann Foundation Young Liberals Liberal International European Liberal Democrat and Reform Party Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe Related articles Liberalism in Germany Jamaica coalition Social–liberal coalition Traffic light coalition Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National Germany United States France BnF data Australia Czech Republic 2 Spain Israel Academics CiNii Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Friedrich_Naumann_Foundation&oldid=1288215892 " Categories : Classical liberalism Free Democratic Party (Germany) Liberal organizations Liberalism in Germany Political and economic think tanks based in Germany Political and economic research foundations Political organisations based in Germany Organizations listed in Russia as undesirable Hidden categories: CS1 German-language sources (de) Webarchive template wayback links CS1 Spanish-language sources (es) CS1 Russian-language sources (ru) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles with a promotional tone from April 2022 All articles with a promotional tone Use dmy dates from November 2023 Articles containing German-language text All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from December 2019 Articles with permanently dead external links This page was last edited on 1 May 2025, at 06:56 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Friedrich Naumann Foundation 16 languages Add topic

