Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Relationship to self-publishing 2 Status of press freedom worldwide Toggle Status of press freedom worldwide subsection 2.1 Annual report on journalists killed and Prison Census 2.2 Freedom of the Press 2.3 Democratic states 2.4 Non-democratic states 3 History Toggle History subsection 3.1 Europe 3.1.1 United Kingdom 3.1.2 Denmark–Norway 3.1.3 Italy 3.1.4 Nazi Germany (1933–1945) 3.1.5 Sweden 3.1.6 Russia 3.1.7 Romania 3.1.8 Turkey 3.1.9 Belarus 3.1.10 Czechia 3.2 Americas 3.2.1 United States 3.2.2 Canada 3.2.3 Mexico 3.2.4 Guatemala 3.2.5 Nicaragua 3.2.6 Argentina 3.2.7 Bolivia 3.2.8 Brazil 3.2.9 Chile 3.2.10 Colombia 3.2.11 Ecuador 3.2.12 Guyana 3.2.13 Paraguay 3.2.14 Peru 3.2.15 Suriname 3.2.16 Uruguay 3.2.17 Venezuela 3.3 Asia 3.3.1 Azerbaijan 3.3.2 Bahrain 3.3.3 Iran 3.3.4 Palestine and Israel 3.3.5 China 3.3.6 Pakistan 3.3.7 Malaysia 3.3.8 Singapore 3.3.9 Saudi Arabia 3.3.10 India 3.3.11 Bangladesh 3.4 Africa 3.4.1 Tanzania 3.4.2 South Africa 4 Implications of new technologies 5 World ranking Toggle World ranking subsection 5.1 World ranking 2023 5.2 World ranking 2021 5.3 World ranking 2020 5.4 World ranking 2019 5.5 World ranking 2018 5.6 World ranking 2017 5.7 World ranking 2016 5.8 World ranking 2015 6 Organizations for press freedom 7 See also 8 References Toggle References subsection 8.1 Citations 8.2 Sources 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Freedom of the press 73 languages العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Български Català Чӑвашла Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Hausa Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Kreyòl ayisyen Кыргызча Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar Македонски Bahasa Melayu မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands Nedersaksies 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan ଓଡ଼ିଆ Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча پنجابی Plattdüütsch Polski Português Română Русский Sardu සිංහල Simple English Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikinews Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Freedom of communication and expression through various media For other uses, see Freedom of the Press (disambiguation) .

"Free press" redirects here. For other uses, see Free Press .

Journalism News Article ( Headline · Byline · Dateline · Report · Special report · Exclusive · Interview · Column · Opinion piece · Editorial · Op-ed ) Writing style ( Five Ws · Inverted pyramid ) Index of journalism articles Beats Arts Business Data Entertainment Environment Fashion Local Medicine Music Politics Science Sports Technology Traffic Video games War Weather World Genres Adversarial Advocacy ( Interventionism ) Analytic Blogging Citizen Civic Collaborative Comics-based Community Database Enterprise Explanatory Feature story Gonzo Human-interest Immersion Infotainment / Soft media Interpretive Investigative Long-form Narrative New Journalism Opinion Peace Public service Sensor Underground Visual Watchdog Ethics and standards Chequebook Churnalism Codes of ethics Culture Editing ( Copy editing · Corrections · Fact-checking · Spiking ) Fake news ( Websites ) Horse race Journalese Media bias ( False balance ) News values ( Above the fold · Man bites dog ) Objectivity Pink-slime Scandals Sensationalism Sources Tabloid ( Television ) Yellow Societal aspects Decline of newspapers ( News desert ) Fourth Estate Fifth Estate Editorial independence ( Independent · State ) Freedom of information Freedom of the press ( Defamation · Safety ) Journalism school Media manipulation News propaganda ( Model ) Public relations ( Media relations · News embargo · Press conference · Press release ) Source protection News media Newspapers ( Newspaper of record · Middle-market · Newspaper formats · Broadsheet · Tabloid · Online · Extra edition ) Magazines Broadcast ( TV and radio ) Digital Multimedia ( Video ) Documentary film News agencies Alternative media Nonprofit Newsroom Journalist ( Staff writer · Correspondent · News presenter ) Columnist Editors ( Editor-in-chief · Managing editor · Political editor · Editorial board · Assignment editor · Duty editor · Public editor · Editor-at-large · Contributing editor ) Weather presenter News bureau News director Photojournalist Pundit Stringer Journalism portal Category: Journalism v t e Part of a series on Liberalism Schools Classical Conservative Cultural Economic Green Muscular National Neo Neoclassical New Ordo Radical Religious Christian Catholic Islamic Jewish Secular Social Techno Principles Consent of the governed Due process Democracy Economic globalization Equality Gender Legal Federalism Freedom Economic Market Trade Press Religion Speech Harm principle Internationalism Invisible hand Labor theory of property Laissez-faire Liberty Negative Positive Limited government Market economy Natural monopoly Open society Permissive society Popular sovereignty Property Private Public Rights Civil and political Minority Natural and legal To own property To bear arms Rule of law Secularism Secular humanism Separation of church and state Separation of powers Social contract Social justice Social services Welfare state Whig history History Glorious Revolution Age of Enlightenment Atlantic Revolutions American Revolution French Revolution Revolutions of 1848 Vormärz Prague Spring Revolutions of 1989 Arab Spring Intellectuals Milton Locke Spinoza Montesquieu Voltaire Rousseau Smith Kant Turgot Burke Priestley Paine Beccaria Condorcet Bentham Korais De Gouges Robespierre Wollstonecraft Staël Say Humboldt Constant Ricardo Guizot Lamennais List Bastiat Martineau Emerson Tocqueville Mill Spencer Arnold Acton Weber Hobhouse Croce Cassirer Mises Ortega Keynes Collingwood Čapek Hu Hayek Popper Aron Berlin Friedman Rawls Sen Nozick Kymlicka Badawi Politicians Jefferson Kołłątaj Madison Artigas Bolívar Broglie Lamartine Macaulay Kossuth Deák Cobden Mazzini Juárez Lincoln Gladstone Cavour Sarmiento Mommsen Naoroji Itagaki Levski Kemal Deakin Milyukov Lloyd George Venizelos Ståhlberg Gokhale Rathenau Madero Einaudi King Roosevelt Pearson Ohlin Kennedy Jenkins Balcerowicz Verhofstadt Obama Macron Organizations Africa Liberal Network Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe Party Arab Liberal Federation Council of Asian Liberals and Democrats European Democratic Party European Liberal Youth International Alliance of Libertarian Parties International Federation of Liberal Youth Liberal International Liberal Network for Latin America Liberal parties Liberal South East European Network Renew Europe Regional variants Europe Latin America Albania Armenia Australia Austria Bangladesh Belgium Bolivia Brazil Bulgaria Canada Chile China Hong Kong Colombia Costa Rica Croatia Cuba Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Ecuador Egypt Estonia Finland France Georgia Germany Greece Venizelism Honduras Hungary India Iran Israel Italy Liberism Japan Latvia Lithuania Luxembourg Mexico Moldova Montenegro Netherlands New Zealand Nicaragua Nigeria North Macedonia Norway Panama Paraguay Peru Philippines Poland Cracovian Portugal Romania Russia Senegal Serbia Slovakia Slovenia South Africa South Korea Spain Sweden Switzerland Taiwan Thailand Tunisia Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom Cobdenism Gladstonian Manchester Whiggism United States Arizona School Classical Jeffersonian Modern Uruguay Venezuela Zimbabwe Related topics Abortion debate Pro-Choice Anti-authoritarianism Anti-clericalism Anti-communism Bias in American academia Bias in the media Capitalism Democratic Centrism Radical Economic freedom Egalitarianism Empiricism Humanism Individualism Anarchist Land value tax Liberal autocracy Liberal conservatism Feminist Equity Internationalist Libertarianism Left Right Pirate Party Progressivism Sexually liberal feminism Utilitarianism Liberalism portal Politics portal v t e Freedom of the press or freedom of the media is the fundamental principle that communication and expression through various media, including printed and electronic media , especially published materials , should be considered a right to be exercised freely.

[ 1 ] Such freedom implies no or minimal censorship or prior restraint from government, and is often protected by laws or a provision in a constitution .  The concept of freedom of speech is often covered by the same laws as freedom of the press, thereby giving equal treatment to spoken and published expression; many countries also protect scientific freedom .

Government restrictions on freedom of the press may include classified information , state secrets , punishment for libel , punishment for violation of copyright , privacy , or judicial orders. Where freedom of the press is lacking, governments may require pre-publication approval, or punish distribution of documents critical of the government or certain political perspectives. Jurisdictions with high levels of transparency are subject to " sunshine laws " or freedom of information legislation that allow citizens broad access to government-held information.

Freedom of the press was formally established in Great Britain with the lapse of the Licensing Act in 1695. Sweden was the first country in the world to adopt freedom of the press into its constitution with the Freedom of the Press Act of 1766.

[ 2 ] The United Nations ' 1948 Universal Declaration of Human Rights states: "Everyone has the right to freedom of opinion and expression; this right includes freedom to hold opinions without interference, and to seek, receive, and impart information and ideas through any media regardless of frontiers".

[ 3 ] Relationship to self-publishing [ edit ] Freedom of the press is not construed as an absence of interference by outside entities, such as a government or religious organization, but rather as a right for authors to have their works published by other people.

[ 4 ] This idea was famously summarized by the 20th-century American journalist , A. J. Liebling , who wrote, "Freedom of the press is guaranteed only to those who own one". Freedom of the press gives the printer or publisher exclusive control over what the publisher chooses to publish, including the right to refuse to print anything for any reason.

[ 4 ] If the author cannot reach a voluntary agreement with a publisher to produce the author's work, then the author must turn to self-publishing .

Status of press freedom worldwide [ edit ] Cumhuriyet 's former editor-in-chief Can Dündar receiving the 2015 Reporters Without Borders Prize . Shortly after, he was arrested.

Beyond legal definitions, several non-governmental organizations use other criteria to judge the level of press freedom worldwide. Some create subjective lists, while others are based on quantitative data: Reporters Without Borders (RWB) (French: Reporters sans frontières ) (RSF) considers the number of journalists murdered, expelled, or harassed, the existence of a state monopoly on TV and radio, as well as the existence of censorship and self-censorship in the media, and the overall independence of media as well as the difficulties that foreign reporters may face to rank countries in levels of press freedom.

The Committee to Protect Journalists (CPJ) systematically tracks the number of journalists killed and imprisoned in reprisal for their work. It says it uses the tools of journalism to help journalists by tracking press freedom issues through independent research, fact-finding missions, and a network of foreign correspondents, including local working journalists in countries worldwide. CPJ shares information on breaking cases with other press freedom organizations worldwide through the International Freedom of Expression Exchange , a global network of more than 119 free expression organizations. CPJ also tracks impunity in cases of journalist murders. CPJ staff applies strict criteria for each case; researchers independently investigate and verify the circumstances behind each death or imprisonment.

Freedom House studies the more general political and economic environments of each nation in order to determine whether relationships of dependence exist that limit in practice the level of press freedom that might exist in theory. Panels of experts assess the press freedom score and draft each country summary according to a weighted scoring system that analyzes the political, economic, legal and safety situation for journalists based on a 100-point scale. It then categorizes countries as having a free, partly free, or not free press.

[ 5 ] Annual report on journalists killed and Prison Census [ edit ] Each year, The Committee to Protect Journalists produces a comprehensive list of all working journalists killed in relation to their employment, including profiles of each deceased journalist within an exhaustive database, and an annual census of incarcerated journalists (as of midnight, 1 December). The year 2017 reported record findings of jailed journalists, reaching 262.

Turkey , China , and Egypt account for more than half of all global journalists jailed.

[ 6 ] As per a 2019 special report by the Committee to Protect Journalists, approximately 25 journalists were murdered on duty in 2019.

[ 6 ] The figure is claimed to be the lowest since 2002, a year in which at least 21 journalists were killed while they were reporting from the field.

[ 7 ] Meanwhile, Reporters Without Borders (RSF) reported 49 killings, the lowest since 2003, when almost 36 journalists were killed. Leading press watchdogs fear persisting danger for the life of journalists. The drop in the murder of in-field journalists came across during the "global attention on the issue of impunity in journalist murders", focusing on the assassination of Saudi journalist Jamal Khashoggi in October 2018 and Daphne Caruana Galizia , a Maltese blogger in October 2017.

[ 8 ] 2023 World Press Freedom Index [ 9 ] Good: 85–100 points Satisfactory: 70–85 points Problematic: 55–70 points Difficult: 40–55 points Very serious <40 points Not classified Every year, Reporters Without Borders establishes a subjective ranking of countries in terms of their freedom of the press. The Press Freedom Index list is based on responses to surveys sent to journalists that are members of partner organizations of the RWB, as well as related specialists such as researchers, jurists, and human rights activists. The survey asks questions about direct attacks on journalists and the media and other indirect sources of pressure against the free press, such as non-governmental groups.

In 2022, the eight countries with the most press freedom are, in order: Norway , Denmark , Sweden , Estonia , Finland , Ireland , Portugal , and Costa Rica . The ten countries with the least press freedom are, in order: North Korea , Eritrea , Iran , Turkmenistan , Myanmar , China , Vietnam , Cuba , Iraq , and Syria .

[ 10 ] Freedom of the Press [ edit ] Freedom of the Press status 2017.

[ 11 ] Freedom of the Press is a yearly report by the US-based non-profit organization Freedom House . It is known to subjectively measure the level of freedom and editorial independence that is enjoyed by the press in every nation and significant disputed territories around the world. Levels of freedom are scored on a scale from 1 (most free) to 100 (least free). Depending on the basics, the nations are then classified in three types:
1. "Free" 
2. "Partly Free"
3. "Not Free".

Democratic states [ edit ] A free and independent press has been theorized to be a key mechanism of a functioning, healthy democracy .

[ 12 ] In the absence of censorship , journalism exists as a watchdog of private and government action, providing information to maintain an informed citizenry of voters.

[ 12 ] In this perspective, "government efforts to influence published or broadcasted news content, either via media control or by inducing self-censorship , represent a threat to the access of important and necessary information to the public and affect the quality of democracy".

[ 13 ] An independent press "serves to increase political knowledge, participation, and voter turnout ", [ 12 ] acting as an essential driver of civic participation.

Non-democratic states [ edit ] Georgiy Gongadze , Ukrainian journalist , founder of a popular Internet newspaper Ukrainska Pravda , who was kidnapped and murdered in 2000.

Turkey , China , Egypt , Eritrea , and Saudi Arabia accounted for 70% of all journalists that were imprisoned in 2018.

[ 14 ] CPJ reported that "After China, Turkey, Saudi Arabia, and Egypt, the worst jailers are Eritrea, Vietnam, and Iran".

[ 15 ] According to Reporters Without Borders , more than a third of the world's people live in countries where there is no press freedom.

[ 16 ] Overwhelmingly, these people live in countries where there is no system of democracy or where there are serious deficiencies in the democratic process.

[ 17 ] Freedom of the press is an extremely problematic problem/concept for most non-democratic systems of government since, in the modern age, strict control of access to information is critical to the existence of most non-democratic governments and their associated control systems and security apparatus. To this end, most non-democratic societies employ state-run news organizations to promote the propaganda critical to maintaining an existing political power base and suppress (often very brutally, through the use of police, military, or intelligence agencies) any significant attempts by the media or individual journalists to challenge the approved "government line" on contentious issues. In such countries, journalists operating on the fringes of what is deemed to be acceptable will very often find themselves the subject of considerable intimidation by agents of the state. This can range from simple threats to their professional careers (firing, professional blacklisting ) to death threats , kidnapping , torture , and assassination .

The Lira Baysetova case in Kazakhstan .

[ 18 ] The Georgiy R. Gongadze case in Ukraine [ 19 ] In Nepal , Eritrea , and mainland China , journalists may spend years in jail simply for using the "wrong" word or photo.

[ 16 ] History [ edit ] Europe [ edit ] Main article: Media freedom in the European Union Central, Northern, and Western Europe have a long tradition of freedom of speech, including freedom of the press, which yet exists in the 18th century and in the 19th century.

[ 20 ] German Enlightenment writer Christoph Martin Wieland argued in 1788 that "press freedom is the ultimate bulwark of humanity" and that restrictions beyond general criminal law would lead to its "gradual erosion", emphasizing that "science, literature, and the printing press... belong to no single nation, but to all mankind." [ 21 ] After World War II, Hugh Baillie , the president of the United Press wire service based in the U.S., promoted freedom of news dissemination. In 1944, he called for an open system of news sources and transmission, and a minimum of government regulation of the news. His proposals were aired at the Geneva Conference on Freedom of Information in 1948 but were blocked by the Soviets and the French.

[ 22 ] Since 1950, the European Convention on Human Rights includes "Article 10" related to Freedom of expression which applies to Member states of the Council of Europe .

Media freedom is a fundamental right that applies to all member states of the European Union and its citizens , as defined in the EU Charter of Fundamental Rights (since 2000) as well as the European Convention on Human Rights (since 1950).

[ 23 ] : 1 Within the EU enlargement process, guaranteeing media freedom is named a "key indicator of a country's readiness to become part of the EU".

[ 24 ] United Kingdom [ edit ] According to the New York Times , "Britain has a long tradition of a free, inquisitive press", but "[u]nlike the United States, Britain has no constitutional guarantee of press freedom".

[ 25 ] Freedom of the press was established in Great Britain in 1695, with Alan Rusbridger , former editor of The Guardian , stating: "When people talk about licensing journalists or newspapers the instinct should be to refer them to history. Read about how licensing of the press in Britain was abolished in 1695. Remember how the freedoms won here became a model for much of the rest of the world, and be conscious of how the world still watches us to see how we protect those freedoms".

[ 26 ] First page of John Milton 's 1644 edition of Areopagitica Until 1694, Great Britain had an elaborate system of licensing ; the most recent was seen in the Licensing of the Press Act, 1662 . No publication was allowed without the accompaniment of a government-granted license. Fifty years earlier, at a time of civil war , John Milton wrote his pamphlet Areopagitica (1644).

[ 27 ] In this work Milton argued forcefully against this form of government censorship and parodied the idea, writing "when as debtors and delinquents may walk abroad without a keeper, but inoffensive books must not stir forth without a visible jailer in their title". Although at the time it did little to halt the practice of licensing, it would be viewed later a significant milestone as one of the most eloquent defenses of press freedom.

[ 27 ] Milton's central argument was that the individual is capable of using reason and distinguishing right from wrong, and good from bad. In order to be able to exercise this ration right, the individual must have unlimited access to the ideas of his fellow men in "a free and open encounter" Milton's writings developed the concept of the open marketplace of ideas , the idea that when people argue against each other, good arguments will prevail. One form of speech that was widely restricted in Great Britain was seditious libel , and laws were in place that made criticizing the government a crime. The king was above public criticism and statements critical of the government were forbidden, according to the English court of the Star Chamber . The truth was not a defense to seditious libel because the goal was to prevent and punish all condemnation of the government.

Locke contributed to the lapse of the Licensing Act in 1695 , whereupon the press needed no license. Still, some libels were tried throughout the 18th century, until "the Society of the Bill of Rights" led by John Horne Tooke and John Wilkes organized a campaign to publish Parliamentary Debates. This culminated in three defeats of the Crown in the 1770 cases of Almon, Miller and Woodfall , who all had published one of the Letters of Junius , and the unsuccessful arrest of John Wheble in 1771. Thereafter the Crown was much more careful in the application of libel ; for example, in the aftermath of the Peterloo Massacre , Burdett was convicted, whereas by contrast, the Junius affair was over a satire and sarcasm about the non-lethal conduct and policies of the government.

In Britain's American colonies, the first editors discovered their readers enjoyed it when they criticised the local governor; the governors discovered they could shut down the newspapers. The most dramatic confrontation came in New York in 1734, where the governor brought John Peter Zenger to trial for criminal libel after the publication of satirical attacks. The defense lawyers argued that according to English common law, the truth was a valid defense against libel. The jury acquitted Zenger, who became the iconic American hero for freedom of the press. The result was an emerging tension between the media and the government. By the mid-1760s, there were 24 weekly newspapers in the 13 colonies, and the satirical attack on the government became common features in American newspapers.

[ 28 ] In the Victorian era , the press became more influential than it had been previously, to the dismay of some readers.

Thomas Carlyle , in his essay " Signs of the Times " (1829), said that the "true Church of England , at this moment, lies in the Editors of its Newspapers. These preach to the people daily, weekly; admonishing kings themselves; advising peace or war, with an authority which only the first Reformers , and a long-past class of Popes , were possessed of". Similarly, Charles Dickens , in his Pickwick Papers (1837), caricatured the newspapers as but the "chosen organ and representative" of either the Whigs or the Tories , and that they were "essentially and indispensably necessary" to the parties' operations.

[ 29 ] John Stuart Mill in 1869 in his book On Liberty approached the problem of authority versus liberty from the viewpoint of a 19th-century utilitarian : The individual has the right of expressing himself so long as he does not harm other individuals. The good society is one in which the greatest number of persons enjoy the greatest possible amount of happiness. Applying these general principles of liberty to freedom of expression, Mill states that if we silence an opinion, we may silence the truth. The individual freedom of expression is therefore essential to the well-being of society. Mill wrote: If all mankind minus one, were of one opinion, and one, and only one person were of the contrary opinion, mankind would be no more justified in silencing that one person, than he, if he had the power, would be justified in silencing mankind.

[ 30 ] The December 1817 Trials of writer and satirist William Hone for publishing three political pamphlets is considered a landmark in the fight for a free press.

Denmark–Norway [ edit ] Between 4 September 1770 and 7 October 1771 the kingdom of Denmark–Norway had the most unrestricted freedom of press of any country in Europe. This occurred during the regime of Johann Friedrich Struensee , whose second act was to abolish the old censorship laws. However, due to the great amount of mostly anonymous pamphlets published that was critical and often slanderous towards Struensee's own regime, he reinstated some restrictions regarding the freedom of press a year later, 7 October 1771.

[ 31 ] Italy [ edit ] See also: Censorship in Italy The Statute was adopted as the constitution of the Kingdom of Italy, granting freedom of the press After the Italian unification in 1861, the Albertine Statute of 1848 was adopted as the constitution of the Kingdom of Italy . The Statute granted the freedom of the press with some restrictions in case of abuses and in religious matters, as stated in Article 28: [ 32 ] The press shall be free, but the law may suppress abuses of this freedom. However, Bibles, catechisms, liturgical and prayer books shall not be printed without the prior permission of the Bishop.

After the abolition of the monarchy in 1946 and the abrogation of the Statute in 1948, the Constitution of the Republic of Italy guarantees the freedom of the press, as stated in Article 21, Paragraphs 2 and 3: [ 33 ] The press may not be subjected to any authorisation or censorship. Seizure may be permitted only by judicial order stating the reason and only for offences expressly determined by the law on the press or in case of violation of the obligation to identify the persons responsible for such offences.

The Constitution allows the warrantless confiscation of periodicals in cases of absolute urgency, when the Judiciary cannot timely intervene, on the condition that a judicial validation must be obtained within 24 hours. Article 21 also gives restrictions against those publications considered offensive by public morality , as stated in Paragraph 6: Publications, performances, and other exhibits offensive to public morality shall be prohibited. Measures of preventive and repressive measure against such violations shall be established by law.

Nazi Germany (1933–1945) [ edit ] Joseph Goebbels ' Ministry of Public Enlightenment and Propaganda was a driving force of suppressing freedom of the press in Nazi Germany.

In 1933, freedom of the press was suppressed in Nazi Germany by the Reichstag Fire Decree of President Paul von Hindenburg , just as Adolf Hitler was coming to power. Hitler suppressed freedom of the press through Joseph Goebbels ' Ministry of Public Enlightenment and Propaganda .

[ 34 ] The Ministry acted as a central control point for all media, issuing orders as to what stories could be run and what stories would be suppressed. Anyone involved in the film industry, from directors to the lowliest assistant, had to sign an oath of loyalty to the Nazi Party due to the opinion-changing power Goebbels perceived movies to have; Goebbels himself maintained some personal control over every single film made in Nazi Europe. Journalists who crossed the Propaganda Ministry were routinely imprisoned.

Sweden [ edit ] One of the world's first freedom of the press acts was introduced in Sweden in 1766 ( Swedish Freedom of the Press Act ), due in part to classical liberal member of parliament, Ostrobothnian priest, Anders Chydenius .

[ 2 ] [ 35 ] [ 36 ] [ 37 ] [ 38 ] Excepted and liable to prosecution was only vocal opposition to the king and the Church of Sweden . The act was largely rolled back after King Gustav 's coup d'état in 1772, restored after the overthrowing of his son, Gustav IV of Sweden in 1809, and fully recognized with the abolition of the king's prerogative to cancel licenses in the 1840s.

Russia [ edit ] Main article: Media freedom in Russia Protest outside the Russian Embassy in Berlin demanding the release of Russia's political prisoners , including journalists Ivan Safronov and Maria Ponomarenko [ sv ] , 2024 The US Secretary of State, Mike Pompeo , criticized Russia for limiting the activities of VOA and Radio Free Europe in Russia with a governmental order demanding reviewing the subject by Moscow.

[ 39 ] On 4 March 2022, Russian President Vladimir Putin signed into law a bill introducing prison sentences of up to 15 years for those who publish "knowingly false information" about the Russian military and its operations in Ukraine, [ 40 ] forcing independent media in Russia to stop reporting on Ukraine or cease operations.

[ 41 ] At least 1,000 Russian journalists have fled Russia since February 2022.

[ 42 ] About 85% of Russians get most of their information from Russian state-controlled media.

[ 43 ] Novaya Gazeta 's editor-in-chief Dmitry Muratov was awarded the 2021 Nobel Peace Prize for his "efforts to safeguard freedom of expression". In March 2022, Novaya Gazeta suspended its print activities after receiving a second warning from the Russian censorship apparatus Roskomnadzor .

[ 44 ] On 17 June 2024, a Moscow court issued arrest warrants for IStories editor-in-chief and award-winning investigative reporter Roman Anin and Ekaterina Fomina, a journalist at TV Rain and a former IStories correspondent, on charges of disseminating "false information" about the Russian armed forces in Ukraine. Russia's Interior Ministry added two Russian journalists in exile to its wanted list. Fomina said the arrest warrant would affect her professional life as she would not be able to travel to many countries that could arrest her and extradite her to Russia.

[ 45 ] Romania [ edit ] AUR leader George Simion answering a question from a Digi 24 reporter in Cluj-Napoca , 2025 Until 1989, Romania was part of the communist bloc as the Socialist Republic of Romania . The communist regime heavily restricted freedom of the press and other civil liberties.

Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty , though available to the Romanian citizenry, was highly illegal and severe repercussions for existed for listening. Directly following the Romanian Revolution , post-communist corruption was largely the subject of investigative reports. At the same time, widespread violence against journalists began. During the June 1990 Mineriad , a series of protests against the National Salvation Front , counter-demonstrators assaulted reporting journalists.

[ 46 ] In 1992, President Ion Iliescu had a nervous meltdown when called journalist Paul Pârvu asked him if he felt guilt over Romanian deaths during the revolution.

[ 47 ] During the exchange, Iliescu referred to Pârvu as an "animal". Modern, major media outlets were founded during the mid-1990s, such as Antena 1 in 1994 and ProTV in 1995. In 1999, the editor of a Ora , a local newspaper, Tiberiu Patru, was arrested [ 48 ] before being able to publish an investigation of corruption in Dolj County under. In response, Ora moved its newsroom in front of the National Theater of Craiova to protest Patru's arrest.

The 2000s saw the creation of many new media outlets across television, radio, and the traditional press. In 2023, Reporters Without Borders identified safety as a concern for Romanian journalists.

[ 49 ] Turkey [ edit ] See also: Freedom of the press in Turkey and List of arrested journalists in Turkey Turkish journalists protesting imprisonment of their colleagues on Human Rights Day , 2016 More than 120 journalists remained in prison in Turkey in 2019, making it the most prolific incarcerator of journalists in the world.

[ 50 ] In some countries, including Turkey, [ 51 ] journalists were threatened or arrested for their coverage of the COVID-19 pandemic .

[ 52 ] Belarus [ edit ] Belarusian journalist Katsyaryna Andreeva was sentenced to 8 years in prison in 2022 Since the 2000s, Reporters Without Borders have been ranking Belarus below all other European countries in its Press Freedom Index .

[ 53 ] Under the authoritarian president Alexander Lukashenko , journalists like Katsyaryna Andreeva and Darya Chultsova have been arrested for their work.

In May 2021, top news site Tut.By which was read by circa 40% of internet users in Belarus was blocked and several its journalists were detained.

[ 54 ] In July 2021, Nasha Niva , a news site, was blocked with simultaneous detention of the editors took place.

[ 55 ] Czechia [ edit ] Current general manager of Czech Television Jan Souček has courted controversy in his tenure given his attack on free media [ 56 ] and his attacks on employees of Czech Television.

[ 57 ] Souček compared himself to Milada Horáková [ 58 ] after strong criticism of his managerial skills from Czech Television Council. Souček later commented that it was silly from him. In an interview on 5. 9. 2023‌ Souček, as the incoming director general, stated: "I am constantly asking for money. A press conference of the Ministry of Culture has been announced for Tuesday, where the ministerial commission should reveal how it envisions the reform of financing public service media. According to my information, our call will be heard for the most part.

[ 59 ] " During his tenure, Souček constantly asks for more money from the public fees, however it seems that he is not able to use money economically while blacking out financial documents to hide it from the public.

[ 60 ] Americas [ edit ] United States [ edit ] Main article: Freedom of the press in the United States The First Amendment of the United States Constitution states: Congress shall make no law respecting an establishment of religion, or prohibiting the free exercise thereof; or abridging the freedom of speech, or of the press; or the right of the people peaceably to assemble, and to petition the government for a redress of grievances.

Canada [ edit ] Canadian politician Andrew Scheer being interviewed in a scrum , 2017 Section 2(b) of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms states that everyone has "the freedom of thought, belief, opinion and expression, including freedom of the press and other media of communication".

[ 61 ] The open court principle ensures the freedom of the press by requiring that court proceedings presumptively be open and accessible to the public and to the media.

Mexico [ edit ] See also: Mass media in Mexico and List of journalists and media workers killed in Mexico Mexican journalist Rubén Espinosa was murdered, along with four women, in Mexico City after fleeing death threats in Veracruz.

In 2016, Reporters Without Borders ranked Mexico 149 out of 180 in the World Press Freedom Index , declaring Mexico to be "the world's most dangerous country for journalists ".

[ 62 ] Guatemala [ edit ] See Mass media in Guatemala Nicaragua [ edit ] See Freedom of the press in Nicaragua and Mass media in Nicaragua Argentina [ edit ] See History of Argentina#New democracy (1983–present) and Mass media in Argentina Bolivia [ edit ] See History of Bolivia (1982–present) and Mass media in Bolivia Brazil [ edit ] See History of Brazil (1985–present) Chile [ edit ] See History of Chile (1990-) Colombia [ edit ] See History of Colombia#From 2004 and on and Mass media in Colombia Ecuador [ edit ] See History of Ecuador#Instability (2000–2007) Guyana [ edit ] See Guyana#UNASUR Paraguay [ edit ] See History of Paraguay#Modern Paraguay and Mass media in Paraguay Peru [ edit ] See Freedom of the press in Peru and Mass media in Peru Suriname [ edit ] See History of Suriname's Independence Uruguay [ edit ] See History of Uruguay#Recent history and Mass media in Uruguay Venezuela [ edit ] See History of Venezuela (1999–present) and Mass media in Venezuela Asia [ edit ] Azerbaijan [ edit ] Abzas Media 's editor-in-chief Sevinj Vagifgizi was sentenced to 9 years in prison in June 2025 According to Reporters Without Borders, Azerbaijan 's President Ilham Aliyev launched "a new wave of fierce repression against the country’s last remaining journalists" in late 2023.

[ 63 ] Journalists from the independent Abzas Media , Toplum TV, and Meydan TV were prosecuted in 2024 and 2025 in trials that international human rights organizations described as unfair.

[ 64 ] The long prison sentences for seven journalists from Abzas Media are widely seen as retaliation for the outlet's investigations into corruption in the family of Ilham Aliyev and his inner circle.

[ 65 ] Bahrain [ edit ] According to Reporters without Borders, a number of reporters in Bahrain were jailed. Some were also tortured or were exiled.

[ 66 ] Iran [ edit ] According to the reports of the RSF in 2007, the freedom of the press in Iran ranked 166 among 169 states. The report reads the Iranian journalists face the "extreme harsh behavior of the Iranian regime that prevents them criticizing authorities or expressing political and social demands.

[ 67 ] After a Ukrainian airliner was shot down in 2020 by the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps , agents of the Iranian Ministry of Intelligence raided the houses and offices of many Iranian journalists seeking for their PCs, cell phones, books, and documents. These journalists had revealed the lies of the Iranian regime. Some of the journalists received warnings by the authorities and were forced to shut down their accounts in Instagram, Twitter, and Facebook.

[ 68 ] Demanding promotion of the global Freedom of Media, in December 1993, UNESCO called 3 April as "International day for Freedom of Media". This is while the RSF reported at least 860 journalists have been detained and imprisoned from 1979 to 2009 in Iran.

[ 69 ] On 21 April 2020, Paris -based Reporters Without Borders (RSF) said in its annual press freedom rankings that the pandemic was "highlighting many crises" already casting a shadow on press freedom , around the world, with authoritarian states including Iran suppressing details of the outbreak.

[ 70 ] RSF accused Iran—in 173rd place—of censoring major coronavirus outbreaks.

[ 70 ] On the occasion of World Press Freedom Day in 2020, the Writers' Association of Iran released a statement emphasizing the existence of censorship and violation of freedom of speech and its destructive impacts on the structure and vital foundation of the society. It noted that during the past decades, the rulers in the country imprisoned more than 890 journalists and reporters, some of whom have been executed. The Iranian Writer Association expressed its regret, when Iran ranked 173 among 180 states due to freedom of speech.

[ 71 ] On 7 February 2020, the International Federation of Journalists in a statement condemned "raiding of Iranian Security Forces upon the houses of six Iranian journalists, holding the forces of "IRGC's Intelligence" responsible for recent pressures on the journalists. The secretary-general of the federation, Anthony Blunker, said that intimidating and threatening journalists are unpleasant tools to silence the public opinion of the administration.

[ 72 ] On 26 November 2019, the RSF condemned the pressure on families of reporters by the Iranian regime, saying Iran ranked 170 among 180 states regarding Freedom of Press in 2019.

[ 73 ] In its 2019 annual report, the Committee to Protect Journalists found at least 250 journalists in jail in relation to their work and stated that the number of imprisoned journalists in Iran was 11, citing the crackdown on protests by the Iranian people over rising gasoline prices. The report named Eritrea, Vietnam and Iran as "the worst prisons for journalists" after China, Turkey, Saudi Arabia and Egypt.

[ 74 ] [ 75 ] On 8 September 2020, Reporters Without Borders expressed concern about the continuing detention and repression of journalists in Iran and warned for the journalists and Reporters who have been arrested for their activities and subjected to harassment. "The Human Rights Council must take more serious action to protect and defend journalists", said an official.

[ 76 ] On Monday, 9 November 2020, Ralf Nestmeyer, vice president of PEN Germany, referred to the repressive methods of authoritarian regimes: "Freedom of expression has declined in many parts of the world". He added that dictatorial regimes respond to any criticism with violence and imprisonment.

[ citation needed ] This year the World Pen Association (Pen), will concentrate on the fate of writers in Iran, China, Turkey, Peru and Uganda.

[ 77 ] [ failed verification ] Human Rights Watch condemned the punishment of the death penalty and demanded that it be prevented at all costs, following the 12 December execution of an Iranian dissident on vague charges. Rouhallah Zam, the founder of Telegram channel Amadnews , was allegedly detained when he was visiting Iran in October 2019. He was deported forcibly to Iran and convicted of vague national security charges, as per Human Rights Watch. Zam faced trial for his ‘activism’ after being deported to Iran. The Iranian Supreme Court confirmed his verdict on 8 December and the journalist was executed on 12 December.

[ 78 ] Palestine and Israel [ edit ] See also: List of journalists killed in the Gaza war Al Jazeera 's Gaza correspondent Hossam Shabat was assassinated by the IDF on 24 March 2025 In October 2019, the Palestinian Authority blocked 59 websites, claiming that they were critical of the government. These websites were both Palestinian and Arabic and were identified to have been publishing material that "threaten national security and civil peace". Quds News Network, among the blocked sites, stated that the move reflected the Palestinian Authority's repression of the press.

[ 79 ] In 2023, nearly 75% of journalists killed worldwide were Palestinians who had died in Israel ’s war in Gaza .

[ 80 ] According to the Committee to Protect Journalists , Israel was the second worst country in the world for allowing the murderers of journalists to go unpunished.

[ 81 ] UNESCO awarded its 2024 World Press Freedom Prize to the Palestinian journalists of Gaza .

[ 82 ] China [ edit ] Main article: Freedom of the press in China Critics argue that the Communist Party in China has failed to live up to its promises about the freedom of the mainland Chinese media .

Freedom House consistently ranks China as 'Not Free' [ 83 ] in its annual press freedom survey, including the 2014 report. PRC journalist He Qinglian says that the PRC's media are controlled by directives from the Communist Party's propaganda department and are subjected to intense monitoring which threatens punishment for violators, rather than to pre-publication censorship. In 2008, ITV News reporter John Ray was arrested while covering a 'Free Tibet' protest.

[ 84 ] International media coverage of Tibetan protests only a few months before the Beijing Olympics in 2008 triggered a strong reaction inside China. Chinese media practitioners took the opportunity to argue with propaganda authorities for more media freedom: one journalist asked, 'If not even Chinese journalists are allowed to report about the problems in Tibet, how can foreign journalists know about the Chinese perspective about the events?' Foreign journalists also reported that their access to certain websites, including those of human rights organizations, was restricted.

[ 85 ] International Olympic Committee president Jacques Rogge stated at the end of the 2008 Olympic Games that "The regulations [governing foreign media freedom during the Olympics] might not be perfect but they are a sea-change compared to the situation before. We hope that they will continue".

[ 86 ] The Foreign Correspondents Club of China (FCCC) issued a statement during the Olympics that 'despite welcome progress in terms of accessibility and the number of press conferences within the Olympic facilities, the FCCC has been alarmed at the use of violence, intimidation and harassment outside. The club has confirmed more than 30 cases of reporting interference since the formal opening of the Olympic media centre on 25 July, and is checking at least 20 other reported incidents.' [ 87 ] Since the Chinese state continues to exert a considerable amount of control over media, public support for domestic reporting has come as a surprise to many observers. Not much is known about the extent to which the Chinese citizenry believe the official statements of the CPC, nor about which media sources they perceive as credible and why. So far, research on the media in China has focused on the changing relationship between media outlets and the state during the reform era. Nor is much known about how China's changing media environment has affected the government's ability to persuade media audiences. Research on political trust reveals that exposure to the media correlates positively with support for the government in some instances, and negatively in others. The research has been cited as evidence that the Chinese public believes propaganda transmitted to them through the news media, but also that they disbelieve it.

In 2012 the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights urged the Chinese government to lift restrictions on media access to the region and allow independent and impartial monitors to visit and assess conditions in Tibet. The Chinese government did not change its position.

[ 88 ] Pakistan [ edit ] Main article: Freedom of the press in Pakistan Article 19 of the constitution of the Pakistan states that: "Every citizen shall have the right to freedom of speech and expression, and there shall be freedom of the press, subject to any reasonable restrictions imposed by law in the interest of the glory of Islam or the integrity, security or defense of Pakistan or any part thereof, friendly relations with foreign States, public order, decency or morality, or in relation to contempt of court, commission of or incitement to an offence".

[ 89 ] Since independence the electronic media in Pakistan remained dominated by the state-run Pakistan Television and Pakistan Broadcasting CorporationsIronically, press freedom in Pakistan flourished for the first time in 2002 during Gen R Prevaiz Musharraf's era.

[ 90 ] To a large extent the media enjoys freedom of expression in spite of political pressure and direct bans sometimes administered by political stake holders. Political pressure on media is mostly done indirectly. One tool widely used by the government is to cut off 'unfriendly' media from governmental advertising. Using draconian laws, the government has also banned or officially silenced popular television channels. The Pakistan Electronic Media Regulatory Authority (PEMRA) has been used to silence the broadcast media by either suspending licenses or by simply threatening to do so. In addition, media is also threatened by non-state actors involved in the current conflict.

In its 2018 Press Freedom Index , Reporters Without Borders ranked Pakistan number 139 out of 180 countries based on freedom of the press. The report implied considerable improvement in the freedom of press compared to the preceding years.

[ 91 ] Malaysia [ edit ] The press in Malaysia is controlled and journalists cannot have a conversation about certain things. For instance, a British reporter in Malaysia was arrested after she reported on the 1Malaysia Development Berhad scandal and published details of the alleged transfer of $681 million from 1MDB to bank accounts held by Najib Razak .

[ 92 ] Singapore [ edit ] Singapore's media environment is considered to be controlled by the government.

[ 93 ] [ 94 ] Saudi Arabia [ edit ] Saudi journalist Jamal Khashoggi was a journalist and critic but was murdered by the Saudi Government.

[ 95 ] Saudi Arabia does not tolerate dissidents and it can impose penalties on such people. Saudi Arabia is also responsible for executing Saudi American journalist, Jamal Khashoggi in 2018. As he entered a Saudi embassy in Turkey, a group of Saudi assassins killed him.

[ 95 ] India [ edit ] Main article: Freedom of the press in India The Indian Constitution , while not mentioning the word "press", provides for "the right to freedom of speech and expression" (Article 19(1) a). However, this right is subject to restrictions under sub clause, whereby this freedom can be restricted for reasons of " sovereignty and integrity of India, the security of the State, friendly relations with foreign States, public order, preserving decency, preserving morality, in relation to contempt, court, defamation , or incitement to an offense". Laws such as the Official Secrets Act and Prevention of Terrorist Activities Act [ 96 ] (PoTA) have been used to limit press freedom. Under PoTA, person could be detained for up to six months for being in contact with a terrorist or terrorist group. PoTA was repealed in 2006, but the Official Secrets Act 1923 continues.

For the first half-century of independence, media control by the state was the major constraint on press freedom.

Indira Gandhi famously stated in 1975 that All India Radio is "a Government organ, it is going to remain a Government organ..." [ 97 ] With the liberalization starting in the 1990s, private control of media has burgeoned, leading to increasing independence and greater scrutiny of government.

It ranks poorly at 142nd [ 98 ] rank out of 180 listed countries in the Press Freedom Index 2021 released by Reporters Without Borders (RSF).

[ 99 ] Analytically India's press freedom, as could be deduced by the Press Freedom Index , has constantly reduced since 2002, when it culminated in terms of apparent freedom, achieving a rank of 80 among the reported countries. In 2018, India's freedom of press ranking declined two placed to 138. In explaining the decline, RSF cited growing intolerance from Hindu nationalist supporters of Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi , and the murders of journalists such as Gauri Lankesh .

[ 100 ] [ 101 ] [ 102 ] Bangladesh [ edit ] Main article: Freedom of the press in Bangladesh Bangladeshi media is reportedly following self-censorship due to the controversial Information and Communication Technology (ICT) Act. Under this act, 25 journalists and several hundred bloggers and Facebook users are reportedly prosecuted in Bangladesh in 2017.

[ 103 ] Bangladesh ranks poorly at 146th rank out of 180 listed countries in the Press Freedom Index 2018 released by Reporters Without Borders (RWB).

[ 99 ] Bangladeshi media has faced many problems in 2018. The country's most popular online newspaper bdnews24.com was blocked for a few hours on 18 June 2018, by Bangladesh's regulatory authority. Another newspaper The Daily Star 's website was blocked for 22 hours on 2 June 2018, after it had published a report about a victim of an extrajudicial execution in the southeastern city of Cox's Bazar .

[ 104 ] During the road-safety protests in 2018 , Bangladeshi government switched off 3G and 4G mobile data and also arrested a photographer named Shahidul Alam under ICT act, after he had given an interview with Al Jazeera .

[ 105 ] Africa [ edit ] Tanzania [ edit ] As of 2018, online content providers must be licensed and pay an annual fee to the government.

[ 106 ] South Africa [ edit ] Following the transition to democracy in 1994, the post-apartheid Constitution of South Africa guarantees the freedom of the press.

[ 107 ] Implications of new technologies [ edit ] Many of the traditional means of delivering information are being slowly superseded by the increasing pace of modern technological advance. Almost every conventional mode of media and information dissemination has a modern counterpart that offers significant potential advantages to journalists seeking to maintain and enhance their freedom of speech. A few simple examples of such phenomena include: Satellite television versus terrestrial television : Whilst terrestrial television is relatively easy to manage and manipulate, satellite television is much more difficult to control as journalistic content can easily be broadcast from other jurisdictions beyond the control of individual governments. An example of this in the Middle East is the satellite broadcaster Al Jazeera . This Arabic-language media channel operates out of Qatar , whose government is relatively liberal compared to many of its neighboring states. As such, its views and content are often problematic to a number of governments in the region and beyond. However, because of the increased affordability and miniaturisation of satellite technology (e.g., dishes and receivers) it is simply not practicable for most states to control popular access to the channel.

Internet-based publishing (e.g., blogging , social media ) vs. traditional publishing : Traditional magazines and newspapers rely on physical resources (e.g., offices, printing presses) that can easily be targeted and forced to close down. Internet-based publishing systems can be run using ubiquitous and inexpensive equipment and can operate from any global jurisdiction. Nations and organisations are increasingly resorting to legal measures to take control of online publications, using national security, anti-terror measures and copyright laws to issue takedown notices and restrict opposition speech.

[ 108 ] Internet, anonymity software and strong cryptography : In addition to Internet-based publishing, the Internet (in combination with anonymity software such as Tor and cryptography ) allows for sources to remain anonymous and sustain confidentiality while delivering information to or securely communicating with journalists anywhere in the world in an instant (e.g.

SecureDrop , WikiLeaks ).

Voice over Internet protocol (VOIP) vs. conventional telephony : Although conventional telephony systems are easily tapped and recorded, modern VOIP technology can employ low-cost strong cryptography to evade surveillance. As VOIP and similar technologies become more widespread they are likely to make the effective monitoring of journalists (and their contacts and activities) a very difficult task for governments.

Governments are responding to the challenges posed by new media technologies by deploying increasingly sophisticated technology of their own (a notable example being China's attempts to impose control through a state-run internet service provider that controls access to the Internet).

World ranking [ edit ] World ranking 2023 [ edit ] In its 2023 report published on 3 May, Reporters Without Borders evaluated the state of media freedom in 180 countries. According to this report, the government of the Islamic Republic of Iran ranks 177 out of 180 countries after North Korea, China and Vietnam, and it has also been named as one of the most dangerous countries for journalists.

[ 109 ] World ranking 2021 [ edit ] The World Press Freedom Index 2021, compiled by Reporters Without Borders, shows that journalism is completely blocked or severely restricted in 73 countries and restricted in 59 others. According to the report, Norway ranks first among 180 countries for the fifth year in a row. Finland is second and Sweden third. In this index, Iran is ranked 174th with a decline.

Russia , China, Saudi Arabia, Egypt, Syria ranked consequently 150th, 177th, 170th, 166th and 173rd.

[ 110 ] [ 111 ] World ranking 2020 [ edit ] On 21 April, the RSF in its 2020 annual report published the latest ranking of Freedom of Media. The Islamic Republic of Iran is the 173rd in the list, declining three steps compared to 2019. The three Iranian allied countries, Syria , China , and North Korea are 174th, 177th, and 180th. This organization accuses China and Iran of censorship of news about an outbreak of coronavirus .

[ 112 ] World ranking 2019 [ edit ] On 18 April, the RSF published its annual report, Indication for Free Media in the world. In this report, among 180 states, Norway was the freest and safest country in the world.

Finland and Sweden are the next. Meanwhile, Iran lost its position in the list- compare to 2018- and is among the 11 countries that suppress the freedom of the media. Iran is on the bottom of the list, ranked as the 170th state.

[ 113 ] World ranking 2018 [ edit ] The RSF in its annual report in 2018 documented deadly violence and misbehavior against reporters saying for one year 80 reporters have been killed, 348 detained, and 60 taken hostage which indicates an unprecedented hostility against media staff. This organization recognizes Iran as one of the five states which is called "prison of reporters" along with China , Saudi Arabia , Egypt, and Turkey. Based on this report Iran is ranked 144th and is still one of the greatest prisons for journalists.

[ 114 ] World ranking 2017 [ edit ] Based on the 2017 annual report on RSF, Iran along with China , Turkey , Vietnam , and Syria are the largest prison for reporters and media activists. The report says during 2017, among professional journalists, 50 have been killed and 326 detained; 54 reporters have been taken hostage.

[ 115 ] World ranking 2016 [ edit ] On 13 December 2016, the Reporters without Borders (RSF) published its annual report. The report reads: 348 journalists have been detained and 52 taken hostage in Iran in 2016. Following Turkey, the countries China, Syria, Egypt , and Iran have almost two-thirds of detained journalists .

[ 116 ] World ranking 2015 [ edit ] On 12 February 2015, the Reporters without Borders (RSF) published its annual report. In this report, 180 states have been reviewed based on the freedom of press, independent media and also the situation of reporters and journalists. Iran is at the 173rd of this list that indicates, despite the Rouhani 's promises, freedom of speeches and journalists has not been improved; the RSF concerns continue. According to the report, Iran ranked third on the list on the imprisonment of journalists.

[ 117 ] Organizations for press freedom [ edit ] American Civil Liberties Union Article 19 Canadian Journalists for Free Expression Committee to Protect Journalists Electronic Frontier Foundation Freedom House Index on Censorship Inter American Press Association International Freedom of Expression Exchange International Press Institute Media Legal Defence Initiative OSCE Representative on Freedom of the Media Reporters Without Borders Student Press Law Center World Association of Newspapers and News Publishers World Press Freedom Committee Worldwide Governance Indicators See also [ edit ] Part of a series on Censorship by country Countries List Albania Algeria Armenia Australia Austria Azerbaijan Bahrain Bangladesh Belarus Belgium Bhutan Bolivia Brazil Cambodia Cameroon Canada Chad China ( Hong Kong / overseas ) Croatia Cuba Czech Republic Denmark Djibouti Ecuador Egypt El Salvador Eritrea EU Finland France ( Ancien Régime ) Germany ( Nazi / Democratic Republic / Federal Republic ) Greece Guatemala Honduras India Indonesia ( Dutch East Indies ) Iran ( Islamic ) Iraq Ireland Israel Italy ( World War I ) Jamaica Japan ( Empire of Japan ) Kenya Malawi Malaysia Maldives Mexico Morocco Myanmar Nepal New Zealand Nicaragua Nigeria North Korea Pakistan Paraguay Peru Philippines Poland ( Communist ) Portugal Qatar Romania ( Communist ) Russia ( Russian Empire / Soviet Union ) Rwanda Samoa Saudi Arabia Serbia Singapore Somalia Sudan South Africa South Asia South Korea South Sudan Spain ( Francoist ) Sri Lanka Sweden Syria Taiwan Thailand Tunisia Turkey Uganda Ukraine United Arab Emirates United Kingdom United States Venezuela Vietnam Yemen Zimbabwe See also Banned political parties by country Blasphemy law by country Freedom of speech by country Hate speech laws by country Internet censorship and surveillance by country v t e Article 10 of the European Convention on Human Rights Chilling effect (term) Declaration of Windhoek (1991) Free Speech, "The People's Darling Privilege" Freedom of the Press Act (1766) Freedom of the press in the Russian Federation Freedom of the press in the United States Freedom of the press in Ukraine Free speech in the media during the 2011 Libyan civil war Gag order Investigative journalism Impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on journalism Journalism ethics and standards Journaliste en danger Journalistic standards Internet censorship List of indices of freedom Media activism Media blackout Media independence Media transparency Muckraker News embargo New York Press Club Photography is Not a Crime Prior restraint Section Two of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms Transparency of media ownership in Europe Tunisia Monitoring Group Turkey's media purge after the failed July 2016 coup d'état Virginia Declaration of Rights World Press Freedom Day on 3 May Press Freedom Index Press freedom under the Restoration Press support References [ edit ] Citations [ edit ] ^ Youm, Kyu Ho. "Freedom of the Press". In Wright, James D. (ed.).

International Encyclopedia of the Social & Behavioral Sciences (Second Edition) . Elsevier. pp.

392– 397.

doi : 10.1016/B978-0-08-097086-8.95054-2 .

ISBN 978-0-08-097087-5 .

^ a b Nordin, Jonas (2023).

The Swedish Freedom of the Press Ordinance of 1766: Background and Significance . Stockholm: The National Library of Sweden.

ISBN 978-91-7000-474-2 .

^ Nations, United.

"Universal Declaration of Human Rights" .

United Nations .

Archived from the original on 24 February 2018 . Retrieved 7 August 2017 .

^ a b Powe, L. A. Scot (1992).

The Fourth Estate and the Constitution: Freedom of the Press in America . University of California Press. p.

200 .

ISBN 9780520913165 .

^ "Summit for Democracy: New Scorecards Highlight State of Freedom in Participating Countries" .

Freedom House .

Archived from the original on 4 August 2022 . Retrieved 8 August 2022 .

^ a b "Explore CPJ's database of attacks on the press" .

cpj.org .

Archived from the original on 11 April 2020 . Retrieved 7 March 2020 .

^ "Explore CPJ's database of attacks on the press" .

cpj.org .

Archived from the original on 31 July 2020 . Retrieved 7 March 2020 .

^ "Number of journalists killed falls sharply as reprisal murders hit record low" .

Committee to Protect Journalists .

Archived from the original on 23 September 2020 . Retrieved 17 December 2019 .

^ "2023 World Press Freedom Index" .

Reporters Without Borders . 2023.

^ "2022 World Press Freedom Index | Reporters Without Borders" .

RSF .

Archived from the original on 27 April 2022 . Retrieved 5 December 2020 .

^ "World Map of the Freedom of the Press Status" .

Our World in Data .

Archived from the original on 17 April 2020 . Retrieved 5 March 2020 .

^ a b c Ambrey, Christopher L.; Fleming, Christopher M.; Manning, Matthew; Smith, Christine (4 August 2015). "On the Confluence of Freedom of the Press, Control of Corruption and Societal Welfare".

Social Indicators Research .

128 (2): 859– 880.

doi : 10.1007/s11205-015-1060-0 .

ISSN 0303-8300 .

S2CID 153582103 .

^ Solis, Jonathan A.; Antenangeli, Leonardo (September 2017). "Corruption Is Bad News for a Free Press: Reassessing the Relationship Between Media Freedom and Corruption: Corruption Is Bad News for a Free Press".

Social Science Quarterly .

98 (3): 1112– 1137.

doi : 10.1111/ssqu.12438 .

^ "Turkey leads the world in jailed journalists" .

The Economist . 16 January 2019.

Archived from the original on 6 March 2021 . Retrieved 27 February 2021 .

^ "Most Jailed Journalists? China, Turkey, Saudi Arabia, Egypt Again Top Annual CPJ Report" .

VOA News . 11 December 2019.

Archived from the original on 18 April 2021 . Retrieved 27 February 2021 .

^ a b "Description: Reporters Without Borders" .

The Media Research Hub . Social Science Research Council. 2003. Archived from the original on 9 January 2011 . Retrieved 23 September 2012 .

^ Freedom House (2005).

"Press Freedom Table (Press Freedom vs. Democracy ranks)" .

Freedom of the Press 2005 . UK: World Audit.

Archived from the original on 3 April 2013 . Retrieved 23 September 2012 .

^ "Editor's daughter killed in mysterious circumstances" Archived 2 May 2019 at the Wayback Machine , International Freedom of Expression Exchange (IFEX), 2 July 2002 ^ "Ukraine remembers slain reporter" Archived 2 May 2019 at the Wayback Machine , BBC News , 16 September 2004 ^ Nordin, Jonas (2018). "From seemly subjects to enlightened citizens: Censorship and press freedom from the Middle Ages to the 18th century". In Örtenhed, Kristina; Wennberg, Bertil (eds.).

Press Freedom 250 Years: Freedom of the Press and Public Access to Official Documents in Sweden and Finland – a living heritage from 1766 . Stockholm: Swedish Parliament. pp.

27– 59.

ISBN 978-91-87541-75-9 . Retrieved 8 March 2025 .

^ Wieland, Christoph Martin (2025). Bastian Terhorst (ed.).

The Secret of the Order of Cosmopolitans . Berlin: epubli. pp. XIII.

ISBN 978-3819044144 .

^ Schoenebaum, Eleonora W., ed. (1978).

Political Profiles: The Truman Years . Facts on File, Inc. pp.

16– 17.

ISBN 978-0-87196-453-3 .

^ Maria Poptcheva, Press freedom in the EU Legal framework and challenges Archived 10 February 2021 at the Wayback Machine , EPRS | European Parliamentary Research Service, Briefing April 2015 ^ "European Neighbourhood Policy and Enlargement Negotiations" . European Commission. Archived from the original on 24 January 2016 . Retrieved 8 February 2016 .

^ "British Press Freedom Under Threat" Archived 30 January 2017 at the Wayback Machine , Editorial, New York Times , 14 November 2013. Retrieved 19 November 2013.

^ "Leveson Inquiry: British press freedom is a model for the world, editor tells inquiry" .

The Telegraph . 14 October 2017. Archived from the original on 7 October 2011.

^ a b Sanders, Karen (2003).

Ethics & Journalism . Sage. p. 66.

ISBN 978-0-7619-6967-9 .

^ Alison Olson, "The Zenger Case Revisited: Satire, Sedition and Political Debate in Eighteenth Century America" Archived 17 February 2016 at the Wayback Machine , Early American Literature , vol.35 no.3 (2000), pp. 223–245.

^ "Carlyle and Dickens on the Dark Side of Freedom of the Press" .

victorianweb.org .

Archived from the original on 8 December 2022 . Retrieved 11 August 2022 .

^ John Stuart Mill (1867).

On Liberty . Longmans. p. 10.

ISBN 9780758337283 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ Laursen, John Christian (January 1998). "David Hume and the Danish Debate about Freedom of the Press in the 1770s".

Journal of the History of Ideas .

59 (1): 167– 172.

doi : 10.1353/jhi.1998.0004 .

JSTOR 3654060 .

S2CID 154481010 .

^ "Lo Statuto Albertino" (PDF) . The official website of the Presidency of the Italian Republic. Archived from the original (PDF) on 16 August 2018.

^ "The Italian Constitution" (PDF) . The official website of the Presidency of the Italian Republic. Archived from the original on 27 November 2016.

^ Green, Jonathon; Karolides, Nicholas J. (2014).

Encyclopedia of Censorship (2nd ed.). Infobase Publishing. pp.

194– 196.

ISBN 9781438110011 .

^ "The Freedom of the Press Act", Sveriges Riksdag Archived 30 September 2007 at the Wayback Machine ^ Fortress Europe? – Circular Letter.

"FECL 15 (May 1993): The Swedish Tradition of Freedom of Press" . Archived from the original on 8 March 2016 . Retrieved 14 March 2016 .

^ "The World's First Freedom of Information Act (Sweden/Finland 1766)" .

Scribd .

Archived from the original on 15 December 2013 . Retrieved 14 March 2016 .

^ "freedominfo.org, "Sweden" " .

Archived from the original on 6 April 2019 . Retrieved 26 September 2011 .

^ "Secretary Michael R. Pompeo With Ray Furlong of Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty" .

U.S. Department of State . 12 August 2020.

Archived from the original on 17 September 2020 . Retrieved 19 September 2020 .

^ "Russia Jails Anti-War Journalist 6 Years for 'Fake News' " .

The Moscow Times . 15 February 2023.

^ "Putin Signs Law Introducing Jail Terms for 'Fake News' on Army" .

The Moscow Times . 4 March 2022.

Archived from the original on 6 March 2022.

^ "1K Journalists Have Fled Russia Since Ukraine Invasion – Report" .

The Moscow Times . 3 February 2023.

^ Stengel, Richard (20 May 2022).

"Putin May Be Winning the Information War Outside of the U.S. and Europe" .

TIME .

^ "Russia's Novaya Gazeta newspaper pauses activities after official warning" .

Reuters . 28 March 2022.

^ "Russia issues arrest warrants for exiled journalists over war coverage" .

VOA News . 3 July 2024.

^ Pirvulescu, Christina (14 June 1990).

"Journalists Clubbed, Newspaper Occupied as Miners Aid Iliescu" .

AP NEWS .

Archived from the original on 8 April 2022 . Retrieved 22 September 2022 .

^ Anton, Christian (1 February 2022).

"Ziaristul pe care Ion Iliescu l-a făcut "Măi, animalule!" a murit răpus de Covid-19. A fost înmormântat chiar de ziua lui" .

Stirileprotv.ro (in Romanian).

Archived from the original on 3 August 2022 . Retrieved 22 September 2022 .

^ International Federation of Journalists (17 August 1999).

"Editor-in-chief arrested" .

IFEX .

Archived from the original on 9 March 2022 . Retrieved 11 March 2025 .

^ "Romania | RSF" .

rsf.org . 17 February 2023.

Archived from the original on 16 May 2023 . Retrieved 16 May 2023 .

^ "More than 120 journalists still jailed in Turkey: International Press Institute" .

Reuters . 19 November 2019.

Archived from the original on 28 March 2021 . Retrieved 27 February 2021 .

^ "Turkish journalists arrested for reporting Covid-19 cases" .

Reporters Without Borders . 11 May 2020.

^ "Coronavirus Has Started a Censorship Pandemic" .

Foreign Policy . 1 April 2020.

^ "Reporters Without Borders: Belarus" . Retrieved 30 November 2017 .

^ Belarus blocks top news site in ‘full-scale assault’ on free press , Retrieved 16 June 2025.

^ В Беларуси обыски у журналистов издания "Наша Нива" , Retrieved 16 June 2025.

^ " 'Pro zvané novináře.' Česká televize odmítla vpustit reportéry Deníku N a Seznam zpráv na brífink Součka" .

^ "Souček: Myslíte, že Moravec může říkat, co chce, kdy chce? Ne, bianco šek nevystavuju | Aktuálně.cz" . 4 September 2024.

^ "Byla to hloupost. Souček lituje přirovnání k Miladě Horákové - Novinky" . 27 March 2025.

^ "Chci, aby ČT udávala trendy na digitálním trhu, říká nastupující generální ředitel Souček" .

^ "Šéf České televize dostal výtku. Za odstupné, začerňování smluv i způsob komunikace | Aktuálně.cz" . 12 March 2025.

^ "Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms" . Paragraph 2(b): Government of Canada. Archived from the original on 10 January 2016 . Retrieved 20 November 2016 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: location ( link ) ^ "Mexico: Two Mexican journalists murdered in space of three days | Reporters without borders" .

RSF (in French). 20 September 2016 . Retrieved 16 November 2016 .

^ "She covered human rights for VOA in Azerbaijan. Now she's in jail" .

The Washington Post . 15 May 2025.

^ "Azerbaijan Convicts Critics in Relentless Crackdown" .

Human Rights Watch . 3 July 2025.

^ "Azerbaijan: Seven journalists sentenced in latest shocking crackdown on free speech" .

Amnesty International . 20 June 2025.

^ "Tenth anniversary of Bahraini blogger's arrest | RSF" . 17 March 2021.

Archived from the original on 30 December 2021 . Retrieved 30 December 2021 .

^ "Country of origin information report Iran" (PDF) .

www.justice.gov . 4 May 2007.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 18 July 2021 . Retrieved 8 September 2020 .

^ "Reporters Without Borders: Iranian Journalists Are Victims Of Jet Crash Lies" .

Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty . 6 February 2020.

Archived from the original on 5 September 2020 . Retrieved 5 September 2020 .

^ شجاعی, میترا (2 May 2015).

"روز آزادی مطبوعات؛ ایران جزو پنج زندان بزرگ روزنامه‌نگاران" .

Deutsche Welle (in Persian).

Archived from the original on 10 November 2020 . Retrieved 9 November 2020 .

^ a b "Coronavirus pandemic 'amplifies press freedom threats' " . AFP. 21 April 2020. Archived from the original on 8 May 2020 . Retrieved 3 May 2020 .

^ "بیانیه کانون نویسنگان ایران به مناسبت روز جهانی آزادی مطبوعات" .

Human Rights Activists News Agency (HRANA) (in Persian). 3 May 2020.

Archived from the original on 17 August 2020 . Retrieved 30 August 2020 .

^ "ادامه انتقاد نهادهای بین‌المللی نسبت به موج تازه‌ فشارها علیه روزنامه‌نگاران ایران" .

BBC (in Persian). 8 February 2020.

Archived from the original on 31 August 2020 . Retrieved 31 August 2020 .

^ "گزارشگران بدون مرز: سفیر ایران در لندن تهدیدی علیه رسانه‌ها و روزنامه‌نگاران است" .

Radio Farda (in Persian). 26 November 2019.

Archived from the original on 30 November 2019 . Retrieved 28 September 2020 .

^ Beiser, Elana (11 December 2019).

"China, Turkey, Saudi Arabia, Egypt are world's worst jailers of journalists" .

CPJ .

Archived from the original on 31 August 2020 . Retrieved 4 September 2020 .

^ "کمیته حمایت از روزنامه‌نگاران: ۲۵۰ روزنامه‌نگار در جهان زندانی هستند" .

BBC (in Persian). 11 December 2019.

Archived from the original on 4 September 2020 . Retrieved 4 September 2020 .

^ "خبرنگاران بدون مرز: سرکوب روزنامه‌نگاران ایران تشدید شده است" .

Deutsche Welle (in Persian). 8 September 2020.

Archived from the original on 9 September 2020 . Retrieved 9 September 2020 .

^ "Iran: Writers Baktash Abtin, Reza Khandan-Mahabadi and Keyvan Bazhan Imprisoned" .

PEN International . 30 October 2020.

Archived from the original on 2 February 2021 . Retrieved 24 November 2020 .

^ "Iran: Dissident Executed on Vague Charges" .

Human Rights Watch . 12 December 2020.

Archived from the original on 12 December 2020 . Retrieved 12 December 2020 .

^ "Palestinian Court Blocks 59 Websites Critical of PA" .

The Palestine Chronicle . 22 October 2019.

Archived from the original on 23 October 2019 . Retrieved 22 October 2019 .

^ "Nearly 75% of journalists killed in 2023 died in Israel's war on Gaza: CPJ" .

Al Jazeera . Retrieved 7 March 2024 .

^ Scott, Liam (30 October 2024).

"Haiti, Israel ranked worst for securing justice in journalist killings" .

Voice of America . Retrieved 1 November 2024 .

^ "Palestinian journalists covering Gaza awarded 2024 UNESCO/Guillermo Cano World Press Freedom Prize" .

UNESCO . 2 May 2024.

^ "China" .

leadingweb.de . 15 April 2020. Archived from the original on 31 July 2020 . Retrieved 3 October 2019 .

^ "8 Tibet Activists Detained near Olympics Venue" . 15 September 2010. Archived from the original on 15 September 2010 . Retrieved 3 October 2019 .

^ "Hundreds of websites still censored at Beijing Olympics | Web Scout | Los Angeles Times" . 14 August 2008. Archived from the original on 14 August 2008 . Retrieved 3 October 2019 .

^ "AFP: Rogge urges China to keep foreign media freedoms" . 5 March 2009. Archived from the original on 5 March 2009 . Retrieved 3 October 2019 .

^ "Games fell short of standards" . 15 September 2008. Archived from the original on 15 September 2008 . Retrieved 3 October 2019 .

^ "China must urgently address rights violations in Tibet – UN senior official" .

UN News . 2 November 2012.

Archived from the original on 17 March 2018 . Retrieved 3 October 2019 .

^ "The Constitution of Pakistan" .

www.pakistani.org . Archived from the original on 7 September 2018 . Retrieved 3 October 2019 .

^ "Musharraf's respect for press freedom | Pakistan Press Foundation (PPF)" .

www.pakistanpressfoundation.org .

Archived from the original on 14 January 2020 . Retrieved 3 October 2019 .

^ "2019 World Press Freedom Index | Reporters Without Borders" .

RSF . 30 January 2013.

Archived from the original on 17 January 2023 . Retrieved 3 October 2019 .

^ "Briton exiled for reporting on 1MDB returns to Malaysia" .

Reuters . 19 May 2018.

Archived from the original on 30 December 2021 . Retrieved 30 December 2021 .

^ "Singapore profile" .

BBC News . 5 September 2017.

Archived from the original on 19 July 2018 . Retrieved 21 July 2018 .

^ Branigin, William (17 December 1990).

"Singapore vs The Foreign Press" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on 13 November 2017 . Retrieved 6 February 2018 .

^ a b "Opinion | Jamal Khashoggi: What the Arab world needs most is free expression" .

The Washington Post . 17 October 2018.

Archived from the original on 20 October 2018 . Retrieved 16 February 2022 .

^ "The Prevention of Terrorism Act 2002" .

Archived from the original on 12 April 2012 . Retrieved 30 October 2006 .

^ "Freedom of the Press" .

PUCL Bulletin . People's Union for Civil Liberties. July 1982. Archived from the original on 11 April 2018 . Retrieved 30 October 2006 .

^ "India : Deadly threat from Modi's nationalism – Reporters without borders" .

RSF . 22 March 2023.

Archived from the original on 2 June 2017 . Retrieved 2 June 2017 .

^ a b "2018 Press Freedom Index" . Reporters Without Borders. Archived from the original on 10 June 2020 . Retrieved 23 June 2018 .

^ "World Press Freedom Index: India down two ranks to 138, one place above Pakistan" .

Indian . 27 April 2018.

Archived from the original on 29 May 2018 . Retrieved 29 May 2018 .

^ "India's ranking in press freedom falls to 138" .

The Hindu . 26 April 2018.

Archived from the original on 30 December 2019 . Retrieved 29 May 2018 .

^ Faisal, Mohammed (3 May 2018).

"World Press Freedom Index Report 2018: India placed only one rank above Pakistan, but why?" .

India Today .

Archived from the original on 3 May 2018 . Retrieved 29 May 2018 .

^ "Press freedom report: media self-censorship on rise in Bangladesh" .

Dhaka Tribune . 25 April 2018.

Archived from the original on 11 August 2018 . Retrieved 11 August 2018 .

^ "Is Bangladesh's media freedom deteriorating?" .

dw.com . 27 July 2018.

Archived from the original on 11 August 2018 . Retrieved 11 August 2018 .

^ "A Bangladeshi Photographer's Arrest Is a Worrying Sign for Press Freedom" .

Time . Retrieved 11 August 2018 .

^ "Tanzania: Bloggers to be charged $900 (average annual income) per year for right to speak" . Peril of Africa. 15 April 2018. Archived from the original on 11 September 2019 . Retrieved 25 April 2018 .

^ Maharaj, Brij (18 October 2021).

"Press freedom in democratic South Africa is a fragile concept" .

Daily Maverick .

Archived from the original on 3 January 2022 . Retrieved 3 January 2022 .

^ "How U.S. copyright law is being used to take down Correa's critics in Ecuador – Committee to Protect Journalists" .

cpj.org . 21 January 2016.

Archived from the original on 20 January 2017 . Retrieved 20 January 2017 .

^ "2023 World Press Freedom Index – journalism threatened by fake content industry | RSF" .

rsf.org .

Archived from the original on 4 May 2023 . Retrieved 4 May 2023 .

^ "2021 World Press Freedom Index: Journalism, the vaccine against disinformation, blocked in more than 130 countries" .

rsf.org . 19 April 2021.

Archived from the original on 10 May 2021 . Retrieved 10 May 2021 .

^ "2021 WORLD PRESS FREEDOM INDEX" .

rsf.org . 30 January 2013.

Archived from the original on 17 January 2023 . Retrieved 11 May 2016 .

^ "2020 World Press Freedom Index: "Entering a decisive decade for journalism, exacerbated by coronavirus" " .

rsf.org . 21 April 2020.

Archived from the original on 7 May 2020 . Retrieved 17 August 2020 .

^ "2019 World Press Freedom Index – A cycle of fear" .

RSF . 15 April 2019.

Archived from the original on 2 June 2020 . Retrieved 18 August 2020 .

^ "RSF's 2018 round-up of deadly attacks and abuses against journalists – figures up in all categories" .

RSF . 14 December 2018.

Archived from the original on 30 May 2020 . Retrieved 20 August 2020 .

^ "RSF round-up: these figures are alarming" .

rsf . 18 December 2017.

Archived from the original on 5 August 2020 . Retrieved 22 August 2020 .

^ "2016 Round-Up: Number of journalists detained worldwide continues to rise" .

rsf . 23 August 2019.

Archived from the original on 1 October 2020 . Retrieved 24 August 2020 .

^ "World Press Freedom Index 2015: decline on all fronts" .

rsf . 25 January 2016. Archived from the original on 8 September 2020 . Retrieved 29 August 2020 .

Sources [ edit ] Gardner, Mary A.

The Inter American Press Association: Its Fight for Freedom of the Press, 1926–1960 (University of Texas Press, 2014) George, Cherian.

Freedom from the Press: Journalism and State Power in Singapore (2012) Molnár, Peter, ed.

Freedom of Speech and Freedom of Information Since the Fall of the Berlin Wall (Central European University Press, 2014) Nord, Lars W., and Torbjörn Von Krogh. "The Freedom of The Press or The Fear Factor? Analysing Political Decisions and Non-Decisions in British Media Policy 1990–2012".

Observatorio (OBS*) (2015) 9#1 pp. 1–16.

Stockmann, Daniela.

Media Commercialization and Authoritarian Rule in China (2012) Thierer, Adam; Brian Anderson (2008).

A Manifesto for Media Freedom . New York: Encounter Books.

ISBN 978-1-59403-228-8 .

External links [ edit ] Look up freedom of the press in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Freedom of the press .

Wikiquote has quotations related to Freedom of the press .

Wikisource has the text of The New Student's Reference Work article about " Freedom of the press ".

Canadian Journalists for Free Expression Archived 31 July 2019 at the Wayback Machine Media Freedom Navigator Media Freedom Indices at a Glance Risorse Etiche Publish and translate articles of independent journalists the ACTivist Magazine (archived 14 August 2006) South East Europe Media Organisation Banned Magazine , the journal of censorship and secrecy.

(archived 15 March 2007) News and Free Speech – Newspaper Index Blog (archived 5 February 2006) Press Freedom Archived 6 January 2010 at the Wayback Machine OSCE Representative on Freedom of the Media MANA – the Media Alliance for New Activism International Freedom of Expression Exchange – Monitors press freedom around the world (archived 23 December 1996) IPS Inter Press Service Independent news on press freedom around the world (archived 29 August 2006) The Reporters Committee for Freedom of the Press Reporters Without Borders (archived 15 June 2006) Doha Center for Media Freedom [ usurped ] World Press Freedom Committee Student Press Law Center Union syndicale des journalistes CFDT Mapping media freedom in Europe (archived 31 May 2015) v t e Censorship Media regulation Books books banned Films banned films Internet circumvention Music Postal Press Radio Speech and expression Student media Televisions banned televisions Thought Video games banned video games Methods Bleeping Book burning Broadcast delay By copyright Cancel culture Censor bars Chilling effect Collateral censorship Concision Conspiracy of silence Content-control software Damnatio memoriae De-banking Deplatforming Euphemism Minced oath Expurgation Fogging Gag order Gatekeeping Hallin's spheres Heckling Heckler's veto Hush money Internet police Malinformation Media blackout Memory hole National intranet News embargo Newspaper theft Non-disclosure agreement Opinion corridor Overton window Pixelization Political correctness Prior restraint Propaganda Purge Redaction Revisionism Sanitization Self-censorship Shadow banning Social rejection Speech code Spiral of silence Strategic lawsuit Super-injunction Surveillance computer and network mass Taboo Whitewashing Word filtering Contexts AI Algorithmic Chinese censorship abroad Criminal Corporate Apple Facebook Google Hate speech Online Ideological Academic LGBT issues Media bias Moral police Moralistic fallacy Naturalistic fallacy Political censorship Banned parties Political prisoner Propaganda model Religious Blasphemy law Islamic Police Suppression of dissent Systemic bias Wikipedia By location Censorship by country Blasphemy law Freedom of speech Internet censorship In the Middle East In South Asia v t e Liberty Concepts Artistic freedom Cognitive liberty Free will Freedom of conscience Freedom of expression Freedom of Expression (book) Algeria Canada India South Africa Freethought Moral responsibility Personification of Liberty Libertas Negative liberty Positive liberty Rights Self-ownership Topfreedom By type Academic Civil Economic Financial Intellectual Internet Morphological Political By right Abortion Assembly Association Asylum Cannabis Choice Civil and political Clothing Death Digital Education Fair trial Family Freedom from discrimination Food Gun Health Housing Internet access Information Life Morphological Movement Personality Press Privacy Property Protest Religion Repair Resist Self-defense Sexual and reproductive health Sexuality Silence Speech Thought To be forgotten Truth Water and sanitation Workers' right to access the toilet See also All men are created equal Anarchism Autonomy Beard and haircut laws by country Civil libertarianism Clothing laws by country Dancing ban Decriminalization of sex work Drug liberalization Human rights Left-libertarianism Legality of recording by civilians LGBTQ rights Libertarianism Liberty, equality, brotherhood Life, Liberty and the pursuit of Happiness Photography and the law Photography Is Not a Crime Pornography laws by region Prostitution law Psilocybin decriminalization in the United States Right-libertarianism Self-determination Stanley v. Georgia Universal Declaration of Human Rights v t e Journalism Newsroom Journalist ( Staff writer · Correspondent · News presenter ) Columnist Editors ( Editor-in-chief · Managing editor · Political editor · Editorial board · Assignment editor · Duty editor · Public editor · Editor-at-large · Contributing editor ) Weather presenter News bureau News director Photojournalist Pundit Stringer Profession News Article ( Headline · Byline · Dateline · Report · Special report · Exclusive · Interview · Column · Opinion piece · Editorial · Op-ed ) Writing style ( Five Ws · Inverted pyramid ) Ethics and standards Chequebook Churnalism Codes of ethics Culture Editing ( Copy editing · Corrections · Fact-checking · Spiking ) Fake news ( Websites ) Horse race Journalese Media bias ( False balance ) News values ( Above the fold · Man bites dog ) Objectivity Pink-slime Scandals Sensationalism Sources Tabloid ( Television ) Yellow Beats Arts Business Data Entertainment Environment Fashion Local Medicine Music Politics Science Sports Technology Traffic Video games War Weather World Genres Adversarial Advocacy ( Interventionism ) Analytic Blogging Citizen Civic Collaborative Comics-based Community Database Enterprise Explanatory Feature story Gonzo Human-interest Immersion Infotainment / Soft media Interpretive Investigative Long-form Narrative New Journalism Opinion Peace Public service Sensor Underground Visual Watchdog Social impact Decline of newspapers ( News desert ) Fourth Estate Fifth Estate Editorial independence ( Independent · State ) Freedom of information Freedom of the press ( Defamation · Safety ) Journalism school Media manipulation News propaganda ( Model ) Public relations ( Media relations · News embargo · Press conference · Press release ) Source protection News media Newspapers ( Newspaper of record · Middle-market · Newspaper formats · Broadsheet · Tabloid · Online · Extra edition ) Magazines Broadcast ( TV and radio ) Digital Multimedia ( Video ) Documentary film News agencies Alternative media Nonprofit List of journalism articles – Outline v t e Sexual revolution Main topics Birth control Male contraceptive Free love Gay liberation Die Sexualität im Kulturkampf Milestones Abortion law Boys in the Sand Blue Movie Myra Breckinridge Deep Throat Divorce law by country Freedom of speech Freedom of the press Golden Age of Porn Loving v. Virginia Miller Test Obergefell v. Hodges " Porno chic " Pornography Pornography in the United States Swinging The Pill (1965) Slogans " Make love, not war " " The personal is political " Events AIDS epidemic Kinsey Reports Masters and Johnson Institute Playboy Protests of 1968 Stonewall riots Summer of Love People Pat Califia Marilyn Chambers Aleister Crowley Gerard Damiano Betty Dodson Larry Flynt Sigmund Freud Ralph Ginzburg Al Goldstein Bob Guccione Terri Hall Fred Halsted Nina Hartley Hugh Hefner Magnus Hirschfeld David Hurles Virginia Johnson Alfred Kinsey Linda Lovelace Robert Mapplethorpe William Margold William Masters Radley Metzger Bettie Page Wilhelm Reich Marquis de Sade Margaret Sanger Annie Sprinkle Andy Warhol Ruth Westheimer Oscar Wilde Places 55th Street Playhouse Caldron (sex club) Catacombs (sex club) Club Baths The Factory Gay bathhouse LGBT culture Dallas-Fort Worth Houston Miami New York City San Francisco Mineshaft (gay club) New Andy Warhol Garrick Theatre Plato's Retreat Sandstone retreat South of Market Related Counterculture of the 1960s Feminist views of pornography Freudo-Marxism Hippie Inside Deep Throat (2005 film) Kinsey (2004 film) LGBT Lust Lovelace (2013 film) Make Love, Not War: The Sexual Revolution: An Unfettered History (2001 book) The Notorious Bettie Page (2005 film) Peace movement Slut-shaming Whatever (1994 novel) v t e Western world and culture Foundations Cradle of civilization Old World Greco-Roman world Greece Hellenistic Kingdoms Rome Roman Empire Western Eastern Roman legacy Romanization Romano-Germanic culture Gallo-Roman Christendom History European Bronze Age Classical antiquity Late antiquity Middle Ages early high late Renaissance Modern period Early modern period Age of Discovery Reformation Age of Enlightenment Scientific Revolution Age of Revolution Romanticism Abolitionism Emancipation Capitalism Industrial Revolution Great Divergence Modernism World War I Interwar period Universal suffrage World War II Cold War Post–Cold War era Information age War on terror Culture Alphabet Greek Latin Cyrillic Architecture Art Periods Calendar Cuisine Diet Classical tradition Studies Clothing History Dance Education Esotericism Astrology Folklore Immigration Law Languages Eurolinguistics Standard Average European Literature Canon Media Internet Music Chant Classical Folk Instruments Mythology Painting contemporary Philosophy Science Values Physical culture Sport Religion East–West Schism Western Christianity Decline Secularism Philosophy Ancient Greek philosophy Hellenistic philosophy Ancient Roman philosophy Christian ethics Judeo-Christian ethics Christian philosophy Scholasticism Rationalism Empiricism Existentialism Christian existentialism Humanism Christian humanism Secular humanism Liberalism Conservatism Socialism Continental philosophy Analytic philosophy Post-structuralism Tolerance Paradox Relativism Peritrope Atlanticism Sovereigntism Individualism Values European Religion Abrahamic Christianity Culture Western / Eastern Catholicism Latin Church Eastern Orthodoxy Greek Orthodox Church Protestantism Paganism Baltic Celtic Finnish Germanic Anglo-Saxon Frankish Gothic Old Norse Hellenistic Roman Slavic Neo Agnosticism Atheism Law Natural law Rule of law Equality before the law Constitutionalism Human rights Life Thought Speech Press Religion Property Democracy International law Contemporary integration ABCANZ Armies AER Anglo-Portuguese Alliance ANZUK ANZUS Arctic Council AUKUS AUSCANNZUKUS Baltic Assembly Benelux British–Irish Council BSEC Bucharest Nine CANZUK CBSS CEFTA Council of Europe Craiova Group Eastern European Group Eastern Partnership EEA EFTA EPC ESA EU EU Customs Union Eurozone EU–UK TCA Five Eyes G7 Lancaster House Treaties Lublin Triangle NATO Nordic Council OAS OECD Open Balkan OSCE Pacific Islands Forum PROSUR/PROSUL Rio Treaty Schengen Special Relationship Three Seas Initiative UKUSA Agreement USMCA Visegrád Group West Nordic Council Western Bloc Western European and Others Group Westernization Portal : Freedom of speech Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic Israel Other NARA Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Freedom_of_the_press&oldid=1304711148 " Categories : Freedom of the press Journalism Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1 errors: ISBN date CS1 Romanian-language sources (ro) CS1 maint: location CS1 French-language sources (fr) CS1 Persian-language sources (fa) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from July 2025 Articles with excerpts Articles containing French-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2025 All articles with failed verification Articles with failed verification from March 2025 Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 7 August 2025, at 18:03 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Freedom of the press 73 languages Add topic

