Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life and work 2 Legacy 3 Works 4 See also 5 References 6 Sources 7 Further reading 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Józef Maria Hoene-Wroński 31 languages العربية Aragonés Беларуская Български Català Чӑвашла Čeština Deutsch Español Esperanto Français Frysk 한국어 Interlingua Italiano Қазақша Magyar Македонски مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Piemontèis Polski Português Русский Slovenčina Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Polish philosopher (1776–1853) Józef Maria Hoene-Wroński Józef Maria Hoene-Wroński, by Laurent-Charles Maréchal, 1845 Born Josef Hoëné ( 1776-08-23 ) 23 August 1776 Wolsztyn , Poznań Province, Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth Died 9 August 1853 (1853-08-09) (aged 76) Neuilly-sur-Seine , France Nationality Polish Other names Josef Hoëné-Wronski Philosophical work Era 19th-century philosophy Region Western philosophy Polish philosophy French philosophy School Polish messianism Main interests Philosophy , mathematics , physics , engineering , law , occultism , economics Notable ideas Wronskian Polish Messianism Continuous track Józef Maria Hoene-Wroński ( / ˈ h oʊ n ə ˈ v r ɒ n s k i / ; Polish: [ˈjuzɛf ˈxɛnɛ ˈvrɔj̃skʲi] ; French : Josef Hoëné-Wronski [ʒozɛf ɔɛne vʁɔ̃ski] ; 23 August 1776 – 9 August 1853) was a Polish messianist philosopher , mathematician , physicist , inventor , lawyer , occultist [ 1 ] and economist . 
In mathematics, he is known for introducing a novel series expansion for a function in response to Joseph Louis Lagrange 's use of infinite series. The coefficients in Wroński's new series form the Wronskian , a determinant Thomas Muir named in 1882. As an inventor, he is credited with designing some of the first caterpillar vehicles .

[ 2 ] Life and work [ edit ] He was born as Hoëné in 1776 but changed his name in 1815 to Józef Wroński.

[ 3 ] Later in life he changed his name to Józef Maria Hoene-Wroński, [ 3 ] without using his family's original French spelling Hoëné. At no point in his life, neither in Polish or French, was he known as Hoëné-Wroński; nor was the common French transliteration, Josef Hoëné-Wronski, ever his official name in his native Poland (though it might have served as his chosen French nom de plume on some work).

[ citation needed ] His father, Antoni Höhne ( pl , de ), was the municipal architect of Poznań . Antoni originally came from the small Bohemian village of Leukersdorf (present-day Čermná which is now a part of Libouchec ). In later life, he settled in western Poland marrying Elżbieta Pernicka in Wolsztyn in 1773. In the same place and a few years later on, in 1776, their son Józef Maria was born. Józef was educated in Poznań and Warsaw . In 1794 he served in Poland's Kościuszko Uprising as a second lieutenant of artillery, was taken prisoner, and remained until 1797 in the Russian Army.  After resigning in the rank of lieutenant colonel in 1798, he studied in the Holy Roman Empire until 1800, when he enlisted in the Polish Legion at Marseille .  There he began his scientific and scholarly work and conceived the idea of a great philosophical system. Ten years later he moved to Paris where he would spend most of his life working unremittingly to the last in the most difficult material circumstances.

He wrote exclusively in French , in the desire that his ideas, of whose immortality he was convinced, be accessible to all; he worked, he said, "through France for Poland."   He published over a hundred works, and left many more in manuscript; at 75 years of age and nearing death, he exclaimed:  "God Almighty, there's still so much more I wanted to say!" In science, Hoene-Wroński set himself an extraordinary task:  the complete reform of philosophy as well as that of mathematics, astronomy and  technology.  He elaborated not only a system of philosophy, but also applications to politics, history, economics, law, psychology, music and pedagogy .  It was his aspiration to reform human knowledge in an "absolute, that is, ultimate" manner.

In 1803, Wroński joined the Marseille Observatory, and began developing an enormously complex theory of the structure and origin of the universe .  During this period, he took up a correspondence with nearly all of the major scientists and mathematicians of his day, and was well respected at the observatory. In 1803 Wroński "experienced a mystical illumination, which he regarded as the discovery of the Absolute." [ 4 ] In 1810, he published the results of his scientific research in a massive tome, which he advocated as a new foundation for all of science and mathematics.  His theories were strongly Pythagorean , holding numbers and their properties to be the fundamental underpinning of essentially everything in the universe.  His claims were met with little acceptance, and his research and theories were generally dismissed as grandiose rubbish.  His earlier correspondence with major figures meant that his writings garnered more attention than a typical crackpot theory , even earning a review from the great mathematician Joseph Louis Lagrange (which turned out to be categorically unfavorable).

[ 5 ] In the ensuing controversy, he was forced to leave the observatory.

He immediately turned his focus towards applying philosophy to mathematics (his critics believed that this meant dispensing with mathematical rigor in favor of generalities).  In 1812, he published a paper purporting to show that every equation has an algebraic solution, directly contradicting results which had been recently published by Paolo Ruffini ; Ruffini turned out to be correct.

Portrait by Félix Vallotton He later turned his attention to disparate and largely unsuccessful pursuits such as a fantastical design for caterpillar -like vehicles which he intended to replace railroad transportation, but did not manage to persuade anyone to give the design serious attention.  In 1819, he travelled to England in an attempt to obtain financial backing from the Board of Longitude to build a device to determine longitude at sea.  After initial difficulties, he was given an opportunity to address the Board, but his pretentious address, On the Longitude , contained much philosophizing and generalities, but no concrete plans for a working device, and thus failed to gain any support from the Board.

[ 6 ] He remained for several years in England and, in 1821, published an introductory text on mathematics in London , which moderately improved his financial situation.

In 1822, he returned to France, and again took up a combination of mathematics and far-fetched ideas, despite being in poverty and scorned by intellectual society. Along with his continuing Pythagorean obsession, he spent much time working on several notoriously futile endeavors, including attempts to build a perpetual motion machine , to square the circle and to build a machine to predict the future (which he dubbed the prognometre ).
In 1852, shortly before his death, he did find a willing audience for his ideas: the occultist Eliphas Levi who met Wroński and was greatly impressed and "attracted by his religious and scientific utopianism." Wroński was "a powerful catalyst" for Levi's occultism.

[ 4 ] Wroński died in 1853 in Neuilly-sur-Seine , France, on the outskirts of Paris.

Legacy [ edit ] His grave in the Old Neuilly-sur-Seine community cemetery .

During his lifetime, nearly all his work was dismissed as nonsense. However, some of it came to be regarded in a more favourable light in later years. Although most of his inflated claims were groundless, his mathematical work contains flashes of deep insight and many important intermediary results, the most significant of which was his work on series . He had strongly criticized Lagrange for his use of infinite series, introducing instead a novel series expansion for a function.  His criticisms of Lagrange were for the most part unfounded but the coefficients in Wroński's new series proved important after his death, forming a determinant now known as the Wronskian (the name which Thomas Muir had given them in 1882).

The level of Wroński's scientific and scholarly accomplishments and the amplitude of his objectives placed Wroński in the first rank of European metaphysicians in the early 19th century.  But the abstract formalism and obscurity of his thought, the difficulty of his language, his boundless self-assurance and his uncompromising judgments of others alienated him from most of the scientific community.  He was perhaps the most original of the Polish metaphysicians, but others were more representative of the Polish outlook.

Works [ edit ] Books 1801 - Mémoires sur l'aberration des astres mobiles, et sur l'inégalité dans l'apparence de leur mouvement , par J. Hoehné [ 7 ] [ 8 ] 1803 - Philosophie critique découverte par Kant, fondée sur le dernier principe du savoir , par J. Hoehne [ 9 ] 1811 - Introduction à la philosophie des mathématiques, et technie de l'algorithmie , par M. Hoëné de Wronski [ 10 ] 1811 - Programme du cours de philosophie transcendantale , par M. Hoëné Wronski [ 11 ] 1812 - Résolution générale des équations de tous les degrés ], par Hoëné Wronski [ 12 ] 1812 - Réfutation de la théorie des fonctions analytiques de Lagrange , par Hoëné Wronski [ 13 ] 1814 - Philosophie de l'Infini , par Hoëné Wronski [ 14 ] 1818 - Introduction à un ouvrage intitulé Le Sphinx, ou la Nomothétique séhélienne , par Hoëné Wronski [ 15 ] 1821 - A Course of mathematics , by Höené Wronski. Translated from the original French under the inspection of the author. London, 1821.

[ 16 ] 1827 - Canons de logarithmes de H. W.

[ 17 ] [ 18 ] 1828 - Loi téléologique du hasard. Deuxième aperçu.

Signé : Hoëné Wronski. Paris, le 13 avril 1828.

[ 19 ] 1831 - Messianisme, union finale de la philosophie et de la religion constituant la philosophie absolue (1831-1839) [ 20 ] 1831 - Prodrome du Messianisme; Révélation des destinées de l’humanité 1832 - Réflexions philosophiques sur un miroir parabolique 1833 - Loi téléologique du Hasard: réimpression de trois pièces rarissimes (1833); précédée d'une autobiographie et d'un inventaire de l'œuvre Hoëné Wronski [ 21 ] 1833 - Resolution of equation polynomials of tous les degries (in anglishe) 1837 - Rails mobiles, ou chemins de fer mouvans , de Hoëné Wroński [ 22 ] 1840 - Secret politique de Napoléon comme base de l'avenir moral du monde , par Hoëné Wronski [ 23 ] 1844 - Urgente réforme des Chemins de fer et de toute la locomotion terrestre , par Hoëné Wronski [ 24 ] 1853 - Secret politique de Napoléon , par Hoëné Wronski, comme introduction à sa récente "Philosophie de l'histoire". Nouvelle édition [ 25 ] Letters 1851 - Épître à Sa Majesté l'Empereur de Russie, pour compléter les "Cent pages décisives", et pour accomplir la réforme de la mécanique céleste". Signé : Hoëné Wroński. Metz, 1851 [ 26 ] 1851 - Épitre secrète a Son Altesse le prince Louis-Napoléon président de la République Française sur les destinées de la France [ 27 ] See also [ edit ] List of Poles Timeline of Polish science and technology References [ edit ] ^ Bramble, John (2015-03-04).

Modernism and the Occult . Springer.

ISBN 978-1-137-46578-8 .

, p.125 ^ "Josef-Maria Hoëné de Wronski" .

Archived from the original on 2009-08-11 . Retrieved 2024-11-15 .

^ a b Pragacz, Piotr (2007).

"Notes on the Life and Work of Józef Maria Hoene-Wroński" (PDF) .

Algebraic Cycles, Sheaves, Shtukas, and Moduli . Trends in Mathematics. pp.

1– 20.

doi : 10.1007/978-3-7643-8537-8_1 .

ISBN 978-3-7643-8536-1 . Retrieved 23 September 2022 .

^ a b Goodrick-Clarke, Nicholas (2008).

"Ritual magic from 1850 to the present" .

The Western esoteric traditions: a historical introduction . Oxford [u.a.]: Oxford University Press. pp.

192– 193.

ISBN 9780195320992 .

^ Alphonse Rebière , Mathématiques et Mathématiciens , Paris, 1998, p. 452.

^ Hoehne Wronsk, M (1820).

Address ... to the British Board of longitude upon the actual state of the mathematics ... and upon the new celestial mechanics, giving the definitive solution of the problem of longitude . Translated by Gardiner, W. Oxford: T. Egerton.

^ Mémoires sur l'aberration des astres mobiles, et sur l'inégalité dans l'apparence de leur mouvement . Par J. Hoehné. Marseille : impr. de Bertrand, an IX. bnf.fr ^ Mémoires sur l'aberration des astres mobiles, et sur l'inégalité dans l'apparence de leur mouvement , par J. Hoehné. Marseille an IX (1801) , polona.pl ^ Philosophie critique découverte par Kant, fondée sur le dernier principe du savoir , par J. Hoehne , propedeutiquemessianique.files.wordpress.com ^ Introduction à la philosophie des mathématiques, et technie de l'algorithmie , par M. Hoëné de Wronski (1811), gallica.bnf.fr ^ Programme du cours de philosophie transcendantale , par M. Hoëné Wronski ^ Résolution générale des équations de tous les degrés ; par Hoëné Wronski (1812) ^ Réfutation de la théorie des fonctions analytiques de Lagrange , par Höené Wronski. Dédiée à l'Institut Impérial de France (1812) ^ Philosophie de l'Infini , Paris 1814, uni-goettingen.de ^ Introduction à un ouvrage intitulé Le Sphinx, ou la Nomothétique séhélienne , par Hoëné Wronski (1818) ^ A Course of mathematics , by Höené Wronski. Translated from the original French under the inspection of the author (London, 1821) ^ Canons de logarithmes de H. W.

, tables n° 1, n° 1 "bis", n° 2, n° 3, n° 3 "bis", n° 4, instructions et théorie. Avec un supplément donnant la résolution générale de l'équation du cinquième degré ^ Canons de logarithmes de H. W.

Paris : impr. de J. Didot aîné, 1827 ^ Loi téléologique du hasard. Deuxième aperçu.

Signé : Hoëné Wronski. Paris, le 13 avril 1828.

^ Messianisme, union finale de la philosophie et de la religion constituant la philosophie absolue . Par Hoene Wroński, d'après Francis Warrain, "L'oeuvre philosophique de Hoené Wronski". Paris : impr. de G. Doyen (impr. de J. Didot l'aîné), 1831-1839 ^ Loi téléologique du Hasard: réimpression de trois pièces rarissimes (1833); précédée d'une autobiographie et d'un inventaire de l'œuvre Hoëné Wronski 1890 ^ Rails mobiles, ou chemins de fer mouvans , de Hoëné Wroński, prêts à être réalisés sur toutes les routes par leur application immédiate aux voitures ou chars quelconques ^ Secret politique de Napoléon comme base de l'avenir moral du monde , par Hoëné Wronski 1840 ^ Urgente réforme des chemins de fer et de toute la locomotion terrestre : proposée au Ministre des travaux publics de France par Hoëné Wronski (1844) ^ Secret politique de Napoléon , par Hoëné Wronski, comme introduction à sa récente "Philosophie de l'histoire". Nouvelle édition 1853 ^ Épitre a Sa Majesté l'empereur de Russie : pour compléter Les Cent pages décisives : et pour accomplir la réforme de la mécanique céleste , par l'auteur de la "Réforme du savoir humain. Signé : Hoëné Wroński. Metz, 1851 ^ Épitre secrète a Son Altesse le prince Louis-Napoléon président de la République Française sur les destinées de la France , par l'auteur de la "Réforme du savoir humain. Signé : Hoëné Wroński. Metz, 1851 Sources [ edit ] Władysław Tatarkiewicz , Historia filozofii (History of Philosophy), 3 vols., Warsaw, Państwowe Wydawnictwo Naukowe, 1978.

Further reading [ edit ] Lazare Augé: Notice sur Hoené Wronski ; suivi du portr. de Wronski par Mme Wronski, née s. de Montferrier de plus. acad. Paris : Libr. philos. de Ladrange, 1865.

Samuel Dickstein: Hoene Wroński : jego życie i prace (Hoene Wronski: His Life And Works), Jagiellonian University Press Cracow, 1896.

Francis Warrain: L'œuvre philosophique de Hoené Wronski , Textes, commentaires et critique. (Three volumes), Paris, Éditions Véga, 1933, 1936, 1938.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Józef Hoene-Wroński .

Works by Józef Maria Hoene-Wroński at Open Library O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F.

, "Józef Maria Hoene-Wroński" , MacTutor History of Mathematics Archive , University of St Andrews Piotr Pragacz, Notes on the life and work of Jozef Maria Hoene-Wronski , preprint (March  2007) J. Hoëné de Wronski, Introduction à la philosophie des mathématiques, et technie de l'algorithmie , 1811 Roman Murawski, "The Philosophy of Hoene-Wronski" in: Organon 35, 2006, pp. 143–150 Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF 2 FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Australia Czech Republic Portugal Netherlands Poland Vatican Israel 2 Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii zbMATH MathSciNet People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Józef_Maria_Hoene-Wroński&oldid=1271691791 " Categories : 1778 births 1853 deaths 19th-century Polish mathematicians Kościuszko insurgents Philosophers of mathematics Polish mathematicians Polish inventors People from Wolsztyn Polish occultists Burials at Neuilly-sur-Seine community cemetery 19th-century Polish philosophers Polish messianism Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with hCards Pages with Polish IPA Articles containing French-language text Pages with French IPA All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from September 2022 Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles with Open Library links This page was last edited on 25 January 2025, at 06:10 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Józef Maria Hoene-Wroński 31 languages Add topic

