Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life and career 2 Work and legacy 3 Publications Toggle Publications subsection 3.1 Books 3.2 Notable articles 4 See also 5 References 6 Further reading 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Francisco Varela 25 languages العربية Български Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Latviešu Magyar Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Русский Simple English Türkçe 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Chilean scientist and philosopher For other people named Francisco Varela, see Francisco Varela (disambiguation) .

In this Spanish name , the first or paternal surname is Varela and the second or maternal family name is García .

Francisco Varela Varela in 1994 Born ( 1946-09-07 ) September 7, 1946 Talcahuano , Chile Died 28 May 2001 (2001-05-28) (aged 54) Paris , France Alma mater Pontifical Catholic University of Chile ; University of Chile ; Harvard University Known for Theory of autopoiesis Children Leonor Varela Scientific career Institutions École Polytechnique ; CNRS ; University of Paris ; Mind and Life Institute Thesis Insect retinas; visual processing in the compound eye (1970) Doctoral advisor Torsten Wiesel Francisco Javier Varela García (September 7, 1946 – May 28, 2001) was a Chilean biologist , philosopher , cybernetician , and neuroscientist who, together with his mentor Humberto Maturana , is best known for introducing the concept of autopoiesis to biology, and for co-founding the Mind and Life Institute to promote dialog between science and Buddhism .

Life and career [ edit ] Varela was born in 1946 in Talcahuano in Chile, the son of Corina María Elena García Tapia and Raúl Andrés Varela Rodríguez.

[ 1 ] After completing secondary school at the Liceo Alemán del Verbo Divino in Santiago (1951–1963), like his mentor Humberto Maturana , Varela temporarily studied medicine at the Pontifical Catholic University of Chile and graduated with a degree in biology from the University of Chile . He later obtained a Ph.D. in biology at Harvard University . His thesis, defended in 1970 and supervised by Torsten Wiesel , was titled Insect Retinas: Information processing in the compound eye .

After the 1973 military coup led by Augusto Pinochet , Varela and his family spent 7 years in exile in the United States before he returned to Chile to become a professor of biology at the Universidad de Chile.

Varela became familiar, by practice, with Tibetan Buddhism in the 1970s, initially studying, together with Keun-Tshen Goba ( né Ezequiel Hernandez Urdaneta), with the meditation master Chögyam Trungpa Rinpoche , founder of Vajradhatu and Shambhala Training , and later with Tulku Urgyen Rinpoche .

In 1986, he settled in France , where he first taught cognitive science and epistemology at the École Polytechnique , and later neuroscience at the University of Paris . From 1988 until his death, he led a research group, as Director of Research at the CNRS (Centre National de Recherche Scientifique).

In 1987, Varela, along with R. Adam Engle , founded the Mind and Life Institute , initially to sponsor a series of dialogues between scientists and the Dalai Lama about the relationship between modern science and Buddhism .

[ 2 ] The Institute continues today as a major nexus for such dialog as well as promoting and supporting multidisciplinary scientific investigation in mind sciences, contemplative scholarship and practice and related areas in the interface of science with meditation and other contemplative practices , especially Buddhist practices .

[ 3 ] Varela died in 2001 in Paris of Hepatitis C after having written an account of his 1998 liver transplant.

[ 4 ] Varela had four children, including the actress, environmental spokesperson, and model Leonor Varela .

Work and legacy [ edit ] Integral theory Integral theorists Don Edward Beck Stanislav Grof George Leonard Michael Murphy William Irwin Thompson Francisco Varela Ken Wilber Michael E. Zimmerman Integral themes AQAL Influences on integral theory Sri Aurobindo James Mark Baldwin Jean Gebser Clare W. Graves Edward Haskell Erich Jantsch Rupert Sheldrake Integral artists Stuart Davis Alex Grey v t e Varela was trained as a biologist, mathematician and philosopher through the influence of different teachers, Humberto Maturana and Torsten Wiesel .

He wrote and edited a number of books and numerous journal articles in biology , neurology , cognitive science , mathematics , and philosophy . He founded, with others, the Integral Institute , a thinktank dedicated to the cross-fertilization of ideas and disciplines.

Varela supported embodied cognition , viewing human cognition and consciousness in terms of the enactive structures in which they arise. These comprise the body (as a biological system and as personally experienced) and the physical world which it enacts.

[ 5 ] Varela's work popularized within the field of neuroscience the concept of neurophenomenology . This concept combined the phenomenology of Edmund Husserl and of Maurice Merleau-Ponty , with "first-person science." Neurophenomenology requires observers to examine their own conscious experience using scientifically verifiable methods.

In the 1996 popular book The Web of Life: A New Scientific Understanding of Living Systems , physicist Fritjof Capra makes extensive reference to Varela and Maturana's theory of autopoiesis as part of a new, systems-based scientific approach for describing the interrelationships and interdependence of psychological, biological, physical, social, and cultural phenomena.

[ 6 ] Written for a general audience, The Web of Life helped popularize the work of Varela and Maturana, as well as that of Ilya Prigogine and Gregory Bateson .

[ 7 ] Varela's 1991 book The Embodied Mind: Cognitive Science and Human Experience , co-authored with Evan Thompson and Eleanor Rosch , is considered a classic in the field of cognitive science, offering pioneering phenomenological connections and introducing the Buddhism-informed enactivist and embodied cognition approach.

[ 8 ] A revised edition of The Embodied Mind was published in 2017, featuring substantive introductions by the surviving authors, as well as a preface by Jon Kabat-Zinn .

[ 9 ] Publications [ edit ] Varela wrote numerous books and articles: [ 10 ] Books [ edit ] 1979.

Principles of Biological Autonomy .

MIT Press .

1980 (with Humberto Maturana ).

Autopoiesis and Cognition: The Realization of the Living . Boston: Reidel.

1987 (rev 1992, 1998) (with Maturana ).

The Tree of Knowledge: The Biological Roots of Human Understanding . Boston: Shambhala Press.

ISBN 978-0877736424 1988.

Connaître:Les Sciences Cognitives, tendences et perspectivess .

Éditions du Seuil , Paris .

1991 (rev 2017) (with Evan Thompson and Eleanor Rosch ).

The Embodied Mind: Cognitive Science and Human Experience . MIT Press.

ISBN 978-0-262-72021-2 1992 (with P. Bourgine, eds.).

Towards a Practice of Autonomous Systems: The First European Conference on Artificial Life . MIT Press.

1992 (with J. Hayward, eds.).

Gentle Bridges: Dialogues Between the Cognitive Sciences and the Buddhist Tradition . Boston: Shambhala Press. [Reprinted, 2014, as Gentle Bridges: Conversations with the Dalai Lama on the Sciences of Mind .] 1993 (with W. Stein, eds.).

Thinking About Biology: An Introduction to Theoretical Biology . Addison-Wesley, SFI Series on Complexity. [Reprinted, 2018, as Thinking About Biology: An Invitation to Current Theoretical Biology , CRC Press.] 1997 (ed.).

Sleeping, Dreaming and Dying: An Exploration of Consciousness with the Dalai Lama . Boston: Wisdom Books.

1999.

Ethical Know-How: Action, Wisdom and Cognition . Stanford University Press.

1999 (with J. Shear, eds.).

The View from Within: First-Person Methodologies in the Study of Consciousness . London: Imprint Academic.

1999 (with  J. Petitot, B. Pachoud, and J-M. Roy, eds.).

Naturalizing Phenomenology: Contemporary Issues in Phenomenology and Cognitive Science . Stanford University Press.

Notable articles [ edit ] 2002 (with A. Weber). 'Life after Kant: Natural purposes and the autopoietic foundations of biological individuality'.

Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences I:97–125, 2002.

See also [ edit ] Systems science portal Cartesian anxiety Enactivism Meaning-making Molecular cellular cognition Neural oscillation Umwelt References [ edit ] ^ Palacios, Adrián G.; Bacigalupo, Juan (2003).

"Francisco Varela (1946-2001):: Filling the mind - brain gap: A life adventure" .

Biological Research .

36 (1): 9– 12.

doi : 10.4067/S0716-97602003000100002 .

hdl : 10533/174734 .

ISSN 0716-9760 .

PMID 12795203 .

^ "History" .

Mind & Life Institute . Archived from the original on 2020-09-19 . Retrieved 2020-09-09 .

^ "Mission" .

Mind & Life Institute .

^ " Intimate Distances - Fragments for a Phenomenology of Organ Transplantation Archived 2016-09-26 at the Wayback Machine " ^ p. 148 'This shift requires that we move away from the idea of the world as independent and extrinsic, to the idea of a world as inseparable from the structure of these processes of self-modification.' Varela, Francisco J., Thompson, Evan T., and Rosch, Eleanor. (1991). The Embodied Mind: Cognitive Science and Human Experience. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press .

ISBN 0-262-72021-3 ^ Capra, Fritjof (1996).

The Web of Life: A New Scientific Understanding of Living Systems . New York: Anchor Books.

ISBN 978-0385476768 .

^ London, Scott (1998).

"THE WEB OF LIFE: Book Review" .

Scottlondon.com . Retrieved 9 Dec 2018 .

^ Walmsley, Lachlan Douglas (2 May 2017).

"Review - The Embodied Mind: Cognitive Science and Human Experience Revised Edition" .

Metapsychology Online . Metapsychology (Volume 21, Issue 18) . Retrieved 10 Dec 2018 .

^ The Embodied Mind, Revised Edition . The MIT Press. January 2017.

ISBN 9780262529365 . Retrieved 7 Jan 2025 .

{{ cite book }} : |website= ignored ( help ) ^ Comprehensive bibliography Archived 2017-11-10 at the Wayback Machine by Randall Whitaker.

Further reading [ edit ] Sarat Maharaj & Francisco Varela in conversation: "Ahamkara". In: Florian Dombois , Ute Meta Bauer, Claudia Mareis, and Michael Schwab, eds.

Intellectual Birdhouse: Artistic Practice as Research . London: Koenig, 2011.

ISBN 978-3-86335-118-2 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Francisco Varela .

Wikiquote has quotations related to Francisco Varela .

Intimate Distances An autobiographical essay written shortly before his death Francisco Varela: In memoriam: John Brockman Randall Whitaker Archived 2017-11-10 at the Wayback Machine The Embodied Mind : Evan Thompson Archived 2006-02-16 at the Wayback Machine , coauthor.

Eleanor Rosch , coauthor.

Daniel Dennett , 1993, " Review of The Embodied Mind ," American Journal of Psychology 106 : 121–26.

" Escher, enaction & intersubjectivity.

" " Why the mind is not in the head " The Cosmos Letter, Expo'90 Foundation, Japan Franz Reichle, 2004.

Film Monte Grande - What is Life?

v t e Subfields of and cyberneticians involved in cybernetics Subfields Artificial intelligence Biological cybernetics Biomedical cybernetics Biorobotics Biosemiotics Neurocybernetics Catastrophe theory Computational neuroscience Connectionism Control theory Conversation theory Cybernetics in the Soviet Union Decision theory Emergence Engineering cybernetics Homeostasis Information theory Management cybernetics Medical cybernetics Second-order cybernetics Cybersemiotics Sociocybernetics Synergetics Cyberneticians Alexander Lerner Alexey Lyapunov Alfred Radcliffe-Brown Allenna Leonard Anthony Wilden Buckminster Fuller Charles François Genevieve Bell Margaret Boden Claude Bernard Cliff Joslyn Erich von Holst Ernst von Glasersfeld Francis Heylighen Francisco Varela Frederic Vester Charles Geoffrey Vickers Gordon Pask Gordon S. Brown Gregory Bateson Heinz von Foerster Humberto Maturana I. A. Richards Igor Aleksander Jacque Fresco Jakob von Uexküll Jason Jixuan Hu Jay Wright Forrester Jennifer Wilby John N. Warfield Kevin Warwick Ludwig von Bertalanffy Maleyka Abbaszadeh Manfred Clynes Margaret Mead Marian Mazur N. Katherine Hayles Natalia Bekhtereva Niklas Luhmann Norbert Wiener Pyotr Grigorenko Qian Xuesen Ranulph Glanville Robert Trappl Sergei P. Kurdyumov Anthony Stafford Beer Stuart Kauffman Stuart Umpleby Talcott Parsons Ulla Mitzdorf Valentin Turchin Valentin Braitenberg William Ross Ashby Walter Bradford Cannon Walter Pitts Warren McCulloch William Grey Walter v t e Systems science System types Art Biological Complex Coupled human–environment Ecological Economic Information Multi-agent Nervous Recommender Social Concepts Doubling time Leverage points Limiting factor Negative feedback Positive feedback Theoretical fields Control theory Cybernetics Earth system science Living systems Sociotechnical system Systemics Urban metabolism World-systems theory Analysis Biology Dynamics Ecology Engineering Neuroscience Pharmacology Philosophy Psychology Theory ( Systems thinking ) Scientists Russell L. Ackoff Victor Aladjev William Ross Ashby Ruzena Bajcsy Béla H. Bánáthy Gregory Bateson Anthony Stafford Beer Richard E. Bellman Ludwig von Bertalanffy Margaret Boden Alexander Bogdanov Kenneth E. Boulding Murray Bowen Kathleen Carley Mary Cartwright C. West Churchman Manfred Clynes George Dantzig Edsger W. Dijkstra Fred Emery Heinz von Foerster Stephanie Forrest Jay Wright Forrester Barbara Grosz Charles A. S. Hall Mike Jackson Lydia Kavraki James J. Kay Faina M. Kirillova George Klir Allenna Leonard Edward Norton Lorenz Niklas Luhmann Humberto Maturana Margaret Mead Donella Meadows Mihajlo D. Mesarovic James Grier Miller Radhika Nagpal Howard T. Odum Talcott Parsons Ilya Prigogine Qian Xuesen Anatol Rapoport John Seddon Peter Senge Claude Shannon Katia Sycara Eric Trist Francisco Varela Manuela M. Veloso Kevin Warwick Norbert Wiener Jennifer Wilby Anthony Wilden Applications Systems theory in anthropology Systems theory in archaeology Systems theory in political science Organizations List Principia Cybernetica Category Portal Commons v t e Philosophy of biology Themes Ethics Eugenics Dysgenics Kin selection Naturalism Reductionism Holism Emergence Evolutionary taxonomy Evolution Adaptationism Alternatives to Darwinian evolution Catastrophism Lamarckism Orthogenesis Mutationism Structuralism Spandrel Theistic Vitalism Darwinism Evolutionary epistemology Teleology Tree of life Philosophers of biology John Beatty Lindley Darden Daniel Dennett John Dupré Carla Fehr Marjorie Grene Peter Godfrey-Smith James R. Griesemer Paul E. Griffiths David Hull Hans Jonas Philip Kitcher Tim Lewens Helen Longino Jane Maienschein Roberta Millstein Sandra Mitchell Susan Oyama Alex Rosenberg Michael Ruse Sahotra Sarkar Elliott Sober Kim Sterelny Alfred I. Tauber Francisco Varela Gerard Verschuuren William C. Wimsatt Biologists Francisco J. Ayala Patrick Bateson Charles Darwin Richard Dawkins Jared Diamond Michael Ghiselin François Jacob Stephen Jay Gould Richard Lewontin Konrad Lorenz Humberto Maturana Ernst Mayr Jacques Monod Denis Noble Joan Roughgarden Rolf Sattler John Maynard Smith E. O. Wilson Jonas Salk Related Philosophy of mind History of biology Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Croatia Korea Poland Israel Catalonia Academics CiNii People Trove DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Francisco_Varela&oldid=1304081011 " Categories : 1946 births 2001 deaths People from Santiago, Chile Tibetan Buddhists from Chile Chilean biologists Chilean people of Galician descent Chilean scientists Complex systems scientists Converts to Buddhism Consciousness researchers and theorists Cyberneticists Harvard Graduate School of Arts and Sciences alumni Integral theory Systems scientists Theoretical biologists Colegio del Verbo Divino alumni French National Centre for Scientific Research scientists Pontifical Catholic University of Chile alumni University of Chile alumni Deaths from hepatitis 20th-century American writers 20th-century Chilean philosophers Researchers of artificial life 20th-century Chilean biologists Academic staff of École Polytechnique Research directors of the French National Centre for Scientific Research Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1 errors: periodical ignored Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with hCards Commons link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 3 August 2025, at 21:22 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Francisco Varela 25 languages Add topic

