Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Cultural roots 2 Ideas Toggle Ideas subsection 2.1 Postgenderism in gender roles and sexuality 2.2 Postgenderism in humanist and socialist theory 2.3 Postgenderism in science fiction 3 Criticism 4 Novels with postgenderist themes 5 See also 6 References 7 Sources 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Postgenderism 19 languages Afrikaans العربية Azərbaycanca Deutsch Español فارسی Français 한국어 Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Nederlands Polski Português Русский Simple English Suomi Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Social, political and cultural movement advocating for the elimination of gender in humans This article is about opposition to the concept of gender. For right-wing opposition to "gender ideology", including towards postgenderism, see Anti-gender movement . For the anti-trans feminist movement, see Gender-critical feminism .

Graffiti advocating the abolition of gender Part of a series on Feminism History Feminist history Women's history American British Canadian German Waves First Second Third Fourth Timelines Women's suffrage Muslim countries US Other women's rights Women's suffrage by country Austria Australia Canada Colombia India Japan Kuwait Liechtenstein New Zealand Spain Second Republic Francoist Switzerland United Kingdom Cayman Islands Wales United States states Intersectional variants Fat Lesbian Lesbian of color Radical lesbianism Separatist Sex-positive Transfeminism Postgenderism Vegetarian ecofeminism Socialist Anarchist Queer Jineology Marxist Critical theory Standpoint Materialist Ecofeminist Postcolonial Global Transnational Xenofeminism Jineoloji Multicultural Africana womanism Black Hip hop Lesbian Ratchet Chicana Lesbian Indigenous Native American Multiracial Romani Womanism Other variants Anti-abortion Conservative Equity Femonationalism Liberal Maternal Postfeminism Reactionary State Carceral Imperial Embedded Gender-critical or trans-exclusionary Victim White Religious variants Atheist Buddhist Christian Mormon New Womanist Asian Neopagan Dianic Wicca Reclaiming Ecofeminist Hindu Islamic Jewish Orthodox Sikh Movements and ideologies 4B movement White Feather Campaign Analytical Anti-fascist Anti-pornography Cyber HCI Networked Xeno Difference Cultural Neo Ecofeminism Eugenic Individualist Liberal Equality Social Labor Libertarian Lipstick Stiletto Post-structural Postmodern Radical Political lesbianism Separatist Technofeminism Women's liberation Concepts Antinaturalism Choice feminism Cognitive labor Conscription Complementarianism Literature Children's literature Diversity (politics) Diversity, equity, and inclusion Effects on society Equality Female education Female genital mutilation Femicide Femonationalism Feminism in culture Feminist movement African-American women's suffrage movement Art movement In hip hop Feminist stripper Formal equality Gender equality Gender quota Gender role Girl power Honor killing Ideal womanhood Invisible labor Internalized sexism International Girl's Day and Women's Day Language reform Feminist capitalism Gender-blind Likeability trap Male privilege Matriarchal religion Media Men in feminism Misogyny Trans Oedipus complex Opposition to feminism Pro-feminism Protofeminism Purplewashing Racism Reproductive justice Sentencing disparity Sex workers' rights Sexual harassment Sexual objectification Substantive equality Toxic masculinity Transmisogyny Triple oppression Violence against women War on women Women's empowerment Women-only space Women's health Women's rights Women in the workforce Outlooks Abortion-rights Bicycling and feminism Bodily integrity Criticism of marriage Views on BDSM Views on pornography Views on prostitution Views on sexual orientation Views on sexuality Views on transgender topics Reproductive rights Sexual and reproductive health and rights SCUM Manifesto Theory Feminist method Gender studies Gender mainstreaming Gynocentrism Kyriarchy Male gaze Matriarchy Women's studies Men's studies Patriarchy Écriture féminine Areas of study Anthropology Archaeology Architecture Art Art criticism Literary criticism Film theory Science fiction Biology Composition studies Criminology Pathways perspective Economics FDPA Geography International relations Constructivism Legal theory Pedagogy Philosophy Aesthetics Empiricism Epistemology Ethics Justice ethics Existentialism Metaphysics science Political ecology Political theory Pornography Psychology Therapy Revisionist mythology Sex wars Sexology Sociology Technoscience Theology womanist theology By continent/country Africa Democratic Republic of the Congo Egypt Ethiopia Ghana Mali Nigeria Senegal South Africa Albania Australia Bangladesh Canada China Denmark Finland France Germany Greece Hong Kong India Indonesia Iran Iraq Republic of Ireland Israel Italy Japan Latin America Argentina Brazil Chile Haiti Honduras Mexico Paraguay Trinidad and Tobago Lebanon Malaysia Nepal Netherlands New Zealand Northern Cyprus Norway Pakistan Philippines Poland Russia Saudi Arabia South Korea Sweden Syria Taiwan Thailand Turkey Vietnam Ukraine United Kingdom United States History of women Lists and categories Lists Articles Feminists by nationality Literature American feminist literature Feminist comic books Feminist songs Conservative feminisms Ecofeminist authors Feminist art critics Feminist economists Feminist philosophers Feminist poets Feminist rhetoricians Jewish feminists Muslim feminists Feminist parties Suffragists and suffragettes Women's rights activists Women's studies journals Women's suffrage organizations Categories Women's rights by country Feminists by nationality Feminism portal v t e Part of a series on Transgender topics Outline History Timeline Gender identities Androgyne Bissu, Calabai, Calalai Burrnesha Cisgender Gender bender Hijra Non-binary or genderqueer Gender fluidity Kathoey Koekchuch Third gender Bakla Faʻafafine Femminiello Khanith Māhū Mudoko dako Mukhannath Muxe Travesti Two-spirit Winkte X-gender Trans man Trans woman Fakaleitī Mak nyah Rae-rae Transgender Youth Akava'ine Trans* Transsexual Health care practices Gender clinic Gender dysphoria in children causes Sex assignment Hormone therapy feminizing masculinizing DIY Puberty-suppressing hormone therapy Gender-affirming surgery masculinizing feminizing Facial feminization surgery Facial masculinization surgery Hair removal Pregnancy Assisted reproductive technology Voice therapy WPATH Standards of Care Transgender health care misinformation Rights and legal status Gender self-identification Legal gender Non-binary gender Personal identity Rights movement Organizations Political office-holders United States Asylum Healthcare Military service South Korea United States Prisons Toilets Bathroom bills Unisex Anti-gender movement Anti-transgender movement in the United Kingdom Discrimination Non-binary Parental rights movement Transgender men Transmisogyny Gender-critical or trans-exclusionary radical feminism Genocide Inequality Violence Murders Trans panic defense Yogyakarta Principles Society and culture Events and awareness Awareness Week Beauty pageants Day of Remembrance Day of Visibility Flag March more Culture Anatomical terminology Fictional characters Film Literature Transgender culture of New York City Media portrayals People non-binary Publications Religion Sports Television Theory and concepts Androphilia and gynephilia Blanchard's typology Childhood gender nonconformity Cisgender / cissexual Cisnormativity Cross-dressing Deadnaming Gender binary Gender detransitioning Gender expression Gender transitioning Gender identity Gender modality Gender nonconformity Gender-sexuality questioning Postgenderism Rapid-onset dysphoria Studies Transfeminism views Transmedicalism Transmisogyny By country Rights Argentina 2012 law 2021 law Australia Austria Brazil Canada 2016 bill China Finland France [ fr ] Germany 1980 law 2018 law 2024 law India 2014 bill 2019 act Tamil Nadu Iran Ireland Pakistan 2017 bill 2018 act New Zealand Norway 2016 act Singapore South Africa 2003 act South Korea Spain 2022 law United Kingdom Anti-trans movement 2004 act 2022 bill United States Disenfranchisement Title IX Transphobia History Argentina [ es ] Australia Re Kevin Brazil China Finland Nazi Germany Singapore United Kingdom United States Legality elected officials Cafeteria riot Stonewall See also 2020s anti-LGBTQ movement in the United States Androgyny Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric Gender Gender diversity Gender studies Healthcare and the LGBTQ community Intersex Legal recognition of intersex people Queer heterosexuality LGBTQ Mental health of LGBTQ people Sex Sex–gender distinction Sexual orientation Social construction of gender Suicide among LGBTQ people LGBTQ portal Category v t e Transhumanism Issues Accelerating change Eradication of suffering Fourth Industrial Revolution Human enhancement Genetic Moral Neuro- Cognitive liberty New eugenics Eugenics Human nature Meliorism Post-politics Post-scarcity People Andrews Bostrom Church Cordeiro de Chardin Drexler Fahy FM-2030 Freitas Fyodorov Fuller de Garis Gasson Goertzel de Grey Haldane Hanson Harari Harbisson Harris Huxley Hughes Istvan Johnson Kurzweil Land Moen Moravec More Musk Pearce Rothblatt Sandberg Savulescu Sorgner Spencer Stock Stolyarov Thiel Vinge Vita-More Walker Warwick Wiener Yudkowsky Influential works Oration on the Dignity of Man (1486) Thus Spoke Zarathustra (1883) Looking Backward (1888) The Will to Power (~1901) Daedalus (1924) La raza cósmica (1925) The Phenomenon of Man (1955) The Dialectic of Sex (1970) Metaman (1993) The Hedonistic Imperative (1995) Regeln für den Menschenpark (1997) The Age of Spiritual Machines (1999) Citizen Cyborg (2004) The Singularity Is Near (2005) Human Enhancement (2009) Fanged Noumena (2011) The Transhumanist Wager (2013) Sapiens (2014) Homo Deus (2015) The Transhumanist Bill of Rights (2015) The Age of Em (2016) The Precipice (2020) What We Owe the Future (2022) " Techno-Optimist Manifesto " (2023) Variants Accelerationism Effective Cypherpunk Dataism Extropianism Immortalism Longtermism Postgenderism Posthumanism Russian Cosmism Singularitarianism Technogaianism Technolibertarianism Technological utopianism Techno-progressivism Related topics Dyson sphere Technologies Emerging Disruptive Hypothetical v t e Postgenderism is a social, political and cultural movement which arose from the eroding of the cultural, psychological, and social role of gender , and an argument for why the erosion of binary gender will be liberatory.

[ 1 ] Postgenderists argue that gender is an arbitrary and unnecessary limitation on human potential, and foresee the elimination of involuntary psychological gendering in the human species as a result of social and cultural designations and through the application of neurotechnology , biotechnology , and assistive reproductive technologies .

[ citation needed ] Advocates of postgenderism argue that the presence of gender roles , social stratification , and gender differences is generally to the detriment of individuals and society. Given the radical potential for advanced assistive reproductive options, postgenderists believe that sex for reproductive purposes will either become obsolete or that all post-gendered humans will have the ability, if they so choose, to both carry a pregnancy to term and impregnate someone, which, postgenderists believe, would have the effect of eliminating the need for definite genders in such a society.

[ citation needed ] Cultural roots [ edit ] Postgenderism as a cultural phenomenon has roots in feminism , masculism , along with the androgyny , metrosexual / technosexual and transgender movements. However, it has been through the application of transhumanist philosophy that postgenderists have conceived the potential for actual morphological changes to the members of the human species and how future humans in a postgender society will reproduce. In this sense, it is an offshoot of transhumanism, posthumanism , [ 2 ] and futurism .

[ citation needed ] In the 19th century, Russian philosopher Nikolay Chernyshevsky believed that "people will be happy when there will be neither women nor men".

[ 3 ] Urania , a feminist journal privately published between 1916 and 1940, advanced the abolishment of gender; [ 4 ] each issue was headed with the statement: "There are no 'men' or 'women' in Urania." [ 5 ] One of the earliest expressions of postgenderism was Shulamith Firestone 's 1970 book The Dialectic of Sex . It argues, [ 6 ] [The] end goal of feminist revolution must be, unlike that of the first feminist movement, not just the elimination of male privilege but of the sex distinction itself: genital differences between human beings would no longer matter culturally. (A reversion to an unobstructed pansexuality Freud's 'polymorphous perversity'—would probably supersede hetero/homo/bi-sexuality.) The reproduction of the species by one sex for the benefit of both would be replaced by (at least the option of) artificial reproduction: children would be born to both sexes equally, or independently of either, however one chooses to look at it; the dependence of the child on the mother (and vice versa) would give way to a greatly shortened dependence on a small group of others in general, and any remaining inferiority to adults in physical strength would be compensated for culturally.

Gayle Rubin expresses in " The Traffic in Woman " (1975) her desire for "an androgynous and genderless (though not sexless) society, in which one's sexual anatomy is irrelevant to who one is, what one does, and with whom one makes love." [ 7 ] Another important and influential work in this regard was socialist feminist Donna Haraway 's essay, " A Cyborg Manifesto : Science, Technology, and Socialist-Feminism in the Late Twentieth Century", in Simians, Cyborgs and Women: The Reinvention of Nature (New York; Routledge, 1991), pp. 149–181. In this work, Haraway is interpreted as arguing that women would only be freed from their biological restraints when their reproductive obligations were dispensed with. This may be viewed as Haraway expressing a belief that women will only achieve true liberation once they become postbiological organisms, or postgendered.

[ citation needed ] However, Haraway has publicly stated that their use of the word "post-gender" has been grossly misinterpreted.

[ 8 ] The term "postgenderism" is also used by George Dvorsky to describe the diverse social, political, and cultural movement that affirms the voluntary elimination of gender in the human species by applying advanced biotechnology and assisted reproductive technologies.

[ 9 ] Ideas [ edit ] This section relies largely or entirely upon a single source .

Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page . Please help improve this article by introducing citations to additional sources at this section.

( August 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Postgenderism in gender roles and sexuality [ edit ] According to George Dvorsky's article "Postgenderism: Beyond the Gender Binary", postgenderists are not exclusively advocates of androgyny , although most believe that a "mixing" of both feminine and masculine traits is desirable—essentially the creation of androgynous individuals who exhibit the best of what females and males have to offer in terms of physical and psychological abilities and proclivities. Just what these traits are precisely is a matter of great debate and conjecture.

[ 1 ] Here, postgenderism is not concerned solely with the physical sex or its assumed traits, but on the idea of eliminating or moving beyond gendered identities. In traditional gender constructs, one is either a man or woman, but in postgenderism one is neither a man nor woman nor any other assumed gender role—thus an individual in society is simply an agent of humanity who is to be defined (if at all) by one's actions.

[ 1 ] Dvorsky also states that postgenderists maintain that a genderless society does not imply the existence of a species uninterested in sex and sexuality, but rather that sexual relations and interpersonal intimacy can and will exist in a postgendered future in different forms.

[ 1 ] Regarding potential assistive reproductive technologies, it is believed that reproduction can continue to happen outside of conventional methods, namely intercourse and artificial insemination . Advances such as human cloning , parthenogenesis , and artificial wombs may significantly extend the potential for human reproduction.

[ 1 ] These ideas also propose posthuman space will be more virtual than real. Individuals may be uploaded minds living as data patterns on supercomputers or users engaged in immersive virtual realities . Postgenderists contend that these types of existences are not gender-specific thus allowing individuals to morph their virtual appearances and sexuality at will.

[ 1 ] Postgenderism in humanist and socialist theory [ edit ] Postgenderism can overlap with discussions of gender in humanism , namely about how humanist attitudes toward gender can promote unequal gender binaries. Discussions of these ideas include how anthropocentrism defines essentialist qualities of humanity that are put upon gender—informing hierarchal social structures, like the patriarchy , that subjugate and dominate whoever becomes "non-human" within those hierarchies.

[ 10 ] For postgenderists, or posthumanists discussing gender, this can mean breaking down the boundaries around what defines humanity by encouraging connections with nature and machines and expanding the possibilities for human identities by deprioritizing "natural" notions of gender through technological principles within gender movements, like xenofeminism and "object-oriented feminisms." [ 10 ] Donna Haraway's "The Cyborg Manifesto" creates a socialist and posthuman basis for dismantling social hierarchies, namely through "the utopian tradition of imagining a world without gender." Haraway discusses how her theoretical figure of the " cyborg " occupies a postgender world that is independent and illegitimate from Western structures of patriarchal domination and how modern technology can make that figure a social reality.

[ 11 ] For postgender feminists, this involves manipulating forms of technology that shape binary control over gender — like biotechnology, immunology , and communication systems — to restructure or "recode" those narratives.

[ 11 ] Moreover, Haraway's definitions, like her "informatics of domination," navigate social theories regarding gender, sexual bodies, and reproduction towards the virtual and technological to eliminate "organic" notions of essential social inequalities within gender and sex, which extending towards race and class, addressing intersectionality in postgenderism.

[ 11 ] Postgenderism in science fiction [ edit ] Science fiction can provide the means to express ideas of postgenderism through popular media, with literary or visual fiction media having the capability to explore the potential for technology to create postgender bodies and societies.

The Cage of Zeus by Sayuri Ueda expresses a science-fiction postgender society where technological advancements allow people to alter their sex and gender however they desire. However, this fictitious society also appears as dystopian due to widespread discrimination against "Rounds," genetically engineered intersex people, describing the presence of discrimination between "natural" and "unnatural" gender identities.

[ 12 ] Literary analysis of the book's postgender themes expresses potential problems that can arise from a society with postgender technologies, like the fetishization of postgender bodies, commercialized monopolization of gender identity, and limiting the possibilities of postgender expression to a strictly techno-biological basis.

[ 12 ] Analysis of postgenderism in science fiction films can emphasize how gender appears through inhuman entities. The realm of "alien feminism" mainly explores how science fiction films use posthuman subjects to critique stereotypical gendered identities in film.

[ 13 ] Examples include Ex Machina (2014) in how the film presents the feminine-appearing cyborg character Ava ( Alicia Vikander ) as characterized by stereotypically feminine sexuality but is eventually revealed to be manipulating these traits to her advantage. According to that analysis, Ava's physical progression towards feminine humanity is artificial, allowing her to escape the forms of male dominance.

[ 13 ] Another example is Under The Skin (2013), where an alien ( Scarlett Johansson ) takes the form of a human woman to murder men but later begins to experience and struggle with how gender is socially and violently imposed upon human female bodies, even when that body is inherently inhuman. The analysis concludes that these films do not wholly achieve postgender ideas but express postgenderism as a basis to resolve posthuman gender issues within science fiction.

[ 13 ] Marge Piercy, an American feminist writer, engages with these themes in her work Woman on the Edge of Time . In her novel a possible future is presented in which either sex can play either role in the childbearing process.

[ 14 ] Criticism [ edit ] Transfeminist Julia Serano criticizes the idea of "end of gender", pointing out the negative impact it has on transgender people. On one hand, they are taken up as "undermining the gender system", while on the other, they are regularly criticized for strengthening gender stereotypes. In her opinion, feminism should fight for "end of sexism ", rather than "end of gender". At the same time, Serano questions what should be considered the end of gender and what a society without gender should look like. She asks the question: "Who gets to decide what is gender and what is not?" [ 15 ] In Feminist Philosophy Quarterly , contributor Matthew J. Cull considers multiple formulations of gender abolitionism from varying perspectives and argues that they are uniformly transphobic and imperil trans lives.

[ 16 ] Novels with postgenderist themes [ edit ] 2312 by Kim Stanley Robinson [ 17 ] Ancillary Justice by Ann Leckie Beatrice the Sixteenth by Irene Clyde [ 18 ] The Cage of Zeus by Sayuri Ueda Distress by Greg Egan Don't Bite the Sun by Tanith Lee Glasshouse by Charles Stross Steel Beach by John Varley The Left Hand of Darkness by Ursula K. Le Guin [ 19 ] Venus Plus X by Theodore Sturgeon Woman on the Edge of Time by Marge Piercy Xenogenesis trilogy by Octavia E. Butler [ 20 ] [ 21 ] See also [ edit ] Anti-gender movement Cyberfeminism Cyborg feminism Feminist science fiction Gender-critical feminism Gender ambiguity Gender anti-essentialism Genderless language Gender neutrality Intersex LGBT linguistics LGBT themes in speculative fiction Morphological freedom Non-binary gender Postsexualism Poststructural feminism Role theory Queer theory Sex differences in humans Social construction of gender References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e f Dvorsky, George (2008).

"Postgenderism: Beyond the Gender Binary" . Retrieved 13 April 2008 .

^ Ferrando, Francesca (2014).

"Is the Post-Human a Post-Woman? Robots, Cyborgs and the Futures of Gender" .

European Journal of Futures Research .

2 .

doi : 10.1007/s40309-014-0043-8 .

^ Polyakov, L. V. (1992). "Women's Emancipation and the Theology of Sex in Nineteenth-Century Russia".

Philosophy East and West .

42 (2): 297– 308.

doi : 10.2307/1399293 .

JSTOR 1399293 .

^ Carey, Niamh.

"The Politics of Urania" .

Glasgow Women's Library . Retrieved 28 June 2020 .

^ Hamer, Emily (2016).

Britannia's Glory: A History of Twentieth Century Lesbians . Bloomsbury Publishing. p. 69.

ISBN 978-1-4742-9280-1 .

^ The Dialectic of Sex, publ. The Women's Press, 1979. Chapter 1 ^ Rubin, Gayle S. (2011).

Deviations: a Gayle Rubin reader . Durham, NC: Duke University Press. p. 61.

ISBN 9780822349860 .

^ Carrico, Dale (2008).

" 'Post-Gender' or Gender Poets?" . Retrieved 13 April 2008 .

^ Aggrawal, Anil (2008).

Forensic and Medico-legal Aspects of Sexual Crimes and Unusual Sexual Practices . Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press. p. 349.

ISBN 9781420043082 .

^ a b Mellamphy, Nandita Biswas (2022).

"Challenging the Humanist Genre of Gender" (PDF) .

Different Voices: Gender and Posthumanism .

10 : 15– 27.

doi : 10.14220/9783737015288.15 – via Department of Political Science Western University.

^ a b c Haraway, Donna J. (2016).

Manifestly Haraway . University of Minnesota Press. pp.

6– 90.

^ a b Mittal Biswas, Pooja (2021).

"The Abolition of Gender: Postgender Technologies in Sayuri Ueda's The Cage of Zeus" .

Crossings: A Journal of English Studies .

12 : 19– 33.

doi : 10.59817/cjes.v12i.2 – via University of Liberal Arts Bangladesh.

^ a b c Jelača, Dijana (2018). "Alien Feminisms and Cinema's Posthuman Women".

Signs: Journal of Women in Culture & Society .

43 (2): 379– 400.

doi : 10.1086/693765 .

JSTOR 26553007 .

^ Orr, Elaine (Spring 1993). "Mothering as Good Fiction: Instances from Marge Piercy's Woman on the Edge of Time".

Journal of Narrative Fiction .

23 (2): 61– 79.

JSTOR 30225380 .

^ Serano, Julia (2013). "The Perversion of "The Personal Is Political" ".

Excluded . Seal Press.

^ Cull, Matthew J. (14 September 2019).

"Against Abolition" .

Feminist Philosophy Quarterly .

5 (3).

doi : 10.5206/fpq/2019.3.5898 .

ISSN 2371-2570 .

^ Goonan., Kathleen Ann (2012).

"2312 by Kim Stanley Robinson (review)" .

Configurations .

20 (1): 199– 203.

doi : 10.1353/con.2012.0009 .

S2CID 144768201 . Retrieved 20 December 2015 .

^ "Clyde, Irene" .

SFE . Retrieved 25 April 2018 .

^ Bertek, Tihana (2014).

Beyond Gender? Imagining Gender in Ursula K. Le Guin's The Left Hand of Darkness (PDF) (Thesis). Central European University.

doi : 10.3828/EXTR.2001.42.4.317 .

S2CID 164657601 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 11 February 2020.

^ Tucker., Jeffrey A (2007).

" 'The Human Contradiction': Identity and/as Essence in Octavia E. Butler's 'Xenogenesis' Trilogy" .

The Yearbook of English Studies .

37 (1): 164– 181.

doi : 10.1353/yes.2007.0001 .

JSTOR 20479308 .

S2CID 245841726 .

^ Haraway, Donna J. (1996).

Simians, Cyborgs and Women: The Reinvention of Nature .

Free Association Books .

Sources [ edit ] Galántai, Zoltán.

Proposal for the Declaration of Intelligent Beings' Rights . Technical University of Budapest Haraway, Donna. " A Cyborg Manifesto: Science, Technology, and Socialist-Feminism in the Late Twentieth Century ," in Simians, Cyborgs and Women: The Reinvention of Nature (New York; Routledge, 1991), pp. 149–181.

Schaub, Joseph Christopher.

Presenting the Cyborg's Futurist Past: An Analysis of Dziga Vertov's Kino-Eye . Department of Comparative Literature, University of Maryland External links [ edit ] The dictionary definition of postgenderism at Wiktionary v t e Gender and sexual identities Gender identities Genders Man Woman Male Female Androgyne Boi Cisgender Cross-dresser Femboy Gender bender Gender fluidity Gender neutrality Gender variance Masculine of center Non-binary / genderqueer Transgender Akava'ine Trans man Trans woman Fakaleitī Mak nyah Rae-rae Transsexual Third genders and sexes Androgynos Apwint Bakla Binabinaaine Bugis genders Bissu Calabai Calalai Chibados Enaree Eunuch Galli Fa'afafine Fakafifine Femminiello Güevedoce Hijra Kathoey Köçek Koekchuch Lhamana Māhū Mudoko dako Mukhannath Muxe Nádleehi Nullo Palopa Sipiniq Sworn virgin Travesti Tumtum Two-spirit Vakasalewalewa Winkte X-gender Sexual orientation identities Sexual orientations Asexual Bisexual Heterosexual Homosexual Alternative labels Banjee Bi-curious Ex-gay Ex-ex-gay Down-low Fictosexual Gay Gay men Gray asexual Demisexual Aegosexual Heteroflexible Khanith Lesbian women Non-heterosexual Pansexual Polysexual Queer Questioning Same gender loving Takatāpui Social aspects Sociosexuality Antisexuality Asociality Homosociality Heterosociality Other Achillean Allosexuality Analloeroticism Androphilia and gynephilia Aromanticism Attraction to transgender people Kinsey scale Monosexuality Plurisexuality Postgenderism Romantic orientation Sapphism See also Aphobia Acephobia Arophobia Anti-gender movement Discrimination against non-binary people Discrimination against transgender men Discrimination against transgender women Gender assignment Gender modality Gender roles Gender self-identification Healthcare and the LGBTQ community Intersex Legal recognition of non-binary gender Legal status of transgender people Mental health of LGBTQ people Queer heterosexuality Right to personal identity Sex as a biological variable Sex–gender distinction Sexuality and gender identity-based cultures Social construction of gender Split attraction model Suicide among LGBTQ people Transgender archaeology Transgender inequality Transmisogyny Transphobia Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Postgenderism&oldid=1305953173 " Categories : Gender identity Bioethics Futures studies Social philosophy Radical feminism Non-binary gender Transhumanism Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from November 2021 Pages using sidebar with the child parameter Articles containing Neapolitan-language text Articles containing German-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2025 Articles needing additional references from August 2021 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 15 August 2025, at 02:11 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Postgenderism 19 languages Add topic

