Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Before establishment 1.2 Establishment and organizational activity 1.3 Dissolution 2 Organizational goals and composition Toggle Organizational goals and composition subsection 2.1 Social agenda 2.1.1 Gay rights issues 3 Organizational structure 4 Political involvement Toggle Political involvement subsection 4.1 Presidential elections 4.1.1 1980 4.1.2 1984 4.1.3 1988 5 Challenges to the Moral Majority Toggle Challenges to the Moral Majority subsection 5.1 Bob Jones 5.2 Norman Lear 6 Moral Majority Coalition 7 Notable people within the movement 8 See also 9 References Toggle References subsection 9.1 Notes 9.2 Sources 10 Further reading 11 External links Toggle the table of contents Moral Majority 11 languages العربية Deutsch Español فارسی Français Ido Nederlands Simple English سنڌي Српски / srpski Suomi Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American right-wing Christian political organization Jerry Falwell Sr.

, whose founding of the Moral Majority was a key step in the formation of the New Christian Right The Moral Majority was an American political organization and movement associated with the Christian right and the Republican Party in the United States . It was founded in 1979 by Baptist minister Jerry Falwell Sr.

and associates, and dissolved in the late 1980s. It played a key role in the mobilization of conservative Christians as a political force and particularly in Republican presidential victories throughout the 1980s.

This article is part of a series on Conservatism in the United States Schools Compassionate Fiscal Fusion Liberal Classical Libertarian Moderate Movement Nationalist Christian Neo- Paleo- Postliberal Populist Progressive Social Straussian Traditionalist Ultra- Principles American exceptionalism Anti-communism Christian Zionism Communitarianism Constitutionalism Familialism Family values Federalism States' rights Subsidiarity Gender essentialism Judeo-Christian values Individualism Law and order Limited government Meritocracy Natural aristocracy Militarism Peace through strength Moral absolutism Natalism Pro-life Natural law Ordered liberty Patriotism Property rights Republicanism Right to bear arms Rule of law Supply-side economics Tradition History Loyalists Federalist Era Southern chivalry Redeemers Boston Brahmins Solid South New Humanism Dunning School Southern Agrarians Old Right Conservative Manifesto Conservative coalition America First Committee McCarthyism Goldwater campaign New Right Reagan era Reagan Doctrine Reaganomics Republican Revolution W. Bush presidency Tea Party movement Neo- vs. paleoconservatism Trump era First term Second term Agenda 47 Intellectuals Adams Anton Babbitt Bacevich Bell Bellow Bloom Boorstin Bradford Buckley Burgess Burnham Calhoun Chambers Conquest Deneen Eliot Francis Genovese Gottfried Hanson Hardin Hazony Himmelfarb Hoppe Hurston Jaffa Kimball Kirk Kirkpatrick Kreeft Kristol Kuehnelt-Leddihn Lind Lovecraft Loury Lukacs Luntz Mansfield Mencken Meyer Molnar Murray Nisbet Pangle Ransom Reno Rieff Santayana Schaeffer Sowell Strauss Vermeule Viereck Voegelin Wattenberg Weaver Wolfe Politicians Abbott Adams Boehner Bolton Buchanan Bush (George H. W.) Bush (George W.) Calhoun Clay Cheney Cleveland Coolidge Cruz DeSantis Dirksen Dole Eisenhower Gingrich Goldwater Harding Hamilton Helms Hoover (Herbert) Huckabee Johnson Kissinger Lodge Luce Madison McCain McCarthy (Joseph) McCarthy (Kevin) McConnell McKinley Meese Nixon Palin Paul (Rand) Paul (Ron) Pence Pierce Randolph Reagan Romney Rubio Rumsfeld Ryan Sessions Sherman Taft (Robert) Taft (William) Thurmond Trump Vance Wallace Wolfowitz Jurists Alito Barrett Bork Burger Colson Field Frelinghuysen Fuller George Goldsmith Gorsuch Harlan Kavanaugh Kennedy Luttig O'Connor Parker Rehnquist Roberts (John) Sanford Scalia Sessions Sutherland Taft (William) Thomas (Clarence) Whittaker Commentators Beck Bongino Breitbart Buchanan (Pat) Buckley Caldwell Carlson Cass Chodorov Coulter D'Souza Derbyshire Dreher Elder Goldberg Grant Griffin Van den Haag Hannity Hart Herberg Hoover (Margaret) Ingraham Jones Kelly Knowles Krauthammer Lahren Levin Limbaugh Mac Donald Neuhaus Ngo North Novak O'Reilly Owens Podhoretz Pool Portnoy Possony Prager Robertson Shapiro Shlaes Sullivan Walsh Watters Weyl Will Wintrich Woods Activists Abramoff Agostinelli Andreessen Atwater Bannon Bennett Bezmenov Bozell Cohn Dans Dobson Drudge Falwell Feulner Flynn Gabriel Hegseth Horowitz Kirk Krikorian Kristol LaHaye Lindell Lindbergh Leo McEntee Mercer (Rebekah) Mercer (Robert) Miller Murdoch Musk political views O'Keefe Park Phillips Posobiec Powell Raichik Reed Regnery Roberts (Kevin) Rove Rufo Scaife Schlafly (Andrew) Schlafly (Phyllis) Stone Thiel Thomas (Ginni) Weyrich Wiles Wood Literature The Federalist Papers (1788) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Notes on Democracy (1926) I'll Take My Stand (1930) Our Enemy, the State (1935) The Managerial Revolution (1941) Ideas Have Consequences (1948) God and Man at Yale (1951) The Conservative Mind (1953) The Conscience of a Conservative (1960) A Choice Not an Echo (1964) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) The Death of the West (2001) Hillbilly Elegy (2016) The Benedict Option (2017) Why Liberalism Failed (2018) The Age of Entitlement (2020) Parties Active American Party American Independent Party Conservative Party NY state Constitution Party Republican Party Defunct Anti-Masonic Party Constitutional Union Party Democratic Party ( historically, factions ) Boll weevils Bourbon Democrats Conservative Democrats Dixiecrats Reagan Democrats Southern Democrats Rhode Island Suffrage Party Federalist Party National Republican Party Native American Party Whig Party Think tanks Acton Institute AdTI AEI AFP CSP CfNI Claremont Institute CEI CSPC EPPC FRI Gatestone Institute Heartland Institute The Heritage Foundation Heritage Action Mandate for Leadership Project Esther Project 2025 Hoover Institution Hudson Institute ISI James Madison Program Leadership Institute Manhattan Institute Mises Institute PRI PNAC (Defunct) Ripon Society R Street Institute Rockford Institute SPN Sutherland Institute Tax Foundation Witherspoon Institute Media Newspapers Chicago Tribune The Epoch Times New Hampshire Union Leader The Jewish Voice The New York Observer New York Post The Remnant The Wall Street Journal (editorial board) The Washington Times Journals American Affairs The American Conservative The American Spectator American Thinker City Journal Claremont Review of Books Commentary Compact Chronicles The Dispatch First Things The Imaginative Conservative Jewish World Review Modern Age National Affairs The National Interest National Review The New American The New Atlantis The New Criterion Policy Review (defunct) Public Discourse Southern Partisan Spectator USA Tablet Taki's Magazine Telos Washington Examiner The Weekly Standard (defunct) TV channels CBN Fox Business Fox News Newsmax TV One America News Network Real America's Voice VOZ Websites 1819 News Babylon Bee Breitbart News The Bulwark Campus Reform The Center Square Conservative Review Daily Caller Daily Signal Daily Wire Discover the Networks The Federalist FrontPage Magazine Front Porch Republic Gateway Pundit Hot Air Human Events Independent Journal Review InfoWars Jihad Watch LifeZette NewsBusters PJ Media Rare RedState The Dispatch Townhall Twitchy Washington Examiner The Washington Free Beacon The Western Journal WorldNetDaily Other Blaze Media Encounter Books Evie Magazine The First Imprimis The Political Cesspool Passage Publishing PragerU RealClearPolitics Red Scare Regnery Publishing RSBN The Rubin Report Sinclair Broadcast Group Other organizations Congressional caucuses Second Amendment Caucus RSC Liberty Caucus Freedom Caucus Republican Main Street Partnership Republican Governance Group Blue Dog Coalition Economics ATR Club for Growth FreedomWorks (defunct) NFIB NTU Tea Party Patriots USCC Gun rights GOA NAGR NRA Identity politics ACT!

CWA Council of Conservative Citizens GAG IWF LCR Moms for Liberty Nativist CIS FAIR Immigration Restriction League NumbersUSA Patriot Prayer Proud Boys Oath Keepers Three Percenters Religion ADF Court cases ACLJ AFA The American TFP Chalcedon Foundation CCA Christian Voice Eagle Forum FCR The Fellowship FFC Focus on the Family Foundation for Moral Law Liberty Counsel Moral Majority (defunct) NOM NRLC PTMC Susan B. Anthony Pro-Life America Thomas More Law Center Watchdog groups AIM Econ Journal Watch Franklin News Foundation JW MRC O'Keefe Media Group Project Veritas Youth/student groups NJC TPUSA Young Americans for Freedom Young America's Foundation YAL Social media Gab Gettr Parler The Right Stuff Miscellaneous The 85 Fund AHI ACU AFPAC Bradley Foundation TCC CNP CPAC Hillsdale College IFF JBS John M. Olin Foundation (defunct) Liberty Fund LU NAS Philadelphia Society Regent University Russell Kirk Center for Cultural Renewal TPPF Other AFL Atlas Network CN ConservAmerica Donors Trust FedSoc NCPAC PJI Turning Point Action SACR YRNF Ziklag Movements Asian and Pacific Islander Black Christian right Reconstructionism Classical education movement Paideia Dark Enlightenment Election denial movement 2020 election disputes Female Green Hispanic and Latino LGBTQ Libertarian republicans Militia movement Monarchism Mormon White Horse Prophecy Theodemocracy New Apostolic Reformation Parental rights movement Fathers' rights Patriot movement Christian Radical right Reactionary feminism Right-libertarianism Paleolibertarianism Secessionism Neo-Confederates in Texas Trumpism Never Trump Related Barstool conservatism Bibliography of US conservatism Conservative talk radio GOP factions List of American conservatives NatCon Timeline of modern American conservatism Conservatism portal United States portal v t e History [ edit ] Before establishment [ edit ] The origins of the Moral Majority can be traced to 1976 when Baptist minister Jerry Falwell Sr.

embarked on a series of "I Love America" rallies across the country to raise awareness of social issues important to him.

[ 1 ] These rallies were an extension of Falwell's decision to go against the traditional Baptist principle of separating religion and politics, a change of heart Falwell says he had when he perceived what he described as the decay of the nation's morality.

[ 2 ] Through hosting these rallies, Falwell was able to gauge national support for a formal organization and also raise his profile as a leader. Having already been a part of a well-established network of ministers and ministries, within a few years Falwell was favorably positioned to launch the Moral Majority.

The impetus for the Moral Majority was the struggle for control of an American conservative Christian advocacy group known as Christian Voice during 1978.

Robert Grant , Christian Voice's president, said in a news conference that the religious right was a "sham... controlled by three Catholics and a Jew ." Following this, Paul Weyrich , Terry Dolan , Richard Viguerie (the Catholics) and Howard Phillips (the Jew) left Christian Voice.

During a 1979 meeting, they urged televangelist Jerry Falwell Sr.

to found the Moral Majority (a phrase coined by Weyrich [ 3 ] ). This was the period when the New Christian Right arose.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] Joining Falwell in the Moral Majority was Ed McAteer, who the same year, founded the Religious Roundtable in Memphis , Tennessee .

[ 6 ] Falwell also brought in Tim LaHaye , leader of a clergy group opposed to gay rights and John Birch Society figure, as an organizer.

[ 7 ] Establishment and organizational activity [ edit ] Falwell and Weyrich founded the Moral Majority in June 1979.

[ 8 ] According to former Arkansas governor Mike Huckabee , who was Texas evangelist James Robison 's communications director at the time, Robison's "Freedom Rally" at the Dallas Convention Center was the genesis of the Moral Majority.

[ 9 ] The Moral Majority was predominately a Southern-oriented organization of the Christian Right, although its state chapters and political activity extended beyond the South.

[ 1 ] The number of state chapters grew quickly, with organizations in eighteen states by 1980.

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] The variety of resources available to the Moral Majority at its founding facilitated this rapid expansion, and included Falwell's mailing list from his program, Old Time Gospel Hour . In addition, the Moral Majority took control of the Old Time Gospel Hour 's publication, Journal Champion , which had been distributed to the show's donors.

[ 12 ] Through the 1980s, Falwell was the organization's best-known spokesperson. By 1982, Moral Majority surpassed Christian Voice in size and influence.

The Moral Majority's headquarters were in Lynchburg, Virginia , where Falwell was the presiding minister of the nation's largest independent Baptist church, Thomas Road Baptist Church . Virginia has been a seat of Christian Right politics, being the state where the Christian Coalition 's first headquarters were established. Falwell was at the head of the Moral Majority and maintained an advisory board, constituting the organization's primary leadership. This leadership was drawn mostly from Falwell's fellow members of the Baptist Bible Fellowship . Falwell insisted the Moral Majority leadership also include Catholics and Jews, although not all members of the leadership approved of this inclusion.

[ 13 ] The Moral Majority was an organization made up of conservative Christian political action committees which campaigned on issues its personnel believed were important to maintaining its Christian conception of moral law. They believed this represented the opinions of the majority of Americans (hence the movement's name). With a membership of millions, the Moral Majority became one of the largest conservative lobby groups in the United States and at its height, it claimed more than four million members and over two million donors.

[ 14 ] These members were spread among about twenty state organizations, of which Washington State's was the largest. The Moral Majority was incorporated into the Liberty Federation in 1985, remaining a distinct entity but falling under the Liberty Federation's larger jurisdiction. In 1987, Falwell retired as the formal head of the Moral Majority, and was succeeded by Jerry Nims, [ 15 ] [ 16 ] although he maintained an active and visible role within the organization. The same year, a major effort which Falwell made to bring scandal-ridden Jim Bakker 's PTL ministries out of financial trouble proved unsuccessful.

[ 17 ] Dissolution [ edit ] By the end of Ronald Reagan 's presidential administration, Christian Right organizations were generally in a phase of decline. After Reagan's two terms in office, donations were decreasing, because after eight years of Christian Right-supported leadership, the nation was no longer seen as in the same state of supposed moral peril as it was when Reagan first took office.

[ 18 ] The Moral Majority's financial base seriously eroded by the time it became part of the Liberty Federation; its financial difficulties ultimately were a major factor in the decision to disband the organization.

[ 19 ] Falwell offered an optimistic public opinion about the Moral Majority's dissolution. Disbanding the Moral Majority in 1989 in Las Vegas , Falwell declared, "Our goal has been achieved... The religious right is solidly in place and [...] religious conservatives in America are now in for the duration." [ 20 ] Organizational goals and composition [ edit ] The Moral Majority sought to mobilize conservative Americans to become politically active on issues they thought were important. A variety of tactics were used to garner support. These tactics included direct-mail campaigns, telephone hotlines, rallies, and religious television broadcasts.

[ 21 ] Although the Moral Majority operated for only a decade, it rapidly became a visible political force and was relatively effective in its mobilization goals. According to Robert Liebman and Robert Wuthnow , common explanations for this success include: [ 22 ] The Moral Majority was founded with strong financial backing already in place.

Its leaders frequently communicated with its constituents, enabling consistent messages to resonate throughout all levels.

Its leaders generally had previous organizational and management experience.

The general public was amenable to the issues the Moral Majority emphasized.

Scholar Carmen Celestini argues that the culture war issues, conspiratorialism , apocalypticism , and fear emphasized in the John Birch Society were key aspects in the successful mobilization of the Moral Majority, particularly through Tim LaHaye, a Moral Majority figure and John Birch Society member and speaker.

[ 23 ] Some issues for which the Moral Majority campaigned included: [ 24 ] Promotion of traditional family values Opposition to media outlets accused of promoting an anti-family agenda Opposition to the Equal Rights Amendment and Strategic Arms Limitation Talks Opposition to state recognition or acceptance of homosexual acts Prohibition of abortion , including in cases involving incest or rape [ 25 ] Support for Christian prayers in schools Proselytising to Jews and other non-Christians for conversion to Christianity Social agenda [ edit ] The Moral Majority successfully campaigned to create an integrated social platform that appealed to most conservative Christians by packaging a variety of previously disparate issues under the banner of "traditional family values ".

[ 26 ] The Moral Majority portrayed issues such as abortion, divorce, feminism, gay and lesbian rights, and the Equal Rights Amendment as attacks on the traditional concept and values of American families and tapped into a sense of societal moral decay that resonated with many evangelicals .

[ 27 ] They also campaigned for the inclusion of prayer in schools and tax incentives for married couples as protection for the traditional family structure. Under this pro-family agenda, they mobilized a large base of supporters with issue-centric dialogue that they proliferated in their network of preachers and mailings.

[ 26 ] Gay rights issues [ edit ] In particular, the anti-homosexual rhetoric that they publicized through fundraising letters and Christian broadcasting had higher contribution rates than other topics. While not explicitly anti-gay in their public platforms during the 1970s, their internal mobilization as "shared anti-gay sentiment aided in solidifying a collective set of grievances and ideologies, in establishing a collective identity of constituents, and in constructing a hostile enemy against which the conservative Christian activists were to fight".

[ 28 ] The Moral Majority refrained from directly speaking out against gays, feminists, and pro-abortion parties and instead used "pro-family" rhetoric to articulate their point. For example, instead of coming out directly against homosexuality and gay families, leaders of the Moral Majority defined a family as "two heterosexual parents", which appealed to many conservatives.

[ 27 ] Later, as the organization gained more influence in the 1980s, their rhetoric became more explicit in their stance on gay rights as they characterized the movement as an attack on the American family.

Jerry Falwell Sr.

expressed that because gay people were rejected by most of society , they had no choice but to prey on the young and were therefore a threat to children and families. Various Moral Majority members also expressed more extreme opinions, such as Moral Majority commentator Charlie Judd, who argued that "There are absolutes in this world. Just as jumping off a building will kill a person, so will the spread of homosexuality bring about the demise of American culture as we know it".

[ 27 ] Organizational structure [ edit ] The Moral Majority comprised four distinct organizations: [ 29 ] Moral Majority Inc. – the organization's lobbying division, which addressed issues on local, state, and national levels.

Moral Majority Foundation – the organization's educational component, through which the Moral Majority educated ministers and lay people on political issues and conducted voter registration drives.

Moral Majority Legal Defense Fund – the organization's legal instrument, used primarily to challenge the American Civil Liberties Union and secular humanist issues in court.

Moral Majority Political Action Committee – the organization's mechanism for supporting the candidacy of people whose political platforms reflected Moral Majority values.

The state chapters of the Moral Majority were financially independent from the national organization and relied on local resources to conduct their activities. Consequently, the national organization encouraged local chapters to cooperate with their policies but had little control over local chapters' activities.

[ 30 ] Political activity of the Moral Majority divided accordingly, with the national Moral Majority office usually focused on addressing multiple issues through Congress while local branches tended to work on a single issue within their respective states.

[ 31 ] Political involvement [ edit ] The Moral Majority engaged in political activity in a variety of ways, including national media campaigns and grassroots organization aimed at supporting particular candidates in elections and using mail and phone calls to reach office-holders.

[ 32 ] The Moral Majority's initial political actions were aimed at supporting Jesse Helms ' proposed legislation on school prayer .

[ 33 ] Before long, the Moral Majority became heavily invested in presidential elections and national politics; although at the state level branches of the Moral Majority continued to pursue specific issues at lower levels of government. As far as elections, state Moral Majority chapters tended to deliberately focus their efforts towards particular candidates. For example, state chapters participated in campaigns to oust liberal members of Congress during the 1980 election. Also, in 1981, the Moral Majority mobilized delegates to the Virginia Republican state nominating convention in order to support Guy Farley, an evangelical candidate for lieutenant governor.

[ 34 ] Nationally, the Moral Majority encouraged electoral participation among its members and used registration drives to register church-goers to vote, with the logic that Moral Majority members would be likely to vote for Moral Majority-endorsed candidates, thus strengthening the organization's electoral efficacy and strengthening its endorsements. Leaders within the Moral Majority asked ministers give their congregants political direction, reminding congregants when to vote, whom to vote for, and why the Moral Majority held particular positions on issues.

[ 35 ] The Moral Majority, however, is probably best known for its involvement in presidential elections, specifically those of Ronald Reagan.

Presidential elections [ edit ] The 1976 election of Jimmy Carter as President of the United States marked a milestone for evangelical Christians. For the first time, a self-professed evangelical Christian had been elected to the nation's highest office, bringing the national awareness of evangelical Christianity to a new level. Despite commonality in religious identification, however, evangelical Christians in general and eventually the newly formed Moral Majority in particular came to be disappointed with Carter's policies. Carter did not share the Moral Majority's political imperative to unify personal and political positions and would instead support the positions of his own party, the Democratic Party. In particular, Carter did not actively oppose his party's general pro-choice platform on abortion, nor did Carter work to bridge the church–state divide, both factors in the Moral Majority's decision to support Ronald Reagan's candidacy in 1980.

[ 2 ] 1980 [ edit ] The Moral Majority was a relatively early supporter of Reagan, endorsing him before the Republican convention.

[ 36 ] According to Jimmy Carter, "that autumn [1980] a group headed by Jerry Falwell purchased $10 million in commercials on southern radio and TV to brand me as a traitor to the South and no longer a Christian." [ 37 ] Naturally, the Moral Majority continued working on behalf of Reagan after he gained the Republican nomination. Following the organization's lead, more than one-fifth of Moral Majority supporters that had supported Carter in 1976 voted for Reagan in 1980.

[ 38 ] After Reagan's victory, Falwell attributed Reagan's success directly to the Moral Majority and others registering and encouraging church-goers to vote who had never before been politically active.

[ 39 ] Empirical evidence suggests that Falwell's claim about the role of Christian Right organizations in Reagan's victory has some truth, though difficult to determine definitively.

[ 40 ] Reagan sought input from the Moral Majority leadership during his campaign and appointed the Rev. Robert Billings, the Moral Majority's first executive director, to be a religious advisor to the campaign.

[ 41 ] Later, Reagan appointed Billings to a position in the Department of Education . This appointment was particularly significant for the Moral Majority, which had lobbied on education policy issues, especially those regarding private schools.

[ 42 ] 1984 [ edit ] The Moral Majority maintained their support for Reagan's 1984 reelection campaign and, alongside other Christian Right organizations, influenced the Republican platform for the election, shaping the party's campaign stances on school prayer and abortion.

[ 43 ] The nation's political climate, however, had changed since Reagan's first campaign. Although Reagan won reelection, the role of the Moral Majority in the victory had changed since 1980. A study of voters in the 1984 election showed that more anti-Moral Majority voters voted for Walter Mondale than pro-Moral Majority voters voted for Reagan, suggesting the Moral Majority may have actually had a negative effect on Reagan's campaign.

[ 43 ] 1988 [ edit ] 1988 was the last presidential election for which the Moral Majority was an active organization. With Reagan having reached his two-term limit, the Republican nomination was open to a variety of primary contenders. The evangelical minister and televangelist Pat Robertson sought the Republican nomination and would have been, at first glance, a natural choice for the Moral Majority's support. Although Robertson's political platforms were extremely similar to the ones the Moral Majority supported, Falwell gave his organization's endorsement to contender George H. W. Bush instead. Falwell's decision highlighted the rivalry between Falwell and Robertson as televangelists but also revealed the deep-seated tension that still persisted between competing evangelical traditions – Falwell's fundamentalist tradition was at odds with Robertson's charismatic tradition.

[ 44 ] Challenges to the Moral Majority [ edit ] By 1987–88, the views of the Moral Majority were challenged widely and the organization started to crumble. With its waning support, critics said "The Moral Majority is neither", meaning the organization was neither moral nor a majority. By 1988, there were serious cash flow problems and Falwell dismantled the organization in 1989.

[ 45 ] Bob Jones [ edit ] During its existence the Moral Majority experienced friction with other evangelical leaders and organizations as well as liberal leaders and organizations. For example, Bob Jones particularly sought to challenge the public position of the Moral Majority and was known to make public statements that the Moral Majority was an instrument of Satan, due to Falwell’s abandonment of strict separatism and willingness to collaborate with Catholics and Orthodox Jews.

[ 13 ] Such rivalries affected the Moral Majority's grassroots efforts. In South Carolina, the Moral Majority had no presence because Bob Jones University 's religious network had already organized the state's independent Baptists.

[ 46 ] The tension between Falwell and Pat Robertson also affected the Moral Majority.

Norman Lear [ edit ] On the ideologically opposed side, Norman Lear 's liberal organization People for the American Way was formed with the specific intention of opposing the platforms of the Moral Majority and other Christian Right organizations.

[ 47 ] Moral Majority Coalition [ edit ] In November 2004, Falwell revived the Moral Majority name for a new organization, the Moral Majority Coalition. The intent of the organization is to continue the "evangelical revolution" to help conservative politicians get elected. Referring to the Coalition as a "21st century resurrection of the Moral Majority," Falwell, a father of the modern "religious right" political movement, committed to leading the organization for four years.

[ 48 ] He died on May 15, 2007.

[ 49 ] Notable people within the movement [ edit ] Ed Dobson Jerry Falwell Sr.

(founder) Robert Grant Jesse Helms D. James Kennedy Beverly LaHaye Tim LaHaye Trent Lott Jerry Prevo Penny Pullen Judith A. Reisman Pat Robertson James Robison Charles Stanley Cal Thomas Richard Viguerie George Wallace Paul Weyrich See also [ edit ] Portals : United States conservatism Save Our Children Seven Mountain Mandate The Eyes of Tammy Faye (2021 film) References [ edit ] Notes [ edit ] ^ a b Liebman & Wuthnow 1983 , p. 58.

^ a b Allitt 2003 , p. 152.

^ Lernoux, Penny (April 17, 1989). "A Reverence for Fundamentalism".

The Nation . Vol. 248, no. 15.

^ Martin, William (1996).

With God on Our Side: The Rise of the Religious Right in America . New York: Broadway Books.

ISBN 978-0-553-06745-3 – via Archive.org .

^ Diamond, Sara (1995).

Roads to Dominion . New York: Guilford Press.

ISBN 978-0-89862-864-7 – via Archive.org .

^ Fox, Margalit (October 10, 2004).

"Edward E. McAteer, 78; Empowered Christian Right" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on July 17, 2016 . Retrieved May 26, 2016 .

^ Celestini 2018 , p. 300.

^ Hudson, D.W. (2008).

Onward, Christian Soldiers: The Growing Political Power of Catholics and Evangelicals in the United States . Threshold Editions. p. 15.

ISBN 9781416565895 . Retrieved November 15, 2014 .

^ Levy, Ariel (June 28, 2010).

"Prodigal Son" .

The New Yorker .

Archived from the original on January 22, 2012 . Retrieved January 22, 2012 .

^ Liebman & Wuthnow 1983 , pp. 31–32.

^ Williams, Daniel K. (April 2010). "Jerry Falwell's Sunbelt Politics: The Regional Origins of the Moral Majority".

Journal of Policy History .

22 (2).

Cambridge University Press : 125– 47.

doi : 10.1017/S0898030610000011 .

S2CID 146148193 .

^ Liebman & Wuthnow 1983 , p. 61.

^ a b Allitt 2003 , p. 153.

^ Wilcox 1996 , p. 96.

^ Lohmann, Bill (February 6, 1988).

"From Beatnik to Religious Right Figure: New Moral Majority Leader Took His Own Path" .

Los Angeles Times .

Archived from the original on October 20, 2016 . Retrieved October 19, 2016 .

^ Carroll, Jerry (November 5, 1987).

"Falwell's Successor Recalls Fondly HIs Bay Area Roots Nims' dad was controversial preacher in the city" .

San Francisco Chronicle .

^ "Falwell Quits, Warning PTL Ministry May End" .

The New York Times . October 9, 1987 . Retrieved December 2, 2021 .

^ Wilcox 1996 , p. 38.

^ Wilcox 1992 , p. 14.

^ Allitt 2003 , p. 198.

^ Wuthnow, Robert (1988).

The Restructuring of American Religion . Studies in church and state.

Princeton University Press . p. 205.

ISBN 978-0-691-07759-8 .

^ Liebman & Wuthnow 1983 , pp. 55–57.

^ Celestini 2018 , pp. 37–38.

^ "Moral Majority" .

Columbia Encyclopedia (6th ed.).

Columbia University Press . 2004. Archived from the original on August 19, 2007 . Retrieved August 11, 2007 .

^ Falwell, Jerry (1997).

Falwell: An Autobiography, The Inside Story . Lynchburg: Liberty House Publishers. p. 395.

ISBN 9781888684049 – via Archive.org .

^ a b Fetner 2008 , p. 58.

^ a b c Banwart, Doug (2013).

"Jerry Falwell, the Rise of the Moral Majority, and the 1980 Election" (PDF) .

Western Illinois Historical Review .

5 : 133– 157. Archived from the original (PDF) on March 19, 2015 . Retrieved December 10, 2019 .

^ Fetner 2008 , p. 60.

^ Liebman & Wuthnow 1983 , p. 54.

^ Liebman & Wuthnow 1983 , p. 70.

^ Liebman & Wuthnow 1983 , p. 71.

^ Wilcox 1996 , p. 86.

^ Liebman & Wuthnow 1983 , p. 34.

^ Rozell, Mark J.; Wilcox, Clyde (2003). "Virginia: Birthplace of the Christian Right". In Green, John C. (ed.).

The Christian Right in American Politics . Washington, D.C.: Georgetown University Press . p. 43.

ISBN 978-0-87840-393-6 .

^ Liebman & Wuthnow 1983 , p. 37.

^ Liebman & Wuthnow 1983 , p. 36.

^ Carter, Jimmy (2010).

White House Diary . New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux. p.

469 .

ISBN 9780374280994 – via Archive.org .

^ Wilcox 1992 , p. 117.

^ Wilcox 1992 , p. 96.

^ Wilcox 1992 , pp. 115–117.

^ Liebman & Wuthnow 1983 , p. 60.

^ Wald, Kenneth (1997).

Religion and Politics in the United States . Washington, D.C.: Congressional Quarterly Press. p. 137.

ISBN 978-1-56802-157-7 .

^ a b Johnson, Stephen D.; Tamney, Joseph B. (1985). "The Christian Right and the 1984 Presidential Election".

Review of Religious Research .

27 (2). Religious Research Association, Inc., Springer: 124– 33.

doi : 10.2307/3511667 .

JSTOR 3511667 .

^ Wilcox 1992 , p. xv.

^ Utter, Glenn H.; True, James L. (2004).

Conservative Christians and Political Participation – A Reference Handbook . Santa Barbara, California: ABC Clio . p. 68.

ISBN 978-1-85109-513-1 .

^ Vinson, C. Danielle; Guth, James L. (2003). "Advance and Retreat in the Palmetto State: Assessing the Christian Right in South Carolina". In Green, John C. (ed.).

The Christian Right in American Politics . Washington, D.C.: Georgetown University Press . p. 23.

ISBN 978-0-87840-393-6 .

^ Williams, Peter W. (1988).

America's Religions .

Princeton University Press . p. 482.

ISBN 0-252-02663-2 .

^ "Moral Majority Timeline" .

Moral Majority Coalition . Archived from the original on March 19, 2007 . Retrieved August 12, 2007 .

^ "Moral Majority founder Jerry Falwell dies" .

NBC News . May 15, 2007 . Retrieved September 22, 2024 .

Sources [ edit ] Allitt, Patrick (2003).

Religion in America Since 1945: A History . New York: Columbia University Press .

ISBN 978-0-231-12154-5 .

Celestini, Carmen (2018).

God, Country, and Christian Conservatives: The National Association of Manufacturers, the John Birch Society, and the Rise of the Christian Right (Thesis).

University of Waterloo . Retrieved September 22, 2024 .

Fetner, Tina (2008).

How the Religious Right Shaped Lesbian and Gay Activism . Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press .

ISBN 978-0-8166-4918-1 .

Liebman, Robert C.; Wuthnow, Robert (1983).

The New Christian Right: mobilization and legitimation . Hawthorne, NY: Aldine Publishing Company.

ISBN 978-0-202-30307-9 .

Wilcox, Clyde (1992).

God's Warriors . Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press .

ISBN 978-0-8018-4263-4 .

Wilcox, Clyde (1996).

Onward Christian Soldiers?

. Boulder: Westview Press .

ISBN 978-0-8133-2696-2 .

Further reading [ edit ] Fager, Chuck (April 20, 1982).

"Clerical cynicism: Jerry Falwell's poor-mouthing from the pulpit" .

The Boston Phoenix . Retrieved August 19, 2024 .

External links [ edit ] Moral Majority Coalition v t e Social conservatism in the United States Issues and ideas Anti-abortion Anti-LGBTQ ( Gay agenda ) Anti-pornography movement Culture of life Culture war Consistent life ethic Eminent domain Euthanasia Familialism Family values Gender roles Organized religion Parental rights movement Prohibition of drugs Public morality Religious liberty School prayer Friendly separation of church and state Advocates Abbott Ashcroft Bachmann Baldwin Bannon Barton Bennett Brownback Bryant Boebert Boykin Bozell III Buchanan Cameron Carlson Carson Coburn Colson Cruz DeLay DeMint DeSantis Dice Dobson Donohue D'Souza Falwell Sr.

Falwell Jr.

Frist George Gingrich Gohmert Harris Helms Hostettler Huckabee Johnson Jones Kennedy Keyes King Kirk Knowles LaHaye LaHaye Limbaugh Lott McCarthy Moore Owens Palin Parsley Pence (Greg) Pence (Mike) Perkins Peroutka Perry Phillips Prager Raichik Reed Robertson Robinson Ruzicka Santorum Scarborough Schlafly Schundler Scott Shapiro Stenzel Stuckey Tancredo Tatum Greene Thomas Trump Uihlein Walsh Groups American Principles Project Concerned Women for America Eagle Forum Faith and Freedom Coalition Family Research Council Focus on the Family Foundation for Moral Law Heritage Foundation Moms for Liberty Moral Majority National Center on Sexual Exploitation National Organization for Marriage National Right to Life Committee Parents Television and Media Council Traditional Values Coalition Political parties American Solidarity Party Constitution Party Prohibition Party Republican Party Related Christian democracy Christian nationalism Christian right Culture war Factions in the Republican Party LGBT conservatism in the United States Manhattan Declaration Paleoconservatism Reactionary Social justice Straight pride Conservatism portal Authority control databases International VIAF National United States Israel Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Moral_Majority&oldid=1270205985 " Categories : American Christian political organizations History of Christianity in the United States New Right (United States) Organizations established in 1979 1979 establishments in the United States Organizations that oppose LGBTQ rights in the United States Conservative organizations in the United States Jerry Falwell Right-wing populism in the United States Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use American English from April 2024 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use mdy dates from April 2024 This page was last edited on 18 January 2025, at 12:04 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Moral Majority 11 languages Add topic

