Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Contents 2 Notes 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Theatrum Chemicum Britannicum 4 languages Deutsch Español Suomi Türkçe Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 1652 compilation by Elias Ashmole Not to be confused with Theatrum Chemicum .

Theatrum Chemicum Britannicum Theatrum Chemicum Britannicum first published in 1652, is an extensively annotated compilation of English alchemical literature acquired by the English alchemist and antiquarian Elias Ashmole .  The book preserved and made available many works that had previously existed only in privately held manuscripts.  It is the first part of a planned multi-volume set.  It contains the rhyming verse of many alchemists, poets, mathematicians &c, such as Thomas Norton , George Ripley , Geoffrey Chaucer , John Gower , John Dee , Edward Kelley , John Lydgate , John Dastin and William Backhouse .

[ 1 ] The quantity of manuscripts acquired by Ashmole was of such a mass, that he planned to publish multiple volumes.  The extant 1652 volume, designated as "The First Part" on the title page, was chosen for presenting the works of rhyming Verse, while the Second Part would be given to prose.

[ a ] [ b ] In his preface Ashmole says of himself, "I must profess I know enough to hold my tongue, but not enough to speak." [ 4 ] Contents [ edit ] The volume is described in its preface as: Theatrum Chemicum Britannicum. Containing Severall Poetical Pieces of our Famous English Philosophers, who have written the Hermetique Mysteries in their owne Ancient Language. Faithfully Collected into one Volume, with Annotations thereon, by Elias Ashmole, Esq. Qui est Mercuriophilus Anglicus. The first part, London, Printed by J. Grismond for Nath: Brooke, at the Angel in Cornhill. MDCLII.

[ 5 ] The compilation contains the following collection of works, several of which are by unknown authors: [ 6 ] [ 7 ] George Ripley's Wheel , from Theatrum Chemicum Britannicum , 1652 Elias Ashmole. Prologue. January 26, 1652.

Thomas Norton .

The Ordinall of Alchimy.

George Ripley .

The Compound of Alchymie.

Anonymous.

Liber patris sapientiae.

(Pseudo-) Ramon Lull .

Hermes Bird.

Geoffry Chaucer .

The Tale of the Chanans Yeoman.

John Dastin .

The Worke of John Dastin.

or Dastin's Dreame.

Pearce the Black Monke upon the Elixir.

The Worke of Rich: Carpenter.

or Carpenter's Worke Abraham Andrews.

The Hunting of the Greene Lyon.

Thomas Charnock .

The Breviary of naturall Philosophy.

1557.

Thomas Charnock.

Aenigma ad Alchimiam . 1572.

Thomas Charnock.

Aenigma de Alchimiae . 1572.

William Bloomefield.

Bloomfields Blossoms: or, The Campe of Philosophy.

Edward Kelley .

Sir Edward Kelle's Worke.

Edward Kelley.

Sir Ed: Kelly concerning the Philosophers Stone written to his especiall good Freind, G.S. Gent.

John Dee .

Testamentum Johannis Dee Philosophi summi ad Johannem Gwynn, transmissum 1568.

Thomas Robinson.

Thomas Robinsonus de lapide philosophorum.

Anonymous.

Experience and Philosophy.

W.B.

The Magistery . December, 1633. (Revealed to be by William Backhouse in Ashmole's annotated copy of the book) [ 8 ] Anonymi: or, severall workes of unknowne Authors.

John Gower .

John Gower concerning the Philosophers Stone.

George Ripley.

The Vision of Sr: George Ripley: Channon of Bridlington.

George Ripley.

Verses belonging to an emblematicall Scrowle: Supposed to be invented by Geo: Ripley.

George Ripley.

The Mistery of alchymists, Composed by Sir Geo: Ripley Chanon of Bridlington.

George Ripley.

The Preface prefixt to Sir Geo: Ripley's Medulla . 1476.

George Ripley.

A shorte worke That beareth the Name of the aforesaid Author, Sir G. Ripley.

John Lydgate .

Translation of the second Epistle that King Alexander sent to his Master Aristotle.

Anonymi.

Anonymous.

The Hermet's Tale.

Anonymous.

A Discription of the Stone.

Anonymous.

The standing of the Glasse for the tyme of the Putrefaction, and Congelation of the Medicine.

D.D.W. Bedman. or W. Redman.

Aenigma Philosophicum.

Fragments Thomas Charnock .

Fragments coppied From Thomas Charnock's owne hand writing.

1574.

In some Coppies I have found these Verses placed before Pearce the Black Monk, upon the Elixir.

I have seene an old Coppy of the said work of Pearce the Black Monk, to the end of which these following Verses were joyned.

This following Fragment in some copies I have found placed at the end of the aforegoing Exposition of Pearce the Black Monke. A Conclusion.

An other Conclusion.

The whole Scyence.

Annotations and Discourses, upon Some part of the preceding Worke.

A table of the several Treatises, with their Authors Names, contained in this Worke.

A Table explaining the Obscure, Obsolete, and mis-spell'd words used throughout this Worke.

Notes [ edit ] ^ Elias Ashmole wanted to ensure readers were aware of more material, already collected and planned for second volume within Theatrum Chemicum Britannicum : "Now for a Particular account, of the Hermetique Science, vouchsafe (Ingenious Reader,) to accept the ensuing Collections, yet not so, as if therein were contained all the Works of our English Hermetique Philosophers, (for more are designed in a Second Part to follow and compleate this a full Theatrum; the which GOD allowing me further Time and Tranquility to run through it, as I have already this, I intend shortly to make ready for the Presse.) [ 2 ] ^ After describing his process of collecting the English works, Elias Ashmole wrote about his analysis of the material: "I made a Question (in regard some Philosophers had writ in Verse, others in Prose) Which of these should take Precedency; and after some Consideration adjudged it to the Poetique part... it is the Ancientest, Prose but of Latter use with other Nations: but because Poetry hath bin most Anciently used with us, and (as if from a Grant of Nature) held unquestionable... In a word, to prefer Prose before Poetry, is no other, or better, then to let a Rough-hewen-Clowne, take the Wall of a Rich-clad-Lady of Honour : or to Hang a Presence Chamber With Tarpalin, instead of Tapestry." [ 3 ] References [ edit ] ^ "Theatrum Chemicum Britannicum Project" . Ouroboros Press. 13 May 2011 . Retrieved April 2, 2013 .

^ Ashmole, Elias. "Prolegomena".

Theatrum Chemicum Britannicum . pp. 13, 18– 20.

^ Ashmole, Elias. "Prolegomena".

Theatrum Chemicum Britannicum . pp.

18– 20.

^ Peters, Hermann (1906).

Pictorial History of Ancient Pharmacy: With Sketches of Early Medical Practice, Hermann Peters (3 ed.). G.P. Engelhard. p. 190.

^ Adam McLean. The Alchemy Website. Retrieved April 2, 2013.

^ Elias Ashmole.

Theatrum Chemicum Britannicum p. Sss. 1652.

^ Adam McLean. The Alchemy Website. Retrieved April 2, 2013.

^ Josten, C. H. (1949). "William Backhouse of Swallowfield".

Ambix .

4 ( 1– 2): 5.

doi : 10.1179/amb.1949.4.1-2.1 .

External links [ edit ] 1652 Edition at the Internet Archive English Alchemical verse from Theatrum Chemicum Britannicum on The Alchemy Website.

High-resolution scans of title page and all plates from 1652 edition freely available for download in variety of formats from Science History Institute Digital Collections at digital.sciencehistory.org v t e Alchemy (general) Alchemists Greco-Egyptian Agathodaemon (legendary) Chymes pseudo-Cleopatra pseudo-Democritus Hermes Trismegistus (legendary) Mary the Jewess pseudo-Moses Ostanes (legendary) Paphnutia the Virgin Zosimos of Panopolis Ancient Chinese Fang (alchemist) Ge Hong Master Geng Wei Boyang Byzantine pseudo-Olympiodorus Stephanus of Alexandria Synesius Arabic-Islamic Abū Bakr al-Rāzī (Rhazes) Alphidius pseudo-Apollonius of Tyana (Balīnūs/Balīnās) Artephius pseudo-Avicenna Ibn Arfaʿ Raʾs Ibn Umayl (Senior Zadith) Ibn Waḥshiyya al-ʿIrāqī Jābir ibn Ḥayyān (Geber) pseudo-Khālid ibn Yazīd (Calid) al-Jildakī Maslama al-Qurṭubī al-Ṭughrāʾī al-Zahrāwī (Abulcasis) Late medieval pseudo-Albertus (pseudo-)Arnaldus de Villa Nova pseudo-Geber George Ripley Guido di Montanor Hugh of Evesham Johann of Laz John Dastin John of Rupescissa (Jean de Roquetaillade) Magister Salernus pseudo-Michael Scot Ortolanus Paul of Taranto Petrus Bonus pseudo-Ramon Llull (pseudo-)Roger Bacon Taddeo Alderotti Thomas Norton Early modern Andreas Libavius Basil Valentine pseudo-Bernard of Treviso George Starkey (Eirenaeus Philalethes) Gerhard Dorn Giovanni da Correggio Heinrich Khunrath Hennig Brand Isaac Newton Jakob Böhme Jan Baptist van Helmont Johann Rudolf Glauber John Dee Michael Maier Michael Sendivogius Paracelsus Pierre-Jean Fabre Robert Boyle Samuel Norton Thomas Vaughan (Eugenius Philalethes) Wilhelm Homberg Modern Carl Jung Eugène Canseliet Frater Albertus Fulcanelli Mary Anne Atwood Writings Major Works Atalanta fugiens Aurora consurgens Liber de compositione alchemiae ( Morienus ) Book of the Silvery Water and the Starry Earth Book of Mercy Books of the Balances Buch der heiligen Dreifaltigkeit Cantong Qi Chymical Wedding of Christian Rosenkreutz Clavis sapientiae ( Miftāḥ al-ḥikma ) De consideratione quintae essentiae Emerald Tablet ( Tabula Smaragdina ) Leyden papyrus X Liber Hermetis de alchemia ( Liber dabessi ) Liber ignium Liber lucis Mappae clavicula Mirror of Alchimy Mutus liber Nabataean Agriculture Ordinal of Alchemy Papyrus Graecus Holmiensis Physika kai mystika Rosary of the Philosophers Rutbat al-ḥakīm ( Step of the Sage ) Seventy Books Sirr al-khalīqa ( Secret of Creation ) Sirr al-Asrar (pseudo-Aristotle) Sirr al-Asrar (al-Rāzī) Splendor solis Summa perfectionis Suspicions about the Hidden Realities of the Air Turba philosophorum Twelve Keys of Basil Valentine Compilations Aureum vellus Bibliotheca chemica curiosa De alchemia Deutsches Theatrum Chemicum Fasciculus chemicus Musaeum Hermeticum Theatrum chemicum Theatrum chemicum Britannicum Tripus aureus Various Alembic Alkahest Athanor Azoth Chrysopoeia Element Digestion Elixir of life Homunculus Iatrochemistry In art/entertainment Magnum opus Ouroboros Pill of Immortality Philosophers' stone Prima materia Rebis Spagyric Takwin Yliaster Processes Substances Symbols ( Unicode , Suns in alchemy ) All articles NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7889cf5cc‐n72ds
Cached time: 20250818110423
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.336 seconds
Real time usage: 0.446 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 774/1000000
Revision size: 8622/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 51181/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 2041/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 8/100
Expensive parser function count: 2/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 30311/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.238/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 17677926/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  379.590      1 -total
 28.85%  109.507      2 Template:Reflist
 25.25%   95.853      3 Template:Navbox
 24.60%   93.385      1 Template:Alchemy
 22.66%   86.010      1 Template:Lang
 17.56%   66.640      1 Template:Cite_web
 15.82%   60.040      1 Template:Short_description
  9.24%   35.077      2 Template:Pagetype
  5.76%   21.880      3 Template:Cite_book
  5.28%   20.034      1 Template:Distinguish Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:28752738:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818110423 and revision id 1305966186. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Theatrum_Chemicum_Britannicum&oldid=1305966186 " Categories : 1652 non-fiction books 1652 in science 1652 in England Alchemical documents English non-fiction books Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Middle English (1100-1500)-language text This page was last edited on 15 August 2025, at 04:02 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Theatrum Chemicum Britannicum 4 languages Add topic

