Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Dictionary definitions 2 Etymology – history of the term Toggle Etymology – history of the term subsection 2.1 Ancient Greece (1100 BC-330 AD) 2.2 Europe Middle Ages (500 – 1500) 2.3 Europe 17th Century (1600-1700) 2.4 Modern Day 3 Artists' definitions 4 Education and Employment Toggle Education and Employment subsection 4.1 India 4.1.1 17th Century (1600-1700) 4.2 United States of America 4.2.1 Modern Day 5 See also 6 References Toggle References subsection 6.1 Works cited 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Artist 91 languages Afrikaans العربية Arpetan Asturianu Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Български བོད་ཡིག Bosanski Català Чӑвашла Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Gaeilge Gaelg Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Ido Igbo Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua ᐃᓄᒃᑎᑐᑦ / inuktitut Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa ಕನ್ನಡ Kiswahili Kreyòl ayisyen Kriyòl gwiyannen Kurdî Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Limburgs Lombard Македонски മലയാളം मराठी مصرى مازِرونی Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Polski Português Română Русский Scots Shqip සිංහල Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska తెలుగు ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 吴语 Yorùbá 粵語 Zazaki Žemaitėška 中文 Betawi Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Person creating art or practicing the arts This article is about the person who is engaged in arts. For the person that is also known as an artist, see Singer .

For other uses, see Artist (disambiguation) .

This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article possibly contains original research .

Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations . Statements consisting only of original research should be removed.

( October 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Artist" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( October 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The examples and perspective in this article may not represent a worldwide view of the subject .

You may improve this article , discuss the issue on the talk page , or create a new article , as appropriate.

( April 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) A painter at work in St Justinian , Wales in 2021 An artist is a person engaged in creating art , or practicing the arts . The most common usage in everyday speech and academic discourse refers to a practitioner in the visual arts only.

However, the term is also very widely used in the entertainment business to refer to actors , musicians , singers , dancers and other performers .

[ 1 ] The French word artiste is sometimes used in English in this context, although this has become old-fashioned. The use of the term "artist" to describe writers is valid, but less common, and mostly restricted to contexts such as critics' reviews; [ 2 ] " author " is generally used instead.

While the use of the word 'artist' is common, there is no agreed upon definition of art [ 3 ] —this makes the definition of who is and is not an artist indeterminate . Many artist and theorists still debate their interpretation of art's definition.

[ 4 ] I am only pointing out that my project, like Collingwood's, Osborne's, and others', is metaphysical in nature. I am interested in trying to find out what a work of art is and what it is essentially .

— James C. Anderson, Aesthetic Concepts of Art, Theories of Art Today page 68 Dictionary definitions [ edit ] Look up artist in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Johann Heinrich Wilhelm Tischbein , Goethe in the Roman Campagna , 1787 – portrait of Johann Wolfgang von Goethe , a German author known for his works of poetry, drama, and prose, on philosophy, the visual arts, and science The Oxford English Dictionary defines the older, broader meanings of the word "artist": a learned person or Master of Arts , one who pursues a practical science, traditionally medicine , astrology , alchemy , chemistry , a follower of a pursuit in which skill comes by study or practice, a follower of a manual art, such as a mechanic , one who makes their craft a fine art, or one who cultivates one of the fine arts –traditionally the arts presided over by the muses The Britannica Dictionary defines "artist" as: [ 5 ] a person who creates art, a person who is skilled at drawing, painting, etc., a skilled performer, or a person who is very good at something The Cambridge Dictionary defines the word as: someone who paints, draws, or makes sculptures, someone who performs music, or someone who creates things with great skill and imagination Etymology – history of the term [ edit ] Ancient Greece (1100 BC-330 AD) [ edit ] The Varvakeion Athena , a Roman-era statue of Athena Parthenos considered to be the most faithful reproduction of the chryselephantine statue made by Pheidias and his assistants, as displayed in the National Archaeological Museum, Athens The Greek word techně ( Greek : τέχνη , romanized : tékhnē , lit.

'art, skill, craft'; Ancient Greek : [tékʰnɛː] , Modern Greek : [ˈtexni] ), often translated as "art", implies mastery of any sort of craft.

In Greek culture , each of the nine Muses oversaw a different field of human creation: Calliope (the "beautiful of speech"): chief of the muses and muse of epic or heroic poetry Clio (the "glorious one"): muse of history Erato (the "amorous one"): muse of love or erotic poetry , lyrics , and marriage songs Euterpe (the "well-pleasing"): muse of music and lyric poetry Melpomene (the "chanting one"): muse of tragedy Polyhymnia or Polymnia (the "[singer] of many hymns "): muse of sacred song , oratory , lyric, singing , and rhetoric Terpsichore (the "[one who] delights in dance"): muse of choral song and dance Thalia (the "blossoming one"): muse of comedy and bucolic poetry Urania (the "celestial one"): muse of astronomy No muse was identified with the visual arts of painting and sculpture . In ancient Greece, sculptors and painters were held in low regard, the work often performed by slaves and mostly regarded as mere manual labour.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] Even if you should become a Pheidias or a Polykleitos and should create many marvellous works, everyone will praise your skill for sure, but none of your admirers , if he had sense, would want to be like you ; for whoever you might become, you would still be considered a laborer, a man who lives by his hands and has nothing but his hands.

— Lucian of Samosata , The Dream, or Lucian's Career, Lucian, vol. III, page 223 The word art derives from the Latin " ars " (stem art- ), which, although literally defined means "skill method" or "technique", also conveys a connotation of beauty.

Europe Middle Ages (500 – 1500) [ edit ] Leon Battista Alberti - Finitorium from his book De pictura explaining how to think about the creation of a sculpture.

During the Middle Ages the word artist already existed in some countries such as Italy, but the meaning was something resembling craftsman , while the word artisan was still unknown. An artist was someone able to do a work better than others, so the skilled excellency was underlined, rather than the activity field. In this period, some "artisanal" products (such as textiles ) were much more precious and expensive than paintings or sculptures.

The first division into major and minor arts dates back at least to the works of Leon Battista Alberti (1404–1472): De re aedificatoria , De statua , De pictura , which focused on the importance of the intellectual skills of the artist rather than the manual skills (even if in other forms of art there was a project behind).

[ 8 ] Europe 17th Century (1600-1700) [ edit ] Judith with the Head of Holofernes (Genoa 17th century).

Genoese School style oil painting.

With the academies in Europe ( second half of 17th century ) the gap between fine and applied arts was definitely set.

Modern Day [ edit ] Many contemporary definitions of "artist" and "art" are highly contingent on culture, resisting aesthetic prescription; in the same way, the features constituting beauty and the beautiful cannot be standardized easily without moving into kitsch .

Artists' definitions [ edit ] Some artists explain their beliefs about art or in being an artist. These beliefs may compel them to take actions outside of the act(s) of creating art but are still related to their work.

Doechii (Jaylah Ji'mya Hickmon) is an American singer, song writer, and rapper who won Best Female Artist in 2025 at the BET Awards . She stated her position as an artist requires civic responsibility while receiving this award.

[ 9 ] I feel it's my responsibility as an artist to use this moment to speak up for all oppressed people. For Black people, for Latino people, for trans people, for the people in Gaza. We all deserve to live in hope and not in fear, and I hope we stand together, my brothers and my sisters, against hate, and we protest against it.

— Jaylah Ji'mya Hickmon, Doechii Takes Center Stage As Winner Of Best Female Hip Hop Artist!, BET Awards '25 Ceremony A single artist may create an art manifesto to explain their work while multiple may join or start art movements of ideologically aligned people to create a set of guidelines or rules to follow when making art.

One of them is the Manifesto of Futurism , created by an Italian poet called Filippo Tommaso Marinetti in 1909. It lists 11 declarations of what Futurism means and then goes on to explain in further detail. He discussed the progress of automobiles , steamers , and aeroplanes and how it created new beauty—speed. He believed literature would be absorbed, not overshadowed, by such progress. Literature and poetry would become an aggressive force against the world.

[ 10 ] .

This manifesto partially inspired people to choose fascism in Italy. "From the 1920s to the 1940s he [Filippo Tommaso Marinetti] allied himself with the Fascist leader Benito Mussolini . Sharing a vision of a new Italy empowered by national and cultural supremacy, they relied on each other for inspiration and collaboration. Marinetti hoped that by supporting Fascism, Futurism would win the backing of the regime, become the official art of the state..." [ 11 ] 9. We will glorify war — the only true hygiene of the world — militarism , patriotism , the destructive gesture of anarchist, the beautiful Ideas which kill, and the scorn of woman. 10. We will destroy museums, libraries and fight against moralism , feminism and all utilitarian cowardice.

— Filippo Tommaso Marinetti, DECLARATION OF FUTURISM, Poesia, Volume 5, Number 6, April 1909 Education and Employment [ edit ] India [ edit ] 17th Century (1600-1700) [ edit ] India, Mughal, 17th century - The dream of Zulaykha, from the Amber Album at the Cleveland Museum of Art In 1556 a new leader was given control of Delhi who would create a major shift in the design, construction, and aesthetics of Indian art—12 year old Akbar . He formed a royal manuscript atelier (modern-day term: artist collective ) consisting of 30 painters and 70 assistants from Central Asia, India, and Persia. Their earliest works had them work in teams to create large pieces for public instead of private viewing. "Each illumination focuses on a single dramatic episode, which retains its primacy even if it is set among a host of subsidiary vignettes." [ 12 ] United States of America [ edit ] Modern Day [ edit ] Foley art is the process of creating sound effects with everyday objects and adding them to movies and television productions.

The US Bureau of Labor Statistics classifies many visual artists as either craft artists or fine artists .

[ 13 ] A craft artist makes handmade functional works of art, such as pottery or clothing . A fine artist makes paintings, illustrations (such as book illustrations or medical illustrations ), sculptures, or similar artistic works primarily for their aesthetic value.

The main source of skill for both craft artists and fine artists is long-term repetition and practice.

[ 13 ] Many fine artists have studied their art form at university, and some have a master's degree in fine arts. Artists may also study on their own or receive on-the-job training from an experienced artist.

The number of available jobs as an artist is increasing more slowly than in other fields.

[ 13 ] About half of US artists are self-employed.  Others work in a variety of industries. For example, a pottery manufacturer will employ craft artists, and book publishers will hire illustrators.

In the US, craft and fine artists have a median income of approximately US$56,260 per year.

[ 13 ] This compares to US$61,000 for all art-related fields, including related jobs such as graphic designers , multimedia artists , animators , and fashion designers .

[ 13 ] Many artists work part-time as artists and hold a second job.

[ 13 ] See also [ edit ] Arts portal Art history Arts by region Artist in Residence Humanities List of painters by name List of painters List of photographers List of composers List of sculptors Mathematics and art Starving artist Tattoo artist Tortured artist References [ edit ] ^ "Definition of ARTIST" .

www.merriam-webster.com . 16 March 2025 . Retrieved 18 March 2025 .

^ "Meaning of artist in English" .

^ Carroll, Noël, ed. (2000), Theories of Art Today , Madison, Wis: University of Wisconsin Press, ISBN 0299163547 ^ Carroll, Noël, ed. (2000), Theories of Art Today , Madison, Wis: University of Wisconsin Press, ISBN 0299163547 ^ "Artist Definition & Meaning | Britannica Dictionary" .

www.britannica.com . Retrieved 18 June 2025 .

^ In Our Time: The Artist BBC Radio 4 , TX 28 March 2002 ^ Samosata, Lucian (1921), "The Dream, or Lucian's Career" , Lucian (Free online English translation of The Dream, or Lucian's Career), vol. 3, translated by Harmon, Austin, Cambridge, Massachusetts London: Harvard University Press, William Heinemann Ltd, pp.

215– 233, Q51866088 {{ citation }} :  CS1 maint: url-status ( link ) ^ P.Galloni, Il sacro artefice. Mitologie degli artigiani medievali , Laterza, Bari , 1998 ^ Hickmon, Jaylah, Doechii Takes Center Stage As Winner Of Best Female Hip Hop Artist! BET Awards '25 (MP4) , BET , archived from the original on 12 June 2025 ^ Marinetti, Filippo (April 1909), "DECLARATION OF FUTURISM" , Poesia , vol. 5, no. 6, p. 1, archived from the original on 5 April 2015 ^ MoMA , Words in Freedom: Futurism at 100 (Primary texts and images from the Words in Freedom exhibit at The Museum of Modern Art), Chiara Bernasconi, Sheelagh Bevan, Sara Bodinson, Allegra Burnette, Michelle Elligott, Emma Enderby, Scott Gerson, Julianna Goodman, Jodi Hauptman, Pablo Helguera, Milan Hughston, Charlie Kalinowski, Rebecca Roberts, Jennifer Tobias, and Wendy Woon., archived from the original on 12 April 2009 ^ Kossak, Steven (1997), "Four Centuries of Indian Painting: The Advent Of The Mughals" , Indian court painting, 16th-19th century (EPUB, PDF) (Free online text of the history of Indian court painting styles, specifically the Rajput and the Mughal .), Metropolitan Museum of Art, pp.

9– 10, ISBN 0810965089 , OCLC 1365873806 , archived from the original on 27 March 2025 , retrieved 14 August 2025 – via The MET ^ a b c d e f "Craft and Fine Artists" . Occupational Outlook Handbook (2024 ed.). U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. 22 July 2025 . Retrieved 22 July 2025 .

Works cited [ edit ] P.Galloni, Il sacro artefice. Mitologie degli artigiani medievali, Laterza, Bari, 1998 C. T. Onions (1991).

The Shorter Oxford English Dictionary . Clarendon Press Oxford.

ISBN 0-19-861126-9 External links [ edit ] Arts at Wikipedia's sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Textbooks from Wikibooks Resources from Wikiversity The Artist on In Our Time at the BBC v t e Visual arts and the art world Artwork Appropriation Collage Conceptual art Cultural artifact Drawing Fine art Fine-art photograph Found object Installation art Kinetic art Mixed media bricolage Mural fresco graffiti New media art history digital virtual Painting Performance art Plastic arts Portrait Printmaking Public art street art Sculpture carving relief statue tallest Site-specific art Social sculpture Soft sculpture Stained glass Artwork title Roles Artist Collector Conservator-restorer paintings frescos Critic Curator Dealer Model Patron Visual arts education Europe Places and events Art auction Art colony Art commune Art exhibition alternative exhibition space Art gallery Contemporary art gallery Art museum Single-artist museum Art school Europe Arts centre Arts festival Artist collective Artist cooperative Artist-in-residence program Artist-run initiative Artist-run space Biennale Commission Sculpture garden Sculpture trail Virtual museum History of art Timeline of art Art history (academic study) Art manifesto Art movements Criticism feminist History of painting outline Periods in Western art history Timeline of 20th century printmaking in America Related Art market The arts Catalogue raisonné Classificatory disputes Museum collection management deaccessioning Conservation-restoration paintings Cultural policy Depiction Destination painting Eclecticism in art Economics of art art finance art valuation Elements of art Forgery Index of painting-related articles Outline of the visual arts painting sculpture Provenance Sociology of art Style Unfinished work Lists Art magazines Art media Art techniques Art movements Art museums largest most visited sculpture parks single artist Art reference books Colossal sculptures in situ Contemporary artists Contemporary art galleries Modern artists National galleries Painters by name by nationality Photographers Sculptors female Stolen paintings Most expensive paintings , sculptures , works by living artists Painting portal Visual arts portal Arts portal Authority control databases National Germany 2 United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic 2 Spain Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐gr84b
Cached time: 20250816100824
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.626 seconds
Real time usage: 0.784 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 3250/1000000
Revision size: 17936/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 105718/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 15859/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 9/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 72903/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.406/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 20637572/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  654.956      1 -total
 21.24%  139.091      1 Template:Reflist
 13.13%   86.010      4 Template:Cite_web
 12.10%   79.249      2 Template:Lang
  9.97%   65.271      1 Template:Multiple_issues
  9.22%   60.382      1 Template:Art_world
  9.02%   59.081      1 Template:Navbox
  8.33%   54.570      1 Template:Sister_project_links
  7.95%   52.067      1 Template:Short_description
  7.48%   49.008      1 Template:Authority_control Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:1212:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250816100824 and revision id 1305996210. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Artist&oldid=1305996210 " Categories : Artists Art occupations Artisans Arts-related lists Concepts in aesthetics Humanities occupations Hidden categories: CS1 maint: url-status Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles that may contain original research from October 2024 All articles that may contain original research Articles needing additional references from October 2024 All articles needing additional references Articles with limited geographic scope from April 2021 Articles with multiple maintenance issues Use dmy dates from September 2015 Articles containing Greek-language text Pages with Ancient Greek (to 1453) IPA Pages with Greek IPA Articles containing Latin-language text Pages using Sister project links with default search This page was last edited on 15 August 2025, at 09:01 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Artist 91 languages Add topic

