Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Homeopathy 3 Inventions 4 Notes 5 References Toggle the table of contents Semyon Korsakov 9 languages Deutsch Français Malagasy مصرى Polski Português Русский Türkçe Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Russian inventor (1787–1853) Semyon Nikolayevich Korsakov Семён Николаевич Корсаков Born January 25 [O.S. January 14], 1787 Kherson , Russian Empire Died December 13 [O.S. December 1], 1853 Village of Tarusovo (part of the Moscow Province) Occupation(s) Homeopath, inventor Semyon Nikolayevich Korsakov ( Russian : Семён Николаевич Корсаков ; 25 January [ O.S.

14 January] 1787 – 13 December [ O.S.

1 December] 1853) was a Russian government official, noted both as a homeopath and an inventor who was involved with an early version of information technology .

Biography [ edit ] Korsakov was born in 1787 in Kherson , Russian Empire (now in Ukraine ).  His father was a military engineer.  The family had migrated from Lithuania in the 14th century.

[ 1 ] He was married to Sofia Mordvinova and they had four daughters and six sons, one of whom, Mikhail Semyonovich Korsakov ( Russian : Михаил Семёнович Корсаков ; 1826–1871), became famous in his own right as governor-general of Eastern Siberia and was the namesake of the town of Korsakov in Sakhalin Oblast and several Russian geological features.

From 1812 to 1814, Semyon Korsakov took part in the Napoleonic Wars with the Russian Army.  He later was to serve as an official in the statistics department of the Russian Police Ministry in St. Petersburg . He was a recipient of the Order of St Anna and the Order of St Vladimir .

Korsakov died in 1853 in the village of Tarusovo, then part of the Moscow Province .

Homeopathy [ edit ] Though Korsakov was not formally trained as a doctor, he was interested in medicine, possibly because of the difficulty in getting medical care in the rural area where he lived.  According to his journals he treated several thousand patients, at first using conventional medicine , but in 1829 switching to homeopathy at the urging of his relatives.

Korsakov is noted in homeopathic circles as the originator of the Korsakovian method of dilution, which differed from the Hahnemannian dilutions used by (and named for) homeopathy's founder in that it used a single container for a series of dilutions rather than a new container for each.  Korsakov also used dilutions higher than those previously used (30C and higher).  Dilutions made using his method are commonly designated with the letter "K", e.g. 15K.

Inventions [ edit ] The ideoscope (from a drawing by Korsakov) While working in the statistics department of the Police Ministry, Korsakov became intrigued with the possibility of using machinery to "enhance natural intelligence".  To this end, he devised several devices which he called "machines for the comparison of ideas".

[ 2 ] These included the "linear homeoscope with movable parts", the "linear homeoscope without movable parts", the "flat homeoscope", the "ideoscope", and the "simple comparator".  The purpose of the devices was primarily to facilitate the search for information, stored in the form of punched cards [ citation needed ] or similar media (for example, wooden boards with perforations).  Korsakov announced his new method in September 1832, and rather than seeking patents offered the machines for public use.

The linear homeoscope without movable parts (from a drawing by Korsakov) The punch card had been introduced in 1805, but until that time had been used solely in the textile industry to control looms .  Korsakov was reputedly the first to use the cards [ citation needed ] for information storage.

Korsakov presented his ideas to the Imperial Academy of Sciences in Saint Petersburg, but their experts rejected his application, failing to see the potential of mechanizing searches through large stores of information. His machines were largely forgotten until after the Second World War , when a revival of historical interest resulted in the publication (in 1961) of several documents from the academy's archives relating to Korsakov's machines and the uncovering of a book about them written by Korsakov himself.

Illustration of the function of the linear homeoscope without movable parts Table of data Search criteria Search for matching data Notes [ edit ] ^ Nitusov, Alexander.

"Семен Корсаков и "машина для сравнения идей" " .

^ Intellectual machines (in Russian) Archived 2011-10-18 at the Wayback Machine References [ edit ] Povarov G.N.

Semen Nikolayevich Korsakov. Machines for the Comparison of Philosophical Ideas.

In: Trogemann, Georg; Ernst, Wolfgang and Nitussov, Alexander, Computing in Russia: The History of Computer Devices and Information Technology Revealed (pp 47–49), Verlag, 2001. Translated by Alexander Y. Nitussov.

ISBN 978-3-528-05757-2 , ISBN 978-3-528-05757-2 Semen Korsakov's inventions , Cybernetics Dept. of MEPhI (in Russian) Semen Korsakov’s brochure of 1832 (translated from the French). Ed. by Alexander Mikhailov (in Russian) , 2009 С.Н. Корсаков , World of Homeopathy (Мир Гомеопатии) (in Russian) Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data People DDB Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Semyon_Korsakov&oldid=1253630552 " Categories : 1787 births 1853 deaths Homeopaths Inventors from the Russian Empire Statisticians from the Russian Empire Russian military personnel of the Napoleonic Wars People from Kherson Recipients of the Order of St. Anna Recipients of the Order of St. Vladimir Scientists from the Russian Empire Hidden categories: Articles with Russian-language sources (ru) Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with hCards Articles containing Russian-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2017 This page was last edited on 27 October 2024, at 01:11 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Semyon Korsakov 9 languages Add topic

