Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 History Toggle History subsection 2.1 New Testament 2.2 Early Church 2.3 Post-Nicene Christianity 2.4 Pre-Reformation Western Church accusers 2.5 Protestant Reformation 2.6 Counter-Reformation 3 Christian views Toggle Christian views subsection 3.1 Roman Catholicism 3.1.1 Popes 3.1.2 Speculation 3.1.3 Catechism of the Catholic Church 3.2 Eastern Orthodox 3.3 Old Believers 3.4 Age of Enlightenment 3.5 Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints 3.6 Seventh-day Adventists 3.7 Other Christian interpretations 3.7.1 Martin Wight 3.7.2 As "man of lawlessness" 3.7.3 As "being in league with other figures" 3.7.4 As Satan 4 Non-Christian views Toggle Non-Christian views subsection 4.1 Judaism 4.2 Islam 4.2.1 Ahmadiyya 4.3 Baha'i 4.4 Scientology 5 In popular culture 6 See also 7 References Toggle References subsection 7.1 Citations 7.2 Bibliography 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Antichrist 65 languages Afrikaans العربية বাংলা Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Bosanski Català Чӑвашла Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Furlan 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Italiano עברית ქართული Kiswahili Кыргызча Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം مصرى مازِرونی Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Română Русский Shqip Simple English Slovenčina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt Walon Winaray 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Figure in the New Testament For other uses, see Antichrist (disambiguation) .

The Antichrist (the figure on the left, with the attributes of a king) by Herrad of Landsberg (about 1180), from the 12th-century Hortus deliciarum In Christian eschatology , Antichrist (or in broader eschatology , Anti-Messiah ) refers to a kind of entity prophesied by the Bible to oppose Jesus Christ and falsely substitute themselves as a savior in Christ's place before the Second Coming .

[ 1 ] The term Antichrist (including one plural form) [ 2 ] is found four times in the New Testament , solely in the First and Second Epistle of John .

[ 2 ] Antichrist is announced as one "who denies the Father and the Son." [ 2 ] The similar term pseudokhristos or "false Christ" is also found in the Gospels .

[ 3 ] In Matthew ( chapter 24 ) and Mark ( chapter 13 ), Jesus alerts his disciples not to be deceived by the false prophets , who will claim themselves to be the Christ , performing "great signs and wonders ".

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] Three other images often associated with Antichrist are the "little horn" in Daniel's final vision , the " man of sin " in Paul the Apostle 's Second Epistle to the Thessalonians , and the Beast of the Sea in the Book of Revelation.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] [ 9 ] Etymology [ edit ] Antichrist is translated from the combination of two ancient Greek words ἀντί + Χριστός (anti + Christos). In Greek, Χριστός means "anointed one" and the word Christ derives from it.

[ 10 ] " Ἀντί " means not only anti in the sense of "against" and "opposite of", but also "in place of".

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] History [ edit ] Christian eschatology Contrasting beliefs Historicism Interpretations of Revelation Futurism Dispensationalism Preterism Idealism The Millennium Amillennialism Postmillennialism Premillennialism Prewrath rapture Posttribulation rapture Dispensationalism Biblical texts Daniel Seventy Weeks Synoptic Gospels Olivet Discourse Mark 13 Matthew 24 Sheep and Goats Pauline Epistles 2 Thessalonians Johannine literature Revelation (Events) Pseudepigrapha 1 Enoch 2 Esdras Key terms Abomination of desolation Antichrist Apocalypse Apocatastasis Armageddon The Beast False prophet Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse Gog and Magog Great Apostasy Great Tribulation Katechon Kingdom of God Lake of fire Last Judgment Man of sin New Earth New Jerusalem Number of the Beast Rapture Resurrection of the dead Second Coming Seven bowls Seven seals Son of perdition Two witnesses War in Heaven Whore of Babylon Woman of the Apocalypse World to come Christianity portal v t e Part of a series on Christian culture Christian culture Christian tradition Eastern Christianity Western Christianity Byzantine culture Protestant culture Holidays Mormon culture Cultural Christian Art Christian symbolism Early art Catholic art Lutheran art Church architecture Icons Media Film industry Radio formats Video games Literature American Catholic literature Bible fiction Christian drama Christian poetry Christian novel Christian science fiction Spiritual autobiography Music CCM Christmas music Church music Gospel music Liturgical music Science List of Christian scientists Merton thesis List of Christian Nobel laureates Catholic Church and science Parson-naturalist Quakers in science History Christianity in civilization Christian history Catholic history Eastern Orthodox history Christian influences in Islam Christianity portal v t e New Testament [ edit ] Whether the New Testament contains an individual Antichrist is disputed. The Greek term antikhristos originates in 1 John.

[ 13 ] The similar term pseudokhristos ("False Messiah") is also first found in the New Testament , but never used by Josephus in his accounts of various false messiahs.

[ 14 ] The concept of an antikhristos is not found in Jewish writings in the period 500 BC–50 AD.

[ 15 ] However, Bernard McGinn conjectures that the concept may have been generated by the frustration of Jews subject to often-capricious Seleucid or Roman rule , who found the nebulous Jewish idea of a Satan who is more of an opposing angel of God in the heavenly court insufficiently humanised and personalised to be a satisfactory incarnation of evil and threat.

[ 16 ] [ unreliable source?

] The five uses of the term "antichrist" or "antichrists" in the Johannine epistles do not clearly present a single latter-day individual Antichrist. The articles "the deceiver" or "the antichrist" are usually seen as marking out a certain category of persons, rather than an individual.

[ 17 ] Children, it is the last hour! As you have heard that antichrist is coming, so now many antichrists have come. From this we know that it is the last hour.

— 1 John 2:18 NRSV (1989) Who is the liar but the one who denies that Jesus is the Christ? This is the antichrist, the one who denies the Father and the Son.

— 1 John 2:22 NRSV (1989) By this you know the Spirit of God: every spirit that confesses that Jesus Christ has come in the flesh is from God, and every spirit that does not confess Jesus is not from God. And this is the spirit of the antichrist, of which you have heard that it is coming; and now it is already in the world.

— 1 John 4:2–3 NRSV (1989) Many deceivers have gone out into the world, those who do not confess that Jesus Christ has come in the flesh; any such person is the deceiver and the antichrist!

— 2 John 1:7 NRSV (1989) Consequently, attention for an individual Antichrist figure focuses on the second chapter of 2 Thessalonians .

[ 18 ] [ 19 ] However, the term "antichrist" is never used in this passage: As to the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ and our being gathered together to him, we beg you, brothers and sisters, not to be quickly shaken in mind or alarmed, either by spirit or by word or by letter, as though from us, to the effect that the day of the Lord is already here. Let no one deceive you in any way; for that day will not come unless the rebellion comes first and the lawless one is revealed, the one destined for destruction. He opposes and exalts himself above every so-called god or object of worship, so that he takes his seat in the temple of God, declaring himself to be God.

— 2 Thessalonians 2:1–4 NRSV (1989) For the mystery of lawlessness is already at work, but only until the one who now restrains it is removed. And then the lawless one will be revealed, whom the Lord Jesus will destroy with the breath of his mouth, annihilating him by the manifestation of his coming. The coming of the lawless one is apparent in the working of Satan, who uses all power, signs, lying wonders, and every kind of wicked deception for those who are perishing, because they refused to love the truth and so be saved.

— 2 Thessalonians 2:7–10 NRSV (1989) The latter of these passages is also the primary scriptural source concerning the Katechon , the "one who now restrains" the coming of the Antichrist. The identity of this person, if it is a person, is mysterious and the subject of debate.

[ 20 ] Although the word "antichrist" (Greek antikhristos ) is used only in the Epistles of John, the similar word "pseudochrist" (Greek pseudokhristos , meaning "false messiah") is used by Jesus in the Gospels : [ 14 ] For false messiahs and false prophets will appear and produce great signs and omens, to lead astray, if possible, even the elect.

— Matthew 24:24 and Mark 13:22 NRSV (1989) Early Church [ edit ] See also: Early Christianity The second- or first-century book Odes of Solomon , written by an Essene convert to Christianity, makes mention of the Antichrist in figurative terms, where the redeemer overcomes the monstrous dragon.

[ 21 ] [ 22 ] [ 23 ] The only one of the late 1st-/early 2nd-century Apostolic Fathers to use the term is Polycarp ( c.

69 – c.

155 ), who warned the Philippians that everyone who preached false doctrine was an antichrist.

[ 24 ] His use of the term Antichrist follows that of the New Testament in not identifying a single personal Antichrist, but a class of people.

[ 25 ] Irenaeus (2nd century AD – c. 202) wrote Against Heresies to refute the teachings of the Gnostics . In Book V of Against Heresies he addresses the figure of the Antichrist referring to him as the "recapitulation of apostasy and rebellion." He uses " 666 ", the Number of the Beast from Revelation 13:18, to numerologically decode several possible names. Some names that he loosely proposed were "Teitan", "Evanthos", "Lateinos" ("Latin" or pertaining to the Roman Empire ). In his exegesis of Daniel 7:21, he stated that the ten horns of the beast will be the Roman Empire divided into ten kingdoms before the Antichrist's arrival. Additionally, he stated that the antichrist would be of the tribe of Dan, evoking Jeremiah 8:16. However, his readings of the Antichrist were more in broader theological terms rather than within a historical context.

[ 26 ] The non-canonical Ascension of Isaiah presents a detailed exposition of the Antichrist as Belial and Nero .

[ 27 ] Tertullian (c. 160 – c. 220 AD) held that the Roman Empire was the restraining force written about by Paul in 2 Thessalonians 2:7–8. The fall of the Western Roman Empire and the disintegration of the ten provinces of the Roman Empire into ten kingdoms were to make way for the Antichrist.

By, "For that day will not come unless the rebellion comes first," he [Paul] means indeed this present empire, "and the man of lawlessness is revealed"—that is to say, the Antichrist, "the son of destruction, who opposes and exalts himself above every so-called god or religion, so that he takes his seat in the temple of God, declaring himself to be God. Do you not remember that I told you these things when I was still with you? And you know what is now restraining him, so that he may be revealed when his time comes. For the mystery of lawlessness is already at work, but only until the one who now restrains it is removed." What obstacles are there but the Roman state, the rebellion of which, by being scattered into the ten kingdoms, will introduce the Antichrist upon its own ruins? "And then the lawless one will be revealed, whom the Lord will destroy with the breath of his mouth, annihilating him by the manifestation of his coming. The coming of the lawless one is apparent in the working of Satan, who uses all power, signs, lying wonders, and every kind of wicked deception for those who are perishing." [ 28 ] Hippolytus of Rome (c. 170 – c. 236) held that the Antichrist would come from the tribe of Dan and would rebuild the Jewish temple on the Temple Mount in order to reign from it. He identified the Antichrist with the Beast out of the Earth from the book of Revelation.

By the beast, then, coming up out of the earth, he means the kingdom of Antichrist; and by the two horns he means him and the false prophet after him. And in speaking of "horns like a lamb," he means that he will make himself like the Son of God, and set himself forward as king. And the terms, "it spoke like a dragon," mean that he is a deceiver, and not truthful.

[ 29 ] Origen (185–254) refuted Celsus ' view of the Antichrist. Origen, using scriptural citations from Daniel , Paul, and the Gospels argued: Where is the absurdity, then, in holding that there exist among men, so to speak, two extremes—the one of virtue, and the other of its opposite; so that the perfection of virtue dwells in the man who realizes the ideal given in Jesus, from whom there flowed to the human race so great a conversion, and healing, and amelioration, while the opposite extreme is in the man who embodies the notion of him that is named Antichrist?... one of these extremes, and the best of the two, should be styled the Son of God, on account of His pre-eminence; and the other, who is diametrically opposite, be termed the son of the wicked demon, and of Satan, and of the devil. And, in the next place, since evil is specially characterized by its diffusion, and attains its greatest height when it simulates the appearance of the good, for that reason are signs, and marvels, and lying miracles found to accompany evil, through the cooperation of its father the devil.

[ 30 ] Post-Nicene Christianity [ edit ] See also: First seven Ecumenical Councils Antichrist in the Catalan Atlas (1375). The label reads: "Antichrist. He will be raised in Goraym of Galilea, and at the age of thirty he will start to preach in Jerusalem; contrary to the truth, he will proclaim that he is Christ, the living son of God. It is said that he will rebuild the Temple." [ 31 ] Cyril of Jerusalem , in the mid-4th century, delivered his 15th catechetical lecture about the Second Coming of Jesus Christ, in which he also lectures about the Antichrist, who will reign as the ruler of the world for three and a half years, before he is killed by Jesus Christ at the end of his three-and-a-half-year reign, shortly after which the Second Coming of Jesus Christ will happen.

Athanasius of Alexandria (c. 298–373) wrote that Arius of Alexandria is to be associated with the Antichrist, saying, "And ever since [the Council of Nicaea] has Arius's error been reckoned for a heresy more than ordinary, being known as Christ's foe, and harbinger of [the] Antichrist." [ 32 ] As part of his prediction that the world would end before 400 CE, Martin of Tours (c. 336 - 397) wrote that "There is no doubt that the Antichrist has already been born. Firmly established already in his early years, he will, after reaching maturity, achieve supreme power." John Chrysostom (c. 347–407) warned against speculating about the Antichrist, saying, "Let us not therefore enquire into these things". He preached that by knowing Paul's description of the Antichrist in 2 Thessalonians, Christians would avoid deception.

[ 33 ] Jerome (c. 347–420) warned that those substituting false interpretations for the actual meaning of scripture belonged to the "synagogue of the Antichrist".

[ 34 ] "He that is not of Christ is of Antichrist", he wrote to Pope Damasus I .

[ 35 ] He believed that "the mystery of lawlessness" written about by Paul in 2 Thessalonians 2:7 was already in action when "every one chatters about his views." [ 36 ] To Jerome, the power restraining this mystery of lawlessness was the Roman Empire, but as it fell this restraining force was removed. He warned a noble woman of Gaul : He that letteth is taken out of the way, and yet we do not realize that Antichrist is near. Yes, Antichrist is near whom the Lord Jesus Christ "shall consume with the spirit of his mouth." "Woe unto them," he cries, "that are with child, and to them that give suck in those days." ... Savage tribes in countless numbers have overrun all parts of Gaul. The whole country between the Alps and the Pyrenees, between the Rhine and the Ocean, has been laid waste by hordes of Quadi , Vandals , Sarmatians , Alans , Gepids , Herules , Saxons , Burgundians , Alemanni , and—alas for the commonweal!—even Pannonians .

[ 37 ] In his Commentary on Daniel , Jerome noted, "Let us not follow the opinion of some commentators and suppose him to be either the Devil or some demon, but rather, one of the human race, in whom Satan will wholly take up his residence in bodily form." Instead of rebuilding the Jewish Temple to reign from, Jerome thought the Antichrist sat in God's Temple inasmuch as he made "himself out to be like God." He refuted Porphyry 's idea that the "little horn" mentioned in Daniel chapter 7 was Antiochus IV Epiphanes by noting that the "little horn" is defeated by an eternal, universal ruler, right before the final judgment.

[ 38 ] Instead, he advocated that the "little horn" was the Antichrist: We should therefore concur with the traditional interpretation of all the commentators of the Christian Church, that at the end of the world, when the Roman Empire is to be destroyed, there shall be ten kings who will partition the Roman world amongst themselves. Then an insignificant eleventh king will arise, who will overcome three of the ten kings... after they have been slain, the seven other kings also will bow their necks to the victor.

[ 38 ] Circa 380, an apocalyptic pseudo-prophecy falsely attributed to the Tiburtine Sibyl describes Constantine as victorious over Gog and Magog . Later on, it predicts: When the Roman empire shall have ceased, then the Antichrist will be openly revealed and will sit in the House of the Lord in Jerusalem. While he is reigning, two very famous men, Elijah and Enoch, will go forth to announce the coming of the Lord. Antichrist will kill them and after three days they will be raised up by the Lord. Then there will be a great persecution, such as has not been before nor shall be thereafter. The Lord will shorten those days for the sake of the elect, and the Antichrist will be slain by the power of God through Michael the Archangel on the Mount of Olives.

[ 39 ] Augustine of Hippo (354–430) wrote "it is uncertain in what temple [the Antichrist] shall sit, whether in that ruin of the temple which was built by Solomon, or in the Church." [ 40 ] Gregory of Tours claimed that the antichrist would place his image to be worshipped in the temple in Jerusalem, he would assert himself to be Christ and would call for Christians to undergo circumcision.

[ 41 ] Pope Gregory I wrote to the Byzantine Emperor Maurice in A.D. 597, concerning the titles of bishops, "I say with confidence that whoever calls or desires to call himself 'universal priest' in self-exaltation of himself is a precursor of the Antichrist." [ 42 ] By the end of the tenth century, Adso of Montier-en-Der , a Benedictine monk, compiled a biography of Antichrist based on a variety of exegetical and Sibylline sources; his account became one of the best-known descriptions of Antichrist in the Middle Ages.

[ 43 ] [ 44 ] De Antichristo libri undecim , published by Tomàs Maluenda in 1604, is considered the most complete treatise on the subject.

[ 45 ] Pre-Reformation Western Church accusers [ edit ] Woodcut showing the Antichrist, 1498 Arnulf (bishop of Orléans) disagreed with the policies and morals of Pope John XV . He expressed his views while presiding over the Council of Reims in A.D. 991 . Arnulf accused John XV of being the Antichrist while also using the 2 Thessalonians passage about the " man of lawlessness " (or "lawless one"), saying: "Surely, if he is empty of charity and filled with vain knowledge and lifted up, he is Antichrist sitting in God's temple and showing himself as God." This incident is history's earliest record of anyone identifying a pope with the Antichrist (see Christian Historicism ).

[ 46 ] [ 47 ] [ 48 ] Pope Gregory VII (c. 1015 or 1029–1085), struggled against, in his own words, "a robber of temples, a perjurer against the Holy Roman Church, notorious throughout the whole Roman world for the basest of crimes, namely, Wilbert , plunderer of the holy church of Ravenna , Antichrist, and arch- heretic ." [ 49 ] Cardinal Benno , on the opposite side of the Investiture Controversy , wrote long descriptions of abuses committed by Gregory VII, including necromancy , torture of a former friend upon a bed of nails, commissioning an attempted assassination, executions without trials, unjust excommunication , doubting the real presence of Christ in the Eucharist , and even burning it.

[ 50 ] Benno held that Gregory VII was "either a member of Antichrist, or Antichrist himself." [ 51 ] Eberhard II von Truchsees, Prince-Archbishop of Salzburg in 1241, denounced Pope Gregory IX at the Council of Regensburg as "that man of perdition, whom they call Antichrist, who in his extravagant boasting says, I am God, I cannot err." [ 52 ] He argued that the ten kingdoms that the Antichrist is involved with [ 53 ] [ 54 ] [ 55 ] were the "Turks, Greeks, Egyptians, Africans, Spaniards, French, English, Germans, Sicilians, and Italians who now occupy the provinces of Rome." [ 56 ] He held that the papacy was the "little horn" of Daniel 7:8: [ 57 ] "A little horn has grown up" with "eyes and mouth speaking great things", which is reducing three of these kingdoms (i.e. Sicily, Italy, and Germany) to subserviency, is persecuting the people of Christ and the saints of God with intolerable opposition, is confounding things human and divine, and is attempting things unutterable, execrable.

[ 56 ] Protestant Reformation [ edit ] See also: Anti-Catholicism , Great Apostasy , and History of Protestantism From a series of woodcuts (1545) usually referred to as the Papstspotbilder or Papstspottbilder in German or Depictions of the Papacy in English, [ 58 ] by Lucas Cranach , commissioned by Martin Luther .

[ 59 ] Title: Kissing the Pope's Feet.

[ 60 ] German peasants respond to a papal bull of Pope Paul III . Caption reads: "Don't frighten us Pope, with your ban, and don't be such a furious man. Otherwise we shall turn around and show you our rears." [ 61 ] [ 62 ] Passional Christi und Antichristi , by Lucas Cranach the Elder , from Luther's 1521 Passionary of the Christ and Antichrist .

[ 63 ] The Pope as the Antichrist , signing and selling indulgences .

Protestant Reformers , including John Wycliffe , Martin Luther , John Calvin , Thomas Cranmer , John Thomas , John Knox , Roger Williams , Cotton Mather , and John Wesley , as well as most Protestants of the 16th–18th centuries, felt that the Early Church had been led into the Great Apostasy by the Papacy and identified the Pope with the Antichrist .

[ 64 ] [ 65 ] Luther declared that not just a pope from time to time was Antichrist, but the Papacy was Antichrist because they were "the representatives of an institution opposed to Christ".

[ 66 ] The Centuriators of Magdeburg , a group of Lutheran scholars in Magdeburg headed by Matthias Flacius , wrote the 12-volume Magdeburg Centuries to discredit the Catholic Church and lead other Christians to recognize the Pope as the Antichrist. So, rather than expecting a single Antichrist to rule the earth during a future Tribulation period, Martin Luther, John Calvin, and other Protestant Reformers saw the Antichrist as a present feature in the world of their time, fulfilled in the Papacy.

[ 64 ] [ 67 ] Among the others who interpreted the biblical prophecy historically there were many Church Fathers ; Justin Martyr wrote about the Antichrist: "He Whom Daniel foretells would have dominion for a time and times and a half, is even now at the door".

[ 68 ] Irenaeus wrote in Against Heresies about the coming of the Antichrist: "This Antichrist shall ... devastate all things ... But then, the Lord will come from Heaven on the clouds ... for the righteous".

[ 69 ] Tertullian looking to the Antichrist wrote: "He is to sit in the temple of God, and boast himself as being god. In our view, he is Antichrist as taught us in both the ancient and the new prophecies; and especially by the Apostle John , who says that 'already many false-prophets are gone out into the world' as the fore-runners of Antichrist".

[ 70 ] Hippolytus of Rome in his Treatise on Christ and Antichrist wrote: "As Daniel also says (in the words) 'I considered the Beast, and look! There were ten horns behind it—among which shall rise another (horn), an offshoot, and shall pluck up by the roots the three (that were) before it.' And under this, was signified none other than Antichrist." [ 71 ] [ 72 ] Athanasius of Alexandria clearly hold to the historical view in his many writings; in The Deposition of Arius , he wrote: "I addressed the letter to Arius and his fellows, exhorting them to renounce his impiety.... There have gone forth in this diocese at this time certain lawless men—enemies of Christ—teaching an apostasy which one may justly suspect and designate as a forerunner of Antichrist".

[ 73 ] Jerome wrote: "Says the apostle [Paul in the Second Epistle to the Thessalonians], 'Unless the Roman Empire should first be desolated, and antichrist proceed, Christ will not come.'" [ 74 ] He also identifies the little horn of Daniel 7:8 and 7:24–25 which "He shall speak as if he were God." [ 75 ] Some Franciscans had considered the Emperor Frederick II a positive Antichrist who would purify the Catholic Church from opulence, riches and clergy.

[ 76 ] Historicist interpretations of Book of Revelation usually included the identification of one or more of the following: the Antichrist ( 1 and 2 John ); the Beast of Revelation 13 ; the Man of Sin , or Man of Lawlessness, of 2 Thessalonians 2 ( 2:1–12 ); the "Little horn" of Daniel 7 and 8 ; The Abomination of desolation of Daniel 9 , 11 , and 12 ; and the Whore of Babylon of Revelation 17 .

The Protestant Reformers tended to hold the belief that the Antichrist power would be revealed so that everyone would comprehend and recognize that the Pope is the real, true Antichrist and not the vicar of Christ. Doctrinal works of literature published by the Lutherans , the Reformed Churches , the Presbyterians , the Baptists , the Anabaptists , and the Methodists contain references to the Pope as the Antichrist, including the Smalcald Articles , Article 4 (1537), [ 77 ] the Treatise on the Power and Primacy of the Pope written by Philip Melanchthon (1537), [ 78 ] the Westminster Confession , Article 25.6 (1646), and the 1689 Baptist Confession of Faith , Article 26.4. In 1754, John Wesley published his Explanatory Notes Upon the New Testament , which is currently a Doctrinal Standard of the United Methodist Church . In his notes on the Book of Revelation (chapter 13), he commented: "The whole succession of Popes from Gregory VII are undoubtedly Antichrists. Yet this hinders not, but that the last Pope in this succession will be more eminently the Antichrist, the Man of Sin, adding to that of his predecessors a peculiar degree of wickedness from the bottomless pit." [ 79 ] [ 80 ] The identification of the Pope with the Antichrist was so ingrained in the Reformation Era , that Luther himself stated it repeatedly: "This teaching [of the supremacy of the pope] shows forcefully that the Pope is the very Antichrist, who has exalted himself above, and opposed himself against Christ, because he will not permit Christians to be saved without his power, which, nevertheless, is nothing, and is neither ordained nor commanded by God".

[ 81 ] and, "nothing else than the kingdom of Babylon and of the very Antichrist. For who is the man of sin and the son of perdition , but he who by his teaching and his ordinances increases the sin and perdition of souls in the church; while he yet sits in the church as if he were God? All these conditions have now for many ages been fulfilled by the papal tyranny." [ 82 ] John Calvin similarly wrote: "Though it be admitted that Rome was once the mother of all Churches, yet from the time when it began to be the seat of Antichrist it has ceased to be what it was before. Some persons think us too severe and censorious when we call the Roman Pontiff Antichrist. But those who are of this opinion do not consider that they bring the same charge of presumption against Paul himself, after whom we speak and whose language we adopt ... I shall briefly show that (Paul's words in II Thess. 2) are not capable of any other interpretation than that which applies them to the Papacy." [ 83 ] John Knox wrote on the Pope: "Yea, to speak it in plain words; lest that we submit ourselves to Satan, thinking that we submit ourselves to Jesus Christ, for, as for your Roman kirk [church], as it is now corrupted, and the authority thereof, whereon stands the hope of your victory, I no more doubt but that it is the synagogue of Satan , and the head thereof, called the pope, to be that man of sin, of whom the apostle speaks." [ 84 ] Thomas Cranmer on the Antichrist wrote: "Whereof it followeth Rome to be the seat of Antichrist, and the pope to be very antichrist himself. I could prove the same by many other scriptures, old writers, and strong reasons." [ 85 ] John Wesley , speaking of the identity given in the Bible of the Antichrist, wrote: "In many respects, the Pope has an indisputable claim to those titles. He is, in an emphatical sense, the man of sin, as he increases all manner of sin above measure. And he is, too, properly styled, the son of perdition, as he has caused the death of numberless multitudes, both of his opposers and followers, destroyed innumerable souls, and will himself perish everlastingly. He it is that opposeth himself to the emperor, once his rightful sovereign; and that exalteth himself above all that is called God, or that is worshipped—Commanding angels, and putting kings under his feet, both of whom are called gods in scripture; claiming the highest power, the highest honour; suffering himself, not once only, to be styled God or vice-God. Indeed no less is implied in his ordinary title, "Most Holy Lord," or, "Most Holy Father." So that he sitteth—Enthroned. In the temple of God—Mentioned Rev. xi, 1. Declaring himself that he is God—Claiming the prerogatives which belong to God alone." [ 86 ] Roger Williams wrote about the Pope: "the pretended Vicar of Christ on earth, who sits as God over the Temple of God, exalting himself not only above all that is called God, but over the souls and consciences of all his vassals, yea over the Spirit of Christ, over the Holy Spirit, yea, and God himself ... speaking against the God of heaven, thinking to change times and laws; but he is the Son of Perdition." [ 87 ] The identification of the Roman Catholic Church as the apostate power written of in the Bible as the Antichrist became evident to many as the Reformation began, including John Wycliffe , who was well known throughout Europe for his opposition to the doctrine and practices of the Catholic Church , which he believed had clearly deviated from the original teachings of the early Church and to be contrary to the Bible. Wycliffe himself tells ( Sermones , III. 199) how he concluded that there was a great contrast between what the Church was and what it ought to be, and saw the necessity for reform. Along with John Hus, they had started the inclination toward ecclesiastical reforms of the Catholic Church.

When the Swiss Reformer Huldrych Zwingli became the pastor of the Grossmünster in Zurich (1518) he began to preach ideas on reforming the Catholic Church. Zwingli, who was a Catholic priest before he became a Reformer, often referred to the Pope as the Antichrist. He wrote: "I know that in it works the might and power of the Devil, that is, of the Antichrist".

[ 88 ] The English Reformer William Tyndale held that while the Roman Catholic realms of that age were the empire of Antichrist, any religious organization that distorted the doctrine of the Old and New Testaments also showed the work of Antichrist. In his treatise The Parable of the Wicked Mammon , he expressly rejected the established Church teaching that looked to the future for an Antichrist to rise up, and he taught that Antichrist is a present spiritual force that will be with us until the end of the age under different religious disguises from time to time.

[ 89 ] Tyndale's translation of 2 Thessalonians, chapter 2, concerning the "Man of Lawlessness" reflected his understanding, but was significantly amended by later revisers, [ 90 ] including the King James Bible committee , which followed the Vulgate more closely.

In 1973, the United States Conference of Catholic Bishops' Committee on Ecumenical and Interreligious Affairs and the USA National Committee of the Lutheran World Federation in the official Catholic–Lutheran dialogue officially signed an agreement on Papal Primacy and the Universal Church, including this passage: In calling the pope the "Antichrist", the early Lutherans stood in a tradition that reached back into the eleventh century . Not only dissidents and heretics but even saints had called the bishop of Rome the "Antichrist" when they wished to castigate his abuse of power . What Lutherans understood as a papal claim to unlimited authority over everything and everyone reminded them of the apocalyptic imagery of Daniel 11 , a passage that even prior to the Reformation had been applied to the pope as the Antichrist of the last days .

[ 65 ] In 1988 Ian Paisley , Evangelical minister and founder of the Free Presbyterian Church of Ulster , made headlines in an infamous manner by accusing Pope John Paul II as the Antichrist during one of the pope's speeches before the European Parliament, which at the time Paisley was member. His accusation, and the reactions of both Pope John Paul II and other members of the European Parliament, was recorded on video.

[ 91 ] [ 92 ] The Wisconsin Evangelical Lutheran Synod states about the Pope and the Catholic Church: [ 93 ] There are two principles that mark the papacy as the Antichrist. One is that the pope takes to himself the right to rule the church that belongs only to Christ. He can make laws forbidding the marriage of priests, eating or not eating meat on Friday, birth control, divorce and remarriage, even where there are not such laws in the Bible. The second is that he teaches that salvation is not by faith alone but by faith and works. The present pope upholds and practices these principles. This marks his rule as antichristian rule in the church. All popes hold the same office over the church and promote the same antichristian belief so they all are part of the reign of the Antichrist. The Bible does not present the Antichrist as one man for one short time, but as an office held by a man through successive generations. It is a title like King of England.

[ 94 ] Currently, many Protestant and Restorationist denominations still officially maintain that the Papacy is the Antichrist, such as the conservative Lutheran Churches [ 93 ] [ 95 ] [ 96 ] and the Seventh-day Adventists .

[ 97 ] [ 98 ] [ 99 ] [ 100 ] [ 101 ] Counter-Reformation [ edit ] In the Counter-Reformation , the views of Preterism and Futurism were advanced by Catholic Jesuits beginning in the 16th century in response to the identification of the Papacy as Antichrist. These were rival methods of prophetic interpretation: the futurist and the preterist systems both are in conflict with the historicist method of interpretation.

Historically, preterists and non-preterists have agreed that the Jesuit Luis de Alcasar (1554–1613) wrote the first systematic preterist exposition of prophecy— Vestigatio arcani sensus in Apocalypsi (published in 1614)—during the Counter-Reformation .

Christian views [ edit ] Roman Catholicism [ edit ] From the Fifth Council of the Lateran , the Catholic Church teaches that priests may not "preach or declare a fixed time for...the coming of antichrist..." [ 102 ] The church also teaches that it must undergo trials before the Second Coming , [ 103 ] and that the church's ultimate trial will be the mystery of iniquity.

[ 104 ] In Judaism, iniquity is a sin done out of moral failing.

[ 105 ] The mystery of iniquity, according to the church, will be a religious deception: Christians receiving alleged solutions to their problems at the cost of apostasy .

[ 104 ] The supreme religious deception, according to the church, will be the Antichrist's messianism : mankind glorifying himself rather than God and Jesus.

[ 104 ] The church teaches that this supreme deception is committed by people who claim to fulfill Israel's messianic hopes (world peace, immortality, end of evil and suffering, no more poverty or pollution, etc.), such as millenarianism and secular messianicism.

[ 104 ] Popes [ edit ] Pope Pius IX in the encyclical Quartus Supra , quoting Cyprian , said Satan disguises the Antichrist with the title of Christ.

[ 106 ] Pope Pius X in the encyclical E Supremi said that the distinguishing mark of the Antichrist is claiming to be God and taking his place.

[ 107 ] Pope Pius XI in the encyclical Divini Redemptoris compared Communism to the pseudo-messianism of the Antichrist.

[ 108 ] Pope John Paul II , in his 18 August 1985 address on his apostolic journey to Africa, said 1 John 4:3 ("Every spirit that does not acknowledge Jesus does not belong to God. This is the spirit of antichrist") evokes the danger of theology divorced from holiness and theological culture divorced from serving Christ.

[ 109 ] Pope Benedict XVI said in the Sunday Angelus of 11 March 2012 that violence is the tool of the Antichrist.

[ 110 ] In the General Audience of 12 November 2008, Benedict XVI said Christian tradition had come to identify the son of perdition as the Antichrist.

[ 111 ] Pope Francis , in his morning meditation of 2 February 2014, said that Christian faith is not an ideology, but that "the Apostle James says that ideologues of the faith are the Antichrist." [ 112 ] In his morning meditation of 19 September 2014, Francis said the Antichrist must come before the final resurrection.

[ 113 ] In his morning meditation of 7 January 2016, he said the evil spirit spoken of in 1 John 4:6 is the Antichrist.

[ 114 ] In his morning meditation on 11 November 2016, Francis said whoever says the criteria of Christian love is not the Incarnation is the Antichrist.

[ 115 ] Speculation [ edit ] The Prophecy of the Popes (identified as a 16th-century forgery by historians [ 116 ] ) claims Rome will be destroyed during the pontificate of the last Pope, implying a connection to the Antichrist.

Fulton J. Sheen , a Catholic bishop , wrote in 1951: [ 117 ] [ 118 ] The Antichrist will not be so called; otherwise he would have no followers... he will come disguised as the Great Humanitarian; he will talk peace, prosperity and plenty not as means to lead us to God, but as ends in themselves... He will tempt Christians with the same three temptations with which he tempted Christ... He will have one great secret which he will tell to no one: he will not believe in God. Because his religion will be brotherhood without the fatherhood of God, he will deceive even the elect. He will set up a counterchurch... It will have all the notes and characteristics of the Church, but in reverse and emptied of its divine content. It will be a mystical body of the Antichrist that will in all externals resemble the mystical body of Christ.

Catechism of the Catholic Church [ edit ] The Catechism of the Catholic Church, which John Paul II said is a "sure norm for teaching the faith," puts the doctrine on the Antichrist under a subsection entitled "The Church's Ultimate Trial," equating it with "the supreme religious deception" and "pseudo-messianism" of human "self-glorification": Before Christ's second coming the Church must pass through a final trial that will shake the faith of many believers. The persecution that accompanies her pilgrimage on earth will unveil the "mystery of iniquity" in the form of a religious deception offering men an apparent solution to their problems at the price of apostasy from the truth. The supreme religious deception is that of the Antichrist, a pseudo-messianism by which man glorifies himself in place of God and of his Messiah come in the flesh. (CCC 675) The Antichrist's deception already begins to take shape in the world every time the claim is made to realize within history that messianic hope which can only be realized beyond history through the eschatological judgment. The Church has rejected even modified forms of this falsification of the kingdom to come under the name of millenarianism, especially the "intrinsically perverse" political form of a secular messianism. (CCC 676) Eastern Orthodox [ edit ] Throughout history, various ecclesiastics of the Eastern Orthodox Church have identified the office of the Roman Catholic papacy with the antichrist.

[ 119 ] Russian Orthodox Metropolitan Anthony Khrapovitsky , in explaining the necessity of rebaptism for Roman Catholics, Protestants and Nestorians , declared: [ 119 ] It is clear that by this regulation the Church does not recognize in heretics and schismatics either the priesthood or the other mysteries, and considers them subject to ecclesiastical baptism in the nature of things ... the Church by receiving Latins into communion in the same way as Nestorians (Council of Trullo, 95) does not make any distinction between old heresies and the Latin one. I think that the Latins are considerably further from the Church and they are worse than Monophysites and Monophelites, because they created a second Christ, i.e., the antichrist in the person of the Pope, who is supposedly infallible...

[ 119 ] In a Christmas 2018 interview on Russian state television, Patriarch Kirill of Moscow warned that "The Antichrist is the person that will be at the head of the World Wide Web controlling all of humanity. That means that the structure itself poses a danger. There shouldn't be a single centre, at least not in the foreseeable future, if we don't want to bring on the apocalypse." He exhorted listeners not to "fall into slavery to what's in your hands"..."You should remain free inside and not fall under any addiction, not to alcohol, not to narcotics, not to gadgets." [ 120 ] Old Believers [ edit ] After Patriarch Nikon of Moscow reformed the Russian Orthodox Church during the second half of the 17th century, a large number of Old Believers held that Peter the Great , the Tsar of the Russian Empire until his death in 1725, was the Antichrist because of his treatment of the Orthodox Church, namely subordinating the church to the state, requiring clergymen to conform to the standards of all Russian civilians (shaved beards, being fluent in French), and requiring them to pay state taxes.

[ 121 ] There are two conceptions of the Antichrist among the Old Believers: the spiritual Antichrist and the sensual Antichrist. The sensual means a particular person who will rule at the end of times for literal 3.5 years. The priested Old believers mostly adhere to this conception. The spiritual Antichrist is said to rule in the heretical church and state as a spirit through many people – since the year 1000 in the West and since 1666 in Russia. The true priesthood is considered to be lacking in the world due to 'abomination of desolation', which is synonymous with the rule of Antichrist. Most non-priested Old believers adhere to this conception (except the so called "Chasovennye").

[ 122 ] Age of Enlightenment [ edit ] Bernard McGinn noted that complete denial of the Antichrist was rare until the Age of Enlightenment . Following frequent use of "Antichrist" laden rhetoric during religious controversies in the 17th century, the use of the concept declined during the 18th century due to the rule of enlightened absolutists , who as European rulers of the time wielded significant influence over official state churches. These efforts [ further explanation needed ] to cleanse Christianity of "legendary" or "folk" accretions effectively removed the Antichrist from discussion in mainstream Western churches.

[ 16 ] Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints [ edit ] In the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints , the "Antichrist" is anyone or anything that counterfeits the true gospel or plan of salvation and that openly or secretly is set up in opposition to Christ. The great antichrist is Lucifer , but he has many assistants [ 123 ] both as spirit beings and as mortals." [ 124 ] Latter-day Saints use the New Testament scriptures: 1 John 2:18, 22; 1 John 4:3–6; 2 John 1:7, and the Book of Mormon : Jacob 7:1–23, Alma 1:2–16, Alma 30:6–60, in their exegesis or interpretation of the Antichrist.

Seventh-day Adventists [ edit ] Seventh-day Adventists teach that the "Little Horn Power", which (as predicted in the Book of Daniel ) rose after the break-up of the Roman Empire, is the Papacy . The Western Roman Empire collapsed in the late 5th century. In 533, Justinian I , the emperor of the Eastern Roman Empire (which historians have labelled the Byzantine Empire), legally recognized the bishop (pope) of Rome as the head of all the Christian churches.

[ 125 ] Because of the Arian domination of some of the Roman Empire by barbarian tribes, the bishop of Rome could not fully exercise such authority. In 538, Belisarius , one of Justinian's generals, succeeded in withstanding a siege of the city of Rome by Arian Ostrogoth besiegers, and the bishop of Rome could begin establishing universal civil authority. So, by the military intervention of the Eastern Roman Empire, the bishop of Rome became all-powerful throughout the area of the old Roman Empire.

[ 126 ] The Ostrogoths promptly re-captured the city of Rome eight years later in 546 , and again in 550 .

Seventh-day Adventists understand the 1260 years as lasting AD 538 to 1798 as the (supposed) duration of the papacy's domination over Rome.

[ 127 ] [ 128 ] This period is seen as starting from one of the defeats of the Ostrogoths by the general Belisarius and as ending with the successes of French general Napoleon Bonaparte , specifically, with the capture of Pope Pius VI by general Louis Alexandre Berthier in 1798.

Like many Reformation-era Protestant leaders, the Adventist pioneer Ellen G. White (1827–1915) spoke of the Catholic Church as a fallen church in preparation for its nefarious eschatological role as the antagonist against God's true church; she saw the pope as the Antichrist. Protestant reformers such as Martin Luther, John Knox, John Calvin, William Tyndale and others held similar beliefs about the Catholic Church and the papacy when they broke away from the Catholic Church during the Reformation.

[ 129 ] Ellen White writes, His word has given warning of the impending danger; let this be unheeded, and the Protestant world will learn what the purposes of Rome really are, only when it is too late to escape the snare. She is silently growing into power. Her doctrines are exerting their influence in legislative halls, in the churches, and in the hearts of men. She is piling up her lofty and massive structures in the secret recesses of which her former persecutions will be repeated. Stealthily and unsuspectedly she is strengthening her forces to further her own ends when the time shall come for her to strike. All that she desires is vantage ground, and this is already being given her. We shall soon see and shall feel what the purpose of the Roman element is. Whoever shall believe and obey the word of God will thereby incur reproach and persecution.

[ 130 ] Seventh-day Adventists view the length of time the apostate church's unbridled power was permitted to rule as shown in Daniel 7:25: "The little horn would rule a time and times and half a time" – or 1,260 years. They regard papal rule as supreme in Europe from 538 (when the Arian Ostrogoths retreated from Rome into temporary oblivion) until 1798 (when the French general Louis-Alexandre Berthier took Pope Pius VI captive) – a period of 1,260 years [ 131 ] – including the 67 years of the Avignon Captivity (1309–1376).

Other Christian interpretations [ edit ] Martin Wight [ edit ] The devout Christian and political theorist Martin Wight , writing immediately after World War II , favoured the revival of the Antichrist doctrine not as a person, but as a recurrent situation featuring "demonic concentrations of power." [ 132 ] As "man of lawlessness" [ edit ] Main article: Man of sin The Antichrist has been equated with the "man of lawlessness" or "lawless one" of 2 Thessalonians 2:3, though commentaries on the identity of the "man of lawlessness" greatly vary.

[ 133 ] The "man of lawlessness" has been identified with Caligula , [ 134 ] Nero, [ 135 ] and the end times Antichrist. Some scholars believe that the passage contains no genuine prediction, but represents a speculation of the apostle's own, based on contemporary ideas of the Antichrist.

[ 134 ] As "being in league with other figures" [ edit ] Several American evangelical and fundamentalist theologians, including Cyrus Scofield , have identified the Antichrist as being in league with (or the same as) several figures in the Book of Revelation including the Dragon (or Serpent ), the Beast, the False Prophet, and the Whore of Babylon.

[ 136 ] As Satan [ edit ] The Devil whispers to the Antichrist; detail from Sermons and Deeds of the Antichrist , Luca Signorelli , 1501, Orvieto Cathedral .

Bernard McGinn described multiple traditions detailing the relationship between the Antichrist and Satan . In the dualist approach, Satan will become incarnate in the Antichrist, just as God became incarnate in Jesus . However, in orthodox Christian thought, this view was problematic because it was too similar to Christ's incarnation and suggested dualism . Instead, the "indwelling" view became more accepted. It stipulates that the Antichrist is a human figure inhabited by Satan, since the latter's power is not to be seen as equivalent to God's.

[ 16 ] Luca Signorelli 's fresco, The Sermon and Deeds of the Antichrist , depicts the indwelling view. Satan whispers in the ear of this Christlike figure and his left arm is slipped through the Antichrist's garment as if he is manipulating him.

Non-Christian views [ edit ] Part of a series on Eschatology Buddhist Maitreya Three Ages Christian Biblical texts Book of Revelation Book of Daniel Olivet Discourse Sheep and Goats Major figures Jesus Two witnesses Four Horsemen Antichrist Different views Preterism Idealism Historicism Futurism Millennialism Premillennialism Amillennialism Postmillennialism Other events Events of Revelation ( Apocalypse ) Rapture Armageddon Seven Seals Second Coming Hindu Kalki Kali Yuga Pralaya Shiva Islamic Figures Beast of the Earth Dhul-Qarnayn Dhul-Suwayqatayn Isa Israfil Mahdi Dajjal Muhammad Al-Qa'im Sufyani Yajuj and Majuj Events Swallowing in Bayda Coming of the Mahdi Return of Isa Resurrection Jewish Biblical texts Book of Isaiah Book of Ezekiel Book of Zechariah Book of Daniel Other sources Rabbinic literature ( Mishnah , Talmud , Midrash ) Medieval Jewish scholars Kabbalah Figures Elijah the Prophet , Messiah ( Mashiach Ben David , Mashiach Ben Yosef ), Gog and Magog , Armilus Events and terms Atchalta De'Geulah , Kibbutz Galuyot , Third Temple , War of Gog and Magog , Resurrection of the dead , Olam Haba Norse Figures and items Bound monster Gjallarhorn Líf and Lífþrasir Naglfar Events Fimbulwinter Ragnarök Vígríðr Taoist Li Hong Divine Incantations Scripture Zoroastrian Frashokereti Saoshyant Inter-religious 2012 phenomenon Afterlife Apocalypticism Fate of the unlearned Gog and Magog Last Judgment Messianism ( Messiah / Age ) Millenarianism Universal resurrection v t e Judaism [ edit ] There are warnings against false prophets (Navi-Sheker) in the Old Testament of the Bible.

An anti-Messiah figure known as Armilus , said to be the offspring of Satan and a statue, appears in some schools of Jewish eschatology , such as the 7th century CE Sefer Zerubbabel and 11th century CE Midrash Vayosha . He is stated to be the God and Messiah of the Christians.

[ 137 ] He is described as "a monstrosity, bald-headed, with one large and one small eye, deaf in the right ear and maimed in the right arm, while the left arm is two and one-half ells long." Being considered similar to, or even identical with Gog , [ 137 ] his believed destruction by a " Messiah ben Joseph " (Messiah, of the tribe of Joseph) symbolizes the ultimate victory of the Jewish Messiah in the Messianic Age .

[ 137 ] Islam [ edit ] Main article: Islamic eschatology See also: List of Mahdi claimants An image from a Falname made in India around 1610-1630, depicts Jesus fighting the Dajjal (right). Behind, the Mahdi with a veiled face.

Al-Masih ad-Dajjal ( Arabic : المسيح الدجّال , romanized : Al-Masīḥ ad-Dajjāl , lit.

'Deceitful Messiah'), or in short Ad-Dajjal (الدجّال), is an evil figure in Islamic eschatology , who will appear before the coming of the Mahdi .

[ 138 ] The Dajjal is never mentioned in the Quran but he is mentioned and described in the ḥadīth literature .

[ 138 ] The Dajjal is described as one eyed (blind in the right eye) and the blind eye looks like a bulging out grape.

[ 139 ] Like in Christianity, the Dajjal is said to emerge out in the east, although the specific location varies among the various sources.

[ 140 ] He will imitate the miracles performed by ʿĪsā (Jesus), such as healing the sick and raising the dead, the latter done with the aid of demons ( Shayatin ). It is claimed that he will deceive many people, such as magicians, half-castes, and Jews .

[ 140 ] According to the Islamic eschatological narrative , the events related to the final battle before the Day of Judgment will proceed in the following order: 11 Hadith also report on the " Greater Signs " of the end, which include the appearance of the Antichrist (Dajjal) and the reappearance of the prophet Jesus to join in battle with him at Dabbiq in Syria , as well as the arrival of the Mahdi, the "guided one." As another hadith attributed to Alī ibn Abī Talib puts it, "Most of the Dajjal's followers are Jews and children of fornication ; God will kill him in Syria, at a pass called the Pass of Afiq, after three hours are gone from the day, at the hand of Jesus".

[ 141 ] Imam Mahdi ( Arabic : ٱلْمَهْدِيّ , romanized : al-Mahdī , meaning "the rightly guided one") is the redeemer according to Islam.

[ 142 ] Just like the Dajjal, [ 138 ] the Mahdi is never mentioned in the Quran but his description can be found in the ḥadīth literature; [ 142 ] according to the Islamic eschatological narrative, he will appear on Earth before the Day of Judgment .

[ 138 ] [ 141 ] [ 143 ] [ 144 ] At the time of the Second Coming of Christ , [ 145 ] the prophet ʿĪsā shall return to defeat and kill al-Masih ad-Dajjal.

[ 138 ] [ 141 ] [ 146 ] Muslims believe that both ʿĪsā and the Mahdi will rid the world of wrongdoing, injustice, and tyranny, ensuring peace and tranquility.

[ 147 ] Eventually, the Dajjal will be killed by theʿĪsā at the gate of Lud , who upon seeing Dajjal will cause him to slowly dissolve (like salt in water).

[ 140 ] Ahmadiyya [ edit ] Part of a series on Ahmadiyya Beliefs and practices Tawhid Five Pillars of Islam Six articles of faith Bay'ah Distinct views Mirza Ghulam Ahmad Prophets Jesus Jihad Evolution Days of remembrance Caliphate Day Eid al-Adha Eid al-Fitr Promised Messiah Day Promised Reformer Day Foundational texts and sciences Quran Sunnah ( Hadith , Sirah ) Aqidah (creed) Tafsir (exegesis) Fiqh (jurisprudence) Sharia (law) Key literature Rūhānī Khazā᾽in Malfūzāt Tafsīr-e-Kabīr Haqā'iq al-Furqān Review of Religions Al Fazl (newspaper) The Muslim Sunrise Organizational structure Caliphs: I II III IV V Majlis al-Shura Lajna Khuddām Ansār Jalsa Salana Mosques Jamia MTA Key sites Hijaz Kaaba Masjid al-Haram Al-Masjid an-Nabawi United Kingdom Fazl Mosque Baitul Futuh Mosque Mubarak Mosque Qadian Aqsa Mosque Minaret-ul-Masih Mubarak Mosque Rabwah Aqsa Mosque Jamia Miscellaneous Persecution Mirzai Qadiani Ahmadiyya by country Ahmadiyya and other faiths List of Ahmadis Humanity First (NGO Charity) Lahore Ahmadiyya Movement Ahmadiyya translations of the Quran Roza Bal (Tomb of Jesus) Mai Mari da Ashtan (Tomb of Mary) v t e Prophecies concerning the emergence of the Antichrist ( Al-Masīḥ ad-Dajjāl ) are interpreted in Ahmadiyya teachings as designating a specific group of nations centred upon a false theology (or Christology) instead of an individual, with the reference to the Antichrist as an individual indicating its unity as a class or system rather than its personal individuality. As such, Ahmadis identify the Antichrist collectively with the missionary expansion and colonial dominance of European Christianity throughout the world that was propelled by the Industrial Revolution .

[ 148 ] [ 149 ] [ 150 ] Mirza Ghulam Ahmad wrote extensively on this topic, identifying the Antichrist principally with colonial missionaries who, according to him, were to be countered through argumentation rather than by physical warfare and whose power and influence was to gradually disintegrate, ultimately allowing for the recognition and worship of God along Islamic ideals to prevail throughout the world in a period similar to the period of time it took for nascent Christianity to rise through the Roman Empire.

[ 151 ] The teaching that Jesus was a mortal man who survived crucifixion and died a natural death , as propounded by Ghulam Ahmad, has been seen by some scholars in this regard as a move to neutralise Christian soteriologies of Jesus and to project the superior rationality of Islam.

[ 152 ] [ 153 ] [ 154 ] [ 155 ] Baha'i [ edit ] The Antichrist is considered to subvert the religion of God from the inner reality of man as 'Abdu'l-Baha narrates: "Christ was a divine Center of unity and love. Whenever discord prevails instead of unity, wherever hatred and antagonism take the place of love and spiritual fellowship, Antichrist reigns instead of Christ." [ 156 ] Scientology [ edit ] Main article: OT VIII In a document originally released only to high-ranking followers, Scientology founder L. Ron Hubbard referred to himself as the Antichrist, who would defend humanity against an alien invasion (for which he believed the Second Coming of Jesus was a metaphor). Many Scientologists who read the document for the first time found its contents highly upsetting. It was subsequently revised after Hubbard's death, with the new version lacking any references to Hubbard as the Antichrist.

In popular culture [ edit ] Main article: List of fictional Antichrists In February 1900, the Christian Russian philosopher and mystic Vladimir Solovyov published the apocalyptic A Short Tale of the Antichrist , showing his prophetic vision about the oncoming 20th century and the end of the human history.

[ 157 ] [ 158 ] The enthronement of the Antichrist is associated with conspiracy theories , particularly a Satanic plot to destroy the Christian faith in St. Nicholas .

[ 159 ] Antichrist is the title of a song released by British alternative band The 1975 released in 2012 on the Facedown EP.

Antichrist is also the title of a track released by Eminem in his album The Death of Slim Shady (Coup de Grâce) .

Thrash metal band Slayer has also released a song titled "The Antichrist" in 1983 on their debut album, " Show No Mercy " The character of Michael Langdon, played by actor Cody Fern , in the FX series American Horror Story: Apocalypse , is labeled as the Antichrist and brings upon the end times.

See also [ edit ] Armageddon Bible prophecy Christendom Constantine (film) Glossary of Christianity Lake of fire New World Order conspiracy theory Old Testament messianic prophecies quoted in the New Testament References to the Antichrist in ecclesiastical writings The Omen Two witnesses References [ edit ] Citations [ edit ] ^ Lietaert Peerbolte, Bert Jan (2018). "Antichrist". In Hunter, David G.; van Geest, Paul J. J.; Lietaert Peerbolte, Bert Jan (eds.).

Brill Encyclopedia of Early Christianity Online .

Leiden , Netherlands and Boston , Massachusetts: Brill Publishers .

doi : 10.1163/2589-7993_EECO_SIM_00000194 .

ISSN 2589-7993 .

S2CID 239226039 .

^ a b c 1 John 2:18–22 ; 4:1–6 .

2 John 1:7–11 .

^ Strong, James (1890).

"G5580 – pseudochristos" .

Strong's Concordance .

Blue Letter Bible . Retrieved 27 December 2021 .

ψευδόχριστος pseudóchristos , psyoo-dokh'-ris-tos; [...] a spurious Messiah:—false Christ.

ψευδόχριστος , ψευδοχριστου , ὁ ( ψευδής and χριστός ), a false Christ (or Messiah) (one who falsely lays claim to the name and office of the Messiah): Matthew 24:24; Mark 13:22.

^ Aune, David E.

(1983).

"The Prophecies of Jesus: Unmasking False Prophets" .

Prophecy in Early Christianity and the Ancient Mediterranean World .

Grand Rapids, Michigan : Wm. B. Eerdmans . pp.

222– 229.

ISBN 978-0-8028-0635-2 .

OCLC 9555379 .

^ Chae, Young S. (2006).

"Matthew 7:15: False Prophets in Sheep's Clothing" .

Jesus as the Eschatological Davidic Shepherd: Studies in the Old Testament, Second Temple Judaism, and in the Gospel of Matthew . Wissenschaftliche Untersuchungen zum Neuen Testament 2. Reihe. Vol. 216.

Tübingen : Mohr Siebeck . pp.

234– 236.

ISBN 978-3-16-148876-4 .

ISSN 0340-9570 .

^ France, Richard T.

(2007).

"Scene 2: False Prophets" .

The Gospel of Matthew .

Grand Rapids, Michigan and Cambridge, U.K.

: Wm. B. Eerdmans . pp.

289– 291.

ISBN 978-0-8028-2501-8 .

LCCN 2007013488 .

^ Lietaert Peerbolte, Bert Jan (2013).

"How Antichrist Defeated Death: The Development of Christian Apocalyptic Eschatology in the Early Church" . In Krans, Jan; Lietaert Peerbolte, L. J.; Smit, Peter-Ben; Zwiep, Arie W. (eds.).

Paul, John, and Apocalyptic Eschatology: Studies in Honour of Martinus C. de Boer .

Novum Testamentum: Supplements . Vol. 149.

Leiden : Brill Publishers . pp.

238– 255.

doi : 10.1163/9789004250369_016 .

ISBN 978-90-04-25026-0 .

ISSN 0167-9732 .

S2CID 191738355 .

^ Rowland, Christopher (2010) [2007].

"Part I: Historical Eschatology – The Eschatology of the New Testament Church" . In Walls, Jerry L. (ed.).

The Oxford Handbook of Eschatology .

Oxford and New York : Oxford University Press . pp.

56– 73.

doi : 10.1093/oxfordhb/9780195170498.001.0001 .

ISBN 978-0195170498 .

LCCN 2006032576 .

S2CID 171574084 .

^ Chrysostom, John.

"Homily 4 on Second Thessalonians" . Translated by John A. Broadus.

From Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers , First Series, Vol. 13. Edited by Philip Schaff. (Buffalo, New York: Christian Literature Publishing Company, 1889.) Revised and edited for New Advent by Kevin Knight.

^ See Strong's Bible Dictionary: χριστος Archived July 11, 2012, at archive.today ^ See Strong's Bible Dictionary: αντί Archived July 16, 2012, at archive.today ^ See the Lexicon to Pindar . Related terms as noted by the Catholic Encyclopedia include: antibasileus – a king who fills an interregnum ; antistrategos – a propraetor ; anthoupatos – a proconsul ; antitheos – in Homer , one resembling a god in power and beauty (in other works it stands for a hostile god).

^ Horbury, William (2003).

Messianism Among Jews and Christians: Biblical and Historical Studies . London, England: A&C Black . p. 333.

ISBN 978-0567088086 .

Against this background it can be seen that the technical Greek term antichristos , although it is known only from Christian … Antichristos first occurs in the Johannine epistles, and it is not used by other Greek Jewish or early Christian writings ...

^ a b Mauser, Ulrich (1992).

The Gospel of Peace: A Scriptural Message for Today's World . p. 70.

From Josephus's writings we collect, first of all, without much critical comment, some statements showing the close affinity of the … nowhere in his extensive accounts of the Jewish–Roman war uses the word "pseudo-Christ" (pseudochristos).

^ "Sacred texts: Judaism" .

Archived from the original on April 23, 2023.

^ a b c Cabinet 2001 .

^ Yarbrough, Robert (2008).

1–3 John . Ada, Michigan: Baker Academic . p. 344.

ISBN 978-0801026874 .

The articles in front of "deceiver" (ὁ πλάνος, ho planos ) and "antichrist" (ὁ ἀντίχριστος, ho antikhristos ) should be seen as marking out a certain category of persons (Wallace 1996: 227–230). This is a common Johannine usage (1 John 2:23) ^ Weima, Jeffrey Alan David ; Porter, Stanley E.

(1998).

Annotated Bibliography of 1 & 2 Thessalonians . Leiden, Netherlands: Brill Publishers . p. 263.

(2) Does the New Testament support the notion of an individual Antichrist in whom all the anti-Christian strife of all ages will be concentrated? 2 Thess 2 answers the second question in the affirmative: an individual Antichrist will bring evil to its ...

^ Hoekma, Anthony A.

(1979).

The Bible and the Future . Grand Rapids, Michigan: William B. Eerdmans Publishing Company . p.

159 .

ISBN 978-0802808516 .

Whereas Berkouwer states, "There is no reason to posit with certainty on the basis of the New Testament that the antichrist ... 2. particularly his statements about the "restrainer," compel us to believe that there will be a future, individual antichrist.

^ "NAB - 2 Thessalonians 2" .

USCCB . Archived from the original on 28 December 2009 . Retrieved 2020-10-02 .

^ Efrón, Joshua (1987).

Studies on the Hasmonean Period . Brill.

ISBN 978-90-04-07609-9 .

^ Harris, J. Rendel (2015).

The Odes and Psalms of Solomon . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-1-107-49773-3 .

^ Charlesworth, James H. (1998).

Critical Reflections on the Odes of Solomon . Sheffield Academic Press.

ISBN 978-1-85075-660-6 .

^ Polycarp.

Polycarp's letter to the Philippians . paragraph 7.

^ Trebilco, Paul (2004).

The Early Christians In Ephesus From Paul To Ignatius . Leiden, Netherlands: William B. Eerdmans Publishing . p. 268.

ISBN 978-0802807694 .

Finally, Hartog notes that the Johannine Letters are the only NT [New Testament] writings to use the term "antichrist" (1 Jn 2:18, 22; 4:3; 2 Jn 7) and Polycarp is also the only Apostolic Father to use the term. He notes "Thus, the tests of 'density' and 'singularity' ...

^ Hughes, Kevin L. (2005).

Constructing antichrist : Paul, biblical commentary, and the development of doctrine in the early Middle Ages . Washington, D.C.: Catholic University of America Press . pp.

29– 31.

ISBN 978-0813214153 .

^ Bromiley, Geoffrey W. (1979).

International Standard Bible Encyclopedia . Wm. B. Eerdmans. p. 140.

ISBN 978-0802837813 .

The fullest exposition of the ideas associated with the antichrist in the early decades of Christian history is to be found in the Ascension of Isaiah. In this we are told that "Beliar" (Belial) would enter into "the matricide king" (Nero), who would work great wonders and do much evil.

^ "On the Resurrection, chp 24" .

Christian Classics Ethereal Library . June 1, 2005.

Archived from the original on June 28, 2010 . Retrieved June 18, 2010 .

^ Hippolytus's Treatise on Christ and Antichrist, part 2 ^ Origen 1872 , p. 386 ^ "Catalan Atlas. The Cresques Project – Panel VI" .

www.cresquesproject.net .

^ "CHURCH FATHERS: Discourse I Against the Arians (Athanasius)" .

www.newadvent.org . Retrieved 2023-11-05 .

^ Schaff, Philip; et al.

Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers: Series I/Volume XIII/On Philippians, Colossians, and Thessalonians/On 2 Thessalonians . Original author: John Chrysostom.

^ Jerome 1893b , p. 334 ^ Jerome 1893 , p. 19 ^ Jerome 1893c , p. 449 ^ Jerome 1893d , pp. 236–237 ^ a b Jerome 1958 ^ "Latin Tiburtine Sibyl" . Http-server.carleton.ca. Archived from the original on 2 July 2010 . Retrieved 18 June 2010 .

^ "Church Fathers: City of God, Book XX (St. Augustine)" .

^ A history of the Franks, Gregory of Tours, Pantianos Classics, 1916 ^ quote from McGinn, Bernard, Visions of the End. Apocalyptic Traditions in the Middle Ages , New York: Columbia
University, 1979. p. 64, found in Brug's A Scriptural and Historical Survey of the Doctrine of the Antichrist Archived November 30, 2010, at the Wayback Machine ^ Emmerson, Richard Kenneth (1981). "The Life and Deeds of Antichrist".

Antichrist in the Middle Ages . Seattle, Washington: University of Washington Press. pp.

74– 107.

^ Emerson, Richard Kenneth (1979). "Antichrist as Anti-Saint: The Significance of Abbot Adso's Libellus de Antichristo ".

American Benedictine Review .

30 (2): 175– 190.

^ McGinn, Bernard (1988). "Portraying Antichrist in the Middle Ages". In Werner Verbeke; D. Verhelst; Andries Welkenhuysen (eds.).

The Use and Abuse of Eschatology in the Middle Ages . Leuven: Leuven University Press. p. 1.

ISBN 978-9061862598 .

[...] Thomas Malvenda, the indefatigable Dominican whose massive De Antichristo published in 1604 is still the most complete treatment of the subject.

^ McGinn, Bernard (2000).

Anti-Christ: Two Thousand Years of the Human Fascination With Evil . New York: Columbia University Press . p. 100.

ISBN 978-0231119771 .

^ Schaff & Schaff 1885 , p. 291 ^ Russell, William R. (1994-12-01).

"Martin Luther's Understanding of the Pope as the Antichrist" .

Archiv für Reformationsgeschichte (in German).

85 (jg): 32– 44.

doi : 10.14315/arg-1994-jg02 .

ISSN 2198-0489 .

S2CID 194015213 .

^ The Correspondence of Pope Gregory VII . Translated by Emerton, Ephraim . New York: Columbia University Press . 1990. p. 162.

ISBN 978-0231096270 .

^ From long quotations in Foxe 1583 , p. 121 ^ Whitford, David M. (Spring 2008). "The Papal Antichrist: Martin Luther and the Underappreciated Influence of Lorenzo Valla".

Renaissance Quarterly .

61 (61). Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press : 26– 52.

doi : 10.1353/ren.2008.0027 .

ISSN 0034-4338 .

S2CID 162257968 .

^ "Editorial Departments" .

The Methodist Review .

XLIII (3). New York City: J. Soule and T. Mason: 305. 1896.

^ 7:23–25 ^ 13:1–2 ^ 17:3–18 ^ a b Fuller, John Mee (1893).

"Antichrist" .

A Dictionary of the Bible . London, England: John Murray . p. 147.

^ 7:8 ^ Oberman, Heiko Augustinus (1994).

The Impact of the Reformation: Essays . Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing.

ISBN 978-0802807328 – via Google Books.

^ Edwards, Jr., Mark U. (2004-11-19).

Luther's Last Battles: Politics and Polemics 1531-46 . Fortress Press.

ISBN 978-1-4514-1398-4 .

^ In Latin, the title reads "Hic oscula pedibus papae figuntur" ^ "Nicht Bapst: nicht schreck uns mit deim ban, Und sey nicht so zorniger man. Wir thun sonst ein gegen wehre, Und zeigen dirs Bel vedere" ^ Edwards, Jr., Mark U. (2004-11-19).

Luther's Last Battles: Politics and Polemics 1531-46 . Fortress Press. p. 199.

ISBN 978-1-4514-1398-4 .

^ Luther, Martin (1521).

Passional Christi vnd Antichristi (in German). Rhau-Grunenberg.

^ a b Johnstone, Nathan (2009). "The synagogue of Satan: anti-Catholicism, false doctrine and the construction of contrariety".

The Devil and Demonism in Early Modern England .

Cambridge , England: Cambridge University Press . pp.

27– 59.

doi : 10.1017/CBO9780511495847.002 .

ISBN 978-0511495847 .

^ a b Joseph A. Burgess; Jeffrey Gros, eds. (1989).

Building Unity .

New York : Paulist Press. p. 140.

ISBN 0-8091-3040-8 .

^ Roland H. Bainton, The Reformation of the Sixteenth
Century (Boston, MA: Beacon Press, 1952), 43, 44.

^ Froom 1948 , pp. 244–245: "The reformers were unanimous in its acceptance. And it was this interpretation of prophecy that lent emphasis to their reformatory action. It led them to protest against Rome with extraordinary strength and undaunted courage. [...] This was the rallying point and the battle cry that made the Reformation unconquerable." ^ Dialogue with Trypho , ch. 32, in Ante-Nic. Fath. I:210.

^ Against Heresies , III: 7:2, in Ante-Nic. Fath. Ib., V:30:3–4.

^ Against Marcion , V:16, in Ante-Nic. Fath. III:463f.

^ Treatise on Christ and Antichrist , chs. 25 to 63, in Ante-Nic. Fath. V:209–218.

^ Fragments from Commentaries , 2:1–3, in Ante-Nic. Fath. V:178.

^ The Deposition of Arius , paras. 2 & 4, in Nic. & Post-Nic. Fath., 2nd Ser., IV:69.

^ Standish, Colin D.; Standish, Russell R. (November 1988).

The Antichrist is here . Hartland Publications. p. 32.

ISBN 0-923309-22-5 .

^ Clarke, Adam (1997).

Commentary on the Old Testament . Vol. 4. Rapidan, Virginia: World Publishing. p. 596.

ISBN 978-0529106346 .

^ Harris, Marvin (1989).

Cows, Pigs, Wars and Witches: The Riddles of Culture . New York: Vintage Books . p.

196 .

ISBN 978-0679724681 .

^ "Smalcald Articles – Book of Concord" . 8 November 2019. Archived from the original on 10 October 2008 . Retrieved 21 April 2007 .

^ Philip Melanchthon , Treatise on the Power and Primacy of the Pope ( full text Archived 2008-10-10 at the Wayback Machine ) in the Triglot translation of the Book of Concord .

^ Archived copy at the Library of Congress (May 8, 2009).

^ "UMC.org : the official online ministry of The United Methodist Church" .

^ Smalcald Articles, II.

^ Martin Luther, First Principles , pp. 196–197.

^ John Calvin, Institutes of the Christian Religion , Vol. 3, p. 149.

^ John Knox, The History of the Reformation in Scotland , p. 65.

^ Works by Cranmer , Vol. 1, pp. 6–7.

^ John Wesley, Explanatory Notes Upon the New Testament , p. 216.

^ Froom, The Prophetic Faith of Our Fathers , Vol. 3, p. 52.

^ Principle Works of Zwingli , Vol. 7, p. 135.

^ Tyndale, William, Parable of the Wicked Mammon , c. 1526, (facsimile copy of later printing, no ISBN, Benediction Classics, 2008) at pp. 4–5.

^ "Tyndale's Doctrine of Antichrist and His Translation of 2 Thessalonians 2", R. Davis, New Matthew Bible Project ; a shorter version of this article was also published in the Tyndale Society Journal No. 36, Spring 2009, under the title Tyndale, the Church, and the Doctrine of Antichrist ).

^ "Papal Audience" .

The New York Times . October 16, 1988.

^ Ian Paisley Heckles the Pope (1988) , 31 March 2012 , retrieved 2023-11-05 ^ a b "Doctrinal Statements: Antichrist" .

Wisconsin Evangelical Lutheran Synod . 2018 . Retrieved August 17, 2018 .

We reject the idea that the teaching that the Papacy is the Antichrist rests on a merely human interpretation of history or is an open question. We hold rather that this teaching rests on the revelation of God in Scripture which finds its fulfillment in history. The Holy Spirit reveals this fulfillment to the eyes of faith (cf. The Abiding Word, Vol. 2, p. 764). Since Scripture teaches that the Antichrist would be revealed and gives the marks by which the Antichrist is to be recognized (2 Th 2:6, 8), and since this prophecy has been clearly fulfilled in the history and development of the Roman Papacy, it is Scripture which reveals that the Papacy is the Antichrist.

^ "Roman Catholic" .

WELS Topical Q&A .

Wisconsin Evangelical Lutheran Synod . Archived from the original on September 27, 2009 . Retrieved July 5, 2017 .

^ Nolting, Paul F., The Antichrist (part 1) Archived May 22, 2013, at the Wayback Machine ^ lutheran (2011-12-20).

"The Brief Statement of 1932 | Church of the Lutheran Confession" . Retrieved 2023-11-05 .

^ 666 Truth .

^ Bacchiocchi, Samuele (July 6, 2002), "Islam and The Papacy in Prophecy" , Endtime Issues (86), Berrien Springs, Michigan: Biblical perspectives, archived from the original on August 22, 2013 , retrieved August 16, 2018 .

^ Paulien, Jon; Bacchiocchi, Samuele (October 17, 2002), "September 11 and God's Mysterious Mercy" , End Time Issues (90), Berrien Springs, Michigan: Biblical perspectives, archived from the original on April 5, 2018 , retrieved August 16, 2018 .

^ "Reformed", Eschatology , Mountain Retreat .

^ "Antichrist Today" , Present Truth , XVII (2) .

^ PapalEncyclicals: Lateran Council V, Session 11 They are in no way to presume to preach or declare a fixed time for future evils, the coming of antichrist or the precise day of judgment; for Truth says, it is not for them to know times or seasons which the Father has fixed by his own authority. Let it be known that those who have hitherto dared to declare such things are liars, and that because of them not a little authority has been taken away from those who preach the truth .

^ Catechism of the Catholic Church 769 ^ a b c d Catechism of the Catholic Church 675 ^ "SIN – JewishEncyclopedia.com" .

www.jewishencyclopedia.com . Retrieved 2023-11-05 .

^ IX, Pope BI Pius (1873-01-06).

"Quartus Supra" .

Papal Encyclicals . Retrieved 2023-11-05 .

^ "E Supremi (October 4, 1903) | PIUS X" .

www.vatican.va . Retrieved 2023-11-05 .

^ Divini Redemptoris, 8 ^ Vatican.Va: John Paul II, August 18, 1985 Address ^ "Angelus, 11 March 2012 | BENEDICT XVI" .

www.vatican.va . Retrieved 2023-11-05 .

^ Vatican.Va: Benedict XVI, General Audience of March 11, 2012 ^ "Faith is not casuistry (21 February 2014) | Francis" .

www.vatican.va . Retrieved 2023-11-05 .

^ "Fear of resurrection (19 September 2014) | Francis" .

www.vatican.va . Retrieved 2023-11-05 .

^ "The only criterion (7 January 2016) | Francis" .

www.vatican.va . Retrieved 2023-11-05 .

^ "Letter of Love (11 November 2016) | Francis" .

www.vatican.va . Retrieved 2023-11-05 .

^ O'Brien, M. J. (1880).

An Historical and Critical Account of the So-called Prophecy of St. Malachy Regarding the Succession of Popes . M.H. Gill and Son.

^ Sheen, Fulton J. (1951).

Communism and the Conscience of the West . Country Life Press. p. 17 . Retrieved October 24, 2015 .

^ Pronechen, Joseph (February 10, 2019).

"Fulton Sheen's Clear Warning About the Anti-Christ" .

National Catholic Register . Irondale, Alabama: EWTN . Retrieved October 7, 2019 .

^ a b c "Does the Russian Orthodox Church Accept the "Mysteries" of the Heretics?" .

Orthodox Ethos . April 22, 2016 . Retrieved March 9, 2022 .

^ "Smartphones are paving way for the Antichrist, says head of Russian church" .

The Telegraph . 8 January 2019.

Archived from the original on 2022-01-11.

^ "Peter I, czar of Russia" .

The Columbia Encyclopedia . New York City: Columbia University . 1935.

Archived from the original on February 12, 2008.

^ "О чувственном и духовном антихристе" (in Russian). 25 March 2021.

^ Korihor is directly referred to in The Book of Mormon as an anti-Christ ( Alma 30:6) ^ LDS, Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

"Bible Dictionary: Antichrist" .

Intellectual Reserve , Inc.

^ Levillain, Philippe (2002).

The Papacy: An Encyclopedia . Vol. 2. Psychology Press. p. 832.

ISBN 978-0415922302 . Retrieved July 17, 2015 .

[Pope John II] received from Justinian a letter dated June 6, 533 [...]. In his letter, Justinian proclaimed that the Holy See is the leader of all the holy churches and confirmed the need for all churches to join together with Rome [...].

^ "The 1260 days of Daniel 7" . Archived from the original on 2018-12-03 . Retrieved 2018-12-07 .

^ The Great Controversy by Ellen White, p. 266. " Chap. 15 – The Bible and the French Revolution ".

^ Seventh-day Adventists Believe (2nd ed) . Ministerial Association, General Conference of Seventh-day Adventists . 2005. pp.

184– 185.

ISBN 1-57847-041-2 .

^ "Articles – White Horse Media" .

White Horse Media .

^ White, Ellen G. (1999) [1888].

"Enmity Between Man and Satan" .

The Great Controversy: Between Christ and Satan . The Ellen G. White Estate. p. 581.

ISBN 0-8163-1923-5 . Archived from the original on May 31, 2007 . Retrieved June 6, 2006 .

^ Paulien, John (2006) " The 1260 Days in the Book of Revelation Archived 2015-10-27 at the Wayback Machine " ^ Hall, Ian (2006).

The International Thought of Martin Wight . London, England: Palgrave Macmillan . p. 37.

ISBN 978-1403969279 .

^ Schink, W. F. (1991). "The Scriptural Doctrine of the Antichrist". In Lange, Lyle; Albrecht, Jerome G. (eds.).

Our Great Heritage: Vol. 3 . Milwaukee, Wisconsin: Northwestern Publishing House . p. 572.

ISBN 978-0810003798 .

^ a b Net Bible: Man of sin Archived July 7, 2009, at the Wayback Machine ^ St. John Chrysostom, Homilies on II Thess., Nicene-Post Nicene Fathers ^ See footnotes in Revelation 7 and 13 in the Scofield Reference Bible , 1917 ^ a b c "ARMILUS – JewishEncyclopedia.com" .

jewishencyclopedia.com . Retrieved 2023-11-05 .

^ a b c d e Farhang, Mehrvash (2017). "Dajjāl". In Madelung, Wilferd; Daftary, Farhad (eds.).

Encyclopaedia Islamica . Translated by Negahban, Farzin.

Leiden , Netherlands and Boston , Massachusetts: Brill Publishers .

doi : 10.1163/1875-9831_isla_COM_035982 .

ISSN 1875-9823 .

^ Sahih al-Bukhari 3439 ^ a b c Cook, David (2021) [2002].

Studies in Muslim Apocalyptic .

Berlin , Germany and London , England: Gerlach Press. pp.

93– 104.

ISBN 978-3959941211 .

OCLC 238821310 .

^ a b c Gallagher, Eugene (2020).

"Millennialism" .

Oxford Research Encyclopedia of Religion .

Oxford : Oxford University Press .

doi : 10.1093/acrefore/9780199340378.013.125 .

ISBN 9780199340378 . Retrieved 17 January 2022 .

^ a b Madelung, Wilferd (1986). "al-Mahdī". In Bosworth, C. E.

; van Donzel, E. J.

; Heinrichs, W. P.

; Lewis, B.; Pellat, Ch.

(eds.).

Encyclopaedia of Islam, Second Edition . Vol. 5.

Leiden , Netherlands: Brill Publishers .

doi : 10.1163/1573-3912_islam_COM_0618 .

ISBN 978-90-04-16121-4 .

^ Martin 2004: 421 ^ Glasse 2001: 280 ^ [ Quran 3:55 ] ^ Sahih Muslim , 41:7023 ^ Momen 1985: 166–168 ^ Glassé, Cyril; Smith, Huston (2003).

The New Encyclopedia of Islam . Altamira Press. p. 33.

ISBN 0-7591-0190-6 .

^ Valentine, Simon (2008).

Islam and the Ahmadiyya jamaʻat: history, belief, practice . Columbia University Press. p. 148.

ISBN 978-0-231-70094-8 .

^ Muhammad Ali. (1992) The Antichrist and Gog and Magog Archived 2018-07-01 at the Wayback Machine , Ohio: Ahmadiyya Anjuman-i Ishāʿat-i Islām ^ Valentine, Simon (2008).

Islam and the Ahmadiyya jamaʻat: history, belief, practice . Columbia University Press. pp.

148– 149.

ISBN 978-0-231-70094-8 .

^ Francis Robinson.

'The British Empire and the Muslim World' in Judith Brown, Wm Roger Louis (ed) The Oxford History of the British Empire: Volume IV: The Twentieth Century .

Oxford University Press, 1999, p. 411. "At their most extreme religious strategies for dealing with the Christian presence might involve attacking Christian revelation at its heart, as did the Punjabi Muslim, Ghulam Ahmad (d. 1908), who founded the Ahmadiyya missionary sect. He claimed that he was the messiah of the Jewish and Muslim tradition; the figure known as Jesus of Nazareth had not died on the cross but survived to die in Kashmir." ^ Yohanan Friedmann.

Prophecy Continuous: Aspects of Ahmadi Religious Thought and its Medieval Background Oxford University Press, 2003, p. 114. "He [Ghulam Ahmad] realized the centrality of the crucifixion and of the doctrine of vicarious atonement in the Christian dogma, and understood that his attack on these two was an attack on the innermost core of Christianity " ^ Kambiz GhaneaBassiri .

A History of Islam in America: From the New World to the New World Order Cambridge University Press, 2010, p. 208. "Ghulam Ahmad denied the historicity of Jesus' crucifixion and claimed that Jesus had fled to India where he died a natural death in Kashmir. In this way, he sought to neutralize Christian soteriologies of Christ and to demonstrate the superior rationality of Islam." ^ Valentine, Simon (2008).

Islam and the Ahmadiyya jamaʻat: history, belief, practice . Columbia University Press. p. 21.

ISBN 978-0-231-70094-8 .

"Proclaiming himself as reformer of Islam, and wanting to undermine the validity of Christianity, Ahmad went for the theological jugular, the foundational teachings of the Christian faith. 'The death of Jesus Christ' explained one of Ahmad's biographers 'was to be the death-knell of the Christian onslaught against Islam'. As Ahmad argued, the idea of Jesus dying in old age, rather than death on a cross, as taught by the gospel writers, 'invalidates the divinity of Jesus and the doctrine of Atonement'." ^ 'Abdu'l-Baha, Abbas Effendi.

"Some Answered Questions" .

bahai.org . Retrieved April 20, 2017 .

^ card.

G. Biffi .

"Russia Will Punish the World – 3rd Secret of Fatima Revealed" .

Gloria.tv . Archived from the original on September 7, 2018 – via radiovaticana.org.

The cardinal speaks often on the theme of the Antichrist. The Times of London reported in 2004 that the Cardinal described the Antichrist as "walking among us".

^ Pronechen, J. (February 24, 2017).

"Vladimir Soloviev, the Mystic Admired by Popes" .

ncregister.com .

Archived from the original on March 2, 2017 . Retrieved September 5, 2018 .

^ Dwight (Reverend), Joseph (November 10, 2013).

"The Masonic Plan For The Destruction Of The Catholic Church" . Retrieved September 29, 2020 .

Bibliography [ edit ] Berry, Rev. Elwood (1921).

"Part 2.2: The Reign and Condemnation of Antichrist" .

The Apocalypse of St. John . The Catholic Church Supply House.

Froom, Le Roy Edwin (1948).

Pre-Reformation and Reformation Restoration, and Second Departure (PDF) . The Prophetic Faith of our Fathers: The Historical Development of Prophetic Interpretation. Vol. 2. Washington, D.C.: The Review and Herald Publishing Association.

Robert, Yarbrough (2008).

1–3 John . Baker Academic.

ISBN 978-0801026874 .

Maas, Anthony John (1907).

"Antichrist" . In Herbermann, Charles (ed.).

Catholic Encyclopedia . Vol. 1. New York: Robert Appleton Company.

Lietaert Peerbolte, L. J. (1966).

The Antecedents of Antichrist: A Traditio-Historical Study of the Earliest Christian Views on Eschatological Opponents . Brill.

ISBN 9004104550 .

Foxe, John (1583).

The Acts and Monuments, Book II . R.B. Seeley and W. Burnside, sold by L. & G. Seeley. p.

121 . Retrieved June 6, 2010 .

Jerome (1893) [347–420].

"Letter to Pope Damasus" . In Schaff, Philip (ed.).

A Select Library of Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers of the Christian Church . 2nd series. Vol. VI.

Henry Wace . New York: The Christian Literature Company. p. 19 . Retrieved June 7, 2010 .

Jerome (1893b) [347–420].

"The Dialogue against the Luciferians" . In Schaff, Philip (ed.).

A Select Library of Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers of the Christian Church . 2nd series. Vol. VI. Henry Wace. New York: The Christian Literature Company. p. 334 . Retrieved June 7, 2010 .

Jerome (1893c) [347–420].

"Against the Pelagians, Book I" . In Schaff, Philip (ed.).

A Select Library of Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers of the Christian Church . 2nd series. Vol. VI. Henry Wace. New York: The Christian Literature Company. p. 449 . Retrieved June 7, 2010 .

Jerome (1893d) [347–420].

"Letter to Ageruchia" . In Schaff, Philip (ed.).

A Select Library of Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers of the Christian Church . 2nd series. Vol. VI. Henry Wace. New York: The Christian Literature Company. pp.

236– 237 . Retrieved June 8, 2010 .

Jerome (1958) [347–420]. Archer, Gleason L. (ed.).

Jerome's Commentary of Daniel (Translation).

Grand Rapids, Michigan : Baker Book House.

Archived from the original on May 26, 2010 . Retrieved June 7, 2010 .

McGinn, Bernard (1994).

Antichrist: Two Thousand Years of the Human Fascination With Evil . New York: HarperCollins .

Cabinet, Kristofer Widholm and Bernard McGinn (2001).

"Antichrist: An Interview with Bernard McGinn" .

Cabinet Magazine . Issue 5 Evil Winter. Cabinet Magazine. Archived from the original on August 8, 2019 . Retrieved October 27, 2010 .

Origen (1872) [185–254].

"Writings of Origen, vol 2" . In Roberts, Rev. Alexander (ed.).

Ante-Nicene Christian Library [ Writings of the Fathers ]. Vol. XXIII. James Donaldson. Edinburgh: T&T Clark . pp.

385– 388 . Retrieved June 6, 2010 .

Schaff, Philip; Schaff, David Schley (1885).

History of the Christian Church .

Charles Scribner's Sons . Retrieved January 18, 2009 .

Cohn, Norman (1970).

The Pursuit of the Millennium (Rev. and expanded. ed.). New York: Oxford University Press .

ISBN 978-0195004564 .

Norman Cohn.

Schneemelcher, Wilhelm ; Wilson, Robert McLachlan (trans.) (2003).

New Testament Apocrypha: Writings relating to the Apostles; Apocalypses and related subjects, Vol. 2 (sixth German edition 1989, 1992, 2003 ed.). [S.l.]: Westminster John Knox .

ISBN 978-0664227227 .

External links [ edit ] The dictionary definition of antichrist at Wiktionary Quotations related to antichrist at Wikiquote Media related to Antichrist at Wikimedia Commons Of Antichrist and His Ruin Archived 2007-12-06 at the Wayback Machine (1692) by John Bunyan. Online as part of the Acacia John Bunyan Online Library.

Lerner, Robert E. (March 22, 2007).

"Antichrist" .

Encyclopædia Britannica (online ed.).

Knight, Kevin (ed.).

"Against Heresies: Book V: Chapter 25" .

Ante-Nicene Fathers , Vol. 1 . Translated by Alexander Roberts ; William Rambaut. Buffalo, New York: New Advent .

Ginzberg, Louis (1901–1906).

"Antichrist" . In Singer, Isidore ; et al. (eds.).

The Jewish Encyclopedia . New York: Funk & Wagnalls.

Lutheran Scholarly Works on the Antichrist Texts on Wikisource: Davidson, Samuel (1878). " Antichrist ".

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 2 (9th ed.). pp.

124– 127.

Bousset, Wilhelm (1911). " Antichrist ".

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 2 (11th ed.). pp.

121– 123.

Maas, Anthony John (1907). " Antichrist ".

Catholic Encyclopedia . Vol. 1.

" Antichrist ".

Easton's Bible Dictionary . 1897.

"Antichrist" .

Encyclopaedia Biblica . Vol. 1. 1899.

Nietzsche, Friedrich (2006) [1918].

The Antichrist: Curse on Christianity . Translated by Mencken, Henry Louis.

v t e First Epistle of John Persons Cain Jesus Christ Terms/Phrases Antichrist Johannine Comma ( Comma Johanneum ) Spirit of Truth Related Authorship Textual variants Sources Greek Text Latin Vulgate Wycliffe Version King James Version American Standard Version World English Version v t e Second Epistle of John Persons Elect Lady Jesus Terms/Phrases Antichrist Related Authorship Textual variants Gnosticism Docetism Sources Greek Text Latin Vulgate Wycliffe Version King James Version American Standard Version World English Version v t e Christian theology Systematic Scripture Inspiration Preservation Canonics Biblical studies Exegesis Law and Gospel Hermeneutics God Attributes Paterology Christology Pneumatology Theocentricism Theology proper Immutability Impassibility Perichoresis Social trinitarianism Trinity Father Son ( Hypostatic union Jesus Logos Christocentric Incarnation Resurrection Ascension ) Holy Spirit Cosmology Creation Angels Angelic hierarchy Humanity Fallen angels Satan Theodicy Soteriology Absolution Adoption Assurance Atonement Baptism Calling Conditional security Conversion Divinization Election Eternal life extra Ecclesiam nulla salus Faith Forgiveness Glorification Grace Irresistible Prevenient Imputation Justification Means of grace Monergism Mortification Ordo salutis Perseverance Predestination Recapitulation Reconciliation Redemption Regeneration Repentance Resurrection Salvation Sanctification Synergism Theosis Union with Christ Worship Blessing Hamartiology Adam Anthropology The Fall Incurvatus in se Occasion of sin Original sin Sin Theodicy Total depravity Ecclesiology Church Free National Sacrament Confession Eucharist Missiology Polity ( Congregational Episcopal Presbyterian ) Bishop Historical Minister Synod Conciliarity Koinonia Full communion Church discipline Shunning Eschatology Historicism Idealism Dispensationalism Futurism Preterism Millenarianism ( Pre- / Post- / A-millennialism ) Adventism Antichrist Apocalypse Apocalypticism Covenant / New Covenant theology End times Four last things Heaven Hell Last Judgment Millennialism New Jerusalem Rapture Second Coming Soul sleep Tribulation War in Heaven Historical History of Christian theology Orthodoxy Calvinist–Arminian debate Apostolic Age Canon Patristics Caesaropapism Semipelagianism Iconoclasm Scholasticism Thomism Conciliarism Renaissance Reformation Counter-Reformation Pietism Great Awakenings Practical Apologetics Biblical law Education Ethics Homiletics Liturgics Missiology Moral Pastoral Polemics Political Public By tradition Catholic Church Absolution Apostolic succession Assumption of Mary Dogmatic Christian humanism Traditionalism Ecumenical Councils Filioque Immaculate Conception Indulgences Infant baptism Josephology Liturgy Mariology Mass Modernism Natural law Papal infallibility Priesthood Purgatory Quartodecimanism Real presence Sacerdotalism Sacrament Sainthood Scotism Thomism Transubstantiation Ultramontanism Veneration Eastern Orthodox Church Apophatic theology Cataphatic theology Economy Essence–energies Gnomic will Metousiosis Phronema Phyletism Proskynesis Sobornost Symphonia Tabor Light Theoria Theosis Theotokos Oriental Orthodoxy Miaphysitism Monophysitism Monoenergism Monothelitism Aphthartodocetism Protestantism General Adiaphora Christian views on the Old Covenant Covenant theology Dispensationalism Supersessionism Evangelicalism Evangelical theology Five solae ( Sola fide Sola gratia Sola scriptura Soli Deo gloria Solus Christus ) Fundamentalism Protestant ecclesiology Priesthood of all believers Church covenant Protestant Soteriology Assurance Conditional election Conditional preservation of the saints Prevenient grace Total depravity Unlimited atonement Anglican Anglo-Catholicism Branch theory Broad church Center church High church Low church Baptist Believer's baptism Immersion baptism Separation of church and state Lutheran Confessional Lutheranism Evangelical Catholic Haugean Loci Theologici Lutheran orthodoxy Lutheran scholasticism Neo-Lutheranism Pietism Theology of the Cross Two kingdoms Pentecostal Baptism with the Holy Spirit Faith healing Glossolalia Prosperity theology Reformed (Calvinist) Christian reconstructionism TULIP Lordship salvation Predestination Wesleyan Christian perfection Imparted righteousness Second work of grace Wesleyan Quadrilateral Other Adventism Anabaptism Arminianism Free Grace Messianic Judaism Restorationism See also Attributes of God in Christianity Christian universalism Divine mercy Grace in Christianity Love of God in Christianity Love of God Omnibenevolence Omnipotence Omnipresence Omniscience Problem of evil Problem of Hell Sacred mysteries Unlimited atonement Lists of Christian theologians Outline of Christian theology Christianity portal v t e Global catastrophic risks Future of the Earth Future of an expanding universe Ultimate fate of the universe Human extinction risk estimates Technological Chemical warfare Cyberattack Cyberwarfare Cyberterrorism Cybergeddon Ransomware Gray goo Nanoweapons Kinetic bombardment Kinetic energy weapon Nuclear warfare Mutual assured destruction Dead Hand Doomsday Clock Doomsday device Antimatter weapon Electromagnetic pulse (EMP) Safety of high-energy particle collision experiments Micro black hole Strangelet Synthetic intelligence / Artificial intelligence AI takeover Existential risk from artificial intelligence Technological singularity Transhumanism Sociological Anthropogenic hazard Collapsology Doomsday argument Self-indication assumption doomsday argument rebuttal Self-referencing doomsday argument rebuttal Economic collapse Malthusian catastrophe New World Order (conspiracy theory) Nuclear holocaust cobalt famine winter Riots Social crisis Societal collapse State collapse World War III Ecological Climate change Anoxic event Biodiversity loss Mass mortality event Cascade effect Cataclysmic pole shift hypothesis Deforestation Desertification Plant or animal species extinctions Civilizational collapse Tipping points Climate sensitivity Flood basalt Global dimming Global terrestrial stilling Global warming Hypercane Ice age Ecocide Ecological collapse Environmental degradation Habitat destruction Human impact on the environment coral reefs on marine life Land degradation Land consumption Land surface effects on climate Ocean acidification Ozone depletion Resource depletion Sea level rise Supervolcano winter Verneshot Water pollution Water scarcity Earth Overshoot Day Overexploitation Overpopulation Human overpopulation Biological Extinction Extinction event Holocene extinction Human extinction List of extinction events Genetic erosion Genetic pollution Others Biodiversity loss Decline in amphibian populations Decline in insect populations Biotechnology risk Biological agent Biological warfare Bioterrorism Colony collapse disorder Defaunation Dysgenics Interplanetary contamination Pandemic Pollinator decline Overfishing Astronomical Big Crunch Big Rip Coronal mass ejection Cosmological phase transition Geomagnetic storm False vacuum decay Gamma-ray burst Heat death of the universe Proton decay Virtual black hole Impact event Asteroid impact avoidance Asteroid impact prediction Potentially hazardous object Near-Earth object winter Rogue planet Rogue star Near-Earth supernova Hypernova Micronova Solar flare Stellar collision Eschatological Buddhist Maitreya Three Ages Hindu Kalki Kali Yuga Last Judgement Second Coming 1 Enoch Daniel Abomination of desolation Prophecy of Seventy Weeks Messiah Christian Futurism Historicism Interpretations of Revelation Idealism Preterism 2 Esdras 2 Thessalonians Man of sin Katechon Antichrist Book of Revelation Events Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse Seven bowls Seven seals The Beast Two witnesses War in Heaven Whore of Babylon Great Apostasy New Earth New Jerusalem Olivet Discourse Great Tribulation Son of perdition Sheep and Goats Islamic Al-Qa'im Beast of the Earth Dhu al-Qarnayn Dhul-Suwayqatayn Dajjal Israfil Mahdi Sufyani Jewish Messiah War of Gog and Magog Third Temple Norse Zoroastrian Saoshyant Others 2011 end times prediction 2012 phenomenon Apocalypse Apocalyptic literature Apocalypticism Armageddon Blood moon prophecy Earth Changes End time Gog and Magog List of dates predicted for apocalyptic events Messianism Messianic Age Millenarianism Millennialism Premillennialism Amillennialism Postmillennialism Nemesis (hypothetical star) Nibiru cataclysm Rapture Prewrath Posttribulation rapture Resurrection of the dead Vulnerable world hypothesis World to come Fictional Alien invasion Apocalyptic and post-apocalyptic fiction List of apocalyptic and post-apocalyptic fiction List of apocalyptic films Climate fiction Disaster films List of disaster films Zombie apocalypse Zombie Organizations Centre for the Study of Existential Risk Future of Humanity Institute Future of Life Institute Nuclear Threat Initiative General Disaster Depression Financial crisis Survivalism World portal Categories Apocalypticism Future problems Hazards Risk analysis Doomsday scenarios Authority control databases National Germany United States Czech Republic Spain Israel Other Theaterlexikon İslâm Ansiklopedisi Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐66xgc
Cached time: 20250814215800
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.928 seconds
Real time usage: 2.220 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 14053/1000000
Revision size: 109958/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 535905/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 36907/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 18/100
Expensive parser function count: 16/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 690422/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.181/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 18175889/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1795.170      1 -total
 40.33%  723.939      1 Template:Reflist
 19.68%  353.233     60 Template:Cite_book
  9.50%  170.489     33 Template:Cite_web
  6.82%  122.421      7 Template:Cite_encyclopedia
  6.71%  120.443      3 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
  6.40%  114.818      9 Template:Lang
  6.07%  108.942      9 Template:Navbox
  4.99%   89.492      4 Template:Sfn
  4.60%   82.490      1 Template:Christian_Eschatology Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:19156399:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814215800 and revision id 1304741722. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Antichrist&oldid=1304741722 " Categories : Antichrist The Beast (Revelation) Book of Revelation Christian eschatology Christian messianism Christian mythology Christian terminology Supernatural legends Unnamed people of the Bible First Epistle of John Second Epistle of John Devils Hidden categories: Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Webarchive template archiveis links Webarchive template wayback links CS1 German-language sources (de) Pages with numeric Bible version references CS1 Russian-language sources (ru) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles lacking reliable references Articles lacking reliable references from August 2018 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from June 2018 Articles containing Arabic-language text Articles incorporating a citation from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference Commons category link is on Wikidata Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1906 Jewish Encyclopedia Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1906 Jewish Encyclopedia without a Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from EB9 Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference This page was last edited on 7 August 2025, at 22:06 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Antichrist 65 languages Add topic

