Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Forms 3 Juridical persons Toggle Juridical persons subsection 3.1 Examples 4 Worldwide Toggle Worldwide subsection 4.1 India 4.1.1 Corporates and trusts 4.1.2 Animal kingdom 4.1.3 Religious deities 4.1.3.1 Shebaitship 4.1.4 Natural entities such as rivers 4.2 New Zealand 4.3 United States 4.3.1 Case law 5 Popular culture 6 See also 7 References Toggle References subsection 7.1 Citations 7.2 Sources 7.2.1 Books 7.2.2 Journal articles Toggle the table of contents Legal person 43 languages Afrikaans العربية Български Čeština Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Қазақша Latina Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча پښتو Polski Português Română Русский Sardu Slovenčina کوردی Српски / srpski Suomi ไทย Українська Tiếng Việt 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Any entity that is recognised as having privileges and obligations in law "Business entity" redirects here. For the concept in computer science, see Business object .

Business administration Accounting Management accounting Financial accounting Audit Business entity ( list ) Corporate group Corporation sole Company Conglomerate Holding company Cooperative Corporation Joint-stock company Limited liability company Partnership Privately held company Sole proprietorship State-owned enterprise Corporate governance Annual general meeting Board of directors Supervisory board Advisory board Audit committee Corporate law Commercial law Constitutional documents Contract Corporate crime Corporate liability Insolvency law International trade law Mergers and acquisitions Corporate title Chairman Chief business officer / Chief brand officer Chief executive officer / Chief operating officer Chief financial officer Chief human resources officer Chief information officer / Chief marketing officer Chief product officer / Chief technology officer Economics Commodity Public economics Labour economics Development economics International economics Mixed economy Planned economy Econometrics Environmental economics Open economy Market economy Knowledge economy Microeconomics Macroeconomics Economic development Economic statistics Finance Financial statement Insurance Factoring Cash conversion cycle Insider dealing Capital budgeting Commercial bank Derivative Financial statement analysis Financial risk Public finance Corporate finance Managerial finance International finance Liquidation Stock market Financial market Tax Financial institution Capital management Venture capital Types of management Asset Brand Business intelligence Business development Capacity Capability Change innovation Commercial Marketing Communications Configuration Conflict Content Customer relationship Distributed Earned value Electronic business Enterprise resource planning management information system Financial Human resource development Incident Knowledge Legal Materials Network administrator Office Operations services Performance Power Process Product life-cycle Product Project Property Quality Records Resource Risk crisis Sales Security Service Strategic Supply chain Systems administrator Talent Technology Organization Architecture Behavior Communication Culture Conflict Development Engineering Hierarchy Patterns Space Structure Trade Business analysis Business ethics Business plan Business judgment rule Consumer behaviour International business Business model International trade Trade route Business process Business statistics Business and economics portal v t e In law , a legal person is any person or legal entity that can do the things a human person is usually able to do in law – such as enter into contracts , sue and be sued, own property , and so on.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] The reason for the term " legal person" is that some legal persons are not human persons: companies and corporations (i.e., business entities ) are persons , legally speaking (they can legally do most of the things an ordinary person can do), but they are not, in a literal sense, human beings .

Legal personhood is a prerequisite to legal capacity (the ability of any legal person to amend – i.e. enter into, transfer, etc. – rights and obligations ): it is a prerequisite for an international organization being able to sign international treaties in its own name .

History [ edit ] The concept of legal personhood for organizations of people is at least as old as Ancient Rome : a variety of collegial institutions enjoyed the benefit under Roman law .

The doctrine has been attributed to Pope Innocent IV , who seems at least to have helped spread the idea of persona ficta as it is called in Latin . In canon law , the doctrine of persona ficta allowed monasteries to have a legal existence that was apart from the monks, simplifying the difficulty in balancing the need for such groups to have infrastructure though the monks took vows of personal poverty. Another effect of this was that, as a fictional person, a monastery could not be held guilty of delict due to not having a soul, helping to protect the organization from non- contractual obligations to surrounding communities. This effectively moved such liability to persons acting within the organization while protecting the structure itself, since persons were considered to have a soul and therefore capable of negligence and able to be excommunicated .

[ 6 ] In the common law tradition, only a person could possess legal rights. To allow them to function, the legal personality of a corporation was established to include five legal rights—the right to a common treasury or chest (including the right to own property), the right to a corporate seal (i.e., the right to make and sign contracts), the right to sue and be sued (to enforce contracts), the right to hire agents (employees) and the right to make by-laws (self-governance).

[ 7 ] Since the 19th century, legal personhood has been further construed to make it a citizen, resident, or domiciliary of a state (usually for purposes of personal jurisdiction ). In Louisville, C. & C.R. Co. v. Letson , 2 How. 497, 558, 11 L.Ed. 353 (1844), the U.S. Supreme Court held that for the purposes of the case at hand, a corporation is "capable of being treated as a citizen of [the State which created it], as much as a natural person." Ten years later, they reaffirmed the result of Letson, though on the somewhat different theory that "those who use the corporate name, and exercise the faculties conferred by it," should be presumed conclusively to be citizens of the corporation's State of incorporation. Marshall v. Baltimore & Ohio R. Co., 16 How. 314, 329, 14 L.Ed. 953 (1854). These concepts have been codified by statute, as U.S. jurisdictional statutes specifically address the domicile of corporations.

Forms [ edit ] There are two kinds of legal persons: human and non-human. In law, a human person is called a natural person (sometimes also a physical person ), and a non-human person is called a juridical person (sometimes also a juridic , juristic , artificial , legal , or fictitious person , Latin : persona ficta ).

Juridical persons are entities such as corporations, firms (in some jurisdictions ), and many government agencies . For most purposes they are treated in law as if they were human persons.

[ 2 ] [ 8 ] [ 9 ] While natural persons acquire legal personality simply by being born, juridical persons must have legal personality conferred on them by a legal process and, for this reason, they are sometimes called "artificial" persons. In the most common case ( incorporating a business), legal personality is usually acquired by registration with a government agency set up for the purpose. In other cases, legal personhood may result from legislation, such as the manner in which the Charity Commission was created in the UK.

[ 10 ] The United Nations Sustainable Development Goal 16 advocates for the provision of legal identity for all natural persons, including birth registration by 2030 as part of the 2030 Agenda .

[ 11 ] Juridical persons [ edit ] Main articles: Juridical person and Corporate personhood Artificial personality , juridical personality , or juristic personality is the characteristic of a non-living entity regarded by law as having the status of personhood .

A juridical or artificial person ( Latin : persona ficta ; also juristic person ) has a legal name and has certain rights, protections, privileges, responsibilities, and liabilities in law, similar to those of a natural person . The concept of a juridical person is a fundamental legal fiction . It is pertinent to the philosophy of law , as it is essential to laws affecting a corporation ( corporations law ).

Juridical personhood allows one or more natural persons ( universitas personarum ) to act as a single entity ( body corporate ) for legal purposes. In many jurisdictions , artificial personality allows that entity to be considered under law separately from its individual members (for example in a company limited by shares, its shareholders ). They may sue and be sued , enter into contracts, incur debt , and own property . Entities with legal personality may also be subjected to certain legal obligations, such as the payment of taxes. An entity with legal personality may shield its members from personal liability .

In some common law jurisdictions a distinction is drawn between corporation aggregate (such as a company, which is composed of a number of members) and a corporation sole , which is a public office of legal personality separated from the individual holding the office (these entities have separate legal personality).

[ 12 ] Historically most corporations sole were ecclesiastical in nature (for example, the office of the Archbishop of Canterbury is a corporation sole), but a number of other public offices are now formed as corporations sole.

The concept of juridical personality is not absolute. " Piercing the corporate veil " refers to looking at the individual natural persons acting as agents involved in a company action or decision; this may result in a legal decision in which the rights or duties of a corporation or public limited company are treated as the rights or liabilities of that corporation's members or directors .

The concept of a juridical person is now central to Western law in both common-law and civil-law countries, but it is also found in virtually every other legal system.

[ 8 ] Examples [ edit ] Some examples of juridical persons include: Cooperatives (co-ops), business organization owned and democratically operated by a group of individuals for their mutual benefit Corporations are bodies corporate created by statute or charter. A corporation sole is a corporation constituted by a single member, in a particular capacity, and that person's successors in the same capacity, in order to give them some legal benefit or advantage, particularly that of perpetuity, which a natural person could not have had. Examples are a religious officiant in that capacity, or The Crown in the Commonwealth realms . A corporation aggregate is a corporation constituted by more than one member.

Municipal corporations (municipalities) are created by statutes . Other organizations may be created by statute as legal persons, including European economic interest groupings (EEIGs).

Unincorporated associations , that is aggregates of two or more persons, are treated as juridical persons in some jurisdictions.

Partnerships , an aggregate of two or more persons to carry on a business in common for profit and created by agreement. Traditionally, partnerships did not have continuing legal personality, but many jurisdictions now treat them as having an independent legal personality.

Family can be treated as a legal person.

[ 13 ] Companies are corporations – the term often refers to a business association that carries on an industrial enterprise, although companies may take other forms, such as trade unions , unlimited companies , trusts , and funds .

Limited liability companies —be they a private company limited by guarantee , private company limited by shares , or public limited company —are entities having certain characteristics of both a corporation and a partnership. Different types have a complex variety of advantages and disadvantages.

[ 14 ] Sovereign states are legal persons.

[ 15 ] In the international legal system , various organizations possess legal personality. These include intergovernmental organizations (the United Nations, the Council of Europe ) and some other international organizations (including the Sovereign Military Order of Malta , a religious order ).

The European Union (EU) has legal personality since the Lisbon Treaty entered into force on 1 December 2009. That the EU has legal personality is a prerequisite for the EU to join the European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR) . However, in 2014, the EU decided not to be bound by the rulings of the European Court of Human Rights .

[ 16 ] Temples, in some legal systems, have separate legal personality.

[ 17 ] The Whanganui River was granted legal personality in March 2017 under New Zealand law because the Whanganui Māori tribe regard the river as their ancestor.

[ 18 ] Also, in March 2017, the High Court of Uttarakhand declared the Ganges River a legal "person" in a move that according to one newspaper, "could help in efforts to clean the pollution-choked rivers". As of 6 April 2017, the ruling has been commented on in Indian newspapers to be hard to enforce, with assertions that experts [ who?

] do not anticipate immediate benefits, that the ruling is "hardly game changing", that experts [ who?

] believe "any follow-up action is unlikely", and that the "judgment is deficient to the extent it acted without hearing others (in states outside Uttarakhand ) who have stakes in the matter".

[ citation needed ] The Supreme Court of India overturned the decision of the High Court of Uttarakhand in July 2017.

[ 19 ] Not all organizations have legal personality. For example, the board of directors of a corporation, legislature, or governmental agency typically are not legal persons in that they have no ability to exercise legal rights independent of the corporation or political body which they are a part of.

Worldwide [ edit ] India [ edit ] Indian law defines two types of "legal person", the human beings as well as certain non-human entities which are given the same legal judicial personality as human beings. The non-human entities given the "legal person" status by the law "have rights and co-relative duties; they can sue and be sued, can possess and transfer property" . Since these non-human entities are "voiceless" they are legally represented "through guardians and representatives" to claim their legal rights and to fulfill their legal duties and responsibilities. Specific non-human entities given the status of "legal person" include " corporate personality , body politic , charitable unions etc," as well as trust estates , deities , temples, churches, mosques, hospitals, universities, colleges, banks, railways, municipalities, and gram panchayats (village councils), rivers, all animals and birds.

[ 20 ] Corporates and trusts [ edit ] In court cases regarding corporates, the shareholders are not responsible for the company's debts but the company itself being a "legal person" is liable to repay those debts or be sued for the non-repayment of debts.

[ 20 ] Animal kingdom [ edit ] In court cases regarding animals, the animals have the status of "legal person" and humans have the legal duty to act as " loco parentis " towards animals welfare like a parent has towards the minor children. A court while deciding the " Animal Welfare Board of India vs Nagaraja" case in 2014 mandated that animals are also entitled to the fundamental right to freedom [ 21 ] enshrined in the Article 21 of Constitution of India i.e. right to life, personal liberty and the right to die with dignity ( passive euthanasia ). In another case, a court in Uttarakhand state mandated that animals have the same rights as humans. In another case of cow-smuggling , the Punjab and Haryana High Court mandated that "entire animal kingdom including avian and aquatic" species has a "distinct legal persona with corresponding rights, duties, and liabilities of a living person" and humans are "loco parentis" while laying out the norms for animal welfare, veterinary treatment, fodder and shelter, e.g. animal drawn carriages must not have more than four humans, and load carrying animals must not be loaded beyond the specified limits and those limits must be halved when animals have to carry the load up a slope.

[ 20 ] Religious deities [ edit ] See also: Hindu law In court cases regarding religious entities, the deity (deity or god is a supernatural being considered divine or sacred) is also a "legal person" who can engage in legal cases through " trustees " or " managing board in charge of the temple" .

Supreme Court of India (SC), while deciding Ayodhya case of Ram Janmabhoomi , decided in 2010 that the deity Rama in the specific temple was a "legal entity" entitled to be represented by their own lawyer appointed by the trustees acting on behalf of the deity. Similarly, in 2018 SC decided that the deity Ayyappan is a "legal person" with " the right to privacy " in the court case regarding the entry of women to Sabarimala shrine of Lord Ayyapan.

[ 20 ] Shebaitship [ edit ] Under the Indian law, the "shebaitship" is the property owned by the deity or idol as a "legal person". Humans appointed to act on behalf of deity are called the "shebait" . A shebait acts as the guardian or custodian of deity to protect the right of deity and fulfill the legal duties of the deity. Shebait is similar to a trustee in case the deity or temple does have a legally registered trust or entity. Under the Hindu Law property gifted or offered as rituals or donations, etc absolutely belongs to the deity and not to the shebait. Case example are "Profulla Chrone Requitte vs Satya Chorone Requitte, AIR 1979 SC 1682 (1686): (1979) 3 SCC 409: (1979) 3 SCR 431. (ii)" and "Shambhu Charan Shukla vs Thakur Ladli Radha Chandra Madan Gopalji Maharaj, AIR 1985 SC 905 (909): (1985) 2 SCC 524: (1985) 3 SCR 372" .

[ 22 ] Natural entities such as rivers [ edit ] India and New Zealand both recognised the legal rights of rivers in 2017.

[ 23 ] In court cases regarding natural entities, the Uttarakhand High Court , mandated that the river Ganges and Yamuna as well as all water bodies are "living entities" i.e.

"legal person" and appointed three humans as trustees to protect the rights of rivers against the pollution caused by the humans, e.g.

"pilgrims's bathing rituals" .

[ 20 ] The Supreme Court of India overturned the decision of the High Court of Uttarakhand in July 2017.

New Zealand [ edit ] Section 29 of the New Zealand Bill of Rights Act 1990 provides: "... the provisions of this Bill of Rights apply, so far as practicable, for the benefit of all legal persons as well as for the benefit of all natural persons." United States [ edit ] In part based on the principle that legal persons are simply natural persons and their organizations, and in part based on the history of statutory interpretation of the word "person", the US Supreme Court has repeatedly held that certain constitutional rights protect legal persons ( such as corporations and other organizations).

Santa Clara County v. Southern Pacific Railroad is sometimes cited for this finding because the court reporter's comments included a statement the Chief Justice made before oral arguments began, telling the attorneys during pre-trial that "the court does not wish to hear argument on the question whether the provision in the Fourteenth Amendment to the Constitution , which forbids a State to deny any person within its jurisdiction the equal protection of the laws, applies to these corporations. We are all of the opinion that it does." Later opinions interpreted these pre-argument comments as part of the legal decision.

[ 24 ] As a result, because of the First Amendment , Congress may not make a law restricting the free speech of a corporation or a political action group or dictating the coverage of a local newspaper, [ 25 ] and because of the Due Process Clause , a state government may not take the property of a corporation without using due process of law and providing just compensation. These protections apply to all legal entities, not just corporations.

A prominent component of relevant case law is the Supreme Court decision Citizens United v. Federal Election Commission , which ruled unconstitutional certain restrictions on corporate campaign spending during elections.

[ 26 ] Case law [ edit ] In U.S. v. The Cooper Corp.

, (1941) the court held that the United States government, as a juristic person, could sue under the Sherman Act . Section 7 of the act granted the right to sue only to persons. The corporate defendant, which was accused of illegally conspiring and colluding to raise prices on tires , argued that the U.S. government did not have power to enforce the act because the government was not a person. The court held that the term "person" includes the U.S. Government, and allowed the action against the collusive corporations to continue.

In Cook County v. U.S. ex rel Chandler , (2003) the county was accused of violating a law which forbids "any person" from falsely obtaining research funds from the government. The county received a $5 million grant, but used it to conduct inappropriate tests on human subjects. The county argued that it could not be held liable because it was not a person. The court held that the county could be sued under the law as a legal person.

In Rowland v. California Men's Colony, Unit II Men's Advisory Council , (1993) the court declined to extend certain rights to legal persons. The association of prisoners sought to proceed in forma pauperis . The court held that the right to sue in forma pauperis existed only for natural persons, not legal persons.

Other significant cases include: Paul v. Virginia ("... in which the United States Supreme Court held that a corporation is not a citizen...") Netscape Communications Corp. v. Konrad for what it means for two entities to be separate Popular culture [ edit ] In Act II, Scene 1 of Gilbert and Sullivan 's 1889 opera, The Gondoliers , Giuseppe Palmieri (who serves, jointly with his brother Marco, as King of Barataria) requests that he and his brother be also recognized individually so that they might each receive individual portions of food as they have "two independent appetites". He is, however, turned down by the Court (made up of fellow Gondolieri) because the joint rule "... is a legal person, and legal person are solemn things." See also [ edit ] Environmental personhood European Convention on the Recognition of the Legal Personality of International Non-Governmental Organisations Institution Intracorporate Conspiracy Doctrine List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 118 List of legal entity types by country Political representation of nature Separate legal entity Successor liability References [ edit ] Citations [ edit ] ^ Lewis A. Kornhauser and W. Bentley MacLeod (June 2010).

"Contracts between Legal Persons" .

National Bureau of Economic Research . Working Paper Series.

doi : 10.3386/w16049 .

S2CID 35849538 .

Archived from the original on 2 December 2013 . Retrieved 7 June 2013 .

^ a b Elizabeth A. Martin (2003).

Oxford Dictionary of Law (7th ed.). Oxford: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 0198607563 .

^ Smith, Bryant (January 1928). "Legal Personality".

Yale Law Journal .

37 (3): 283– 299.

doi : 10.2307/789740 .

JSTOR 789740 .

^ Anonymous (19 August 2010).

"Entity" .

LII / Legal Information Institute .

Archived from the original on 29 July 2017 . Retrieved 28 July 2017 .

^ Black, Henry Campbell; Garner, Bryan Andrew (2009).

Black's law dictionary (9th ed.). St. Paul, Minn: West. p. 976.

ISBN 978-0314199492 .

^ John Dewey, "The Historic Background of Corporate Legal Personality", Yale Law Journal, Vol. XXXV, April 1926, pages 655–673 ^ Saha, Tushar Kanti (2010).

Textbook on legal methods, legal systems and research . Universal Law.

ISBN 9788175348936 .

OCLC 892043129 .

^ a b Deiser, George F. (December 1908). "The Juristic Person. I".

University of Pennsylvania Law Review and American Law Register . 48 New Series (3): 131– 142.

doi : 10.2307/3313312 .

JSTOR 3313312 .

[...] men in law and philosophy are natural persons. This might be taken to imply there are persons of another sort. And that is a fact. They are artificial persons or corporations [...] ^ Frederic William (1911).

"Moral Personality and Legal Personality 1" . In H.A.L. Fisher (ed.).

The Collected Papers of Frederic William Maitland . Cambridge University Press. Archived from the original on 2014-02-21 . Retrieved 2013-06-07 .

Besides men or "natural persons," law knows persons of another kind. In particular it knows the corporation, and for a multitude of purposes it treats the corporation very much as it treats the man. Like the man, the corporation is (forgive this compound adjective) a right-and-duty-bearing unit.

^ "Charities Act 2006, s. 6" .

legislation.gov.uk . 8 November 2006.

Archived from the original on 14 April 2021 . Retrieved 22 November 2019 .

^ Doss, Eric.

"Sustainable Development Goal 16" .

United Nations and the Rule of Law .

Archived from the original on 2021-12-20 . Retrieved 2020-09-25 .

^ Ministry of Justice (21 October 2008).

"S.I. 2008/1957: extract from the explanatory memorandum prepared by the Ministry of Justice" . publications.parliament.uk.

Archived from the original on 23 August 2021 . Retrieved 23 August 2021 .

If each separate office that person held had been a "corporation sole" (i.e. recognised in law as a separate legal entity)...

^ Carney, Michael; Gedajlovic, Eric; Strike, Vanessa M. (2014). "Dead Money: Inheritance Law and the Longevity of Family Firms".

Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice .

38 (6): 1261– 1283.

doi : 10.1111/etap.12123 .

ISSN 1042-2587 .

^ Frisch D. (2011).

Commercial Law's Complexity Archived February 3, 2014, at the Wayback Machine .

George Mason Law Review .

^ Thorpe, Chris P.; Bailey, John C. L. (1999).

Commercial Contracts: A Practical Guide to Deals, Contracts, Agreements and Promises .

Kogan Page . p. 23.

ISBN 9780749428426 .

^ Opinion 2/13 [2014], nyr [1] ^ Williams v The Shipping Corporation of India (US District Court, Eastern District Virginia), 10 March 1980, 63 ILR 363 ^ Roy, Eleanor Ainge (16 March 2017).

"New Zealand river granted same legal rights as human being" .

The Guardian . London, United Kingdom.

Archived from the original on 2017-04-01 . Retrieved 2017-03-16 .

^ "India's Ganges and Yamuna rivers are 'not living entities' " . BBC. 7 July 2017.

Archived from the original on 21 March 2023 . Retrieved 21 March 2023 .

^ a b c d e Bhattacharya, Ananya (June 7, 2019).

"Birds to holy rivers: A list of everything India considers "legal persons" " .

Quartz .

Archived from the original on 2019-11-09.

^ Democratic Politics Class 9 . NCERT.

^ shebaitship Archived 2019-11-09 at the Wayback Machine , legalcrystal.com.

^ "Innovative bill protects Whanganui River with legal personhood" .

www.parliament.nz .

Archived from the original on 2019-09-30 . Retrieved 2022-09-03 .

^ See, for example, Noble v. Union River Logging Archived 2015-04-02 at the Wayback Machine ^ First Nat. Bank of Boston v. Bellotti ^ http://origin.www.supremecourt.gov/docket/08-205.htm [ dead link ] Sources [ edit ] Books [ edit ] Binder, J. (1907).

Das Problem der juristischen Persönlichkeit (in German). Archived from the original on 2011-07-20.

Saleilles, R. (1922).

De La Personalité Juridique: Histoire et Théories (in French).

Hallis, F. (1930).

Corporate Personality: A Study in Jurisprudence .

Duff, P.W. (1938).

Personality in Roman Private Law .

Cooke, C.A. (1950).

Corporation, Trust and Company: A Legal History .

Watson, A. (1967).

The Law of Persons in the Later Roman Republic .

Guterman, S. (1990).

The Principle of the Personality of Law in the Germanic Kingdoms of Western Europe from the Fifth to the Eleventh Century .

Journal articles [ edit ] Dewey, J. (1926).

"The Historic Background of Corporate Legal Personality" .

Yale Law Journal .

35 (6): 655– 673.

doi : 10.2307/788782 .

JSTOR 788782 .

Archived from the original on 2021-01-16 . Retrieved 2020-09-10 .

Machen, A.W. (1910). "Corporate Personality".

Harvard Law Review .

24 .

v t e Law Core subjects Administrative law Civil law Constitutional law Contract Criminal law Crime Deed Doctrine Equity Evidence International law Law of obligations Private law Procedure Civil Criminal Property law Public law Punishment Corporal Restitution and unjust enrichment Statutory law Tort Disciplines Abortion law Agricultural law Animal law Aviation law Amnesty law Banking law Bankruptcy Commercial law Competition law Conflict of laws Construction law Consumer protection Corporate law Cyberlaw Drugs law Election law Energy law Entertainment law (Media law) Environmental law Family law Financial law Financial regulation Health law Immigration law Intellectual property International criminal law International labour law International human rights International slavery laws International trade law Jurimetrics Labour Landlord–tenant law Law of war Legal archaeology Legal fiction Maritime law Marriage law Military law Music law Nationality law Probate Estate Will and testament Product liability Public international law Refugee law Space law Sports law State of emergency Tax law Transport law Trust law Unenforced law Sources of law Charter Legal code / Statutory law Constitution Custom Divine law Divine right Human rights Legitimacy Letters patent Man-made law Natural law Natural and legal rights Case law Precedent Law reports Legal treatise Regulations Law making Ballot measure Codification Decree Edict Executive order Proclamation Legislation Delegated legislation Regulation Rulemaking Promulgation Ratification Repeal Treaty Concordat Statutory law Statute Act of parliament Act of Congress Basic structure doctrine Legal systems Civil law Common law Chinese law Legal pluralism Religious law Canon law Catholic canon law Hindu law Jain law Jewish law Parsi law Sharia Roman law Byzantine law Socialist law Statutory law Xeer Yassa Legal theory Anarchist Contract theory Comparative law Expressive function Feminist Law and economics Legal ethics Legal formalism History Libertarian International legal theory Principle of legality Principle of typicality Pseudolaw Rule of law Rule of man Sociology Jurisprudence Adjudication Administration of justice Admission to practice law Constitutionalism Criminal justice Court-martial Disbarment Dispute resolution Fiqh Lawsuit/Litigation Legal opinion Legal remedy Damages Deterrence (penology) Proportionality Reparations Legal status Judge Justice of the peace Magistrate Judgment Judicial activism Judicial interpretation Judicial misconduct Kangaroo court Judicial review Jurisdiction Jury Justice Practice of law Attorney Barrister Counsel Lawyer Legal representation Prosecutor Solicitor Question of fact Question of law Trial Trial advocacy Trier of fact Ultra vires Verdict Legal institutions Barristers' chambers Bureaucracy The bar The bench Civil society Court Ecclesiastical Court of equity Election commission Executive Judiciary Law enforcement Agency Legal education Law school Legal industry by country Legislature Military Police Political party Tribunal History History of the legal profession History of the American legal profession Women in law Law portal Category Index Outline v t e Social class Status Stratum Economic classes Theories Elite theory Gilbert model Marxian Mudsill theory New class Spoon class theory Weberian (three-component) Related topics Caste Chattering classes Class conflict Class discrimination Class society Class traitor Classicide Classless society Euthenics High society Nouveau riche / Parvenu Poverty Ranked society Snobbery Social cleansing Social exclusion Social mobility Social orphan Social position Social stigma Subaltern Status Anxiety By demographic By status Administrative detainee Alien illegal immigrant refugee Citizen dual or multiple native-born naturalized second-class Clique adolescent Convicted Migrant worker Political prisoner Socioeconomic Stateless By " collar " Blue Green Grey New Pink White By type Ruling Aristocracy Aristoi Hanseaten Magnate Oligarchy Russian Patrician Ancient Rome Post-Roman Political Family List Hereditary Royal family Intellectual Clergy Priest Knowledge worker Professor Scholar Warrior Chhetri Cossacks Cuāuh Harii Hashashin Knight Kshatriya Nair Ocēlōtl Pendekar Samurai Spartiate Vanniyar / Vanniar (Chieftain) Upper Business magnate Elite Gabellotto Gentry Lord Nobility Landed Petty Old money Overclass Robber baron Seigneur Superclass Creative Bohemians Middle Bourgeoisie Petite Burgher Lower middle class Upper middle class Working Commoner Lazzaroni Lumpenproletariat Pea-pickers Peasant Precariat Proletariat Working poor Under Ant tribe Outcast Outlaw / Prisoner Serf Plebeian Rat tribe Slave / Freedman Untouchable By country or region United States Affluence American Dream History Mobility Classes Upper Black Donor Gentry Middle Black Mexican-American Upper Middle Underprivileged Lower Under Income Household Inequality Personal Poverty Standard of living Education Homelessness Home-ownership Other regions or countries Africa Belize Cambodia China Colombia France Haiti India Iran Italy Luxembourg Nepal New Zealand Nigeria Romania Sri Lanka Tibet United Kingdom United States Historic 18th-century Spain Ancient Greece Ancient Rome Aztec Ottoman Empire Pre-industrial East Asia Pre-industrial Europe Soviet Union Category Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐qk2sk
Cached time: 20250814220235
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.754 seconds
Real time usage: 0.932 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 3009/1000000
Revision size: 32979/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 187984/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 3225/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 11/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 126888/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.480/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 16044537/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  748.608      1 -total
 29.59%  221.509      1 Template:Reflist
 14.29%  106.943      6 Template:Cite_journal
 12.62%   94.502      2 Template:Langx
 12.07%   90.337      1 Template:Business_administration
 11.80%   88.306      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 10.71%   80.140     13 Template:Cite_book
  8.27%   61.902      6 Template:Navbox
  8.16%   61.101      1 Template:Short_description
  6.70%   50.184      4 Template:Fix Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:219287:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814220235 and revision id 1301527697. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Legal_person&oldid=1301527697 " Categories : Legal entities Corporate law Financial law Business economics Business terms Legal terminology Hidden categories: CS1: long volume value Webarchive template wayback links All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from May 2012 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Latin-language text All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from July 2017 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2017 CS1 German-language sources (de) CS1 French-language sources (fr) Articles containing French-language text This page was last edited on 20 July 2025, at 09:17 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Legal person 43 languages Add topic

