Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biosphere reserves Toggle Biosphere reserves subsection 1.1 IUCN classification 2 Programme's structure 3 World Congress of Biosphere Reserves 4 Networks 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Man and the Biosphere Programme 26 languages العربية Azərbaycanca भोजपुरी Dansk Eesti Español Esperanto فارسی Français Galego Hausa हिन्दी Italiano Қазақша Nederlands Polski Português Русский සිංහල Simple English Slovenščina Српски / srpski Svenska Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia UNESCO conservation programme This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article may contain excessive or inappropriate references to self-published sources .

Please help improve it by removing references to unreliable sources where they are used inappropriately.

( September 2020 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Man and the Biosphere Programme" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( September 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Some of this article's listed sources may not be reliable .

Please help improve this article by looking for better, more reliable sources. Unreliable citations may be challenged and removed.

( September 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Logo Walkway in Zuvintas Biosphere Reserve Man and the Biosphere Programme ( MAB ) is an intergovernmental scientific program, launched in 1971 by UNESCO , that aims to establish a scientific basis for the 'improvement of relationships' between people and their environments.

[ 1 ] MAB engages with the international development agenda, especially the Sustainable Development Goals and the Post 2015 Development Agenda . The MAB programme provides a platform for cooperation in research and development. As of July 2024 [update] , 759 sites across 136 countries, including 22 transboundary sites, have been included in the World Network of Biosphere Reserves .

[ 2 ] The reserves cover more than 5% of the world’s surface and are home to over 260 million people.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] Biosphere reserves [ edit ] Biosphere reserves are areas comprising terrestrial, marine and coastal ecosystems.

[ 3 ] Its biosphere reserves are nominated by national governments and remain under the sovereign jurisdiction of the states where they are located. Their status is internationally recognized. Biosphere reserves are 'Science for Sustainability support sites'.

Biosphere reserves have three zones: [ 1 ] [ 5 ] The core area(s) comprises a strictly protected ecosystem.

The buffer zone surrounds or adjoins the core areas and is used for ecological practices.

The transition area is the part of the reserve where most activity is allowed.

[ 6 ] IUCN classification [ edit ] The first biosphere reserves were designated in 1976 in several countries including the US, UK, Uruguay, Thailand, Iran and Poland.

[ 1 ] [ 7 ] In 1996, the IUCN and MAB published a guideline for how to assess UNESCO biosphere reserves in the IUCN classification system . The IUCN distinguishes between the biosphere core area, buffer zones, transition zones, and each individual biosphere reserve. Biosphere core zones were in IUCN category I; either Ia ( strict nature reserve ) or Ib ( wilderness area ). Biosphere buffer zones would fall into categories IV, V or VI, and transition zones would be categorized as either V or VI, if possible.

[ 8 ] In the 2020s, the zones are categorized as follows: core (category I-IV), buffer (category V-VI), transition (uncategorized).

[ 9 ] Programme's structure [ edit ] Further information: World Network of Biosphere Reserves Participating countries establish MAB National Committees that define and implement each country's activities. MAB currently operates through 158 national committees established among the 195 member states and nine associate member states of UNESCO.

The agenda of the MAB programme is defined by its main governing body, the International Coordinating Council. The MAB Council consists of 34 member states elected by UNESCO's General Conference. The council elects a chair and five vice-chairs from each of UNESCO's geopolitical regions, one of which functions as a rapporteur. These constitute the MAB Bureau.

The MAB Secretariat is based at UNESCO's Division of Ecological and Earth Sciences, at UNESCO's headquarters in Paris.

[ 10 ] It works with field offices at national and regional levels. MAB is funded by UNESCO and mobilizes funds in trust granted by Member States, bilateral and multilateral sources, and extra-budgetary funds provided by countries, the private sector and private institutions.

World Congress of Biosphere Reserves [ edit ] The first World Congress of Biosphere Reserves was held in Minsk, Belarus in 1983; [ 11 ] the congress created an 'Action Plan for Biosphere Reserves' which was adopted the following year.

The second World Congress was held in Seville, Spain in March 1995.

[ 11 ] The third World Congress was held in Madrid, Spain from February 4–9, 2008.

[ 12 ] The fourth World Congress of Biosphere Reserves took place in Lima , Peru , from March 14–17, 2016.

[ 13 ] The fifth World Congress is due to be held in Hangzhou, China from September 22–27 2025.

[ 14 ] Networks [ edit ] The World Network of Biosphere Reserves are as follows: The African Biosphere Reserves Network (AfriMAB) was created in 1996 and comprises 33 African countries.

The ArabMAB Network was officially launched in 1997 and represents 18 Arab countries.

The East Asian Biosphere Reserve Network was launched in 1994. Today, it consists of China, the Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Japan, Kazakhstan, Mongolia, the Republic of Korea and the Russian Federation.

EuroMAB is the network of biosphere reserves in Europe and North America . Created in 1987, it is the largest MAB Regional Network with 53 countries.

The Ibero-American MAB Network (IberoMAB) was created in 1992. It comprises 22 countries from Latin American and the Caribbean, Spain and Portugal.

The Pacific Man and the Biosphere Network (PacMAB) was created in 2006 and comprises the Federated States of Micronesia, Kiribati, Palau, Papua New Guinea, Samoa and Tonga.

The South and Central Asia MAB Network (SACAM) was created in 2002 and comprises Afghanistan, Bangladesh, Bhutan, India, Iran, Kazakhstan, Maldives, Nepal, Pakistan and Sri Lanka.

The Southeast Asian Biosphere Reserve Network (SeaBRnet) was created in 1998. Today, it comprises Cambodia, China, Indonesia, Japan, Lao PDR, Malaysia, Myanmar, Philippines, Thailand and Viet Nam.

The East Atlantic Biosphere Reserve Network (REDBIOS) was created in 1994. It comprises the Canary Islands (Spain), Cape Verde, Guinea Bissau, Madeira and Azores (Portugal), Mauritania, Morocco, Sao Tomé and Principe, and Senegal.

The World Network of Island and Coastal Biosphere Reserves was established in 2012 and comprises 22 countries.

See also [ edit ] Agenda 21 References [ edit ] ^ a b c University of Bergen website, UNESCO Chair: Sustainable heritage and environmental management , article dated 8 October 2020 ^ Drishti Vision Foundation India website, UNESCO Designates 11 New Biosphere Reserves , article dated 9 July 2024 ^ a b Britannica website, Biosphere Reserve ^ "Man and the Biosphere (MAB) Programme" .

UNESCO . January 7, 2019.

^ Southern Appalachian Man and the Biosphere website ^ "MAB leaflet 2015" (PDF) .

^ National Park Service History website, UNESCO Man and the Biosphere Program , article dated 9 October 2023 ^ Biosphere reserves and the IUCN system of protected area management categories . IUCN Man and the Biosphere Programme, World Conservation Union and Australian Nature Conservation Agency. 1996. Archived from the original on 26 October 2020 . Retrieved 11 September 2019 .

^ IUCN website, Guidelines for Applying Protected Area Management Categories , edited by Nigel Dudley (2013) ^ Nordic Council of Ministers website, UNESCO Biosphere Reserves – A Path to Local Holistic Sustainability , page 13 (2024) ^ a b South African Journal of Science website, A history of the UNESCO Man and the Biosphere Programme in South Africa , article by Ruida Pool-Stanvliet ^ SDG Knowledge Hub website, 3rd World Congress on Biosphere Reserves ^ "4th World Congress | United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization" .

www.unesco.org .

^ China Daily website, Event marks one-year countdown to biosphere reserve congress , article by Chen Ye dated 23 September, 2024 External links [ edit ] UNESCO World Network of Biosphere Reserves Frequently Asked Questions on Biosphere Reserve at the Library of Congress Web Archives (archived 2015-11-29) A-Z of Areas of Biodiversity Importance: Biosphere Reserves (MAB) v t e UNESCO Man and the Biosphere Programme World Network of Biosphere Reserves Africa Arab States Asia and the Pacific Europe and North America Latin America and the Caribbean Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National Germany United States Czech Republic Israel Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Man_and_the_Biosphere_Programme&oldid=1285654200 " Categories : 1971 in the environment Biodiversity Biomes Biosphere reserves Protected areas Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles with self-published sources from September 2020 All articles with self-published sources Articles needing additional references from September 2024 All articles needing additional references Articles lacking reliable references from September 2024 All articles lacking reliable references Articles with multiple maintenance issues Articles containing potentially dated statements from July 2024 All articles containing potentially dated statements Webarchive template other archives This page was last edited on 14 April 2025, at 23:34 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Man and the Biosphere Programme 26 languages Add topic

