Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Uses of fish hydrolysate 2 Bycatch 3 Stabilizers 4 Comparison with fish emulsion 5 References 6 External links 7 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Fish hydrolysate 2 languages العربية Bahasa Indonesia Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Fish hydrolysates have been made into a dried product Fish hydrolysate , in its simplest form, is ground up fish transformed into a liquid phase, where the cleavage of molecular bonds occurs through various biological processes. Raw material choice; either whole fish or by-products, depends on the commercial sources of the fish. In some cases, the fillet portions are removed for human consumption, the remaining fish body (generally the guts , bones , cartilage , scales and remaining meat ) is put into water and ground up. Some fish hydrolysate is ground more finely than others so more bone material is able to remain suspended.

Enzymes may also be used to dissolve bones, scale and meat. If the larger chunks of bone and scales are screened out, calcium or mineral content may be lacking in the finished product form. If purchasing fish hydrolysate for agricultural applications, one should look at the label carefully for the concentration of mineral elements in the liquid. Some fish hydrolysates have been made into a dried product, increasing the potential for inclusion as an ingredient in other food or feed products.  The oil is separated out in this process, which means the Omega 3 fatty acid would remain with the oil and not the hydrolysate.

[ 1 ] Uses of fish hydrolysate [ edit ] There are many uses of fish hydrolysate - from fish-based fertilizer , to its use as an animal food, or even for human consumption applications which are developing.  A number of scientific journals have cited the antiproliferative activity of fish protein hydrolysate, which makes it eligible for listing as a nutriceutical .

[ 2 ] Bycatch [ edit ] Hydrolysate process minces New technologies that have increased fishing efficiency have also resulted in the taking of species or sizes not suitable for market, known as bycatch . An increased catch of unsaleable whole fish has resulted from the increased bycatch of the fishing industry . These fish are often dumped overboard at sea, but are also brought into port in the holds of fishing boats . This has spurred an incentive to find a market for the bycatch in order to lower the cost of production.

Stabilizers [ edit ] The liquid fish hydrolysate process minces the whole fish, then enzymatically digests, then grinds and liquifies the resulting product, known as gurry. Because it is a cold process, gurry putrefies more rapidly than fish emulsion and needs to be stabilized at a lower pH, requiring more acid. Researchers have tried formic acid , sulfuric acid , and others. Formic acid had phytotoxic effects on plants.

Phosphoric acid is the preferred stabilizer.

[ 3 ] Comparison with fish emulsion [ edit ] If fish hydrolysate is heated, the oils and certain proteins can be more easily removed to be sold in purified forms. The complex protein, carbohydrate and fats in the fish material are denatured, which means they are broken down into less complex foods. Overheating can result in destruction of the material as a food to grow beneficial organisms. Once the oils are removed and proteins denatured and simplified by the heating process, this material is called a fish emulsion . The hydrolysate process has substantially lower capital and production costs compared to fish emulsion production.

[ 1 ] References [ edit ] ^ a b Critical Reviews in Food Science and Nutrition, Volume 40, Issue 1 January 2000, pp. 43–81.

^ Picot, L, et al., 'Antiproliferative activity of fish protein hydrolysates on human breast cancer cell lines', Process Biochemistry. Vol. 41, no. 5, May 2006.

^ Brian Baker, Plant Nutrition from the Sea , Farmer to Farmer 16 (Sept./Oct. 1996), available online at [1] Archived 2016-04-23 at the Wayback Machine .

External links [ edit ] Freshwater Fish Processing - Equipment and Examples of Technological Lines Further reading [ edit ] Hordur G. Kristinsson & Barabar A. Rasco, Fish Protein Hydrolysates: Production, Biochemical, and Functional Properties pp. 43–81, 40 Institute for Food Science and Technology 1(University of Washington 2000).

v t e Fishing industry topics Wild fisheries Fishing industry Aquarium fishery Artisanal fishing Bycatch Commercial fishing Declawing of crabs Fish slaughter List of harvested aquatic animals by weight Trawling Overfishing Pair trawling Midwater trawling Bottom trawling Seining Gillnetting Longlining Lobster fishing Trolling Dredging Fishing vessels Fish trap Power block Shark finning Fisheries Agulhas Bank Crab fisheries Cod fisheries Fishing by country Fisheries management Illegal fishing in Africa Krill fishery Ocean fisheries World fish production North Sea Shrimp fishery Aquaculture and farmed fisheries Aquaculture Aquaculture engineering Aquaponics Best practices Copper alloys Geothermal energy and aquaculture Inland saline Integrated multi-trophic Mariculture Antimicrobials Offshore Organic Raceway Recirculating Fish farming Broodstock Catfish Cobia Fish diseases and parasites Fish farming Fish feed Fish hatchery Fish stocking Spawning bed Salmon Tilapia Tailwater US hatcheries Algaculture Giant kelp Microalgae Microalgal bacterial flocs Photobioreactor Raceway pond Seaweed Other species Brine shrimp Coral Freshwater prawns Geoduck Hirudiculture Marine shrimp Octopus Oysters Scallops Sea cucumber Sea sponges Turtles By country Australia Canada Chile China Federated States of Micronesia Fiji Indonesia Kiribati Madagascar Marshall Islands Nauru New Zealand Palau Papua New Guinea Philippines Samoa Solomon Islands South Africa South Korea Timor-Leste Tonga Tuvalu United Kingdom United States Alaska Hawaii Maine Vanuatu Seafood processing and marketing Seafood processing Fish processing Fish factory Factory ship Fish preservation Slurry ice Dried fish Filleted fish Gibbing Salmon cannery Salted fish Smoked fish Kippers Seafood products Seafood Fish as food Cod liver oil Fish products Fish emulsion Fish meal Fish hydrolysate Fish oil Fish protein powder Fish sauce Gravlax Hákarl Lox Lutefisk Rakfisk Roe Bottarga Caviar Eoran Red caviar Pollock roe Tobiko Karasumi Shrimp paste Surimi Surströmming Seafood marketing Fish marketing Live fish trade Shrimp marketing Chasse-marée Fishmonger Fishwife Worshipful Company of Fishmongers Fish markets Billingsgate Busan English (Ireland) Fulton Garak Honolulu Huanan Jagiroad Jagalchi La Nueva Viga Maine Avenue Muara Angke Nouakchott Noryangjin Oluwo Pasil Peterhead Pike Place Sydney Scania Taipei Toyosu Tsukiji Ulsan Waterfront (Dubai) v t e Fisheries and fishing topic areas Fisheries Aquaculture Diversity of fish Fish diseases and parasites Fish farming Fisheries management Fisheries science Individual fishing quota Sustainable fishery Overfishing Wild fisheries Fishing Artisanal fishing Fisherman Fishing vessel History of fishing Industry List of harvested aquatic animals by weight By country Commercial fishing Marketing Markets Processing Products Seafood Recreation Angling Big-game fishing Catch and release Fishing tournaments Fly fishing Techniques Destructive fishing practices Fish trap Fishfinder Fishing net Gathering seafood by hand Handline fishing Spearfishing Trawling Trolling Tackle Artificial flies Bait Bite indicators Hook Line Lures Rod Sinker Locations Fish ponds Fishing banks Fishing villages Marine habitats Crime Bering Sea Anti-Poaching Operations Coral poaching Freshwater eel poaching and smuggling Illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing Arctic Glossary Index Outline Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Fish_hydrolysate&oldid=1300953734 " Categories : Organic fertilizers Fish products Soil improvers Hidden category: Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 17 July 2025, at 08:47 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Fish hydrolysate 2 languages Add topic

