Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Historical divisions Toggle Historical divisions subsection 1.1 Classical antiquity and medieval origins 1.2 Religion 1.3 Cold War 1.4 Western European Union 2 Modern divisions Toggle Modern divisions subsection 2.1 UN geoscheme classification 2.2 CIA classification 2.3 EuroVoc classification 2.4 UN regional groups: Western European and Others Group 3 Population 4 Climate 5 Languages 6 Economy 7 Global impact 8 See also 9 References Toggle References subsection 9.1 Citations 9.2 Sources 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Western Europe 139 languages Acèh Afrikaans Alemannisch አማርኛ Ænglisc العربية Aragonés Arpetan Asturianu Avañe'ẽ Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Basa Banyumasan Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Чӑвашла Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Estremeñu Euskara فارسی Føroyskt Français Frysk Gaeilge Gaelg Gagauz Galego ГӀалгӀай 客家語 / Hak-kâ-ngî 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Ирон Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa ಕನ್ನಡ Къарачай-малкъар ქართული Қазақша Kiswahili Kotava Kreyòl ayisyen Kurdî Ladin Ladino ລາວ Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Limburgs Lingua Franca Nova Magyar Македонски Malagasy मराठी მარგალური مصرى Bahasa Melayu Монгол Nederlands Nedersaksies नेपाली 日本語 Nordfriisk Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Novial Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی پښتو Polski Português Qaraqalpaqsha Română Русиньскый Русский Sardu Scots Shqip Simple English سنڌي Slovenčina Slovenščina Словѣньскъ / ⰔⰎⰑⰂⰡⰐⰠⰔⰍⰟ Ślůnski Soomaaliga کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Taqbaylit Татарча / tatarça ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Türkmençe Українська اردو Vèneto Tiếng Việt Walon 文言 West-Vlams Winaray Wolof 吴语 ייִדיש Yorùbá 粵語 Zazaki Zeêuws 中文 ⵜⴰⵎⴰⵣⵉⵖⵜ ⵜⴰⵏⴰⵡⴰⵢⵜ Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Subregion of the European continent Not to be confused with Western European Union .

Western Europe is the western region of Europe . The region's extent varies depending on context.
The concept of "the West" appeared in Europe in juxtaposition to "the East" and originally applied to the Western half of the ancient Mediterranean world, the Latin West of the Roman Empire , and " Western Christendom ". Beginning with the Renaissance and the Age of Discovery , roughly from the 15th century, the concept of Europe as "the West " slowly became distinguished from and eventually replaced the dominant use of "Christendom" as the preferred endonym within the area.

[ 1 ] By the Age of Enlightenment and the Industrial Revolution , the concepts of " Eastern Europe " and "Western Europe" were more regularly used.

[ 2 ] The distinctiveness of Western Europe became most apparent during the Cold War , when Europe was divided for 40 years by the Iron Curtain into the Western Bloc and Eastern Bloc , each characterised by distinct political and economical systems.

[ 3 ] Historical divisions [ edit ] This section possibly contains original research .

Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations . Statements consisting only of original research should be removed.

( September 2020 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Classical antiquity and medieval origins [ edit ] Schism of 1054 (East–West Schism) in Christianity [ 4 ] [ 5 ] Prior to the Roman conquest, a large part of Western Europe had adopted the newly developed La Tène culture . As the Roman domain expanded, a cultural and linguistic division appeared between the mainly Greek -speaking eastern provinces, which had formed the highly urbanised Hellenistic civilisation , and the western territories, which in contrast largely adopted the Latin language. This cultural and linguistic division was eventually reinforced by the later political east–west division of the Roman Empire . The Western Roman Empire and the Eastern Roman Empire controlled the two divergent regions between the 3rd and the 5th centuries.

The division between these two was enhanced during late antiquity and the Middle Ages by a number of events. The Western Roman Empire collapsed , starting the Early Middle Ages . By contrast, the Eastern Roman Empire, mostly known as the Greek or Byzantine Empire , survived and even thrived for another 1000 years. The rise of the Carolingian Empire in the west, and in particular the Great Schism between Eastern Orthodoxy and Roman Catholicism , enhanced the cultural and religious distinctiveness between Eastern and Western Europe.

After the conquest of the Byzantine Empire , center of the Eastern Orthodox Church, by the Muslim Ottoman Empire in the 15th century, and the gradual fragmentation of the Holy Roman Empire (which had replaced the Carolingian Empire ), the division between Roman Catholic and Protestant became more important in Europe than that with Eastern Orthodoxy.

In East Asia , Western Europe was historically known as taixi in China and taisei in Japan, which literally translates as the " Far West ". The term Far West became synonymous with Western Europe in China during the Ming dynasty . The Italian Jesuit priest Matteo Ricci was one of the first writers in China to use the Far West as an Asian counterpart to the European concept of the Far East . In Ricci's writings, Ricci referred to himself as "Matteo of the Far West".

[ 6 ] The term was still in use in the late 19th and early 20th centuries.

Religion [ edit ] Christianity is the largest religion in Western Europe. According to a 2018 study by the Pew Research Center , 71.0% of Western Europeans identified as Christians.

[ 7 ] In 1054, the East–West Schism divided Christianity into Western Christianity and Eastern Christianity . This split Europe in two, with Western Europe primarily under the Catholic Church , and much of Eastern Europe under the Eastern Orthodox Church . Ever since the Reformation in the 16th century, Protestantism has also been a major denomination in Europe, mostly in the West.

Cold War [ edit ] Political spheres of influence in Europe during the Cold War ; neutral countries (shaded grey or light blue) considered informally Western-oriented but not formally aligned to the West During the four decades of the Cold War , the definition of East and West was simplified by the existence of the Eastern Bloc . A number of historians and social scientists view the Cold War definition of Western and Eastern Europe as outdated or relegating.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] [ 10 ] During the final stages of World War II , the future of Europe was decided between the Allies in the 1945 Yalta Conference , between the British Prime Minister , Winston Churchill , the U.S. President , Franklin D. Roosevelt , and the Premier of the Soviet Union , Joseph Stalin .

Post-war Europe was divided into two major spheres: the Western Bloc , influenced by the United States , and the Eastern Bloc , influenced by the Soviet Union . With the onset of the Cold War, Europe was divided by the Iron Curtain . This term had been used during World War II by German Propaganda Minister Joseph Goebbels and, later, Count Lutz Schwerin von Krosigk in the last days of the war; however, its use was hugely popularised by Winston Churchill, who used it in his famous "Sinews of Peace" address on 5 March 1946 at Westminster College in Fulton, Missouri : From Stettin in the Baltic to Trieste in the Adriatic an iron curtain has descended across the Continent. Behind that line lie all the capitals of the ancient states of Central and Eastern Europe .

Warsaw , Berlin , Prague , Vienna , Budapest , Belgrade , Bucharest and Sofia ; all these famous cities and the populations around them lie in what I must call the Soviet sphere, and all are subject, in one form or another, not only to Soviet influence but to a very high and in some cases increasing measure of control from Moscow.

Although some countries were officially neutral , they were classified according to the nature of their political and economic systems. This division largely defines the popular perception and understanding of Western Europe and its borders with Eastern Europe on the east side. On the western side is the Atlantic ocean.

The world changed dramatically with the fall of the Iron Curtain in 1989.

West Germany peacefully absorbed East Germany , in the German reunification .

Comecon and the Warsaw Pact were dissolved, and in 1991, the Soviet Union ceased to exist. Several countries which had been part of the Soviet Union regained full independence.

Western European Union [ edit ] Member states of the Western European Union (1995–2011) In 1948 the Treaty of Brussels was signed between Belgium , France , Luxembourg , the Netherlands and the United Kingdom . It was further revisited in 1954 at the Paris Conference , when the Western European Union was established. It was declared defunct in 2011 after the Treaty of Lisbon , and the Treaty of Brussels was terminated. When the Western European Union was dissolved, it had 10 member countries. Additionally, it had 6 associate member countries, 7 associate partner countries and 5 observer countries.

Modern divisions [ edit ] UN geoscheme classification [ edit ] Subregions of Europe by United Nations geoscheme .

Eastern Europe Northern Europe Southern Europe Western Europe The United Nations geoscheme is a system devised by the United Nations Statistics Division (UNSD) which divides the countries of the world into regional and subregional groups, based on the M49 coding classification . The partition is for statistical convenience and does not imply any assumption regarding political or other affiliation of countries or territories.

[ 11 ] In the UN geoscheme, the following countries are classified as Western Europe: [ 11 ] Austria Belgium France Germany Liechtenstein Luxembourg Monaco Netherlands Switzerland CIA classification [ edit ] Regions of Europe based on CIA World Factbook : Northern Europe Western Europe Central Europe Southwest Europe Southern Europe Southeast Europe Eastern Europe The CIA classifies seven countries as belonging to "Western Europe": [ 12 ] Belgium France Ireland Luxembourg Monaco Netherlands United Kingdom The CIA also classifies three countries as belonging to "Southwestern Europe": Andorra Portugal Spain EuroVoc classification [ edit ] European sub-regions according to EuroVoc : Northern Europe Western Europe Southern Europe Central and Eastern Europe EuroVoc is a multilingual thesaurus maintained by the Publications Office of the European Union . In this thesaurus, the countries of Europe are grouped into sub-regions.

[ 13 ] The following countries are included in the sub-group Western Europe: [ 14 ] Andorra Austria Belgium France Germany Ireland Liechtenstein Luxembourg Monaco Netherlands Switzerland United Kingdom UN regional groups: Western European and Others Group [ edit ] WEOG member and observer states The Western European and Others Group is one of several unofficial Regional Groups in the United Nations that act as voting blocs and negotiation forums. Regional voting blocs were formed in 1961 to encourage voting to various UN bodies from different regional groups. The European members of the group are: [ 15 ] Andorra Austria Belgium Denmark Finland France Germany Greece Iceland Ireland Italy Liechtenstein Luxembourg Malta Monaco Netherlands Norway Portugal San Marino Spain Sweden Switzerland Turkey United Kingdom In addition, Australia , Canada , Israel and New Zealand are members of the group, with the United States as observer.

Population [ edit ] Using the CIA classification strictly would give the following calculation of Western Europe's population. All figures based on the projections for 2018 by the Population Division of the United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs .

[ 16 ] Rank Country or territory Population (most recent estimates) Languages Capital 1 United Kingdom 66,040,229 English London 2 France (metropolitan) 65,058,000 French Paris 3 Netherlands 17,889,600 Dutch , Frisian Amsterdam 1 4 Belgium 11,420,163 Dutch , French and German Brussels 5 Ireland 5,123,536 English , Irish Dublin 6 Luxembourg 602,005 French , Luxembourgish and German Luxembourg City 7 Monaco 38,300 French Monaco (city-state) Total 165,265,329 Using the CIA classification a little more liberally and including "South-Western Europe", would give the following calculation of Western Europe's population.

[ 16 ] Rank Country or territory Population (most recent estimates) Languages Capital 1 United Kingdom 66,040,229 English London 2 France (metropolitan) 65,058,000 French Paris 3 Spain 46,700,000 Spanish Madrid 4 Netherlands 17,889,600 Dutch , Frisian Amsterdam 1 5 Belgium 11,420,163 Dutch , French and German Brussels 6 Portugal 10,291,027 Portuguese Lisbon 7 Ireland 5,123,536 English , Irish Dublin 8 Luxembourg 602,005 French , Luxembourgish and German Luxembourg City 9 Andorra 78,264 Catalan Andorra la Vella 10 Monaco 38,300 French Monaco (city-state) Total 222,293,922 1 The Hague is the seat of government [ 17 ] Climate [ edit ] European climate. The Köppen-Geiger climates map is presented by the Climatic Research Unit of the University of East Anglia and the Global Precipitation Climatology Center of the Deutscher Wetterdienst.

The climate of Western Europe varies from Mediterranean in the coasts of Italy , Portugal and Spain to alpine in the Pyrenees and the Alps . The Mediterranean climate of the south is dry and warm. The western and northwestern parts have a mild, generally humid climate, influenced by the North Atlantic Current . Western Europe is a heatwave hotspot, exhibiting upward trends that are three-to-four times faster compared to the rest of the northern midlatitudes.

[ 18 ] Languages [ edit ] See also: Languages of Europe , Indo-European languages , and List of Indo-European languages Western European languages mostly fall within two Indo-European language families: the Romance languages , descended from the Latin of the Roman Empire ; and the Germanic languages , whose ancestor language ( Proto-Germanic ) came from southern Scandinavia .

[ 19 ] Romance languages are spoken primarily in the southern and central part of Western Europe, Germanic languages in the northern part (the British Isles and the Low Countries ), as well as a large part of Northern and Central Europe .

[ 19 ] Other Western European languages include the Celtic group (that is, Irish , Scottish Gaelic , Manx , Welsh , Cornish and Breton [ 19 ] ) and Basque , the only currently living European language isolate .

[ 20 ] Multilingualism and the protection of regional and minority languages are recognised political goals in Western Europe today. The Council of Europe Framework Convention for the Protection of National Minorities and the Council of Europe's European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages set up a legal framework for language rights in Europe.

[ 21 ] Economy [ edit ] Western Europe is one of the richest regions of the world.

Germany has the highest gross domestic product in Europe and the largest financial surplus of any country, Luxembourg has the world's highest GDP per capita, and Germany has the highest net national wealth of any European state.

[ 22 ] Switzerland and Luxembourg have the highest average wage in the world, in nominal and PPP , respectively.

Norway ranks highest in the world on the Social Progress Index .

[ 23 ] Global impact [ edit ] See also: Age of Discovery , History of colonialism , New Imperialism , and Industrial Revolution See also [ edit ] Geography portal Europe portal Atlantic Europe Central Europe Eastern Europe Northern Europe Southern Europe Far West Marshall Plan EuroVoc § Western Europe Western world References [ edit ] Citations [ edit ] ^ Delanty, Gerard (1995). "The Westernisation of Europe".

Inventing Europe Idea, Identity, Reality . p. 30.

doi : 10.1057/9780230379657 .

ISBN 978-0-333-62203-2 .

Until the late fifteenth century the idea of Europe was principally a geographical expression and subordinated to Christendom which was the dominant identity system in the West. The idea of Europe as the West began to be consolidated in the foreign conquests of the age of 'discovery" (...) "Europe then begins to shed itself of its association with Christendom and slowly becomes an autonomous discourse.

^ Sushytska, Julia (2012). Bradatan, Costica (ed.).

"What Is Eastern Europe? A Philosophical Approach" .

Angelaki .

Routledge : 39– 51.

^ "Key factors in the start of the Cold War upto 1955 - Reasons for the Cold War - Higher History Revision" .

BBC Bitesize . Retrieved 23 February 2024 .

^ "Atlas of the Historical Geography of the Holy Land" . Rbedrosian.com. Archived from the original on 10 June 2013 . Retrieved 23 February 2013 .

^ "home.comcast.net" . Archived from the original on 13 February 2013 . Retrieved 23 February 2013 .

^ Ricci, Matteo (1610) [2009].

On Friendship: One Hundred Maxims for a Chinese Prince . Translated by Timothy Billings. Columbia University Press. pp. 19, 71, 87.

ISBN 978-0-231-14924-2 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ "Being Christian in Western Europe" , Pew Research Center , Pew Research Center, 2018 , retrieved 29 May 2018 ^ "One very common, but now outdated, definition of Eastern Europe was the Soviet-dominated communist countries of Europe." http://www.cotf.edu/earthinfo/balkans/BKdef.html Archived 10 December 2017 at the Wayback Machine ^ "Too much writing on the region has – consciously or unconsciously – clung to an outdated image of 'Eastern Europe', desperately trying to patch together political and social developments from Budapest to Bukhara or Tallinn to Tashkent without acknowledging that this Cold War frame of reference is coming apart at the seams.

Central Europe Review: Re-Viewing Central Europe By Sean Hanley, Kazi Stastna and Andrew Stroehlein, 1999 [ usurped ] ^ Berglund, Sten; Ekman, Joakim; Aarebrot, Frank H. (2004).

The handbook of political change in Eastern Europe . p. 2.

ISBN 978-1-78195-432-4 . Retrieved 5 October 2011 .

The term 'Eastern Europe' is ambiguous and in many ways outdated.

^ a b "Methodology" .

UNSD . Retrieved 17 June 2019 .

^ "Field listing: Location" . CIA World Factbook. Archived from the original on 24 May 2011 . Retrieved 30 July 2017 .

^ "EuroVoc: 7206 Europe" . Retrieved 9 February 2021 .

^ "EuroVoc: Western Europe" . Retrieved 9 February 2021 .

^ UNAIDS, The Governance Handbook , January 2010 Archived 9 January 2011 at the Wayback Machine (p. 29).

^ a b "World Population Prospects 2018" . Archived from the original on 19 September 2016 . Retrieved 14 October 2018 .

^ "Europe :: Netherlands — The World Factbook" .

Central Intelligence Agency . Retrieved 6 October 2020 .

^ Rousi, Efi; Kornhuber, Kai; Beobide-Arsuaga, Goratz; Luo, Fei; Coumou, Dim (4 July 2022).

"Accelerated western European heatwave trends linked to more-persistent double jets over Eurasia" .

Nature Communications .

13 (1): 3851.

Bibcode : 2022NatCo..13.3851R .

doi : 10.1038/s41467-022-31432-y .

ISSN 2041-1723 .

PMC 9253148 .

PMID 35788585 .

S2CID 250282752 .

^ a b c "Europe" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . 2007 . Retrieved 10 June 2008 .

^ "Basque language" .

Encyclopedia Britannica . Retrieved 16 June 2020 .

^ Oszmiańska-Pagett, Aleksandra (January 2022).

"A Word from the Chair of the Committee of Experts" . Council of Europe . Retrieved 10 November 2023 .

^ "GDP (current US$) - European Union | Data" .

data.worldbank.org . Retrieved 12 March 2021 .

^ "2020 Social Progress Index" . The Social Progress Imperative . Retrieved 29 December 2020 .

Sources [ edit ] The Making of Europe , ISBN 978-0-14-015409-2 , by Robert Bartlett Crescent and Cross , ISBN 978-1-84212-753-7 , by Hugh Bicheno The Normans , ISBN 978-0-7524-2881-9 , by Trevor Rowley 1066: The Year of the Three Battles , ISBN 978-0-7126-6672-5 , by Frank McLynn External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Western Europe The European sub-regions according to the UN Teaching about Western Europe Archived 1 June 2006 at the Wayback Machine v t e Earth 's primary regions and subregions Worlds Down Under New World Old World Three/Four Worlds First World Second World Third World Fourth World Hemispheres Eastern Land Hemisphere Northern Southern Water Hemisphere Western Landmasses Africa-Eurasia Eurasia Americas Antarctica Australia Zealandia submerged Tectonic plates Continents Africa North Maghreb Sub-Saharan Central East Horn Great Lakes Southern West Antarctica East Antarctica Antarctic Plateau Transantarctic Mountains West Antarctica Antarctic Peninsula Asia East Northeast Southeast Mainland Maritime Central Aral Sea Aralkum Desert Caspian Sea North Siberia Ural Russian Far East Northeast South Indian subcontinent Subregions West Arabian Peninsula Caucasus South Caucasus Levant Dead Sea Levantine corridor Levantine Sea Near East Other regions Himalayan Himalayan states Indian region Inner Asia Greater Central Asia Europe Eastern Balkans Caucasus North Caucasus South Caucasus Southern Russia European Russia Southeastern Northern Baltic British Isles Nordic Northwestern Scandinavia Scandinavian Peninsula Southern Mediterranean Middle East Italy Italian peninsula South-eastern Balkan Peninsula South-western Iberian Peninsula Western Atlantic Low Countries Northwestern Other regions Central Europe By language Celtic Germanic Romance Slavic Macaronesia North America Northern America Greenland Great Lakes Pacific Northwest United States Appalachia Bible Belt Eastern East Coast Northern Southeast Southwest U.S. Census regions Northeastern New England Mid-Atlantic Midwest South Western Mountain Pacific Canada Atlantic Canadian Prairies Central Eastern Northern Western Middle America Aridoamerica Greater Caribbean Caribbean West Indies Central Am.

Mesoamerica Northern Mexico Oceania Australasia Australia Mainland Australia New Guinea Tasmania Zealandia Melanesia Island Melanesia Micronesia Near Oceania Polynesia Remote Oceania South America Amazon Plain Amazon Basin Amazon Rainforest Andean States Brazilian Highlands Caribbean South America The Guianas Southern Cone Patagonia Geopolitical regions Global East Heartland North Northeast Northwest South Southeast Southwest West Asia–Pacific Far East Pacific Asia Sinosphere Greater China Indosphere Greater India Europe, the Middle East and Africa Mediterranean Greater Middle East Middle East and North Africa Middle East Arab world Mashriq Maghreb Greater Iran Iranian plateau Americas Anglo Dutch French Latin America and the Caribbean Latin Ibero Hispanic Portuguese Islands By continent Africa Americas North America Caribbean Central America South America Antarctica Asia Europe by area by population Oceania Australia New Zealand By ocean Arctic Atlantic Baltic Sea Black Sea Caribbean Sea Irish Sea Mediterranean Sea Adriatic Sea Aegean Sea Ionian Sea Indian Persian Gulf Pacific East China Sea South China Sea Southern Oceans Antarctic/Southern Antarctic Convergence Arctic Atlantic Indian Pacific Great Barrier Reef Mariana Trench Challenger Deep Ring of Fire World Ocean Other waterbodies Lakes lists Rivers Seas Rim Arctic Atlantic Indo-Mediterranean Indian Ocean Mediterranean Pacific Polar Antarctic Arctic Continents of Earth / List of seas / Physical Earth v t e Europe articles History Chronology Bibliography of European history Prehistory Classical antiquity Late antiquity Middle Ages Early modernity World War I World War II Pax Europaea Crisis situations and unrest since 2000 COVID-19 pandemic Russian invasion of Ukraine By topic Military Sovereignty predecessor states Geography Areas and populations Countries by area European microstates Largest metropolitan areas Cities Climate Climate change Extreme points Geology Islands Lakes Mountains Regions Rivers Sovereign states and dependent territories by population Villages Politics Eurosphere International organisations Integration Law Post-Soviet Europe Transatlantic relations Intergovernmental Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) Council of Europe (CoE) Collective Security Treaty Organisation (CSTO) Eurasian Economic Union (EAEU) European Political Community (EPC) GUAM Organization Open Balkan North Atlantic Treaty Organisation (NATO) Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE) statistics Organization of the Black Sea Economic Cooperation European Union Economy relations free trade agreements Education European Economic Area (EEA) European Neighbourhood Policy (ENP) Eastern Partnership Euronest Parliamentary Assembly European Union Customs Union (EUCU) Eurozone Foreign relations Members enlargement Politics Schengen Area Visa policy Statistics Economy History Financial (and social) rankings Free trade areas Energy Telecommunications Transport Rail Road Intergovernmental Central European Free Trade Agreement (CEFTA) Eurasian Customs Union (EACU) Eurasian Economic Community (EAEC) European Free Trade Association (EFTA) Sovereign states by Average wage Budget revenues per capita GDP (nominal) per capita GDP (PPP) per capita GNI (nominal) per capita GNI (PPP) per capita HDI Internet users (%) Minimum wage Press Freedom Index Unemployment rate (%) Health expense per capita Military spending (%) Urban population (%) Electricity use per capita Society Ages of consent Etiquette Social (and financial) rankings Languages endangered Tattooing Universities Bologna Process Erasmus Culture Art painting sculpture Architecture Capital of Culture Cinema film festivals Classical music Cuisine Dance Folklore Literature Philosophy Religion Christianity Islam Judaism Sport Symbols ( Armorial , Flags ) Demographics Ageing Childhood population (%) Ethnic groups genetic history Immigration Life expectancy by region Retirement Outline Index Category Portal Maps Authority control databases International VIAF National Germany United States Czech Republic Israel Other NARA Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Western_Europe&oldid=1296274341 " Categories : Western Europe Regions of Europe Hidden categories: CS1 errors: ISBN date Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from November 2022 Use British English from April 2024 Articles that may contain original research from September 2020 All articles that may contain original research Articles containing Chinese-language text Articles containing Japanese-language text Articles containing video clips This page was last edited on 19 June 2025, at 00:36 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Western Europe 139 languages Add topic

