Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Marxist criminological views 2 Individual theorists Toggle Individual theorists subsection 2.1 Willem Bonger 2.2 Thorsten Sellin 3 Criticism 4 References Toggle References subsection 4.1 Works cited 5 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Marxist criminology 3 languages Azərbaycanca Português Svenska Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia School of criminology This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .

Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( August 2014 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Marxist criminology" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( April 2020 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article is written like a personal reflection, personal essay, or argumentative essay that states a Wikipedia editor's personal feelings or presents an original argument about a topic.

Please help improve it by rewriting it in an encyclopedic style .

( August 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a series on Marxism Outline Theoretical works Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844 The Condition of the Working Class in England The German Ideology Wage Labour and Capital The Communist Manifesto The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte Grundrisse Capital Critique of the Gotha Programme Dialectics of Nature The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State What Is to Be Done?

The Accumulation of Capital Philosophical Notebooks Terrorism and Communism The State and Revolution Essays on Marx's Theory of Value History and Class Consciousness Prison Notebooks The Black Jacobins On Practice Dialectic of Enlightenment A Critique of Soviet Economics The Long Revolution Guerrilla Warfare The Wretched of the Earth Reading Capital The Society of the Spectacle Pedagogy of the Oppressed Ideology and Ideological State Apparatuses Ways of Seeing How Europe Underdeveloped Africa Social Justice and the City Women, Race and Class Marxism and the Oppression of Women Imagined Communities Hegemony and Socialist Strategy The Sublime Object of Ideology Time, Labor and Social Domination The Age of Extremes The Origin of Capitalism Empire Late Victorian Holocausts Change the World Without Taking Power Caliban and the Witch An Introduction to the Three Volumes of Karl Marx's Capital Capitalist Realism Capital in the Anthropocene Philosophy Alienation Dialectical materialism Ideology Philosophy of nature Philosophy in the Soviet Union Reification Marxist ethics Critique of political economy Capital ( accumulation ) Crisis theory Commodity Concrete and abstract labor Factors of production Falling profit-rate tendency Means of production Mode of production Capitalist Socialist Productive forces Scientific socialism State monopoly capitalism Surplus product Socially necessary labour time Value-form Wage labour Sociology Base and superstructure Bourgeoisie Class Class consciousness Classless society Commodity fetishism Communist society Critical theory Cultural hegemony Democracy Dictatorship of the proletariat Soviet Radical Democratic centralism Exploitation False consciousness Human nature Immiseration Imperialism Lumpenproletariat Metabolic rift Proletariat Private property Relations of production State theory Working class History Class struggle Historical determinism Primitive accumulation Proletarian revolution World revolution Theory of historical trajectory Aspects Aesthetics Archaeology Criminology Cultural Marxism Cultural Studies Ethics Film theory Geography Historiography Literary criticism Marxism and religion Sociology Philosophy Common variants Structural Autonomist Marxism–Leninism Guevarism Maoism Neo-Gramscianism Regulation school Third-worldist Titoism Trotskyism Hegelian Budapest School Frankfurt School Humanist Neue Marx-Lektüre Open Praxis School Both Black Classical Communization Feminist Leninism Neo Post Western Other variants Analytical Austromarxism Hispanic marxism Centrist Eurocommunism Instrumental Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Nkrumaism Political Revisionist Situationist Socialism with Chinese characteristics Wertkritik People Marx Engels Morris Lafargue Rubin Kautsky Plekhanov Du Bois Connolly Lenin Luxemburg Liebknecht Kollontai Stalin Trotsky Grossman Zinoviev Bloch Lukács Korsch Bukharin Ho Serge Gramsci Pashukanis Bordiga Benjamin Mao Basu Mariátegui Horkheimer Dutt Brecht Marcuse Kalecki Fromm Cox Lefebvre James Adorno Padmore Sartre Deutscher Beauvoir Sombart Nkrumah Sweezy Emmanuel Hill Bettelheim Draper Jones Hobsbawm Althusser Hinton Williams Freire Cunhal Lara Mandel Sivanandan Miliband Cabral Thompson Bauman Fanon Berger Castro Guevara Liebman Heller Guattari Mészáros O'Connor Wallerstein Mies Tronti Debord Amin Hall Nairn Parenti Negri Jameson Dussel Harvey Laclau Bahro Poulantzas Vattimo Badiou Harnecker Altvater Ismail Anderson Löwy Vogel Sison Easthope Rancière Berman Przeworski Cohen Therborn Losurdo Postone Rodney Bannerji Spivak Newton Wood Federici Wolff Balibar Eagleton Kurz Rowbotham Mouffe Geras Brenner Davis Massey Cleaver Bishop Haraway Panitch Clarke Jessop Davis Wright Fraser Burawoy Holloway Rose Screpanti Tamás Hampton Cano Žižek Berardi Sankara Hennessy McDonnell Douzinas Roediger Foster West Ghandy Marcos Heinrich Prashad Kelley Dean Lordon Linera Fisher Li Prestes Coulthard Malm Seymour Toscano Bhattacharya Moufawad-Paul Srnicek Horvat Hamza Saito Journals Antipode Capital & Class Capitalism Nature Socialism Constellations Critique: Journal of Socialist Theory Historical Materialism Mediations Monthly Review New Left Review Race & Class Rethinking Marxism Science & Society Socialist Register Related topics 21st-century communist theorists Anarchism Creative destruction Conflict theory Criticism of Marxism Communism Communalism Economic determinism History of communism Left-wing politics Marxian economics New Left Old Left Municipalism Political ecology Socialism Authoritarian Democratic Market Reformist Revolutionary Social Utopian Left-wing populism Universal class Vulgar Marxism Economism Worker cooperative Workers' council Communism portal Economics portal Philosophy portal Politics portal Socialism portal v t e Criminology and penology Theory Anomie Biosocial criminology Broken windows Collective efficacy Crime analysis Criminalization Differential association Deviance Expressive function of law Labeling theory Psychopathy Rational choice Risk and actuarial criminology Social control Social learning Strain Subculture Symbolic interactionism Victimology Secondary victimisation Victim blaming Types of crime Against Humanity Person State Class Blue-collar White-collar Cold case Perfect Corporate Hate Immigrant International Juvenile Organized Political Public-order State State-corporate Transnational Victimless War Narcotic slavery Methods Comparative Profiling Ethnography Uniform Crime Reports Crime mapping reform sentencing Crime statistics Positivist school Qualitative Quantitative BJS NIBRS Penology Crime prevention Corrections Denunciation Deterrence Incapacitation Sentence Trial Prison Prisoner Solitary confinement Punishment Rehabilitation Recidivism Zero tolerance Criminal justice Participatory Restorative Retributive Right to an effective remedy Utilitarian Transformative Prison abolition Prison reform open Prisoner abuse Prisoners' rights Victims' rights Schools Anarchist Chicago Classical Conflict Critical Environmental Feminist Integrative Italian Law and order Marxist Neo-classical Populist Positivist Postmodernist Realism Left Right Subfields American Anthropological Biosocial criminology Conflict Criminology Culture Cyber Demography Development Environmental Experimental Organizational Political Public Radical criminology Browse Index Journals Organizations People v t e Marxist criminology is one of the schools of criminology . It parallels the work of the structural functionalism school which focuses on what produces stability and continuity in society but, unlike the functionalists, it adopts a predefined political philosophy . As in conflict criminology , it focuses on why things change, identifying the disruptive forces in industrialized societies, and describing how society is divided by power, wealth, prestige, and the perceptions of the world.

[ 1 ] It is concerned with the causal relationships between society and crime, i.e. to establish a critical understanding of how the immediate and structural social environment gives rise to crime and criminogenic conditions.

William Chambliss and Robert Seidman explain that "the shape and character of the legal system in complex societies can be understood as deriving from the conflicts inherent in the structure of these societies which are stratified economically and politically." [ 2 ] Karl Marx argued that the law is the mechanism by which one social class , usually referred to as the " ruling class ", keeps all the other classes in a disadvantaged position.

[ 3 ] [ page needed ] Marx criticized Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel for his German idealist view on law that gives "a transcendental sanction to the rules of existing society" and looking upon the criminal as "a free and self-determined being" rather than a "slave of justice" with "multifarious social circumstances pressing upon him".

[ 4 ] Thus, this school uses a Marxist lens through which, inter alia , to consider the criminalization process, and by which explain why some acts are defined as deviant whereas others are not. It is therefore interested in political crime , state crime , and state-corporate crime .

Marxist criminological views [ edit ] Marxism provides a systematic theoretical basis upon which to interrogate social structural arrangements, and the hypothesis that economic power is translated into political power substantially accounts for the general disempowerment of the majority who live in the modern state and the limitations of political discourse . Hence, whether directly or indirectly, it informs much of the research into social phenomena not only in criminology, but also in semiotics and the other disciplines which explore the structural relationships of power, knowledge, meaning, and positional interests within society.

[ citation needed ] Many criminologists agree [ citation needed ] that for a society to function efficiently, social order is necessary and that conformity is induced through a socialization process.

[ 5 ] "Law" is the label given to one of the means used to enforce the interests of the state . Hence, because each state is sovereign , the law can be used for any purpose. It is also common ground that, whether the society is meritocratic , democratic or autocratic , a small group emerges to lead. The reason for this group's emergence may be their ability to use power more effectively, or simple expediency in that, as population size grows, the delegation of decision-making powers to a group representative of the majority leads to more efficiency. Marxists are critical of the ideas, values, and norms of capitalist ideology, and characterize the modern state as being under the control of the group that owns the means of production. For example, William Chambliss (1973) examined the way in which the vagrancy laws were amended to reflect the interests of the ruling elite. He also looked at how British Colonial Law was applied in East Africa, so that the capitalist "ruling class" could profit from coffee plantations, and how the law in medieval England benefited feudal landowners.

[ 6 ] [ page needed ] Similarly, other researchers have highlighted evidence that corporate crime is widespread but is rarely prosecuted.

[ 7 ] These researchers assert that political power is used to reinforce economic inequality by embedding individual property rights in the law and that the resulting poverty is one of the causes of criminal activity as a means of survival. Marxists argue that a socialist society with communal ownership of the means of production would have much less crime. Indeed, Milton Mankoff asserts that there is much less crime in Western Europe than in the United States because Europe is more ‘Socialist’ than America. The implication of such views is that the solution to the "crime problem" is to engage in a socialist revolution.

[ citation needed ] A different issue emerges by applying Marx's theory of alienation . A proportion of crime is said to be the result of society offering only demeaning work with little sense of creativity.

[ citation needed ] However, the characterization of some crime as "working-class crime" and portraying it as a response to oppression is problematic. It selectively labels crime committed by people simply on the basis of their membership of a class, without engaging in victimology to identify whether any particular class or group is most likely to be the victim of such crime (because many criminals are disinclined to travel far, working-class crime is often directed at working-class people who live in the same neighborhood). In fact, the social differentiation of crime may vary by age, class, ethnicity, gender, demographic, and locality. This can cause some individuals to be at greater risk to victimization simply based on their location or even daily routine. According to Miethe and Stafford, different roles correlate to risks of victimization, and "structural changes in activity patterns influence crime rates." The three necessary elements of victimization include "motivated offenders, suitable targets, and absence of capable guardians." [ 8 ] Further, if anomie (the feeling one has when there is no longer any type of regulation or predictability in one’s life) is a primary cause of crime, there should be a theory to explain why only some working-class people commit crimes. According to Charles R. Tittle [ de ] , anomie can be considered one of eight theories or schools that "[imply] a negative association between socioeconomic status and the probability of criminal behavior." [ 9 ] [ page needed ] But if there is evidence that some individuals and, in some cases, entire groups are alienated from mainstream society, there should be detailed research into the effect that this has on society as a whole ( normlessness ). In such research, Marxism tends to focus on societal forces rather than the motives of individuals and their dualistic capacity for both right and wrong, moral and immoral. This can lead to a less comprehensive explanation of why people exercise their autonomy by choosing to act in particular ways. By comparison, in the sociology of deviance , Robert K. Merton borrows Durkheim 's concept of anomie to form the Strain Theory .

[ citation needed ] Merton argues that the real problem of alienation is not created by a sudden social change, as Durkheim proposed, but rather by a social structure that holds out the same goals to all its members without giving them equal means to achieve them. It is this lack of integration between what the culture calls for and what the structure permits that causes deviant behavior. Deviance then is a symptom of the social structure. Taylor et al. intend a combination of Interactionism and Marxism as a radical alternative to previous theories to formulate a "fully social theory of deviance".

[ 10 ] Sociologically, deviance is "the violation of a social norm which is likely to result in condemnation or punishment for the violator." [ 11 ] Marxist criminologists view the power to label behavior as "deviant" as arising partly from the unequal distribution of power within the state, and because the judgment carries the authority of the state, it attributes greater stigma to the prohibited behavior.

[ 12 ] This is true no matter what the political orientation of the state. All states enact laws which, to a greater or lesser extent, protect property. This may take the form of theft , or prohibit damage or trespass. Even though a theft law may not appear judgmental, a Marxist analysis of the conviction rates may detect inequalities in the way in which the law is applied.

[ 13 ] [ citation needed ] Thus, the decision whether to prosecute or to convict may be skewed by having the resources to employ a good lawyer . The same analysis may also show that the distribution of punishment for any given crime may vary according to the social class of the perpetrator. But, the law of theft exists to protect the interests of all those who own property. It does not discriminate by reference to the class of the owner.

[ citation needed ] Indeed, few laws in any states are drafted to protect property interests by reference to class, and the acceptance and enforcement of laws generally depend on a consensus within the community that such laws meet local needs.

[ citation needed ] In this, a comparison of the crime rates between states shows little correlation by reference to political orientation. Such correlations as do exist tend to reflect disparities between rich and poor, and features describing the development of the social and economic environment. Hence, the crimes rates are comparable in states where there are the largest disparities of wealth distribution, regardless of whether they are first, second or third world.

[ citation needed ] Individual theorists [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

( August 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Willem Bonger [ edit ] Dutch criminologist Willem Bonger believed in a causal link between crime and economic and social conditions.

[ 14 ] He asserted that crime is social in origin and a normal response to prevailing cultural conditions.

[ 15 ] In more primitive societies, he contended that survival requires more selfless altruism within the community.

[ 16 ] Once agricultural technology improved and a surplus of food was generated, systems of exchange and barter began offering the opportunity for selfishness. As capitalism emerged, there were social forces of competition and wealth, resulting in an unequal distribution of resources, avarice and individualism. Once self-interest and more egoistic impulses assert themselves, crime emerges.

[ citation needed ] The poor would commit crime out of need or out of a sense of injustice. Hence, those with power exercise control and impose punishment, equating the definition of crime with harm or threat of harm to the property and business interests of the powerful. Although the inherent activities comprising, say, a theft, may be identical, theft by the poor will be given greater emphasis than theft by the rich. This will have two consequences: direct which will increase the pressure for survival in an unequal society, and indirect in that it will increase a sense of alienation among the poor. Crime in the streets was a result of the miserable conditions in which workers lived in competition with one another. He believed that poverty alone could not be a cause of crime but rather poverty coupled with individualism, materialism, false needs, racism, and the false masculinity of violence and domination among street thugs.

[ citation needed ] Thorsten Sellin [ edit ] Thorsten Sellin was a sociologist at the University of Pennsylvania and one of the pioneers of scientific criminology.

[ 17 ] His method involved a comprehensive view of the subject incorporating historical, sociological, psychological, and legal factors into the analysis. He applied both Marxism and conflict theory to an examination of the cultural diversity of modern industrial society. In a homogeneous society, norms or codes of behavior will emerge and become laws where enforcement is necessary to preserve the unitary culture; where separate cultures diverge from the mainstream, those minority groups will establish their own norms. Socialization will therefore be to the subgroup and to the mainstream norms. When laws are enacted, they will represent the norms, values and interests of the dominant cultural or ethnic groups in a state which may produce border culture conflict. When the two cultures interact and one seeks to extend its influence into the other, each side is likely to react protectively. If the balance of power is relatively equal, an accommodation will usually be reached; if the distribution of power is unequal, the everyday behavior of the minority group may be defined as deviant. The more diversified and heterogeneous a society becomes, the greater the probability of more frequent conflict as subgroups who live by their own rules break the rules of other groups.

[ citation needed ] Criticism [ edit ] Ronald L. Akers has criticized Marxist criminology on the grounds that societies based on Marxist principles "have been unjust and repressive and do not represent a future for which criminologists should strive".

[ 18 ] [ page needed ] Marxist criminology shares with anarchist criminology the view that crime has its origins in an unjust social order and that a radical transformation of society is desirable.

[ 19 ] Unlike Marxists, who propose that capitalism be replaced with socialism, anarchists reject all hierarchical or authoritarian structures of power.

[ 19 ] References [ edit ] ^ Black, Pamela (January 2014). "Conflict Theories of Crime". In Miller, J. Mitchell (ed.).

The Encyclopedia of Criminology and Criminal Justice .

Blackwell Publishing . pp.

1– 5.

doi : 10.1002/9781118517383.wbeccj322 .

ISBN 978-1118517383 .

^ Chambliss, William J.

; Seidman, Robert B. (1971).

Law, Order, and Power . Reading, USA: Addison-Wesley Publishing Company. p. 3.

^ Tibbetts 2011 .

^ Marx, Karl (February 17–18, 1853).

"Capital Punishment. — Mr. Cobden's Pamphlet. — Regulations of the Bank of England" .

New-York Tribune . Retrieved 28 May 2024 – via Marxists Internet Archive .

^ "LSR volume 4 issue 3 Cover and Back matter" .

Law & Society Review .

4 (3): b1 – b8 . 1970-04-10.

doi : 10.1017/S0023921600015036 .

ISSN 0023-9216 .

^ Chambliss 1973 .

^ Shapiro 1985 [ page needed ] Pearce 2003 [ page needed ] Uhlmann 2016 [ page needed ] Diamantis & Laufer 2019 [ page needed ] Tombs & Whyte 2020 [ page needed ] St-Georges et al. 2023 [ page needed ] ^ Miethe, Terance D.; Stafford, Mark C.; Long, J. Scott (1987). "Social Differentiation in Criminal Victimization: A Test of Routine Activities/Lifestyle Theories".

American Sociological Review .

52 (2): 184– 194.

doi : 10.2307/2095447 .

ISSN 0003-1224 .

JSTOR 2095447 .

^ Tittle 1983 .

^ Taylor, Ian R.; Walton, Paul; Young, Jock (2013).

The new criminology: for a social theory of deviance . London. p. 25.

ISBN 978-0-415-85586-0 .

OCLC 827528457 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ Goode, Erich (2011). "Deviance". In Ritzer, G.; Ryan, J. M. (eds.).

The Concise Encyclopedia of Sociology . pp.

135– 136.

doi : 10.1002/9781444392654 .

ISBN 978-1-4051-8353-6 .

^ Bittle et al. 2018 , pp. xxxiv–xxxvi.

^ "Law, Order, and Power - Second Edition | Office of Justice Programs" .

www.ojp.gov . Retrieved 2025-04-04 .

^ Bonger 1916 , p. 244: "The great majority of authors are of the opinion that economic conditions occupy a more or less important position, but that other factors besides these are also at work. I have tried to show that as far as these factors are of a cosmic or religious nature, this thesis cannot be correct; that as far as they are of an anthropological nature, they play a role only with regard to a part of criminality." ^ Bonger 1916 , p. 244: "However, economic conditions, in my opinion, occupy an entirely different place; they are the foundation upon which the social structure rests. To make my thought clear I will once more call attention to the classic formula of this doctrine, originated by Marx and Engels, taken from the preface to the work, " Zur Kritik der politischen Oekonomie ", which I have already quoted in treating of the theories of Professor Ferri." ^ Bonger 1916 , p. 395: "We have seen above that primitive peoples, to whom we have referred showed very altruistic traits of character. The members of a group extend mutual aid, and, in their relations with one another, are benevolent, honest, truthful, and very susceptible to the opinions of others, etc." ^ "Johan Thorsten Sellin biography" .

University of Pennsylvania . Archived from the original on February 27, 2015 . Retrieved October 1, 2020 .

^ Akers 1979 .

^ a b Ugwudike 2015 , p. 94.

Works cited [ edit ] Akers, Ronald L. (1 February 1979). "Theory and Ideology in Marxist Criminology".

Criminology .

16 (4): 527– 544.

doi : 10.1111/j.1745-9125.1979.tb01391.x .

ISSN 1745-9125 .

Bittle, Steven; Snider, Laureen; Tombs, Steve; Whyte, David (2018). "Revisiting Crimes of the Powerful: an introduction". In Bittle, Steven; Snider, Laureen; Tombs, Steve; Whyte, David (eds.).

Crimes of the Powerful .

Routledge . pp.

xxxiii– xlix.

ISBN 978-1-315-21233-3 .

Bonger, Willem (1916).

Criminality and Economic Conditions . Translated by Horton, Henry P.

Little, Brown, and Company .

Chambliss, William (1973). "Elites and the Creation of Criminal Law". In Chambliss, William (ed.).

Sociological Readings in the Conflict Perspective . Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley. pp.

430– 444.

Diamantis, Mihailis E.; Laufer, William S. (October 2019).

"Prosecution and Punishment of Corporate Criminality" .

Annual Review of Law and Social Science .

15 : 453– 472.

doi : 10.1146/annurev-lawsocsci-101317-031212 .

Pearce, Frank (2003). "Preface". In Tombs, Steve; Whyte, David (eds.).

Crimes of the Powerful .

Peter Lang Publishing .

ISBN 0-8204-5691-8 .

Shapiro, Susan P. (1985). "The Road Not Taken: The Elusive Path to Criminal Prosecution for White-Collar Offenders".

Law & Society Review .

19 (179): 179– 217.

doi : 10.2307/3053454 .

JSTOR 3053454 .

St-Georges, Simon; Arel-Bundock, Vincent; Blais, André; Aviña, Marco Mendoza (December 2023).

"Jobs and Punishment: Public Opinion on Leniency for White-Collar Crime" .

Political Research Quarterly .

76 (4): 1751– 1763.

doi : 10.1177/10659129231176211 .

PMC 10615619 .

PMID 37916036 .

Tibbetts, Stephen G. (6 April 2011).

Criminological Theory: The Essentials .

SAGE Publications .

ISBN 9781412992343 .

Tittle, Charles R.

[in German] (1983). "Social Class and Criminal Behavior: A Critique of the Theoretical Foundation".

Social Forces .

62 (2): 334– 358.

doi : 10.2307/2578311 .

ISSN 0037-7732 .

JSTOR 2578311 .

Tombs, Steve; Whyte, David (2020).

"The Shifting Imaginaries of Corporate Crime" (PDF) .

Journal of White Collar and Corporate Crime .

1 (1): 16– 23.

doi : 10.1177/2631309X19882641 .

Ugwudike, Pamela (2015).

An Introduction to Critical Criminology .

Policy Press .

Uhlmann, David M. (2016). "The Pendulum Swings: Reconsidering Corporate Criminal Prosecution".

UC Davis Law Review .

49 (4): 1235– 1283.

Further reading [ edit ] Bonger, Willem (1905).

Criminality and Economic Conditions – via Marxists Internet Archive .

Chambliss, William J.

; Mankoff, Milton, eds. (1976).

Whose Law? What Order? A Conflict Approach to Criminology . New York: John Wiley .

Pearce, Frank & Snider, Laureen (1992). "Crimes of the Powerful" special issue of The Journal of Human Justice , Vol. 3, No.2, Spring.

Pearce, Frank & Tombs, S. (1998). "Foucault, Governmentality, Marx", Journal of Social and Legal Studies , 7:4, December.

Quinney, Richard. (1974).

Critique of Legal Order: Crime Control in Capitalist Society . Boston: Little, Brown and Company .

ISBN 0-7658-0797-1 Schwartz, Martin D. & Hatty, Suzanne E. (eds). (2003).

Controversies in Critical Criminology . Cincinnati, OH: Anderson Publishing.

ISBN 1-58360-521-5 Sellin, Thorsten. (1937).

Crime in the Depression Sellin, Thorsten. (1938) Culture Conflict and Crime . New York: Social Science Research Council .

Taylor, Ian R., Walton, Paul & Young, Jock. (1988) The New Criminology: For a Social Theory of Deviance (International Library of Sociology) , Routledge .

ISBN 0-415-03447-7 Wincup, Emma & Griffiths, Janis. (1999).

Crime, Deviance and Social Control (Access to Sociology S) , London: Hodder Arnold H&S, ISBN 0-340-74924-5 Vold, George Bryan, Thomas J. Bernard, Jeffrey B. Snipes, Theoretical Criminology , Oxford University Press , 2002, ISBN 0195142020 Vegh Weis, Vakeria (2018).

Marxism and Criminology . Chicago: Haymarket Books .

ISBN 9781608469307 .

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Marxist_criminology&oldid=1292110279 " Categories : Criminology Marxism Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from April 2025 CS1 maint: location missing publisher Articles containing German-language text Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles lacking in-text citations from August 2014 All articles lacking in-text citations Articles needing additional references from April 2020 All articles needing additional references Wikipedia articles with style issues from August 2024 All articles with style issues Articles with multiple maintenance issues All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2025 Articles with unsourced statements from January 2010 Articles with unsourced statements from November 2010 Articles needing additional references from August 2024 CS1 interwiki-linked names This page was last edited on 25 May 2025, at 07:24 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Marxist criminology 3 languages Add topic

