Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Assessment of forest biomass and carbon stocks 2 Methodology 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Tree allometry 2 languages Català Français Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Quantitative relations between some key characteristic dimensions of trees Stem profile measurement Electronic equipment (as Field-Map for example) is used for stem profile measurements and for measurements of profiles/projections of the crown. These key measurements are used for estimation of carbon sequestered in the plants.

Forest structure measurement is needed for establishment of allometric equations.

Tree allometry establishes quantitative relations between some key characteristic dimensions of trees ( usually fairly easy to measure ) and other properties (often more difficult to assess). To the extent these statistical relations, established on the basis of detailed measurements on a small sample of typical trees, hold for other individuals, they permit extrapolations and estimations of a host of dendrometric quantities on the basis of a single (or at most a few) measurements.

The study of allometry is extremely important in dealing with measurements and data analysis in the practice of forestry . Allometry studies the relative size of organs or parts of organisms. Tree allometry narrows the definition to applications involving measurements of the growth or size of trees. Allometric relationships often are used to estimate difficult tree measurements, such as volume, from an easily  measured attribute such as diameter at breast height (DBH).

The use of allometry is widespread in forestry and forest ecology . In order to develop an allometric relationship there must be a strong relationship and an ability to quantify this relationship between the parts of the subject measured and the other quantities of interest.

[ 1 ] Also when developing this equation one must play in factors which affect tree growth such as age, species, site location, etc.

[ 2 ] Once all these guidelines are met, one may attempt to develop an allometric equation.

Assessment of forest biomass and carbon stocks [ edit ] In 2013, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations launched GlobAllomeTree , a web-based platform designed to improve global access to tree allometric equations and support forest and climate-change project developers, researchers, scientists and foresters to assess forest volume and biomass, and carbon stocks. Jointly developed by FAO , the French Research Centre CIRAD and Tuscia University of Italy, the GlobAllomeTree platform provides a consistent and harmonized database of tree and stand volume and biomass allometric equations; software to compare equations and assess variables of interests, such as volume, biomass and carbon stocks; access to scientific research information on allometric equations; and access to tutorials, manuals and documentation supporting the development and use of tree allometric equations.

In 2012, FAO and CIRAD published a manual for building tree volume and biomass allometric equations for students, technicians or researchers working to assess forest resources such as volume, biomass and carbon stocks for commercial, bioenergy or climate change mitigation purposes.

[ 3 ] Methodology [ edit ] First thing to do is select a group of some subject (for forestry: trees). Then measure several easily measured attributes such as DBH, height, species, etc. Graph the results and perform a regression analysis and transform some of the variables until a correct regression is found.

There are different tree species compositions in each region in the world and most of those regions have at least one equation that estimates tree volume from DBH. Research and the application of forest allometry have meshed over time to develop these quick equations to accurately estimate how much volume a particular forest stand holds.

The general allometric equation for mathematics and science is Y = β β X α α {\displaystyle Y=\beta X^{\alpha }} where Y is a biological variable (such as tree height or DBH), β is a proportionality coefficient, α is the scaling exponent (which is equal to the slope of the line when plotted on logarithmic coordinates), and X is some physical measure such as body volume or body mass(M). While α is often quite similar between very diverse organisms, β differs from species to species. Because the proportionality constants β and the scaling exponents α are often denoted using Greek letters, it is desirable to use β as the proportionality coefficient versus α , since α could be misread as the symbol for "proportional".

A well-known allometric equation relates metabolic rate to body mass: Y = βM 3/4.

In forestry the equation takes on many forms in order to represent relationships between the many various attributes of tree size and growth. Below is an example: Y = b 0 + b 1 X {\displaystyle Y=b_{0}+b_{1}X} See also [ edit ] Biomass allocation da Vinci branching rule References [ edit ] ^ Smith, W.B., and G.J. Brand. 1983 Allometric biomass equations for 98 species of herbs, shrubs, and small trees. Research note NC-299. USDA Forest Service, North Central Forest Experiment Station, St. Paul, MN 8p.

^ Avery and Burkhart. Forest Measurements. Copyright 2002 by McGraw-Hill Companies Inc. New York.

^ Picard N., Saint-André L., Henry M. 2012. Manual for building tree volume and biomass allometric equations: from field measurement to prediction. Food and Agricultural Organization of the United Nations, Rome, and Centre de Coopération Internationale en Recherche Agronomique pour le Développement, Montpellier Biomass functions applicable to European beech [ permanent dead link ] E. CIENCIALA, M. ČERNÝ, J. APLTAUER, Z. EXNEROVÁ, JOURNAL OF FOREST SCIENCE, 51, 2005 (4): p. 147–154; v t e Forestry Index Forest areas Ministries Research institutes Colleges Journals Arbor Day Types Agroforestry dehesa Analog forestry Bamboo forestry Close to nature forestry Community forestry Ecoforestry Energy forestry Mycoforestry Permaforestry Plantation forestry Social forestry Sustainable forestry Urban forest Urban forestry Ecology and management Arboriculture Controlled burn Debris coarse driftwood large log jam slash Dendrology Ecological thinning Even-aged management Fire ecology Forest dynamics informatics IPM inventory governance law Global Forest Information Service old-growth pathology protection restoration secondary stand transition Trillion Tree Campaign Forest certification ATFS CFS FSC PEFC SFI SmartWood Woodland Carbon Code Forestation afforestation reforestation Formally designated Glade Growth and yield modelling Horticulture GM trees i-Tree urban Multipurpose tree Silviculture Sustainable management Tree allometry breeding Tree measurement crown girth height volume Environmental topics Acid rain Carbon sequestration Clearcutting Deforestation Ecosystem services Forest degradation Forest dieback Forest fragmentation Ghost forest Great Green Wall (Africa) Great Green Wall (China) High grading Illegal logging timber mafia Invasive species wilding Million Tree Initiative REDD Shifting cultivation chitemene slash-and-burn slash-and-char svedjebruk Timber recycling Tree hugging Urban forest inequity Wildfire Industries Coppicing Forest farming Forest gardening Logging Manufacturing lumber plywood pulp and paper sawmilling Products biochar biomass charcoal non-timber palm oil rayon rubber tanbark Rail transport Tree farm Christmas trees Wood engineered fuel mahogany spruce-pine-fir teak Woodworking green woodworking Occupations Forester Arborist Bucker Choker setter Ecologist Feller Firefighter handcrew hotshot lookout smokejumper River driver Truck driver Log scaler Lumberjack Ranger Resin tapper Rubber tapper Shingle weaver Timber cruiser Tree planter Wood process engineer WikiProject Climate change portal Earth sciences portal Ecology portal Environment portal Plants portal Trees portal Category Outline Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Tree_allometry&oldid=1066547806 " Category : Forest modelling Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from July 2018 Articles with permanently dead external links This page was last edited on 18 January 2022, at 22:12 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Tree allometry 2 languages Add topic

