Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History of space technology 2 Hazards caused by space technology 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Space technology 29 languages अंगिका العربية বাংলা Български Català Dansk Eesti Ελληνικά Español فارسی 한국어 हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia עברית Bahasa Melayu नेपाली 日本語 Norsk nynorsk Português Русский سنڌي Suomi ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська اردو 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiversity Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Technology developed for use in Space exploration Space technology is technology for use in outer space . Space technology includes space vehicles such as spacecraft , satellites , space stations and orbital launch vehicles ; deep-space communication ; in-space propulsion ; and a wide variety of other technologies including support infrastructure equipment, and procedures .

Many common everyday services for terrestrial use such as weather forecasting , remote sensing , satellite navigation systems, satellite television , and some long-distance communications systems critically rely on space infrastructure . Of the sciences, astronomy and Earth science benefit from space technology.

[ 1 ] New technologies originating with or accelerated by space-related endeavors are often subsequently exploited in other economic activities.

History of space technology [ edit ] See also: Astronautics The first country on Earth to put any technology into space was the Soviet Union . The Soviet Union sent the Sputnik 1 satellite on October 4, 1957. It weighed about 83 kg (183 lb), and is believed to have orbited around the globe. Analysis of the radio signals was used to gather information about the electron density of the ionosphere , while temperature and pressure data was encoded in the duration of radio beeps.

The first successful human spaceflight was Vostok 1 , carrying 27-year-old Soviet cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin in April 1961. The entire mission was controlled by either automatic systems or by ground control . This was because medical staff and spacecraft engineers were unsure how a human might react to weightlessness, and therefore it was decided to lock the pilot's manual controls.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] The first probe to impact the surface of the Moon was the Soviet probe Luna 2 , which made a hard landing on September 14, 1959. The far side of the Moon was first photographed on October 7, 1959, by the Soviet probe Luna 3 .s
On December 24, 1968, the crew of Apollo 8 , Frank Borman , James Lovell and William Anders , became the first human beings to enter lunar orbit and see the far side of the Moon in person. Humans first landed on the Moon on July 20, 1969. The first human to walk on the lunar surface was Neil Armstrong , commander of Apollo 11 . The first space probe to land on moon South Pole of India.

Chandrayaan-3 was launched aboard an LVM3-M4 rocket on 14 July 2023, at 09:05 UTC from Satish Dhawan Space Centre Second Launch Pad in Sriharikota, Andhra Pradesh, India, entering an Earth parking orbit with a perigee of 170 km (106 mi) and an apogee of 36,500 km (22,680 mi).

Apollo 11 was followed by Apollo 12 , 14 , 15 , 16 , and 17 .

Apollo 13 had a failure of the Apollo service module , but passed the far side of the Moon at an altitude of 254 kilometers (158 miles; 137 nautical miles) above the lunar surface, and 400,171 km (248,655 mi) from Earth, marking the record for the farthest humans traveled from Earth in 1970.

The first robotic lunar rover to land on the Moon was the Soviet vessel Lunokhod 1 on November 17, 1970, as part of the Lunokhod program . To date, the last human to stand on the Moon was Eugene Cernan , who, as part of the Apollo 17 mission, walked on the Moon in December 1972. Apollo 17 was followed by several uncrewed interplanetary missions operated by NASA. Also Technological innovations in space exploration have important effects on the economy, society, and the environment.

Economically, new safety features and technology have made space missions cheaper. Using reusable rockets helps companies save money because they do not need to fix or replace rockets as often. This makes space exploration more affordable and encourages more people to invest in the space industry.

Socially, these new technologies have created many jobs in areas like engineering, research, and aerospace manufacturing. The growth of the space industry also helps other industries, such as telecommunications and materials engineering, by creating new job opportunities.

Environmentally, using reusable rockets helps reduce space debris. By reusing rockets, space agencies can produce less waste and lessen the impact of space missions on the environment. This approach supports cleaner space exploration and a more sustainable future.

In summary, technological advances in space exploration positively affect the economy, create jobs, and promote environmental sustainability, helping the field continue to grow.

One of the notable interplanetary missions is Voyager 1 , the first artificial object to leave the Solar System into interstellar space on August 25, 2012. It is also the most distant artificial object from Earth.

[ 4 ] The probe passed the heliopause at 121 AU to enter interstellar space .

[ 5 ] Voyager 1 is currently at a distance of 145.11 astronomical units (2.1708 × 10 10 km; 1.3489 × 10 10 mi) (21.708 billion kilometers; 13.489 billion miles) from Earth as of January 1, 2019.

[ 6 ] Hazards caused by space technology [ edit ] This section is an excerpt from Spaceflight § Safety .

[ edit ] All launch vehicles contain a huge amount of energy that is needed for some part of it to reach orbit. There is therefore some risk that this energy can be released prematurely and suddenly, with significant effects. When a Delta II rocket exploded 13 seconds after launch on January 17, 1997, there were reports of store windows 10 miles (16 km) away being broken by the blast.

[ 7 ] Space is a fairly predictable environment, but there are still risks of accidental depressurization and the potential failure of equipment, some of which may be very newly developed.

In April 2004 the International Association for the Advancement of Space Safety was established in the Netherlands to further international cooperation and scientific advancement in space systems safety.

[ 8 ] See also [ edit ] Spaceflight portal Space Technology and Satellite Technology [ 9 ] NewSpace Spacecraft propulsion Space science References [ edit ] ^ Hall, Loura (2015-03-16).

"About Us" .

NASA . Retrieved 2020-06-27 .

^ "Oleg Ivanovsky - obituary" .

The Daily Telegraph . September 21, 2014 . Retrieved September 25, 2014 .

^ Burgess and Hall, p.156 ^ "Voyager 1" .

BBC Solar System . Archived from the original on February 3, 2018 . Retrieved September 4, 2018 .

^ Harwood, William (September 12, 2013).

"Voyager 1 finally crosses into interstellar space" .

CBS News .

^ "Voyager - Mission Status" .

Jet Propulsion Laboratory .

NASA . Retrieved January 1, 2019 .

^ "Unmanned rocket explodes after liftoff" . CNN.

^ "The second IAASS: Introduction" .

Congrex . European Space Agency. Archived from the original on 24 July 2012 . Retrieved 3 January 2009 .

^ "Space Technology and Satellite Technology - Space Tech" . 2024-02-04 . Retrieved 2024-02-07 .

External links [ edit ] Space technology at Wikipedia's sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Textbooks from Wikibooks Resources from Wikiversity Media related to Space exploration technologies at Wikimedia Commons NASA images and videos of space technology NASA solar system overview Space-Tech: To Infinity and Beyond v t e ... in space Biology Human The human body Hygiene Locomotion Medicine Neuroscience Psychology Psychological and sociological effects Sex Sleep Non-human Animals Cats Cockroaches Dogs Frogs Fruit flies Mice Primates Tardigrades Tortoises Extraterrestrial life Microorganisms Plants Astrobotany Environment Climate Corrosion Debris Dust Magnetosphere Weather Weathering Society Advertising Alcohol Archaeology of Earth of items in space Art Burial Colonization Economy Mining Trade Ethics Exploration Food Law Military Music Religion Christmas Selfies Tourism Voting War Women Technology Human spaceflight Accidents Architecture Farming Food Carbonated drinks Toilets Writing Other technologies Logistics Manufacturing Mining Power Batteries Nuclear Solar for Earth for spacecraft Radar Telescopes Weapons Outer space portal Authority control databases : National Czech Republic Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Space_technology&oldid=1293563619 " Category : Space technology Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with excerpts Pages using Sister project links with default search Commons category link is locally defined This page was last edited on 2 June 2025, at 12:08 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Space technology 29 languages Add topic

