Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Community programs 2 Governance and funding 3 List of members 4 UCAR Presidents 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents University Corporation for Atmospheric Research 9 languages العربية Español فارسی Français Македонски Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Polski 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "University Corporation for Atmospheric Research" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( December 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) US nonprofit higher education consortium The University Corporation for Atmospheric Research ( UCAR ) is a US nonprofit consortium of more than 100 colleges and universities providing research and training in the atmospheric and related sciences.

[ 1 ] UCAR manages the National Center for Atmospheric Research (NCAR) and provides additional services to strengthen and support research and education through its community programs. Its headquarters, in Boulder , Colorado , include NCAR's Mesa Laboratory , designed by I.M. Pei .

UCAR was established in 1959 by faculty from 14 leading universities to support and nourish the atmospheric sciences. They were motivated by a newly recognized need for pooled observational and computational facilities and a strong research staff, which together would allow the academic community to carry out complex, long-term scientific programs beyond the reach of individual universities.

[ 2 ] This group's first major action, in partnership with the National Science Foundation , was to establish NCAR. Since then, UCAR has managed NCAR on behalf of NSF to address pressing scientific and societal needs involving the atmosphere and its interactions with the oceans, land, and Sun—what is now called Earth system science.

Community programs [ edit ] UCAR's role in supporting and complementing the work of academia has grown to include new research, service, and education efforts, including COMET Program - offers professional training on site and online in meteorology , weather hazards, hydrology, oceanography, emergency management, and environmental science COSMIC Program - supports satellite and ground-based observations and research using GPS technology for meteorology, climate, and ionospheric studies GLOBE Program - provides hands-on, school-based learning and collaboration with a global network of students, scientists, and educators Joint Office for Science Support - supports community research, conference, and field projects National Science Digital Library Resource Center and Digital Learning Sciences - supports and sustains community digital education projects Unidata Program - provides streaming observational data to university classrooms and researchers around the world Visiting Scientist Programs - places postdoctoral fellows and visiting scientists at partner institutions The organization hosts numerous workshops, community meetings, and opportunities for collaboration throughout the year.

Governance and funding [ edit ] As of 2016, UCAR comprises 109 member colleges and universities and 52 international affiliates. The organization has a total of 1,390 staff, including 877 at NCAR and 282 engaged in community programs. Total expenditures for fiscal year 2015 (October 2014–September 2015) were approximately $204.2 million.

[ 3 ] UCAR and NCAR are headquartered in Boulder, Colorado , spread across four campuses. Ancillary activities take place in Cheyenne, Wyoming, Washington, D.C., and in about 15 other states.

Walter Orr Roberts was UCAR's first president. Antonio J. Busalacchi Jr. has been UCAR president since August 2016.

List of members [ edit ] Appalachian State University Arizona State University Brown University California Institute of Technology Central Michigan University Clemson University Coastal Carolina University College at Brockport College of Charleston Colorado State University Columbia University Cornell University Dartmouth College Drexel University Duke University Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University Florida Institute of Technology Florida State University George Mason University Georgia Institute of Technology Hampton University Harvard University Howard University Indiana University Iowa State University Jackson State University Johns Hopkins University Louisiana State University Massachusetts Institute of Technology McGill University Metropolitan State University of Denver Michigan State University Michigan Technological University Millersville University Mississippi State University Naval Postgraduate School Desert Research Institute New Mexico Institute of Mining & Technology New York University North Carolina A&T University North Carolina State University Northern Vermont University-Lyndon Old Dominion University Oregon State University Pennsylvania State University Plymouth State University Princeton University Purdue University Rice University Rutgers University San Diego State University St. Cloud State University Saint Louis University San Francisco State University San José State University Scripps Institute , University of California, San Diego South Dakota School of Mines & Technology Stanford University University at Albany SUNY Oswego Stony Brook University Texas A&M University Texas A&M University, Corpus Christi Texas State University Texas Tech University United States Naval Academy Universidad Metropolitana University of Alabama University of Alabama in Huntsville University of Alaska, Fairbanks University of Arizona University of British Columbia University of California, Berkeley University of California, Davis University of California, Irvine University of California, Los Angeles University of Chicago University of Colorado University of Connecticut University of Delaware University of Denver University of Georgia University of Hawaiʻi at Mānoa University of Houston University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign University of Iowa University of Kansas University of Louisiana at Monroe University of Maine University of Maryland, Baltimore County University of Maryland, College Park University of Massachusetts Amherst University of Massachusetts Lowell University of Miami University of Michigan University of Minnesota, Twin Cities University of Missouri University of Nebraska–Lincoln University of New Hampshire University of North Carolina at Asheville University of North Dakota University of Northern Colorado University of Oklahoma University of Rhode Island University of Saskatchewan University of Texas at Arlington University of Texas at Austin University of Texas at El Paso University of Toronto University of Utah University of Virginia University of Washington University of Wisconsin-Madison University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee University of Wyoming Utah State University Valparaiso University Washington State University Western Illinois University Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution Yale University York University UCAR Presidents [ edit ] A list of all UCAR presidents is given below.

[ 4 ] UCAR President Dates in office Walter Orr Roberts 1960 - 1974 Francis P. Bretherton 1974 - 1980 Robert White 1980 - 1983 Clifford Murino 1983 - 1988 Richard A. Anthes 1988 - 2012 Thomas Bogdan 2012 - 2015 Michael Thompson (interim) 2015 - 2016 Antonio J. Busalacchi 2016 - In addition to NSF sponsorship, funding includes grants from and contracts with the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA), the Department of Defense (DOD), Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), Department of Energy (DOE), Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), and other agencies and organizations.

See also [ edit ] Carolyn Brinkworth , ACO officer for UCAR References [ edit ] ^ "University Corporation for Atmospheric Research | University Corporation for Atmospheric Research" .

^ "The first 14, UCAR Quarterly , Winter 08-09" . Archived from the original on 2013-09-30 . Retrieved 2011-05-11 .

^ Quick Facts about NCAR & UCAR ^ UCAR Presidents External links [ edit ] Official website National Center for Atmospheric Research (NCAR) Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National United States Israel Catalonia Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=University_Corporation_for_Atmospheric_Research&oldid=1304746693 " Categories : Meteorology and climate education Meteorological organizations based in the United States Meteorological research institutes Research organizations in the United States Hidden categories: Articles needing additional references from December 2023 All articles needing additional references Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 7 August 2025, at 22:51 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents University Corporation for Atmospheric Research 9 languages Add topic

