Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Packages 2 See also 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents List of spatial analysis software 1 language Français Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia The topic of this article may not meet Wikipedia's general notability guideline .

Please help to demonstrate the notability of the topic by citing reliable secondary sources that are independent of the topic and provide significant coverage of it beyond a mere trivial mention. If notability cannot be shown, the article is likely to be merged , redirected , or deleted .

Find sources: "List of spatial analysis software" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( May 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

Find sources: "List of spatial analysis software" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( May 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Spatial analysis software is software written to enable and facilitate spatial analysis . Currently, there are several packages, both free software and proprietary software , which cover most of the spatial data infrastructure stack [ citation needed ] .

Packages [ edit ] Package Free of charge Operating Systems Developer institution/person Field of interest (if any specific) Main Features Language License Snappy Mapper Yes, for non-commercial use Web-based Snappy Mapper Vector data Bridges the knowledge gap between users and GIS entities, allowing data generation and sharing by non-technical users Proprietary (with free trial available).

CARTO No Web-based (Cloud SaaS) CARTO Spatial data science & location intelligence Spatial SQL, spatial data science, location analytics, site selection, data visualization, mapping, geocoding and app development. Access to a catalog of 1,000s of spatial datasets.

Proprietary (with free trial available).

Fract No Linux , Windows , Unix , iOS , Android , Windows Phone , Cloud Fract, Inc.

Geospatial AI Analytics for Business Intelligence Ease of use, AI feedback, Territory Mapping Proprietary Mapcite Yes for Excel addin Linux , Windows , Unix , iOS , Android , Windows Phone Mapcite Ltd - London and Sydney Geospatial data analytics, location data sets, geocoding Ease of aggregation and harmonisation of disparate data sets to expose insights and create new data.

Proprietary 360FranTerra 20/20iSite MarketMentor No GbBIS Custom web applications used for a range of spatial analysis including franchise territory design and management, location analysis and site selection, market analysis and more.

LuciadLightspeed No Linux , Windows , Unix , iOS , Android , Windows Phone Luciad LuciadLightspeed is widely recognized as the leading set of high-performance geospatial software components.

LuciadLightspeed consists of over 100 different software components and connectors to fuse, visualize and analyze geospatial data. This can include static and moving data, maps, satellite imagery, crowd-sourced data, full motion video, weather data and terrain elevation in many different geodetic references and map projections. Geo-fencing, line-of-sight calculations, geo-triggered events, dynamic and complex route calculations and automated anomaly detection are just a mouse click away. Independent benchmark tests by academia and industry leave no doubt: LuciadLightspeed is over 100 times faster and more accurate than traditional GIS software.

Web API , Java-J2EE , .NET , JavaScript , HTML5 Proprietary.

Polaris Intelligence No Linux , Windows , Unix , iOS , Android , Windows Phone Polaris Intelligence Geospatial data analytics, business intelligence Easy to use. Polaris Intelligence consists of multiple modules including mapping (thematic maps, heat maps, POI maps, trade area maps), customer profiling, gravity models, customer allocation models, feature selection, data mining, and targeting. A key strength is the vast quantities of consumer geo-demographic and behaviour data native to the platform.

ArcGIS No Linux , Windows , Unix , iOS , Android , Windows Phone Esri A GIS system to create, visualize, manage, and analyze spatial data. Supports desktop, web, and mobile applications.

In addition to spatial data editing and visualization, ArcGIS provides spatial analysis and modeling features including overlay, surface, proximity, suitability, and network analysis, as well as interpolation analysis and other geostatistical modeling techniques.

Python , Web API , .NET Proprietary. Analytical extensions can be purchased separately.

ClusterPy (non-GUI, open source) GeoGrouper (GUI, free) yes Linux , MAC OS , Windows RiSE group, Dr. Juan C. Duque and Boris Dev Spatial clustering Library of algorithms to aggregate areas into regions, where each region is geographically connected, while optimizing a predefined objective function.

Python BSD license R -Analysis of Spatial Data yes Linux , MAC OS , Windows Roger Bivand (maintainer) Analysis Full integration of spatial data analysis tools with the R : classes for spatial data; handling spatial data; reading and writing spatial data; point pattern analysis; geostatistics ; disease mapping and areal data analysis; spatial regression and ecological analysis.

R GPL-2 Google Earth yes Linux , MAC OS , Windows Google 3D visualisation Easy to use, dynamic graphics, historical maps , users can create dynamic "tours," integrated with the Web.

- Freeware PySAL yes Linux , MAC OS , Windows GeoDa Center Analysis Modules for: computational geometry, spatial weights, ESDA, inequality, mobility and spatial econometrics Python BSD license Minerva yes Linux , MAC OS , Windows Arizona State University Minerva Project Visualization (3D) High performance; ability to display large amounts of raster and vector from multiple sources C++ BSD license GMap Creator yes Linux , MAC OS , Windows CASA CASA website for GMap Creator, Web Mapping Thematic mapping. Creates image pictures from shapefiles and creates Google Maps websites with the data linked to the shapefile - Freeware QGIS yes Linux , MAC OS , Windows QGIS Development Team Visualization Easy to use, ability to expand functionality with Python plugins. Geo-processing functions included.

C++ GPL GRASS yes Linux , MAC OS , Windows GRASS Development Team GIS Extensive set of GIS tools for both raster and vector data , SQL, visualization, voxel C, C++, Python, Tcl GPL GeoDa [1] yes Windows , MAC OS , Linux Center for Spatial Data Science, University of Chicago Analysis Interactive exploratory spatial data analysis, dynamic linking and brushing for cross-section data, local cluster stats, basic spatial regression capabilities.

C++ GPL STARS yes Linux , MAC OS , Windows GeoDa Center Analysis ESTDA (Exploratory Space-Time Data Analysis). Interactive linking, brushing and travelling for space-time data Python GPL GeoDaSpace [2] yes MAC OS , Windows Center for Spatial Data Science, University of Chicago Spatial Econometrics Advanced spatial models for cross section (GMM, IV and spatial HAC) Python Freeware SANET yes Windows Atsu Okabe Point patterns in networks Analysis of events that occur on networks or alongside networks. Includes 14 tools for point patterns in networks - Freeware CrimeStat yes Windows Ned Levine and Associates Spatial analysis of points, zones, and lines Basic spatial description, hot spot analysis, kernel density interpolation, space-time interaction, journey-to-crime analysis ( Geographic profiling ),  crime travel demand modelling, and spatial regression.

- Freeware SaTScan yes Windows , Linux , MAC OS Martin Kulldorff and Information Management Services Inc.

Applications by Field of Study Spatial, temporal and Space-Time Scan Statistics C/C++, Java Freeware Croizat yes Linux , MAC OS , Windows Mauro J. Cavalcanti Panbiogeography Ability to integrate and analyze spatial data on species or other taxa and to explore geographical patterns in diversity under a panbiogeographic and
graph-theoretic approach Python GPL Hawths Tools yes (Requires ArcGIS , which is not free) Windows Hawthorne Beyer Ecology Analysis, sampling, animal movements, kernel, raster, table, vector editing, specialist and other tools.

Freeware Fragstats yes Windows Dr. Kevin McGarigal - University of Massachusetts Landscape metrics for categorical map patterns Area, density, edge metrics. Shape metrics (Fractal dimension index) and much more.

Visual C++ Freeware Patch Analyst yes Windows Rob Rempel - Centre for Northern Forest Ecosystems Research Patch metrics for categorical map patterns Mean patch size, Number of patches, Indices of patchiness, edge metrics, and much more.

Visual C++ Freeware SAGA yes Windows , Linux Institute of Geography at the University of Hamburg, Germany GIS, Analysis Grid analysis, Geostatistics, Terrain Analysis, Hydrology simulation, TIN tools.

C++ OpenSource Whitebox GAT yes Linux , MAC OS , Windows John Lindsay - Centre for Hydrogeomatics, University of Guelph, Canada GIS and remote sensing package GIS analysis, hydrological tools, image processing tools, LiDAR tools, statistical analysis, stream network analysis, terrain analysis .NET framework 3.5 GPL ILWIS Open yes Windows Remote sensing and GIS software which integrates image, vector and thematic data.

Integrated raster and vector design; import and export of widely used data formats; on-screen and tablet digitizing; image processing tools; orthophoto, image geo-referencing, transformation and mosaicing; Advanced modelling and spatial data analysis; 3D visualization; projection and coordinate system library; geo-statistical analyses; production and visualization of stereo image pairs; spatial Multiple Criteria Evaluation; WMS; Surface Energy Balances.

- GPL Map Comparison Kit (MCK) yes Windows Map comparisons for categorical and numerical maps.

A large number of map comparison algorithms for categorical and numerical maps, including Kappa, variations to Kappa, and landscape metrics.

C++ Freeware IDRISI No Windows Clark Labs GIS, Image Processing, Spatial Modelling A GIS analysis package for basic and advanced spatial analysis, an Image Processing system with extensive hard and soft classifiers including machine learning classifiers, integrated modelling environments including the Earth Trends Modeller for image time series of environmental trends and Land Change Modeller for land change analysis and prediction.

Delphi Proprietary Biodiverse Yes Linux , Windows , Unix , macOS Shawn Laffan Biogeography, Biodiversity, Environmental Biodiverse is a tool for the spatial analysis of diversity using indices based on taxonomic, phylogenetic and matrix-based (e.g. genetic distance) relationships, as well as related environmental variations. Biodiverse supports: linked visualisation of data in geographic, taxonomic, phylogenetic and matrix spaces; Spatial moving window analyses; Spatially constrained agglomerative cluster and region grower analyses; and Randomisations for hypothesis testing.

Perl LGPL ERDAS IMAGINE No Windows Intergraph Remote Sensing, Image Processing, Spatial Modelling, GIS ERDAS IMAGINE incorporates geospatial image processing and analysis, remote sensing, and GIS capabilities into a single powerful, convenient package. ERDAS IMAGINE enables users to easily create value-added products such as 2D and 3D images, 3D fly-through movies, and cartographic-quality map compositions from geospatial data.

C , C++ Proprietary TerraLens No Linux , Windows , Unix , MacOS , Android , Windows Phone Kongsberg Geospatial TerraLens is a real-time computing geospatial software platform optimized for mission-critical applications and performance on low-end hardware and chipsets.

TerraLens is a geospatial platform that includes a comprehensive core API, as well as additional tools like a Web Map Tile Service (WMTS) tile server, a map styling and packaging tool, and a UI development middleware toolkit. TerraLens is designed to easily fuse and integrate a wide range of real-time data sources, including SONAR, RADAR, and LIDAR data, full-motion video, and proprietary or open-source data that includes geolocation elements with terrain elevation and satellite imagery in a wide range of formats and map projections. TerraLens is used extensively for real-time applications including naval and air defence, beyond visual line-of-sight (BVLOS) mission management for unmanned systems, and air traffic management.

C++ , Java-J2EE , .NET , QT (software) , Web GL Proprietary GIS Spatial Analytics & Analysis No Web-based Marketing Systems Group Spatial analysis and data visualization for an array of business and government sectors Leverage the power of geographic and demographic data using MSG’s full suite of GIS services: reports and maps, geocoding, spatial analytics, geographic frame design and much more. From simple maps and reports to multifaceted data, spatial projects, and custom consulting, MSG’s GIS group has you covered.

- Proprietary See also [ edit ] Comparison of GIS software GIS Spatial analysis Spatial network analysis software References [ edit ] External links [ edit ] Show me the code: Spatial Analysis and Open Source by Rey, S. J.

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=List_of_spatial_analysis_software&oldid=1289073333 " Categories : Lists of software Geographic information systems Hidden categories: Articles with topics of unclear notability from May 2025 All articles with topics of unclear notability Articles lacking sources from May 2025 All articles lacking sources Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from May 2025 This page was last edited on 6 May 2025, at 09:37 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents List of spatial analysis software 1 language Add topic

