Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Name 2 Life 3 Perspectiva 4 Other works 5 Legacy 6 See also 7 Notes 8 References 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Vitello 24 languages العربية Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Català Čeština Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano ქართული 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Русский Slovenčina Svenska Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Witelo ) Polish scholar For other uses, see Vitello (disambiguation) .

Cover of Vitellonis Thuringopoloni opticae libri decem (Ten Books of Optics by the Thuringo-Pole Witelo) Vitello ( Polish : Witelon ; German : Witelo ; c.

1230 – 1280/1314) was a Polish friar , theologian , natural philosopher and an important figure in the history of philosophy in Poland .

Name [ edit ] Vitello's name varies with some sources. In earlier publications he was quoted as Erazmus Ciolek Witelo, Erazm Ciołek, Vitellio and Vitulon. Today, he is usually referred to by his Latin name Vitello Thuringopolonis , often shortened to Vitello.

Life [ edit ] Vitello's exact birth-name and birthplace are uncertain. He was most likely born around 1230 in Silesia , in the vicinity of Legnica .

[ 1 ] His mother came from a Polish knightly house, while his father was a German settler from Thuringia . He called himself, in Latin , " Thuringorum et Polonorum filius " — "a son of Thuringians and Poles ."  He studied at Padua University about 1260, then went on to Viterbo .  He became friends with William of Moerbeke , the translator of Aristotle from Greek language into Latin. Vitello's major surviving work on optics , Perspectiva , completed in about 1270–78, [ 2 ] was dedicated to William. In 1284 he described the reflection and refraction of light.

[ 3 ] Perspectiva [ edit ] Page from a manuscript of De Perspectiva , with miniature of its author Vitello.

Vitello's Perspectiva was largely based on the work of the polymath Alhazen ( Ibn al-Haytham ; d. ca. 1041) and Robert Grosseteste , and he in turn influenced later scientists, in particular Johannes Kepler . Vitello's treatise in optics was closely linked to the Latin version of Ibn al-Haytham's Arabic opus: Kitab al-Manazir ( The Book of Optics ; De aspectibus or Perspectivae ), and both were printed in the Friedrich Risner edition Opticae thesaurus (Basel, 1572).

[ 4 ] Vitello's Perspectiva , which rested on Ibn al-Haytham's research in optics, influenced also the Renaissance theories of perspective.

Lorenzo Ghiberti 's Commentario terzo ( Third Commentary ) was based on an Italian translation of Vitello's Latin Perspectiva .

[ 5 ] Vitello's treatise also contains much material in psychology , outlining views that are close to modern notions on the association of ideas and on the subconscious .

Perspectiva also includes Platonic metaphysical discussions. Vitello argues that there are intellectual and corporeal bodies, connected by causality (corresponding to the Idealist doctrine of the universal and the actual), emanating from God in the form of Divine Light.

Light itself is, for Vitello, the first of all sensible entities, and his views on light are similar to those held by Roger Bacon , though he is closer in this to Alhazen 's legacy.

[ 6 ] Other works [ edit ] In Perspectiva , Vitello refers to other works that he had written. Most of these do not survive, but De natura daemonum and De primaria causa paenitentiae have been recovered.

Legacy [ edit ] The lunar crater Vitello is named after him.

See also [ edit ] History of philosophy in Poland List of Poles List of Catholic clergy scientists Notes [ edit ] ^ Haisig, Marian (1977).

Legnica, monografia historyczna miasta (in Polish). Poland: Ossoliński. p. 77.

^ CHAUCER NAME DICTIONARY Copyright © 1988, 1996 Jacqueline de Weever Published by Garland Publishing, Inc., New York and London.

^ Joe Rosen; Lisa Quinn Gothard.

Encyclopedia of Physical Science . Infobase Publishing; 2009.

ISBN 978-0-8160-7011-4 . p. 691.

^ Nader El-Bizri , "A Philosophical Perspective on Alhazen's Optics ", Arabic Sciences and Philosophy , Vol. 15, Issue 2 (2005), pp. 189-218 (Cambridge University Press) ^ Graziela F. Vescovini, "Contributo per la storia della fortuna di Alhazen in Italia: II volgarizzamento del MS. Vat. 4595 e il Commentario terzo del Ghiberti, Rinascimento , V (1965), pp. 1749 -- Also ( Ibid , El-Bizri, 2005) ^ Ibid , El-Bizri, 2005 References [ edit ] Vitello and his thoughts Witelonis Perspectivae Liber Primus: Book I of Vitello's Perspectiva , edition and English translation by Sabetai Unguru , with introduction and commentary, Warsaw, The Polish Academy of Science Press, Studia Copernicana, vol. XV, 1977.

Witelonis Perspectivae Libri Duo - Liber Secundus et Liber Tertius: Books II and III of Vitello's Perspectiva , edition and English translation by Sabetai Unguru , with introduction and commentary, Warsaw, The Polish Academy of Science Press, Studia Copernicana, vol. XXVII, 1991.

Witelonis Perspectivae Liber Quartus: Book IV of Vitello's Perspectiva , A Critical Edition and English Translation with Introduction, Notes and Commentary by Carl J. Kelso, University of Missouri-Columbia, 2003.

Witelonis Perspectivae Liber Quintus: Books V of Vitello's Perspectiva , edition and English translation by Mark A. Smith of the First Catoptrical Book of Witelo's Perspectiva, with introduction and commentary, Warsaw, The Polish Academy of Science Press, 1983.

Studies Clemens Baeumker , " Witelo: Ein Philosoph und Naturforscher des dreizehnten Jahrhunderts ," Beiträge zur Geschichte der Philosophie des Mittelalters , part 3, no. 2,  Münster, Aschendorff, 1908.

Władysław Tatarkiewicz , Historia filozofii (History of Philosophy), 3 vols., Warsaw, Państwowe Wydawnictwo Naukowe, 1978.

Jerzy Burchardt, "The Discovery of the Rainbow in Crystal by Witelo" External links [ edit ] Online Galleries, History of Science Collections, University of Oklahoma Libraries High resolution images of works by and/or portraits of Witelo in .jpg and .tiff format.

Erasmus Ciołek Witelo monument in the Żórawina village, Wrocław County, Lower Silesian Voivodeship, SW Poland.

[1] v t e Medieval philosophers Christian Early " Church Fathers " Augustine of Hippo Boethius Cassiodorus Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite Isidore of Seville John Scotus Eriugena Alcuin 11–12th century " Scholasticism " Anselm of Canterbury Peter Abelard Anselm of Laon Hugh of Saint Victor Richard of Saint Victor Roscelin Peter Lombard Alexander of Hales Bernard of Chartres Dominicus Gundissalinus Gilbert de la Porrée Alain de Lille 13–14th century Robert Grosseteste Michael Scot Albertus Magnus Henry of Ghent Roger Bacon Bonaventure Thomas Aquinas Vitello John Peckham Ramon Llull Siger of Brabant Boetius of Dacia Petrus Peregrinus de Maricourt Meister Eckhart Giles of Rome Godfrey of Fontaines Duns Scotus Durandus Petrus Aureolus William of Ockham Late Jean Buridan Marsilius of Inghen Nicole Oresme Albert of Saxony Francesc Eiximenis Nicholas of Cusa Vincent Ferrer Paul of Venice Lambertus de Monte John Hennon Jewish Medieval Isaac Israeli ben Solomon Saadia Gaon Solomon ibn Gabirol Judah Halevi Abraham ibn Daud Maimonides Nachmanides Gersonides Hasdai Crescas Joseph Albo Islamic Early Jabir ibn Hayyan (Geber) al-Nazzam Al-Kindi (Alkindus) Abu Bakr al-Razi (Rhazes) Ikhwan al-Safa' (Brethren of Purity) Matta ibn Yunus Al-Farabi (Alpharabius) Abu Ya'qub al-Sijistani Ibn Masarra Abd al-Jabbar Al-Amiri Abu Sulayman al-Sijistani Miskawayh Ibn al-Haytham (Alhazen) al-Biruni al-Kirmani High Ibn Sina (Avicenna) Ibn Hazm Al-Ghazali (Algazel) Abu l-Barakat al-Baghdadi Ibn Bajjah (Avempace) Ayn al-Quzat Hamadani Ibn Tufayl Ibn Rushd (Averroes) Late Ibn Sab'in Shahab al-Din Yahya ibn Habash Suhrawardi Fakhr al-Din al-Razi Rashid al-Din Ibn Arabi al-Qazwini Abd al-Latif al-Baghdadi Athir al-Din al-Abhari Nasir al-Din al-Tusi Ibn al-Nafis Qutb al-Din al-Shirazi Ibn Taymiyya Ibn Khaldun See also Renaissance philosophy Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Czech Republic Portugal Netherlands Norway Sweden Poland Vatican Catalonia Belgium Academics zbMATH MathSciNet People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Vitello&oldid=1269985022 " Categories : People from Silesia Polish historians of philosophy Natural philosophers 13th-century mathematicians Catholic clergy scientists 13th-century Polish historians Polish Roman Catholic theologians Medieval Polish scientists Polish philosophers Medieval Polish mathematicians 13th-century German scientists German physicists Canons of Wrocław 13th-century German writers Medieval German mathematicians 13th-century writers in Latin People from Legnica Scholastic philosophers 1280 deaths 13th-century Polish clergy University of Padua alumni 13th-century German philosophers Hidden categories: CS1 Polish-language sources (pl) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Polish-language text Articles containing German-language text Year of birth uncertain This page was last edited on 17 January 2025, at 10:34 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Vitello 24 languages Add topic

