Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life and works 2 Bibliography 3 Notes 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Menelaus of Alexandria 24 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Български Català Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Euskara فارسی Français Bahasa Indonesia Italiano 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Română Русский Slovenščina Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Svenska தமிழ் Türkçe Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Greek mathematician and astronomer (c. 70–140) Menelaus of Alexandria ( / ˌ m ɛ n ɪ ˈ l eɪ ə s / ; Ancient Greek : Μενέλαος ὁ Ἀλεξανδρεύς , Menelaos ho Alexandreus ; c. 70 – 140 CE) was a Greek [ 1 ] mathematician and astronomer , the first to recognize geodesics on a curved surface as natural analogs of straight lines.

Life and works [ edit ] Sphaericorum libri tres Although very little is known about Menelaus's life, it is supposed that he lived in Rome , where he probably moved after having spent his youth in Alexandria . He was called Menelaus of Alexandria by both Pappus of Alexandria and Proclus , and a conversation of his with Lucius, held in Rome, is recorded by Plutarch .

Ptolemy (2nd century CE ) also mentions, in his work Almagest (VII.3), two astronomical observations made by Menelaus in Rome in January of the year 98. These were occultations of the stars Spica and Beta Scorpii by the moon, a few nights apart. Ptolemy used these observations to confirm precession of the equinoxes , a phenomenon that had been discovered by Hipparchus in the 2nd century BCE .

In the 10th-century Kitāb al-Fihrist [ The Book Catalogue ] by Ibn al-Nadīm , six books by Menelaus are mentioned: the Book of Spherical Propositions ( Sphaerica ), On the Knowledge of the Weights and Distribution of Different Bodies , The Elements of Geometry in three books, and The Book on the Triangle .

[ 2 ] Only the first of these, Sphaerica , survives today in Arabic translation. Composed of three books, it deals with the geometry of the sphere and its application in astronomical measurements and calculations. The book introduces the concept of spherical triangle (figures formed of three great circle arcs, which he named "trilaterals") and proves Menelaus' theorem on collinearity of points on the edges of a triangle (which may have been previously known) and its analog for spherical triangles. It was later translated by the sixteenth century astronomer and mathematician Francesco Maurolico .

The lunar crater Menelaus is named after him.

Bibliography [ edit ] The titles of a few books by Menelaus have been preserved: On the calculation of the chords in a circle , composed of six books Elements of geometry , composed of three books, later edited by Thabit ibn Qurra On the knowledge of the weights and distributions of different bodies He may also have written a star catalogue .

Notes [ edit ] ^ Encyclopædia Britannica "Greek mathematician and astronomer who first conceived and defined a spherical triangle (a triangle formed by three arcs of great circles on the surface of a sphere)." ^ Mayers, Kenneth (2014). "Menelaus of Alexandria".

Biographical Encyclopedia of Astronomers . Springer. pp.

1456– 1457.

doi : 10.1007/978-1-4419-9917-7_938 .

ISBN 978-1-4419-9916-0 .

References [ edit ] Ivor Bulmer-Thomas . "Menelaus of Alexandria." Dictionary of Scientific Biography 9:296-302.

Pedro Pablo Fuentes González, “ Ménélaos d’Alexandrie ”, in R. Goulet (ed.), Dictionnaire des Philosophes Antiques , vol. IV, Paris, CNRS, 2005, p. 456-464.

Roshdi Rashed and Athanase Papadopoulos, Menelaus' Spherics. Early Translation and al-Māhānī / al-Harawī's Version. De Gruyter, Scientia Graeco-Arabica 21. xiv, 874 pages.

ISBN 978-3-11-056987-2 External links [ edit ] O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F.

, "Menelaus of Alexandria" , MacTutor History of Mathematics Archive , University of St Andrews Halley's Latin Translation from the Arabic and Hebrew Versions (three books) at Google Books Google Books scan of the Sphaerica at wilbourhall.org v t e Ancient Greek astronomy Astronomers Aglaonice Agrippa Anaximander Andronicus Apollonius Aratus Aristarchus Aristyllus Attalus Autolycus Bion Callippus Cleomedes Cleostratus Conon Eratosthenes Euctemon Eudoxus Geminus Heraclides Hicetas Hipparchus Hippocrates of Chios Hypsicles Menelaus Meton Oenopides Philip of Opus Philolaus Posidonius Ptolemy Pytheas Seleucus Sosigenes of Alexandria Sosigenes the Peripatetic Strabo Thales Theodosius Theon of Alexandria Theon of Smyrna Timocharis Works Almagest (Ptolemy) Catasterismi (Eratosthenes) Little Astronomy On Sizes and Distances (Hipparchus) On the Sizes and Distances (Aristarchus) On the Heavens (Aristotle) Instruments Antikythera mechanism Armillary sphere Astrolabe Dioptra Equatorial ring Gnomon Mural instrument Triquetrum Concepts Callippic cycle Celestial spheres Circle of latitude Counter-Earth Deferent and epicycle Equant Geocentrism Heliocentrism Hipparchic cycle Inferior and superior planets Metonic cycle Octaeteris Solstice Spherical Earth Sublunary sphere Zodiac Influences Babylonian astronomy Egyptian astronomy Influenced Medieval European science Indian astronomy Medieval Islamic astronomy v t e Ancient Greek mathematics Mathematicians (timeline) Anaxagoras Anthemius Apollonius Archimedes Archytas Aristaeus the Elder Aristarchus Autolycus Bion Bryson Callippus Carpus Chrysippus Cleomedes Conon Ctesibius Democritus Dicaearchus Dinostratus Diocles Dionysodorus of Caunus Dionysodorus of Amisene Diophantus Domninus Eratosthenes Euclid Eudemus Eudoxus Eutocius Geminus Heliodorus Heron Hipparchus Hippasus Hippias Hippocrates Hypatia Hypsicles Isidore of Miletus Leon Marinus Menaechmus Menelaus Metrodorus Nicomachus Nicomedes Nicoteles Oenopides Pandrosion Pappus Perseus Philolaus Philon Philonides Porphyry of Tyre Posidonius Proclus Ptolemy Pythagoras Serenus Sosigenes Sporus Thales Theaetetus Theodorus Theodosius Theon of Alexandria Theon of Smyrna Thymaridas Xenocrates Zeno of Elea Zeno of Sidon Zenodorus Treatises Almagest Arithmetica Conics (Apollonius) Catoptrics Data (Euclid) Elements (Euclid) Little Astronomy Measurement of a Circle On Conoids and Spheroids On the Sizes and Distances (Aristarchus) On Sizes and Distances (Hipparchus) On the Moving Sphere (Autolycus) Optics (Euclid) On Spirals On the Sphere and Cylinder Ostomachion Phaenomena (Euclid) Planisphaerium Spherics (Theodosius) Spherics (Menelaus) The Quadrature of the Parabola The Sand Reckoner Concepts and definitions Chord Circles of Apollonius Apollonian circles Apollonian gasket Problem of Apollonius Commensurability Diophantine equation Euclidean geometry Golden ratio Lune of Hippocrates Method of exhaustion Parallel postulate Platonic solid Regular polygon Straightedge and compass construction Angle trisection Doubling the cube Squaring the circle Quadratrix of Hippias Neusis construction Results In Elements Angle bisector theorem Exterior angle theorem Euclidean algorithm Euclid's theorem Geometric mean theorem Hinge theorem Inscribed angle theorem Intercept theorem Intersecting chords theorem Intersecting secants theorem Law of cosines Pons asinorum Pythagorean theorem Tangent-secant theorem Thales's theorem Theorem of the gnomon Apollonius's theorem Aristarchus's inequality Heron's formula Law of sines Menelaus's theorem Pappus's area theorem Problem II.8 of Arithmetica Ptolemy's inequality Ptolemy's table of chords Ptolemy's theorem Spiral of Theodorus Centers/Schools Cyrene Platonic Academy Pythagoreanism School of Chios Related Ancient Greek astronomy Attic numerals Greek numerals History of A History of Greek Mathematics by Thomas Heath Archimedes Palimpsest algebra timeline arithmetic timeline calculus timeline geometry timeline logic timeline mathematics timeline numbers prehistoric counting numeral systems list Other cultures Arabian/Islamic Babylonian Chinese Egyptian Incan Indian Japanese Ancient Greece portal • Mathematics portal Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF 2 3 4 5 6 FAST National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Spain 2 Netherlands 2 Norway Vatican Israel Academics zbMATH MathSciNet People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Menelaus_of_Alexandria&oldid=1286480835 " Categories : 70s births 140 deaths 2nd-century Greek people Ancient Greek geometers Ancient Greek astronomers Roman-era Alexandrians 2nd-century mathematicians 1st-century astronomers Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text This page was last edited on 20 April 2025, at 04:23 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Menelaus of Alexandria 24 languages Add topic

