Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Benefits 2 Types 3 References Toggle the table of contents Travel cot Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Foldable bed for use by a baby or young child This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article possibly contains original research .

Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations . Statements consisting only of original research should be removed.

( January 2011 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Travel cot" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( January 2011 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Portable baby bed (England, 1940) A travel cot is a bed for use by a baby or young child that collapses or folds into a bag for easy carriage. Travel cots are typically much lighter than a standard cot, with soft sides to provide comfort to the baby when sleeping.

Benefits [ edit ] The United Kingdom Department of Health 's guide Reducing the Risk Of Cot Death [ 1 ] states that babies should always sleep by themselves, and are much safer in their own cot.

The Foundation for the Study of Infant Deaths states that it is preferable that each new baby has his or her own new mattress to avoid the risk of infection spreading between children which has been a contributing factor in some cases of SIDS .

In addition to the health benefits, a travel cot can also provide benefits to the child. Regular use of a travel cot means that a baby will become used to a sleeping environment outside the usual cot which means that they are more likely to go to sleep quicker when they are travelling and sleep for longer and more soundly when they have gone to sleep.

[ citation needed ] If using a bassinet or pop-up travel cot, the travel cot can eliminate the need to buy a separate Moses basket for the baby. Such a travel cot can be used in the first few months of a baby's life either in any part of the house so that parents can closely monitor their new born baby and can place their baby in the cot without straining to the bottom of the back - which can cause harm to a new mothers recovering body.

[ 2 ] Types [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( January 2011 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Standard travel cot : This is the usual type of travel cot with collapsible frame and removable mattress . It usually has a rectangular shape, but different styles are now being developed. This can be used as a travel cot and a playpen and is suitable for babies from birth until 6.5 kg (approximately 3 years old). Though a Standard travel cot is usually quite cumbersome to carry, Lightweight travel cots have now been designed ideal for camping, hiking or taking on airplanes when weight is at a premium.

Pop-up travel cot : this is a much smaller version of the travel cot which is suitable from birth until the baby can support themselves on their hands and knees. A pop-up travel cot is constructed in the same manner as a pop up tent which immediately 'pops up' when it is removed from its bag and is folded down to a compact size about the size of a large shopping bag . A pop-up travel cot is easier to construct and is more portable as it is lighter and more flexible than other models, but  is only suitable for very young babies.

Bassinet travel cot : A bassinet travel cot is a standard travel cot with a bassinet included for a smaller baby. Much like the pop-up travel cot, the bassinet is smaller and softer, and is designed for new babies, however when the baby can support himself on his hands and feet, parents can remove the bassinet and use the travel cot as they would a standard travel cot, without having to buy a new travel cot. Bassinet travel cots can come with added extras including a vibrating mattress, lights and music, which are intended to support the baby in its efforts to sleep.

Inflatable Travel Cot: An inflatable travel cot offers a unique and portable solution. Designed with convenience in mind, these cots can be easily inflated and deflated, making them an excellent choice for those on the go. The inflatable structure provides a comfortable and secure environment for the baby. However, it's crucial to ensure proper inflation and stability for the safety of the child.

Convertible Travel Cot: For parents seeking versatility, a convertible travel cot is an attractive option. This type can transform into different configurations, such as a playpen or a changing station, providing a multi-functional solution for various needs. Convertible travel cots often come with adjustable features, allowing them to adapt as the baby grows, making them a cost-effective and sustainable choice.

Co-sleeping Travel Cot: Co-sleeping travel cots are designed to provide a secure sleeping space for both the baby and the parent. These cots typically have one side that can be lowered or attached to the adult bed , facilitating easy access to the baby during the night. This type of cot promotes a close and comforting sleeping environment for the infant, enhancing bonding between parent and child.

References [ edit ] ^ "Archived copy" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2010-12-21 . Retrieved 2011-01-27 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: archived copy as title ( link ) ^ Harris, Brian J. (2024-01-01).

"The Best Travel Cots of 2024: Comfortable cribs for babies and toddlers" .

AnalyzeAndAssess.com . Retrieved 2024-01-19 .

v t e Infants and their care Health ( pediatrics ) Baby food Birth weight Breast pump Breastfeeding Breastfeeding and medications Breastfeeding and mental health Bottle feeding Colic Cradle cap Esotropia Failure to thrive Immunization Infant and toddler safety Infant bathing Infant feeding Infant food safety Infant formula Infant massage Infant respiratory distress syndrome Infant sleep training Neonatal intensive care unit Newborn care and safety Oral rehydration therapy Pedialyte Preterm birth Shaken baby syndrome Soy formula SIDS Development Attachment parenting Baby-led weaning Baby talk Babbling Birth defect Childbirth Crawling Gestational age Infant visual development Irritant diaper dermatitis Infant cognitive development Infant crying Kangaroo care Mother Nursery rhyme Object permanence Parent Parenting Peekaboo Play Prenatal development Prenatal development table Teething Walking Weaning Socialization and culture Attachment Babysitting Child abuse Child care Child custody Children's rights UN Child rights Circumcision Foster care Grandparent visitation Infant swimming Milk bank Nanny Wet nurse Infant care and equipment Baby bouncer Baby gate Baby monitor / Hidden camera Baby powder Baby shampoo Baby toy Baby walker Bib Baby swing Baby transport Bassinet Car seat safety Child vehicular heat stroke deaths Cloth diaper Cradle board Diaper Diaper bag Baby wipes Haberman Feeder High chair Infant bed (American 'crib' and 'cradle', British 'cot') Infant carrier Infant clothing Pacifier Playpen Stroller Supplemental nursing system Swaddling Swim diaper Teether Travel cot Other topics Baby shower Babywearing Child neglect Closed adoption Cry room Fetal alcohol spectrum disorder Infant ear piercing Open adoption Prenatal cocaine exposure Neonatal withdrawal syndrome Parental child abduction Parental responsibility Parenting plan Paternity Paternity fraud NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐697fd75b6‐dbbs7
Cached time: 20250812104606
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1]
CPU time usage: 0.276 seconds
Real time usage: 0.405 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 916/1000000
Revision size: 5577/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 58724/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 9543/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 4/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 23940/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.178/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 4514184/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  341.462      1 -total
 27.41%   93.578      1 Template:Infants_and_their_care
 26.77%   91.413      1 Template:Navbox
 25.67%   87.649      1 Template:Reflist
 22.78%   77.774      2 Template:Cite_web
 20.38%   69.606      1 Template:Multiple_issues
 19.50%   66.593      1 Template:Short_description
 14.35%   49.013      3 Template:Ambox
 10.71%   36.556      1 Template:Original_research
 10.54%   36.006      2 Template:Pagetype Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:30653424:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812104606 and revision id 1282619495. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Travel_cot&oldid=1282619495 " Category : Babycare Hidden categories: CS1 maint: archived copy as title Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles that may contain original research from January 2011 All articles that may contain original research Articles needing additional references from January 2011 All articles needing additional references Articles with multiple maintenance issues All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2011 This page was last edited on 27 March 2025, at 15:13 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Travel cot Add languages Add topic

