Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Geography 2 History Toggle History subsection 2.1 History before establishment 2.2 History since establishment 3 Recreation 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Punakaiki Marine Reserve Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 42°06′50″S 171°19′22″E ﻿ / ﻿ 42.113933°S 171.3228833°E ﻿ / -42.113933; 171.3228833 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Punakaiki Marine Reserve Punakaiki Marine Reserve coastline Location Punakaiki , Buller District , New Zealand Coordinates 42°06′50″S 171°19′22″E ﻿ / ﻿ 42.113933°S 171.3228833°E ﻿ / -42.113933; 171.3228833 Area 3,520 hectares (8,700 acres) Established 2014 Governing body Department of Conservation Punakaiki Marine Reserve is a marine reserve administered by the Department of Conservation . The reserve includes the area of sea surrounding the pancake rocks and blowholes at Dolomite Point, at Punakaiki on the West Coast Region of New Zealand's South Island . It also includes most of the coastline on the western edge of Paparoa National Park .

[ 1 ] The reserve covers an area of 3,520 hectares (8,700 acres) and was established in 2014.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Geography [ edit ] Punakaiki Marine Reserve extends approximately 10.8 kilometres (6.7 mi) from Perpendicular Point south to Maher Swamp, and about 3.7 kilometres (2.3 mi) offshore. It includes natural coastlines and catchments within Paparoa National Park. The reserve does not include two inshore areas around the Pororari River beach and Punakaiki River beach.

[ 4 ] Within the reserve there are natural examples of six habitat types, including rocky, gravel and cobble shore habitats reaching out to sandy seabed areas about 20 metres (66 ft).

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] The array of bird and marine life includes tāiko , weka , fur seal and the Hector's dolphin .

[ 6 ] Little blue penguins also nest in the area.

[ 7 ] Several species within the reserve are under potential threat, including waterfowl and indigenous waders , such as white-fronted tern , Westland petrel , sooty shearwater , fairy prion and banded dotterel , as well as red-billed gulls .

[ 7 ] History [ edit ] History before establishment [ edit ] The landscape of the reserve has formed over millions of years. The pancake rocks began forming 30 million years, when lime-rich fragments of dead marine shells started to collect on the sea floor. These were layered with soft mud and clay, and plant sediments. The rocks were raised by earthquakes and then etched out by the sea.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] [ 6 ] The reserve was one of five recommended in 2012 by the West Coast Marine Protection Forum, a group of representations of Ngāi Tahu , commercial and recreational fishers, conservationists, tourism operators and local councils. The Minister of Conservation , Nick Smith , approved the reserve in March 2013, [ 10 ] and it was gazetted later that year.

[ 11 ] History since establishment [ edit ] The reserve came into existence on 7 September 2014.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] A gold mining operation already operating in the area were allowed to continue on existing scale and extent. Farmers were allowed to continue driving cattle and sheep with dogs and using vehicles on the foreshore. The owner or occupier of land next to Hibernia Creek were also allowed to continue using construction vehicles and non-motorised handheld tools to open the outlet.

[ 1 ] In 2015, the Ministry for Primary Industries proposed a regulatory change to prohibit mobile, bottom-impacting commercial fishing methods in the river mouths enclosed by the reserve.

[ 12 ] A German tourist was caught taking mussels from the reserve in January 2015.

[ 13 ] The Department of Conservation investigated reports of kontiki longline fishing from beaches within the reserve in April 2016.

[ 14 ] By October 2016, no other major breaches had been reported.

[ 15 ] In 2020 the National Institute of Water and Atmospheric Research , the Department of Conservation and the University of Canterbury used drones to map the plants and animals in the marine reserve, including large kelp beds off the coast.

[ 16 ] Recreation [ edit ] A range of activities are banned in the marine reserve, including fishing, taking or killing marine life, and moving or removing any marine life or materials. People must not feed fish as it disturbs their natural behaviour, and they must take care when anchoring to avoid damaging the sea floor.

[ 1 ] There are two areas at river mouths enclosed by the marine reserve, where eeling, whitebaiting and recreational fishing are allowed. Quad bikes and horses are allowed, and small stones, shells, driftwood, sand and gravel can also be carried out of the site. Certain Ngāi Tahu members are allowed to collect pounamu in accordance with tradition.

[ 1 ] According to the Department of Conservation, weather and sea conditions can change rapidly on the coast, and people need to be aware of large waves when walking on the beach or rocky shore. It urges people to check weather forecasts, take adequate food, water, warm clothing and wet weather gear, and tell someone where they are going.

[ 1 ] See also [ edit ] Marine reserves of New Zealand References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e f "Punakaiki Marine Reserve" .

doc.govt.nz .

Department of Conservation .

^ a b Hutching, Gerard.

"Marine protected areas" .

Te Ara - the Encyclopedia of New Zealand .

Ministry for Culture and Heritage .

^ a b "Marine Reserve (Punakaiki) Order 2014" .

legislation.govt.nz .

New Zealand Government .

^ a b "Background: West Coast marine reserve sites" (PDF) .

beehive.govt.nz .

New Zealand Government .

^ Alestra, Tommaso (June 2018).

Community composition of the rocky intertidal shores within and outside the Punakaiki Marine Reserve: baseline sampling. Prepared for the Department of Conservation .

Christchurch : University of Canterbury .

^ a b "About Punakaiki, West Coast, New Zealand" .

punakaiki.co.nz . West Coast New Zealand.

^ a b "Assessment of West Coast Region coastal sites against indigenous ecological significance criteria" (PDF) .

envirolink.govt.nz .

National Institute of Water and Atmospheric Research .

^ "Punakāiki Marine Reserve" .

aa.com .

Automobile Association of New Zealand .

^ "Pancake Rocks" .

atlasobscura.com .

Atlas Obscura .

^ "Five marine reserves for West Coast" .

The Christchurch Press .

stuff.co.nz .

^ "West Coast marine reserves approved" .

Radio New Zealand . 11 March 2013.

^ "West Coast South Island: Proposed Marine Protected Areas (using fisheries regulations) Regulatory Impact Statement" .

mpi.govt.nz .

Ministry for Primary Industries .

^ Mills, Laura (17 January 2015).

"Tourist caught breaking new marine rules" .

New Zealand Media and Entertainment . Greymouth Star.

^ "Reports kontikis used in marine reserve" .

New Zealand Media and Entertainment . Greymouth Star. 6 April 2015.

^ Mills, Laura (12 October 2016).

"First serious breach in West Coast marine reserve" . Allied Press.

Otago Daily Times .

^ "NIWA drones going where people can't on the West Coast" .

New Zealand Government .

National Institute of Water and Atmospheric Research . 13 January 2021.

v t e Protected areas of New Zealand Conservation parks Ahuriri Aorangi Aotea Catlins Coromandel Craigieburn Eyre Mountains/Taka Ra Haka Hakatere Hāwea Hanmer Kaimai Mamaku Kaimanawa Kaweka Ka Whata Tu O Rakihouia Korowai / Torlesse Tussocklands Lake Sumner Mavora Lakes Mount Richmond Northland North-west Nelson Oteake Pirongia Pureora Remutaka Ruahine Raukumara Ruataniwha Tararua Te Kahui Kaupeka Te Papanui Victoria Whakarewarewa Whirinaki Te Pua-a-Tāne Ecological islands Brook Waimārama Sanctuary Bushy Park Sanctuary Mountain Maungatautari Orokonui Ecosanctuary Tawharanui Open Sanctuary Zealandia Government purpose reserves Pāuatahanui Wildlife Reserve Pukaha / Mount Bruce National Wildlife Centre Historic reserves Hāpūpū / J M Barker Maungauika / North Head Puhi Kai Iti / Cook Landing Site Stony Batter Te Kuri a Paoa/Young Nick's Head Marine reserves Akaroa Auckland Islands Cape Rodney-Okakari Point Hautai Hawea (Clio Rocks) Hikurangi Horoirangi Kahukura (Gold Arm) Kahurangi Kapiti Kermadec Islands Kutu Parera (Gaer Arm) Long Bay-Okura Long Island-Kokomohua Moana Uta (Wet Jacket Arm) Motu Manawa-Pollen Island Moutere Hauriri / Bounty Islands Moutere Ihupuku / Campbell Island Moutere Mahue / Antipodes Island Parininihi Piopiotahi (Milford Sound) Pohatu / Flea Bay Poor Knights Islands Punakaiki Taipari Roa (Elizabeth Island) Tapuae Taputeranga Taumoana (Five Finger Peninsula) Tauparikākā Tāwharanui Te Angiangi Te Awaatu Channel (The Gut) Te Hapua (Sutherland Sound) Te Matuku Te Paepae o Aotea (Volkner Rocks) Te Tapuwae o Hua (Long Sound) Te Tapuwae o Rongokako Tonga Island Tuhua (Mayor Island) Ulva Island-Te Wharawhara Waiau Glacier Coast Westhaven (Te Tai Tapu) Whanganui-A-Hei (Cathedral Cove) Whangarei Harbour National parks Current Abel Tasman Aoraki / Mount Cook Arthur's Pass Egmont Fiordland Kahurangi Mount Aspiring Nelson Lakes Paparoa Rakiura Tongariro Westland Tai Poutini Whanganui Former Te Urewera National reserves Hāpūpū / J M Barker Lewis Pass Puhi Kai Iti / Cook Landing Site Subantarctic Islands Te Kuri a Paoa/Young Nick's Head Recreation reserves Bastion Point Otago Central Rail Trail Truby King Recreation Reserve Regional parks Akatarawa Ambury Ashley Rakahuri Ātiu Creek Auckland Botanic Gardens Āwhitu Battle Hill Farm Belmont Duder East Harbour Ferrymead Glenfern Sanctuary Hunua Ranges Kaitoke Lake Tekapo Long Bay Mahurangi Motukorea Browns Island Muriwai Mutukaroa / Hamlins Hill Ōmana Onekawa Te Mawhai Orere Point Pākiri Pakuratahi Papamoa Hills Queen Elizabeth Scandrett Shakespear Tāpapakanga Tāwharanui Tawhitokino Te Ārai Te Muri Te Rau Pūriri Waharau Waimakariri River Wainuiomata Regional Park Waitākere Ranges Waitawa Wenderholm Whakanewha Whakatīwai Scenic reserves Alice Eaves Reserve Bruce Park Goldie Bush Peel Forest Park Waro Limestone Wetlands Awarua Wetland Farewell Spit Firth of Thames Kopuatai Peat Dome Manawatū Estuary Pāuatahanui Wildlife Reserve Wairarapa Moana Whangamarino Other areas Fensham Reserve Hutt Water Collection Area Northern Pegasus Bay Wainuiomata Water Collection Area Whitireia Other Amenity area Ecological area Sanctuary area Wilderness area Wildlife management area v t e Buller District , New Zealand Seat : Westport Populated places Inangahua Ward Big River Blacks Point Cronadun Crushington Ikamatua Inangahua Junction Lyell Maruia Reefton Springs Junction Waiuta Seddon Ward Arapito Denniston Granity Hector Karamea Little Wanganui Millerton Mokihinui Ngakawau Seddonville Stockton Summerlea Waimangaroa Westport Ward Cape Foulwind Carters Beach Charleston Punakaiki Sergeants Hill Te Kuha Westport Geographic features Allen River Awakari River Awarau River Ballroom Overhang Beautiful River Blackwater River (Buller River tributary) Blackwater River (Little Grey River tributary) Buller Gorge Buller River Bullock Creek Denniston Plateau Fox River Glasgow Range Kahurangi Point Karamea Bight Lake Christabel Lewis Pass Metro Cave / Te Ananui Cave Mount Augustus Mount Haast Ngākawau River Ōpārara Basin Ōpārara Basin Arches Ōtūmahana Estuary Papahaua Range Paparoa Range Perpendicular Point Pororari River Scotts Beach Waitakere / Nile River Wharepapa / Arthur Range Facilities and attractions Big Rimu Walk Charming Creek Tramway Conns Creek Branch Fenian Track Granity Community Library Heaphy Track Inland Pack Track Kahurangi Marine Reserve Kahurangi National Park Karamea Centennial Museum Koranui Incline Mokihinui Hydro Ngakawau Hydro Project Old Ghost Road Pancake Rocks and Blowholes Paparoa National Park Punakaiki Marine Reserve Reefton Hospital Rockies Incline Seddonville Branch Stillwater–Ngākawau line Stockton Mine Truman Track Victoria Forest Park Wangapeka Track Westport Airport Government District Council Mayor Regional Council Iwi Ngāi Tahu Ngāti Apa ki te Rā Tō Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Punakaiki_Marine_Reserve&oldid=1277789459 " Categories : Marine reserves of New Zealand Protected areas of the West Coast Region Buller District 2014 establishments in New Zealand Protected areas established in 2014 Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Use New Zealand English from April 2024 All Wikipedia articles written in New Zealand English Coordinates on Wikidata This page was last edited on 26 February 2025, at 18:42 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Punakaiki Marine Reserve Add languages Add topic

