Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Work 3 Notes 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Leopold Prowe 3 languages Deutsch مصرى Polski Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia German historian (1821–1887) Leopold Prowe The Monument to Copernicus erected 1853 in Thorn Nicolaus Coppernicus Leopold Friedrich Prowe (14 October 1821 – 26 September 1887) was a German historian and gymnasium instructor, born as the son of a town councillor of Thorn in West Prussia (now in Poland ), the town where in 1473 the astronomer Nicolaus Copernicus was born. Prowe compiled a comprehensive German language biography of Copernicus, titled Nicolaus Coppernicus .

[ 1 ] Life [ edit ] Prowe studied in Leipzig and Berlin and then returned home to become a teacher at the gymnasium of Thorn. In 1839, a local "monument committee" had been founded with the intention to erect a monument, which was created by Friedrich Tieck of Berlin, and erected posthumously in 1853. The activities then continued in a society for science and arts, called Coppernicus-Verein für Wissenschaft und Kunst zu Thorn , headed by Prowe for many years.

Work [ edit ] Prowe researched the local archives of Copernicus ' birthplace, as well as those of other towns in Prussia where the astronomer had worked and lived, especially Frauenburg . He also travelled to Krakau , then part of Austria, [ 2 ] to Italian cities, and to Upsala in Sweden, where documents and books owned by the astronomer and scientist Copernicus had been abducted to in later wars. He published several reports, contributed to the celebration of the 400th anniversary in 1873, and to the Latin and German edition of de revolutionibus in 1879.

Prowe's biography of the astronomer, published in 1883 and 1884, [ 3 ] consists of two volumes, the first (about 970 pages split in two books, before and after the year 1512) describes his life, the second volumes (over 500 pages) focuses on works of the astronomer, works falsely attributed to him, and other documents related.

Prowe's biography is still considered a masterwork: "Despite its age and defects, Prowe's still remains the standard biography of Copernicus." [ 4 ] "As a result of its comprehensive treatment of the stages of Copernicus's life and its cultural, political, and scientific context, the biography by PROWE is regarded as unsurpassed to the present, despite some corrections recommended by more recent biographical research.

[ 5 ] Copernicus' nationality has since long been a source of argument between Germans and Poles. Viewed in Poland as one of the nation's greatest figures, Germans also consider the man to be one of their own. Leopold Prowe contributed to the view that Copernicus had German origins.

Notes [ edit ] ^ With the spelling with pp used by the astronomer himself in most cases, especially in official documents. Based on over two dozen signatures of the astronomers, of which more than 74% use the spelling with two p, Prowe and Curtze came to the conclusion that the form Coppernicus is the best form to represent the chosen name of the astronomer (and the form Koppernick for his family). - Maximilian Curtze: Ueber die Orthographie des Namens Coppernicus.

, in the foreword to Nicolaus Coppernicus aus Thorn über die Kreisbewegungen der Weltkörper , 1879 (from German wikisource ) ^ "Krakau, Austria" ^ Nicolaus Coppernicus , reprinted Osnabrück: O. Zeller, 1967.

^ Edward Rosen, "Copernicus' Attitude Toward the Common People, Journal of the History of Ideas , 32 (April–June 1971)2: 281.

[1] ^ Andreas Kühne, "Copernicanism" (translated from German by Andrea Katherina-Mayer), in Arne Hessenbruch, ed., Reader's Guide to the History of Science Taylor & Francis, 2000, p. 152.

ISBN 9781884964299 [2] External links [ edit ] German Wikisource has original text related to this article: Leopold Prowe Andreas Kühne (2001).

"Prowe, Leopold" .

Neue Deutsche Biographie (in German). Vol. 20. Berlin: Duncker & Humblot. pp.

745– 745 .

Moritz Cantor (1888). " Prowe, Leopold ".

Allgemeine Deutsche Biographie (in German). Vol. 26. Leipzig: Duncker & Humblot. p. 671.

Works by Prowe [3] at Google Books Gedächtnisrede auf Professor Leopold Prowe 1887, M. Curtze (in German) Leopold Prowe in the German National Library catalogue Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National Germany United States Italy Czech Republic Netherlands Poland Vatican Israel Academics CiNii zbMATH Leopoldina People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Leopold_Prowe&oldid=1217472928 " Categories : 1821 births 1889 deaths German biographers German male biographers People from Toruń People from West Prussia 19th-century German historians 19th-century German male writers 19th-century German writers Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata CS1 German-language sources (de) Articles with German-language sources (de) This page was last edited on 6 April 2024, at 01:18 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Leopold Prowe 3 languages Add topic

