Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Practice Toggle Practice subsection 2.1 United Kingdom 3 Wildlife 4 Natural occurrence 5 For energy wood 6 Gallery 7 See also 8 References 9 Further reading 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Coppicing 28 languages العربية Aragonés Asturianu বাংলা Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 हिन्दी Ido Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Lietuvių Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Română Svenska Walon 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Method of woodland management "Coppice" redirects here. For the locality in Oldham, see Coppice, Greater Manchester .

"Copse" redirects here; not to be confused with Corpse or Cops .

Coppice stool shortly after coppicing One year's regrowth: Coppiced alder in Hampshire , UK Coppicing / ˈ k ɒ p ɪ s ɪ ŋ / is the traditional method in woodland management of cutting down a tree to a stump , which in many species encourages new shoots to grow from the stump or roots, thus ultimately regrowing the tree. A forest or grove that has been subject to coppicing is called a copse / k ɒ p s / or coppice , in which young tree stems are repeatedly cut down to near ground level. The resulting living stumps are called stools . New growth emerges, and after a number of years, the coppiced trees are harvested, and the cycle begins anew.

Pollarding is a similar process carried out at a higher level on the tree in order to prevent grazing animals from eating new shoots.

[ 1 ] Daisugi (台杉, where sugi refers to Japanese cedar ) is a similar Japanese technique.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Many silviculture practices involve cutting and regrowth; coppicing has been of significance in many parts of lowland temperate Europe.

[ citation needed ] The widespread and long-term practice of coppicing as a landscape-scale industry is something that remains of special importance in southern England.

[ 4 ] Many of the English language terms referred to in this article are particularly relevant to historic and contemporary practice in that area.

Typically a coppiced woodland is harvested in sections or coups [ 5 ] (also spelled 'coupe' but pronounced 'coop' and descended from the French or Norman French 'couper', to cut or coupé 'has been cut') on a rotation. English terms for an area of coppice include 'cant', 'panel' and 'fall' which can be interchangeable and regionally-based.

[ citation needed ] In this way, a crop is available each year somewhere in the woodland. Coppicing has the effect of providing a rich variety of habitats, as the woodland always has a range of different-aged coppice growing in it, which is beneficial for biodiversity . The cycle length depends upon the species cut, the local custom, and the use of the product.

Birch can be coppiced for faggots on a three- or four-year cycle, whereas oak can be coppiced over a fifty-year cycle for poles or firewood .

Trees being coppiced do not die of old age as coppicing maintains the tree at a juvenile stage, allowing them to reach immense ages.

[ 1 ] The age of a stool may be estimated from its diameter; some are so large—as much as 5.5 metres (18 ft) across—that they are thought to have been continually coppiced for centuries.

[ 6 ] History [ edit ] Evidence suggests that coppicing has been continuously practised since pre-history.

[ 7 ] Coppiced stems are characteristically curved at the base. This curve occurs as the competing stems grow out from the stool in the early stages of the cycle, then up towards the sky as the canopy closes.

[ citation needed ] The curve may allow the identification of coppice timber in archaeological sites. Timber in the Sweet Track in Somerset (built in the winter of 3807 and 3806 BCE ) has been identified as coppiced Tilia species.

[ 7 ] Originally, the silvicultural system now called coppicing was practised solely for small wood production.

[ citation needed ] In German this is called Niederwald , which translates as low forest. Later on in medieval times, farmers encouraged pigs to feed from acorns, and so some trees were allowed to grow bigger.

[ citation needed ] This different silvicultural system is called in English coppice with standards . In German this is called Mittelwald (middle forest). As modern forestry ( Hochwald in German, which translates as High forest ) seeks to harvest timber mechanically, and pigs are generally no longer fed from acorns, both systems have declined. However, there are cultural and wildlife benefits from these two silvicultural systems, so both can be found where timber production or some other main forestry purpose (such as a protection forest against an avalanche) is not the sole management objective of the woodland.

[ 8 ] In the 16th and 17th centuries, the technology of charcoal iron production became widely established in England, continuing in some areas until the late 19th century.

[ 9 ] Charcoal once fuelled all metalworking (with evidence dating back many thousands of years) and other high temperature industrial processes (see white coal ) but scarcity led to the eventual adoption of coal as the primary fuel. Decline in charcoal as an industrial fuel accelerated after the discovery of coke (coal heated in limited oxygen) in the 18th century and leading to a crash in UK charcoal production in the century thereafter. Notably, scarcity of charcoal for industrial processes actually led to the survival of large areas of woodland in the weald of Kent and the Sussexes as large areas of coppiced woodland were jealously guarded by Roman ironmasters and later by Medieval ironmasters. Charcoal hearths in woodlands are indications of ancient status (in context).

[ citation needed ] Along with the need for oak bark for tanning , charcoal required large amounts of coppiced wood. With this coppice management, wood could be provided for those growing industries in principle indefinitely. This was regulated by a statute of 1544 [ 10 ] of Henry VIII , which required woods to be enclosed after cutting (to prevent browsing by animals) and 12 standels ( standards or mature uncut trees) to be left in each acre, to be grown into timber. Coppice with standards (scattered individual stems allowed to grow on through several coppice cycles) has been commonly used throughout most of Europe [ when?

] as a means of giving greater flexibility in the resulting forest product from any one area. The woodland provides the small material from the coppice as well as a range of larger timber for such uses as house building , bridge repair , cart-making and so on. But note that coppice produce was used in parallel with larger timber. For example, hazel and willow as woven wattle infill panels (daubed or plastered) in housebuilding and ash coppice to produce components for carts, and several species for components for bridge rails and fences.

[ citation needed ] In the 18th century coppicing in Britain began a long decline. This was brought about by the erosion of its traditional markets. Firewood was no longer needed for domestic or industrial uses as coal and coke became easily obtained and transported, and wood as a construction material was gradually replaced by newer materials.

[ citation needed ] Coppicing died out first in the north of Britain and steadily contracted toward the south-east until by the 1960s active commercial coppice was heavily concentrated in Kent and Sussex.

[ 11 ] Practice [ edit ] The shoots (or suckers ) may be used either in their young state for interweaving in wattle fencing (as is the practice with coppiced willows and hazel ), or the new shoots may be allowed to grow into large poles, as was often the custom with trees such as oaks or ashes and sweet chestnut (Castanea sativa). This creates long, straight poles which do not have the bends and forks of naturally grown trees. Coppicing may be practised to encourage specific growth patterns, as with cinnamon trees which are grown for their bark.

[ citation needed ] (Note that the use of the term 'suckers' above is incompatible with an accurate understanding of how coppice works. Coppice stems grow from epicormic buds developed from groups of cells called bud precursors in the cambium under the bark on cut stem bases. Epicormic buds develop and grow when the upper parts of the stem (which normally produce inhibitory plant hormone analogues) are removed. Suckers refers to shoots growing from roots  in response to felling to ground as seen in wild cherry or gean (Prunus avium) and aspen (Populus tremula) but also has been adopted in horticulture to refer to a competing shoot sprouting from a rootstock below the interface with the scion. Such shoots (if not removed) can grow more vigorously then the grafted material which can fail and die).

[ citation needed ] Another, more complicated system is called compound coppice . Here some of the standards would be left, some harvested. Some of the coppice would be allowed to grow into new standards and some regenerated coppice would be there. Thus there would be three age classes.

[ 12 ] Coppiced hardwoods were used extensively in carriage and shipbuilding , and they are still sometimes grown for making wooden buildings and furniture.

[ citation needed ] Compound coppice is a term used for when two or more different species are grown in the same cant and cut on different cycles. Example: Hazel-ash coppice with hazel cut at 7 years and ash in the same area cut at 21 years (every third cut, all stools in the cant are cut). But note that under coppice with standards (for instance oak standards over hazel) the oak was cut under a much longer cycle. With hazel-ash under oak standards you now have 3 cycles superimposed. However, a range of ages of standards was managed-for to allow for continuity of oak production for timber (shipbuilding especially) and this was sometimes legislated for. It is commonly written that there should be 12 standards per acre. BUT this '12 per acre' includes (as an average over the whole wood) maybe 1 mature oak per acre, a couple of young standards and several waivers with a larger number of seedlings/saplings whose genesis was sporadic and occurred when oak mast years coincided with coppice cuts - planting being relatively rare until perhaps the 16th century. Coppice can be complicated, which is likely why large areas of one species (hazel, sweet chestnut) with no standards is called 'simple coppice'.

[ citation needed ] Waivers: (also 'wavers') Young oak trees (older than seedlings or saplings) that may become standards in due turn. Or may be cut before becoming standards. If you can get both hands around it at breast height but can't get 4 Sussex fence rails out of the first 10’, it's a waiver.

[ citation needed ] Diagram illustrating the coppicing cycle over a 7- to 20-year period Withies for wicker -work are grown in coppices of various willow species, principally osier .

[ citation needed ] In France, sweet chestnut trees are coppiced for use as canes and bâtons for the martial art Canne de combat (also known as Bâton français ).

[ citation needed ] Some Eucalyptus species are coppiced in a number of countries, including Australia, North America, Uganda, and Sudan.

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] The Sal tree is coppiced in India, [ 15 ] and the Moringa oleifera tree is coppiced in many countries, including India.

Sometimes former coppice is converted to high-forest woodland by the practice of singling. All but one of the regrowing stems are cut, leaving the remaining one to grow as if it were a maiden (uncut) tree.

[ citation needed ] The boundaries of coppice coups were sometimes marked by cutting certain trees as pollards or stubs.

United Kingdom [ edit ] Recently felled chestnut coppice near Petworth in West Sussex Old hornbeam coppice stools left uncut for at least 100 years, Coldfall Wood , London In southern Britain , coppice was traditionally hazel , hornbeam , field maple , ash , sweet chestnut , occasionally sallow , elm , small-leafed lime and rarely oak or beech , grown among pedunculate or sessile oak, ash or beech standards. In wet areas alder and willows were used.

[ 16 ] A small, and growing, number of people make a living wholly or partly by working coppices in the area today, [ 17 ] at places such as at the Weald and Downland Living Museum .

[ 18 ] Coppices provided wood for many purposes, especially charcoal before coal was economically significant in metal smelting . A minority of these woods are still operated for coppice today, often by conservation organisations , producing material for hurdle -making, thatching spars, local charcoal-burning or other crafts. The only remaining large-scale commercial coppice crop in England is sweet chestnut which is grown in parts of Sussex and Kent .

[ 11 ] Much of this was established as plantations in the 19th century for hop-pole production (hop-poles are used to support the hop plant while growing hops ) and is nowadays cut on a 12 to 18-year cycle for splitting and binding into cleft chestnut paling fence , or on a 20- to 35-year cycle for cleft post-and-rail fencing, or for sawing into small lengths to be finger-jointed for architectural use. Other material goes to make farm fencing and to be chipped for modern wood-fired heating systems.

[ citation needed ] In northwest England , coppice-with-standards has been the norm, [ when?

] the standards often of oak with relatively little simple coppice. After World War II , a great deal was planted up with conifers or became neglected. Coppice-working almost died out, though a few men continued in the woods.

Wildlife [ edit ] Overstood sweet chestnut coppice stool, Banstead Woods , Surrey Coppice management favours a range of wildlife, often of species adapted to open woodland.

[ 11 ] After cutting, the increased light allows existing woodland-floor vegetation such as bluebell , anemone and primrose to grow vigorously. Often brambles grow around the stools, encouraging insects, or various small mammals that can use the brambles as protection from larger predators. Woodpiles (if left in the coppice) encourage insects such as beetles to come into an area. The open area is then colonised by many animals such as nightingale , European nightjar and fritillary butterflies . As the coup grows, the canopy closes and it becomes unsuitable for these animals again—but in an actively managed coppice there is always another recently cut coup nearby, and the populations therefore move around, following the coppice management.

[ citation needed ] However, most British coppices have not been managed in this way for many decades.

[ 11 ] The coppice stems have grown tall (the coppice is said to be overstood ), forming a heavily shaded woodland of many closely spaced stems with little ground vegetation. The open-woodland animals survive in small numbers along woodland rides or not at all, and many of these once-common species have become rare. Overstood coppice is a habitat of relatively low biodiversity —it does not support the open-woodland species, but neither does it support many of the characteristic species of high forest , because it lacks many high-forest features such as substantial dead-wood, clearings and stems of varied ages. Suitable conservation management of these abandoned coppices may be to restart coppice management, or in some cases it may be more appropriate to use singling and selective clearance to establish a high-forest structure.

[ citation needed ] Natural occurrence [ edit ] Coppice and pollard growth is a response of the tree to damage, and can occur naturally. Trees may be browsed or broken by large herbivorous animals , such as cattle or elephants , felled by beavers or blown over by the wind . Some trees, such as linden , may produce a line of coppice shoots from a fallen trunk, and sometimes these develop into a line of mature trees. For some trees, such as the common beech ( Fagus sylvatica ), coppicing is more or less easy depending on the altitude: it is much more efficient for trees in the montane zone .

[ 19 ] For energy wood [ edit ] Coppicing of willow , alder and poplar for energy wood has proven commercially successful.

[ 20 ] The Willow Biomass Project in the United States is an example of this. In this case the coppicing is done in a way that an annual or more likely a tri-annual cut can happen. This seems to maximize the production volume from the stand. Such frequent growth means the soils can be easily depleted and so fertilizers are often required. The stock also becomes exhausted after some years and so will be replaced with new plants. The method of harvesting of energy wood can be mechanized by adaptation of specialized agricultural machinery.

[ 21 ] Species and cultivars vary in when they should be cut, regeneration times and other factors. However, full life cycle analysis has shown that poplars have a lower effect in greenhouse gas emissions for energy production than alternatives.

[ 22 ] Gallery [ edit ] Ash coppice stool Bluebells among coppice in Bysing Wood, Kent Hornbeam coppice, Pond Wood, Essex Ash coppice in Overlangbroek, Netherlands Coppicing in progress, note standard trees among the coppice stools, Lower Wood, Norfolk See also [ edit ] Trees portal Ancient woodland Apical dominance Basal shoot Bodging Coarse woody debris Crown sprouting Epicormic shoot Even aged timber management Fire ecology Layering Lignotuber Mallee (habit) Pollarding Pruning Fruit tree pruning Short rotation coppice Shredding (tree pruning technique) Silvopasture Stand level modelling Thinning Tree topping References [ edit ] ^ a b De Decker, Kris (n.d.).

"How to Make Biomass Energy Sustainable Again" .

Low-Tech Magazine . Retrieved 27 April 2021 .

^ "Incredible 15th-Century Japanese Technique for Growing Ultra-Straight Cedar Trees" .

My Modern Met . 31 July 2020 . Retrieved 19 August 2020 .

^ Taaffe, Gerard (26 September 2002).

"Trees that tower over the past and present" .

The Japan Times . Retrieved 19 August 2020 .

...known as dai-sugi. This is a coppiced sugi ...

^ Bartlett, Debbie (4 April 2016).

"Traditional coppice in South East England: the importance of workforce engagement for development" .

IForest - Biogeosciences and Forestry .

9 (4): 577– 582.

doi : 10.3832/ifor1809-009 . Retrieved 1 January 2024 .

^ Coup (French coup , 'cut') is pronounced / ˈ k uː p / in this context.

^ Rackham, Oliver (1980).

"The medieval landscape of Essex" (PDF) . In D. G. Buckley (ed.). Archaeology in Essex to AD 1500 (Report). CBA Research Reports. The Council for British Archaeology. p. 104 . Retrieved 25 July 2022 .

^ a b Coles, J M (1978). Limbrey, Susan and J G Evans (ed.).

"Man and landscape in the Somerset Levels" (PDF) .

The Effect of Man on the Landscape: The Lowland Zone . London: 86– 89. Archived from the original (PDF) on 27 September 2011 . Retrieved 13 September 2007 .

^ "A Critique of Silviculture Managing for Complexity" Chapter 1 Historical Context of Silviculture Puettmann, K.J. et al. 2009 ^ "Coppicing – A Brief History" .

Wandering Woodsmen - Woodland & Countryside Conservation . Retrieved 12 June 2018 .

^ Forestry in the Weald, Forestry Commission Booklet 22, C. Barrington 1968 ^ a b c d Fuller, R J; Warren, M S.

"Coppiced woodlands: their management for wildlife" (PDF) .

JNCC . Archived from the original (PDF) on 9 September 2011 . Retrieved 6 November 2017 .

^ Silviculture Concepts and Applications , Ralph D. Nyland 2002 p. 563 ^ Matthews, John D. (1989).

Silvicultural systems . Oxford [England]: Clarendon Press. pp. 71, 202, 205.

ISBN 978-0198594918 .

^ Hamilton, Liz (June 2000).

"Managing coppice in Eucalypt plantations" .

Trees & Native Vegetation: Farm Forestry . Department of Primary Industries, Victoria, Australia . Retrieved 17 April 2008 .

^ "coppice on sal tree (Shorea robusta) – 2714050" . 3 February 2003 . Retrieved 29 April 2014 .

^ Rackham, Oliver (2003).

Ancient Woodland; its history, vegetation and uses in England (New ed.). Castlepoint Press.

ISBN 1-897604-27-0 .

^ The Bill Hogarth MBE Memorial Apprenticeship Trust Retrieved 17 June 2014 ^ "Coppicing at the Museum" .

Weald and Downland Living Museum . 27 January 2023 . Retrieved 31 January 2023 .

^ Flore forestière française : guide écologique illustré. 1, Plaines et collines [ French forest flora: illustrated ecological guide ], Institut pour le développement forestier, 1989, p. 453, ISBN 2-904740-16-3 Cite: [...] rejette mal de souche à l'étage collinéen, mais très facilement à l'étage montagnard ; (Does not coppice well in the foothill zone but very easily in the montane zone).

^ Dimitriou, Ioannis; Aronsson, Pär (2005).

"Willows for energy and phytoremediation in Sweden" .

Food and Agriculture Organization . Retrieved 29 August 2021 .

^ Silviculture Concepts and Applications , Ralph D. Nyland 2002 Ch. 24 "Coppice Silviculture" ^ "Poplar (Populus spp.) Trees for Biofuel Production – Farm Energy" .

farm-energy.extension.org . Retrieved 1 December 2024 .

Further reading [ edit ] Rackham, Oliver (2001).

Trees and woodland in the British landscape: the complete history of Britain's trees, woods & hedgerows . London: Phoenix Press.

ISBN 1-84212-469-2 .

Hammersley, G, 'The charcoal iron industry and its fuel 1540–1750' Econ Hist. Rev.

Ser. II, 26 (1973), 593–613.

External links [ edit ] Media related to Coppices at Wikimedia Commons The dictionary definition of coppicing at Wiktionary What is coppicing?

The National Trust Industry of Charcoal v t e Forestry Index Forest areas Ministries Research institutes Colleges Journals Arbor Day Types Agroforestry dehesa Analog forestry Bamboo forestry Close to nature forestry Community forestry Ecoforestry Energy forestry Mycoforestry Permaforestry Plantation forestry Social forestry Sustainable forestry Urban forest Urban forestry Ecology and management Arboriculture Controlled burn Debris coarse driftwood large log jam slash Dendrology Ecological thinning Even-aged management Fire ecology Forest dynamics informatics IPM inventory governance law Global Forest Information Service old-growth pathology protection restoration secondary stand transition Trillion Tree Campaign Forest certification ATFS CFS FSC PEFC SFI SmartWood Woodland Carbon Code Forestation afforestation reforestation Formally designated Glade Growth and yield modelling Horticulture GM trees i-Tree urban Multipurpose tree Silviculture Sustainable management Tree allometry breeding Tree measurement crown girth height volume Environmental topics Acid rain Carbon sequestration Clearcutting Deforestation Ecosystem services Forest degradation Forest dieback Forest fragmentation Ghost forest Great Green Wall (Africa) Great Green Wall (China) High grading Illegal logging timber mafia Invasive species wilding Million Tree Initiative REDD Shifting cultivation chitemene slash-and-burn slash-and-char svedjebruk Timber recycling Tree hugging Urban forest inequity Wildfire Industries Coppicing Forest farming Forest gardening Logging Manufacturing lumber plywood pulp and paper sawmilling Products biochar biomass charcoal non-timber palm oil rayon rubber tanbark Rail transport Tree farm Christmas trees Wood engineered fuel mahogany spruce-pine-fir teak Woodworking green woodworking Occupations Forester Arborist Bucker Choker setter Ecologist Feller Firefighter handcrew hotshot lookout smokejumper River driver Truck driver Log scaler Lumberjack Ranger Resin tapper Rubber tapper Shingle weaver Timber cruiser Tree planter Wood process engineer WikiProject Climate change portal Earth sciences portal Ecology portal Environment portal Plants portal Trees portal Category Outline Authority control databases International FAST National Germany United States 2 Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Coppicing&oldid=1294553244 " Categories : Forest management Habitat management equipment and methods Horticultural techniques Habitat Trees Wildfire ecology Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from January 2023 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from October 2022 Articles with unsourced statements from December 2024 Articles with unsourced statements from November 2022 All articles with vague or ambiguous time Vague or ambiguous time from May 2016 Articles with unsourced statements from June 2024 Commons category link is locally defined This page was last edited on 8 June 2025, at 11:41 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Coppicing 28 languages Add topic

