Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 In parametric equations 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Abscissa and ordinate 9 languages বাংলা Deutsch Français Galego Hrvatski ქართული Polski Português Türkçe Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Ordinate ) Horizontal and vertical axes/coordinate numbers of a 2D coordinate system or graph This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Abscissa and ordinate" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( May 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Cartesian plane with marked points (signed ordered pairs of coordinates). For any point, the abscissa is the first value (x coordinate), and the ordinate is the second value (y coordinate).

In mathematics , the abscissa ( / æ b ˈ s ɪ s .

ə / ; plural abscissae or abscissas ) and the ordinate are respectively the first and second coordinate of a point in a Cartesian coordinate system : [ 1 ] [ 2 ] abscissa ≡ ≡ x {\displaystyle \equiv x} -axis (horizontal) coordinate ordinate ≡ ≡ y {\displaystyle \equiv y} -axis (vertical) coordinate Together they form an ordered pair which defines the location of a point in two-dimensional rectangular space .

More technically, the abscissa of a point is the signed measure of its projection on the primary axis. Its absolute value is the distance between the projection and the origin of the axis, and its sign is given by the location on the projection relative to the origin (before: negative; after: positive). Similarly, the ordinate of a point is the signed measure of its projection on the secondary axis.

In three dimensions , the third direction is sometimes referred to as the applicate .

[ 3 ] Etymology [ edit ] Though the word "abscissa" (from Latin linea abscissa ' a line cut off ' ) has been used at least since De Practica Geometrie (1220) by Fibonacci (Leonardo of Pisa), its use in its modern sense may be due to Venetian mathematician Stefano degli Angeli in his work Miscellaneum Hyperbolicum, et Parabolicum (1659).

[ 4 ] Historically, the term was used in the more general sense of a 'distance'.

[ 5 ] In his 1892 work Vorlesungen über die Geschichte der Mathematik (" Lectures on history of mathematics "), volume 2, German historian of mathematics Moritz Cantor writes: Gleichwohl ist durch [Stefano degli Angeli] vermuthlich ein Wort in den mathematischen Sprachschatz eingeführt worden, welches gerade in der analytischen Geometrie sich als zukunftsreich bewährt hat. […] Wir kennen keine ältere Benutzung des Wortes Abscisse in lateinischen Originalschriften. Vielleicht kommt das Wort in Uebersetzungen der Apollonischen Kegelschnitte vor, wo Buch I Satz 20 von ἀποτεμνομέναις die Rede ist, wofür es kaum ein entsprechenderes lateinisches Wort als abscissa geben möchte.

[ 6 ] At the same time it was presumably by [Stefano degli Angeli] that a word was introduced into the mathematical vocabulary for which especially in analytic geometry the future proved to have much in store. […] We know of no earlier use of the word abscissa in Latin original texts. Maybe the word appears in translations of the Apollonian conics , where [in] Book I, Chapter 20 there is mention of ἀποτεμνομέναις, for which there would hardly be a more appropriate Latin word than abscissa .

The use of the word ordinate is related to the Latin phrase linea ordinata appliicata 'line applied parallel'.

In parametric equations [ edit ] In a somewhat obsolete variant usage, the abscissa of a point may also refer to any number that describes the point's location along some path, e.g. the parameter of a parametric equation .

[ 1 ] Used in this way, the abscissa can be thought of as a coordinate-geometry analog to the independent variable in a mathematical model or experiment (with any ordinates filling a role analogous to dependent variables ).

See also [ edit ] Look up abscissa or ordinate in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Function (mathematics) Relation (mathematics) Line chart References [ edit ] ^ a b Hedegaard, Rasmus; Weisstein, Eric W.

"Abscissa" .

MathWorld . Retrieved 14 July 2013 .

^ Hedegaard, Rasmus; Weisstein, Eric W.

"Ordinate" .

MathWorld . Retrieved 14 July 2013 .

^ "Cartesian coordinates" .

PlanetMath .

Archived from the original on 2025-02-21 . Retrieved 2025-04-02 .

'applicate' is rare in English, but its [equivalents] in continental European, [such as] 'die Applikate' in German and 'aplikaat' in Estonian, are more known.

^ Dyer, Jason (March 8, 2009).

"On the Word "Abscissa" " .

numberwarrior.wordpress.com . The number Warrior . Retrieved September 10, 2015 .

^ Miller, Jeff (June 24, 2017).

"Earliest Known Uses of Some of the Words of Mathematics" .

MacTutor . University of St. Andrews, Scotland . Retrieved 2025-01-06 .

^ Cantor, Moritz (1900).

Vorlesungen über Geschichte der Mathematik (in German). Vol. 2 (2nd ed.). Leipzig: B.G. Teubner. p. 898 . Retrieved 10 September 2015 .

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Abscissa_and_ordinate&oldid=1283637864 " Categories : Elementary mathematics Coordinate systems Dimension Hidden categories: CS1 German-language sources (de) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from May 2024 All articles needing additional references Articles containing German-language text Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Articles containing Latin-language text This page was last edited on 2 April 2025, at 19:07 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Abscissa and ordinate 9 languages Add topic

