Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Classification Toggle Classification subsection 1.1 Theories 1.1.1 Subgroups 1.1.2 Inner–Outer hypothesis 1.2 Groups 1.2.1 Dardic 1.2.2 Northern Zone 1.2.3 Northwestern Zone 1.2.4 Western Zone 1.2.5 Central Zone 1.2.6 Eastern Zone 1.2.7 Southern Zone 1.2.8 Unclassified 2 History Toggle History subsection 2.1 Indian subcontinent 2.1.1 Proto-Indo-Aryan 2.1.2 Mitanni-Aryan hypothesis 2.1.3 Old Indo-Aryan 2.1.4 Middle Indo-Aryan (Prakrits) 2.1.5 New Indo-Aryan 2.1.5.1 Medieval Hindustani 2.2 Outside the Indian subcontinent 2.2.1 Domari 2.2.2 Lomavren 2.2.3 Parya 2.2.4 Romani 2.2.5 Sindhic migrations 2.2.6 Indentured labourer migrations 3 Phonology Toggle Phonology subsection 3.1 Consonants 3.1.1 Stop positions 3.1.2 Nasals 3.1.3 Aspiration and breathy-voice 3.1.4 Regional developments 3.2 Vowels 3.3 Charts 4 Sociolinguistics Toggle Sociolinguistics subsection 4.1 Register 4.2 Language and dialect 5 See also 6 Notes 7 References 8 Further reading 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Indo-Aryan languages 105 languages Afrikaans अंगिका العربية অসমীয়া Asturianu Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه Basa Bali বাংলা Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) भोजपुरी Bikol Central Български Bosanski Català Čeština ChiShona Cymraeg Dansk Davvisámegiella Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Fiji Hindi Français Galego गोंयची कोंकणी / Gõychi Konknni 客家語 / Hak-kâ-ngî 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hornjoserbsce Hrvatski Ido বিষ্ণুপ্রিয়া মণিপুরী Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית ಕನ್ನಡ ქართული کٲشُر Қазақша Kurdî Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar मैथिली Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം मराठी მარგალური مازِرونی Bahasa Melayu Nederlands नेपाली नेपाल भाषा 日本語 Nordfriisk Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan ଓଡ଼ିଆ ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی Piemontèis Polski Português Română Runa Simi Русский संस्कृतम् ᱥᱟᱱᱛᱟᱲᱤ Shqip සිංහල Simple English سنڌي Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Sunda Suomi Svenska தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 吴语 粵語 Zazaki 中文 Kumoring ꠍꠤꠟꠐꠤ Tolışi Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Branch of the Indo-Iranian languages Indo-Aryan Indic [ a ] Geographic distribution South Asia , Europe Native speakers est.

1.5 billion (2024) [ 1 ] Linguistic classification Indo-European Indo-Iranian Indo-Aryan Proto-language Proto-Indo-Aryan Subdivisions Central Dardic Eastern Northern Northwestern Southern Western Unclassified: Bhariati Bazigar Chinali–Lahuli Sheikhgal Language codes ISO 639-2 / 5 inc Linguasphere 59= (phylozone) Glottolog indo1321 Present-day geographical distribution of the major Indo-Aryan language groups.

Romani , Domari , Kholosi , Luwati , and Lomavren are outside the scope of the map.

Pashai ( Dardic ) Khowar (Dardic) Shina (Dardic) Kohistani (Dardic) Kashmiri (Dardic) Punjabi ( Northwestern ) Sindhi (Northwestern) Rajasthani ( Western ) Gujarati (Western) Khandeshi (Western) Bhili (Western) Western Pahari ( Northern ) Central Pahari (Northern) Eastern Pahari (Northern) Western Hindi ( Central ) Eastern Hindi (Central) Bengali-Assamese ( Eastern ) Bihari (Eastern) Odia (Eastern) Halbic (Eastern) Marathi-Konkani ( Southern ) Sinhala - Dhivehi (Southern) (not shown: Kunar (Dardic), Chinali-Lahuli (Unclassified)) Part of a series on Indo-European topics Languages List of Indo-European languages Extant Albanoid Albanian Armenian Balto-Slavic Baltic Slavic Celtic Germanic Hellenic Greek Indo-Iranian Indo-Aryan Iranian Nuristani Italic Romance Extinct Anatolian Tocharian Paleo-Balkan Dacian Illyrian Liburnian Messapic Mysian Paeonian Phrygian Thracian Reconstructed Proto-Indo-European language Phonology : Sound laws , Accent , Ablaut Hypothetical Balkanic Daco-Thracian Graeco-Albanian Graeco-Armenian Graeco-Aryan Graeco-Phrygian Indo-Hittite Italo-Celtic Thraco-Illyrian Grammar Vocabulary Root Verbs Nouns Pronouns Numerals Particles Other Proto-Albanian Proto-Anatolian Proto-Armenian Proto-Germanic ( Proto-Norse ) Proto-Italo-Celtic ( Proto-Celtic · Proto-Italic ) Proto-Greek Proto-Balto-Slavic ( Proto-Slavic · Proto-Baltic ) Proto-Indo-Iranian ( Proto-Indo-Aryan , Proto-Iranian , Proto-Nuristani ) Philology Hittite inscriptions Hieroglyphic Luwian Linear B Rigveda Avesta Homer Behistun Greek epigraphy Phrygian epigraphy Messapic epigraphy Latin epigraphy Gaulish epigraphy Runic epigraphy Ogham Gothic Bible Bible translations into Armenian Tocharian script Old Irish glosses Albanian Kanun Origins Homeland Proto-Indo-Europeans Society Religion Mainstream Kurgan hypothesis Indo-European migrations Eurasian nomads Alternative and fringe Anatolian hypothesis Armenian hypothesis Beech argument Indigenous Aryanism Baltic homeland Paleolithic continuity theory Archaeology Chalcolithic (Copper Age) Pontic Steppe Domestication of the horse Kurgan Kurgan stelae Kurgan culture Steppe cultures Bug–Dniester Sredny Stog Dnieper–Donets Samara Khvalynsk Yamnaya Mykhailivka culture Novotitarovskaya culture Caucasus Maykop East Asia Afanasievo Eastern Europe Usatove Cernavodă Cucuteni Northern Europe Corded ware Baden Middle Dnieper Bronze Age Pontic Steppe Chariot Yamnaya Catacomb Multi-cordoned ware Poltavka Srubnaya Northern/Eastern Steppe Abashevo culture Andronovo Sintashta Europe Globular Amphora Corded ware Bell Beaker Únětice Trzciniec Nordic Bronze Age Terramare Tumulus Urnfield Proto-Villanovan Lusatian Este South Asia Bishkent Vakhsh BMAC Ochre Coloured Pottery Copper Hoard Cemetery H Gandhara grave Iron Age Steppe Chernoles Europe Thraco-Cimmerian Hallstatt Latial Jastorf Caucasus Colchian Central Asia Yaz India Painted Grey Ware Northern Black Polished Ware Peoples and societies Bronze Age Anatolian peoples ( Hittites ) Armenians Mycenaean Greeks Indo-Iranians Iron Age Indo-Aryans Indo-Aryans Iranians Iranians Nuristanis Nuristanis East Asia Wusun Yuezhi Europe Celts Gauls Celtiberians Insular Celts Cimmerians Hellenic peoples Italic peoples Germanic peoples Paleo-Balkan / Anatolia Thracians Dacians Illyrians Paeonians Phrygians Scythians Middle Ages East Asia Tocharians Europe Albanians Balts Slavs Norsemen / Medieval Scandinavians Middle Ages Indo-Aryan Medieval India Iranian Greater Iran Religion and mythology Reconstructed Proto-Indo-European mythology Proto-Indo-Iranian religion Historical Vedic religion Ancient Iranian religion Historical Hittite Indo-Aryan Vedic Hinduism Buddhism Jainism Sikhism Iranian Persian Zoroastrianism Kurdish Yazidism Yarsanism Scythian Ossetian Others Armenian European Paleo-Balkan ( Albanian · Illyrian · Thracian · Dacian ) Greek Roman Celtic Irish Scottish Breton Welsh Cornish Germanic Anglo-Saxon Continental Norse Baltic Latvian Lithuanian Slavic Practices Fire rituals Horse sacrifice Sati Winter solstice / Yule Indo-European studies Scholars Marija Gimbutas J. P. Mallory Institutes Copenhagen Studies in Indo-European Publications Encyclopedia of Indo-European Culture The Horse, the Wheel, and Language Journal of Indo-European Studies Indogermanisches etymologisches Wörterbuch Indo-European Etymological Dictionary Category v t e The Indo-Aryan languages , or sometimes Indic languages , [ a ] are a branch of the Indo-Iranian languages in the Indo-European language family . As of 2024, there are more than 1.5 billion speakers, primarily concentrated east of the Indus river in Bangladesh , Northern India , Eastern Pakistan , Sri Lanka , Maldives and Nepal .

[ 4 ] Moreover, apart from the Indian subcontinent , large immigrant and expatriate Indo-Aryan–speaking communities live in Northwestern Europe , Western Asia , North America , the Caribbean , Southeast Africa , Polynesia and Australia , along with several million speakers of Romani languages primarily concentrated in Southeastern Europe . There are over 200 known Indo-Aryan languages.

[ 5 ] Modern Indo-Aryan languages descend from Old Indo-Aryan languages such as early Vedic Sanskrit , through Middle Indo-Aryan languages (or Prakrits ).

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] [ 8 ] [ 9 ] The largest such languages in terms of first-speakers are Hindustani (Hindi/Urdu) ( c.

330 million ), [ 10 ] Bengali (242 million), [ 11 ] Punjabi (about 150 million), [ 12 ] [ 13 ] Marathi (112 million), and Gujarati (60 million). A 2005 estimate placed the total number of native speakers of the Indo-Aryan languages at nearly 900 million people.

[ 14 ] Other estimates are higher, suggesting a figure of 1.5 billion speakers of Indo-Aryan languages.

[ 1 ] Classification [ edit ] Theories [ edit ] Classification tree of the Indo-Aryan languages The Indo-Aryan family as a whole is thought to represent a dialect continuum , where languages are often transitional towards neighbouring varieties.

[ 15 ] Because of this, the division into languages vs. dialects is in many cases somewhat arbitrary. The classification of the Indo-Aryan languages is controversial, with many transitional areas that are assigned to different branches depending on classification.

[ 16 ] There are concerns that a tree model is insufficient for explaining the development of New Indo-Aryan, with some scholars suggesting the wave model .

[ 17 ] Subgroups [ edit ] The following table of proposals is expanded from Masica (1991) (from Hoernlé to Turner), and also includes subsequent classification proposals. The table lists only some modern Indo-Aryan languages.

Indo-Aryan subgroups Model Odia Bengali– Assamese Bihari E. Hindi W. Hindi Rajasthani Gujarati Pahari E. Punjabi W. Punjabi Sindhi Dardic Marathi– Konkani Sinhala – Dhivehi Romani Hoernlé (1880) E E~W W N W ?

W ?

S ?

?

Grierson (−1927) E C~E C NW non-IA S non-IA Chatterji (1926) E Midland SW N NW non-IA S NW Grierson (1931) E Inter.

Midland Inter.

NW non-IA S non-IA Katre (1968) E C NW Dardic S ?

Nigam (1972) E C C (+NW) C ?

NW N S ?

Cardona (1974) E C (S)W NW (S)W ?

Turner (−1975) E C SW C (C.) ~NW (W.) NW SW C Kausen (2006) E C W N NW Dardic S Romani Kogan (2016) E ?

C C~NW NW C~NW C NW non-IA S Insular C Ethnologue (2020) [ 18 ] E EC C W EC (E.) ~W (C., W.) W NW S W Glottolog (2024) [ 19 ] E Midland N NW Dardic S Dhivehi-Sinhala Midland Anton I. Kogan , in 2016, conducted a lexicostatistical study of the New Indo-Aryan languages based on a 100-word Swadesh list , using techniques developed by the glottochronologist and comparative linguist Sergei Starostin .

[ 17 ] That grouping system is notable for Kogan's exclusion of Dardic from Indo-Aryan on the basis of his previous studies showing low lexical similarity to Indo-Aryan (43.5%) and negligible difference with similarity to Iranian (39.3%).

[ 20 ] He also calculated Sinhala–Dhivehi to be the most divergent Indo-Aryan branch. Nevertheless, the modern consensus of Indo-Aryan linguists tends towards the inclusion of Dardic based on morphological and grammatical features.

[ citation needed ] Inner–Outer hypothesis [ edit ] Main article: Inner–Outer hypothesis The Inner–Outer hypothesis argues for a core and periphery of Indo-Aryan languages, with Outer Indo-Aryan (generally including Eastern and Southern Indo-Aryan, and sometimes Northwestern Indo-Aryan, Dardic and Pahari ) representing an older stratum of Old Indo-Aryan that has been mixed to varying degrees with the newer stratum that is Inner Indo-Aryan. It is a contentious proposal with a long history, with varying degrees of claimed phonological and morphological evidence. Since its proposal by Rudolf Hoernlé in 1880 and refinement by George Grierson it has undergone numerous revisions and a great deal of debate, with the most recent iteration by Franklin Southworth and Claus Peter Zoller based on robust linguistic evidence (particularly an Outer past tense in -l- ). Some of the theory's sceptics include Suniti Kumar Chatterji and Colin P. Masica .

[ citation needed ] Groups [ edit ] The below classification follows Masica (1991) , and Kausen (2006) .

Percentage of Indo-Aryan speakers by native language: Hindustani (Hindi/Urdu) (25.4%) Bengali (20.7%) Punjabi (9.40%) Marathi (5.60%) Gujarati (3.80%) Bhojpuri (3.10%) Maithili (2.60%) Odia (2.50%) Sindhi (1.90%) Other (25.0%) Dardic [ edit ] Main article: Dardic languages The Dardic languages (also Dardu or Pisaca) are a group of Indo-Aryan languages largely spoken in the northwestern extremities of the Indian subcontinent. Dardic was first formulated by George Abraham Grierson in his Linguistic Survey of India but he did not consider it to be a subfamily of Indo-Aryan. The Dardic group as a genetic grouping (rather than areal) has been scrutinised and questioned to a degree by recent scholarship: Southworth, for example, says "the viability of Dardic as a genuine subgroup of Indo-Aryan is doubtful" and "the similarities among [Dardic languages] may result from subsequent convergence".

[ 21 ] : 149 The Dardic languages are thought to be transitional with Punjabi and Pahari (e.g. Zoller describes Kashmiri as "an interlink between Dardic and West Pahāṛī"), [ 22 ] : 83 as well as non-Indo-Aryan Nuristani ; and are renowned for their relatively conservative features in the context of Proto-Indo-Aryan .

Kashmiri : Kashmiri , Kishtwari , Poguli ; Shina : Brokskad , Kundal Shahi , Shina , Ushojo , Kalkoti , Palula , Savi ; Chitrali : Kalasha , Khowar ; Kohistani : Bateri , Chilisso , Gowro , Indus Kohistani , Kalami , Tirahi , Torwali , Wotapuri-Katarqalai ; Pashayi Kunar : Dameli , Gawar-Bati , Nangalami , Shumashti .

Northern Zone [ edit ] Main article: Northern Indo-Aryan languages The Northern Indo-Aryan languages , also known as the Pahari ('hill') languages, are spoken throughout the Himalayan regions of the subcontinent.

Eastern Pahari : Nepali , Jumli , Doteli ; Central Pahari : Garhwali , Kumaoni ; Western Pahari : Dogri , Kangri , Bhadarwahi , Churahi , Bhateali , Bilaspuri , Chambeali , Gaddi , Pangwali , Mandeali , Mahasu Pahari , Jaunsari , Kullui , Pahari Kinnauri , Hinduri , Sarazi , Sirmauri .

Northwestern Zone [ edit ] Northwestern Indo-Aryan languages are spoken in the northwestern region of India and eastern region of Pakistan.

Punjabi is spoken predominantly in the Punjab region and is the official language of the northern Indian state of Punjab , in addition to being the most widely-spoken language in Pakistan.

Sindhi and its variants are spoken natively in the Pakistani province of Sindh and neighbouring regions. Northwestern languages are ultimately thought to be descended from Shauraseni Prakrit , with influence from Persian and Arabic .

[ 23 ] Punjabi Central : Majhi Central - Western : Dhanni , Jhangvi , Pahari-Pothwari , Shahpuri , Thali Eastern : Doabi , Malwai , Puadhi Standard Western : Hindko ( Kohati , Ghebi , Awankari , Chachhi , Peshawari, Hazarvi), Inku , Saraiki ( Multani , Riasti , Derawali ) Sindhi : Sindhi , Jadgali , Kutchi , Luwati , Memoni , Khetrani , Kholosi .

Western Zone [ edit ] Western Indo-Aryan languages are spoken in central and western India, in states such as Madhya Pradesh and Rajasthan , in addition to contiguous regions in Pakistan. Gujarati is the official language of Gujarat , and is spoken by over 50 million people. In Europe, various Romani languages are spoken by the Romani people , an itinerant community who historically migrated from India. The Western Indo-Aryan languages are thought to have diverged from their northwestern counterparts, although they have a common antecedent in Shauraseni Prakrit .

Rajasthani : Bagri , Marwari , Mewati , Dhundari , Harauti , Mewari , Shekhawati , Dhatki , Malvi , Nimadi , Gujari , Goaria , Loarki , Bhoyari / Pawari , Kanjari , Od , Lambadi ; Gujarati : Gujarati , Jandavra , Saurashtra , Aer , Vaghri , Parkari Koli , Kachi Koli , Wadiyara Koli ; Bhil : Kalto , Vasavi , Wagdi , Gamit , Vaagri Booli ; Northern Bhil: Bauria , Bhilori , Magari ; Central Bhil: Bhili proper , Bhilali , Chodri , Dhodia , Dhanki , Dubli ; Bareli: Palya Bareli , Pauri Bareli , Rathwi Bareli , Pardhi ; Khandeshi Domaaki Domari Romani : Carpathian Romani , Balkan Romani , Vlax Romani , Baltic Romani ; Northern Romani British Romani: Angloromani , Welsh Romani Northwestern Romani: Sinte Romani , Finnish Kalo Central Zone [ edit ] Main article: Central Indo-Aryan languages Within India, Central Indo-Aryan languages are spoken primarily in the western Gangetic plains , including Delhi and parts of the Central Highlands , where they are often transitional with neighbouring lects. Many of these languages, including Braj and Awadhi , have rich literary and poetic traditions.

Urdu , a Persianised derivative of Dehlavi descended from Shauraseni Prakrit , is the official language of Pakistan and also has strong historical connections to India , where it also has been designated with official status.

Hindi , a standardised and Sanskritised register of Dehlavi , is the official language of the Government of India (along with English ).

Together with Urdu , it is the third most-spoken language in the world.

Western Hindi : Hindustani (including Standard Hindi and Standard Urdu ), Khariboli , Braj , Haryanvi , Bundeli , Kannauji , Parya , Sansi .

Eastern Hindi : Bagheli , Chhattisgarhi , Surgujia , Awadhi ( Fiji Hindi , Caribbean Hindustani ).

Eastern Zone [ edit ] Main article: Eastern Indo-Aryan languages The Eastern Indo-Aryan languages, also known as Magadhan languages, are spoken throughout the eastern subcontinent , alongside other regions surrounding the northwestern Himalayan corridor.

Bengali is the seventh most-spoken language in the world, and has a strong literary tradition; the national anthems of India and Bangladesh are written in Bengali.

Assamese and Odia are the official languages of Assam and Odisha , respectively. The Eastern Indo-Aryan languages descend from Magadhan Apabhraṃśa [ 24 ] and ultimately from Magadhi Prakrit .

[ 25 ] [ 26 ] [ 24 ] Eastern Indo-Aryan languages display many morphosyntactic features similar to those of Munda languages , which are largely absent in western Indo-Aryan languages. It is suggested that "proto-Munda" languages may have once dominated the eastern Indo-Gangetic Plain , and were then absorbed by Indo-Aryan languages at an early date as Indo-Aryan spread east.

[ 27 ] [ 28 ] Bihari : Bhojpuri , Caribbean Hindustani , Fiji Hindi ; Magahi , Khortha ; Maithili , Angika , Bajjika , Thethi , Dehati; Sadanic : Nagpuri , Kurmali (Panchpargania) ; Tharu : [ 29 ] Kochila Tharu , Rana Tharu , Kathariya Tharu , Sonha Tharu , Dangaura Tharu , Chitwania Buksa , Majhi , Musasa ; Kumhali , Kuswaric: [ 30 ] Danwar , Bote-Darai ; Halbic : Halbi , Kamar , Bhunjia , Nahari ; Odia : Baleswari , Kataki, Ganjami , Sundargadi , Sambalpuri , Desia ; Bodo Parja , Bhatri , Reli , Kupia ; Bengali–Assamese Bengali-Gauda: Bengali ( Bangali , Rarhi , Varendri , Manbhumi , Dhakaiya Kutti , Mymensinghi , Dobhashi ), Noakhali , Chittagonian , Sylheti , Bishnupriya Manipuri , Hajong , Chakma , Tanchangya , Rohingya ; Kamarupic: Assamese ( Kamrupi , East Goalpariya ), Kamtapuri , Surjapuri , Rajbanshi ; Southern Zone [ edit ] Marathi-Konkani languages are ultimately descended from Maharashtri Prakrit , whereas Insular Indo-Aryan languages are descended from Elu Prakrit and possess several characteristics that markedly distinguish them from most of their mainland Indo-Aryan counterparts. Insular Indo-Aryan languages (of Sri Lanka and Maldives ) started developing independently and diverging from the continental Indo-Aryan languages from around 5th century BCE.

[ 17 ] Marathi-Konkani Marathic: Marathi , Varhadi , Andh , Agri , Zadi Boli, Thanjavur , Berar-Deccan Marathi , Phudagi , Judeo , Katkari , Varli , Kadodi ; Konkanic: Konkani , Canarese Konkani, Maharashtrian Konkani .

Insular Indo-Aryan Sinhala : Vedda Maldivian : Dhivehi Unclassified [ edit ] The following languages are otherwise unclassified within Indo-Aryan: Chinali–Lahul Lohar : [ 31 ] Chinali , Lahul Lohar .

Bazigar Sheikhgal History [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

( February 2017 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Indian subcontinent [ edit ] See also: Linguistic history of India Dates indicate only a rough time frame.

Proto-Indo-Aryan (before 1500 BCE, reconstructed) Old Indo-Aryan ( c.

1500 –300 BCE) early Old Indo-Aryan: includes Vedic Sanskrit ( c.

1500 to 500 BCE) late Old Indo-Aryan: Epic Sanskrit , Classical Sanskrit ( c.

200 CE to 1300 CE) Mitanni Indo-Aryan ( c.

1400 BCE ) Middle Indo-Aryan or Prakrits ( c.

300 BCE to 1500 CE) early Jain and Buddhist texts ( c.

6th or 5th century BCE) early Middle Indo-Aryan: e.g. Ashokan Prakrits, Pali , Gandhari , ( c.

300 BCE to 200 BCE) middle Middle Indo-Aryan: e.g.

Dramatic Prakrits , Elu ( c.

200 BCE to 700 CE) late Middle Indo-Aryan: e.g.

Abahattha ( c.

700 CE to 1500 CE) Early Modern Indo-Aryan (Late Medieval India): e.g. early Dakhini and emergence of the Dehlavi dialect Early Indo-European migrations from the Pontic–Caspian steppe Proto-Indo-Aryan [ edit ] Main article: Proto-Indo-Aryan language Proto-Indo-Aryan (or sometimes Proto-Indic [ a ] ) is the reconstructed proto-language of the Indo-Aryan languages. It is intended to reconstruct the language of the pre-Vedic Indo-Aryans . Proto-Indo-Aryan is meant to be the predecessor of Old Indo-Aryan (1500–300 BCE), which is directly attested as Vedic and Mitanni-Aryan . Despite the great archaicity of Vedic, however, the other Indo-Aryan languages preserve a small number of conservative features lost in Vedic .

Mitanni-Aryan hypothesis [ edit ] Main article: Indo-Aryan superstrate in Mitanni Some theonyms, proper names, and other terminology of the Late Bronze Age Mitanni civilisation of Upper Mesopotamia exhibit an Indo-Aryan superstrate. While what few written records left by the Mittani are either in Hurrian (which appears to have been the predominant language of their kingdom) or Akkadian (the main diplomatic language of the Late Bronze Age Near East), these apparently Indo-Aryan names suggest that an Indo-Aryan elite imposed itself over the Hurrians in the course of the Indo-Aryan expansion . If these traces are Indo-Aryan, they would be the earliest known direct evidence of Indo-Aryan, and would increase the precision in dating the split between the Indo-Aryan and Iranian languages (as the texts in which the apparent Indicisms occur can be dated with some accuracy).

In a treaty between the Hittites and the Mitanni, the deities Mitra , Varuna , Indra , and the Ashvins ( Nasatya ) are invoked.

Kikkuli 's horse training text includes technical terms such as aika (cf. Sanskrit eka , "one"), tera ( tri , "three"), panza ( panca , "five"), satta ( sapta , seven), na ( nava , "nine"), vartana ( vartana , "turn", round in the horse race). The numeral aika "one" is of particular importance because it places the superstrate in the vicinity of Indo-Aryan proper as opposed to Indo-Iranian in general or early Iranian (which has aiva ).

[ 32 ] Another text has babru ( babhru , "brown"), parita ( palita , "grey"), and pinkara ( pingala , "red"). Their chief festival was the celebration of the solstice ( vishuva ) which was common in most cultures in the ancient world. The Mitanni warriors were called marya , the term for "warrior" in Sanskrit as well; note mišta-nnu (= miẓḍha , ≈ Sanskrit mīḍha ) "payment (for catching a fugitive)" (M. Mayrhofer, Etymologisches Wörterbuch des Altindoarischen , Heidelberg, 1986–2000; Vol. II:358).

Sanskritic interpretations of Mitanni royal names render Artashumara ( artaššumara ) as Ṛtasmara "who thinks of Ṛta " (Mayrhofer II 780), Biridashva ( biridašṷa, biriiašṷ a) as Prītāśva "whose horse is dear" (Mayrhofer II 182), Priyamazda ( priiamazda ) as Priyamedha "whose wisdom is dear" (Mayrhofer II 189, II378), Citrarata as Citraratha "whose chariot is shining" (Mayrhofer I 553), Indaruda/Endaruta as Indrota "helped by Indra " (Mayrhofer I 134), Shativaza ( šattiṷaza ) as Sātivāja "winning the race price" (Mayrhofer II 540, 696), Šubandhu as Subandhu "having good relatives" (a name in Palestine , Mayrhofer II 209, 735), Tushratta ( tṷišeratta, tušratta , etc.) as *tṷaiašaratha, Vedic Tvastar "whose chariot is vehement" (Mayrhofer, Etym. Wb., I 686, I 736).

Old Indo-Aryan [ edit ] The earliest evidence of the group is from Vedic Sanskrit , that is used in the ancient preserved texts of the Indian subcontinent , the foundational canon of the Hindu synthesis known as the Vedas . The Indo-Aryan superstrate in Mitanni is of similar age to the language of the Rigveda , but the only evidence of it is a few proper names and specialised loanwords.

[ 33 ] While Old Indo-Aryan is the earliest stage of the Indo-Aryan branch, from which all known languages of the later stages Middle and New Indo-Aryan are derived, some documented Middle Indo-Aryan variants cannot fully be derived from the documented form of Old Indo-Aryan (on which Vedic and Classical Sanskrit are based), but betray features that must go back to other undocumented dialects of Old Indo-Aryan.

[ 34 ] From Vedic Sanskrit, " Sanskrit " (literally 'put together, perfected, elaborated') developed as the prestige language of culture, science and religion, as well as the court, theatre, etc. Sanskrit of the later Vedic texts is comparable to Classical Sanskrit , but is largely mutually unintelligible with Vedic Sanskrit.

[ 35 ] Middle Indo-Aryan (Prakrits) [ edit ] Outside the learned sphere of Sanskrit, vernacular dialects ( Prakrits ) continued to evolve. The oldest attested Prakrits are the Buddhist and Jain canonical languages Pali and Ardhamagadhi Prakrit , respectively. Inscriptions in Ashokan Prakrit were also part of this early Middle Indo-Aryan stage.

By medieval times, the Prakrits had diversified into various Middle Indo-Aryan languages .

Apabhraṃśa is the conventional cover term for transitional dialects connecting late Middle Indo-Aryan with early Modern Indo-Aryan, spanning roughly the 6th to 13th centuries. Some of these dialects showed considerable literary production; the Śravakacāra of Devasena (dated to the 930s) is now considered to be the first book written in Hindi.

The next major milestone occurred with the Muslim conquests in the Indian subcontinent in the 13th–16th centuries. Under the flourishing Turco-Mongol Mughal Empire , Persian became very influential as the language of prestige of the Islamic courts due to adoption of the foreign language by the Mughal emperors.

The largest languages that formed from Apabhraṃśa were Bengali , Bhojpuri , Hindustani , Assamese , Sindhi , Gujarati , Odia , Marathi , and Punjabi .

New Indo-Aryan [ edit ] Medieval Hindustani [ edit ] Main article: Hindustani language See also: History of Hindustani In the Central Zone Hindi -speaking areas, for a long time the prestige dialect was Braj Bhasha , but this was replaced in the 13th century by Dehlavi -based Hindustani . Hindustani was strongly influenced by Persian , with these and later Sanskrit influence leading to the emergence of Modern Standard Hindi and Modern Standard Urdu as registers of the Hindustani language.

[ 36 ] [ 37 ] This state of affairs continued until the division of the British Indian Empire in 1947, when Modern Standard Hindi became the official language in India and Modern Standard Urdu became official in Pakistan. Despite the different script the fundamental grammar remains identical, the difference is more sociolinguistic than purely linguistic.

[ 38 ] [ 39 ] [ 40 ] Today it is widely understood/spoken as a second or third language throughout South Asia [ 41 ] and one of the most widely known languages in the world in terms of number of speakers.

Outside the Indian subcontinent [ edit ] Domari [ edit ] Main article: Domari language Domari is an Indo-Aryan language spoken by older Dom people scattered across the Middle East. The language is reported to be spoken as far north as Azerbaijan and as far south as central Sudan.

[ 42 ] : 1 Based on the systematicity of sound changes, linguists have concluded that the ethnonyms Domari and Romani derive from the Indo-Aryan word ḍom .

[ 43 ] Lomavren [ edit ] Main article: Lomavren language Lomavren is a nearly extinct mixed language , spoken by the Lom people , that arose from language contact between a language related to Romani and Domari [ 44 ] and the Armenian language .

Parya [ edit ] Main article: Parya language Parya is spoken in Tajikistan and Uzbekistan by the descendants of migrants from the Indian subcontinent. The language retains many features similar to Punjabi and the Western Hindi dialects, while also bearing some influence from Tajik Persian.

[ 45 ] Romani [ edit ] Main article: Romani language The Romani language is usually included in the Western Indo-Aryan languages.

[ 46 ] Romani varieties, which are mainly spoken throughout Europe, are noted for their relatively conservative nature; maintaining the Middle Indo-Aryan present-tense person concord markers, alongside consonantal endings for nominal case. Indeed, these features are no longer evident in most other modern Central Indo-Aryan languages. Moreover, Romani shares an innovative pattern of past-tense person, which corresponds to Dardic languages, such as Kashmiri and Shina. This is believed to be further indication that proto-Romani speakers were originally situated in central regions of the subcontinent, before migrating to northwestern regions. However, there are no known historical sources regarding the development of the Romani language specifically within India.

Research conducted by nineteenth-century scholars Pott (1845) and Miklosich (1882–1888) demonstrated that the Romani language is most aptly designated as a New Indo-Aryan language (NIA), as opposed to Middle Indo-Aryan (MIA); establishing that proto-Romani speakers could not have left India significantly earlier than AD 1000.

The principal argument favouring a migration during or after the transition period to NIA is the loss of the old system of nominal case, coupled with its reduction to a two-way nominative-oblique case system. A secondary argument concerns the system of gender differentiation, due to the fact that Romani has only two genders (masculine and feminine). Middle Indo-Aryan languages (named MIA) generally employed three genders (masculine, feminine and neuter), and some modern Indo-Aryan languages retain this aspect today.

It is suggested that loss of the neuter gender did not occur until the transition to NIA. During this process, most of the neuter nouns became masculine, while several became feminine. For example, the neuter aggi "fire" in Prakrit morphed into the feminine āg in Hindustani, and jag in Romani. The parallels in grammatical gender evolution between Romani and other NIA languages have additionally been cited as indications that the forerunner of Romani remained on the Indian subcontinent until a later period, possibly as late as the tenth century.

Sindhic migrations [ edit ] Kholosi , Jadgali , Luwati , Maimani and Al Sayigh [ 47 ] represent offshoots of the Sindhic subfamily of Indo-Aryan that have established themselves in the Persian Gulf region, perhaps through sea-based migrations. These are of a later origin than the Rom and Dom migrations which represent a different part of Indo-Aryan as well.

Indentured labourer migrations [ edit ] The use by the British East India Company of indentured labourers led to the transplanting of Indo-Aryan languages around the world, leading to locally influenced lects that diverged from the source language, such as Fiji Hindi and Caribbean Hindustani .

Phonology [ edit ] Consonants [ edit ] Stop positions [ edit ] The normative system of New Indo-Aryan stops consists of five places of articulation : labial , dental , " retroflex ", palatal , and velar , which is the same as that of Sanskrit. The "retroflex" position may involve retroflexion, or curling the tongue to make the contact with the underside of the tip, or merely retraction. The point of contact may be alveolar or postalveolar , and the distinctive quality may arise more from the shaping than from the position of the tongue. Palatal stops have affricated release and are traditionally included as involving a distinctive tongue position (blade in contact with hard palate). Widely transcribed as [tʃ] , Masica (1991 :94) claims [cʃ] to be a more accurate rendering.

Moving away from the normative system, some languages and dialects have alveolar affricates [ts] instead of palatal, though some among them retain [tʃ] in certain positions: before front vowels (esp.

/i/ ), before /j/ , or when geminated . Alveolar as an additional point of articulation occurs in Marathi and Konkani where dialect mixture and others factors upset the aforementioned complementation to produce minimal environments, in some West Pahari dialects through internal developments ( *t̪ɾ , t̪ > /tʃ/ ), and in Kashmiri . The addition of a retroflex affricate to this in some Dardic languages maxes out the number of stop positions at seven (barring borrowed /q/ ), while a reduction to the inventory involves *ts > /s/ , which has happened in Assamese , Chittagonian , Sinhala (though there have been other sources of a secondary /ts/ ), and Southern Mewari.

Further reductions in the number of stop articulations are in Assamese and Romani , which have lost the characteristic dental/retroflex contrast, and in Chittagonian, which may lose its labial and velar articulations through spirantisation in many positions (> [f, x] ).

[ 48 ] /q x ɣ f/ are restricted to Perso-Arabic loanwords in most IA languages but they occur natively in Khowar.

[ 49 ] According to Masica (1991) some dialects of Pashayi have a /θ/ which is unusual for IA languages. Domari which is spoken in the Middle East and had high contact with Middle Eastern languages has /q ħ ʕ ʔ/ and emphatic consonants from loanwords.

Stops Languages / p / / t̪ / / ʈ / ~ / t / / ʈ͡ʂ / / t͡ʃ / ~ / t͡ɕ / / t͡s / / k / / q / Khowar, Shina, Bashkarik, Kalasha Gawarbati, Phalura, Shumashti, Kanyawali, Pashai Marathi, Konkani, certain W. Pahari dialects (Bhadrawahi, Bhalesi, Mandeali, Padari, Simla, Satlej, maybe Kulu), Kashmiri, E. and N. dialects of Bengali (parts of Dhaka, Mymensingh, Rajshahi) Hindustani, Punjabi, Dogri, Sindhi, Gujarati, Sinhala, Odia, Standard Bengali, dialects of Rajasthani (except Lamani, NW. Marwari, S. Mewari), Sanskrit, [ 50 ] Prakrit, Pali, Maithili, Magahi, Bhojpuri Romani, Domari, Kholosi Nepali, dialects of Rajasthani (Lamani and NW. Marwari), Northern Lahnda's Kagani, Kumauni, many West Pahari dialects (not Chamba Mandeali, Jaunsari, or Sirmauri) Rajasthani's S. Mewari Assamese Chittagonian Sylheti Nasals [ edit ] Sanskrit was noted as having five nasal-stop articulations corresponding to its oral stops, and among modern languages and dialects Dogri, Kacchi, Kalasha, Rudhari, Shina, Saurashtri, and Sindhi have been analysed as having this full complement of phonemic nasals / m / / n / / ɳ / / ɲ / / ŋ / , with the last two generally as the result of the loss of the stop from a homorganic nasal + stop cluster ( [ɲj] > [ɲ] and [ŋɡ] > [ŋ] ), though there are other sources as well.

[ 51 ] In languages that lack phonemic nasals at some places of articulation, they can still occur allophonically from place assimilation in a nasal + stop culture, e.g. Hindustani /nɡ/ > [ŋɡ] .

Nasals Languages / m / / n / / ɳ / / ɲ / / ŋ / Dogri, Kacchi, Kalasha, Rudhari, Shina, Saurashtri, Sindhi, Saraiki Sinhala Kalami, Odia, Dhundhari, Pashayi, Marwari Dhivehi [ b ] Gujarati, Kashmiri, Marathi, Punjabi, Rajasthani (Marwari) Hindustani, Nepali, Sylheti, Assamese, Bengali Romani, Domari Aspiration and breathy-voice [ edit ] Most Indo-Aryan languages have contrastive aspiration ( /ʈ/ ~ /ʈʰ/ ), and some retain historical breathy voice on voiced consonants ( /ɖ/ ~ /ɖʱ/ ). Sometimes both phenomena are analysed as a single aspiration contrast. The places and manners of articulation which allow contrastive aspiration vary by language; e.g. Sindhi permits phonemic /mʱ/ , but the phonemic status of this sound in Hindustani is uncertain, and many "Dardic" languages lack aspirated retroflex sibilants despite having unaspirated equivalents.

[ 52 ] In languages that have lost breathy-voice, the contrast has often been replaced with tone.

Regional developments [ edit ] Some of these are mentioned in Masica (1991 :104–105).

Implosives : Languages in the Sindhic subfamily, as well as Saraiki , western Marwari dialects, and some dialects of Gujarati have developed implosive consonants from historical intervocalic geminates and word-initial stops. Sindhi has a full implosive series except for the dental implosive: /ɠ ʄ ᶑ ɓ/ . It has been claimed that Wadiyari Koli has the dental implosive too. Other languages have less complete implosive series, e.g. Kacchi has just /ᶑ ɓ/ .

Prenasalized stops : Sinhala and Maldivian (Dhivehi) have a series of prenasalised stops covering all places except for palatal: /ᵐb ⁿd ᶯɖ ᵑɡ/ .

Palatalization : Kashmiri (natively) and some Romani dialects (from contact with Slavic languages) have contrastive palatalisation.

Voiceless lateral In Gawarbati, some Pashai dialects, partly Bashkarik and some Shina dialects have /ɬ/ from clusters of tr kr or sometimes pr; dr gr and br merged with /l/ in these languages.

Lateral affricates : Bhadarwahi has an unusual series of lateral retroflex affricates ( /ʈ͡ꞎ ɖ͡ɭ ɖ͡ɭʱ/ derived from historical /Cɾ/ clusters.

Vowels [ edit ] Vowel typologies are varied across Indo-Aryan due to diachronic mergers and (in some cases) splits, as well as different accounts by linguists for even the widely-spoken languages. Vowel systems per Masica (1991 :108–113) are listed below. Many languages also have phonemic nasal vowels.

Vowels Languages 16 /iː i eː e ɨː ɨ əː ə aː a ɔː ɔ oː o uː u/ Kashmiri 14 /ɪ iː ʊ uː e eː ə~ɐ əː o oː æ~ɛ a aː ɔ/ Maithili 13 /iː i eː e æː æ aː a ə oː o uː u/ Sinhala 10 /i ɪ e ɛ · a ə · ɔ o ʊ u/ Hindustani, Punjabi, Sindhi, Kacchi, Hindko, Rajasthani (most varieties) 9 /i ɪ e æ~ɛ · a ə · o ʊ u/ W. Pahari (Dogri, Rudhari, Mandeali, Pangwali, Khashali, Churahi), Saraiki /i ɪ e · a ə · ɔ o ʊ u/ W. Pahari (Shodochi, Surkhuli) /i ɪ e ɛ · a · ɔ o ʊ u/ W. Pahari (Jaunsari, Shoracholi, Kullui) 8 /i e ɛ · a ə · ɔ o u/ Gujarati /i e ɛ a · ɒ ɔ o u/ Assamese /i ɪ e · a ə · o ʊ u/ Halbi, Bhatri, W. Pahari (Garhwali, Chameali, Gaddi) 7 /i e æ · a · ɔ o u/ Bengali 6 /i e a · ɔ o u/ Odia, Bishnupriya Manipuri /i e · a ə · o u/ Marathi, Lambadi, Sadri/Sadani /i e · a ʌ · o u/ Nepali 5 /i e · a · o u/ Romani (European dialects) Sylheti language is one of the few tonal Indo-Aryan languages, others being Punjabi and a few Dardic languages. The vowels of Sylheti language listed below.

[ 53 ] Vowels Languages 5 /i e · a · ɔ u/ Sylheti Charts [ edit ] The following are consonant systems of major and representative New Indo-Aryan languages, mostly following Masica (1991 :106–107), though here they are in IPA . Parentheses indicate those consonants found only in loanwords: square brackets indicate those with "very low functional load". The arrangement is roughly geographical.

Romani p t (ts) tʃ k pʲ tʲ kʲ b d (dz) dʒ ɡ bʲ dʲ ɡʲ pʰ tʰ tʃʰ kʰ m n nʲ (f) s ʃ x (fʲ) sʲ v (z) ʒ ɦ vʲ zʲ ɾ l lʲ j Shina p t̪ ʈ ts tʃ tʂ k b d ɖ dʒ ɖʐ ɡ pʰ t̪ʰ ʈʰ tsʰ tʃʰ tʂʰ kʰ m n ɳ ɲ ŋ (f) s ʂ ɕ z ʐ ʑ ɦ ɾ l ɽ w j Kashmiri p t̪ ʈ ts tʃ k pʲ t̪ʲ ʈʲ tsʲ kʲ b d̪ ɖ dʒ ɡ bʲ d̪ʲ ɖʲ ɡʲ pʰ t̪ʰ ʈʰ tsʰ tʃʰ kʰ pʲʰ t̪ʲʰ ʈʲʰ tsʲʰ kʲʰ m n ɲ mʲ nʲ s ʃ sʲ z ɦ zʲ ɦʲ ɾ l ɾʲ lʲ w j wʲ Saraiki p t̪ ʈ tʃ k b d̪ ɖ dʒ ɡ pʰ t̪ʰ ʈʰ tʃʰ kʰ bʱ d̪ʱ ɖʱ dʒʱ ɡʱ ɓ ɗ ʄ ɠ m n ɳ ɲ ŋ mʱ nʱ ɳʱ s (ʃ) (x) (z) (ɣ) ɦ ɾ l ɽ ɾʱ lʱ ɽʱ w j wʱ Punjabi p t̪ ʈ tʃ k b d̪ ɖ dʒ ɡ pʰ t̪ʰ ʈʰ tʃʰ kʰ m n ɳ [ɲ ŋ (f) s ʃ (z) ɦ ɾ l ɽ ɭ [w] [j] Nepali p t̪ ʈ ts k b d̪ ɖ dz ɡ pʰ t̪ʰ ʈʰ tsʰ kʰ bʱ d̪ʱ ɖʱ dzʱ ɡʱ m n ŋ s ɦ ɾ l [w] [j] Sylheti [ 54 ] t̪ ʈ b d̪ ɖ ɡ m n ŋ ɸ s ʃ x z ɦ r l Sindhi [ 55 ] p t̪ ʈ tʃ k b d̪ ɖ dʒ ɡ pʰ t̪ʰ ʈʰ tʃʰ kʰ bʱ d̪ʱ ɖʱ dʒʱ ɡʱ ɓ ɗ ʄ ɠ m n ɳ ɲ ŋ mʱ nʱ ɳʱ (f) s (ʃ) (x) (z) (ɣ) ɦ ɾ l ɽ ɾʱ lʱ ɽʱ w j wʱ Marwari p t̪ ʈ tʃ k b d̪ ɖ dʒ ɡ pʰ t̪ʰ ʈʰ tʃʰ kʰ bʱ d̪ʱ ɖʱ dʒʱ ɡʱ ɓ ɗ̪ ɗ ɠ m n ɳ mʱ nʱ s ɦ ɾ l ɽ ɭ w j wʱ Hindustani p t̪ ʈ tʃ (q) k b d̪ ɖ dʒ (ɣ) ɡ pʰ t̪ʰ ʈʰ tʃʰ (x) kʰ bʱ d̪ʱ ɖʱ dʒʱ ɡʱ m n (ɳ) (f) s (ʂ) ʃ (ʒ) (z) ɦ [r] ɾ l ɽ ɽʱ ʋ [w] j Assamese p t k b d g pʰ tʰ kʰ bʱ dʱ ɡʱ m n ŋ s x z ɦ ɹ l [w] Bengali p t̪ ʈ tʃ k b d̪ ɖ dʒ ɡ pʰ t̪ʰ ʈʰ tʃʰ kʰ bʱ d̪ʱ ɖʱ dʒʱ ɡʱ m n ŋ [s] ʃ ɦ [z] ɾ l ɽ [ɽʱ] [j] Gujarati p t̪ ʈ tʃ k b d̪ ɖ dʒ ɡ pʰ t̪ʰ ʈʰ tʃʰ kʰ bʱ d̪ʱ ɖʱ dʒʱ ɡʱ m n ɳ mʱ nʱ ɳʱ s ʃ ɦ ɾ l ɭ ɾʱ lʱ w j Marathi p t̪ ʈ ts tʃ k b d̪ ɖ dz dʒ ɡ pʰ t̪ʰ ʈʰ tʃʰ kʰ bʱ d̪ʱ ɖʱ dzʱ dʒʱ ɡʱ m n ɳ mʱ nʱ ɳʱ s ʃ ɦ ɾ l ɭ ɾʱ lʱ w j wʱ Odia p t̪ ʈ tʃ k b d̪ ɖ dʒ ɡ pʰ t̪ʰ ʈʰ tʃʰ kʰ bʱ d̪ʱ ɖʱ dʒʱ ɡʱ m n ɳ s ɦ ɾ l [ɽ] ɭ [ɽʱ] [w] [j] Sinhala p t̪ ʈ tʃ k b d̪ ɖ dʒ ɡ ᵐb ⁿ̪d ᶯɖ ᵑɡ m n ɲ ŋ s ɦ ɾ l w j Sociolinguistics [ edit ] Register [ edit ] In many Indo-Aryan languages, the literary register is often more archaic and utilises a different lexicon (Sanskrit or Perso-Arabic) than spoken vernacular. One example is Bengali's high literary form, Sādhū bhāṣā , as opposed to the more modern Calita bhāṣā (Cholito-bhasha).

[ 56 ] This distinction approaches diglossia .

Language and dialect [ edit ] In the context of South Asia, the choice between the appellations "language" and "dialect" is a difficult one, and any distinction made using these terms is obscured by their ambiguity. In one general colloquial sense, a language is a "developed" dialect: one that is standardised, has a written tradition and enjoys social prestige . As there are degrees of development, the boundary between a language and a dialect thus defined is not clear-cut, and there is a large middle ground where assignment is contestable.
There is a second meaning of these terms, in which the distinction is drawn on the basis of linguistic similarity. Though seemingly a "proper" linguistics sense of the terms, it is still problematic: methods that have been proposed for quantifying difference (for example, based on mutual intelligibility ) have not been seriously applied in practice; and any relationship established in this framework is relative.

[ 57 ] See also [ edit ] Indo-Aryans Iranic languages Proto-Vedic Continuity The family of Brahmic scripts Indo-Aryan loanwords in Tamil Dravidian languages Languages of Bangladesh Languages of India Languages of Maldives Languages of Nepal Languages of Pakistan Languages of Sri Lanka Languages of South Asia Notes [ edit ] ^ a b c In modern and colloquial context, the term " Indic " also refers more generally to the languages of the Indian subcontinent , thus also including non-Indo-Aryan languages.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] ^ Unclear status of /ɲ/ References [ edit ] ^ a b "Development team" (PDF) .

inflibnet.ac.in . Retrieved 9 March 2024 .

^ Reynolds, Mike; Verma, Mahendra (2007).

"Indic languages" . In Britain, David (ed.).

Language in the British Isles .

Cambridge University Press . pp.

293– 307.

ISBN 978-0-521-79488-6 . Retrieved 4 October 2021 .

^ Munshi, S (2009). "Indo-Aryan languages". In Keith Brown; Sarah Ogilvie (eds.).

Concise Encyclopedia of Language of the World . Amsterdam: Elsevier. p.

522–528 .

^ "Overview of Indo-Aryan languages" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Retrieved 8 July 2018 .

^ Various counts depend on where the line is drawn between a "dialect" and a "language".

[ citation needed ] Glottolog 4.1 lists 224 languages.

^ Burde, Jayant (2004).

Rituals, Mantras, and Science: An Integral Perspective . Motilal Banarsidass Publishers. p. 3.

ISBN 978-81-208-2053-1 .

The Aryans spoke an Indo-European language sometimes called the Vedic language from which have descended Sanskrit and other Indic languages ... Prakrit was a group of variants which developed alongside Sanskrit.

^ Jain, Danesh; Cardona, George (26 July 2007).

The Indo-Aryan Languages .

Routledge . p. 163.

ISBN 978-1-135-79711-9 .

... a number of their morphophonological and lexical features betray the fact that they are not direct continuations of R̥gvedic Sanskrit, the main base of 'Classical' Sanskrit; rather they descend from dialects which, despite many similarities, were different from R̥gvedic and in some regards even more archaic.

^ Chamber's Encyclopaedia, Volume 7 . International Learnings Systems. 1968.

Most Aryan languages of India and Pakistan belong to the Indo-Aryan family, and are descended from Sanskrit through the intermediate stage of Prakrit. The Indo-Aryan languages are by far the most important numerically and the territory occupied by them extends over the whole of northern and central India and reaches as far south as Goa.

^ Donkin, R. A. (2003).

Between East and West: The Moluccas and the Traffic in Spices Up to the Arrival of Europeans .

American Philosophical Society . p. 60.

ISBN 9780871692481 .

The modern, regional Indo-Aryan languages developed from Prakrt, an early 'unrefined' ( prakrta ) form of Sanskrit, around the close of the first millennium A.D.

^ Standard Hindi first language: 260.3 million (2001), as second language: 120 million (1999). Urdu L1: 68.9 million (2001–2014), L2: 94 million (1999): Ethnologue 19.

^ Bengali or Bangla-Bhasa, L1: 242.3 million (2011), L2: 19.2 million (2011), Ethnologue ^ "Världens 100 största språk 2010" [The world's 100 largest languages in 2010].

Nationalencyclopedin (in Swedish).

Government of Sweden publication. Archived from the original on 11 November 2012 . Retrieved 30 August 2013 .

^ "Punjabi speaking countries" .

WorldData.info .

^ Bryant, Edwin Francis; Patton, Laurie L. (2005).

The Indo-Aryan Controversy: Evidence and Inference in Indian History .

Routledge . pp.

246– 247.

ISBN 978-0-7007-1463-6 .

^ Masica (1991) , p. 25.

^ Masica (1991) , pp. 446–463.

^ a b c Kogan, Anton I. (2016).

"Genealogical classification of New Indo-Aryan languages and lexicostatistics" (PDF) .

Journal of Language Relationship .

14 (4): 227– 258.

doi : 10.31826/jlr-2017-143-411 .

S2CID 212688418 .

^ Eberhard, David M.; Simons, Gary F.; Fennig, Charles D., eds. (2020).

Ethnologue: Languages of the World (23rd ed.). Dallas, Texas: SIL International.

^ Hammarström, Harald; Forkel, Robert; Haspelmath, Martin, eds. (2017).

"Indo-Aryan" .

Glottolog 3.0 . Jena, Germany: Max Planck Institute for the Science of Human History.

^ Kogan, Anton I. (2005).

Dardskie yazyki. Geneticheskaya kharakteristika [ Dardic language. Genetic characteristic ] (in Russian). Moskva: Vostochnaya literatura.

^ Southworth, Franklin C. (2005).

Linguistic archaeology of South Asia .

Routledge .

ISBN 0-415-33323-7 .

^ Zoller, Claus Peter (2016).

"Outer and Inner Indo-Aryan, and northern India as an ancient linguistic area" .

Acta Orientalia .

77 : 71– 132.

^ Sigfried J. de Laet.

History of Humanity: From the seventh to the sixteenth century UNESCO, 1994.

ISBN 9231028138 p 734 ^ a b Ray, Tapas S. (2007).

"Eleven: "Oriya" " . In Jain, Danesh; Cardona, George (eds.).

The Indo-Aryan Languages .

Routledge . p. 445.

ISBN 978-1-135-79711-9 .

^ Cardona, George; Jain, Dhanesh, eds. (2003). "The historical context and development of Indo-Aryan".

The Indo-Aryan Languages . Routledge language family series. London: Routledge . pp.

46– 66.

ISBN 0-7007-1130-9 .

^ Claus, Peter J.; Diamond, Sarah; Mills, Margaret Ann (2003). "Afghanistan, Bangladesh, India".

South Asian folklore: an encyclopedia .

Routledge . p. 203.

^ Peterson, John (2017). " The prehistorical spread of Austro-Asiatic in South Asia Archived 11 April 2018 at the Wayback Machine ". Presented at ICAAL 7, Kiel, Germany.

^ Ivani, Jessica K.; Paudyal, Netra; Peterson, John (1 September 2020).

"Indo-Aryan – a house divided? Evidence for the east–west Indo-Aryan divide and its significance for the study of northern South Asia" .

Journal of South Asian Languages and Linguistics .

7 (2): 287– 326.

doi : 10.1515/jsall-2021-2029 .

ISSN 2196-078X .

^ Hammarström, Harald; Forkel, Robert; Haspelmath, Martin, eds. (2017).

"Tharuic" .

Glottolog 3.0 . Jena, Germany: Max Planck Institute for the Science of Human History.

^ Hammarström, Harald; Forkel, Robert; Haspelmath, Martin, eds. (2017).

"Kuswaric" .

Glottolog 3.0 . Jena, Germany: Max Planck Institute for the Science of Human History.

^ Hammarström, Harald; Forkel, Robert; Haspelmath, Martin, eds. (2017).

"Chinali–Lahul Lohar" .

Glottolog 3.0 . Jena, Germany: Max Planck Institute for the Science of Human History.

^ Paul Thieme, The 'Aryan' Gods of the Mitanni Treaties. JAOS 80, 1960, 301–17 ^ Parpola, Asko (2015).

The Roots of Hinduism: The Early Aryans and The Indus Civilization .

Oxford University Press .

^ Oberlies, Thomas (2007).

"Chapter Five: Aśokan Prakrit and Pāli" . In Cardona, George; Jain, Danesh (eds.).

The Indo-Aryan Languages . Routledge. p. 179.

ISBN 9781135797119 .

^ Gombrich, Richard (14 April 2006).

Theravada Buddhism: A Social History from Ancient Benares to Modern Colombo .

Routledge . p. 24.

ISBN 978-1-134-90352-8 .

^ Kulshreshtha, Manisha; Mathur, Ramkumar (24 March 2012).

Dialect Accent Features for Establishing Speaker Identity: A Case Study .

Springer Science & Business Media . p. 16.

ISBN 978-1-4614-1137-6 .

^ Nunley, Robert E.; Roberts, Severin M.; Wubrick, George W.; Roy, Daniel L. (1999).

The Cultural Landscape an Introduction to Human Geography .

Prentice Hall .

ISBN 978-0-13-080180-7 .

... Hindustani is the basis for both languages ...

^ "Urdu and its Contribution to Secular Values" . South Asian Voice. Archived from the original on 11 November 2007 . Retrieved 26 February 2008 .

^ "Hindi/Urdu Language Instruction" .

University of California , Davis. Archived from the original on 3 January 2015 . Retrieved 3 January 2015 .

^ "Ethnologue Report for Hindi" .

Ethnologue . Retrieved 26 February 2008 .

^ Zwartjes, Otto (2011).

Portuguese Missionary Grammars in Asia, Africa and Brazil, 1550–1800 .

John Benjamins Publishing .

ISBN 978-9027283252 .

^ *Matras, Y. (2012).

A grammar of Domari . Berlin: De Gruyter Mouton (Mouton Grammar Library).

^ "History of the Romani language" . Archived from the original on 6 October 2022 . Retrieved 16 July 2016 .

^ "GYPSY ii. Gypsy Dialects – Encyclopaedia Iranica" . Archived from the original on 2 April 2015 . Retrieved 25 March 2015 .

Encyclopædia Iranica ^ Tiwari, Bholanath (1970).

Tajuzbeki . National Publishing House.

^ "Romani (subgroup)" .

SIL International . n.d . Retrieved 15 September 2013 .

^ Jahdhami, Said Humaid Al (31 July 2022).

"Maimani Language and Lawati Language: Two Sides of the Same Coin?" .

Journal of Modern Languages .

32 (1): 37– 57.

doi : 10.22452/jml.vol32no1.3 .

ISSN 2462-1986 .

^ Masica (1991 :94–95) ^ Cardona & Jain (2003) , p. 932.

^ In Sanskrit, probably /cɕ/ is a more correct representation. Sometimes, only for representation, /c/ is also used.

^ Masica (1991 :95–96) ^ Masica (1991 :101–102) ^ Mahanta, Shakuntala; Gope, Amalesh (1 September 2018).

"Tonal polarity in Sylheti in the context of noun faithfulness" .

Language Sciences .

69 : 81.

doi : 10.1016/j.langsci.2018.06.010 .

ISSN 0388-0001 .

S2CID 149759441 .

^ Gope, Amalesh; Mahanta, Shakuntala (2015).

An Acoustic Analysis of Sylheti Phonemes (PDF) . ICPhS 2015. Glasgow . Retrieved 11 November 2022 .

^ Pandey, Anshuman (10 September 2010).

"Proposal to Encode the Sindhi Script in ISO/IEC 10646" (PDF) . Retrieved 11 November 2022 .

^ Masica 1991 , p. 57.

^ Masica 1991 , pp. 23–27.

Further reading [ edit ] Morgenstierne, Georg. "Early Iranic Influence upon Indo-Aryan." Acta Iranica, I. série, Commemoration Cyrus. Vol. I. Hommage universel (1974): 271–279.

John Beames , A comparative grammar of the modern Aryan languages of India: to wit, Hindi, Panjabi, Sindhi, Gujarati, Marathi, Oriya, and Bangali . Londinii: Trübner, 1872–1879. 3 vols.

Madhav Deshpande (1979).

Sociolinguistic attitudes in India: An historical reconstruction . Ann Arbor: Karoma Publishers.

ISBN 0-89720-007-1 , ISBN 0-89720-008-X (pbk).

Chakrabarti, Byomkes (1994).

A comparative study of Santali and Bengali . Calcutta: K.P. Bagchi & Co.

ISBN 81-7074-128-9 Erdosy, George. (1995).

The Indo-Aryans of ancient South Asia: Language, material culture and ethnicity . Berlin: Walter de Gruyter .

ISBN 3-11-014447-6 .

Kausen, Ernst (2006).

"Die Klassifikation der indogermanischen Sprachen (Microsoft Word, 133 KB)" .

Kobayashi, Masato.; & George Cardona (2004).

Historical phonology of old Indo-Aryan consonants . Tokyo: Research Institute for Languages and Cultures of Asia and Africa, Tokyo University of Foreign Studies.

ISBN 4-87297-894-3 .

Masica, Colin (1991), The Indo-Aryan Languages , Cambridge: Cambridge University Press , ISBN 978-0-521-29944-2 .

Misra, Satya Swarup. (1980).

Fresh light on Indo-European classification and chronology . Varanasi: Ashutosh Prakashan Sansthan.

Misra, Satya Swarup. (1991–1993).

The Old-Indo-Aryan, a historical & comparative grammar (Vols. 1–2). Varanasi: Ashutosh Prakashan Sansthan.

Sen, Sukumar. (1995).

Syntactic studies of Indo-Aryan languages . Tokyo: Institute for the Study of Languages and Foreign Cultures of Asia and Africa, Tokyo University of Foreign Studies.

Vacek, Jaroslav. (1976).

The sibilants in Old Indo-Aryan: A contribution to the history of a linguistic area . Prague: Charles University.

External links [ edit ] The Indo-Aryan languages , 25 October 2009 The Indo-Aryan languages Colin P.Masica Survey of the syntax of the modern Indo-Aryan languages (Rajesh Bhatt), 7 February 2003.

v t e Indo-European languages ( list ) Albanoid Albanian Messapic Illyrian ?

Anatolian Hittite Lydian Palaic Luwic Carian Luwian Lycian Milyan Pisidian Sidetic Kalasmaic ?

Balto-Slavic Baltic Dnieper-Oka Golyad East Baltic West Baltic Slavic East Slavic South Slavic West Slavic Celtic Hispano-Celtic Celtiberian Gallaecian Nuclear Celtic Continental Celtic Insular Celtic Germanic East Germanic North Germanic West Germanic Hellenic Ancient Macedonian Greek Indo-Iranian Indo-Aryan Iranian Nuristani Badeshi (unclassified) Italic Latino-Faliscan Romance Osco-Umbrian Siculian Belgic ?

Tocharian Tocharian A Tocharian B Tocharian C Others Armenian Unclassified Dacian Dardanian Elymian Getaean Liburnian Lusitanian Moesian Mysian Paeonian Phrygian Thracian Venetic Wusun Ligurian ?

Philistine ?

Proto-languages Proto-Indo-European Proto-Albanian Proto-Anatolian Proto-Armenian Proto-Balto-Slavic Proto-Baltic Proto-Slavic Proto-Celtic Proto-Germanic Proto-Norse Proto-Hellenic Proto-Indo-Iranian Proto-Indo-Aryan Proto-Iranian Proto-Nuristani Proto-Italic Proto-Romance Proto-Tocharian Italics indicate extinct languages Indo-Iranian languages v t e Indo-Aryan languages Dardic Kashmiri Kashmiri Kishtwari Shina Shina Brokskat Kundal Shahi Kalkoti Ushoji Palula Sawi Pashayi Pashayi Kunar Dameli Gawar-Bati Nangalami Shumashti Wotapuri-Katarqalai Chitral Kalasha Khowar Hazara Division Indus Kohistani Bateri Chilisso Gowro Kalami Tirahi Mankiyali Northern Eastern Doteli Jumli Nepali Central Garhwali Kumaoni Western Dogri Kangri Bhadarwahi Churahi Bhateali Bilaspuri Chambeali Gaddi Pangwali Mandeali Mahasu Pahari Jaunsari Kullui Pahari Kinnauri Hinduri Sirmauri Sarazi Northwestern Punjabi Eastern Punjabi dialects Sansi Lahnda Hindko Inku Khetrani Pahari-Pothwari Saraiki Sindhi Jadgali Kholosi Kutchi Luwati Memoni Sindhi Western Gujarati Aer Gujarati Lisan ud-Dawat Jandavra Koli Kachi Parkari Wadiyara Saurashtra Vaghri Rajasthani Bagri Goaria Loarki Gujari Dhundari Harauti Malvi Marwari Mewati Mewari Shekhawati Dhatki Od Nimadi Bhil Bhili Bhilali Chodri Dhodia–Kukna Dhanki Dubli Bauria Bhilori Mawchi Magari Palya Bareli Pauri Bareli Rathwi Bareli Pardhi Gamit Kalto Vasavi Wagdi Vaagri Booli Others Khandeshi Lambadi Dawoodi Domari Romani list of languages Central Western Braj Bhasha Bundeli Haryanvi Hindustani Kauravi Hindi Hinglish / Urdish Urdu Deccani Judeo-Urdu Hyderabadi Urdu Rekhta Kannauji Sansi Sadhukkadi Eastern Awadhi Bagheli Chhattisgarhi Fiji Hindi Others Parya Eastern Bihari Bhojpuric Bhojpuri Caribbean Hindustani Magahi Magahi Khortha Maithili Maithili Angika Bajjika Sadanic Sadri Kurmali Tharuic Tharu Kochila Buksa Majhi Musasa Others Kumhali Kuswaric Bote-Darai Danwar Gauda– Kamarupa Bengali Bengali dialects Bishnupriya Manipuri Hajong Kharia Thar Kurmukar Mal Paharia Noakhali Sylheti Tanchangya Chittagonian Chakma Rohingya Kamarupic Assamese Kamrupi Dehan Goalpariya Rajbanshi (Nepal) Rangpuri Surjapuri Odia Odia Sambalpuri Desia Bhatri Bodo Parja Reli Kupia Halbic Halbi Kamar Bhunjia Nahari Southern Marathi– Konkani Marathic Marathi Varhadi Andh Berar Deccan Varli Phudagi Katkari Kadodi Konkanic Konkani Maharashtrian Konkani Nawayathi Insular Maldivian Sinhala Old Sanskrit Vedic Classical Mitanni superstrate Middle Early Ashokan Prakrit Pāli Early Ardhamagadhi Middle ( Prakrit ) Buddhist Hybrid Sanskrit Dramatic Prakrits Ardhamagadhi Magadhi Maharashtri Shauraseni Gāndhārī Gaudi Paishachi Late ( Apabhraṃśa ) Abahattha Apabhraṃśa Elu Kamarupi Khasa Prakrit Proto- languages Proto-Indo-Iranian Proto-Indo-Aryan Unclassified Badeshi (unknown further classification) Bazigar Chinali–Lahul Chinali Lahul Lohar Sheikhgal Pidgins and creoles Andaman Creole Hindi Bombay Hindi Haflong Hindi Nagamese Nefamese Vedda See also Indo-Iranian languages Nuristani languages Iranian languages v t e Iranian languages History Proto-Iranian Old Iranian Middle Iranian New Iranian Eastern Pamir Ishkashimi Khufi Munji Rushani Sanglechi Sarghulami Shughni Bartangi Khufi Oroshori Sarikoli Vanji Wakhi Yazghulami Yidgha Scythian/Northern Eastern Khwarezmian Saka Wakhi Sogdian Yaghnobi Western Alanic Ossetian Digor Iron Jassic Cimmerian Pontic Scythian Others Bactrian Parachi Pashto Central Northern Southern Wanetsi Ormuri Western North Ashtiani Balochi Koroshi Makrani Daylami Fars Gazi Judeo-Esfahani Gilaki Eastern Gilaki Galeshi Western Gilaki Gorgani Gozarkhani Judeo-Hamedani–Borujerdi Kajali Karan Karingani Kavir Khunsari Kurdish Abduyi Kurmanji Laki Sorani Hewlêrî Xwarin Kalhor Kordali Korouni Mazanderani Tabaroid Median Razi Natanzi Nayini Old Azeri Parthian Razajerdi Semnani Lasgerdi Sangsari Semnani proper Sorkhei Shahrudi Sivandi Soi Abuzaydabadi Judeo-Kashani Talysh Tati Alviri-Vidari Harzandi Kilit Kho'ini Maraghei Tatoid Vafsi Zaza–Gorani Gorani Shabaki Zaza Zoroastrian Dari South Achomi Judeo-Shirazi Bashkardi Garmsiri Khargi Khuzestani Persian Dezfuli Shushtari Kuhmareyi Kumzari Luri Bakhtiari Northern Luri Southern Luri Mamasani Old Kazeruni Old Persian Middle Persian Persian Aimaq Dari Hazaragi Sistani Dehwari Iranian Basseri Esfahani Kermanshahi Khorasani Kuwaiti Tehrani Judeo-Persian Pahlavani Tajik Bukharian Caucasian Tat Armeno-Tat Judeo-Tat Northwestern Fars Others Avestan Badeshi (unclassified) Italics indicate extinct or historical languages .

Languages between parentheses are varieties of the language on their left.

v t e Nuristani languages Katë Katë Western Northeastern Southeastern Prasun Prasun Ashkun Ashkun Southern group Nuristani Kalasha Tregami Zemiaki Proto-language Proto-Nuristani Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Latvia Sweden Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Indo-Aryan_languages&oldid=1303792382 " Categories : Indo-European languages Indo-Aryan languages Hidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2020 CS1 Swedish-language sources (sv) Language articles citing Ethnologue 23 CS1 Russian-language sources (ru) Webarchive template wayback links CS1: unfit URL Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from June 2025 Use British English from June 2025 Articles with unsourced statements from November 2023 Articles needing additional references from February 2017 All articles needing additional references Pages with plain IPA This page was last edited on 2 August 2025, at 02:46 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Indo-Aryan languages 105 languages Add topic

