Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 EPPO code database Toggle EPPO code database subsection 1.1 Example 2 External links 3 References Toggle the table of contents EPPO Code 19 languages Afrikaans Azərbaycanca Čeština Deutsch Français 한국어 Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia മലയാളം Nederlands Română Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Suomi Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikispecies Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Encoded identifier used by the European and Mediterranean Plant Protection Organization EPPO Code Full name European and Mediterranean Plant Protection Organization Code Organisation European and Mediterranean Plant Protection Organization Example CARPPO Website gd .eppo .int An EPPO code , formerly known as a Bayer code , is an encoded identifier that is used by the European and Mediterranean Plant Protection Organization (EPPO), in a system designed to uniquely identify organisms – namely plants , pests and pathogens – that are important to agriculture and crop protection .  EPPO codes are a core component of a database of names, both scientific and vernacular .  Although originally started by the Bayer Corporation , the official list of codes is now maintained by EPPO.

EPPO code database [ edit ] All codes and their associated names are included in a database (EPPO Global Database). In total, there are over 93,500 species listed in the EPPO database, including: [ 1 ] 55,000 species of plants (e.g.

cultivated , wild plants and weeds ) 27,000 species of animals (e.g.

insects , mites , nematodes , rodents ), biocontrol agents 11,500 microorganism species (e.g.

bacteria , fungi , viruses , viroids and virus-like) Plants are identified by a five-letter code, other organisms by a six-letter one. In many cases the codes are mnemonic abbreviations of the scientific name of the organism, derived from the first three or four letters of the genus and the first two letters of the species .

[ 2 ] For example, corn, or maize ( Zea mays ), was assigned the code "ZEAMA"; the code for potato late blight ( Phytophthora infestans ) is "PHYTIN". The unique and constant code for each organism provides a shorthand method of recording species. The EPPO code avoids many of the problems caused by revisions to scientific names and taxonomy which often result in different synonyms being in use for the same species. When the taxonomy changes, the EPPO code stays the same.

[ 2 ] The EPPO system is used by governmental organizations, conservation agencies, and researchers.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] Example [ edit ] Taxonomic Rank Example taxon EPPO Code Kingdom Animalia 1 ANIM K Phylum Arthropoda 1 ARTH P Subphylum Hexapoda 1 HEXA Q Class Insecta 1 INSE C Order Hemiptera 1 HEMI O Suborder Sternorrhyncha 1 STER R Family Aleyrodidae 1 ALEY F Genus Bemisia 1 BEMI G Species Bemisia tabaci BEMITA External links [ edit ] Wikidata has the property: EPPO Code (P3031) (see uses ) EPPO Global Database (lookup EPPO codes) EPPO Data Services (download EPPO codes) References [ edit ] ^ "EPPO Codes: building blocks for information systems" (PDF) .

European and Mediterranean Plant Protection Organization . Retrieved 4 November 2021 .

^ a b "EPPO Codes" .

www.eppo.int . EPPO.

^ Francis, A; Warwick, S I (July 2009). "The Biology of Canadian Weeds. 142. Camelina alyssum (Mill.) Thell.; C. microcarpa Andrz. ex DC.; C. sativa (L.) Crantz".

Canadian Journal of Plant Science .

89 (4): 791– 810.

doi : 10.4141/CJPS08185 .

^ Mair, Wesley; Lopez-Ruiz, Francisco; Stammler, Gerd; Clark, William; Burnett, Fiona; Hollomon, Derek; Ishii, Hideo; Thind, Tarlochan S; Brown, James KM; Fraaije, Bart; Cools, Hans; Shaw, Michael; Fillinger, Sabine; Walker, Anne-Sophie; Mellado, Emilia; Schnabel, Guido; Mehl, Andreas; Oliver, Richard P (August 2016).

"Proposal for a unified nomenclature for target-site mutations associated with resistance to fungicides" .

Pest Management Science .

72 (8): 1449– 1459.

doi : 10.1002/ps.4301 .

PMC 5094580 .

PMID 27148866 .

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=EPPO_Code&oldid=1171952685 " Categories : Taxonomy (biology) Plant pathogens and diseases Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 24 August 2023, at 03:42 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents EPPO Code 19 languages Add topic

