Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Publication 2 Contents 3 Reception 4 References 5 Sources 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Spectropia Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 1864 book by John Henry Brown Spectropia Cover page.

Author J. H. Brown Language English Genre Optical illusions Publisher James G. Gregory ( New York City ) Griffith and Farran ( London ) Publication date 1864 Publication place United States Media type Print Pages 27 pp OCLC 1165364 Text Spectropia at Wikisource Spectropia, or, surprising spectral illusions showing ghosts everywhere and of any colour is an optical illusion book by J. H. Brown, first published in 1864.

Publication [ edit ] Initial printings of Spectropia were made in New York City by James G. Gregory, and in London by Griffith and Farran.

[ 1 ] With sixteen large lithographed plates [ 2 ] (thirteen of which were hand-coloured [ 3 ] ), Spectropia includes several sections; namely an introduction, directions, and one called "Popular and Scientific description." The writing, spanning over eleven pages in addition to the plates makes for a total of twenty-seven pages. The cover is bound on green cloth, [ 3 ] with a height of 25 centimetres (9.8 in) [ 4 ] An edition with "fancy boards" sold for two shillings and sixpence , [ 5 ] and an edition with the plates mounted on cloth sold for an extra shilling.

[ 6 ] A Dutch edition translated by Hugo Suringar Leeuwarden of Spectropia was published in 1866. Additionally, a second edition was published in 1870.

[ 3 ] Contents [ edit ] Plate XIV.

Brown was distressed by an increased public interest in spiritualism , [ 7 ] something which he deemed a "mental epidemic." [ 8 ] By offering a scientific explanation on the properties of light, color, and the structure of the eyes, [ 1 ] he states in the section "Popular and Scientific description" that the purpose in writing Spectropia was to bring forth "the extinction of the superstitious belief that apparitions are actual spirits, by showing some of the ways our senses may be deceived." [ 8 ] By staring at an image in Spectropia for roughly a quarter of a minute without blinking and then looking away from the book at a wall, [ 9 ] the reader will see the image of the spectres appear before them floating on the wall.

[ 1 ] This is due to an optical illusion called afterimage , a phenomenon where the image continues to appear in one's vision after the exposure to the original image has ceased.

The point of focus of each plate is marked with an asterisk located near the center of the illustration.

[ 9 ] Reception [ edit ] An Athenæum reviewer called it "one of the best toy books we have seen." [ 10 ] the Virginia Historical Society felt that Spectropia "must have delighted its young audience when it was first published." [ 7 ] Additionally it was called "a clever book" by a reviewer of Chemical News , noting its exemplary use of the afterimage phenomena.

[ 10 ] References [ edit ] ^ a b c Special Collections Research Center (31 October 2011).

"Debunking Ghosts in 1864" .

News . The University of Chicago Library . Retrieved 10 November 2011 .

^ Norris, pg. 23.

^ a b c "Using optics to explain how people see ghosts" (PDF) .

Asher Rare Books and Antiquariaat Forum . Retrieved 10 November 2011 .

^ Spectropia; or, Surprising spectral illusions. Showing ghosts everywhere, and of any colour .

OCLC 1165364 – via WorldCat .

^ Pomo, pg. 19.

^ Hutton, pg. 23.

^ a b "Spectropia, or Surprising Spectral Illusions" .

Virginia Historical Society . Retrieved 5 November 2012 .

^ a b Brown, pg. 13.

^ a b Brown, pg. 10.

^ a b Pollard, pg. 274.

Sources [ edit ] Brown, J. H. (1864).

Spectropia . new York: James G. Gregory. p. 27 – via Wikisource .

Hutton, Barbara (1875).

The fiery cross; or, The vow of Montrose!

. Griffith and Farran.

Norris, Emilia Marryat (1876).

Paul Howard's captivity; and why he escaped .

OCLC 5697137 .

Pollard, Matilda Mary (1877).

Grey Towers; or, Aunt Hetty's will . Griffith and Farran.

Pomo, Percy (1881).

Percy Pomo; or, The autobiography of a South Sea islander . Griffith and Farran.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Spectropia, or, Surprising spectral illusions .

Spettropia, ovvero l'apparizione degli spettri , 1886 Digital copy of the italian version The Intellectual Observer (2 pages of review) v t e Optical illusions ( list ) Illusions Afterimage Ambigram Ambiguous image Ames room Autostereogram Barberpole Bezold Café wall Checker shadow Chubb Cornsweet Delboeuf Ebbinghaus Ehrenstein Flash lag Fraser spiral Gravity hill Grid Hering Impossible trident Irradiation Jastrow Lilac chaser Mach bands McCollough Müller-Lyer Necker cube Oppel-Kundt Orbison Penrose stairs Penrose triangle Peripheral drift Poggendorff Ponzo Rubin vase Sander Schroeder stairs Shepard tables Spinning dancer Ternus Vertical–horizontal White's Wundt Zöllner Popular culture Op art Trompe-l'œil Spectropia (1864 book) Ascending and Descending (1960 drawing) Waterfall (1961 drawing) The dress (2015 photograph) Related Accidental viewpoint Auditory illusions Illusions Tactile illusions Temporal illusion Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Spectropia&oldid=1215596888 " Categories : 1864 non-fiction books Optical illusions Books about the paranormal Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles that link to Wikisource Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 26 March 2024, at 02:04 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Spectropia Add languages Add topic

