Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Mathematics 3 Astronomy Toggle Astronomy subsection 3.1 Eudoxan planetary models 3.2 Importance of Eudoxan system 4 Ethics 5 See also 6 References 7 Bibliography 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Eudoxus of Cnidus 63 languages Alemannisch العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه বাংলা Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Català Čeština Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Hausa Հայերեն Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Latina Lietuvių Magyar Malagasy മലയാളം Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча پښتو Piemontèis Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt Winaray 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Eudoxus of Cnidos ) Greek astronomer and mathematician (c.390–c.340 BC) Not to be confused with Eudoxus of Cyzicus .

Eudoxus of Cnidus Born c. 390 BC Cnidus , Anatolia (now Yazıköy, Muğla , Turkey ) Died c. 340 BC (aged c. 50) Cnidus, Anatolia Known for Kampyle of Eudoxus Concentric spheres Scientific career Fields Mathematics Physics Geography Astronomy Medicine Philosophy Eudoxus of Cnidus ( / ˈ juː d ə k s ə s / ; Ancient Greek : Εὔδοξος ὁ Κνίδιος , Eúdoxos ho Knídios ; c.

390 – c.

340 BC ) was an ancient Greek astronomer , mathematician , doctor, and lawmaker.

[ 1 ] He was a student of Archytas and Plato . All of his original works are lost, though some fragments are preserved in Hipparchus ' Commentaries on the Phenomena of Aratus and Eudoxus .

[ 2 ] Spherics by Theodosius of Bithynia may be based on a work by Eudoxus.

Life [ edit ] Eudoxus, son of Aeschines, was born and died in Cnidus (also transliterated Knidos), a city on the southwest coast of Anatolia .

[ 3 ] The years of Eudoxus' birth and death are not fully known but Diogenes Laërtius gave several biographical details, mentioned that Apollodorus said he reached his acme in the 103rd Olympiad (368– 365 BC ), and claimed he died in his 53rd year. From this 19th century mathematical historians reconstructed dates of 408– 355 BC , [ 4 ] but 20th century scholars found their choices contradictory and prefer a birth year of c.

390 BC .

[ 5 ] His name Eudoxus means "honored" or "of good repute" ( εὔδοξος , from eu "good" and doxa "opinion, belief, fame", analogous to the Latin Benedictus ).

According to Diogenes Laërtius, crediting Callimachus ' Pinakes , Eudoxus studied mathematics with Archytas (of Tarentum , Magna Graecia ) and studied medicine with Philiston the Sicilian . At the age of 23, he traveled with the physician Theomedon —who was his patron and possibly his lover [ 6 ] —to Athens to study with the followers of Socrates . He spent two months there—living in Piraeus and walking 7 miles (11 km) each way every day to attend the Sophists ' lectures—then returned home to Cnidus. His friends then paid to send him to Heliopolis , Egypt for 16 months, to pursue his study of astronomy and mathematics. From Egypt, he then traveled north to Cyzicus , located on the south shore of the Sea of Marmara, the Propontis . He traveled south to the court of Mausolus . During his travels he gathered many students of his own.

[ citation needed ] Around 368 BC, Eudoxus returned to Athens with his students. According to some sources, [ citation needed ] c.

367 he assumed headship ( scholarch ) of the Academy during Plato's period in Syracuse, and taught Aristotle .

[ citation needed ] He eventually returned to his native Cnidus, where he served in the city assembly. While in Cnidus, he built an observatory and continued writing and lecturing on theology , astronomy, and meteorology . He had one son, Aristagoras, and three daughters, Actis, Philtis, and Delphis.

In mathematical astronomy, his fame is due to the introduction of the concentric spheres , and his early contributions to understanding the movement of the planets . He is also credited, by the poet Aratus , with having constructed a celestial globe .

[ 7 ] His work on proportions shows insight into irrational numbers and the linear continuum : it allows rigorous treatment of continuous quantities and not just whole numbers or even rational numbers . When it was revived by Tartaglia and others in the 16th century [ citation needed ] , it became the basis for quantitative work in science, and inspired Richard Dedekind 's work on the real numbers .

[ 8 ] Craters on Mars and the Moon are named in his honor. An algebraic curve (the Kampyle of Eudoxus ) is also named after him.

Mathematics [ edit ] Eudoxus is considered by some to be the greatest of classical Greek mathematicians, and in all Antiquity second only to Archimedes .

[ 9 ] Eudoxus was probably the source for most of book V of Euclid's Elements .

[ 10 ] He rigorously developed Antiphon 's method of exhaustion ,  a precursor to the integral calculus which was also used in a masterly way by Archimedes in the following century.  In applying the method, Eudoxus proved such mathematical statements as: areas of circles are to one another as the squares of their radii, volumes of spheres are to one another as the cubes of their radii, the volume of a pyramid is one-third the volume of a prism with the same base and altitude, and the volume of a cone is one-third that of the corresponding cylinder.

[ 11 ] Eudoxus introduced the idea of non-quantified mathematical magnitude to describe and work with continuous geometrical entities such as lines, angles, areas and volumes, thereby avoiding the use of irrational numbers . In doing so, he reversed a Pythagorean emphasis on number and arithmetic, focusing instead on geometrical concepts as the basis of rigorous mathematics. Some Pythagoreans, such as Eudoxus's teacher Archytas , had believed that only arithmetic could provide a basis for proofs. Induced by the need to understand and operate with incommensurable quantities , Eudoxus established what may have been the first deductive organization of mathematics on the basis of explicit axioms . The change in focus by Eudoxus stimulated a divide in mathematics which lasted two thousand years. In combination with a Greek intellectual attitude unconcerned with practical problems, there followed a significant retreat from the development of techniques in arithmetic and algebra.

[ 11 ] The Pythagoreans had discovered that the diagonal of a square does not have a common unit of measurement with the sides of the square; this is the famous discovery that the square root of 2 cannot be expressed as the ratio of two integers. This discovery had heralded the existence of incommensurable quantities beyond the integers and rational fractions, but at the same time it threw into question the idea of measurement and calculations in geometry as a whole. For example, Euclid provides an elaborate proof of the Pythagorean theorem ( Elements I.47), by using addition of areas and only much later ( Elements VI.31) a simpler proof from similar triangles, which relies on ratios of line segments.

Ancient Greek mathematicians calculated not with quantities and equations as we do today; instead, a proportionality expressed a relationship between geometric magnitudes. The ratio of two magnitudes was not a numerical value, as we think of it today; the ratio of two magnitudes was a primitive relationship between them.

Eudoxus is credited with defining equality between two ratios, the subject of Book V of the Elements .

In Definition 5 of Euclid's Book V we read: Magnitudes are said to be in the same ratio, the first to the second and the third to the fourth when, if any equimultiples whatever be taken of the first and third, and any equimultiples whatever of the second and fourth, the former equimultiples alike exceed, are alike equal to, or alike fall short of, the latter equimultiples respectively taken in corresponding order.

Using modern notation , this can be made more explicit. Given four quantities ⁠ a {\displaystyle a} ⁠ , ⁠ b {\displaystyle b} ⁠ , ⁠ c {\displaystyle c} ⁠ , and ⁠ d {\displaystyle d} ⁠ , take the ratio of the first to the second, ⁠ a / b {\displaystyle a/b} ⁠ , and the ratio of the third to the fourth, ⁠ c / d {\displaystyle c/d} ⁠ . That the two ratios are proportional, ⁠ a / b = c / d {\displaystyle a/b=c/d} ⁠ , can be defined by the following condition: For any two arbitrary positive integers ⁠ m {\displaystyle m} ⁠ and ⁠ n {\displaystyle n} ⁠ , form the equimultiples ⁠ m ⋅ ⋅ a {\displaystyle m\cdot a} ⁠ and ⁠ m ⋅ ⋅ c {\displaystyle m\cdot c} ⁠ of the first and third; likewise form the equimultiples ⁠ n ⋅ ⋅ b {\displaystyle n\cdot b} ⁠ and ⁠ n ⋅ ⋅ d {\displaystyle n\cdot d} ⁠ of the second and fourth. If it happens that ⁠ m ⋅ ⋅ a > n ⋅ ⋅ b {\displaystyle m\cdot a>n\cdot b} ⁠ , then also ⁠ m ⋅ ⋅ c > n ⋅ ⋅ d {\displaystyle m\cdot c>n\cdot d} ⁠ . If instead ⁠ m ⋅ ⋅ a = n ⋅ ⋅ b {\displaystyle m\cdot a=n\cdot b} ⁠ , then also ⁠ m ⋅ ⋅ c = n ⋅ ⋅ d {\displaystyle m\cdot c=n\cdot d} ⁠ . Finally, if ⁠ m ⋅ ⋅ a < n ⋅ ⋅ b {\displaystyle m\cdot a<n\cdot b} ⁠ , then also ⁠ m ⋅ ⋅ c < n ⋅ ⋅ d {\displaystyle m\cdot c<n\cdot d} ⁠ .

This means that ⁠ a / b = c / d {\displaystyle a/b=c/d} ⁠ if and only if the ratios ⁠ n / m {\displaystyle n/m} ⁠ that are larger than ⁠ a / b {\displaystyle a/b} ⁠ are the same as the ones that are larger than ⁠ c / d {\displaystyle c/d} ⁠ , and likewise for "equal" and "smaller". This can be compared with Dedekind cuts that define a real number by the set of rational numbers that are larger, equal or smaller than the number to be defined.

Eudoxus' definition depends on comparing the similar quantities ⁠ m ⋅ ⋅ a {\displaystyle m\cdot a} ⁠ and ⁠ n ⋅ ⋅ b {\displaystyle n\cdot b} ⁠ , and the similar quantities ⁠ m ⋅ ⋅ c {\displaystyle m\cdot c} ⁠ and ⁠ n ⋅ ⋅ d {\displaystyle n\cdot d} ⁠ , and does not depend on the existence of a common unit for  measuring these quantities.

The complexity of the definition reflects the deep conceptual and methodological innovation involved. The Eudoxian definition of proportionality uses the quantifier, "for every ..." to harness the infinite and the infinitesimal, similar to the modern epsilon-delta definitions of limit and continuity.

The Archimedean property , definition 4 of Elements Book V, was credited to Eudoxus by Archimedes.

[ 12 ] Astronomy [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

( September 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) In ancient Greece , astronomy was a branch of mathematics; astronomers sought to create geometrical models that could imitate the appearances of celestial motions. Identifying the astronomical work of Eudoxus as a separate category is therefore a modern convenience. Some of Eudoxus's astronomical texts whose names have survived include: Disappearances of the Sun , possibly on eclipses Oktaeteris (Ὀκταετηρίς), on an eight-year lunisolar-Venus cycle of the calendar Phaenomena (Φαινόμενα) and Enoptron (Ἔνοπτρον), on spherical astronomy , probably based on observations made by Eudoxus in Egypt and Cnidus On Speeds , on planetary motions We are fairly well informed about the contents of Phaenomena , for Eudoxus's prose text was the basis for a poem of the same name by Aratus .

Hipparchus quoted from the text of Eudoxus in his commentary on Aratus.

Eudoxan planetary models [ edit ] Main article: Concentric spheres A general idea of the content of On Speeds can be gleaned from Aristotle 's Metaphysics XII, 8, and a commentary by Simplicius of Cilicia (6th century AD) on De caelo , another work by Aristotle. According to a story reported by Simplicius, Plato posed a question for Greek astronomers: "By the assumption of what uniform and orderly motions can the apparent motions of the planets be accounted for?" [ 13 ] Plato proposed that the seemingly chaotic wandering motions of the planets could be explained by combinations of uniform circular motions centered on a spherical Earth, apparently a novel idea in the 4th century BC.

In most modern reconstructions of the Eudoxan model, the Moon is assigned three spheres: The outermost rotates westward once in 24 hours, explaining rising and setting.

The second rotates eastward once in a month, explaining the monthly motion of the Moon through the zodiac .

The third also completes its revolution in a month, but its axis is tilted at a slightly different angle, explaining motion in latitude (deviation from the ecliptic ), and the motion of the lunar nodes .

The Sun is also assigned three spheres. The second completes its motion in a year instead of a month. The inclusion of a third sphere implies that Eudoxus mistakenly believed that the Sun had motion in latitude.

Eudoxus's model of planetary motion. Each of his homocentric spheres is represented as a ring which rotates on the axis shown. The outermost (yellow) sphere rotates once per day; the second (blue) describes the planet's motion through the zodiac; the third (green) and fourth (red) together move the planet along a figure-eight curve (or hippopede) to explain retrograde motion.

Animation depicting Eudoxus's model of retrograde planetary motion. The two innermost spheres turn with the same period but in opposite directions, moving the planet along a figure-eight curve, or hippopede.

The five visible planets ( Mercury , Venus , Mars , Jupiter , and Saturn ) are assigned four spheres each: The outermost explains the daily motion.

The second explains the planet's motion through the zodiac.

The third and fourth together explain retrogradation , when a planet appears to slow down, then briefly reverse its motion through the zodiac. By inclining the axes of the two spheres with respect to each other, and rotating them in opposite directions but with equal periods, Eudoxus could make a point on the inner sphere trace out a figure-eight shape, or hippopede .

Importance of Eudoxan system [ edit ] Callippus , a Greek astronomer of the 4th century, added seven spheres to Eudoxus's original 27 (in addition to the planetary spheres, Eudoxus included a sphere for the fixed stars). Aristotle described both systems, but insisted on adding "unrolling" spheres between each set of spheres to cancel the motions of the outer set. Aristotle was concerned about the physical nature of the system; without unrollers, the outer motions would be transferred to the inner planets.

A major flaw in the Eudoxian system is its inability to explain changes in the brightness of planets as seen from Earth. Because the spheres are concentric, planets will always remain at the same distance from Earth. This problem was pointed out in Antiquity by Autolycus of Pitane . Astronomers responded by introducing the deferent and epicycle , which caused a planet to vary its distance. However, Eudoxus's importance to astronomy and in particular to Greek astronomy is considerable.

Ethics [ edit ] Aristotle , in the Nicomachean Ethics , [ 14 ] attributes to Eudoxus an argument in favor of hedonism —that is, that pleasure is the ultimate good that activity strives for.  According to Aristotle, Eudoxus put forward the following arguments for this position: All things, rational and irrational, aim at pleasure; things aim at what they believe to be good; a good indication of what the chief good is would be the thing that most things aim at.

Similarly, pleasure's opposite—pain—is universally avoided, which provides additional support for the idea that pleasure is universally considered good.

People don't seek pleasure as a means to something else, but as an end in its own right.

Any other good that you can think of would be better if pleasure were added to it, and it is only by good that good can be increased.

Of all of the things that are good, happiness is peculiar for not being praised, which may show that it is the crowning good.

[ 15 ] See also [ edit ] Eudoxus reals (a fairly recently discovered construction of the real numbers, named in his honor) Delian problem Incommensurable magnitudes Speusippus References [ edit ] ^ Diogenes Laertius; VIII.86 ^ Lasserre, François (1966) Die Fragmente des Eudoxos von Knidos (de Gruyter: Berlin) ^ O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F.

"Eudoxus of Cnidus" .

MacTutor History of Mathematics Archive .

University of St Andrews .

^ Hultsch 1907 .

^ De Santillana, George (1940). "Eudoxus and Plato. A Study in Chronology".

Isis .

32 (2): 248– 262.

doi : 10.1086/347693 .

JSTOR 226242 .

^ Diogenes Laertius; VIII.87 ^ Sumira, Sylvia (2014).

"A brief history of globes" .

Globes: 400 Years of Exploration, Navigation, and Power . Chicago: Chicago University Press. p. 13.

doi : 10.7208/9780226139142-005 (inactive 12 July 2025).

ISBN 9780226139142 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: DOI inactive as of July 2025 ( link ) ^ Nikolić, Milenko (1974). "The Relation between Eudoxus' Theory of Proportions and Dedekind's Theory of Cuts". In Cohen, Robert S.; Stachel, John J.; Wartofsky, Marx W. (eds.).

For Dirk Struik: Scientific, Historical and Political Essays in Honor of Dirk J. Struik . Boston Studies in the Philosophy of Science. Vol. 15. Dordrecht: Springer. pp.

225– 243.

doi : 10.1007/978-94-010-2115-9_19 .

ISBN 978-90-277-0379-8 .

^ Calinger, Ronald (1982).

Classics of Mathematics . Oak Park, Illinois: Moore Publishing Company, Inc. p. 75.

ISBN 0-935610-13-8 .

^ Ball 1908 , p. 54.

^ a b Morris Kline, Mathematical Thought from Ancient to Modern Times Oxford University Press, 1972 pp. 48–50 ^ Knopp, Konrad (1951).

Theory and Application of Infinite Series (English 2nd ed.). London and Glasgow: Blackie & Son, Ltd. p.

7 .

^ Lloyd, GER (1970).

Early Greek Science: Thales to Aristotle . W.W. Norton. p. 84.

ISBN 9780393005837 .

^ Largely in Book Ten.

^ This particular argument is referenced in Book One.

Bibliography [ edit ] Ball, Walter William Rouse (1908).

A Short Account of the History of Mathematics (4th ed.). Dover Publications.

ISBN 9780486206301 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) Evans, James (1998).

The History and Practice of Ancient Astronomy . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 0-19-509539-1 .

OCLC 185509676 .

Hultsch, Friedrich (1907).

"Eudoxos Von Knidos" . In Pauly, August; Wissowa, Georg (eds.).

Realencyclopädie der classischen Altertumswissenschaft (in German). Vol. 6.1. pp.

930– 950 – via Wikisource .

Huxley, GL (1980).

Eudoxus of Cnidus p. 465-7 in: the Dictionary of Scientific Biography, volume 4 .

Huxley, G. L. (1963). "Eudoxian Topics".

Greek, Roman, and Byzantine Studies .

4 : 83– 96.

Knorr, Wilbur Richard (1978). "Archimedes and the Pre-Euclidean Proportion Theory".

Archives Internationales d'Histoire des Sciences .

28 : 183– 244.

Knorr, Wilbur R.

(1986).

The Ancient tradition of geometric problems . Boston: Birkhäuser.

ISBN 0-8176-3148-8 .

Lasserre, François ( 1966) Die Fragmente des Eudoxos von Knidos (de Gruyter: Berlin) Laërtius, Diogenes .

"Pythagoreans: Eudoxus" .

Lives of the Eminent Philosophers . Vol. 2:8. Translated by Hicks, Robert Drew (Two volume ed.). Loeb Classical Library.

Manitius, C. (1894) Hipparchi in Arati et Eudoxi Phaenomena Commentariorum Libri Tres (Teubner) Neugebauer, O. (1975).

A history of ancient mathematical astronomy . Berlin: Springer-Verlag.

ISBN 0-387-06995-X .

Van der Waerden, B. L. (1988).

Science Awakening (5th ed.). Leiden: Noordhoff.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Eudoxus of Cnidus .

Working model and complete explanation of the Eudoxus's Spheres (video on YouTube ) Eudoxus (and Plato) Archived 2018-08-16 at the Wayback Machine , a documentary on Eudoxus, including a description of his planetary model Dennis Duke, "Statistical dating of the Phaenomena of Eudoxus", DIO , volume 15 see pages 7 to 23 Eudoxus of Cnidus Britannica.com Eudoxus of Cnidus Archived 1997-07-23 at the Wayback Machine Donald Allen, Professor, Texas A&M University Eudoxos of Knidos (Eudoxus of Cnidus): astronomy and homocentric spheres Henry Mendell, Cal State U, LA (archived 16 May 2011) Herodotus Project: Extensive B+W photo essay of Cnidus Models of Planetary Motion—Eudoxus , Craig McConnell, Ph.D., Cal State, Fullerton (archived 19 July 2011) The Universe According to Eudoxus ( Java applet) (archived 21 November 2007) v t e Platonists Ancient Academics Old Plato Aristotle Eudoxus Philip of Opus Aristonymus Coriscus and Erastus of Scepsis Demetrius of Amphipolis Euaeon of Lampsacus Heraclides and Python of Aenus Hestiaeus of Perinthus Lastheneia of Mantinea Timolaus of Cyzicus Speusippus Axiothea of Phlius Heraclides Ponticus Menedemus of Pyrrha Xenocrates Crantor Polemon Crates of Athens Skeptics Middle Arcesilaus Diocles of Cnidus Lacydes Telecles and Evander Hegesinus New Carneades Hagnon of Tarsus Metrodorus of Stratonicea Clitomachus Charmadas Aeschines of Neapolis Philo of Larissa Cicero Dio of Alexandria Middle Platonists Antiochus Eudorus of Alexandria Anonymous Theaetetus Commentator Philo of Alexandria Plutarch Justin Martyr Gaius Albinus Alcinous Alexander Peloplaton Apuleius Atticus Maximus of Tyre Numenius of Apamea Ammonius Saccas Longinus Clement of Alexandria Origen Origen the Pagan Calcidius Neoplatonists Plotinus Students Amelius Porphyry of Tyre Iamblichus Sopater Eustathius of Cappadocia Sosipatra Aedesius Dexippus Chrysanthius Theodorus of Asine Julian Salutius Maximus of Ephesus Eusebius of Myndus Priscus of Epirus Antoninus Hypatia Gaius Marius Victorinus Augustine Macrobius Boethius Academy Plutarch of Athens Asclepigenia Hierocles Syrianus Hermias Aedesia Proclus Marinus Isidore Ammonius Hermiae Asclepiodotus Hegias Zenodotus Agapius Damascius Simplicius Priscian John Philoponus Olympiodorus David the Invincible Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite Medieval John Scotus Eriugena Al-Farabi Anselm Peter Abelard Bernard Gilbert Thierry Henry of Ghent Bonaventure Theodoric of Freiberg Meister Eckhart Berthold of Moosburg Paul of Venice Modern Renaissance Florentine Academy Plethon Marsilio Ficino Cristoforo Landino Giovanni Pico della Mirandola Giordano Bruno Blaise Pascal Cambridge Ralph Cudworth Henry More Anne Conway Thomas Taylor Emanuel Swedenborg Josiah Royce Aleksei Losev Contemporary Analytic Gottlob Frege Bertrand Russell Kurt Gödel Roderick Chisholm W. V. O. Quine Jan Łukasiewicz Crispin Wright Edward N. Zalta Continental Edmund Husserl Leo Strauss v t e Ancient Greek astronomy Astronomers Aglaonice Agrippa Anaximander Andronicus Apollonius Aratus Aristarchus Aristyllus Attalus Autolycus Bion Callippus Cleomedes Cleostratus Conon Eratosthenes Euctemon Eudoxus Geminus Heraclides Hicetas Hipparchus Hippocrates of Chios Hypsicles Menelaus Meton Oenopides Philip of Opus Philolaus Posidonius Ptolemy Pytheas Seleucus Sosigenes of Alexandria Sosigenes the Peripatetic Strabo Thales Theodosius Theon of Alexandria Theon of Smyrna Timocharis Works Almagest (Ptolemy) Catasterismi (Eratosthenes) Little Astronomy On Sizes and Distances (Hipparchus) On the Sizes and Distances (Aristarchus) On the Heavens (Aristotle) Instruments Antikythera mechanism Armillary sphere Astrolabe Dioptra Equatorial ring Gnomon Mural instrument Triquetrum Concepts Callippic cycle Celestial spheres Circle of latitude Counter-Earth Deferent and epicycle Equant Geocentrism Heliocentrism Hipparchic cycle Inferior and superior planets Metonic cycle Octaeteris Solstice Spherical Earth Sublunary sphere Zodiac Influences Babylonian astronomy Egyptian astronomy Influenced Medieval European science Indian astronomy Medieval Islamic astronomy v t e Ancient Greek mathematics Mathematicians (timeline) Anaxagoras Anthemius Apollonius Archimedes Archytas Aristaeus the Elder Aristarchus Autolycus Bion Bryson Callippus Carpus Chrysippus Cleomedes Conon Ctesibius Democritus Dicaearchus Dinostratus Diocles Dionysodorus of Caunus Dionysodorus of Amisene Diophantus Domninus Eratosthenes Euclid Eudemus Eudoxus Eutocius Geminus Heliodorus Heron Hipparchus Hippasus Hippias Hippocrates Hypatia Hypsicles Isidore of Miletus Leon Marinus Menaechmus Menelaus Metrodorus Nicomachus Nicomedes Nicoteles Oenopides Pandrosion Pappus Perseus Philolaus Philon Philonides Porphyry of Tyre Posidonius Proclus Ptolemy Pythagoras Serenus Sosigenes Sporus Thales Theaetetus Theodorus Theodosius Theon of Alexandria Theon of Smyrna Thymaridas Xenocrates Zeno of Elea Zeno of Sidon Zenodorus Treatises Almagest Arithmetica Conics (Apollonius) Catoptrics Data (Euclid) Elements (Euclid) Little Astronomy Measurement of a Circle On Conoids and Spheroids On the Sizes and Distances (Aristarchus) On Sizes and Distances (Hipparchus) On the Moving Sphere (Autolycus) Optics (Euclid) On Spirals On the Sphere and Cylinder Ostomachion Phaenomena (Euclid) Planisphaerium Spherics (Theodosius) Spherics (Menelaus) The Quadrature of the Parabola The Sand Reckoner Concepts and definitions Chord Circles of Apollonius Apollonian circles Apollonian gasket Problem of Apollonius Commensurability Diophantine equation Euclidean geometry Golden ratio Lune of Hippocrates Method of exhaustion Parallel postulate Platonic solid Regular polygon Straightedge and compass construction Angle trisection Doubling the cube Squaring the circle Quadratrix of Hippias Neusis construction Results In Elements Angle bisector theorem Exterior angle theorem Euclidean algorithm Euclid's theorem Geometric mean theorem Hinge theorem Inscribed angle theorem Intercept theorem Intersecting chords theorem Intersecting secants theorem Law of cosines Pons asinorum Pythagorean theorem Tangent-secant theorem Thales's theorem Theorem of the gnomon Apollonius's theorem Aristarchus's inequality Heron's formula Law of sines Menelaus's theorem Pappus's area theorem Problem II.8 of Arithmetica Ptolemy's inequality Ptolemy's table of chords Ptolemy's theorem Spiral of Theodorus Centers/Schools Cyrene Platonic Academy Pythagoreanism School of Chios Related Ancient Greek astronomy Attic numerals Greek numerals History of A History of Greek Mathematics by Thomas Heath Archimedes Palimpsest algebra timeline arithmetic timeline calculus timeline geometry timeline logic timeline mathematics timeline numbers prehistoric counting numeral systems list Other cultures Arabian/Islamic Babylonian Chinese Egyptian Incan Indian Japanese Ancient Greece portal • Mathematics portal Portals : Biography Greece Mathematics Astronomy Stars Outer space Solar System Science Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF 2 3 4 5 6 7 FAST National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Spain Netherlands Norway Chile Greece Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Catalonia Academics zbMATH MathSciNet People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐qzzwk
Cached time: 20250817045858
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.844 seconds
Real time usage: 1.129 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 6256/1000000
Revision size: 23487/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 180004/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 7982/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 16/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 94104/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.532/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 21285352/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  878.437      1 -total
 13.87%  121.839      1 Template:Infobox_scientist
 13.15%  115.519      2 Template:Reflist
 11.03%   96.932     10 Template:Navbox
  9.95%   87.434      1 Template:Langx
  7.67%   67.399      1 Template:MacTutor_Biography
  7.33%   64.388     12 Template:Cite_book
  6.66%   58.468      1 Template:Short_description
  5.92%   51.960      1 Template:Platonists
  5.04%   44.295      1 Template:Commonscat Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:48388:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817045858 and revision id 1300053091. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Eudoxus_of_Cnidus&oldid=1300053091 " Categories : 4th-century BC births 4th-century BC deaths 4th-century BC Greek physicians 4th-century BC Greek philosophers Ancient Greek astronomers Ancient Greek geometers Ancient Greek ethicists Ancient Cnidians Students of Plato 4th-century BC Greek mathematicians People from Muğla Province Hidden categories: CS1 maint: DOI inactive as of July 2025 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with hCards No local image but image on Wikidata Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2021 Articles with unsourced statements from September 2010 Articles with unsourced statements from August 2024 Articles needing additional references from September 2022 All articles needing additional references CS1 errors: ISBN date CS1 German-language sources (de) Wikipedia articles incorporating the template Lives of the Eminent Philosophers Commons category link from Wikidata Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 12 July 2025, at 01:42 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Eudoxus of Cnidus 63 languages Add topic

