Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Description Toggle Description subsection 1.1 Five unlucky days 2 Notes 3 References Toggle the table of contents Haabʼ 9 languages Deutsch Español Français Italiano Nederlands 日本語 Norsk nynorsk Polski Slovenčina Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Part of the Maya calendric system "Haab" redirects here. For the airport designated by ICAO code HAAB, see Bole International Airport . For the medieval Hungarian prelate, see Haab (bishop of Vác) .

The Haabʼ ( Mayan pronunciation: [haːɓ] ) is part of the Maya calendric system . It was a 365-day calendar used by many of the pre-Columbian cultures of Mesoamerica .

Description [ edit ] Haabʼ months : names in glyphs [ 1 ] in sequence N o.

Seq.

Name of month Glyph examples glyph meaning N o.

Seq.

Name of month Glyph examples glyph meaning 1 Pop mat 10 Yax green storm 2 Woʼ black conjunction 11 Sakʼ white storm 3 Sip red conjunction 12 Keh red storm 4 Sotzʼ bat 13 Mak enclosed 5 Sek death 14 Kʼankʼin yellow sun 6 Xul dog 15 Muwan owl 7 Yaxkʼin new sun 16 Pax planting time 8 Mol water 17 Kʼayabʼ turtle 9 Chʼen black storm 18 Kumkʼu granary 19 five unlucky days The Haabʼ comprises eighteen months of twenty days each, plus an additional period of five days ("nameless days") at the end of the year known as Wayeb' (or Uayeb in 16th-century orthography).

Bricker (1982) estimates that the Haabʼ was first used around 500 BCE with a starting point of the winter solstice .

[ 2 ] The Haabʼ month names are most commonly referred to by their names in colonial-era Yucatec (Yukatek) . In sequence, these (in the revised orthography [ 3 ] ) are as seen on the right:
Each day in the Haabʼ calendar was identified by a day number within the month followed by the name of the month. Day numbers began with a glyph translated as the "seating of" a named month, which is usually regarded as day 0 of that month, although a minority treat it as day 20 of the month preceding the named month. In the latter case, the seating of Pop is day 5 of Wayebʼ. For the majority, the first day of the year was Seating Pop. This was followed by 1 Pop, 2 Pop ... 19 Pop, Seating Wo, 1 Wo and so on.

Inscriptions on The Temple of the Cross at Palenque shows clearly that the Maya were aware of the true length of the year, even though they did not employ the use of leap days in their system of calculations generally. J. Eric Thompson [ 4 ] wrote that the Maya knew of the drift between the Haabʼ and the solar year and that they made "calculations as to the rate at which the error accumulated, but these were merely noted as corrections they were not used to change the calendar." Five unlucky days [ edit ] The five nameless days at the end of the calendar, called Wayebʼ, was thought to be a dangerous time. Foster (2002) writes "During Wayeb, portals between the mortal realm and the Underworld dissolved. No boundaries prevented the ill-intending deities from causing disasters." To ward off these evil spirits, the Mayans had customs and rituals they practised during Wayebʼ. For example, the Mayans would not leave their homes and wash their hair.

Notes [ edit ] ^ Kettunen and Helmke (2005), pp.47–48 ^ Zero Pop actually fell on the same day as the solstice on −575 December 27, −574 December 27, −573 December 27, and −572 December 26 ( astronomical year numbering , Universal Time ), if one does not account for the fact that the Maya region is in roughly time zone UT−6. See "IMCCE seasons" . Archived from the original on 2012-08-23.

^ Again, per Kettunen and Helmke (2005) ^ J. Eric Thompson (1971).

Maya Hieroglyphic Writing . University of Oklahoma Press. p. 121.

ISBN 0-8061-0958-0 .

References [ edit ] Bricker, Victoria (1982). "The Origin of the Maya Solar Calendar".

Current Anthropology .

23 (1): 101– 103.

doi : 10.1086/202782 .

Coe, Michael D.

(1992).

Breaking the Maya Code . London: Thames and Hudson .

ISBN 0-500-05061-9 .

Foster, Lynn V. (2002).

Handbook to Life in the Ancient Mayan World . New York: Facts on File .

Kettunen, Harri ; Christophe Helmke (2005).

Introduction to Maya Hieroglyphs: 10th European Maya Conference Workshop Handbook (pdf) . Leiden: Wayeb and Leiden University . Retrieved 2006-06-08 .

v t e Calendars Systems Lunar Lunisolar Solar In wide use Astronomical Buddhist Chinese Ethiopian Gregorian Hindu Lunar Hijri Solar Hijri ISO Unix time In more limited use Akan Armenian Assamese (Bhāshkarābda) Assyrian Baháʼí Badí‘ Bali Pawukon Saka Bengali Bangladeshi Berber Borana Burmese Chinese Earthly Branches Heavenly Stems Minguo Solar term Germanic heathen Georgian Hebrew Hindu Vikram Samvat Saka Hmong Igbo Iranian Jalali medieval Zoroastrian Irish Gaelic Islamic Fasli Tabular Jain Japanese Javanese Korean Juche Kurdish Lithuanian Maithili Malayalam Mandaean Manipuri (Meitei) Melanau Mizo (Lushai) Mongolian Nepal Nepal Sambat Vikram Samvat Yele Sambat Nanakshahi Nisg̱a'a Odia Punjabi Romanian Shona Somali Sesotho Slavic Slavic Native Faith Macedonian Tamil Thai lunar solar Tibetan Tripuri Tulu Vietnamese Wicca Xhosa Yoruba Zulu Types Runic Mesoamerican Long Count Calendar round Christian variants Coptic Ethiopian and Eritrean Julian Revised Liturgical year Eastern Orthodox Saints Historical Arabian Attic Aztec Tōnalpōhualli Xiuhpōhualli Babylonian Bulgar Byzantine Cappadocian Celtic Cham Culāsakaraj Coligny Egyptian Enoch Florentine French Republican Germanic Greek Hindu Inca Macedonian Maya Haabʼ Tzolkʼin Muisca Pentecontad Pisan Qumran Rapa Nui Roman Rumi Sexagenary Soviet Swedish Turkmen By specialty Holocene anthropological Proleptic Gregorian / Proleptic Julian historiographical Darian Martian Dreamspell New Age Discordian 'Pataphysical Reform proposals Hanke–Henry Permanent International Fixed Pax Positivist Sexagesimal Symmetry454 World Displays and applications Electronic Perpetual Wall Year naming and numbering Terminology Era Epoch Leap year New Year Regnal name Regnal year Year zero Systems Ab urbe condita Anka year Anno Domini / Common Era Anno Lucis Anno Martyrum Anno Mundi Assyrian Before Present Chinese Imperial Chinese Minguo English and British regnal year Hijri year Human (Holocene) Japanese Korean Nirayana system Seleucid Spanish Yugas Satya Treta Dvapara Kali Vietnamese Fictional Discworld ( Discworld ) Greyhawk ( Dungeons & Dragons ) Middle-earth ( The Lord of the Rings ) Stardate ( Star Trek ) List of calendars Category v t e Maya civilization History Preclassic Maya Classic Maya collapse Spanish conquest Chiapas Guatemala Petén Yucatán Topics Architecture E-Group Triadic pyramid Twin-pyramid complex Revival Art Graffiti Ceramics Cities Cuisine Dance Economy Trade Maritime trade Languages Classic Script List Mayanist Medicine Music Mythology Numerals People Sites Stelae Textiles Warfare Society Childhood Women Midwifery Religion Priesthood Sacrifice Human sacrifice Death rituals Social classes Ajaw Households Calendar Ajaw Baktun Haabʼ Kʼatun Kʼin Tun Tzolkʼin Winal Literature Annals of the Cakchiquels Chilam Balam Codices Dresden Grolier Madrid Paris Popol Vuh Rabinal Achí Ritual of the Bacabs Songs of Dzitbalché Título Cʼoyoi Título de Totonicapán Deities Classic Bacab Chaac Death gods God L Goddess I Hero Twins Howler monkey gods Itzamna Ixchel Jaguar gods Kʼawiil Kinich Ahau Maize god Mam Moon goddess Yopaat Post-Classic Acat Ah-Muzen-Cab Akna Chin Ixtab Kukulkan Yum Kaax Popol Vuh Awilix Camazotz Hun Hunahpu Huracan Jacawitz Qʼuqʼumatz Tohil Vucub Caquix Xmucane and Xpiacoc Xquic Zipacna Kings Bʼalaj Chan Kʼawiil Haʼ Kʼin Xook Itzam Kʼan Ahk II Kʼakʼ Tiliw Chan Yopaat Kʼinich Janaabʼ Pakal Kʼinich Yat Ahk II Kʼinich Yax Kʼukʼ Moʼ Kʼinich Yoʼnal Ahk I Uaxaclajuun Ubʼaah Kʼawiil Yoʼnal Ahk III Yuknoom Chʼeen II Yuknoom Yichʼaak Kʼahkʼ Queens Lady Eveningstar Lady of Itzan Lady of Tikal Lady Xoc Sak Kʼukʼ Wak Chanil Ajaw Yohl Ikʼnal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Haabʼ&oldid=1301713152 " Categories : Maya calendars Specific calendars Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Pages with Mayan languages IPA This page was last edited on 21 July 2025, at 08:37 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Haabʼ 9 languages Add topic

