Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Engineering considerations 2 Medical considerations 3 NASA's Bioastronautics library 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Bioastronautics 13 languages Azərbaycanca Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Español فارسی Հայերեն Italiano ქართული Polski Русский Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Татарча / tatarça Тоҷикӣ Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Academic discipline This article includes a list of references , related reading , or external links , but its sources remain unclear because it lacks inline citations .

Please help improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( April 2013 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) An astronaut in outer space with a view of the Earth reflected on his visor Bioastronautics is a specialty area of biological and astronautical research which encompasses numerous aspects of biological, behavioral, and medical concern governing humans and other living organisms in outer space ; and includes the design of space vehicle payloads, space habitats , and life-support systems .  In short, it spans the study and support of life in space .

Bioastronautics includes many similarities with its sister discipline astronautical hygiene ; they both study the hazards that humans may encounter during a space flight.  However, astronautical hygiene differs in many respects e.g. in this discipline, once a hazard is identified, the exposure risks are then assessed and the most effective measures determined to prevent or control exposure and thereby protect the health of the astronaut.  Astronautical hygiene is an applied scientific discipline that requires knowledge and experience of many fields including bioastronautics, space medicine, ergonomics etc.  The skills of astronautical hygiene are already being applied for example, to characterise Moon dust and design the measures to mitigate exposure during lunar exploration, to develop accurate chemical monitoring techniques and use the results in the setting SMACs.

Of particular interest from a biological perspective are the effects of reduced gravitational force felt by inhabitants of spacecraft.  Often referred to as " microgravity ", the lack of sedimentation, buoyancy, or convective flows in fluids results in a more quiescent cellular and intercellular environment primarily driven by chemical gradients.  Certain functions of organisms are mediated by gravity, such as gravitropism in plant roots and negative gravitropism in plant stems, and without this stimulus growth patterns of organisms onboard spacecraft often diverge from their terrestrial counterparts.  Additionally, metabolic energy normally expended in overcoming the force of gravity remains available for other functions.  This may take the form of accelerated growth in organisms as diverse as worms like C. elegans to miniature parasitoid wasps such as Spangia endius .  It may also be used in the augmented production of secondary metabolites such as the vinca alkaloids Vincristine and Vinblastine in the rosy periwinkle ( Catharanthus roseus ), whereby space grown specimens often have higher concentrations of these constituents that on earth are present in only trace amounts.

[ 1 ] Engineering considerations [ edit ] From an engineering perspective, facilitating the delivery and exchange of air, food, and water, and the processing of waste products is also challenging.  The transition from expendable physicochemical methods to sustainable bioregenerative systems that function as a robust miniature ecosystem is another goal of bioastronautics in facilitating long duration space travel.  Such systems are often termed Closed Ecological Life Support Systems (CELSS).

Medical considerations [ edit ] From a medical perspective, long duration space flight also has physiological impacts on astronauts.  Accelerated bone decalcification, similar to osteopenia and osteoporosis on Earth, is just one such condition.

[ 2 ] Another serious concern is the effects of space travel upon the kidneys.  Current estimates of these effects upon the kidneys indicates that unless some kind of effective additional remedial technology against kidney damage is employed, astronauts who have been exposed to micro-gravity, reduced gravity, and Galactic radiation for 3 years or so on a Mars mission may have to return to Earth while attached to dialysis machines.

[ 3 ] The study of the potential effects of space travel is useful not only for advancing methods of the safe habitation of space, and the travel through space, but also in uncovering ways to more effectively treat closely related terrestrial ailments.

NASA's Bioastronautics library [ edit ] NASA 's Johnson Space Center in Houston, Texas maintains a Bioastronautics Library. The one-room facility provides a collection of textbooks, reference books, conference proceedings, and academic journals related to bioastronautics topics.

[ 4 ] Because the library is located within secure government property (not part of Space Center Houston , the official visitors center of JSC), it is not generally accessible to the public.

See also [ edit ] Effect of spaceflight on the human body Life support system Space habitation Locomotion in space Reduced muscle mass, strength and performance in space Space food Astronautical hygiene Spaceflight radiation carcinogenesis Space medicine Sex in space Space tourism Space-based economy List of spaceflight-related accidents and incidents Writing in space Space art#Art in space Religion in space Organisms at high altitude Astrobiology Astrobotany Plants in space References [ edit ] ^ Stodieck, Louis S.; Hoehn, Alex; Heyenga, A. Gerard (1998). "Space flight research leading to the development of enhanced plant products: Results from STS-94".

AIP Conference Proceedings .

420 : 578– 585.

Bibcode : 1998AIPC..420..578S .

doi : 10.1063/1.54909 .

ISSN 0094-243X .

^ Graebe, Annemarie; Schuck, Edgar L.; Lensing, Petra; Putcha, Lakshmi; Derendorf, Hartmut (2004). "Physiological, Pharmacokinetic, and Pharmacodynamic Changes in Space".

The Journal of Clinical Pharmacology .

44 (8): 837– 853.

doi : 10.1177/0091270004267193 .

ISSN 0091-2700 .

PMID 15286087 .

S2CID 7861059 .

^ Any Trip to Mars Might Destroy Astronaut's Kidneys: Study US News. By HealthDay. June 12, 2024. Retrieved June 18, 2024.

^ Duggan, Clay.

"STI Center resources still available to employees following move to UHCL" .

External links [ edit ] Harvard-MIT Health Sciences and Technology - Bioastronautics Training Program (HST-Bioastro) [1] NASA 's Bioastronautics Roadmap [2] University of Colorado at Boulder Bioastronautics Research Group [3] The American Society for Gravitational and Space Biology (ASGSB) [4] Archived 2008-09-12 at the Wayback Machine 1965 radio series titled Their Other World , 13 half-hour episodes with typed transcript [5] .

v t e Spaceflight General Astrodynamics History Timeline Space Race Records Accidents and incidents Space launch Space policy Australia China European Space Agency European Union India Japan North Korea South Korea Russia Soviet Union United States Space law Outer Space Treaty Rescue Agreement Space Liability Convention Registration Convention Moon Treaty Space warfare Space command Space force Militarisation of space Private spaceflight Billionaire space race Applications Astronomy Earth observation Archaeology Imagery and mapping Reconnaissance Weather and environment monitoring Communications satellite Internet Radio Telephone Television Satellite navigation Commercial use of space Space launch market competition Space architecture Space exploration Space research Space technology Space weather Human spaceflight General Astronaut commercial Life-support system Animals in space Bioastronautics Space suit Extravehicular activity Overview effect Weightlessness Space toilet Space tourism Space colonization Space diving Programs Vostok Mercury Voskhod Gemini Soyuz Apollo Skylab Apollo–Soyuz Space Shuttle Mir Shuttle–Mir International Space Station Shenzhou Tiangong New Shepard Artemis Health issues Effect of spaceflight on the human body Space adaptation syndrome Health threat from cosmic rays Space psychology Psychological and sociological effects Space and survival Space medicine Space nursing Space sexology Spacecraft Launch vehicle Rocket Space capsule Orbital module Reentry capsule Service module Spaceplane Robotic spacecraft Satellite Space probe Lander Rover Self-replicating spacecraft Space telescope Spacecraft propulsion Rocket engine Electric propulsion Solar sail Gravity assist Destinations Sub-orbital Orbital Geocentric Geosynchronous Interplanetary Interstellar Intergalactic Space launch Direct ascent Escape velocity Expendable and reusable launch systems Launch pad Non-rocket spacelaunch Spaceport Ground segment Flight controller Ground station Pass Mission control center Category Portal v t e Space medicine Main areas Artificial gravity Astronautical hygiene Bioastronautics Neuroscience in space Space exposure Space food Space nursing Space weather Weightlessness Illness and injuries Asthenization Ebullism Illness and injuries during spaceflight Medical treatment during spaceflight Space adaptation syndrome Space and survival Spaceflight osteopenia Organizations Aerospace Medical Association National Space Biomedical Research Institute Rubicon Foundation Space Nursing Society Other topics Adverse health effects from lunar dust exposure Alcohol Cardiac rhythm problems during space flight Central nervous system effects from radiation exposure during spaceflight Effect of spaceflight on the human body Effects of sleep deprivation in space Epidemiology data for low-linear energy transfer radiation Sleep in space Health threat from cosmic rays Intervertebral disc damage and spaceflight List of microorganisms tested in outer space Psychological and sociological effects of spaceflight Radiobiology evidence for protons and HZE nuclei Reduced muscle mass, strength and performance in space Renal stone formation in space Spaceflight radiation carcinogenesis Team composition and cohesion in spaceflight missions Visual impairment due to intracranial pressure Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Bioastronautics&oldid=1288999067 " Categories : Aviation medicine Human spaceflight Biological engineering Space medicine Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles lacking in-text citations from April 2013 All articles lacking in-text citations Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 5 May 2025, at 21:45 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Bioastronautics 13 languages Add topic

