Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life Toggle Life subsection 1.1 Early life 1.2 Marriage and emigration to New England 1.3 Death 2 Bequest to college Toggle Bequest to college subsection 2.1 Founding "myth" 3 Memorials and tributes 4 References 5 Further reading 6 External links Toggle the table of contents John Harvard 33 languages العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা Български Čeština Deutsch Español فارسی Français Frysk 한국어 Հայերեն Italiano ქართული Lietuvių Magyar مصرى Монгол Nederlands پښتو Polski Português Română Русский Shqip Slovenčina Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska தமிழ் Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from John Harvard (clergyman) ) English clergyman and philanthropist (1607–1638) For other uses, see John Harvard (disambiguation) .

The Reverend John Harvard The John Harvard statue (1884) at Harvard University Born Southwark , Surrey , England Baptised ( 1607-11-29 ) 29 November 1607 [ 1 ] Died ( 1638-09-14 ) 14 September 1638 (aged 30) Charlestown , Massachusetts Bay Colony , British America Cause of death Tuberculosis Alma mater Emmanuel College, Cambridge ( BA , MA ) Occupation Pastor Known for A founder of Harvard College Spouse Ann Sadler Children None Signature John Harvard (1607–1638) was an English Puritan minister in colonial New England whose deathbed [ 2 ] bequest to the
"schoale or colledge"
founded two years earlier by the Massachusetts Bay Colony was so gratefully received that the colony consequently ordered "that the
Colledge
agreed upon formerly to
be
built at Cambridge shalbee
called Harvard
Colledge ".

[ 3 ] Harvard was born in Southwark , England, and earned bachelor's and master's degrees from Emmanuel College, Cambridge .
In 1637 he emigrated to the Massachusetts Bay Colony in America, where he became a teaching elder and assistant preacher of the First Church in Charlestown .

Harvard died of tuberculosis in 1638, leaving a large sum of money and his 400-volume scholar's library to the colony's new school, which the colony then voted to name in his honor.

Harvard University considers him the most honored of its founders—those whose efforts and contributions in its early days "ensure[d] its permanence"—and a statue in his honor is a prominent feature of Harvard Yard .

Life [ edit ] Early life [ edit ] Harvard House in Stratford-upon-Avon was the childhood home of John Harvard's mother Katherine Rogers.

Harvard was born and raised in Southwark , Surrey , England, (later part of London ), the fourth of nine children of Robert Harvard (1562–1625), a butcher and tavern owner, and Katherine Rogers (1584–1635), a native of Stratford-upon-Avon . Her father, Thomas Rogers (1540–1611), served on the borough corporation's council with John Shakespeare .

[ citation needed ] Harvard was baptised in St Saviour's Church (later Southwark Cathedral ) [ 4 ] and attended St Saviour's Grammar School , where his father was a member of the governing body and a warden of the parish church . His grandparents' house in Stratford-upon-Avon, largely rebuilt after a fire of 1595, survives as 'Harvard House'.

[ 5 ] In 1625, bubonic plague reduced the immediate family to only John, his brother Thomas, and Katherine. Katherine was soon remarried‍—‌firstly in 1626 to John Elletson (1580–1626), who died within a few months, then (1627) to Richard Yearwood (1580–1632). She died in 1635, Thomas in 1637.

Left with some property,
Harvard's mother was able to send him to the University of Cambridge , [ 6 ] He was admitted as a pensioner to Emmanuel College, Cambridge , on 19 December 1627; he was awarded his B.A.

in 1632 and M.A.

in 1635.

[ 7 ] Marriage and emigration to New England [ edit ] On 19 April of either 1636 or 1637, Harvard married Ann Sadler (1614–55) of Patcham in East Sussex , sister of his college contemporary John Sadler , at St Michael the Archangel Church, in the parish of South Malling, Lewes .

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] In the spring or summer of 1637, the couple emigrated to the New England Colonies , where Harvard became a freeman of Massachusetts [ 6 ] and, settling in Charlestown , a teaching elder of the First Church there [ 10 ] and an assistant preacher, though it is not known whether he was episcopally ordained.

[ 11 ] [ 11 ] In 1638, a tract of land was deeded [ clarification needed ] to him there, and he was appointed that same year to a committee "to consider of some things tending toward a body of laws." [ 6 ] [ clarification needed ] He built his house on Country Road (later Market Street and then Main Street), next to Gravel Lane, a site that became John Harvard Mall . His orchard extended up the hill behind his house.

[ 12 ] Death [ edit ] On 14 September 1638, Harvard died of tuberculosis and was buried at Charlestown's Phipps Street Burying Ground . In 1828, Harvard University alumni erected a granite monument to his memory there, [ 6 ] [ 13 ] his original stone having disappeared during the American Revolution .

[ 10 ] Harvard's widow, Ann, is believed to have married again, to Thomas Allen , Harvard's successor as teacher of the Charlestown church and administrator of Harvard's estate.

[ 14 ] Bequest to college [ edit ] Tablets outside Harvard Yard's Johnston Gate . The tablet on the left (above) quotes from a longer history which continues, "And as we were thinking and consulting how to effect this great work, it pleased God to stir up the heart of one Mr. Harvard (a godly gentleman and a lover of learning, there living among us) to give the one-half of his estate (it being in all about 1700 £) toward the erecting of a college, and all his library. After him, another gave 300 £; others after them cast in more; and the public hand of the state added the rest." [ 15 ] Emmanuel College window (1884) depicting John Harvard on left Tablet, Emmanuel College Two years before Harvard's death the Great and General Court of the Massachu­setts Bay Colony ‍—‌desiring to "advance learning and perpetuate it to posterity: dreading to leave an illiterate ministry to the churches, when our present ministers shall lie in the dust"‍—‌appropriated £ 400 toward a "schoale or colledge" [ 3 ] at what was then called Newtowne.

[ 15 ] In an oral will spoken to his wife [ 16 ] the childless Harvard, who had inherited considerable sums from his father, mother, and brother, [ 17 ] bequeathed to the school £ 780‍—‌half of his monetary estate‍—‌with the remainder to his wife; [ 4 ] this bequest was roughly equal to the Massachusetts Bay Colony's annual tax receipts.

[ 18 ] Perhaps more importantly [ 19 ] he also gave his scholar's library comprising some 329 titles (totaling 400 volumes, some titles being multivolume works).

[ 20 ] : 192 In gratitude, it was subsequently ordered "that the
Colledge
agreed upon formerly to
bee
built at
Cambridg shalbee
called Harvard
Colledge ." [ 3 ] (Even before Harvard's death, Newtowne had been renamed [ 3 ] Cambridge, after the English university attended by many early colonists, including Harvard himself.) [ 21 ] Founding "myth" [ edit ] The Harvard College undergraduate newspaper, The Harvard Crimson , [ 22 ] as well as what Harvard Magazine calls "smartass" tour guides, [ 23 ] [ 24 ] commonly assert that John Harvard does not merit the honorific founder , because the Colony's vote creating the institution occurred two years prior to Harvard's bequest.
But as detailed in a 1934 letter by Jerome Davis Greene , Secretary of the Harvard Corporation , the founding of Harvard College was not the act of one but the work of many; John Harvard is therefore consid­ered not the founder, but rather a founder, [ 25 ] [ 26 ] of the school‍—‌though the timeliness and generosity of his contribu­tion have made him the most honored of these: The quibble over the question whether John Harvard was entitled to be called the Founder of Harvard College seems to me one of the least profitable. The destruc­tion of myths is a legiti­mate sport, but its only justifica­tion is the establish­ment of truth in place of error.

If the founding of a universi­ty must be dated to a split second of time, then the founding of Harvard should perhaps be fixed by the fall of the presi­dent's gavel in announc­ing the passage of the vote of 28 October, 1636. But if the founding is to be regarded as a process rather than as a single event [then John Harvard, by virtue of his bequest "at the very threshold of the College's existence and going further than any other contribu­tion made up to that time to ensure its permanence"] is clearly entitled to be consid­ered a founder. The General Court ... acknowl­edged the fact by bestowing his name on the College. This was almost two years before the first President took office and four years before the first students were graduated.

These are all familiar facts and it is well that they should be understood by the sons of Harvard. There is no myth to be destroyed.

[ 27 ] Memorials and tributes [ edit ] The Harvard Chapel in Southwark Cathedral , London Plaque at 211, Borough High Street , London A statue in Harvard's honor—not, however, a 'likeness' of him, there being nothing to indicate what he had looked like [ 11 ] —is a prominent feature of Harvard Yard (see John Harvard statue ) and was featured on a 1986 stamp, part of the United States Postal Service's Great Americans series .

[ 28 ] A figure representing him also appears in a stained-glass window in the chapel of Emmanuel College, Cambridge .

[ 11 ] [ 6 ] The John Harvard Library in Southwark, London, is named in Harvard's honor, as is the Harvard Bridge linking Boston and Cambridge, Massachusetts.

[ 29 ] In Southwark Cathedral , where Harvard was baptised, the Harvard Chapel in the north transept was rebuilt with donations from Harvard graduates and dedicated in 1907. The stained-glass window was designed by the American artist, John La Farge and given by the American ambassador to the United Kingdom, Joseph Choate .

[ 30 ] References [ edit ] ^ Tedder, Henry Richard (1891).

"Harvard, John" . In Stephen, Leslie ; Lee, Sidney (eds.).

Dictionary of National Biography . Vol. 25. London: Smith, Elder & Co. pp.

77– 78.

^ Conrad Edick Wright, John Harvard: Brief life of a Puritan philanthropist Harvard Magazine .  January–February 2000.
"By the time the Harvards settled in Charlestown John must already have been in failing health ... Consumption kills slowly. By the time Harvard died, he knew what he wanted to do with his estate." ^ a b c d Charter of the President and Fellows of Harvard College ^ a b Rowston, Guy (2006).

Southwark Cathedral – The authorised Guide .

^ Historic England .

"Harvard House (Grade I) (1298524)" .

National Heritage List for England . Retrieved 15 March 2020 .

^ a b c d e Wilson, J. G.

; Fiske, J.

, eds. (1892).

"Harvard, John" .

Appletons' Cyclopædia of American Biography . New York: D. Appleton.

^ "Harvard, John (HRVT627J)" .

A Cambridge Alumni Database . University of Cambridge.

^ Morison, Samuel Eliot (1995).

The Founding of Harvard College . Harvard University Press.

ISBN 9780674314511 . Retrieved 24 August 2021 .

^ Dean, John Ward (July 1996).

The New England Historical and Genealogical Register,: Volume 39 1885 . Heritage Books.

ISBN 9780788404986 . Retrieved 4 April 2020 .

^ a b Melnick, Arseny James.

"Celebrating the Life and Times of JOHN HARVARD" . Retrieved 20 September 2011 .

[ better source needed ] ^ a b c d Emmanuel College: John Harvard Retrieved 2012-05-01 ^ Charlestown Historical Society: Full Historic Timeline ^ Edward Everett (1850).

Orations and speeches on various occasions . Vol. I. Boston: Charles C. Little and James Brown. pp.

185– 189.

^ J. Savage, A Genealogical Dictionary of the First Settlers of New England , 4 Vols. (Little, Brown & Co., Boston 1860), I, pp. 36–37 (Internet Archive).

^ a b New England's First Fruits (1643) ^ Callan, Richard L.

100 Years of Solitude: John Harvard Finishes His First Century .

The Harvard Crimson . 28 April 1984. Retrieved 13 October 2012 ^ The Harvard Graduates' Magazine . Vol. 16. Harvard Graduates' Magazine Association. 1908 . Retrieved 12 May 2014 .

^ Foster, Margery Somers (1962).

"Out of smalle beginings..." : An Economic History of Harvard College in the Puritan Period (1636 to 1712) . Belknap Press of Harvard University Press. p. 6.

^ Alfred C. Potter, "The College Library." Harvard Illustrated Magazine, vol. IV no. 6, March 1903, pp. 105–112.

^ Potter, Alfred Claghorn (1913).

Catalogue of John Harvard's library . Cambridge: J. Wilson. Archived from the original on 6 May 2016 . Retrieved 19 April 2016 .

^ Degler, Carl Neumann (1984).

Out of Our Pasts: The Forces That Shaped Modern America . New York: HarperCollins.

ISBN 978-0-06-131985-3 . Retrieved 20 September 2011 .

^ "Memorial Society Honors Founder of College In the Name and Image of Two Other Men – College Founded By Grant of the Massachu­setts General Court in the Year 1636" .

Harvard Crimson . 26 November 1934.

When the members of the Memorial Society place a wreath on the statue of John Harvard today, expecting to honor the memory and the image of the founder of Harvard College, they will be honoring the likeness of another man and the name of a man who was not the legal founder of the college.

^ Shand-Tucci, Douglas (2001).

The Campus Guide: Harvard Universi­ty . Princeton Architectural Press. pp.

46– 51.

ISBN 9781568982809 .

^ Primus V (May–June 1999).

"The College Pump. Toes Imperiled" .

Harvard Magazine .

^ Morison, Samuel Eliot (1935).

The Founding of Harvard College . p.

210 .

John Harvard cannot rightly be called the founder of Harvard College...

^ Mather, Cotton (1853). Robbins, Thomas (ed.).

Magnalia Christi Americana: Or, The Ecclesiastical History of New-England, from Its First Planting, in the Year 1620, Unto the Year of Our Lord 1698 ...

Vol. 2. Hartford: S. Andrus & Son. p. 10.

But that which laid the most significant stone in the foundation, was the last will of Mr. John Harvard ...

^ Excerpted from Greene, Jerome Davis (11 December 1934).

"Don't Quibble Sybil — The Mail" (Letter to the editor)" .

Harvard Crimson .

("Don't quibble, Sybil" is a line from Noël Coward's 1930 Private Lives .) ^ usstampgallery.com: John Harvard ^ Alger, Alpheus B.; Matthews, Nathan Jr. (1892).

Harvard Bridge: Boston to Cambridge, March 1892 . Boston, Massachusetts: Rockwell and Churchill. p. 14 . Retrieved 20 September 2011 .

^ "John La Farge Stained Glass in New England: A Digital Guide" .

library.bc.edu .

Further reading [ edit ] Rendle, William (1885).

John Harvard, St. Saviour's, Southwark, and Harvard University, U.S.A . London: J.C. Francis.

Shelley, Henry C. (1907).

John Harvard and His Times . Boston, MA: Little, Brown, and Co.

External links [ edit ] Wikisource has the text of an 1879 American Cyclopædia article about John Harvard .

Wikisource has the text of a 1905 New International Encyclopedia article about " John Harvard ".

Potter, Alfred Claghorn (1913).

Catalogue of John Harvard's library . Cambridge: J. Wilson. Archived from the original on 6 May 2016 . Retrieved 19 April 2016 .

v t e Harvard University History John Harvard statue President Alan Garber Board of Overseers President and Fellows Provost John Manning Library Arts and Sciences Dean Hopi Hoekstra College Dean Rakesh Khurana Radcliffe College Freshman dormitories Upperclass houses Adams Cabot Currier Dudley Dunster Eliot Kirkland Leverett Lowell Mather Pforzheimer Quincy Winthrop Undergraduate organizations Hasty Pudding Theatricals The Harvard Advocate The Harvard Crimson The Harvard Independent The Harvard Lampoon Continuing Education Dean Nancy Coleman Extension School Extension School history Summer School Engineering and Applied Sciences Dean David C. Parkes Lyman Laboratory of Physics Graduate School Dean Emma Dench Libraries Cabot Harvard-Yenching Houghton Harvard Review Lamont Pusey Widener Harry Elkins Widener Eleanor Elkins Widener Grossman Centers, institutes, and societies Asia Center Center for African and African American Research Du Bois Institute Center for Astrophysics Center for Chinese Studies Center for European Studies Center for Visual Arts Center for Hellenic Studies Dumbarton Oaks Harvard Forest Rowland Institute Ukrainian Research Institute Business Dean Srikant Datar Baker Library/Bloomberg Center Harvard Business Publishing Harvard Business Review Harvard Business School RFC Spangler Center Design Dean Sarah Whiting Harvard Design Magazine Center for Housing Studies Divinity Dean David N. Hempton Education Dean Bridget Terry Long Government Dean Jeremy M. Weinstein Ash Center Belfer Center Carr Center Center for American Political Studies Center for Ethics Center for Housing Studies Center for Nonprofit Organizations Center for Public Leadership Institute of Politics Rappaport Institute Shorenstein Center The Journalist's Resource Law Dean John F. Manning Berkman Klein Center Civil Rights-Civil Liberties Law Review International Law Journal Journal of Law & Technology Journal on Legislation Law Record Law Review Medicine Dean George Q. Daley Broad Institute Medical Library Anatomical Museum Program in Health Sciences School of Dental Medicine Public Health Dean Michelle Ann Williams Museums and arboretum Arnold Arboretum Harvard Art Museums Archaeology and Ethnology Museum Busch–Reisinger Museum Fogg Museum Sackler Museum Collection of Scientific Instruments Glass Flowers Mineralogical Museum General Artemas Ward House Natural History Museum Comparative Zoology Museum Herbaria Museum of the Ancient Near East Cambridge campus Boylston Hall Bradley Memorial Discobolus Gates of Harvard Yard Graduate Center Harvard Hall Memorial Church Choir Harvard Yard Massachusetts Hall Memorial Hall Night Wall I Peabody Terrace President's House Science Center Smith Campus Center University Hall Centers and institutes Harvard Innovation Labs Computing Center Harvard Radcliffe Institute Schlesinger Library Institute for Advanced Theater Training Nieman Foundation for Journalism Real Colegio Complutense Villa I Tatti Wyss Institute People List of Harvard University people Non-graduate alumni Athletics Teams Baseball Men's basketball Women's basketball Fencing Football Men's ice hockey Women's ice hockey Men's lacrosse‎ Men's rugby Women's rugby Men's soccer Women's soccer Men's squash Men's volleyball Women's volleyball Venues Bright-Landry Hockey Center Harvard Stadium Jordan Field Lavietes Pavilion Ohiri Field Malkin Athletic Center Newell Boathouse Weld Boathouse Rivalries Cornell (hockey) Yale (football) Miscellaneous Anti-Vietnam War protests Alma mater Commencement traditions Academic regalia Graduate Students Union Heraldry Tercentenary celebration Harvard Magazine Harvard University Press Lionel de Jersey Harvard Math 55 Society of Fellows University Professor Harvard–Adam Dziewonski Observatory Excellence Without a Soul Category Commons Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States Japan Netherlands Israel Other SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=John_Harvard&oldid=1298659840 " Categories : 1607 births 1638 deaths 17th-century Calvinist and Reformed Christians 17th-century English clergy 17th-century New England Puritan ministers 17th-century deaths from tuberculosis Alumni of Emmanuel College, Cambridge English Dissenters English philanthropists Harvard University people People educated at St Saviour's Grammar School Clergy from Southwark Burials at Phipps Street Burying Ground University and college founders English emigrants to Massachusetts Bay Colony 17th-century philanthropists Tuberculosis deaths in Massachusetts Hidden categories: Articles incorporating Cite DNB template Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from Appleton's Cyclopedia All articles lacking reliable references Articles lacking reliable references from September 2024 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from March 2020 Biography with signature Articles with hCards All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2020 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from March 2012 This page was last edited on 3 July 2025, at 21:31 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents John Harvard 33 languages Add topic

