Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Varieties of topopolises and similar fictional structures 2 Examples in fiction 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Topopolis 3 languages Deutsch 日本語 Türkçe Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Proposed tube-like space habitat Interior view of an O'Neill cylinder space habitat, similar to a short Topopolis A topopolis is a proposed tube-shaped space habitat , rotating to produce artificial gravity via centrifugal force on the inner surface, which is extended into a loop around the local planet or star. The concept was invented by writer Patrick Gunkel .

Varieties of topopolises and similar fictional structures [ edit ] A topopolis has been compared to an O'Neill cylinder , or a McKendree cylinder , that has been extended in length so that it encircles a star .  A "normal" topopolis would be hundreds of millions of miles/kilometers long and at least several miles (kilometers) in diameter.

Topopoles can be looped several times around the local star, in a geometric figure known as a torus knot .  Topopolises are also called cosmic spaghetti.

A topopolis with big enough diameter could theoretically have multiple levels of concentric cylinders.

Larry Niven (1974) mentioned the idea in a much-reprinted magazine article " Bigger Than Worlds ".

[ 1 ] Paul Birch referred to this design as the "macaroni habitat". He suggested that, aside from looping around a star, it could instead extend between one star and another, resulting in a habitable area about 100 million times that of the Earth.

[ 2 ] Examples in fiction [ edit ] In the novel Matter , Iain M. Banks (2008) [ 3 ] depicts a topopolis that loops its system star many times in various braidings, and houses trillions of sapient residents. The topopolis was so massive that stray gases from the system collected within the major spacing within the braids by gravitation alone, producing a slight atmosphere between the strands, that the author describes as a "haze".

Dennis E. Taylor (2020) [ 4 ] in the book Heaven’s River features an alien civilization inhabiting a topopolis.

The setting of the worldbuilding project Orion's Arm has topopoli among the various kinds of megastructures.

[ 5 ] The system of Cableville is notable for having three topopoli of different sizes and orbits, with names referencing long objects: the innermost is Spaghetti , the one outside it is Ouroboros , and the outermost is Wyrme .

[ 6 ] See also [ edit ] Big dumb object Ringworld References [ edit ] ^ Niven, Larry (March 1974). " Bigger Than Worlds ".

Analog .

reprinted that same year in Niven, Larry (1974). " Bigger Than Worlds ".

A Hole in Space . New York, NY: Ballantine Books. pp.

111– 126.

reprinted 17 years later in Niven, Larry (1991). " Bigger Than Worlds ".

Playgrounds of the Mind . Tor Books.

^ Birch, Paul (2006).

"Custom Planets - or Move over Slartibartfast" (PDF) .

Paper Read to Brit. Interplan. Soc/CEMS Syposium "Bringing Worlds to Life" .

^ Banks, I.M.

(25 January 2008).

Matter .

^ Taylor, D.E.

(2020).

Heaven's River . Bobiverse. Vol. 4.

^ "Topopolis" .

OrionsArm.com .

^ "Cableville, a fictional topopolis at Orion's Arm" .

OrionsArm.com .

v t e Science fiction Outline Authors Definitions Anthropological Hard Scientific romance Soft History Pulp era Golden Age New Wave Timeline Subgenres Apocalyptic and post-apocalyptic Comedy Sitcoms Feminist Grimdark Inner space Mecha Anime and manga Mundane Space warfare Military Space opera Space Western Parallel universes Isekai Science fantasy Dying Earth Planetary romance Superhero Sword and planet Social Climate fiction Christian Libertarian Utopian and dystopian Tech noir Spy-Fi Techno-thriller Tokusatsu Kaiju Underwater Cyberpunk derivatives Cyberpunk Japanese Biopunk Dieselpunk Nanopunk Solarpunk Steampunk Culture Conventions Fandom Fanzines ISFDB Libraries and museums Science Fiction Museum Studies Women in SF Worldcon Region Australian Bengali Brazilian Canadian Chilean Chinese Croatian Czech Estonian French Hungarian Japanese Korean Norwegian Polish Romanian Russian Serbian Spanish Yugoslav Awards Cinematic Jules Verne Saturn Literary, art, and audio Astounding Aurealis BSFA Campbell Memorial Chesley Clarke Crook Deutscher Dick Ditmar Endeavor FantLab Galaxy Gaughan Geffen Golden Duck Grand Master Grand Prix Harland Heinlein Ignotus Kitschies Lambda Laßwitz Locus Nautilus Nebula Nommo Norton Parsec Prometheus Rhysling SFERA Sidewise Skylark Sturgeon Sunburst Tähtivaeltaja TBD Tiptree Tour-Apollo Translation Urania Vogel Writers and Illustrators of the Future Zajdel Multimedia Aurora Chandler Dragon Hugo Seiun Spectrum Media Film Film history Films Indian Japanese Anime Tokusatsu Literature Comics Magazines Novels Publishers Short stories Stage Opera Theatre Television List of TV shows Australasian British Canadian European Japanese Anime Live-action U.S.

Themes Architectural Dyson sphere Ecumenopolis Matrioshka brain Space stations and habitats Stellar engine Terraforming Topopolis Biological Biological warfare Evolution Extraterrestrials List Gender Genetic engineering Invisibility Nanotechnology Organ transplantation Parasitism Sex and sexuality Symbiosis Physical Black holes Extrasolar planets Multiverse Parallel universes Portable hole Space travel Stars Tachyons Teleportation Time travel Time viewer Wormhole Psychological Group mind Mind uploading Psionics Simulated consciousness Social Africanfuturism Afrofuturism Alien invasion Alien language Ancient astronauts Black Evil corporation First contact Frankenstein complex Galactic empire LGBT Message from space Transhumanism Uplift Xenoarchaeology Technological Ansible Artificial intelligence AI takeover Astroengineering Force field Holography Hyperspace Inertialess Robots and Cyborgs Self-replicating machines Simulated reality Spacecraft Stargate Warp drive Weapons Religious Christian science fiction Related Alternate history Fantasy Fictional astronauts Fictional technology Future history Horror Magic realism Museum of Science Fiction Rubber science Science and technology studies Sense of wonder Speculative fiction Supernatural Technology and society Weird Category Portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Topopolis&oldid=1302203069 " Categories : Megastructures Fictional space stations Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 24 July 2025, at 00:57 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Topopolis 3 languages Add topic

