Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Human Visual Perception 2 Psycho-physical Research 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Parallax scanning Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Parallax scanning" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( September 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Parallax scanning depth enhancing imaging methods rely on discrete parallax differences between depth planes in a scene.  The differences are caused by a parallax scan.  When properly balanced (tuned) and displayed, the discrete parallax differences are perceived by the brain as depth.

A continuously moving parallax scan records a pattern of sequential parallax views on a single strip of film or video tape.  The lens's optical axis sweeps in the plane of the nominal X and Y axes around the nominal optical Z axis, pivoting on the optical convergence point (out along the Z axis), so that it passes through positions having parallax in relation to the optical convergence point.  The circular scanning of the lens's optical axis traces out a coaxial cone pattern with the convergence point as its apex.

Early tests revealed that the brain will translate parallax scanned information into depth information at scanning frequencies of between 3–6 Hz, and that the ideal frequency is 4.31 Hz.

Human Visual Perception [ edit ] In his 1995 book, Foundations of Vision, Brian Wandell states, " Perception is an interpretation of the retinal image, not a description.  Information in the retinal image may be interpreted in many different ways.  Because we begin with ambiguous information, we cannot make deductions from the retinal image, only inferences.   ....we have learned that the visual system succeeds in interpreting images because of statistical regularities present in the visual environment and hence in the retinal image.  These regularities permit the visual system to use fragmentary information present in the retinal image to draw accurate inferences about the physical cause of the image.  For example, when we make inferences from the retinal image, the knowledge that we live in a three-dimensional world is essential to the correct interpretation of the image.  Often, we are made aware of the existence of these powerful interpretations and their assumptions when they are in error, that is, when we discover a visual illusion ." [ 1 ] While it is not possible to create a stereo image on a standard display without special equipment, it is possible to create an image with enhanced texture and depth.  The parallax scanning lens technology creates autostereoscopic moving images with enhanced texture and depth on standard displays (television, movie screens and computer monitors) without the necessity of special screens or the use of viewing glasses.  Images can be recorded on normal film or videotape using industry standard camera systems.  The image depth enhancement is accomplished entirely by the lens using parallax scanning technology.

[ 2 ] Psycho-physical Research [ edit ] It is known that the act of visual perception is a cognitive exercise and not merely a stimulus response.

[ 3 ] In other words, perception is a learned ability which we develop in infancy.  Kenneth Ogle of the Mayo Clinic, reported 1967 that left and right-eye information can be presented alternatively to the left and right eyes, resulting in depth perception as long as the time interval does not exceed 100 ms.

[ 4 ] Visual researcher David Marr has suggested that perceptual fusion of binocular information occurs in a short-term memory buffer by means of some sort of visual depth mapping.

[ 5 ] In 1984, Edwin Jones of the University of South Carolina reported that the human brain can accept and process parallax information without regard to the direction of the parallax, i.e. horizontal, diagonal or vertical.

[ 6 ] A. P. McLaurin of the University of South Carolina, has stated that if visual information is in fact compared in a temporary memory and does not have to be received simultaneously, there is no reason why stereoscopic information that is appropriately sequenced at the proper rate cannot be observed by the single eye.

[ 7 ] In August 1998, the University of Virginia—Cognitive Science Department received an Innovation Award from the Virginia Center for Innovative Technology (CIT) to fund a research project to study the perceptual aspects of parallax scanning on the human visual system.  This project and its subsequent report were completed in March 1999.

The UVA report titled Perceived depth is enhanced with parallax scanning, was the first independent study of the parallax scanning technologies. Dr. Dennis Proffitt and Tom Banton's work confirm that parallax scanning enhances perceived depth in images, especially when the object depth is large (See UVA Report). The more depth in the scene, the more parallax scanning enhances its perception by a viewer on a standard television screen without the aid of special glasses.

[ 8 ] See also [ edit ] Stereopsis parallax scrolling Critical alignment through Parallax Induction Parallax Image Display (PID) Vision III Imaging, Inc.

3D Display vergence-accommodation conflict References [ edit ] ^ Wandell, B. (1995), Foundations of Vision , Sinauer Associates, Inc.

^ Mayhew, C. A. (1990). "Texture and Depth Enhancement for Motion Pictures and Television".

SMPTE Journal .

9 (10): 809– 814.

doi : 10.5594/j00096 .

^ Churchland, P. (1992), The Computational Brain , Cambridge, MA: MIT Press ^ Ogle, K. N. (1967). "Some Aspects of Stereoscopic Depth Perception".

Journal of the Optical Society of America .

57 (9): 1073– 1081.

doi : 10.1364/josa.57.001073 .

PMID 6051761 .

^ Marr, D. (1982), Vision , San Francisco: W. H. Freeman ^ Jones, E.; et al. (1984). "Visual Image Depth Enhancement by Parallax Induction".

Advances in Display Technology IV, SPIE Proceedings . Society of Photo-Optical Instrumentation Engineers: 16.

^ McLaurin, A. P.; et al. (1986). "Visual Image Depth Enhancement Process: An Approach to Three-Dimensional Imaging".

Displays .

7 (3): 112.

doi : 10.1016/0141-9382(86)90002-8 .

^ Proffitt, D.; et al. (March 1999), Perceived depth is enhanced with parallax scanning , University of Virginia - Cognitive Science Department External links [ edit ] UVA Report Archived 2007-10-09 at the Wayback Machine v t e Stereoscopy and 3D display Perception 3D stereo view Binocular rivalry Binocular vision Chromostereopsis Convergence insufficiency Correspondence problem Peripheral vision Depth perception Epipolar geometry Kinetic depth effect Stereoblindness Stereopsis Stereopsis recovery Stereoscopic acuity Vergence-accommodation conflict Display technologies Active shutter 3D system Anaglyph 3D Autostereogram Autostereoscopy Bubblegram Head-mounted display Holography Integral imaging Lenticular lens Multiscopy Parallax barrier Parallax scrolling Polarized 3D system Specular holography Stereo display Stereoscope Vectograph Virtual retinal display Volumetric display Wiggle stereoscopy Other technologies 2D to 3D conversion 2D plus Delta 2D-plus-depth Computer stereo vision Multiview Video Coding Parallax scanning Pseudoscope Stereo photography techniques Stereoautograph Stereoscopic depth rendition Stereoscopic rangefinder Stereoscopic spectroscopy Stereoscopic video coding Product types 3D camcorder 3D film 3D television 3D-enabled mobile phones 4D film Blu-ray 3D Digital 3D Stereo camera Stereo microscope Stereoscopic video game Virtual reality headset Notable products AMD HD3D Dolby 3D Fujifilm FinePix Real 3D Infitec MasterImage 3D Nintendo 3DS New 3DS Nvidia 3D Vision Panavision 3D RealD 3D Sharp Actius RD3D View-Master XpanD 3D Miscellany Stereographer Stereoscopic Displays and Applications Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Parallax_scanning&oldid=1246470725 " Categories : Vision Parallax Hidden categories: Articles needing additional references from September 2022 All articles needing additional references Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 19 September 2024, at 04:34 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Parallax scanning Add languages Add topic

