Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Animals Toggle Animals subsection 2.1 Mammals including humans 2.2 Ooplasm 2.3 Ova development in oviparous animals 2.4 Ovoviviparity 3 Plants 4 Other organisms 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Egg cell 89 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch العربية Aragonés অসমীয়া Asturianu Azərbaycanca বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Чӑвашла Čeština ChiShona Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge Galego ગુજરાતી 𐌲𐌿𐍄𐌹𐍃𐌺 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa ಕನ್ನಡ کٲشُر Қазақша Kiswahili Kurdî Кыргызча Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Македонски മലയാളം მარგალური مصرى Bahasa Melayu Мокшень Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan ଓଡ଼ିଆ Oromoo Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Română Runa Simi Русский Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Татарча / tatarça ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt Winaray 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Ova ) Female reproductive cell in most anisogamous organisms "Ova" redirects here. For anime films released direct-to-video, see Original video animation . For other uses, see Ova (disambiguation) .

Not to be confused with Egg .

Egg cell A human egg cell with surrounding corona radiata Details Identifiers Latin ovum Greek ωάριον (ōárion) MeSH D010063 FMA 67343 Anatomical terms of microanatomy [ edit on Wikidata ] Human egg cell The egg cell or ovum ( pl.

: ova ) is the female reproductive cell, or gamete , [ 1 ] in most anisogamous organisms (organisms that reproduce sexually with a larger, female gamete and a smaller, male one). The term is used when the female gamete is not capable of movement (non- motile ). If the male gamete ( sperm ) is capable of movement, the type of sexual reproduction is also classified as oogamous . A nonmotile female gamete formed in the oogonium of some algae, fungi, oomycetes, or bryophytes is an oosphere .

[ 2 ] When fertilized, the oosphere becomes the oospore .

[ clarification needed ] When egg and sperm fuse together during fertilisation , a diploid cell (the zygote ) is formed, which rapidly grows into a new organism.

History [ edit ] While the non-mammalian animal egg was obvious, the doctrine ex ovo omne vivum ("every living [animal comes from] an egg"), associated with William Harvey (1578–1657), was a rejection of spontaneous generation and preformationism as well as a bold assumption that mammals also reproduced via eggs.

Karl Ernst von Baer discovered the mammalian ovum in 1827.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] The fusion of spermatozoa with ova (of a starfish) was observed by Oskar Hertwig in 1876.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] Animals [ edit ] In animals, egg cells are also known as ova (singular ovum , from the Latin word ovum meaning ' egg ').

[ 7 ] The term ovule in animals is used for the young ovum of an animal. In vertebrates, ova are produced by female gonads (sex glands) called ovaries . A number of ova are present at birth in mammals and mature via oogenesis .

Studies performed on humans, dogs, and cats in the 1870s suggested that the production of oocytes (immature egg cells) stops at or shortly after birth. A review of reports from 1900 to 1950 by zoologist Solomon Zuckerman cemented the belief that females have a finite number of oocytes that are formed before they are born. This dogma has been challenged by a number of studies since 2004. Several studies suggest that ovarian stem cells exist within the mammalian ovary. Whether or not mature mammals can actually create new egg cells remains uncertain and is an ongoing research question.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] Mammals including humans [ edit ] Diagram of a human egg cell Ovum and sperm fusing together The process of fertilizing an ovum (top to bottom).

In all mammals , the ovum is fertilized inside the female body. Human ova grow from primitive germ cells that are embedded in the substance of the ovaries .

[ 10 ] The ovum is one of the largest cells in the human body, typically visible to the naked eye without the aid of a microscope or other magnification device.

[ 11 ] The human ovum measures approximately 120 μm (0.0047 in) in diameter.

[ 12 ] In humans, recombination rates differ between maternal and paternal DNA: Maternal DNA: Recombines approximately 42 times on average.

Paternal DNA: Recombines approximately 27 times on average.

Ooplasm [ edit ] Ooplasm is like the yolk of the ovum, a cell substance at its center, which contains its nucleus , named the germinal vesicle , and the nucleolus , called the germinal disc .

[ 13 ] The ooplasm consists of the cytoplasm of the ordinary animal cell with its spongioplasm and hyaloplasm , often called the formative yolk ; and the nutritive yolk or deutoplasm , made of rounded granules of fatty and albuminoid substances imbedded in the cytoplasm.

[ 13 ] Mammalian ova contain only a tiny amount of the nutritive yolk, for nourishing the embryo in the early stages of its development only. In contrast, bird eggs contain enough to supply the chick with nutriment throughout the whole period of incubation.

[ 13 ] Ova development in oviparous animals [ edit ] In the oviparous animals (all birds , most fish , amphibians and reptiles ), the ova develop protective layers and pass through the oviduct to the outside of the body. They are fertilized by male sperm either inside the female body (as in birds), or outside (as in many fish). After fertilization, an embryo develops, nourished by nutrients contained in the egg. It then hatches from the egg, outside the mother's body. See egg for a discussion of eggs of oviparous animals.

The egg cell's cytoplasm and mitochondria are the sole means the egg can reproduce by mitosis and eventually form a blastocyst after fertilization.

Ovoviviparity [ edit ] There is an intermediate form, the ovoviviparous animals: the embryo develops within and is nourished by an egg as in the oviparous case, but then it hatches inside the mother's body shortly before birth, or just after the egg leaves the mother's body. Some fish, reptiles and many invertebrates use this technique.

Plants [ edit ] Nearly all land plants have alternating diploid and haploid generations. Gametes are produced by the haploid generation, which is known as the gametophyte . The female gametophyte produces structures called archegonia , and the egg cells form within them via mitosis . The typical bryophyte archegonium consists of a long neck with a wider base containing the egg cell. Upon maturation, the neck opens to allow sperm cells to swim into the archegonium and fertilize the egg. The resulting zygote then gives rise to an embryo, which will grow into a new diploid individual, known as a sporophyte . In seed plants , a structure called the ovule contains the female gametophyte. The gametophyte produces an egg cell. After fertilization , the ovule develops into a seed containing the embryo.

[ 14 ] In flowering plants , the female gametophyte (sometimes referred to as the embryo sac) has been reduced to just eight cells inside the ovule . The gametophyte cell closest to the micropyle opening of the ovule develops into the egg cell. Upon pollination , a pollen tube delivers sperm into the gametophyte and one sperm nucleus fuses with the egg nucleus. The resulting zygote develops into an embryo inside the ovule. The ovule, in turn, develops into a seed and in many cases, the plant ovary develops into a fruit to facilitate the dispersal of the seeds. Upon germination , the embryo grows into a seedling .

[ 14 ] Gene expression pattern determined by histochemical GUS assays in Physcomitrella patens . The Polycomb gene FIE is expressed (blue) in unfertilized egg cells of the moss Physcomitrella patens (right) and expression ceases after fertilization in the developing diploid sporophyte (left). In situ GUS staining of two female sex organs ( archegonia ) of a transgenic plant expressing a translational fusion of FIE-uidA under control of the native FIE promoter In the moss Physcomitrella patens , the Polycomb protein FIE is expressed in the unfertilised egg cell (Figure, right) as the blue colour after GUS staining reveals. Soon after fertilisation the FIE gene is inactivated (the blue colour is no longer visible, left) in the young embryo.

[ 15 ] Other organisms [ edit ] In algae , the egg cell is often called oosphere.

[ citation needed ] Drosophila oocytes develop in individual egg chambers that are supported by nurse cells and surrounded by somatic follicle cells. The nurse cells are large polyploid cells that synthesize and transfer RNA, proteins, and organelles to the oocytes. This transfer is followed by the programmed cell death (apoptosis) of the nurse cells. During oogenesis, 15 nurse cells die for every oocyte that is produced.

[ 16 ] In addition to this developmentally regulated cell death, egg cells may also undergo apoptosis in response to starvation and other insults.

[ 16 ] See also [ edit ] Insemination Menstrual cycle Ova bank Ovulation Polar body Pollination Pregnancy Spawn (biology) References [ edit ] ^ "Ovum" .

Biology Dictionary . BiologyOnline. 7 October 2019 . Retrieved 21 January 2023 .

^ "Oosphere Meaning" .

YourDictionary . Retrieved 12 April 2021 .

^ Cobb, M. (August 2012).

"An amazing 10 years: the discovery of egg and sperm in the 17th century" .

Reprod Domest Anim .

47 (Suppl 4): 2– 6.

doi : 10.1111/j.1439-0531.2012.02105.x .

PMID 22827343 .

^ " "Conclusio" from Carl Ernst von Baer's De Ovi Mammalium et..." (jpeg).

^ Needham, Joseph (1959).

A History of Embryology (2nd, revised ed.). Cambridge, England, UK: Cambridge University Press.

^ Lopata, Alex (April 2009). "History of the Egg in Embryology".

Journal of Mammalian Ova Research .

26 (1): 2– 9.

doi : 10.1274/jmor.26.2 .

S2CID 86828337 .

^ Lewis, Charlton T.; Short, Charles (1879).

"ōvum" .

A Latin Dictionary . Perseus Digital Library.

^ Horan CJ, Williams SA (July 2017).

"Oocyte stem cells: fact or fantasy?" .

Reproduction .

154 (1): R23 – R35 .

doi : 10.1530/REP-17-0008 .

PMID 28389520 .

S2CID 207156647 .

^ Telfer EE, Anderson RA (February 2019).

"The existence and potential of germline stem cells in the adult mammalian ovary" .

Climacteric .

22 (1): 22– 26.

doi : 10.1080/13697137.2018.1543264 .

PMC 6364305 .

PMID 30601039 .

^ Regan, Carmen L. (2001).

"Pregnancy" . In Worell, Judith (ed.).

Encyclopedia of Women and Gender: Sex Similarities and Differences and the Impact of Society on Gender . Vol. 1. Academic Press. p. 859.

ISBN 9780122272455 . Retrieved 3 November 2013 .

^ Alexander, Rachel; Davies, Mary-Ann; Major, Vicky; Singaram, S. Veena; Dale-Jones, Barbara (2006).

X-kit Anatomy . Pearson South Africa. p. 3.

ISBN 978-1-86891-380-0 .

^ Alberts, Bruce; Johnson, Alexander; Lewis, Julian; Raff, Martin; Roberts, Keith; Walter, Peter (2002).

"Eggs" .

Molecular Biology of the Cell (4th ed.). New York, US: Garland Science.

ISBN 0-8153-3218-1 .

^ a b c "The Ovum" .

Gray's Anatomy . Retrieved 18 October 2010 .

^ a b Esau, K. (1977).

Anatomy of seed plants (second ed.). New York: John Wiley and Sons.

ISBN 978-0-471-24520-9 .

^ Mosquna, Assaf; Katz, Aviva; Decker, Eva L.; Rensing, Stefan A.; Reski, Ralf ; Ohad, Nir (2009).

"Regulation of stem cell maintenance by the Polycomb protein FIE has been conserved during land plant evolution" .

Development .

136 (14): 2433– 2444.

doi : 10.1242/dev.035048 .

PMID 19542356 .

^ a b McCall K (October 2004). "Eggs over easy: cell death in the Drosophila ovary".

Dev. Biol .

274 (1): 3– 14.

doi : 10.1016/j.ydbio.2004.07.017 .

PMID 15355784 .

External links [ edit ] Look up oosphere or ovum in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

The Ovarian Kaleidoscope Database description of 1800 genes involved in ovarian functions v t e Sex Biological terms Sexual dimorphism Male Female Sexual differentiation Feminization Virilization Sex-determination system XY ZW XO ZO Temperature-dependent Haplodiploidy Sex chromosome Testis-determining factor Hermaphrodite Sequential hermaphroditism Simultaneous hermaphroditism Intersex parasexuality Sex as a biological variable Sexual reproduction Evolution of sexual reproduction Anisogamy Isogamy Germ cell Reproductive system Sex organ Mating Meiosis Gametogenesis Spermatogenesis Oogenesis Gamete spermatozoon ovum Fertilization External Internal Sexual selection Plant reproduction Fungal reproduction Sexual reproduction in animals Sexual intercourse Penile–vaginal intercourse Copulation Hormonal motivation Human reproduction Lordosis behavior Pelvic thrust Sexuality Plant sexuality Animal sexuality Human sexuality Mechanics Differentiation Activity Sexual system Dioecy Gonochorism Hermaphrodite Intersex Category v t e Human physiology of sexual reproduction Menstrual cycle Menarche Menstruation Follicular phase Ovulation Luteal phase Gametogenesis Spermatogenesis spermatogonium spermatocyte spermatid sperm Oogenesis oogonium oocyte ootid ovum Germ cell gonocyte gamete Human sexual activity Sexual arousal Sexual intercourse Masturbation Erection Penile Clitoral Orgasm Ejaculation Male Female Insemination Fertilization / Fertility Implantation Pregnancy Postpartum period Mechanics of sex Vaginal lubrication Development of the reproductive system Sexual differentiation Sexual dimorphism Feminization Virilization Puberty Gonadarche Tanner scale Pubarche Menarche Spermarche Adrenarche Maternal age / Paternal age Menopause Egg Ovum Vivipary Reproductive endocrinology and infertility Hypothalamic–pituitary–gonadal axis Hypothalamic–pituitary–prolactin axis Andrology Hormone Breast Thelarche Development Lactation Breastfeeding Human reproductive system Male Female Diseases and disorders Anorgasmia Dysorgasmia Dyspareunia Erectile dysfunction Hard flaccid syndrome Premature ejaculation Vaginismus Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Egg_cell&oldid=1282695977 " Categories : Cloning Eggs Germ cells Human female endocrine system Human female reproductive system Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia articles needing clarification from May 2021 Articles containing Latin-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from October 2014 This page was last edited on 28 March 2025, at 01:42 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Egg cell 89 languages Add topic

