Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Notable works 2 Theology and cosmology 3 Influence on Ancient Greek philosophy 4 Notes and references 5 Further reading 6 See also Toggle the table of contents Ancient Egyptian philosophy 15 languages العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা Čeština Español فارسی Galego Bahasa Indonesia Italiano مصرى Português Русский Српски / srpski Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Part of a series on Ancient Egyptian religion Beliefs Afterlife Creation myths Isfet Maat Maa Kheru Mythology Numerology Osiris myth Philosophy Soul Practices Canopic jars Embalming ritual Funerals Mortuary temples Offering formula Opening of the mouth Pyramids Temples Veneration of the dead Deities ( list ) Ogdoad Amun and Amunet Heh and Hauhet Kek and Kauket Nu and Naunet Ennead Atum Geb Isis Nephthys Nut Osiris Set Shu Tefnut Triads Theban Triad Elephantine Triad A Aani Aati Abaset Abtu Ahmose-Nefertari Aker Akhty Amenhotep, son of Hapu Amesemi Am-heh Ammit Amu-Aa Anat Andjety Anput Anubis Anuket Apedemak Apesh Apis Apophis Aqen Arensnuphis Arsinoe II Ash Assessors of Maat Astarte Aten B Baal Baalat Gebal Babi Banebdjedet Ba-Pef Bastet Bat Bata Bennu Bes Beset Buchis C Cavern deities of the underworld Celestial Ferrymana D Dedun Dionysus-Osiris Djedefhor Duamutef Duau G Gate deities of the underworld Gengen-Wer H Ha Hapi Hapy Harmachis Harpocrates Harsomtus Hathor Hatmehit Hauron Hedetet Hedjhotep Heka Hemen Hemsut Henet Henkhisesui Heqaib Heqet Hermanubis Hermes Trismegistus Heru-ur Heryshaf Hery-maat Hesat Horus Hu Hutchai I Iabet Iah Iat Igai Ihy Ikhemu-sek Imentet Imhotep Imsety Ipy Irer Ishtar Iunit Iusaaset J Jupiter Ammon K Kagemni I Kebechet Khensit Khenti-Amentiu Khenti-kheti Khepri Khereduankh Kherty Khnum Khonsu Kneph Kolanthes Kothar-wa-Khasis M Maahes Maat Mafdet Mandulis Medjed Mehen Mehet-Weret Mehit Menhit Meret Meretseger Meskhenet Min Mnevis Montu Mut N Nebethetepet Nebnerou Nebtuwi Nefertem Nehebkau Nehmetawy Neith Nekhbet Nemty Neper Nepit O Onuris P Pakhet Panebtawy Perit Petbe Peteese Pihor Ptah Ptahhotep Q Qebehsenuef Qebui Qed-her Qetesh R Ra Raet-Tawy Rekhyt Rem Renenutet Renpet Renpetneferet Repyt Resheph Ruty S Sah Satis Sebiumeker Sedjem Sekhmet Sepa Serapis Serket Seshat Shai Shed Shehbui Shemanefer Shepsy Shesmetet Shezmu Sia Sobek Sokar Sopdet Sopdu Souls of Pe and Nekhen T Ta-Bitjet Tatenen Taweret Tayt Teka-her Thoth Tjenenyet Tutu U Unut W Wadjet Wadj-wer Weneg Wepset Wepwawet Werethekau Wosret Y Yam Creatures Akhekh Apshait Criosphinx Griffin Hieracosphinx Medjed Serpopard Set animal Sphinx Uraeus Characters Djedi Djadjaemankh Rededjet Ubaoner Locations Aaru Akhet Benben Duat Lake of fire Land of Manu The Indestructibles Symbols and objects Ankh Anra scarab Atef Cartouche Cowroid Corn mummy Crook and flail Crown of justification Deshret Djed Egyptian obelisk Egyptian pool Eye of Horus Eye of Ra Hedjet Hemhem crown Hennu Horus on the Crocodiles Hypocephalus Imiut fetish Khepresh Kneph Menat Modius Nebu Nemes Neshmet Ouroboros Pschent Scarab Seqtet boat Serekh Shen ring Solar barque Tyet Ushabti Vulture crown Was-sceptre Winged sun Writings Amduat Books of Breathing Book of Caverns Book of the Dead Book of the Earth Book of Gates Book of the Heavenly Cow Book of Traversing Eternity Coffin Texts The Contendings of Horus and Seth Enigmatic Book of the Netherworld Festival Songs of Isis and Nephthys Great Hymn to the Aten Litany of the Eye of Horus Litany of Re Pyramid Texts Spell of the Twelve Caves Festivals Beautiful Festival of the Valley Cattle count Coronation of the pharaoh Min festival Mysteries of Osiris Opet Festival Sed festival Related religions Atenism Church of the Most High Goddess Gnosticism Hermeticism Kemetic Orthodoxy Kemetism Kushite religion Mysteries of Isis Temple of Set Thelema Ancient Egypt portal v t e Ancient Egyptian philosophy refers to the philosophical works and beliefs of Ancient Egypt . There is some debate regarding its true scope and nature.

[ 1 ] Notable works [ edit ] Further information: Wisdom literature § Ancient Egyptian literature One Egyptian figure sometimes considered an early philosopher is Ptahhotep .

[ 2 ] He served as vizier to the pharaoh in the late 25th, early 24th century BC.  Ptahhotep is known for his work on ethical behavior, called The Maxims of Ptahhotep .

The work, which is believed to have been compiled by his grandson Ptahhotep Tjefi , is a series of 37 letters or maxims addressed to his son, Akhethotep , speaking on such topics as daily behavior and ethical practices.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] Dag Herbjørnsrud , writing for the American Philosophical Association , describes the 3200-year-old manuscript " The Immortality of Writers ", or "Be a Writer" (c. 1200 BC), as a "remarkable example of classical Egyptian philosophy." [ 5 ] The manuscript, attributed to the writer Irsesh, states: Man perishes; his corpse turns to dust; all his relatives return to the earth. But writings make him remembered in the mouth of the reader. A book is more effective than a well-built house or a tomb-chapel, better than an established villa or a stela in the temple! [...] They gave themselves a book as their lector-priest, a writing-board as their dutiful son. Teachings are their mausolea, the reed-pen their child, the burnishing-stone their wife. Both great and small are given them as their children, for the writer is chief.

[ 6 ] Herbjørnsrud writes: "In 2018, projects are under way to translate several ancient Egyptian texts for the first time. Yet we already have a wide variety of genres to choose from in order to study the manuscripts from a philosophical perspective: The many maxims in “ The Teaching of Ptahhotep ”, the earliest preserved manuscript of this vizier of the fifth dynasty is from the 19th century BC, in which he also argues that you should “follow your heart”; “ The Teaching of Ani ”, written by a humble middle-class scribe in the 13th century BC, which gives advice to the ordinary man; “ The Satire of the Trades ” by Khety, who tries to convince his son Pepy to “love books more than your mother” as there is nothing “on earth” like being a scribe; the masterpiece “ The Dispute Between a Man and His Ba ” of the 19th century BC – in which a man laments “the misery of life,” while his ba (personality/soul) replies that life is good, that he should rather “ponder life” as it is a burial that is miserable [...] Or we can read Amennakht (active in 1170–1140 BC), the leading intellectual of the scribal town Deir El-Medina , whose teaching states that “it is good to finish school, better than the smell of lotus blossoms in summer.” [ 5 ] Theology and cosmology [ edit ] Theology and cosmology were central concerns in Egyptian thought. Perhaps the earliest form of a monotheistic theology also emerged in Egypt, with the rise of the Amarna theology (or Atenism) of Akhenaten (14th century BCE), which held that the solar creation deity Aten was the only god. This has been described as a "monotheistic revolution" by egyptologist Jan Assmann , though it also drew on previous developments in Egyptian thought, particularly the "New Solar Theology" based around Amun-Ra .

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] These theological developments also influenced the post-Amarna Ramesside theology, which retained a focus on a single creative solar deity (though without outright rejection of other gods, which are now seen as manifestations of the main solar deity). This period also saw the development of the concept of the ba (soul) and its relation to god.

[ 8 ] According to Goldwasser (2006) the Hyksos king Apophis (c. 1550 BC) may have been "the first to introduce into the history of ideas, the option of a "single god and no other," the first step on the long winding road of monotheism".

[ 9 ] Influence on Ancient Greek philosophy [ edit ] Several of the ancient Greek philosophers regarded Egypt as a place of wisdom and philosophy.

Isocrates (b. 436 BC) states in Busiris that "all men agree the Egyptians are the healthiest and most long of life among men; and then for the soul they introduced philosophy's training, a pursuit which has the power, not only to establish laws, but also to investigate the nature of the universe. " [ 10 ] He declares that Greek writers traveled to Egypt to seek knowledge. One of them was Pythagoras of Samos who "was first to bring to the Greeks all philosophy," according to Isocrates .

Plato states in Phaedrus that the Egyptian Thoth "invented numbers and arithmetic... and, most important of all, letters.” [ 11 ] In Plato's Timaeus , Socrates quotes the ancient Egyptian wise men when the law-giver Solon travels to Egypt to learn: "O Solon, Solon, you Greeks are always children." [ 12 ] Aristotle attests to Egypt being the original land of wisdom. He stated in Politics that "Egyptians are reputed to be the oldest of nations, but they have always had laws and a political system." [ 13 ] Notes and references [ edit ] ^ Juan José Castillos, Ancient Egyptian Philosophy, RSUE 31, 2014, 29-37.

^ Fontaine, Carole R. "A Modern Look at Ancient Wisdom: The Instruction of Ptahhotep Revisited." The Biblical Archaeologist 44, no. 3 (1981): 155-60.

doi : 10.2307/3209606 .

^ Browder, Anthony (1988).

Nile Valley Contributions to Civilization . Karmaic Institute.

^ Simpson, W. K., ed. The Maxims of Ptahhotep. Las Vegas, Nevada: Evan Blythin, 1986.

^ a b Herbjørnsrud, Dag (2018-12-17).

"The Radical Philosophy of Egypt: Forget God and Family, Write!" .

Blog of the APA . Retrieved 2019-06-19 .

^ "Writings from Ancient Egypt: Be a Writer" .

www.penguin.co.uk . Retrieved 2019-06-19 .

^ Najovits, Simson (2004).

Egypt, the Trunk of the Tree, A Modern Survey of and Ancient Land, Vol. II . New York: Algora Publishing. p. 131.

ISBN 978-0875862569 .

^ a b Assmann, Jan (2004).

"Theological Responses to Amarna" (PDF) . In Knoppers, Gary N.; Hirsch, Antoine (eds.).

Egypt, Israel, and the Ancient Mediterranean World. Studies in Honor of Donald B. Redford . Leiden/Boston. pp.

179– 191.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 18 May 2020.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ Goldwasser, Orly (2006).

"King Apophis of Avaris and the emergence of Monotheism" .

In: Timelines, ed. E. Czerny et al., vol. II, Orientalia Lovaniensia Analecta 149/II, 129-133 .

^ "Isocrates, Busiris, section 22" .

www.perseus.tufts.edu . Retrieved 2019-06-19 .

^ "Plato, Phaedrus, section 274d" .

www.perseus.tufts.edu . Retrieved 2019-06-19 .

^ "Plato, Timaeus, section 21e" .

www.perseus.tufts.edu . Retrieved 2019-06-19 .

^ "Aristotle, Politics, Book 7, section 1329b" .

www.perseus.tufts.edu . Retrieved 2019-06-19 .

Further reading [ edit ] Allen, James P. (1988).

Genesis in Egypt: the philosophy of ancient Egyptian creation accounts . New Haven, Conn: Yale Egyptological Seminar, Dept. of Near Eastern Languages and Literatures, The Graduate School, Yale Univ.

ISBN 9780912532141 .

See also [ edit ] African philosophy Book of Thoth Egyptology Isfet (Egyptian mythology) Maat Maxims of Ptahhotep Middle Eastern philosophy Philosophy in Coptic Sebayt v t e Ancient Egypt topics Glossary of artifacts Index Main topics Agriculture Architecture Revival Obelisks Pylon Ancient Egyptian race controversy Art Portraiture Astronomy Chronology Cities List Clothing Cuisine Dance Dynasties Funerary practices Geography Great Royal Wives List Hieroglyphs Cursive hieroglyphs History Language Demotic Hieratic Literature Mathematics Medicine Military Music Mythology People Pharaohs List Titulary Philosophy Population history of Egypt Pottery Prehistoric Egypt Religion Scribes Sites Capitals District Technology Trade Egypt–Mesopotamia relations Egyptology Egyptologists Museums Ancient Egypt portal Category Commons Outline WikiProject Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ancient_Egyptian_philosophy&oldid=1296082678 " Categories : Ancient Egyptian philosophy Ancient philosophy by culture Hidden categories: CS1 maint: location missing publisher Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 17 June 2025, at 18:10 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Ancient Egyptian philosophy 15 languages Add topic

