Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 1960–1970 1.2 1980-1990 1.3 2000s 1.3.1 Feminist art movement and media 2 Feminist art worldwide Toggle Feminist art worldwide subsection 2.1 India 2.2 South Africa 2.3 Cuba 3 Multi-disciplinary art movement Toggle Multi-disciplinary art movement subsection 3.1 Performance art 3.2 Body art 3.3 Video art 4 Notable artists and collectives of the movement Toggle Notable artists and collectives of the movement subsection 4.1 Artists: 19th century 4.2 Artists: 20th and 21st centuries 4.3 Artist collectives 5 See also 6 References Toggle References subsection 6.1 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Feminist art movement 7 languages العربية Հայերեն 日本語 ᱥᱟᱱᱛᱟᱲᱤ Slovenščina Türkçe Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia International feminist movement, promoting art reflecting women's lives and experiences This article is about worldwide phenomenon. For the article specific to the United States, see Feminist art movement in the United States .

Part of a series on Feminism History Feminist history Women's history American British Canadian German Waves First Second Third Fourth Timelines Women's suffrage Muslim countries US Other women's rights Women's suffrage by country Austria Australia Canada Colombia India Japan Kuwait Liechtenstein New Zealand Spain Second Republic Francoist Switzerland United Kingdom Cayman Islands Wales United States states Intersectional variants Fat Lesbian Lesbian of color Radical lesbianism Separatist Sex-positive Transfeminism Postgenderism Vegetarian ecofeminism Socialist Anarchist Queer Jineology Marxist Critical theory Standpoint Materialist Ecofeminist Postcolonial Global Transnational Xenofeminism Jineoloji Multicultural Africana womanism Black Hip hop Lesbian Ratchet Chicana Lesbian Indigenous Native American Multiracial Romani Womanism Other variants Anti-abortion Conservative Equity Femonationalism Liberal Maternal Postfeminism Reactionary State Carceral Imperial Embedded Gender-critical or trans-exclusionary Victim White Religious variants Atheist Buddhist Christian Mormon New Womanist Asian Neopagan Dianic Wicca Reclaiming Ecofeminist Hindu Islamic Jewish Orthodox Sikh Movements and ideologies 4B movement White Feather Campaign Analytical Anti-fascist Anti-pornography Cyber HCI Networked Xeno Difference Cultural Neo Ecofeminism Eugenic Individualist Liberal Equality Social Labor Libertarian Lipstick Stiletto Post-structural Postmodern Radical Political lesbianism Separatist Technofeminism Women's liberation Concepts Antinaturalism Choice feminism Cognitive labor Conscription Complementarianism Literature Children's literature Diversity (politics) Diversity, equity, and inclusion Effects on society Equality Female education Female genital mutilation Femicide Femonationalism Feminism in culture Feminist movement African-American women's suffrage movement Art movement In hip hop Feminist stripper Formal equality Gender equality Gender quota Gender role Girl power Honor killing Ideal womanhood Invisible labor Internalized sexism International Girl's Day and Women's Day Language reform Feminist capitalism Gender-blind Likeability trap Male privilege Matriarchal religion Media Men in feminism Misogyny Trans Oedipus complex Opposition to feminism Pro-feminism Protofeminism Purplewashing Racism Reproductive justice Sentencing disparity Sex workers' rights Sexual harassment Sexual objectification Substantive equality Toxic masculinity Transmisogyny Triple oppression Violence against women War on women Women's empowerment Women-only space Women's health Women's rights Women in the workforce Outlooks Abortion-rights Bicycling and feminism Bodily integrity Criticism of marriage Views on BDSM Views on pornography Views on prostitution Views on sexual orientation Views on sexuality Views on transgender topics Reproductive rights Sexual and reproductive health and rights SCUM Manifesto Theory Feminist method Gender studies Gender mainstreaming Gynocentrism Kyriarchy Male gaze Matriarchy Women's studies Men's studies Patriarchy Écriture féminine Areas of study Anthropology Archaeology Architecture Art Art criticism Literary criticism Film theory Science fiction Biology Composition studies Criminology Pathways perspective Economics FDPA Geography International relations Constructivism Legal theory Pedagogy Philosophy Aesthetics Empiricism Epistemology Ethics Justice ethics Existentialism Metaphysics science Political ecology Political theory Pornography Psychology Therapy Revisionist mythology Sex wars Sexology Sociology Technoscience Theology womanist theology By continent/country Africa Democratic Republic of the Congo Egypt Ethiopia Ghana Mali Nigeria Senegal South Africa Albania Australia Bangladesh Canada China Denmark Finland France Germany Greece Hong Kong India Indonesia Iran Iraq Republic of Ireland Israel Italy Japan Latin America Argentina Brazil Chile Haiti Honduras Mexico Paraguay Trinidad and Tobago Lebanon Malaysia Nepal Netherlands New Zealand Northern Cyprus Norway Pakistan Philippines Poland Russia Saudi Arabia South Korea Sweden Syria Taiwan Thailand Turkey Vietnam Ukraine United Kingdom United States History of women Lists and categories Lists Articles Feminists by nationality Literature American feminist literature Feminist comic books Feminist songs Conservative feminisms Ecofeminist authors Feminist art critics Feminist economists Feminist philosophers Feminist poets Feminist rhetoricians Jewish feminists Muslim feminists Feminist parties Suffragists and suffragettes Women's rights activists Women's studies journals Women's suffrage organizations Categories Women's rights by country Feminists by nationality Feminism portal v t e The feminist art movement refers to the efforts and accomplishments of feminists internationally to produce art that reflects women's lives and experiences , as well as to change the foundation for the production and perception of contemporary art. It also seeks to bring more visibility to women within art history and art practice. The movement challenges the traditional hierarchy of arts over crafts, which views hard sculpture and painting as superior to the narrowly perceived ' women's work ' of arts and crafts such as weaving , sewing , quilting and ceramics .

[ 1 ] Women artists have overturned the traditional view by, for example, using unconventional materials in soft sculptures , new techniques such as stuffing, hanging and draping, and for new purposes such as telling stories of their own life experiences.

[ 1 ] The objectives of the feminist art movement are to deconstruct the traditional hierarchies, represent women more fairly and to give more meaning to art. It helps construct a role for those who wish to challenge the mainstream (and often masculine) narrative of the art world.

[ 2 ] Corresponding with general developments within feminism , and often including such self-organizing tactics as the consciousness-raising group, the movement began in the 1960s and flourished throughout the 1970s as an outgrowth of the so-called second wave of feminism . It has been called "the most influential international movement of any during the postwar period ." [ 3 ] History [ edit ] Womanhouse , installation and performance space, 1972, organized by Judy Chicago and Miriam Schapiro , at the Feminist Art Program in Fresno, CA.

1960–1970 [ edit ] Sheila de Bretteville , Pink, poster, 1973. Provided by the artist.

The 1960s was a period when women artists wanted to gain equal rights with men within the established art world, and to create feminist art , often in non-traditional ways, to help "change the world".

[ 4 ] This movement was actually started in the United States and Great Britain in the late 1960s and is often referred to as "second-wave" feminism. And In the 1960s and 1970s, many artists began to practice art that showed their own reality in their works. The artists at the time realized that it was wrong for art historians and museums to pay more attention to male artists and only to their paintings, and that women should further integrate topics such as the social treatment of women, and the frequent discrimination against women into their works.

Louise Bourgeois (1911–2010) and German-American Eva Hesse (1936–1970) were some early feminist artists.

[ 4 ] On 20 July 1964 Yoko Ono , a Fluxus , avant-garde artist, singer, and activist, presented Cut Piece at the Yamaichi Concert Hall, Kyoto, Japan where she sat still as parts of her clothing were cut off of her, which meant to protest violence against women. She performed it again at Carnegie Hall in 1965.

[ 5 ] Her son, Sean, participated in the artist performance on 15 September 2013 at the Théâtre le Ranelagh in Paris.

The Guardian ' s Jonathan Jones considered it "one of the 10 most shocking performance artworks ever." [ 6 ] Mary Beth Edelson 's Some Living American Women Artists / Last Supper (1972) appropriated Leonardo da Vinci 's The Last Supper , with the heads of notable women artists collaged over the heads of Christ and his apostles. Benglis was among those notable women artists. This image, addressing the role of religious and art historical iconography in the subordination of women, became "one of the most iconic images of the feminist art movement." [ 7 ] [ 8 ] Women artists, motivated by feminist theory and the feminist movement , began the feminist art movement in the 1970s. Feminist art represented a shift away from modernism , where art made by women was put in a different class to works made by men. The movement cultivated a new feminist consciousness, a "freedom to respond to life... [Unimpeded] by traditional male mainstream." [ 9 ] Or, as Griselda Pollock and Rozsika Parker put it—a separation of Art with a capital "A" from art made by women produced a "feminine stereotype".

[ 10 ] The Dinner Party by Chicago , an art installation symbolically representing women's history , is widely considered the first epic feminist artwork which was very significant in Feminist art.

[ 11 ] There are 39 elaborate place settings on a triangular table for 39 mythical and historical famous women. And each place setting includes a hand-painted china plate, ceramic cutlery and chalice, and a napkin with an embroidered gold edge. And the goal of the artwork was "end the ongoing cycle of omission in which women were written out of the historical record." [ 12 ] Moreover, Chicago said she was "scared to death of what I'd unleashed," however, she was also "I had watched a lot of young women come up with me through graduate school only to disappear, and I wanted to do something about it." [ 13 ] This demand for equality in representation was codified in the Art Workers' Coalition 's (AWC) Statement of Demands, which was developed in 1969 and published in definitive form in March 1970. The AWC was set up to defend the rights of artists and force museums and galleries to reform their practices. While the coalition sprung up as a protest movement following Greek kinetic sculptor Panagiotis "Takis" Vassilakis 's physical removal of his work Tele-Sculpture(1960) from a 1969 exhibition at the Museum of Modern Art , New York, it quickly issued a broad list of demands to 'art museums in general'.

[ citation needed ] Alongside calls for free admission, better representation of ethnic minorities, late openings and an agreement that galleries would not exhibit an artwork without the artist's consent, the AWC also demanded that museums 'encourage female artists to overcome centuries of damage done to the image of the female as an artist by establishing equal representation of the sexes in exhibitions, museum purchases and on selection committees'.

[ 14 ] 1980-1990 [ edit ] The feminist art movement in the 1980s and 1990s built upon the foundations laid by earlier feminist art movements of the 1960s and 1970s. Feminist artists throughout this time period aimed to question and undermine established gender roles, confront issues of gender injustice, and give voice to women's experiences in the arts and society at large. A wide range of artistic disciplines, such as painting, sculpture, performance art, photography, video art, and installations, were included in the movement.

The portrayal of women in art was one of the main issues feminist artists in the 1980s and 1990s focused on. They challenged and subverted standard representations of women as passive objects or muses while criticizing the male-dominated art canon. Many feminist artists investigated topics of sexuality, identity, and the social construction of gender while reclaiming the female body as a source of power. Moreover, The 1980s and 1990s feminist art movement placed a strong emphasis on the examination of both individual and group experiences. Photographic and collage techniques were used by artists like Cindy Sherman and Barbara Kruger to explore themes of identity, self-representation, and the formation of gender roles in popular culture. They questioned the idea of a rigid and fundamental feminine identity and emphasized how gender is performative.

In detail for the example of artists, Barbara Kruger, Sherry Levin since the late 1980 s. Cindy Sherman, Louis Bourgeois, Rosemary Trokel, Kiki Smith, Helen Chedwick and others stood out. Cindy Sherman gave a visual shock through photographs she took while transforming into a specific character or acting herself. Sherry Levine intentionally reproduced the works of masters to reveal the fiction of originality and artistry. Kiki Smith urged people to reflect on the lives of modern people through damaged human ridicule.

Institutional critique emerged as a prominent component of the feminist art movement in the 1980s and 1990s. Along with producing their own works, feminist artists also looked at and opposed the patriarchal structures and restrictive practices that prevail in art institutions. They sought to remove the obstacles that prevented women from participating fully and being taken seriously in the art industry. Here are a some examples of how artists of this time engaged in institutional criticism: Guerrilla Girls which was a collective of anonymous feminist artists, emerged in the 1980s. ,The Museum of Modern Art Protest in 1984 which the protesters criticized MoMA for its exclusionary practices and demanded more representation for women and artists of color, and The "Bad Girls" Exhibition in 1994, which was aiming to upend the currently male-dominated art world and make room for the perspectives and experiences of female artists.

These illustrations show how feminist artists participated in institutional critique by contesting the discriminatory attitudes and practices that exist in art institutions. They planned demonstrations, interventions, and shows to challenge the current quo, demand more representation for female artists, and draw attention to racial and gender disparities in the art world. Feminist artists made a contribution to the continuous evolution of the art world by promoting inclusivity and providing opportunities for upcoming generations of female artists.

Overall, Women's art in the 1980s developed more diversely, by also the magazine ARTnews in the U.S. published praise for female artists being in a leading position without being subordinate to male art. However, as the overall flow of the art world tends to return to traditional styles and materials, feminists also have neo-expressionism. He showed a tendency to ride with new conceptualism.

There are also feminist forms of postmodernism which emerged in the 1980s. Feminist art movements emerged in the United States ;  Europe, [ 15 ] including Spain; [ 16 ] Australia ; Canada; [ 17 ] and Latin America in the 1970s.

[ 18 ] [ 19 ] The women's art movements spread world-wide in the latter half of the 20th century, including Sweden, Denmark and Norway, Russia, and Japan.

[ 20 ] [ 21 ] Women artists from Asia, Africa and particularly Eastern Europe emerged in large numbers onto the international art scene in the late 1980s and 1990s as contemporary art became popular worldwide.

[ 22 ] [ 23 ] [ 24 ] 2000s [ edit ] The contemporary feminist art movement is now following various directions with the development of electronic technology and the new forms of entertainment in the 21st century.

Major exhibitions of contemporary women artists include WACK! Art and the Feminist Revolution curated by Connie Butler, SF MOMA, 2007, Global Feminisms curated by Linda Nochlin and Maura Reilly at the Brooklyn Museum, 2007, [ 25 ] Rebelle , curated by Mirjam Westen at MMKA, Arnheim, 2009, Kiss Kiss Bang Bang! 45 Years of Art and Feminism curated by Xavier Arakistan at Bilbao Fine Arts Museum, 2007, [ 26 ] Elles at Centre Pompidou in Paris (2009–2011), which also toured to Seattle Art Museum.

[ 27 ] have been increasingly international in their selection. This shift is also reflected in journals set up in the 1990s like n.paradoxa .

[ 28 ] Feminist art movement and media [ edit ] One of the things that gives people the most entertainment in the modern era as the times progressed is the works of art from the media. For example, things like 'music', 'drama', 'movie', and 'game'. The development in music is particularly notable. In terms of Hip-Hop music, many hip-hop songs promote the art of feminism . Taking South Korea as an example, many female hip-hop singers will openly produce hip-hop songs about feminism to speak out for some unequal gender issues in society.

[1] For example, the Korean female rapper BIBI released a song called "Animal Farm" this year, which expresses women's resistance to gender discrimination against women in a patriarchal society and the issue of male coagulation by borrowing the classic footage from " Kill Bill ".

Feminist art worldwide [ edit ] India [ edit ] Feminist art is a diverse realm and differs immensely throughout the world.

India is one of many Southeast Asian countries to have prominent feminist art regarding cultural and systemic factors related to gender marginalization, and art inspired by the experience of women living in the Global South.

[ 29 ] Sutapa Biswas Sutapa Biswas is one such artist. Born in Santiniketan, India, her artwork questions gender and racial hierarchies relating to colonization and concepts such as space and time. Biswas showcased an exhibition at the Institute of Contemporary Arts in 1985 in London where her piece, Housewives with Steak-Knives, became widely known and exhibited.

[ 30 ] Housewives with Steak-Knives blends elements of anti-colonialism, Hindu religious figures, and remembrance of past women artists.

[ 31 ] Indian feminist art is also prominent in social media. Priyanka Paul, a young artist based out of Mumbai , creates feminist art relating to the Indian caste system , patriarchy , and the sexualization of Indian women's bodies. Paul's piece, Nangeli, is an illustrated, fictional magazine cover of three topless women. Paul posted it to Instagram in 2017. This piece was meant to memorialize Nangeli, a woman of a low caste in the Ezhava community who protested the taxation of women of lower castes who wished to cover their breasts by removing her own breast. Paul's piece calls attention to the oversexualization of women's breasts and the oppressive culture of the caste system.

[ 32 ] Similarly, digital artist Kruttika Susarala 's portrait of Satyarani Chadha , an anti- dowry movement activist who lost her own daughter to dowry, seeks to be a reminder of the women who have died due to the demands of dowry practices. The piece, also posted on Instagram, uses the digital art medium to represent Chadha as the face of the ongoing movement for women's rights, showing her with anguish in her eyes and dressed in khadi plain clothes, which are indicative of a social rights activist.

[ 32 ] South Africa [ edit ] Billie Zangewa in 2019.

Artists from South Africa have made immense contributions to the feminist art genre. Feminist art from South Africa often focuses on themes of colonialism, poverty, violence, [ 33 ] and African women's representation, including Black women's bodies and hypersexualization from colonialist standpoints.

[ 34 ] The Philani Printing Project, created in 1997, provided training for mothers in painting, textile making, and design. The trainees then have access to a large workshop with several art supplies and materials. The Printing Project was created to give impoverished South African women access to valuable skills, education, financial security, and the ability to represent themselves. Additionally, several works by Philani artists address social and political issues regarding gender discrimination, labor exploitation, and physical violence. One example of a Philani project is Stop Crime , a sizeable wall hanging showcasing several women in a dark street with the words "we want to walk safe in the streets" on their tank tops.

[ 33 ] Children are included in the work as well, surrounded by images intended to depict danger, such as a skull and crossbones.

Stop Crime is meant to bring light to violence against women and children and advocate for changes in South Africa in order to end oppression of these groups.

[ 33 ] Tracey Rose is another South African feminist artist. Rose tackles racist imperialism in Africa by the West, racial stereotypes, and oversexualization of the Black female body in her 2001 piece, Venus Baartman.

This piece is a self portrait that uses a photography medium and depicts a side view of Rose naked and crouched, moving through an open, green field with her eyes on something out of view of the image.

Venus Baartman echoes the experience and cultural perception of Sarah Baartman , an African woman who was forcibly taken to Europe in 1807 and used as entertainment for Europeans as they gazed upon her physique as a spectacle. Rose's piece calls attention not only to Baartman's story, but also to the history of colonization, exploitation, and oppression, especially regarding African women's bodies and the hypersexualization of them from Western points of view.

[ 34 ] Another well known feminist artist based out of South Africa is Billie Zangewa . Born in Malawi in 1973, Zangewa studied art at Rhodes University and now lives in Johannesburg .

[ 35 ] Her works utilize themes of motherhood, domesticity, femininity, and the intersections of race and gender.

[ 35 ] [ 36 ] Many of Zangewa's pieces are combinations of drawings, hand sewing textiles together, and prints. Several depict everyday images such as her infant son sleeping, Zangewa drinking coffee at home, and a couple showering together. Zangewa holds these images of home life as an important aspect of feminist activism, stating, "I use fabric and sewing, which traditionally is a female pastime, to empower myself. I tell my personal story, how it's happening on the home front, and show the intimate life of a woman, which usually we're not encouraged to do." [ 36 ] Zangewa's art has been exhibited all over many major cities in the United States, several countries in Europe, and in South Africa , Cape town , and South Korea .

[ 35 ] Cuba [ edit ] Cuba's feminist art scene reflects the country's rich history and social landscape. Most art in Cuba has been male-dominated, but radical feminist artists who are women regularly challenge the status quo.

[ 37 ] A large amount of feminist art in Cuba is directly related to the economic and political situation in the country, demonstrating themes of US imperialism and economic struggles.

Tania Bruguera is a Cuban radical feminist artist born in 1968.

[ 38 ] Much of Bruguera's work is highly political, encourages citizens to dream of a different nation, and demands changes within the Cuban government. Bruguera's 2009 performance art piece, Tatlin's Whisper #6, was a unique performance in that members of the audience had one minute of censorship free speech time where they spoke of their desires and imaginations of a different society. As each participant stood in front of the podium to speak, a white dove was placed on their shoulder as a nod to the famous image of the dove that landed on Fidel Castro 's shoulder after a lengthy public speech.

[ 38 ] The image of the speaker with the dove and the podium were meant to create a juxtaposing image between what Castro promised his citizens and what they were currently experiencing.

[ 38 ] The performance was deemed "shameful" and "un-cultural" by Cuban authorities. Five years later, in 2014, Bruguera attempted to restage Tatlin's Whisper #6, but was arrested and charged for incitement to break the law. Outrage ensued among other artists and political dissidents, and Bruguera was eventually let out of prison after months of interrogation.

[ 39 ] Multi-disciplinary art movement [ edit ] Feminist art (feminist art movement) frequently blended elements from numerous movements such as conceptual art, body art, and video art into works that delivered a message about the experience of women and the need for gender equality.

[ 13 ] Performance art [ edit ] Mary Schepisi , Beauty Interrupted, 2011 During the 1970s and until now (21st century), performance art and the feminist art movement well interact with each other, as the aspect of 'performance' is an effective way for women artists to communicate a physical and visceral message [ 13 ] The interaction of art with the viewer throughout performance art has significant impact emotionally. Moreover, as the artists and works are combined into one art and there is no separation, performance art, and feminist art is also a nice element to evaluate the artists' actual experiences. It strives to question and criticize patriarchy, gender norms, and female oppression. Feminist performance artists work to empower women, bring attention to gender inequality, and spark social and political change through their bodies, voices, and other artistic forms.

For example, Regina José Galindo , is a Guatemalan performance artist who specializes in body art . Galindo's female body works focus on two major representations: First, the representation of the "excessive, carnalized, grotesque and abject female body"; Second, on the "female body that has been subjected to violence at a private and public level". Galindo uses the body to explore " female sexuality , notions of feminine beauty, race or domestic and national violence".

For another example, there is Karen Finley , a female performer who performs nude, by shocking her audiences with violent and sexually abusing stories. Within Finley's performance, she used to stand at the point as "victims of rape , child abuse , AIDS , domestic violence and racism ". Finely is using her body and the nudity from her body performance to "speak for other women who are unable to speak for themselves...". Finely's body is a medium to present as a "site of oppression". Though, the critique Finely's nudity performances as "pornographic", Finely believes that a woman's body can become a representative of all the bodies of all women who had/have/will be suffered from those oppression.

The emergence of digital graphic art created by Rupert García represents feminist art and political communication of Black feminist and political advocacy of Dr.

Angela Davis .

Carolee Schneemann 's "Interior Scroll" is a famous performance from 1975 in which she stood on a table, gently unrolled a scroll tucked inside her vagina, and read aloud from it. The artwork criticizes the male-dominated art world and stands for the reclamation of women's bodies.

Judy Chicago 's " The Dinner Party " This enormous installation piece was created between 1974 and 1979 and depicts a triangular table with place settings for 39 famous women in history. The complex designs on each dish, which celebrate women's accomplishments and raise awareness about the exclusion of female contributions, resemble vulvae.

Marina Abramović 's " Rhythm 0 " was a durational performance from 1974 in which she invited the audience to use 72 objects on her in any way they chose. Power, vulnerability, and the objectification of women were all topics that were covered throughout the performance.

Orlan 's "The Reincarnation of Saint Orlan" In this continuing performance piece that dates back to 1990, the artist has had her face altered through several plastic procedures in order to conform it to the ideals of Western art history. Orlan examines problems of identity and the nexus between art and technology by questioning beauty standards and the commodification of women's bodies.

Suzanne Lacy 's "The Institute of the Feminine Mystique" The purpose of this performance, which took place in 1977, was to discuss the expectations that society has for women. In order to question these established positions, Lacy and her collaborators created a pretend institute that offered services like cooking classes, weight loss programs, and self-help lectures.

Guerrilla Girls ' The Advantages of Being a Woman Artist Since the 1980s, The Guerrilla Girls, an anonymous collective of feminist artists, have used performance art to highlight racial and gender disparities in the art industry. They are holding up a list of benefits that male artists have over their female counterparts in this particular piece while wearing gorilla masks.

Body art [ edit ] Body art can be tattoos, body piercing, branding, scarification, dermal anchors, and three-dimensional art or body modifications such as beading. Body art can be an example of performance art and they can be overlapped in feminist art. For example, there is Nil Yalter's film The Headless Woman (Belly Dance) . It focuses on a woman's stomach on which text has been inscribed. And the woman keeps writing the text on the belly (body art). And as the woman begins her belly dance, all we see is the soft flesh of her undulating stomach, and the pulsing text.

[ 40 ] An example is Cut Piece by Yoko Ono : In 1964, Ono performed Cut Piece , in which she invited the audience to cut portions of her garment with scissors while she sat on a stage wearing her nicest dress. Topics like vulnerability, agency, and objectification of women were all touched on in the performance.

Barbara Kruger 's Your Body is a Battleground : This famous piece of art from 1989 combines a black-and-white image of a woman's face with the bold words "Your Body is a Battleground." In her essay, Kruger addresses topics including body commodification, reproductive rights, and control.

Hannah Wilke 's Nude Descending a Staircase, No. 2 In this performance from 1976, Wilke descended a stairway slowly while wearing sculptures made out of chewed-up gum. She fought the commodification of women's bodies, the male gaze, and sexualization in her piece.

Ana Mendieta 's The Pregnant Woman : Mendieta explored the relationship between her body and nature in a series of performances from the 1970s. She utilized her bare body as a canvas for The Pregnant Woman , pushing it against various objects like rocks and trees to make imprints. The piece honors the female body's capacity for conception and childrearing.

By Suzanne Lacy, In Mourning and In Rage : A group of women, directed by Suzanne Lacy, laid down on the grass of a Los Angeles cemetery in the shape of a huge peace sign for this performance in 1977. The concert was a protest against violence against women, especially the murders committed by the Hillside Strangler at the time.

Another example is Orlan 's Redressing III . In this 1990 work, Orlan has plastic surgery while awake and broadcasts the procedure to a gallery audience. The piece questions gender norms, masculine gaze, and the pressure on women to uphold specific standards of beauty.

These examples show how feminist body art challenges and subverts conventional ideas about the female body by bringing attention to issues of power, control, and agency and reclaiming women's bodies as places for resistance and self-expression.

Video art [ edit ] Starting in the late 1960s, video art appeared in the art world as a unique art form using video technology as a visual and sound medium. And unlike classic and traditional arts like painting and sculpture, video art was not only dominated by men in history. With the aid of new technology, female artists were able to tell their own stories and share their perspectives, resulting in new works about women that would serve as a repository for the feminist history of contemporary art. The video was seen as a trigger for a media revolution that could put the means of television transmission in the hands of the general population, giving the feminist art movement a huge opportunity to expand its audience. There were female artists who demonstrated feminism through video art such as Pipilotti Rist , Shirin Neshat , Martha Rosler , Chantal Akerman , Joan Jonas , Sadie Benning , and more.

An example is the 1975 book " Semiotics of the Kitchen " by Martha Rosler : In this renowned video performance, Martha Rosler parodies the structure of a cooking show, but instead of showcasing her domestic prowess, she vents her resentment and rage by wielding kitchen implements. The show criticizes traditional gender norms and the notion that women should be submissive and domestic.

Dara Birnbaum 's " Technology/Transformation: Wonder Woman " (1978–1979): The popular television program "Wonder Woman" is dissected in Birnbaum's video art work by focusing on and replaying specific scenes where the lead character assumes her heroic persona. By editing the video, Birnbaum explores how women are portrayed in the media and challenges the constraints and standards put on female characters.

Suzanne Lacy's "The Cyphers" (1977–1978): The experiences of African American women living in Watts, Los Angeles, are the main subject of Lacy's video work. Lacy emphasizes the perspectives and experiences of these women through interviews and performances, shedding focus on the interconnectedness of race, gender, and class and questioning prevailing myths.

Annette Messager 's "A Short History of the Wheel" was published in 1972. In this work of video art, Messager offers a feminist critique of the demands imposed on women by society. She explores issues of power, oppression, and the constrained roles given to women through a sequence of symbolic images and acts.

Notable artists and collectives of the movement [ edit ] Artists: 19th century [ edit ] Rosa Bonheur (1822–1899) Barbara Bodichon (1827–1891) Kristiane Konstantin-Hansen (1848–1925) Marie Bashkirtseff (1858–1884) Wilhelmina Weber Furlong (1978–1962) Maria Dulębianka (1861–1919) Jessie Newbery (1864–1948) Evelyn De Morgan (1855–1919) Mary Cassatt (1845–1926) Artists: 20th and 21st centuries [ edit ] Marina Abramović (born 1946) Eija-Liisa Ahtila (born 1959) Ghada Amer (born 1963) Emma Amos (1937–2020) Laurie Anderson (born 1947) Janine Antoni (born 1964) Vanessa Beecroft (born 1969) Cosima von Bonin (born 1962) Louise Bourgeois (1911–2010) Angela Bulloch (born 1966) Sophie Calle (born 1953) Judy Chicago (born 1939) Lygia Clark (1920–1988) Hanne Darboven (1941–2009) Sonia Delaunay (1885–1979) Orshi Drozdik (born 1946) Marlene Dumas (born 1953) Tracey Emin (born 1963) Hanna Eshel (1926–2023) Valie Export (born 1940) Sylvie Fleury (born 1961) Katharina Fritsch (born 1956) Ellen Gallagher (born 1965) Isa Genzken (born 1948) Nan Goldin (born 1953) Natalia Goncharova (1881–1962) Renée Green (born 1959) Asta Gröting (born 1961) Guerrilla Girls (born 1985) Roxana Halls (born 1974) Mona Hatoum (born 1952) Barbara Hepworth (1903–1975) Lynn Hershman (born 1941) Eva Hesse (1936–1970) Susan Hiller (1940–2019) Hannah Wilke (1940–1993) Hannah Höch (1889–1978) Candida Höfer (born 1944) Nancy Holt (1938–2014) Rebecca Horn (born 1944) Frida Kahlo (1907–1954) Toba Khedoori (born 1964) Karen Kilimnik (born 1955) Sarah Maple (born 1985) Dindga McCannon (born 1947) Ana Mendieta (1948–1985) Shirin Neshat (born 1957) Orlan (born 1947) Yoko Ono (born 1933) Carolee Schneeman (1939–2019) Yayoi Kusama (born 1929) Barbara Kruger (born 1945) Suzy Lake (born 1947) Jenny Holzer (born 1950) Cindy Sherman (born 1957) Kara Walker (born 1969) Adrian Piper (born 1948) Amal Kenawy (1974–2012) Andrea Fraser (born 1965) Coco Fusco (born 1960) Emily Jacir (born 1970) Larissa Sansour (born 1973) Laurie Simmons (born 1949) Faith Ringgold (born 1930) Carrie Mae Weems (born 1953) Mickalene Thomas (born 1971) Sherrie Levine (born 1947) Mimi Smith (born 1942) Lia Garcia (born 1989) Artist collectives [ edit ] Guerrilla Girls (founded 1985) Heresies Collective iQhiya Collective Las Damas de Arte (founded 1971) Mujeres de Maiz Ni Santas (founded 2016) Ridykeulos collective (founded 2005) Pussy Riot Speaking of I.M.E.L.D.A.

SOHO20 Spiderwoman Theater (founded 1976) See also [ edit ] Antimonumenta , feminist protest art in Mexico Cyberfeminism Feminism in 1950s Britain Feminist art Feminist art criticism Feminist art movement in the United States Historiography List of 20th century women artists n.paradoxa Postmodern feminism Timeline of the feminist art movement in New Zealand Women artists Women's Art Movement , in Australia 1970s–1980s References [ edit ] ^ a b Gipson, Ferren (2022).

Women's work: from feminine arts to feminist art . London: Frances Lincoln.

ISBN 978-0-7112-6465-6 .

^ Kennedy, Victoria (July 19, 2017).

"What is Feminist Art?" .

canvas.saatchiart.com . Retrieved March 28, 2019 .

^ Jeremy Strick , director of the Museum of Contemporary Art in Los Angeles in the Washington Post , 2007.

^ a b "Feminist art movement" . The Art Story Foundation . Retrieved 13 January 2014 .

^ Jarett Murphy (16 October 2003).

"Crowd Cuts Yoko Ono's Clothing Off" .

CBS News . Retrieved 12 January 2014 .

^ Jonathan Jones (11 November 2013).

"The 10 most shocking performance artworks ever" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 12 January 2014 .

^ "Mary Beth Edelson" .

The Frost Art Museum Drawing Project . Archived from the original on 2016-06-15 . Retrieved 20 October 2022 .

^ "Mary Beth Adelson" .

Clara – Database of Women Artists . Washington, D.C.: National Museum of Women in the Arts. Archived from the original on 10 January 2014 . Retrieved 10 January 2014 .

^ Deoritha Anne Waters, Three Feminist Perspectives on Visual Media: Influences of the Second Wave Feminist Movement on Women's Art Education and Their Lives as Artists, ed. Deoritha Anne Waters (Michigan: ProQuest Dissertations Publishing, 2014), 1.

^ Rozsika Parker ; Griselda Pollock (1981).

Old Mistresses: Women, Art and Ideology . Pandora, RKP.

^ Jane F. Gerhard (1 June 2013).

The Dinner Party: Judy Chicago and the Power of Popular Feminism, 1970–2007 . University of Georgia Press. pp. 221–.

ISBN 978-0-8203-3675-6 .

^ Chicago, 10 ^ a b c "Feminist Art Movement Overview" .

The Art Story . Retrieved 2023-05-15 .

^ Harrison, Charles (2000).

Art in theory (Repr. ed.). Oxford [u.a.]: Blackwell. p. 901.

ISBN 0-631-16575-4 .

^ Gislind Nabakowski; Peter Gorsen; Sander Helke (1980).

Frauen in der Kunst(2 Vols.) . Frankfurt, Suhrkamp.

^ "Mujeres en les Artes Visuales, Women in the Visual Arts, Spanish chronology" . Archived from the original on 2014-02-21 . Retrieved 2014-02-05 .

^ Marie Rose Arbour Art et Feminisme Exhibition catalogue. Canada: Quebec, Musée d'Art Contemporain, Montreal & Ministere des Affaires Culturelles. 1982.

^ Catriona Moore (1994).

Dissonance: Feminism and the Arts, 1970–1990 . Allen and Unwin and Artspace.

^ see Andrea Giunta's, Feminist Disruptions in Mexican Art Archived 2014-10-26 at the Wayback Machine , 1975–1987 in Number 5 .(c) Artelogie , October 2013.

^ Hindsbo, Karen.

The Beginning is Always Today: Scandinavian feminist art from the last 20 years . SKMU, Sørlandets Kunstmuseum, 2013.

^ Kokatsu, Reiko.

Women In-Between: Asian Women Artists 1984–2012 . Japan, Fukuoka Asian Art Museum, 2012.

^ Gender Check: Masculinity and Femininity in the Art in Eastern Europe Archived 2017-07-03 at the Wayback Machine , ^ Huangfu, Binghui.(ed).

Text and Sub-Text( Singapore: Lasalle-SIA University, 2000).

^ Dike, Paul Chike and Oyelola, Patricia.

Nigerian Women in Visual Art . National Gallery of Art, Lagos, Nigeria, 2004.

^ Global Feminisms ^ "Kiss Kiss Bang Bang! 45 Years of Art and Feminism" . Archived from the original on 2018-11-18 . Retrieved 2014-01-31 .

^ Elles Pompidou.

Archived 2014-03-17 at the Wayback Machine Seattle Art Museum ^ Connor, Maureen (Summer 2002). "Working Notes: Conversation with Katy Deepwell".

Art Journal .

61 (2): 32– 43.

doi : 10.2307/778180 .

JSTOR 778180 .

^ Priyanka, Prachi (2021). "Quest for Selfhood: Women Artists in the South Asian Visual Arts".

Journal of International Women's Studies .

22 (3).

^ "Sutapa Biswas" .

Niru Ratnam . Retrieved 2025-04-18 .

^ Sherwin, Skye (2020-08-21).

"Sutapa Biswas's Housewives With Steak-Knives: avenging goddess" .

The Guardian .

ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved 2025-04-18 .

^ a b Yadav, Isha (2023). "Memorializing Acts Against Gender Violence in South Asia Through Visual Portraits".

Visual Culture & Gender .

18 : 7– 17.

^ a b c Miller, Kimberly (2003). " "The Philani Printing Project: Women's Art and Activism in Crossroads, South Africa" ".

Feminist Studies .

29 (3): 619– 637.

^ a b Friar, Tayler (2021-12-15).

"The black female body: Representation of the erotic in contemporary visual art in Africa" .

E-Rea. Revue électronique d'études sur le monde anglophone .

19 (1).

doi : 10.4000/erea.13034 .

ISSN 1638-1718 .

^ a b c "Billie Zangewa - Artists - Lehmann Maupin" .

www.lehmannmaupin.com . Retrieved 2025-04-18 .

^ a b "Billie Zangewa – the fierce feminine" .

Art Basel . Retrieved 2025-04-18 .

^ January 2024, Rosanne Pellegrini | University Communications |.

"Women ceramicists and the Cuban avant-garde" .

Boston College . Retrieved 2025-04-18 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list ( link ) ^ a b c Amich, Candice (2022). "When Doves Cry: Tania Bruguera's Untimely Practice".

The Drama Review .

66 (2): 27– 44.

doi : 10.1017/S1054204322000089 .

^ "Tania Bruguera Paintings, Bio, Ideas" .

The Art Story . Retrieved 2025-04-18 .

^ Güner, Fisun (2016-10-02).

"Feminist art of the 1970s: knives, nudity and terrified Men" .

Fisun Güner . Retrieved 2023-05-15 .

Further reading [ edit ] Juan Vicente Aliaga Gender Battle/A Battala dos Xeneros Spain, Santiago de Compostela, 2007.

Juan Aliaga and Maria Laura Rosa Recuperar la Memoria: Experiencias feministas desde el Arte, Argentina y Espana, Ana Navarette and Mujeres Publicas Centro Cultural de Espana, Buenos Aires and CCEBE, Sede Parana, 2013.

L. Anderson, A. Livion Ingvarsson, M. Jensner, A. Nystrom, B.Werkmeister, N. Ostlind (eds.) Konstfeminism Helsingborg, Sweden, Dunkers Kulturhaus and Lilevalch Konsthall, 2004.

Kathy Battista Re-Negotiating the Body: Feminist Art in 1970s London, I B Tauris, 2011.

Carla Bianpoen, Farah Wardani, Wulan Dirgantoro Indonesian Women Artists Jakarta: Yayasan Semirupa Indonesia:2007.

Katy Deepwell (ed) New Feminist Art Criticism: Critical Strategies UK, Manchester, Manchester University Press, 1995.

Sylvia Eiblmayr Die Frau als Bild: Der weibliche Körper in der Kunst des 20 Jahrhunderts Berlin, Dietrich Reimer, 1993.

Isabelle Graw Die bessere Hälfte: Künstlerinnen des 20. und 21. Jahrhunderts Cologne, du Mont Verlag, 2003.

Uta Grosenick (ed.) "Women Artists in the 20th and 21st Century" Köln: Taschen GmbH, 2001.

Karen Hindsbo The Beginning is Always Today': Scandinavian feminist art from the last 20 years Norway: Saarlandets Kunstmuseum, 2013.

Johanna Householder and Tanya Mars (eds) Caught in the Act: an Anthology of Performance Art by Canadian Women Toronto:YYZ Books, 2003.

Lucy Lippard From the Center:Feminist Essays on Women's Art New York. Dutton, 1976.

Rozsika Parker and Griselda Pollock Framing Feminism: Art and the Women's Movement, 1970–1985 London. Pandora/RKP, 1987.

Bojana Pejic (ed) The Gender Check Reader Vienna, MUMOK and Erste Foundation, 2010 Griselda Pollock (ed) Generations and Geographies London, Routledge, 1996.

Helena Reckitt (ed) Art and Feminism London, Phaidon, 2001 Hilary Robinson (ed) Visibly Female London, Camden Press, 1987 Hilary Robinson (ed) Feminism – Art – Theory: An Anthology, 1968–2000 Oxford. Blackwells, 2001.

Araceli Barbosa Sanchez Arte Feminista en los ochenta en Mexico: una perspectiva de genero Mexico: Casa Juan Pablos Centro Cultural, Universidad Autonoma de Estado de Morelos, 2008.

Ella Shohat (ed) Talking Visions: Multicultural Feminism in a Transnational Age Cambridge, Massachusetts, MIT:1998 Bridget Tracy Tan Women Artists in Singapore Singapore, Select Books and Singapore Art Museum, 2011.

Jayne Wark Radical Gestures: Feminism and Performance Art in North America Montreal: McGill-Queen's University Press, 2006.

Women Down the Pub (a.k.a. N.Debois Buhl, L.Strombeck, A.Sonjasdotter) Udsight – Feministiske Strategier i Dansk Billedkunst / View – Feminist Strategies in Danish Visual Art Denmark, Informations Vorla, 2004.

v t e Feminism History General Timeline First-wave Second-wave timeline Third-wave Fourth-wave Social Bicycling and feminism Feminist history Women's history Timeline of women's legal rights (other than voting) Women's suffrage Timeline Australia Canada Japan Kuwait Majority-Muslim countries New Zealand Switzerland United Kingdom Wales United States Timeline African-American States of Utah Virginia Wyoming Movements and ideologies General Abortion-rights Analytical Anarchist Anti-abortion Anti-fascist Atheist Bodily integrity Carceral Conservative Cultural Cyber HCI Difference Eco Vegetarian Equality Eugenic Fat Gender-critical or trans-exclusionary Global Hip hop Activism Individualist Intersectional Labor Lesbian Liberal Equity Lipstick Materialist Maternal Neo- New Post- Postcolonial Postmodern Post-structural Radical Reactionary Reproductive rights Separatism Sex workers' rights Sex-positive Sexual and reproductive health and rights Social Socialist Marxist Standpoint State Trans Transnational Victim Womanism Africana Women's liberation Religious Atheist Buddhist Christian Mormon New Womanist Asian Neopagan Dianic Wicca Reclaiming Ecofeminist Hindu Islamic Jewish Orthodox Sikh Ethnic and racial Black Chicana Indigenous Kurdish (Jineology) Native American Sámi Jewish Mizrahi Romani White Concepts Antinaturalism Choice feminism Cognitive labor Conscription Complementarianism Literature Children's literature Diversity (politics) Diversity, equity, and inclusion Effects on society Equality Female education Female genital mutilation Femicide Femonationalism Feminism in culture Feminist movement African-American women's suffrage movement Art movement In hip hop Feminist stripper Formal equality Gender equality Gender quota Gender role Girl power Honor killing Ideal womanhood Invisible labor Internalized sexism International Girl's Day and Women's Day Language reform Feminist capitalism Gender-blind Likeability trap Male privilege Matriarchal religion Media Men in feminism Misogyny Trans Oedipus complex Opposition to feminism Pro-feminism Protofeminism Purplewashing Racism Reproductive justice Sentencing disparity Sex workers' rights Sexual harassment Sexual objectification Substantive equality Toxic masculinity Transmisogyny Triple oppression Violence against women War on women Women's empowerment Women-only space Women's health Women's rights Women in the workforce Theory Complementarianism Gender studies Gender mainstreaming Gynocentrism Matriarchy Women's studies Men's studies Kyriarchy Patriarchy Écriture féminine Economics Post-structuralist discourse analysis Method Oedipus complex Political theory Theology Thealogy Womanist Sexology Sociology Rhetoric Legal theory Art Art criticism Literary criticism Film theory Biology Political ecology Architecture Anthropology Archaeology Criminology Pathways perspective Geography Pedagogy Philosophy Aesthetics Empiricism Epistemology Ethics Justice ethics Existentialism Metaphysics Science Pornography Psychology Therapy Seriality International relations Existentialism Revisionist mythology Technoscience Science fiction Composition studies By country Africa Democratic Republic of the Congo Egypt Ethiopia Ghana Mali Nigeria Senegal South Africa Albania Australia Bangladesh Canada China Denmark Finland France Germany Greece Hong Kong India Indonesia Iran Iraq Republic of Ireland Israel Italy Japan Latin America Argentina Brazil Chile Haiti Honduras Mexico Paraguay Trinidad and Tobago Lebanon Malaysia Nepal Netherlands New Zealand Northern Cyprus Norway Pakistan Philippines Poland Russia Saudi Arabia South Korea Sweden Syria Taiwan Thailand Turkey Vietnam Ukraine United Kingdom United States History of women Lists People Art critics Ecofeminist authors Economists Jewish Muslim Philosophers Poets Rhetoricians Suffragists and suffragettes Women's rights activists Other Conservative feminisms Literature American Comic books Parties Women's studies journals SCUM Manifesto (1967) Women in peacekeeping Feminism portal Category Index v t e Premodern , Modern and Contemporary art movements List of art movements / periods Premodern (Western) Ancient Thracian Dacian Nuragic Aegean Cycladic Minoan Minyan ware Mycenaean Greek Sub-Mycenaean Protogeometric Geometric Orientalizing Archaic Black-figure Red-figure Severe style Classical Kerch style Hellenistic "Baroque" Indo-Greek Greco-Buddhist Neo-Attic Etruscan Scythian Iberian Gaulish Roman Republican Gallo-Roman Julio-Claudian Pompeian Styles Trajanic Severan Medieval Late antique Early Christian Coptic Ethiopian Migration Period Anglo-Saxon Hunnic Insular Lombard Visigothic Donor portrait Pictish Mozarabic Repoblación Viking Byzantine Iconoclast Macedonian Palaeologan Italo-Byzantine Frankish Merovingian Carolingian Pre-Romanesque Ottonian Romanesque Mosan Spanish Norman Norman-Sicilian Opus Anglicanum Gothic Gothic art in Milan International Gothic International Gothic art in Italy Lucchese school Crusades Moscow school Novgorod school Vladimir-Suzdal school Duecento Sienese school Mudéjar Medieval cartography Italian school Majorcan school Mappa mundi Renaissance Italian Renaissance Trecento Proto-Renaissance Florentine school Pittura infamante Quattrocento Ferrarese school Forlivese school Venetian school Cinquecento High Renaissance Bolognese school Mannerism Counter- Maniera Northern Renaissance Early Netherlandish World landscape Ghent–Bruges school Northern Mannerism German Renaissance Cologne school Danube school Dutch and Flemish Renaissance Antwerp Mannerism Romanism Still life English Renaissance Tudor court Cretan school Turquerie Fontainebleau school Art of the late 16th century in Milan 17th century Baroque Baroque in Milan Flemish Baroque Caravaggisti in Utrecht Tenebrism Louis XIII style Lutheran Baroque Stroganov school Animal painting Guild of Romanists Dutch Golden Age Delft school Capriccio Heptanese school Classicism Louis XIV style Poussinists and Rubenists 18th century Rococo Rocaille Louis XV style Frederician Chinoiserie Fête galante Neoclassicism Goût grec Louis XVI style Adam style Directoire style Neoclassical architecture in Milan Picturesque Colonial art Art of the African diaspora African-American Caribbean Haitian Colonial Asian art Arts in the Philippines Letras y figuras Tipos del País Colonial Asian Baroque Company style Latin American art Casta painting Indochristian art Chilote school Cuzco school Quito school Latin American Baroque Art borrowing Western elements Islamic Moorish Manichaean Mughal Qajar Qing handicrafts Western influence in Japan Akita ranga Uki-e Transition to modern (c. 1770 – 1862) Romanticism Fairy painting Danish Golden Age Troubadour style Nazarene movement Purismo Shoreham Ancients Düsseldorf school Pre-Raphaelites Hudson River School American luminism Orientalism Norwich school Empire style Historicism Revivalism Biedermeier Realism Barbizon school Costumbrismo Verismo Macchiaioli Academic art Munich school in Greece Neo-Grec Etching revival Modern (1863–1944) 1863–1899 Neo-romanticism National romanticism Yōga Nihonga Japonisme Anglo-Japanese style Beuron school Hague school Peredvizhniki Impressionism American Hoosier Group Boston school Amsterdam Canadian Heidelberg school Aestheticism Arts and Crafts Art pottery Tonalism Decadent movement Symbolism Romanian Russian Volcano school Incoherents Post-Impressionism Neo-Impressionism Luminism Divisionism Pointillism Pont-Aven School Cloisonnism Synthetism Les Nabis American Barbizon school California tonalism Costumbrismo 1900–1914 Art Nouveau Art Nouveau in Milan Primitivism California Impressionism Secessionism School of Paris Munich Secession Vienna Secession Berlin Secession Sonderbund Pennsylvania Impressionism Mir iskusstva Ten American Painters Fauvism Expressionism Die Brücke Der Blaue Reiter Noucentisme Deutscher Werkbund American Realism Ashcan school Cubism Proto-Cubism Orphism A Nyolcak Neue Künstlervereinigung München Futurism Cubo-Futurism Art Deco Metaphysical Rayonism Productivism Synchromism Vorticism 1915–1944 Sosaku-hanga Suprematism School of Paris Crystal Cubism Constructivism Latin American Universal Constructivism Dada Shin-hanga Neoplasticism De Stijl Purism Return to order Novecento Italiano Figurative Constructivism Stupid Cologne Progressives Arbeitsrat für Kunst November Group Australian tonalism Dresden Secession Social realism Functionalism Bauhaus Kinetic art Anthropophagy Mingei Group of Seven New Objectivity Grosvenor school Neues Sehen Surrealism Iranian Latin American Mexican muralism Neo-Fauvism Precisionism Aeropittura Asso Scuola Romana Cercle et Carré The Group Harlem Renaissance Kapists Regionalism California Scene Painting Heroic realism Socialist realism Nazi art Streamline Moderne Concrete art Abstraction-Création Tiki The Ten Dimensionism Boston Expressionism Leningrad school Contemporary and Postmodern (1945–present) 1945–1959 International Typographic Style Abstract expressionism Washington Color School Visionary art Vienna School of Fantastic Realism Spatialism Color field Lyrical abstraction Tachisme Arte Informale COBRA Nuagisme Generación de la Ruptura Jikken Kōbō Metcalf Chateau Mono-ha Nanyang Style Action painting American Figurative Expressionism in New York New media art New York school Hard-edge painting Bay Area Figurative Movement Les Plasticiens Gutai Art Association Gendai Bijutsu Kondankai Pop art Situationist International Soviet Nonconformist Ukrainian underground Lettrism Letterist International Ultra-Lettrist Florida Highwaymen Cybernetic art Antipodeans 1960–1969 Otra Figuración Afrofuturism Nueva Presencia ZERO Happening Neo-Dada Neo-Dada Organizers Op art Nouveau réalisme Nouvelle tendance Capitalist realism Art & Language Arte Povera Black Arts Movement The Caribbean Artists Movement Chicano art movement Conceptual art Land art Systems art Video art Minimalism Fluxus Generative art Post-painterly abstraction Intermedia Psychedelic art Nut Art Photorealism Environmental art Performance art Process art Institutional critique Light and Space Street art Feminist art movement in the US Saqqakhaneh movement The Stars Art Group Tropicália Yoru no Kai Artificial intelligence visual art 1970–1999 Post-conceptual art Installation art Artscene Postminimalism Endurance art Sots Art Moscow Conceptualists Pattern and Decoration Pliontanism Punk art Neo-expressionism Transavantgarde Saint Soleil school Guerrilla art Lowbrow art Telematic art Appropriation art Neo-conceptual art New European Painting Tunisian collaborative painting Memphis Group Cyberdelic Neue Slowenische Kunst Scratch video Transgressive Retrofuturism Young British Artists Superfiction Taring Padi Superflat New Leipzig school Artist-run initiative Artivism The Designers Republic Grunge design Verdadism Chinese Apartment Art 2000– present Amazonian pop art Altermodern Art for art Art game Art intervention Brandalism Classical Realism Contemporary African art Africanfuturism Contemporary Indigenous Australian art Crypto art Cyborg art Excessivism Fictive art Flat design Corporate Memphis Hypermodernism Hyperrealism Idea art Internet art Post-Internet iPhone art Kitsch movement Lightpainting Massurrealism Modern European ink painting Neo-futurism Neomodern Neosymbolism Passionism Post-YBAs Relational art Skeuomorphism Software art Sound art Stuckism Superflat SoFlo Superflat Superstroke Toyism Unilalianism Vaporwave Walking Artists Network Related topics History of art Abstract art Asemic writing Anti-art Avant-garde Ballets Russes Christian art Art in the Protestant Reformation and Counter-Reformation Catholic art Icon Lutheran art Digital art Fantastic art Folk art Hierarchy of genres Genre painting History painting Illuminated manuscript Illustration Interactive art Jewish art Kitsch Landscape painting Modernism Modern sculpture Late modernism Naïve art Outsider art Portrait Prehistoric European art Queer art Realism Shock art Trompe-l'œil Western painting Category v t e Feminist art movement in the United States Feminist art movement Women artists Precursors American Association of University Women (1881) National Association of Women Artists (1889) New York School of Applied Design for Women (1892) Venues or organizations A.I.R. Gallery Elizabeth A. Sackler Center for Feminist Art ( Brooklyn Museum ) Feminist Art Coalition Hera Gallery Lesbian Art Project National Museum of Women in the Arts New York Feminist Art Institute SOHO20 Gallery tArt Collective Washington Women's Art Center Women Artists in Revolution (WAR) Women's Art Resources of Minnesota Woman's Building (Los Angeles) The Women's Building (San Francisco) Women's Graphic Center Women's Interart Center Women's Studio Workshop Exhibitions or installations Twenty Six Contemporary Women Artists (1971) Womanhouse (1972) Three Weeks in May (1977) The Sister Chapel (1974–1978) The Dinner Party (1979) WACK! Art and the Feminist Revolution (2007) Films or documentaries !Women Art Revolution Publications Heresies: A Feminist Publication on Art and Politics (1977–1992) The Feminist Art Journal (1972–1977) Women Artists News {1975-1992) " Why Have There Been No Great Women Artists?

" (1971) Groups subRosa Guerrilla Girls The Waitresses Women Artists in Revolution Women's Caucus for Art Where We At Notable women Alison Bechdel Lynda Benglis Louise Bourgeois Norma Broude Judy Chicago Elaine de Kooning Mary Beth Edelson Suzi Ferrer Helen Frankenthaler Mary Garrard Nancy Graves Eva Hesse Lila Katzen Jane Kaufman Lee Krasner Georgia O'Keeffe Barbara Kruger Louise Nevelson Yoko Ono M. C. Richards Rachel Rosenthal Carolee Schneemann Cindy Sherman Sylvia Sleigh Alma Thomas June Wayne Lists List of feminist artists Women in the art history field Feminist movements and ideologies Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Feminist_art_movement&oldid=1302490393 " Categories : 1960s introductions 20th-century art movements Contemporary art movements Feminist theory Feminist artists Feminist theatre Political art Second-wave feminism Anarchist art Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Pages using sidebar with the child parameter All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2015 Articles with excerpts This page was last edited on 25 July 2025, at 18:57 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Feminist art movement 7 languages Add topic

