Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 Definition and meanings Toggle Definition and meanings subsection 2.1 Eschatological sense 2.2 Epistemological and psychological senses 2.2.1 As a state of perfection 2.2.2 Nagarjuna's challenge 2.2.3 Adi Shankara's challenge 2.2.4 The Vaisnavas' challenge 3 History Toggle History subsection 3.1 Evolution of the concept 4 Synonyms 5 Hinduism Toggle Hinduism subsection 5.1 Sāmkhya and Yoga 5.2 Vedanta 5.2.1 Advaita Vedanta 5.2.2 Dvaita 5.2.3 Vishishtadvaita 5.3 Mokṣha in this life 5.4 Mokṣa in Balinese Hinduism 6 Buddhism 7 Jainism 8 Sikhism 9 See also 10 References Toggle References subsection 10.1 Notes 10.2 Citations 10.3 Works cited 11 Further reading 12 External links Toggle the table of contents Moksha 62 languages Afrikaans العربية Basa Bali বাংলা भोजपुरी Bikol Central Български Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français ગુજરાતી 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano Jawa ಕನ್ನಡ ქართული Lietuvių Magyar मैथिली Македонски मराठी Bahasa Melayu Nederlands नेपाली नेपाल भाषा 日本語 Norsk bokmål पालि پښتو Polski Português Română Русский संस्कृतम् Shqip Simple English Slovenčina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Татарча / tatarça ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 吴语 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Spiritual liberation in Hinduism, Buddhism, Jainism and Sikhism For other uses, see Moksha (disambiguation) .

Translations of Moksha English Emancipation, liberation, release Sanskrit मोक्ष ( IAST : mokṣa ) Assamese মোক্ষ ( mokkho ) Balinese ᬫᭀᬓ᭄ᬲ ( moksa ) Bengali মোক্ষ ( mokkho ) Hindi मोक्ष ( mokṣa ) Javanese ꦩꦺꦴꦏ꧀ꦱ ( moksa ) Kannada ಮೋಕ್ಷ ( mōkṣa ) Malayalam മോക്ഷം ( mōkṣaṁ ) Marathi मोक्ष ( mokṣa ) Nepali मोक्ष ( mokṣa ) Odia ମୋକ୍ଷ ( mokṣa ) Punjabi ਮੋਖ / موکھ ( mokh ) Tamil வீடுபேறு ( vīdupēru ) Telugu మోక్షము ( mōkṣaṁu ) Urdu موکش ( mokash ) Gujarati મોક્ષ ( mōkṣa ) Glossary of Hinduism terms Translations of Moksha Chinese 解脫 ( Pinyin : jiětuō ) Japanese 解脱 ( Rōmaji : gedatsu ) Korean 해탈 ( RR : haetal ) Sinhala මෝක්ෂ ( moksha ) Tagalog moksha Thai โมกษะ ( RTGS : moksa ) Vietnamese giải thoát Glossary of Buddhism Part of a series on Hinduism Hindus Mythology Origins Historical History Indus Valley Civilisation Vedic religion Dravidian folk religion Śramaṇa Tribal religions in India Traditional Itihasa-Purana Epic-Puranic royal genealogies Epic-Puranic chronology Sampradaya (traditions) Major Sampradaya (traditions) Vaishnavism Pancharatra Shaivism Kapalika Pashupata Pratyabhijña Shaktism Smartism Other Sampradaya (traditions) Deities Absolute Reality / Unifying Force Brahman Trimurti Brahma Vishnu Shiva Tridevi Saraswati Lakshmi Parvati Other major Devas / Devis Vedic Deities: Tridasha Adityas Rudras Vasus Ashvins Mahadevi Other Vedic Deities Post-Vedic: Avatar Dashavatara Durga Navadurga Mahavidya Kartikeya Ganesha Hanuman Radha Shakti Sita Devatas Vishvakarma Kubera Concepts Worldview Cosmology Mythology Ontology Tattvas Subtle elements Panchikarana Gross elements Guṇas Purusha Prakṛti Supreme reality Brahman Nirguna Saguna Om Saccidānanda God Ishvara Devas / Devi Devatas God in Hinduism God and gender Puruṣārtha (meaning of life) Dharma Artha Kama Moksha Āśrama (stages of life) Brahmacharya Gṛhastha Vānaprastha Sannyasa Three paths to liberation Bhakti yoga Jnana yoga Karma yoga Liberation Mokṣa-related topics: Paramātman Maya Karma Saṃsāra Mind Ātman (self) Anātman (non-self) Sūkṣma śarīra (subtle body) Antaḥkaraṇa (mental organs) Prajña (wisdom) Ānanda (happiness) Viveka (discernment) Vairagya (dispassion) Sama (equanimity) Dama (temperance) Uparati (self-settledness) Titiksha (forbearance) Shraddha (faith) Samadhana (concentration) Arishadvargas (six enemies) Ahamkara (attachment) Ethics Niti śastra Yamas Niyama Ahimsa Achourya Aparigraha Brahmacharya Satya Damah Dayā Akrodha Arjava Santosha Tapas Svādhyāya Shaucha Mitahara Dāna Sources of dharma Epistemology Pratyakṣa (perception) Anumāṇa (inference) Upamāṇa (comparison, analogy) Arthāpatti (postulation, presumption) Anupalabdi (non-perception, negation) Śabda (word, testimony) Practices Worship , sacrifice, and charity Puja Ārtī Prarthana Śrauta Temple Murti Bhakti Japa Bhajana Kīrtana Yajna Homa Tarpana Vrata Prāyaścitta Tirtha Yatra Tirthadana Matha Nritta-Nritya Dāna Sevā Yoga Exorcism Meditation Tapas Dhyana Samādhāna Nididhyāsana Yoga Sadhu Yogi Yogini Asana Sādhanā Hatha yoga Jnana yoga Bhakti yoga Karma yoga Rāja yoga Kundalini yoga Arts Bharatanatyam Kathak Kathakali Kuchipudi Manipuri Mohiniyattam Odissi Sattriya Bhagavata Mela Yakshagana Dandiya Raas Carnatic music Pandav Lila Kalaripayattu Silambam Adimurai Rites of passage Garbhadhana Pumsavana Pumsavana Simantonayana Simantonnayana Jatakarma Nāmakaraṇa Nishkramana Annaprashana Chudakarana Karnavedha Vidyāraṃbhaṃ Upanayana Keshanta Ritushuddhi Samavartanam Vivaha Antyesti Festivals Diwali Holi Maha Shivaratri Navaratri Durga Puja Ramlila Vijayadashami-Dussehra Raksha Bandhan Ganesh Chaturthi Vasant Panchami Rama Navami Janmashtami Onam Makar Sankranti Kumbh Mela Pongal Ugadi Vaisakhi Bihu Puthandu Vishu Ratha Yatra Philosophical schools Six Astika schools Samkhya Yoga Nyaya Vaisheshika Mīmāṃsā Vedanta Advaita Dvaita Vishishtadvaita Achintya Bheda Abheda Shuddhadvaita Svabhavika Bhedabheda Akshar Purushottam Darshan Other schools Ājīvika Buddhism Jainism Charvaka Gurus, Rishi, philosophers Ancient Saptarshi Vashistha Kashyapa Atri Jamadagni Gotama Vishvamitra Bharadwaja Agastya Angiras Aruni Ashtavakra Jaimini Kanada Kapila Patanjali Pāṇini Prashastapada Raikva Satyakama Jabala Valmiki Vyasa Yajnavalkya Medieval Abhinavagupta Adi Shankara Akka Mahadevi Allama Prabhu Alvars Basava Chaitanya Ramdas Kathiababa Chakradhara Chāngadeva Dadu Dayal Eknath Gangesha Upadhyaya Gaudapada Gorakshanatha Haridasa Thakur Harivansh Jagannatha Dasa Jayanta Bhatta Jayatīrtha Jiva Goswami Jñāneśvar Kabir Kanaka Dasa Kumārila Bhaṭṭa Madhusūdana Madhva Matsyendranatha Morya Gosavi Mukundarāja Namadeva Narahari Tirtha Narasimha Saraswati Nayanars Nimbarkacharya Srinivasacharya Prabhākara Purandara Dasa Raghavendra Swami Raghunatha Siromani Raghuttama Tirtha Ram Charan Ramananda Ramanuja Ramprasad Sen Ravidas Rupa Goswami Samarth Ramdas Sankardev Satyanatha Tirtha Siddheshwar Sripada Srivallabha Sripadaraja Surdas Swaminarayan Śyāma Śastri Tukaram Tulsidas Tyagaraja Vācaspati Miśra Vadiraja Tirtha Vallabha Valluvar Vedanta Desika Vidyaranya Vyasaraja Modern Aurobindo Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Bhaktivinoda Thakur Chandrashekarendra Saraswati Chinmayananda Dayananda Saraswati Jaggi Vasudev Krishnananda Saraswati Mahavatar Babaji Mahesh Yogi Narayana Guru Nigamananda Nisargadatta Maharaj Prabhupada Radhakrishnan R. D. Ranade Ramakrishna Rama Tirtha Ramana Maharshi Ravi Shankar Ramdas Samarth Sathya Sai Baba Shirdi Sai Baba Shraddhanand Satyadhyana Tirtha Siddharameshwar Maharaj Sivananda Trailanga U. G. Krishnamurti Upasni Maharaj Vethathiri Maharishi Vivekananda Yogananda Texts Sources and classification of scripture Śruti Smṛti Ācāra Ātmatuṣṭi Scriptures Timeline of Hindu texts Vedas Rigveda Yajurveda Samaveda Atharvaveda Divisions Samhita Brahmana Aranyaka Upanishads Upanishads Principal Upanishads Rigveda: Aitareya Kaushitaki Yajurveda: Brihadaranyaka Isha Taittiriya Katha Shvetashvatara Maitri Samaveda: Chandogya Kena Atharvaveda: Mundaka Mandukya Prashna Vedangas Shiksha Chandas Vyākaraṇa Nirukta Kalpa Jyotisha Other scriptures Bhagavad Gita Agama s (Hinduism) Itihasas Ramayana Mahabharata Puranas Vishnu Purana Bhagavata Purana Devi Bhagavata Purana Naradiya Purana Vāmana Purana Matsya Purana Garuda Purana Brahma Purana Brahmanda Purana Brahma Vaivarta Purana Bhavishya Purana Padma Purana Agni Purana Shiva Purana Linga Purana Kūrma Purana Skanda Purana Varaha Purana Markandeya Purana Upavedas Ayurveda Dhanurveda Gandharvaveda Sthapatyaveda Shastras , sutras , and samhitas Dharma Shastra Artha Śastra Shilpa Shastras Kama Sutra Brahma Sutras Samkhya Sutras Mimamsa Sutras Nyāya Sūtras Vaiśeṣika Sūtra Yoga Sutras Pramana Sutras Charaka Samhita Sushruta Samhita Natya Shastra Panchatantra Naalayira Divya Prabandham Tirumurai Ramcharitmanas Yoga Vasistha Swara yoga Panchadasi Stotras , stutis and Bhashya Kanakadhara Stotra Shiva Stuti Vayu Stuti Tamil literature Tirumurai Naalayira  Divya Prabandham Tirumurukāṟṟuppaṭai Tiruppukal Kural Kamba Ramayanam/Ramavataram Five Great Epics Eighteen Greater Texts Eighteen Lesser Texts Athichudi Iraiyanar Akapporul Abirami Antati Thiruvilaiyadal Puranam Vinayagar Agaval Other texts Hindu culture & society Society Varna Brahmin Kshatriya Kayastha Vaishya Shudra Dalit Jāti Gotra Dvija Dasa Hindu art Hindu art Hindu iconography Shilpa Shastras Rasa (aesthetics) Indian aesthetics Yantra Hindu architecture Hindu architecture Hindu temple architecture Vastu shastra Talamana Hindu music Hindu music Shruti (music) Svara Alankāra Tala (music) Raga Rasa (aesthetics) Sangita Vadya Natya Shastra Food & diet customs Ahimsa Diet in Hinduism Sattvic diet Mitahara Jhatka Vrata Time keeping practices Hindu units of time Hindu calendar Panchangam Vikram Samvat Shaka era Hindu pilgrimage Pilgrimage sites Other society-related topics Discrimination Persecution Nationalism Hindutva Organisations Reform movements Other topics Hinduism by country Greater India Balinese Hinduism Caribbean Shaktism Template:Hindu scriptures and texts Hinduism & other religions Hinduism and Jainism / and Buddhism / and Sikhism / and Judaism / and Christianity / and Islam Other related links (templates) Hindu scriptures & texts Hindu philosphy Sampradayas (traditions) Shaivism Vaishnavism Shaktism Glossary Outline Hinduism portal v t e Part of a series on Jainism Jains History Timeline Index Philosophy Anekantavada Cosmology Ahimsa Karma Dharma Mokṣa Kevala Jnana Dravya Tattva Brahmacarya Aparigraha Gunasthana Saṃsāra Ethics Ethics of Jainism Mahavratas (major vows) Ahiṃsā (non-violence) Satya (truth) Asteya (non-stealing) Brahmacarya (chastity) Aparigraha (non-possession) Anuvratas (further vows) Sāmāyika Sallekhana Jain prayers Bhaktamara Stotra Micchami Dukkadam Navkar Mantra Ṇamōkāra mantra Jai Jinendra Major figures The 24 Tirthankaras Rishabha Pārśva Mahavira Arihant Ganadhara Kundakunda Siddhasenadivākarasuri Samantabhadra Haribhadra Yashovijaya Major sects Schools and Branches Digambara Śvetāmbara Jain literature Samayasāra (Digambara) Pravachanasara (Digambara) Agama (Śvetāmbara) Tattvartha Sutra Dravyasamgraha (Digambara) Kalpa Sūtra (Śvetāmbara) Uttaradhyayana (Śvetāmbara) Cīvaka Cintāmaṇi Silappatikaram Valayapathi Festivals Diwali Mahavir Janma Kalyanak Paryushana Samvatsari Pilgrimages Tirth Abu Palitana Girnar Shikharji Shravanabelagola Other Ekendriya Temples Jain flag Jain symbols Parasparopagraho Jivanam Topics list Religion portal v t e Moksha ( / ˈ m oʊ k ʃ ə / , [ 1 ] UK also / ˈ m ɒ k ʃ ə / ; [ 2 ] Sanskrit : मोक्ष , mokṣa ), also called vimoksha , vimukti , and mukti , [ 3 ] is a term in Jainism , Buddhism , Hinduism , and Sikhism for various forms of emancipation, liberation, nirvana , or release.

[ 4 ] In its soteriological and eschatological senses, it refers to freedom from saṃsāra , the cycle of death and rebirth .

[ 5 ] In its epistemological and psychological senses, moksha is freedom from ignorance: self-realization, self-actualization and self-knowledge.

[ 6 ] In Hindu traditions, moksha is a central concept [ 7 ] and the utmost aim of human life; the other three aims are dharma (virtuous, proper, moral life), artha (material prosperity, income security, means of life), and kama (pleasure, sensuality, emotional fulfillment).

[ 8 ] Together, these four concepts are called Puruṣārtha in Hinduism.

[ 9 ] In some schools of Indian religions, moksha is considered equivalent to and used interchangeably with other terms such as vimoksha , vimukti , kaivalya , apavarga , mukti , nihsreyasa , and nirvana .

[ 10 ] However, terms such as moksha and nirvana differ and mean different states between various schools of Hinduism, Buddhism, and Jainism.

[ 11 ] The term nirvana is more common in Buddhism, [ 12 ] while moksha is more prevalent in Hinduism .

[ 13 ] Etymology [ edit ] Moksha is derived from the Sanskrit root word, muc , which means to free, let go, release, liberate. According to Jain scriptures, it is a combination of two Sanskrit words, moh (attachment) and kshay (its destruction).

[ 14 ] Definition and meanings [ edit ] The definition and meaning of moksha varies between various schools of Indian religions.

[ 15 ] Moksha means freedom, liberation, but from what and how is where the schools differ.

[ 16 ] Moksha is also a concept that means liberation from rebirth or saṃsāra .

[ 5 ] This liberation can be attained while one is on earth ( jivanmukti ), or eschatologically ( karmamukti , [ 5 ] videhamukti ). Some Indian traditions have emphasized liberation on concrete, ethical action within the world. This liberation is an epistemological transformation that permits one to see the truth and reality behind the fog of ignorance.

[ 17 ] Moksha has been defined not merely as absence of suffering and release from bondage to saṃsāra.

Various schools of Hinduism also explain the concept as presence of the state of paripurna-brahmanubhava (the experience of oneness with Brahman , the One Supreme Self), a state of knowledge, peace and bliss.

[ 18 ] For example, Vivekachudamani – an ancient book on moksha , explains one of many meditative steps on the path to moksha , as: Beyond caste, creed, family or lineage, That which is without name and form, beyond merit and demerit, That which is beyond space, time and sense-objects, You are that, God himself; Meditate this within yourself. ||Verse 254|| — Vivekachudamani, 8th Century CE [ 19 ] Eschatological sense [ edit ] Moksha is a concept associated with saṃsāra (birth-rebirth cycle).

Samsara originated with religious movements in the first millennium BCE.

[ 17 ] These movements such as Buddhism, Jainism and new schools within Hinduism, saw human life as bondage to a repeated process of rebirth. This bondage to repeated rebirth and life, each life subject to injury, disease and aging, was seen as a cycle of suffering. By release from this cycle, the suffering involved in this cycle also ended. This release was called moksha , nirvana , kaivalya , mukti and other terms in various Indian religious traditions but as per Hindu scripture veda one can attain mokhsha by giving up shadripu ( kama, lobha, krodha, moha, mada and matsarya).

[ 20 ] A desire for the release from pain and suffering seems to lie at the root of striving for moksha, and it is commonly believed that moksha is an otherwordly reality, only achievable at the end of life, not during.

[ 21 ] However there is also a notion that moksha can be achieved during life in the form of a state of liberation, known as jivan-mukti , although this is still reliant on personal and spiritual endeavours attributed to attaining moksha.

[ 21 ] Eschatological ideas evolved in Hinduism.

[ 22 ] In earliest Vedic literature, heaven and hell sufficed soteriological curiosities. Over time, the ancient scholars observed that people vary in the quality of virtuous or sinful life they lead, and began questioning how differences in each person's puṇya (merit, good deeds) or pāp (demerit, sin) as human beings affected their afterlife.

[ 23 ] This question led to the conception of an afterlife where the person stayed in heaven or hell, in proportion to their merit or demerit, then returned to earth and were reborn, the cycle continuing indefinitely. The rebirth idea ultimately flowered into the ideas of saṃsāra , or transmigration – where one's balance sheet of karma determined one's rebirth. Along with this idea of saṃsāra , the ancient scholars developed the concept of moksha , as a state that released a person from the saṃsāra cycle.

Moksha release in eschatological sense in these ancient literature of Hinduism, suggests van Buitenen , [ 24 ] comes from self-knowledge and consciousness of oneness of supreme soul.

Epistemological and psychological senses [ edit ] Scholars provide various explanations of the meaning of moksha in epistemological and psychological senses. For example, Deutsche sees moksha as transcendental consciousness, the perfect state of being, of self-realization, of freedom and of "realizing the whole universe as the Self".

[ 25 ] Moksha in Hinduism, suggests Klaus Klostermaier , [ 26 ] implies a setting-free of hitherto fettered faculties, a removing of obstacles to an unrestricted life, permitting a person to be more truly a person in the full sense; the concept presumes an unused human potential of creativity, compassion and understanding which had been blocked and shut out.

Moksha is more than liberation from a life-rebirth cycle of suffering ( samsara ); the Vedantic school separates this into two: jivanmukti (liberation in this life) and videhamukti (liberation after death).

[ 27 ] Moksha in this life includes psychological liberation from adhyasa (fears besetting one's life) and avidya (ignorance or anything that is not true knowledge).

[ 26 ] As a state of perfection [ edit ] Gajendra Moksha (pictured) is a symbolic tale in Vaishnavism . The elephant Gajendra enters a lake where a crocodile (Huhu) clutches his leg and becomes his suffering. Despite his pain, Gajendra constantly remembers Vishnu, who then liberates him. Gajendra symbolically represents human beings, Huhu represents sins, and the lake is saṃsāra.

Many schools of Hinduism according to Daniel Ingalls , [ 16 ] see moksha as a state of perfection. The concept was seen as a natural goal beyond dharma .

Moksha , in the epics and ancient literature of Hinduism, is seen as achievable by the same techniques necessary to practice dharma . Self-discipline is the path to dharma , moksha is self-discipline that is so perfect that it becomes unconscious, second nature.

Dharma is thus a means to moksha .

[ 28 ] The Samkhya school of Hinduism, for example, suggests that one of the paths to moksha is to magnify one's sattvam .

[ 29 ] [ 30 ] To magnify one's sattvam , one must develop oneself where one's sattvam becomes one's instinctive nature. Many schools of Hinduism thus understood dharma and moksha as two points of a single journey of life, a journey for which the viaticum was discipline and self-training.

[ 30 ] Over time, these ideas about moksha were challenged.

Nagarjuna's challenge [ edit ] Dharma and moksha , suggested Nagarjuna in the 2nd century, cannot be goals on the same journey.

[ 31 ] He pointed to the differences between the world we live in, and the freedom implied in the concept of moksha . They are so different that dharma and moksha could not be intellectually related.

Dharma requires worldly thought, moksha is unworldly understanding, a state of bliss. "How can the worldly thought-process lead to unworldly understanding?", asked Nagarjuna.

[ 31 ] Karl Potter explains the answer to this challenge as one of context and framework, the emergence of broader general principles of understanding from thought processes that are limited in one framework.

[ 32 ] Adi Shankara's challenge [ edit ] Adi Shankara in the 8th century AD, like Nagarjuna earlier, examined the difference between the world one lives in and moksha , a state of freedom and release one hopes for.

[ 33 ] Unlike Nagarjuna, Shankara considers the characteristics between the two. The world one lives in requires action as well as thought; our world, he suggests, is impossible without vyavahara (action and plurality). The world is interconnected, one object works on another, input is transformed into output, change is continuous and everywhere.

Moksha , suggests Shankara, [ 26 ] is a final perfect, blissful state where there can be no change, where there can be no plurality of states. It has to be a state of thought and consciousness that excludes action.

[ 33 ] He questioned: "How can action-oriented techniques by which we attain the first three goals of man ( kama , artha and dharma ) be useful to attain the last goal, namely moksha ?" Scholars [ 34 ] suggest Shankara's challenge to the concept of moksha parallels those of Plotinus against the Gnostics , with one important difference: [ 33 ] Plotinus accused the Gnostics of exchanging an anthropocentric set of virtues with a theocentric set in pursuit of salvation ; Shankara challenged that the concept of moksha implied an exchange of anthropocentric set of virtues ( dharma ) with a blissful state that has no need for values. Shankara goes on to suggest that anthropocentric virtues suffice.

The Vaisnavas' challenge [ edit ] Vaishnavism , one of the bhakti schools of Hinduism, is devoted to the worship of God, sings his name, anoints his image or idol, and has many sub-schools. Vaishnavas (followers of Vaishnavism) suggest that dharma and moksha cannot be two different or sequential goals or states of life.

[ 35 ] Instead, they suggest God should be kept in mind constantly to simultaneously achieve dharma and moksha , so constantly that one comes to feel one cannot live without God's loving presence. This school emphasized love and adoration of God as the path to "moksha" (salvation and release), rather than works and knowledge. Their focus became divine virtues, rather than anthropocentric virtues.

Daniel Ingalls [ 35 ] regards Vaishnavas' position on moksha as similar to the Christian position on salvation, and Vaishnavism as the school whose views on dharma , karma and moksha dominated the initial impressions and colonial-era literature on Hinduism, through the works of Thibaut, Max Müller and others.

History [ edit ] The concept of moksha appears much later in ancient Indian literature than the concept of dharma . The proto-concept that first appears in the ancient Sanskrit verses and early Upanishads is mucyate , which means "freed" or "released". In the middle and later Upanishads, such as the Svetasvatara and Maitri , the word moksha appears and begins becoming an important concept.

[ 16 ] [ 36 ] The Katha Upanishad , [ 37 ] a middle Upanishadic-era script dated to the second half of the first millennium BCE, is among the earliest expositions about saṃsāra and moksha . In Book I, Section III, the legend of boy Nachiketa queries Yama , the lord of death to explain what causes saṃsāra and what leads to liberation.

[ 38 ] Naciketa inquires: what causes sorrow? Yama explains that suffering and saṃsāra results from a life that is lived absent-mindedly, with impurity, with neither the use of intelligence nor self-examination, where neither mind nor senses are guided by one's atma (soul, self).

[ 39 ] [ 40 ] Liberation comes from a life lived with inner purity, alert mind, led by buddhi (reason, intelligence), realization of the Supreme Self ( purusha ) who dwells in all beings. Kathaka Upanishad asserts knowledge liberates, knowledge is freedom.

[ 41 ] [ 42 ] Kathaka Upanishad also explains the role of yoga in personal liberation, moksha .

The Svetasvatara Upanishad , another middle-era Upanishad written after Kathaka Upanishad , begins with questions such as why is man born? what is the primal cause behind the universe? what causes joy and sorrow in life?

[ 43 ] It then examines the various theories, that were then existing, about saṃsāra and release from bondage. Svetasvatara claims [ 44 ] that bondage results from ignorance, illusion or delusion; deliverance comes from knowledge. The Supreme Being dwells in every being, he is the primal cause, he is the eternal law, he is the essence of everything, he is nature, he is not a separate entity. Liberation comes to those who know Supreme Being is present as the Universal Spirit and Principle, just as they know butter is present in milk. Such realization, claims Svetasvatara, come from self-knowledge and self-discipline; and this knowledge and realization is liberation from transmigration, the final goal of the Upanishad.

[ 45 ] The Hindu goddess of knowledge, learning and creative arts, Sarasvati , is sometimes depicted alongside a swan, which is a symbol of spiritual perfection, liberation and moksha.

[ 46 ] The symbolism of Sarasvati and the swan is that knowledge and moksha go together.

Starting with the middle Upanishad era, moksha – or equivalent terms such as mukti and kaivalya – is a major theme in many Upanishads . For example, Sarasvati Rahasya Upanishad, one of several Upanishads of the bhakti school of Hinduism, starts out with prayers to Goddess Sarasvati. She is the Hindu goddess of knowledge, learning and creative arts; [ 46 ] her name is a compound word of sara [ 47 ] and sva , [ 48 ] meaning "essence of self". After the prayer verses, the Upanishad inquires about the secret to freedom and liberation (mukti). Sarasvati's reply in the Upanishad is: It was through me the Creator himself gained liberating knowledge, I am being, consciousness, bliss, eternal freedom: unsullied, unlimited, unending.

My perfect consciousness shines your world, like a beautiful face in a soiled mirror, Seeing that reflection I wish myself you, an individual soul, as if I could be finite!

A finite soul, an infinite Goddess – these are false concepts, in the minds of those unacquainted with truth, No space, my loving devotee, exists between your self and my self, Know this and you are free. This is the secret wisdom.

— Sarasvati Rahasya Upanishad, Translated by Linda Johnsen [ 49 ] Evolution of the concept [ edit ] The concept of moksha , according to Daniel Ingalls , [ 16 ] represented one of the many expansions in Hindu Vedic ideas of life and the afterlife. In the Vedas, there were three stages of life: studentship, householdship and retirement. During the Upanishadic era, Hinduism expanded this to include a fourth stage of life: complete abandonment . In Vedic literature, there are three modes of experience: waking, dream and deep sleep. The Upanishadic era expanded these modes to include turiyam – the stage beyond deep sleep. The Vedas suggest three goals of man: kama , artha and dharma . To these, the Upanishadic era added moksha .

[ 16 ] The acceptance of the concept of moksha in some schools of Hindu philosophy was slow. These refused to recognize moksha for centuries, considering it irrelevant.

[ 16 ] The Mimamsa school, for example, denied the goal and relevance of moksha well into the 8th century AD, until the arrival of a Mimamsa scholar named Kumarila .

[ 50 ] Instead of moksha , the Mimamsa school of Hinduism considered the concept of heaven as sufficient to answer the question: what lay beyond this world after death. Other schools of Hinduism, over time, accepted the moksha concept and refined it over time.

[ 16 ] It is unclear when the core ideas of samsara and moksha developed in ancient India. Patrick Olivelle suggests these ideas likely originated with new religious movements in the first millennium BCE.

[ 17 ] The concepts of mukti and moksha , suggests J. A. B. van Buitenen , [ 24 ] seem traceable to yogis in Hinduism, with long hair, who chose to live on the fringes of society, given to self-induced states of intoxication and ecstasy, possibly accepted as medicine-men and "sadhus" by ancient Indian society.

[ 16 ] Moksha to these early concept-developers, was the abandonment of the established order, not in favor of anarchy, but in favor of self-realization, to achieve release from this world.

[ 51 ] Mokṣha is a key concept in Yoga , where it is a state of "awakening", liberation and freedom in this life.

[ 52 ] In its historical development, the concept of moksha appears in three forms: Vedic, yogic and bhakti.

In the Vedic period, moksha was ritualistic.

[ 24 ] Mokṣa was claimed to result from properly completed rituals such as those before Agni – the fire deity. The significance of these rituals was to reproduce and recite the cosmic-creation event described in the Vedas; the description of knowledge on different levels – adhilokam , adhibhutam , adhiyajnam , adhyatmam – helped the individual transcend to moksa. Knowledge was the means, the ritual its application.

By the middle to late Upanishadic period, the emphasis shifted to knowledge, and ritual activities were considered irrelevant to the attainment of moksha .

[ 53 ] Yogic moksha [ 24 ] [ 54 ] replaced Vedic rituals with personal development and meditation, with hierarchical creation of the ultimate knowledge in self as the path to moksha . Yogic moksha principles were accepted in many other schools of Hinduism, albeit with differences. For example, Adi Shankara in his book on moksha suggests: अर्थस्य निश्चयो दृष्टो विचारेण हितोक्तितः | न स्नानेन न दानेन प्राणायमशतेन वा || १३ || By reflection, reasoning and instructions of teachers, the truth is known, Not by ablutions, not by making donations, nor by performing hundreds of breath control exercises. || Verse 13 || — Vivekachudamani , 8th Century AD [ 55 ] Bhakti moksha created the third historical path, where neither rituals nor meditative self-development were the way, rather it was inspired by constant love and contemplation of God, which over time results in a perfect union with God.

[ 24 ] Some Bhakti schools evolved their ideas where God became the means and the end, transcending moksha ; the fruit of bhakti is bhakti itself.

[ 56 ] In the history of Indian religious traditions, additional ideas and paths to moksha beyond these three, appeared over time.

[ 57 ] Synonyms [ edit ] The words moksha , nirvana ( nibbana ) and kaivalya are sometimes used synonymously, [ 58 ] because they all refer to the state that liberates a person from all causes of sorrow and suffering.

[ 59 ] [ 60 ] However, in modern era literature, these concepts have different premises in different religions.

[ 11 ] Nirvana, a concept common in Buddhism, is accompanied by the realization that all experienced phenomena are not self ; while moksha , a concept common in many schools of Hinduism, is acceptance of Self (soul), realization of liberating knowledge, the consciousness of Oneness with Brahman, all existence and understanding the whole universe as the Self.

[ 61 ] [ 62 ] Nirvana starts with the premise that there is no Self, moksha on the other hand, starts with the premise that everything is the Self; there is no consciousness in the state of nirvana, but everything is One unified consciousness in the state of moksha .

[ 61 ] Kaivalya, a concept akin to moksha , rather than nirvana, is found in some schools of Hinduism such as the Yoga school. Kaivalya is the realization of aloofness with liberating knowledge of one's self and disentanglement from the muddled mind and cognitive apparatus. For example, Patanjali 's Yoga Sutra suggests: After the dissolution of avidya (ignorance), comes removal of communion with material world, this is the path to Kaivalyam.

— Yoga Sutra (Sadhana Pada), 2:24–25 [ 63 ] Nirvana and moksha , in all traditions, represent resting in one's true essence, named Purusha or Atman, or pointed at as Nirvana, but described in a very different way. Some scholars, states Jayatilleke, assert that the Nirvana of Buddhism is same as the Brahman in Hinduism, a view other scholars and he disagree with.

[ 64 ] Buddhism rejects the idea of Brahman , and the metaphysical ideas about soul (atman) are also rejected by Buddhism, while those ideas are essential to moksha in Hinduism.

[ 65 ] In Buddhism, nirvana is 'blowing out' or 'extinction'.

[ 66 ] In Hinduism, moksha is 'identity or oneness with Brahman'.

[ 62 ] Realization of anatta (anatman) is essential to Buddhist nirvana.

[ 67 ] [ 68 ] [ 69 ] Realization of atman (atta) is essential to Hindu moksha .

[ 68 ] [ 70 ] [ 71 ] Hinduism [ edit ] Ancient literature of different schools of Hinduism sometimes use different phrases for moksha . For example, Keval jnana or kaivalya ("state of Absolute"), Apavarga , Nihsreyasa , Paramapada , Brahmabhava , Brahmajnana and Brahmi sthiti . Modern literature additionally uses the Buddhist term nirvana interchangeably with moksha of Hinduism.

[ 60 ] [ 61 ] There is difference between these ideas, as explained elsewhere in this article, but they are all soteriological concepts of various Indian religious traditions.

The six major orthodox schools of Hinduism have had a historic debate, and disagree over whether moksha can be achieved in this life, or only after this life.

[ 72 ] Many of the 108 Upanishads discuss amongst other things moksha . These discussions show the differences between the schools of Hinduism, a lack of consensus, with a few attempting to conflate the contrasting perspectives between various schools.

[ 73 ] For example, freedom and deliverance from birth-rebirth, argues Maitrayana Upanishad, comes neither from the Vedanta school's doctrine (the knowledge of one's own Self as the Supreme Soul) nor from the Samkhya school's doctrine (distinction of the Purusha from what one is not), but from Vedic studies, observance of the Svadharma (personal duties), sticking to Asramas (stages of life).

[ 74 ] The six major orthodox schools of Hindu philosophy offer the following views on moksha , each for their own reasons: the Nyaya, Vaisesika and Mimamsa schools of Hinduism consider moksha as possible only after death.

[ 72 ] [ 75 ] Samkhya and Yoga schools consider moksha as possible in this life. In the Vedanta school, the Advaita sub-school concludes moksha is possible in this life, [ 72 ] while Dvaita, Visistadvaita, Shuddhadvait sub-schools of Vedanta tradition believes that moksha is a continuous event, one assisted by loving devotion to God, that extends from this life to post-mortem. Beyond these six orthodox schools, some heterodox schools of Hindu tradition, such as Carvaka, deny there is a soul or after life moksha .

[ 76 ] The Nyaya school does not take moksha to be a state of bliss, but only a complete absence of suffering.

[ 77 ] Sāmkhya and Yoga [ edit ] Both Sāmkhya and Yoga systems of religious thought are mokshaśāstras , suggests Knut Jacobsen , they are systems of salvific liberation and release.

[ 78 ] Sāmkhya is a system of interpretation, primarily a theory about the world. Yoga is both a theory and a practice. Yoga gained wide acceptance in ancient India, its ideas and practices became part of many religious schools in Hinduism, including those that were very different from Sāmkhya. The eight limbs of yoga can be interpreted as a way to liberation ( moksha ).

[ 78 ] [ 79 ] In Sāmkhya literature, liberation is commonly referred to as kaivalya . In this school, kaivalya means the realization of purusa , the principle of consciousness, as independent from mind and body, as different from prakrti . Like many schools of Hinduism, in Sāmkhya and Yoga schools, the emphasis is on the attainment of knowledge, vidyā or jñāna , as necessary for salvific liberation, moksha .

[ 78 ] [ 80 ] Yoga's purpose is then seen as a means to remove the avidyā – that is, ignorance or misleading/incorrect knowledge about one self and the universe. It seeks to end ordinary reflexive awareness ( cittavrtti nirodhah ) with deeper, purer and holistic awareness ( asamprājñāta samādhi ).

[ 79 ] [ 81 ] Yoga, during the pursuit of moksha , encourages practice ( abhyāsa ) with detachment ( vairāgya ), which over time leads to deep concentration ( samādhi ). Detachment means withdrawal from outer world and calming of mind, while practice means the application of effort over time. Such steps are claimed by Yoga school as leading to samādhi, a state of deep awareness, release and bliss called kaivalya .

[ 78 ] [ 80 ] Muktinath Temple ('Lord of liberation or Moksha) at Mustang, Nepal - a pilgrimage place for Hindus and Buddhists .

Jñāna yoga Bhakti yoga Rāja marga Three of four paths of spirituality in Hinduism. Each path suggests a different way to moksha .

Yoga, or mārga (meaning "way" or "path"), in Hinduism is widely classified into four spiritual approaches.

[ 82 ] The first mārga is Jñāna Yoga , the way of knowledge. The second mārga is Bhakti Yoga , the way of loving devotion to God. The third mārga is Karma Yoga , the way of works. The fourth mārga is Rāja Yoga , the way of contemplation and meditation. These mārgas are part of different schools in Hinduism, and their definition and methods to moksha .

[ 83 ] For example, the Advaita Vedanta school relies on Jñāna Yoga in its teachings of moksha .

[ 84 ] The marga s need not lead to all forms of moksha, according to some schools of Hinduism. For example, the Ekasarana dharma denies the sayujya form of mukti, where the complete absorption in God deprives jiva of the sweetness and bliss associated with bhakti .

Madhavadeva begins the Namghoxa by declaring his admiration for devotees who do not prefer mukti .

[ 85 ] Vedanta [ edit ] Main article: Vedanta The three main sub-schools in Vedanta school of Hinduism – Advaita Vedanta , Vishistadvaita and Dvaita – each have their own views about moksha .

Advaita Vedanta [ edit ] The Vedantic school of Hinduism suggests the first step towards mokṣa begins with mumuksutva , that is desire of liberation.

[ 26 ] This takes the form of questions about self, what is true, why do things or events make us happy or cause suffering, and so on. This longing for liberating knowledge is assisted by, claims Adi Shankara of Advaita Vedanta, [ 86 ] a guru (teacher), study of historical knowledge and viveka (critical thinking). This is because a guru can help one develop knowledge of maya (the illusionary nature of the world), a critical step on the path to moksha.

[ 87 ] Shankara cautions that the guru and historic knowledge may be distorted, so traditions and historical assumptions must be questioned by the individual seeking moksha . Those who are on their path to moksha (samnyasin), suggests Klaus Klostermaier , are quintessentially free individuals, without craving for anything in the worldly life, thus are neither dominated by, nor dominating anyone else.

[ 26 ] Vivekachudamani , which literally means "Crown Jewel of Discriminatory Reasoning", is a book devoted to moksa in Advaita Vedanta philosophy. It explains what behaviors and pursuits lead to moksha , as well what actions and assumptions hinder moksha . The four essential conditions, according to Vivekachudamani, before one can commence on the path of moksha include (1) vivekah (discrimination, critical reasoning) between everlasting principles and fleeting world; (2) viragah (indifference, lack of craving) for material rewards; (3) samah (calmness of mind), and (4) damah (self restraint, temperance ).

[ 88 ] The Brahmasutrabhasya adds to the above four requirements, the following: uparati (lack of bias, dispassion), titiksa (endurance, patience), sraddha (faith) and samadhana (intentness, commitment).

[ 84 ] The Advaita tradition considers moksha achievable by removing avidya (ignorance) by knowledge.

Moksha is seen as a final release from illusion, and through knowledge ( anubhava ) of one's own fundamental nature, which is Satcitananda .

[ 89 ] [ note 1 ] Advaita holds there is no being/non-being distinction between Atman , Brahman , and Paramatman . True knowledge is a direct, permanent realization that the Atman and  Brahman are one. This realization instantly removes ignorance and leads to moksha , and is considered timeless, eliminating the cycle of birth and death ( samsara ).

[ 94 ] Advaita Vedanta emphasizes Jnana Yoga as the means of achieving moksha .

[ 84 ] Bliss, claims this school, is the fruit of knowledge (vidya) and work (karma).

[ 95 ] Dvaita [ edit ] The Dvaita (dualism) traditions define moksha as the loving, eternal union with God and considered the highest perfection of existence. Dvaita schools suggest every soul encounters liberation differently.

[ 96 ] Dualist traditions (e.g.

Vaishnava ) see God as the object of love, for example, a personified monotheistic conception of Shiva , Vishnu or Adishakti . By immersing oneself in the love of God, one's karmas slough off, one's illusions decay, and truth is lived.  Both the worshiped and worshiper gradually lose their illusory sense of separation and only One beyond all names remains. This is salvation to dualist schools of Hinduism. Dvaita Vedanta emphasizes Bhakti Yoga as the means of achieving moksha .

[ 97 ] Vishishtadvaita [ edit ] The Vishistadvaita tradition, led by Ramanuja , defines avidya and moksha differently from the Advaita tradition. To Ramanuja, avidya is a focus on the self, and vidya is a focus on a loving god. The Vishistadvaita school argues that other schools of Hinduism create a false sense of agency in individuals, which makes the individual think oneself as potential or self-realized god. Such ideas, claims Ramanuja, decay to materialism, hedonism and self worship. Individuals forget Ishvara (God). Mukti, to Vishistadvaita school, is release from such avidya, towards the intuition and eternal union with God.

[ 98 ] Mokṣha in this life [ edit ] Among the Samkhya, Yoga and Vedanta schools of Hinduism, liberation and freedom reached within one's life is referred to as jivanmukti , and the individual who has experienced this state is called jivanmukta (self-realized person).

[ 99 ] Dozens of Upanishads, including those from middle Upanishadic period, mention or describe the state of liberation, jivanmukti .

[ 100 ] [ 101 ] Some contrast jivanmukti with videhamukti ( moksha from samsara after death).

[ 102 ] Jivanmukti is a state that transforms the nature, attributes and behaviors of an individual, claim these ancient texts of Hindu philosophy. For example, according to Naradaparivrajaka Upanishad, the liberated individual shows attributes such as: [ 103 ] He is not bothered by disrespect and endures cruel words, treats others with respect regardless of how others treat him; When confronted by an angry person he does not return anger, instead replies with soft and kind words; Even if tortured, he speaks and trusts the truth; He does not crave for blessings or expect praise from others; He never injures or harms any life or being (ahimsa), he is intent in the welfare of all beings; [ 104 ] He is as comfortable being alone as in the presence of others; He is as comfortable with a bowl, at the foot of a tree in tattered robe without help, as when he is in a mithuna (union of mendicants), grama (village) and nagara (city); He doesn't care about or wear ṣikha (tuft of hair on the back of head for religious reasons), nor the holy thread across his body. To him, knowledge is sikha, knowledge is the holy thread, knowledge alone is supreme. Outer appearances and rituals do not matter to him, only knowledge matters; For him there is no invocation nor dismissal of deities, no mantra nor non-mantra, no prostrations nor worship of gods, goddess or ancestors, nothing other than knowledge of Self; He is humble, high-spirited, of clear and steady mind, straightforward, compassionate, patient, indifferent, courageous, speaks firmly and with sweet words.

When a Jivanmukta dies he achieves Paramukti and becomes a Paramukta. Jivanmukta experience liberation while alive and also after death i.e., after becoming paramukta, while Videhmukta experiences liberation only after death.

[ citation needed ] Mokṣa in Balinese Hinduism [ edit ] Balinese Hinduism incorporates moksha as one of five tattvas . The other four are: brahman (the one supreme god head, not to be confused with Brahmin), atma (soul or spirit), karma (actions and reciprocity, causality), samsara (principle of rebirth, reincarnation).

Moksha , in Balinese Hindu belief, is the possibility of unity with the divine; it is sometimes referred to as nirwana.

[ 105 ] [ 106 ] Buddhism [ edit ] Part of a series on Buddhism Glossary Index Outline History Timeline The Buddha Pre-sectarian Buddhism Councils Silk Road transmission of Buddhism Decline in the Indian subcontinent Later Buddhists Buddhist modernism Dharma Concepts Four Noble Truths Noble Eightfold Path Dharma wheel Five Aggregates Impermanence Suffering No-self Dependent Origination Middle Way Mettā Emptiness Morality Karma Rebirth Saṃsāra Cosmology Buddhist texts Buddhavacana Early Texts Tripiṭaka Mahayana Sutras Pāli Canon Sanskrit literature Tibetan canon Chinese canon Post-canon Practices Three Jewels Buddhist paths to liberation Five precepts Perfections Meditation Philosophical reasoning Devotional practices Merit making Recollections Mindfulness Wisdom Sublime abidings Aids to Enlightenment Monasticism Lay life Buddhist chant Pilgrimage Vegetarianism Nirvāṇa Awakening Four Stages Arhat Pratyekabuddhayāna Bodhisattva Buddha Traditions Theravāda Pāli Mahāyāna Hinayana Chinese Vajrayāna Tibetan Navayana Newar Buddhism by country Bhutan Brazil Cambodia China India Indonesia Japan Korea Laos Malaysia Mongolia Myanmar New Zealand Russia Singapore US Sri Lanka Taiwan Thailand Tibet Vietnam Buddhism portal v t e Main articles: Nirvana and Rebirth (Buddhism) In Buddhism the term "moksha" is uncommon, but an equivalent term is vimutti , "release". In the suttas two forms of release are mentioned, namely ceto-vimutti , "deliverance of mind," and panna-vimutti , "deliverance through wisdom" (insight).

Ceto-vimutti is related to the practice of dhyana, while panna-vimutti is related to the development of insight. According to Gombrich, the distinction may be a later development, which resulted in a change of doctrine, regarding the practice of dhyana to be insufficient for final liberation.

[ 107 ] With release comes Nirvana (Pali: Nibbana), "blowing out", "quenching", or "becoming extinguished" of the fires of the passions and of self-view.

[ 108 ] [ 109 ] It is a "timeless state" in which there is no more becoming .

[ 110 ] Nirvana ends the cycle of Dukkha and rebirth in the six realms of Saṃsāra (Buddhism) .

[ 111 ] [ note 2 ] It is part of the Four Noble Truths doctrine of Buddhism, which plays an essential role in Theravada Buddhism.

[ 116 ] [ 117 ] Nirvana has been described in Buddhist texts in a manner similar to other Indian religions, as the state of complete liberation, nirvana , highest happiness, bliss, fearless, freedom, dukkha-less, permanence, non-dependent origination, unfathomable, indescribable.

[ 118 ] [ 119 ] It has also been described as a state of release marked by "emptiness" and realization of non-Self .

[ 120 ] [ 121 ] [ 122 ] Such descriptions, states Peter Harvey, are contested by scholars because nirvana in Buddhism is ultimately described as a state of "stopped consciousness (blown out), but one that is not non-existent", and "it seems impossible to imagine what awareness devoid of any object would be like".

[ 123 ] [ 111 ] Jainism [ edit ] Part of a series on Jainism Jains History Timeline Index Philosophy Anekantavada Cosmology Ahimsa Karma Dharma Mokṣa Kevala Jnana Dravya Tattva Brahmacarya Aparigraha Gunasthana Saṃsāra Ethics Ethics of Jainism Mahavratas (major vows) Ahiṃsā (non-violence) Satya (truth) Asteya (non-stealing) Brahmacarya (chastity) Aparigraha (non-possession) Anuvratas (further vows) Sāmāyika Sallekhana Jain prayers Bhaktamara Stotra Micchami Dukkadam Navkar Mantra Ṇamōkāra mantra Jai Jinendra Major figures The 24 Tirthankaras Rishabha Pārśva Mahavira Arihant Ganadhara Kundakunda Siddhasenadivākarasuri Samantabhadra Haribhadra Yashovijaya Major sects Schools and Branches Digambara Śvetāmbara Jain literature Samayasāra (Digambara) Pravachanasara (Digambara) Agama (Śvetāmbara) Tattvartha Sutra Dravyasamgraha (Digambara) Kalpa Sūtra (Śvetāmbara) Uttaradhyayana (Śvetāmbara) Cīvaka Cintāmaṇi Silappatikaram Valayapathi Festivals Diwali Mahavir Janma Kalyanak Paryushana Samvatsari Pilgrimages Tirth Abu Palitana Girnar Shikharji Shravanabelagola Other Ekendriya Temples Jain flag Jain symbols Parasparopagraho Jivanam Topics list Religion portal v t e Main article: Moksha (Jainism) In Jainism , moksha and nirvana are one and the same.

[ 60 ] [ 124 ] Jaina texts sometimes use the term Kevalya , and call the liberated soul as Kevalin .

[ 125 ] As with all Indian religions, moksha is the ultimate spiritual goal in Jainism. It defines moksha as the spiritual release from all karma.

[ 125 ] Jainism is a Sramanic non-theistic philosophy that believes in a metaphysical permanent self or soul often termed jiva . Jaina believe that this soul is what transmigrates from one being to another at the time of death. The moksa state is attained when a soul ( atman ) is liberated from the cycles of deaths and rebirths ( saṃsāra ), is at the apex, is omniscient, remains there eternally, and is known as a siddha .

[ 126 ] In Jainism, it is believed to be a stage beyond ethical perfection, states Paul Dundas , because they can perform physical and mental activities such as teach, without accruing karma that leads to rebirth.

[ 125 ] Jaina traditions believe that there exist Abhavya (incapable), or a class of souls that can never attain moksha (liberation).

[ 127 ] [ 125 ] The Abhavya state of soul is entered after an intentional and shockingly evil act, [ 128 ] but Jaina texts also polemically applied Abhavya condition to those who belonged to a competing ancient Indian tradition called Ājīvika .

[ 125 ] A male human being is considered closest to the apex of moksha , with the potential to achieve liberation, particularly through asceticism. The ability of women to attain moksha has been historically debated, and the subtraditions with Jainism have disagreed. In the Digambara tradition of Jainism, women must live an ethical life and gain karmic merit to be reborn as a man, because only males can achieve spiritual liberation.

[ 129 ] [ 130 ] In contrast, the Śvētāmbara tradition has believed that women too can attain moksha just like men.

[ 130 ] [ 131 ] [ 132 ] According to Jainism, purification of soul and liberation can be achieved through the path of three jewels: [ 133 ] [ 134 ] [ 135 ] Samyak darśana (Correct View), meaning faith, acceptance of the truth of soul ( jīva ); [ 136 ] Samyak jnana (Correct Knowledge), meaning undoubting knowledge of the tattvas ; [ 137 ] and Samyak charitra (Correct Conduct), meaning behavior consistent with the Five vows.

[ 137 ] Jain texts often add samyak tap (Correct Asceticism) as a fourth jewel, emphasizing belief in ascetic practices as the means to liberation (moksha).

[ 138 ] The four jewels are called moksha marg .

[ 134 ] According to Jain texts, the liberated pure soul ( Siddha ) goes up to the summit of universe ( Siddhashila ) and dwells there in eternal bliss.

[ 139 ] Sikhism [ edit ] Part of a series on Sikhism People Topics Outline History Glossary Sikh gurus Guru Nanak Guru Angad Guru Amar Das Guru Ram Das Guru Arjan Guru Hargobind Guru Har Rai Guru Har Krishan Guru Tegh Bahadur Guru Gobind Singh Guru Granth Sahib Selected revered saints Bhagat Kabir Bhagat Ravidas Bhagat Farid Bhagat Ramanand Bhagat Beni Bhagat Namdev Bhagat Sadhana Bhagat Bhikhan Bhagat Parmanand Bhagat Sain Bhagat Dhanna Bhagat Pipa Bhagat Surdas Bhagat Jaidev Bhagat Trilochan Bhatt Kalshar Bhatt Balh Bhatt Bhalh Bhatt Bhika Bhatt Gayand Bhatt Harbans Bhatt Jalap Bhatt Kirat Bhatt Mathura Bhatt Nalh Bhatt Salh Baba Sundar Satta Doom Balvand Rai Philosophy Naam Japo Kirat Karō Vand Chakkō Charhdi Kalā Guru Maneyo Granth Five Thieves Five Virtues Practices Sikh Rehat Maryada Prohibitions Ardās Kirtan Amrit Velā Dasvand The Five Ks Langar Sewa Simran Nitnem Dastaar (Turban) Naam Karan Amrit Sanskar Anand Karaj Antam Sanskar Scripture Guru Granth Sahib Dasam Granth Sarbloh Granth Five Banis Places and Takhts Gurdwara Harmandir Sahib Akal Takht Keshgarh Sahib Damdama Sahib Patna Sahib Hazur Sahib Culture Literature Music Names Khanda Khalsa General topics Ik Onkar Waheguru Panj Pyare Nirgun and Sargun Nanakshahi calendar Criticism Jathedar of Akal Takht War Sects Sikhism and other religions Sikhism and Hinduism Sikhism and Islam Sikhism and Jainism Religion portal v t e The Sikh concept of mukti ( Gurmukhi : ਮੁਕਤੀ) is similar to other Indian religions, and refers to spiritual liberation.

[ 140 ] It is described in Sikhism as the state that breaks the cycle of rebirths.

[ 140 ] Mukti is obtained according to Sikhism, states Singha, through "God's grace".

[ 141 ] According to the Guru Granth Sahib , the devotion to God is viewed as more important than the desire for Mukti .

[ 141 ] I desire neither worldly power nor liberation. I desire nothing but seeing the Lord.

I desire neither Brahma , Shiva , the Siddhas , the silent sages and Indra – I seek only the Blessed Vision of my Lord Master's vision.

I have come, helpless, to Your Door, O Lord Master; I am exhausted – I seek the Sanctuary of the saints .

Says Nanak , I have met my Enticing Lord God; my mind is cooled and soothed – it blossoms forth in joy.

— Guru Granth Sahib , P534 [ 141 ] [ 142 ] Sikhism recommends Naam Simran as the way to mukti, which is meditating and repeating the Naam (Name of God).

[ 140 ] [ 141 ] See also [ edit ] Henosis References [ edit ] This article has an unclear citation style .

The references used may be made clearer with a different or consistent style of citation and footnoting .

( December 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Notes [ edit ] ^ The description comprises the three Sanskrit words sat-chit-ananda : sat सत् ( present participle ); [Sanskrit root as , " to be "]: [ citation needed ] "Truth", "Absolute Being", [ 90 ] Sat describes an essence that is pure and timeless, that never changes.

[ 90 ] cit चित् ( noun ): "consciousness", [ 90 ] "true consciousness", [ 91 ] "to be consciousness of", [ 92 ] "to understand", [ 92 ] "to comprehend".

[ 92 ] ānanda आनन्द (noun): "bliss", [ 90 ] "true bliss", [ citation needed ] "happiness", [ 93 ] "joy", [ 93 ] "delight", [ 93 ] "pleasure" [ 93 ] ^ Ending rebirth: * Graham Harvey: "The Third Noble Truth is nirvana. The Buddha tells us that an end to suffering is possible, and it is nirvana. Nirvana is a "blowing out," just as a candle flame is wxtinguished in the wind, from our lives in samsara. It connotes an end to rebirth" [ 112 ] * Spiro: "The Buddhist message then, as I have said, is not simply a psychological message, i.e. that desire is the cause of suffering because unsatisfied desire produces frustration. It does contain such a message to be sure; but more importantly it is an eschatological message. Desire is the cause of suffering because desire is the cause of rebirth; and the extinction of desire leads to deliverance from suffering because it signals release from the Wheel of Rebirth." [ 113 ] * John J. Makransky: "The third noble truth, cessation ( nirodha ) or nirvana, represented the ultimate aim of Buddhist practice in the Abhidharma traditions: the state free from the conditions that created samsara. Nirvana was the ultimate and final state attained when the supramundane yogic path had been completed. It represented salvation from samsara precisely because it was understood to comprise a state of complete freedom from the chain of samsaric causes and conditions, i.e., precisely because it was unconditioned ( asamskrta )." [ 114 ] * Walpola Rahula: "Let us consider a few definitions and descriptions of Nirvana as found in the original Pali texts [...] 'It is the complete cessation of that very thirst (tanha), giving it up, renouncing it, emancipation from it, detachment from it.' [...] 'The abandoning and destruction of craving for these Five Aggregates of Attachment: that is the cessation of dukkha . [...] 'The Cessation of Continuity and becoming ( Bhavanirodha ) is Nibbana.'" [ 115 ] Citations [ edit ] ^ "moksha" .

Oxford English Dictionary (Online ed.).

Oxford University Press . Retrieved 30 September 2024 .

(Subscription or participating institution membership required.) ^ "moksha" .

Collins English Dictionary .

HarperCollins . Retrieved 7 July 2025 .

^ " The Soka Gakkai Dictionary of Buddhism , vimoksha " . Archived from the original on 22 February 2014 . Retrieved 17 February 2014 .

^ John Bowker, The Oxford Dictionary of World Religions, Oxford University Press, ISBN 978-0192139658 , p. 650 ^ a b c Sharma 2000 , p. 113.

^ See: E. Deutsch, The self in Advaita Vedanta, in Roy Perrett (Editor), Indian philosophy: metaphysics, Volume 3, ISBN 0-8153-3608-X , Taylor and Francis, pp 343–360; T. Chatterjee (2003), Knowledge and Freedom in Indian Philosophy, ISBN 978-0739106921 , pp 89–102; Quote – "Moksa means freedom"; "Moksa is founded on atmajnana, which is the knowledge of the self."; Jorge Ferrer, Transpersonal knowledge, in Transpersonal Knowing: Exploring the Horizon of Consciousness (editors: Hart et al.), ISBN 978-0791446157 , State University of New York Press, Chapter 10 ^ John Tomer (2002), Human well-being: a new approach based on overall and ordinary functionings, Review of Social Economy, 60(1), pp 23–45; Quote – "The ultimate aim of Hindus is self-liberation or self-realization (moksha)." ^ See: A. Sharma (1982), The Puruṣārthas: a study in Hindu axiology, Michigan State University, ISBN 9789993624318 , pp 9–12; See review by Frank Whaling in Numen, Vol. 31, 1 (Jul., 1984), pp. 140–142; A. Sharma (1999), The Puruṣārthas: An Axiological Exploration of Hinduism , The Journal of Religious Ethics, Vol. 27, No. 2 (Summer, 1999), pp. 223–256; Chris Bartley (2001), Encyclopedia of Asian Philosophy, Editor: Oliver Learman, ISBN 0-415-17281-0 , Routledge, Article on Purushartha, pp 443; The Hindu Kama Shastra Society (1925), The Kama Sutra of Vatsyayana , University of Toronto Archives, pp. 8 ^ See: Gavin Flood (1996), The meaning and context of the Purusarthas, in Julius Lipner (Editor) – The Fruits of Our Desiring, ISBN 978-1896209302 , pp 11–21; Karl H. Potter (2002), Presuppositions of India's Philosophies, Motilal Banarsidass, ISBN 978-8120807792 , pp. 1–29 ^ The Soka Gakkai Dictionary of Buddhism: "Vimoksha [解脱]" (Skt.; Jpn.

gedatsu ). Emancipation, release, or liberation. The Sanskrit words vimukti, mukti, and moksha also have the same meaning.

Vimoksha means release from the bonds of earthly desires, delusion, suffering, and transmigration. While Buddhism sets forth various kinds and stages of emancipation, or enlightenment, the supreme emancipation is nirvana, a state of perfect quietude, freedom, and deliverance. See The Soka Gakkai Dictionary of Buddhism , vimoksha Archived 22 February 2014 at the Wayback Machine ^ a b See: Loy, David (1982), Enlightenment in Buddhism and Advaita Vedanta: Are Nirvana and Moksha the Same?, International Philosophical Quarterly, 23 (1), pp 65–74; T. Chatterjea (2003), Knowledge and Freedom in Indian Philosophy, ISBN 978-0739106921 , pp 89; Quote – "In different philosophical systems moksa appears in different names, such as apavarga, nihsreyasa, nirvana, kaivalya, mukti, etc. These concepts differ from one another in detail." ^ Peter Harvey (2013), An Introduction to Buddhism: Teachings, History and Practices, ISBN 978-0521859424 , Cambridge University Press ^ Knut Jacobsen, in The Continuum Companion to Hindu Studies (Editor: Jessica Frazier), ISBN 978-0-8264-9966-0 , pp 74–83 ^ "Moksha | Derived from the Sanskrit word muc ("to free")" .

Encyclopedia Britannica . Retrieved 13 May 2021 .

^ M. Hiriyanna (2000), The essentials of Indian philosophy, ISBN 978-8120813304 , pp 50–52 ^ a b c d e f g h Daniel H. H. Ingalls, "Dharma and Moksha", Philosophy East and West , Vol. 7, No. 1/2 (Apr. – Jul., 1957), pp. 41–48 ^ a b c Patrick Olivelle (2012), Encyclopædia Britannica , "Moksha (Indian religions)" ^ see: S. R. Bhatt (1976), The Concept of Moksha—An Analysis, Philosophy and Phenomenological Research, Vol. 36, No. 4 (Jun., 1976), pp. 564–570; S.M.S. Chari (1994), Vaiṣṇavism: Its Philosophy, Theology, and Religious Discipline, ISBN 978-8120810983 , 2nd Edition, Motilal Banarsidass, pp 122–123 David White (1960), Moksa as value and experience, Philosophy East and West, Vol. 9, No. 3/4 (Oct., 1959 – Jan., 1960), pp. 145–161 ^ Many verses from Vivekachudamani expound on “Tat tvam asi” phrase such as the verse above. For other verses, and translation, see: John Richards (Translator), Vivekachudamani, ISBN 978-0979726743 (2011 Edition); Madhavananda's translation of Vivekachudamani published in 1921, Himalayan Series 43; ^ R.C. Mishra, Moksha and the Hindu Worldview, Psychology & Developing Societies , Vol. 25, Issue 1, pp 23, 27 ^ a b Mishra, R.C (2013).

Moksha and the Hindu World View . New Delhi, India: SAGE Publications. pp.

21– 42.

^ N. Ross Reat (1990), The Origins of Indian Psychology, ISBN 0-89581-924-4 , Asian Humanities Press, Chapter 2 ^ See: Simon Brodbeck (2011), Sanskrit Epics: The Ramayana, Mahabharata and Harivamsa, in Jessica Frazier (Editor) – The Continuum Companion to Hindu Studies, ISBN 978-0-8264-9966-0 , pp 83–100 J. A. B. Van Buitenen, Dharma and Moksa, Philosophy East and West, Vol. 7, No. 1/2 (Apr. – Jul., 1957), pp. 33–40 ^ a b c d e J. A. B. Van Buitenen, Dharma and Moksa, Philosophy East and West, Vol. 7, No. 1/2 (Apr. – Jul., 1957), pp. 33–40 ^ E. Deutsch, The self in Advaita Vedanta, in Roy Perrett (Editor), Indian philosophy: metaphysics, Volume 3, ISBN 0-8153-3608-X , Taylor and Francis, pp 343–360 ^ a b c d e Klaus Klostermaier, Mokṣa and Critical Theory, Philosophy East and West, Vol. 35, No. 1 (Jan., 1985), pp. 61–71 ^ see: M. von Brück (1986), Imitation or Identification?, Indian Theological Studies, Vol. 23, Issue 2, pp 95–105 Klaus Klostermaier, Mokṣa and Critical Theory, Philosophy East and West, Vol. 35, No. 1 (Jan., 1985), pp. 61–71 ^ see: Karl Potter, Dharma and Mokṣa from a Conversational Point of View, Philosophy East and West, Vol. 8, No. 1/2 (Apr. – Jul., 1958), pp. 49–63 Daniel H. H. Ingalls, Dharma and Moksha, Philosophy East and West, Vol. 7, No. 1/2 (Apr. – Jul., 1957), pp. 41–48 ^ One of three qualities or habits of an individual; sattvam represents spiritual purity; sattvic people, claims Samkhya school, are those who see world's welfare as a spiritual principle. See cited Ingalls reference.

^ a b Daniel H. H. Ingalls, Dharma and Moksha, Philosophy East and West, Vol. 7, No. 1/2 (Apr. – Jul., 1957), pp. 45–46 ^ a b Daniel H. H. Ingalls, Dharma and Moksha, Philosophy East and West, Vol. 7, No. 1/2 (Apr. – Jul., 1957), pp. 46 ^ Karl Potter, Dharma and Mokṣa from a Conversational Point of View, Philosophy East and West, Vol. 8, No. 1/2 (Apr. – Jul., 1958), pp. 49–63 ^ a b c Daniel H. H. Ingalls, Dharma and Moksha, Philosophy East and West, Vol. 7, No. 1/2 (Apr. – Jul., 1957), pp. 47 ^ see: Daniel H. H. Ingalls, Dharma and Moksha, Philosophy East and West, Vol. 7, No. 1/2 (Apr. – Jul., 1957), pp 41–48 R Sinari (1982), The concept of human estrangement in plotinism and Shankara Vedanta, in "Neoplatonism and Indian thought", Ed: R.B. Harris, Albany, NY, pp 243–255 R.K. Tripathi (1982), Advaita Vedanta and Neoplatonism, in "Neoplatonism and Indian thought", Ed: R.B. Harris, Albany, NY, pp 237; also see pp 294–297 by Albert Wolters ^ a b Daniel H. H. Ingalls, "Dharma and Moksha", Philosophy East and West , Vol. 7, No. 1/2 (Apr. – Jul., 1957), pp. 48 ^ see: Klaus Klostermaier (1985), Mokṣa and Critical Theory, Philosophy East and West, 35 (1), pp 61–71 Roeser, R.W. (2005), An introduction to Hindu Indiaís contemplative psychological perspectives on motivation, self, and development, in M.L. Maehr & S. Karabenick (Eds.), Advances in Motivation and Achievement, Volume 14: Religion and Motivation. Elsevier, pp. 297–345 ^ Sometimes called Katha Upanishad – for example, by Max Muller, Nakhilananda ^ Paul Deussen , Sixty Upanishads of the Veda, Vol 1, ISBN 978-0842616454 , pp 269–290 ^ [a] Atman , Oxford Dictionaries, Oxford University Press (2012), Quote : "1. real self of the individual; 2. a person's soul"; [b] John Bowker (2000), The Concise Oxford Dictionary of World Religions, Oxford University Press, ISBN 978-0192800947 , See entry for Atman; [c] WJ Johnson (2009), A Dictionary of Hinduism , Oxford University Press, ISBN 978-0198610250 , See entry for Atman (self).

^ [a] David Lorenzen (2004), The Hindu World (Editors: Sushil Mittal and Gene Thursby), Routledge, ISBN 0-415215277 , pages 208–209, Quote : "Advaita and nirguni movements, on the other hand, stress an interior mysticism in which the devotee seeks to discover the identity of individual soul (atman) with the universal ground of being (brahman) or to find god within himself".; [b] Richard King (1995), Early Advaita Vedanta and Buddhism , State University of New York Press, ISBN 978-0791425138 , page 64, Quote: "Atman as the innermost essence or soul of man, and Brahman as the innermost essence and support of the universe. (...) Thus we can see in the Upanishads, a tendency towards a convergence of microcosm and macrocosm, culminating in the equating of atman with Brahman".

[c] Chad Meister (2010), The Oxford Handbook of Religious Diversity , Oxford University Press, ISBN 978-0195340136 , page 63; Quote : "Even though Buddhism explicitly rejected the Hindu ideas of Atman (soul) and Brahman, Hinduism treats Sakyamuni Buddha as one of the ten avatars of Vishnu." ^ Paul Deussen, Sixty Upanishads of the Veda , Vol 1, ISBN 978-0842616454 , pp 283–289 ^ S. Nikhilananda, The Principal Upanishads , Dover Publications, ISBN 978-0486427171 , pp 63–84 ^ Paul Deussen, Sixty Upanishads of the Veda , Vol 1, ISBN 978-0842616454 , pp 301–326 ^ Paul Deussen, Sixty Upanishads of the Veda , Vol 1, ISBN 978-0842616454 , pp 316, 319–325 ^ Paul Deussen, Sixty Upanishads of the Veda , Vol 1, ISBN 978-0842616454 , pp 305–306, 322–325 ^ a b see: John Bowker (1998), Picturing God , Series Editor: Jean Holm, Bloomsbury Academic, ISBN 978-1855671010 , pp 99–101; Richard Leviton (2011), Hierophantic Landscapes , ISBN 978-1462054145 , pp 543 ^ सार Sanskrit English Dictionary, Germany ^ स्व Sanskrit English Dictionary, Germany ^ Linda Johnsen (2002), The Living Goddess: Reclaiming the Tradition of the Mother of the Universe , ISBN 978-0936663289 , pp 51–52; for Sanskrit original see: सरस्वतीरहस्योपनिषत् sarasvatIrahasya ^ see: M. Hiriyanna (1952), The Quest After Perfection , Kavyalaya Publishers, pp 23–33 John Taber, "The significance of Kumarila's Philosophy", in Roy Perrett (Ed) – Theory of Value , Vol 5, ISBN 978-0815336129 pp. 113–161 Okita, K. (2008), "Mīmāṃsā and Vedānta: Interaction and Continuity", The Journal of Hindu Studies , 1(1–2), pp 155–156 ^ J.A.B. van Buitenen, in Roy Perrett (Editor) – Theory of Value , Volume 5, ISBN 0-8153-3612-8 , Taylor & Francis, pp 25–32 ^ see: Mircea Eliade (1958, Reprinted: 2009), Yoga: Immortality and Freedom , Princeton University Press, ISBN 978-0691142036 , pp 33–34; Sarah Strauss (2005), Positioning Yoga , Berg/Oxford International, ISBN 1-85973-739-0 , pp 15 ^ Angelika Malinar (2011), in Jessica Frazier (ed.), The Bloomsbury companion to Hindu studies , ISBN 978-1-4725-1151-5 , Chapter 4 ^ Knut Jacobson, in Jessica Frazier (Editor), Continuum companion to Hindu studies , ISBN 978-0-8264-9966-0 , pp 74–82 ^ See: John Richards (Translator), Vivekachudamani, ISBN 978-0979726743 (2011 Edition); Madhavananda's translation of Vivekachudamani published in 1921, Himalayan Series 43; ^ Klaus Klostermaier (1986), "Contemporary conceptions among North Indian Vaishnavas", in Ronald Neufeldt (Editor) – Karma and Rebirth Post Classical Developments , ISBN 978-0873959902 , State University of New York Press, Chapter 5 ^ D. Datta (1888), "Moksha, or the Vedántic Release", Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society of Great Britain and Ireland , New Series, Vol. 20, No. 4 (Oct., 1888), pp. 513–539 ^ For example, the Adhyatma Upanishad uses all three words nirvana, kaivalya and moksha (Verses 12, 16, 69, 70); K.N. Aiyar (Transl. 1914), Thirty Minor Upanishads , University of Toronto Robart Library Archives, Canada, pp 55–60 ^ A. Sharma, The realization of Kaivalya in the Poetry of Les A Murray: An Indian Perspective, Explorations in Australian Literature, ISBN 978-8176257091 , Chapter 18, pp 187 ^ a b c Jaini, Padmanabh (2000).

Collected Papers on Jaina Studies . Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass Publ.

ISBN 81-208-1691-9 .

: "Moksa and Nirvana are synonymous in Jainism".

p.168 ^ a b c David Loy (1982), Enlightenment in Buddhism and Advaita Vedanta: Are Nirvana and Moksha the Same?, International Philosophical Quarterly, 23(1), pp 65–74 ^ a b [a] Brian Morris (2006).

Religion and Anthropology: A Critical Introduction . Cambridge University Press. p. 51.

ISBN 978-0-521-85241-8 .

[b] Gadjin M. Nagao (January 1991).

Madhyamika and Yogacara: A Study of Mahayana Philosophies . State University of New York Press. pp.

177– 180.

ISBN 978-1-4384-1406-5 .

[c] Brian Morris (2015).

Anthropology, Ecology, and Anarchism: A Brian Morris Reader . PM Press. p. 74.

ISBN 978-1-60486-093-1 .

^ For Sanskrit version: Sadasivendra Sarasvati (1912), Yoga Sutra ; For English version: Charles Johnston (1912), yogasutrasofpata00pata Yoga Sutra of Patanjali; For secondary peer reviewed source, see: Jeffrey Gold, Plato in the Light of Yoga, Philosophy East and West, Vol. 46, No. 1 (Jan., 1996), pp. 17–32; A. Sharma, The Realization of Kaivalya, in Explorations in Australian Literature, ISBN 978-8176257091 , Chapter 18 ^ K.N. Jayatilleke (2009).

Facets of Buddhist Thought: Collected Essays . Buddhist Publication Society. p. 96.

ISBN 978-955-24-0335-4 .

^ K.N. Jayatilleke (2009).

Facets of Buddhist Thought: Collected Essays . Buddhist Publication Society. pp.

96– 97.

ISBN 978-955-24-0335-4 .

^ K.N. Jayatilleke (2009).

Facets of Buddhist Thought: Collected Essays . Buddhist Publication Society. p. 90.

ISBN 978-955-24-0335-4 .

^ Martin Southwold (1983).

Buddhism in Life: The Anthropological Study of Religion and the Sinhalese Practice of Buddhism . Manchester University Press. pp.

209 –210.

ISBN 978-0-7190-0971-6 .

^ a b Sue Hamilton (2000).

Early Buddhism: A New Approach : the I of the Beholder . Routledge. pp.

19– 20.

ISBN 978-0-7007-1280-9 .

^ Peter Harvey (2015). Steven M. Emmanuel (ed.).

A Companion to Buddhist Philosophy . John Wiley & Sons. p. 36.

ISBN 978-1-119-14466-3 .

^ Constance Jones; James D. Ryan (2006).

Encyclopedia of Hinduism . Infobase. pp. 392, 292.

ISBN 978-0-8160-7564-5 .

^ Yong Zhao; Jing Lei; Guofang Li; et al. (2010).

Handbook of Asian Education: A Cultural Perspective . Routledge. p. 466.

ISBN 978-1-136-72129-8 .

^ a b c A. Sharma (2000), Classical Hindu Thought: An Introduction, Oxford University Press, ISBN 978-0195644418 , pp 117 ^ Paul Deussen , Sixty Upanishads of the Veda, Vol 1, ISBN 978-81-208-1468-4 ^ Paul Deussen, Sixty Upanishads of the Veda, Vol 1, ISBN 978-81-208-1468-4 , pp 342 ^ Note: Each school has a different meaning for moksha . For example, Mimamsa school considers moksha as release into svarga (heaven), it does not recognize samsara; while Nyaya school considers moksha as linked to samsara and a release from it; See: The Purva-Mimamsa Sutra of Jaimini , Transl: M.L. Sandal (1923), Chapter II, Pada I and Chapter VI, Pada I through VIII; Also see Klaus Klostermaier, A Survey of Hinduism, 3rd Edition, ISBN 978-0-7914-7082-4 , Chapter 26 ^ see: Miller, A. T. (2013), A review of "An Introduction to Indian Philosophy: Perspectives on Reality, Knowledge, and Freedom", Religion, 43(1), 119–123.

Snell, M. M. (1894). Hinduism's Points of Contact with Christianity. IV. Salvation. The Biblical World, 4(2), pp 98–113 ^ Mookerjee, Satkari (1997).

The Buddhist philosophy of universal flux: an exposition of the philosophy of critical realism as expounded by the school of Dignāga (Repr., 1. ed. publ. by Univ. of Calcutta, 1935 ed.). Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass.

ISBN 978-81-208-0737-2 .

^ a b c d Knut Jacobson, in Jessica Frazier (Editor), Continuum companion to Hindu studies, ISBN 978-0-8264-9966-0 ^ a b Knut Jacobsen (2011), in Jessica Frazier (Editor), The Bloomsbury companion to Hindu studies, ISBN 978-1-4725-1151-5 , pp 74–82 ^ a b Jeffrey Gold, Plato in the Light of Yoga, Philosophy East and West, Vol. 46, No. 1 (Jan., 1996), pp. 20–27 ^ R. Sinari, The way toward Moksa, in Murty et al. (Editors) – Freedom, Progress & Society, ISBN 81-208-0262-4 , pp 45–60 ^ See: John Lochtefeld (2002), The Illustrated Encyclopedia of Hinduism, Rosen Publishing New York, ISBN 0-8239-2287-1 , see articles on bhaktimārga, jnanamārga, karmamārga; Bhagwad Gita (The Celestial Song), Chapters 2:56–57, 12, 13:1–28 Feuerstein, Georg (2003), The deeper dimension of yoga: Theory and practice, Shambhala, ISBN 1-57062-935-8 ; D. Bhawuk (2011), Spirituality and Cultural Psychology, in Anthony Marsella (Series Editor), International and Cultural Psychology, Springer New York, ISBN 978-1-4419-8109-7 , pp 93–140 ^ H. Negendra (2008), Int Journal of Yoga, Jul–Dec, 1(2), pp 43–44 ^ a b c Eliot Deutsch, Advaita Vedanta: A philosophical reconstruction, University of Hawaii Press, ISBN 978-0824802714 , pp 104–106 ^ ( Sarma 1966 , pp. 41–42) ^ Shankara, Sarva vedanta siddhantasara 230–239 ^ Mishra, R.C (2013).

Moksha and the Hindu Worldview . New Delhi, India: SAGE Publications. p. 27.

^ D. Datta  (1888), Moksha, or the Vedántic Release, Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society of Great Britain and Ireland, New Series, Vol. 20, No. 4 (Oct., 1888), pp. 516 ^ Brodd, Jeffrey (2003).

World Religions . Winona, MN: Saint Mary's Press.

ISBN 978-0-88489-725-5 .

^ a b c d Maharishi's Teaching, Meaning of the word "Satcitananda" (Sat Chit Ananda) ^ "Sat-Cit-Ananda Eternity Knowledged and Bliss, Kala Material Time, Form" .

ISKCON Desire Tree | IDT . 8 March 2010 . Retrieved 3 November 2020 .

^ a b c "Sanskrit Dictionary, chit " . Archived from the original on 10 May 2013 . Retrieved 3 January 2019 .

^ a b c d "Sanskrit dictionary for Spoken Sanskrit, ananda " . Archived from the original on 1 July 2017 . Retrieved 20 March 2013 .

^ Sharma, Chandradhar.

Indian Philosophy A Critical Survey . pp.

274– 275.

^ Karl Potter (2008), The Encyclopedia of Indian Philosophies: Advaita Vedānta Up to Śaṃkara and His Pupils, Volume 3, Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, pp 213 ^ Betty, Stafford. "Dvaita, Advaita, And Viśiṣṭadvaita: Contrasting Views Of Mokṣa." Asian Philosophy 20.2 (2010): 215–224. Academic Search Elite. Web. 24 Sept. 2012.

^ N.S.S. Raman (2009), Ethics in Bhakti Philosophical Literature, in R. Prasad – A Historical-developmental Study of Classical Indian Philosophy of Morals, ISBN 978-8180695957 , Chapter 19 ^ Abha Singh (October 2001), Social Philosophy of Ramanuja: its modern relevance, Indian Philosophical Quarterly , Vol. 28, No. 4, pp 491–498 ^ see: Andrew Fort and Patricia Mumme (1996), Living Liberation in Hindu Thought, ISBN 978-0-7914-2706-4 ; Norman E. Thomas (April 1988), Liberation for Life: A Hindu Liberation Philosophy, Missiology, Volume 16, Number 2, pp 149–160 ^ See for example Muktika Upanishad, Varaha Upanishad, Adhyatma Upanishad, Sandilya Upanishad, Tejobindu Upanishad , etc.; in K.N. Aiyar (Transl. 1914), Thirty Minor Upanishads , University of Toronto Robart Library Archives, Canada ^ Paul Deussen , The philosophy of the Upanishads , Translated by A.S. Geden (1906), T&T Clark, Edinburgh ^ Paul Deussen, Sixty Upanishads of the Veda, Vol 1 & 2, ISBN 978-81-208-1467-7 ^ see:

K.N. Aiyar (Transl. 1914), Thirty Minor Upanishads , University of Toronto Robart Library Archives, Canada, pp 140–147 S. Nikhilananda (1958), Hinduism : Its meaning for the liberation of the spirit, Harper, ISBN 978-0911206265 , pp 53–79; Andrew Fort (1998), Jivanmukti in Transformation, State University of New York Press, ISBN 0-7914-3904-6 ^ see also Sandilya Upanishad for ahimsa and other virtues; Quote: "तत्र हिंसा नाम मनोवाक्कायकर्मभिः सर्वभूतेषु सर्वदा क्लेशजननम्"; Aiyar translates this as: He practices Ahimsa – no injury or harm to any living being at any time through actions of his body, his speech or in his mind; K.N. Aiyar (Transl. 1914), Thirty Minor Upanishads , University of Toronto Robart Library Archives, Canada, pp 173–174 ^ Balinese Hindus spell words slightly differently from Indian Hindus; tattva in India is spelled tattwa in Bali, nirvana in India is spelled nirwana in Bali, etc.

^ Anna Nettheim (2011), Tattwa are the words of the world: Balinese narratives and creative transformation , Ph.D. Thesis, University of New South Wales, Australia ^ Gombrich, The Conditioned genesis of Buddhism , chapter four: "How Insight Worsted Concentration" ^ Steven Collins (2010).

Nirvana: Concept, Imagery, Narrative . Cambridge University Press. pp.

63– 64, 33– 34, 47– 50, 74– 75, 106.

ISBN 978-0-521-88198-2 .

^ Gombrich, "What the Buddha thought" ^ Steven Collins (2010).

Nirvana: Concept, Imagery, Narrative . Cambridge University Press. p. 31.

ISBN 978-0-521-88198-2 .

, Quote: "This general scheme remained basic to later Hinduism, to Jainism, and to Buddhism. Eternal salvation, to use the Christian term, is not conceived of as world without end; we have already got that, called samsara, the world of rebirth and redeath: that is the problem, not the solution. The ultimate aim is the timeless state of moksha , or as the Buddhists seem to have been the first to call it, nirvana." ^ a b Rupert Gethin (1998).

The Foundations of Buddhism . Oxford University Press. pp.

74 –84.

ISBN 978-0-19-160671-7 .

^ Harvey 2016 .

^ Spiro 1982 , p. 42.

^ Makransky 1997 , p. 27-28.

^ Rahula 2007 .

^ Harvey 2013 , pp. 73–76.

^ Jay L. Garfield; William Edelglass (2011).

The Oxford Handbook of World Philosophy . Oxford University Press. pp.

206– 208.

ISBN 978-0-19-532899-8 .

^ Steven Collins (1998).

Nirvana and Other Buddhist Felicities . Cambridge University Press. pp.

191– 233.

ISBN 978-0-521-57054-1 .

^ Peter Harvey (2013).

The Selfless Mind: Personality, Consciousness and Nirvana in Early Buddhism . Routledge. pp.

198– 226.

ISBN 978-1-136-78336-4 .

^ Mun-Keat Choong (1999).

The Notion of Emptiness in Early Buddhism . Motilal Banarsidass. pp.

21– 22.

ISBN 978-81-208-1649-7 .

^ Gananath Obeyesekere (2012).

The Awakened Ones: Phenomenology of Visionary Experience . Columbia University Press. pp.

145– 146.

ISBN 978-0-231-15362-1 .

^ Edward Conze (2012).

Buddhism: Its Essence and Development . Courier. pp.

125– 137.

ISBN 978-0-486-17023-7 .

^ Harvey 2013 , pp. 75–76.

^ Michael Carrithers, Caroline Humphrey (1991) The Assembly of listeners: Jains in society Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 0521365058 : "Nirvana: A synonym for liberation, release, moksa." p.297 ^ a b c d e Paul Dundas (2003).

The Jains . Routledge. pp.

104– 105.

ISBN 978-0415266055 .

^ Jaini 1980 , pp. 222–223.

^ Jaini 1980 , p. 226.

^ Jaini 1980 , p. 225.

^ Jeffery D Long (2013).

Jainism: An Introduction . I.B.Tauris. pp.

36– 37.

ISBN 978-0-85773-656-7 .

^ a b Graham Harvey (2016).

Religions in Focus: New Approaches to Tradition and Contemporary Practices . Routledge. pp.

182– 183.

ISBN 978-1-134-93690-8 .

^ Paul Dundas (2003).

The Jains . Routledge. pp.

55– 59.

ISBN 978-0415266055 .

^ Jaini, Padmanabh S. (2000).

Collected Papers on Jaina Studies . Motilal Banarsidass. p. 169.

ISBN 978-81-208-1691-6 .

^ Jain 2011 , p. 6.

^ a b Cort 2001a , pp. 6–7.

^ Fohr 2015 , pp. 9–10, 37.

^ Jaini 1998 , pp. 141–147.

^ a b Jaini 1998 , pp. 148, 200.

^ Cort 2001a , p. 7.

^ Jain 1992 , p. 282–283.

^ a b c Geoff Teece (2004), Sikhism: Religion in focus, ISBN 978-1-58340-469-0 , page 17 ^ a b c d HS Singha (2009), Sikhism: A Complete Introduction, Hemkunt Press, ISBN 978-8170102458 , pages 53–54 ^ Guru Granth Sahib P534, 2.3.29 Works cited [ edit ] This section lacks ISBNs for books it lists .

Please help add the ISBNs or run the citation bot .

( December 2023 ) Cort, John E. (2001a), Jains in the World : Religious Values and Ideology in India , Oxford University Press, ISBN 978-0-19-513234-2 .

Fohr, Sherry (2015), Jainism: A Guide for the Perplexed , Bloomsbury Publishing, ISBN 978-1-4742-2756-8 .

Harvey, Graham (2016), Religions in Focus: New Approaches to Tradition and Contemporary Practices , Routledge .

Harvey, Peter (2013), An Introduction to Buddhism , Cambridge University Press .

Jain, S. A. (1992) [1960], Reality: English Translation of Srimat Pujyapadacharya's Sarvarthasiddhi (Second ed.), Jwalamalini Trust, This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

Jain, Vijay K. (2011), Acharya Umasvami's Tattvarthsūtra (1st ed.), Uttarakhand : Vikalp Printers, ISBN 978-81-903639-2-1 , This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

Jaini, Padmanabh (1980), Wendy Doniger (ed.), Karma and Rebirth in Classical Indian Traditions , University of California Press, ISBN 978-0-520-03923-0 .

Jaini, Padmanabh S. (1998) [1979], The Jaina Path of Purification , Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass , ISBN 978-81-208-1578-0 .

Makransky, John J. (1997), Buddhahood Embodied: Sources of Controversy in India and Tibet , SUNY .

Rahula, Walpola (2007), What the Buddha Taught , Grove Press .

Sarma, S N (1966), The Neo-Vaisnavite Movement and the Satra Institution of Assam , Gauhati University, ISBN 978-8173310263 .

Sharma, Arvind (2000), Classical Hindu Thought: An Introduction , Oxford University Press, ISBN 978-0195644418 .

Spiro, Melford E. (1982), Buddhism and Society: A Great Tradition and Its Burmese Vicissitudes , University of California Press .

Further reading [ edit ] Huxley, Aldous (1999), Michael Horowitz; Cynthia Palmer (eds.), Moksha: Aldous Huxley's Classic Writings on Psychedelics and the Visionary Experience , Simon and Schuster, ISBN 1594775176 .

External links [ edit ] Quotations related to Moksha at Wikiquote v t e Death in Hinduism Goal Moksha Svarga Rituals Antyesti : Shmashana and Cremation ghats Burial in Hinduism Ngaben Pinda Post- Antyesti rituals: Niravapanjali Tarpana Rasam Pagri Pind Sammelan or Terahvin * Ancestor worship : Pitr Pitru Paksha Śrāddha Jathera or Dhok Samadhi Other related Bhuta Karma Loka Reincarnation Samskara Vaitarani Yama Hindu genealogy registers See also History Denominations Sampradaya Parampara Philosophy Texts Dharmic religions v t e Indian philosophy Topics Atheism Atomism Idealism Logic Monotheism Vedic philosophy Kama Artha Moksha Ancient Āstika Hindu : Samkhya Nyaya Vaisheshika Yoga Mīmāṃsā Vedanta Shaiva Raseśvara Pashupata Shaivism Pāṇiniya Nāstika Ājīvika Ajñana Charvaka Jain Anekantavada Syādvāda Buddhist philosophy and Early Buddhist schools Śūnyatā Madhyamaka Yogachara Sautrāntika Svatantrika Medieval Vedanta Acintya bheda abheda Advaita Bhedabheda Dvaita Svabhavika Bhedabheda Shuddhadvaita Vishishtadvaita Navya-Nyāya Sikh Philosophy Shaiva Pratyabhijna Pashupata Shaivism Shaiva Siddhanta Modern Integral yoga Gandhism Radical Humanism Progressive utilization theory Texts Abhinavabharati Arthashastra Bhagavad Gita Bhagavata Purana Brahma Sutra Buddhist texts Dharmashastra Hindu texts Jain Agamas Kamasutra Mimamsa Sutras All 108 texts Principal Nyāya Sūtras Nyayakusumanjali Panchadasi Samkhyapravachana Sutra Sangam texts Sarvadarsanasangraha Shiva Sutras Tarka-Sangraha Tattvacintāmaṇi Tirukkuṟaḷ Upanishads Minor Vaiśeṣika Sūtra Vedangas Vedas Yoga Sutras of Patanjali Yoga Vasistha More...

Philosophers Adi Shankara Abhinavagupta Kumārila Bhaṭṭa Maṇḍana Miśra Valluvar Avatsara Vāchaspati Misra Uddalaka Aruni Gautama Buddha Yājñavalkya Gārgī Vāchaknavī Buddhaghosa Patañjali Kanada Kapila Brihadratha Ikshvaku Jaimini Vyasa Chanakya Dharmakirti Akshapada Gotama Nagarjuna Padmasambhāva Vasubandhu Gaudapada Ramana Maharshi Vivekananda Dayananda Saraswati Ramanuja Vedanta Desika Raikva Sadananda Sakayanya Satyakama Jabala Madhvacharya Mahavira Guru Nanak More...

Concepts Abhava Abhasavada Abheda Adarsana Adrishta Advaita Aham Ahimsa Aishvarya Akrodha Aksara Anatta Ananta Anavastha Anupalabdhi Apauruṣheyā Artha Asiddhatva Asatkalpa Ātman Avyakta Bhrama Brahman Bhuman Bhumika Catuṣkoṭi Chaitanya Chidabhasa Cittabhumi Dāna Devatas Dharma Dhi Dravya Dhrti Ekagrata Guṇa Hitā Idam Ikshana Ishvaratva Jivatva Kama Karma Kasaya Kshetrajna Lakshana Matsya Nyaya Mithyatva Mokṣa Nididhyasana Nirvāṇa Nishkama Karma Niyama Padārtha Paramatman Paramananda Parameshashakti Parinama-vada Pradhana Prajna Prakṛti Pratibimbavada Pratītyasamutpāda Puruṣa Rājamaṇḍala Ṛta Sakshi Samadhi Saṃsāra Satya Satkaryavada Shabda Brahman Sphoṭa Sthiti Śūnyatā Sutram Svātantrya Iccha-mrityu Syādvāda Taijasa Tajjalan Tanmatra Tyāga Uparati Upekkhā Utsaha Vivartavada Viraj Yamas Yoga More...

v t e Hinduism topics Glossary Index Timeline Philosophy Concepts Brahman Om Ishvara Atman Maya Karma Saṃsāra Puruṣārthas Dharma Artha Kama Moksha Niti Ahimsa Asteya Aparigraha Brahmacharya Satya Dāna Damah Dayā Akrodha Schools Āstika : Samkhya Yoga Nyaya Vaisheshika Mīmāṃsā Vedanta Svābhāvika Bhedābheda Dvaita Advaita Vishishtadvaita Nāstika : Charvaka Texts Classification Śruti Smṛti Vedas Rigveda Yajurveda Samaveda Atharvaveda Divisions Samhita Brahmana Aranyaka Upanishads Aitareya Kaushitaki Brihadaranyaka Isha Taittiriya Katha Maitrayaniya Shvetashvatara Chandogya Kena Mundaka Mandukya Prashna Upavedas Ayurveda Dhanurveda Natyaveda Sthapatyaveda Vedanga Shiksha Chandas Vyākaraṇa Nirukta Kalpa Jyotisha Other Bhagavad Gita Agamas Itihasas Ramayana Mahabharata Puranas Minor Upanishads Arthashastra Nitisara Dharmaśāstra Manusmriti Nāradasmṛti Yājñavalkya Smṛti Sutras Stotras Subhashita Tantras Yoga Vasistha Yoga Sutras of Patanjali Sangam literature Tirumurai Divya Prabandham Tirumurukāṟṟuppaṭai Thiruppugal Thirukkural Kamba Ramayanam Five Great Epics Eighteen Greater Texts Eighteen Lesser Texts Athichudi Iraiyanar Akapporul Abhirami Antati Thiruvilaiyadal Puranam Vinayagar Agaval Vedarthasamgraha Deities Gods Trimurti Brahma Vishnu Shiva Agni Dattatreya Ganesha Hanuman Indra Kartikeya Krishna Rama Surya Varuna Vayu more Goddesses Tridevi Saraswati Lakshmi Parvati Bhumi Durga Kali Mahavidya Matrika Radha Rukmini Sati Shakti Shashthi Sita more Practices Worship Temple Murti Puja Bhakti Japa Bhajan Naivedhya Yajna Homa Tapas Dhyāna Tirthatana Sanskaras Garbhadhana Pumsavana Simantonayana Jatakarma Namakarana Nishkramana Annaprashana Chudakarana Karnavedha Vidyarambha Upanayana Keshanta Ritushuddhi Samavartanam Vivaha Antyeshti Varnashrama Varna Brahmin Kshatriya Vaishya Shudra Ashrama Brahmacharya Grihastha Vanaprastha Sannyasa Festivals Diwali Holi Shivaratri Raksha Bandhan Navaratri Durga Puja Ramlila Vijayadashami Ganesh Chaturthi Rama Navami Janmashtami Onam Pongal Makar Sankranti New Year Bihu Gudi Padwa Pahela Baishakh Puthandu Vaisakhi Vishu Ugadi Kumbh Mela Haridwar Nashik Prayag Ujjain Ratha Yatra Teej Vasant Panchami Others Other Svādhyāya Namaste Bindi Tilaka Related Hindus Etymology List Denominations Law Calendar Anti-Hindu sentiment Criticism Hindu gurus and sants Hindu studies Iconography Mythology Nationalism Hindutva Persecution Pilgrimage sites India Relations with other religions Baháʼí Buddhism Islam Jainism Judaism Sikhism Theosophy Glossary Hinduism by country Hindu temples List Architecture Outline Category Portal WikiProject v t e Afterlife locations Abrahamic religions Judaism Gan Eden Gehinnom Sheol Christianity Heaven Seven heavens Third Heaven Throne of God Hell Limbo Kingdom of God Garden of Eden Paradise Purgatory New Jerusalem Pearly gates Hades Islam Araf As-Sirāt Barzakh Jahannam Jannah Malakut Sidrat al-Muntaha Mormonism Celestial Kingdom Terrestrial Kingdom Telestial Kingdom Spirit world Mandaeism World of Light World of Darkness European mythologies Celtic Otherworld Annwn Tír na nÓg Mag Mell Tech Duinn Finnic Tuonela Germanic Asgard Fólkvangr Valhalla Neorxnawang Gimlé Hel Greek / Italic Hades Elysium Erebus Orcus Asphodel Meadows Myth of Er Empyrean Tartarus Fortunate Isles Slavic Iriy Nav Vyraj Eastern/Asian religions Buddhism Desire Realm Hell Pretaloka Animal world Human world Asura Heaven Yāma Form Realm Brahmā worlds Formless Realm Nirvana Pure Land Sukhavati Hinduism 14 planetary systems Ādi Śeṣa Svarga Naraka Vaikuntha Kailash Goloka Akshardham Jainism Three Worlds Urdhva Loka Madhya Loka Adho Loka Sikhism Sach Khand Taoism Grotto-heavens Chinese Tian Diyu Youdu Japanese Yomi Zoroastrianism Chinvat Bridge Hamistagan Tengrism Uçmag Tamağ Others Mesoamerican Mictlān Tamoanchan Thirteen Heavens Tlālōcān Xibalba Plains Indians Happy hunting ground Tupi - Guarani Yvy marã e'ỹ Guajupiá Wicca The Summerland Theosophy Summerland Devachan Nirvana Ancient Egyptian Aaru Duat Avalon Existential planes Guf Heaven Millennialism Mythological places Otherworld Spirits in prison Underworld Utopianism Well of Souls Authority control databases : National Japan Czech Republic NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐xql9s
Cached time: 20250817043751
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.790 seconds
Real time usage: 2.055 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 11038/1000000
Revision size: 80680/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 486827/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 11889/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 15/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 497728/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.964/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 20394372/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1501.601      1 -total
 31.13%  467.489      2 Template:Reflist
 13.30%  199.675      2 Template:Infobox
 11.89%  178.607      1 Template:Infobox_Hindu_term
 11.21%  168.311     31 Template:Cite_book
 10.56%  158.592     41 Template:Lang
  9.93%  149.175      4 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
  7.19%  107.925      1 Template:Hinduism
  6.76%  101.498     14 Template:Navbox
  6.32%   94.831     21 Template:Sfn Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:175918:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817043751 and revision id 1301934676. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Moksha&oldid=1301934676 " Categories : Moksha Hindu philosophical concepts Jain philosophical concepts Puruṣārthas Shabda Religious terminology Salvation Sanskrit words and phrases Mystical union Hidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2013 Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use Indian English from May 2016 All Wikipedia articles written in Indian English Use dmy dates from March 2015 Articles containing Sanskrit-language text Articles containing Assamese-language text Articles containing Balinese-language text Articles containing Bengali-language text Articles containing Hindi-language text Articles containing Javanese-language text Articles containing Kannada-language text Articles containing Malayalam-language text Articles containing Marathi-language text Articles containing Nepali (macrolanguage)-language text Articles containing Odia-language text Articles containing Punjabi-language text Articles containing Tamil-language text Articles containing Telugu-language text Articles containing Urdu-language text Articles containing Gujarati-language text Articles containing Chinese-language text Articles containing Japanese-language text Articles containing Korean-language text Articles containing Sinhala-language text Articles containing Tagalog-language text Articles containing Thai-language text Articles containing Vietnamese-language text Articles with unsourced statements from January 2025 Wikipedia references cleanup from December 2023 All articles needing references cleanup Articles covered by WikiProject Wikify from December 2023 All articles covered by WikiProject Wikify Articles lacking ISBNs Source attribution This page was last edited on 22 July 2025, at 13:16 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Moksha 62 languages Add topic

