Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Concepts taught 2 Pre-medical track Toggle Pre-medical track subsection 2.1 Topics of general chemistry covered by the AAMC Medical College Admissions Test 3 "Weed out course" 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents General chemistry 2 languages Tiếng Việt 粵語 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Introductory chemistry class taught at many universitites This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "General chemistry" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( March 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) General chemistry (sometimes referred to as "gen chem") is offered by colleges and universities as an introductory level chemistry course usually taken by students during their first year.

[ 1 ] The course is usually run with a concurrent lab section that gives students an opportunity to experience a laboratory environment and carry out experiments with the material learned in the course. These labs can consist of acid-base titrations , kinetics , equilibrium reactions , and electrochemical reactions . Chemistry majors as well as students across STEM majors such as biology , biochemistry , biomedicine , physics , and engineering are usually required to complete one year of general chemistry as well.

[ 2 ] Concepts taught [ edit ] The concepts taught in a typical general chemistry course are as follows: Stoichiometry Conservation of energy Conservation of mass Elementary atomic theory Periodic table and periodicity Law of constant composition Gas laws Nuclear chemistry Solubility Acid-base chemistry Chemical bonding Chemical kinetics Thermodynamics Electrochemistry Chemical equilibria Pre-medical track [ edit ] Students in colleges and universities looking to follow the " pre-medical " track are required to pass general chemistry as the Association of American Medical Colleges requires at least one full year of chemistry.

[ 3 ] In order for students to apply to medical school, they must pass the medical college admission test, or MCAT , which consists of a section covering the foundations of general chemistry.

[ 4 ] General chemistry covers many of the principal foundations that apply to medicine and the human body that is essential in our current understanding and practice of medicine.

[ 5 ] Topics of general chemistry covered by the AAMC Medical College Admissions Test [ edit ] Acids and bases Atomic structure Bonding and chemical interactions Chemical kinetics Electrochemistry Equilibrium Solutions Stoichiometry The gas phase Thermochemistry Redox reactions "Weed out course" [ edit ] Students who are enrolled in general chemistry often desire to become doctors, researchers, and educators. Because of the demands of these fields, professors believe that the level of rigor that is associated with general chemistry should be elevated from that of a typical introductory course. This has led to this course to gain the title of a "weed out course" where students drop out from their respected major due to the level of difficulty.

[ 6 ] Students can have different perceptions of the course based on their experiences, or lack thereof, in high school chemistry courses. Students who enroll in AP chemistry in high school, a course that mirrors what is covered in college, could be perceived as having an advantage over students who do not come to college with a strong chemistry background. Students who wish to be competitive in applying to medical schools try to achieve success in general chemistry as the average GPA for medical school matriculants was 3.71 in 2017.

[ 7 ] This makes a simply passing grade not acceptable for students with medical school aspirations. General chemistry professors have been known to make tests worth a large portion of the course, and make them more challenging than the material presents itself as. Grade deflation, purposely adjusting the grades of a course to be lower, is also an issue of general chemistry courses at the undergraduate level.

References [ edit ] ^ "Preparing for Medical School | Molecular Biophysics and Biochemistry" .

mbb.yale.edu . Retrieved 2022-02-26 .

^ Dowd, Mary.

"Majors That Require Chemistry | Synonym" .

classroom.synonym.com . Retrieved 2022-02-26 .

^ "Medical School Admission Requirements™ for Applicants" .

AAMC . Retrieved 2022-02-25 .

^ "What's on the MCAT Exam?" .

AAMC . Retrieved 2022-02-26 .

^ "1.6: Medicine" .

Chemistry LibreTexts . 2016-06-16 . Retrieved 2022-02-26 .

^ Thompson, Marissa E. (2021-07-26).

"Who's getting pulled in weed-out courses for STEM majors?" .

Brookings . Retrieved 2022-02-26 .

^ "How Important is GPA When Applying to Med School?" .

www.princetonreview.com . Retrieved 2022-02-26 .

External links [ edit ] Media related to General chemistry at Wikimedia Commons v t e Branches of chemistry Glossary of chemical formulae List of biomolecules List of inorganic compounds Periodic table Analytical Calorimetry Characterization Chromatography GC HPLC Crystallography Electroanalytical methods Elemental analysis Instrumental chemistry Mass spectrometry EI ICP MALDI Separation process Spectroscopy IR Raman UV-Vis NMR Titration Wet chemistry Theoretical Computational chemistry Mathematical chemistry Molecular modelling Molecular mechanics Molecular dynamics Molecular geometry VSEPR theory Quantum chemistry Physical Chemical kinetics Chemical physics Molecular physics Chemical thermodynamics Cryochemistry Electrochemistry Spectroelectrochemistry Photoelectrochemistry Equilibrium chemistry Femtochemistry Interface and colloid science Micromeritics Mechanochemistry Microwave chemistry Photochemistry Sonochemistry Spectroscopy Spin chemistry Structural chemistry Surface science Thermochemistry Inorganic Ceramic chemistry Cluster chemistry Coordination chemistry Magnetochemistry Organometallic chemistry Organolanthanide chemistry Solid-state chemistry Organic Dynamic covalent chemistry Enantioselective synthesis Fullerene chemistry Organic reactions Organic synthesis Petrochemistry Physical organic chemistry Polymer chemistry Retrosynthetic analysis Stereochemistry Alkane stereochemistry Total synthesis / Semisynthesis Biological Biochemistry Molecular biology Cell biology Bioinorganic chemistry Bioorganic chemistry Bioorganometallic chemistry Biophysical chemistry Chemical biology Bioorthogonal chemistry Clinical chemistry Medicinal chemistry Pharmacology Neurochemistry Interdisciplinarity Nuclear chemistry Radiochemistry Radiation chemistry Actinide chemistry Cosmochemistry / Astrochemistry / Stellar chemistry Geochemistry Biogeochemistry Photogeochemistry Environmental chemistry Atmospheric chemistry Ocean chemistry Clay chemistry Carbochemistry Food chemistry Carbohydrate chemistry Food physical chemistry Agricultural chemistry Soil chemistry Chemistry education Amateur chemistry General chemistry Clandestine chemistry Forensic chemistry Forensic toxicology Post-mortem chemistry Nanochemistry Supramolecular chemistry Chemical synthesis Green chemistry Click chemistry Combinatorial chemistry Biosynthesis Chemical engineering Stoichiometry Materials science Metallurgy Ceramic engineering Polymer science See also History of chemistry Nobel Prize in Chemistry Timeline of chemistry of element discoveries " The central science " Chemical reaction Catalysis Chemical element Chemical compound Atom Molecule Ion Chemical substance Chemical bond Alchemy Quantum mechanics Category Commons Portal WikiProject Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=General_chemistry&oldid=1245172149 " Categories : General chemistry Chemistry education Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from March 2022 All articles needing additional references Commons category link is the pagename This page was last edited on 11 September 2024, at 12:56 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents General chemistry 2 languages Add topic

