Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 The emergence of a Jewish working class 1.2 In Soviets and against fascism 1.3 Radical Jews in Central and Western Europe 1.4 Labor Zionism and the Israeli left 1.5 Postwar era in the diaspora 1.5.1 United States 1.5.2 United Kingdom 1.5.3 Belgium 1.5.4 South Africa 1.6 21st century 1.6.1 2014-2023: Aftermath of the 2014 Gaza War and 2016 presidential election 2 Contemporary Jewish left Toggle Contemporary Jewish left subsection 2.1 North America 2.2 United Kingdom 3 Jewish left in Palestine and Israel 4 Jewish left in Britain 5 See also 6 Further reading 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Jewish left 10 languages العربية Español Esperanto Bahasa Indonesia עברית Português Simple English Svenska Türkçe 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Left-wing ideologies and movements among Jews Part of a series on Socialism in Israel Ideologies Agrarian socialism Anarchism Communism and Marxism Borochovism Jung Bundism Centrist Marxism Leninism Marxism-Leninism Orthodox Marxism Democratic socialism Left-wing nationalism Arab socialism Labor Zionism Liberal socialism Revolutionary socialism Social democracy State socialism Principles Anti-capitalism Anti-clericalism Environmental justice Equality Kibbutz (factions) Proletariat Radical democracy Redistribution Social justice Solidarity State intervention Sustainability History Kibbutz Movement Oslo Accords Standing Together People Barak Ben-Eliezer Ben-Gurion Borochov Dayan Eshkol Golan Herzl Hess Meir Odeh Oz Peres Rabin Sharett Ya'alon Zahalka Extant parties Labor Zionists The Democrats Non- or anti-Zionists Balad Da'am Workers Party Hadash Maki Historical parties Labor Zionists Ahdut HaAvoda Democratic Choice Faction independent of Ahdut HaAvoda Hapoel Hatzair Hashomer Hatzair Workers Party Hebrew Communists Israeli Labor Party The Israelis Jewish Social Democratic Labour Party Left Faction Mapai Mapam Meimad Meretz Non-Partisans One Nation Poale Zion Rafi Ratz Socialist League Ya'ad Non- or anti-Zionists Black Panthers Independent Socialist Faction Israeli Communist Opposition Left Camp of Israel Maki Meri Moked Progressive List for Peace Unity Party Alliances Alignment Democratic Union Joint List Labor-Gesher Labor-Gesher-Meretz Zionist Union Organisations Arbeter-ring in Yisroel – Brith Haavoda Gdud HaAvoda HaNoar HaOved VeHaLomed HaOlam HaZeh Hashomer Hatzair Histadrut Ma'avak Matzpen Tze'irei Zion Media Broit un ehre Der jüdische Arbeiter Israel Shtime Related topics Ameinu Antifa Dror-Israel " Hebrew labor " Israeli–Palestinian peace process Two-state solution Jewish left Jewish People's and Peretz Schools List of kibbutzim Partners for Progressive Israel Rome and Jerusalem Israel portal Socialism portal v t e This article is part of a series on Liberalism in Israel Ideologies Classical Conservative Liberal Zionism Reform Revisionist General National Neo Progressivism Social Third Way Principles Civil and political rights Due process Equality before the law Freedom economic press religion speech Human rights Liberal democracy Jewish and democratic state Popular sovereignty Rule of law Secularism conscription of Haredi Social justice History Balfour Protests 2023 Israeli judicial reform protests Oslo Accords People Gantz Lapid Livni Olmert Peres Scheindlin Schwartz Tichon Weizmann Parties Active Blue and White The Democrats ( factions ) Israel Democratic Party Likud ( historically ) Shinui Telem Yesh Atid Defunct Democratic Movement for Change General Zionists Gesher Hatnua Hetz Independent Liberals Israeli Liberal Party Kadima Kulanu Progressive Party Alliances Alignment Blue and White National Unity Organisations Association for Civil Rights in Israel Israel Democracy Institute Mitvim Molad Zulat for Equality and Human Rights Media Haaretz Related topics Anarchism in Israel Anti-clericalism Israeli–Palestinian peace process Two-state solution Jewish left Liberal hawk Progressive except Palestine Politics of Israel Conservatism Liberalism portal Israel portal v t e The Jewish left refers to Jewish individuals or organizations that identify with or support left-wing or social liberal causes, consciously as Jews. There is no singular organization or movement that constitutes the Jewish left.

Jews have been major forces in the history of the labor movement , the settlement house movement, the women's rights movement, anti-racist and anti-colonialist work, and anti-fascist and anti-capitalist organizations of many forms in Europe , the United States , Australia , Algeria , Iraq , Ethiopia , South Africa , Palestine , and the State of Israel .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] Jews have a history of involvement in anarchism , socialism , Marxism , and Western liberalism . The expression "on the left" encompasses a range of political positions. Many individuals associated with left-wing politics have been Jews born into Jewish families, with varying degrees of connection to Jewish communities, cultures , traditions, or religious practices.

History Jewish leftist thought has roots in the Haskalah , led by thinkers such as Moses Mendelssohn , as well as in the support of European Jews , including Ludwig Börne , for republican ideals following the French Revolution and the Napoleonic Wars . In the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, the movement for Jewish emancipation spread across Europe and was closely associated with the emergence of political liberalism , which emphasized Enlightenment principles of rights and equality before the law . At the time, liberals were considered part of the political left , and emancipated Jews, as they became more integrated into the political culture of their respective nations, were often associated with liberal political parties . Many Jews supported the American Revolution , the French Revolution , and the Revolutions of 1848 . In England, Jews tended to support the Liberal Party , which had led the parliamentary struggle for Jewish emancipation, [ 5 ] a political dynamic described by some scholars as "the liberal Jewish compromise".

[ 6 ] The emergence of a Jewish working class During the late 19th century, industrialisation led to the emergence of a Jewish working class in the cities of Eastern and Central Europe , followed by the development of a Jewish labor movement . The Jewish Labour Bund was established in Lithuania , Poland, and Russia in 1897, and various Jewish socialist organizations formed across the Russian Empire 's Pale of Settlement .

[ 7 ] Additionally, individuals of Jewish origin participated in anarchist , socialist , social democratic , and communist movements, though not all explicitly identified as Jewish.

[ citation needed ] As Zionism developed as a political movement, Labor Zionist parties such as Ber Borochov 's Poale Zion emerged. Other left-wing Jewish nationalist movements included territorialism , which sought a homeland for the Jewish people but not necessarily in Palestine ; Jewish autonomism , which advocated for non-territorial national rights for Jews within multinational empires; and folkism , promoted by Simon Dubnow , which emphasized the cultural identity of Yiddish -speaking Jews.

[ citation needed ] As Eastern European Jews migrated West from the 1880s onward, these ideological movements took root in growing Jewish communities, including the East End of London , Paris ’s Pletzl , New York City 's Lower East Side , [ 8 ] and Buenos Aires . London had an active Jewish anarchist movement, in which the non-Jewish German writer Rudolf Rocker was a central figure. In the United States, a significant Jewish socialist movement developed, exemplified by the Yiddish-language daily The Forward and trade unions such as the International Ladies' Garment Workers' Union and the Amalgamated Clothing Workers of America . Notable figures in these circles included Rose Schneiderman , Abraham Cahan , Morris Winchevsky , and David Dubinsky .

In the late 19th and early 20th centuries, Jews played a significant role in the social democratic parties of Germany , Russia , Austria-Hungary , and Poland . Historian Enzo Traverso has used the term "Judeo-Marxism" to describe the distinct contributions of Jewish socialists to Marxist thought. These ranged from cosmopolitan perspectives opposing nationalism , as seen in the views of Rosa Luxemburg and, to a lesser extent, Leon Trotsky , to positions more accommodating of cultural nationalism, as represented by the Austromarxists and Vladimir Medem .

In Soviets and against fascism As with the American Revolution of 1776, the French Revolution of 1789, and the German Revolution of 1848, many Jews worldwide welcomed the Russian Revolution , viewing the collapse of a regime associated with antisemitic pogroms as a positive development. Many believed that the new Soviet order would improve conditions for Jews in the region. Many Jews became involved in communist parties , constituting large proportions of their membership in many countries, including Great Britain and the United States. Some Communist parties had dedicated Jewish sections, such as the Yevsektsiya in the Soviet Union . The Soviet government implemented policies toward Jews and Jewish culture that fluctuated over time, at times promoting Jewish cultural development—such as supporting Yiddish-language scholarship and establishing the Jewish Autonomous Oblast —while also engaging in antisemitic purges, including the crackdown following the Doctors' Plot .

With the rise of fascism in parts of Europe during the 1920s and 1930s, many Jews became active in left-wing movements, particularly Communist parties, which were at the forefront of antifascist efforts. Jewish volunteers participated in the International Brigades during the Spanish Civil War , including the American XV International Brigade and the Polish-Jewish Palafox Battalion . In Britain, Jews and leftist activists fought Oswald Mosley ’s British Union of Fascists , including at the Battle of Cable Street in 1936. The Jewish Anti-Fascist Committee in the Soviet Union also played a role in mobilizing opposition to fascism.

During World War II , Jewish leftist groups were actively involved in resistance against Nazism . Bundists and Labor Zionists played key roles in the Jewish Combat Organization and the Warsaw Ghetto Uprising .

[ citation needed ] Radical Jews in Central and Western Europe Alongside movements rooted in the Jewish working class, relatively assimilated middle-class Jews in Central and Western Europe explored radicalism within Jewish tradition.

Martin Buber incorporated Hasidic Jewish thought into his anarchist philosophy, while Gershom Scholem combined anarchism with his scholarship on Kabbalah .

Walter Benjamin was influenced by both Marxism and Jewish messianism , and Gustav Landauer , a religious Jew, identified as a libertarian communist .

Jacob Israël de Haan merged socialism with Haredi Judaism , while Bernard Lazare , a left-libertarian , initially embraced Zionism in 1897 but later criticized its bourgeois character in a letter to Theodor Herzl and the Zionist Action Committee writing "You are bourgeois in thoughts, bourgeois in your feelings, bourgeois in your ideas, bourgeois in your conception of society." [ 9 ] In the Weimar Republic , Walther Rathenau was a prominent figure in the Jewish left.

[ citation needed ] Labor Zionism and the Israeli left Main article: Labor Zionism First Prime Minister of Israel , David Ben-Gurion , a key figure in Labor Zionism In the twentieth century, particularly after the Second Aliyah , Labor Zionism became a significant force in the yishuv settlement of Palestine . It was first developed in Russia by the Marxist Ber Borochov and the non-Marxists Nachman Syrkin and A. D. Gordon . Organizations such as Poale Zion , the Histadrut labour union, and the Mapai party played a central role in the establishment of the State of Israel , with Labor Zionist politicians including David Ben-Gurion and Golda Meir among its founders. The kibbutz movement also emerged as a model of collective Jewish settlement based on Labor Zionist principles.

During the 1940s, many leftists supported the idea of a binational state in Palestine rather than an exclusively Jewish state, a position advocated by figures including Hannah Arendt and Martin Buber . Since the State of Israel’s founding in 1948, the country has had an active political left, including both Zionist parties (including The Democrats and its predecessors) and anti-Zionist movements (such as the Palestine Communist Party and Maki ). The Israeli Labor Party held power in the State of Israel for significant periods between 1948 and 2009.

Modern Labor Zionist organizations include Habonim Dror , Histadrut, Na’amat, Hashomer Hatzair , the Kibbutz Movement , and Givat Haviva . Labor and progressive Zionists are represented at the World Zionist Organization . and align with historical divisions between Poale Zion Right (which evolved into Avoda) and Poale Zion Left (which led to Hashomer Hatzair, Mapam, and Meretz).

There were historically two worldwide groupings of left-wing Zionist organizations. The World Labour Zionist Movement, associated with Labor Zionism, is a loose association, including Avoda , Habonim Dror , Histadrut and Na'amat . The World Union of Meretz , associated with what was historically known as the Socialist Zionist tendency, is a loose association of the Israeli Meretz party, the Hashomer Hatzair Socialist Zionist youth movement, the Kibbutz Artzi Federation and the Givat Haviva research and study center. Both movements exist as factions within the World Zionist Organization , as well as regional or country-specific Zionist movements; the two roughly correspond to the interwar split between the Poale Zion Right (the tradition that led to Avoda) and the Poale Zion Left (Hashomer Hatzair, Mapam, Meretz).

Postwar era in the diaspora United States As the Jewish working class declined after World War II , its associated institutions and political movements also diminished. In the United Kingdom, the English branch of The Workers Circle ceased operations in the 1950s, and Jewish trade unionism in the United States lost its influence around the same time. However, some remnants of Jewish working-class organizations continue to exist, including the Jewish Labor Committee , The Forward , and The Workers Circle in the United States, the International Jewish Labor Bund in Australia, and the United Jewish People's Order in Canada.

Starting in the 1960s, there was a renewed interest among Western Jews in Jewish working-class culture and radical traditions. This period saw the emergence of new Jewish organizations focused on Yiddish culture, Jewish spirituality, and social justice. In the United States, New Jewish Agenda operated from 1980 to 1992 as a national, multi-issue progressive membership organization advocating for a "Jewish voice on the Left and a Left voice in the Jewish Community". In 1990, Jews for Racial and Economic Justice was founded in New York City to promote economic and social equity. In 1999, leftists in Los Angeles split from the American Jewish Congress to establish the Progressive Jewish Alliance .

The majority of Jewish voters in the United States have backed the Democratic Party 's presidential candidate in every election since 1924 , with the exception of 1980 .

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] United Kingdom In Britain, organizations such as the Jewish Socialists' Group and Rabbi Michael Lerner ’s Tikkun continued this tradition, while more recent groups like Jewdas have adopted a more eclectic and radical approach to Jewish identity and activism.

Belgium In Belgium, the Union des progressistes juifs de Belgique traces its origins to the Jewish Communist and Bundist Solidarité movement of the Belgian Resistance and has supported causes such as the Israeli refuseniks and the rights of undocumented immigrants in Belgium.

South Africa South Africa's Jewish left was actively involved in left-wing causes, including the anti- apartheid movement. Several Jewish individuals were among the defendants in the Rivonia Trial , including Joe Slovo , Denis Goldberg , Lionel Bernstein , Bob Hepple , Arthur Goldreich , Harold Wolpe , and James Kantor .

Helen Suzman was a Jewish member of the South African Parliament from 1953 to 1989, representing various liberal parties.

21st century Melbourne Jews protest Australia's policy on refugees in July 2013.

During the first decade of the 2000s, the Israeli–Palestinian conflict became an increasing factor in shaping the Jewish left. A new wave of grassroots leftist Jewish organizations emerged in support of Palestinian causes. Groups such as Jewish Voice for Peace in the United States, Independent Jewish Voices in Canada, Independent Jewish Voices in the United Kingdom, and the International Jewish Anti-Zionist Network provided a renewed platform for left-wing Jewish anti-Zionism . This perspective continues to be represented in media outlets such as the American Mondoweiss and the Canadian Treyf podcast .

[ 12 ] 2014-2023: Aftermath of the 2014 Gaza War and 2016 presidential election Following the 2014 Gaza War , some leftist Jewish organizations in the United States and Canada shifted their focus to directly challenging Zionist Jewish organizations, [ 13 ] [ 14 ] [ 15 ] [ 16 ] such as the Jewish federations , the American Israel Public Affairs Committee ( AIPAC ), the Anti-Defamation League , and the Centre for Israel and Jewish Affairs , over their support for the State of Israel’s actions during the war.

While a majority of American Jews during this period continued to report feeling attached to the State of Israel, younger generations increasingly voiced criticism of the Israeli government and expressed greater sympathy for Palestinians compared to their predecessors.

[ 17 ] [ 18 ] These intra-community tensions extended into domestic politics following the 2016 United States presidential election .

[ 19 ] Groups such as IfNotNow , Jewish Voice for Peace, and Jews for Racial and Economic Justice began organizing under the banner of #JewishResistance, aiming to challenge institutional Jewish support for the first presidency of Donald Trump and its associations with white nationalist figures.

[ 20 ] After the 2016 election, liberal and leftist Jewish organizations with a range of positions on Zionism experienced significant growth in the United States.

[ 21 ] New Jewish initiatives emerged, including Never Again Action , which focused on opposing the expansion of migrant detention by the United States government.

[ 22 ] Several Jewish organizations, including Bend the Arc , T’ruah , JFREJ, Jewish Voice for Peace, and IfNotNow, joined these efforts under the banner of #JewsAgainstICE.

[ 23 ] Other initiatives, such as the Outlive Them network, [ 24 ] Fayer, [ 25 ] and the Muslim-Jewish Anti-Fascist Front, [ 26 ] were established to address antisemitism and white nationalism.

This period also saw the rise of new leftist Jewish media outlets.

Protocols , a journal of culture and politics, began publishing in 2017.

[ 27 ] Jewish Currents , originally founded in 1946, was relaunched in 2018 by a new editorial team of millennial Jews. The Treyf podcast, which started in 2015, documented the Jewish left’s growth in the United States during this time.

There was also a renewed interest in Jewish anarchism within the United States. This resurgence was supported by new publications, such as Kenyon Zimmer’s Immigrants Against the State (2015), and the reissuing of documentaries like The Free Voice of Labor , which chronicles the final days of the Fraye Arbeter Shtime .

[ 28 ] In January 2019, YIVO hosted a conference on Yiddish anarchism in New York City , which attracted over 450 attendees.

[ 29 ] Following this event, a national Jewish anarchist convergence was organized in Chicago.

[ 30 ] Contemporary Jewish left North America A new wave of the resurgence of Jewish left-wing activism emerged in late 2023, coinciding with the Israeli invasion of the Gaza Strip following the October 7 Hamas-led attack on Israel .

[ 31 ] [ 32 ] According to Jay Ulfelder , this period marked "the largest and broadest pro-Palestinian mobilization in U.S. history".

[ 33 ] This movement included the largest recorded Jewish American demonstration in support of Palestine [ 34 ] and the largest pro-Palestinian demonstration in U.S. history, the National March on Washington: Free Palestine . Several new Jewish leftist organizations and coalitions were established, including Jews Say No to Genocide ( Toronto ), [ 35 ] [ 36 ] the Tzedek Collective ( Victoria, British Columbia ), [ 37 ] [ 38 ] Gliklekh in Goles ( Vancouver ), [ 39 ] Shoresh (United States), [ 40 ] [ 41 ] and Rabbis for Ceasefire (United States), [ 42 ] [ 43 ] while existing anti-Zionist Jewish groups, such as Jewish Voice for Peace, experienced significant membership growth.

[ 44 ] During this period, traditionally liberal Zionist Jewish groups generally adopted positions supporting the State of Israel.

[ 45 ] Groups such as J Street and the Anti-Defamation League opposed calls for a ceasefire and expressed support for continued Israeli military operations in Gaza , leading to internal dissent and staff resignations.

[ 46 ] [ 47 ] [ 48 ] [ 49 ] By January 2024, J Street had advocated for a qualified end to Israel's military campaign, [ 50 ] while the Anti-Defamation League maintained its opposition to anti-Zionist and other Jewish leftist groups calling for a ceasefire, characterizing some as "hate groups" and collaborating with law enforcement to oppose the 2024 pro-Palestinian protests on university campuses .

[ 51 ] [ 52 ] [ 53 ] [ 54 ] The Progressive Israel Network, a coalition of ten liberal and progressive Zionist Jewish organizations—including Ameinu , Americans for Peace Now , Habonim Dror North America, Hashomer Hatzair, The Jewish Labor Committee, J Street, the New Israel Fund , Partners for Progressive Israel , Reconstructing Judaism , and T'ruah—was established in 2019.

[ 55 ] Many of these organizations experienced internal debate regarding their positions on Israel in the years leading up to the war in Gaza.

[ 56 ] [ 57 ] [ 58 ] [ 59 ] Following the onset of Israeli military operations in Gaza, staff members from nearly all Progressive Israel Network organizations signed an open letter advocating for a ceasefire.

[ 47 ] [ 60 ] [ 61 ] Several of these groups participated in the 2023 March for Israel during the war under the banner of a "Peace Bloc". Reporting on the event for Jewish Currents , journalist Mari Cohen observed that by "attending the November 14th March for Israel and refusing to call for a ceasefire, many progressive Jewish groups have cast their lot with the Jewish mainstream".

[ 45 ] United Kingdom Jewish groups on the left include Independent Jewish Voices , Jewdas , the Jewish Socialists' Group , Jewish Voice for Labour and Jews for Justice for Palestinians . The Jewish Labour Movement is affiliated to the Labour Party .

Jewish left in Palestine and Israel Further information: Politics of Israel § Political left In Israel’s Knesset , left-wing political parties and blocs have participated in elections with varying degrees of success. Over time, these parties have undergone changes, with some merging, others dissolving, and new parties emerging.

Israeli social liberal, Labor Zionist, and left-wing parties have included: Hadash (1977–present) Mapam (1948–1997) Meretz (1992–2024) Israeli Labor Party (1968–2024) Meimad (founded 1988) Progressive List for Peace (1984–1990s) Ratz (1973–1997) Left Camp of Israel (1970s–1980s) Meri (1960s–1970s) Maki (1965–present) Notable figures associated with these parties have included Amir Peretz , Meir Vilner , Shulamit Aloni , Uri Avnery , Yossi Beilin , Ran Cohen , Matti Peled , Amnon Rubinstein , Dov Khenin and Yossi Sarid .

The Israeli left has also played a role in social movements, including the 2011 Israeli social justice protests and the 2023 Israeli judicial reform protests . Activists from the 2011 protests, particularly those affiliated with Hadash, established Standing Together in 2015.

Jewish left in Britain British Jews have played a significant role in left-wing politics in the United Kingdom, particularly within the Labour Party and, to a lesser extent, the Liberal Democrats .

During the period when the Liberal Party was a main party for British leftists, multiple Jewish politicians attained high office.

Herbert Samuel served as leader of the Liberal Party from 1930 to 1935, while Rufus Isaacs became the only British Jew to be created a Marquess. Other notable Jewish Liberal politicians in the 19th and early 20th centuries included Lionel de Rothschild , the first Jewish Member of Parliament, as well as Sir David Salomons , Sir Francis Goldsmid , Sir George Jessel , Arthur Cohen , The Lord Swaythling , Edward Sassoon , The Lord Hore-Belisha , Edwin Montagu , Ignaz Trebitsch-Lincoln , and The Lord Wandsworth .

As the Liberal Party declined in the early 20th century, the Labour Party emerged as the main party of the left. Jewish individuals were active in Labour, including Leonard Woolf and Hugh Franklin . Many Jewish MPs, such as Barnett Janner , Sir Percy Harris , and Harry Nathan , transitioned from the Liberal Party to Labour. Academics and intellectuals such as Harold Laski , Nicholas Kaldor , Victor Gollancz , and Karl Mannheim contributed to the ideological foundations of British socialism. Notable early Labour politicians included Lewis Silkin , a minister in Clement Attlee ’s government, Sydney Silverman , who played a key role in the abolition of capital punishment in Britain, and Manny Shinwell , a leader of the Red Clydeside movement and later Secretary of State for War .

Following the World War II, the Labour Party formed a government, and several newly elected Jewish MPs were associated with the socialist left, influenced by events such as the Battle of Cable Street . These included Herschel Austin , Maurice Edelman , and Ian Mikardo , as well as Phil Piratin , one of the four Communist Party MPs in British history. Jewish MPs elected in the 1940s and 1950s who later held ministerial positions in Harold Wilson ’s governments of the 1960s and 1970s included The Lord Barnett , Edmund Dell , John Diamond , Reg Freeson , The Baroness Gaitskell , Myer Galpern , Gerald Kaufman , The Lord Lever of Manchester , Paul Rose , The Lord Segal , The Baroness Serota , The Lord Sheldon , John and Samuel Silkin , Barnett Stross , and David Weitzman . Another Jewish Labour politician of this era, Leo Abse , played a notable role in the decriminalization of homosexuality and liberalisation to divorce laws.

Robert Maxwell , a Labour MP in the 1964–66 Wilson government, eventually became a leading newspaper publisher when his holding company purchased Mirror Group Newspapers in 1984.

In the 1970s and 1980s, the Labour Party experienced internal divisions, including conflicts over the Militant tendency , a Trotskyist group led by Ted Grant , and the split that led to the formation of the Social Democratic Party (SDP). The SDP formed an Alliance with the Liberal Party (who had two Jewish MPs, The Lord Carlile of Berriew and Clement Freud ) and later to unite as the Liberal Democrats. Some Jewish Labour MPs, such as Neville Sandelson and Robert Skidelsky , joined the SDP, while others, including Harry Cohen , Alf Dubs , Millie Miller , Eric Moonman , and David Winnick , remained in Labour.

During the late 1980s and 1990s, with the shift away from the socialist left of the party, and during Tony Blair 's leadership of the Labour Party, notable senior Jewish politicians included Peter Mandelson , one of the architects of " New Labour ", Peter Goldsmith, Baron Goldsmith , The Lord Beecham , and The Lord Gould of Brookwood . Mandelson, party fund-raiser The Lord Levy and Jack Straw (who is of partial Jewish ancestry), were accused by Tam Dalyell , MP, of being a " cabal of Jewish advisers" around Blair.

[ 62 ] Several of Blair's Ministers and Labour backbenchers were Jewish or partially Jewish, including Barbara Roche , Dame Margaret Hodge , Fabian Hamilton , Louise Ellman , The Baroness King of Bow , and Gillian Merron . Labour donors during the 1990s and 2000s who were Jewish included David Abrahams , The Lord Bernstein of Craigweil , Richard Caring , Sir Trevor Chinn , Sir David Garrard , The Lord Gavron , Sir Emmanuel Kaye , Andrew Rosenfeld , The Lord Sainsbury of Turville , and Barry Townsley . Several of these were caught up in the Cash for Honours scandal.

[ citation needed ] Under the government of Blair's successor, Gordon Brown , brothers David Miliband and Ed Miliband became members of the Cabinet. Their father was the Marxist academic Ralph Miliband . The brothers differed in their view of the party's future direction, and they fought a bitter leadership election against each other in 2010.

Ed Miliband won the election and became the first Jewish leader of the Labour Party. One of Miliband's Shadow Cabinet members, Ivan Lewis , as well as advisers David Axelrod , Arnie Graf , and The Lord Glasman are all Jewish.

Recent Jewish Labour politicians include William Bach , The Lord Bassam of Brighton , Michael Cashman , The Lord Grabiner , Ruth Henig , Margaret Hodge , The Lord Kestenbaum , Jonathan Mendelsohn , Janet Neel Cohen , Meta Ramsay , Ruth Smeeth , Alex Sobel , Catherine Stihler , Andrew Stone , Leslie Turnberg , and Robert Winston .

Since the foundation of the Liberal Democrats, several Jews have achieved prominence: David Alliance , Luciana Berger , the aforementioned Alex Carlisle, Miranda Green , Olly Grender , Sally Hamwee , Evan Harris , Susan Kramer , Anthony Lester , Jonathan Marks , Julia Neuberger , Monroe Palmer , Paul Strasburger , and Lynne Featherstone , who became a Minister in the Cameron–Clegg coalition .

See also Ameinu Australian Jewish Democratic Society Broit un ehre Bundist Chutzpah Collective Conservatism in Israel Cosmopolitanism Der jüdische Arbeiter (Vienna) Der royter shtern (Buenos Aires) Der yidisher arbeyter (Paris) Dos Abend Blatt Folks-Ligue Hebrew Socialist Union in London History of the Jews in Russia and the Soviet Union Independent Australian Jewish Voices Independent Jewish Voices Internationalism (politics) Jewish anti-racism Jewish pro-Palestinian activism J Street Judaism and politics Jewish Anti-Zionist League Jewish political movements List of Jewish feminists Liberalism in Israel Naivelt Partners for Progressive Israel Progressive Jewish Thought and the New Anti-Semitism Self-hating Jew Undzer emes Vochenblatt Further reading Srebrnik, H. (2002).

"Such Stuff As Diaspora Dreams Are Made On: Birobidzhan and the Canadian-Jewish Communist Imagination." Canadian Jewish Studies Études Juives Canadiennes , 10. https://doi.org/10.25071/1916-0925.19957 References ^ "The New Left." Jewish Virtual Library (2008); retrieved 6 June 2015.

^ "Henri Alleg, auteur de "La Question", est mort" .

Le Monde.fr . July 18, 2013 – via Le Monde.

^ Naeim Giladi , "The Jews of Iraq": "In many countries, including the United States and Iraq, Jews represented a large part of the Communist party. In Iraq, hundreds of Jews of the working intelligentsia occupied key positions in the hierarchy of the Communist and Socialist parties." ^ Hannah Borenstein, "Savior Story" : "The violence of the late 1970s and early 1980s Ethiopia spurred many forms of active and comprehensive resistance. Ethiopian Jews participated widely; many, for instance, were members of the Marxist-Leninist EPRP." ^ Geoffrey Alderman (1983) The Jewish Community in British Politics , Oxford: Clarendon.

^ see Sharman Kadish Bolsheviks and British Jews , London: Frank Cass. (1992, e. g., pp. 55–60, 132); Jonathan Hyman Jews in Britain During the Great War , Manchester: University of Manchester Working Papers in Economic and Social History No. 51, October (2001, e. g., p. 11). The phrase was coined by Steven Bayme.

^ Mendes, Philip.

"The Rise and Fall of the Jewish Labor Bund" Archived 2014-07-01 at the Wayback Machine , Jewish Currents (Autumn 2013); accessed 8 June 2015.

^ Michels, Tony (2005).

A Fire in Their Hearts: Yiddish Socialists in New York . Cambridge, Massachusetts, and London, England: Harvard University Press. p. 335.

ISBN 978-0-674-03243-9 .

JSTOR 40864944 . Retrieved 5 May 2024 .

^ Gabriel Piterberg (2008), The Returns of Zionism: Myths, Politics, and Scholarship in Israel , London: Verso, p. 10 ^ "Jewish Voting Record in U.S. Presidential Elections" . Jewish Virtual Library . Retrieved 2017-01-09 .

^ Huang, Jon; Jacoby, Samuel; Strickland, Michael; Lai, K. K. Rebecca (8 November 2016).

"Election 2016: Exit Polls" .

The New York Times . Archived from the original on 11 December 2016 . Retrieved 16 January 2017 .

^ "Weinfeld: In praise of radical Jewish anarchist radio" .

The Canadian Jewish News . 2019-08-15 . Retrieved 2024-02-18 .

^ "Direct action disrupts Jewish-Canadian complicity in settler colonialism – Canadian Dimension" .

Canadiandimension.com . Retrieved 2017-01-09 .

^ "The rise of 'If Not Now' and the collapse of the pro-Israel consensus" .

Mondoweiss.net . 2014-09-10 . Retrieved 2017-01-09 .

^ "17 Jewish Activists Protesting Israeli Occupation Arrested at ADL Headquarters" .

Forward.com . 21 April 2016 . Retrieved 2017-01-09 .

^ "St. Louis Jews call on ADL to cancel honor to police" .

Mondoweiss.net . 2015-07-18 . Retrieved 2017-01-09 .

^ "A Portrait of Jewish Americans" . Pew Research Center. October 2013 . Retrieved 2017-01-09 .

^ Dov Waxman (2017).

"Young American Jews and Israel: Beyond Birthright and BDS" .

Israel Studies .

22 (3): 177– 199.

doi : 10.2979/israelstudies.22.3.08 .

JSTOR 10.2979/israelstudies.22.3.08 .

S2CID 148971751 .

^ "PHOTOS: Young Jews march on Trump HQ: #StopBannon: Will the Jewish Federations of North America follow suit?" .

Jewschool.com . 17 November 2016 . Retrieved 2017-01-09 .

^ "Hundreds join #JewishResistance protest against Trump chief strategist Steve Bannon" .

Mic.com . 2016-11-21 . Retrieved 2017-01-09 .

^ Goldberg, Michelle (24 August 2019).

"Opinion | Mazel Tov, Trump. You've Revived the Jewish Left" .

The New York Times .

^ "Making "Never Again" More Than a Slogan" . 11 July 2019.

^ Treyf [@treyfpodcast] (2019-08-11).

"An enormous shkoyach to everyone who participated in #JewsAgainstIce actions today for Tisha B'Av!" ( Tweet ) . Retrieved 2020-12-31 – via Twitter .

^ "Outlive Them Network – For a World without Pogroms, for a Future without Fascism" .

^ " "Fayer" Twitter account" .

Twitter . Retrieved 2022-04-08 .

^ " 'MuJews': Muslims and Jews band together against hate" .

NBC News . 15 February 2017.

^ "Issue #10: TEMPLE – PROTOCOLS" .

^ Pacific Street Films, "Free Voice of Labour: The Jewish Anarchists" ^ Andrew Silow-Carroll, "A YIVO conference finds a new audience for Yiddish anarchism" Jewish Telegraphic Agency , January 22, 2019 ^ "HOME | Mysite" .

^ "A Surge in American Jewish Left Organizing" .

Jewish Currents . Retrieved 2024-02-18 .

^ "Israeli War on Gaza Sparks 'Largest Mass Mobilization of Jews' for Palestine in US History" .

www.commondreams.org . Retrieved 2024-02-19 .

^ Maltz, Judy (December 5, 2023).

" 'Largest pro-Palestinian Mobilization in U.S. History' " .

Haaretz . Archived from the original on December 12, 2023.

^ Burch, Sarah (2023-10-19).

"The largest ever Jewish protest in solidarity with Palestinians" .

JVP . Retrieved 2024-02-19 .

^ "Jews Say No to Genocide" .

^ Smith, Louise (2024-02-01).

"Jews Against Genocide" .

The Grind Magazine . Retrieved 2024-02-19 .

^ "The Tzedek Collective" .

^ "Tzedek Collective: 'On NCCM's Lawsuit Against Hillel BC' Feb 8/24" . Retrieved 2024-02-19 .

^ "Gliklekh in Goles" .

^ "Shoresh: the anti-Zionist Israeli movement in the U.S." Action Network .

^ "Shoresh US" .

^ "Rabbis for Ceasefire" .

^ Singh, Kanishka (2024-01-09).

"Rabbis protest at United Nations asking for ceasefire in Gaza" .

Reuters .

^ Burley, Shane (2024-01-15).

"Jewish Activists Mobilizing Against War Are Finding a New Community" .

New Lines Magazine . Retrieved 2024-02-19 .

^ a b Cohen, Mari (2023-12-08).

"Progressive Zionists Choose a Side" .

Jewish Currents . Retrieved 2024-02-19 .

^ Cohen, Mari (2014-02-09).

"J Street's Pro-War Stance Prompts Staff Departures" .

Jewish Currents . Retrieved 2024-02-19 .

^ a b Rosenfeld, Arno (2024-02-02).

" 'Clear violation of our policies': Jewish nonprofit workers face pushback calling for Gaza cease-fire" .

The Forward . Retrieved 2024-02-19 .

^ Harpaz, Beth (2023-10-19).

"ADL researcher quits over Greenblatt blasting of Jewish left on Israel and Hamas" .

The Forward . Retrieved 2024-02-19 .

^ Zhang, Sharon (2024-01-05).

"ADL Staff Internally Dissent Over Group's Targeting of Pro-Palestine Advocates" .

Truthout . Retrieved 2024-02-19 .

^ " 'Time for Diplomacy' " .

J Street . 2024-01-22 . Retrieved 2024-02-19 .

^ Lee, Micah (2023-11-11).

"Anti-Defamation League Maps Jewish Peace Rallies With Antisemitic Attacks" .

The Intercept . Archived from the original on 2023-12-03.

^ Guyer, Jonathan; Perkins, Tom (2024-01-05).

"Anti-Defamation League staff decry 'dishonest' campaign against Israel critics" .

The Guardian .

ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved 2024-02-19 .

^ Dickson, EJ (2023-11-26).

"Musk Endorsement Has a Top ADL Advisor Ready to Quit" .

Rolling Stone .

^ Kane, Alex (2023-11-21).

"The Push to "Deactivate" Students for Justice in Palestine" .

Jewish Currents . Retrieved 2024-02-19 .

^ "Ten Organizations Launch New Progressive Israel Network" .

New Israel Fund . 2019-06-24 . Retrieved 11 December 2023 .

^ Cohen, Mari (2021-04-19).

"Revising The Dream: Members of the socialist-Zionist youth group Habonim Dror North America are increasingly pushing back on Zionism's centrality in the movement" .

Jewish Currents .

^ Kampeas, Ron (2019-04-15).

"Reconstructionist Movement Backs Anti-BDS Measure – But 60 Rabbis Disagree" .

The Forward .

^ "Reconstructionist Judaism and Zionism" , Wikipedia , 2023-11-27 , retrieved 2024-02-19 ^ Alex Kane, Mari Cohen (2022-02-10).

"Why Liberal Zionist Groups Won't Say "Apartheid" " .

Jewish Currents .

^ Seitz-Wald, Alex (2023-12-07).

"Hundreds of Jewish organization staffers call for White House to back Gaza cease-fire" .

NBC News . Retrieved 2024-02-19 .

^ "Open Letter from Professionals at Jewish Organizations to President Biden and Congress" .

docs.google.com . Retrieved 2024-02-19 .

^ "Dalyell's 'Jewish cabal' remarks denied" . BBC News . Retrieved 9 January 2017 .

External links Jews and the workers' movement (Marxist Internet Archive) Yiddish language sections of American socialist parties (Marxist Internet Archive) Faith and Socialism Commission of the Socialist Party USA v t e Jews and Judaism Outline of Judaism Index of Jewish history-related articles History Timeline Israelites Origins of Judaism Ancient Israel and Judah Second Temple period Synagogal Judaism Rabbinic Judaism Middle Ages Zionism Population Assimilation Atheists Buddhists Israeli Jews Karaites Samaritans Lists of Jews Persecution Antisemitism Xueta Christianity Zionism, race and genetics Gentile Groups claiming affiliation with Israelites Diaspora Ashkenazim Afrikaner-Jode Chuts Galitzianers Lita'im Oberlander Jews Ostjuden Udmurt and Tatar Jews Unterlander Jews Yekkes Beta Israel Beta Abraham Falash Mura Desi Jews Bene Israel Kochinim Dönmeh Gruzínim Italkim Neofiti Kaifeng Jews Karaites Constantinopolitan Karaites Crimean Karaites Kurdish Jews Krymchaks Lemba Maghrebi Berber Jews Mizrahi Afghan Jews Alexandrian Jews Baghdadi Bukharan Jews Egyptian Jews Mountain Jews Palestinian Jews Persian Jews Urfalim Teimanim Adeni Jews Ḥabbanim Hadhrami Jews Saada Jews Mustaʿravim Jewish tribes of Arabia Romaniote Sephardim Eastern Sephardim Livornese Jews North African Sephardim Paradesi Meshuchrarim Sephardic Bnei Anusim Xuetes Languages ( Diasporic ) Hebrew Modern Ashkenazi Sephardi Mizrahi Yemenite Tiberian Samaritan Signed Medieval Mishnaic Biblical Babylonian Palestinian Catalanic Judeo-Amazigh Judeo-Arabic Yahudic Judeo-Baghdadi Judeo-Moroccan Judeo-Tripolitanian Judeo-Tunisian Judeo-Yemeni Judaeo-Aramaic Targum Barzani Betanure Hulaulá Lishana Deni Lishán Didán Lishanid Noshan Biblical Talmudic Palestinian Galilean Judeo-Aragonese Jewish English Yeshivish Yinglish Heblish Judeo-Gascon Judaeo-Greek Judeo-Italian Judaeo-Piedmontese Judeo-Latin Judeo-Malay Judeo-Malayalam Judeo-Marathi Judaeo-Occitan Judeo-Persian Bukhori Judeo-Borujerdi Judeo-Golpaygani Judeo-Hamedani Judeo-Shirazi Juhuri Judaeo-Portuguese Judeo-Urdu Karaim Kayliñña Kivruli Knaanic Koiné Greek Krymchak Lachoudisch Ladino Haketia Tetuani Lotegorisch Qwareña Shassagh Shassi Shuadit Yiddish dialects Eastern Galitzish Litvish Poylish Klezmer-loshn Western Judeo-Alsatian Lachoudisch Scots-Yiddish Zarphatic Philosophy Beliefs Mitzvah Rabbinic authority Chosen people Conversion Eschatology Messiah Ethics Holiness God Names of God Halakha Haskalah Kabbalah Sefirot Land of Israel Who is a Jew?

Branches Religious movements Orthodox Haredi Hasidic Litvaks Modern Conservative Reform Reconstructionist Humanistic Neo-Hasidism Renewal Neolog relations Haymanot Hellenistic Karaite Samaritanism Science Secularism Schisms Literature Sifrei Kodesh Tanakh /Hebrew Bible Torah Nevi'im Ketuvim Rabbinic Mishnah Talmud Tosefta Midrash Kabbalah texts Hekhalot literature Pardes Rimonim Sefer HaBahir Sefer HaEtz Chaim Sefer Raziel HaMalakh Sefer Yetzirah Zohar Shulchan Aruch Siddur Hebrew literature Culture Astrology perspectives Monen Astronomy Calendar Holidays Cuisine Kashrut Education Leadership Rabbi Rebbe Marriage Divorce Music Mythology Names Politics Prayer Synagogue Hazzan Symbolism Studies Center for Jewish History American Jewish Historical Society American Sephardi Federation Leo Baeck Institute New York Yeshiva University Museum YIVO Institute for Jewish Research Center of Contemporary Jewish Documentation Encyclopaedia Judaica Genetics Jew (word) Jewish Encyclopedia Jewish Virtual Library National Library of Israel YIVO Encyclopedia United States Holocaust Memorial Museum Encyclopedia of the Holocaust Holocaust Encyclopedia Relations with other religions Christian Anabaptism Catholicism Mormonism Protestantism Jews and Christmas Jews and Halloween non-Christian Buddhism Islam Hinduism Italics indicate extinct languages Category Judaism portal v t e Political spectrum Far-left Left Centre-left Centre Centre-right Right Far-right Political positions Post-leftism Ultra-leftism Anti-Stalinist left New Left Centrist Marxism Third Way Radical centrism New Right Political ideologies Anarchism Marxism Communism Socialism Social democracy Liberalism Christian democracy Conservatism Nationalism Fascism Nazism Religious politics Buddhist socialism Christian left Jewish left Islamic socialism Christian right Hindutva Islamism Religious Zionism Political pejoratives Baizuo Champagne socialist Hard left Liberal elite Limousine liberal Loony left Moonbat Red fascist Regressive left Social fascism Social imperialism Social justice warrior Soft left Wingnut Models Horseshoe theory Left–right political spectrum Nolan Chart Overton window Open–closed political spectrum Pournelle chart Right-wing authoritarianism See also Anti-authoritarianism Democratic transition Libertarianism Syndicalism Progressivism Green politics Identity politics Corporatism Authoritarianism Totalitarianism Revolutionary Reactionary Anti-establishment Collectivism Communitarianism The Establishment Individualism Hardline Populism Radical politics Triangulation v t e Anarchism Concepts Anarchy Anarchist Black Cross Anarchist criminology Anationalism Anti-authoritarianism Anti-capitalism Anti-militarism Affinity group Autonomous social center Black bloc Classless society Class struggle Consensus decision-making Conscientious objector Critique of work Decentralization Deep ecology Direct action Free love Freethought Horizontalidad Individualism Law Mutual aid Participatory politics Permanent autonomous zone Prefigurative politics Proletarian internationalism Propaganda of the deed Refusal of work Revolution Rewilding Sabotage Security culture Self-ownership Social ecology Sociocracy Somatherapy Spontaneous order Squatting Temporary autonomous zone Union of egoists Voluntary association Workers' council Issues Animal rights Capitalism Education Love and sex Nationalism Religion Violence Schools of thought Classical Individualist Egoist Illegalist Naturist Philosophical Mutualist Social Collectivist Communist Magonist Post-classical Feminist Green Primitivist Social ecology Independence Insurrectionary Pacifist Religious Christian Buddhist Jewish Without adjectives Contemporary Black Free-market Postcolonial Post-anarchist Post-left Queer Types of federation Affinity group Anarcho-syndicalism Platformism Anarchist synthesis Union of egoists Economics Communization Cooperative Cost the limit of price Decentralized planned economy Free association General strike Gift economy Give-away shop Labor voucher Market socialism Mutual bank Mutual credit Social ownership Wage slavery Workers' self-management Culture A las Barricadas Anarchist bookfair Anarcho-punk Anarchy in the U.K.

Architecture Arts DIY ethic Escuela Moderna Films Freeganism Infoshop Independent Media Center The Internationale Lifestylism May Day " No gods, no masters " Popular education " Property is theft!

" Radical cheerleading Radical environmentalism Self-managed social center Symbolism History French Revolution Revolutions of 1848 Spanish Regional Federation of the IWA Paris Commune Hague Congress Cantonal rebellion Haymarket affair Trial of the Thirty International Conference of Rome Ferrer movement Strandzha Commune Congress of Amsterdam Tragic Week High Treason Incident Manifesto of the Sixteen German Revolution of 1918–1919 Bavarian Soviet Republic 1919 United States bombings Biennio Rosso Kronstadt rebellion Makhnovshchina Amakasu Incident Alt Llobregat insurrection Anarchist insurrection of January 1933 Anarchist insurrection of December 1933 Spanish Revolution of 1936 Barcelona May Days Red inverted triangle Labadie Collection Provo May 1968 Kate Sharpley Library Carnival Against Capital 1999 Seattle WTO protests Really Really Free Market Occupy movement People Alston Armand Ba Bakunin Berkman Bonanno Bookchin Bourdin Chomsky Cleyre Day Durruti Ellul Ervin Faure Ferrer Feyerabend Giovanni Godwin Goldman González Prada Graeber Guillaume He-Yin Kanno Kōtoku Kropotkin Landauer Liu Magón Makhno Maksimov Malatesta Mett Michel Most Parsons Pi i Margall Pouget Proudhon Raichō Reclus Rocker Santillán Spooner Stirner Thoreau Tolstoy Tucker Volin Ward Warren Yarchuk Zerzan Lists Anarcho-punk bands Books Fictional characters Films Jewish anarchists Musicians Periodicals By region Africa Albania Algeria Andorra Argentina Armenia Australia Austria Azerbaijan Bangladesh Belarus Belgium Bolivia Bosnia and Herzegovina Brazil Bulgaria Canada Chile China Colombia Costa Rica Croatia Cuba Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Dominican Republic Ecuador Egypt El Salvador Estonia Finland France French Guiana Georgia Germany Greece Guatemala Hong Kong Hungary Iceland India Indonesia Iran Ireland Israel Italy Japan Korea Latvia Malaysia Mexico Monaco Mongolia Morocco Netherlands New Zealand Nicaragua Nigeria Norway Panama Paraguay Peru Philippines Poland Portugal Romania Russia Serbia Singapore South Africa Spain Sweden Switzerland Syria ( DAANES ) Taiwan Timor-Leste Tunisia Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom United States ( Puerto Rico ) Uruguay Venezuela Vietnam Related topics Anarcho-capitalism Anti-corporatism Anti-consumerism Anti-fascism Anti-globalization Anti-statism Anti-war movement Autarchism Autonomism Communism Definition of anarchism and libertarianism Dual power IWA Labour movement Left communism Left-libertarianism Libertarianism Libertarian socialism Marxism National-anarchism Relationship between Friedrich Nietzsche and Max Stirner Situationist International Socialism Spontaneous order Anarchism portal Category Outline v t e Communism Concepts Anti-capitalism Class conflict Class consciousness Classless society Collective leadership Communist revolution Commune Communist society Critique of political economy Free association "From each according to his ability, to each according to his needs" Market abolitionism Proletarian internationalism Labour movement Social revolution Stateless society Wage slavery Workers' self-management World revolution Dictatorship of the proletariat Economics Planned economy Gift economy Common ownership Socialization (Marxism) Economic democracy Use value Variants Anarchist Crypto Marxism Leninist Libertarian Pre-Marxist Utopian Primitive Religious Christian Catholic World History Communist League First International Second International Third International Fourth International Fifth International Organisations Communist party list WPC WFTU WFDY IUS WIDF WFSW IOR People Mazdak More Meslier Babeuf Marx Engels Morris Kropotkin Malatesta Pannekoek Du Bois Lenin Luxemburg Kollontai Stalin Trotsky Lukács Thälmann Makhno Bukharin Ho Gramsci Tito Togliatti Benjamin Khrushchev Mao Pot Zhou James Padmore Sartre Hoxha Beauvoir Nkrumah Kim Hobsbawm Althusser Freire Pasolini Mandel Aidit Raja Fanon Castro Berger Guevara Guattari Debord Amin Berlinguer Negri Guzmán Badiou Sison Newton Ali Davis Holloway Hampton Žižek Sankara Öcalan Gordillo Gilmore Marcos Hardt Dean Graeber Lordon Kelley Fisher Prashad Hatherley Moufawad-Paul Saito By region Brazil Britain Cambodia Colombia France India Kerala Korea Nepal Peru Philippines Poland Russia Sumatra Vietnam Symbols Hammer and sickle Red flag (politics) Red star " The Internationale " " Workers of the world, unite!

" Criticism Anti-communism Communist propaganda Criticism of communist party rule Totalitarianism Criticism of Marxism Related topics 21st-century communist theorists Anti anti-communism Anti-communist mass killings Anti-fascism Communist state Communitarianism Crimes against humanity Genocide Cambodian genocide Holodomor Genocides committed by the Soviet Union Mass killings under communist regimes Internationalism Intentional community Left-wing politics Old Left New Left LGBTQ rights Marx's theory of alienation National communism Romania Red Scare Revolutionary socialism Socialist economics Socialist mode of production Trade union War communism Worker cooperative Communism portal Socialism portal v t e Socialism History - Outline Schools of thought 21st century Agrarian Communist Democratic Ethical Feminist Green Guild Labourism Syndicalism Liberal Market Marxian Nationalist Reformist Revolutionary Scientific Social democracy Utopian Fourierism Icarianism Owenism Saint-Simonianism Technocracy Libertarian ( from below ) Anarchism Collectivist Communist Free-market Left-wing laissez-faire Green Individualist Insurrectionary Magonism Mutualism Neozapatismo Platformism Communalism Social Syndicalist Left-libertarianism Libertarian Marxism Left communism Council communism Luxemburgism Mao-Spontex Trotskyism Pabloism Posadism Orthodox Third camp Authoritarian ( from above ) Barracks Nechayevism Blanquism Bolshevism Leninism Marxism–Leninism Brezhnevism Castroism Ceaușism Guevarism Ho Chi Minh Thought Hoxhaism Husakism Juche Kadarism Khrushchevism Maoism Dengism Maoism–Third Worldism Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Marxism–Leninism–Maoism–Gonzalo Thought Marxism–Leninism–Maoism–Prachanda Path Xi Jinping Thought Stalinism Neo-Stalinism National Tkachevism State Lassallism Religious Buddhist Christian anarchism communism Islamic Jewish Regional variants African African-Caribbean Arab Bolivarian Chinese Communist Nationalist Chiangist European Eurocommunism Indian Israeli Indonesian Melanesian Mexican Soviet In one country Real Sri Lankan Third World Yugoslav Key topics and issues Anti-revisionism Criticism of capitalism Criticism of socialism Critique of political economy Critique of work Class struggle Democracy Dictatorship of the proletariat Egalitarianism Equal liberty Equality of opportunity Equality of outcome History of anarchism History of communism History of socialism History of social democracy Impossibilism " The Internationale " Internationalism Socialist Internationals First International Second International Third International Fourth International Fifth International Socialist International Land reform Left-wing politics Mixed economy Mode of production Nanosocialism Nationalization Planned economy Post-capitalism Proletarian revolution Reformism Revisionism Socialisation of production Socialist economics Socialist market economy Socialist state State capitalism State-owned enterprise Trade union Welfare state Workers' council Concepts Adhocracy Basic income Calculation in kind Common ownership Cooperative ownership Decentralized planning Direct democracy Economic democracy Economic planning Equal opportunity Free association of producers Industrial democracy Labor-time calculation Labour voucher Organizational self-management Production for use Public ownership Social dividend Socialist mode of production Technocracy Workplace democracy People 16th c.

Tommaso Campanella Thomas More 18th c.

Gracchus Babeuf Louis Antoine de Saint-Just Victor d'Hupay Gabriel Bonnot de Mably Sylvain Maréchal Étienne-Gabriel Morelly 19th c.

Stephen Pearl Andrews Mikhail Bakunin John Goodwyn Barmby Enrico Barone August Bebel Edward Bellamy Eduard Bernstein Louis Blanc Louis Auguste Blanqui Philippe Buchez Georg Büchner Philippe Buonarroti Francisco Largo Caballero Étienne Cabet Edward Carpenter Nikolay Chernyshevsky James Connolly Victor Prosper Considerant Claire Démar Théodore Dézamy W. E. B. Du Bois Prosper Enfantin Friedrich Engels Charles Fourier Emma Goldman William Batchelder Greene Charles Hall Alexander Herzen Thomas Hodgskin Jean Jaurès Mother Jones Karl Kautsky Peter Kropotkin Paul Lafargue Ferdinand Lassalle Pyotr Lavrov Alexandre Ledru-Rollin Pierre Leroux Helen Macfarlane Errico Malatesta Karl Marx Louise Michel Nikolay Mikhaylovsky William Morris Robert Owen Antonie Pannekoek Giovanni Pascoli Constantin Pecqueur Georgi Plekhanov Pierre-Joseph Proudhon Luis Emilio Recabarren Henri de Saint-Simon Mikhail Saltykov-Shchedrin George Sand Friedrich Wilhelm Schulz Eugène Sue Lysander Spooner Fred M. Taylor William Thompson Pyotr Tkachev Benjamin Tucker Suzanne Voilquin Alfred Russel Wallace Josiah Warren Wilhelm Weitling Oscar Wilde 20th c.

Tariq Ali Salvador Allende Inejirō Asanuma Hafez al-Assad Clement Attlee Aung San Deng Xiaoping Jiang Zemin Henri Barbusse Jyoti Basu Simone de Beauvoir Walter Benjamin Tony Benn Léon Blum Grace Lee Boggs Murray Bookchin Bertolt Brecht Aristide Briand Nikolai Bukharin Cornelius Castoriadis Noam Chomsky M. N. Roy G. D. H. Cole Jeremy Corbyn Marcel Déat Guy Debord Eugene V. Debs John Dewey Alexander Dubček Albert Einstein Faiz Ahmad Faiz Muammar Gaddafi Einar Gerhardsen Mikhail Gorbachev Maxim Gorky Antonio Gramsci Safdar Hashmi Eric Hobsbawm Saddam Hussein Dolores Ibárruri Pablo Iglesias Posse Jayaprakash Narayan Russell Jacoby Kim Jong-il Kim Il Sung Martin Luther King Jr.

Alexandra Kollontai James Larkin E. M. S. Namboodiripad Jack Layton Henri Lefebvre Claude Lefort Vladimir Lenin György Lukács Rosa Luxemburg Lu Xun Alasdair MacIntyre Nestor Makhno Nelson Mandela José Carlos Mariátegui Adrien Marquet Mao Dun Salama Moussa François Mitterrand Imre Nagy Gamal Abdel Nasser Jawaharlal Nehru Ernst Niekisch Ne Win George Orwell Sylvia Pankhurst Fred Paterson Karl Polanyi Pierre Renaudel B. T. Ranadive Bertrand Russell Gaetano Salvemini Bernie Sanders Jean-Paul Sartre Arthur Scargill Léopold Sédar Senghor George Bernard Shaw Sukarno Sun Yat-sen R. H. Tawney E. P. Thompson Ernst Toller Leon Trotsky Ram Manohar Lohia H. G. Wells Cornel West Clara Zetkin Howard Zinn J. Posadas 21st c.

Pedro Castillo Hugo Chávez Bob Crow Hu Jintao Kemal Kılıçdaroğlu Kim Jong Un Hasan Piker Lula da Silva Evo Morales Yanis Varoufakis Xi Jinping Vaush Organizations International socialist organizations Socialist parties See also Economic calculation problem Marxist philosophy New Left Old Left Socialism by country Socialist calculation debate Categories Socialism WikiProject Socialism portal Communism portal Organized Labour portal v t e Religion in politics General concepts Anti-clericalism Anti-clericalism and Freemasonry Caesaropapism Civil religion Clericalism Clerical fascism Confessionalism Constitutional references to God Divine law Divine rule Engaged Spirituality Feminist theology Thealogy Womanist theology Freedom of religion Humanism Identity politics Organized secularism Political religion Religious anarchism Religious anti-Masonry Religious anti-Zionism Religious communism Religious humanism Religious law Religious nationalism Religious pacifism Religion and peacebuilding Religious police Religious rejection of politics Religious segregation Religious separatism Religious socialism Religious views on same-sex marriage Secular humanism Secular liberalism Secular state Secularism Secularity Secularization Secular religion Separation of church and state Spiritual left State atheism State religion Theocracy Theonomy Christianity and politics Blaine Amendment Christian anarchism Christian anti-communism Christian anti-Masonry Papal ban Christian anti-Zionism Christian communism Christian corporatism Christian democracy Christian egalitarianism Christian environmentalism Evangelical environmentalism Christian fascism German Christians (movement) National Catholicism Positive Christianity Protestant Reich Church Christian feminism Mormon feminism Christian humanism Christian law Christian left Evangelical left Christian libertarianism Christian nationalism Christian pacifism Christian peacemaking Christian reconstructionism Christian republic Christian right Christian socialism In Utah Christian state Christian Zionism Cisalpinism Dominion Theology Febronianism Gallicanism Liberation theology Maronite politics Phoenicianism Papal state Pillarisation Political Catholicism Relations between the Catholic Church and the state In Argentina Sphere sovereignty Subsidiarity Temporal power Theodemocracy Ultramontanism Neo-ultramontanism Islam and politics Hui pan-nationalism Human Rights in Islam Imamate Islamic anarchism Islamic anti-Masonry Islamic anti-Zionism Islamic democracy Islamic fascism Islamic feminism Sharia law by country In Pakistan In South Asia Islamic pacifism Islamic republic Islamic socialism Islamic state Islamic Zionism Islamism Criticism Islamization Khilafat Petro-Islam Political quietism Taliban Talibanization Two-nation theory Judaism and politics Halachic state Jewish anarchism Jewish anti-Zionism Haredim Jewish Autonomism Jewish democracy Jewish fascism Kahanism Revisionist Maximalism Jewish feminism Jewish law Jewish left Jewish pacifism Jewish political movements Jewish right Jewish secularism Jewish socialism Bundism Poale Zion Zionism Religious World Agudath Israel Hinduism and politics Akhand Bharat Hindu feminism Gandhism Hindu law Hindu modernism Hindu nationalism Hindutva Hindu Rashtra Panun Kashmir Bangabhumi Hindu revolution Hindu revivalism Hindu environmentalism Integral humanism Indigenous Aryans Rama Rajya Saffronisation Shuddhi Uniform civil code Buddhism and politics Buddhist anti-communism Buddhist feminism Buddhist law Buddhist modernism Buddhist nationalism 969 Movement Nichirenism Sinhalese Buddhist nationalism Buddhist socialism Engaged Buddhism Humanistic Buddhism Secular Buddhism Other American civil religion Disestablishmentarianism Imperial cult Ancient Rome Gottgläubig Khalistan movement Neopaganist feminism Religious aspects of Nazism Cult of personality State Shinto NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐9zpv5
Cached time: 20250816110758
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.242 seconds
Real time usage: 1.487 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 5623/1000000
Revision size: 47346/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 399095/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 4590/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 17/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 255185/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.739/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 8535994/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1043.176      1 -total
 34.19%  356.665      1 Template:Reflist
 32.58%  339.847      9 Template:Navbox
 24.60%  256.661      1 Template:Anarchism
 23.08%  240.782      9 Template:Excerpt
 14.59%  152.238     38 Template:Cite_web
 12.06%  125.841      2 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 11.45%  119.413      1 Template:Socialism_in_Israel
 10.93%  114.071     10 Template:Cite_news
  5.73%   59.739      5 Template:Citation_needed Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:40438174:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250816110758 and revision id 1306003063. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Jewish_left&oldid=1306003063 " Categories : Jewish anarchism Jewish movements Jewish socialism Jewish society Judaism and politics Labor Zionism Political movements Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Wikipedia extended-confirmed-protected pages Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2017 Articles with unsourced statements from June 2009 Articles with unsourced statements from June 2024 Articles with excerpts This page was last edited on 15 August 2025, at 10:05 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Jewish left 10 languages Add topic

