Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Further development 3 See also 4 References 5 Bibliography Toggle the table of contents Utraquism 23 languages বাংলা Български Bosanski Čeština Cymraeg Deutsch Español Esperanto Français 한국어 Italiano Lietuvių Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Русский Slovenčina Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Utraquist ) 15th-century Protestant doctrine held by the Hussites For the type of bilingual school, see Utraquist school .

Luther and Hus serving communion under both kinds together , an imaginative woodcut from 16th-century Saxony representing the affinity of Lutherans and Moderate Hussites Utraquism (from the Latin sub utraque specie , meaning "under both kinds"), also called Calixtinism (from chalice ; Latin : calix , borrowed from Greek kalyx , "shell, husk"; Czech : kališníci ), was a belief amongst Hussites , a pre-Protestant reformist Christian movement in fifteenth century Bohemia that communion under both kinds (both the consecrated host and the precious blood, as opposed to the consecrated host alone) should be administered to the laity during the celebration of the Eucharist .

[ 1 ] Communion in both kinds was a principal dogma of the Hussites and one of the Four Articles of Prague .

[ 2 ] After the Hussite movement split into various factions early in the Hussite Wars , Hussites that emphasized the laity's right to communion under both kinds became known as Moderate Hussites, Utraquist Hussites, or simply Utraquists. The Utraquists were the largest Hussite faction.

History [ edit ] The Meeting at Křížky : Sub Utraque (1916), by Alphonse Mucha , The Slav Epic Utraquism was a Christian dogma first proposed by Jacob of Mies , professor of philosophy at the University of Prague , in 1414.

[ 2 ] It maintained that the Eucharist should be administered "under both kinds" [ 1 ] – as both sacred host and precious blood – to all the congregation, including the laity . The practice among Roman Catholics at the time was for only the priests to partake of the consecrated wine, the Precious Blood.

[ 2 ] Jacob taught that communion should be provided and taken under both kinds, which as a precept of Christ could not be changed by the church. Only those who received the utraquist (both kinds) communion belong to the church of Christ.

[ 3 ] : 51 There is disagreement in sources about whether he, or early Utraquists, taught this was necessary for salvation [ 4 ] : 180 (as claimed by Catholic detractors such as Andrew of Brod), or necessary to receive the salvific effect of the eucharist [ 4 ] : 174 or an obligation.

[ 5 ] : 518 The 15th century Utraquists were a moderate faction of the Hussites with strong respect for the sacrament and, generally, endorsed transubstantiation and Catholicity [ 6 ] (in contrast to the more radical Taborites , Orebites and Orphans who were closer to the beliefs of John Wycliffe ). They were also known as the Prague Party or the Calixtines – from calix , Latin for their "emblem", the chalice .

[ 2 ] The Utraquists eventually allied themselves with the Catholic forces (following the Council of Basel ) and defeated the more radical Taborites and Orphans at the Battle of Lipany in 1434.

[ 2 ] After that battle, nearly all forms of Hussite revival were Utraquist, as seen with George of Poděbrady , who even managed to cause the town of Tábor , the famous Taborite stronghold, to convert to Utraquism.

[ 7 ] An agreement of mutual accommodation was agreed in 1485 between Catholics and Utraquists: the religious peace of Kutná Hora ended the Hussite wars. Following the victory of allied Utraquist and Catholic forces in the Hussite Wars , Utraquists constituted a majority of the Bohemian lands.

Further development [ edit ] In the 16th century much of the population then adopted the pre-Lutheran Protestant Unity of the Brethren and eventually Lutheranism ; the Utraquist Church remained strong in the cities.

The Battle of White Mountain , in 1620, marked the end of the Bohemian Revolt and, led to recatholization in the Lands of the Bohemian Crown . In 1627, communion under both kinds was again not made available, until the eventual Josephinian Patent of Toleration in 1781.

In modern Catholic practice since the Second Vatican Council , it is determined by each local bishop whether communion is available in one or both kinds in their diocese.

See also [ edit ] Altar Wings of Roudníky Concomitance (doctrine) References [ edit ] ^ a b Wood 1907 .

^ a b c d e Hughes 1915 .

^ Cermanová, Pavlína (2018).

"Jakoubek of Stříbro's Czech Výklad Na Zjevenie and Its Latin Reception in Hussite Exegetical Texts" .

Listy filologické / Folia philologica .

141 (1/2): 45– 73.

ISSN 0024-4457 .

^ a b Levy, Ian Christopher (2017).

"Interpreting the Intention of Christ: Roman Responses to Bohemian Utraquism from Constance to Basel" .

Europe After Wyclif . Fordham University Press: 173– 195.

^ Patapios, Hieromonk (2002).

"Sub Utraque Specie: The Arguments of John Hus and Jacoubek of Stříbro in Defence of Giving Communion to the Laity Under Both Kinds" .

The Journal of Theological Studies .

53 (2): 503– 522.

ISSN 0022-5185 .

^ "Utraquism’s faithfulness to the Prague Use of the Roman rite …(was) an intentional symbol of Utraquism’s self-understanding as a continuing part of the Western Catholic Church." Holeton, David R.; Vlhová-Wörner, Hana; Bílková, Milena (2007).

"The Trope Gregorius presul meritis in Bohemian Tradition: Its Origins, Development, Liturgical Function and Illustration" (PDF) .

Bohemian Reformation and Religious Practice .

6 : 215– 246 . Retrieved 18 November 2023 .

^ Sedlar, Jean W. (1994).

East Central Europe in the Middle Ages, 1000-1500 . University of Washington Press. p. 187.

ISBN 978-0-295-97290-9 .

Bibliography [ edit ] Look up utraquism in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Ogden, C. K.; Richards, I. A. (1989) [1923]. "Chapter VI: The Theory of Definitions".

The Meaning of Meaning . Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.

ISBN 0-15-658446-8 .

This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Hughes, Joseph (1915). " Utraquism ". In Herbermann, Charles (ed.).

Catholic Encyclopedia . Vol. 15. New York: Robert Appleton Company.

This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Wood, James , ed. (1907). " Utraquists ".

The Nuttall Encyclopædia . London and New York: Frederick Warne.

v t e Proto-Protestantism 400–1100 AD People Jovinian Claudius of Turin Gottschalk of Orbais Ratramnus Berengar of Tours Sects and groups Pataria Berengarians 1100–1400 AD People Tanchelm Peter of Bruys Henry of Lausanne Arnold of Brescia Peter Waldo Milíč of Kroměříž John Wycliffe Matthias of Janov Marsilius of Padua Sects and groups Arnoldists Waldensians Lollardy Strigolniki Friends of God Petrobrusians 1400–1500 AD People Jan Hus Jan Žižka Mikuláš of Pelhřimov Petr Chelčický Johannes von Goch Johann Ruchrat von Wesel Wessel Gansfort Jacques Lefèvre d'Étaples Lorenzo Valla Girolamo Savonarola Luke of Prague Sects and groups Bohemian Reformation Hussites Taborites Utraquism Czech Brethren Piagnoni Events Oldcastle Revolt Hussite Wars Compacts of Basel Peace of Kutná Hora Mérindol massacre Savoyard–Waldensian wars Piedmontese Easter Literature Wycliffe Bible Hussite Bible Jistebnice hymn book Ecclesiae Regimen Twelve Conclusions of the Lollards Triumph of the Cross (Girolamo Savonarola) Other Comparison of Catharism and Protestantism Italics indicate their inclusion to be controversial or disputed.

Authority control databases : National Germany Czech Republic 2 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Utraquism&oldid=1291065312 " Category : Hussite Wars Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use shortened footnotes from December 2022 Articles incorporating a citation from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference Articles incorporating text from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the Nuttall Encyclopedia Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the Nuttall Encyclopedia This page was last edited on 18 May 2025, at 21:15 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Utraquism 23 languages Add topic

