Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Background 2 Provisions 3 Josiah Bailey 4 The New Deal 5 Events leading up to the Conservative Manifesto 6 Repercussions 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Conservative Manifesto 2 languages Deutsch Suomi Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Conservative anti-New Deal position statement For the general election manifestos of the British Conservative Party, see List of Conservative Party (UK) general election manifestos .

This article is part of a series on Conservatism in the United States Schools Compassionate Fiscal Fusion Liberal Classical Libertarian Moderate Movement Nationalist Christian Neo- Paleo- Postliberal Populist Progressive Social Straussian Traditionalist Ultra- Principles American exceptionalism Anti-communism Christian Zionism Communitarianism Constitutionalism Familialism Family values Federalism States' rights Subsidiarity Gender essentialism Judeo-Christian values Individualism Law and order Limited government Meritocracy Natural aristocracy Militarism Peace through strength Moral absolutism Natalism Pro-life Natural law Ordered liberty Patriotism Property rights Republicanism Right to bear arms Rule of law Supply-side economics Tradition History Loyalists Federalist Era Southern chivalry Redeemers Boston Brahmins Solid South New Humanism Dunning School Southern Agrarians Old Right Conservative Manifesto Conservative coalition America First Committee McCarthyism Goldwater campaign New Right Reagan era Reagan Doctrine Reaganomics Republican Revolution W. Bush presidency Tea Party movement Neo- vs. paleoconservatism Trump era First term Second term Agenda 47 Intellectuals Adams Anton Babbitt Bacevich Bell Bellow Bloom Boorstin Bradford Buckley Burgess Burnham Calhoun Chambers Conquest Deneen Eliot Francis Genovese Gottfried Hanson Hardin Hazony Himmelfarb Hoppe Hurston Jaffa Kimball Kirk Kirkpatrick Kreeft Kristol Kuehnelt-Leddihn Lind Lovecraft Loury Lukacs Luntz Mansfield Mencken Meyer Molnar Murray Nisbet Pangle Ransom Reno Rieff Santayana Schaeffer Sowell Strauss Vermeule Viereck Voegelin Wattenberg Weaver Wolfe Politicians Abbott Adams Boehner Bolton Buchanan Bush (George H. W.) Bush (George W.) Calhoun Clay Cheney Cleveland Coolidge Cruz DeSantis Dirksen Dole Eisenhower Gingrich Goldwater Harding Hamilton Helms Hoover (Herbert) Huckabee Johnson Kissinger Lodge Luce Madison McCain McCarthy (Joseph) McCarthy (Kevin) McConnell McKinley Meese Nixon Palin Paul (Rand) Paul (Ron) Pence Pierce Randolph Reagan Romney Rubio Rumsfeld Ryan Sessions Sherman Taft (Robert) Taft (William) Thurmond Trump Vance Wallace Wolfowitz Jurists Alito Barrett Bork Burger Colson Field Frelinghuysen Fuller George Goldsmith Gorsuch Harlan Kavanaugh Kennedy Luttig O'Connor Parker Rehnquist Roberts (John) Sanford Scalia Sessions Sutherland Taft (William) Thomas (Clarence) Whittaker Commentators Beck Bongino Breitbart Buchanan (Pat) Buckley Caldwell Carlson Cass Chodorov Coulter D'Souza Derbyshire Dreher Elder Goldberg Grant Griffin Van den Haag Hannity Hart Herberg Hoover (Margaret) Ingraham Jones Kelly Knowles Krauthammer Lahren Levin Limbaugh Mac Donald Neuhaus Ngo North Novak O'Reilly Owens Podhoretz Pool Portnoy Possony Prager Robertson Shapiro Shlaes Sullivan Walsh Watters Weyl Will Wintrich Woods Activists Abramoff Agostinelli Andreessen Atwater Bannon Bennett Bezmenov Bozell Cohn Dans Dobson Drudge Falwell Feulner Flynn Gabriel Hegseth Horowitz Kirk Krikorian Kristol LaHaye Lindell Lindbergh Leo McEntee Mercer (Rebekah) Mercer (Robert) Miller Murdoch Musk political views O'Keefe Park Phillips Posobiec Powell Raichik Reed Regnery Roberts (Kevin) Rove Rufo Scaife Schlafly (Andrew) Schlafly (Phyllis) Stone Thiel Thomas (Ginni) Weyrich Wiles Wood Literature The Federalist Papers (1788) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Notes on Democracy (1926) I'll Take My Stand (1930) Our Enemy, the State (1935) The Managerial Revolution (1941) Ideas Have Consequences (1948) God and Man at Yale (1951) The Conservative Mind (1953) The Conscience of a Conservative (1960) A Choice Not an Echo (1964) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) The Death of the West (2001) Hillbilly Elegy (2016) The Benedict Option (2017) Why Liberalism Failed (2018) The Age of Entitlement (2020) Parties Active American Party American Independent Party Conservative Party NY state Constitution Party Republican Party Defunct Anti-Masonic Party Constitutional Union Party Democratic Party ( historically, factions ) Boll weevils Bourbon Democrats Conservative Democrats Dixiecrats Reagan Democrats Southern Democrats Rhode Island Suffrage Party Federalist Party National Republican Party Native American Party Whig Party Think tanks Acton Institute AdTI AEI AFP CSP CfNI Claremont Institute CEI CSPC EPPC FRI Gatestone Institute Heartland Institute The Heritage Foundation Heritage Action Mandate for Leadership Project Esther Project 2025 Hoover Institution Hudson Institute ISI James Madison Program Leadership Institute Manhattan Institute Mises Institute PRI PNAC (Defunct) Ripon Society R Street Institute Rockford Institute SPN Sutherland Institute Tax Foundation Witherspoon Institute Media Newspapers Chicago Tribune The Epoch Times New Hampshire Union Leader The Jewish Voice The New York Observer New York Post The Remnant The Wall Street Journal (editorial board) The Washington Times Journals American Affairs The American Conservative The American Spectator American Thinker City Journal Claremont Review of Books Commentary Compact Chronicles The Dispatch First Things The Imaginative Conservative Jewish World Review Modern Age National Affairs The National Interest National Review The New American The New Atlantis The New Criterion Policy Review (defunct) Public Discourse Southern Partisan Spectator USA Tablet Taki's Magazine Telos Washington Examiner The Weekly Standard (defunct) TV channels CBN Fox Business Fox News Newsmax TV One America News Network Real America's Voice VOZ Websites 1819 News Babylon Bee Breitbart News The Bulwark Campus Reform The Center Square Conservative Review Daily Caller Daily Signal Daily Wire Discover the Networks The Federalist FrontPage Magazine Front Porch Republic Gateway Pundit Hot Air Human Events Independent Journal Review InfoWars Jihad Watch LifeZette NewsBusters PJ Media Rare RedState The Dispatch Townhall Twitchy Washington Examiner The Washington Free Beacon The Western Journal WorldNetDaily Other Blaze Media Encounter Books Evie Magazine The First Imprimis The Political Cesspool Passage Publishing PragerU RealClearPolitics Red Scare Regnery Publishing RSBN The Rubin Report Sinclair Broadcast Group Other organizations Congressional caucuses Second Amendment Caucus RSC Liberty Caucus Freedom Caucus Republican Main Street Partnership Republican Governance Group Blue Dog Coalition Economics ATR Club for Growth FreedomWorks (defunct) NFIB NTU Tea Party Patriots USCC Gun rights GOA NAGR NRA Identity politics ACT!

CWA Council of Conservative Citizens GAG IWF LCR Moms for Liberty Nativist CIS FAIR Immigration Restriction League NumbersUSA Patriot Prayer Proud Boys Oath Keepers Three Percenters Religion ADF Court cases ACLJ AFA The American TFP Chalcedon Foundation CCA Christian Voice Eagle Forum FCR The Fellowship FFC Focus on the Family Foundation for Moral Law Liberty Counsel Moral Majority (defunct) NOM NRLC PTMC Susan B. Anthony Pro-Life America Thomas More Law Center Watchdog groups AIM Econ Journal Watch Franklin News Foundation JW MRC O'Keefe Media Group Project Veritas Youth/student groups NJC TPUSA Young Americans for Freedom Young America's Foundation YAL Social media Gab Gettr Parler The Right Stuff Miscellaneous The 85 Fund AHI ACU AFPAC Bradley Foundation TCC CNP CPAC Hillsdale College IFF JBS John M. Olin Foundation (defunct) Liberty Fund LU NAS Philadelphia Society Regent University Russell Kirk Center for Cultural Renewal TPPF Other AFL Atlas Network CN ConservAmerica Donors Trust FedSoc NCPAC PJI Turning Point Action SACR YRNF Ziklag Movements Asian and Pacific Islander Black Christian right Reconstructionism Classical education movement Paideia Dark Enlightenment Election denial movement 2020 election disputes Female Green Hispanic and Latino LGBTQ Libertarian republicans Militia movement Monarchism Mormon White Horse Prophecy Theodemocracy New Apostolic Reformation Parental rights movement Fathers' rights Patriot movement Christian Radical right Reactionary feminism Right-libertarianism Paleolibertarianism Secessionism Neo-Confederates in Texas Trumpism Never Trump Related Barstool conservatism Bibliography of US conservatism Conservative talk radio GOP factions List of American conservatives NatCon Timeline of modern American conservatism Conservatism portal United States portal v t e The Conservative Manifesto (officially titled " An Address to the People of the United States ") was a position statement drafted in 1937 by a bipartisan conservative coalition of politicians in the United States . Those involved in its creation included longtime opponents of President Franklin Roosevelt 's New Deal as well as former supporters who had come to believe its programs were proving ineffective.

Background [ edit ] The Conservative Manifesto is an economic plan that was based on a set of beliefs that were relatively universal to the conservative coalition on both the Democrat and Republican sides of the aisle of in 1937 and heavily influenced the conservative platform going forward from this point. It was first expressed by a number of conservative Republicans and Democrats who were concerned with Franklin Roosevelt 's New Deal plan for solving the Great Depression believing it was steering the country towards collectivism. However, most have reportedly denied involvement and so the responsibility was taken up by Josiah Bailey , a congressman from North Carolina .

[ 1 ] The document was leaked to the public by the New York Times , in this case two reporters named Joseph Alsop and Robert Kitner [ 2 ] During its initial leak by the New York Times it was seen as anti- New Deal , and there is some level of truth to this.

[ 2 ] Its original intent was to convince Roosevelt that there needed to be some level of balance between enterprise and government and that there was some bipartisan opposition to Roosevelt's New Deal as it was being implemented up until this point. Ultimately the Manifesto was delivered to the people of the United States through a document called "An address to the People of the United States" on 19 December 1937.

[ 2 ] Provisions [ edit ] The full text of the Manifesto, as read into the record of the U.S. Senate, is available here (beginning on page 1937): https://www.congress.gov/75/crecb/1937/12/20/GPO-CRECB-1937-pt2-v82-11.pdf .

Following is a summary of its provisions: Immediate revision of taxes on capital gains and undistributed profits in order to free investment funds.

Reduced expenditures to achieve a balanced budget, and thus, to still fears deterring business expansion.

An end to coercion and violence in relations between capital and labor.

Opposition to unnecessary government competition with private enterprise.

Recognition that private investment and enterprise require a reasonable profit.

Safeguarding the collateral upon which credit rests.

Reduction of taxes, or if this proved impossible at the moment, firm assurance of no further increases.

Maintenance of state rights, home rule, and local self-government, except where proved definitely inadequate.

Economical and non-political relief to unemployed with maximum local responsibility.

Reliance upon the American form of government and the American system of enterprise.

[ 1 ] Josiah Bailey [ edit ] Josiah Bailey was the leader of the conservatives that drafted the Conservative Manifesto. He was a Senator from North Carolina from 1931 to his death in 1946 and served on the committee of commerce and the committee of claims. He was a member of the North Carolina Constitutional Commission, United States Collector of Internal Revenue for North Carolina. He was an editor with the Biblical Recorder , and was a practitioner of law who was admitted to the bar in 1908. He was the only name to actually be applied to the conservative manifesto as he was the only one to not deny his involvement and openly state his support before his official address.

[ 2 ] The New Deal [ edit ] The New Deal was an economic plan put forth by Franklin Roosevelt that was notable in the speed by which it reacted to problems but heavily criticized by opponents the method by which it went about solving those problems which could be seen as hasty.

[ citation needed ] The New Deal: Closed many of the weaker banks in the country and halted the export of gold from the U.S.

Confiscated both gold & gold certificates from the American people, devalued the dollar, and annulled the gold clauses, which brought a (so-far) definitive end to the gold standard in the U.S.

Created the Agricultural Adjustment Administration in 1933 in order to manipulate prices by buying and holding food, as well as providing subsidies for low production among farmers.

Created the Tennessee Valley Authority in 1933 to create a hydroelectric project on the Tennessee River.

Created the National Recovery Administration in order to regulate competition amongst businesses (declared unconstitutional in 1935).

Created the Federal Emergency Relief Administration in order to create state and local jobs.

Created the Civilian Conservation Corps to put people to work on natural resource projects.

Passed the Wagner Act allowing workers to collectively bargain A.K.A. form unions.

Passed the Social Security Act in order to provide welfare for minors, the disabled, and the elderly.

Passed the Housing Act to give funds for low income housing.

Passed the Fair Labor Standards in order to institute the standard work week and the national minimum wage.

[ citation needed ] There were also many other pieces of legislation passed beyond these, but these are the major laws passed and organizations created.

[ citation needed ] Events leading up to the Conservative Manifesto [ edit ] Josiah Bailey was an influential member of the Southern Democratic Conservative Party and had been a United States Senator for North Carolina since 1931. He wished to answer the growing needs of the public while adhering to the traditional values of individualism, hard work, self-help, balanced budgets, strong local governments and administrative efficiency. Bailey respected Roosevelt as a leader and recognized that while Roosevelt intended to be moderate in order to attempt to not fracture the nation but believed that the struggles of the Great Depression was causing him to abandon the conservatives of both parties. He also believed that Roosevelt was experimenting without much thought to economic theory and that he would go too far and cause more harm than good. Josiah Bailey started out his term in the United States Senate being a weak objector of President Franklin D. Roosevelt. He later claimed that this was simply an act so that he may get re-elected and eventually go on the offensive. Bailey agreed with the idea behind the New Deal: to promote enterprise but crack down on extreme corporate profits. It wasn't until he saw Roosevelt begin to build a new party around himself that Bailey began to start making his own move with the manifesto.

[ 2 ] Repercussions [ edit ] Bailey's Conservative Manifesto created a marked change in how politics worked, particularly in the South. This piece consolidated conservative efforts in order to halt further New Deal legislation. This ultimately led to a downturn of Roosevelt's power in congress as more of his policy were denied as the country entered the " Roosevelt Recession ", a downturn of the economy that had been looming for the better part of a year, that Roosevelt thought would blow over relatively quickly. As for the president himself, he was decidedly against the ideas of the conservative manifesto as he attempted to break through the conservative wall against the New Deal policy.

[ 2 ] References [ edit ] ^ a b "The Conservative Manifesto" .

North Carolina History Project .

Archived from the original on 3 March 2016 . Retrieved 2 May 2019 .

^ a b c d e f Moore, John Robert (February 1965). "Senator Josiah W. Bailey and the "Conservative Manifesto" of 1937".

The Journal of Southern History .

31 (1): 21– 39.

doi : 10.2307/2205008 .

ISSN 0022-4642 .

JSTOR 2205008 .

External links [ edit ] "Conservative Manifesto" from the North Carolina History Project Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Conservative_Manifesto&oldid=1253394236 " Categories : Political manifestos New Deal Old Right (United States) 1937 in American politics 1937 documents Conservatism in the United States Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from December 2020 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2023 This page was last edited on 25 October 2024, at 19:16 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Conservative Manifesto 2 languages Add topic

