Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Nietzschean usage 2 Later usage Toggle Later usage subsection 2.1 Continental philosophy 2.2 Ruth Benedict 2.3 Albert Szent-Györgyi 2.4 Camille Paglia 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Apollonian and Dionysian 19 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Català Deutsch Español فارسی Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Қазақша Norsk bokmål Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Português Română Русский Slovenčina Svenska Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Philosophical and literary concepts Marble statue of Apollo (left), and of Dionysus (right) The Apollonian and the Dionysian are philosophical and literary concepts represented by a duality between the figures of Apollo and Dionysus from Greek mythology . Its popularization is widely attributed to the work The Birth of Tragedy by Friedrich Nietzsche , though the terms had already been in use prior to this, [ 1 ] such as in the writings of poet Friedrich Hölderlin , historian Johann Joachim Winckelmann , and others. The word Dionysian occurs as early as 1608 in Edward Topsell 's zoological treatise The History of Serpents .

[ 2 ] The concept has since been widely invoked and discussed within Western philosophy and literature .

In Greek mythology, Apollo and Dionysus are both sons of Zeus . Apollo, son of Leto , is the god of the sun, art, plague and disease, of rational thinking and order, and appeals to logic , prudence and purity and stands for reason .  Dionysus, son of Semele , is the god of wine, dance and pleasure , of irrationality and chaos , representing passion , emotions and instincts . The ancient Greeks did not consider the two gods to be opposites or rivals, although they were often entwined by nature.

Nietzschean usage [ edit ] Friedrich Wilhelm Nietzsche , who popularised the Apollonian and Dionysian dialectic These paragraphs are an excerpt from Friedrich Nietzsche § Apollonian and Dionysian .

[ edit ] Nietzsche found in classical Athenian tragedy an art form that transcended the pessimism found in the so-called wisdom of Silenus . The Greek spectators, by looking into the abyss of human suffering depicted by characters on stage, passionately and joyously affirmed life, finding it worth living. The main theme in The Birth of Tragedy is that the fusion of Dionysian and Apollonian Kunsttriebe ("artistic impulses") forms dramatic arts or tragedies. He argued that this fusion has not been achieved since the ancient Greek tragedians . Apollo represents harmony, progress, clarity, logic and the principle of individuation , whereas Dionysus represents disorder, intoxication, emotion, ecstasy and unity (hence the omission of the principle of individuation).

Nietzsche strongly distinguishes his Dionysus from the Dionysus of the Orphic tradition, which he considers a later corruption of the original Dionysian force. To him in the pre-Homeric world, Dionysian civilisations were marked by barbarism, cruelty, and ecstatic sexual excess, unrestrained by rational or moral principles. Nietzsche associates this period with unmediated life-affirmation, where violence and eroticism intertwined as expressions of raw vitality.

[ 3 ] The Orphics, overwhelmed by anxiety toward this unmitigated savagery, reacted by turning away from the physical world and abstracting their gods into metaphysical ideas. In doing so, they transformed Dionysus from a figure of visceral power into a god of suffering and redemption and, in parallel, converted man from a being of flesh and instincts into a soul burdened with guilt and the need for purification.

[ 4 ] Nietzsche criticises this Orphic reinterpretation as an early decline in Greek spiritual health, arguing that it marked the beginning of an anti-life tendency that would later manifest in Platonism and Christianity.

[ 3 ] He further argues that Socrates and Euripides continued the Orphic trajectory, replacing instinct, myth, and artistic frenzy with rationalism, dialectic, and moral didacticism. By doing so, they undermined the ecstatic and violent balance of Apollonian and Dionysian forces, ultimately leading to the decline of Greek tragedy.

[ 5 ] Nietzsche used these two forces because, for him, the world of mind and order on one side, and passion and chaos on the other, formed principles that were fundamental to the Greek culture : [ 6 ] [ 7 ] the Apollonian a dreaming state, full of illusions; and Dionysian a state of intoxication, representing the liberation of instincts and dissolution of boundaries. In this mould, a man appears as the satyr . He is the horror of the annihilation of the principle of individuality and at the same time someone who delights in its destruction.

[ 8 ] In this state one enriches everything out of one's own fullness: whatever one sees, whatever wills is seen swelled, taut, strong, overloaded with strength. A man in this state transforms things until they mirror his power—until they are reflections of his perfection. This having to transform into perfection is—art.

Nietzsche is adamant that the works of Aeschylus and Sophocles represent the apex of artistic creation, the true realisation of tragedy; it is with Euripides , that tragedy begins its Untergang (literally 'going under' or 'downward-way;' meaning decline, deterioration, downfall, death, etc.). Nietzsche objects to Euripides' use of Socratic rationalism and morality in his tragedies, claiming that the infusion of ethics and reason robs tragedy of its foundation, namely the fragile balance of the Dionysian and Apollonian.

Socrates emphasised reason to such a degree that he diffused the value of myth and suffering to human knowledge.

Plato continued along this path in his dialogues, and the modern world eventually inherited reason at the expense of artistic impulses found in the Apollonian and Dionysian dichotomy. He notes that without the Apollonian, the Dionysian lacks the form and structure to make a coherent piece of art, and without the Dionysian, the Apollonian lacks the necessary vitality and passion. Only the fertile interplay of these two forces brought together as an art represented the best of Greek tragedy.

[ 9 ] An example of the impact of this idea can be seen in the book Patterns of Culture , where the anthropologist Ruth Benedict acknowledges Nietzschean opposites of "Apollonian" and "Dionysian" as the stimulus for her thoughts about Native American cultures .

[ 10 ] Carl Jung has written extensively on the dichotomy in Psychological Types .

[ 11 ] Michel Foucault commented that his own book Madness and Civilization should be read "under the sun of the great Nietzschean inquiry". Here Foucault referenced Nietzsche's description of the birth and death of tragedy and his explanation that the subsequent tragedy of the Western world was the refusal of the tragic and, with that, refusal of the sacred.

[ 12 ] The painter Mark Rothko was influenced by Nietzsche's view of tragedy presented in The Birth of Tragedy.

Later usage [ edit ] Continental philosophy [ edit ] Nietzsche's idea has been interpreted as an expression of fragmented consciousness or existential instability by a variety of modern and post-modern writers, especially Martin Heidegger , Michel Foucault and Gilles Deleuze .

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] According to Peter Sloterdijk , the Dionysian and the Apollonian form a dialectic ; they are contrasting, but Nietzsche does not mean one to be valued more than the other.

[ 15 ] Truth being primordial pain , our existential being is determined by the Dionysian/Apollonian dialectic.

Extending the use of the Apollonian and Dionysian onto an argument on interaction between the mind and physical environment, Abraham Akkerman has pointed to masculine and feminine features of city form.

[ 16 ] Ruth Benedict [ edit ] Anthropologist Ruth Benedict used the terms to characterize cultures that value restraint and modesty (Apollonian) and ostentatiousness and excess (Dionysian). An example of an Apollonian culture in Benedict's analysis was the Zuñi people as opposed to the Dionysian Kwakiutl people .

[ 17 ] The theme was developed by Benedict in her main work Patterns of Culture .

Albert Szent-Györgyi [ edit ] Albert Szent-Györgyi , who wrote that "a discovery must be, by definition, at variance with existing knowledge", [ 18 ] divided scientists into two categories: the Apollonians and the Dionysians. He called scientific dissenters, who explored "the fringes of knowledge", Dionysians. He wrote, "In science the Apollonian tends to develop established lines to perfection, while the Dionysian rather relies on intuition and is more likely to open new, unexpected alleys for research...The future of mankind depends on the progress of science, and the progress of science depends on the support it can find. Support mostly takes the form of grants, and the present methods of distributing grants unduly favor the Apollonian".

[ 18 ] Camille Paglia [ edit ] American humanities scholar Camille Paglia writes about the Apollonian and Dionysian in her 1990 bestseller Sexual Personae .

[ 19 ] The broad outline of her concept has roots in Nietzschean discourse, an admitted influence, although Paglia's ideas diverge significantly.

The Apollonian and Dionysian concepts comprise a dichotomy that serves as the basis of Paglia's theory of art and culture. For Paglia, the Apollonian is light and structured while the Dionysian is dark and chthonic (she prefers Chthonic to Dionysian throughout the book, arguing that the latter concept has become all but synonymous with hedonism and is inadequate for her purposes, declaring that "the Dionysian is no picnic"). The Chthonic is associated with females, wild/chaotic nature, and unconstrained sex/procreation. In contrast, the Apollonian is associated with males, clarity, celibacy and/or homosexuality, rationality/reason, and solidity, along with the goal of oriented progress: "Everything great in western civilization comes from struggle against our origins".

[ 20 ] She argues that there is a biological basis to the Apollonian/Dionysian dichotomy, writing: "The quarrel between Apollo and Dionysus is the quarrel between the higher cortex and the older limbic and reptilian brains ".

[ 21 ] Moreover, Paglia attributes all the progress of human civilization to masculinity revolting against the Chthonic forces of nature, and turning instead to the Apollonian trait of ordered creation. The Dionysian is a force of chaos and destruction, which is the overpowering and alluring chaotic state of wild nature. Rejection of—or combat with—Chthonianism by socially constructed Apollonian virtues accounts for the historical dominance of men (including asexual and homosexual men; and childless and/or lesbian-leaning women) in science, literature, arts, technology and politics. As an example, Paglia states: "The male orientation of classical Athens was inseparable from its genius. Athens became great not despite but because of its misogyny".

[ 22 ] See also [ edit ] "Cygnus X-1 Book II: Hemispheres" , a song by Canadian rock band Rush based in part on the concept.

The Decline of the West Faust Light and dark side of the Force Logocentrism Phallogocentrism Master-morality and slave-morality References [ edit ] ^ Adrian Del Caro, " Dionysian Classicism, or Nietzsche's Appropriation of an Aesthetic Norm" (in English) , in Journal of the History of Ideas , Vol. 50, No. 4 (October–December 1989), pp. 589–605.

JSTOR 2709799 .

^ Topsell, Edward (1608).

The History of Serpents . Published by William Jaggard .

^ a b Nietzsche, Friedrich Wilhelm.

Kritische Studienausgabe [KSA], vol. 1, p. 785.

^ Nietzsche, Friedrich Wilhelm.

Kritische Studienausgabe [KSA], vol. 1, p. 874.

^ Nietzsche, Friedrich Wilhelm.

Kritische Gesamtausgabe Werke [KGW], II, 4, p. 252.

^ "Nietzsche, Dionysus and Apollo" .

www.historyguide.org .

^ Desmond, Kathleen K. (2011).

Ideas About Art . John Wiley & Sons.

ISBN 978-1444396003 – via Google Books .

^ "Nietzsche's Apollonianism and Dionysiansism: Meaning and Interpretation" .

bachelorandmaster.com .

^ "SparkNotes: Friedrich Nietzsche (1844–1900): The Birth of Tragedy" .

sparknotes.com .

^ Benedict, Ruth .

Patterns of Culture . Archived from the original on 14 April 2012 . Retrieved 17 October 2012 .

^ Jung, Carl. "The Apollonian and the Dionysian".

Psychological Types .

^ Mahon, Michael (1992).

Foucault's Nietzschean Genealogy . SUNY Press.

ISBN 978-0791411490 .

^ Michael, Drolet (2004).

The Postmodernism Reader . Routledge.

ISBN 9780415160841 .

^ Postmodernism and the re-reading of modernity By Francis Barker, Peter Hulme, Margaret Iversen, Manchester University Press,1992, ISBN 978-0-7190-3745-0 p. 258 ^ Thinker on Stage: Nietzsche's Materialism, translation by Jamie Owen Daniel; foreword by Jochen Schulte-Sasse, Minneapolis, University of Minnesota Press, 1989.

ISBN 0-8166-1765-1 ^ Akkerman, Abraham (2006). "Femininity and Masculinity in City-Form: Philosophical Urbanism as a History of Consciousness".

Human Studies .

29 (2): 229– 256.

doi : 10.1007/s10746-006-9019-4 .

S2CID 144871101 .

^ Benedict, Ruth (January 1932). "Configurations of Culture in North America".

American Anthropologist .

34 (1): 1– 27.

doi : 10.1525/aa.1932.34.1.02a00020 .

^ a b Szent-Györgyi, Albert (1972-06-02). "Dionysians and Apollonians".

Science .

176 (4038): 966.

doi : 10.1126/science.176.4038.966.a .

ISSN 0036-8075 .

PMID 17778411 .

S2CID 239854822 .

^ Paglia, Camille (1990).

Sexual Personae: Art and decadence from Nefertiti to Emily Dickinson . New York: Vintage Book.

ISBN 9780300043969 .

^ Paglia (1990), p. 40 ^ Paglia (1990), p. 96 ^ Paglia (1990), p. 100.

v t e Philosophy Branches Branches Applied philosophy Logic Metaphilosophy Philosophy of education Philosophy of information Philosophy of language Philosophy of mathematics Philosophy of religion Philosophy of science Political philosophy Practical philosophy Social philosophy Theoretical philosophy Aesthetics Aesthetic response Formalism Institutionalism Epistemology Empiricism Fideism Naturalism Particularism Rationalism Skepticism Solipsism Ethics Consequentialism Deontology Virtue Free will Compatibilism Determinism Hard Incompatibilism Hard Libertarianism Metaphysics Atomism Dualism Idealism Monism Naturalism Realism Mind Behaviorism Eliminativism Emergentism Epiphenomenalism Functionalism Objectivism Subjectivism Normativity Absolutism Particularism Relativism Nihilism Skepticism Universalism Ontology Action Event Process Reality Anti-realism Conceptualism Idealism Materialism Naturalism Nominalism Physicalism Realism By era By era Ancient Western Medieval Renaissance Early modern Modern Contemporary Ancient Chinese Agriculturalism Confucianism Legalism Logicians Mohism Chinese naturalism Taoism Yangism Greco- Roman Presocratic Ionians Pythagoreans Eleatics Atomists Sophists Cyrenaics Cynicism Eretrian school Megarian school Academy Peripatetic school Hellenistic philosophy Pyrrhonism Stoicism Epicureanism Academic Skepticism Middle Platonism School of the Sextii Neopythagoreanism Second Sophistic Neoplatonism Church Fathers Dispositio Indian Hindu Samkhya Nyaya Vaisheshika Yoga Mīmāṃsā Ājīvika Ajñana Cārvāka Jain Anekantavada Syādvāda Buddhist Abhidharma Sarvāstivadā Pudgalavada Sautrāntika Madhyamaka Svatantrika and Prasangika Śūnyatā Yogacara Tibetan Persian Mazdakism Mithraism Zoroastrianism Zurvanism Medieval East Asian Neotaoism Tiantai Huayan Chan Zen Neo-Confucianism Korean Confucianism European Christian Augustinianism Scholasticism Thomism Scotism Occamism Renaissance humanism Indian Vedanta Acintya bheda abheda Advaita Bhedabheda Dvaita Nimbarka Sampradaya Shuddhadvaita Vishishtadvaita Navya-Nyāya Islamic Aristotelianism Averroism Avicennism Illuminationism ʿIlm al-Kalām Sufi Jewish Judeo-Islamic Modern Anarchism Classical Realism Collectivism Conservatism Determinism Dualism Edo neo-Confucianism Empiricism Existentialism Foundationalism Historicism Holism Humanism Anti- Idealism Absolute British German Objective Subjective Transcendental Individualism Kokugaku Liberalism Materialism Modernism Monism Naturalism Natural law Nihilism New Confucianism Neo-scholasticism Pessimism Pragmatism Phenomenology Positivism Reductionism Rationalism Social contract Socialism Transcendentalism Utilitarianism People Cartesianism Kantianism Neo Kierkegaardianism Krausism Hegelianism Marxism Newtonianism Nietzscheanism Spinozism Contemporary Analytic Applied ethics Analytic feminism Analytical Marxism Communitarianism Consequentialism Critical rationalism Experimental philosophy Falsificationism Foundationalism / Coherentism Internalism and externalism Logical positivism Legal positivism Meta-ethics Moral realism Quinean naturalism Normative ethics Ordinary language philosophy Postanalytic philosophy Quietism Rawlsian Reformed epistemology Systemics Scientism Scientific realism Scientific skepticism Transactionalism Contemporary utilitarianism Vienna Circle Wittgensteinian Continental Critical theory Deconstruction Existentialism Feminist Frankfurt School Hermeneutics Neo-Marxism New Historicism Phenomenology Posthumanism Postmodernism Post-structuralism Social constructionism Structuralism Western Marxism Miscellaneous Kyoto School Objectivism Postcritique Russian cosmism By region By region African Bantu Egyptian Ethiopian Africana Eastern Buddhist Chinese Indian Indonesian Japanese Korean Taiwanese Vietnamese Middle Eastern Iranian Islamic Jewish Pakistani Turkish Western ( Analytic / Continental ) American Australian British Scottish Canada Czech Danish Dutch Finland French German Greek Italian Maltese Polish Slovene Spanish Miscellaneous Amerindian Aztec Romanian Russian Yugoslav Philosophy portal Category v t e Friedrich Nietzsche Works The Birth of Tragedy On the Pathos of Truth Philosophy in the Tragic Age of the Greeks On Truth and Lies in a Nonmoral Sense Untimely Meditations On the Advantage and Disadvantage of History for Life Hymnus an das Leben Human, All Too Human The Dawn of Day Idylls from Messina The Gay Science Thus Spoke Zarathustra Beyond Good and Evil On the Genealogy of Morality The Case of Wagner Twilight of the Idols The Antichrist Ecce Homo Dionysian Dithyrambs Nietzsche contra Wagner The Will to Power (posthumous) Concepts and philosophy Affirmation Amor fati Apollonian and Dionysian The Four Great Errors Eternal return Faith in the Earth Genealogy (philosophy) God is dead Holy Lie Immaculate perception Last man Master–slave morality Perspectivism Ressentiment Transvaluation of values Tschandala Übermensch Will to power World riddle Influence and reception Costin Alamariu Giorgio de Chirico Works about Nietzsche The Journal of Nietzsche Studies Nietzschean Zionism Related Anarchism and Nietzsche Library of Friedrich Nietzsche Nietzsche's views on women Nietzsche and free will Nietzsche Archive Nietzsche-Haus, Naumburg Nietzsche-Haus, Sils Maria Relationship with Max Stirner My Sister and I Elisabeth Förster-Nietzsche (sister) Herd instinct Zarathustra's roundelay Friedrich Nietzsche Prize Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Apollonian_and_Dionysian&oldid=1279054478 " Categories : Ancient Greece studies Apollo Concepts in aesthetics Conceptual distinctions Dionysus Existentialist concepts Greek mythology studies History of literature Jungian archetypes Literary concepts Philosophy of Friedrich Nietzsche Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Pages using multiple image with auto scaled images Articles with excerpts This page was last edited on 6 March 2025, at 06:25 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Apollonian and Dionysian 19 languages Add topic

