Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology and usage 2 History Toggle History subsection 2.1 Origins (1945–1955) 2.2 Formation (1956–1957) 2.3 Artistic period (1958–1962) 2.4 Political period (1963–1968) 2.5 May events (1968) 2.6 Aftermath (1968–1972) 3 Main concepts Toggle Main concepts subsection 3.1 The spectacle and its society 3.2 Détournement 3.3 Anti-capitalism 3.4 Art and politics 3.5 The construction of situations 3.6 Psychogeography 3.6.1 Dérive 4 Political theory Toggle Political theory subsection 4.1 Major works 4.2 Relationship with Marxism 4.3 Relationship with anarchism 4.4 Relationship with the established left 5 Reception Toggle Reception subsection 5.1 Criticism 5.2 Influence 6 Punk and culture 7 See also 8 Notes 9 References 10 Further reading 11 External links Toggle the table of contents Situationist International 34 languages العربية Brezhoneg Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Hrvatski Italiano Latina Lietuvių Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Polski Português Română Русский Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Situationism ) International organization of social revolutionaries (1957–72) "Situationism" redirects here. For other uses, see Situationism (disambiguation) .

Situationist International Certain founding members of the Situationist International in 1957. From left to right: Giuseppe Pinot-Gallizio , Piero Simondo , Elena Verrone, Michèle Bernstein , Guy Debord , Asger Jorn , and Walter Olmo Abbreviation SI Named after Situation Predecessor International Movement for an Imaginist Bauhaus Letterist International London Psychogeographical Association Formation 1957 ; 68 years ago ( 1957 ) Founders Guy Debord Asger Jorn Founded at Cosio di Arroscia Dissolved 1972 ; 53 years ago ( 1972 ) Merger of Gruppe SPUR Methods Dérive Détournement Situlogy De facto leader and theorist Guy Debord Key people Michèle Bernstein Jacqueline de Jong Mustapha Khayati Pinot Gallizio Alice Becker-Ho Attila Kotanyi Constant Nieuwenhuys Ralph Rumney Gianfranco Sanguinetti Alexander Trocchi René Viénet Publication Internationale Situationniste Secessions Gruppe SPUR Nashists Second Situationist International Part of the Politics series on the Situationist International " It is forbidden to forbid " Concepts Anti-art Class consciousness Class struggle Communism Dérive Détournement General strike Internationalism Psychogeography Recuperation Situation (Sartre) Situationist prank Spectacle Unitary urbanism Workers' council World revolution People Michèle Bernstein Ivan Chtcheglov Guy Debord Jacqueline de Jong Asger Jorn Attila Kotányi Jørgen Nash Constant Nieuwenhuys Charles Radcliffe Ralph Rumney Gianfranco Sanguinetti Alexander Trocchi Raoul Vaneigem René Viénet Works Can Dialectics Break Bricks?

Mémoires On the Poverty of Student Life Report on the Construction of Situations The Revolution of Everyday Life The Society of the Spectacle Organizations Letterist International Golden Fleet Gruppe SPUR International Movement for an Imaginist Bauhaus (IMIB) Situationist International Council for Maintaining the Occupations Second Situationist International Related articles Anarchist communism Autonomism Constructivism Council communism Left communism Libertarian Marxism Libertarian socialism Ultra-leftism Youth International Party Anarchism portal Socialism portal Communism portal Politics portal v t e The Situationist International ( SI ) was an international organization of social revolutionaries made up of avant-garde artists, intellectuals, and political theorists . It was prominent in Europe from its formation in 1957 to its dissolution in 1972.

[ 1 ] The intellectual foundations of the Situationist International were derived primarily from libertarian Marxism and the avant-garde art movements of the early 20th century, particularly Dada and Surrealism .

[ 1 ] Overall, situationist theory represented an attempt to synthesize this diverse field of theoretical disciplines into a modern and comprehensive critique of mid-20th century advanced capitalism .

[ 1 ] Essential to situationist theory was the concept of the spectacle , a unified critique of advanced capitalism of which a primary concern was the progressively increasing tendency towards the expression and mediation of social relations through images .

[ 2 ] The situationists believed that the shift from individual expression through directly lived experiences, or the first-hand fulfillment of authentic desires, to individual expression by proxy through the exchange or consumption of commodities , or passive second-hand alienation, inflicted significant and far-reaching damage to the quality of human life for both individuals and society.

[ 1 ] Another important concept of situationist theory was the primary means of counteracting the spectacle; the construction of situations, moments of life deliberately constructed for the purpose of reawakening and pursuing authentic desires, experiencing the feeling of life and adventure, and the liberation of everyday life.

[ 1 ] [ 3 ] The situationists recognized that capitalism had changed since Karl Marx 's formative writings, but maintained that his analysis of the capitalist mode of production remained fundamentally correct; they rearticulated and expanded upon several classical Marxist concepts, such as his theory of alienation .

[ 1 ] In their expanded interpretation of Marxist theory , the situationists asserted that the misery of social alienation and commodity fetishism were no longer limited to the fundamental components of capitalist society, but had now in advanced capitalism spread themselves to every aspect of life and culture.

[ 1 ] They rejected the idea that advanced capitalism's apparent successes—such as technological advancement, increased productive capacity, and a raised general quality of life when compared to previous systems, such as feudalism—could ever outweigh the social dysfunction and degradation of everyday life that it simultaneously inflicted.

[ 1 ] When the Situationist International was first formed, it had a predominantly artistic focus; emphasis was placed on concepts like unitary urbanism and psychogeography .

[ 1 ] Gradually, however, that focus shifted more towards revolutionary and political theory.

[ 1 ] The Situationist International reached the apex of its creative output and influence in 1967 and 1968, with the former marking the publication of the two most significant texts of the situationist movement, The Society of the Spectacle by Guy Debord and The Revolution of Everyday Life by Raoul Vaneigem . The expressed writing and political theory of the two aforementioned texts, along with other situationist publications, proved greatly influential in shaping the ideas behind the May 1968 insurrections in France ; quotes, phrases, and slogans from situationist texts and publications were ubiquitous on posters and graffiti throughout France during the uprisings.

[ 1 ] Etymology and usage [ edit ] The founding manifesto of the Situationist International, Report on the Construction of Situations (1957), defined the construction of situations as "the concrete construction of momentary ambiances of life and their transformation into a superior passional quality." [ 4 ] The term "situationist" refers to the construction of situations, one of the early central concepts of the Situationist International; the term also refers to any individuals engaged in the construction of situations, or, more narrowly, to members of the Situationist International.

[ 3 ] Situationist theory sees the situation as a tool for the liberation of everyday life, a method of negating the pervasive alienation that accompanied the spectacle .

[ 4 ] Internationale Situationniste No. 1 (June 1958) defined the constructed situation as "a moment of life concretely and deliberately constructed by the collective organization of a unitary ambiance and a game of events".

[ 3 ] The situationists argued that advanced capitalism manufactured false desires; literally in the sense of ubiquitous advertising and the glorification of accumulated capital , and more broadly in the abstraction and reification of the more ephemeral experiences of authentic life into commodities . The experimental direction of situationist activity consisted of setting up temporary environments favorable to the fulfillment of true and authentic human desires in response.

[ 5 ] The Situationist International strongly resisted use of the term "situationism", which Debord called a "meaningless term", adding "[t]here is no such thing as situationism, which would mean a doctrine for interpreting existing conditions".

[ 3 ] The situationists maintained a philosophical opposition to all ideologies , conceiving of them as abstract superstructures ultimately serving only to justify the economic base of a given society; accordingly, they rejected "situationism" as an absurd and self-contradictory concept.

[ 6 ] In The Society of the Spectacle , Debord asserted that ideology was "the abstract will to universality and the illusion thereof" which was "legitimated in modern society by universal abstraction and by the effective dictatorship of illusion".

[ 7 ] History [ edit ] Origins (1945–1955) [ edit ] The situationist movement had its origins as a left wing tendency within Lettrism , [ 8 ] [ 9 ] an artistic and literary movement led by the Romanian-born French poet and visual artist Isidore Isou , originating in 1940s Paris. The group was heavily influenced by the preceding avant-garde movements of Dadaism and Surrealism , seeking to apply critical theories based on these concepts to all areas of art and culture, most notably in poetry, film, painting and political theory .

[ 4 ] Among some of the concepts and artistic innovations developed by the Lettrists were the lettrie , a poem reflecting pure form yet devoid of all semantic content, new syntheses of writing and visual art identified as metagraphics and hypergraphics , as well as new creative techniques in filmmaking. Future situationist Guy Debord , who was at that time a significant figure in the Lettrist movement, helped develop these new film techniques, using them in his Lettrist film Howlings for Sade (1952) as well as later in his situationist film Society of the Spectacle (1972).

By 1950, a much younger and more left-wing part of the Lettrist movement began to emerge. This group kept very active in perpetrating public outrages such as the Notre-Dame Affair , where at the Easter High Mass at Notre Dame de Paris , in front of ten thousand people and broadcast on national TV, their member and former Dominican Michel Mourre posed as a monk , "stood in front of the altar and read a pamphlet proclaiming that God was dead".

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] André Breton prominently came out in support of the action in a letter that spawned a large debate in the newspaper Combat .

[ 12 ] [ 13 ] In 1952, this left wing of the Lettrist movement, which included Debord, broke off from Isou's group and formed the Letterist International , a new Paris-based collective of avant-garde artists and political theorists. The schism finally erupted when the future members of the radical Lettrists disrupted a Charlie Chaplin press conference for Limelight at the Hôtel Ritz Paris . They distributed a polemic entitled "No More Flat Feet!", which concluded: "The footlights have melted the make-up of the supposedly brilliant mime. All we can see now is a lugubrious and mercenary old man. Go home Mister Chaplin." [ 14 ] Isou was upset with this, his own attitude being that Chaplin deserved respect as one of the great creators of the cinematic art. The breakaway group felt that his work was no longer relevant, while having appreciated it "in its own time," and asserted their belief "that the most urgent expression of freedom is the destruction of idols, especially when they claim to represent freedom," in this case, filmmaker Charlie Chaplin.

[ 15 ] During this period of the Letterist International , many of the important concepts and ideas that would later be integral in situationist theory were developed. Individuals in the group collaboratively constructed the new field of psychogeography , which they defined as "the study of the specific effects of the geographical environment (whether consciously organized or not) on the emotions and behavior of individuals." [ 3 ] [ 16 ] Debord further expanded this concept of psychogeography with his theory of the dérive , an unplanned tour through an urban landscape directed entirely by the feelings evoked in the individual by their surroundings, serving as the primary means for mapping and investigating the psychogeography of these different areas.

[ 17 ] During this period the Letterist International also developed the situationist tactic of détournement , which by reworking or re-contextualizing an existing work of art or literature sought to radically shift its meaning to one with revolutionary significance.

Formation (1956–1957) [ edit ] In 1956, Guy Debord, a member of the Lettrist International , and Asger Jorn of the International Movement for an Imaginist Bauhaus , brought together a group of artistic collectives for the First World Congress of Free Artists in Alba , Italy.

[ 18 ] The meeting established the foundation for the development of the Situationist International, which was officially formed in July 1957 at a meeting in Cosio di Arroscia , Italy.

[ 19 ] The resulting International was a fusion of these extremely small avant-garde collectives: the Lettrist International , the International Movement for an Imaginist Bauhaus (an offshoot of COBRA ), and the London Psychogeographical Association (though, Anselm Jappe has argued that the group pivoted around Jorn and Debord for the first four years).

[ 20 ] Later, the Situationist International drew ideas from other groups such as Socialisme ou Barbarie .

[ 21 ] The most prominent member of the group, Guy Debord , generally became considered the organization's de facto leader and most distinguished theorist. Other members included theorist Raoul Vaneigem , the Dutch painter Constant Nieuwenhuys , the Italo-Scottish writer Alexander Trocchi , the English artist Ralph Rumney (sole member of the London Psychogeographical Association, Rumney suffered expulsion relatively soon after the formation), the Danish artist Asger Jorn (who after parting with the SI also founded the Scandinavian Institute of Comparative Vandalism ), the architect and veteran of the Hungarian Uprising Attila Kotanyi , and the French writer Michèle Bernstein . Debord and Bernstein later married.

In June 1957, Debord wrote the manifesto of the Situationist International, titled Report on the Construction of Situations . This manifesto plans a rereading of Karl Marx 's Das Kapital and advocates a cultural revolution in western countries .

[ 4 ] Artistic period (1958–1962) [ edit ] Danish painter, sculptor, ceramic artist , and author Asger Jorn , founding member of the Situationist International.

During the first few years of the SI's founding, avant-garde artistic groups began collaborating with the SI and joining the organization.

Gruppe SPUR , a German artistic collective, collaborated with the Situationist International on projects beginning in 1959, continuing until the group officially joined the SI in 1961. The role of the artists in the SI was of great significance, particularly Asger Jorn , Constant Nieuwenhuys and Pinot Gallizio .

[ 22 ] Asger Jorn, who invented Situgraphy and Situlogy , had the social role of catalyst and team leader among the members of the SI between 1957 and 1961. Jorn's role in the situationist movement (as in COBRA ) was that of a catalyst and team leader.

Guy Debord on his own lacked the personal warmth and persuasiveness to draw people of different nationalities and talents into an active working partnership. As a prototype Marxist intellectual Debord needed an ally who could patch up the petty egoisms and squabbles of the members. When Jorn's leadership was withdrawn in 1961, many simmering quarrels among different sections of the SI flared up, leading to multiple exclusions.

Internationale situationniste The first major split was the exclusion of Gruppe SPUR, the German section, from the SI on 10 February 1962.

[ 23 ] Many different disagreements led to the fracture, for example; while at the Fourth SI Conference in London in December 1960, in a discussion about the political nature of the SI, the Gruppe SPUR members disagreed with the core situationist stance of counting on a revolutionary proletariat ; [ 24 ] the accusation that their activities were based on a "systematic misunderstanding of situationist theses"; [ 23 ] the understanding that at least one Gruppe SPUR member, sculptor Lothar Fischer , and possibly the rest of the group, were not actually understanding and/or agreeing with the situationist ideas, but were just using the SI to achieve success in the art market ; [ 23 ] [ 25 ] and the betrayal, in the Spur #7 issue, of a common agreement on the Gruppe SPUR and SI publications.

[ 26 ] [ 27 ] The exclusion was a recognition that Gruppe SPUR 's "principles, methods and goals" were significantly in contrast with those of the SI.

[ 28 ] [ 29 ] This split however was not a declaration of hostilities, as in other cases of SI exclusions. A few months after the exclusion, in the context of judicial prosecution against the group by the German state, Debord expressed his esteem to Gruppe SPUR, calling it the only significant artist group in (Germany) since World War II , and regarding it at the level of the avant-gardes in other countries.

[ 30 ] The next significant split was in 1962, wherein the "Nashists," the Scandinavian section of the SI led by Jørgen Nash , were excluded from the organization. Nash created the 2nd Situationist International .

[ 31 ] Political period (1963–1968) [ edit ] By this point the Situationist International consisted almost exclusively of the Franco-Belgian section, led by Guy Debord and Raoul Vaneigem . These members possessed much more of a tendency towards political theory over the more artistic aspects of the SI. The shift in the intellectual priorities within the SI resulted in more focus on the theoretical, such as the theory of the spectacle and Marxist critical analysis, spending much less time on the more artistic and tangible concepts like unitary urbanism , détournement , and situgraphy .

[ 32 ] During this period, the SI began having more and more influence on local university students in France. Taking advantage of the apathy of their colleagues, five "Pro-situs", situationist-influenced students, infiltrated the University of Strasbourg 's student union in November 1966 and began scandalising the authorities.

[ 33 ] [ 34 ] Their first action was to form an " anarchist appreciation society" called The Society for the Rehabilitation for Karl Marx and Ravachol ; next they appropriated union funds to flypost "Return of the Durruti Column ", André Bertrand's détourned comic strip.

[ 34 ] They then invited the situationists to contribute a critique of the University of Strasbourg, and On the Poverty of Student Life , written by Tunisian situationist Mustapha/Omar Khayati was the result.

[ 34 ] The students promptly proceeded to print 10,000 copies of the pamphlet using university funds and distributed them during a ceremony marking the beginning of the academic year . This provoked an immediate outcry in the local, national and international media.

[ 34 ] May events (1968) [ edit ] Main article: May 1968 events in France The Situationists played a preponderant role in the May 1968 uprisings, [ 35 ] and to some extent their political perspective and ideas fueled such crisis, [ 35 ] [ 36 ] [ 37 ] providing a central theoretic foundation.

[ 38 ] [ 39 ] [ 40 ] [ 41 ] [ 42 ] [ 43 ] While SI's member count had been steadily falling for the preceding several years, the ones that remained were able to fill revolutionary roles for which they had patiently anticipated and prepared. The active ideologists ("enragés" and Situationists) behind the revolutionary events in Strasbourg, Nanterre and Paris, numbered only about one or two dozen persons.

[ 44 ] This has now been widely acknowledged as a fact by studies of the period, [ 45 ] [ 46 ] [ 47 ] [ 48 ] [ 49 ] [ 50 ] what is still wide open to interpretation is the "how and why" that happened.

[ 35 ] Charles de Gaulle , in the aftermath televised speech of 7 June, acknowledged that "This explosion was provoked by groups in revolt against modern consumer and technical society, whether it be the communism of the East or the capitalism of the West." [ 51 ] They also made up the majority in the Occupation Committee of the Sorbonne .

[ 35 ] An important event leading up to May 1968 was the scandal in Strasbourg in December 1966.

[ 52 ] The Union Nationale des Étudiants de France declared itself in favor of the SI's theses, and managed to use public funds to publish Mustapha Khayati 's pamphlet On the Poverty of Student Life .

[ 53 ] Thousands of copies of the pamphlet were printed and circulated and helped to make the Situationists well known throughout the nonstalinist left.

Quotations from two key situationist books, Debord's The Society of the Spectacle (1967) and Khayati's On the Poverty of Student Life (1966), were written on the walls of Paris and several provincial cities.

[ 52 ] This was documented in the collection of photographs published in 1968 by Walter Lewino , L'imagination au pouvoir .

[ 54 ] Though the SI were a very small group, they were expert self-propagandists, and their slogans appeared daubed on walls throughout Paris at the time of the revolt. SI member René Viénet 's 1968 book Enragés and Situationists in the Occupations Movement, France, May '68 gives an account of the involvement of the SI with the student group of Enragés and the occupation of the Sorbonne .

The occupations of 1968 started at the University of Nanterre and spread to the Sorbonne. The police tried to take back the Sorbonne and a riot ensued. Following this a general strike was declared with up to 10 million workers participating. The SI originally participated in the Sorbonne occupations and defended barricades in the riots. The SI distributed calls for the occupation of factories and the formation of workers' councils , [ 54 ] but, disillusioned with the students, left the university to set up the Council for Maintaining the Occupations (CMDO) which distributed the SI's demands on a much wider scale. After the end of the movement, the CMDO disbanded.

Aftermath (1968–1972) [ edit ] By 1972, Gianfranco Sanguinetti and Guy Debord were the only two remaining members of the SI. Working with Debord, in August 1975, Sanguinetti wrote a pamphlet titled Rapporto veridico sulle ultime opportunità di salvare il capitalismo in Italia ( The Real Report on the Last Chance to Save Capitalism in Italy ), [ 55 ] which (inspired by Bruno Bauer ) purported to be the cynical writing of "Censor", a powerful industrialist. The pamphlet argued that the ruling class of Italy supported the Piazza Fontana bombing and other covert, false flag mass slaughter for the higher goal of defending the capitalist status quo from communist influence. The pamphlet was mailed to 520 of Italy's most powerful individuals. It was received as genuine and powerful politicians, industrialists and journalists praised its content. After reprinting the tract as a small book, Sanguinetti revealed himself to be the true author. In the outcry that ensued [ 56 ] and under pressure from Italian authorities Sanguinetti left Italy in February 1976, and was denied entry to France.

[ 57 ] After publishing in the last issue of the magazine, an analysis of the May 1968 revolts and the strategies that will need to be adopted in future revolutions, [ 54 ] the SI was dissolved in 1972.

[ 58 ] Main concepts [ edit ] The spectacle and its society [ edit ] Main article: Spectacle (critical theory) The Spectacle is a central notion in situationist theory, developed by Guy Debord in his 1967 book, The Society of the Spectacle . In a limited sense, spectacle includes the mass media, which are "its most glaring superficial manifestation." [ 59 ] Debord said that the society of the spectacle came to existence in the late 1920s.

[ 60 ] [ 61 ] The critique of the spectacle is a development and application of Karl Marx's concept of fetishism of commodities , reification and alienation , [ 62 ] and the way it was reprised by György Lukács in 1923. In the society of the spectacle, the commodities rule the workers and the consumers instead of being ruled by them. The consumers are passive subjects that contemplate the reified spectacle.

As early as 1958, in the situationist manifesto , Debord described official culture as a "rigged game", where conservative powers forbid subversive ideas to have direct access to the public discourse . Such ideas get first trivialized and sterilized, and then they are safely incorporated back within mainstream society, where they can be exploited to add new flavors to old dominant ideas.

[ 63 ] This technique of the spectacle is sometimes called recuperation , and its counter-technique is the détournement .

[ 64 ] Détournement [ edit ] Main article: détournement A détournement is a technique developed in the 1950s by the Letterist International , [ 8 ] [ 9 ] and consist in "turning expressions of the capitalist system against itself," [ 65 ] like turning slogans and logos against the advertisers or the political status quo.

[ 66 ] Détournement was prominently used to set up subversive political pranks, an influential tactic called situationist prank that was reprised by the punk movement in the late 1970s [ 67 ] and inspired the culture jamming movement in the late 1980s.

[ 65 ] Anti-capitalism [ edit ] The Situationist International, in the 15 years from its formation in 1957 and its dissolution in 1972, is characterized by a Marxist and surrealist perspective on aesthetics and politics, [ 68 ] without separation between the two: art and politics are faced together and in revolutionary terms.

[ 69 ] The SI analyzed the modern world from the point of view of everyday life.

[ 70 ] The core arguments of the Situationist International were an attack on the capitalist degradation of the life of people [ 4 ] [ 71 ] [ 72 ] and the fake models advertised by the mass media, [ 4 ] to which the Situationist responded with alternative life experiences.

[ 4 ] The alternative life experiences explored by the Situationists were the construction of situations, unitary urbanism , psychogeography , and the union of play, freedom and critical thinking .

[ 22 ] A major stance of the SI was to count on the force of a revolutionary proletariat . This stance was reaffirmed very clearly in a discussion on "To what extent is the SI a political movement?", during the Fourth SI Conference in London.

[ 24 ] The SI remarked that this is a core Situationist principle, and that those that don't understand it and agree with it, are not Situationist.

Art and politics [ edit ] Main article: Art and politics The SI rejected all art that separated itself from politics, the concept of 20th-century art that is separated from topical political events.

[ 4 ] [ 28 ] The SI believed that the notion of artistic expression being separated from politics and current events is one proliferated by reactionary considerations to render artwork that expresses comprehensive critiques of society impotent.

[ 4 ] They recognized there was a precise mechanism followed by reactionaries to defuse the role of subversive artists and intellectuals, that is, to reframe them as separated from the most topical events, and divert from them the taste for the new that may dangerously appeal the masses; after such separation, such artworks are sterilized, banalized, degraded, and can be safely integrated into the official culture and the public discourse, where they can add new flavors to old dominant ideas and play the role of a gear wheel in the mechanism of the society of the spectacle.

[ 4 ] According to this theory, artists and intellectuals that accept such compromises are rewarded by the art dealers and praised by the dominant culture.

[ 28 ] The SI received many offers to sponsor "creations" that would just have a "situationist" label but a diluted political content, that would have brought things back to order and the SI back into the old fold of artistic praxis. The majority of SI continued to refuse such offers and any involvement on the conventional avant-garde artistic plane.

[ 28 ] This principle was affirmed since the founding of the SI in 1957, but the qualitative step of resolving all the contradictions of having situationists that make concessions to the cultural market, was made with the exclusion of Gruppe SPUR in 1962.

[ 28 ] The SI noted how reactionary forces forbid subversive ideas from artists and intellectuals to reach the public discourse , and how they attack the artworks that express comprehensive critique of society, by saying that art should not involve itself into politics.

[ 4 ] The construction of situations [ edit ] The first edition of Internationale Situationniste defines the constructed situation as "a moment of life concretely and deliberately constructed by the collective organization of a unitary ambiance and a game of events." As the SI embraced dialectical Marxism, the situation came to refer less to a specific avant-garde practice than to the dialectical unification of art and life more generally. Beyond this theoretical definition, the situation as a practical manifestation thus slipped between a series of proposals. The SI thus were first led to distinguish the situation from the mere artistic practice of the happening , and later identified it in historical events such as the Paris Commune in which it exhibited itself as the revolutionary moment. The SI's interest in the Paris Commune was expressed in 1962 in their fourteen " Theses on the Paris Commune ." Psychogeography [ edit ] Main article: Psychogeography The first edition of Internationale Situationniste defined psychogeography as "the study of the specific effects of the geographical environment (whether consciously organized or not) on the emotions and behavior of individuals." [ 3 ] The term was first recognized in 1955 by Guy Debord while still with the Letterist International: The word psychogeography, suggested by an illiterate Kabyle as a general term for the phenomena a few of us were investigating around the summer of 1953, is not too inappropriate. It does not contradict the materialist perspective of the conditioning of life and thought by objective nature. Geography, for example, deals with the determinant action of general natural forces, such as soil composition or climatic conditions, on the economic structures of a society, and thus on the corresponding conception that such a society can have of the world. Psychogeography could set for itself the study of the precise laws and specific effects of the geographical environment, whether consciously organized or not, on the emotions and behavior of individuals. The charmingly vague adjective psychogeographical can be applied to the findings arrived at by this type of investigation, to their influence on human feelings, and more generally to any situation or conduct that seems to reflect the same spirit of discovery.

[ 16 ] Dérive [ edit ] Main article: Dérive By definition, psychogeography combines subjective and objective knowledge and studies. Debord struggled to stipulate the finer points of this theoretical paradox, ultimately producing "Theory of the Dérive" in 1958, a document which essentially serves as an instruction manual for the psychogeographic procedure, executed through the act of dérive ("drift").

In a dérive one or more persons during a certain period drop their usual motives for movement and action, their relations, their work and leisure activities, and let themselves be drawn by the attractions of the terrain and the encounters they find there... But the dérive includes both this letting go and its necessary contradiction: the domination of psychogeographical variations by the knowledge and calculation of their possibilities.

— Ken Knabb [ 73 ] SI engaged in a play-form that was also
practiced by its predecessor organization, the Lettrist International , the art of wandering through urban space, which they termed dérive , whose unique mood is conveyed in Debord's darkly romantic meaning of palindrome. Two excursions organized by Andre Breton serve as the closest cultural precedents to the dérive . The first in 1921, was an excursion to the Church of Saint-Julien-le-Pauvre with the Parisian Dadaists ; [ 74 ] the second excursion was on 1 May 1923, when a small group of Surrealists walked toward the countryside outside of Blois .

[ 75 ] Debord was cautious however to differentiate between the derive and such precedents. He emphasized its active character as "a mode of experimental behavior" that reached to Romanticism , the Baroque, and the age of chivalry, with its tradition of long adventures voyages. Such urban roaming was characteristic of Left Bank bohemianism in Paris.

[ 76 ] In the SI's 6th issue, Raoul Vaneigem writes in a manifesto of unitary urbanism, "All space is occupied by the enemy. We are living under a permanent curfew. Not just the cops—the geometry".

[ 77 ] Dérive, as a previously conceptualized tactic in the French military, was "a calculated action determined by the absence of a greater locus", and "a maneuver within the enemy's field of vision".

[ 78 ] To the SI, whose interest was inhabiting space, the dérive brought appeal in this sense of taking the "fight" to the streets and truly indulging in a determined operation. The dérive was a course of preparation, reconnaissance, a means of shaping situationist psychology among urban explorers for the eventuality of the situationist city.

Political theory [ edit ] Part of a series on Libertarian socialism Concepts Anti-authoritarianism Class conflict Decentralization Egalitarian community Free association Mutual aid Revolutionary spontaneity Workers' control Economics Anti-capitalism Co-operative economics Decentralized planning Economic democracy Industrial democracy Participatory economics Socialization Socialist economics Worker cooperative Workers' self-management People Albert Andrews Bakunin Berkman Bookchin Boric Camus Castoriadis Chomsky Cole Déjacque Foot Fotopoulos Fourier Guérin Kropotkin Lefort Luxemburg Makhno Marcos Morris Marcuse Negri Öcalan Pallis Pankhurst Pannekoek Pi i Margall Proudhon Rocker Russell Rühle Variants Anarchist tendencies Social anarchism Communist Collectivist Individualist anarchism Market Mutualism Anarcho-syndicalism Marxist tendencies Autonomism Chaulieu–Montal tendency Communization Council communism Situationism Western Marxism Other tendencies Democratic confederalism Guild socialism Libertarian municipalism Utopian socialism Neozapatismo History International Workingmen's Association Revolutions of 1917–1923 Makhnovshchina Korean People's Association in Manchuria Spanish Revolution of 1936 New Left New social movements Zapatista uprising MAREZ Rojava Revolution AANES Related topics Communism Libertarianism Social democracy Socialism Democratic socialism Eco-socialism Syndicalism Anarchism portal Libertarianism portal Socialism portal Politics portal v t e Part of a series on Left communism Concepts Anti-Leninism Anti-Stalinist left Class consciousness Class struggle Communism Mass strike Organic centralism Proletarian internationalism Workers' council World revolution Movements Bordigism In China Communization Council communism Situationist International People Jan Appel Amadeo Bordiga Arrigo Cervetto Marc Chirik Onorato Damen Bruno Fortichiari Herman Gorter Paul Mattick Grandizo Munis Gavril Myasnikov Sylvia Pankhurst Anton Pannekoek Lorenzo Parodi Otto Rühle Karl Schröder Julien Coupat Organizations Extant Communist Struggle Communist Workers' Organisation International Communist Current International Communist Party Internationalist Communist Party The Invisible Committee Defunct Anti-Parliamentary Communist Federation Communist Bulletin Group Communist League Communist Workers' International Communist Workers' Party of Germany Forward Hunan Provincial Proletarian Revolutionary Great Alliance Committee International Socialists of Germany League for Proletarian Culture Left Communists Marxist Working Group Revolutionary Socialist Party Revolutionary Workers Ferment Socialism or Barbarism Solidarity Workers' Group Workers' Opposition Workers' Socialist Federation Workers' Truth Tiqqun Related topics Autonomism Classical Marxism Impossibilism Industrial unionism Ultra-leftism Workerism Communism portal Socialism portal Politics portal v t e Major works [ edit ] Twelve issues of the main French edition of journal Internationale Situationniste were published, each issue edited by a different individual or group, including: Guy Debord , Hadj Mohamed Dahou , Giuseppe Pinot-Gallizio , Maurice Wyckaert , Constant Nieuwenhuys , Asger Jorn , Helmut Sturm , Attila Kotanyi , Jørgen Nash , Uwe Lausen , Raoul Vaneigem , Michèle Bernstein , Jeppesen Victor Martin , Jan Strijbosch , Alexander Trocchi , Théo Frey , Mustapha Khayati , Donald Nicholson-Smith , René Riesel , and René Viénet .

[ 79 ] Classic Situationist texts include: On the Poverty of Student Life , Society of the Spectacle by Guy Debord, and The Revolution of Everyday Life by Raoul Vaneigem.

The first English-language collection of SI writings, although poorly and freely translated, was Leaving The 20th century edited by Christopher Gray.

The Situationist International Anthology edited and translated by Ken Knabb , collected numerous SI documents which had previously never been seen in English.

[ 80 ] Relationship with Marxism [ edit ] Rooted firmly in the Marxist tradition, the Situationist International criticized Trotskyism , Marxism–Leninism , Stalinism and Maoism from a position they believed to be further left and more properly Marxist. The situationists possessed a strong anti-authoritarian current, commonly deriding the centralized bureaucracies of China and the Soviet Union in the same breath as capitalism.

Debord's work The Society of the Spectacle (1967) established situationist analysis as Marxist critical theory.

The Society of the Spectacle is widely recognized as the main and most influential Situationist essay.

[ 81 ] The concept of revolution created by the Situationist International was anti-capitalist , [ 82 ] [ 83 ] [ 84 ] Marxist , Young Hegelian , [ 35 ] and from the very beginning in the 50s, remarkably differently from the established Left, anti-Stalinist and against all repressive regimes.

[ 85 ] Debord starts his 1967 work with a revisited version of the first sentence with which Marx began his critique of classical political economy, Das Kapital .

[ 86 ] [ 87 ] In a later essay, Debord will argue that his work was the most important social critique since Marx's work. Drawing from Marx, which argued that under a capitalist society the wealth is degraded to an immense accumulation of commodities , Debord argues that in advanced capitalism , life is reduced to an immense accumulation of spectacles, a triumph of mere appearance where "all that once was directly lived has become mere representation".

[ 88 ] [ 89 ] The spectacle, which according to Debord is the core feature of the advanced capitalist societies, [ 90 ] has its "most glaring superficial manifestation" in the advertising-mass media-marketing complex.

[ 91 ] Elaborating on Marx's argument that under capitalism our lives and our environment are continually depleted, Debord adds that the Spectacle is the system by which capitalism tries to hide such depletion. Debord added that, further than the impoverishment in the quality of life , [ 22 ] [ 71 ] our psychic functions are altered, we get a degradation of mind and also a degradation of knowledge .

[ 92 ] In the spectacular society, knowledge is not used anymore to question, analyze, or resolve contradictions , but to assuage reality.

Situationist theorists advocated methods of operation that included democratic workers' councils and workers' self-management , [ 93 ] [ 94 ] [ 95 ] [ 96 ] interested in empowering the individual, in contrast to the perceived corrupt bureaucratic states of the Eastern bloc . Their anti-authoritarian interpretation of Marxist theory can be identified with the broader council communist and libertarian Marxist movements, themselves more broadly termed as left communism .

The last issue (1969) of the Situationist International journal, featured an editorial analyzing the events of May 1968 . The editorial, written by Guy Debord , was titled The Beginning of an Era , [ 97 ] probably as a détournement reference of Nachalo ( The Beginning ), a Russian Marxist monthly magazine.

According to Greil Marcus , some found similarities between the Situationists and the Yippies .

[ 98 ] Former situationists T. J. Clark and Donald Nicholson-Smith (British section), argued that the portion of the moderate Left that is the "established Left", and its "Left opinion-makers", usually addressed contemptuously the SI as "hopelessly young-Hegelian ".

[ 35 ] Relationship with anarchism [ edit ] The Situationist International was differentiated from both anarchists and Marxists . In spite of this, they have frequently been associated with anarchism.

[ 99 ] Debord did a critical assessment of the anarchists in his 1967 The Society of the Spectacle .

[ 100 ] In the final, 12th issue of the journal, the situationists rejected spontaneism and the "mystics of nonorganization," labeling them as a form of "sub-anarchism": [ 101 ] The only people who will be excluded from this debate are... those who in the name of some sub-anarchist spontaneism proclaim their opposition to any form of organization, and who only reproduce the defects and confusion of the old movement—mystics of nonorganization, workers discouraged by having been mixed up with Trotskyist sects too long, students imprisoned in their impoverishment who are incapable of escaping from bolshevik organizational schemas. The situationists are obviously partisans of organization—the existence of the situationist organization testifies to that. Those who announce their agreement with our theses while crediting the SI with a vague spontaneism simply don't know how to read.

According to situationist Ken Knabb , Debord pointed out the flaws and merits of both Marxism and anarchism.

[ 102 ] He argued that "the split between Marxism and anarchism crippled both sides. The anarchists rightly criticized the authoritarian and narrowly economistic tendencies in Marxism, but they generally did so in an undialectical, moralistic, ahistorical manner... and leaving Marx and a few of the more radical Marxists with a virtual monopoly on coherent dialectical analysis—until the situationists finally brought the libertarian and dialectical aspects back together again." Relationship with the established left [ edit ] The SI poses a challenge to the model of political action of a portion of the left, [ 103 ] the "established Left" and "Left opinion-makers".

[ 35 ] The first challenging aspect is the fueling role that the SI had in the upheavals of the political and social movements of the 1960s, [ 37 ] [ 45 ] upheavals for which much is still at stake and which many foresee as recurring in the 21st century. The second challenging aspect, [ 37 ] is the comparison between the Situationist Marxist theory of the Society of the Spectacle , which is still very topical 30 years later, [ 45 ] and the current status of the theories supported by leftist establishments in the same period, like Althusserianism , Maoism , Autonomism , Freudo-Marxism and others.

[ 45 ] The response to this challenge has been an attempt to silence and misinterpret, to "turn the SI safely into an art movement , and thereby to minimize its role in the political and social movements of the sixties".

[ 37 ] [ 103 ] The core aspect of the revolutionary perspectives, and the political theory, of the Situationist International, has been neglected by some commentators, [ 104 ] which either limited themselves to an apolitical reading of the situationist avant-garde art works, or dismissed the Situationist political theory. Examples of this are Simon Sadler 's The Situationist City , [ 104 ] and the accounts on the SI published by the New Left Review .

[ 35 ] The concept of revolution created by the Situationist International was anti-capitalist , [ 82 ] [ 83 ] [ 84 ] Marxist , Young Hegelian , [ 35 ] and from the very beginning in the 1950s, remarkably differently from the established Left, anti-Stalinist and against all repressive regimes.

[ 85 ] The SI called in May 1968 for the formation of workers' councils .

[ 54 ] There was no separation between the artistic and the political perspectives.

[ 69 ] For instance, Asger Jorn never believed in a conception of the Situationist ideas as exclusively artistic and separated from political involvement. He was at the root and at the core of the Situationist International project, fully sharing the revolutionary intentions with Debord.

[ 105 ] [ 106 ] Reception [ edit ] Criticism [ edit ] Critics of the Situationists frequently assert that their ideas are not in fact complex and difficult to understand, but are at best simple ideas expressed in deliberately difficult language, and at worst actually nonsensical. For example, anarchist Chaz Bufe asserts in Listen Anarchist!

that "obscure situationist jargon" is a major problem in the anarchist movement.

[ 107 ] Andrea Gibbons argues that the Parisian situationists failed to take on board practically or theoretically the experience of their African members, such as is shown by Abdelhafid Khattib 's experience of police harassment while conducting psychogeographic research on Les Halles in 1958. She remarks how little the suppression of Algerians in Paris had impacted their activity and thinking – Bernstein and Debord co-signed the Declaration on the Right to Insubordination in the Algerian War in 1961, which led to them being questioned by the police. She cites a letter written by Jacqueline de Jong, Jorgen Nash, and Ansgar Elde protesting the expulsion of the Spur group in 1962 which highlights the political repression in Paris at that time. Gibbons also criticises the lack of mention of the Algerian situationists in either Debord's or Vaneigem's memoirs.

[ 108 ] Influence [ edit ] Debord's analysis of the spectacle has been influential among people working on television, particularly in France and Italy; [ 109 ] [ 110 ] in Italy, TV programs produced by situationist intellectuals, like Antonio Ricci's Striscia la notizia , or Carlo Freccero's programming schedule for Italia 1 in the early 1990s.

[ 109 ] In the 1960s and 1970s, anarchists, communists, and other leftists offered various interpretations of Situationist concepts in combination with a variety of other perspectives. Examples of these groups include: in Amsterdam, the Provos ; in the UK, King Mob , the producers of Heatwave magazine (including Charles Radcliffe who later briefly joined the English Section of the Situationist International ), and the Angry Brigade .

[ 111 ] In the US, groups like Black Mask (later Up Against the Wall Motherfuckers ), The Weathermen , and the Rebel Worker group also explicitly employed their ideas.

[ 112 ] Anarchist theorists such as Fredy Perlman , Bob Black , Hakim Bey , and John Zerzan , have developed the SI's ideas in various directions away from Marxism. These theorists were predominantly associated with the magazines Fifth Estate , Anarchy: A Journal of Desire Armed , and Green Anarchy . During the early 1980s, English anarchist Larry Law produced the Spectacular Times pocket-books series, which aimed to make Situationist ideas more easily assimilated into the anarchist movement. Later anarchist theorists such as the CrimethInc.

collective also claim Situationist influence.

[ 112 ] Situationist urban theory, defined initially by the members of the Lettrist International as "Unitary Urbanism," was extensively developed through the behavioural and performance structures of The Workshop for Non-Linear Architecture during the 1990s. The re-emergence of the London Psychogeographical Association also inspired many new psychogeographical groups including Manchester Area Psychogeographic. The LPA and the Neoist Alliance along with the Luther Blissett Project came together to form a New Lettrist International with a specifically Communist perspective. Around this time, Unpopular Books and the LPA released some key texts including new translations of Asger Jorn 's work.

Around this time also, groups such as Reclaim the Streets and Adbusters have, respectively, seen themselves as "creating situations" or practicing detournement on advertisements.

Punk and culture [ edit ] In cultural terms, Situationist International's influence has arguably been greater, if more diffuse. In the late 1960s, MC5 , the Fugs and Hawkwind were radical situationist bands.

Situationist ideas exerted a strong influence on the design language of the punk rock phenomenon of the 1970s and the post-punk scene of the early 1980s. To a significant extent, this was the result of the adoption of the style, aesthetics and slogans employed by the SI. These were often secondhand influences received through British situationist groups such as King Mob whose associates included Malcolm McLaren and Jamie Reid .

Factory Records owner Tony Wilson was influenced by situationist urbanism , and Factory band the Durutti Column took their name from André Bertrand's collage Le Retour de la Colonne Durutti .

[ 113 ] (Bertrand, in turn, took his title from the eponymous anarchist army during the Spanish Civil War ). American punk group the Feederz have been acclaimed as exhibiting a more direct and conscious influence. Formed in the late 1970s, they became known for extensive use of detournement and their intention to provoke their audience through the exposition of situationist themes.

[ 114 ] Other musical artists whose lyrics and artwork have referenced situationist concepts include the Clash , Pussy Riot , [ 115 ] Crass , Tom Robinson Band , Ian Dury , X-Ray Spex , Sham 69 , Buzzcocks , the Fall , Patrik Fitzgerald , Conflict, the Royal Family and the Poor, Angelic Upstarts , Chaos UK , Chaotic Dischord , MDC , Dead Kennedys , [ 116 ] Reagan Youth , Chumbawamba and Manic Street Preachers . Situationist theory experienced a vogue in the late '90s hardcore punk scene, when it was referenced by Orchid , His Hero Is Gone and CrimethInc.

Situationist ideas may be found within the development of other avant-garde threads such as unilalianism [ 117 ] [ 118 ] and neoism , as well as artists such as Mark Divo and American artist Joey Skaggs who has been compared to Situationist practitioners for his use of staged spectacles and media infiltration to subvert dominant cultural narratives. His satirical hoaxes, such as Cathouse for Dogs and Portofess , reflect Situationist strategies like détournement by exposing media complicity and challenging societal norms.

[ 119 ] Writers such as Thomas de Zengotita have echoed situationist theories regarding the spectacle of contemporary society.

See also [ edit ] Anti-art Bernadette Corporation Golden Fleet King Mob The Right to Be Greedy : Theses on the Practical Necessity of Demanding Everything Neoism Arsenale Institute for Politics of Representation : an international institution for cultural studies and philosophical research, which archives contains an extensive research collection of the avant-garde movements of the early 20th century, with a focus on documents and works by Situationists, among others Notes [ edit ] ^ a b c d e f g h i j k Plant, Sadie (1992).

The Most Radical Gesture . New York: Routledge.

ISBN 978-0-415-06222-0 .

^ Debord, Guy (1967).

Society of the Spectacle .

^ a b c d e f Debord, Guy (June 1958).

"Definitions" .

Internationale Situationniste . No. 1. Translated by Knabb, Ken . Paris.

Archived from the original on 17 October 2006 . Retrieved 19 July 2007 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k Guy Debord (1957) Report on the Construction of Situations and on the International Situationist Tendency's Conditions of Organization and Action Archived 14 May 2011 at the Wayback Machine . (Paris, June 1957). Translated by Ken Knabb.

^ Guy Debord (1958) Preliminary Problems in Constructing a Situation Archived 8 June 2011 at the Wayback Machine . Internationale Situationniste No. 1 (Paris, June 1958). Translated by Ken Knabb.

^ Raoul Vaneigem (1967) Traité du savoir-vivre à l’usage des jeunes générations Archived 24 February 2011 at the Wayback Machine . (Paris, June 1967). Chapter 1: The Insignificant Signified.

^ Guy Debord (1967) Society of the Spectacle . (Paris, June 1967). Chapter IX: Ideology in Material Form.

Archived 20 July 2011 at the Wayback Machine ^ a b Report on the Construction of Situations (1957) ^ a b "Internationale Situationniste No. 1 (June 1958)" . Cddc.vt.edu.

Archived from the original on 13 June 2010 . Retrieved 11 October 2013 .

^ Horn (2007), p. 8 ^ Greil Marcus (1989) Lipstick Traces: A Secret History of the 20th Century , preview Archived 13 April 2017 at the Wayback Machine at Google books, pp. 279–86 ^ Boucharenc, Myriam (2005) L'universel reportage Archived 13 April 2017 at the Wayback Machine , pp. 94–6 ^ Breton, André (1950) Lettre a Louis Pauwels" sur le «"scandale" de Notre Dame» Archived 28 July 2011 at the Wayback Machine , in Combat , 12 April 1950, OC III , pp. 1024–5 ^ Serge Berna, Jean-Louis Brau, Guy Debord & Gil J. Wolman (1952) No More Flat Feet!

Archived 29 December 2010 at the Wayback Machine . Internationale Lettriste No. 1 (Paris, November 1952). Translated by Ken Knabb. Emphasis in original.

^ (1952) Position of the Lettrist International Archived 20 July 2011 at the Wayback Machine . Internationale Lettriste No. 1 (Paris, November 1952). Translated by Ken Knabb.

^ a b Guy Debord (1955) Introduction to a Critique of Urban Geography Archived 20 July 2011 at the Wayback Machine . Les Lèvres Nues No. 6 (Paris, September 1955). Translated by Ken Knabb.

^ Guy Debord (1956) Theory of the Dérive Archived 20 July 2011 at the Wayback Machine . Les Lèvres Nues No. 9 (Paris, November 1956). Reprinted in Internationale Situationniste No. 2 (Paris, December 1958). Translated by Ken Knabb.

^ Horn (2007), pp. 5–7, 42 ^ Wark, McKenzie (20 June 2011).

The Beach Beneath the Street: The Everyday Life and Glorious Times of the Situationist International (1 ed.). Verso Books. p. 67.

ISBN 9781844677207 .

^ Anselm Jappe , 1999, p. 65 quotation: "For the first four years of the SI's existence, the pivot of the group was the collaboration between Debord and Asger Jorn, who complemented each other well precisely because they were so different".

^ Hayes, Anthony (2017). "Appendix three: Whose spectacle?".

How the Situationist International became what it was (Thesis).

Archived from the original on 2 May 2022 . Retrieved 3 May 2022 .

^ a b c Debord harshly denounced the degradation in the quality of life under capitalism, also in his 1957 Report .

Poli 1991 said on Debord's Report: Con il suo Rapporto...

del 1957, Debord definisce programmaticamente le basi teoriche del situazionismo.

...

Nel Rapporto di Debord si legge inoltre una durissima critica allo sfruttamento capitalistico delle masse anche nel tempo libero attraverso l'industria del divertimento che abbrutisce la gente con sottoprodotti dell'ideologia mistificata della borghesia.

^ a b c (1963) The Exclusion of the Spurists Archived 20 May 2009 at the Wayback Machine . Internationale Situationniste No. 8 (Paris, January 1963). Translated by Ken Knabb.

^ a b The Fourth SI Conference in London Archived 5 September 2008 at the Wayback Machine , [1] Archived 23 September 2009 at the Wayback Machine Internationale Situationniste No. 5 (December 1960) ^ Nothing to talk about Archived 5 January 2009 at the Wayback Machine key, Halil Altindere and Sezgin Boynik (editors) ^ The Fifth SI Conference in Göteborg Archived 29 October 2010 at the Wayback Machine , [2] Archived 23 September 2009 at the Wayback Machine Internationale Situationniste No. 7 (April 1962) ^ Letter Archived 13 June 2010 at the Wayback Machine from Guy Debord and Uwe Lausen to the journal Vernissage , 15 March 1962 ^ a b c d e (1963) The Counter-Situationist Campaign in Various Countries Archived 21 August 2008 at the Wayback Machine . Internationale Situationniste No. 8 (Paris, January 1963). Translated by Ken Knabb.

^ Letter Archived 13 June 2010 at the Wayback Machine from Guy Debord to Rodolphe Gasche (member of the Gruppe SPUR), 18 June 1962 ^ Letter Archived 28 February 2021 at the Wayback Machine from Guy Debord To the Spur group, 28 April 1962 ^ Bunyard, Tom (20 November 2017).

Debord, Time and Spectacle: Hegelian Marxism and Situationist Theory . BRILL.

ISBN 9789004356023 .

^ Luther Blissett (2002) Guy Debord Is Really Dead Archived 13 March 2011 at the Wayback Machine ^ Plant, Sadie (1992).

The Most Radical Gesture . New York: Routledge. p. 94.

ISBN 978-0-415-06222-0 .

^ a b c d Vague, Tom (1997).

Anarchy in the Uk: the Angry Brigade . Stirling: AK Press. pp.

13– 14.

ISBN 978-1-873176-98-6 .

^ a b c d e f g h i Clark and Nicholson-Smith (Winter 1997), quotation: In particular the key issue, of how and why the situationists came to have a preponderant role in May 1968—that is, how and why their brand of politics participated in, and to an extent fueled, a crisis of the late-capitalist State—is still wide open to interpretation.

A description of the portion of the Left at clash with the situationists is found in note #4: The word "Left" ...

much of the time is used descriptively, and therefore pessimistically, to indicate a set of interlocking ideological directorships stretching roughly from the statist and workerist fringes of social democracy and laborism to the para-academic journals and think tanks of latter-day Trotskyism , taking in the Stalinist and lightly post-Stalinist center along the way.

^ Lasn, Kalle (2000) Culture Jam . New York: Quill. Quotation: In May 1968, the Situationist-inspired Paris riots set off "a chain reaction of refusal" against consumer capitalism.

^ a b c d Bandini 1988 , Preface to second edition L'I.S. diventa il detonatore, il reiferimento spesso taciuto per ragioni settarie, la fabbrica di metafore entrate nel linguaggio comune che ne ignora molto spesso l'esatto senso: e su tutte valga la metafora debordiana della nostra societa' come "societa' dello spettacolo.

^ Rivarol , 16 March 1984, quotation: the Situationist International, the political and revolutionary movement that was at the origin of the events of May 1968 ^ Présent , 10 March 1984, quotation: ...the enragé Guy Debord , the leader of the situationists, the most nihilistic, the most destructive of the anarcho-surrealist movements, probably the principal promoter of subversion of 1968.

^ Babronski, Lamy, Brigouleix, France-Soir , 9 and 10 March 1984, quotation: the situationists, a movement of libertarian tendency that was one of the detonators of the May '68 events.

^ Guy Debord (August 2003).

"Words and Bullets – The Condemned of the Lebovici Affair" . NOT BORED!.

Archived from the original on 25 July 2008 . Retrieved 23 June 2008 .

. On May '68, it quotes Babronski et al. (1984) ^ The monthly magazine 20 Ans , June 1968 issue, quotation: The Situationist International is the vanguard of the student movement.

^ Rivarol , 3 May 1968, quotation: it has largely been forgotten that, as early as February, the riots at Nantes showed the real face of these 'situationists,' fifteen hundred students under red and black flags, the Hall of Justice occupied...

^ Atkins 1977 ^ a b c d Anselm Jappe , 1999, p. 81.

^ Richard Gombin (1971).

^ Marie Luise Syring (1998) (editor) Um 1968: konkrete Utopien in Kunst und Gesellschaft , quotation: By far the greatest influence that the theory of art and aesthetics exercised upon the protest movement of students and left-wing intellectuals was in all likelihood that of the Situationists, something which practically nobody recalls today.

^ Demonet, Michel et al. (1975) Des Tracts en mai 68 . Paris: Champ Libre, 1978.

^ Pascal Dumontier (1990) Les Situationnistes et mai 68 : Théorie et la practique de la révolution (1966–1972) . Paris: Gérard Lebovici.

^ Christine Fauré (1998) Mai 68: Jour et Nuit ^ De Gaulle, Televised speech of 7 June 1968. Quoted in René Viénet (1968) Enragés et situationnistes dans le mouvement des occupations (Paris: Gallimard) ^ a b René Viénet (1968) Enragés and Situationists in the Occupations Movement Archived 27 March 2008 at the Wayback Machine (Translated by Loren Goldner and Paul Sieveking, New York: Autonomedia, 1992), sec.1 ^ Mustapha Khayati (November 1966) ^ a b c d The Beginning of an Era ( part1 Archived 23 September 2009 at the Wayback Machine , part 2 Archived 23 March 2009 at the Wayback Machine ) Situationist International No. 12, 1969 ^ u2r2h (13 August 2010).

"Complete (translated) texts" . Tangibleinfo.blogspot.com.

Archived from the original on 13 October 2013 . Retrieved 11 October 2013 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list ( link ) ^ "Gianfranco Sanguinetti" . Notbored.org.

Archived from the original on 26 August 2013 . Retrieved 11 October 2013 .

^ "Preuves de l'inexistence de Censor" .

debordiana.chez.com .

Archived from the original on 22 October 2020 . Retrieved 27 February 2021 .

^ Karen Elliot (1 June 2001).

"Situationism in a nutshell" . Barbelith Webzine. Archived from the original on 9 May 2008 . Retrieved 23 June 2008 .

^ Debord (1967) thesis 24 ^ Brush (2005) pp. 377–8 ^ Debord (1988) Comments on the Society of the Spectacle , II ^ Guy Debord (1967) Society of the Spectacle . (Paris, June 1967). Chapter I: Separation Perfected.

Archived 20 July 2011 at the Wayback Machine ^ Debord (1957) pp. 2, 10 ^ Robert Chasse, Bruce Elwell, Jonathon Horelick, Tony Verlaan. (1969) Faces of Recuperation Archived 20 July 2011 at the Wayback Machine . In the American section of the Situationist International, issue No. 1 (New York, June 1969).

^ a b Holt (2010) p. 252 ^ Martin Kaste Exploring Occupy Wall Street's 'Adbuster' Origins Archived 15 December 2018 at the Wayback Machine , NPR, 20 October 2011 ^ Marrone, Gianfranco (2005) Sensi alterati: droghe, musica, immagini Archived 13 April 2017 at the Wayback Machine , p. 45, quote: [...] gioco al coplotto, alla manipolazione dei media, alla beffa, alla "grande truffa," o al detournement —inventato dai situazionisti e ripreso dai punk—che appunto del situazionismo sono talvolta concreti continuatori. Pensiamo in questo senso al fin troppo noto caso, esagerato dai media, ma paradigmatico, del manager dei Sex Pistols, Malcom McClaren, a partire dal quale, nell'estate del 1977, si scateno', con grande scandalo, il lancio del gruppo dei Pistols in pieno Giubileo della regina, e l'interesse della stampa per la nascente scena punk. Tuttavia, anche in questo caso non-si tratta, come invece è stato spesso sostenuto, di freddo "gioco a tavolino", di cinismo, di furbo lancio di un prodotto da parte di chi aveva studiato i media e lavorava sulla guerriglia semiologica (cfr. Fabbri P. 2002, p. 40), di una tattica che sarebbe poi stata facilmente sfruttata e fatta propria da quel momento in avanti dall'industria culturale mainstream .

^ Francesco Poli (1991) p. 63. Quotation: Nel 1972, quindici anni dopo la sua fondazione ...

l'Internazionale Situazionista si scioglie in quanto organizzazione. Durante questi anni, il movimento, caratterizzato da un'ideologia dell'estetico e del politico di matrice marxista e surrealista, produce una quantita' consistente di scritti teorici, opuscoli, libri, film e lavori artistici nel campo della pittura e della progettazione di interventi nella dimensione urbana. Di grande rilievo è il ruolo degli artisti, tra cui in particolare Asger Jorn, Constant e Pinot Gallizio; ^ a b Bandini 1988 , quotation: Per la prima volta dopo il surrealismo, arte e politica vengono affrontate insieme in termini rivoluzionari.

...

L'idea chiave è quella della 'costruzione di situazioni' ...

L'urbanesimo unitario ...

Fondamentale è la 'ricerca psicogeografica': studio delle leggi esatte e degli effetti precisi che l'ambiente geografico, coscientemente disposto o no, attua direttamente sul comportamento affettivo degli individui.

^ Richard Gombin (1971), chap. 3, quotation: the IS was to attempt an analysis of the modern world from the point of view of everyday life. ... The critique of everyday life is not intended to be purely an analysis; it is supposed to lead on to a revolutionary praxis. ...

On SI analysis of consumerism: This process causes an accelerating degradation of everyday life.

^ a b Debord G.E. (1967) : thesis 6, 8, 10, 17, 19, 30, 37, 60, 68, 114, 134 ^ Bandini 1988 , Preface to second edition, quotation: [...] reagire all'avvilita condizione dell'uomo nel sistema capitalista.

^ Knabb, Ken , ed. (1995).

Situationist International Anthology . Berkeley: Bureau of Public Secrets. p. 50.

^ Sanouillet, Michel; Ganguly, Sharmila (2 October 2012).

Dada in Paris (Revised, Expanded ed.). Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press. p. 178.

ISBN 9780262518215 .

^ Haladyn, Julian Jason (30 October 2015).

Boredom and Art: Passions of the Will To Boredom . Zero Books.

ISBN 9781782799986 .

^ Andreotti, Libero. "Play-Tactics of the "Internationale Situationniste"" https://www.jstor.org/stable/779148Play-tactics of the Internationale Situationniste* (n.d.): 36–58.

Jstor . The MIT Press, 2000. Web. 2015.

^ Gray, Christopher, ed. (1998).

Leaving the 20th Century: the Incomplete Work of the Situationist International . London: Rebel P. p. 26.

^ McDonough, Tom, ed. (2004).

Guy Debord and the Situationist International: Texts and Documents . Boston: October Press. p. 259.

^ Issues available at "situationist international archive" .

situationist international archive .

Archived from the original on 3 May 2022 . Retrieved 3 May 2022 .

^ "Situationist International Anthology" .

www.bopsecrets.org .

Archived from the original on 15 August 2006 . Retrieved 12 August 2006 .

^ Giorgio Agamben (1990), " Glosse in margine ai Commentari sulla societa dello spettacolo " in Debord 1990 , pp. 233–250: On book Society of Spectacle : "l'analisi più lucida e severa delle miserie e della servitù di una società—quella dello spettacolo, in cui noi viviamo—che ha esteso oggi il suo dominio su tutto il pianeta ^ a b Richard Gombin (1971), chap. 3, quotation: The concept of revolution created by the Situationist International is that of total contestation of modern capitalism.

^ a b Guy Debord (1961) Perspectives for Conscious Changes in Everyday Life Archived 21 February 2009 at the Wayback Machine . This work was originally presented by tape recording 17 May 1961 at a conference of the Group for Research on Everyday Life convened in Paris by Henri Lefebvre . Its first print appearance was in Internationale Situationniste No. 6 (Paris, August 1961).

^ a b Editorial Notes Archived 4 March 2009 at the Wayback Machine , Internationale Situationniste No. 8, 1963.

^ a b Bandini 1988 , Preface to second edition Non a caso l'I.S. sorge ed e' coeva alla denuncia dello Stalinismo.

^ Das Kapital , entry sentence, p. 125: "The wealth of societies in which the capitalist mode of production prevails appears as an 'immense collection of commodities'" ^ "The whole life of those societies in which modern conditions of production prevail presents itself as an immense accumulation of spectacles." Debord G.E. (1967), thesis 1st.

^ Debord G.E. (1967) : thesis 17, 42 ^ Giorgio Agamben, 1989 ^ Debord G.E. (1967) : thesis 6, 34 ^ Debord G.E. (1967) : thesis 24 ^ Debord G.E. (1967) : thesis 25, 192 ^ Guy Debord letter Archived 26 November 2010 at the Wayback Machine to Italian section of the SI in Milan and to Mario Perniola in Rome,
12 March 1969 ^ Guy Debord letter Archived 26 November 2010 at the Wayback Machine to Paolo Salvadori 9 December [19]69 ^ Guy Debord letter Archived 26 November 2010 at the Wayback Machine To all the sections of the SI, [17 March 1970] ^ Guy Debord letter Archived 26 November 2010 at the Wayback Machine To Rene Vienet, Wednesday 30 July [19]69 ^ Situationist International (9 December 1966).

" The Beginning of an Era " . Bopsecrets.org.

Archived from the original on 13 December 2013 . Retrieved 11 October 2013 .

^ Greil Marcus The long walk of the Situationist International in McDonough (2004), Guy Debord and the Situationist International ^ "A Short Guide to the Anglo-American Situationist Image" .

Archived from the original on 30 October 2019 . Retrieved 16 September 2019 .

^ Debord (1967) The Society of the Spectacle , chap. 4 The Proletariat as Subject and as Representation , theses 92-4 ^ Riesel, René Preliminaries on Councils and Councilist Organization Archived 31 March 2012 at the Wayback Machine , International Situationniste No. 12 (September 1969) ^ Ken Knabb (28 October 1980).

"The Joy of Revolution (chap. 2)" . Bopsecrets.org.

Archived from the original on 29 June 2013 . Retrieved 11 October 2013 .

^ a b Clark and Nicholson-Smith (Spring 1997), response to Peter Wollen (March–April 1989). Quotation: So far as Wollen is concerned, the anger was provoked by his essay on the history of the SI, and specifically his three-sentence treatment of the organization in its last decade. We think he should look again at these sentences (which conclude some thirty pages of discussion of the SI's place in modern art), and ask himself whether they are not lofty, contemptuous, and dismissive. That's how they read to us. They seem to epitomize—and, in view of their publication history, to enshrine—a certain effort to turn the SI safely into an art movement , and thereby to minimize its role in the political and social movements of the sixties. Like Wollen, presumably, we think that those up-heavals are of much more than historical interest, and every day they are traduced and trivialized by the culture industry . Much is at stake, therefore. We wanted to denounce a loose conspirancy of silence and misrepresentation which has been the response of a portion of the Left to the challenge that the SI poses to their model of political action.

^ a b Ken Knabb (2006) SI Anthology , Bibliography – Books about the SI – In English, p. 498 ^ Mario Lippolis (2000) Notizie su Asger Jorn, situazionista iperpolitico in Jorn 2000 ^ Mario Lippolis (2000) Un dialogo tra vandali civilizzatori nello sfacelo dell'impero della merce in Jorn 2000 ^ Chaz Bufe.

"Listen Anarchist!" . See Sharp Press.

Archived from the original on 23 November 2012 . Retrieved 23 June 2008 .

^ Gibbons, Andrea (30 November 2015).

"Salvaging Situationism: Race and Space | Salvage" .

salvage.zone . Salvage.

Archived from the original on 10 May 2018 . Retrieved 10 May 2018 .

^ a b Luther Blissett (2002) [1995] Guy Debord Is Really Dead , Sabotage Editions, ISBN 978-0-9514417-3-2 English edition of Guy Debord è morto davvero Archived 25 April 2012 at the Wayback Machine ^ Derrida (2002) Q&A session at Film Forum pp. 116–7 quote: I think you probably know that his work [Debord's] is read now more than when he was alive. At least that's the case in France. I don't know if he's read in the States, but in France he's read as presenting a precise critique and political analysis of the media, of the becoming-spectacle, the exploitation of the 'show' in politics and in the media, and television.
What's interesting is that in France people, especially the writers or the intellectuals who are often asked to appear on TV—sometimes almost every day—they [reflexively] mention Guy Debord as their master, and I hate this! So I never quote Debord when I'm on TV, and I'm almost never on TV—so I guess that's how, in my way, I'm true to Debord.

^ Cooper, Sam (2016).

The Situationist International in Britain: modernism, surrealism, and the avant-gardes . New York: Routledge.

ISBN 9781138680456 .

Archived from the original on 24 January 2018 . Retrieved 20 December 2016 .

^ a b Lang, Daniel (May 2007).

" "Give Us the Dumpsters -Or- Give Us Life": Res Derilictae and the Trash of Free Trade" .

Cultural Recycling .

3 (1).

Archived from the original on 28 September 2008 . Retrieved 3 October 2008 .

^ "Le Retour de la Colonne Durutti" . Cerysmatic Factory.

Archived from the original on 25 July 2008 . Retrieved 23 October 2007 .

^ Nehring, Neil (December 2006). "The Situationist International in American Hardcore Punk, 1982–2002".

Popular Music & Society .

^ Russian anti Putin punk band ^ Vander Molen, Jodi, Jello Biafra Interview Archived 25 June 2006 at the Wayback Machine The Progressive Retrieved 21 March 2022 ^ "The Secret Stairs: YNAPMOK – Deconstructing the Badaud" .

Issuu . 20 November 2018.

Archived from the original on 24 April 2019 . Retrieved 24 December 2018 .

^ "YNAPMOK: An Installation" .

The Unilalia Group . Archived from the original on 24 December 2018 . Retrieved 24 December 2018 .

^ Harold, Christine (1 September 2004).

"Pranking rhetoric: "culture jamming" as media activism" .

Critical Studies in Media Communication .

21 (3): 189– 211.

doi : 10.1080/0739318042000212693 .

ISSN 1529-5036 .

References [ edit ] Manifestolibri , ed. (2006) [1991].

I situazionisti e la loro storia (in Italian). Roma: Manifestolibri.

ISBN 978-88-7285-438-9 .

OCLC 173233761 . Archived from the original on 23 January 2009 . Retrieved 12 December 2008 .

Agamben, Giorgio (6 July 1989). "Violenza e speranza nell'ultimo spettacolo: Dal maggio francese a piazza Tian An Men".

Il Manifesto : 1– 2.

Atkins, Guy (1977).

Asger Jorn, the Crucial Years: 1954–1964 . New York: Wittenborn Art Books.

ISBN 978-0-8150-0696-1 .

OCLC 3260328 .

Archived from the original on 23 March 2009 . Retrieved 10 December 2008 .

Bandini, Mirella (1988) [1977].

L'estetico, il politico. Da Cobra all'Internazionale situazionista 1948–1957 (in Italian). Ancone: Costa & Nolan.

ISBN 978-88-7648-344-8 .

OCLC 42461565 .

Clark, T. J.

; Nicholson-Smith, Donald (Winter 1997). "Why Art Can't Kill the Situationist International".

October .

79 : 15– 31.

JSTOR 778836 .

Full text.

Archived 20 March 2009 at the Wayback Machine Clark, T. J.

; Nicholson-Smith, Donald ; Wollen, Peter (Spring 1997). "Letters and Responses".

October .

80 ( 149– 151): 149.

doi : 10.2307/778815 .

JSTOR 778815 .

S2CID 147610507 .

Debord, Guy (1990).

Commentari sulla società dello spettacolo e La società dello spettacolo (in Italian). Milan.

OCLC 84945205 .

Debord, Guy (1967).

The Society of the Spectacle . Black & Red.

ISBN 978-0-86091-302-3 .

OCLC 44236857 .

Archived from the original on 30 November 2017 . Retrieved 12 December 2008 .

Derrida, Jacques (2002) Q&A session at Film Forum , New York City, 23 October 2002, transcript by Gil Kofman . Published in Kirby Dick, Amy Ziering Kofman, Jacques Derrida (2005) Derrida: screenplay and essays on the film Archived 7 May 2016 at the Wayback Machine Gombin, Richard (1975) [1971].

The Origins of Modern Leftism .

Michael K. Perl . London: Penguin Books .

ISBN 978-0-14-021846-6 .

OCLC 247811170 . Archived from the original on 24 August 2001.

Jappe, Anselm (1999) [1992].

Guy Debord . Berkeley: University of California Press .

ISBN 978-0-520-21205-3 .

Archived from the original on 13 April 2017 . Retrieved 18 March 2016 .

Jorn, Asger (2000). Mario Lippolis (ed.).

Asger Jorn, la comunitá prodiga (in Italian). Rapallo: Zona.

ISBN 978-88-87578-08-9 .

OCLC 79899532 .

McDonough, Tom (July 2002). "The many lives of Asger Jorn".

Art in America .

McDonough, Tom, ed. (1 April 2004).

Guy Debord and the Situationist International: Texts and Documents . Cambridge: MIT Press .

ISBN 978-0-262-63300-0 .

OCLC 254164446 .

Khayati, Mustapha (1966).

On the Poverty of Student Life .

Poli, Francesco (1991). "Sulla scia dei surrealisti".

I Situazionisti e la Loro Storia (in Italian): 63.

Wollen, Peter (March–April 1989).

"The Situationist International" .

New Left Review .

I (174): 67– 95.

Archived from the original on 26 March 2016 . Retrieved 7 January 2016 .

Further reading [ edit ] Balsebre, Gianluigi.

Della critica radicale. Bibliografia ragionata sull'Internazionale situazionista. Con documenti inediti in italiano Grafton edizioni, Bologna, 1995.

Cooper, Sam.

The Situationist International in Britain: Modernism, Surrealism, and the Avant-Gardes . Routledge, New York, 2016.

ISBN 9781138680456 Knabb, Ken, ed. (2024) [originally 1981].

The Situationist International Anthology (Revised and updated ed.). Oakland, California: PM Press.

ISBN 979-8-887440-57-6 .

Ford, Simon .

The Situationist International: A User's Guide (Black Dog, London, 2004) ISBN 978-1-904772-05-7 Sadler, Simon .

The Situationist City . MIT Press, Cambridge MA, 1998.

ISBN 978-0-262-69225-0 Vachon, Marc.

L'arpenteur de la ville: L'utopie situationniste et Patrick Straram . Les Éditions Triptyque, Montreal, 2003 ISBN 978-2-89031-476-4 .

Wark, McKenzie .

50 Years of Recuperation of the Situationist International (Princeton Architectural Press, New York, 2008) ISBN 978-1-56898-789-7 Wark, McKenzie.

The Beach Beneath the Street: The Everyday Life and Glorious Times of the Situationist International (Verso, New York, 2011) ISBN 978-1-84467-720-7 The Rise and Fall of The Green Mountain Anarchist Collective , 2015.

The Situationist international (1957–1972) In girum imus nocte et consumimur igni . JRP Ringier, Zurich, 2007 ISBN 978-3-905770-14-8 External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Situationist International .

Wikiquote has quotations related to Situationist International .

Situationist International Online The Situationist International Text Library Situationist Cinema at 0xDB Translations of all twelve issues of Internationale Situationniste "REVOLUTIONARY ABSENCE" by Ara H. Merjian found in Issue 67 of Cabinet Magazine (2019–20).

v t e Premodern , Modern and Contemporary art movements List of art movements / periods Premodern (Western) Ancient Thracian Dacian Nuragic Aegean Cycladic Minoan Minyan ware Mycenaean Greek Sub-Mycenaean Protogeometric Geometric Orientalizing Archaic Black-figure Red-figure Severe style Classical Kerch style Hellenistic "Baroque" Indo-Greek Greco-Buddhist Neo-Attic Etruscan Scythian Iberian Gaulish Roman Republican Gallo-Roman Julio-Claudian Pompeian Styles Trajanic Severan Medieval Late antique Early Christian Coptic Ethiopian Migration Period Anglo-Saxon Hunnic Insular Lombard Visigothic Donor portrait Pictish Mozarabic Repoblación Viking Byzantine Iconoclast Macedonian Palaeologan Italo-Byzantine Frankish Merovingian Carolingian Pre-Romanesque Ottonian Romanesque Mosan Spanish Norman Norman-Sicilian Opus Anglicanum Gothic Gothic art in Milan International Gothic International Gothic art in Italy Lucchese school Crusades Moscow school Novgorod school Vladimir-Suzdal school Duecento Sienese school Mudéjar Medieval cartography Italian school Majorcan school Mappa mundi Renaissance Italian Renaissance Trecento Proto-Renaissance Florentine school Pittura infamante Quattrocento Ferrarese school Forlivese school Venetian school Cinquecento High Renaissance Bolognese school Mannerism Counter- Maniera Northern Renaissance Early Netherlandish World landscape Ghent–Bruges school Northern Mannerism German Renaissance Cologne school Danube school Dutch and Flemish Renaissance Antwerp Mannerism Romanism Still life English Renaissance Tudor court Cretan school Turquerie Fontainebleau school Art of the late 16th century in Milan 17th century Baroque Baroque in Milan Flemish Baroque Caravaggisti in Utrecht Tenebrism Louis XIII style Lutheran Baroque Stroganov school Animal painting Guild of Romanists Dutch Golden Age Delft school Capriccio Heptanese school Classicism Louis XIV style Poussinists and Rubenists 18th century Rococo Rocaille Louis XV style Frederician Chinoiserie Fête galante Neoclassicism Goût grec Louis XVI style Adam style Directoire style Neoclassical architecture in Milan Picturesque Colonial art Art of the African diaspora African-American Caribbean Haitian Colonial Asian art Arts in the Philippines Letras y figuras Tipos del País Colonial Asian Baroque Company style Latin American art Casta painting Indochristian art Chilote school Cuzco school Quito school Latin American Baroque Art borrowing Western elements Islamic Moorish Manichaean Mughal Qajar Qing handicrafts Western influence in Japan Akita ranga Uki-e Transition to modern (c. 1770 – 1862) Romanticism Fairy painting Danish Golden Age Troubadour style Nazarene movement Purismo Shoreham Ancients Düsseldorf school Pre-Raphaelites Hudson River School American luminism Orientalism Norwich school Empire style Historicism Revivalism Biedermeier Realism Barbizon school Costumbrismo Verismo Macchiaioli Academic art Munich school in Greece Neo-Grec Etching revival Modern (1863–1944) 1863–1899 Neo-romanticism National romanticism Yōga Nihonga Japonisme Anglo-Japanese style Beuron school Hague school Peredvizhniki Impressionism American Hoosier Group Boston school Amsterdam Canadian Heidelberg school Aestheticism Arts and Crafts Art pottery Tonalism Decadent movement Symbolism Romanian Russian Volcano school Incoherents Post-Impressionism Neo-Impressionism Luminism Divisionism Pointillism Pont-Aven School Cloisonnism Synthetism Les Nabis American Barbizon school California tonalism Costumbrismo 1900–1914 Art Nouveau Art Nouveau in Milan Primitivism California Impressionism Secessionism School of Paris Munich Secession Vienna Secession Berlin Secession Sonderbund Pennsylvania Impressionism Mir iskusstva Ten American Painters Fauvism Expressionism Die Brücke Der Blaue Reiter Noucentisme Deutscher Werkbund American Realism Ashcan school Cubism Proto-Cubism Orphism A Nyolcak Neue Künstlervereinigung München Futurism Cubo-Futurism Art Deco Metaphysical Rayonism Productivism Synchromism Vorticism 1915–1944 Sosaku-hanga Suprematism School of Paris Crystal Cubism Constructivism Latin American Universal Constructivism Dada Shin-hanga Neoplasticism De Stijl Purism Return to order Novecento Italiano Figurative Constructivism Stupid Cologne Progressives Arbeitsrat für Kunst November Group Australian tonalism Dresden Secession Social realism Functionalism Bauhaus Kinetic art Anthropophagy Mingei Group of Seven New Objectivity Grosvenor school Neues Sehen Surrealism Iranian Latin American Mexican muralism Neo-Fauvism Precisionism Aeropittura Asso Scuola Romana Cercle et Carré The Group Harlem Renaissance Kapists Regionalism California Scene Painting Heroic realism Socialist realism Nazi art Streamline Moderne Concrete art Abstraction-Création Tiki The Ten Dimensionism Boston Expressionism Leningrad school Contemporary and Postmodern (1945–present) 1945–1959 International Typographic Style Abstract expressionism Washington Color School Visionary art Vienna School of Fantastic Realism Spatialism Color field Lyrical abstraction Tachisme Arte Informale COBRA Nuagisme Generación de la Ruptura Jikken Kōbō Metcalf Chateau Mono-ha Nanyang Style Action painting American Figurative Expressionism in New York New media art New York school Hard-edge painting Bay Area Figurative Movement Les Plasticiens Gutai Art Association Gendai Bijutsu Kondankai Pop art Situationist International Soviet Nonconformist Ukrainian underground Lettrism Letterist International Ultra-Lettrist Florida Highwaymen Cybernetic art Antipodeans 1960–1969 Otra Figuración Afrofuturism Nueva Presencia ZERO Happening Neo-Dada Neo-Dada Organizers Op art Nouveau réalisme Nouvelle tendance Capitalist realism Art & Language Arte Povera Black Arts Movement The Caribbean Artists Movement Chicano art movement Conceptual art Land art Systems art Video art Minimalism Fluxus Generative art Post-painterly abstraction Intermedia Psychedelic art Nut Art Photorealism Environmental art Performance art Process art Institutional critique Light and Space Street art Feminist art movement in the US Saqqakhaneh movement The Stars Art Group Tropicália Yoru no Kai Artificial intelligence visual art 1970–1999 Post-conceptual art Installation art Artscene Postminimalism Endurance art Sots Art Moscow Conceptualists Pattern and Decoration Pliontanism Punk art Neo-expressionism Transavantgarde Saint Soleil school Guerrilla art Lowbrow art Telematic art Appropriation art Neo-conceptual art New European Painting Tunisian collaborative painting Memphis Group Cyberdelic Neue Slowenische Kunst Scratch video Transgressive Retrofuturism Young British Artists Superfiction Taring Padi Superflat New Leipzig school Artist-run initiative Artivism The Designers Republic Grunge design Verdadism Chinese Apartment Art 2000– present Amazonian pop art Altermodern Art for art Art game Art intervention Brandalism Classical Realism Contemporary African art Africanfuturism Contemporary Indigenous Australian art Crypto art Cyborg art Excessivism Fictive art Flat design Corporate Memphis Hypermodernism Hyperrealism Idea art Internet art Post-Internet iPhone art Kitsch movement Lightpainting Massurrealism Modern European ink painting Neo-futurism Neomodern Neosymbolism Passionism Post-YBAs Relational art Skeuomorphism Software art Sound art Stuckism Superflat SoFlo Superflat Superstroke Toyism Unilalianism Vaporwave Walking Artists Network Related topics History of art Abstract art Asemic writing Anti-art Avant-garde Ballets Russes Christian art Art in the Protestant Reformation and Counter-Reformation Catholic art Icon Lutheran art Digital art Fantastic art Folk art Hierarchy of genres Genre painting History painting Illuminated manuscript Illustration Interactive art Jewish art Kitsch Landscape painting Modernism Modern sculpture Late modernism Naïve art Outsider art Portrait Prehistoric European art Queer art Realism Shock art Trompe-l'œil Western painting Category v t e Avant-garde movements Visual art Abstract expressionism Art Nouveau Art & Language Conceptual art Constructivism Proto-Cubism Cubism Functionalism Bauhaus Grosvenor School Devětsil Divisionism Fauvism Impressionism Neo-Impressionism Post-Impressionism Color Field Incoherents Lyrical Abstraction Mail art Minimalism Mir iskusstva Multidimensional art Neoplasticism De Stijl Neue Slowenische Kunst Nonconformism Nouveau réalisme Orphism Performance art Pop art Process art Purism Rayonism Suprematism Temporary art Vorticism Literature and poetry Acmeism Angry Penguins Asemic writing Conceptual poetry Cyberpunk Ego-Futurism Experimental literature Flarf poetry Hungry generation Imaginism Imagism Language poets Neoavanguardia Neoteric Nouveau roman Oberiu Oulipo Slam poetry Ultraísmo Visual poetry Zaum Music By style Funk Jazz Free funk Yass Pop Rock Prog Punk Metal Others Aleatoric music Ars nova Ars subtilior Atonal music Electroacoustic music Electronic music Industrial music Experimental pop Free jazz Free improvisation Futurism Microtonal music Minimal music Drone music Music theatre Musique concrète New Complexity No wave Noise music Post-rock Rock in Opposition Second Viennese School Serialism Spectral music Stochastic music Textural music Totalism Twelve-tone technique Cinema and theatre Cinéma pur Dogme 95 Drop Art Epic theatre Experimental film Experimental theatre Modernist film Poetic realism Postdramatic theatre Remodernist film Structural film Theatre of the Absurd Theatre of Cruelty General Constructivism Dada Expressionism Fluxus Futurism Russian Futurism Cubo-Futurism Lettrism Modernism Minimalism Postminimalism Neo-minimalism Neo-Dada Neoism Postmodernism Postmodernist film Late modernism Primitivism Situationist International Social realism Socialist realism Surrealism Symbolism Russian symbolism v t e Political internationals Active Conservative International Democracy Union Centrist Democrat International Progressive Progressive Alliance Progressive International Socialist Left communist International Communist Current International Communist Party Marxist–Leninist Coordination Committee of Maoist Parties and Organisations of South Asia European Communist Action International Meeting of Communist and Workers' Parties International Conference of Marxist–Leninist Parties and Organizations International Coordination of Revolutionary Organizations Trotskyist CWI CRFI FI (USFI) ICFI ICL-FI ICU IRL ISA IST IWL-FI LFI L5I RCI TF-FI WIRFI Other COPPPAL International League of Peoples' Struggle International Peoples' Assembly International Workers' Association São Paulo Forum Socialist International World Socialist Movement Other Global Greens ( Green ) Humanist International ( Universal Humanist ) Humanists International ( Secular humanist ) International Alliance of Libertarian Parties ( Libertarian ) International Monarchist League ( Monarchist ) Liberal International ( Liberal ) Muslim Brotherhood ( Islamist ) Pirate Parties International ( Pirate ) World Ecological Parties ( Ecologist ) World Union of National Socialists ( Neo-Nazi ) Historical Alliance of Democrats Anarchist St. Imier International Black International Committee for a Workers' International (1974) Communist Workers' International First International Second International Third International Vienna International International Agrarian Bureau International Entente of Radical and Similar Democratic Parties ILO International Revolutionary Marxist Centre International Secretariat of Democratic Parties of Christian Inspiration Labour and Socialist International Krestintern Fascist International Fourth International Situationist International Revolutionary Internationalist Movement International Communist Seminar E2D International West Indies Democratic Labour Party West Indies Federal Labour Party Young Europe Pan-European political parties v t e Anarchism Concepts Anarchy Anarchist Black Cross Anarchist criminology Anationalism Anti-authoritarianism Anti-capitalism Anti-militarism Affinity group Autonomous social center Black bloc Classless society Class struggle Consensus decision-making Conscientious objector Critique of work Decentralization Deep ecology Direct action Free love Freethought Horizontalidad Individualism Law Mutual aid Participatory politics Permanent autonomous zone Prefigurative politics Proletarian internationalism Propaganda of the deed Refusal of work Revolution Rewilding Sabotage Security culture Self-ownership Social ecology Sociocracy Somatherapy Spontaneous order Squatting Temporary autonomous zone Union of egoists Voluntary association Workers' council Issues Animal rights Capitalism Education Love and sex Nationalism Religion Violence Schools of thought Classical Individualist Egoist Illegalist Naturist Philosophical Mutualist Social Collectivist Communist Magonist Post-classical Feminist Green Primitivist Social ecology Independence Insurrectionary Pacifist Religious Christian Buddhist Jewish Without adjectives Contemporary Black Free-market Postcolonial Post-anarchist Post-left Queer Types of federation Affinity group Anarcho-syndicalism Platformism Anarchist synthesis Union of egoists Economics Communization Cooperative Cost the limit of price Decentralized planned economy Free association General strike Gift economy Give-away shop Labor voucher Market socialism Mutual bank Mutual credit Social ownership Wage slavery Workers' self-management Culture A las Barricadas Anarchist bookfair Anarcho-punk Anarchy in the U.K.

Architecture Arts DIY ethic Escuela Moderna Films Freeganism Infoshop Independent Media Center The Internationale Lifestylism May Day " No gods, no masters " Popular education " Property is theft!

" Radical cheerleading Radical environmentalism Self-managed social center Symbolism History French Revolution Revolutions of 1848 Spanish Regional Federation of the IWA Paris Commune Hague Congress Cantonal rebellion Haymarket affair Trial of the Thirty International Conference of Rome Ferrer movement Strandzha Commune Congress of Amsterdam Tragic Week High Treason Incident Manifesto of the Sixteen German Revolution of 1918–1919 Bavarian Soviet Republic 1919 United States bombings Biennio Rosso Kronstadt rebellion Makhnovshchina Amakasu Incident Alt Llobregat insurrection Anarchist insurrection of January 1933 Anarchist insurrection of December 1933 Spanish Revolution of 1936 Barcelona May Days Red inverted triangle Labadie Collection Provo May 1968 Kate Sharpley Library Carnival Against Capital 1999 Seattle WTO protests Really Really Free Market Occupy movement People Alston Armand Ba Bakunin Berkman Bonanno Bookchin Bourdin Chomsky Cleyre Day Durruti Ellul Ervin Faure Ferrer Feyerabend Giovanni Godwin Goldman González Prada Graeber Guillaume He-Yin Kanno Kōtoku Kropotkin Landauer Liu Magón Makhno Maksimov Malatesta Mett Michel Most Parsons Pi i Margall Pouget Proudhon Raichō Reclus Rocker Santillán Spooner Stirner Thoreau Tolstoy Tucker Volin Ward Warren Yarchuk Zerzan Lists Anarcho-punk bands Books Fictional characters Films Jewish anarchists Musicians Periodicals By region Africa Albania Algeria Andorra Argentina Armenia Australia Austria Azerbaijan Bangladesh Belarus Belgium Bolivia Bosnia and Herzegovina Brazil Bulgaria Canada Chile China Colombia Costa Rica Croatia Cuba Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Dominican Republic Ecuador Egypt El Salvador Estonia Finland France French Guiana Georgia Germany Greece Guatemala Hong Kong Hungary Iceland India Indonesia Iran Ireland Israel Italy Japan Korea Latvia Malaysia Mexico Monaco Mongolia Morocco Netherlands New Zealand Nicaragua Nigeria Norway Panama Paraguay Peru Philippines Poland Portugal Romania Russia Serbia Singapore South Africa Spain Sweden Switzerland Syria ( DAANES ) Taiwan Timor-Leste Tunisia Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom United States ( Puerto Rico ) Uruguay Venezuela Vietnam Related topics Anarcho-capitalism Anti-corporatism Anti-consumerism Anti-fascism Anti-globalization Anti-statism Anti-war movement Autarchism Autonomism Communism Definition of anarchism and libertarianism Dual power IWA Labour movement Left communism Left-libertarianism Libertarianism Libertarian socialism Marxism National-anarchism Relationship between Friedrich Nietzsche and Max Stirner Situationist International Socialism Spontaneous order Anarchism portal Category Outline Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National Germany United States France BnF data Australia Spain Norway Croatia Israel Catalonia Academics CiNii Artists ULAN RKD Artists Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Situationist_International&oldid=1306002402 " Categories : Situationist International 1957 establishments in France 1972 disestablishments in France Anti-capitalism Anti-consumerist groups Anti-Stalinist left Architecture groups Contemporary French history Continental philosophy organizations Critical theory Culture jamming Far-left politics in France Left-wing internationals Modern art Organizations established in 1957 Organizations disestablished in 1972 Socialism Underground culture Critics of work and the work ethic Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use American English from January 2022 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use dmy dates from February 2019 Articles containing French-language text CS1 Italian-language sources (it) Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles with excerpts This page was last edited on 15 August 2025, at 09:59 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Situationist International 34 languages Add topic

