Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Origins Toggle Origins subsection 1.1 Unfulfilled prophecy 1.2 Traditions 2 Object and contents 3 Comparison to prophecy Toggle Comparison to prophecy subsection 3.1 Message 3.2 Dualistic theology 3.3 Conception of history 4 Hebrew Bible Toggle Hebrew Bible subsection 4.1 Characteristics 4.2 Canonical 4.2.1 Proto-apocalyptic 4.2.2 Apocalyptic 4.3 Non-canonical 5 New Testament Toggle New Testament subsection 5.1 Canonical 5.2 Non-canonical 5.3 Gnostic 6 See also 7 Notes 8 References 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Apocalyptic literature 16 languages العربية Català Español Français Bahasa Indonesia Kiswahili Malagasy മലയാളം Nederlands Português Română Русский Shqip ไทย Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Genre of prophetical writing This article is about the genre of religious writings dealing with revelation. For the genre of fiction dealing with cataclysm, see Apocalyptic and post-apocalyptic fiction . For academic (nonfiction) literature on potential end-of-the-world events, see global catastrophic risk .

The Book of Daniel is one of the earliest instances of apocalyptic literature within the Abrahamic traditions.

Apocalyptic literature is a genre of prophetical writing that developed in post- Exilic Jewish culture and was popular among millennialist early Christians .

Apocalypse ( Ancient Greek : ἀποκάλυψις , romanized : apokálupsis ) is a Greek word meaning " revelation ", "an unveiling or unfolding of things not previously known and which could not be known apart from the unveiling".

[ 1 ] As a genre, apocalyptic literature details the authors' visions of the end times / end of the age as revealed by an angel or other heavenly messenger.

[ 2 ] The apocalyptic literature of Judaism and Christianity embraces a considerable period, from the centuries following the Babylonian exile down to the close of the Middle Ages .

[ 3 ] Origins [ edit ] Apocalyptic elements can be detected in the prophetic books of Joel and Zechariah , while Isaiah chapters 24–27 and 33 present well-developed apocalypses. The second half of the Book of Daniel (chs. 7–12) offers a fully matured and classic example of this genre of literature.

[ 3 ] Unfulfilled prophecy [ edit ] This section possibly contains original research .

Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations . Statements consisting only of original research should be removed.

( August 2018 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The non-fulfillment of prophecies served to popularize the methods of apocalyptic in comparison with the non-fulfillment of the advent of the Messianic kingdom . Thus, though Jeremiah had promised that after seventy years Israelites should be restored to their own land, [ 4 ] and then enjoy the blessings of the Messianic kingdom under the Messianic king, [ 5 ] this period passed by and things remained as of old.

[ 6 ] Some believe that the Messianic kingdom was not necessarily predicted to occur at the end of the seventy years of the Babylonian exile, but at some unspecified time in the future. The only thing for certain that was predicted was the return of the Jews to their land, which occurred when Cyrus the Persian conquered Babylon in c.

539 BCE . Thus, the fulfillment of the Messianic kingdom remained in the future for the Jews.

Haggai and Zechariah explained the delay by the failure of Judah to rebuild the temple, and so hope of the kingdom persisted, until in the first half of the 2nd century the delay is explained in the Books of Daniel and Enoch as due not to man's shortcomings but to the counsels of God.

[ 7 ] Regarding the 70 years of exile predicted in Jeremiah 29:10, the Jews were first exiled in 605 BCE in the reign of king Jehoiakim and were allowed to return to their land in c. 536 BCE when King Cyrus conquered Babylon. This period was approximately 70 years, as prophesied by Jeremiah.

[ citation needed ] Others connect the 70 years of Jeremiah with the 70 weeks of years mentioned by the angel in Daniel 9. Enoch 85 interprets the 70 years of Jeremiah as the 70 successive reigns of the 70 angelic patrons of the nations, which are to come to a close in his own generation.

[ 7 ] The Book of Enoch, however, was not considered inspired Scripture by the Jews, so that any failed prophecy in it is of no consequence to the Jewish faith.

The Greek empire of the East was overthrown by Rome, and prompted a new interpretation of Daniel. The fourth and last empire was declared to be Roman by the Apocalypse of Baruch [ 7 ] chapters 36–40 and 4 Ezra 10:60–12:35. Again, these two books were not considered inspired Scripture by the Jews, and thus were not authoritative on matters of prophecy. In addition, earlier in Daniel chapter 7 and also in chapter 2, the fourth world empire is considered to be Rome since Babylon, Medo-Persia ( Achaemenid Empire ), Greece, and Rome were world empires which all clearly arrived in succession.

Such ideas as those of "the day of Yahweh" and the "new heavens and a new earth" were re-interpreted by the Jewish people with fresh nuances in conformity with their new settings. Thus the inner development of Jewish apocalyptic was conditioned by the historical experiences of the nation.

[ 7 ] Traditions [ edit ] Another source of apocalyptic thought was primitive mythological and cosmological traditions, in which the eye of the seer could see the secrets of the future. Thus the six days of the world's creation, followed by a seventh of rest, were regarded as at once a history of the past and a forecasting of the future. As the world was made in six days its history would be accomplished in six thousand years, since each day with God was as a thousand years and a thousand years as one day; and as the six days of creation were followed by one of rest, so the six thousand years of the world's history would be followed by a rest of a thousand years.

[ 8 ] [ 7 ] Object and contents [ edit ] This section possibly contains original research .

Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations . Statements consisting only of original research should be removed.

( August 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The object of this literature in general was to reconcile the righteousness of God with the suffering condition of His righteous servants on earth.  Early Old Testament prophecy taught the need of personal and national righteousness, and foretold the ultimate blessedness of the righteous nation on the present earth. Its views were not systematic and comprehensive in regard to the nations in general. Regarding the individual, it held that God's service here was its own and adequate reward, and saw no need of postulating another world to set right the evils of this one.

But later, with the growing claims of the individual and the acknowledgment of these in the religious and intellectual life, both problems, and especially the latter, pressed themselves irresistibly on the notice of religious thinkers, and made it impossible for any conception of the divine rule and righteousness to gain acceptance, which did not render adequate satisfaction to the claims of both problems. To render such satisfaction was the task undertaken by apocalyptic, as well as to vindicate the righteousness of God alike in respect of the individual and of the nation. Later prophecy incorporated an idea of future vindication of present evils, often including the idea of an afterlife.

Apocalyptic prophets sketched in outline the history of the world and mankind, the origin of evil and its course, and the final consummation of all things. The righteous as a nation should yet possess the earth, either via an eternal Messianic kingdom on earth, or else in temporary blessedness here and eternal blessedness hereafter. Though the individual might perish amid the disorders of this world, apocalyptic prophets taught that the righteous person would not fail to attain through resurrection the recompense that was due in the Messianic kingdom or, alternatively, in heaven itself.

[ 7 ] Comparison to prophecy [ edit ] This section possibly contains original research .

Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations . Statements consisting only of original research should be removed.

( November 2018 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Message [ edit ] Some may distinguish between the messages of the prophets and the messages of proto-apocalyptic and apocalyptic literature by saying that the message of the prophets was primarily a preaching of repentance and righteousness needed for the nation to escape judgment; the message of the apocalyptic writers was of patience and trust for that deliverance and reward were sure to come.

[ 7 ] Neither the prophets nor the apocalyptic authors are without conflict between their messages, however, and there are significant similarities between prophecy and apocalyptic writings.

Apocalyptic literature shares with prophecy revelation through the use of visions and dreams, and these often combine reality and fantasy. In both cases, a heavenly interpreter is often provided to the receiver so that he may understand the many complexities of what he has seen. The oracles in Amos , Hosea, First Isaiah, and Jeremiah give a clear sense of how messages of imminent punishment develop into the later proto-apocalyptic literature, and eventually into the thoroughly apocalyptic literature of Daniel 7–12. The fully apocalyptic visions in Daniel 7–12, as well as those in the New Testament's Revelation, can trace their roots to the pre-exilic latter biblical prophets; the sixth century BCE prophets Ezekiel, Isaiah 40–55 and 56–66, Haggai 2, and Zechariah 1–8 show a transition phase between prophecy and apocalyptic literature.

[ 9 ] Dualistic theology [ edit ] Prophecy believes that this world is God's world and that in this world His goodness and truth will yet be vindicated. Hence the prophet prophesies of a definite future arising out of and organically connected with the present. The apocalyptic writer despairs of the present and directs his hopes to the future, to a new world standing in essential opposition to the present.

[ 10 ] This becomes a dualistic principle, which, though it can largely be accounted for by the interaction of certain inner tendencies and outward sorrowful experience on the part of Judaism, may ultimately be derived from Mazdean influences. This principle, which shows itself in the conception that the various nations are under angelic rulers, who are in a greater or less degree in rebellion against God, as in Daniel and Enoch, grows in strength with each succeeding age, till at last Satan is conceived as "the ruler of this world" [ 11 ] or "the god of this age." [ 12 ] [ 13 ] Conception of history [ edit ] Apocalyptic writing took a wider view of the world's history than did prophecy. Whereas prophecy had to deal with governments of other nations, apocalyptic writings arose at a time when Israel had been subject for generations to the sway of one or other of the great world-powers. Hence to harmonize Israel's difficulties with belief in God's righteousness, apocalyptic writing had to encompass such events in the counsels of God, the rise, duration and the downfall of each empire in turn, until, finally the lordship of the world passed into the hands of Israel, or the final judgment arrived. These events belonged in the main to the past, but the writer represented them as still in the future, arranged under certain artificial categories of time definitely determined from the beginning in the counsels of God and revealed by Him to His servants, the prophets.

Determinism thus became a leading characteristic of Jewish apocalyptic, and its conception of history became mechanical.

[ 14 ] Hebrew Bible [ edit ] Jewish mysticism History of Jewish mysticism Forms Prophets 800–400s BCE Apocalyptic literature 300–100 BCE Pardes Rabbinic esotericism c. 1 – 200 CE Merkabah - Hekhalot c. 100 BCE – 1000 CE Practical Kabbalah early CE–modernity Sefer Yetzirah 200–600 CE Ashkenazi Hasidim c. 1150 – 1250 CE Medieval Kabbalah Ecstatic Kabbalah c. 1175 – 1500s CE Zohar 1280s–1400s CE Cordoverian Kabbalah 1500s CE Lurianic Kabbalah 1570 CE – today Sabbatean sects 1665 – c. 1800 CE Hasidism Hasidic schools 1730s CE – today Academic study c. 1920s – today v t e Characteristics [ edit ] The revelations from heavenly messengers about the end times came in the form of angels or from people who were taken up to heaven and returned to earth with messages. The descriptions not only tell of the end times, but also describe both past and present events and their significance, often in heavily coded language. When speaking of the end times, apocalyptic literature generally includes chronologies of events that are to occur, and frequently places them in the near future, which gives a sense of urgency to the prophet's broader message. Though the understanding of the present is bleak, the visions of the future are far more positive, and include divinely delivered victory and a complete reformation of absolutely everything. Many visions of these end times mirror creation mythologies, invoke the triumph of God over the primordial forces of chaos, and provide clear distinctions between light and dark, good and evil . In such revelations, humankind is typically divided into a small group that experiences salvation, while the wicked majority is destroyed. Since the apocalyptic genre developed during the Persian period , this dualism may have developed under the influence of Persian thought .

[ 15 ] The imagery in apocalyptic literature is not realistic or reflective of the physical world as it was, but is rather surreal and fantastic, invoking a sense of wonder at the complete newness of the new order to come.

[ 16 ] Canonical [ edit ] Proto-apocalyptic [ edit ] Isaiah 24–27; 33; 34–35 Jeremiah 33:14–26 Ezekiel 38–39 Joel 3:9–17 Zechariah 12–14 Apocalyptic [ edit ] Daniel 7–12 Some are possibly falsely attributed works ( pseudepigraphic ) except for the passages from Ezekiel and Joel. Of the remaining passages and books, some consider large sections of Daniel attributable to the Maccabean period , with the rest possibly to the same period.

[ 14 ] Some consider Isaiah 33 to be written about 163 BCE; [ 17 ] Zechariah 12–14 about 160 BCE; Isaiah 24–27 about 128 BCE; and Isaiah 34–35 sometime in the reign of John Hyrcanus . Jeremiah 33:14–26 is assigned by Marti to Maccabean times, but this is disputed.

[ 14 ] Non-canonical [ edit ] 1 Enoch (although considered to be a deuterocanonical text within the Beta Israel Jewish community) 2 Enoch 3 Enoch Apocalypse of Abraham Apocalypse of Adam Apocalypse of Moses Apocalypse of Sedrach Apocalypse of Zephaniah Apocalypse of Zerubbabel Aramaic Apocalypse Gabriel's Revelation Genesis Apocryphon Greek Apocalypse of Baruch Greek Apocalypse of Daniel Greek Apocalypse of Ezra Sefer Elijah Syriac Apocalypse of Baruch New Testament [ edit ] In the transition from Jewish literature to that of early Christianity, there is a continuation of the tradition of apocalyptic prophecy. Christianity preserved the Jewish apocalyptic tradition (as Judaism developed into Rabbinism) and gave it a Christian character by a systematic process of interpolation. Christianity cultivated this form of literature and made it the vehicle of its own ideas. Christianity saw itself as the spiritual representative of what was true in prophecy and apocalyptic.

[ 18 ] Canonical [ edit ] Matthew 24 The Sheep and the Goats Mark 13 2 Thessalonians 2 1 Timothy 4 2 Peter 3 Jude 14-15 Book of Revelation Non-canonical [ edit ] Apocalypse of Golias Apocalypse of Paul Apocalypse of Peter Apocalypse of Pseudo-Methodius Apocalypse of Samuel of Kalamoun Apocalypse of Stephen Apocalypse of Thomas Coptic Apocalypse of Elijah Gnostic [ edit ] Gnostic Apocalypse of Peter First Apocalypse of James Second Apocalypse of James Coptic Apocalypse of Paul See also [ edit ] Apocalypse Series Apocalyptic and post-apocalyptic fiction Apocalypticism Christian eschatology Divine retribution Hindu eschatology Islamic eschatology Jewish eschatology List of dates predicted for apocalyptic events Messianic Age Millennialism Ragnarök Notes [ edit ] ^ Goswiller 1987 p.3 ^ Coogan 2009 p 424 ^ a b Charles 1911 , p. 169.

^ Jeremiah 25:11, 29:10 ^ Jeremiah 28:5,6 ^ Charles 1911 , pp. 169–170.

^ a b c d e f g Charles 1911 , p. 170.

^ 2 Enoch 32:2–33:2 ^ Coogan p.354 ^ 4 Ezra 7:50 ^ John 12:31 ^ 2 Corinthians 4:4 ^ Charles 1911 , pp. 170–171.

^ a b c Charles 1911 , p. 171.

^ Hayes, Christine (2006).

"Introduction to the Old Testament (Hebrew Bible) — Lecture 23 — Visions of the End: Daniel and Apocalyptic Literature" .

Open Yale Courses .

Yale University .

^ Coogan p.353 ^ Bernhard Duhm , Das Buch Jesaia übersetzt und erklärt , Göttingen 1902 (second edition), and Karl Marti.

^ Charles 1911 , p. 174.

References [ edit ] This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Charles, Robert Henry (1911). " Apocalyptic Literature ". In Chisholm, Hugh (ed.).

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 2 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. pp.

169– 175.

Charlesworth, James H. ed., The Old Testament Pseudepigrapha , Vol. 1: Apocalyptic Literature and Testaments , Gsrden City, New York: Doubleday & Co., 1983.

Collins, John Joseph The Apocalyptic Imagination: An Introduction to Jewish Apocalyptic Literature ,  (The Biblical Resource Series), Grand Rapids: Eerdman, 1998 (second edition).

Coogan, Michael A Brief Introduction to the Old Testament , Oxford: Oxford University Press 2009.

Cook, David, Contemporary Muslim Apocalyptic Literature (Religion and Politics), Syracure, NY: Syracuse University Press, 2005.

Cook, Stephen L., The Apocalyptic Literature: Interpreting Biblical Texts , Nashville: Abingdon Press, 2003.

Frye, Northrop , 1957.

Anatomy of Criticism: Four Essays , Princeton, Princeton University Press, 1957.

Goswiller, Richard, Revelation , Pacific Study Series, Melbourne, 1987.

Reddish, Mitchell G.

Apocalyptic Literature: A Reader , Peabody, Massachusetts: Hendrickson Publishers, 1998.

External links [ edit ] L. Michael White.

"Apocalyptic literature in Judaism and early Christianity" .

PBS .

Archived from the original on March 4, 2000.

(Thorough historical introduction).

David M. Williams.

"The Book of Revelation as Jewish apocalyptic literature" .

Archived from the original on October 3, 2009 . Retrieved April 28, 2019 .

(A coincise introduction to the Apocalypse of John) " "Apocalyptic" lemma" .

iranicaonline.org .

Archived from the original on May 17, 2018 . Retrieved Aug 19, 2018 .

David L. Barr (Wright State University) (1995). "Using Plot to Discern Structure in John's Apocalypse".

Proceedings of the Eastern Great Lakes and Mid-West Biblical Societies : 23– 33.

(sourced in "Articles & Reviews on the Boom of Revelation" .

ntgateway.com . Archived from the original on 2018-08-20 . Retrieved 2018-08-19 .

v t e Books of the Bible Old Testament Hebrew Bible (protocanon) Genesis Exodus Leviticus Numbers Deuteronomy Joshua Judges Ruth 1–2 Samuel 1–2 Kings 1–2 Chronicles Ezra Nehemiah Esther Job Psalms Proverbs Ecclesiastes Song of Songs Isaiah Jeremiah Lamentations Ezekiel Daniel Hosea Joel Amos Obadiah Jonah Micah Nahum Habakkuk Zephaniah Haggai Zechariah Malachi Deuterocanon or apocrypha Catholic , Eastern Orthodox & others Tobit Judith Additions to Esther 1 Maccabees 2 Maccabees Wisdom Sirach Baruch / Letter of Jeremiah Additions to Daniel Susanna Song of the Three Children Bel and the Dragon Eastern Orthodox & others 1 Esdras 2 Esdras Prayer of Manasseh Psalm 151 3 Maccabees 4 Maccabees Odes Orthodox Tewahedo Enoch Jubilees 1, 2, and 3 Meqabyan Paralipomena of Baruch Broader canon Syriac Peshitta Psalms 152–155 2 Baruch Beta Israel Testaments of the Three Patriarchs Abraham Isaac Jacob New Testament Canon Matthew Mark Luke John Acts Romans 1 Corinthians 2 Corinthians Galatians Ephesians Philippians Colossians 1 Thessalonians 2 Thessalonians 1 Timothy 2 Timothy Titus Philemon Hebrews James 1 Peter 2 Peter 1 John 2 John 3 John Jude Revelation Antilegomena Acts of Paul Apocalypse of Peter Didache Gospel of the Hebrews Epistle of Barnabas 1 Clement 2 Clement 3 Corinthians Shepherd of Hermas Subdivisions Chapters and verses Pentateuch Historical books Wisdom books ( Poetic Books ) Prophetic books Major prophets Minor prophets Gospels List Synoptic Epistles Pauline Johannine Pastoral Catholic Apocalyptic literature Development Authorship Jewish canon Intertestamental period Christian canon Old Testament canon New Testament canon Antilegomena Apocrypha Jewish Old Testament New Testament Pseudepigrapha Old Testament Dating the Bible Manuscripts Dead Sea Scrolls Samaritan Pentateuch Septuagint Targum Diatessaron Muratorian fragment Peshitta Vetus Latina Vulgate Masoretic Text New Testament manuscript categories New Testament papyri New Testament uncials Related Bible version debate English Bible translations Other books referenced in the Bible Additional Scriptures Studies Biblical and Quranic narratives Synod of Hippo Textual criticism Category Portal WikiProject v t e Global catastrophic risks Future of the Earth Future of an expanding universe Ultimate fate of the universe Human extinction risk estimates Technological Chemical warfare Cyberattack Cyberwarfare Cyberterrorism Cybergeddon Ransomware Gray goo Nanoweapons Kinetic bombardment Kinetic energy weapon Nuclear warfare Mutual assured destruction Dead Hand Doomsday Clock Doomsday device Antimatter weapon Electromagnetic pulse (EMP) Safety of high-energy particle collision experiments Micro black hole Strangelet Synthetic intelligence / Artificial intelligence AI takeover Existential risk from artificial intelligence Technological singularity Transhumanism Sociological Anthropogenic hazard Collapsology Doomsday argument Self-indication assumption doomsday argument rebuttal Self-referencing doomsday argument rebuttal Economic collapse Malthusian catastrophe New World Order (conspiracy theory) Nuclear holocaust cobalt famine winter Riots Social crisis Societal collapse State collapse World War III Ecological Climate change Anoxic event Biodiversity loss Mass mortality event Cascade effect Cataclysmic pole shift hypothesis Deforestation Desertification Plant or animal species extinctions Civilizational collapse Tipping points Climate sensitivity Flood basalt Global dimming Global terrestrial stilling Global warming Hypercane Ice age Ecocide Ecological collapse Environmental degradation Habitat destruction Human impact on the environment coral reefs on marine life Land degradation Land consumption Land surface effects on climate Ocean acidification Ozone depletion Resource depletion Sea level rise Supervolcano winter Verneshot Water pollution Water scarcity Earth Overshoot Day Overexploitation Overpopulation Human overpopulation Biological Extinction Extinction event Holocene extinction Human extinction List of extinction events Genetic erosion Genetic pollution Others Biodiversity loss Decline in amphibian populations Decline in insect populations Biotechnology risk Biological agent Biological warfare Bioterrorism Colony collapse disorder Defaunation Dysgenics Interplanetary contamination Pandemic Pollinator decline Overfishing Astronomical Big Crunch Big Rip Coronal mass ejection Cosmological phase transition Geomagnetic storm False vacuum decay Gamma-ray burst Heat death of the universe Proton decay Virtual black hole Impact event Asteroid impact avoidance Asteroid impact prediction Potentially hazardous object Near-Earth object winter Rogue planet Rogue star Near-Earth supernova Hypernova Micronova Solar flare Stellar collision Eschatological Buddhist Maitreya Three Ages Hindu Kalki Kali Yuga Last Judgement Second Coming 1 Enoch Daniel Abomination of desolation Prophecy of Seventy Weeks Messiah Christian Futurism Historicism Interpretations of Revelation Idealism Preterism 2 Esdras 2 Thessalonians Man of sin Katechon Antichrist Book of Revelation Events Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse Seven bowls Seven seals The Beast Two witnesses War in Heaven Whore of Babylon Great Apostasy New Earth New Jerusalem Olivet Discourse Great Tribulation Son of perdition Sheep and Goats Islamic Al-Qa'im Beast of the Earth Dhu al-Qarnayn Dhul-Suwayqatayn Dajjal Israfil Mahdi Sufyani Jewish Messiah War of Gog and Magog Third Temple Norse Zoroastrian Saoshyant Others 2011 end times prediction 2012 phenomenon Apocalypse Apocalyptic literature Apocalypticism Armageddon Blood moon prophecy Earth Changes End time Gog and Magog List of dates predicted for apocalyptic events Messianism Messianic Age Millenarianism Millennialism Premillennialism Amillennialism Postmillennialism Nemesis (hypothetical star) Nibiru cataclysm Rapture Prewrath Posttribulation rapture Resurrection of the dead Vulnerable world hypothesis World to come Fictional Alien invasion Apocalyptic and post-apocalyptic fiction List of apocalyptic and post-apocalyptic fiction List of apocalyptic films Climate fiction Disaster films List of disaster films Zombie apocalypse Zombie Organizations Centre for the Study of Existential Risk Future of Humanity Institute Future of Life Institute Nuclear Threat Initiative General Disaster Depression Financial crisis Survivalism World portal Categories Apocalypticism Future problems Hazards Risk analysis Doomsday scenarios NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐api‐ext.codfw.main‐77f755c49c‐26z2p
Cached time: 20250817104645
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.561 seconds
Real time usage: 0.677 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2841/1000000
Revision size: 20106/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 147984/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 2716/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 8/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 72324/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.363/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 16346200/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  536.731      1 -total
 19.65%  105.461      1 Template:Langx
 14.70%   78.919      5 Template:Cite_web
 14.52%   77.910      1 Template:Jewish_mysticism
 14.20%   76.233      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 13.68%   73.420      1 Template:Reflist
 11.77%   63.164      7 Template:Navbox
 10.98%   58.910     15 Template:Sfn
  7.39%   39.676      1 Template:Short_description
  6.64%   35.640      3 Template:Original_research Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:528859:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817104645 and revision id 1306368653. Rendering was triggered because: unknown Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Apocalyptic_literature&oldid=1306368653 " Categories : Apocalyptic literature Apocrypha Christian literary genres Literary genres Old Testament pseudepigrapha Religious literature Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Articles that may contain original research from August 2018 All articles that may contain original research All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from September 2017 Articles that may contain original research from August 2021 Articles that may contain original research from November 2018 Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica This page was last edited on 17 August 2025, at 10:46 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Apocalyptic literature 16 languages Add topic

