Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Characteristics 2 Electrolytes 3 Reactions 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Aqueous solution 44 languages العربية Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית Kreyòl ayisyen Македонски മലയാളം Bahasa Melayu Монгол Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Slovenčina کوردی Српски / srpski Svenska தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 文言 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Solution in which the solvent is water "Aqueous" redirects here. For the fluid in the eye, see Aqueous humour .

The first solvation shell of a sodium ion dissolved in water An aqueous solution is a solution in which the solvent is water . It is mostly shown in chemical equations by appending (aq) to the relevant chemical formula . For example, a solution of table salt , also known as sodium chloride (NaCl), in water would be represented as Na + (aq) + Cl − (aq) . The word aqueous (which comes from aqua ) means pertaining to, related to, similar to, or dissolved in, water.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] As water is an excellent solvent and is also naturally abundant, it is a ubiquitous solvent in chemistry . Since water is frequently used as the solvent in experiments, the word solution refers to an aqueous solution, unless the solvent is specified.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] A non-aqueous solution is a solution in which the solvent is a liquid, but is not water.

[ 5 ] Characteristics [ edit ] Substances that are hydrophobic ('water-fearing') do not dissolve well in water, whereas those that are hydrophilic ('water-friendly') do. An example of a hydrophilic substance is sodium chloride. In an aqueous solution the hydrogen ions ( H + ) and hydroxide ions ( OH − ) are in Arrhenius balance ( [H + ] [OH − ] = K w = 1 x 10 −14 at 298 K).

Acids and bases are aqueous solutions, as part of their Arrhenius definitions .

[ 1 ] An example of an Arrhenius acid is hydrogen chloride (HCl) because of its dissociation of the hydrogen ion when dissolved in water.

Sodium hydroxide (NaOH) is an Arrhenius base because it dissociates the hydroxide ion when it is dissolved in water.

[ 3 ] Aqueous solutions may contain, especially in the alkaline zone or subjected to radiolysis, hydrated atomic hydrogen and hydrated electrons .

[ citation needed ] Electrolytes [ edit ] Aqueous solutions that conduct electric current efficiently contain "strong" electrolytes , while those that conduct poorly are attributable to  weaker electrolytes. The former substances are completely, or at least substantially, ionized in water; conversely, the weak electrolytes exhibit relatively limited  ionization in water.

[ 1 ] The ability of ions to move freely through a solvent is a characteristic of an aqueous strong electrolyte solution; the solutes in a weaker electrolyte solution are present as ions, but only to a small degree.

[ 3 ] Non-electrolytes, conversely, are substances that dissolve in water, yet maintain their molecular integrity: they do not dissociate into ions. Examples include sugar , urea , glycerol , and methylsulfonylmethane (MSM).

[ citation needed ] Reactions [ edit ] Reactions in aqueous solutions are usually metathesis reactions. Metathesis reactions are another term for double-displacement ; that is, when a cation displaces to form an ionic bond with the other anion. The cation bonded with the latter anion will dissociate and bond with the other anion.

[ 1 ] A common metathesis reaction in aqueous solutions is a precipitation reaction. This reaction occurs when two aqueous strong electrolyte solutions mix and produce an insoluble solid, also known as a precipitate . The ability of a substance to dissolve in water is determined by whether the substance can match or exceed the strong attractive forces that water molecules generate between themselves. If the substance lacks the ability to dissolve in water, the molecules form a precipitate .

[ 3 ] When writing the equations of precipitation reactions, it is essential to determine the precipitate. To determine the precipitate, one must consult a chart of solubility . Soluble compounds are aqueous, while insoluble compounds are the precipitate. There may not always be a precipitate. Complete ionic equations and net ionic equations are used to show dissociated ions in metathesis reactions. When performing calculations regarding the reacting of one or more aqueous solutions, in general one must know the concentration , or molarity , of the aqueous solutions.

[ citation needed ] See also [ edit ] Look up aqueous solution in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Acid–base reaction Acidity function Dissociation (chemistry) Drug permeability Inorganic nonaqueous solvent List of ions in pure water (aqueous chemistry) Metal ions in aqueous solution Properties of water Solubility Solvated electron References [ edit ] ^ a b c d Zumdahl, Steven (1997).

Chemistry (4th ed.) . Boston, MA: Houghton Mifflin Company. pp.

133– 145.

ISBN 9780669417944 .

^ Sorrenti, A.; Illa, O.; Ortuño, R. M. (2013-10-07).

"Amphiphiles in aqueous solution: well beyond a soap bubble" .

Chemical Society Reviews .

42 (21): 8200– 8219.

doi : 10.1039/C3CS60151J .

ISSN 1460-4744 .

PMID 23884241 .

^ a b c d Atkins, Peter (19 March 2004).

Chemical Principles: The Quest for Insight (3rd ed.) . New York, NY: W.H. Freeman and Company. pp.

F61 – F64 .

ISBN 0-7167-5701-X .

^ "What Is an Aqueous Solution? Chemistry Definition and Example" .

ThoughtCo . Retrieved 2024-08-24 .

^ "Solutions" .

Washington University Chemistry Department . Washington University.

Archived from the original on 25 April 2018 . Retrieved 13 April 2018 .

v t e Chemical solutions Solution Ideal solution Aqueous solution Solid solution Buffer solution Flory–Huggins Mixture Suspension Colloid Phase diagram Phase separation Eutectic point Alloy Saturation Supersaturation Serial dilution Dilution (equation) Apparent molar property Miscibility gap Concentration and related quantities Molar concentration Mass concentration Number concentration Volume concentration Normality Molality Mole fraction Mass fraction Isotopic abundance Mixing ratio Ternary plot Total dissolved solids Solubility Solubility equilibrium Solvation Solvation shell Enthalpy of solution Lattice energy Raoult's law Henry's law Solubility table (data) Solubility chart Miscibility Solvent ( Category ) Acid dissociation constant Protic solvent Polar aprotic solvent Inorganic nonaqueous solvent Solvation List of boiling and freezing information of solvents Partition coefficient Polarity Hydrophobe Hydrophile Lipophilic Amphiphile Lyonium ion Lyate ion Authority control databases : National Czech Republic Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Aqueous_solution&oldid=1306013632 " Categories : Chemical properties Solutions Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2024 This page was last edited on 15 August 2025, at 11:47 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Aqueous solution 44 languages Add topic

