Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Geographical matters 2 Financial matters 3 Recent developments 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Geography of finance Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Branch of economic geography Part of a series on Geography Portal Outline History of geography Graeco-Roman Chinese Islamic Age of Discovery History of cartography Historical geography Environmental determinism Regional geography Quantitative revolution Critical geography Human geography Fields Behavioral Cognitive Critical Cultural Animal Children's Economic Agricultural Cyber Development Financial Histo-economic Labor Marketing Retail Theoretical economic Transport Language Linguistics Music Vernacular Moral Psychological Emotional Neo Sexuality Religion Food Health Historical Palaeo Imagined Internet Political Critical geopolitics Electoral Geopolitics Strategic Military Population Settlement Regional Urban Music Transport Social Tourism Tropical Physical geography Fields Biogeography Ecology Phytogeography Zoogeography Climatology / Paleoclimatology / Palaeogeography Coastal geography / Oceanography Earth science Geology Geomorphology Glaciology Hydrology / Hydrography Landscape ecology Limnology Pedology Quaternary science Technical geography Fields Geodesign Geodesy Geoinformatics Geographic information science Geomatics Statistical geography Spatial analysis Integrated geography Fields Environmental social science Environmental studies Landscape architecture Landscape ecology Methods Quantitative Cartography Computer cartography Web mapping Geochronology Geographic information system Distributed GIS Internet GIS Web GIS Geologic modelling Geomathematics Geostatistics Geovisualization Global Positioning System Hydrography Map algebra Participant observation Photogrammetry Remote Sensing Statistical survey Surveying Land change modeling Qualitative Ethnography Geopoetics Interview (research) Survey (human research) Philosophy of geography Behavioral Critical Feminist Marxist Non-representational theory Modernism Structuralism Semiotics Postmodernism Post-structuralism Deconstruction Societies Index Geographers v t e The geography of finance (or financial geography ) is a branch of economic geography that focuses on issues of financial globalization and the geographic patterns of finance . It studies the effects of state sovereignty , culture , and different kinds of barriers that affect the spatial distribution of finance, such as uneven development and financial exclusion, as well as the global and local connectivity of financial flows and networks. It also researches the creation of new financial centres around the world, both offshore and onshore.

[ 1 ] Geographical matters [ edit ] With the continuing process of globalization , some geographic barriers, such as transportation costs of goods and capital, are steadily decreasing.

[ 2 ] However, many other kinds of geographic distance are still very present and relevant to explaining spatial differences.

[ 3 ] In the geography of finance, researchers analyse the effects of this distance on the distribution of the financial system across the world. Fields of research include culture and education , [ 4 ] technology , [ 5 ] the effects of tacit knowledge and relational proximity, [ 1 ] and politics .

[ 6 ] An interesting issue in the latter is the increasing entanglement of banks and nations , [ 7 ] which is closely related to the geography of networks.

[ 8 ] Furthermore, researchers analyse how and how strongly the current spatial distribution of finance affects the allocation of funds , capital , and credit across different regions.

[ 9 ] Financial matters [ edit ] The relevance of economic geography is already quite established in the academic world, and research on the topic is in full progress.

[ 10 ] However, the geography of finance is now gaining individual focus, especially as the link between the financial economy and the real economy is losing strength.

[ 11 ] This is emphasized by the existence of economic bubbles and the fact that the value of financial transactions is often multiple times larger than the real economy.

[ 12 ] Recent developments [ edit ] The September 11 attacks that targeted the World Trade Centre in New York City drew new attention to the geography of finance. Even though cities have more often been damaged by natural disasters or terrorist attacks , this attack was focused on the financial system and proved to have significant effects. The event led to a rethinking of the global geographical organization of the financial services industry and drew academic attention to the importance of such densely organized financial districts.

[ 13 ] The 2008 financial crisis also led to interesting developments in the geography of finance. It drew new attention to the field, as the crisis showed that local events could cause a financial crisis that affected small businesses and local governments around the world.

[ 14 ] The relocation of financial services that had already been occurring was amplified by this crisis, decreasing the importance of major financial centers like Wall Street in lieu of relatively new financial centers elsewhere around the world.

[ 15 ] See also [ edit ] International Finance International Trade Location Theory References [ edit ] ^ a b Jayson J. Funke.

"Geography of Finance" . Oxford Bibliographies . Retrieved 2013-12-20 .

^ Saif I.Shah Mohammed and Jeffrey G. Williamson (2004). "Freight rates and productivity gains in British tramp shipping 1869–1950".

Explorations in Economic History .

41 (2): 172– 203.

CiteSeerX 10.1.1.201.5956 .

doi : 10.1016/S0014-4983(03)00043-3 .

^ J. Michael Greig (2002). "The End of Geography? Globalization, Communications and Culture in the International System".

Journal of Economic Geography .

9 (5): 597– 617.

doi : 10.1093/jeg/lbp026 .

^ Sarah Hall and Lindsey Appleyard (2009-06-11). " 'City of London, City of Learning'? Placing business education within the geographies of finance".

Journal of Economic Geography .

9 (5): 597– 617.

doi : 10.1093/jeg/lbp026 .

^ Philip G. Cerny (1994). "The dynamics of financial globalization: Technology, market structure, and policy response".

Policy Sciences .

27 (4): 319– 342.

doi : 10.1007/BF01000063 .

S2CID 154365281 .

^ Cox, Kevin R. (1997-03-29).

Spaces of Globalization: Reasserting the Power of the Local - Google Boeken . Guilford Press.

ISBN 9781572301993 . Retrieved 2014-01-15 – via Google Books .

^ Nicolae Gârleanu, Stavros Panageas and Jianfeng Yu (2013).

"Financial Entanglement: A Theory of Incomplete Integration, Leverage, Crashes, and Contagion" (PDF) . Retrieved 2014-01-18 .

^ Johannes Glückler (2007-05-29). "Economic geography and the evolution of networks".

Journal of Economic Geography .

7 (5): 619– 634.

doi : 10.1093/jeg/lbm023 .

^ "Geography Department, Cambridge » The Economic Geography of Money and Finance" . Geog.cam.ac.uk. 2014-01-30 . Retrieved 2014-01-15 .

^ "Nep-Geo" . Ideas.repec.org . Retrieved 2014-01-18 .

^ Menkhoff, Lukas; Tolksdorf, Norbert (2000-12-04).

Financial Market Drift: Decoupling of the Financial Sector from the Real ... - Lukas Menkhoff, Norbert Tolksdorf - Google Boeken . Springer.

ISBN 9783540411659 . Retrieved 2014-01-18 – via Google Books .

^ Kindleberger, Charles P.; Aliber, Robert Z. (2011-08-09).

Manias, Panics and Crashes: A History of Financial Crises, Sixth Edition - Charles P. Kindleberger, Robert Z. Aliber - Google Boeken . Palgrave Macmillan.

ISBN 9780230367562 . Retrieved 2014-01-15 – via Google Books .

^ Nicole Pohl.

"Where is Wall Street? Financial Geography after 09/11" (PDF) . Retrieved 2014-01-18 .

^ Ewald Engelen and James Faulconbridge (2009-07-20). "Introduction: financial geographies—the credit crisis as an opportunity to catch economic geography's next boat?".

Journal of Economic Geography .

9 (5): 587– 595.

doi : 10.1093/jeg/lbp037 .

^ Daniel Altman (2008-09-30).

"Other financial centers could rise amid crisis" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 2014-01-18 .

Links to related articles v t e Sub-fields of and approaches to human geography Sub-fields Behavioral Cognitive Critical Cultural Animal Children's Economic Agricultural Cyber Development Financial Histo-economic Labor Marketing Retail Theoretical economic Transport Language Linguistics Music Vernacular Moral Psychological Emotional Neo Sexuality Religion Food Health Historical Palaeo Imagined Internet Political Critical geopolitics Electoral Geopolitics Strategic Military Population Settlement Regional Urban Music Transport Social Tourism Tropical Approaches Critical Culture theory Feminist Marxist Modernism Structuralism Semiotics Non-representational theory Postmodernism Post-structuralism Deconstruction Scientific method Time Universalism Category v t e Geography topics Glossary History Philosophy Geographers Index Outline Branches Human Behavioral Cognitive Critical Cultural Animal Children's Economic Agricultural Cyber Development Financial Histo-economic Labor Marketing Retail Theoretical economic Transport Language Linguistics Music Vernacular Moral Psychological Emotional Neo Sexuality Religion Food Health Historical Palaeo Imagined Internet Political Critical geopolitics Electoral Geopolitics Strategic Military Population Settlement Regional Urban Music Transport Social Tourism Tropical Physical Biogeography Ecology Phytogeography Zoogeography Coastal geography / Oceanography Earth science Atmospheric science / Meteorology Environmental science Climatology / Paleoclimatology / Palaeogeography Geobiology Geophysics / Geodesy Earth system science Geomorphology / Geology Glaciology Hydrology / Limnology Soil science ( Pedology / Edaphology ) Quaternary science Technical Geodesign Geodesy Geoinformatics Geographic information science Geomatics Statistical geography Spatial analysis Integrated Environmental social science Environmental studies Landscape architecture Landscape ecology Time geography Techniques and tools Quantitative Cartography Computer cartography Web mapping Geochronology Geographic information system Distributed GIS Internet GIS Web GIS Geologic modelling Geomathematics Geostatistics Geovisualization Global Positioning System Hydrography Map algebra Participant observation Photogrammetry Remote sensing Statistical survey Surveying Land change modeling Qualitative Ethnography Geopoetics Interview (research) Survey (human research) Institutions, organizations, and societies Geography organizations Geographic data and information organizations Geographical societies Geoscience societies Education Geo-literacy Geographers on Film International Geography Olympiad National Council for Geographic Education Spatial citizenship Publication Geography books Geography journals Geographic magazines Category Portal Commons WikiProject Authority control databases : National Germany Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Geography_of_finance&oldid=1292593482 " Category : Economic geography Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Pages using sidebar with the child parameter This page was last edited on 27 May 2025, at 20:37 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Geography of finance Add languages Add topic

