Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology and meaning Toggle Etymology and meaning subsection 1.1 Etymology 1.2 Meaning 2 Development of the concept Toggle Development of the concept subsection 2.1 Vedas 2.2 Upanishads 2.2.1 Brihadaranyaka Upanishad 2.2.2 Chandogya Upanishad 2.2.3 Katha Upanishad 2.3 Bhagavad Gita 3 Indian philosophy Toggle Indian philosophy subsection 3.1 Orthodox schools 3.1.1 Samkhya 3.1.2 Yoga philosophy 3.1.3 Nyaya 3.1.4 Vaiśeṣika 3.1.5 Mimamsa 3.1.6 Vedanta 3.1.6.1 Advaita Vedanta 3.1.6.2 Dvaita Vedanta 3.2 Heterodox schools 3.2.1 Buddhism 3.2.1.1 Pudgalavāda 3.2.2 Jainism 3.2.3 Ājīvika 3.2.4 Sassatavāda 4 Influence of Atman-concept on Hindu ethics Toggle Influence of Atman-concept on Hindu ethics subsection 4.1 Dharma-sutras 4.2 Ahimsa 5 See also 6 Notes 7 References 8 Sources 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Ātman (Hinduism) 45 languages Afrikaans العربية अवधी বাংলা भोजपुरी Bikol Central Български Català Čeština Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ಕನ್ನಡ Lietuvių Magyar मैथिली Bahasa Melayu Nederlands नेपाली नेपाल भाषा 日本語 Norsk bokmål पालि Română संस्कृतम् Shqip Slovenčina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் Türkçe Українська اردو 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Hindu concept for inner self or essence as mere consciousness For other uses, see Atman (disambiguation) .

Part of a series on Hinduism Hindus Mythology Origins Historical History Indus Valley Civilisation Vedic religion Dravidian folk religion Śramaṇa Tribal religions in India Traditional Itihasa-Purana Epic-Puranic royal genealogies Epic-Puranic chronology Sampradaya (traditions) Major Sampradaya (traditions) Vaishnavism Pancharatra Shaivism Kapalika Pashupata Pratyabhijña Shaktism Smartism Other Sampradaya (traditions) Deities Absolute Reality / Unifying Force Brahman Trimurti Brahma Vishnu Shiva Tridevi Saraswati Lakshmi Parvati Other major Devas / Devis Vedic Deities: Tridasha Adityas Rudras Vasus Ashvins Mahadevi Other Vedic Deities Post-Vedic: Avatar Dashavatara Durga Navadurga Mahavidya Kartikeya Ganesha Hanuman Radha Shakti Sita Devatas Vishvakarma Kubera Concepts Worldview Cosmology Mythology Ontology Tattvas Subtle elements Panchikarana Gross elements Guṇas Purusha Prakṛti Supreme reality Brahman Nirguna Saguna Om Saccidānanda God Ishvara Devas / Devi Devatas God in Hinduism God and gender Puruṣārtha (meaning of life) Dharma Artha Kama Moksha Āśrama (stages of life) Brahmacharya Gṛhastha Vānaprastha Sannyasa Three paths to liberation Bhakti yoga Jnana yoga Karma yoga Liberation Mokṣa-related topics: Paramātman Maya Karma Saṃsāra Mind Ātman (self) Anātman (non-self) Sūkṣma śarīra (subtle body) Antaḥkaraṇa (mental organs) Prajña (wisdom) Ānanda (happiness) Viveka (discernment) Vairagya (dispassion) Sama (equanimity) Dama (temperance) Uparati (self-settledness) Titiksha (forbearance) Shraddha (faith) Samadhana (concentration) Arishadvargas (six enemies) Ahamkara (attachment) Ethics Niti śastra Yamas Niyama Ahimsa Achourya Aparigraha Brahmacharya Satya Damah Dayā Akrodha Arjava Santosha Tapas Svādhyāya Shaucha Mitahara Dāna Sources of dharma Epistemology Pratyakṣa (perception) Anumāṇa (inference) Upamāṇa (comparison, analogy) Arthāpatti (postulation, presumption) Anupalabdi (non-perception, negation) Śabda (word, testimony) Practices Worship , sacrifice, and charity Puja Ārtī Prarthana Śrauta Temple Murti Bhakti Japa Bhajana Kīrtana Yajna Homa Tarpana Vrata Prāyaścitta Tirtha Yatra Tirthadana Matha Nritta-Nritya Dāna Sevā Yoga Exorcism Meditation Tapas Dhyana Samādhāna Nididhyāsana Yoga Sadhu Yogi Yogini Asana Sādhanā Hatha yoga Jnana yoga Bhakti yoga Karma yoga Rāja yoga Kundalini yoga Arts Bharatanatyam Kathak Kathakali Kuchipudi Manipuri Mohiniyattam Odissi Sattriya Bhagavata Mela Yakshagana Dandiya Raas Carnatic music Pandav Lila Kalaripayattu Silambam Adimurai Rites of passage Garbhadhana Pumsavana Pumsavana Simantonayana Simantonnayana Jatakarma Nāmakaraṇa Nishkramana Annaprashana Chudakarana Karnavedha Vidyāraṃbhaṃ Upanayana Keshanta Ritushuddhi Samavartanam Vivaha Antyesti Festivals Diwali Holi Maha Shivaratri Navaratri Durga Puja Ramlila Vijayadashami-Dussehra Raksha Bandhan Ganesh Chaturthi Vasant Panchami Rama Navami Janmashtami Onam Makar Sankranti Kumbh Mela Pongal Ugadi Vaisakhi Bihu Puthandu Vishu Ratha Yatra Philosophical schools Six Astika schools Samkhya Yoga Nyaya Vaisheshika Mīmāṃsā Vedanta Advaita Dvaita Vishishtadvaita Achintya Bheda Abheda Shuddhadvaita Svabhavika Bhedabheda Akshar Purushottam Darshan Other schools Ājīvika Buddhism Jainism Charvaka Gurus, Rishi, philosophers Ancient Saptarshi Vashistha Kashyapa Atri Jamadagni Gotama Vishvamitra Bharadwaja Agastya Angiras Aruni Ashtavakra Jaimini Kanada Kapila Patanjali Pāṇini Prashastapada Raikva Satyakama Jabala Valmiki Vyasa Yajnavalkya Medieval Abhinavagupta Adi Shankara Akka Mahadevi Allama Prabhu Alvars Basava Chaitanya Ramdas Kathiababa Chakradhara Chāngadeva Dadu Dayal Eknath Gangesha Upadhyaya Gaudapada Gorakshanatha Haridasa Thakur Harivansh Jagannatha Dasa Jayanta Bhatta Jayatīrtha Jiva Goswami Jñāneśvar Kabir Kanaka Dasa Kumārila Bhaṭṭa Madhusūdana Madhva Matsyendranatha Morya Gosavi Mukundarāja Namadeva Narahari Tirtha Narasimha Saraswati Nayanars Nimbarkacharya Srinivasacharya Prabhākara Purandara Dasa Raghavendra Swami Raghunatha Siromani Raghuttama Tirtha Ram Charan Ramananda Ramanuja Ramprasad Sen Ravidas Rupa Goswami Samarth Ramdas Sankardev Satyanatha Tirtha Siddheshwar Sripada Srivallabha Sripadaraja Surdas Swaminarayan Śyāma Śastri Tukaram Tulsidas Tyagaraja Vācaspati Miśra Vadiraja Tirtha Vallabha Valluvar Vedanta Desika Vidyaranya Vyasaraja Modern Aurobindo Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Bhaktivinoda Thakur Chandrashekarendra Saraswati Chinmayananda Dayananda Saraswati Jaggi Vasudev Krishnananda Saraswati Mahavatar Babaji Mahesh Yogi Narayana Guru Nigamananda Nisargadatta Maharaj Prabhupada Radhakrishnan R. D. Ranade Ramakrishna Rama Tirtha Ramana Maharshi Ravi Shankar Ramdas Samarth Sathya Sai Baba Shirdi Sai Baba Shraddhanand Satyadhyana Tirtha Siddharameshwar Maharaj Sivananda Trailanga U. G. Krishnamurti Upasni Maharaj Vethathiri Maharishi Vivekananda Yogananda Texts Sources and classification of scripture Śruti Smṛti Ācāra Ātmatuṣṭi Scriptures Timeline of Hindu texts Vedas Rigveda Yajurveda Samaveda Atharvaveda Divisions Samhita Brahmana Aranyaka Upanishads Upanishads Principal Upanishads Rigveda: Aitareya Kaushitaki Yajurveda: Brihadaranyaka Isha Taittiriya Katha Shvetashvatara Maitri Samaveda: Chandogya Kena Atharvaveda: Mundaka Mandukya Prashna Vedangas Shiksha Chandas Vyākaraṇa Nirukta Kalpa Jyotisha Other scriptures Bhagavad Gita Agama s (Hinduism) Itihasas Ramayana Mahabharata Puranas Vishnu Purana Bhagavata Purana Devi Bhagavata Purana Naradiya Purana Vāmana Purana Matsya Purana Garuda Purana Brahma Purana Brahmanda Purana Brahma Vaivarta Purana Bhavishya Purana Padma Purana Agni Purana Shiva Purana Linga Purana Kūrma Purana Skanda Purana Varaha Purana Markandeya Purana Upavedas Ayurveda Dhanurveda Gandharvaveda Sthapatyaveda Shastras , sutras , and samhitas Dharma Shastra Artha Śastra Shilpa Shastras Kama Sutra Brahma Sutras Samkhya Sutras Mimamsa Sutras Nyāya Sūtras Vaiśeṣika Sūtra Yoga Sutras Pramana Sutras Charaka Samhita Sushruta Samhita Natya Shastra Panchatantra Naalayira Divya Prabandham Tirumurai Ramcharitmanas Yoga Vasistha Swara yoga Panchadasi Stotras , stutis and Bhashya Kanakadhara Stotra Shiva Stuti Vayu Stuti Tamil literature Tirumurai Naalayira  Divya Prabandham Tirumurukāṟṟuppaṭai Tiruppukal Kural Kamba Ramayanam/Ramavataram Five Great Epics Eighteen Greater Texts Eighteen Lesser Texts Athichudi Iraiyanar Akapporul Abirami Antati Thiruvilaiyadal Puranam Vinayagar Agaval Other texts Hindu culture & society Society Varna Brahmin Kshatriya Kayastha Vaishya Shudra Dalit Jāti Gotra Dvija Dasa Hindu art Hindu art Hindu iconography Shilpa Shastras Rasa (aesthetics) Indian aesthetics Yantra Hindu architecture Hindu architecture Hindu temple architecture Vastu shastra Talamana Hindu music Hindu music Shruti (music) Svara Alankāra Tala (music) Raga Rasa (aesthetics) Sangita Vadya Natya Shastra Food & diet customs Ahimsa Diet in Hinduism Sattvic diet Mitahara Jhatka Vrata Time keeping practices Hindu units of time Hindu calendar Panchangam Vikram Samvat Shaka era Hindu pilgrimage Pilgrimage sites Other society-related topics Discrimination Persecution Nationalism Hindutva Organisations Reform movements Other topics Hinduism by country Greater India Balinese Hinduism Caribbean Shaktism Template:Hindu scriptures and texts Hinduism & other religions Hinduism and Jainism / and Buddhism / and Sikhism / and Judaism / and Christianity / and Islam Other related links (templates) Hindu scriptures & texts Hindu philosphy Sampradayas (traditions) Shaivism Vaishnavism Shaktism Glossary Outline Hinduism portal v t e Ātman ( / ˈ ɑː t m ə n / ; Sanskrit : आत्मन् ) in Hinduism is the true, innermost essence or self of a living being, conceived as eternal and unchanging.

[ note 1 ] Atman is conceptually closely related to the individual self, Jīvātman , which persists across multiple bodies and lifetimes , but different from the self-image or ego ( Ahankara ), the emotional aspect of the mind ( Citta ), and the bodily or natural aspects ( prakṛti ). The term is often translated as soul , [ note 2 ] but is better translated as "Self" [ 1 ] or essence.To attain moksha (liberation), a human being must acquire self-knowledge ( Atma Gyaan or Brahmajnana ).

The six orthodox schools of Indian philosophy have different views on what this self is. In Samkhya and Yoga, which call the essence purusha , and in Advaita Vedanta, the essence is pure consciousness or witness-consciousness ( sakshi ), beyond identification with phenomena.

[ 2 ] In Samkhya and Yoga there are innumerable selves, while in Advaita Vedanta there is only one Self. Prominent views in Vedanta on the relation between (Jīv)Atman and the supreme Self ( Paramātmā ) or Ultimate Reality (Vishnu, Shiva, Brahman ) are that atman and Brahman are simultaneously different and non-different ( Bhedabheda ), [ 3 ] non-different ( Advaita , 'not-two'), [ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] different with dependence ( Dvaita , 'dualist'), [ 7 ] or non-different but with dependence ( Vishishtadvaita , qualified non-dualism).

[ 8 ] The six orthodox schools of Hinduism believe that there is Ātman in every living being ( jiva ), which is distinct from the body-mind complex. This may be seen as a major point of difference with the Buddhist doctrine of Anatta , which holds that in essence there is no unchanging essence or Self to be found in the empirical constituents of a living being, [ note 3 ] staying silent on what it is that is liberated, [ 9 ] [ 10 ] [ 11 ] [ 12 ] yet essentialist positions are also found in Buddhism, while Madhyamika ( sunyata ) and Yogachara ('mere representation') resembling views can also be found the Hindu-traditions.

Etymology and meaning [ edit ] Etymology [ edit ] Ātman ( Atma , आत्मा, आत्मन्) is a Sanskrit word that refers to "essence, breath, soul." [ web 1 ] [ web 2 ] [ 13 ] It is thought to be derived from the reconstructed hypothetical Proto-Indo-European word *etmen "breath" (a root found in Sanskrit and Germanic; source also of Old English æðm, Dutch adem, Old High German atum "breath," Old English eþian, Dutch ademen "to breathe").

[ web 2 ] Meaning [ edit ] Olivelle notes that ātman "has many meanings and usages in the Upanisadic vocabulary," including "Self," "the ultimate essence of a human being," [ 14 ] but is also used to refer to "a living, btreathing body," and as reflexive pronoun, akin to "myself." [ 15 ] In contemporary Hinduism, Ātman means "real Self" of the individual, [ note 1 ] "innermost essence." [ 16 ] Atman refers to the essence of human beings that persists amid change, distinct from the ever-evolving embodied individual being ( jiva ) embedded in material reality. Embodied personality can change while Atman does not.

[ 17 ] In Advaita Vedanta, it is the observing pure consciousness or witness-consciousness , "pure, undifferentiated, self-shining consciousness," [ 18 ] while in Neo-Advaita it is also the nonconceptual insight that 'being' cannot be grasped in words or deeds.

[ note 4 ] While often translated as "soul", it is better translated as "self." [ 1 ] [ note 2 ] As such, it is different from non-Hindu notions of soul , which includes consciousness but also the mental abilities of a living being, such as reason, character, feeling, consciousness, memory, perception and thinking. In Hinduism, these are all included in embodied reality, the counterpart of Atman.

[ 19 ] [ 20 ] [ 21 ] Development of the concept [ edit ] Vedas [ edit ] The earliest use of the word Ātman in Indian texts is found in the Rig Veda (RV X.97.11).

[ 22 ] Yāska , the ancient Indian grammarian, commenting on this Rigvedic verse, accepts the following meanings of Ātman : the pervading principle, the organism in which other elements are united and the ultimate sentient principle.

[ 23 ] Other hymns of Rig Veda where the word Ātman appears include I.115.1, VII.87.2, VII.101.6, VIII.3.24, IX.2.10, IX.6.8, and X.168.4.

[ 24 ] Upanishads [ edit ] Ātman is a central topic in all of the Upanishads , and "know your Ātman" is one of their thematic foci.

[ 25 ] The Upanishads say that Atman denotes "the ultimate essence of the universe" as well as "the vital breath in human beings", which is "imperishable Divine within" that is neither born nor does it die.

[ 26 ] The Upanishads express two distinct, somewhat divergent themes on the relation between Atman and Brahman. Some teach that Brahman (highest reality; universal principle; being-consciousness-bliss) is identical with Ātman , while others teach that Ātman is part of Brahman but not identical to it.

[ 27 ] [ 28 ] This ancient debate flowered into various dual and non-dual theories in Hinduism. The Brahmasutra by Badarayana (~100 BCE) synthesized and unified these somewhat conflicting theories, stating that Atman and Brahman are different in some respects, particularly during the state of ignorance, but at the deepest level and in the state of self-realization, Atman and Brahman are identical, non-different (advaita).

[ 27 ] According to Koller, this synthesis countered the dualistic tradition of Samkhya-Yoga schools and realism-driven traditions of Nyaya-Vaiseshika schools, enabling it to become the foundation of Vedanta as Hinduism's most influential spiritual tradition.

[ 27 ] The atman , according to several Upaniṣadic texts, is present within the human body, extending even to the extremities such as the tips of the nails ( Brihadaranyaka Upanishad 1.4.7). Though the atman pervades the entire body, the Upanishads often emphasize the heart, not as a physical organ but as an inner "cave" or guha , as the atman's special locus. It is described as lying deep within the heart ( Chandogya Upanishad III.14.3-4).

[ 29 ] Brihadaranyaka Upanishad [ edit ] The Brihadaranyaka Upanishad (800-600 BCE [ 30 ] ) describes Atman as that in which everything exists, which is of the highest value, which permeates everything, which is the essence of all, bliss and beyond description.

[ 31 ] In hymn 4.4.5, Brihadaranyaka Upanishad describes Atman as Brahman , and describes the self as made of everything, including the functions, elements and desires: That Atman (self, soul) is indeed Brahman. It [Ātman] is also identified with the intellect, the Manas (mind), and the vital breath, with the eyes and ears, with earth, water, air, and ākāśa (sky), with fire and with what is other than fire, with desire and the absence of desire, with anger and the absence of anger, with righteousness and unrighteousness, with everything — it is identified, as is well known, with this (what is perceived) and with that (what is inferred).
As it [Ātman] does and acts, so it becomes: by doing good it becomes good, and by doing evil it becomes evil. It becomes virtuous through good acts, and vicious through evil acts. Others, however, say, "The self is identified with desire alone. What it desires, so it resolves; what it resolves, so is its deed; and what deed it does, so it reaps.

— Brihadaranyaka Upanishad 4.4.5, 9th century BCE [ 32 ] The theme of acquiring knowledge of Brahman, and thereby becoming godlike, is extensively repeated in Brihadāranyaka Upanishad. Not even gods can prevail over such a liberated man, to their dismay. For example, in hymn 1.4.10, [ 33 ] Brahman was this before; therefore it knew even the Ātma (soul, himself). I am Brahman, therefore it became all. And whoever among the gods had this enlightenment, also became That. It is the same with the sages, the same with men. Whoever knows the self as "I am Brahman," becomes all this universe. Even the gods cannot prevail against him, for he becomes their Ātma. Now, if a man worships another god, thinking: "He is one and I am another," he does not know. He is like an animal to the gods. As many animals serve a man, so does each man serve the gods. Even if one animal is taken away, it causes anguish; how much more so when many are taken away? Therefore it is not pleasing to the gods that men should know this.

— Brihadaranyaka Upanishad 1.4.10 [ 33 ] Chandogya Upanishad [ edit ] The Chandogya Upanishad (7th-6th c. BCE) explains Ātman as that which appears to be separate between two living beings but isn't, that essence and innermost, true, radiant self of all individuals which connects and unifies all.  Hymn 6.10 explains it with the example of rivers, some of which flow to the east and some to the west, but ultimately all merge into the ocean and become one. In the same way, the individual souls are pure being, states the Chandogya Upanishad ; an individual soul is pure truth, and an individual soul is a manifestation of the ocean of one universal soul.

[ 34 ] Katha Upanishad [ edit ] Along with the Brihadāranyaka , all the earliest and middle Upanishads discuss Ātman as they build their theories to answer how man can achieve liberation, freedom and bliss. The Katha Upanishad (5th to 1st century BCE) explains Atman as the imminent and transcendent innermost essence of each human being and living creature, that this is one, even though the external forms of living creatures manifest in different forms.  Hymn 2.2.9 states: As the one fire, after it has entered the world, though one, takes different forms according to whatever it burns, so does the internal Ātman of all living beings, though one, takes a form according to whatever He enters and is outside all forms.

— Katha Upanishad, 2.2.9 [ 35 ] Katha Upanishad, in Book 1, hymns 3.3-3.4, describes the widely cited proto-Samkhya analogy of chariot for the relation of "Soul, Self" to body, mind and senses.

[ 36 ] Stephen Kaplan [ 37 ] translates these hymns as, "Know the Self as the rider in a chariot, and the body as simply the chariot. Know the intellect as the charioteer, and the mind as the reins. The senses, they say are the horses, and sense objects are the paths around them". The Katha Upanishad then declares that "when the Self [Ātman] understands this and is unified, integrated with body, senses and mind, is virtuous, mindful and pure, he reaches bliss, freedom and liberation".

[ 36 ] Bhagavad Gita [ edit ] In Bhagavad Gita verses 10-30 of the second chapter, Krishna urges Arjuna to understand the indestructible nature of the atman , emphasizing that it transcends the finite body it inhabits. The atman neither kills nor can be killed, as it is eternal and unaffected by birth or death.

[ 38 ] The analogy of changing clothes is used to illustrate how the soul discards old bodies for new ones. Krishna emphasizes the eternal existence of the soul by explaining that even as it undergoes various life stages and changes bodies it remains unaffected. It is imperceptible, inconceivable, and unchanging.

[ 38 ] Indian philosophy [ edit ] Orthodox schools [ edit ] Main article: Hindu philosophy Atman is a metaphysical and spiritual concept for Hindus, often discussed in their scriptures with the concept of Brahman.

[ 39 ] [ 40 ] [ 41 ] All major orthodox schools of Hinduism – Samkhya, Yoga, Nyaya, Vaisesika, Mimamsa, and Vedanta – accept the foundational premise of the Vedas and Upanishads that "Ātman exists." In Hindu philosophy , especially in the Vedanta school of Hinduism , Ātman is the first principle .

[ 42 ] Jainism too accepts this premise, although it has its own idea of what that means. In contrast, both Buddhism and the Charvakas deny that there is anything called "Ātman/soul/self".

[ 17 ] Samkhya [ edit ] Purusha-prakriti Main article: Samkhya In Samkhya, the oldest Hindu school of Dualism , Puruṣa , the witness-consciousness, is Atman . It is absolute, independent, free, imperceptible, unknowable through other agencies, above any experience by mind or senses and beyond any words or explanations. It remains pure, "nonattributive consciousness". Puruṣa is neither produced nor does it produce.

[ 43 ] No appellations can qualify purusha, nor can it substantialized or objectified.

[ 44 ] It "cannot be reduced, can't be 'settled'." Any designation of purusha comes from prakriti, and is a limitation.

[ 45 ] Unlike Advaita Vedanta , and like Purva-Mīmāṃsā , Samkhya believes in plurality of the puruṣas.

[ 43 ] [ 17 ] Samkhya considers ego ( asmita , ahamkara ) to be the cause of pleasure and pain.

[ 46 ] Self-knowledge is the means to attain kaivalya , the separation of Atman from the body-mind complex.

[ 17 ] Yoga philosophy [ edit ] The Yogasutra of Patanjali, the foundational text of Yoga school of Hinduism, sees purusha as the essence of human beings, revealed in samadhi , but mentions Atma in multiple verses, and particularly in its last book, where Samadhi is described as the path to self-knowledge and kaivalya . Some earlier mentions of Atman in Yogasutra include verse 2.5, where evidence of ignorance includes "confusing what is not Atman as Atman".

अनित्याशुचिदुःखा नात्म सु नित्यशुचिसु खात्म ख्यातिरविद्या Avidya (अविद्या, ignorance) is regarding the transient as eternal, the impure as pure, the pain-giving as joy-giving, and the non-Atman as Atman.

— Yogasutra 2.5 [ 47 ] In verses 2.19-2.20, Yogasutra declares that pure ideas are the domain of Atman, the perceivable universe exists to enlighten Atman, but while Atman is pure, it may be deceived by complexities of perception or mind. These verses also set the purpose of all experience as a means to self-knowledge.

द्रष्टा दृशिमात्रः शुद्धोऽपि प्रत्ययानुपश्यः तदर्थ एव दृश्यस्यात्मा The seer is the absolute knower. Though pure, modifications are witnessed by him by coloring of intellect.

The spectacle exists only to serve the purpose of the Atman.

— Yogasutra 2.19 - 2.20 [ 47 ] In Book 4, Yogasutra states spiritual liberation as the stage where the yogin achieves distinguishing self-knowledge, he no longer confuses his mind as Atman, the mind is no longer affected by afflictions or worries of any kind, ignorance vanishes, and "pure consciousness settles in its own pure nature".

[ 47 ] [ 48 ] The Yoga school is similar to the Samkhya school in its conceptual foundations of purusha as Ātman . It is the self that is discovered and realized in the Kaivalya state, in both schools. Like Samkhya, this is not a single universal Ātman . It is one of the many individual selves where each "pure consciousness settles in its own pure nature", as a unique distinct soul/self.

[ 49 ] However, Yoga school's methodology was widely influential on other schools of Hindu philosophy. Vedanta monism, for example, adopted Yoga as a means to reach Jivanmukti – self-realization in this life – as conceptualized in Advaita Vedanta. Yoga and Samkhya define Ātman as an "unrelated, attributeless, self-luminous , omnipresent entity", which is identical with consciousness.

[ 26 ] Nyaya [ edit ] According to John Plott, " Nyaya scholars made considerable contributions to the logical explanation of the mode in which Ātman , although itself of the nature of the knower, can still be an object of knowledge." [ 50 ] Plott states that the Nyaya scholars developed a theory of negation that far exceeds Hegel 's theory of negation , while their epistemological theories refined to "know the knower" at least equals Aristotle's sophistication.

[ 50 ] Nyaya methodology influenced all major schools of Hinduism.

Nyaya scholars defined Ātman as an imperceptible substance that is the substrate of human consciousness, manifesting itself with or without qualities such as desires, feelings, perception, knowledge, understanding, errors, insights, sufferings, bliss, and others.

[ 51 ] [ 52 ] Nyaya theory of the ātman had two broader contributions to Hindu conceptions of the ātman . One, Nyaya scholars went beyond holding it as "self evident" and offered rational proofs, consistent with their epistemology, in their debates with Buddhists, that "Atman exists".

[ 53 ] Second, they developed theories on what "Atman is and is not".

[ 54 ] As proofs for the proposition 'self exists', for example, Nyaya scholars argued that personal recollections and memories of the form "I did this so many years ago" implicitly presume that there is a self that is substantial, continuing, unchanged, and existent.

[ 53 ] [ 54 ] Pandit Badrinath Shukla argues that considerations of ontological economy show that the manas or "mind" alone suffices, thus contending that an eternal atman is unnecessary for the system, suggesting a rational revision to the Nyaya tradition.

[ 55 ] Nyayasutra , a 2nd-century CE foundational text of Nyaya school of Hinduism, states that Atma is a proper object of human knowledge. It also states that Atman is a real substance that can be inferred from certain signs, objectively perceivable attributes. For example, in book 1, chapter 1, verses 9 and 10, Nyayasutra states [ 51 ] Ātman , body, senses, objects of senses, intellect, mind, activity, error, pretyabhava (after life), fruit, suffering and bliss are the objects of right knowledge.

Desire, aversion, effort, happiness, suffering and cognition are the Linga (लिङ्ग, mark, sign) of the Ātman .

— Nyaya Sutra, I.1.9-10 [ 51 ] Book 2, chapter 1, verses 1 to 23, of the Nyayasutras posits that the sensory act of looking is different from perception and cognition–that perception and knowledge arise from the seekings and actions of Ātman .

[ 56 ] The Naiyayikas emphasize that Ātman has qualities, but is different from its qualities. For example, desire is one of many qualities of Ātman , but Ātman does not always have desire, and in the state of liberation, for instance, the Ātman is without desire.

[ 51 ] Additionally, the self has the property of consciousness, but that too, is not an essential property. Naiyayikas take the ātman to lose consciousness during deep sleep.

[ 57 ] Vaiśeṣika [ edit ] The Vaisheshika school of Hinduism, using its non-theistic theories of atomistic naturalism , posits that Ātman is one of the four eternal non-physical [ 58 ] substances without attributes, the other three being kāla (time), dik (space) and manas (mind).

[ 59 ] Time and space, stated Vaiśeṣika scholars, are eka (one), nitya (eternal) and vibhu (all pervading). Time and space are indivisible reality, but human mind prefers to divide them to comprehend past, present, future, relative place of other substances and beings, direction and its own coordinates in the universe. In contrast to these characteristics of time and space, Vaiśeṣika scholars considered Ātman to be many, eternal, independent and spiritual substances that cannot be reduced or inferred from other three non-physical and five physical dravya (substances).

[ 59 ] Mind and sensory organs are instruments, while consciousness is the domain of "atman, soul, self".

[ 59 ] The knowledge of Ātman , to Vaiśeṣika Hindus, is another knowledge without any "bliss" or "consciousness" moksha state that Vedanta and Yoga school describe.

[ 17 ] Mimamsa [ edit ] Ātman , in the ritualism-based Mīmāṃsā school of Hinduism, is an eternal, omnipresent, inherently active essence that is identified as I-consciousness.

[ 60 ] [ 61 ] Unlike all other schools of Hinduism, Mimamsaka scholars considered ego and Atman as the same. Within Mimamsa school, there was divergence of beliefs.

Kumārila , for example, believed that Atman is the object of I-consciousness, whereas Prabhākara believed that Atman is the subject of I-consciousness.

[ 60 ] Mimamsaka Hindus believed that what matters is virtuous actions and rituals completed with perfection, and it is this that creates merit and imprints knowledge on Atman , whether one is aware or not aware of Atman . Their foremost emphasis was formulation and understanding of laws/duties/virtuous life ( dharma ) and consequent perfect execution of kriyas (actions). The Upanishadic discussion of Atman , to them, was of secondary importance.

[ 61 ] [ 62 ] While other schools disagreed and discarded the Atma theory of Mimamsa, they incorporated Mimamsa theories on ethics, self-discipline, action, and dharma as necessary in one's journey toward knowing one's Atman .

[ 63 ] [ 64 ] Vedanta [ edit ] Advaita Vedanta [ edit ] Advaita Vedanta (non-dualism) sees the Ātman (“spirit, soul, self”) as seemingly manifesting as many individuals, while being fully identical with Brahman.

[ 65 ] The Advaita school believes that there is one soul that connects and exists in all living beings, regardless of their shapes or forms, and there is no distinction. There is no separate devotee soul ( Atman ) and god soul (Brahman).

[ 65 ] Each self is non-different from the infinite.

[ 65 ] [ 66 ] Advaita Vedanta philosophy considers Atman as Sat-cit-ānanda , self-existent awareness, limitless and non-dual.

[ 67 ] Atman is the universal principle, one eternal undifferentiated self-luminous consciousness, the truth asserts Advaita Hinduism.

[ 68 ] [ 69 ] Human beings, in a state of unawareness of this universal self, see their "I-ness" as different from the being in others, then act out of impulse, fears, cravings, malice, division, confusion, anxiety, passions, and a sense of distinctiveness.

[ 70 ] [ 71 ] To Advaitins, Atman-knowledge is the state of full awareness, liberation, and freedom that overcomes dualities at all levels, realizing the divine within oneself, the divine in others, and in all living beings; the non-dual oneness, that God is in everything, and everything is God.

[ 65 ] [ 67 ] This identification of individual living beings/souls, or jiva-atmas , with the 'one Atman' is the non-dualistic Advaita Vedanta position.

Dvaita Vedanta [ edit ] Dvaita Vedanta differentiates the individual atman of living beings from the a tman of a supreme being ( Paramatman ).

[ 72 ] [ 73 ] God is the ultimate, perfect, but distinct soul from incomplete, imperfect jivas (individual souls).

[ 74 ] God created individual souls, state Dvaita Vedantins, but the individual soul never was and never will become one with God; the best it can do is to experience bliss by getting infinitely close to God.

[ 75 ] Liberation is only possible in after-life as communion with God, and only through the grace of God (if not, then one's Atman is reborn).

[ 76 ] Heterodox schools [ edit ] See also: Āstika and nāstika , Hindu Philosophy , and Indian Philosophy Buddhism [ edit ] See also: Anatta , Buddha-nature , Shentong , Sunyata , Precanonical Buddhism , and Ātman (Buddhism) “Form (rūpaṁ) is emptiness, emptiness (śūnyatā) is form.” Prajñāpāramitā Hṛdayam Applying the disidentification of 'no-self' to the logical end, [ 9 ] [ 12 ] [ 11 ] Buddhism does not assert an unchanging essence, any "eternal, essential and absolute something called a soul, self or atman," [ note 3 ] According to Jayatilleke, the Upanishadic inquiry fails to find an empirical correlate of the assumed Atman , but nevertheless assumes its existence, [ 9 ] and, states Mackenzie, Advaitins "reify consciousness as an eternal self." [ 77 ] [ note 5 ] In contrast, the Buddhist inquiry "is satisfied with the empirical investigation which shows that no such Atman exists because there is no evidence" states Jayatilleke.

[ 9 ] While Nirvana is liberation from the kleshas and the disturbances of the mind-body complex, Buddhism eludes a definition of what it is that is liberated, [ 10 ] [ 11 ] [ note 3 ] implying, in Anguttara Nikaya 4.23, that the ' tathagata ' is "deep, unfathomable." [ note 6 ] According to Johannes Bronkhorst, "it is possible that original Buddhism did not deny the existence of soul," but did not want to talk about it, as they could not say that "the soul is essentially not involved in action, as their opponents did." [ 10 ] While the skandhas are regarded is impermanent ( anatman ) and sorrowfull ( dukkha ), the existence of a permanent, joyful and unchanging self is neither acknowledged nor explicitly denied. Liberation is not attained by knowledge of such a self, but by " turning away from what might erroneously be regarded as the self." [ 11 ] According to Harvey, in Buddhism the negation of temporal existents is applied even more rigorously than in the Upanishads: While the Upanishads recognized many things as being not-Self, they felt that a real, true Self could be found. They held that when it was found, and known to be identical to Brahman, the basis of everything, this would bring liberation. In the Buddhist Suttas , though, literally everything is seen is non-Self, even Nirvana . When this is known, then liberation – Nirvana – is attained by total non-attachment. Thus both the Upanishads and the Buddhist Suttas see many things as not-Self, but the Suttas apply it, indeed non-Self, to everything .

[ 12 ] Nevertheless, Atman-like notions can also be found in Buddhist texts chronologically placed in the 1st millennium of the Common Era , such as the Mahayana tradition's Tathāgatagarbha sūtras suggest self-like concepts, variously called Tathagatagarbha or Buddha nature .

[ 80 ] [ 81 ] In the Theravada tradition, the Dhammakaya Movement in Thailand teaches that it is erroneous to subsume nirvana under the rubric of anatta (non-self); instead, nirvana is taught to be the "true self" or dhammakaya .

[ 82 ] Similar interpretations have been put forth by the then Thai Sangharaja in 1939. According to Williams, the Sangharaja's interpretation echoes the tathāgatagarbha sutras.

[ 83 ] The notion of Buddha-nature is controversial, and "eternal self" concepts have been vigorously attacked.

[ 84 ] These "self-like" concepts are neither self nor sentient being, nor soul, nor personality.

[ 85 ] Some scholars posit that the Tathagatagarbha Sutras were written to promote Buddhism to non-Buddhists.

[ 86 ] [ note 7 ] [ 87 ] [ 88 ] The Dhammakaya Movement teaching that nirvana is atta (atman) has been criticized as heretical in Buddhism by Prayudh Payutto , a well-known scholar monk, who added that 'Buddha taught nibbana as being non-self".

[ 89 ] Pudgalavāda [ edit ] Pudgalavāda was a Buddhist philosophical view and also referred to a group of Nikaya Buddhist schools (mainly known as Vātsīputrīyas) that arose within the school of minority elders who split from the majority Mahāsāṃghika after the Second Buddhist Council.

[ 90 ] The Pudgalavādins asserted that while there is no ātman , there exists a pudgala (person) or sattva (being), which is neither a conditioned dharma nor an unconditioned dharma.

[ 90 ] Because the Vātsīputrīya views were seen as close to the concept of a self or ātman, they were sharply criticized by the Vibhajjavadins (a record of this is found in the Theravadin Kathavatthu ), as well as by the Sarvastivadins (In the Vijñanakaya ), Sautrantikas (most famously in the Abhidharmakosha ), and the Madhyamaka school ( Candrakirti's Madhyamakavatara ).

[ 91 ] Jainism [ edit ] See also: Jīva (Jainism) Ātman is a philosophical term used within Jainism to identify the soul .

[ 92 ] As per Jain cosmology , jīva or soul is the principle of sentience and is one of the tattvas or one of the fundamental substances forming part of the universe.
According to the Jain text, Samayasāra (2nd century CE or later): Know that the Jiva (soul) which rests on pure faith, knowledge, and conduct, alone is the Real Self. The one which is conditioned by the karmic matter is to be known as the impure self. – Verse 1-2-2 According to Vijay Jain, the souls which rest on the pure self are called the Real Self, and only arihant and Siddhas are the Real Self.

[ 93 ] Ājīvika [ edit ] See also: Ājīvika The predetermined fate (niyati) of living beings was the major distinctive doctrine of Ājīvika school, along with withholding judgement on how to achieve liberation ( moksha ) from the eternal cycle of birth, death, and rebirth , instead believing that fate would lead us there. Ājīvikas further considered the karma doctrine as a fallacy. They were mostly considered as atheists ; [ 94 ] however, they believed that in every living being there is an Ātman.

[ 95 ] Sassatavāda [ edit ] See also: Sassatavāda and Pakudha Kaccāyana Sassatavāda refers to a school of "eternalism and categoralism" that holds the belief in an unchanging self.

[ 96 ] Whatever is known about Sassatavāda comes from Buddhist sources. According to the Pali Canon, Pakudha Kaccāyana founded this school around the 6th century BCE. He was an atomist who taught that everything is composed of seven eternal elements: earth, water, fire, air, happiness (joy), pain, and Ātman (soul).

[ 97 ] Pakudha further asserted that these elements do not interact with one another.

[ 98 ] Influence of Atman-concept on Hindu ethics [ edit ] Ahimsa , non-violence, is considered the highest ethical value and virtue in Hinduism.

[ 99 ] The virtue of Ahimsa follows from the Atman theories of Hindu traditions.

[ 100 ] [ 101 ] The Atman theory in Upanishads had a profound impact on ancient ethical theories and dharma traditions now known as Hinduism.

[ 100 ] The earliest Dharmasutras of Hindus recite Atman theory from the Vedic texts and Upanishads, [ 102 ] and on its foundation build precepts of dharma, laws and ethics.

Atman theory, particularly the Advaita Vedanta and Yoga versions, influenced the emergence of the theory of Ahimsa (non-violence against all creatures), culture of vegetarianism, and other theories of ethical, dharmic life.

[ 103 ] [ 104 ] Dharma-sutras [ edit ] The Dharmasutras and Dharmasastras integrate the teachings of Atman theory. Apastamba Dharmasutra, the oldest known Indian text on dharma, for example, titles Chapters 1.8.22 and 1.8.23 as "Knowledge of the Atman" and then recites, [ 105 ] There is no higher object than the attainment of the knowledge of Atman . We shall quote the verses from the Veda which refer to the attainment of the knowledge of the Atman. All living creatures are the dwelling of him who lies enveloped in matter, who is immortal, who is spotless. A wise man shall strive after the knowledge of the Atman. It is he [Self] who is the eternal part in all creatures, whose essence is wisdom, who is immortal, unchangeable, pure; he is the universe, he is the highest goal. – 1.8.22.2-7 Freedom from anger , from excitement, from rage, from greed , from perplexity, from hypocrisy , from hurtfulness (from injury to others); Speaking the truth, moderate eating , refraining from calumny and envy, sharing with others , avoiding accepting gifts, uprightness, forgiveness, gentleness, tranquility, temperance , amity with all living creatures, yoga , honorable conduct, benevolence and contentedness – These virtues have been agreed upon for all the ashramas ; he who, according to the precepts of the sacred law, practices these, becomes united with the Universal Self . – 1.8.23.6 — Knowledge of the Atman, Apastamba Dharma Sūtra, ~ 400 BCE [ 105 ] Ahimsa [ edit ] The ethical prohibition against harming any human beings or other living creatures (Ahimsa, अहिंसा), in Hindu traditions, can be traced to the Atman theory.

[ 100 ] This precept against injuring any living being appears together with Atman theory in hymn 8.15.1 of Chandogya Upanishad (ca. 8th century BCE), [ 106 ] then becomes central in the texts of Hindu philosophy, entering the dharma codes of ancient Dharmasutras and later era Manu-Smriti . Ahimsa theory is a natural corollary and consequence of "Atman is universal oneness, present in all living beings. Atman connects and prevades in everyone. Hurting or injuring another being is hurting the Atman, and thus one's self that exists in another body". This conceptual connection between one's Atman , the universal, and Ahimsa starts in Isha Upanishad , [ 100 ] develops in the theories of the ancient scholar Yajnavalkya, and one which inspired Gandhi as he led non-violent movement against colonialism in early 20th century.

[ 107 ] [ 108 ] यस्तु सर्वाणि भूतान्यात्मन्येवानुपश्यति । सर्वभूतेषु चात्मानं ततो न विजुगुप्सते ॥६॥ यस्मिन्सर्वाणि भूतान्यात्मैवाभूद्विजानतः । तत्र को मोहः कः शोक एकत्वमनुपश्यतः ॥७॥ स पर्यगाच्छुक्रमकायमव्रणम् अस्नाविरँ शुद्धमपापविद्धम् । कविर्मनीषी परिभूः स्वयम्भूःयाथातथ्यतोऽर्थान् व्यदधाच्छाश्वतीभ्यः समाभ्यः ॥८॥ And he who sees everything in his atman, and his atman in everything, does not seek to hide himself from that.

In whom all beings have become one with his own atman, what perplexity, what sorrow, is there when he sees this oneness?

He [the self] prevades all, resplendent, bodiless, woundless, without muscles, pure, untouched by evil; far-seeing, transcendent, self-being, disposing ends through perpetual ages.

— Isha Upanishad, Hymns 6-8, [ 107 ] See also [ edit ] Ātman (Buddhism) Ātman (Jainism) Ishvara Jiva (Hinduism) Jnana Moksha Spirit Tat tvam asi Tree of Jiva and Atman Notes [ edit ] ^ a b Definitions: Oxford Dictionaries, Oxford University Press (2012), Atman : "1. real self of the individual; 2. a person's soul"; John Bowker (2000), The Concise Oxford Dictionary of World Religions, Oxford University Press, ISBN 978-0192800947 , Atman : "the real or true Self"; W.J. Johnson (2009), A Dictionary of Hinduism, Oxford University Press, ISBN 978-0198610250 , See entry for Atman (self).

Encyclopedia Britannica, Atman : Atman, (Sanskrit: "self," "breath") one of the most basic concepts in Hinduism, the universal self, identical with the eternal core of the personality that after death either transmigrates to a new life or attains release (moksha) from the bonds of existence." Shepard (1991) : "Usually translated "Soul" but better rendered "Self."" John Grimes (1996), A Concise Dictionary of Indian Philosophy, State University of New York Press, ISBN 0791430685 , Atman : "breath" (from the verb root at = "to breathe"); inner Self, the Reality which is the substrate of the individual and identical with the Absolute ( Brahman ).

The Presence of Shiva (1994), Stella Kramrisch , Princeton University Press, ISBN 9780691019307 , Atma (Glossary) p. 470 "the Self, the inmost Self or, the life principle" ^ a b While often translated as "soul," it is better translated as "self": Lorenzen (2004 , pp. 208–209): "individual soul (aatman) [sic]" King (1995 , p. 64): "Atman as the innermost essence or soul of man." Meister (2010 , p. 63): Atman (soul)" Shepard (1991) : "Usually translated "Soul" but better rendered "Self."" ^ a b c Atman and Buddhism: Wynne (2011 , pp. 103–105): "The denial that a human being possesses a "self" or "soul" is probably the most famous Buddhist teaching. It is certainly its most distinct, as has been pointed out by G. P. Malalasekera: "In its denial of any real permanent Soul or Self, Buddhism stands alone." A similar modern Sinhalese perspective has been expressed by Walpola Rahula: "Buddhism stands unique in the history of human thought in denying the existence of such a Soul, Self or Ātman." The "no Self" or "no soul" doctrine (Sanskrit: anātman; Pāli: anattan) is particularly notable for its widespread acceptance and historical endurance. It was a standard belief of virtually all the ancient schools of Indian Buddhism (the notable exception being the Pudgalavādins), and has persisted without change into the modern era. [...] both views are mirrored by the modern Theravādin perspective of Mahasi Sayadaw that "there is no person or soul" and the modern Mahāyāna view of the fourteenth Dalai Lama that "[t]he Buddha taught that [...] our belief in an independent self is the root cause of all suffering"." Collins (1994 , p. 64): "Central to Buddhist soteriology is the doctrine of not-self (Pali: anattā, Sanskrit: anātman, the opposed doctrine of ātman is central to Brahmanical thought). Put very briefly, this is the [Buddhist] doctrine that human beings have no soul, no self, no unchanging essence." Plott (2000 , p. 62): "The Buddhist schools reject any Ātman concept. As we have already observed, this is the basic and ineradicable distinction between Hinduism and Buddhism." The notion of no-self is not so much a doctrine, as it is a 'technique' to disidentify from any sorrowfull existent, akin to the Samkhya-notion of Kaivalya : Jayatilleke (1963 , pp. 246–249, from note 385 onwards) refers to various notions of "self" or "soul" rejected by early Buddhism; several Buddhist texts record Samkhya-like notions of Atman c.q. consciousness being different from the body, and liberation is the recognition of this difference.

Javanaud (2013) : "When Buddhists assert the doctrine of 'no-self', they have a clear conception of what a self would be. The self Buddhists deny would have to meet the following criteria: it would (i) retain identity over time, (ii) be permanent (that is, enduring), and (iii) have 'controlling powers' over the parts of a person. Yet through empirical investigation, Buddhists conclude that there is no such thing. 'I' is commonly used to refer to the mind/body integration of the five skandhas, but when we examine these, we discover that in none alone are the necessary criteria for self met, and as we've seen, the combination of them is a convenient fiction [...] Objectors to the exhaustiveness claim often argue that for discovering the self the Buddhist commitment to empirical means is mistaken. True, we cannot discover the self in the five skandhas, precisely because the self is that which is beyond or distinct from the five skandhas. Whereas Buddhists deny the self on grounds that, if it were there, we would be able to point it out, opponents of this view, including Sankara of the Hindu Advaita Vedanta school, are not at all surprised that we cannot point out the self; for the self is that which does the pointing rather than that which is pointed at. Buddha defended his commitment to the empirical method on grounds that, without it, one abandons the pursuit of knowledge in favour of speculation." Liberation (nirvana) is not attained by a "self," but is the release of anything that could be "self": Collins1990 , p. 82): "It is at this point that the differences [between Upanishads and Abhidharma] start to become marked. There is no central self which animates the impersonal elements. The concept of nirvana (Pali nibbana ), although similarly the criterion according to which ethical judgements are made and religious life assessed, is not the liberated state of a self. Like all other things and concepts ( dhamma ) it is anatta , not-self [in Buddhism]." McClelland (2010 , pp. 16–18): "Anatman/Anatta. Literally meaning no (an-) self or soul (-atman), this Buddhist term applies to the denial of a metaphysically changeless, eternal and autonomous soul or self. (...) The early canonical Buddhist view of nirvana sometimes suggests a kind of extinction-like (kataleptic) state that automatically encourages a metaphysical no-soul (self)." ^ See Neti neti , Neo-Advaita , and Nisargadatta Maharaj ^ Prajñānaṁ Brahma (प्रज्ञानं ब्रह्म) - "Consciousness is Brahman" - Aitareya Upanishad 3.3 of the Rig Veda ^ The word's original significance is not known and there has been speculation about it since at least the time of Buddhaghosa , who gives eight interpretations of the word, each with different etymological support, in his commentary on the Digha Nikaya , the Sumangalavilasini .

[ 78 ] According to Fyodor Shcherbatskoy , the term 'tathagata' has a non-Buddhist origin, and is best understood when compared to its usage in non-Buddhist works such as the Mahabharata .

[ 79 ] ^ Williams (2008 , pp. 104–105, 108–109): "(...) it refers to the Buddha using the term "Self" in order to win over non-Buddhist ascetics." References [ edit ] ^ a b Shepard 1991 .

^ Jeffrey D. Long, Historical Dictionary of Hinduism , p.50 ^ Bhedabheda: "Bhedabheda Vedanta" , Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy , retrieved 9 June 2020 ^ Lorenzen 2004 , p. 208-209.

^ Richard King (1995), Early Advaita Vedanta and Buddhism, State University of New York Press, ISBN 978-0791425138 , page 64, Quote: "Atman as the innermost essence or soul of man, and Brahman as the innermost essence and support of the universe. (...) Thus we can see in the Upanishads, a tendency towards a convergence of microcosm and macrocosm, culminating in the equating of atman with Brahman".

^ "Hindu Philosophy: Advaita" , Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy , retrieved 9 June 2020 and "Advaita Vedanta" , Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy , retrieved 9 June 2020 ^ Dvaita: "Hindu Philosophy: Dvaita" , Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy , retrieved 9 June 2020 and "Madhva (1238—1317)" , Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy , retrieved 9 June 2020 ^ Chari, Srinivasa (2000), "Vaishnavism, Its Philosophy, Theology And Religious Discipline" , Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy , retrieved 5 August 2025 {{ citation }} :  CS1 maint: url-status ( link ) ^ a b c d Jayatilleke 1963 , p. 39.

^ a b c Bronkhorst 1993 , p. 99 with footnote 12.

^ a b c d Bronkhorst 2009 , p. 25.

^ a b c Harvey 2012 , p. 59–60.

^ Dalal 2011 , p. 38.

^ Olivelle 2008 , p. lv.

^ Olivelle 2008 , p. xlix.

^ Karel Werner (1998), Yoga and Indian Philosophy , Motilal Banarsidass, pp.

57– 58, ISBN 978-81-208-1609-1 ^ a b c d e Plott 2000 , p. 60-62.

^ Deutsch 1973 , p. 48.

^ Roshen Dalal (2010), The Religions of India: A Concise Guide to Nine Major Faiths , Penguin Books, p. 38, ISBN 978-0-14-341517-6 ^ Norman C. McClelland (2010), Encyclopedia of Reincarnation and Karma , McFarland, pp.

34– 35, ISBN 978-0-7864-5675-8 ^ [a] Julius Lipner (2012), Hindus: Their Religious Beliefs and Practices , Routledge, pp.

53– 56, 81, 160– 161, 269– 270, ISBN 978-1-135-24060-8 ; [b] P. T. Raju (1985), Structural Depths of Indian Thought , State University of New York Press, pp.

26 –37, ISBN 978-0-88706-139-4 ; [c] Gavin D. Flood (1996), An Introduction to Hinduism , Cambridge University Press, pp.

15 , 84– 85, ISBN 978-0-521-43878-0 ^ ऋग्वेद: सूक्तं १०.९७ , Wikisource; Quote: "यदिमा वाजयन्नहमोषधीर्हस्त आदधे । आत्मा यक्ष्मस्य नश्यति पुरा जीवगृभो यथा ॥११॥ ^ Baumer, Bettina and Vatsyayan, Kapila. Kalatattvakosa Vol. 1: Pervasive Terms Vyapti (Indira Gandhi National Centre for the Arts). Motilal Banarsidass; Revised edition (March 1, 2001).

P. 42.

ISBN 8120805844 .

^ Source 1: Rig veda Sanskrit; Source 2: ऋग्वेदः/संहिता Wikisource ^ PT Raju (1985), Structural Depths of Indian Thought, State University of New York Press, ISBN 978-0887061394 , pages 35-36 ^ a b Grimes 1996 , p. 69.

^ a b c Koller 2012 , p. 99-102.

^ Paul Deussen , The Philosophy of the Upanishads at Google Books , Dover Publications, pages 86-111, 182-212 ^ Mitra, Arpita (2018), Jain, Pankaj; Sherma, Rita; Khanna, Madhu (eds.), "Ātman, Hinduism" , Hinduism and Tribal Religions , Dordrecht: Springer Netherlands, pp.

1– 8, doi : 10.1007/978-94-024-1036-5_172-1 , ISBN 978-94-024-1036-5 , retrieved 2025-05-17 ^ Patrick Olivelle (2014), The Early Upanishads, Oxford University Press, ISBN 978-0195124354 , page 12-13 ^ Raju, Poolla Tirupati. Structural Depths of Indian Thought. SUNY Series in Philosophy. P. 26.

ISBN 0-88706-139-7 .

^ Sanskrit Original: बृहदारण्यक उपनिषद् मन्त्र ५ [IV.iv.5], Sanskrit Documents; Translation 1 : Brihadāranyaka Upanishad 4.4.5 Madhavananda (Translator), page 712; Translation 2 : Brihadāranyaka Upanishad 4.4.5 Eduard Roer (Translator), page 235 ^ a b Sanskrit Original: बृहदारण्यक उपनिषद् , Sanskrit Documents; Translation 1 : Brihadāranyaka Upanishad 1.4.10 Eduard Roer (Translator), pages 101-120, Quote: "For he becomes the soul of them." (page 114); Translation 2 : Brihadāranyaka Upanishad 1.4.10 Madhavananda (Translator), page 146; ^ Max Müller , Upanishads, Wordsworth, ISBN 978-1840221022 , pages XXIII-XXIV ^ Original Sanskrit: अग्निर्यथैको भुवनं प्रविष्टो, रूपं रूपं प्रतिरूपो बभूव । एकस्तथा सर्वभूतान्त रात्मा , रूपं रूपं प्रतिरूपो बहिश्च ॥ ९ ॥; English Translation 1 : Stephen Knapp (2005), The Heart of Hinduism, ISBN 978-0595350759 , page 202-203; English Translation 2 : Katha Upanishad Max Müller (Translator), Fifth Valli, 9th verse ^ a b Sanskrit Original: आत्मानँ रथितं विद्धि शरीरँ रथमेव तु । बुद्धिं तु सारथिं विद्धि मनः प्रग्रहमेव च ॥ ३ ॥ इन्द्रियाणि हयानाहुर्विषयाँ स्तेषु गोचरान् । आत्मेन्द्रियमनोयुक्तं भोक्तेत्याहुर्मनीषिणः ॥ ४ ॥, Katha Upanishad Wikisource; English Translation: Max Müller, Katha Upanishad Third Valli, Verse 3 & 4 and through 15, pages 12-14 ^ Stephen Kaplan (2011), The Routledge Companion to Religion and Science, (Editors: James W. Haag, Gregory R. Peterson, Michael L. Speziopage), Routledge, ISBN 978-0415492447 , page 323 ^ a b Sutton, Nicholas (2017-03-13).

Bhagavad Gita: The Oxford Centre for Hindu Studies Guide . Oxford Centre for Hindu Studies. pp.

35– 37.

ISBN 978-1-5030-5291-8 .

^ A. L. Herman (1976), An Introduction to Indian Thought , Prentice-Hall, pp.

110 –115, ISBN 978-0-13-484477-0 ^ Jeaneane D. Fowler (1997), Hinduism: Beliefs and Practices , Sussex Academic Press, pp.

109– 121, ISBN 978-1-898723-60-8 ^ Arvind Sharma (2004), Advaita Vedānta: An Introduction , Motilal Banarsidass, pp.

24 –43, ISBN 978-81-208-2027-2 ^ Deussen, Paul and Geden, A. S. The Philosophy of the Upanishads. Cosimo Classics (June 1, 2010). P. 86.

ISBN 1616402407 .

^ a b Sharma 1997 , pp. 155–7.

^ Chapple 2008 , p. 21.

^ Osto 2018 , p. 203.

^ Paranjpe, A. C. Self and Identity in Modern Psychology and Indian Thought. Springer; 1 edition (September 30, 1998). P. 263-264.

ISBN 978-0-306-45844-6 .

^ a b c Sanskrit Original with Translation 1 : The Yoga Philosophy TR Tatya (Translator), with Bhojaraja commentary; Harvard University Archives; Translation 2 : The Yoga-darsana: The sutras of Patanjali with the Bhasya of Vyasa GN Jha (Translator), with notes; Harvard University Archives; Translation 3 : The Yogasutras of Patanjali Charles Johnston (Translator) ^ Verses 4.24-4.34, Patanjali's Yogasutras; Quote: "विशेषदर्शिन आत्म भावभावनाविनिवृत्तिः" ^ Stephen H. Phillips, Classical Indian Metaphysics: Refutations of Realism and the Emergence of "new Logic".

Open Court Publishing, 1995, pages 12–13.

^ a b Plott 2000 , p. 62.

^ a b c d Original Sanskrit: Nyayasutra Anand Ashram Sanskrit Granthvali, pages 26-28; English translation 1: Nyayasutra see verses 1.1.9 and 1.1.10 on pages 4-5; English translation 2: Elisa Freschi (2014), Puspika: Tracing Ancient India Through Texts and Traditions, (Editors: Giovanni Ciotti, Alastair Gornall, Paolo Visigalli), Oxbow, ISBN 978-1782974154 , pages 56-73 ^ KK Chakrabarti (1999), Classical Indian Philosophy of Mind: The Nyaya Dualist Tradition, State University of New York Press, ISBN 978-0791441718 , pages 2, 187-188, 220 ^ a b See example discussed in this section; For additional examples of Nyaya reasoning to prove that 'self exists', using propositions and its theories of negation, see: Nyayasutra verses 1.2.1 on pages 14-15, 1.2.59 on page 20, 3.1.1-3.1.27 on pages 63-69, and later chapters ^ a b Roy W. Perrett (Editor, 2000), Indian Philosophy: Metaphysics, Volume 3, Taylor & Francis, ISBN 978-0815336082 , page xvii; also see Chakrabarti pages 279-292 ^ Shukla, Pandit Badrinath. "Dehiitmavada or the Body as Soul: Exploration of a Possibility Within Nyaya Thought". In Perrett, Roy W. (ed.).

Indian Philosophy. Vol. III [ Metaphysics] . pp.

293– 309.

^ Sutras_1913#page/n47/mode/2up Nyayasutra see pages 22-29 ^ Thompson, Evan (2014-11-18).

Waking, Dreaming, Being: Self and Consciousness in Neuroscience, Meditation, and Philosophy . Columbia University Press. p. 240.

ISBN 978-0-231-53831-2 .

^ The school posits that there are five physical substances: earth, water, air, water and akasa (ether/sky/space beyond air) ^ a b c Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan and Charles A. Moore (Eds., 1973), A Sourcebook in Indian Philosophy, Princeton University Press, Reprinted in 1973, ISBN 978-0691019581 , pages 386-423 ^ a b PT Raju (2008), The Philosophical Traditions of India, Routledge, ISBN 978-0415461214 , pages 79-80 ^ a b Chris Bartley (2013), Purva Mimamsa, in Encyclopaedia of Asian Philosophy (Editor: Oliver Leaman), Routledge, 978-0415862530, page 443-445 ^ Oliver Leaman (2006), Shruti, in Encyclopaedia of Asian Philosophy, Routledge, ISBN 978-0415862530 , page 503 ^ PT Raju (2008), The Philosophical Traditions of India, Routledge, ISBN 978-0415461214 , pages 82-85 ^ PT Raju (1985), Structural Depths of Indian Thought, State University of New York Press, ISBN 978-0887061394 , pages 54-63; Michael C. Brannigan (2009), Striking a Balance: A Primer in Traditional Asian Values, Rowman & Littlefield, ISBN 978-0739138465 , page 15 ^ a b c d Arvind Sharma (2007), Advaita Vedānta: An Introduction, Motilal Banarsidass, ISBN 978-8120820272 , pages 19-40, 53-58, 79-86 ^ Karl Potter (2008), Encyclopedia of Indian Philosophies: Advaita Vedānta, Volume 3, Motilal Banarsidass, ISBN 978-8120803107 , pages 510-512 ^ a b A Rambachan (2006), The Advaita Worldview: God, World, and Humanity, State University of New York Press, ISBN 978-0791468524 , pages 47, 99-103 ^ S Timalsina (2014), Consciousness in Indian Philosophy: The Advaita Doctrine of 'Awareness Only', Routledge, ISBN 978-0415762236 , pages 3-23 ^ Eliot Deutsch (1980), Advaita Vedanta: A Philosophical Reconstruction, University of Hawaii Press, ISBN 978-0824802714 , pages 48-53 ^ A Rambachan (2006), The Advaita Worldview: God, World, and Humanity, State University of New York Press, ISBN 978-0791468524 , pages 114-122 ^ Adi Sankara, A Bouquet of Nondual Texts: Advaita Prakarana Manjari, Translators: Ramamoorthy & Nome, ISBN 978-0970366726 , pages 173-214 ^ Bhagavata Purana 3.28.41 Archived 2012-02-17 at the Wayback Machine ^ Bhagavata Purana 7.7.19–20 "Atma also refers to the Supreme Lord or the living entities. Both of them are spiritual." ^ R Prasad (2009), A Historical-developmental Study of Classical Indian Philosophy of Morals, Concept Publishing, ISBN 978-8180695957 , pages 345-347 ^ Thomas Padiyath (2014), The Metaphysics of Becoming, De Gruyter, ISBN 978-3110342550 , pages 155-157 ^ James Lewis and William Travis (1999), Religious Traditions of the World, ISBN 978-1579102302 , pages 279-280 ^ Mackenzie 2012 .

^ Chalmers, Robert.

The Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society, 1898. pp.103-115 ^ Florin Giripescu Sutton (1991), Existence and Enlightenment in the Laṅkāvatāra-sūtra: A Study in the Ontology and Epistemology of the Yogācāra School of Mahāyāna Buddhism , SUNY Press, 1991, p.104 ^ Williams 2008 , p. 104, 125–127.

^ Hookham 1991 , p. 100–104.

^ Mackenzie 2007 , pp. 100–5, 110.

^ Williams 2008 , p. 126.

^ Hubbard & Swanson 1997 .

^ Williams 2008 , p. 107, 112; Hookham 1991 , p. 96.

^ Williams 2008 , p. 104–105, 108–109.

^ Fowler 1999 , p. 101–102.

^ Pettit 1999 , p. 48–49.

^ Mackenzie 2007 , pp. 51–52.

^ a b Williams, Paul, Buddhism: The early Buddhist schools and doctrinal history; Theravāda doctrine, Volume 2, Taylor & Francis, 2005, p. 86.

^ Paul Williams, Anthony Tribe, Alexander Wynne, Buddhist Thought: A Complete Introduction to the Indian Tradition, p. 92.

^ "dravya - Jainism" .

Encyclopædia Britannica .

^ Jain 2012 , p. 3.

^ Johannes Quack (2014), The Oxford Handbook of Atheism (Editors: Stephen Bullivant, Michael Ruse), Oxford University Press, ISBN 978-0199644650 , page 654 ^ Analayo (2004), Satipaṭṭhāna: The Direct Path to Realization , ISBN 978-1899579549 , pp. 207-208 ^ K. Venkata Ramanan, Nagarjuna's Philosophy: As Presented in the Maha-Prajnaparamita-Sastra.

Motilal Banarsidass Publ., 1993, page 60.

^ "Six Contemporary Teachers Of The Buddh" (PDF) .

stylomilo.com . Retrieved 2021-04-21 .

^ Thanissaro (1997).

^ Stephen H. Phillips & other authors (2008), in Encyclopedia of Violence, Peace, & Conflict (Second Edition), ISBN 978-0123739858 , Elsevier Science, Pages 1347–1356, 701-849, 1867 ^ a b c d Ludwig Alsdorf (2010), The History of Vegetarianism and Cow-Veneration in India, Routledge, ISBN 978-0415548243 , pages 111-114 ^ NF Gier (1995), Ahimsa, the Self, and Postmodernism, International Philosophical Quarterly, Volume 35, Issue 1, pages 71-86, doi : 10.5840/ipq199535160 ; Jean Varenne (1977), Yoga and the Hindu Tradition, University of Chicago Press, ISBN 978-0226851167 , page 200-202 ^ These ancient texts of India refer to Upanishads and Vedic era texts some of which have been traced to preserved documents, but some are lost or yet to be found.

^ Stephen H. Phillips (2009), Yoga, Karma, and Rebirth: A Brief History and Philosophy, Columbia University Press, ISBN 978-0231144858 , pages 122-125 ^ Knut Jacobsen (1994), The institutionalization of the ethics of "non-injury" toward all "beings" in Ancient India, Environmental Ethics, Volume 16, Issue 3, pages 287-301, doi : 10.5840/enviroethics199416318 ^ a b Sanskrit Original: Apastamba Dharma Sutra page 14; English Translation 1 : Knowledge of the Atman Apastamba Dharmasutra, The Sacred Laws of the Aryas, Georg Bühler (Translator), pages 75-79; English Translation 2 : Ludwig Alsdorf (2010), The History of Vegetarianism and Cow-Veneration in India, Routledge, ISBN 978-0415548243 , pages 111-112; English Translation 3 : Patrick Olivelle (1999), Dharmasutras, Oxford University Press, ISBN 978-0192838827 , page 34 ^ Sanskrit original: तधैतद्ब्रह्मा प्रजापतये उवाच प्रजापतिर्मनवे मनुः प्रजाभ्यः आचार्यकुलाद्वेदमधीत्य यथाविधानं गुरोः कर्मातिशेषेणाभिसमावृत्य कुटुम्बे शुचौ देशे स्वाध्यायमधीयानो धर्मिकान्विदधदात्मनि सर्वैन्द्रियाणि संप्रतिष्ठा प्याहिँस न्सर्व भूतान्यन्यत्र तीर्थेभ्यः स खल्वेवं वर्तयन्यावदायुषं ब्रह्मलोकमभिसंपद्यते न च पुनरावर्तते न च पुनरावर्तते ॥१॥; छान्दोग्योपनिषद् ४ Wikisource; English Translation: Paul Deussen, Sixty Upanishads of the Veda, Volume 1, Motilal Banarsidass, ISBN 978-8120814684 , page 205 ^ a b Sanskrit original: ईशावास्य उपनिषद् Wikisource; English Translation 1: Isha Upanishad Max Müller (Translator), Oxford University Press, page 312, hymns 6 to 8; English Translation 2: Isha Upanishad See translation by Charles Johnston, Universal Theosophy; English Translation 3: Isavasyopanishad SS Sastri (Translator), hymns 6-8, pages 12-14 ^ Deen K. Chatterjee (2011), Encyclopedia of Global Justice: A - I, Volume 1, Springer, ISBN 978-1402091599 , page 376 Sources [ edit ] Printed sources Baroni, Helen J. (2002), The Illustrated Encyclopedia of Zen Buddhism , Rosen Publishing, ISBN 978-0823922406 Bronkhorst, Johannes (1993), The Two Traditions of Meditation in Ancient India , Motilal Banarsidass, ISBN 978-81-208-1114-0 Bronkhorst, Johannes (2009), Buddhist Teaching in India , Wisdom Publications, ISBN 978-0-86171-811-5 Chapple, Christopher Key (2008), Yoga and the Luminous: Patañjali's Spiritual Path to , SUNY Press Collins, Steven (1990), Selfless Persons: Imagery and Thought in Theravada Buddhism , Cambridge University Press, p. 82, ISBN 978-0-521-39726-1 Collins, Steven (1994), Reynolds, Frank; Tracy, David (eds.), Religion and Practical Reason , State University of New York Press, ISBN 978-0791422175 Dalal, R. (2011), The Religions of India: A Concise Guide to Nine Major Faiths , Penguin, ISBN 978-0143415176 Deutsch, Eliot (1973), Advaita Vedanta: A Philosophical Reconstruction , University of Hawaii Press Eggeling, Hans Julius (1911).

"Hinduism" . In Chisholm, Hugh (ed.).

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 13 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. pp.

501– 513.

Fowler, Merv (1999), Buddhism: Beliefs and Practices , Sussex Academic Press, ISBN 978-1-898723-66-0 J. Ganeri (2013), The Concealed Art of the Soul, Oxford University Press, ISBN 978-0199658596 Grimes, John (1996).

A Concise Dictionary of Indian Philosophy: Sanskrit Terms Defined in English . State University of New York Press.

ISBN 0791430685 .

Harvey, Peter (2012), An Introduction to Buddhism: Teachings, History and Practices , Cambridge University Press, ISBN 978-0-521-85942-4 Hookham, S. K. (1991), The Buddha Within: Tathagatagarbha Doctrine According to the Shentong Interpretation of the Ratnagotravibhaga , State University of New York Press, ISBN 978-0-7914-0357-0 Hubbard, Jamie; Swanson, Paul L., eds. (1997), Pruning the Bodhi Tree: The Storm over Critical Buddhism , University of Hawaii Press Jain, Vijay K. (2012), Acharya Kundkund's Samayasara , Vikalp Printers, ISBN 978-81-903639-3-8 , Non-Copyright Javanaud, Katie (2013), "Is The Buddhist 'No-Self' Doctrine Compatible With Pursuing Nirvana?" , Philosophy Now Jayatilleke, K.N. (1963), Early Buddhist Theory of Knowledge (PDF) (1st ed.), London: George Allen & Unwin Ltd., archived from the original (PDF) on September 11, 2015 King, Richard (1995), Early Advaita Vedanta and Buddhism , State University of New York Press, ISBN 978-0791425138 Koller, John (2012), "Shankara", in Meister, Chad; Copan, Paul (eds.), Routledge Companion to Philosophy of Religion , Routledge, ISBN 978-0415782944 Lorenzen, David (2004), "Bhakti", in Mittal, Sushil; Thursby, Gene (eds.), The Hindu World , Routledge, ISBN 0-415215277 Loy, David (1982), "Enlightenment in Buddhism and Advaita Vedanta: Are Nirvana and Moksha the Same?", International Philosophical Quarterly , 23 (1) Mackenzie, Matthew (2012), "Luminosity, Subjectivity, and Temporality: An Examination of Buddhist and Advaita views of Consciousness", in Kuznetsova, Irina; Ganeri, Jonardon; Ram-Prasad, Chakravarthi (eds.), Hindu and Buddhist Ideas in Dialogue: Self and No-Self , Routledge Mackenzie, Rory (2007), New Buddhist Movements in Thailand: Towards an Understanding of Wat Phra Dhammakaya and Santi Asoke , Routledge, ISBN 978-1-134-13262-1 McClelland, Norman C. (2010), Encyclopedia of Reincarnation and Karma , McFarland, ISBN 978-0-7864-5675-8 Meister, Chad (2010), The Oxford Handbook of Religious Diversity , Oxford University Press, ISBN 978-0195340136 Olivelle, Patrick (2008), The Early Upanishads , Oxford University Press Osto, Douglas (January 2018), "No-Self in Sāṃkhya: A Comparative Look at Classical Sāṃkhya and Theravāda Buddhism" , Philosophy East and West , 68 (1): 201– 222, doi : 10.1353/pew.2018.0010 , S2CID 171859396 Pettit, John W. (1999), Mipham's Beacon of Certainty: Illuminating the View of Dzogchen, the Great Perfection , Simon and Schuster, ISBN 978-0-86171-157-4 Plott, John C. (2000), Global History of Philosophy: The Axial Age, Volume 1 , Motilal Banarsidass, ISBN 978-8120801585 Sharma, C. (1997), A Critical Survey of Indian Philosophy , New Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass Publ, ISBN 81-208-0365-5 Shepard, Leslie (1991), Encyclopedia of Occultism & Parapsychology - Volume 1 , Gale Research Incorporated, ISBN 9780810301962 Suh, Dae-Sook (1994), Korean Studies: New Pacific Currents , University of Hawaii Press, ISBN 978-0824815981 Williams, Paul (2008), Mahayana Buddhism: The Doctrinal Foundations (2 ed.), Routledge, ISBN 978-1-134-25056-1 Wynne, Alexander (2011), "The ātman and its negation", Journal of the International Association of Buddhist Studies , 33 ( 1– 2) Web-sources ^ Atman Britannica, Atman
Hindu philosophy ^ a b Atman Etymology Dictionary, Douglas Harper (2012) External links [ edit ] A. S. Woodburne (1925), The Idea of God in Hinduism , The Journal of Religion, Vol. 5, No. 1 (Jan., 1925), pages 52–66 K. L. Seshagiri Rao (1970), On Truth: A Hindu Perspective , Philosophy East and West, Vol. 20, No. 4 (Oct., 1970), pages 377-382 Norman E. Thomas (1988), Liberation for Life: A Hindu Liberation Philosophy , Missiology, Vol. 16, No. 2, pages 149-162 v t e Hinduism topics Glossary Index Timeline Philosophy Concepts Brahman Om Ishvara Atman Maya Karma Saṃsāra Puruṣārthas Dharma Artha Kama Moksha Niti Ahimsa Asteya Aparigraha Brahmacharya Satya Dāna Damah Dayā Akrodha Schools Āstika : Samkhya Yoga Nyaya Vaisheshika Mīmāṃsā Vedanta Svābhāvika Bhedābheda Dvaita Advaita Vishishtadvaita Nāstika : Charvaka Texts Classification Śruti Smṛti Vedas Rigveda Yajurveda Samaveda Atharvaveda Divisions Samhita Brahmana Aranyaka Upanishads Aitareya Kaushitaki Brihadaranyaka Isha Taittiriya Katha Maitrayaniya Shvetashvatara Chandogya Kena Mundaka Mandukya Prashna Upavedas Ayurveda Dhanurveda Natyaveda Sthapatyaveda Vedanga Shiksha Chandas Vyākaraṇa Nirukta Kalpa Jyotisha Other Bhagavad Gita Agamas Itihasas Ramayana Mahabharata Puranas Minor Upanishads Arthashastra Nitisara Dharmaśāstra Manusmriti Nāradasmṛti Yājñavalkya Smṛti Sutras Stotras Subhashita Tantras Yoga Vasistha Yoga Sutras of Patanjali Sangam literature Tirumurai Divya Prabandham Tirumurukāṟṟuppaṭai Thiruppugal Thirukkural Kamba Ramayanam Five Great Epics Eighteen Greater Texts Eighteen Lesser Texts Athichudi Iraiyanar Akapporul Abhirami Antati Thiruvilaiyadal Puranam Vinayagar Agaval Vedarthasamgraha Deities Gods Trimurti Brahma Vishnu Shiva Agni Dattatreya Ganesha Hanuman Indra Kartikeya Krishna Rama Surya Varuna Vayu more Goddesses Tridevi Saraswati Lakshmi Parvati Bhumi Durga Kali Mahavidya Matrika Radha Rukmini Sati Shakti Shashthi Sita more Practices Worship Temple Murti Puja Bhakti Japa Bhajan Naivedhya Yajna Homa Tapas Dhyāna Tirthatana Sanskaras Garbhadhana Pumsavana Simantonayana Jatakarma Namakarana Nishkramana Annaprashana Chudakarana Karnavedha Vidyarambha Upanayana Keshanta Ritushuddhi Samavartanam Vivaha Antyeshti Varnashrama Varna Brahmin Kshatriya Vaishya Shudra Ashrama Brahmacharya Grihastha Vanaprastha Sannyasa Festivals Diwali Holi Shivaratri Raksha Bandhan Navaratri Durga Puja Ramlila Vijayadashami Ganesh Chaturthi Rama Navami Janmashtami Onam Pongal Makar Sankranti New Year Bihu Gudi Padwa Pahela Baishakh Puthandu Vaisakhi Vishu Ugadi Kumbh Mela Haridwar Nashik Prayag Ujjain Ratha Yatra Teej Vasant Panchami Others Other Svādhyāya Namaste Bindi Tilaka Related Hindus Etymology List Denominations Law Calendar Anti-Hindu sentiment Criticism Hindu gurus and sants Hindu studies Iconography Mythology Nationalism Hindutva Persecution Pilgrimage sites India Relations with other religions Baháʼí Buddhism Islam Jainism Judaism Sikhism Theosophy Glossary Hinduism by country Hindu temples List Architecture Outline Category Portal WikiProject v t e Indian philosophy Topics Atheism Atomism Idealism Logic Monotheism Vedic philosophy Kama Artha Moksha Ancient Āstika Hindu : Samkhya Nyaya Vaisheshika Yoga Mīmāṃsā Vedanta Shaiva Raseśvara Pashupata Shaivism Pāṇiniya Nāstika Ājīvika Ajñana Charvaka Jain Anekantavada Syādvāda Buddhist philosophy and Early Buddhist schools Śūnyatā Madhyamaka Yogachara Sautrāntika Svatantrika Medieval Vedanta Acintya bheda abheda Advaita Bhedabheda Dvaita Svabhavika Bhedabheda Shuddhadvaita Vishishtadvaita Navya-Nyāya Sikh Philosophy Shaiva Pratyabhijna Pashupata Shaivism Shaiva Siddhanta Modern Integral yoga Gandhism Radical Humanism Progressive utilization theory Texts Abhinavabharati Arthashastra Bhagavad Gita Bhagavata Purana Brahma Sutra Buddhist texts Dharmashastra Hindu texts Jain Agamas Kamasutra Mimamsa Sutras All 108 texts Principal Nyāya Sūtras Nyayakusumanjali Panchadasi Samkhyapravachana Sutra Sangam texts Sarvadarsanasangraha Shiva Sutras Tarka-Sangraha Tattvacintāmaṇi Tirukkuṟaḷ Upanishads Minor Vaiśeṣika Sūtra Vedangas Vedas Yoga Sutras of Patanjali Yoga Vasistha More...

Philosophers Adi Shankara Abhinavagupta Kumārila Bhaṭṭa Maṇḍana Miśra Valluvar Avatsara Vāchaspati Misra Uddalaka Aruni Gautama Buddha Yājñavalkya Gārgī Vāchaknavī Buddhaghosa Patañjali Kanada Kapila Brihadratha Ikshvaku Jaimini Vyasa Chanakya Dharmakirti Akshapada Gotama Nagarjuna Padmasambhāva Vasubandhu Gaudapada Ramana Maharshi Vivekananda Dayananda Saraswati Ramanuja Vedanta Desika Raikva Sadananda Sakayanya Satyakama Jabala Madhvacharya Mahavira Guru Nanak More...

Concepts Abhava Abhasavada Abheda Adarsana Adrishta Advaita Aham Ahimsa Aishvarya Akrodha Aksara Anatta Ananta Anavastha Anupalabdhi Apauruṣheyā Artha Asiddhatva Asatkalpa Ātman Avyakta Bhrama Brahman Bhuman Bhumika Catuṣkoṭi Chaitanya Chidabhasa Cittabhumi Dāna Devatas Dharma Dhi Dravya Dhrti Ekagrata Guṇa Hitā Idam Ikshana Ishvaratva Jivatva Kama Karma Kasaya Kshetrajna Lakshana Matsya Nyaya Mithyatva Mokṣa Nididhyasana Nirvāṇa Nishkama Karma Niyama Padārtha Paramatman Paramananda Parameshashakti Parinama-vada Pradhana Prajna Prakṛti Pratibimbavada Pratītyasamutpāda Puruṣa Rājamaṇḍala Ṛta Sakshi Samadhi Saṃsāra Satya Satkaryavada Shabda Brahman Sphoṭa Sthiti Śūnyatā Sutram Svātantrya Iccha-mrityu Syādvāda Taijasa Tajjalan Tanmatra Tyāga Uparati Upekkhā Utsaha Vivartavada Viraj Yamas Yoga More...

v t e Modern spirituality Spirituality Outline of spirituality Category:Spirituality Concepts Afterlife Akashic records Ātman Awakening Bodhi Chakra Consciousness Cosmogony Cosmology Creation myths Deity Dharma Ekam Emanationism Enlightenment Epigenesis Eschatology Eternal return Eternity Ethic of reciprocity Existence God Guru Inner peace Involution Jihad Karma Kevala jnana Lataif-e-Sitta Meaning of life Metaphysics Mind's eye Moksha Nature Nirvana Paranormal Parapsychology Planes of existence Prophecy Qi Reality Reincarnation Revelation Salvation Samadhi Satguru Satori Shabda Śūnyatā Soul Spirit Spiritual evolution Spiritual possession Supernatural Synchronicity Tao Tattvas Yana Yuga Practices Ahimsa Aikido Altruism Ancestor worship Asceticism Astrology Bearing testimony Being born again Bhajan Bhakti Blessing Celibacy Channelling Chanting Contemplation Dhikr Embodiment Entheogen Exorcism Faith healing Fasting Glossolalia Hymn Iconolatry Japa Kinomichi Koan practice Magick Mantra Meditation Martyrdom Ministering Miracles Monasticism Muraqabah Nonresistance Nonviolence Pacifism Pilgrimage Prayer Qawwali Qigong Religious ecstasy Religious music Repentance Revivalism Ritual Sacrament Sacrifice Sādhanā Sahaj Marg Sainthood Self-realization Shamanism Simple living Simran Supplication Sufi whirling Tai chi Theophany Theosis Tithing Vegetarianism Veneration Vipassanā Wabi-sabi Wearing vestments Worship Yoga Zazen Belief systems Advaita Anthroposophy Darshana Deism Eutheism, dystheism, and maltheism Gnosticism Henotheism Hermeticism Kabbalah Kathenotheism Martinism Modern paganism Monotheism Monolatry Mysticism Neoplatonism Nondualism Pandeism Panentheism Pantheism Polytheism Religion Rosicrucianism Spiritualism Sufism Taoism Theism Thelema Theosophy Transcendentalism Vedanta Texts A Course in Miracles Akilathirattu Ammanai Bible Book of Mormon The Cloud of Unknowing Dhammapada Hindu scripture Guru Granth Sahib I Ching Liber AL vel Legis Quran Sufi texts Tao Te Ching Torah The Urantia Book Zhuangzi Virtues Awareness Charity Compassion Empathy Faith Forgiveness Gratitude Honesty Hope Intuition Kindness Love Mercy Mettā Moral courage Patience Seven virtues Wisdom NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐gxhgz
Cached time: 20250817172119
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.449 seconds
Real time usage: 1.673 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 10570/1000000
Revision size: 76201/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 316986/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 13884/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 11/100
Expensive parser function count: 18/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 376290/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.831/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 19139462/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1291.282      1 -total
 26.57%  343.097      3 Template:Reflist
 23.57%  304.403     48 Template:Citation
 12.46%  160.891     48 Template:Sfn
  8.79%  113.525     44 Template:ISBN
  8.31%  107.346      1 Template:Langx
  7.63%   98.588      1 Template:Hinduism
  7.44%   96.096      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
  5.26%   67.962      1 Template:Short_description
  5.15%   66.486      9 Template:Navbox Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:100542:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817172119 and revision id 1306421832. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ātman_(Hinduism)&oldid=1306421832 " Categories : Conceptions of self Hindu philosophical concepts Vedanta Hidden categories: CS1 maint: url-status Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Sanskrit-language text Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference This page was last edited on 17 August 2025, at 17:21 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Ātman (Hinduism) 45 languages Add topic

