Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life 2 Education 3 Early work 4 Later life 5 Philosophy Toggle Philosophy subsection 5.1 Theory of perception 5.2 World as representation 5.3 World as will 5.4 Art and aesthetics 5.5 Mathematics 5.6 Ethics 5.6.1 Eternal justice 5.6.2 Quietism 5.7 Psychology 5.8 Political and social thought 5.8.1 Politics 5.8.2 Punishment 5.8.3 Races and religions 5.8.4 Women 5.8.5 Pederasty 5.8.6 Heredity and eugenics 5.8.7 Animal rights 5.9 Intellectual interests and affinities 5.9.1 Indology 5.9.2 Buddhism 5.9.3 Magic and occultism 6 Thoughts on other philosophers Toggle Thoughts on other philosophers subsection 6.1 Giordano Bruno and Spinoza 6.2 Immanuel Kant 6.3 Post-Kantian school 7 Influence and legacy 8 Selected bibliography Toggle Selected bibliography subsection 8.1 Online 9 See also 10 References Toggle References subsection 10.1 Sources 11 Further reading Toggle Further reading subsection 11.1 Biographies 11.2 Other books 11.3 Articles 12 External links Toggle the table of contents Arthur Schopenhauer 106 languages Afrikaans አማርኛ العربية Aragonés অসমীয়া Asturianu Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Чӑвашла Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Kernowek Kiswahili Kurdî Кыргызча Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Lingua Franca Nova Magyar Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം მარგალური مصرى Mirandés Монгол Nederlands 日本語 Nordfriisk Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Novial Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی Papiamentu پښتو Plattdüütsch Polski Português Română Rumantsch Runa Simi Русский Scots Shqip Sicilianu Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Taclḥit Татарча / tatarça ไทย Türkçe Türkmençe Українська اردو Vahcuengh Tiếng Việt Volapük Winaray 吴语 ייִדיש Yorùbá 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia German philosopher (1788–1860) "Schopenhauer" redirects here. For other uses, see Schopenhauer (disambiguation) .

Arthur Schopenhauer Schopenhauer in 1859 Born ( 1788-02-22 ) 22 February 1788 Danzig (Gdańsk), Crown of the Kingdom of Poland , Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth Died 21 September 1860 (1860-09-21) (aged 72) Frankfurt , German Confederation Relatives Johanna Schopenhauer (mother) Adele Schopenhauer (sister) Education Education Illustrious Gymnasium University of Göttingen University of Jena (PhD, 1813) Thesis On the Fourfold Root of the Principle of Sufficient Reason (1813) Philosophical work Era 19th-century philosophy Region Western philosophy School Continental philosophy Post-Kantian philosophy Transcendental idealism (disputed) [ 1 ] [ 2 ] Metaphysical voluntarism [ 3 ] Philosophical pessimism Institutions University of Berlin Main interests Metaphysics , aesthetics , ethics , morality , psychology Notable ideas Animal ethics [ 4 ] Anthropic principle [ 5 ] [ 6 ] Criticism of religion Criticism of German idealism [ 7 ] [ 8 ] Eternal justice Fourfold root of the principle of sufficient reason Hedgehog's dilemma Philosophical pessimism Principium individuationis Schopenhauerian aesthetics Will as thing in itself Will to live Wooden iron Signature Arthur Schopenhauer ( / ˈ ʃ oʊ p ən h aʊər / SHOH -pən-how-ər ; [ 9 ] German: [ˈaʁtuːɐ̯ ˈʃoːpn̩haʊɐ] ⓘ ; 22 February 1788 – 21 September 1860) was a German philosopher . He is known for his 1818 work The World as Will and Representation (expanded in 1844), which characterizes the phenomenal world as the manifestation of a blind and irrational noumenal will .

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] [ 12 ] Building on the transcendental idealism of Immanuel Kant , Schopenhauer developed an atheistic metaphysical and ethical system that rejected the contemporaneous ideas of German idealism .

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] Schopenhauer was among the first philosophers in the Western tradition to share and affirm significant tenets of Indian philosophy , such as asceticism , denial of the self , and the notion of the world-as-appearance .

[ 13 ] His work has been described as an exemplary manifestation of philosophical pessimism .

[ 14 ] Though his work failed to garner substantial attention during his lifetime, he had a posthumous impact across various disciplines, including philosophy, literature, and science. His writing on aesthetics , morality and psychology has influenced many thinkers and artists.

Early life [ edit ] Schopenhauer's birthplace house, ul. Św. Ducha (formerly Heiliggeistgasse ) Arthur Schopenhauer was born on 22 February 1788, in Danzig (then part of the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth ; present-day Gdańsk, Poland ) on Heiliggeistgasse (present day Św. Ducha 47), the son of Heinrich Floris Schopenhauer [ de ] and his wife Johanna Schopenhauer (née Trosiener), [ 15 ] both descendants of wealthy German patrician families. While they both came from Protestant backgrounds, they were not very religious; [ 16 ] : 79 [ 17 ] they supported the French Revolution [ 16 ] : 13 and were republicans , cosmopolitans and Anglophiles .

[ 16 ] : 9 When Danzig became part of Prussia in 1793, Heinrich moved to Hamburg —a free city with a republican constitution. His firm continued trading in Danzig, where most of their extended families remained.

Adele , Arthur's only sibling, was born on 12 July 1797.

[ citation needed ] In 1797 Arthur was sent to Le Havre to live with the family of his father's business associate, Grégoire de Blésimaire. He seemed to enjoy his two-year stay there, learning to speak French and fostering a life-long friendship with Jean Anthime Grégoire de Blésimaire.

[ 16 ] : 18 As early as 1799, Arthur started playing the flute.

[ 16 ] : 30 In 1803 he accompanied his parents on a European tour of Holland , Britain , France, Switzerland , Austria and Prussia . Viewed as primarily a pleasure tour, Heinrich used the opportunity to visit some of his business associates abroad.

[ citation needed ] Heinrich presented Arthur with a choice: he could either stay at home to begin preparations for university or travel with them to further his merchant education. Arthur chose to travel with them. He deeply regretted his choice later because the merchant training was very tedious. He spent twelve weeks of the tour attending school in Wimbledon, London , where he was confused by strict and intellectual Anglicans , whom he described as shallow. He continued to sharply criticize Anglican religiosity later in life despite his general Anglophilia.

[ 16 ] : 56 He was also under pressure from his father, who became very critical of his educational results.

[ citation needed ] In 1805 Heinrich drowned in a canal near their home in Hamburg. Although it was possible that his death was accidental, his wife and son believed that it was suicide. He was prone to anxiety and depression , each becoming more pronounced later in his life.

[ 18 ] Heinrich had become so fussy that even his wife started to doubt his mental health.

[ 16 ] : 43 "There was, in the father's life, some dark and vague source of fear which later made him hurl himself to his death from the attic of his house in Hamburg." [ 16 ] : 88 Arthur showed similar moodiness during his youth and often acknowledged that he inherited it from his father. There were other instances of serious mental health problems on his father's side of the family.

[ 16 ] : 4 Despite his hardship, Schopenhauer liked his father and later referred to him in a positive light.

[ 16 ] : 90 Heinrich left the family with a significant inheritance split in three among Johanna and the children. Arthur was entitled to control of his part when he reached the age of majority. He invested it conservatively in government bonds and earned annual interest that was more than double the salary of a university professor.

[ 16 ] : 136 After quitting his merchant apprenticeship, with encouragement from his mother, he dedicated himself to studies at the Ernestine Gymnasium, Gotha , in Saxe-Gotha-Altenburg . While there, he also enjoyed a social life among the local nobility, spending large amounts of money, which deeply concerned his frugal mother.

[ 16 ] : 128 He left the Gymnasium after writing a satirical poem about one of the schoolmasters. Although Arthur claimed he left voluntarily, his mother's letter indicates that he may have been expelled.

[ 16 ] : 129 Schopenhauer in his youth Arthur spent two years as a merchant in honor of his dead father. During this time, he had doubts about being able to start a new life as a scholar.

[ 16 ] : 120 Most of his prior education was as a practical merchant and he had trouble learning Latin; a prerequisite for an academic career.

[ 16 ] : 117 His mother moved away, with her daughter Adele, to Weimar —then the centre of German literature —to enjoy social life among writers and artists. Arthur and his mother did not part on good terms. In one letter, she wrote: "You are unbearable and burdensome, and very hard to live with; all your good qualities are overshadowed by your conceit, and made useless to the world simply because you cannot restrain your propensity to pick holes in other people." [ 19 ] His mother, Johanna, was generally described as vivacious and sociable.

[ 16 ] : 9 She died 24 years later. Some of Arthur's negative opinions about women may be rooted in his troubled relationship with his mother.

[ 20 ] Arthur moved to Hamburg to live with his friend Jean Anthime, who was also studying to become a merchant.

Education [ edit ] He moved to Weimar but did not live with his mother, who even tried to discourage him from coming by explaining that they would not get along very well.

[ 16 ] : 131 Their relationship deteriorated even further due to their temperamental differences. He accused his mother of being financially irresponsible, flirtatious and seeking to remarry, which he considered an insult to his father's memory.

[ 16 ] : 116,131 His mother, while professing her love to him, criticized him sharply for being moody, tactless, and argumentative, and urged him to improve his behavior so that he would not alienate people.

[ 16 ] : 129 Arthur concentrated on his studies, which were now going very well, and he also enjoyed the usual social life such as balls, parties and theater. By that time Johanna's famous salon was well established among local intellectuals and dignitaries, the most celebrated of them being Johann Wolfgang von Goethe . Arthur attended her parties, usually when he knew that Goethe would be there—although the famous writer and statesman seemed not even to notice the young and unknown student. It is possible that Goethe kept a distance because Johanna warned him about her son's depressive and combative nature, or because Goethe was then on bad terms with Arthur's language instructor and roommate, Franz Passow .

[ 16 ] : 134 Schopenhauer was also captivated by Karoline Jagemann , whom he found beautiful and who was the mistress of Karl August, Grand Duke of Saxe-Weimar-Eisenach , and he wrote to her his only known love poem.

[ 16 ] : 135 Despite his later celebration of asceticism and negative views of sexuality, Schopenhauer occasionally had sexual affairs—usually with women of lower social status, such as servants, actresses and sometimes prostitutes.

[ 16 ] : 21 In a letter to his friend Anthime he claims that such affairs continued even in his mature age and admits that he had two out-of-wedlock daughters (born in 1819 and 1836), both of whom died in infancy.

[ 16 ] : 25 In their youthful correspondence Arthur and Anthime were somewhat boastful and competitive about their sexual exploits—but Schopenhauer seemed aware that women usually did not find him very charming or physically attractive, and his desires often remained unfulfilled.

[ 16 ] : 22 He left Weimar to become a student at the University of Göttingen in 1809. There are no written reasons about why Schopenhauer chose that university instead of the then more famous University of Jena , but Göttingen was known as more modern and scientifically oriented, with less attention given to theology.

[ 16 ] : 140 Law or medicine were usual choices for young men of Schopenhauer's status who also needed career and income; he chose medicine due to his scientific interests . Among his notable professors were Bernhard Friedrich Thibaut , Arnold Hermann Ludwig Heeren , Johann Friedrich Blumenbach , Friedrich Stromeyer , Heinrich Adolf Schrader , Johann Tobias Mayer and Konrad Johann Martin Langenbeck .

[ 16 ] : 141–144 He studied metaphysics , psychology and logic under Gottlob Ernst Schulze , the author of Aenesidemus , who made a strong impression and advised him to concentrate on Plato and Immanuel Kant .

[ 16 ] : 144 He decided to switch from medicine to philosophy around 1810–11 and he left Göttingen, which did not have a strong philosophy program: besides Schulze, the only other philosophy professor was Friedrich Bouterwek , whom Schopenhauer disliked.

[ 16 ] : 150 He did not regret his medicinal and scientific studies; he claimed that they were necessary for a philosopher, and even in Berlin he attended more lectures in sciences than in philosophy.

[ 16 ] : 170 During his days at Göttingen, he spent considerable time studying, but also continued his flute playing and social life. His friends included Friedrich Gotthilf Osann , Karl Witte , Christian Charles Josias von Bunsen and William Backhouse Astor Sr.

[ 16 ] : 151 He arrived at the newly founded University of Berlin for the winter semester of 1811–12. At the same time, his mother had just begun her literary career; she published her first book in 1810, a biography of her friend Karl Ludwig Fernow , which was a critical success. Arthur attended lectures by the prominent post-Kantian philosopher Johann Gottlieb Fichte , but quickly found many points of disagreement with his epistemology; he also found Fichte's lectures tedious and hard to understand.

[ 16 ] : 159 He later mentioned Fichte only in critical, negative terms [ 16 ] : 159 —seeing his philosophy as a lower-quality version of Kant's and considering it useful only because Fichte's poor arguments unintentionally highlighted some failings of Kantianism.

[ 16 ] : 165–169 He also attended the lectures of the famous Protestant theologian Friedrich Schleiermacher , whom he also quickly came to dislike.

[ 16 ] : 174 His notes and comments on Schleiermacher's lectures show that Schopenhauer was becoming very critical of religion and moving towards atheism .

[ 16 ] : 175 He learned by self-directed reading; besides Plato, Kant and Fichte he also read the works of Friedrich Wilhelm Joseph Schelling , Jakob Friedrich Fries , Friedrich Heinrich Jacobi , Francis Bacon , John Locke and much current scientific literature.

[ 16 ] : 170 He attended philological courses by August Böckh and Friedrich August Wolf and continued his naturalistic interests with courses by Martin Heinrich Klaproth , Paul Erman , Johann Elert Bode , Ernst Gottfried Fischer , Johann Horkel , Friedrich Christian Rosenthal and Hinrich Lichtenstein (Lichtenstein was also a friend whom he met at one of his mother's parties in Weimar).

[ 16 ] : 171–174 Early work [ edit ] Schopenhauer left Berlin in a rush in 1813, fearing that the city could be attacked and that he could be pressed into military service as Prussia had just joined the war against France .

[ 16 ] : 179 He returned to Weimar but left after less than a month, disgusted by the fact that his mother was now living with her supposed lover, Georg Friedrich Konrad Ludwig Müller von Gerstenbergk [ de ] , a civil servant twelve years younger than she; he considered the relationship an act of infidelity to his father's memory.

[ 16 ] : 188 He settled for a while in Rudolstadt , hoping that no army would pass through the small town. He spent his time in solitude, hiking in the mountains and the Thuringian Forest and writing his dissertation, On the Fourfold Root of the Principle of Sufficient Reason .

Schopenhauer completed his dissertation at about the same time as the French army was defeated at the Battle of Leipzig . He became irritated by the arrival of soldiers in the town and accepted his mother's invitation to visit her in Weimar. She tried to convince him that her relationship with Gerstenbergk was platonic and that she had no intention of remarrying.

[ 16 ] : 230 But Schopenhauer remained suspicious and often came in conflict with Gerstenbergk because he considered him untalented, pretentious, and nationalistic .

[ 16 ] : 231 His mother had just published her second book, Reminiscences of a Journey in the Years 1803, 1804, and 1805 , a description of their family tour of Europe, which quickly became a hit. She found his dissertation incomprehensible and said it was unlikely that anyone would ever buy a copy. In a fit of temper Arthur told her that people would read his work long after the "rubbish" she wrote was totally forgotten.

[ 21 ] [ 22 ] In fact, although they considered her novels of dubious quality, the Brockhaus publishing firm held her in high esteem because they consistently sold well. Hans Brockhaus later claimed that his predecessors "saw nothing in this manuscript, but wanted to please one of our best-selling authors by publishing her son's work. We published more and more of her son Arthur's work and today nobody remembers Johanna, but her son's works are in steady demand and contribute to Brockhaus' reputation." [ 23 ] He kept large portraits of the pair in his office in Leipzig for the edification of his new editors.

[ 23 ] Also contrary to his mother's prediction, Schopenhauer's dissertation made an impression on Goethe, to whom he sent it as a gift.

[ 16 ] : 241 Although it is doubtful that Goethe agreed with Schopenhauer's philosophical positions, he was impressed by his intellect and extensive scientific education.

[ 16 ] : 243 Their subsequent meetings and correspondence were a great honor to a young philosopher, who was finally acknowledged by his intellectual hero. They mostly discussed Goethe's newly published (and somewhat lukewarmly received) work on colour theory . Schopenhauer soon started writing his own treatise on the subject, On Vision and Colors , which in many points differed from his teacher's. Although they remained polite towards each other, their growing theoretical disagreements—and especially Schopenhauer's extreme self-confidence and tactless criticisms—soon made Goethe become distant again and after 1816 their correspondence became less frequent.

[ 16 ] : 247–265 Schopenhauer later admitted that he was greatly hurt by this rejection, but he continued to praise Goethe, and considered his color theory a great introduction to his own.

[ 16 ] : 252,256,265 Another important experience during his stay in Weimar was his acquaintance with Friedrich Majer [ 24 ] —a historian of religion , orientalist and disciple of Johann Gottfried Herder —who introduced him to Eastern philosophy [ 25 ] [ 16 ] : 266 (see also Indology ). Schopenhauer was immediately impressed by the Upanishads (he called them "the production of the highest human wisdom", and believed that they contained superhuman concepts) and the Buddha , [ 25 ] and put them on a par with Plato and Kant.

[ 16 ] : 268,272 He continued his studies by reading the Bhagavad Gita , an amateurish German journal Asiatisches Magazin , and Asiatick Researches by the Asiatic Society .

[ 16 ] : 267,272 Schopenhauer held a profound respect for Indian philosophy ; [ 26 ] and loved Hindu texts . Although he never revered a Buddhist text he regarded Buddhism as the most distinguished religion.

[ 27 ] [ 16 ] : 272 His studies on Hindu and Buddhist texts were constrained by the lack of adequate literature, [ 28 ] and the latter were mostly restricted to Theravada Buddhism . He also claimed that he formulated most of his ideas independently, [ 25 ] and only later realized the similarities with Buddhism.

[ 16 ] : 274–276 Schopenhauer read the Latin translation and praised the Upanishads in his main work, The World as Will and Representation (1819), as well as in his Parerga and Paralipomena (1851), and commented In the whole world there is no study so beneficial and so elevating as that of the Upanishads. It has been the solace of my life, it will be the solace of my death.

[ 29 ] Schopenhauer in 1815. Portrait by Ludwig Sigismund Ruhl.

As the relationship with his mother fell to a new low, in May 1814 he left Weimar and moved to Dresden .

[ 16 ] : 265 He continued his philosophical studies, enjoyed the cultural life, socialized with intellectuals and engaged in sexual affairs.

[ 16 ] : 284 His friends in Dresden were Johann Gottlob von Quandt , Friedrich Laun , Karl Christian Friedrich Krause and Ludwig Sigismund Ruhl, a young painter who made a romanticized portrait of him in which he improved some of Schopenhauer's unattractive physical features.

[ 16 ] : 278,283 His criticisms of local artists occasionally caused public quarrels when he ran into them in public.

[ 16 ] : 282 Schopenhauer's main occupation during his stay in Dresden was his seminal philosophical work, The World as Will and Representation , which he started writing in 1814 and finished in 1818.

[ 30 ] He was recommended to the publisher Friedrich Arnold Brockhaus by Baron Ferdinand von Biedenfeld, an acquaintance of his mother.

[ 16 ] : 285 Although Brockhaus accepted his manuscript, Schopenhauer made a poor impression because of his quarrelsome and fussy attitude, as well as very poor sales of the book after it was published in December 1818.

[ 16 ] : 285–289 In September 1818, while waiting for his book to be published and conveniently escaping an affair with a maid that caused an unwanted pregnancy, [ 16 ] : 342 Schopenhauer left Dresden for a year-long vacation in Italy.

[ 16 ] : 346 He visited Venice , Bologna , Florence , Naples and Milan , travelling alone or accompanied by mostly English tourists he met.

[ 16 ] : 350 He spent the winter months in Rome, where he accidentally met his acquaintance Karl Witte and engaged in numerous quarrels with German tourists in the Caffè Greco , among them Johann Friedrich Böhmer , who also mentioned his insulting remarks and unpleasant character.

[ 16 ] : 348–349 He enjoyed art, architecture, and ancient ruins, attended plays and operas, and continued his philosophical contemplation and love affairs.

[ 16 ] : 346–350 One of his affairs supposedly became serious, and for a while he contemplated marriage to a rich Italian noblewoman—but, despite his mentioning this several times, no details are known and it may have been Schopenhauer exaggerating.

[ 31 ] [ 16 ] : 345 He corresponded regularly with his sister Adele and became close to her as her relationship with Johanna and Gerstenbergk also deteriorated.

[ 16 ] : 344 She informed him about their financial troubles as the banking house of A. L. Muhl in Danzig—in which her mother invested their whole savings and Arthur a third of his—was near bankruptcy.

[ 16 ] : 351 Arthur offered to share his assets, but his mother refused and became further enraged by his insulting comments.

[ 16 ] : 352 The women managed to receive only thirty percent of their savings while Arthur, using his business knowledge, took a suspicious and aggressive stance towards the banker and eventually received his part in full.

[ 16 ] : 354–356 The affair additionally worsened the relationships among all three members of the Schopenhauer family.

[ 16 ] : 352,354 He shortened his stay in Italy because of the trouble with Muhl and returned to Dresden.

[ 16 ] : 356 Disturbed by the financial risk and the lack of responses to his book he decided to take an academic position since it provided him with both income and an opportunity to promote his views.

[ 16 ] : 358 He contacted his friends at universities in Heidelberg, Göttingen and Berlin and found Berlin most attractive.

[ 16 ] : 358–362 He scheduled his lectures to coincide with those of the famous philosopher Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel , whom Schopenhauer described as a "clumsy charlatan".

[ 32 ] He was especially appalled by Hegel's supposedly poor knowledge of natural sciences and tried to engage him in a quarrel about it already at his test lecture in March 1820.

[ 16 ] : 363 Hegel was also facing political suspicions at the time, when many progressive professors were dismissed following the Carlsbad Decrees , while Schopenhauer carefully mentioned in his application that he had no interest in politics.

[ 16 ] : 362 Despite their differences and the arrogant request to schedule lectures at the same time as his own, Hegel still voted to accept Schopenhauer to the university.

[ 16 ] : 365 Only five students turned up to Schopenhauer's lectures, and he dropped out of academia. A late essay, "On University Philosophy", expressed his resentment towards the work conducted in academies.

Later life [ edit ] Sculpture of Arthur Schopenhauer by Giennadij Jerszow After his efforts in academia, he continued to travel extensively, visiting Leipzig , Nuremberg , Stuttgart , Schaffhausen , Vevey , Milan and spending eight months in Florence.

[ 16 ] : 411 Before he left for his three-year travel, Schopenhauer had an incident with his Berlin neighbor, 47-year-old seamstress Caroline Louise Marquet. The details of the August 1821 incident are unknown. He claimed that he had just pushed her from his entrance after she had rudely refused to leave, and that she had purposely fallen to the ground so that she could sue him. She claimed that he had attacked her so violently that she had become paralyzed on her right side and unable to work. She immediately sued him, and the court case lasted until May 1827, when a court found Schopenhauer guilty and forced him to pay her an annual pension until her death in 1842.

[ 16 ] : 408–411 Schopenhauer enjoyed Italy, where he studied art and socialized with Italian and English nobles.

[ 16 ] : 411–414 It was his last visit to the country. He left for Munich and stayed there for a year, mostly recuperating from various health problems, some of them possibly caused by venereal diseases (the treatment his doctor used suggests syphilis ).

[ 16 ] : 415 He contacted publishers, offering to translate Hume into German and Kant into English, but his proposals were declined.

[ 16 ] : 417,422 Returning to Berlin, he began to study Spanish so he could read some of his favorite authors in their original language. He liked Pedro Calderón de la Barca , Lope de Vega , Miguel de Cervantes and especially Baltasar Gracián .

[ 16 ] : 420 He also made failed attempts to publish his translations of their works. A few attempts to revive his lectures—again scheduled at the same time as Hegel's—also failed, as did his inquiries about relocating to other universities.

[ 16 ] : 429–432 During his Berlin years, Schopenhauer occasionally mentioned his desire to marry and have a family.

[ 16 ] : 404,432 For a while he was unsuccessfully courting 17-year-old Flora Weiss, who was 22 years younger than himself.

[ 16 ] : 433 His unpublished writings from that time show that he was already very critical of monogamy but still not advocating polygyny —instead musing about a polyamorous relationship that he called "tetragamy".

[ 16 ] : 404–408 He had an on-and-off relationship with a young dancer, Caroline Richter (she also used the surname Medon after one of her ex-lovers).

[ 16 ] : 403 They met when he was 33 and she was 19 and working at the Berlin Opera. She had already had numerous lovers and a son out of wedlock, and later gave birth to another son, this time to an unnamed foreign diplomat (she soon had another pregnancy but the child was stillborn).

[ 16 ] : 403–404 As Schopenhauer was preparing to escape from Berlin in 1831, due to a cholera epidemic, he offered to take her with him on the condition that she left her young son behind.

[ 16 ] : 404 She refused and he went alone; in his will he left her a significant sum of money, but insisted that it should not be spent in any way on her second son.

[ 16 ] : 404 Schopenhauer claimed that, in his last year in Berlin, he had a prophetic dream that urged him to escape from the city.

[ 16 ] : 436 As he arrived in his new home in Frankfurt , he supposedly had another supernatural experience , an apparition of his dead father and his mother, who was still alive.

[ 16 ] : 436 This experience led him to spend some time investigating paranormal phenomena and magic . He was quite critical of the available studies and claimed that they were mostly ignorant or fraudulent, but he did believe that there are authentic cases of such phenomena and tried to explain them through his metaphysics as manifestations of the will.

[ 16 ] : 437–452 Upon his arrival in Frankfurt, he experienced a period of depression and declining health.

[ 16 ] : 454 He renewed his correspondence with his mother, and she seemed concerned that he might commit suicide like his father.

[ 16 ] : 454–457 By now Johanna and Adele were living very modestly. Johanna's writing did not bring her much income, and her popularity was waning.

[ 16 ] : 458 Their correspondence remained reserved, and Arthur seemed undisturbed by her death in 1838.

[ 16 ] : 460 His relationship with his sister grew closer and he corresponded with her until she died in 1849.

[ 16 ] : 463 In July 1832, Schopenhauer left Frankfurt for Mannheim but returned in July 1833 to remain there for the rest of his life, except for a few short journeys.

[ 16 ] : 464 He lived alone except for a succession of pet poodles named Atman and Butz. In 1836, he published On the Will in Nature . In 1838, he sent his essay " On the Freedom of the Will " to the contest of the Royal Norwegian Society of Sciences in 1838 and won the prize in 1839. He sent another essay, " On the Basis of Morality ", to the Royal Danish Society of Sciences in 1839, but did not win the (1840) prize despite being the only contestant.

[ 33 ] The Society was appalled that several distinguished contemporary philosophers were mentioned in a very offensive manner, and claimed that the essay missed the point of the set topic and that the arguments were inadequate.

[ 16 ] : 483 Schopenhauer, who had been very confident that he would win, was enraged by this rejection. He published both essays as The Two Basic Problems of Ethics . The first edition, published September 1840 but with an 1841 date, again failed to draw attention to his philosophy. In the preface to the second edition, in 1860, he was still pouring insults on the Royal Danish Society.

[ 16 ] : 484 Two years later, after some negotiations, he managed to convince his publisher, Brockhaus, to print the second, updated edition of The World as Will and Representation . That book was again mostly ignored and the few reviews were mixed or negative.

Schopenhauer began to attract some followers, mostly outside academia, among practical professionals (several of them were lawyers) who pursued private philosophical studies. He jokingly referred to them as "evangelists" and "apostles".

[ 16 ] : 504 One of the most active early followers was Julius Frauenstädt , who wrote numerous articles promoting Schopenhauer's philosophy. He was also instrumental in finding another publisher after Brockhaus declined to publish Parerga and Paralipomena , believing that it would be another failure.

[ 16 ] : 506 Though Schopenhauer later stopped corresponding with him, claiming that he did not adhere closely enough to his ideas, Frauenstädt continued to promote Schopenhauer's work.

[ 16 ] : 507–508 They renewed their communication in 1859 and Schopenhauer named him heir for his literary estate.

[ 16 ] : 508 Frauenstädt also became the editor of the first collected works of Schopenhauer.

[ 16 ] : 506 In 1848 Schopenhauer witnessed violent upheaval in Frankfurt after General Hans Adolf Erdmann von Auerswald and Prince Felix Lichnowsky were murdered. He became worried for his own safety and property.

[ 16 ] : 514 Even earlier in life he had had such worries and kept a sword and loaded pistols near his bed to defend himself from thieves.

[ 16 ] : 465 He gave a friendly welcome to Austrian soldiers who wanted to shoot revolutionaries from his window and as they were leaving he gave one of the officers his opera glasses to help him monitor rebels.

[ 16 ] : 514 The rebellion passed without any loss to Schopenhauer and he later praised Alfred I, Prince of Windisch-Grätz , for restoring order.

[ 16 ] : 515 He even modified his will, leaving a large part of his property to a Prussian fund that helped soldiers who became invalids while fighting rebellion in 1848 or the families of soldiers who died in battle.

[ 16 ] : 517 As Young Hegelians were advocating change and progress, Schopenhauer claimed that misery is natural for humans and that, even if some utopian society were established, people would still fight each other out of boredom, or would starve due to overpopulation.

[ 16 ] : 515 1855 painting of Schopenhauer by Jules Lunteschütz In 1851 Schopenhauer published Parerga and Paralipomena , which contains essays that are supplementary to his main work. It was his first successful, widely read book, partly due to the work of his disciples who wrote praising reviews.

[ 16 ] : 524 The essays that proved most popular were the ones that actually did not contain the basic philosophical ideas of his system.

[ 16 ] : 539 Many academic philosophers considered him a great stylist and cultural critic but did not take his philosophy seriously.

[ 16 ] : 539 His early critics liked to point out similarities of his ideas to those of Fichte and Schelling, [ 16 ] : 381–386 or to claim that there were numerous contradictions in his philosophy.

[ 16 ] : 381–386, 537 Both criticisms enraged Schopenhauer. He was becoming less interested in intellectual fights, but encouraged his disciples to do so.

[ 16 ] : 525 His private notes and correspondence show that he acknowledged some of the criticisms regarding contradictions, inconsistencies, and vagueness in his philosophy, but claimed that he was not concerned about harmony and agreement in his propositions [ 16 ] : 394 and that some of his ideas should not be taken literally but instead as metaphors.

[ 16 ] : 510 Academic philosophers were also starting to notice his work. In 1856 the University of Leipzig sponsored an essay contest about Schopenhauer's philosophy, which was won by Rudolf Seydel 's very critical essay.

[ 16 ] : 536 Schopenhauer's friend Jules Lunteschütz made the first of his four portraits of him—which Schopenhauer did not particularly like—which was soon sold to a wealthy landowner, Carl Ferdinand Wiesike, who built a house to display it. Schopenhauer seemed flattered and amused by this, and would claim that it was his first chapel.

[ 16 ] : 540 As his fame increased, copies of paintings and photographs of him were being sold and admirers were visiting the places where he had lived and written his works. People visited Frankfurt's Englischer Hof to observe him dining. Admirers gave him gifts and asked for autographs.

[ 16 ] : 541 He complained that he still felt isolated due to his not very social nature and the fact that many of his good friends had already died from old age.

[ 16 ] : 542 Grave at the Hauptfriedhof in Frankfurt He remained healthy in his own old age, which he attributed to regular walks no matter the weather and always getting enough sleep.

[ 16 ] : 544–545 He had a great appetite and could read without glasses, but his hearing had been declining since his youth and he developed problems with rheumatism .

[ 16 ] : 545 He remained active and lucid, continued his reading, writing and correspondence until his death.

[ 16 ] : 545 The numerous notes that he made during these years, amongst others on aging, were published posthumously under the title Senilia . In the spring of 1860 his health began to decline, and he experienced shortness of breath and heart palpitations; in September he suffered inflammation of the lungs and, although he was starting to recover, he remained very weak.

[ 16 ] : 546 The last friend to visit him was Wilhelm Gwinner; according to him, Schopenhauer was concerned that he would not be able to finish his planned additions to Parerga and Paralipomena but was at peace with dying.

[ 16 ] : 546–547 He died of pulmonary-respiratory failure [ 34 ] on 21 September 1860 while sitting at home on his couch. He died at the age of 72 and had a funeral conducted by a Lutheran minister.

[ 35 ] [ 36 ] Philosophy [ edit ] Theory of perception [ edit ] In November 1813 Johann Wolfgang von Goethe invited Schopenhauer to help him on his Theory of Colours . Although Schopenhauer considered colour theory a minor matter, [ 37 ] he accepted the invitation out of admiration for Goethe. Nevertheless, these investigations led him to his most important discovery in epistemology: finding a demonstration for the a priori nature of causality.

Kant openly admitted that it was Hume 's skeptical assault on causality that motivated the critical investigations in Critique of Pure Reason and gave an elaborate proof to show that causality is a priori . After Gottlob Ernst Schulze had made it plausible that Kant had not disproven Hume's skepticism, it was up to those loyal to Kant's project to prove this important matter.

The difference between the approaches of Kant and Schopenhauer was this: Kant simply declared that the empirical content of perception is "given" to us from outside, an expression with which Schopenhauer often expressed his dissatisfaction.

[ 38 ] He, on the other hand, was occupied with the questions: how do we get this empirical content of perception; how is it possible to comprehend subjective sensations "limited to my skin" as the objective perception of things that lie "outside" of me?

[ 39 ] The sensations in the hand of a man born blind, on feeling an object of cubic shape, are quite uniform and the same on all sides and in every direction: the edges, it is true, press upon a smaller portion of his hand, still nothing at all like a cube is contained in these sensations. His Understanding draws the immediate and intuitive conclusion from the resistance felt, that this resistance must have a cause, which then presents itself through that conclusion as a hard body; and through the movements of his arms in feeling the object, while the hand's sensation remains unaltered, he constructs the cubic shape in Space. If the representation of a cause and of Space, together with their laws, had not already existed within him, the image of a cube could never have proceeded from those successive sensations in his hand.

[ 40 ] Causality is therefore not an empirical concept drawn from objective perceptions, as Hume had maintained; instead, as Kant had said, objective perception presupposes knowledge of causality.

[ 41 ] By this intellectual operation, comprehending every effect in our sensory organs as having an external cause, the external world arises. With vision, finding the cause is essentially simplified due to light acting in straight lines. We are seldom conscious of the process that interprets the double sensation in both eyes as coming from one object, that inverts the impressions on the retinas, and that uses the change in the apparent position of an object relative to more distant objects provided by binocular vision to perceive depth and distance.

Schopenhauer stresses the importance of the intellectual nature of perception; the senses furnish the raw material by which the intellect produces the world as representation. He set out his theory of perception for the first time in On Vision and Colors , [ 42 ] and, in the subsequent editions of Fourfold Root , an extensive exposition is given in § 21.

World as representation [ edit ] Schopenhauer saw his philosophy as an extension of Kant's, and used the results of Kant's theoretical and epistemological investigations ( transcendental idealism ) as starting point for his own. Kant had argued that the empirical world is merely a complex of appearances whose existence and connection occur only in our mental representations .

[ 43 ] Schopenhauer did not deny that the external world existed and was known empirically, yet he followed Kant in claiming that our knowledge and experience of the world is always in some sense dependent on us .

[ 44 ] For Schopenhauer in particular, the spatiotemporal form and causal structure of the external world are contributed to our experiences of it by the mind as it renders perceptions.

[ 45 ] Schopenhauer reiterates this in the first sentence of his main work: "The world is my representation ( Die Welt ist meine Vorstellung )". Everything that there is for cognition (the entire world) exists simply as an object in relation to a subject—a 'representation' to a subject. Everything that belongs to the world is, therefore, 'subject-dependent'. In Book One of The World as Will and Representation , Schopenhauer considers the world from this angle—that is, insofar as it is representation.

Kant had previously argued that we perceive reality as something spatial and temporal not because reality is inherently spatial and temporal, but because that is how our minds operate in perceiving an object. Therefore, understanding objects in space and time represents our 'contribution' to an experience. For Schopenhauer, Kant's 'greatest service' lay in the 'differentiation between phenomena and the thing-in-itself ( noumena ), based on the proof that between everything and us there is always a perceiving mind.' In other words, Kant's primary achievement is to demonstrate that instead of being a blank slate where reality merely reveals its character, the mind, with sensory support, actively participates in constructing reality. Thus, Schopenhauer believed that Kant had shown that the everyday world of experience, and indeed the entire material world related to space and time, is merely 'appearance' or 'phenomena,' entirely distinct from the thing-in-itself.' [ 46 ] World as will [ edit ] Main article: The World as Will and Representation In Book Two of The World as Will and Representation , Schopenhauer considers what the world is beyond the aspect of it that appears to us—that is, the aspect of the world beyond representation, the world considered " in-itself " or " noumena ", its inner essence. The very being in-itself of all things, Schopenhauer argues, is will ( Wille ). The empirical world that appears to us as representation has plurality and is ordered in a spatio-temporal framework. The world as thing in-itself must exist outside the subjective forms of space and time. Although the world manifests itself to our experience as a multiplicity of objects (the "objectivation" of the will), each element of this multiplicity has the same blind essence striving towards existence and life. Human rationality is merely a secondary phenomenon that does not distinguish humanity from the rest of nature at the fundamental, essential level. The advanced cognitive abilities of human beings, Schopenhauer argues, serve the ends of willing—an illogical, directionless, ceaseless striving that condemns the human individual to a life of suffering unredeemed by any final purpose. Schopenhauer's philosophy of the will as the essential reality behind the world as representation is often called metaphysical voluntarism .

[ 3 ] For Schopenhauer, understanding the world as will leads to ethical concerns (see the ethics section below for further detail), which he explores in the Fourth Book of The World as Will and Representation and again in his two prize essays on ethics, On the Freedom of the Will and On the Basis of Morality . No individual human actions are free, Schopenhauer argues, because they are events in the world of appearance and thus are subject to the principle of sufficient reason: a person's actions are a necessary consequence of motives and the given character of the individual human. Necessity extends to the actions of human beings just as it does to every other appearance, and thus we cannot speak of freedom of individual willing. Albert Einstein quoted the Schopenhauerian idea that "a man can do as he will, but not will as he will." [ 47 ] Yet the will as thing in-itself is free, as it exists beyond the realm of representation and thus is not constrained by any of the forms of necessity that are part of the principle of sufficient reason.

According to Schopenhauer, salvation from our miserable existence can come through the will's being "tranquillized" by the metaphysical insight that reveals individuality to be merely an illusion. The saint or 'great soul' intuitively "recognizes the whole, comprehends its essence, and finds that it is constantly passing away, caught up in vain strivings, inner conflict, and perpetual suffering".

[ 48 ] The negation of the will, in other words, stems from the insight that the world in-itself (free from the forms of space and time) is one.

Ascetic practices, Schopenhauer remarks, are used to aid the will's "self-abolition", which brings about a blissful, redemptive "will-less" state of emptiness that is free from striving or suffering.

Art and aesthetics [ edit ] Main article: Arthur Schopenhauer's aesthetics In his main work, Schopenhauer praised the Dutch Golden Age artists , who "directed such purely objective perception to the most insignificant objects, and set up a lasting monument of their objectivity and spiritual peace in paintings of still life . The aesthetic beholder does not contemplate this without emotion." [ 49 ] For Schopenhauer, human "willing"—desiring, craving, etc.—is at the root of suffering . A temporary way to escape this pain is through aesthetic contemplation. Here one moves away from ordinary cognizance of individual things to cognizance of eternal Platonic Ideas —in other words, cognizance that is free from the service of will. In aesthetic contemplation, one no longer perceives an object of perception as something from which one is separated; rather "it is as if the object alone existed without anyone perceiving it, and one can thus no longer separate the perceiver from the perception, but the two have become one, the entirety of consciousness entirely filled and occupied by a single perceptual image".

[ 50 ] Subject and object are no longer distinguishable, and the Idea comes to the fore.

From this aesthetic immersion, one is no longer an individual who suffers as a result of servitude to one's individual will but, rather, becomes a "pure, will-less, painless, timeless, subject of cognition". The pure, will-less subject of cognition is cognizant only of Ideas, not individual things: this is a kind of cognition that is unconcerned with relations between objects according to the Principle of Sufficient Reason (time, space, cause and effect) and instead involves complete absorption in the object.

Art is the practical consequence of this brief aesthetic contemplation, since it attempts to depict the essence/pure Ideas of the world. Music, for Schopenhauer, is the purest form of art because it is the one that depicts the will itself without it appearing as subject to the Principle of Sufficient Reason, therefore as an individual object. According to Daniel Albright , "Schopenhauer thought that music was the only art that did not merely copy ideas, but actually embodied the will itself".

[ 51 ] He deemed music a timeless, universal language comprehended everywhere, that can imbue global enthusiasm, if in possession of a significant melody.

[ 52 ] Mathematics [ edit ] Schopenhauer's realist views on mathematics are evident in his criticism of contemporaneous attempts to prove the parallel postulate in Euclidean geometry . Writing shortly before the discovery of hyperbolic geometry demonstrated the logical independence of the axiom —and long before the general theory of relativity revealed that it does not necessarily express a property of physical space—Schopenhauer criticized mathematicians for trying to use indirect concepts to prove what he held was directly evident from intuitive perception .

The Euclidean method of demonstration has brought forth from its own womb its most striking parody and caricature in the famous controversy over the theory of parallels , and in the attempts, repeated every year, to prove the eleventh axiom (also known as the fifth postulate). The axiom asserts, and that indeed through the indirect criterion of a third intersecting line, that two lines inclined to each other (for this is the precise meaning of "less than two right angles"), if produced far enough, must meet. Now this truth is supposed to be too complicated to pass as self-evident, and therefore needs a proof; but no such proof can be produced, just because there is nothing more immediate.

[ 53 ] Throughout his writings, [ 54 ] Schopenhauer criticized the logical derivation of philosophies and mathematics from mere concepts, instead of from intuitive perceptions.

In fact, it seems to me that the logical method is in this way reduced to an absurdity. But it is precisely through the controversies over this, together with the futile attempts to demonstrate the directly certain as merely indirectly certain, that the independence and clearness of intuitive evidence appear in contrast with the uselessness and difficulty of logical proof, a contrast as instructive as it is amusing. The direct certainty will not be admitted here, just because it is no merely logical certainty following from the concept, and thus resting solely on the relation of predicate to subject, according to the principle of contradiction. But that eleventh axiom regarding parallel lines is a synthetic proposition a priori , and as such has the guarantee of pure, not empirical, perception; this perception is just as immediate and certain as is the principle of contradiction itself, from which all proofs originally derive their certainty. At bottom this holds good of every geometrical theorem ...

Although Schopenhauer could see no justification for trying to prove Euclid's parallel postulate, he did see a reason for examining another of Euclid's axioms.

[ 55 ] It surprises me that the eighth axiom, [ 56 ] "Figures that coincide with one another are equal to one another", is not rather attacked. For "coinciding with one another" is either a mere tautology , or something quite empirical , belonging not to pure intuition or perception, but to external sensuous experience. Thus it presupposes mobility of the figures, but matter alone is movable in space . Consequently, this reference to coincidence with one another forsakes pure space, the sole element of geometry , in order to pass over to the material and empirical.

[ 53 ] This follows Kant's reasoning.

[ 57 ] Ethics [ edit ] Main article: On the Basis of Morality Schopenhauer asserts that the task of ethics is not to prescribe moral actions that ought to be done, but to investigate moral actions. As such, he states that philosophy is always theoretical: its task to explain what is given.

[ 58 ] According to Kant's transcendental idealism, space and time are forms of our sensibility in which phenomena appear in multiplicity. Reality in itself is free from multiplicity, not in the sense that an object is one, but that it is outside the possibility of multiplicity. Two individuals, though they appear distinct, are in-themselves not distinct.

[ 59 ] Appearances are entirely subordinated to the principle of sufficient reason . The egoistic individual who focuses his aims on his own interests has to deal with empirical laws as well as he can.

What is relevant for ethics are individuals who can act against their own self-interest. If we take a man who suffers when he sees his fellow men living in poverty and consequently uses a significant part of his income to support their needs instead of his own pleasures, then the simplest way to describe this is that he makes less distinction between himself and others than is usually made.

[ 60 ] Regarding how things appear to us, the egoist asserts a gap between two individuals, but the altruist experiences the sufferings of others as his own. In the same way a compassionate man cannot hurt animals, though they appear as distinct from himself.

What motivates the altruist is compassion. The suffering of others is for him not a cold matter to which he is indifferent, but he feels connectiveness to all beings. Compassion is thus the basis of morality.

[ 61 ] Eternal justice [ edit ] Schopenhauer calls the principle through which multiplicity appears the principium individuationis . When we behold nature we see that it is a cruel battle for existence. Individual manifestations of the will can maintain themselves only at the expense of others—the will, as the only thing that exists, has no other option but to devour itself to experience pleasure. This is a fundamental characteristic of the will, and cannot be circumvented.

[ 62 ] Unlike temporal or human justice, which requires time to repay an evil deed and "has its seat in the state, as requiting and punishing", [ 63 ] eternal justice "rules not the state but the world, is not dependent upon human institutions, is not subject to chance and deception, is not uncertain, wavering, and erring, but infallible, fixed, and sure".

[ 63 ] Eternal justice is not retributive, because retribution requires time. There are no delays or reprieves. Instead, punishment is tied to the offence, "to the point where the two become one. ... Tormenter and tormented are one. The [Tormenter] errs in that he believes he is not a partaker in the suffering; the [tormented], in that he believes he is not a partaker in the guilt." [ 63 ] Suffering is the moral outcome of our attachment to pleasure. Schopenhauer deemed that this truth was expressed by the Christian dogma of original sin and, in Eastern religions, by the dogma of rebirth.

Quietism [ edit ] He who sees through the principium individuationis and comprehends suffering in general as his own will see suffering everywhere and, instead of fighting for the happiness of his individual manifestation, will abhor life itself since he knows that it is inseparably connected with suffering. For him, a happy individual life in a world of suffering is like a beggar who dreams one night that he is a king.

[ 64 ] Those who have experienced this intuitive knowledge cannot affirm life, but exhibit asceticism and quietism, meaning that they are no longer sensitive to motives, are not concerned about their individual welfare, and accept without resistance the evil that others inflict on them. They welcome poverty and neither seek nor flee death.

[ 64 ] Schopenhauer referred to asceticism as the denial of the will to live .

Human life is a ceaseless struggle for satisfaction and, instead of continuing their struggle, ascetics break it. It does not matter if these ascetics adhere to the dogmata of Christianity or to Dharmic religions , since their way of living is the result of intuitive knowledge.

The Christian mystic and the teacher of the Vedanta philosophy agree in this respect also, they both regard all outward works and religious exercises as superfluous for him who has attained to perfection. So much agreement in the case of such different ages and nations is a practical proof that what is expressed here is not, as optimistic dullness likes to assert, an eccentricity and perversity of the mind, but an essential side of human nature, which only appears so rarely because of its excellence.

[ 64 ] Psychology [ edit ] Philosophers have not traditionally been impressed by the necessity of sex, but Schopenhauer addressed sex and related concepts forthrightly: ... one ought rather to be surprised that a thing [sex] which plays throughout so important a part in human life has hitherto practically been disregarded by philosophers altogether, and lies before us as raw and untreated material.

[ 65 ] He named a force within man that he felt took invariable precedence over reason: the will to live or will to life ( Wille zum Leben ), defined as an inherent drive within human beings, and all creatures, to stay alive; a force that inveigles [ 66 ] us into reproducing.

Schopenhauer refused to conceive of love as either trifling or accidental, but rather understood it as an immensely powerful force that lay unseen within man's psyche , guaranteeing the quality of the human race: The ultimate aim of all love affairs ... is more important than all other aims in man's life; and therefore it is quite worthy of the profound seriousness with which everyone pursues it. What is decided by it is nothing less than the composition of the next generation ...

[ 67 ] It has often been argued that Schopenhauer's thoughts on sexuality foreshadowed the theory of evolution , a claim met with satisfaction by Darwin as he included a quotation from Schopenhauer in his Descent of Man .

[ 68 ] This has also been noted about Freud 's concepts of the libido and the unconscious mind , and evolutionary psychology in general.

[ 69 ] Political and social thought [ edit ] Politics [ edit ] Bust in Frankfurt Schopenhauer's politics were an echo of his system of ethics, which he elucidated in detail in his Die beiden Grundprobleme der Ethik (the two essays On the Freedom of the Will and On the Basis of Morality ).

In occasional political comments in his Parerga and Paralipomena and Manuscript Remains , Schopenhauer described himself as a proponent of limited government . Schopenhauer shared the view of Thomas Hobbes on the necessity of the state and state action to check the innate destructive tendencies of our species. He also defended the independence of the legislative, judicial and executive branches of power, and a monarch as an impartial element able to practise justice (in a practical and everyday sense, not a cosmological one).

[ 70 ] He declared that monarchy is "natural to man in almost the same way as it is to bees and ants, to cranes in flight, to wandering elephants, to wolves in a pack in search of prey, and to other animals".

[ 71 ] Intellect in monarchies, he writes, always has "much better chances against stupidity, its implacable and ever-present foe, than it has in republics; but this is a great advantage." [ 71 ] On the other hand, Schopenhauer disparaged republicanism as being "as unnatural to man as it is unfavorable to higher intellectual life and thus to the arts and sciences".

[ 72 ] By his own admission, Schopenhauer did not give much thought to politics, and several times he wrote proudly of how little attention he paid "to political affairs of [his] day". In a life that spanned several revolutions in French and German government, and a few continent-shaking wars, he maintained his position of "minding not the times but the eternities". He wrote many disparaging remarks about Germany and the Germans. A typical example is: "For a German it is even good to have somewhat lengthy words in his mouth, for he thinks slowly, and they give him time to reflect." [ 73 ] Punishment [ edit ] The State, Schopenhauer claimed, punishes criminals to prevent future crimes. It places "beside every possible motive for committing a wrong a more powerful motive for leaving it undone, in the inescapable punishment. Accordingly, the criminal code is as complete a register as possible of counter-motives to all criminal actions that can possibly be imagined ..." [ 74 ] He claimed that this doctrine was not original to him but had appeared in the writings of Plato , [ 75 ] Seneca the Younger , Thomas Hobbes , Samuel von Pufendorf and Paul Johann Anselm Ritter von Feuerbach .

Races and religions [ edit ] Schopenhauer attributed civilizational primacy to the northern "white races" due to their sensitivity and creativity (except for the ancient Egyptians and Hindus, whom he saw as equal): The highest civilization and culture, apart from the ancient Hindus and Egyptians , are found exclusively among the white races; and even with many dark peoples, the ruling caste or race is fairer in colour than the rest and has, therefore, evidently immigrated, for example, the Brahmans , the Incas , and the rulers of the South Sea Islands . All this is due to the fact that necessity is the mother of invention because those tribes that emigrated early to the north, and there gradually became white, had to develop all their intellectual powers and invent and perfect all the arts in their struggle with need, want and misery, which in their many forms were brought about by the climate. This they had to do in order to make up for the parsimony of nature and out of it all came their high civilization.

[ 76 ] Schopenhauer was fervently opposed to slavery . Speaking of the treatment of slaves in the slave-holding states of the United States , he condemned "those devils in human form, those bigoted, church-going, strict sabbath-observing scoundrels, especially the Anglican parsons among them" for how they "treat their innocent black brothers who through violence and injustice have fallen into their devil's claws". The slave-holding states of North America, Schopenhauer writes, are a "disgrace to the whole of humanity".

[ 77 ] Schopenhauer also maintained a marked metaphysical and political anti-Judaism . He argued that Christianity constituted a revolt against what he styled the materialistic basis of Judaism, exhibiting an Indian-influenced ethics reflecting the Aryan - Vedic theme of spiritual self-conquest. He saw this as opposed to the ignorant drive toward earthly utopianism and superficiality of a worldly "Jewish" spirit: [Judaism] is, therefore, the crudest and poorest of all religions and consists merely in an absurd and revolting theism . It amounts to this that the κύριος ['Lord'] , who has created the world, desires to be worshipped and adored; and so above all he is jealous, is envious of his colleagues, of all the other gods; if sacrifices are made to them he is furious and his Jews have a bad time ... It is most deplorable that this religion has become the basis of the prevailing religion of Europe; for it is a religion without any metaphysical tendency. While all other religions endeavor to explain to the people by symbols the metaphysical significance of life, the religion of the Jews is entirely immanent and furnishes nothing but a mere war-cry in the struggle with other nations.

[ 78 ] Women [ edit ] In his 1851 essay "On Women", Schopenhauer expressed opposition to what he called "Teutonico-Christian stupidity" of "reflexive, unexamined reverence for the female ( abgeschmackten Weiberveneration )".

[ 79 ] He wrote: "Women are directly fitted for acting as the nurses and teachers of our early childhood by the fact that they are themselves childish, frivolous and short-sighted; in a word, they are big children all their life long—a kind of intermediate stage between the child and the full-grown man." He opined that women are deficient in artistic faculties and sense of justice, and expressed his opposition to monogamy .

[ 80 ] He claimed that "woman is by nature meant to obey". The essay does give some compliments: "women are decidedly more sober in their judgment than [men] are", and are more sympathetic to the suffering of others.

Schopenhauer's writings influenced many, from Friedrich Nietzsche to nineteenth-century feminists , [ 81 ] and continue to inspire sexist views today. His biological analysis of the difference between the sexes, and their separate roles in the struggle for survival and reproduction, anticipates some of the claims that were later ventured by sociobiologists and evolutionary psychologists .

[ 82 ] When the elderly Schopenhauer sat for a sculpture portrait by the Prussian sculptor Elisabet Ney in 1859, he was much impressed by the young woman's wit and independence, as well as by her skill as a visual artist.

[ 83 ] After his time with Ney, he told Richard Wagner's friend Malwida von Meysenbug : "I have not yet spoken my last word about women. I believe that if a woman succeeds in withdrawing from the mass, or rather raising herself above the mass, she grows ceaselessly and more than a man." [ 84 ] Pederasty [ edit ] In the third, expanded edition of The World as Will and Representation (1859), Schopenhauer added an appendix to his chapter on the Metaphysics of Sexual Love . He wrote that pederasty has the benefit of preventing ill-begotten children. Concerning this, he stated that "the vice we are considering appears to work directly against the aims and ends of nature, and that in a matter that is all important and of the greatest concern to her it must in fact serve these very aims, although only indirectly, as a means for preventing greater evils." [ 85 ] Schopenhauer ends the appendix with the statement that "by expounding these paradoxical ideas, I wanted to grant to the professors of philosophy a small favour. I have done so by giving them the opportunity of slandering me by saying that I defend and commend pederasty." [ 86 ] Heredity and eugenics [ edit ] Schopenhauer at age 58 on 16 May 1846 Schopenhauer viewed personality and intellect as inherited. He quotes Horace 's saying, "From the brave and good are the brave descended" ( Odes , iv, 4, 29) and Shakespeare's line from Cymbeline , "Cowards father cowards, and base things sire base" (IV, 2) to reinforce his hereditarian argument.

[ 87 ] Mechanistically, Schopenhauer believed that a person inherits his intellect through his mother, and personal character through the father.

[ 88 ] This belief in heritability of traits informed Schopenhauer's view of love—placing it at the highest level of importance. For Schopenhauer the "final aim of all love intrigues, be they comic or tragic, is really of more importance than all other ends in human life. What it all turns upon is nothing less than the composition of the next generation. ... It is not the weal or woe of any one individual, but that of the human race to come, which is here at stake." This view of the importance for the species of whom we choose to love was reflected in his views on eugenics or good breeding. Here Schopenhauer wrote: With our knowledge of the complete unalterability both of character and of mental faculties, we are led to the view that a real and thorough improvement of the human race might be reached not so much from outside as from within, not so much by theory and instruction as rather by the path of generation. Plato had something of the kind in mind when, in the fifth book of his Republic , he explained his plan for increasing and improving his warrior caste. If we could castrate all scoundrels and stick all stupid geese in a convent, and give men of noble character a whole harem , and procure men, and indeed thorough men, for all girls of intellect and understanding, then a generation would soon arise which would produce a better age than that of Pericles .

[ 89 ] In another context, Schopenhauer reiterated his eugenic thesis: "If you want Utopian plans, I would say: the only solution to the problem is the despotism of the wise and noble members of a genuine aristocracy, a genuine nobility, achieved by mating the most magnanimous men with the cleverest and most gifted women. This proposal constitutes my Utopia and my Platonic Republic." [ 90 ] Analysts (e.g., Keith Ansell-Pearson ) have suggested that Schopenhauer's anti- egalitarianist sentiment and his support for eugenics influenced the neo-aristocratic philosophy of Friedrich Nietzsche, who initially considered Schopenhauer his mentor.

[ 91 ] Animal rights [ edit ] Main article: Arthur Schopenhauer's view on animal rights As a consequence of his monistic philosophy, Schopenhauer was very concerned about animal welfare and rights.

[ 92 ] [ 4 ] For him, all individual animals, including humans, are essentially phenomenal manifestations of the one underlying Will. For him the word "will" designates force, power, impulse, energy, and desire; it is the closest word we have that can signify both the essence of all external things and our own direct, inner experience. Since every living thing possesses will, humans and animals are fundamentally the same and can recognize themselves in each other.

[ 93 ] For this reason, he claimed that a good person would have sympathy for animals, who are our fellow sufferers.

Compassion for animals is intimately associated with goodness of character, and it may be confidently asserted that he who is cruel to living creatures cannot be a good man.

— On the Basis of Morality , § 19 Nothing leads more definitely to a recognition of the identity of the essential nature in animal and human phenomena than a study of zoology and anatomy.

— On the Basis of Morality , chapter 8 [ 94 ] The assumption that animals are without rights and the illusion that our treatment of them has no moral significance is a positively outrageous example of Western crudity and barbarity. Universal compassion is the only guarantee of morality.

— On the Basis of Morality , chapter 8 [ 95 ] In 1841 he praised the establishment in London of the Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals , and in Philadelphia of the Animals' Friends Society. Schopenhauer went so far as to protest using the pronoun "it" in reference to animals because that led to treatment of them as though they were inanimate things.

[ 96 ] To reinforce his points, Schopenhauer referred to anecdotal reports of the look in the eyes of a monkey who had been shot [ 97 ] and also the grief of a baby elephant whose mother had been killed by a hunter.

[ 98 ] Schopenhauer was very attached to his succession of pet poodles. He criticized Baruch Spinoza 's [ 99 ] belief that animals are a mere means for the satisfaction of humans.

[ 100 ] [ 101 ] Tim Madigan wrote that despite all of his bombast, Schopenhauer was a sympathetic character who had concerns for the suffering of animals.

The greatest benefit conferred by the railways is that they spare millions of draught-horses their miserable existences.

— Essays and Aphorisms , p. 171 [ 102 ] Intellectual interests and affinities [ edit ] Schopenhauer had a wide range of interests, from science and opera to occultism and literature.

In his student years, Schopenhauer went more often to lectures in the sciences than philosophy. He kept a strong interest as his personal library contained near to 200 books of scientific literature at his death, and his works refer to scientific titles not found in the library.

[ 16 ] : 170 Many evenings were spent in the theatre, opera and ballet; Schopenhauer especially liked the operas of Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart , Gioachino Rossini and Vincenzo Bellini .

[ 103 ] Schopenhauer considered music the highest art, and played the flute during his whole life.

[ 16 ] : 30 As a polyglot, he knew German, Italian, Spanish, French, English, Latin and ancient Greek , and was an avid reader of poetry and literature. He particularly revered Goethe, Petrarch , Pedro Calderón de la Barca and William Shakespeare .

If Goethe had not been sent into the world simultaneously with Kant in order to counterbalance him, so to speak, in the spirit of the age, the latter would have been haunted like a nightmare many an aspiring mind and would have oppressed it with great affliction. But now the two have an infinitely wholesome effect from opposite directions and will probably raise the German spirit to a height surpassing even that of antiquity.

[ 16 ] : 240 In philosophy, his most important influences were, according to himself, Kant, Plato and the Upanishads .

Indology [ edit ] Schopenhauer, 1852 Schopenhauer read the Latin translation of the ancient Hindu texts , the Upanishads , translated by the French writer Anquetil du Perron [ 104 ] from the Persian translation of Prince Dara Shukoh entitled Sirre-Akbar ("The Great Secret"). He was so impressed by its philosophy that he called it "the production of the highest human wisdom", and believed it contained superhuman concepts. Schopenhauer considered India as "the land of the most ancient and most pristine wisdom, the place from which Europeans could trace their descent and the tradition by which they had been influenced in so many decisive ways", [ 104 ] and regarded the Upanishads as "the most profitable and elevating reading which [...] is possible in the world. It has been the solace of my life, and will be the solace of my death." [ 104 ] In The World as Will and Representation , he writes: If the reader has also received the benefit of the Vedas, the access to which by means of the Upanishads is in my eyes the greatest privilege which this still young century (1818) may claim before all previous centuries, if then the reader, I say, has received his initiation in primeval Indian wisdom, and received it with an open heart, he will be prepared in the very best way for hearing what I have to tell him. It will not sound to him strange, as to many others, much less disagreeable; for I might, if it did not sound conceited, contend that every one of the detached statements which constitute the Upanishads, may be deduced as a necessary result from the fundamental thoughts which I have to enunciate, though those deductions themselves are by no means to be found there.

[ 105 ] Schopenhauer was first introduced to Anquetil du Perron's translation by Friedrich Majer in 1814.

[ 104 ] They met during the winter of 1813–1814 in Weimar at the home of Schopenhauer's mother, according to the biographer Safranski. Majer was a follower of Herder , and an early Indologist . Schopenhauer did not begin serious study of the Indic texts until the summer of 1814. Safranski maintains that, between 1815 and 1817, Schopenhauer had another important cross-pollination with Indian thought in Dresden . This was through his neighbor of two years, Karl Christian Friedrich Krause . Krause was then a minor and rather unorthodox philosopher who attempted to mix his own ideas with ancient Indian wisdom. Krause had also mastered Sanskrit , unlike Schopenhauer, and they developed a professional relationship. It was from Krause that Schopenhauer learned meditation and received the closest thing to expert advice concerning Indian thought.

[ 106 ] The view of things [...] that all plurality is only apparent, that in the endless series of individuals, passing simultaneously and successively into and out of life, generation after generation, age after age, there is but one and the same entity really existing, which is present and identical in all alike;—this theory, I say, was of course known long before Kant; indeed, it may be carried back to the remotest antiquity. It is the alpha and omega of the oldest book in the world, the sacred Vedas , whose dogmatic part, or rather esoteric teaching, is found in the Upanishads. There, in almost every page this profound doctrine lies enshrined; with tireless repetition, in countless adaptations, by many varied parables and similes it is expounded and inculcated.

— On the Basis of Morality , chapter 4 [ 107 ] For Schopenhauer, will had ontological primacy over the intellect ; desire is prior to thought. Schopenhauer felt this was similar to notions of puruṣārtha or goals of life in Vedānta Hinduism .

In Schopenhauer's philosophy, denial of the will is attained by: personal experience of an extremely great suffering that leads to loss of the will to live ; or knowledge of the essential nature of life in the world through observation of the suffering of other people.

The book Oupnekhat (Upanishad) always lay open on his table, and he invariably studied it before going to bed. He called the opening up of Sanskrit literature "the greatest gift of our century", and predicted that the philosophy and knowledge of the Upanishads would become the cherished faith of the West.

[ 108 ] Most noticeable, in the case of Schopenhauer's work, was the significance of the Chandogya Upanishad , whose Mahāvākya , Tat Tvam Asi , is mentioned throughout The World as Will and Representation .

[ 109 ] Buddhism [ edit ] Schopenhauer noted a correspondence between his doctrines and the Four Noble Truths of Buddhism .

[ 110 ] Similarities centered on the principles that life involves suffering, that suffering is caused by desire ( taṇhā ), and that the extinction of desire leads to liberation. Thus three of the four "truths of the Buddha" correspond to Schopenhauer's doctrine of the will.

[ 111 ] In Buddhism, while greed and lust are always unskillful, desire is ethically variable – it can be skillful, unskillful, or neutral.

[ 112 ] Buddhist nirvāṇa is not equivalent to the condition that Schopenhauer described as denial of the will. Nirvāṇa is not the extinguishing of the person as some Western scholars have thought, but only the "extinguishing" (the literal meaning of nirvana) of the flames of greed, hatred, and delusion that assail a person's character.

[ 113 ] Schopenhauer made the following statement in his discussion of religions: [ 114 ] If I wished to take the results of my philosophy as the standard of truth, I should have to concede to Buddhism pre-eminence over the others. In any case, it must be a pleasure to me to see my doctrine in such close agreement with a religion that the majority of men on earth hold as their own, for this numbers far more followers than any other. And this agreement must be yet the more pleasing to me, inasmuch as in my philosophizing I have certainly not been under its influence [emphasis added]. For up till 1818, when my work appeared, there was to be found in Europe only a very few accounts of Buddhism.

[ 115 ] Buddhist philosopher Keiji Nishitani sought to distance Buddhism from Schopenhauer.

[ 116 ] While Schopenhauer's philosophy may sound rather mystical in such a summary, his methodology was resolutely empirical , rather than speculative or transcendental: Philosophy ... is a science, and as such has no articles of faith; accordingly, in it nothing can be assumed as existing except what is either positively given empirically, or demonstrated through indubitable conclusions.

[ 117 ] Also note: This actual world of what is knowable, in which we are and which is in us, remains both the material and the limit of our consideration.

[ 118 ] The argument that Buddhism affected Schopenhauer's philosophy more than any other Dharmic faith loses credence since he did not begin a serious study of Buddhism until after the publication of The World as Will and Representation in 1818.

[ 119 ] Scholars have started to revise earlier views about Schopenhauer's discovery of Buddhism. Proof of early interest and influence appears in Schopenhauer's 1815–16 notes (transcribed and translated by Urs App) about Buddhism. They are included in a recent case study that traces Schopenhauer's interest in Buddhism and documents its influence.

[ 120 ] Other scholarly work questions how similar Schopenhauer's philosophy actually is to Buddhism.

[ 121 ] Magic and occultism [ edit ] Some traditions in Western esotericism and parapsychology interested Schopenhauer and influenced his philosophical theories. He praised animal magnetism as evidence for the reality of magic in his On the Will in Nature , and went so far as to accept the division of magic into left-hand and right-hand magic , although he doubted the existence of demons.

[ 122 ] Schopenhauer grounded magic in the Will and claimed all forms of magical transformation depended on the human Will, not on ritual. This theory notably parallels Aleister Crowley 's system of magic and its emphasis on human will.

[ 122 ] Given the importance of the Will to Schopenhauer's overarching system, this amounts to "suggesting his whole philosophical system had magical powers." [ 123 ] Schopenhauer rejected the theory of disenchantment and claimed philosophy should synthesize itself with magic, which he believed amount to "practical metaphysics".

[ 124 ] Neoplatonism , including the traditions of Plotinus and to a lesser extent Marsilio Ficino , has also been cited as an influence on Schopenhauer.

[ 125 ] Thoughts on other philosophers [ edit ] Giordano Bruno and Spinoza [ edit ] Schopenhauer saw Giordano Bruno and Spinoza as philosophers not bound to their age or nation. "Both were fulfilled by the thought, that as manifold the appearances of the world may be, it is still one being, that appears in all of them. ... Consequently, there is no place for God as creator of the world in their philosophy, but God is the world itself." [ 126 ] [ 127 ] Schopenhauer expressed regret that Spinoza stuck, for the presentation of his philosophy, with the concepts of scholasticism and Cartesian philosophy , and tried to use geometrical proofs that do not hold because of vague and overly broad definitions. Bruno on the other hand, who knew much about nature and ancient literature, presented his ideas with Italian vividness, and is amongst philosophers the only one who comes near Plato's poetic and dramatic power of exposition.

[ 126 ] [ 127 ] Schopenhauer noted that their philosophies do not provide any ethics, and it is therefore very remarkable that Spinoza called his main work Ethics . In fact, it could be considered complete from the standpoint of life-affirmation, if one completely ignores morality and self-denial.

[ 128 ] It is yet even more remarkable that Schopenhauer mentions Spinoza as an example of the denial of the will, if one uses the French biography by Jean Maximilien Lucas [ 129 ] as the key to Tractatus de Intellectus Emendatione .

[ 130 ] Immanuel Kant [ edit ] Schopenhauer's philosophy took Kant's work as its foundation. While he praised Kant's greatness, he nonetheless included a highly detailed criticism of Kantian philosophy as an appendix to The World as Will and Representation .

See also: Critique of the Kantian philosophy and Schopenhauer's criticism of Kant's schemata Kant's influence on Schopenhauer's development, personally as well as in philosophy, was extensive. Kant's philosophy lies at the foundation of Schopenhauer's, and he had high praise for the Transcendental Aesthetic section of Kant's Critique of Pure Reason . Schopenhauer maintained that Kant stands in the same relation to philosophers such as Berkeley and Plato, as Copernicus to Hicetas , Philolaus , and Aristarchus of Samos : Kant succeeded in demonstrating what previous philosophers merely asserted.

Schopenhauer writes about Kant's influence on his work in the preface to the second edition of The World as Will and Representation : I have already explained in the preface to the first edition, that my philosophy is founded on that of Kant, and therefore presupposes a thorough knowledge of it. I repeat this here. For Kant's teaching produces in the mind of everyone who has comprehended it a fundamental change which is so great that it may be regarded as an intellectual new-birth. It alone is able really to remove the inborn realism which proceeds from the original character of the intellect, which neither Berkeley nor Malebranche succeed in doing, for they remain too much in the universal, while Kant goes into the particular, and indeed in a way that is quite unexampled both before and after him, and which has quite a peculiar, and, we might say, immediate effect upon the mind in consequence of which it undergoes a complete undeception, and forthwith looks at all things in another light. Only in this way can any one become susceptible to the more positive expositions which I have to give. On the other hand, he who has not mastered the Kantian philosophy, whatever else he may have studied, is, as it were, in a state of innocence; that is to say, he remains in the grasp of that natural and childish realism in which we are all born, and which fits us for everything possible, with the single exception of philosophy.

[ 131 ] In his study room, one bust was of Buddha , the other was of Kant.

[ 132 ] The bond that Schopenhauer felt with the philosopher is demonstrated in an unfinished poem he dedicated to Kant (included in volume 2 of the Parerga ): With my eyes I followed thee into the blue sky, And there thy flight dissolved from view.

Alone I stayed in the crowd below, Thy word and thy book my only solace.— Through the strains of thy inspiring words I sought to dispel the dreary solitude.

Strangers on all sides surround me.

The world is desolate and life interminable.

[ 133 ] Schopenhauer dedicated one fifth of his main work, The World as Will and Representation , to a detailed criticism of the Kantian philosophy .

Schopenhauer praised Kant for his distinction between appearance and the thing-in-itself , whereas the general consensus in German idealism was that this was the weakest spot of Kant's theory, [ 42 ] since, according to Kant, causality can find application on objects of experience only, and consequently, things-in-themselves cannot be the cause of appearances. The inadmissibility of this reasoning was also acknowledged by Schopenhauer. He insisted that this was a true conclusion, drawn from false premises.

[ 134 ] Post-Kantian school [ edit ] The leading figures of post-Kantian philosophy — Johann Gottlieb Fichte , Schelling and Hegel—were not respected by Schopenhauer. He argued that they were not philosophers at all, for they lacked "the first requirement of a philosopher, namely a seriousness and honesty of inquiry." [ 135 ] Rather, they were merely sophists who, excelling in the art of beguiling the public, pursued their own selfish interests (such as professional advancement within the university system). Diatribes against the alleged vacuity, dishonesty, pomposity, and self-interest of these contemporaries are to be found throughout Schopenhauer's published writings. The following passage is an example: All this explains the painful impression with which we are seized when, after studying genuine thinkers, we come to the writings of Fichte and Schelling, or even to the presumptuously scribbled nonsense of Hegel, produced as it was with a boundless, though justified, confidence in German stupidity. With those genuine thinkers one always found an honest investigation of truth and just as honest an attempt to communicate their ideas to others. Therefore whoever reads Kant, Locke, Hume, Malebranche, Spinoza, and Descartes feels elevated and agreeably impressed. This is produced through communion with a noble mind which has and awakens ideas and which thinks and sets one thinking. The reverse of all this takes place when we read the above-mentioned three German sophists. An unbiased reader, opening one of their books and then asking himself whether this is the tone of a thinker wanting to instruct or that of a charlatan wanting to impress, cannot be five minutes in any doubt; here everything breathes so much of dishonesty .

[ 136 ] Schopenhauer deemed Schelling the most talented of the three and wrote that he would recommend his "elucidatory paraphrase of the highly important doctrine of Kant" concerning the intelligible character, if he had been honest enough to admit he was parroting Kant, instead of hiding this relation in a cunning manner.

[ 137 ] Schopenhauer reserved his most unqualified damning condemnation for Hegel, whom he considered less worthy than Fichte or Schelling. Whereas Fichte was merely a windbag ( Windbeutel ), Hegel was a "commonplace, inane, loathsome, repulsive, and ignorant charlatan." [ 138 ] The philosophers Karl Popper and Mario Bunge agreed with this distinction.

[ 139 ] [ 140 ] Hegel, Schopenhauer wrote in the preface to his Two Fundamental Problems of Ethics , not only "performed no service to philosophy, but he has had a detrimental influence on philosophy, and thereby on German literature in general, really a downright stupefying, or we could even say a pestilential influence, which it is therefore the duty of everyone capable of thinking for himself and judging for himself to counteract in the most express terms at every opportunity." [ 141 ] Influence and legacy [ edit ] Sculpture of Schopenhauer by Elisabeth Ney Schopenhauer remained the most influential German philosopher until the First World War .

[ 142 ] His philosophy was a starting point for a new generation of philosophers including Julius Bahnsen , Paul Deussen , Lazar von Hellenbach, Karl Robert Eduard von Hartmann , Ernst Otto Lindner, Philipp Mainländer , Friedrich Nietzsche , Olga Plümacher and Agnes Taubert . His legacy shaped the intellectual debate, and forced movements that were utterly opposed to him, neo-Kantianism and positivism , to address issues they would otherwise have completely ignored, and in doing so he changed them markedly.

[ 142 ] The French writer Guy de Maupassant commented that "to-day even those who execrate him seem to carry in their own souls particles of his thought".

[ 143 ] Other philosophers of the 19th century who cited his influence include Hans Vaihinger , Johannes Volkelt , Vladimir Solovyov and Otto Weininger .

Schopenhauer was well read by physicists, most notably Albert Einstein , Erwin Schrödinger , Wolfgang Pauli [ 144 ] and Ettore Majorana .

[ 145 ] Einstein described Schopenhauer's thoughts as a "continual consolation" and called him a genius.

[ 146 ] In his Berlin study three figures hung on the wall: Michael Faraday , James Clerk Maxwell and Schopenhauer.

[ 147 ] Konrad Wachsmann recalled: "He often sat with one of the well-worn Schopenhauer volumes, and as he sat there, he seemed so pleased, as if he were engaged with a serene and cheerful work." [ 148 ] When Schrödinger discovered Schopenhauer ("the greatest savant of the West") he considered switching his study of physics to philosophy.

[ 149 ] He maintained the idealistic views during the rest of his life.

[ 150 ] Pauli accepted the main tenet of Schopenhauer's metaphysics, that the thing-in-itself is will.

[ 151 ] But most of all Schopenhauer is famous for his influence on artists.

Richard Wagner became one of the earliest and most famous adherents of the Schopenhauerian philosophy.

[ 152 ] The admiration was not mutual, and Schopenhauer proclaimed: "I remain faithful to Rossini and Mozart!" [ 153 ] So he has been nicknamed "the artist's philosopher".

[ 1 ] See also Influence of Schopenhauer on Tristan und Isolde .

Schopenhauer depicted on a 500 million Danzig papiermark note (1923) Under the influence of Schopenhauer, Leo Tolstoy became convinced that the truth of all religions lies in self-renunciation. When he read Schopenhauer's philosophy, Tolstoy exclaimed "at present I am convinced that Schopenhauer is the greatest genius among men. ... It is the whole world in an incomparably beautiful and clear reflection." [ 154 ] He said that what he has written in War and Peace is also said by Schopenhauer in The World as Will and Representation .

[ 155 ] Jorge Luis Borges remarked that the reason he had never attempted to write a systematic account of his world view, despite his penchant for philosophy and metaphysics in particular, was because Schopenhauer had already written it for him.

[ 156 ] Other figures in literature who were strongly influenced by Schopenhauer were Thomas Mann , Thomas Hardy , Afanasy Fet , J.-K. Huysmans and George Santayana .

[ 157 ] In Herman Melville's final years, while he wrote Billy Budd , he read Schopenhauer's essays and marked them heavily. Scholar Brian Yothers notes that Melville "marked numerous misanthropic and even suicidal remarks, suggesting an attraction to the most extreme sorts of solitude, but he also made note of Schopenhauer's reflection on the moral ambiguities of genius." [ 158 ] Schopenhauer's attraction to and discussions of both Eastern and Western religions in conjunction with each other made an impression on Melville in his final years.

Sergei Prokofiev , although initially reluctant to engage with works noted for their pessimism, became fascinated with Schopenhauer after reading Aphorisms on the Wisdom of Life in Parerga and Paralipomena . "With his truths Schopenhauer gave me a spiritual world and an awareness of happiness." [ 159 ] Nietzsche owed the awakening of his philosophical interest to reading The World as Will and Representation and admitted that he was one of the few philosophers that he respected, dedicating to him his essay "Schopenhauer als Erzieher", [ 160 ] one of his Untimely Meditations .

Commemorative stamp of the Deutsche Bundespost Early in his career, Ludwig Wittgenstein adopted Schopenhauer's epistemological idealism, and some traits of Schopenhauer's influence (particularly Schopenhauerian transcendentalism) can be observed in the Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus .

[ 161 ] [ 162 ] Later on, Wittgenstein rejected epistemological transcendental idealism for Gottlob Frege 's conceptual realism . In later years, Wittgenstein became highly dismissive of Schopenhauer, describing him as an ultimately shallow thinker.

[ 163 ] [ 164 ] His friend Bertrand Russell had a low opinion on the philosopher, and even came to attack him in his History of Western Philosophy for hypocritically praising asceticism yet not acting upon it.

[ 165 ] Opposite to Russell on the foundations of mathematics, the Dutch mathematician L. E. J. Brouwer incorporated Kant's and Schopenhauer's ideas in the philosophical school of intuitionism , where mathematics is considered as a purely mental activity instead of an analytic activity wherein objective properties of reality are revealed. Brouwer was also influenced by Schopenhauer's metaphysics, and wrote an essay on mysticism.

Schopenhauer's philosophy features in the novel The Schopenhauer Cure , by American existential psychiatrist and emeritus professor of psychiatry Irvin Yalom .

Schopenhauer's philosophy, and the discussions on philosophical pessimism it has engendered, has been the focus of contemporary thinkers such as David Benatar , Thomas Ligotti , and Eugene Thacker . Their work also served as an inspiration for the popular HBO TV series True Detective as well as Life Is Beautiful .

[ 166 ] In this regard, Schopenhauer is sometimes considered the founding father of today's antinatalism .

[ 167 ] Advocates of idealism in contemporary analytic philosophy and neuroscience such as Bernardo Kastrup and Christof Koch owe their philosophical system, in part, to the metaphysics of Schopenhauer.

[ 168 ] [ 169 ] Selected bibliography [ edit ] On the Fourfold Root of the Principle of Sufficient Reason ( Ueber die vierfache Wurzel des Satzes vom zureichenden Grunde ), 1813 (revised and enlarged: 1847) On Vision and Colours ( Ueber das Sehn und die Farben ), 1816 ISBN 978-0-85496-988-3 (revised and enlarged: 1854) Theory of Colours ( Theoria colorum physiologica ), 1830 The World as Will and Representation (alternatively translated as The World as Will and Idea ; original German is Die Welt als Wille und Vorstellung ): vol. 1, 1818–1819, vol. 2, 1844 Världen som vilja och föreställning (2nd edition: 1844, 3rd edition: 1859) Vol. 1 Dover edition 1966, ISBN 978-0-486-21761-1 Vol. 2 Dover edition 1966, ISBN 978-0-486-21762-8 Peter Smith Publisher hardcover set 1969, ISBN 978-0-8446-2885-1 Everyman Paperback combined abridged edition (290 pp.) ISBN 978-0-460-87505-9 The Longman Library of Primary Sources in Philosophy, vol. 1, 2008; vol. 2, 2010. Title translated as The World as Will and Presentation , rather than Representation .

The Art of Being Right ( Eristische Dialektik: Die Kunst, Recht zu Behalten ), 1831 On the Will in Nature ( Ueber den Willen in der Natur ), 1836 ISBN 978-0-85496-999-9 (revised and enlarged: 1854) On the Freedom of the Will ( Ueber die Freiheit des menschlichen Willens ), 1838 ISBN 978-0-631-14552-3 On the Basis of Morality ( Ueber die Grundlage der Moral ), 1839 Schopenhauer, Arthur (2010).

The Two Fundamental Problems of Ethics . Translated by Cartwright, David E.; Erdmann, Edward E. London: Oxford University Press .

ISBN 9780199297221 .

1841 (revised and enlarged: 1860) Contains On the Freedom of the Will and On the Basis of Morality .

Schopenhauer, Arthur (September 1840) [Stated date: 1841.].

Die beiden Grundprobleme der Ethik, behandelt in zwei akademischen Preisschriften (in German). Frankfurt am Main: Johann Christian Hermannsche Buchandlung . Retrieved 15 April 2024 .

Freely available from Internet Archive . Contains Preisschrift über die Freiheit des Willens and Preisschrift über die Grundlage der Moral .

Parerga and Paralipomena (2 vols., 1851) – Reprint: (Oxford: Clarendon Press) (2 vols., 1974) (English translation by E. F. J. Payne) Printings: 1974 Hardcover, by ISBN Vols. 1 and 2, ISBN 978-0-19-519813-3 , Vol. 1, ISBN Vol. 2, ISBN 978-0-19-824527-8 , 1974–1980 Paperback, Vol. 1, ISBN 978-0-19-824634-3 , Vol. 2, ISBN 978-0-19-824635-0 , 2001 Paperback, Vol. 1, ISBN 978-0-19-924220-7 , Vol. 2, ISBN 978-0-19-924221-4 Essays and Aphorisms , being excerpts from Volume 2 of Parerga und Paralipomena , selected and translated by R. J. Hollingdale, with Introduction by R J Hollingdale, Penguin Classics, 1970, Paperback 1973: ISBN 978-0-14-044227-4 An Enquiry concerning Ghost-seeing, and what is connected therewith (Versuch über das Geistersehn und was damit zusammenhangt) , 1851 Manuscript Remains , (6 Volumes), Volume 2 published by Berg Publishers Ltd., ISBN 978-0-85496-539-7 Online [ edit ] Works by Arthur Schopenhauer at Project Gutenberg The Art of Controversy (Die Kunst, Recht zu behalten) Archived 15 December 2002 at the Wayback Machine . (bilingual) [ The Art of Being Right ] Studies in Pessimism – audiobook from LibriVox The World as Will and Idea at the Internet Archive : Volume I Volume II Volume III "On the fourfold root of the principle of sufficient reason" and "On the will in nature". Two essays: Internet Archive . Translated by Mrs. Karl Hillebrand (1903).

Cornell University Library Historical Monographs Collection . Reprinted by Cornell University Library Digital Collections Facsimile edition of Schopenhauer's manuscripts in SchopenhauerSource Essays of Schopenhauer See also [ edit ] Philosophy portal Antinatalism Existential nihilism Eye of a needle God in Buddhism Massacre of the Innocents (Guido Reni) Misotheism Mortal coil Nihilism Post-Schopenhauerian pessimism References [ edit ] ^ a b "Arthur Schopenhauer (1788–1860) (Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy)" .

Archived from the original on 30 June 2019 . Retrieved 12 April 2013 .

^ Frederick C. Beiser reviews the commonly held position that Schopenhauer was a transcendental idealist and he rejects it: "Though it is deeply heretical from the standpoint of transcendental idealism, Schopenhauer's objective standpoint involves a form of transcendental realism , i.e. the assumption of the independent reality of the world of experience." (Beiser 2016, p. 40) ^ a b Voluntarism (philosophy) Archived 17 October 2020 at the Wayback Machine – Britannica.com ^ a b Stephen Puryear, "Schopenhauer on the Rights of Animals." European Journal of Philosophy 25/2 (2017):250–269 Archived 9 April 2023 at the Wayback Machine .

^ Arthur Schopenhauer, Arthur Schopenhauer: The World as Will and Presentation, Volume 1 , Routledge, 2016, p. 211: "the world [is a] mere presentation , object for a subject ..." ^ Lennart Svensson, Borderline: A Traditionalist Outlook for Modern Man , Numen Books, 2015, p. 71: "[Schopenhauer] said that 'the world is our conception'. A world without a perceiver would in that case be an impossibility. But we can—he said—gain knowledge about Essential Reality for looking into ourselves, by introspection. ... This is one of many examples of the anthropic principle. The world is there for the sake of man." ^ a b The World as Will and Representation , vol. 3, Ch. 50.

^ a b Dale Jacquette, ed. (2007).

Schopenhauer, Philosophy and the Arts . Cambridge University Press. p. 162.

ISBN 978-0-521-04406-6 .

For Kant, the mathematical sublime, as seen for example in the starry heavens, suggests to imagination the infinite, which in turn leads by subtle turns of contemplation to the concept of God. Schopenhauer's atheism will have none of this, and he rightly observes that despite adopting Kant's distinction between the dynamical and mathematical sublime, his theory of the sublime, making reference to the struggles and sufferings of struggles and sufferings of Will, is unlike Kant's.

^ Wells, John C. (2008), Longman Pronunciation Dictionary (3rd ed.), Longman, ISBN 978-1-4058-8118-0 ^ Arthur Schopenhauer (2004).

Essays and Aphorisms . Penguin Classics. p.

23 .

ISBN 978-0-14-044227-4 .

^ Magee, Bryan (14 August 1997).

"The World as Will" .

The Philosophy of Schopenhauer (1 ed.). Oxford University PressOxford. pp.

137– 163.

doi : 10.1093/0198237227.003.0007 .

ISBN 978-0-19-823722-8 .

Archived from the original on 17 September 2023 . Retrieved 13 September 2023 .

^ Vandenabeele, Bart (December 2007).

"Schopenhauer on the Values of Aesthetic Experience" .

The Southern Journal of Philosophy .

45 (4): 565– 582.

doi : 10.1111/j.2041-6962.2007.tb00065.x .

Archived from the original on 17 September 2023 . Retrieved 13 September 2023 .

^ See the book-length study about oriental influences on the genesis of Schopenhauer's philosophy by Urs App : Schopenhauer's Compass. An Introduction to Schopenhauer's Philosophy and its Origins . Wil: UniversityMedia, 2014 ( ISBN 978-3-906000-03-9 ) Hergenhahn, B. R. (2009).

An Introduction to the History of Psychology (6th ed.). Cengage Learning. p. 216.

ISBN 978-0-495-50621-8 .

Although Schopenhauer was an atheist, he realized that his philosophy of denial had been part of several great religions; for example, Christianity, Hinduism, and Buddhism.

^ Arthur Schopenhauer (2004).

Essays and Aphorisms . Penguin Classics. pp.

22–36 .

ISBN 978-0-14-044227-4 .

...but there has been none who tried with so great a show of learning to demonstrate that the pessimistic outlook is justified , that life itself is really bad. It is to this end that Schopenhauer's metaphysic of will and idea exists.

Studies in Pessimism Archived 15 April 2008 at the Wayback Machine – audiobook from LibriVox .

David A. Leeming; Kathryn Madden; Stanton Marlan, eds. (2009).

Encyclopedia of Psychology and Religion, Volume 2 . Springer. p. 824.

ISBN 978-0-387-71801-9 .

A more accurate statement might be that for a German—rather than a French or British writer of that time—Schopenhauer was an honest and open atheist.

^ Schopenhauer, Arthur; Günter Zöller; Eric F. J. Payne (1999).

Chronology . Prize Essay on the Freedom of the Will.

Cambridge University Press . p. xxx.

ISBN 978-0-521-57766-3 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t u v w x y z aa ab ac ad ae af ag ah ai aj ak al am an ao ap aq ar as at au av aw ax ay az ba bb bc bd be bf bg bh bi bj bk bl bm bn bo bp bq br bs bt bu bv bw bx by bz ca cb cc cd ce cf cg ch ci cj ck cl cm cn co cp cq cr cs ct cu cv cw cx cy cz da db dc dd de df dg dh di dj dk dl dm dn do dp dq dr ds dt du dv dw dx dy Cartwright, David E. (2010).

Schopenhauer: A Biography . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0-521-82598-6 .

^ Bullock, A.B. (1920).

The Supreme Human Tragedy: And Other Essays . C.W. Daniel. p. 53 . Retrieved 22 October 2022 .

^ Safranski (1990), p. 12 ^ Wallace, W. (2003).

Life of Arthur Schopenhauer . Honolulu: University Press of the Pacific. p. 59.

ISBN 978-1-4102-0641-1 .

^ Durant, Will, The Story of Philosophy , Garden City Publishing Co., Inc., New York, p. 350 ^ "Schopenhauer: A Pessimist in the Optimistic Month of May" . Germanic American Institute. Archived from the original on 11 June 2010 . Retrieved 12 March 2010 .

^ "Full text of "Selected Essays Of Schopenhauer" " . Retrieved 12 March 2010 .

^ a b Fredriksson, Einar H. (2001), "The Dutch Publishing Scene: Elsevier and North-Holland", A Century of Science Publishing: A Collection of Essays , Amsterdam: IOS Press, pp.

61– 76, ISBN 978-4-274-90424-0 ^ Willson, A. Leslie (1961). "Friedrich Majer: Romantic Indologist".

Texas Studies in Literature and Language .

3 (1): 40– 49.

ISSN 0040-4691 .

JSTOR 40753707 .

^ a b c Clarke 1997 , pp. 67–68.

^ Clarke 1997 , pp. 67–69.

^ Clarke 1997 , pp. 273.

^ Clarke 1997 , p. 69.

^ Schopenhauer, Arthur (22 April 2019).

The world as will and idea . Classic Wisdom Reprint.

ISBN 978-1-950330-23-2 .

OCLC 1229105608 .

^ Although the first volume was published by December 1818, it was printed with a title page erroneously giving the year as 1819 (see Braunschweig, Yael (2013), "Schopenhauer and Rossinian Universiality: On the Italianate in Schopenhauer's Metaphysics of Music", The Invention of Beethoven and Rossini: Historiography, Analysis, Criticism , Cambridge : Cambridge University Press, p.

297, n. 7 , ISBN 978-0-521-76805-4 ).

^ Safranski, Rüdiger (1991) Schopenhauer and the Wild Years of Philosophy . Harvard University Press. p. 244 ^ Schopenhauer, Arthur. Author's preface to "On the Fourfold Root of the Principle of sufficient reason", p. 1 ( On the Fourfold Root of the Principle of Sufficient Reason on Wikisource.) ^ Schopenhauer 2010 , pp. xxviii, xxxix ^ Dale Jacquette, The Philosophy of Schopenhauer , Routledge, 2015: "Biographical sketch".

^ Schopenhauer: his life and philosophy by H. Zimmern – 1932 – G. Allen & Unwin.

^ Lewis, Peter (15 February 2013).

Arthur Schopenhauer, 2013 . Reaktion Books.

ISBN 978-1-78023-069-6 .

^ Letter to Goethe on 23 January 1816:  "Ich weiß, daß durch mich die Wahrheit geredet hat, – in dieser kleinen Sache, wie dereinst in größern." ^ Schopenhauer, Arthur.

The World as Will and Representation . Vol. 1. Criticism of the Kantian Philosophy.

But the whole teaching of Kant contains really nothing more about this than the oft-repeated meaningless expression: 'The empirical element in perception is given from without.' ... always through the same meaningless metaphorical expression: 'The empirical perception is given us.' ^ Schopenhauer, Arthur.

On the Fourfold Root of the Principle of Sufficient Reason . § 21.

For sensation is and remains a process within the organism and is limited, as such, to the region within the skin; it cannot therefore contain any thing which lies beyond that region, or, in other words, anything that is outside us. ... It is only when the Understanding begins to apply its sole form, the causal law, that a powerful transformation takes place, by which subjective sensation becomes objective perception.

^ Schopenhauer, Arthur.

On the Fourfold Root of the Principle of Sufficient Reason . § 21.

^ Schopenhauer, Arthur.

The World as Will and Representation . Vol. 1, § 4.

The contrary doctrine that the law of causality results from experience, which was the scepticism of Hume, is first refuted by this. For the independence of the knowledge of causality of all experience,—that is, its a priori character—can only be deduced from the dependence of all experience upon it; and this deduction can only be accomplished by proving, in the manner here indicated, and explained in the passages referred to above, that the knowledge of causality is included in perception in general, to which all experience belongs, and therefore in respect of experience is completely a priori, does not presuppose it, but is presupposed by it as a condition.

^ a b David E. Cartwright; Edward E. Erdmann.

Introduction to "On the Fourfold Root of the Principle of Sufficient Reason" . Cambridge University Press. pp.

xvi– xvii.

He had also rehearsed for the first time his physiological arguments for the intellectual nature of intuition [Anschauung, objective perception] in his "On Vision and Colours", and he had discussed how his philosophy was corroborated by the sciences in "On Will in Nature". ... Like the German Idealists, Schopenhauer was convinced that Kant's great unknown, the thing in itself, is the weak point of the critical philosophy.

^ Kant, Immanuel.

Prolegomena to Any Future Metaphysics . Translated by Paul Carus. § 52c.

^ See the quotation of Schopenhauer in Storm, Jason Josephson (2021).

Metamodernism: The Future of Theory . Chicago: University of Chicago Press. pp.

36– 37.

ISBN 978-0-226-78665-0 .

^ Schopenhauer, Arthur.

"On the Fourfold Root of the Principle of Sufficient Reason, and On the Will in Nature: Two Essays (revised edition)" .

gutenberg.org . Project Gutenberg.

Archived from the original on 3 December 2024 . Retrieved 27 September 2024 .

^ Young, Julian (2005).

Schopenhauer (1 ed.). Routledge. pp.

4– 25.

doi : 10.4324/9780203022108 .

ISBN 978-1-134-32883-3 .

^ Einstein, Albert (1935).

The World as I See It , p. 14. Snowball Publishing.

ISBN 1-4948-7706-6 .

^ The World as Will and Representation, Vol. 1 , §68 ^ The World as Will and Representation , Vol. 1, §38 ^ The World as Will and Representation, Vol. 1, §34 ^ Daniel Albright, Modernism and Music , 2004, p. 39, footnote 34 ^ Schopenhauer, Arthur (1970).

Essays and Aphorisms . Penguin Classics. p.

162 .

ISBN 978-0-14-044227-4 .

^ a b The World as Will and Representation , vol. 2, ch. 13 ^ "I wanted in this way to stress and demonstrate the great difference, indeed opposition, between knowledge of perception and abstract or reflected knowledge. Hitherto this difference has received too little attention, and its establishment is a fundamental feature of my philosophy ..." – The World as Will and Representation.

, vol. 2, ch. 7, p. 88 (trans. Payne) ^ This comment by Schopenhauer was called "an acute observation" by Sir Thomas L. Heath . In his translation of The Elements , vol. 1, Book I, "Note on Common Notion 4", Heath made this judgment and also noted that Schopenhauer's remark "was a criticism in advance of Helmholtz' theory". Helmholtz had "maintained that geometry requires us to assume the actual existence of rigid bodies and their free mobility in space" and is therefore "dependent on mechanics".

^ What Schopenhauer calls the eighth axiom is Euclid's Common Notion 4.

^ "Motion of an object in space does not belong in a pure science, and consequently not in geometry. For the fact that something is movable cannot be cognized a priori , but can be cognized only through experience." (Kant, Critique of Pure Reason ,  B 155, Note) ^ Schopenhauer, Arthur.

The World as Will and Representation . Vol. 1, § 53.

^ Schopenhauer, Arthur.

The World as Will and Representation . Vol. 1, § 23.

^ Schopenhauer, Arthur.

The World as Will and Representation . Vol. 1, § 66.

^ Schopenhauer, Arthur.

On the Basis of Morality . § 19.

^ Schopenhauer, Arthur.

Parerga and Paralipomena . Vol. 2, § 173.

^ a b c The World as Will and Idea Vol. 1 § 63 ^ a b c Schopenhauer, Arthur.

The World as Will and Representation . Vol. 1, § 68.

^ Schopenhauer, Arthur.

The World as Will and Representation: Supplements to the Fourth Book ^ The Oxford Encyclopedic English Dictionary . Schopenhauer: Oxford University Press. 1991. p. 1298.

ISBN 978-0-19-861248-3 .

^ Schopenhauer, Arthur, The World as Will and Representation , Supplements to the Fourth Book ^ Darwin, Charles.

The Descent of Man . p. 586.

Archived from the original on 21 October 2021 . Retrieved 3 December 2017 .

^ "Nearly a century before Freud ... in Schopenhauer there is, for the first time, an explicit philosophy of the unconscious and of the body." Safranski p. 345.

^ The World as Will and Representation , Vol. 2, Ch. 47 ^ a b Parerga and Paralipomena, Vol. 2 , "On Jurisprudence and Politics," §127, trans. Payne (p. 254).

^ Parerga and Paralipomena, Vol. 2 , "On Jurisprudence and Politics," §127, trans. Payne (p. 255).

^ The World as Will and Representation , Vol. 2, Ch. 12 ^ Schopenhauer, The World as Will and Representation , Vol. I, § 62.

^ "... he who attempts to punish in accordance with reason does not retaliate on account of the past wrong (for he could not undo something which has been done) but for the future, so that neither the wrongdoer himself, nor others who see him being punished, will do wrong again." Plato, " Protagoras ", 324 B. Plato wrote that punishment should "be an example to other men not to offend". Plato, " Laws ", Book IX, 863.

^ Parerga and Paralipomena , Vol. 2, "On Philosophy and Natural Science," §92, trans. Payne (p. 158-159).

^ Parerga and Paralipomena , Vol. 2, "On Ethics," §114, trans. Payne (p. 212).

^ "Fragments for the History of Philosophy", Parerga and Paralipomena , Volume I, trans. Payne (p. 126).

^ "Arthur Schopenhauer: Ueber die Weiber" .

aboq.org .

Archived from the original on 18 October 2023 . Retrieved 19 September 2022 .

^ Rodgers (environmentalist) and Thompson in Philosophers Behaving Badly call Schopenhauer "a misogynist without rival in ... Western philosophy".

^ Feminism and the Limits of Equality PA Cain – Ga. L. Rev., 1989 ^ Julian Young (23 June 2005).

Schopenhauer . Psychology Press. p. 242.

ISBN 978-0-415-33346-7 .

^ Long, Sandra Salser (Spring 1984). "Arthur Schopenhauer and Elisabet Ney".

Southwest Review .

69 (2): 130– 47.

JSTOR 43469632 .

^ Safranski (1990), Chapter 24. p. 348.

^ Schopenhauer 1969 , p. 566 ^ Schopenhauer 1969 , p. 567 ^ Payne, The World as Will and Representation , Vol. II, p. 519 ^ On the Suffering of the World (1970), p. 35. Penguin Books – Great Ideas.

^ Schopenhauer, Arthur (1969). E. F. J. Payne (ed.).

The World as Will and Representation . Vol. II. New York: Dover Publications. p. 527.

ISBN 978-0-486-21762-8 .

^ Essays and Aphorisms , trans. R.J. Hollingdale, Middlesex: London, 1970, p. 154 ^ Nietzsche and Modern German Thought by K. Ansell-Pearson – 1991 – Psychology Press.

^ Christina Gerhardt, "Thinking With: Animals in Schopenhauer, Horkheimer and Adorno." Critical Theory and Animals . Ed. John Sanbonmatsu. Lanham: Rowland, 2011. 137–157.

^ "Unlike the intellect, it [the Will] does not depend on the perfection of the organism, but is essentially the same in all animals as what is known to us so intimately. Accordingly, the animal has all the emotions of humans, such as joy, grief, fear, anger, love, hatred, strong desire, envy, and so on. The great difference between human and animal rests solely on the intellect's degrees of perfection.

On the Will in Nature , "Physiology and Pathology".

^ Quoted in Schopenhauer, Arthur (1994).

Philosophical Writings . London: Continuum. p. 233.

ISBN 978-0-8264-0729-0 .

^ Quoted in Ryder, Richard (2000).

Animal Revolution: Changing Attitudes Towards Speciesism . Oxford: Berg Publishers. p. 57.

ISBN 978-1-85973-330-1 .

^ "... in English all animals are of the neuter gender and so are represented by the pronoun 'it,' just as if they were inanimate things. The effect of this artifice is quite revolting, especially in the case of primates, such as dogs, monkeys, and the like...." On the Basis of Morality , § 19.

^ "I recall having read of an Englishman who, while hunting in India, had shot a monkey; he could not forget the look which the dying animal gave him, and since then had never again fired at monkeys." On the Basis of Morality , § 19.

^ "[Sir William Harris] describes how he shot his first elephant, a female. The next morning he went to look for the dead animal; all the other elephants had fled from the neighborhood except a young one, who had spent the night with its dead mother. Forgetting all fear, he came toward the sportsmen with the clearest and liveliest evidence of inconsolable grief, and put his tiny trunk round them in order to appeal to them for help. Harris says he was then filled with real remorse for what he had done, and felt as if he had committed a murder." On the basis of morality , § 19.

^ "His contempt for animals, who, as mere things for our use, are declared by him to be without rights, ... in conjunction with Pantheism, is at the same time absurd and abominable." The World as Will and Representation , Vol. 2, Chapter 50.

^ Spinoza, Ethics , Pt. IV, Prop. XXXVII, Note I.: "Still I do not deny that beasts feel: what I deny is, that we may not consult our own advantage and use them as we please, treating them in a way which best suits us; for their nature is not like ours ..." This is the exact opposite of Schopenhauer's doctrine. Also, Ethics , Appendix, 26, "whatsoever there be in nature beside man, a regard for our advantage does not call on us to preserve, but to preserve or destroy according to its various capacities, and to adapt to our use as best we may." ^ "Such are the matters which I engage to prove in Prop. xviii of this Part, whereby it is plain that the law against the slaughtering of animals is founded rather on vain superstition and womanish pity than on sound reason. The rational quest of what is useful to us further teaches us the necessity of associating ourselves with our fellow-men, but not with beasts, or things, whose nature is different from our own; we have the same rights in respect to them as they have in respect to us. Nay, as everyone's right is defined by his virtue, or power, men have far greater rights over beasts than beasts have over men. Still I affirm that beasts feel. But I also affirm that we may consult our own advantage and use them as we please, treating them in the way which best suits us; for their nature is not like ours, and their emotions are naturally different from human emotions." Ethics , Part 4, Prop. 37, Note 1.

^ Quoted in Madigan, Tim.

"Schopenhauer's Compassionate Morality | Issue 52 | Philosophy Now" .

Philosophy Now .

Archived from the original on 18 September 2023 . Retrieved 16 September 2023 .

^ Carnegy, Patrick.

Wagner and the Art of the Theatre . p. 51.

^ a b c d Clarke 1997 , p. 68.

^ The World as Will and Representation Preface to the first edition, p. xiii ^ Christopher McCoy, 3–4 ^ Schopenhauer, Arthur (1840).

"Part IV" .

On the Basis of Morality . Translated by Bullock, Arthur Brodrick. London: Swan Sonnenschein (published 1908). pp.

269– 271 – via Internet Archive .

^ Dutt, Purohit Bhagavan.

"Western Indologists: A Study in Motives" . Archived from the original on 2 August 2010 . Retrieved 9 May 2009 .

^ Christopher McCoy, 54–56 ^ Abelson, Peter (April 1993).

Schopenhauer and Buddhism Archived 28 June 2011 at the Wayback Machine .

Philosophy East and West Volume 43, Number 2, pp. 255–278. University of Hawaii Press. Retrieved on: 12 April 2008.

^ Janaway , Christopher, Self and World in Schopenhauer's Philosophy , pp. 28 ff.

^ David Burton, "Buddhism, Knowledge and Liberation: A Philosophical Study." Ashgate Publishing, Ltd., 2004, p. 22.

^ John J. Holder, Early Buddhist Discourses.

Hackett Publishing Company, 2006, p. xx.

^ "Schopenhauer is often said to be the first modern Western philosopher to attempt integration of his work with Eastern ways of thinking. That he was the first is true, but the claim that he was influenced by Indian thought needs qualification. There is a remarkable correspondence in broad terms between some central Schopenhauerian doctrines and Buddhism: notably in the views that empirical existence is suffering, that suffering originates in desires, and that salvation can be attained by the extinction of desires. These three 'truths of the Buddha' are mirrored closely in the essential structure of the doctrine of the will." (On this, see Dorothea W. Dauer, Schopenhauer as Transmitter of Buddhist Ideas . Note also the discussion by Bryan Magee, The Philosophy of Schopenhauer , pp. 14–15, 316–321). Janaway, Christopher, Self and World in Schopenhauer's Philosophy , p. 28 f.

^ The World as Will and Representation , Vol. 2, Ch. 17 ^ Artistic detachment in Japan and the West: psychic distance in comparative aesthetics by S. Odin – 2001 – University of Hawaii Press.

^ Parerga & Paralipomena , vol. I, p. 106., trans. E.F.J. Payne.

^ World as Will and Representation , vol. I, p. 273, trans. E.F.J. Payne.

^ Christopher McCoy, 3 ^ App, Urs Arthur Schopenhauer and China.

Sino-Platonic Papers Nr. 200 (April 2010) Archived 4 July 2010 at the Wayback Machine (PDF, 8.7 Mb PDF, 164 p.; Schopenhauer's early notes on Buddhism reproduced in Appendix). This study provides an overview of the actual discovery of Buddhism by Schopenhauer.

^ Hutton, Kenneth Compassion in Schopenhauer and Śāntideva.

Journal of Buddhist Ethics Vol. 21 (2014) Archived 14 April 2015 at the Wayback Machine ^ a b Josephson-Storm, Jason (2017).

The Myth of Disenchantment: Magic, Modernity, and the Birth of the Human Sciences . Chicago: University of Chicago Press. pp.

187– 188.

ISBN 978-0-226-40336-6 .

^ Quote from Josephson-Storm (2017), p. 188.

^ Josephson-Storm (2017), pp. 188–189.

^ Anderson, Mark (2009). "Experimental Subversions of Modernity".

Pure: Modernity, Philosophy, and the One . Sophia Perennis.

ISBN 978-1-59731-094-9 .

^ a b Schopenhauer, Arthur.

The World as Will and Representation . Vol. 1, Criticism of the Kantian Philosophy. Note 5.

^ a b "Handschriftlicher, Nachlass, Vorlesungen und Abhandlungen" .

Gutenberg Spiegel .

Archived from the original on 20 August 2018 . Retrieved 1 December 2017 .

^ Abschnitt: Handschriftlicher Nachlaß . § 588.

Es kann daher eine vollkommen wahre Philosophie geben, die ganz von der Verneinung des Lebens abstrahirt, diese ganz ignorirt.

^ "Vie de Spinoza – Wikisource" .

fr.wikisource.org .

^ The World as Will and Representation . § 68.

We might to a certain extent regard the well-known French biography of Spinoza as a case in point, if we used as a key to it that noble introduction to his very insufficient essay, "De Emendatione Intellects", a passage which I can also recommend as the most effectual means I know of stilling the storm of the passions.

^ Arthur Schopenhauer.

World as Will and Representation . Vol. 1, Preface of the Second Edition.

^ Jerauld McGill, Vivian (1931).

Schopenhauer. Pessimist and Pagan . p. 320.

^ Parerga and Paralipomena: Short Philosophical Essays, Volume 2 , trans. Payne, p. 655–656.

^ Schopenhauer, Arthur.

The World as Will and Representation . Vol. 1 Criticism of the Kantian philosophy. Translated by J. Kemp.

With the proof of the thing in itself it has happened to Kant precisely as with that of the a priori nature of the law of causality. Both doctrines are true, but their proof is false. They thus belong to the class of true conclusions from false premises.

^ Parerga and Paralipomena, Vol. 1, Appendix to "Sketch of a History of the Doctrine of the Ideal and the Real," trans. E. J. Payne (Oxford, 1974), p. 21.

^ Parerga and Paralipomena, Vol. 1, Appendix to "Sketch of a History of the Doctrine of the Ideal and the Real," trans. E. J. Payne (Oxford, 1974), p. 23.

^ Schopenhauer, Arthur.

On the Freedom of the Will . p. 82.

^ Parerga and Paralipomena , Vol. I, "Fragments for the History of Philosophy", Sec. 13, trans. E. J. Payne (Oxford, 1974), p. 96.

^ Popper, Karl (1946). "The Open Society and Her Enemies".

Nature .

157 (3987): 52.

Bibcode : 1946Natur.157..387R .

doi : 10.1038/157387a0 .

S2CID 4074331 .

^ Bunge, Mario (2020).

"Mario Bunge nos dijo: "Se puede ignorar la filosofía, pero no evitarla" " . Filosofía&Co.

Archived from the original on 15 November 2022 . Retrieved 26 May 2020 .

^ The Two Fundamental Problems of Ethics , Preface to the First Edition, trans. Christopher Janaway (Cambridge, 2009), p. 15.

^ a b Beiser, Frederick C. (2008).

Weltschmerz, Pessimism in German Philosophy, 1860–1900 . Oxford: Oxford University Press. pp.

14– 16.

ISBN 978-0-19-876871-5 .

Arthur Schopenhauer was the most famous and influential philosopher in Germany from 1860 until the First World War. ... Schopenhauer had a profound influence on two intellectual movements of the late 19th century that were utterly opposed to him: neo-Kantianism and positivism. He forced these movements to address issues they would otherwise have completely ignored, and in doing so he changed them markedly. ... Schopenhauer set the agenda for his age.

^ Beside Schopenhauer's Corpse ^ Howard, Don (1997).

A Peek behind the Veil of Maya: Einstein, Schopenhauer, and the Historical Background of the Conception of Space as a Ground for the Individuation of Physical Systems . University of Pittsburgh Press.

Pauli greatly admired Schopenhauer. ... Pauli wrote sympathetically about extrasensory perception, noting approvingly that "even such a thoroughly critical philosopher as Schopenhauer not only regarded parapsychological effects going far beyond what is secured by scientific evidence as possible, but even considered them as a support for his philosophy".

^ Bassani, Giuseppe-Franco (15 December 2006). Società Italiana di Fisica (ed.).

Ettore Majorana: Scientific Papers . Springer. p. xl.

ISBN 978-3-540-48091-4 .

His interest in philosophy, which had always been great, increased and prompted him to reflect deeply on the works of various philosophers, in particular Schopenhauer.

^ Isaacson, Walter (2007).

Einstein: His Life and Universe . New York: Simon & Schuster. p. 367.

ISBN 978-0-7432-6474-7 .

^ Howard (1997). p. 87 ^ Howard (1997). p. 92 ^ Halpern, Paul (2015).

Einstein's Dice and Schrödinger's Cat: How Two Great Minds Battled Quantum Randomness to Create a Unified Theory of Physics . Basic Books. p. 189.

ISBN 978-0-465-04065-0 .

^ Howard (1997). p. 132 ^ Raymond B. Marcin.

"Schopenhauers Metaphysics and Contemporary Quantum Theory" .

David Lindorff referred to Schopenhauer as Pauli's "favorite philosopher", and Pauli himself often expressed his agreement with the main tenet of Schopenhauer's philosophy. ... Suzanne Gieser cited a 1952 letter from Pauli to Carl Jung, in which Pauli indicated that, while he accepted Schopenhauer's main tenet that the thing-in-itself of all reality is will.

[ permanent dead link ] ^ See e.g. Magee (2000) 276–278.

^ Nicholas Mathew, Benjamin Walton.

The Invention of Beethoven and Rossini: Historiography, Analysis, Criticism . p. 296.

^ Tolstoy's letter to Afanasy Fet on 30 August 1869. "Do you know what this summer has meant for me? Constant raptures over Schopenhauer and a whole series of spiritual delights as I've never experienced before. I have brought all of his works and read him over and over, Kant too by the way. Assuredly no student has ever learned and discovered so much in one semester as I have during this summer. I do not know if I shall ever change my opinion, but at present I am convinced that Schopenhauer is the greatest genius among men. You say he is so-so, he has written a few things on philosophy? What is so-so? It is the whole world in an incomparably beautiful and clear reflection. I have started to translate him. Won't you help me? Indeed, I cannot understand how his name can be unknown. The only explanation for this can only be the one he so often repeats, that is, that there is scarcely anyone but idiots in the world." ^ Thompson, Caleb (2009).

"Quietism from the Side of Happiness: Tolstoy, Schopenhauer, War and Peace" .

Common Knowledge .

15 (3): 395– 411.

doi : 10.1215/0961754X-2009-020 .

S2CID 145535267 .

Archived from the original on 4 December 2021 . Retrieved 15 November 2017 .

^ Magee, Bryan (1997).

Confessions of a Philosopher . p. 413.

^ Caleb Flamm, Matthew (2002). "Santayana and Schopenhauer".

Transactions of the Charles S. Peirce Society .

38 (3): 413– 431.

JSTOR 40320900 .

A thinker of whom it is well known that Santayana had an early, deep admiration, namely, Schopenhauer ^ Yothers, Brian (2015).

Sacred Uncertainty: Religious Difference and The Shape of Melville's Career . Evanston, Illinois: Northwestern University Press. p. 13.

ISBN 978-0-8101-3071-5 .

^ Morrison, Simon (2008).

Sergey Prokofiev and His World . Princeton University Press. pp. 19, 20.

ISBN 978-0-691-13895-4 .

^ Schopenhauer as Educator ^ Glock, Hans-Johann (2017).

A Companion to Wittgenstein . Sussex, UK: Wiley Blackwell. p.

60 .

^ Glock, Hans-Johann (2000).

The Cambridge Companion to Schopenhauer . New York, NY: Cambridge University Press. p.

424 .

^ Culture & Value, p. 24, 1933–34 ^ Malcolm, Norman. Ludwig Wittgenstein: A Memoir. Oxford University Press, 1958, p. 6 ^ Russell, Bertrand (1946).

History of Western Philosophy . George Allen and Unwin. p. 786.

^ "Writer Nic Pizzolatto on Thomas Ligotti and the Weird Secrets of 'True Detective' " .

The Wall Street Journal . 12 February 2014.

Archived from the original on 11 October 2023 . Retrieved 14 September 2021 .

^ M.Morioka What Is Antinatalism? and Other Essays Archived 26 March 2023 at the Wayback Machine , pp.8–12.

^ Kastrup, Bernardo Decoding Schopenhauer’s Metaphysics: The Key to Understanding How It Solves the Hard Problem of Consciousness and the Paradoxes of Quantum Mechanics Iff Books (July 31, 2020) ^ Koch, Christof Then I Am Myself the World: What Consciousness Is and How to Expand It Basic Books (May 7, 2024) pp. 49, 127, 132, 139, 209, 244.

Sources [ edit ] Albright, Daniel (2004) Modernism and Music: An Anthology of Sources . University of Chicago Press.

ISBN 978-0-226-01267-4 Beiser, Frederick C.

, Weltschmerz: Pessimism in German Philosophy, 1860–1900 (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2016).

Cartwright, David E. (2010).

Schopenhauer: A Biography . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0-521-82598-6 .

Clarke, John James (1997).

Oriental Enlightenment: The Encounter Between Asian and Western Thought .

Abingdon, Oxfordshire : Routledge .

ISBN 978-0-415-13376-0 .

Hannan, Barbara, The Riddle of the World: A Reconsideration of Schopenhauer's Philosophy (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2009).

Magee, Bryan , Confessions of a Philosopher , Random House, 1998, ISBN 978-0-375-50028-2 . Chapters 20, 21.

Safranski, Rüdiger (1990) Schopenhauer and the Wild Years of Philosophy . Harvard University Press, ISBN 978-0-674-79275-3 ; orig. German Schopenhauer und Die wilden Jahre der Philosophie , Carl Hanser Verlag (1987) Thomas Mann editor, The Living Thoughts of Schopenhauer , Longmans Green & Co., 1939 Further reading [ edit ] Biographies [ edit ] Copleston, Frederick , Arthur Schopenhauer, philosopher of pessimism (Burns, Oates & Washbourne, 1946) Damm, O. F., Arthur Schopenhauer – eine Biographie (Reclam, 1912) Fischer, Kuno, Arthur Schopenhauer (Heidelberg: Winter, 1893); revised as Schopenhauers Leben, Werke und Lehre (Heidelberg: Winter, 1898).

Grisebach, Eduard, Schopenhauer – Geschichte seines Lebens (Berlin: Hofmann, 1876).

Hamlyn, D. W., Schopenhauer , London: Routledge & Kegan Paul (1980, 1985) Hasse, Heinrich, Schopenhauer . (Reinhardt, 1926) Hübscher, Arthur, Arthur Schopenhauer – Ein Lebensbild (Leipzig: Brockhaus, 1938).

Mann, Thomas , Schopenhauer (Bermann-Fischer, 1938) Matthews, Jack , Schopenhauer's Will: Das Testament , Nine Point Publishing, 2015.

ISBN 978-0-9858278-8-5 . A recent creative biography by philosophical novelist Jack Matthews .

Safranski, Rüdiger, Schopenhauer und die wilden Jahre der Philosophie – Eine Biographie , hard cover Carl Hanser Verlag, München 1987, ISBN 978-3-446-14490-3 , pocket edition Fischer: ISBN 978-3-596-14299-6 .

Safranski, Rüdiger, Schopenhauer and the Wild Years of Philosophy , trans. Ewald Osers (London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson, 1989) Schneider, Walther, Schopenhauer – Eine Biographie (Vienna: Bermann-Fischer, 1937).

Wallace, William, Life of Arthur Schopenhauer (London: Scott, 1890; repr., St. Clair Shores, Mich.: Scholarly Press, 1970) Bather Woods, David (2025).

Arthur Schopenhauer: The Life and Thought of Philosophy’s Greatest Pessimist . Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.

ISBN 9780226829760 .

Zimmern, Helen, Arthur Schopenhauer: His Life and His Philosophy (London: Longmans, Green & Co, 1876) Other books [ edit ] App, Urs .

Arthur Schopenhauer and China.

Sino-Platonic Papers Nr. 200 (April 2010) (PDF, 8.7 Mb PDF, 164 p.). Contains extensive appendixes with transcriptions and English translations of Schopenhauer's early notes about Buddhism and Indian philosophy.

App, Urs, Schopenhauers Kompass. Die Geburt einer Philosophie.

UniversityMedia, Rorschach/ Kyoto 2011.

ISBN 978-3-906000-02-2 Atwell, John.

Schopenhauer on the Character of the World, The Metaphysics of Will .

Atwell, John, Schopenhauer, The Human Character .

Edwards, Anthony.

An Evolutionary Epistemological Critique of Schopenhauer's Metaphysics . 123 Books, 2011.

Copleston, Frederick , Schopenhauer: Philosopher of Pessimism , 1946 (reprinted London: Search Press, 1975).

Gardiner, Patrick , 1963.

Schopenhauer . Penguin Books.

Janaway, Christopher, 2002.

Schopenhauer: A Very Short introduction . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0192802590 Janaway, Christopher, 2003.

Self and World in Schopenhauer's Philosophy . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-825003-6 Magee, Bryan , The Philosophy of Schopenhauer , Oxford University Press (1988, reprint 1997).

ISBN 978-0-19-823722-8 Marcin, Raymond B.

In Search of Schopenhauer's Cat: Arthur Schopenhauer's Quantum-Mystical Theory of Justice . Washington, D.C.: The Catholic University of America Press, 2005.

ISBN 978-0813214306 Norberg, Jakob, Schopenhauer's Politics Mannion, Gerard, "Schopenhauer, Religion and Morality – The Humble Path to Ethics", Ashgate Press, New Critical Thinking in Philosophy Series, 2003, 314pp.

Whittaker, Thomas , Schopenhauer Zimmern, Helen , Arthur Schopenhauer, his Life and Philosophy , London, Longman, and Co.

, 1876.

Kastrup, Bernardo .

Decoding Schopenhauer's Metaphysics – The key to understanding how it solves the hard problem of consciousness and the paradoxes of quantum mechanics.

Winchester/Washington, iff Books, 2020.

de Botton, Alain : The Consolations of Philosophy . Hamish Hamilton, London 2000.

ISBN 0-14-027661-0 (Chapter: Consolation for a Broken Heart ).

Articles [ edit ] Abelson, Peter (1993).

"Schopenhauer and Buddhism" .

Philosophy East and West .

43 (2): 255– 78.

doi : 10.2307/1399616 .

JSTOR 1399616 . Archived from the original on 28 June 2011 . Retrieved 25 October 2007 .

Jiménez, Camilo, 2006, " Tagebuch eines Ehrgeizigen: Arthur Schopenhauers Studienjahre in Berlin ," Avinus Magazin (in German).

Luchte, James, 2009, " The Body of Sublime Knowledge: The Aesthetic Phenomenology of Arthur Schopenhauer ," Heythrop Journal , Volume 50, Number 2, pp. 228–242.

Mazard, Eisel, 2005, " Schopenhauer and the Empirical Critique of Idealism in the History of Ideas.

Archived 29 October 2008 at the Wayback Machine " On Schopenhauer's (debated) place in the history of European philosophy and his relation to his predecessors.

Sangharakshita , 2004, " Schopenhauer and aesthetic appreciation.

" Young, Christopher; Brook, Andrew (1994).

"Schopenhauer and Freud" .

International Journal of Psychoanalysis .

75 : 101– 18.

PMID 8005756 .

Oxenford's "Iconoclasm in German Philosophy," (See p. 388) Thacker, Eugene , 2020. "A Philosophy in Ruins, An Unquiet Void." Introduction to Arthur Schopenhauer, On the Suffering of the World . Repeater Books.

ISBN 978-1-913462-03-1 .

External links [ edit ] Arthur Schopenhauer at Wikipedia's sister projects Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Works by Arthur Schopenhauer at Project Gutenberg Works by or about Arthur Schopenhauer at the Internet Archive Works by Arthur Schopenhauer at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) Wicks, Robert (Spring 2019).

"Arthur Schopenhauer" . In Zalta, Edward N.

(ed.).

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Stanford University : Center for the Study of Language and Information .

" Arthur Schopenhauer " an article by Mary Troxell in the Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy , 2011 "Arthur Schopenhauer: Logic and Dialectic" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Kant's philosophy as rectified by Schopenhauer Timeline of German Philosophers A Quick Introduction to Schopenhauer Ross, Kelley L., 1998, " Arthur Schopenhauer (1788–1860) ". Two short essays, on Schopenhauer's life and work, and on his dim view of academia.

v t e Arthur Schopenhauer Books On the Fourfold Root of the Principle of Sufficient Reason On Vision and Colours The World as Will and Representation Critique of the Kantian philosophy On the Freedom of the Will On the Basis of Morality Parerga and Paralipomena The Art of Being Right Philosophy Aesthetics Animal rights Criticism of Kant's schemata Hedgehog's dilemma Metaphysical voluntarism Family Heinrich Floris Schopenhauer (father) Johanna Schopenhauer (mother) Adele Schopenhauer (sister) Andreas Schopenhauer (grandfather) Christian Heinrich Trosiener (grandfather) Johann Schopenhauer (great-grandfather) Hendrik Soermans (great-grandfather) Works about Critique of the Schopenhauerian philosophy In the Presence of Schopenhauer Schopenhauer and the Wild Years of Philosophy The Schopenhauer Cure Related Arthur Schopenhauer (sculpture) Schopenhauer Society v t e Metaphysics Theories Abstract object theory Action theory Anti-realism Determinism Dualism Enactivism Essentialism Existentialism Free will Idealism Libertarianism Liberty Materialism Meaning of life Monism Naturalism Nihilism Phenomenalism Physicalism Realism Relativism Scientific realism Solipsism Spiritualism Subjectivism Substance theory Theory of forms Truthmaker theory Type theory Concepts Abstract object Anima mundi Category of being Causality Causal closure Cogito, ergo sum Concept Cosmos Embodied cognition Entity Essence Existence Experience Hypostatic abstraction Idea Identity Importance Information Data Insight Intelligence Intention Linguistic modality Matter Meaning Mental representation Mind Motion Nature Necessity Object Ontology Pattern Perception Physical object Principle Property Qualia Quality Reality Relation Self Soul Subject Substantial form Thought Time Truth Type–token distinction Universal Unobservable Value Metaphysicians Anscombe Aquinas Aristotle Armstrong Averroes Avicenna Baudrillard Bergson Berkeley Boethius Bolzano Carnap Collingwood Davidson Deleuze Descartes Dummett Al-Ghazali Hegel Heidegger Hume Kant Kierkegaard Al-Kindi Kripke Laozi Leibniz Lewis Locke Lotze Lucretius Malebranche Meinong Moore Mozi Newton Nietzsche Parfit Parmenides Peirce Plantinga Plato Plotinus Proclus Putnam Quine Reid Russell Ryle Sartre Schopenhauer Scotus Spinoza Strawson Suárez Whitehead Wittgenstein Wolff more ...

Notable works Sophist (c. 350 BC) Timaeus (c. 350 BC) Nyāya Sūtras (c. 200 BC) De rerum natura (c. 80 BC) Metaphysics (c. 50) Enneads (c. 270) Daneshnameh-ye Alai and Al-Nijat (c. 1000) Meditations on First Philosophy (1641) Ethics (1677) A Treatise Concerning the Principles of Human Knowledge (1710) Monadology (1714) Critique of Pure Reason (1781) Prolegomena to Any Future Metaphysics (1783) The Phenomenology of Spirit (1807) The World as Will and Representation (1818) Concluding Unscientific Postscript to Philosophical Fragments (1846) Being and Time (1927) Being and Nothingness (1943) Simulacra and Simulation (1981) Related topics Axiology Cosmology Epistemology Feminist metaphysics Interpretations of quantum mechanics Mereology Meta- Phenomenology Philosophy of mind Philosophy of psychology Philosophy of self Philosophy of space and time Teleology Category Philosophy portal v t e Ethics Normative Consequentialism Deontology Care Particularism Pragmatic Role Suffering-focused Utilitarianism Virtue Applied Animal Artificial intelligence Bio Business Computer Discourse Economic Engineering Environmental Land Legal Machine Marketing Meat eating Media Medical Nursing Professional Programming Research Sexual Technology Terraforming Uncertain sentience Work Meta Absolutism Axiology Cognitivism Realism Naturalism Non-naturalism Subjectivism Ideal observer theory Divine command theory Constructivism Euthyphro dilemma Intuitionism Nihilism Non-cognitivism Emotivism Expressivism Quasi-realism Universal prescriptivism Rationalism Relativism Skepticism Universalism Value monism – Value pluralism Schools Buddhist Christian Protestant Confucian Epicurean Existentialist Feminist Islamic Jewish Kantian Rousseauian Stoic Tao Concepts Accountability Authority Autonomy Blame Common sense Compassion Conscience Consent Culture of life Desert Dignity Double standard Duty Equality Etiquette Eudaimonia Family values Fidelity Free will Good and evil Good Evil Problem of evil Greed Happiness Honour Ideal Immorality Importance Justice Liberty Loyalty Moral agency Moral courage Moral hierarchy Moral imperative Morality Norm Pacifism Political freedom Precept Punishment Rights Self-discipline Suffering Stewardship Sympathy Theodicy Torture Trust Utility Value Instrumental Intrinsic Japan Western Vice Virtue Vow Wrong Ethicists Confucius Mozi Socrates Plato Aristotle Diogenes Mencius Xunzi Cicero Augustine Valluvar Aquinas Spinoza Butler Hume Smith Kant Hegel Schopenhauer Bentham Mill Kierkegaard Sidgwick Nietzsche Moore Barth Tillich Bonhoeffer Foot Rawls Dewey Williams Mackie Anscombe Frankena MacIntyre Hare Singer Parfit Nagel Adams Taylor Azurmendi Korsgaard Nussbaum Works Nicomachean Ethics (c. 322 BC) Tirukkural (c. 450 CE) Ethics (Spinoza) (1677) Fifteen Sermons Preached at the Rolls Chapel (1726) A Treatise of Human Nature (1740) The Theory of Moral Sentiments (1759) An Introduction to the Principles of Morals and Legislation (1780) Groundwork of the Metaphysics of Morals (1785) Critique of Practical Reason (1788) Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1820) Either/Or (1843) Utilitarianism (1861) The Methods of Ethics (1874) On the Genealogy of Morality (1887) Principia Ethica (1903) A Theory of Justice (1971) Practical Ethics (1979) After Virtue (1981) Reasons and Persons (1984) Related Axiology Casuistry Descriptive ethics Ethics in religion Evolutionary ethics History of ethics Human rights Ideology Moral psychology Philosophy of law Political philosophy Population ethics Rehabilitation Secular ethics Social philosophy Category Outline Portal WikiProject v t e Aesthetics Areas Ancient Africa India Japanese Mathematics Medieval Music Nature Science Theology Schools Aestheticism Classicism Fascism Feminism Formalism Historicism Marxism Modernism Postmodernism Psychoanalysis Realism Romanticism Symbolism Theosophy more...

Philosophers Abhinavagupta Adorno Alberti Aristotle Aquinas Balázs Balthasar Baudelaire Baudrillard Baumgarten Bell Benjamin Burke Coleridge Collingwood Coomaraswamy Danto Deleuze Dewey Fry Goethe Goodman Greenberg Hanslick Hegel Heidegger Hume Hutcheson Kant Kierkegaard Klee Langer Lipps Liu Lukács Lyotard Man Marcuse Maritain Merleau-Ponty Nietzsche Ortega y Gasset Orwell Pater Plato Rancière Rand Richards Ruskin Santayana Schiller Schopenhauer Scruton Tagore Tanizaki Vasari Wilde Winckelmann more...

Concepts Appropriation Art for art's sake Art manifesto Artistic merit Avant-garde Beauty Feminine Masculine Camp Comedy Creativity Cuteness Depiction Disgust Ecstasy Elegance Emotions Entertainment Eroticism Fashion Gaze Harmony Humour Interpretation Judgment Kama Kitsch Life imitating art Magnificence Mimesis Perception Picturesque Quality Rasa Recreation Reverence Style Sublime Taste Tragedy Work of art Works Hippias Major (c. 390 BC) Poetics (c. 335 BC) The Literary Mind and the Carving of Dragons (c. 100) On the Sublime (c. 500) On the Sublime and Beautiful (1757) Lectures on Aesthetics (1835) " The Critic as Artist " (1891) In Praise of Shadows (1933) Art as Experience (1934) " The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction " (1935) " Avant-Garde and Kitsch " (1939) Critical Essays (1946) The Aesthetic Dimension (1977) Why Beauty Matters (2009) Related Aestheticization of politics Applied aesthetics Arts criticism Axiology Evolutionary aesthetics Mathematical beauty Neuroesthetics Patterns in nature Philosophy of design Philosophy of film Philosophy of music Psychology of art Theory of art Outline Category Philosophy portal v t e Philosophical pessimism Philosophers Hegesias of Cyrene Giacomo Leopardi Arthur Schopenhauer Julius Bahnsen Olga Plümacher Philipp Mainländer Eduard von Hartmann Agnes Taubert Peter Wessel Zapffe Emil Cioran Julio Cabrera Thomas Ligotti David Benatar Concepts Antinatalism Benatar's asymmetry argument Depressive realism Duḥkha History of philosophical pessimism Misanthropy Problem of evil Radical evil Weltschmerz Wild animal suffering Related articles Absurdism Nihilism Will to live Bibliography of philosophical pessimism List of pessimistic literature v t e Animal rights Topics (overviews, concepts, issues, cases) Overviews Movement History ( Ancient world ) Timeline Europe United States By country or territory Argentina Australia Austria Azerbaijan Brazil Canada China Denmark Ethiopia France Germany Hong Kong India Indonesia Iran Israel Italy Japan Malaysia Mexico Netherlands Russia South Africa South Korea Spain Sweden Switzerland United Kingdom United States Anarchism Punk subculture Religion Christianity Indian religions Islam Women Concepts Abolitionism Ahimsa Animal cognition Animal consciousness Animal–industrial complex Animal law Animal machine Animal protectionism Animal trial Animal welfare Animal-free agriculture Anthropocentrism Argument from marginal cases Cambridge Declaration on Consciousness New York Declaration on Animal Consciousness Carnism Equal consideration of interests Emotion in animals Ethics of eating meat Ethics of uncertain sentience Holocaust analogy Insects in ethics Intrinsic value Meat paradox Mentophobia Moral circle expansion Nonviolence Nonkilling Open rescue Opposition to hunting Painism Personism Replaceability argument Sentientism Speciesism Total liberation Veganism Vegaphobia Vegetarianism Issues Animal husbandry Animal product Animal husbandry Battery cage Bile bear Chick culling Crocodiles CAFOs Cow-calf separation Feedback Fish Foam depopulation Fur Fur trade Insects Intensive Pigs Livestock Live export Poultry Wildlife Slaughter Slaughterhouse Ventilation shutdown Blood sport Badger-baiting Bear-baiting Boar-baiting Bull-baiting Donkey-baiting Duck-baiting Hog-baiting Human-baiting Hyena-baiting Lion-baiting Monkey-baiting Rat-baiting Wolf-baiting Cruelty Pest control ( Varmint hunting ) Sacrifice Working animal Animal testing History Alternatives Regulations Countries banning non-human ape experimentation Non-human primates Cosmetics Model organism Vivisection ( Anti-vivisection movement ) Organizations Huntingdon Life Sciences Nafovanny Green Scare ( Operation Backfire ) Animal welfare Abandoned pets Captivity Euthanasia ( insects ) Farmed insects Killing of animals Live food Pain Amphibians Cephalopods Crustaceans Fish Invertebrates Laboratory animals Sports Fishing Bait Commercial Farming Recreational Wild animals Culling Farming Hunting Techniques Coursing Spotlighting Trail hunting Trapping Treeing Trophy hunting Upland hunting Animals Alligators Bats Bears Birds Bison Boar Raccoons Deer Dolphins Foxes Hares Jackals Lions Mink Petrels Quail Rabbit Rooks Seals Squirrels Tigers Turtles Waterfowl Wild birds Whales Wolves Management Predation problem Suffering Trade Primates Ivory Welfare Cases Brown Dog affair Cambridge University primates McLibel case Monkey selfie copyright dispute Pit of despair SHAC Silver Spring monkeys University of California, Riverside 1985 laboratory raid Unnecessary Fuss War of the currents Studies Animal ethics Anthrozoology Critical animal studies Ethology Vegan studies Methodologies Direct Action Everywhere Hunt sabotage Observances World Animal Day World Day for Farmed Animals World Day for the End of Speciesism World Day for Laboratory Animals World Day for the End of Fishing World Vegan Day World Vegetarian Day Advocates (academics, writers, activists) Academics and writers Contemporary Carol J. Adams Aysha Akhtar Kristin Andrews Marc Bekoff Steven Best Paola Cavalieri Stephen R. L. Clark Alasdair Cochrane J. M. Coetzee Alice Crary David DeGrazia Daniel Dombrowski Sue Donaldson Josephine Donovan Joan Dunayer Mylan Engel Catia Faria Lawrence Finsen Michael W. Fox Gary L. Francione Robert Garner Valéry Giroux Lori Gruen John Hadley Oscar Horta Christine Korsgaard Dale Jamieson Kyle Johannsen Melanie Joy Hilda Kean Will Kymlicka Renan Larue Thomas Lepeltier Andrew Linzey Clair Linzey Dan Lyons David Nibert Martha Nussbaum Clare Palmer Charles Patterson David Pearce Jessica Pierce Evelyn Pluhar Mark Rowlands Richard D. Ryder Steve F. Sapontzis Jeff Sebo Jérôme Segal Peter Singer Gary Steiner Cass Sunstein David Sztybel Michael Tye Tatjana Višak Paul Waldau Corey Lee Wrenn Historical Tom Beauchamp Jeremy Bentham David Renaud Boullier Stephen St. C. Bostock Brigid Brophy Peter Buchan Mona Caird Priscilla Cohn Sherry Colb Henry Crowe Herman Daggett Richard Dean Wilhelm Dietler William Hamilton Drummond Edward Payson Evans T. Forster John Galsworthy Thomas G. Gentry V. A. Holmes-Gore Arthur Helps John Hildrop John Zephaniah Holwell Francis Hutcheson Soame Jenyns Marie Jungius Karl Christian Friedrich Krause John Lawrence Charles R. Magel Jean Meslier Mary Midgley J. Howard Moore José Ferrater Mora Robert Morris Leonard Nelson Edward Nicholson Siobhan O'Sullivan John Oswald Rod Preece Humphrey Primatt James Rachels Tom Regan Joseph Ritson Nathaniel Peabody Rogers Bernard Rollin Henry Stephens Salt Arthur Schopenhauer Laurids Smith John Styles Thomas Tryon Gary Varner Johann Friedrich Ludwig Volckmann Mary Anne Warren Adam Gottlieb Weigen Johann Heinrich Winckler Steven M. Wise Jon Wynne-Tyson Voltaire Thomas Young Activists Contemporary James Aspey Greg Avery Matt Ball Martin Balluch Carole Baskin Barbi Twins Brigitte Bardot Gene Baur Yves Bonnardel Joey Carbstrong Aymeric Caron Jake Conroy Rod Coronado Karen Dawn Chris DeRose John Feldmann Bruce Friedrich Juliet Gellatley Tal Gilboa Antoine Goetschel Mark Gold Brigitte Gothière Alex Hershaft Wayne Hsiung Charlotte Laws Ronnie Lee Howard Lyman Evanna Lynch Bill Maher Keith Mann Jim Mason Dan Mathews Joaquin Phoenix Jo-Anne McArthur Luísa Mell Virginia McKenna Morrissey Ingrid Newkirk Heather Nicholson Jack Norris Ric O'Barry David Olivier Alex Pacheco Craig Rosebraugh Jasmin Singer Kim Stallwood Lynda Stoner Marianne Thieme Darren Thurston Christine Townend Wendy Turner-Webster Jerry Vlasak Louise Wallis Ed Winters Gary Yourofsky That Vegan Teacher Historical Cleveland Amory Henry B. Amos Bob Barker Ernest Bell William Brown Edith Carrington Joseph Collinson Frances Power Cobbe Joan Court Karen Davis Royal Dixon Muriel Dowding Elizabeth Farians Emarel Freshel André Géraud Lewis Gompertz James Granger Barry Horne Marie Huot Lizzy Lind af Hageby Jessie Mackay Alfred Mansfield Mitchell J. Isaac Pengelly Norm Phelps Jill Phipps Maud Ingersoll Probasco Hans Ruesch Magnus Schwantje Nell Shipman Henry Spira Joseph Stratton Andrew Tyler Gretchen Wyler Movement (groups, parties) Groups Contemporary American Anti-Vivisection Society Animal Aid Animal Ethics Animal Justice Animal Justice Project Animal Legal Defense Fund Animal Liberation Animal Liberation Front Animal Liberation Press Office Animal Liberation Victoria Animal Rights Militia Animal Rising AnimaNaturalis Anti-Vivisection Coalition Anonymous for the Voiceless Beauty Without Cruelty Born Free Foundation Centre for Animals and Social Justice Chinese Animal Protection Network Cruelty Free International Direct Action Everywhere Doctors Against Animal Experiments Equanimal Every Animal Farm Animal Rights Movement Faunalytics Great Ape Project Hunt Saboteurs Association In Defense of Animals Korea Animal Rights Advocates L214 Last Chance for Animals Massachusetts Animal Rights Coalition Mercy for Animals Oxford Centre for Animal Ethics People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals Revolutionary Cells – Animal Liberation Brigade Rise for Animals Sentience Politics Uncaged Campaigns United Activists for Animal Rights United Poultry Concerns UPF-Centre for Animal Ethics Viva!

Voice for Animals Humane Society Voiceless Historical Canadian Anti-Vivisection Society Humanitarian League (1891–1919) Millennium Guild Order of the Golden Age Oxford Group Parties Animal Justice Party (Australia) Animal Politics EU (Europe) Animal Protection Party of Canada (Canada) Animal Justice Party of Finland (Finland) Animals' Party (Sweden) Animalist Movement (Italy) Animalist Party with the Environment (Spain) DierAnimal (Belgium) Human Environment Animal Protection Party (Germany) Italian Animalist Party (Italy) Party for the Animals (Netherlands) People Animals Nature (Portugal) V-Partei³ (Germany) Activism Animal Rights National Conference Media (books, films, periodicals, albums) Books On Abstinence from Eating Animals (3rd century) A Reasonable Plea for the Animal Creation (1746) A System of Moral Philosophy, in Three Books (1755) The Cry of Nature (1791) An Essay on Humanity to Animals (1798) An Essay on Abstinence from Animal Food, as a Moral Duty (1802) Moral Inquiries on the Situation of Man and of Brutes (1824) The Rights of Animals (1838) The Ethics of Diet (1883) A Plea for Vegetarianism and Other Essays (1886) Animals' Rights: Considered in Relation to Social Progress (1892) Evolutional Ethics and Animal Psychology (1897) Better-World Philosophy (1899) The Logic of Vegetarianism (1899) The Universal Kinship (1906) The New Ethics (1907) Animals, Men and Morals (1971) Animal Liberation (1975) The Case for Animal Rights (1983) Morals, Reason, and Animals (1987) Zoos and Animal Rights (1993) Animals, Property, and the Law (1995) The Lives of Animals (1999) Eternal Treblinka (2001) Do Animals Have Rights?

(2005) Striking at the Roots (2008) An American Trilogy (2009) An Introduction to Animals and Political Theory (2010) Animal Rights Without Liberation (2012) Political Animals and Animal Politics (2014) Animal (De)liberation (2016) Beating Hearts: Abortion and Animal Rights (2016) Sentientist Politics (2018) Wild Animal Ethics (2020) Animal Ethics in the Wild (2022) Making a Stand for Animals (2022) Animal Rights Law (2023) The Moral Circle (2025) Films The Animals Film (1981) A Cow at My Table (1998) Shores of Silence (2000) The Witness (2000) Meet Your Meat (2002) Legally Blonde 2 (2003) The Meatrix (2003) Peaceable Kingdom (2004) Earthlings (2005) Behind the Mask (2006) Your Mommy Kills Animals (2007) Food, Inc.

(2009) The Cove (2009) Peaceable Kingdom: The Journey Home (2009) Forks Over Knives (2011) Vegucated (2011) An Apology to Elephants (2013) Speciesism: The Movie (2013) The Ghosts in Our Machine (2013) Unlocking the Cage (2016) Land of Hope and Glory (2017) Carnage (2017) Okja (2017) Dominion (2018) Seaspiracy (2021) Periodicals Journals Animal Sentience Between the Species Cahiers antispécistes Etica & Animali Journal of Animal Ethics Relations. Beyond Anthropocentrism The Animals' Defender Magazines Arkangel Bite Back Muutoksen kevät No Compromise Satya Albums Animal Liberation (1987) Tame Yourself (1991) Manifesto (2008) Salvation of Innocents (2014) Onward to Freedom (2014) Fairs and exhibitions Holocaust on your Plate (2003) Category ( 138 ) v t e Continental philosophy Philosophers Adorno Agamben Althusser Arendt Aron Bachelard Badiou Barthes Bataille Baudrillard Bauman Benjamin de Beauvoir Bergson Blanchot Bourdieu Buber Butler Camus Cassirer Castoriadis Cioran Cixous Croce de Man Debord Deleuze Derrida Dilthey Eco Eagleton Engels Fanon Fichte Fisher Foucault Gadamer Gentile Guattari Gramsci Habermas Hegel Heidegger Husserl Ingarden Irigaray Jameson Jaspers Kierkegaard Kojève Koyré Kołakowski Kristeva Lacan Latour Lefebvre Lévi-Strauss Levinas Luhmann Lukács Lyotard Marcel Marcuse Marx Meillassoux Merleau-Ponty Nancy Negri Nietzsche Ortega y Gasset Rancière Ricœur Said Sartre Schelling Schmitt Schopenhauer Serres Sloterdijk Spengler Stein Strauss Weber Weil Williams Žižek Theories Absurdism Critical theory Deconstruction Existentialism Frankfurt School German idealism Hegelianism Hermeneutics Marxism Western Freudo- Neo-Kantianism Non-philosophy Non-representational theory Phenomenology Philosophical pessimism Postmodernism Post-structuralism Psychoanalysis Psychoanalytic theory Romanticism Speculative realism Structuralism Concepts Alterity Always already Angst Apollonian and Dionysian Authenticity Being in itself Binary oppositions Boredom Class struggle Critique Immanent Ideological Postcritique Dasein Death of God Death drive Différance Difference Existence precedes essence Existential crisis Facticity Gaze Genealogy Habitus Hauntology Historical materialism Ideology Interpellation (philosophy) Intersubjectivity Leap of faith Master–slave dialectic Master–slave morality Oedipus complex Ontic Ontopoetics Other Power Ressentiment Self-deception Totalitarianism Trace Transvaluation of values Wertkritik Will to power Hermeneutics of suspicion Discourse Linguistic theory Linguistic determinism Semantics Semiotics Media studies Film theory Linguistic turn Postcolonialism Philosophy of language Category Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Russia 2 Spain Portugal 2 Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Chile Greece Argentina Korea Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Finland Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii zbMATH Artists ULAN MusicBrainz KulturNav FID People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC RISM Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐56p2m
Cached time: 20250817053644
Cache expiry: 3600
Reduced expiry: true
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 3.027 seconds
Real time usage: 3.389 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 65303/1000000
Revision size: 157376/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 624813/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 41653/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 17/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 513453/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.515/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 23196117/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 2769.833      1 -total
 30.30%  839.279    129 Template:R
 29.24%  809.958    129 Template:R/ref
 20.84%  577.363    129 Template:R/superscript
 19.14%  530.038      1 Template:Reflist
 13.46%  372.765     61 Template:Cite_book
 10.06%  278.547    387 Template:R/where
  8.20%  227.028      1 Template:Infobox_philosopher
  8.16%  225.922     15 Template:Navbox
  4.25%  117.698      1 Template:IPA Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:700:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817053644 and revision id 1304382703. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Arthur_Schopenhauer&oldid=1304382703 " Categories : Arthur Schopenhauer 1788 births 1860 deaths 19th-century atheists 19th-century German philosophers Academic staff of the Humboldt University of Berlin German animal rights scholars Anti-natalists Atheist philosophers Burials at Frankfurt Main Cemetery German epistemologists German atheists German ethicists German people of Dutch descent German scholars of Buddhism German idealists Kantian philosophers German philosophers of art Philosophers of pessimism Philosophers of psychology University of Göttingen alumni Writers from Gdańsk Hidden categories: Pages using the Phonos extension Webarchive template wayback links CS1: long volume value All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from August 2023 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from October 2020 Biography with signature Articles with hCards Pages with German IPA Pages including recorded pronunciations All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from September 2024 CS1 German-language sources (de) Articles with Project Gutenberg links Articles with Internet Archive links Articles with LibriVox links Articles with Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy links This page was last edited on 5 August 2025, at 18:32 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Arthur Schopenhauer 106 languages Add topic

