Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Publications Toggle Publications subsection 2.1 Books 3 References Toggle the table of contents Robert Markley Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American academic and author This biography of a living person needs additional citations for verification .

Please help by adding reliable sources .

Contentious material about living persons that is unsourced or poorly sourced must be removed immediately from the article and its talk page, especially if potentially libelous .

Find sources: "Robert Markley" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( April 2016 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Robert Markley is an American academic and author who is noted for his contributions to eighteenth-century studies, science studies, and science fiction. He is the W.D. and Sara E. Trowbridge Professor of English at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign , where he is also affiliated with Writing Studies and the Center for East Asian and Pacific Studies.

[ 1 ] He is an editor of the journal The Eighteenth Century [ 2 ] and President of the Society for Literature, Science, and the Arts .

[ 3 ] The author of more than eighty articles in eighteenth-century studies, science studies, and new media, his recent books include Fallen Languages: Crises of Representation in Newtonian England (Cornell UP, 1993), Virtual Realities and Their Discontents (Johns Hopkins UP, 1996), Dying Planet: Mars in Science and the Imagination (Duke UP, 2005), and The Far East and the English Imagination, 1600-1730 (Cambridge UP, 2006).

[ 4 ] He has held fellowships from the National Endowment for the Humanities, the Huntington, Clark, and Beinecke Libraries, and most recently at the National Center for Supercomputing Applications . His study of the contemporary science-fiction novelist, Kim Stanley Robinson , is forthcoming from the University of Illinois Press next year.

Life [ edit ] Robert Markley is a graduate of Vassar College and the University of Pennsylvania . Prior to his work at the University of Illinois, Markley taught at several universities, including Tulane , the University of Washington , and West Virginia University , where he held the Jackson Distinguished Chair of British Literature.

[ 5 ] Publications [ edit ] Books [ edit ] The Far East and the English Imagination 1600-1730.

Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2006.

Dying Planet: Mars in Science and the Imagination .

Durham: Duke University Press, 2005.

Fallen Languages: Crises of Representation in Newtonian England, 1660-1740.

Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1993.

Two-Edg'd Weapons: Style and Ideology in the Comedies of Etherege, Wycherley, andCongreve.

Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1988.

References [ edit ] ^ "Robert Markley Profile, Department of English, College of LAS, University of Illinois" .

English.illinois.edu . Retrieved 4 April 2016 .

^ "Journal information: Editors" .

The Eighteenth Century . University of Pennsylvania Press . Retrieved 4 April 2016 .

^ "Governance" . Society for Literature, Science, and the Arts . Retrieved 4 April 2016 .

^ "Robert Markley - Google Scholar Citations" .

Scholar.google.com . Retrieved 4 April 2016 .

^ "Archived copy" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 28 December 2015 . Retrieved 5 April 2016 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: archived copy as title ( link ) Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National Germany Czech Republic Israel Academics Google Scholar Artists FID Other Yale LUX This biography of an American English academic is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it .

v t e Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Robert_Markley&oldid=1303460408 " Categories : Living people American academics of English literature University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign faculty Vassar College alumni University of Pennsylvania alumni American male non-fiction writers American English academic biography stubs Hidden categories: CS1 maint: archived copy as title Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from July 2025 BLP articles lacking sources from April 2016 All BLP articles lacking sources Year of birth missing (living people) All stub articles This page was last edited on 31 July 2025, at 04:21 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Robert Markley Add languages Add topic

