Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Origins and precedents 1.2 Modern conception 2 See also 3 References 4 Bibliography 5 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Communization 10 languages العربية Deutsch Español فارسی Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Português Русский Simple English 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Term describing mixing of radical anarchist and ultra-left tendencies Part of a series on Left communism Concepts Anti-Leninism Anti-Stalinist left Class consciousness Class struggle Communism Mass strike Organic centralism Proletarian internationalism Workers' council World revolution Movements Bordigism In China Communization Council communism Situationist International People Jan Appel Amadeo Bordiga Arrigo Cervetto Marc Chirik Onorato Damen Bruno Fortichiari Herman Gorter Paul Mattick Grandizo Munis Gavril Myasnikov Sylvia Pankhurst Anton Pannekoek Lorenzo Parodi Otto Rühle Karl Schröder Julien Coupat Organizations Extant Communist Struggle Communist Workers' Organisation International Communist Current International Communist Party Internationalist Communist Party The Invisible Committee Defunct Anti-Parliamentary Communist Federation Communist Bulletin Group Communist League Communist Workers' International Communist Workers' Party of Germany Forward Hunan Provincial Proletarian Revolutionary Great Alliance Committee International Socialists of Germany League for Proletarian Culture Left Communists Marxist Working Group Revolutionary Socialist Party Revolutionary Workers Ferment Socialism or Barbarism Solidarity Workers' Group Workers' Opposition Workers' Socialist Federation Workers' Truth Tiqqun Related topics Autonomism Classical Marxism Impossibilism Industrial unionism Ultra-leftism Workerism Communism portal Socialism portal Politics portal v t e Part of a series on Libertarian socialism Concepts Anti-authoritarianism Class conflict Decentralization Egalitarian community Free association Mutual aid Revolutionary spontaneity Workers' control Economics Anti-capitalism Co-operative economics Decentralized planning Economic democracy Industrial democracy Participatory economics Socialization Socialist economics Worker cooperative Workers' self-management People Albert Andrews Bakunin Berkman Bookchin Boric Camus Castoriadis Chomsky Cole Déjacque Foot Fotopoulos Fourier Guérin Kropotkin Lefort Luxemburg Makhno Marcos Morris Marcuse Negri Öcalan Pallis Pankhurst Pannekoek Pi i Margall Proudhon Rocker Russell Rühle Variants Anarchist tendencies Social anarchism Communist Collectivist Individualist anarchism Market Mutualism Anarcho-syndicalism Marxist tendencies Autonomism Chaulieu–Montal tendency Communization Council communism Situationism Western Marxism Other tendencies Democratic confederalism Guild socialism Libertarian municipalism Utopian socialism Neozapatismo History International Workingmen's Association Revolutions of 1917–1923 Makhnovshchina Korean People's Association in Manchuria Spanish Revolution of 1936 New Left New social movements Zapatista uprising MAREZ Rojava Revolution AANES Related topics Communism Libertarianism Social democracy Socialism Democratic socialism Eco-socialism Syndicalism Anarchism portal Libertarianism portal Socialism portal Politics portal v t e Part of a series on Marxism Outline Theoretical works Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844 The Condition of the Working Class in England The German Ideology Wage Labour and Capital The Communist Manifesto The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte Grundrisse Capital Critique of the Gotha Programme Dialectics of Nature The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State What Is to Be Done?

The Accumulation of Capital Philosophical Notebooks Terrorism and Communism The State and Revolution Essays on Marx's Theory of Value History and Class Consciousness Prison Notebooks The Black Jacobins On Practice Dialectic of Enlightenment A Critique of Soviet Economics The Long Revolution Guerrilla Warfare The Wretched of the Earth Reading Capital The Society of the Spectacle Pedagogy of the Oppressed Ideology and Ideological State Apparatuses Ways of Seeing How Europe Underdeveloped Africa Social Justice and the City Women, Race and Class Marxism and the Oppression of Women Imagined Communities Hegemony and Socialist Strategy The Sublime Object of Ideology Time, Labor and Social Domination The Age of Extremes The Origin of Capitalism Empire Late Victorian Holocausts Change the World Without Taking Power Caliban and the Witch An Introduction to the Three Volumes of Karl Marx's Capital Capitalist Realism Capital in the Anthropocene Philosophy Alienation Dialectical materialism Ideology Philosophy of nature Philosophy in the Soviet Union Reification Marxist ethics Critique of political economy Capital ( accumulation ) Crisis theory Commodity Concrete and abstract labor Factors of production Falling profit-rate tendency Means of production Mode of production Capitalist Socialist Productive forces Scientific socialism State monopoly capitalism Surplus product Socially necessary labour time Value-form Wage labour Sociology Base and superstructure Bourgeoisie Class Class consciousness Classless society Commodity fetishism Communist society Critical theory Cultural hegemony Democracy Dictatorship of the proletariat Soviet Radical Democratic centralism Exploitation False consciousness Human nature Immiseration Imperialism Lumpenproletariat Metabolic rift Proletariat Private property Relations of production State theory Working class History Class struggle Historical determinism Primitive accumulation Proletarian revolution World revolution Theory of historical trajectory Aspects Aesthetics Archaeology Criminology Cultural Marxism Cultural Studies Ethics Film theory Geography Historiography Literary criticism Marxism and religion Sociology Philosophy Common variants Structural Autonomist Marxism–Leninism Guevarism Maoism Neo-Gramscianism Regulation school Third-worldist Titoism Trotskyism Hegelian Budapest School Frankfurt School Humanist Neue Marx-Lektüre Open Praxis School Both Black Classical Communization Feminist Leninism Neo Post Western Other variants Analytical Austromarxism Hispanic marxism Centrist Eurocommunism Instrumental Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Nkrumaism Political Revisionist Situationist Socialism with Chinese characteristics Wertkritik People Marx Engels Morris Lafargue Rubin Kautsky Plekhanov Du Bois Connolly Lenin Luxemburg Liebknecht Kollontai Stalin Trotsky Grossman Zinoviev Bloch Lukács Korsch Bukharin Ho Serge Gramsci Pashukanis Bordiga Benjamin Mao Basu Mariátegui Horkheimer Dutt Brecht Marcuse Kalecki Fromm Cox Lefebvre James Adorno Padmore Sartre Deutscher Beauvoir Sombart Nkrumah Sweezy Emmanuel Hill Bettelheim Draper Jones Hobsbawm Althusser Hinton Williams Freire Cunhal Lara Mandel Sivanandan Miliband Cabral Thompson Bauman Fanon Berger Castro Guevara Liebman Heller Guattari Mészáros O'Connor Wallerstein Mies Tronti Debord Amin Hall Nairn Parenti Negri Jameson Dussel Harvey Laclau Bahro Poulantzas Vattimo Badiou Harnecker Altvater Ismail Anderson Löwy Vogel Sison Easthope Rancière Berman Przeworski Cohen Therborn Losurdo Postone Rodney Bannerji Spivak Newton Wood Federici Wolff Balibar Eagleton Kurz Rowbotham Mouffe Geras Brenner Davis Massey Cleaver Bishop Haraway Panitch Clarke Jessop Davis Wright Fraser Burawoy Holloway Rose Screpanti Tamás Hampton Cano Žižek Berardi Sankara Hennessy McDonnell Douzinas Roediger Foster West Ghandy Marcos Heinrich Prashad Kelley Dean Lordon Linera Fisher Li Prestes Coulthard Malm Seymour Toscano Bhattacharya Moufawad-Paul Srnicek Horvat Hamza Saito Journals Antipode Capital & Class Capitalism Nature Socialism Constellations Critique: Journal of Socialist Theory Historical Materialism Mediations Monthly Review New Left Review Race & Class Rethinking Marxism Science & Society Socialist Register Related topics 21st-century communist theorists Anarchism Creative destruction Conflict theory Criticism of Marxism Communism Communalism Economic determinism History of communism Left-wing politics Marxian economics New Left Old Left Municipalism Political ecology Socialism Authoritarian Democratic Market Reformist Revolutionary Social Utopian Left-wing populism Universal class Vulgar Marxism Economism Worker cooperative Workers' council Communism portal Economics portal Philosophy portal Politics portal Socialism portal v t e Communization theory (or communisation theory in British English ) refers to a tendency on the ultra-left that understands communism as a process that, in a social revolution , immediately begins to replace all capitalist social relations with communist ones, rejecting transitional stages.

[ 1 ] Thus it rejects the role of the dictatorship of the proletariat , which it sees as reproducing capitalism. There exist two broad trends within communization theory: a ‘ Marxist ’ one (exemplified by Gilles Dauvé , Théorie Communiste, and later, Endnotes) and an ‘ Anarchist ’ one (represented by Tiqqun , The Invisible Committee , and Hostis).

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] The term "communization" in this context was coined by Dauvé, following the uprising of May 68 , in an attempt to explain its failure. Dauvé's theory synthesised the council communist emphasis on proletarian self-emancipation and rejection of the party-form with Italian communist Amadeo Bordiga ’s critique of what he saw as capitalism in the Soviet Union , which stressed the importance of the content of communism.

[ 4 ] He was additionally influenced by the Situationists ’ rejection of work (at least in words) and focus on the revolutionary transformation of everyday life.

[ 5 ] History [ edit ] Origins and precedents [ edit ] In his 1843 Code de la Communauté , the Neo-Babouvist Théodore Dézamy called for an immediate move from capitalism to communism . Instead of a transitional stage between the two, he envisioned the gradual abolition of the state and the "communisation of social relations " through the direct cessation of commerce.

[ 6 ] In The Conquest of Bread , anarcho-communist Peter Kropotkin called for the immediate expropriation of all property, for the purposes of ensuring well-being for all, following an insurrectionary period.

[ 7 ] He also proposed the immediate communisation of social relations, [ 8 ] which would integrate both agricultural and industrial workers into the process by each fulfilling the needs of the other.

[ 9 ] But anarcho-communists came to disagree on what form communisation would take. Some came to see that it was insurrectionists themselves, rather than the organised working class, that would be the real agent of a social revolution . Criticising the labour movement as reformist , this anti-organisational tendency came to favour agitating the unemployed , expropriating food and carrying out propaganda of the deed .

[ 10 ] Although the English socialist William Morris was critical of this individualist anarchist tendency, regarding both its theory and practice as " reactionary ", in his 1893 Manifesto of English Socialists , Morris also called on socialists to dedicate themselves to immediately bringing about the "complete communization of industry for which the economic forms are ready and the minds of the people are almost prepared." [ 11 ] Modern conception [ edit ] In the wake of the protests of 1968 , the French communist Gilles Dauvé coined the modern concept of communization, building on the earlier works of Karl Marx and Peter Kropotkin which had identified elements of communism that already existed within society.

[ 12 ] Dauvé rejected the conception of communism as a political platform that would be implemented after seizing power, as previous movements that had done so did not actually implement communism after their revolutions.

[ 13 ] Instead Dauvé called for a "communization" that would "break all separations": [ 14 ] circulating goods without money; occupying workplaces and bringing them under social ownership ; closing any workplaces that couldn't function without causing alienation ; abolishing specialized education ; and breaking up single-family households .

[ 15 ] After a wave of unemployment protests in France during the late 1990s, the Tiqqun collective was established, drawing their ideology from a mix of insurrectionary anarchism , post-structuralism and post-Marxism , while drawing its stylistic influences from the French avant-garde .

[ 16 ] The collective came to characterise their anti-authoritarian form of communism by the term "communization", referring to an insurrectionary period that would lead to structural changes in society.

[ 17 ] Tiqqun rejected seizing state power, which they considered would make those that took power into a new ruling class, but instead as called for a "revolution rooted in the transformation of every day life." [ 18 ] See also [ edit ] Amadeo Bordiga Communism Communist society Gilles Dauvé Guy Debord Left communism Marxism Post-Marxism Situationist International Tiqqun Ultra-leftism References [ edit ] ^ "Communisation - Troploin | libcom.org" .

libcom.org . Retrieved 2023-03-26 .

^ Noys, Benjamin, ed. (2012).

Communization and its discontents : contestation, critique, and contemporary struggles . New York: Autonomedia.

ISBN 978-1-57027-231-8 .

OCLC 757148526 .

^ "A Short Introduction to the Politics of Cruelty" . 23 July 2017.

^ Dauvé, Gilles.

"The story of our origins - Gilles Dauvé | libcom.org" .

libcom.org . Retrieved 2023-03-26 .

^ Dauvé, Gilles.

"Intakes: Back to the Situationist International | libcom.org" .

libcom.org . Retrieved 2023-03-26 .

^ Pengam 1987 , pp. 61–62.

^ Pengam 1987 , pp. 71–72.

^ Pengam 1987 , p. 72.

^ Pengam 1987 , p. 74.

^ Pengam 1987 , pp. 74–75.

^ Kinna 2012 , p. 37.

^ Nappalos 2012 , p. 308.

^ Nappalos 2012 , pp. 308–309.

^ Nappalos 2012 , pp. 308–309; Shannon 2012 , pp. 281–282.

^ Shannon 2012 , pp. 281–282.

^ Loadenthal 2017 , p. 141.

^ Loadenthal 2017 , pp. 97–98.

^ Loadenthal 2017 , p. 98.

Bibliography [ edit ] Kinna, Ruth (December 2012). "Anarchism, Individualism and Communism: William Morris's Critique of Anarcho-communism". In Prichard, Alex; Kinna, Ruth; Pinta, Saku; Berry, Dave (eds.).

Libertarian Socialism: Politics in Black and Red .

Palgrave Macmillan . pp.

35– 56.

ISBN 978-0-230-28037-3 .

Loadenthal, Michael (2017).

The Politics of Attack: A Discourse of Insurrectionary Communiqués .

Manchester University Press .

ISBN 978-1-5261-1444-0 .

JSTOR j.ctv18b5k7t .

Pengam, Alain (1987).

"Anarcho-Communism" . In Ribel, Maximilien; Crump, John (eds.).

Non-Market Socialism in the Nineteenth and Twentieth Centuries . Palgrave Macmillan. pp.

60– 82.

doi : 10.1007/978-1-349-18775-1_4 .

ISBN 978-1-349-18775-1 .

Nappalos, Scott (2012). "Ditching Class: The Praxis of Anarchist Communist Economics". In Shannon, Deric; Nocella, Anthony J.; Asimakopoulos, John (eds.).

The Accumulation of Freedom: Writings on Anarchist Economics .

AK Press . pp.

291– 312.

ISBN 978-1-84935-094-5 .

LCCN 2011936250 .

Shannon, Deric (2012). "Chopping Off the Invisible Hand: Internal Problems with Markets and Anarchist Theory, Strategy, and Vision". In Shannon, Deric; Nocella, Anthony J.; Asimakopoulos, John (eds.).

The Accumulation of Freedom: Writings on Anarchist Economics .

AK Press . pp.

276– 290.

ISBN 978-1-84935-094-5 .

LCCN 2011936250 .

Zepke, Stephen (2014). "Schizo-Revolutionary Art: Deleuze, Guattari and Communization Theory". In Buchanan, Ian; Collins, Lorna (eds.).

Deleuze and the Schizoanalysis of Visual Art .

Bloomsbury . pp.

31– 53.

ISBN 978-1-4725-3346-3 .

LCCN 2014007018 .

Further reading [ edit ] Cammate, Jacques (1975).

The Wandering of Humanity . Translated by Perlman, Fredy .

Detroit : Black & Red.

Cammate, Jacques (1995). Trotter, Alex (ed.).

This World We Must Leave and other essays .

Autonomedia .

Dauvé, Gilles ; Martin, François (2015) [1974].

Eclipse and Re-emergence of the Communist Movement .

PM Press .

ISBN 978-1-62963-043-4 .

LCCN 2014908066 .

Kropotkin, Peter (2015) [1892].

The Conquest of Bread .

London : Penguin Classics .

ISBN 978-0-141-39611-8 .

OCLC 913790063 .

Noys, Benjamin, ed. (2011).

Communization and its Discontents: Contestation, Critique, and Contemporary Struggles (1st ed.).

Autonomedia .

ISBN 978-1-57027-231-8 .

Théorie Communiste; Troploin (2008). Endnotes (ed.).

Preliminary Materials for a Balance Sheet of the 20th Century . End Notes. Vol. 1.

ISBN 978-0-9933699-0-2 .

Tiqqun (2010).

Introduction to Civil War .

Los Angeles : Semiotext(e) .

Tiqqun (2011).

This is Not A Program . Translated by David Jordan, Joshua.

Los Angeles : Semiotext(e) .

Tiqqun (2012a).

Theory of Bloom . Translated by Hurley, Robert.

Berkeley, California : LBC Books.

Tiqqun (2012b).

Preliminary Materials for a Theory of the Young-Girl . Translated by Reines, Ariana.

Los Angeles : Semiotext(e) .

v t e Anarchism Concepts Anarchy Anarchist Black Cross Anarchist criminology Anationalism Anti-authoritarianism Anti-capitalism Anti-militarism Affinity group Autonomous social center Black bloc Classless society Class struggle Consensus decision-making Conscientious objector Critique of work Decentralization Deep ecology Direct action Free love Freethought Horizontalidad Individualism Law Mutual aid Participatory politics Permanent autonomous zone Prefigurative politics Proletarian internationalism Propaganda of the deed Refusal of work Revolution Rewilding Sabotage Security culture Self-ownership Social ecology Sociocracy Somatherapy Spontaneous order Squatting Temporary autonomous zone Union of egoists Voluntary association Workers' council Issues Animal rights Capitalism Education Love and sex Nationalism Religion Violence Schools of thought Classical Individualist Egoist Illegalist Naturist Philosophical Mutualist Social Collectivist Communist Magonist Post-classical Feminist Green Primitivist Social ecology Independence Insurrectionary Pacifist Religious Christian Buddhist Jewish Without adjectives Contemporary Black Free-market Postcolonial Post-anarchist Post-left Queer Types of federation Affinity group Anarcho-syndicalism Platformism Anarchist synthesis Union of egoists Economics Communization Cooperative Cost the limit of price Decentralized planned economy Free association General strike Gift economy Give-away shop Labor voucher Market socialism Mutual bank Mutual credit Social ownership Wage slavery Workers' self-management Culture A las Barricadas Anarchist bookfair Anarcho-punk Anarchy in the U.K.

Architecture Arts DIY ethic Escuela Moderna Films Freeganism Infoshop Independent Media Center The Internationale Lifestylism May Day " No gods, no masters " Popular education " Property is theft!

" Radical cheerleading Radical environmentalism Self-managed social center Symbolism History French Revolution Revolutions of 1848 Spanish Regional Federation of the IWA Paris Commune Hague Congress Cantonal rebellion Haymarket affair Trial of the Thirty International Conference of Rome Ferrer movement Strandzha Commune Congress of Amsterdam Tragic Week High Treason Incident Manifesto of the Sixteen German Revolution of 1918–1919 Bavarian Soviet Republic 1919 United States bombings Biennio Rosso Kronstadt rebellion Makhnovshchina Amakasu Incident Alt Llobregat insurrection Anarchist insurrection of January 1933 Anarchist insurrection of December 1933 Spanish Revolution of 1936 Barcelona May Days Red inverted triangle Labadie Collection Provo May 1968 Kate Sharpley Library Carnival Against Capital 1999 Seattle WTO protests Really Really Free Market Occupy movement People Alston Armand Ba Bakunin Berkman Bonanno Bookchin Bourdin Chomsky Cleyre Day Durruti Ellul Ervin Faure Ferrer Feyerabend Giovanni Godwin Goldman González Prada Graeber Guillaume He-Yin Kanno Kōtoku Kropotkin Landauer Liu Magón Makhno Maksimov Malatesta Mett Michel Most Parsons Pi i Margall Pouget Proudhon Raichō Reclus Rocker Santillán Spooner Stirner Thoreau Tolstoy Tucker Volin Ward Warren Yarchuk Zerzan Lists Anarcho-punk bands Books Fictional characters Films Jewish anarchists Musicians Periodicals By region Africa Albania Algeria Andorra Argentina Armenia Australia Austria Azerbaijan Bangladesh Belarus Belgium Bolivia Bosnia and Herzegovina Brazil Bulgaria Canada Chile China Colombia Costa Rica Croatia Cuba Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Dominican Republic Ecuador Egypt El Salvador Estonia Finland France French Guiana Georgia Germany Greece Guatemala Hong Kong Hungary Iceland India Indonesia Iran Ireland Israel Italy Japan Korea Latvia Malaysia Mexico Monaco Mongolia Morocco Netherlands New Zealand Nicaragua Nigeria Norway Panama Paraguay Peru Philippines Poland Portugal Romania Russia Serbia Singapore South Africa Spain Sweden Switzerland Syria ( DAANES ) Taiwan Timor-Leste Tunisia Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom United States ( Puerto Rico ) Uruguay Venezuela Vietnam Related topics Anarcho-capitalism Anti-corporatism Anti-consumerism Anti-fascism Anti-globalization Anti-statism Anti-war movement Autarchism Autonomism Communism Definition of anarchism and libertarianism Dual power IWA Labour movement Left communism Left-libertarianism Libertarianism Libertarian socialism Marxism National-anarchism Relationship between Friedrich Nietzsche and Max Stirner Situationist International Socialism Spontaneous order Anarchism portal Category Outline Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Communization&oldid=1300913551 " Categories : Communism Political theories Anarchist theory Marxism Left communism Libertarian socialism Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with excerpts This page was last edited on 17 July 2025, at 02:46 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Communization 10 languages Add topic

