Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Description Toggle Description subsection 1.1 Terminology 2 Classification 3 History 4 Construction 5 Configurations 6 Tether management 7 Applications Toggle Applications subsection 7.1 Survey 7.2 Support of diving operations 7.3 Military 7.4 Science 7.4.1 Educational outreach 7.4.2 List of scientific ROVs 7.5 Media 7.6 Hobby 7.7 STEM education 8 See also 9 References 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Remotely operated underwater vehicle 22 languages Català Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español فارسی Français Italiano Lietuvių Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Română Русский Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikinews Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia A tethered underwater mobile device operated by a remote crew A science ROV being retrieved by an oceanographic research vessel A remotely operated underwater vehicle ( ROUV ) [ 1 ] or remotely operated vehicle ( ROV ) is a free-swimming submersible craft.

ROVs are used to perform underwater observation, inspection and physical tasks such as valve operations, hydraulic functions and other general tasks within the subsea oil and gas industry , military, scientific and other applications. ROVs can also carry tooling packages for undertaking specific tasks such as pull-in and connection of flexible flowlines and umbilicals, and component replacement.

[ 2 ] They are often used to do research and commercial work at great depths beyond the capacities of most submersibles and divers.

[ 3 ] Description [ edit ] This meaning is different from remote control vehicles operating on land or in the air because ROVs are designed specifically to function in underwater environments, where conditions such as high pressure, limited visibility, and the effects of buoyancy and water currents pose unique challenges. While land and aerial vehicles use wireless communication for control, ROVs typically rely on a physical connection, such as a tether or umbilical cable, to transmit power, video, and data signals, ensuring reliable operation even at great depths. The tether also provides a stable means of communication, which is crucial in underwater conditions where radio waves are absorbed quickly by water, making wireless signals ineffective for long-range underwater use.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] An ROV uses a torque wrench to adjust a valve in an underwater oil and gas field.

ROVs are unoccupied, usually highly maneuverable, and operated by a crew either aboard a vessel/floating platform or on proximate land. They are common in deepwater industries such as offshore hydrocarbon extraction. They are generally, but not necessarily, linked to a host ship by a neutrally buoyant tether or, often when working in rough conditions or in deeper water, a load-carrying umbilical cable is used along with a tether management system (TMS). The TMS is either a garage-like device which contains the ROV during lowering through the splash zone or, on larger work-class ROVs, a separate assembly mounted on top of the ROV. The purpose of the TMS is to lengthen and shorten the tether so the effect of cable drag where there are underwater currents is minimized. The umbilical cable is an armored cable that contains a group of electrical conductors and fiber optics that carry electric power, video, and data signals between the operator and the TMS. Where used, the TMS then relays the signals and power for the ROV down the tether cable. Once at the ROV, the electric power is distributed between the components of the ROV. However, in high-power applications, most of the electric power drives a high-power electric motor which drives a hydraulic pump . The pump is then used for propulsion and to power equipment such as torque tools and manipulator arms where electric motors would be too difficult to implement subsea. Most ROVs are equipped with at least a video camera and lights. Additional equipment is commonly added to expand the vehicle's capabilities. These may include sonars , magnetometers , a still camera, a manipulator or cutting arm, water samplers, and instruments that measure water clarity, water temperature, water density, sound velocity, light penetration, and temperature.

[ 6 ] Terminology [ edit ] All users of the machines use the term remotely operated vehicle (ROV).

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] [ 9 ] [ 2 ] The term remotely operated underwater vehicle (ROUV) is a creation of wikipedia.

Classification [ edit ] Submersible ROVs are normally classified into categories based on their size, weight, ability or power. Some common ratings are: Micro - typically Micro-class ROVs are very small in size and weight. Today's Micro-Class ROVs can weigh less than 3 kg. These ROVs are used as an alternative to a diver, specifically in places where a diver might not be able to physically enter such as a sewer, pipeline or small cavity.

Mini - typically Mini-Class ROVs weigh in around 15 kg. Mini-Class ROVs are also used as a diver alternative. One person may be able to transport the complete ROV system out with them on a small boat, deploy it and complete the job without outside help. Some Micro and Mini classes are referred to as "eyeball"-class to differentiate them from ROVs that may be able to perform intervention tasks.

General - typically less than 5 HP (propulsion); occasionally small three finger manipulators grippers have been installed, such as on the very early RCV 225. These ROVs may be able to carry a sonar unit and are usually used on light survey applications. Typically the maximum working depth is less than 1,000 metres though one has been developed to go as deep as 7,000 m.

Inspection Class - these are typically rugged commercial or industrial use observation and data gathering ROVs - typically equipped with live-feed video, still photography, sonar, and other data collection sensors. Inspection Class ROVs can also have manipulator arms for light work and object manipulation.

Light Workclass - typically less than 50 hp (propulsion). These ROVs may be able to carry some manipulators. Their chassis may be made from polymers such as polyethylene rather than the conventional stainless steel or aluminium alloys. They typically have a maximum working depth less than 2000 m.

Heavy Workclass - typically less than 220 hp (propulsion) with an ability to carry at least two manipulators. They have a working depth up to 3500 m.

Trenching & Burial - typically more than 200 hp (propulsion) and not usually greater than 500 hp (while some do exceed that) with an ability to carry a cable laying sled and work at depths up to 6000 m in some cases.

Submersible ROVs may be "free swimming" where they operate neutrally buoyant on a tether directly from the launch ship or platform, or they may be "garaged" where they operate from a heavy submersible "garage" or "tophat" on a tether deployed from the garage which is lowered from the ship or platform. Both techniques have their pros and cons; [ clarification needed ] however very deep work is normally done with a garage.

[ 10 ] History [ edit ] In the 1970s and '80s the Royal Navy used "Cutlet", a remotely operated submersible, to recover practice torpedoes and mines. RCA (Noise) maintained the "Cutlet 02" System based at BUTEC ranges, whilst the "03" system was based at the submarine base on the Clyde and was operated and maintained by RN personnel.

A Royal Navy ROV Cutlet used in the 1950s to retrieve practice torpedoes and mines The U.S. Navy funded most of the early ROV technology development in the 1960s into what was then named a "Cable-Controlled Underwater Recovery Vehicle" (CURV). This created the capability to perform deep-sea rescue operation and recover objects from the ocean floor, such as a nuclear bomb lost in the Mediterranean Sea after the 1966 Palomares B-52 crash . Building on this technology base; the offshore oil and gas industry created the work-class ROVs to assist in the development of offshore oil fields. More than a decade after they were first introduced, ROVs became essential in the 1980s when much of the new offshore development exceeded the reach of human divers. During the mid-1980s the marine ROV industry suffered from serious stagnation in technological development caused in part by a drop in the price of oil and a global economic recession. Since then, technological development in the ROV industry has accelerated and today ROVs perform numerous tasks in many fields. Their tasks range from simple inspection of subsea structures, pipelines , and platforms, to connecting pipelines and placing underwater manifolds. They are used extensively both in the initial construction of a sub-sea development and the subsequent repair and maintenance.

[ 11 ] The oil and gas industry has expanded beyond the use of work class ROVs to mini ROVs, which can be more useful in shallower environments. They are smaller in size, oftentimes allowing for lower costs and faster deployment times.

[ 12 ] Submersible ROVs have been used to identify many historic shipwrecks, including the RMS Titanic , the Bismarck , USS Yorktown , the SM U-111 , and SS Central America . In some cases, such as the Titanic and the SS Central America , ROVs have been used to recover material from the sea floor and bring it to the surface, [ 13 ] [ 14 ] the most recent being in July 2024 during a Titanic expedition in recovering artefacts for the first time through a magnetometer .

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] While the oil and gas industry uses the majority of ROVs, other applications include science, military, and salvage. The military uses ROV for tasks such as mine clearing and inspection. Science usage is discussed below.

Construction [ edit ] Work-class ROVs are built with a large flotation pack on top of an aluminium chassis to provide the necessary buoyancy to perform a variety of tasks. The sophistication of construction of the aluminum frame varies depending on the manufacturer's design.

Syntactic foam is often used for the flotation material. A tooling skid may be fitted at the bottom of the system to accommodate a variety of sensors or tooling packages. By placing the light components on the top and the heavy components on the bottom, the overall system has a large separation between the center of buoyancy and the center of gravity : this provides stability and the stiffness to do work underwater.

Thrusters are placed between center of buoyancy and center of gravity to maintain the attitude stability of the robot in maneuvers. Various thruster configurations and control algorithms can be used to give appropriate positional and attitude control during the operations, particularly in high current waters. Thrusters are usually in a balanced vector configuration to provide the most precise control possible.

Electrical components can be in oil-filled water tight compartments or one-atmosphere compartments to protect them from corrosion in seawater and being crushed by the extreme pressure exerted on the ROV while working deep. The ROV will be fitted with thrusters, cameras , lights, tether, a frame, and pilot controls to perform basic work.

[ 17 ] Additional sensors, such as manipulators and sonar, can be fitted as needed for specific tasks.

[ 18 ] It is common to find ROVs with two robotic arms; each manipulator may have a different gripping jaw. The cameras may also be guarded for protection against collisions.

The majority of the work-class ROVs are built as described above; however, this is not the only style in ROV building method. Smaller ROVs can have very different designs, each appropriate to its intended task. Larger ROVs are commonly deployed and operated from vessels, so the ROV may have landing skids for retrieval to the deck.

Configurations [ edit ] Remotely operated vehicles have three basic configurations. Each of these brings specific limitations.

Open or box frame ROVs - this is the most familiar of the ROV configurations - consisting of an open frame where all the operational sensors, thrusters, and mechanical components are enclosed. These are useful for free-swimming in light currents (less than 4 knots based upon manufacturer specifications). These are not suitable for towed applications due to their very poor hydrodynamic design. Most Work-Class and Heavy Work-Class ROVs are based upon this configuration.

[ 19 ] Torpedo shaped ROVs - this is a common configuration for data gathering or inspection class ROVs. The torpedo shape offers low hydrodynamic resistance, but comes with significant control limitations. The torpedo shape requires high speed (which is why this shape is used for military munitions) to remain positionally and attitudinally stable, but this type is highly vulnerable at high speed. At slow speeds (0–4 knots) suffers from numerous instabilities, such as tether induced roll and pitch, current induced roll, pitch, and yaw. It has limited control surfaces at the tail or stern, which easily cause over compensation instabilities. These are frequently referred to as "Tow Fish", since they are more often used as a towed ROV.

[ 19 ] Tether management [ edit ] ROVs require a tether, or an umbilical, (unlike an AUV) in order to transmit power and data between the vehicle and the surface. The size and weight of the tether should be considered: too large of a tether will adversely affect the drag of the vehicle, and too small may not be robust enough for lifting requirements during launch and recovery.

The tether is typically spooled onto a tether management system (TMS) which helps manage the tether so that it does not become tangled or knotted. In some situations it can be used as a winch to lower or recover the vehicle.

[ 20 ] Applications [ edit ] Survey [ edit ] Tim Renson explains the use of a ROV for inspecting mussel farms.

Survey or inspection ROVs are generally smaller than work class ROVs and are often sub-classified as either Class I: Observation Only or Class II Observation with payload.

[ 21 ] They are used to assist with hydrographic survey, i.e. the location and positioning of subsea structures, and also for inspection work for example pipeline surveys, jacket inspections and marine hull inspection of vessels. Survey ROVs (also known as "eyeballs"), although smaller than workclass, often have comparable performance with regard to the ability to hold position in currents, and often carry similar tools and equipment - lighting, cameras, sonar, ultra-short baseline (USBL) beacon, Raman spectrometer , [ 22 ] and strobe flasher depending on the payload capability of the vehicle and the needs of the user.

Support of diving operations [ edit ] This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( February 2021 ) ROV operations in conjunction with simultaneous diving operations are under the overall supervision of the diving supervisor for safety reasons.

[ 7 ] The International Marine Contractors Association (IMCA) published guidelines for the offshore operation of ROVs in combined operations with divers in the document Remotely Operated Vehicle Intervention During Diving Operations (IMCA D 054, IMCA R 020), intended for use by both contractors and clients.

[ 23 ] Remotely operated vehicles might be used during Submarine rescue operations.

Military [ edit ] See also: Status-6 Oceanic Multipurpose System and Orca (AUV) ROVs have been used by several navies for decades, primarily for minehunting and minebreaking.

AN/SLQ-48 Mine Neutralization Vehicle In October 2008 the U.S. Navy began to improve its locally piloted rescue systems, based on the Mystic DSRV and support craft, with a modular system, the SRDRS, based on a tethered, occupied ROV called a pressurized rescue module (PRM). This followed years of tests and exercises with submarines from the fleets of several nations.

[ 24 ] It also uses the uncrewed Sibitzky ROV for disabled submarine surveying and preparation of the submarine for the PRM.

The US Navy also uses an ROV called AN/SLQ-48 Mine Neutralization Vehicle (MNV) for mine warfare. It can go 1,000 yards (910 m) away from the ship due to a connecting cable, and can reach 2,000 feet (610 m) deep. The mission packages available for the MNV are known as MP1, MP2, and MP3.

[ 25 ] The MP1 is a cable cutter to surface the moored mine for recovery exploitation or explosive ordnance disposal (EOD).

The MP2 is a bomblet of 75 lb (34 kg) polymer-bonded explosive PBXN-103 high explosive for neutralizing bottom/ground mines.

The MP3 is a moored mine cable gripper and a float with the MP2 bomblet combination to neutralize moored mines underwater.

The charges are detonated by acoustic signal from the ship.

The AN/BLQ-11 autonomous uncrewed undersea vehicle (UUV) is designed for covert mine countermeasure capability and can be launched from certain submarines.

[ 26 ] The U.S.Navy's ROVs are only on Avenger-class mine countermeasures ships . After the grounding of USS Guardian (MCM-5) and decommissioning of USS Avenger (MCM-1) , and USS Defender (MCM-2) , only 11 US Minesweepers remain operating in the coastal waters of Bahrain ( USS Sentry (MCM-3) , USS Devastator (MCM-6) , USS Gladiator (MCM-11) and USS Dextrous (MCM-13) ), Japan ( USS Patriot (MCM-7) , USS Pioneer (MCM-9) , USS Warrior (MCM-10) and USS Chief (MCM-14) ), and California ( USS Champion (MCM-4) , USS Scout (MCM-8) , and USS Ardent (MCM-12) ).

[ 27 ] During August 19, 2011, a Boeing -made robotic submarine dubbed Echo Ranger was being tested for possible use by the U.S. military to stalk enemy waters, patrol local harbors for national security threats and scour ocean floors to detect environmental hazards.

[ 28 ] The Norwegian Navy inspected the ship Helge Ingstad by the Norwegian Blueye Pioneer underwater drone.

[ 29 ] As their abilities grow, smaller ROVs are also increasingly being adopted by navies, coast guards, and port authorities around the globe, including the U.S. Coast Guard and U.S. Navy, Royal Netherlands Navy, the Norwegian Navy, the Royal Navy and the Saudi Border Guard. They have also been widely adopted by police departments and search and recovery teams. Useful for a variety of underwater inspection tasks such as explosive ordnance disposal (EOD), meteorology, port security, mine countermeasures (MCM), and maritime intelligence, surveillance, reconnaissance (ISR).

[ 30 ] Science [ edit ] Image taken by a ROV of krill feeding on ice algae in Antarctica A ROV's suction device about to capture a specimen of the deep sea octopus Cirroteuthis muelleri ROVs are also used extensively by the scientific community to study the ocean. A number of deep sea animals and plants have been discovered or studied in their natural environment through the use of ROVs; examples include the jellyfish Stellamedusa ventana and the eel-like halosaurs . In the US, cutting-edge work is done at several public and private oceanographic institutions, including the Monterey Bay Aquarium Research Institute (MBARI), the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution (WHOI) (with Nereus ), and the University of Rhode Island / Institute for Exploration (URI/IFE).

[ 31 ] [ 32 ] In Europe, Alfred Wegener Institute use ROVs for Arctic and Antarctic surveys of sea ice, including measuring ice draft, [ 33 ] light transmittance, [ 34 ] sediments, oxygen, nitrate, seawater temperature, and salinity. For these purposes, it is equipped with a single- and multibeam sonar, spectroradiometer , manipulator, fluorometer , conductivity/ temperature/depth (salinity measurement) (CTD), optode , and UV-spectrometer.

[ 35 ] Science ROVs take many shapes and sizes. Since good video footage is a core component of most deep-sea scientific research, research ROVs tend to be outfitted with high-output lighting systems and broadcast quality cameras.

[ 36 ] Depending on the research being conducted, a science ROV will be equipped with various sampling devices and sensors. Many of these devices are one-of-a-kind, state-of-the-art experimental components that have been configured to work in the extreme environment of the deep ocean. Science ROVs also incorporate a good deal of technology that has been developed for the commercial ROV sector, such as hydraulic manipulators and highly accurate subsea navigation systems. They are also used for underwater archaeology projects such as the Mardi Gras Shipwreck Project in the Gulf of Mexico [ 37 ] [ 38 ] and the CoMAS project [ 39 ] in the Mediterranean Sea.

[ 40 ] There are several larger high-end systems that are notable for their capabilities and applications. MBARI's Tiburon vehicle cost over $6 million US dollars to develop and is used primarily for midwater and hydrothermal research on the West Coast of the US.

[ 41 ] WHOI's Jason system has made many significant contributions to deep-sea oceanographic research and continues to work all over the globe. URI/IFE's Hercules ROV is one of the first science ROVs to fully incorporate a hydraulic propulsion system and is uniquely outfitted to survey and excavate ancient and modern shipwrecks. The Canadian Scientific Submersible Facility ROPOS system is continually used by several leading ocean sciences institutions and universities for challenging tasks such as deep-sea vents recovery and exploration to the maintenance and deployment of ocean observatories.

[ 42 ] Educational outreach [ edit ] The SeaPerch Remotely Operated Underwater Vehicle (ROV) educational program is an educational tool and kit that allows elementary, middle, and high-school students to construct a simple, remotely operated underwater vehicle, from polyvinyl chloride (PVC) pipe and other readily made materials. The SeaPerch program teaches students basic skills in ship and submarine design and encourages students to explore naval architecture and marine and ocean engineering concepts.

SeaPerch is sponsored by the Office of Naval Research , as part of the National Naval Responsibility for Naval Engineering (NNRNE), and the program is managed by the Society of Naval Architects and Marine Engineers .

[ 43 ] ROV Ventana , Monterey, California , 1996 Another innovative use of ROV technology was during the Mardi Gras Shipwreck Project. The "Mardi Gras Shipwreck" sank some 200 years ago about 35 miles off the coast of Louisiana in the Gulf of Mexico in 4,000 feet (1,200 meters) of water. The shipwreck, whose real identity remains a mystery, lay forgotten at the bottom of the sea until it was discovered in 2002 by an oilfield inspection crew working for the Okeanos Gas Gathering Company (OGGC). In May 2007, an expedition, led by Texas A&M University and funded by OGGC under an agreement with the Minerals Management Service (now BOEM ), was launched to undertake the deepest scientific archaeological excavation ever attempted at that time to study the site on the seafloor and recover artifacts for eventual public display in the Louisiana State Museum . As part of the educational outreach Nautilus Productions in partnership with BOEM , Texas A&M University, the Florida Public Archaeology Network [ 44 ] and Veolia Environmental produced a one-hour HD documentary [ 45 ] about the project, short videos for public viewing and provided video updates during the expedition.

[ 46 ] Video footage from the ROV was an integral part of this outreach and used extensively in the Mystery Mardi Gras Shipwreck documentary.

[ 47 ] The Marine Advanced Technology Education (MATE) Center uses ROVs to teach middle school, high school, community college, and university students about ocean-related careers and help them improve their science, technology, engineering, and math skills. MATE's annual student ROV competition challenges student teams from all over the world to compete with ROVs that they design and build. The competition uses realistic ROV-based missions that simulate a high-performance workplace environment, focusing on a different theme that exposes students to many different aspects of marine-related technical skills and occupations. The ROV competition is organized by MATE and the Marine Technology Society's ROV Committee and funded by organizations such as the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA), National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), and Oceaneering , and many other organizations that recognize the value of highly trained students with technology skills such as ROV designing, engineering, and piloting. MATE was established with funding from the National Science Foundation and is headquartered at Monterey Peninsula College in Monterey, California .

[ 48 ] List of scientific ROVs [ edit ] ROV name Operator Years in operation Jason WHOI 1988–present [ 49 ] VICTOR FOF 2002–present [ 50 ] Nereus WHOI 2009–2014 [ 51 ] ISIS National Oceanography Centre 2006–present [ 52 ] SuBastian Schmidt Ocean Institute 2016–present [ 53 ] ROV Tiburon MBARI 1996–2008 [ 54 ] ROV Ventana MBARI 1988–present [ 55 ] [ 56 ] ROV Doc Ricketts MBARI 2009–present [ 57 ] [ 58 ] Luʻukai University of Hawaiʻi at Mānoa 2013–present [ 59 ] V8 Offshore University of Gothenburg 2011–present [ 60 ] ROV Hercules Nautilus Live Ocean Exploration Trust 2003–present [ 61 ] Ægir6000 UiB 2015–present [ 62 ] ROV Kiel GEOMAR 2007–present [ 63 ] Deep Discoverer Global Foundation for Ocean Exploration 2013–present [ 64 ] [ 65 ] Kaikō JAMSTEC 1993–2003 [ 66 ] ABISMO JAMSTEC 2007–present [ 67 ] ROPOS Canadian Scientific Submergence Facility 1986–present [ 68 ] AURORA REV Ocean 2021–present [ 69 ] MARUM-QUEST MARUM 2003–present [ 70 ] MARUM-SQUID MARUM 2015–present [ 71 ] ISIS University of Southampton 2003–present [ 72 ] Media [ edit ] BlueROV2 equipped with 4K camera As cameras and sensors have evolved and vehicles have become more agile and simple to pilot, ROVs have become popular particularly with documentary filmmakers due to their ability to access deep, dangerous, and confined areas unattainable by divers. There is no limit to how long an ROV can be submerged and capturing footage, which allows for previously unseen perspectives to be gained.

[ 73 ] ROVs have been used in the filming of several documentaries, including Nat Geo's Shark Men and The Dark Secrets of the Lusitania and the BBC Wildlife Special Spy in the Huddle.

[ 74 ] Due to their extensive use by military, law enforcement, and coastguard services, ROVs have also featured in crime dramas such as the popular CBS series CSI .

Hobby [ edit ] With an increased interest in the ocean by many people, both young and old, and the increased availability of once expensive and non-commercially available equipment, ROVs have become a popular hobby amongst many. This hobby involves the construction of small ROVs that generally are made out of PVC piping and often can dive to depths between 50 and 100 feet but some have managed to get to 300 feet.

STEM education [ edit ] This new interest in ROVs has led to the formation of many competitions, including MATE (Marine Advanced Technology Education), NURC (National Underwater Robotics Challenge), and RoboSub .

[ 75 ] These are competitions in which competitors, most commonly schools and other organizations, compete against each other in a series of tasks using ROVs that they have built.

[ 76 ] Most hobby ROVs are tested in swimming pools and lakes where the water is calm, however some have tested their own personal ROVs in the sea. Doing so, however, creates many difficulties due to waves and currents that can cause the ROV to stray off course or struggle to push through the surf due to the small size of engines that are fitted to most hobby ROVs.

[ 77 ] See also [ edit ] Autonomous underwater vehicle – Uncrewed underwater vehicle with autonomous guidance system Echo Ranger – Marine autonomous underwater vehicle built by Boeing Eelume – An autonomous underwater vehicle for inspection, maintenance, and repair Global Explorer ROV – Deep water science and survey remotely operated vehicle Helix Energy Solutions Group – Provider of offshore services and ROV operations Nereus (underwater vehicle) – Hybrid remotely operated or autonomous underwater vehicle PantheROV – Remotely operated vehicle built by undergraduate students at the University of Wisconsin–Milwaukee Scorpio ROV – Work class remotely operated underwater vehicle Subsea technology – Technology of submerged operations in the sea Underwater acoustic positioning system – System for tracking and navigation of underwater vehicles or divers using acoustic signals UNESCO Convention on the Protection of the Underwater Cultural Heritage – Treaty adopted on 2 November 2001 VideoRay UROVs – Series of inspection class remotely operated underwater vehicles Robotic non-destructive testing – Method of inspection using remotely operated tools Radio-controlled submarine – Scale model of a submarine that can be steered via radio control.

Unmanned underwater vehicle – Submersible vehicles that can operate underwater without a human occupant References [ edit ] ^ He, Y.; Wang, DB; Ali, ZA. (2020).

"A review of different designs and control models of remotely operated underwater vehicle" .

Measurement and Control .

53 ((9-10)): 1561– 1570.

doi : 10.1177/0020294020952483 .

^ a b "ISO 13628-8:2002: Petroleum and natural gas industries — Design and operation of subsea production systems — Part 8: Remotely Operated Vehicle (ROV) interfaces on subsea production systems" .

ISO . Retrieved 2023-02-19 .

^ "Expeditions to the Titanic Wreck Site" .

www.discovertitanic.com . Retrieved 2024-08-17 .

^ "Remote Systems & ROV Division" .

IMCA . Retrieved 2024-10-25 .

^ "Underwater Vehicles - Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution" .

www.whoi.edu/ . Retrieved 2024-10-25 .

^ "Remotely Operated Vehicle Design and Function" .

Maritime About . Archived from the original on 1 July 2016 . Retrieved 4 June 2016 .

^ a b Staff (February 2014). IMCA International Code of Practice for Offshore Diving.

IMCA D 014 Rev. 2 (Report). London: International Marine Contractor's Association.

^ Diving Regulations 2009 .

Occupational Health and Safety Act 85 of 1993 – Regulations and Notices – Government Notice R41 (Report). Pretoria: Government Printer. Archived from the original on 2016-11-04 . Retrieved 2019-03-16 – via Southern African Legal Information Institute.

^ "IMCA C 005: Guidance on competence assurance and assessment: Remote systems & ROV Division" (Rev. 3 ed.).

International Marine Contractors Association . January 2011 . Retrieved 16 March 2019 .

^ "ROV Categories - Summary" .

Remotely Operated Vehicle Committee . Archived from the original on 17 September 2016 . Retrieved 4 June 2016 .

^ "What Are Rov's" .

Kmex Group . Retrieved 4 June 2016 .

^ Chevron Policy, Government and Public Affairs.

"Mini ROV makes waves in subsea inspections" .

chevron.com . Retrieved 2024-01-12 .

^ "Ships & Technology used during the Titanic Expeditions" .

Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution . Retrieved 4 June 2016 .

^ @NatGeoUK (2022-09-30).

"Exclusive: Wreck of fabled WWI German U-boat found off Virginia" .

National Geographic . Retrieved 2024-01-11 .

^ "TITANIC Expedition 2024" .

www.discovertitanic.com . Retrieved 2024-08-17 .

^ "Titanic mission to map wreck in greatest-ever detail" .

www.bbc.com . 12 July 2024 . Retrieved 2024-08-12 .

^ "What is an Underwater ROV?" .

Blue Robotics . Retrieved 2024-01-12 .

^ "What Are Underwater ROVs & How Are They Used?" .

reachrobotics.com . 2021-10-08 . Retrieved 2023-03-29 .

^ a b "Remotely Operated Vehicle Committee of the Marine Technology Society" .

rov.org . Retrieved 2017-10-10 .

^ Bai, Yong (2019).

Subsea Engineering Handbook (Second ed.). Elsevier Science.

ISBN 978-0-12-812622-6 .

^ Staff (7 August 2015).

"World-Wide ROV Stats for 2014" .

IMCA . Retrieved 18 August 2016 .

^ Teague, Jonathan; Megson-Smith, David; Verbelen, Yannick; Scott, Thomas (6 March 2022).

"Underwater Spectroscopic Techniques for In-situ Nuclear Waste Characterisation" .

Proceedings of WM2022 . Nuclear Waste Management (WM2022). Phoenix, AZ.

^ "IMCA Issues ROV Guide During Diving Ops" .

www.offshore-energy.biz . Offshore Energy. 2 February 2015 . Retrieved 10 February 2021 .

^ Tarantola, Andrew (11 October 2012).

"This ROV Dives 2,000 Feet To Save Sailors on a Sunken Submarine" .

Gizmodo . Retrieved 4 June 2016 .

^ "AN/SLQ-48 - Mine Neutralization Vehicle" .

FAS . Retrieved 4 June 2016 .

^ "AN/BLQ-11 Autonomous Unmanned Undersea Vehicle" .

NavalDrones . Retrieved 4 June 2016 .

^ Dan Petty.

"The US Navy – Fact File: Mine Countermeasures Ships - MCM" . Archived from the original on May 27, 2005 . Retrieved 25 May 2015 .

^ Hennigan, W. J. (2011-08-19).

"Boeing Co. tests submarine drone off Santa Catalina Island" .

Los Angeles Times . Retrieved 25 May 2015 .

^ Blueye Robotics (2018-12-19), The Norwegian Navy piloting the Blueye Pioneer underwater drone | Frigate Helge Ingstad , retrieved 2019-02-25 ^ "Blueprint Lab and VideoRay in Partnership for New EOD Tool for US Navy" .

ONT . Ocean News. 23 Mar 2020 . Retrieved 14 May 2020 .

^ HG Greene; DS Stakes; DL Orange; JP Barry; BH Robison (1993).

"Application of a remotely operated vehicle in geologic mapping of Monterey Bay, California, USA" .

Heine and Crane (Eds). Diving for Science...1993 . Proceedings of the American Academy of Underwater Sciences (13th Annual Scientific Diving Symposium). Archived from the original on March 13, 2009 . Retrieved 2008-07-11 .

^ C Harrold, K Light & S Lisin. (1993).

"Distribution, Abundance, and Utilization of Drift Macrophytes in a Nearshore Submarine Canyon System" .

In: Heine and Crane (Eds). Diving for Science...1993 . Proceedings of the American Academy of Underwater Sciences (13th annual Scientific Diving Symposium). Archived from the original on March 13, 2009 . Retrieved 2008-07-11 .

^ Salganik, Evgenii; Katlein, Christian; Lange, Benjamin A.; Matero, Ilkka; Lei, Ruibo; Fong, Allison A.; Fons, Steven W.; Divine, Dmitry; Oggier, Marc; Castellani, Giulia; Bozzato, Deborah; Chamberlain, Emelia J.; Hoppe, Clara J. M.; Müller, Oliver; Gardner, Jessie; Rinke, Annette; Pereira, Patric Simões; Ulfsbo, Adam; Marsay, Chris; Webster, Melinda A.; Maus, Sönke; Høyland, Knut V.; Granskog, Mats A. (2023).

"Temporal evolution of under-ice meltwater layers and false bottoms and their impact on summer Arctic sea ice mass balance" .

Elementa: Science of the Anthropocene .

11 (1). University of California Press: 00035.

Bibcode : 2023EleSA..11...35S .

doi : 10.1525/elementa.2022.00035 .

hdl : 10037/30456 .

ISSN 2325-1026 .

S2CID 257937347 .

^ Anhaus, Philipp; Katlein, Christian; Nicolaus, Marcel; Arndt, Stefanie; Jutila, Arttu; Haas, Christian (2021-12-17).

"Snow Depth Retrieval on Arctic Sea Ice Using Under-Ice Hyperspectral Radiation Measurements" .

Frontiers in Earth Science .

9 . Frontiers Media SA: 1174.

Bibcode : 2021FrEaS...9.1174A .

doi : 10.3389/feart.2021.711306 .

ISSN 2296-6463 .

^ Katlein, Christian; Schiller, Martin; Belter, Hans J.; Coppolaro, Veronica; Wenslandt, David; Nicolaus, Marcel (2017-09-04).

"A New Remotely Operated Sensor Platform for Interdisciplinary Observations under Sea Ice" .

Frontiers in Marine Science .

4 . Frontiers Media SA: 281.

Bibcode : 2017FrMaS...4..281K .

doi : 10.3389/fmars.2017.00281 .

hdl : 10013/epic.51540.d001 .

ISSN 2296-7745 .

^ Reed JK, Koenig CC, Shepard AN, Gilmore Jr RG (2007).

"Long Term Monitoring of a Deep-water Coral Reef: Effects of Bottom Trawling" .

In: NW Pollock, JM Godfrey (Eds.) the Diving for Science…2007 . Proceedings of the American Academy of Underwater Sciences (Twenty–sixth annual Scientific Diving Symposium). Archived from the original on November 22, 2008 . Retrieved 2008-07-11 .

^ "Projects, Mardi Gras" .

Florida Public Archaeology Network . University of West Florida. Archived from the original on 9 November 2017 . Retrieved 8 November 2017 .

^ "Mardi Gras Project" .

Center for Maritime Archaeology & Conservation .

^ Bruno, F.; et al. (2016).

"The CoMAS project: new materials and tools for improving the in-situ documentation, restoration and conservation of underwater archaeological remains" .

Marine Technology Society Journal .

50 (4): 108– 118.

doi : 10.4031/MTSJ.50.4.2 .

^ A ROV for supporting the planned maintenance in underwater archaeological sites . MTS/IEEE OCEANS 2015 - Genova: Discovering Sustainable Ocean Energy for a New World.

doi : 10.1109/OCEANS-Genova.2015.7271602 .

^ TM Shank, DJ Fornari, M Edwards, R Haymon, M Lilley, K Von Damm, and RA Lutz . (1994).

"Rapid Development of Biological Community Structure and Associated Geological Features at Hydrothermal Vents at 9-10 North, East Pacific Rise" .

In: M DeLuca (Ed). Diving for Science...1994 . Proceedings of the American Academy of Underwater Sciences (14th annual Scientific Diving Symposium). Archived from the original on March 13, 2009 . Retrieved 2008-07-11 .

{{ cite journal }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ "ROPOS - Canadian Scientific Submersible Facility" .

Ropos . Retrieved 4 June 2016 .

^ "seaperch.org :: The official site of SeaPerch" . Retrieved 25 May 2015 .

^ "FPAN Home" .

Florida Public Archaeology .

^ Landis, Nomee (2008).

"Mystery Mardi Gras Shipwreck" .

Nautilus Productions .

^ Faulk, Kimberly L; Allen, Rick (September 2017). "Lights, Camera ... Shipwreck!?! Multimedia at Four Thousand Feet".

Historical Archaeology .

51 (3): 418– 424.

doi : 10.1007/s41636-017-0051-1 .

S2CID 164446605 .

^ Opdyke, Mark (2007).

"Mystery Mardi Gras Shipwreck Documentary" .

The Museum of Underwater Archaeology .

^ "MATE - Marine Advanced Technology Education :: Home" . Retrieved 25 May 2015 .

^ "ROV Jason/Medea - Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution" .

www.whoi.edu/ .

^ "ROV VICTOR - IFREMER/Flotte Océanographique Française" .

www.flotteoceanographique.fr/en/ .

^ "Robotic Deep-sea Vehicle Lost on Dive to 6-Mile Depth" .

www.whoi.edu/ .

^ "Deep Platforms | National Oceanography Centre" .

noc.ac.uk . Retrieved 2021-11-10 .

^ "4500 m Remotely Operated Vehicle (ROV SuBastian)" .

Schmidt Ocean Institute . 6 February 2019.

^ "Vessels and Vehicles - ROV Tiburon" .

www3.mbari.org .

^ "16,000 hours beneath the sea (and counting)" .

MBARI . 10 March 2017.

^ "ROV Ventana" .

MBARI . 24 November 2015.

^ Cardoza, Teresa (30 December 2015).

"ROV Doc Ricketts Specifications" .

MBARI .

^ "Deep Sea Exploration in the Southern California Borderland" .

Occidental College . 30 January 2020.

^ "ROV Luʻukai" .

luukai.php .

^ "Remotely Operated Vehicle" .

www.gu.se . 22 October 2021.

^ "ROV Hercules" .

nautiluslive.org . 9 May 2014.

^ "Ægir6000 (ROV)" .

University of Bergen .

^ "Cruise schedule Statistics - GEOMAR - Helmholtz-Zentrum für Ozeanforschung Kiel" .

www.geomar.de .

^ US Department of Commerce, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration.

"Remotely Operated Vehicle Deep Discoverer: Technology: Submersibles: Vessels: NOAA Office of Ocean Exploration and Research" .

oceanexplorer.noaa.gov .

^ "Deep Discoverer and Seirios – Global Foundation for Ocean Exploration" .

^ Kyo, M.; Hiyazaki, E.; Tsukioka, S.; Ochi, H.; Amitani, Y.; Tsuchiya, T.; Aoki, T.; Takagawa, S. (1995). "The sea trial of "KAIKO", the full ocean depth research ROV".

'Challenges of Our Changing Global Environment'. Conference Proceedings. OCEANS '95 MTS/IEEE . Vol. 3. pp.

1991– 1996.

doi : 10.1109/OCEANS.1995.528882 .

ISBN 0-933957-14-9 .

S2CID 110932870 .

^ Ishibashi, Shojiro; Yoshida, Hiroshi; Osawa, Hiroyuki; Inoue, Tomoya; Tahara, Junichiro; Ito, Kazuaki; Watanabe, Yohitaka; Sawa, Takao; Hyakudome, Tadahiro; Aoki, Taro (April 2008). "A ROV "ABISMO" for the Inspection and Sampling in the Deepest Ocean and Its Operation Support System".

OCEANS 2008 - MTS/IEEE Kobe Techno-Ocean . pp.

1– 6.

doi : 10.1109/OCEANSKOBE.2008.4530967 .

ISBN 978-1-4244-2125-1 .

S2CID 21881841 .

^ "CSSF-ROPOS - About Us" .

www.ropos.com .

^ "REV Ocean´s ROV "Aurora" enables scientist to collect data and samples 4km under drifting Arctic Ice" .

www.revocean.or . 25 October 2021.

^ "ROV MARUM-QUEST" .

www.marum.de . 2022-07-29.

^ "ROV MARUM-SQUID" .

www.marum.de . 2022-07-29.

^ "Lord Sainsbury in Southampton to launch UK's first deep-diving ROV facility" .

www.southampton.ac.uk . University of Southampton.

^ Landis, Nomee.

" "Mystery Mardi Gras Shipwreck" Documentary" .

Nautilus Productions . Retrieved 4 June 2016 .

^ "The Dark Secrets of the Lusitania" .

Irish Film News . Retrieved 4 June 2016 .

^ "Which Underwater Robotics Competition is Right for You?" .

Blue Robotics . Retrieved 2024-06-05 .

^ "NURC - National Underwater Robotics Challenge" .

NASA Space Grant Robotics at ASU . Archived from the original on 30 June 2016 . Retrieved 4 June 2016 .

^ " "Bart" - Argonaut Jr's Underwater ROV" .

submarineboat . Retrieved 4 June 2016 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Remotely operated underwater vehicles .

What are Underwater ROVs and What are they used for?

Remotely Operated Vehicles (ROV) , Ocean Explorer , NOAA What are Remotely Operated Vehicles (ROVs)?

[ usurped ] ROVs at the Smithsonian Ocean Portal Mystery Mardi Gras Shipwreck on YouTube v t e Mobile robots and uncrewed vehicles Aerial Unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) Unmanned combat air vehicle (UCAV) Aerobot Helicam List of unmanned aerial vehicle applications Ornithopter Ground Walking Humanoid Android Hexapod list Other Unmanned ground vehicle (UGV) Automated guided vehicle (AGV) Self-driving car Automatic train operation (ATO) list Underwater Unmanned underwater vehicle (UUV) Autonomous underwater vehicle (AUV) Intervention AUV (I-AUV) Remotely operated underwater vehicle (ROUV) Underwater glider Surface Unmanned surface vehicle (USV) Space Uncrewed spacecraft list of probes list by program list of orbiters Cargo spacecraft spaceflights to the ISS Space telescope list Other Domestic Military Rescue Medical Disability Agricultural BEAM robotics Microbotics Nanorobotics Robotics Robot locomotion Autonomous robot Autonomous logistics Radio-controlled model Remote control vehicle Remote control animal Categories Radio control Unmanned vehicles v t e Robotics Main articles Outline Glossary Index History Geography Hall of Fame Ethics Laws Competitions AI competitions Types Aerobot Anthropomorphic Humanoid Android Cyborg Gynoid Claytronics Companion Automaton Animatronic Audio-Animatronics Industrial Articulated arm Domestic Educational Entertainment Juggling Military Medical Service Disability Agricultural Food service Retail BEAM robotics Soft robotics Classifications Biorobotics Cloud robotics Continuum robot Unmanned vehicle aerial ground Mobile robot Microbotics Nanorobotics Necrobotics Robotic spacecraft Space probe Swarm Telerobotics Underwater remotely-operated Robotic fish Locomotion Tracks Walking Hexapod Climbing Electric unicycle Robotic fins Navigation and mapping Motion planning Simultaneous localization and mapping Visual odometry Vision-guided robot systems Research Evolutionary Kits Simulator Suite Open-source Software Adaptable Developmental Human–robot interaction Paradigms Perceptual Situated Ubiquitous Companies ABB Amazon Robotics Anybots Barrett Technology Boston Dynamics Doosan Robotics Energid Technologies FarmWise FANUC Figure AI Foster-Miller Harvest Automation HD Hyundai Robotics Honeybee Robotics Intuitive Surgical IRobot KUKA Rainbow Robotics Starship Technologies Symbotic Universal Robotics Wolf Robotics Yaskawa Related Critique of work Powered exoskeleton Workplace robotics safety Robotic tech vest Technological unemployment Terrainability Fictional robots Category Outline v t e Underwater diving Diving activities Diving modes Atmospheric pressure diving Freediving Saturation diving Scuba diving Snorkeling Surface oriented diving Surface-supplied diving Unmanned diving Diving equipment Cleaning and disinfection of personal diving equipment Human factors in diving equipment design List of diving equipment manufacturers Basic equipment Diving mask Snorkel Swimfin Breathing gas Bailout gas Bottom gas Breathing air Decompression gas Emergency gas supply Heliox Hydreliox Hydrox Nitrox Oxygen Travel gas Trimix Buoyancy and trim equipment Avelo diving system Buoyancy compensator Power inflator Dump valve Variable buoyancy pressure vessel Diving weighting system Ankle weights Integrated weights Trim weights Weight belt Decompression equipment Decompression buoy Decompression chamber Decompression cylinder Decompression trapeze Dive computer Diving bell Diving shot Diving stage Jersey upline Jonline Diving suit Atmospheric diving suit JIM suit Newtsuit Dry suit Sladen suit Standard diving suit Rash vest Wetsuit Dive skins Hot-water suit Helmets and masks Anti-fog Diving helmet Free-flow helmet Lightweight demand helmet Orinasal mask Reclaim helmet Shallow water helmet Standard diving helmet Diving mask Band mask Full-face mask Half mask Instrumentation Bottom timer Depth gauge Dive computer Dive timer Diving watch Helium release valve Electro-galvanic oxygen sensor Pneumofathometer Submersible pressure gauge Mobility equipment Diver propulsion vehicle Human torpedo Wet sub Diving bell Closed bell Wet bell Diving stage Swimfin Monofin PowerSwim Towboard Safety equipment Alternative air source Octopus regulator Pony bottle Bolt snap Buddy line Dive light Diver's cutting tool Diver's knife Diver's telephone Through-water communications Underwater acoustic communication Diving bell Diving safety harness Emergency gas supply Bailout block Bailout bottle Lifeline Screw gate carabiner Emergency locator beacon Rescue tether Safety helmet Shark-proof cage Snoopy loop Navigation equipment Distance line Diving compass Dive reel Line marker Surface marker buoy Silt screw Underwater breathing apparatus Atmospheric diving suit Diving cylinder Burst disc Scuba cylinder valve Diving helmet Reclaim helmet Diving regulator Mechanism of diving regulators Regulator malfunction Regulator freeze Single-hose regulator Twin-hose regulator Full-face diving mask Open-circuit scuba Scuba set Bailout bottle Decompression cylinder Independent doubles Manifolded twin set Scuba manifold Pony bottle Scuba configuration Sidemount Sling cylinder Diving rebreathers Carbon dioxide scrubber Carleton CDBA Clearance Divers Life Support Equipment Cryogenic rebreather CUMA DSEA Dolphin Halcyon PVR-BASC Halcyon RB80 IDA71 Interspiro DCSC LAR-5 LAR-6 LAR-V LARU Mark IV Amphibian Porpoise Ray Siebe Gorman CDBA Salvus Siva Surface-supplied diving equipment Air line Diver's umbilical Diving air compressor Gas panel Hookah Scuba replacement Snuba Standard diving dress Diving equipment manufacturers AP Diving Apeks Aqua Lung America Aqua Lung/La Spirotechnique Beuchat René Cavalero Cis-Lunar Cressi-Sub Dacor DESCO Dive Xtras Divex Diving Unlimited International Drägerwerk Faber Fenzy Maurice Fernez Technisub Oscar Gugen Heinke HeinrichsWeikamp Johnson Outdoors Mares Morse Diving Nemrod Oceanic Worldwide Porpoise Shearwater Research Siebe Gorman Submarine Products Suunto Diving support equipment Access equipment Boarding stirrup Diver lift Diving bell Diving ladder Diving platform (scuba) Diving stage Downline Jackstay Launch and recovery system Messenger line Moon pool Breathing gas handling Air filtration Activated carbon Hopcalite Molecular sieve Silica gel Booster pump Carbon dioxide scrubber Cascade filling system Diver's pump Diving air compressor Diving air filter Water separator High pressure breathing air compressor Low pressure breathing air compressor Gas blending Gas blending for scuba diving Gas panel Gas reclaim system Gas storage bank Gas storage quad Gas storage tube Helium analyzer Nitrox production Membrane gas separation Pressure swing adsorption Oxygen analyser Electro-galvanic oxygen sensor Oxygen compatibility Decompression equipment Air-lock Built-in breathing system Decompression tables Diving bell Bell cursor Closed bell Clump weight Launch and recovery system Wet bell Diving chamber Diving stage Recreational Dive Planner Saturation system Platforms Dive boat Canoe and kayak diving Combat rubber raiding craft Liveaboard Subskimmer Diving support vessel HMS Challenger (K07) Underwater habitat Aquarius Reef Base Continental Shelf Station Two Helgoland Habitat Scott Carpenter Space Analog Station SEALAB Tektite habitat Remotely operated underwater vehicles 8A4-class ROUV ABISMO Atlantis ROV Team COTSBot CURV Deep Drone Épaulard Global Explorer ROV Goldfish-class ROUV Kaikō ROV Kaşif ROUV Long-Term Mine Reconnaissance System Mini Rover ROV OpenROV ROV KIEL 6000 ROV PHOCA Scorpio ROV Sea Dragon-class ROV Seabed tractor Seafox drone SeaPerch SJT-class ROUV T1200 Trenching Unit VideoRay UROVs Safety equipment Diver down flag Diving shot ENOS Rescue-System Hyperbaric lifeboat Hyperbaric stretcher Jackstay Jonline Reserve gas supply General Diving spread Air spread Saturation spread Hot water system Sonar Underwater acoustic positioning system Underwater acoustic communication Freediving Activities Aquathlon Apnoea finswimming Freediving Haenyeo Pearl hunting Ama Snorkeling Spearfishing Underwater football Underwater hockey Underwater rugby Underwater target shooting Competitions Nordic Deep Vertical Blue Disciplines Constant weight (CWT) Constant weight bi-fins (CWTB) Constant weight without fins (CNF) Dynamic apnea (DYN) Dynamic apnea without fins (DNF) Free immersion (FIM) No-limits apnea (NLT) Static apnea (STA) Skandalopetra diving Variable weight apnea (VWT) Variable weight apnea without fins Equipment Diving mask Diving suit Hawaiian sling Polespear Snorkel (swimming) Speargun Swimfins Monofin Water polo cap Freedivers Deborah Andollo Simone Arrigoni Peppo Biscarini Michael Board Sara Campbell Derya Can Göçen Goran Čolak Carlos Coste Robert Croft Mandy-Rae Cruickshank Yasemin Dalkılıç Leonardo D'Imporzano Flavia Eberhard Şahika Ercümen Emma Farrell Francisco Ferreras Pierre Frolla Flavia Eberhard Mehgan Heaney-Grier Elisabeth Kristoffersen Andriy Yevhenovych Khvetkevych Loïc Leferme Enzo Maiorca Jacques Mayol Audrey Mestre Karol Meyer Kate Middleton Stéphane Mifsud Alexey Molchanov Natalia Molchanova Dave Mullins Patrick Musimu Guillaume Néry Herbert Nitsch Umberto Pelizzari Liv Philip Annelie Pompe Stig Severinsen Tom Sietas Martin Štěpánek Walter Steyn Tanya Streeter William Trubridge Devrim Cenk Ulusoy Fatma Uruk Danai Varveri Alessia Zecchini Nataliia Zharkova Kateryna Sadurska Hazards Barotrauma Drowning Freediving blackout Deep-water blackout Shallow-water blackout Hypercapnia Hypothermia Historical Ama Octopus wrestling Swimming at the 1900 Summer Olympics – Men's underwater swimming Organisations AIDA International Scuba Schools International Australian Underwater Federation British Freediving Association Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins Performance Freediving International Professional diving Occupations Ama Commercial diver Commercial offshore diver Hazmat diver Divemaster Diving instructor Diving safety officer Diving superintendent Diving supervisor Haenyeo Media diver Police diver Public safety diver Scientific diver Underwater archaeologist Military diving Army engineer diver Canadian Armed Forces Divers Clearance diver Frogman Minentaucher Royal Navy ships diver United States military divers U.S. Navy diver U.S.Navy master diver Military diving units 7th Marine Brigade Clearance Diving Branch (RAN) Commando Hubert Combat Divers Service (Lithuania) Comando Raggruppamento Subacquei e Incursori Teseo Tesei Decima Flottiglia MAS Frogman Corps (Denmark) Fuerzas Especiales Fukuryu GRUMEC Grup Gerak Khas Jagdkommando JW Formoza JW GROM JW Komandosów Kommando Spezialkräfte Marine KOPASKA MARCOS Marine Commandos Marinejegerkommandoen Marine Raider Regiment Minedykkerkommandoen Namibian Marine Corps Operational Diving Unit Naval Diving Unit (Singapore) Naval Service Diving Section Naval Special Operations Command Operational Diving Division (SA Navy) Royal Engineers Russian commando frogmen Sappers Divers Group Shayetet 13 Special Air Service Special Air Service Regiment Special Actions Detachment Special Boat Service Special Boat Squadron (Sri Lanka) Special Forces Command (Turkey) Special Forces Group (Belgium) Special Operations Battalion (Croatia) Special Service Group (Navy) Special Warfare Diving and Salvage Tactical Divers Group US Marine Corps Force Reconnaissance US Marine Corps Reconnaissance Battalions US Navy SEALs Underwater Construction Teams Underwater Demolition Command Underwater Demolition Team Underwater Offence (Turkish Armed Forces) UNGERIN Underwater work Commercial offshore diving Dive leader Diver training Recreational diver training Hazmat diving Hyperbaric welding Marine construction Offshore construction Underwater construction Media diving Pearl hunting Police diving Potable water diving Public safety diving Scientific diving Ships husbandry Sponge diving Submarine pipeline Underwater archaeology Archaeology of shipwrecks Underwater cutting and welding Underwater demolition Underwater inspection Nondestructive testing Underwater logging Underwater photography Underwater search and recovery Underwater searches Underwater videography Underwater survey Salvage diving SS Egypt Kronan La Belle SS Laurentic RMS Lusitania Mars Mary Rose USS Monitor HMS Royal George Vasa Diving contractors COMEX Helix Energy Solutions Group International Marine Contractors Association Tools and equipment Abrasive waterjet Airlift Baited remote underwater video In-water surface cleaning Brush cart Cavitation cleaning Pressure washing Pigging Hot stab Lifting bag Remotely operated underwater vehicle Thermal lance Tremie Water jetting Underwater weapons Limpet mine Speargun Hawaiian sling Polespear Underwater firearm Gyrojet Mk 1 Underwater Defense Gun Powerhead Underwater pistols Heckler & Koch P11 SPP-1 underwater pistol Underwater revolvers AAI underwater revolver Underwater rifles ADS amphibious rifle APS underwater rifle ASM-DT amphibious rifle QBS-06 Recreational diving Recreational dive sites Index of recreational dive sites List of wreck diving sites Outline of recreational dive sites Specialties Altitude diving Cave diving Deep diving Ice diving Muck diving Open-water diving Rebreather diving Sidemount diving Solo diving Technical diving Underwater photography Wreck diving Diver organisations British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Cave Divers Association of Australia (CDAA) Cave Diving Group (CDG) Comhairle Fo-Thuinn (CFT) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas (FEDAS) Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins (FFESSM) International Association for Handicapped Divers (IAHD) Quintana Roo Speleological Survey (QRSS) Woodville Karst Plain Project (WKPP) Diving tourism industry Dive center Diving in Timor-Leste Diving in the Maldives Environmental impact of recreational diving Scuba diving tourism Scuba diving in the Cayman Islands Shark tourism Sinking ships for wreck diving sites Underwater diving in Guam Diving events and festivals Diversnight Underwater Bike Race Diving safety Human factors in diving equipment design Human factors in diving safety Life-support system Safety-critical system Scuba diving fatalities Underwater diving emergency Water safety Water surface searches Diving hazards List of diving hazards and precautions Environmental Current Delta-P Entanglement hazard Overhead Silt out Wave action Equipment Freeflow Use of breathing equipment in an underwater environment Failure of diving equipment other than breathing apparatus Single point of failure Physiological Cold shock response Decompression Nitrogen narcosis Oxygen toxicity Seasickness Uncontrolled decompression Diver behaviour and competence Incompetence Overconfidence effect Panic Task loading Trait anxiety Willful violation Consequences Barotrauma Decompression sickness Drowning Hypothermia Hypoxia Hypercapnia Hyperthermia Non-freezing cold injury Diving procedures Ascending and descending Emergency ascent Boat diving Canoe and kayak diving Buddy diving buddy check Decompression Decompression practice Pyle stop Ratio decompression Dive briefing Dive log Dive planning Rule of thirds Scuba gas planning Diver communications Diver rescue Diver training Doing It Right Drift diving Gas blending for scuba diving Night diving Rebreather diving Scuba gas management Solo diving Wall diving Risk management Checklist Hazard identification and risk assessment Hazard analysis Job safety analysis Risk assessment Hyperbaric evacuation and rescue Risk control Hierarchy of hazard controls Incident pit Lockout–tagout Permit To Work Redundancy Safety data sheet Situation awareness Diving team Bellman Chamber operator Diver medical technician Diver's attendant Diving supervisor Diving systems technician Gas man Life support technician Stand-by diver Equipment safety Breathing gas quality Testing and inspection of diving cylinders Hydrostatic test Sustained load cracking Diving regulator Breathing performance of regulators Occupational safety and health Association of Diving Contractors International International Marine Contractors Association Code of practice Contingency plan Diving regulations Emergency response plan Diving safety officer Diving superintendent Diving supervisor Operations manual Standard operating procedure Diving medicine Diving disorders List of signs and symptoms of diving disorders Cramp Motion sickness Surfer's ear Pressure related Alternobaric vertigo Barostriction Barotrauma Air embolism Aerosinusitis Barodontalgia Dental barotrauma Middle ear barotrauma Pulmonary barotrauma Compression arthralgia Decompression illness Dysbarism Oxygen Freediving blackout Hyperoxia Hypoxia Oxygen toxicity Inert gases Avascular necrosis Decompression sickness Dysbaric osteonecrosis Inner ear decompression sickness Isobaric counterdiffusion Taravana High-pressure nervous syndrome Hydrogen narcosis Nitrogen narcosis Carbon dioxide Hypercapnia Hypocapnia Breathing gas contaminants Carbon monoxide poisoning Immersion related Asphyxia Drowning Hypothermia Immersion diuresis Instinctive drowning response Laryngospasm Salt water aspiration syndrome Swimming-induced pulmonary edema Treatment Demand valve oxygen therapy First aid Hyperbaric medicine Hyperbaric treatment schedules In-water recompression Oxygen therapy Therapeutic recompression Personnel Diving Medical Examiner Diving Medical Practitioner Diving Medical Technician Hyperbaric nursing Screening Atrial septal defect Effects of drugs on fitness to dive Fitness to dive Psychological fitness to dive Research Researchers in diving physiology and medicine Arthur J. Bachrach Albert R. Behnke Peter B. Bennett Paul Bert George F. Bond Robert Boyle Alf O. Brubakk Albert A. Bühlmann John R. Clarke Guybon Chesney Castell Damant Kenneth William Donald William Paul Fife John Scott Haldane Robert William Hamilton Jr.

Henry Valence Hempleman Leonard Erskine Hill Brian Andrew Hills Felix Hoppe-Seyler Christian J. Lambertsen Simon Mitchell Charles Momsen Neal W. Pollock John Rawlins Charles Wesley Shilling Edward D. Thalmann Jacques Triger Diving medical research organisations Aerospace Medical Association Divers Alert Network (DAN) Diving Diseases Research Centre (DDRC) Diving Medical Advisory Council (DMAC) European Diving Technology Committee (EDTC) European Underwater and Baromedical Society (EUBS) National Board of Diving and Hyperbaric Medical Technology Naval Submarine Medical Research Laboratory Royal Australian Navy School of Underwater Medicine Rubicon Foundation South Pacific Underwater Medicine Society (SPUMS) Undersea and Hyperbaric Medical Society (UHMS) United States Navy Experimental Diving Unit (NEDU) Law Civil liability in recreational diving Diving regulations Duty of care List of legislation regulating underwater diving Investigation of diving accidents Convention on the Protection of the Underwater Cultural Heritage History of underwater diving History of decompression research and development History of dive computers History of Diving Museum History of scuba diving List of researchers in underwater diving Lyons Maritime Museum Man in the Sea Museum Timeline of atmospheric diving suits Timeline of diving technology Pearling in Western Australia US Navy decompression models and tables Archeological sites SS Commodore USS Monitor Queen Anne's Revenge Whydah Gally Underwater art and artists The Diver Jason deCaires Taylor Engineers and inventors Jerónimo de Ayanz y Beaumont William Beebe Georges Beuchat Giovanni Alfonso Borelli Joseph-Martin Cabirol John R. Clarke Jacques Cousteau Charles Anthony Deane John Deane Louis de Corlieu Auguste Denayrouze Ted Eldred Henry Fleuss Émile Gagnan Karl Heinrich Klingert Peter Kreeft Christian J. Lambertsen Yves Le Prieur John Lethbridge Ernest William Moir Joseph Salim Peress Auguste Piccard Joe Savoie Willard Franklyn Searle Gordon Smith Augustus Siebe Pierre-Marie Touboulic Jacques Triger Historical equipment Aqua-Lung RV Calypso SP-350 Denise Magnesium torch Nikonos Porpoise regulator Standard diving dress Sub Marine Explorer Vintage scuba Diver propulsion vehicles Advanced SEAL Delivery System Cosmos CE2F series Dry Combat Submersible Human torpedo Motorised Submersible Canoe Necker Nymph R-2 Mala-class swimmer delivery vehicle SEAL Delivery Vehicle Shallow Water Combat Submersible Siluro San Bartolomeo Welfreighter Wet Nellie Military and covert operations Raid on Alexandria (1941) Sinking of the Rainbow Warrior Scientific projects 1992 cageless shark-diving expedition Mission 31 Awards and events Hans Hass Award International Scuba Diving Hall of Fame London Diving Chamber Dive Lectures NOGI Awards Women Divers Hall of Fame Incidents Dive boat incidents Sinking of MV Conception Diver rescues Alpazat cave rescue Tham Luang cave rescue Early diving John Day (carpenter) Charles Spalding Ebenezer Watson Freediving fatalities Stephen Keenan Loïc Leferme Audrey Mestre Nicholas Mevoli Natalia Molchanova Offshore diving incidents Byford Dolphin diving bell accident Drill Master diving accident Star Canopus diving accident Stena Seaspread diving accident Venture One diving accident Waage Drill II diving accident Wildrake diving accident Professional diving fatalities Roger Baldwin John Bennett Victor F. Guiel Jr.

Francis P. Hammerberg Craig M. Hoffman Peter Henry Michael Holmes Johnson Sea Link accident Edwin Clayton Link Gerard Anthony Prangley Per Skipnes Robert John Smyth Albert D. Stover Richard A. Walker Lothar Michael Ward Joachim Wendler Bradley Westell Arne Zetterström Scuba diving fatalities 1973 Mount Gambier cave diving accident Ricardo Armbruster Allan Bridge David Bright Berry L. Cannon Cotton Coulson Cláudio Coutinho E. Yale Dawson Deon Dreyer Milan Dufek Sheck Exley Maurice Fargues Fernando Garfella Palmer Guy Garman Steve Irwin death Jim Jones Henry Way Kendall Artur Kozłowski Yuri Lipski Kirsty MacColl Linnea Mills Agnes Milowka François de Roubaix Chris and Chrissy Rouse Dave Shaw Wesley C. Skiles Dewey Smith Rob Stewart Esbjörn Svensson Josef Velek Publications Manuals NOAA Diving Manual U.S. Navy Diving Manual Basic Cave Diving: A Blueprint for Survival Underwater Handbook Bennett and Elliott's physiology and medicine of diving Encyclopedia of Recreational Diving The new science of skin and scuba diving Professional Diver's Handbook Basic Scuba Standards and Codes of Practice Code of Practice for Scientific Diving (UNESCO) DIN 7876 IMCA Code of Practice for Offshore Diving ISO 24801 Recreational diving services — Requirements for the training of recreational scuba divers General non-fiction The Darkness Beckons Goldfinder The Last Dive Shadow Divers The Silent World: A Story of Undersea Discovery and Adventure Research List of Divers Alert Network publications Dive guides Training and registration Diver training Competence and assessment Competency-based learning Refresher training Skill assessment Diver training standard Diving instructor Diving school Occupational diver training Commercial diver training Military diver training Public safety diver training Scientific diver training Recreational diver training Introductory diving ISO training standards Teaching method Muscle memory Overlearning Stress exposure training Skills Combat sidestroke Diver navigation Diver trim Ear clearing Frenzel maneuver Valsalva maneuver Finning techniques Scuba skills Buddy breathing Low impact diving Diamond Reef System Surface-supplied diving skills Underwater searches Recreational scuba certification levels Core diving skills Advanced Open Water Diver Autonomous diver CMAS* scuba diver CMAS** scuba diver Introductory diving Low Impact Diver Master Scuba Diver Open Water Diver Supervised diver Leadership skills Dive leader Divemaster Diving instructor Master Instructor Specialist skills Rescue Diver Solo diver Diver training certification and registration organisations European Underwater Federation (EUF) International Diving Regulators and Certifiers Forum (IDRCF) International Diving Schools Association (IDSA) International Marine Contractors Association (IMCA) List of diver certification organizations National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) Nautical Archaeology Society Recreational diver course referral World Recreational Scuba Training Council (WRSTC) Commercial diver certification authorities Australian Diver Accreditation Scheme (ADAS) Commercial diver registration in South Africa Divers Institute of Technology Health and Safety Executive (HSE) Department of Employment and Labour Commercial diving schools Divers Academy International Norwegian diver school Free-diving certification agencies AIDA International (AIDA) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Performance Freediving International (PI) Scuba Schools International (SSI) Recreational scuba certification agencies American Canadian Underwater Certifications (ACUC) American Nitrox Divers International (ANDI) Association nationale des moniteurs de plongée (ANMP) British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Comhairle Fo-Thuinn (CFT) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas (FEDAS) Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins (FFESSM) Federazione Italiana Attività Subacquee (FIAS) Global Underwater Explorers (GUE) International Association for Handicapped Divers (IAHD) International Association of Nitrox and Technical Divers (IANTD) International Life Saving Federation (ILS) Israeli Diving Federation (TIDF) National Academy of Scuba Educators (NASE) National Association of Underwater Instructors (NAUI) Nederlandse Onderwatersport Bond (NOB) Professional Association of Diving Instructors (PADI) Professional Diving Instructors Corporation (PDIC) Professional Technical and Recreational Diving (ProTec) Rebreather Association of International Divers (RAID) Sub-Aqua Association (SAA) Scuba Diving International (SDI) Scuba Educators International (SEI) Scuba Schools International (SSI) Türkiye Sualtı Sporları Federasyonu (TSSF) United Diving Instructors (UDI) YMCA SCUBA Program Scientific diver certification authorities American Academy of Underwater Sciences (AAUS) CMAS Scientific Committee Technical diver certification agencies American Nitrox Divers International (ANDI) British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Diving Science and Technology (DSAT) Federazione Italiana Attività Subacquee (FIAS) International Association of Nitrox and Technical Divers (IANTD) Professional Association of Diving Instructors (PADI) Professional Diving Instructors Corporation (PDIC) Professional Technical and Recreational Diving (ProTec) Rebreather Association of International Divers (RAID) Trimix Scuba Association (TSA) Technical Extended Range (TXR) Cave diving Cave Divers Association of Australia (CDAA) Cave Diving Group (CDG) Global Underwater Explorers (GUE) National Speleological Society#Cave Diving Group (CDG) National Association of Underwater Instructors (NAUI) Technical Diving International (TDI) Military diver training centres Defence Diving School Navy Diving Salvage and Training Center Underwater Escape Training Unit Military diver training courses United States Marine Corps Combatant Diver Course Underwater sports Surface snorkeling Finswimming Snorkeling/breath-hold Spearfishing Underwater football Underwater hockey Australia Turkey Underwater rugby Colombia United States Underwater target shooting Breath-hold Aquathlon Apnoea finswimming Freediving Open Circuit Scuba Immersion finswimming Sport diving Underwater cycling Underwater orienteering Underwater photography Rebreather Underwater photography Sports governing organisations and federations International AIDA International Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques ) National AIDA Hellas Australian Underwater Federation British Freediving Association British Octopush Association British Underwater Sports Association Comhairle Fo-Thuinn Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins South African Underwater Sports Federation Türkiye Sualtı Sporları Federasyonu Underwater Society of America ) Competitions 14th CMAS Underwater Photography World Championship Underwater Hockey World Championships Underwater Orienteering World Championships Underwater Rugby World Championships Underwater divers Pioneers of diving Eduard Admetlla i Lázaro Aquanaut Mary Bonnin Amelia Behrens-Furniss James F. Cahill Jacques Cousteau Billy Deans Dottie Frazier Trevor Hampton Hans Hass Hannes Keller Dick Rutkowski Teseo Tesei Arne Zetterström Underwater scientists archaeologists and environmentalists Michael Arbuthnot Robert Ballard George Bass Mensun Bound Louis Boutan Jeffrey Bozanic Hugh Bradner Cathy Church Eugenie Clark James P. Delgado Sylvia Earle John Christopher Fine George R. Fischer Anders Franzén Honor Frost Fernando Garfella Palmer David Gibbins Graham Jessop Swietenia Puspa Lestari Pilar Luna Robert F. Marx Anna Marguerite McCann Innes McCartney Charles T. Meide Mark M. Newell Lyuba Ognenova-Marinova John Peter Oleson Mendel L. Peterson Richard Pyle Andreas Rechnitzer William R. Royal Margaret Rule Gunter Schöbel Stephanie Schwabe Myriam Seco E. Lee Spence Robert Sténuit Peter Throckmorton Cristina Zenato Scuba record holders Pascal Bernabé Jim Bowden Mark Ellyatt Sheck Exley Nuno Gomes Claudia Serpieri Krzysztof Starnawski Underwater filmmakers and presenters Samir Alhafith David Attenborough Ramón Bravo Jean-Michel Cousteau Richie Kohler Paul Rose Andy Torbet Ivan Tors Andrew Wight James Cameron Underwater photographers Doug Allan Tamara Benitez Georges Beuchat Adrian Biddle Jonathan Bird Eric Cheng Neville Coleman Jacques Cousteau John D. Craig Ben Cropp Bernard Delemotte David Doubilet Candice Farmer John Christopher Fine Rodney Fox Ric Frazier Stephen Frink Peter Gimbel Monty Halls Hans Hass Henry Way Kendall Rudie Kuiter Joseph B. MacInnis Luis Marden Agnes Milowka Noel Monkman Pete Oxford Steve Parish Zale Parry Pierre Petit Leni Riefenstahl Peter Scoones Brian Skerry Wesley C. Skiles E. Lee Spence Philippe Tailliez Ron Taylor Valerie Taylor Albert Tillman John Veltri Stan Waterman Michele Westmorland John Ernest Williamson J. Lamar Worzel Underwater explorers Caves Graham Balcombe Sheck Exley Martyn Farr Jochen Hasenmayer Jill Heinerth Jarrod Jablonski Brian Kakuk William Hogarth Main Tom Mount Jack Sheppard Bill Stone Reefs Arthur C. Clarke Wrecks Leigh Bishop John Chatterton Clive Cussler Bill Nagle Valerie van Heest Aristotelis Zervoudis Aquanauts Andrew Abercromby Joseph M. Acaba Clayton Anderson Richard R. Arnold Serena Auñón-Chancellor Michael Barratt (astronaut) Robert A. Barth Robert L. Behnken Randolph Bresnik Timothy J. Broderick Justin Brown Berry L. Cannon Scott Carpenter Gregory Chamitoff Steve Chappell Catherine Coleman Robin Cook Craig B. Cooper Fabien Cousteau Philippe Cousteau Timothy Creamer Jonathan Dory Pedro Duque Sylvia Earle Jeanette Epps Sheck Exley Albert Falco Andrew J. Feustel Michael Fincke Satoshi Furukawa Ronald J. Garan Jr.

Michael L. Gernhardt Christopher E. Gerty David Gruber Chris Hadfield Jeremy Hansen José M. Hernández John Herrington Paul Hill Akihiko Hoshide Mark Hulsbeck Emma Hwang Norishige Kanai Les Kaufman Scott Kelly Karen Kohanowich Timothy Kopra Dominic Landucci Jon Lindbergh Kjell N. Lindgren Michael López-Alegría Joseph B. MacInnis Sandra Magnus Thomas Marshburn Matthias Maurer K. Megan McArthur Craig McKinley Jessica Meir Simone Melchior Dorothy Metcalf-Lindenburger Andreas Mogensen Karen Nyberg John D. Olivas Takuya Onishi Luca Parmitano Nicholas Patrick Tim Peake Thomas Pesquet Marc Reagan Garrett Reisman Kathleen Rubins Dick Rutkowski Tara Ruttley David Saint-Jacques Josef Schmid Robert Sheats Dewey Smith Steve Squyres Heidemarie Stefanyshyn-Piper Robert Sténuit Hervé Stevenin Nicole Stott James Talacek Daniel M. Tani Robert Thirsk Bill Todd Mark T. Vande Hei Koichi Wakata Rex J. Walheim Shannon Walker John Morgan Wells Joachim Wendler Douglas H. Wheelock Peggy Whitson Dafydd Williams Jeffrey Williams Sunita Williams Reid Wiseman Kimiya Yui Writers and journalists Michael C. Barnette Victor Berge Philippe Diolé Gary Gentile Bret Gilliam Bob Halstead Hillary Hauser Trevor Jackson Steve Lewis John Mattera Rescuers Craig Challen Richard Harris Rick Stanton John Volanthen Frogmen Lionel Crabb Ian Edward Fraser Sydney Knowles James Joseph Magennis Commercial salvors Keith Jessop Science of underwater diving List of researchers in underwater diving Diving physics Metre sea water Neutral buoyancy Underwater acoustics Modulated ultrasound Underwater vision Underwater computer vision Diving physiology Blood shift Cold shock response Diving reflex Equivalent narcotic depth Maximum operating depth Physiological response to water immersion Thermal balance of the underwater diver Underwater vision Work of breathing Decompression theory Decompression models: Bühlmann decompression algorithm Haldane's decompression model Reduced gradient bubble model Thalmann algorithm Thermodynamic model of decompression Varying Permeability Model Equivalent air depth Oxygen window Physiology of decompression Diving environments Underwater exploration Deep-sea exploration Classification List of diving environments by type Altitude diving Benign water diving Confined water diving Deep diving Inland diving Inshore diving Muck diving Night diving Open-water diving Black-water diving Blue-water diving Penetration diving Cave diving Torricellian chamber Ice diving Wreck diving Recreational dive sites Underwater environment Underwater diving environment Impact Environmental impact of recreational diving Low impact diving Other Bathysphere Defense against swimmer incursions Diver detection sonar Offshore survey Rugged compact camera Underwater domain awareness Underwater vehicle Deep-submergence vehicle Aluminaut DSV Alvin American submarine NR-1 Bathyscaphe Archimède FNRS-2 FNRS-3 Harmony class bathyscaphe Sea Pole -class bathyscaphe Trieste II Deepsea Challenger Ictineu 3 JAGO Jiaolong Konsul -class submersible Limiting Factor Russian submarine Losharik Mir Nautile Pisces -class deep submergence vehicle DSV Sea Cliff DSV Shinkai DSV Shinkai 2000 DSV Shinkai 6500 DSV Turtle DSV-5 Nemo Submarine rescue International Submarine Escape and Rescue Liaison Office Submarine Escape and Rescue system (Royal Swedish Navy) McCann Rescue Chamber Submarine rescue ship Deep-submergence rescue vehicle LR5 LR7 MSM-1 Mystic -class deep-submergence rescue vehicle DSRV-1 Mystic DSRV-2 Avalon NATO Submarine Rescue System Priz -class deep-submergence rescue vehicle Russian deep submergence rescue vehicle AS-28 Russian submarine AS-34 ASRV Remora SRV-300 Submarine Rescue Diving Recompression System Type 7103 DSRV URF (Swedish Navy) Submarine escape Escape trunk Submarine escape training facility Submarine Escape Training Facility (Australia) Escape set Davis Submerged Escape Apparatus Momsen lung Steinke hood Submarine Escape Immersion Equipment Special interest groups Artificial Reef Society of British Columbia CMAS Europe Coral Reef Alliance Divers Alert Network Green Fins Finger Lakes Underwater Preserve Association Karst Underwater Research Nautical Archaeology Program Nautical Archaeology Society Naval Air Command Sub Aqua Club PADI AWARE Reef Check Reef Life Survey Rubicon Foundation Save Ontario Shipwrecks SeaKeys Sea Research Society Society for Underwater Historical Research Society for Underwater Technology Underwater Archaeology Branch, Naval History & Heritage Command Neutral buoyancy facilities for Astronaut training Neutral Buoyancy Laboratory Neutral buoyancy pool Neutral buoyancy simulation as a training aid Neutral Buoyancy Simulator Space Systems Laboratory Yuri Gagarin Cosmonaut Training Center Other Nautilus Productions Helicopter Aircrew Breathing Device Scuba diving therapy Seabed mining Category Commons Glossary Indexes: Dive sites Divers Diving Outline Portal Authority control databases National United States Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Remotely_operated_underwater_vehicle&oldid=1306445681 " Categories : Remotely operated underwater vehicles Robotic submarines Hidden categories: CS1: long volume value CS1: unfit URL CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia articles needing clarification from March 2019 Articles to be expanded from February 2021 All articles to be expanded Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 17 August 2025, at 20:19 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Remotely operated underwater vehicle 22 languages Add topic

