Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Origin Toggle Origin subsection 1.1 Manifesto 2 Method Toggle Method subsection 2.1 Collaboration 2.2 New media and technologies 2.3 Japanese traditional arts 3 Influence 4 Significant works 5 Participants 6 General references 7 Notes Toggle the table of contents Jikken Kōbō 2 languages 日本語 Русский Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Japanese art collective Jikken Kōbō (実験工房, official English name: "Experimental Workshop") was one of the first avant-garde artist collectives active in postwar Japan . It was founded in Tokyo in 1951 by a group of artists working in various media. Until its disbandment in 1957, a total of fourteen members participated in the group. Members were typically in their twenties and hailed from different backgrounds – the group included not just visual artists and musicians, but also a printmaker, a lighting designer, an engineer, and others.

[ 1 ] The art critic Shūzō Takiguchi was the key mentor and promoter of the group.

[ 2 ] Jikken Kōbō organized its own exhibitions of group members' works, which were influenced by Western avant-garde art and showed a strong interest in new technology. However, they are best known for their collaborative "presentations" ( happyōkai 発表会): theatrical or musical performances where each member contributed their individual works to create a multimedia production.

[ 3 ] Origin [ edit ] Jikken Kōbō was formed by a group of young artists and creators. Original members included visual artists Hideko Fukushima , Katsuhiro Yamaguchi , and Shōzō Kitadai ; music composers Tōru Takemitsu , Hiroyoshi Suzuki , Keijiro Satō, and Kazuo Fukushima ; the poet Kuniharu Akiyama , the lighting designer Naoji Imai , and the engineer Hideo Yamazaki.

[ 4 ] Fukushima, Yamaguchi, and Kitadai had attended the Modern Art Summer Lectures in 1948 and were mentees of the art critic Shūzō Takiguchi .

[ 5 ] Prior to the official formation of the group, many members had befriended each other and had been meeting to listen to music and to discuss art. Kitadai explained that "out of this spontaneously grew the desire: we want an occasion to work in collaboration!" [ 6 ] The group adopted the name "Jikken Kōbō" ("Experimental Workshop") at the recommendation of Takiguchi.

[ 7 ] Manifesto [ edit ] Jikken Kōbō did not publish an official manifesto , but prior to their first collaborative project in 1951 – a ballet production titled The Joy of Life and inspired by Picasso – they did write a provisional group agreement. They wrote that their aim was "to combine the various art forms, reaching an organic combination that could not be realized within the combinations of a gallery exhibition, and to create a new style of art with social relevance closely related to everyday life." The agreement explained that the group would create painting , objects, ballet , music , single pieces and combined works. Rather than presenting works separately, their exhibitions should be spaces where "the works are organically interrelated. They are not presented as single entities." [ 7 ] Method [ edit ] Collaboration [ edit ] Jikken Kōbō worked on their artistic efforts in a collaborative manner that has been characterized as a comparatively loose and diffuse collective, where individual members had few obvious similarities other than a desire to experiment.

[ 8 ] Kitadai notably argued that even if their group experiments failed, they would not be disappointed as they still "succeeded in collaborating." [ 9 ] Group member Yamaguchi characterized the collaboration of Jikken Kōbō as a dynamic tension between individual works and group projects: "The energy of [Jikken Kōbō] always radiated in both centripetal and centrifugal directions. By centripetal I mean an inward movement away from the outer directed teamwork of the group, a return to the individual work. By centrifugal I mean the attempt to combine work in the various fields of art, music, and literature logically necessary ideas." [ 10 ] New media and technologies [ edit ] Jikken Kōbō's works drew inspiration from a wide variety of Western avant-garde practices including Cubism , Constructivism , Surrealism , and the Bauhaus .

[ 1 ] Their mentor Takiguchi was a key figure in prewar Japanese Surrealism and offered a direct connection to these prewar avant-gardes.

[ 11 ] Inspired by Bauhaus master László Moholy-Nagy , Jikken Kōbō was interested in incorporating new media and technology into their experiments.

[ 12 ] For this reason, Jikken Kōbō has also been compared to the Independent Group in postwar England – both groups referenced science fiction and technology relevant to the rapidly modernizing postwar era.

[ 13 ] Jikken Kōbō also shares similarities with Experiments in Art and Technology (E.A.T.) , an American organization that provided technical assistance to avant-garde artists working with new technologies. Both Jikken Kōbō and E.A.T. were collaborative and multidisciplinary.

[ 14 ] In this spirit, artists from the Jikken Kōbō collaborated on a series of photographs of mixed media collages for the publication Asahi Picture News in 1953 .

[ 15 ] Jikken Kōbō artists collaborated with the filmmaker Toshio Matsumoto on his first film, Ginrin (Silver Wheels), in 1955 .

Kitadai and Yamaguchi assisted with the direction, and Suzuki and Takemitsu produced the music. The film is often considered the first special effects color film in Japan.

[ 16 ] Japanese traditional arts [ edit ] Jikken Kōbō group members also worked with elements of traditional Japanese culture including Zen and nō theater . This interest was piqued by Akiyama's correspondence with the American composer John Cage , who himself was inspired by Zen and Japanese music.

[ 17 ] For this reason, Jikken Kōbō's group works have been characterized by their embrace of both experimentation and tradition. The nō play the group created in collaboration with Takechi Tetsuji , Pierrot Lunaire, is an important example of their avant-garde interests combining with Japanese tradition. It was performed at the presentation An Evening of Original Plays by the Circular Theater in 1955.

[ 1 ] Influence [ edit ] Jikken Kōbō's The 5th Experimental Workshop Presentation (1953) is cited as an important early postwar art project for its experimentation with new technologies. Works in the presentation were presented using either the automatic slide projector or the tape recorder, both technologies which had recently been developed by Tokyo Tsūshin Kōgyō (precursor to Sony ).The presentation featured several "auto-slide" works projected on to screens in the theatre, accompanied by pre-recorded audio tracks. These works ultimately focused on creating a unique experience for the audience.

[ 18 ] The 5th Presentation is also considered an early "intermedia" endeavor that set the stage for later experiments with technology and new media in Japan.

[ 19 ] The group disbanded in late 1957, but many of its members continued to work independently and helped influence the trajectory of Japanese avant-garde art in the 1960s and after.

[ 20 ] Group member Jōji Yuasa credited Jikken Kōbō with being the catalyst for new experiments and collaborations, recalling that it was "a crucible, a magnetic field of youthful, fresh spirit and individuality," and that "it was a valuable source of encouragement and stimulating interaction." [ 21 ] In 2013, Dale Eisinger of Complex ranked The Joy of Life (1951) the 21st best work of performance art in history.

[ 22 ] Jikken Kōbō has often been paired with the Gutai collective as two examples of avant-garde art groups who created cross-genre or interdisciplinary projects, exhibitions, and performances in early postwar Japan.

[ 23 ] However, in contrast to Gutai, which has been the subject of several major English-language books and exhibitions, historically Jikken Kōbō has not been as well known outside of Japan.

[ 1 ] [ 24 ] Significant works [ edit ] Jikken Kōbō members worked both collaboratively and independently. Their collaborative projects were often performances or concerts. Their more traditional gallery exhibitions still folded in musical components and can also be considered collaborative projects. The division between exhibition and collective artwork was not clear. The works listed below are performances, concerts, exhibitions, and other projects on which the majority of group members collaborated.

[ 25 ] 1951 - Picasso Festival: Ballet "Joie de Vivre" (First Experimental Workshop Presentation), Hibiya Kōkaidō Hall, Tokyo 1952 - The 2nd Experimental Workshop Presentation "Contemporary Music Concert," Joshi Gakuin Auditorium, Tokyo 1952 - The 3rd Experimental Workshop Presentation "Plastic Arts Exhibition," Takemiya Gallery, Tokyo 1952 - "Work A" and "Work B" (plywood reliefs) 1952 - The 4th Experimental Workshop Presentation in Commemoration of Takahiro Sonoda's Visit to Europe "Contemporary Works Concert," Joshi Gakuin Auditorium, Tokyo 1953 - Asahi Picture News header series (mixed media construction photographs) 1953 - The 5th Experimental Workshop Presentation , Daiichi Seimei Hall, Tokyo 1954 - Experimental Workshop "Arnold Schoenberg Concert," Yamaha Hall, Tokyo 1955 - Ballet Experimental Theater, Haiyūza Theater, Tokyo 1955 - An Evening of Original Plays by the Circular Theater, Sankei International Conference Hall, Tokyo 1955 - Looking Down into the Bottom of the Ravines from the Country of the Gods, Nichigeki Music Hall, Tokyo 1956 - Musique Concrète/Electronic Music Audition, Yamaha Hall, Tokyo 1956 - Summer Exhibition for the Enjoyment of a New Vision and Space by the Members of Experimental Workshop, Fūgetsu-dō, Tokyo 1957 - Summer Exhibition by the Members of Experimental Workshop, Fūgetsu-dō, Tokyo Participants [ edit ] Source: [ 26 ] Founding members are noted with an asterisk.

Shōzō Kitadai (painter, photographer)* Hideko Fukushima (painter)* Katsuhiro Yamaguchi (painter)* Tetsurō Komai (printmaker) - joined after founding Kazuo Fukushima (music composer)* Keijiro Satō (music composer)* Hiroyoshi Suzuki (music composer)* Tōru Takemitsu (music composer)* Jōji Yuasa (music composer) - joined after founding Kuniharu Akiyama (poet and critic)* Kiyoji Ōtsuji (photographer) - joined after founding Naoji Imai (lighting designer)* Takahiro Sonoda (pianist) - participated briefly Hideo Yamazaki (engineer)* General references [ edit ] Kanagawa Prefectural Museum of Modern Art, et al., eds.

Jikken Kōbō ten – sengo geijutsu o kirihiraku / Jikken Kōbō: Experimental Workshop . Tokyo: Yomiuri Shinbun-sha, 2013. Exhibition catalogue.

Mermod, Melanie and Obinata Kin'ichi, eds.

APN Research . Bern: Kunsthalle Bern, 2012. Exhibition catalogue.

Satani Garō, ed.

Jikken kōbō to Takiguchi Shūzō / Experimental Workshop: The 11th Exhibition Homage to Shūzō Takiguchi . Tokyo: Satani Gallery, 1991. Exhibition catalogue.

Tezuka, Miwako. "Experimentation and Tradition: The Avant-Garde Play Pierrot Lunaire by Jikken Kōbō and Takechi Tetsuji." Art Journal 70:3 (Fall 2011): 65-85.

Tezuka, Miwako. "Jikken Kōbō and Takiguchi Shūzō: The New Deal Collectivism of 1950s Japan." positions east asia critiqu e 21:2 (Spring 2013): 351-381.

Notes [ edit ] ^ a b c d Tezuka, Miwako (2011). "Experimentation and Tradition: The Avant-Garde Play Pierrot Lunaire by Jikken Kōbō and Takechi Tetsuji".

Art Journal . 70:3 (Fall 2011): 65– 66.

^ Tezuka, Miwako (2013). "Jikken Kōbō and Takiguchi Shūzō: The New Deal Collectivism of 1950s Japan".

Positions East Asia Art Critique . 21:2 (Spring 2013): 353– 354.

^ Chong, Doryun (2012). Chong, Doryun (ed.).

Tokyo 1955-1970: A New Avant-Garde . New York: The Museum of Modern Art. p. 56.

^ Tezuka, Miwako (2013). "Jikken Kōbō and Takiguchi Shūzō: The New Deal Collectivism of 1950s Japan".

Positions East Asia Critique . 21:2 (Spring 2013): 375.

^ Satō, Reiko (2013). "Jiken Kōbō no katachi – Kitadai Shōzō o chūshin toshite". In Kanagawa Prefectural Museum of Modern Art (ed.).

Jikken Kōbō ten – Sengo geijutsu o kirihiraku/Jikken Kōbō: Experimental Workshop (in Japanese). Tokyo: Yomiuri Shinbun-sha. p. 238.

^ Kitadai, Shōzō (2012) [1953]. "The Experimental Workshop: Our Contention (1953)". In Chong, Doryun (ed.).

From Postwar to Postmodern: Art in Japan 1945-1989: Primary Documents . New York: The Museum of Modern Art. p. 87.

^ a b Satani Garō, ed. (1991).

Jikken kōbō to Takiguchi Shūzō / Experimental Workshop: the 11th exhibition homage to Shūzō Takiguchi . Tokyo: Satani Gallery. p. 102.

^ Chong, Doryun (2012). Chong, Doryun (ed.).

Tokyo 1955-1970: A New Avant-Garde . New York: The Museum of Modern Art. p. 50.

^ Kitadai, Shōzō (2012) [1953]. "The Experimental Workshop: Our Contention (1953)". In Chong, Doryun (ed.).

From Postwar to Postmodern: Art in Japan 1945-1989: Primary Documents . New York: The Museum of Modern Art. p. 89.

^ Doryun, Chong (2012). Chong, Doryun (ed.).

Tokyo 1955-1970: A New Avant-Garde . New York: The Museum of Modern Art. p. 53.

^ Sas, Miryam (1999).

Fault Lines: Cultural Memory and Japanese Surrealism . Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press. pp.

158– 159.

^ Tezuka, Miwako (2013). "Jikken Kōbō and Takiguchi Shūzō: The New Deal Collectivism of 1950s Japan".

Positions East Asia Art Critique . 21:2 (Spring 2013): 360– 361.

^ Tezuka, Miwako (2013). "Jikken Kōbō and Takiguchi Shūzō: The New Deal Collectivism of 1950s Japan".

Positions East Asia Art Critique . 21:2 (Spring 2013): 366– 367.

^ Tezuka, Miwako (2013). "Jikken Kōbō and Takiguchi Shūzō: The New Deal Collectivism of 1950s Japan".

Positions East Asia Art Critique . 21:2 (Spring 2013): 374.

^ Mermod, Melanie; Obinata, Kin'ichi, eds. (2012).

APN Research . Bern: Kunsthalle Bern.

^ Satani Garō, ed. (1991).

Jikken kōbō to Takiguchi Shūzō / Experimental Workshop: The 11th Exhibition Homage to Shūzō Takiguchi . Tokyo: Satani Gallery. p. 124.

^ Tezuka, Miwako (2011). "Experimentation and Tradition: The Avant-Garde Play Pierrot Lunaire by Jikken Kōbō and Takechi Tetsuji".

Art Journal . 70:3 (Spring 2011): 69.

^ Sas, Miryam (2012). "Intermedia: 1955-1970". In Chong, Doryun (ed.).

Tokyo 1955-1970: A New Avant-Garde . New York: The Museum of Modern Art. p. 143.

^ Sas, Miryam (2012). "Intermedia: 1955-1970". In Chong, Doryun (ed.).

Tokyo 1955-1970: A New Avant-Garde . New York: The Museum of Modern Art. p. 147.

^ Hirano, Akihiko (2013). "Intāmedia toshite no undōtai – 1960 nendai ni okeru Jikken Kōbō ni tsuite". In Kanagawa Prefectural Museum of Modern Art (ed.).

Jikken Kōbō ten – sengo geijutsu o kirihiraku/Jikken Kōbō: Experimental Workshop (in Japanese). Tokyo: Yomiuri Shinbun-sha. p. 249.

^ Satani Garō, ed. (1991).

Jikken kōbō to Takiguchi Shūzō / Experimental Workshop: the 11th exhibition homage to Shūzō Takiguchi . Tokyo: Satani Gallery. p. 93.

^ Eisinger, Dale (2013-04-09).

"The 25 Best Performance Art Pieces of All Time" .

Complex . Retrieved 2021-02-28 .

^ Chong, Doryun (2012). Chong, Doryun (ed.).

Tokyo 1955-1970: A New Avant-Garde . New York: The Museum of Modern Art. p. 46.

^ For example, see the publications Ming Tiampo, Gutai: Decentering Modernism (Chicago: The University of Chicago Press, 2011) and Ming Tiampo and Alexandra Munroe eds., Gutai: Splendid Playground (New York: Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum, 2013).

^ List compiled from chronology in Satani Garō, ed., Experimental Workshop, 96-130.

^ List of members compiled in Tezuka, "Jikken Kōbō and Takiguchi Shūzō: The New Deal Collectivism of 1950s Japan," 352.

v t e Premodern , Modern and Contemporary art movements List of art movements / periods Premodern (Western) Ancient Thracian Dacian Nuragic Aegean Cycladic Minoan Minyan ware Mycenaean Greek Sub-Mycenaean Protogeometric Geometric Orientalizing Archaic Black-figure Red-figure Severe style Classical Kerch style Hellenistic "Baroque" Indo-Greek Greco-Buddhist Neo-Attic Etruscan Scythian Iberian Gaulish Roman Republican Gallo-Roman Julio-Claudian Pompeian Styles Trajanic Severan Medieval Late antique Early Christian Coptic Ethiopian Migration Period Anglo-Saxon Hunnic Insular Lombard Visigothic Donor portrait Pictish Mozarabic Repoblación Viking Byzantine Iconoclast Macedonian Palaeologan Italo-Byzantine Frankish Merovingian Carolingian Pre-Romanesque Ottonian Romanesque Mosan Spanish Norman Norman-Sicilian Opus Anglicanum Gothic Gothic art in Milan International Gothic International Gothic art in Italy Lucchese school Crusades Moscow school Novgorod school Vladimir-Suzdal school Duecento Sienese school Mudéjar Medieval cartography Italian school Majorcan school Mappa mundi Renaissance Italian Renaissance Trecento Proto-Renaissance Florentine school Pittura infamante Quattrocento Ferrarese school Forlivese school Venetian school Cinquecento High Renaissance Bolognese school Mannerism Counter- Maniera Northern Renaissance Early Netherlandish World landscape Ghent–Bruges school Northern Mannerism German Renaissance Cologne school Danube school Dutch and Flemish Renaissance Antwerp Mannerism Romanism Still life English Renaissance Tudor court Cretan school Turquerie Fontainebleau school Art of the late 16th century in Milan 17th century Baroque Baroque in Milan Flemish Baroque Caravaggisti in Utrecht Tenebrism Louis XIII style Lutheran Baroque Stroganov school Animal painting Guild of Romanists Dutch Golden Age Delft school Capriccio Heptanese school Classicism Louis XIV style Poussinists and Rubenists 18th century Rococo Rocaille Louis XV style Frederician Chinoiserie Fête galante Neoclassicism Goût grec Louis XVI style Adam style Directoire style Neoclassical architecture in Milan Picturesque Colonial art Art of the African diaspora African-American Caribbean Haitian Colonial Asian art Arts in the Philippines Letras y figuras Tipos del País Colonial Asian Baroque Company style Latin American art Casta painting Indochristian art Chilote school Cuzco school Quito school Latin American Baroque Art borrowing Western elements Islamic Moorish Manichaean Mughal Qajar Qing handicrafts Western influence in Japan Akita ranga Uki-e Transition to modern (c. 1770 – 1862) Romanticism Fairy painting Danish Golden Age Troubadour style Nazarene movement Purismo Shoreham Ancients Düsseldorf school Pre-Raphaelites Hudson River School American luminism Orientalism Norwich school Empire style Historicism Revivalism Biedermeier Realism Barbizon school Costumbrismo Verismo Macchiaioli Academic art Munich school in Greece Neo-Grec Etching revival Modern (1863–1944) 1863–1899 Neo-romanticism National romanticism Yōga Nihonga Japonisme Anglo-Japanese style Beuron school Hague school Peredvizhniki Impressionism American Hoosier Group Boston school Amsterdam Canadian Heidelberg school Aestheticism Arts and Crafts Art pottery Tonalism Decadent movement Symbolism Romanian Russian Volcano school Incoherents Post-Impressionism Neo-Impressionism Luminism Divisionism Pointillism Pont-Aven School Cloisonnism Synthetism Les Nabis American Barbizon school California tonalism Costumbrismo 1900–1914 Art Nouveau Art Nouveau in Milan Primitivism California Impressionism Secessionism School of Paris Munich Secession Vienna Secession Berlin Secession Sonderbund Pennsylvania Impressionism Mir iskusstva Ten American Painters Fauvism Expressionism Die Brücke Der Blaue Reiter Noucentisme Deutscher Werkbund American Realism Ashcan school Cubism Proto-Cubism Orphism A Nyolcak Neue Künstlervereinigung München Futurism Cubo-Futurism Art Deco Metaphysical Rayonism Productivism Synchromism Vorticism 1915–1944 Sosaku-hanga Suprematism School of Paris Crystal Cubism Constructivism Latin American Universal Constructivism Dada Shin-hanga Neoplasticism De Stijl Purism Return to order Novecento Italiano Figurative Constructivism Stupid Cologne Progressives Arbeitsrat für Kunst November Group Australian tonalism Dresden Secession Social realism Functionalism Bauhaus Kinetic art Anthropophagy Mingei Group of Seven New Objectivity Grosvenor school Neues Sehen Surrealism Iranian Latin American Mexican muralism Neo-Fauvism Precisionism Aeropittura Asso Scuola Romana Cercle et Carré The Group Harlem Renaissance Kapists Regionalism California Scene Painting Heroic realism Socialist realism Nazi art Streamline Moderne Concrete art Abstraction-Création Tiki The Ten Dimensionism Boston Expressionism Leningrad school Contemporary and Postmodern (1945–present) 1945–1959 International Typographic Style Abstract expressionism Washington Color School Visionary art Vienna School of Fantastic Realism Spatialism Color field Lyrical abstraction Tachisme Arte Informale COBRA Nuagisme Generación de la Ruptura Jikken Kōbō Metcalf Chateau Mono-ha Nanyang Style Action painting American Figurative Expressionism in New York New media art New York school Hard-edge painting Bay Area Figurative Movement Les Plasticiens Gutai Art Association Gendai Bijutsu Kondankai Pop art Situationist International Soviet Nonconformist Ukrainian underground Lettrism Letterist International Ultra-Lettrist Florida Highwaymen Cybernetic art Antipodeans 1960–1969 Otra Figuración Afrofuturism Nueva Presencia ZERO Happening Neo-Dada Neo-Dada Organizers Op art Nouveau réalisme Nouvelle tendance Capitalist realism Art & Language Arte Povera Black Arts Movement The Caribbean Artists Movement Chicano art movement Conceptual art Land art Systems art Video art Minimalism Fluxus Generative art Post-painterly abstraction Intermedia Psychedelic art Nut Art Photorealism Environmental art Performance art Process art Institutional critique Light and Space Street art Feminist art movement in the US Saqqakhaneh movement The Stars Art Group Tropicália Yoru no Kai Artificial intelligence visual art 1970–1999 Post-conceptual art Installation art Artscene Postminimalism Endurance art Sots Art Moscow Conceptualists Pattern and Decoration Pliontanism Punk art Neo-expressionism Transavantgarde Saint Soleil school Guerrilla art Lowbrow art Telematic art Appropriation art Neo-conceptual art New European Painting Tunisian collaborative painting Memphis Group Cyberdelic Neue Slowenische Kunst Scratch video Transgressive Retrofuturism Young British Artists Superfiction Taring Padi Superflat New Leipzig school Artist-run initiative Artivism The Designers Republic Grunge design Verdadism Chinese Apartment Art 2000– present Amazonian pop art Altermodern Art for art Art game Art intervention Brandalism Classical Realism Contemporary African art Africanfuturism Contemporary Indigenous Australian art Crypto art Cyborg art Excessivism Fictive art Flat design Corporate Memphis Hypermodernism Hyperrealism Idea art Internet art Post-Internet iPhone art Kitsch movement Lightpainting Massurrealism Modern European ink painting Neo-futurism Neomodern Neosymbolism Passionism Post-YBAs Relational art Skeuomorphism Software art Sound art Stuckism Superflat SoFlo Superflat Superstroke Toyism Unilalianism Vaporwave Walking Artists Network Related topics History of art Abstract art Asemic writing Anti-art Avant-garde Ballets Russes Christian art Art in the Protestant Reformation and Counter-Reformation Catholic art Icon Lutheran art Digital art Fantastic art Folk art Hierarchy of genres Genre painting History painting Illuminated manuscript Illustration Interactive art Jewish art Kitsch Landscape painting Modernism Modern sculpture Late modernism Naïve art Outsider art Portrait Prehistoric European art Queer art Realism Shock art Trompe-l'œil Western painting Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Jikken_Kōbō&oldid=1283457663 " Categories : 1951 establishments in Japan Japanese contemporary art Contemporary art movements Japanese artist groups and collectives Japanese contemporary artists Hidden categories: CS1: long volume value CS1 Japanese-language sources (ja) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 1 April 2025, at 16:59 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Jikken Kōbō 2 languages Add topic

