Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Continuities Toggle Continuities subsection 1.1 Structure of philosophy 1.2 Sources of philosophy 1.3 Topics in philosophy 2 Discontinuities Toggle Discontinuities subsection 2.1 Sources of philosophy 2.2 Structure of philosophy 2.3 Method of philosophy 2.4 Topics in philosophy 3 Renaissance philosophers 4 See also 5 References 6 Bibliography 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Renaissance philosophy 42 languages Afrikaans العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca বাংলা Башҡортса Български Bosanski Català Čeština Deutsch Eesti Español Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Hausa Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano Қазақша Latina Lingua Franca Nova Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Русский Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Tolışi Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This article is written like a personal reflection, personal essay, or argumentative essay that states a Wikipedia editor's personal feelings or presents an original argument about a topic.

Please help improve it by rewriting it in an encyclopedic style .

( June 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Period of European thought (1355–1650) Renaissance The Birth of Venus (c. 1484–1486) by Botticelli Aspects Architecture Dance Fine arts Greek scholars Humanism Literature Magic Music Philosophy Science Technology Warfare Regions England France Germany Italy Poland Portugal Spain Scotland Northern Europe Low Countries History and study Age of Discovery Continuity thesis High Renaissance v t e Part of a series on Philosophy Philosophy portal Contents Outline Glossary History Categories Philosophies By period Ancient Egyptian Greek Roman Chinese Medieval Buddhism Neo-Confucianism Scholasticism Renaissance Modern Enlightenment Idealism Contemporary Analytic Continental By region African Egyptian Ethiopian South African Eastern Chinese Indian Indonesian Japanese Korean Vietnamese Indigenous American Aztec Middle Eastern Iranian Western United States British French German Italian Russian By religion Buddhist Confucian Christian Hindu Islamic Jain Jewish Taoist Branches Epistemology Ethics Logic Metaphysics Aesthetics Education History Language Law Metaphilosophy Mind Ontology Phenomenology Political Religion Science Philosophers Aesthetic philosophers Epistemologists Ethicists Logicians Metaphysicians Philosophers of mind Social and political philosophers Women in philosophy v t e The designation " Renaissance philosophy " is used by historians of philosophy to refer to the thought of the period running in Europe roughly between 1400 and 1600.

[ 1 ] It therefore overlaps both with late medieval philosophy , which in the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries was influenced by notable figures such as Albert the Great , Thomas Aquinas , William of Ockham , and Marsilius of Padua , and early modern philosophy , which conventionally starts with René Descartes and his publication of the Discourse on Method in 1637.

Continuities [ edit ] The structure, sources, method, and topics of philosophy in the Renaissance had much in common with those of previous centuries.

Structure of philosophy [ edit ] Particularly since the recovery of a great portion of Aristotelian writings in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries, it became clear that, in addition to Aristotle's writings on logic, which had already been known, there were numerous others roughly having to do with natural philosophy, moral philosophy, and metaphysics. These areas provided the structure for the philosophy curriculum of the emerging universities. The general assumption was that the most 'scientific' branches of philosophy were those that were more theoretical and therefore more widely applicable. During the Renaissance too, many thinkers saw these as the main philosophical areas, with logic providing a training of the mind to approach the other three.

Sources of philosophy [ edit ] A similar continuity can be seen in the case of sources. Although Aristotle was never an unquestioned authority [ 2 ] (he was more often than not a springboard for discussion, and his opinions were often discussed along those of others, or the teaching of Holy Scripture), medieval lectures in physics consisted of reading Aristotle's Physics , lessons in moral philosophy consisted of examinations of his Nicomachean Ethics (and often his Politics ), and metaphysics was approached through his Metaphysics . The assumption that Aristotle's works were foundational to an understanding of philosophy did not wane during the Renaissance, which saw a flourishing of new translations, commentaries, and other interpretations of his works, both in Latin and in the vernacular.

[ 3 ] After the Reformation, Aristotle's Nicomachean Ethics continued to be the main authority for the discipline of ethics at Protestant universities until the late seventeenth century, with over fifty Protestant commentaries published on the Nicomachean Ethics before 1682.

[ 4 ] In terms of method, philosophy was considered during the late Middle Ages as a subject that required robust enquiry on the part of people trained in the subject's technical vocabulary. Philosophical texts and problems were typically approached through university lectures and 'questions'. The latter, similar in some ways to modern debates, examined the pros and cons of particular philosophical positions or interpretations. They were one of the cornerstones of the ' scholastic method ', made students who proposed or responded to questions quick on their feet, and required a deep familiarity with all of the known philosophical tradition, which would often be invoked in support of or against specific arguments. This style of philosophy continued to have a strong following in the Renaissance.

Pico della Mirandola 's Disputations , for instance, depended directly on this tradition, which was not at all limited to university lecture halls.

Bust of Aristotle , Roman copy after a Greek bronze original by Lysippos from 330 BC.

Topics in philosophy [ edit ] Given the remarkable range of Aristotelian philosophy , it was possible to discuss all kinds of issues in medieval and Renaissance philosophy. Aristotle had treated directly problems such as the trajectory of missiles, the habits of animals, how knowledge is acquired, the freedom of the will, how virtue is connected with happiness, the relationship of the lunar and the sublunar worlds . Indirectly he had stimulated discussion on two points that were particularly of concern to Christians: the immortality of the soul and the eternity of the world. All of these continued to be of considerable interest to Renaissance thinkers , but we shall see that in some cases the solutions offered were significantly different because of changing cultural and religious landscapes.

[ 5 ] Discontinuities [ edit ] This section includes a list of references , related reading , or external links , but its sources remain unclear because it lacks inline citations .

Please help improve this section by introducing more precise citations.

( May 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This section is written like a personal reflection, personal essay, or argumentative essay that states a Wikipedia editor's personal feelings or presents an original argument about a topic.

Please help improve it by rewriting it in an encyclopedic style .

( May 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Having established that many aspects of philosophy were held in common during the Middle Ages and the Renaissance, it will now be useful to discuss in what areas changes were afoot. The same outline as above will be used, to show that within trends of continuity one can also find surprising differences.

Sources of philosophy [ edit ] It is therefore useful to reconsider what was mentioned above about philosophical sources. The Renaissance saw a significant broadening of source material. Plato, known directly only through two and a half dialogues in the Middle Ages, came to be known through numerous Latin translations in fifteenth century Italy, culminating in the hugely influential translation of his complete works by Marsilio Ficino in Florence in 1484.

[ 6 ] Petrarch was not able to read Plato directly, but he greatly admired him. Petrarch was also a great admirer of Roman poets such as Virgil and Horace and of Cicero for Latin prose writing.  Not all Renaissance humanists followed his example in all things, but Petrarch contributed to a broadening of his time's 'canon' (pagan poetry had previously been considered frivolous and dangerous), something that happened in philosophy as well. In the sixteenth century anyone who considered himself 'au fait' read Plato as well as Aristotle, trying as much as possible (and not always very successfully) to reconcile the two with each other and with Christianity. This is probably the main reason why Donato Acciaiuoli 's commentary on Aristotle's Ethics (first published in 1478) was so successful: it blended the three traditions beautifully.

Other movements from ancient philosophy also re-entered the mainstream. While this was seldom the case for Epicureanism , which was largely caricatured and considered with suspicion, Pyrrhonism and Academic Skepticism made a comeback thanks to philosophers such as Michel de Montaigne , and Neostoicism became a popular movement due to the writings of Justus Lipsius .

[ 7 ] In all of these cases it is impossible to separate the pagan philosophical doctrines from the Christian filter through which they were approached and made legitimate.

Structure of philosophy [ edit ] Portrait of St. Thomas by Antonio del Castillo y Saavedra , ca. 1649 While generally the Aristotelian structure of the branches of philosophy stayed in place, interesting developments and tensions were taking place within them. In moral philosophy , for instance, a position consistently held by Thomas Aquinas and his numerous followers was that its three subfields (ethics, economics, politics) were related to progressively wider spheres (the individual, the family and the community). Politics, Thomas thought, is more important than ethics because it considers the good of the greater number. This position came under increasing strain in the Renaissance, as various thinkers claimed that Thomas's classifications were inaccurate, and that ethics were the most important part of morality.

[ 8 ] Other important figures, such as Francesco Petrarca (Petrarch) (1304–1374), questioned the whole assumption that the theoretical aspects of philosophy were the more important ones. He insisted, for instance, on the value of the practical aspects of ethics. Petrarch's position, expressed both strongly and amusingly in his invective On His Own Ignorance and That of Many Others ( De sui ipsius ac multorum ignorantia ) is also important for another reason: it represents the conviction that philosophy should let itself be guided by rhetoric, that the purpose of philosophy is therefore not so much to reveal the truth, but to encourage people to pursue the good. This perspective, so typical of Italian humanism, could easily lead to reducing all philosophy to ethics, in a move reminiscent of Plato's Socrates and of Cicero.

Method of philosophy [ edit ] If, as mentioned above, scholasticism continued to flourish, the Italian humanists (i.e., lovers and practitioners of the humanities) challenged its supremacy. As we have seen, they believed that philosophy could be brought under the wing of rhetoric. They also thought that the scholarly discourse of their time needed to return to the elegance and precision of its classical models. They therefore tried dressing philosophy in a more appealing garb than had their predecessors, whose translations and commentaries were in technical Latin and sometimes simply transliterated the Greek. In 1416–1417, Leonardo Bruni , the pre-eminent humanist of his time and chancellor of Florence, re-translated Aristotle's Ethics into a more flowing, idiomatic and classical Latin. He hoped to communicate the elegance of Aristotle's Greek while also making the text more accessible to those without a philosophical education. Others, including Nicolò Tignosi in Florence around 1460, and the Frenchman Jacques Lefèvre d'Étaples in Paris in the 1490s, tried to please the humanists either by including in their commentaries on Aristotle appealing historical examples or quotations from poetry, or by avoiding the standard scholastic format of questions, or both.

Portrait of Erasmus by Hans Holbein the Younger , 1523 The driving conviction was that philosophy should be freed of its technical jargon so that more people would be able to read it. At the same time, all kinds of summaries, paraphrases, and dialogues dealing with philosophical issues were prepared, in order to give their topics a wider dissemination. Humanists also encouraged the study of Aristotle and other writers of antiquity in the original.

Desiderius Erasmus , the great Dutch humanist, even prepared a Greek edition of Aristotle, and eventually those teaching philosophy in the universities had to at least pretend that they knew Greek. Humanists were not, however, great fans of the vernacular. There is only a handful of examples of dialogues or translations of Aristotle's works into Italian during the fifteenth century. Once it had been determined, however, that Italian was a language with literary merit and that it could carry the weight of philosophical discussion, numerous efforts in this direction started to appear, particularly from the 1540s onward.

Alessandro Piccolomini had a programme to translate or paraphrase the entire Aristotelian corpus into the vernacular.

Other important figures were Benedetto Varchi , Bernardo Segni and Giambattista Gelli , all of them active in Florence. Efforts got underway to present Plato's doctrines in the vernacular as well. This rise of vernacular philosophy, which quite predated the Cartesian approach, is a new field of research whose contours are only now beginning to be clarified.

[ 9 ] Topics in philosophy [ edit ] It is very hard to generalize about the ways in which discussions of philosophical topics shifted in the Renaissance, mainly because to do so requires a detailed map of the period, something we do not yet have. We know that debates about the freedom of the will continued to flare up (for instance, in the famous exchanges between Erasmus and Martin Luther ), that Spanish thinkers were increasingly obsessed with the notion of nobility, that duelling was a practice that generated a large literature in the sixteenth century (was it permissible or not?).

Earlier histories gave perhaps undue attention to Pietro Pomponazzi 's pronouncements on the immortality of the soul as a question that could not be resolved philosophically in a way consistent with Christianity, or to Pico della Mirandola's Oration on the Dignity of Man , as if these were signals of the period's increasing secularism or even atheism. In fact, the most successful compendium of natural philosophy in the period ( Compendium philosophiae naturalis , first published in 1530) was authored by Frans Titelmans, a Franciscan friar from the Low Countries whose work has a very strong religious flavour.

[ 10 ] We must not forget that most philosophers of the time were at least nominal, if not devout, Christians, that the sixteenth century saw both the Protestant and the Catholic reformations, and that Renaissance philosophy culminates with the period of the Thirty Years' War (1618–1648). In other words, religion had a massive importance in the period, and one can hardly study philosophy without remembering this.

Marsilio Ficino , detail of Angel Appearing to Zacharias by Domenico Ghirlandaio , ca. 1490 This is true among others for the philosophy of Marsilio Ficino (1433–1499), who reinterpreted Plato in the light of his early Greek commentators and also of Christianity. Ficino hoped that a purified philosophy would bring about a religious renewal in his society and therefore transformed distasteful aspects of Platonic philosophy (for instance, the homosexual love exalted in the Symposium) into spiritual love (i.e., Platonic love ), something later transformed by Pietro Bembo and Baldassare Castiglione in the early sixteenth century as something also applicable to relationships between men and women. Ficino and his followers also had an interest in 'hidden knowledge', mainly because of his belief that all of ancient knowledge was interconnected (Moses, for instance, had received his insights from the Greeks, who in turn had received them from others, all according to God's plan and therefore mutually consistent; Hermeticism is relevant here). Although Ficino's interest in and practice of astrology was not uncommon in his time, one should not necessarily associate it with philosophy, as the two were usually considered to be quite separate and often in contradiction with each other.

In conclusion, like any other moment in the history of thought Renaissance philosophy cannot be considered to have provided something entirely new nor to have continued for centuries to repeat the conclusions of its predecessors. Historians call this period the 'Renaissance' in order to indicate the rebirth that took place of ancient (particularly classical) perspectives, sources, attitudes toward literature and the arts. At the same time, we realize that every re-appropriation is constrained and even guided by contemporary concerns and biases. It was no different for the period considered here: the old was mixed with and changed by the new, but while no claims can be made for a revolutionary new starting point in philosophy, in many ways the synthesis of Christianity, Aristotelianism , and Platonism offered by Thomas Aquinas was torn apart in order to make way for a new one, based on more complete and varied sources, often in the original, and certainly attuned to new social and religious realities and a much broader public.

Renaissance philosophers [ edit ] Coluccio Salutati (1331–1406) Gemistus Pletho (1355–1452) Leonardo Bruni (1370–1444) Nicholas of Cusa (1401–1464) Leon Battista Alberti (1404–1472) Lorenzo Valla (1407–1457) Marsilio Ficino (1433–1499) Antonio de Nebrija (1444–1522) Pietro Pomponazzi (1462–1524) Giovanni Pico della Mirandola (1463–1494) Erasmus of Rotterdam (1466–1536) Niccolò Machiavelli (1469–1527) Nicolaus Copernicus (1473–1543) Thomas More (1478–1535) Charles de Bovelles (1479–1553) Francesco Guicciardini (1483–1540) Francisco de Vitoria (1483–1546) Martin Luther (1490–1546) Martín de Azpilcueta (1492–1586) Domingo de Soto (1494–1560) Juan Ginés de Sepúlveda (1490–1573) Bernardino Telesio (1509–1588) Diego de Covarrubias y Leyva (1512–1577) Luis de León (1527–1591) Jean Bodin (1529–1596) Michel de Montaigne (1533–1592) Luis de Molina (1536–1600) Juan de Mariana (1536–1624) Tycho Brahe (1546–1601) Joest Lips (1547-1606) Giordano Bruno (1548–1600) Francisco Suárez (1548–1617) Gabriel Vásquez (1549 or 1551–1604) Francis Bacon (1561–1626) Galileo Galilei (1564–1642) Tommaso Campanella (1568–1639) Johannes Kepler (1571–1630) Giulio Cesare Vanini (1585–1619) See also [ edit ] Philosophy portal Age of Enlightenment Hermeticism Renaissance humanism Renaissance magic Platonism in the Renaissance Second scholasticism References [ edit ] ^ "Renaissance philosophy - Routledge Encyclopedia of Philosophy" .

^ Luca Bianchi, '“Aristotele fu un uomo e poté errare”: sulle origini medievali della critica al “principio di autorità”', in idem, Studi sull'aristotelismo del Rinascimento (Padua: Il Poligrafo, 2003), pp. 101–24.

^ Charles B. Schmitt, Aristotle and the Renaissance (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press , 1988).

^ Sytsma, David (2021).

"Aristotle's Nicomachean Ethics and Protestantism" .

Academia Letters .

1650 : 1– 8.

doi : 10.20935/AL1650 .

S2CID 237798959 .

^ Helpful if weighty guides to philosophical topics in the period are The Cambridge History of Later Medieval Philosophy , ed. by Norman Kretzman et al., and The Cambridge History of Renaissance Philosophy , ed. by Charles B. Schmitt et al.

^ James Hankins, Plato in the Italian Renaissance , 2 vols (Leiden: Brill, 1990, 1991).

^ On the melding of various traditions in moral philosophy see especially Jill Kraye, 'Moral Philosophy', in The Cambridge History of Renaissance Philosophy.

^ David A. Lines, Aristotle's Ethics in the Italian Renaissance (ca. 1300–1650): The Universities and the Problem of Moral Education (Leiden: Brill, 2002), pp. 271–72.

^ For now see Luca Bianchi, 'Per una storia dell'aristotelismo “volgare” nel Rinascimento: problemi e prospettive di ricerca', Bruniana & Campanelliana , 15.2 (2009), 367–85.

^ David A. Lines, 'Teaching Physics in Louvain and Bologna: Frans Titelmans and Ulisse Aldrovandi', in Scholarly Knowledge: Textbooks in Early Modern Europe , ed. by Emidio Campi, Simone De Angelis, Anja-Silvia Goeing, Anthony T. Grafton in cooperation with Rita Casale, Jürgen Oelkers and Daniel Tröhler (Geneva: Droz, 2008), 183–203.

Bibliography [ edit ] Copenhaver, Brian P., & Schmitt, Charles B., Renaissance Philosophy , New York: Oxford University Press , 1992.

Hankins, James, (ed.), The Cambridge Companion to Renaissance Philosophy , Cambridge: Cambridge University Press , 2007.

Riedl, John O., A Catalogue of Renaissance Philosophers (1350–1650) , Milwaukee: Marquette University Press , 1940.

Schmitt, Charles B., Skinner, Quentin (eds.), The Cambridge History of Renaissance Philosophy , Cambridge: Cambridge University Press , 1988.

External links [ edit ] Media related to Renaissance philosophy at Wikimedia Commons Renaissance philosophy at PhilPapers Soldato, Eva Del.

"Natural Philosophy in the Renaissance" . In Zalta, Edward N.

(ed.).

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

"Renaissance philosophy" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Vernacular Aristotelianism in Renaissance Italy, c. 1400 – c. 1650 Pico Project v t e Renaissance General Renaissance Greek scholars in the Renaissance High Renaissance Mannerism Northern Mannerism Outline of the Renaissance Renaissance studies By field Architecture Brick Central and Eastern Europe French Italian domes Palladian Plateresque Portuguese Purism Spanish Venetian Art Early Netherlandish painting Dutch and Flemish painting Italian painting Sculpture Italian sculpture Dance Humanism France Northern Europe Latin Literature Dutch French Spanish Magic Medicine Music Philosophy Platonism in the Renaissance Science Scientific Revolution Technology Theatre Warfare By region Italian Renaissance Bergamo and Brescia Ferrara Florence Lombardy Rome Papacy Sicily Urbino Venice Northern Renaissance England France Germany Saxony Weser Low Countries Poland Scotland Iberian peninsula Portugal Spain Spanish Golden Age Lists Composers Figures Humanists Structures Related Cloak and dagger Medieval renaissances Carolingian Ottonian 12th century Reenactment v t e Philosophy Branches Branches Applied philosophy Logic Metaphilosophy Philosophy of education Philosophy of information Philosophy of language Philosophy of mathematics Philosophy of religion Philosophy of science Political philosophy Practical philosophy Social philosophy Theoretical philosophy Aesthetics Aesthetic response Formalism Institutionalism Epistemology Empiricism Fideism Naturalism Particularism Rationalism Skepticism Solipsism Ethics Consequentialism Deontology Virtue Free will Compatibilism Determinism Hard Incompatibilism Hard Libertarianism Metaphysics Atomism Dualism Idealism Monism Naturalism Realism Mind Behaviorism Eliminativism Emergentism Epiphenomenalism Functionalism Objectivism Subjectivism Normativity Absolutism Particularism Relativism Nihilism Skepticism Universalism Ontology Action Event Process Reality Anti-realism Conceptualism Idealism Materialism Naturalism Nominalism Physicalism Realism By era By era Ancient Western Medieval Renaissance Early modern Modern Contemporary Ancient Chinese Agriculturalism Confucianism Legalism Logicians Mohism Chinese naturalism Taoism Yangism Greco- Roman Presocratic Ionians Pythagoreans Eleatics Atomists Sophists Cyrenaics Cynicism Eretrian school Megarian school Academy Peripatetic school Hellenistic philosophy Pyrrhonism Stoicism Epicureanism Academic Skepticism Middle Platonism School of the Sextii Neopythagoreanism Second Sophistic Neoplatonism Church Fathers Dispositio Indian Hindu Samkhya Nyaya Vaisheshika Yoga Mīmāṃsā Ājīvika Ajñana Cārvāka Jain Anekantavada Syādvāda Buddhist Abhidharma Sarvāstivadā Pudgalavada Sautrāntika Madhyamaka Svatantrika and Prasangika Śūnyatā Yogacara Tibetan Persian Mazdakism Mithraism Zoroastrianism Zurvanism Medieval East Asian Neotaoism Tiantai Huayan Chan Zen Neo-Confucianism Korean Confucianism European Christian Augustinianism Scholasticism Thomism Scotism Occamism Renaissance humanism Indian Vedanta Acintya bheda abheda Advaita Bhedabheda Dvaita Nimbarka Sampradaya Shuddhadvaita Vishishtadvaita Navya-Nyāya Islamic Aristotelianism Averroism Avicennism Illuminationism ʿIlm al-Kalām Sufi Jewish Judeo-Islamic Modern Anarchism Classical Realism Collectivism Conservatism Determinism Dualism Edo neo-Confucianism Empiricism Existentialism Foundationalism Historicism Holism Humanism Anti- Idealism Absolute British German Objective Subjective Transcendental Individualism Kokugaku Liberalism Materialism Modernism Monism Naturalism Natural law Nihilism New Confucianism Neo-scholasticism Pessimism Pragmatism Phenomenology Positivism Reductionism Rationalism Social contract Socialism Transcendentalism Utilitarianism People Cartesianism Kantianism Neo Kierkegaardianism Krausism Hegelianism Marxism Newtonianism Nietzscheanism Spinozism Contemporary Analytic Applied ethics Analytic feminism Analytical Marxism Communitarianism Consequentialism Critical rationalism Experimental philosophy Falsificationism Foundationalism / Coherentism Internalism and externalism Logical positivism Legal positivism Meta-ethics Moral realism Quinean naturalism Normative ethics Ordinary language philosophy Postanalytic philosophy Quietism Rawlsian Reformed epistemology Systemics Scientism Scientific realism Scientific skepticism Transactionalism Contemporary utilitarianism Vienna Circle Wittgensteinian Continental Critical theory Deconstruction Existentialism Feminist Frankfurt School Hermeneutics Neo-Marxism New Historicism Phenomenology Posthumanism Postmodernism Post-structuralism Social constructionism Structuralism Western Marxism Miscellaneous Kyoto School Objectivism Postcritique Russian cosmism By region By region African Bantu Egyptian Ethiopian Africana Eastern Buddhist Chinese Indian Indonesian Japanese Korean Taiwanese Vietnamese Middle Eastern Iranian Islamic Jewish Pakistani Turkish Western ( Analytic / Continental ) American Australian British Scottish Canada Czech Danish Dutch Finland French German Greek Italian Maltese Polish Slovene Spanish Miscellaneous Amerindian Aztec Romanian Russian Yugoslav Philosophy portal Category Authority control databases : National Japan Czech Republic Latvia Israel NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐xp7hf
Cached time: 20250816134224
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.546 seconds
Real time usage: 0.707 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2296/1000000
Revision size: 20870/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 197049/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 2167/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 15/100
Expensive parser function count: 5/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 72372/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.304/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 6709321/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  535.943      1 -total
 18.27%   97.912      1 Template:Reflist
 15.56%   83.409      1 Template:Renaissance
 15.44%   82.754      2 Template:Sidebar
 14.05%   75.318      1 Template:Cite_web
 12.23%   65.519     10 Template:Navbox
 11.29%   60.531      2 Template:Essay
 11.10%   59.470      1 Template:Short_description
  9.56%   51.228      3 Template:Ambox
  8.52%   45.649      2 Template:Essay-like Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:809629:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250816134224 and revision id 1294316758. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Renaissance_philosophy&oldid=1294316758 " Category : Renaissance philosophy Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles with style issues from June 2025 All articles with style issues Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Pages using sidebar with the child parameter Articles lacking in-text citations from May 2025 All articles lacking in-text citations Wikipedia articles with style issues from May 2025 Commons category link from Wikidata Articles with Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy links This page was last edited on 7 June 2025, at 00:21 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Renaissance philosophy 42 languages Add topic

