Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Oil resources 2 Climate 3 Bay of Campeche Pictorials 4 References 5 Notes 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Bay of Campeche 40 languages العربية 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Беларуская Български Bosanski Català Cebuano Español Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Galego 한국어 Ilokano Íslenska Italiano עברית ქართული Kiswahili Latviešu Lietuvių Македонски मराठी მარგალური Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Simple English Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Svenska Українська اردو Tiếng Việt Winaray 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 20°00′00″N 94°00′00″W ﻿ / ﻿ 20.00000°N 94.00000°W ﻿ / 20.00000; -94.00000 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Bight in the southern area of the Gulf of Mexico This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Bay of Campeche" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( October 2019 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Bay of Campeche Bahía de Campeche Campeche Sound Bay of Campeche Bay of Campeche Location Campeche Tabasco Veracruz Coordinates 20°00′00″N 94°00′00″W ﻿ / ﻿ 20.00000°N 94.00000°W ﻿ / 20.00000; -94.00000 Part of Campeche Bank Campeche Knolls Laguna de Términos Ocean/sea sources Gulf of Mexico Basin countries Mexico Max. length 152 nautical miles (175 mi; 282 km) Max. width 378 nautical miles (435 mi; 700 km) Surface area 41,909 square nautical miles (55,500 sq mi; 143,740 km 2 ) Islands Triángulo Sur [ 1 ] Triángulo Oeste [ 2 ] Triángulo Este [ 3 ] Cayos Arcas [ 4 ] The Bay of Campeche ( Spanish : Bahía de Campeche ), or Campeche Sound , is a bight in the southern area of the Gulf of Mexico , forming the north side of the Isthmus of Tehuantepec . It is surrounded on three sides by the Mexican states of Campeche , Tabasco and Veracruz . The area of the bay is 6,000 square miles (16,000 km 2 ) and maximum depth of the bay is approximately 180 feet (55 m). It was named by Francisco Hernández de Córdoba and Antón de Alaminos during their expedition in 1517.

Oil resources [ edit ] The Cantarell Complex of five oil fields lies beneath the Bay of Campeche. In 2003, it was the second most productive oil field in the world, then supplying about two thirds of Mexico's crude oil output, but it went into a steep decline soon thereafter.

On June 3, 1979, Ixtoc I , an exploratory oil well located in the bay, suffered a blowout that caused a catastrophic explosion, resulting in what has been ranked as the third largest unintentional oil spill in history.

Climate [ edit ] During the months of June and July, the Bay of Campeche is considered one of the "hot" breeding spots for Atlantic hurricanes .

[1] It experiences strong winds from the north from November into February along its western edge, with the winds ultimately funneling between the mountains and out into the Pacific near Salina Cruz.

[ 5 ] On the other hand, the bay is also known for being a hurricane "graveyard", with unusually weak steering currents in the area causing hurricanes to slow down and meander, starving themselves (for example, Hurricane Roxanne in 1995). The bay is also considered the eastern border on the main migration routes for birds in the Americas.

[2] Bay of Campeche Pictorials [ edit ] Depictions of Bahía de Campeche Bay of Campeche Bay of Campeche Boats at Bay of Campeche References [ edit ] ^ Triángulo Sur in Geonames.org (cc-by) ^ Triángulo Oeste in Geonames.org (cc-by) ^ Triángulo Este in Geonames.org (cc-by) ^ Cayos Arcas in Geonames.org (cc-by) ^ "Salina Cruz Climate, Weather By Month, Average Temperature (Mexico) - Weather Spark" .

weatherspark.com . Retrieved 2022-10-09 .

Notes [ edit ] ^ Hauptmann, David.

"Where do hurricanes form and where do they strike?" . Archived from the original on 2005-11-20 . Retrieved 2006-03-27 .

^ "Routes of Migration" .

Migration of Birds . Northern Prairie Wildlife Research Center. Archived from the original on 17 April 2006 . Retrieved 2006-03-27 .

External links [ edit ] Media related to Bay of Campeche at Wikimedia Commons "General Facts about the Gulf of Mexico" (PDF) .

U.S. Fish & Wildlife Service . GulfBase.org.

v t e State of Campeche Campeche (capital) Municipalities (municipal seats) Calakmul ( Xpujil ) Calkiní ( Calkiní ) Campeche ( Campeche ) Candelaria ( Candelaria ) Carmen ( Ciudad del Carmen ) Champotón ( Champotón ) Dzitbalché ( Dzitbalché ) Escárcega ( Escárcega ) Hecelchakán ( Hecelchakán ) Hopelchén ( Hopelchén ) Palizada ( Palizada ) Seybaplaya ( Seybaplaya ) Tenabo ( Tenabo ) v t e Marginal seas of the Atlantic Ocean Basins Foxe Basin Bays Baffin Bay Bay of Biscay Bay of Campeche Bay of Fundy Bothnian Bay Hudson Bay James Bay Pottles Bay Channels English Channel Gulfs Gulf of Bothnia Gulf of Finland Gulf of Guinea Gulf of Lion Gulf of Maine Gulf of Mexico Gulf of Sidra Gulf of St. Lawrence Gulf of Venezuela Seas Adriatic Sea Aegean Sea Alboran Sea American Mediterranean Sea Archipelago Sea Argentine Sea Balearic Sea Baltic Sea Black Sea Bothnian Sea Caribbean Sea Celtic Sea Greenland Sea Icarian Sea Ionian Sea Irish Sea Irminger Sea Kattegat Labrador Sea Levantine Sea Libyan Sea Ligurian Sea Mediterranean Sea Myrtoan Sea North Sea Norwegian Sea Sargasso Sea Sea of Åland Sea of Azov Sea of Crete Sea of the Hebrides Sea of Marmara Skagerrak Thracian Sea Tyrrhenian Sea Wadden Sea Oceans portal v t e Earth 's oceans and seas Antarctic/Southern Ocean Amundsen Sea Bellingshausen Sea Cooperation Sea Cosmonauts Sea Davis Sea D'Urville Sea King Haakon VII Sea Lazarev Sea Mawson Sea Riiser-Larsen Sea Ross Sea Scotia Sea Somov Sea Weddell Sea Arctic Ocean Amundsen Gulf Barents Sea Beaufort Sea Chukchi Sea East Siberian Sea Greenland Sea Gulf of Boothia Kara Sea Laptev Sea Lincoln Sea Pechora Sea Prince Gustaf Adolf Sea Queen Victoria Sea Wandel Sea White Sea Atlantic Ocean Adriatic Sea Aegean Sea Alboran Sea American Mediterranean Sea Archipelago Sea Argentine Sea Baffin Bay Balearic Sea Baltic Sea Bay of Biscay Bay of Bothnia Bay of Campeche Bay of Fundy Black Sea Bothnian Sea Caribbean Sea Celtic Sea English Channel Foxe Basin Greenland Sea Gulf of Bothnia Gulf of Finland Gulf of Guinea Gulf of Lion Gulf of Maine Gulf of Mexico Gulf of Sidra Gulf of St. Lawrence Gulf of Venezuela Hudson Bay Ionian Sea Irish Sea Irminger Sea James Bay Labrador Sea Levantine Sea Libyan Sea Ligurian Sea Mediterranean Sea Myrtoan Sea North Sea Norwegian Sea Sargasso Sea Sea of Åland Sea of Azov Sea of Crete Sea of the Hebrides Sea of Marmara Thracian Sea Tyrrhenian Sea Wadden Sea Indian Ocean Andaman Sea Arabian Sea Bay of Bengal Flores Sea Great Australian Bight Gulf of Aden Gulf of Aqaba Gulf of Khambhat Gulf of Kutch Gulf of Oman Gulf of Suez Laccadive Sea Mozambique Channel Persian Gulf Red Sea Timor Sea Pacific Ocean Arafura Sea Bali Sea Banda Sea Bering Sea Bismarck Sea Bohai Sea Bohol Sea Camotes Sea Celebes Sea Chilean Sea Coral Sea East China Sea Gulf of Alaska Gulf of Anadyr Gulf of California Gulf of Carpentaria Gulf of Fonseca Gulf of Panama Gulf of Thailand Gulf of Tonkin Halmahera Sea Java Sea Koro Sea Mar de Grau Molucca Sea Moro Gulf Philippine Sea Salish Sea Savu Sea Sea of Japan Sea of Okhotsk Seram Sea Seto Inland Sea Shantar Sea Sibuyan Sea Solomon Sea South China Sea Sulu Sea Tasman Sea Visayan Sea West Philippine Sea Yellow Sea Endorheic basins Aral Sea Caspian Sea Dead Sea Salton Sea Others Ancient oceans Ocean Sea Superocean Oceans portal Category Authority control databases International VIAF Other NARA Yale LUX Portals : Islands Marine life Mexico Oceans Tropical cyclones This Mexico location article is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it .

v t e Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Bay_of_Campeche&oldid=1303993147 " Categories : Bays of Mexico Bays of the Gulf of Mexico Gulf Coast of Mexico Landforms of Campeche Bights (geography) Campeche City Mexico geography stubs Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from October 2019 All articles needing additional references Coordinates on Wikidata Articles using infobox body of water without image Articles using infobox body of water without pushpin map alt Articles using infobox body of water without image bathymetry Articles containing Spanish-language text Commons category link is on Wikidata All stub articles This page was last edited on 3 August 2025, at 08:41 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Bay of Campeche 40 languages Add topic

