Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life and education 2 U.S. Naval Reserve (1941–1945) Toggle U.S. Naval Reserve (1941–1945) subsection 2.1 Commanding PT-109 and PT-59 3 Journalism (1945) 4 U.S. House of Representatives (1947–1953) 5 U.S. Senate (1953–1960) 6 1960 presidential election 7 Presidency (1961–1963) Toggle Presidency (1961–1963) subsection 7.1 Foreign policy 7.1.1 Cold War and flexible response 7.1.2 Decolonization and the Congo Crisis 7.1.3 Peace Corps 7.1.4 Vienna Summit and the Berlin Wall 7.1.5 Bay of Pigs Invasion 7.1.6 Operation Mongoose 7.1.7 Cuban Missile Crisis 7.1.8 Latin America and communism 7.1.9 Laos 7.1.10 Vietnam 7.1.11 West Berlin speech 7.1.12 Middle East 7.1.13 Ireland 7.1.14 American University speech 7.1.15 Nuclear Test Ban Treaty 7.2 Domestic policy 7.2.1 New Frontier 7.2.2 Taxes 7.2.3 Economy 7.2.4 Civil rights movement 7.2.5 Status of women 7.2.6 Crime 7.2.7 Agriculture 7.2.8 Native American relations 7.2.9 Space policy 7.3 Judicial appointments 8 Assassination Toggle Assassination subsection 8.1 Funeral 9 Personal life, family, and reputation Toggle Personal life, family, and reputation subsection 9.1 Wife and children 9.2 Popular image 9.3 Health 9.4 Affairs and friendships 9.5 Sports 9.6 Religion 10 Historical evaluations and legacy Toggle Historical evaluations and legacy subsection 10.1 Presidency 10.1.1 Camelot 10.2 Memorials and eponyms 11 Works Toggle Works subsection 11.1 Books 11.2 Select speeches 12 See also 13 Notes 14 References Toggle References subsection 14.1 Citations 14.2 Works cited 15 Further reading 16 External links Toggle the table of contents John F. Kennedy 175 languages Acèh Afrikaans Alemannisch አማርኛ Anarâškielâ Ænglisc Аԥсшәа العربية Aragonés ܐܪܡܝܐ Արեւմտահայերէն Arpetan Asturianu Avañe'ẽ Aymar aru Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه Basa Bali বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Bikol Central Bislama Български Boarisch Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Чӑвашла Cebuano Čeština Corsu Cymraeg Dansk الدارجة Deutsch ދިވެހިބަސް Eesti Ελληνικά Emiliàn e rumagnòl Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Føroyskt Français Frysk Gaeilge Gaelg Gàidhlig Galego ગુજરાતી गोंयची कोंकणी / Gõychi Konknni Gungbe 客家語 / Hak-kâ-ngî 한국어 Hausa Hawaiʻi Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Ilokano বিষ্ণুপ্রিয়া মণিপুরী Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Interlingue Ирон IsiZulu Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa ಕನ್ನಡ Kapampangan ქართული Қазақша Kernowek Ikinyarwanda Kiswahili Kreyòl ayisyen Kurdî Кыргызча Кырык мары ລາວ Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Ligure Limburgs Lingála Lingua Franca Nova Lombard Magyar Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം मराठी მარგალური مصرى مازِرونی Bahasa Melayu 閩東語 / Mìng-dĕ̤ng-ngṳ̄ Монгол မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands नेपाली 日本語 Nordfriisk Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan ଓଡ଼ିଆ Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Pangcah پنجابی Papiamentu ភាសាខ្មែរ Piemontèis Plattdüütsch Polski Português Qaraqalpaqsha Qırımtatarca Ripoarisch Română Rumantsch Runa Simi Русский Саха тыла Sakizaya Scots Seeltersk Sesotho Shqip Sicilianu සිංහල Simple English سنڌي Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Татарча / tatarça తెలుగు ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Türkmençe Українська اردو ئۇيغۇرچە / Uyghurche Tiếng Việt Volapük Winaray 吴语 ייִדיש Yorùbá 粵語 Zazaki Zeêuws Žemaitėška 中文 Jaku Iban Yerwa Kanuri Tolışi Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia President of the United States from 1961 to 1963 Several terms  redirect here. For other uses, see John Kennedy (disambiguation) , Jack Kennedy (disambiguation) , JFK (disambiguation) , and John F. Kennedy (disambiguation) .

John F. Kennedy Oval Office portrait, 1963 35th President of the United States In office January 20, 1961 – November 22, 1963 Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson Preceded by Dwight D. Eisenhower Succeeded by Lyndon B. Johnson United States Senator from Massachusetts In office January 3, 1953 – December 22, 1960 Preceded by Henry Cabot Lodge Jr.

Succeeded by Benjamin A. Smith II Member of the U.S. House of Representatives from Massachusetts's 11th district In office January 3, 1947 – January 3, 1953 Preceded by James Michael Curley Succeeded by Tip O'Neill Personal details Born John Fitzgerald Kennedy ( 1917-05-29 ) May 29, 1917 Brookline, Massachusetts , U.S.

Died November 22, 1963 (1963-11-22) (aged 46) Dallas , Texas, U.S.

Manner of death Assassination Resting place Arlington National Cemetery Political party Democratic Spouse Jacqueline Bouvier ​ ( m.

1953 ) ​ Children 4, including Caroline , John Jr.

, and Patrick Parents Joseph P. Kennedy Sr.

Rose Fitzgerald Relatives Kennedy family Bouvier family (by marriage) Education Harvard University ( AB ) Occupation Politician journalist Signature Military service Allegiance United States Branch/service United States Navy Years of service 1941–1945 Rank Lieutenant Unit Motor Torpedo Squadron 2 Commands Patrol Torpedo Boat 109 Patrol Torpedo Boat 59 Battles/wars World War II Solomon Islands campaign Awards Navy and Marine Corps Medal Purple Heart American Defense Service Medal American Campaign Medal Asiatic–Pacific Campaign Medal (with 3 service stars ) World War II Victory Medal [ 1 ] John F. Kennedy's voice Kennedy speaking on the establishment of the Peace Corps Recorded March 1, 1961 This article is part of a series about John F. Kennedy Personal Family Military service in WWII Why England Slept Profiles in Courage A Nation of Immigrants 35th President of the United States Presidency timeline Transition Inauguration Tenure Executive actions New Frontier Foreign policy Doctrine "A Strategy of Peace" Bay of Pigs Cuban Missile Crisis Civil Rights Address Partial Nuclear Test Ban Treaty Clean Air Peace Corps " We choose to go to the Moon " Space programs Mercury Gemini Apollo Appointments Cabinet Judges Assassination Timeline Perpetrator Media coverage Reactions Conspiracy theories CIA In popular culture Rifle Autopsy State funeral dignitaries Eternal Flame Presidential campaigns 1960 primaries convention vice presidential candidate selection debates election Legacy Eponyms Library Cultural depictions v t e John Fitzgerald Kennedy (May 29, 1917 – November 22, 1963), also known as JFK , was the 35th president of the United States , serving from 1961 until his assassination in 1963. He was the first Roman Catholic and youngest person elected president at 43 years.

[ a ] Kennedy served at the height of the Cold War , and the majority of his foreign policy concerned relations with the Soviet Union and Cuba . A member of the Democratic Party , Kennedy represented Massachusetts in both houses of the United States Congress prior to his presidency.

Born into the prominent Kennedy family in Brookline, Massachusetts , Kennedy graduated from Harvard University in 1940, joining the U.S. Naval Reserve the following year. During World War II , he commanded PT boats in the Pacific theater . Kennedy's survival following the sinking of PT-109 and his rescue of his fellow sailors made him a war hero and earned the Navy and Marine Corps Medal , but left him with serious injuries. After a brief stint in journalism, Kennedy represented a working-class Boston district in the U.S. House of Representatives from 1947 to 1953. He was subsequently elected to the U.S. Senate , serving as the junior senator for Massachusetts from 1953 to 1960. While in the Senate, Kennedy published his book Profiles in Courage , which won a Pulitzer Prize . Kennedy ran in the 1960 presidential election . His campaign gained momentum after the first televised presidential debates in American history, and he was elected president, narrowly defeating Republican opponent Richard Nixon , the incumbent vice president.

Kennedy's presidency saw high tensions with communist states in the Cold War. He increased the number of American military advisers in South Vietnam , and the Strategic Hamlet Program began during his presidency. In 1961, he authorized attempts to overthrow the Cuban government of Fidel Castro in the failed Bay of Pigs Invasion and Operation Mongoose . In October 1962, U.S. spy planes discovered Soviet missile bases had been deployed in Cuba. The resulting period of tensions, termed the Cuban Missile Crisis , nearly resulted in nuclear war . In August 1961, after East German troops erected the Berlin Wall , Kennedy sent an army convoy to reassure West Berliners of U.S. support, and delivered one of his most famous speeches in West Berlin in June 1963. In 1963, Kennedy signed the first nuclear weapons treaty . He presided over the establishment of the Peace Corps , Alliance for Progress with Latin America, and the continuation of the Apollo program with the goal of landing a man on the Moon before 1970. He supported the civil rights movement but was only somewhat successful in passing his New Frontier domestic policies.

On November 22, 1963, Kennedy was assassinated in Dallas . His vice president, Lyndon B. Johnson , assumed the presidency .

Lee Harvey Oswald was arrested for the assassination, but he was shot and killed by Jack Ruby two days later. The FBI and the Warren Commission both concluded Oswald had acted alone, but conspiracy theories about the assassination persist. After Kennedy's death, Congress enacted many of his proposals, including the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and the Revenue Act of 1964 . Kennedy ranks highly in polls of U.S. presidents with historians and the general public. His personal life has been the focus of considerable sustained interest following public revelations in the 1970s of his chronic health ailments and extramarital affairs . Kennedy is the most recent U.S. president to have died in office .

Early life and education John Fitzgerald Kennedy was born outside Boston in Brookline, Massachusetts , on May 29, 1917, [ 2 ] to Joseph P. Kennedy Sr.

, a businessman and politician, and Rose Kennedy ( née Fitzgerald), a philanthropist and socialite.

[ 3 ] His paternal grandfather, P. J. Kennedy , was an East Boston ward boss and Massachusetts state legislator .

[ 4 ] Kennedy's maternal grandfather and namesake, John F. Fitzgerald , was a U.S. congressman and two-term mayor of Boston .

[ 5 ] All four of his grandparents were children of Irish immigrants.

[ 1 ] Kennedy had an older brother, Joseph Jr.

, and seven younger siblings: Rosemary , Kathleen , Eunice , Patricia , Robert , Jean , and Ted .

[ 6 ] Kennedy's father amassed a private fortune and established trust funds for his nine children that guaranteed lifelong financial independence.

[ 7 ] His business kept him away from home for long stretches, but Joe Sr. was a formidable presence in his children's lives. He encouraged them to be ambitious, emphasized political discussions at the dinner table, and demanded a high level of academic achievement. John's first exposure to politics came in 1922 , when he toured Boston wards with his grandfather Fitzgerald during his unsuccessful gubernatorial campaign.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] In September 1927, due to an outbreak of polio in Massachusetts and Joe Sr.'s business interests in Wall Street and Hollywood , the family relocated from Boston to the Riverdale neighborhood of New York City.

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] Several years later, his brother Robert told Look magazine that his father left Boston because of job signs that read: " No Irish Need Apply ." [ 12 ] The Kennedys spent summers and early autumns at their home in Hyannis Port, Massachusetts , a village on Cape Cod , [ 13 ] where they swam, sailed, and played touch football.

[ 14 ] Christmas and Easter holidays were spent at their winter retreat in Palm Beach, Florida .

[ 15 ] In September 1930, Kennedy, 13 years old, was sent to the Canterbury School in New Milford, Connecticut , for 8th grade. In April 1931, he had an appendectomy , after which he withdrew from Canterbury and recuperated at home.

[ 16 ] In September 1931, Kennedy began attending Choate , a preparatory boarding school in Wallingford, Connecticut .

[ 17 ] Rose had wanted John and Joe Jr. to attend a Catholic school , but Joe Sr. believed that if they were to compete in the political world, they needed to be with boys from prominent Protestant families.

[ 18 ] John spent his first years at Choate in his older brother's shadow and compensated with rebellious behavior that attracted a clique. Their most notorious stunt was exploding a toilet seat with a firecracker. In the next chapel assembly, the headmaster, George St. John, brandished the toilet seat and spoke of "muckers" who would "spit in our sea," leading Kennedy to name his group "The Muckers Club," which included roommate and lifelong friend Lem Billings .

[ 19 ] [ 20 ] Kennedy graduated from Choate in June 1935, finishing 64th of 112 students.

[ 11 ] He had been the business manager of the school yearbook and was voted the "most likely to succeed." [ 19 ] Kennedy's birthplace in Brookline, Massachusetts The Kennedy family in Hyannis Port, Massachusetts , with JFK at top left in the white shirt, c.

1931 Kennedy intended to study under Harold Laski at the London School of Economics , as his older brother had done. However, ill health forced his return to the United States in October 1935, when he enrolled late at Princeton University , but had to withdraw after two months due to gastrointestinal illness.

[ 21 ] In September 1936, Kennedy enrolled at Harvard College .

[ 22 ] He wrote occasionally for The Harvard Crimson , the campus newspaper, but had little involvement with campus politics, preferring to concentrate on athletics and his social life. Kennedy played football and was on the junior varsity squad during his sophomore year, but an injury forced him off the team, and left him with back problems that plagued him for the rest of his life. He earned membership in the Hasty Pudding Club and the Spee Club , one of Harvard's elite " final clubs ".

[ 23 ] [ 24 ] In July 1938, Kennedy sailed overseas with his older brother to work at the American embassy in London , where their father was serving as President Franklin D. Roosevelt 's ambassador to the Court of St. James's .

[ 25 ] The following year, Kennedy traveled throughout Europe, the Soviet Union , the Balkans , and the Middle East in preparation for his Harvard senior honors thesis.

[ 26 ] He then went to Berlin, where a U.S. diplomatic representative gave him a secret message about war breaking out soon to pass on to his father, and to Czechoslovakia before returning to London on September 1, 1939—the day that Germany invaded Poland ; the start of World War II .

[ 27 ] Two days later, the family was in the House of Commons for speeches endorsing the United Kingdom's declaration of war on Germany. Kennedy was sent as his father's representative to assist with arrangements for American survivors of the torpedoing of SS Athenia before flying back to the United States on his first transatlantic flight.

[ 28 ] [ 29 ] While an upperclassman at Harvard, Kennedy began to take his studies more seriously and developed an interest in political philosophy . He made the dean's list in his junior year.

[ 30 ] In 1940, Kennedy completed his thesis, "Appeasement in Munich", about British negotiations during the Munich Agreement . The thesis was released on July 24, under the title Why England Slept .

[ 31 ] The book was one of the first to offer information about the war and its origins, and quickly became a bestseller.

[ 32 ] In addition to addressing Britain's unwillingness to strengthen its military in the lead-up to the war, the book called for an Anglo-American alliance against the rising totalitarian powers. Kennedy became increasingly supportive of U.S. intervention in World War II, and his father's isolationist beliefs resulted in the latter's dismissal as ambassador.

[ 33 ] In 1940, Kennedy graduated cum laude from Harvard with a Bachelor of Arts in government, concentrating on international affairs .

[ 34 ] That fall, he enrolled at the Stanford Graduate School of Business and audited classes, [ 35 ] but he left after a semester to help his father complete his memoirs as an American ambassador. In early 1941, Kennedy toured South America.

[ 36 ] [ 37 ] U.S. Naval Reserve (1941–1945) Kennedy planned to attend Yale Law School , but canceled those plans when American entry into World War II seemed imminent.

[ 38 ] In 1940, Kennedy attempted to enter the Army's Officer Candidate School . Despite months of training, he was medically disqualified due to chronic back problems. On September 24, 1941, with the help of Alan Kirk—the director of the Office of Naval Intelligence (ONI) and former naval attaché to Joe Sr.—Kennedy joined the United States Naval Reserve . He was commissioned as an ensign on October 26, 1941, [ 39 ] and joined the ONI staff in Washington, D.C.

[ 40 ] [ 41 ] [ 42 ] In January 1942, Kennedy was assigned to the ONI field office at Headquarters, Sixth Naval District , in Charleston, South Carolina .

[ 41 ] He hoped to command a PT (patrol torpedo) boat , but his health problems seemed almost certain to prevent active duty. Kennedy's father intervened by providing misleading medical records and convincing PT officers that his presence would bring publicity to the fleet.

[ 43 ] Kennedy completed six months of training at the Naval Reserve Officer Training School in Chicago and at the Motor Torpedo Boat Squadrons Training Center in Melville, Rhode Island .

[ 40 ] [ 44 ] His first command was PT-101 from December 7, 1942, until February 23, 1943.

[ 41 ] Unhappy with his assignment to the Panama Canal , far from the fighting, Kennedy appealed to Senator David Walsh of Massachusetts, who arranged for him to be reassigned to the South Pacific .

[ 43 ] Commanding PT-109 and PT-59 Main article: Patrol torpedo boat PT-109 Kennedy on his navy patrol boat, the PT-109 , 1943 In April 1943, Kennedy was assigned to Motor Torpedo Squadron TWO, [ 40 ] and on April 24 he took command of PT-109 , [ 45 ] then based on Tulagi Island in the Solomons .

[ 41 ] On the night of August 1–2, in support of the New Georgia campaign , PT-109 and fourteen other PTs were ordered to block or repel four Japanese destroyers and floatplanes carrying food, supplies, and 900 Japanese soldiers to the Vila Plantation garrison on the southern tip of the Solomon's Kolombangara Island. Intelligence had been sent to Kennedy's commander Thomas G. Warfield, who as a result was expecting the arrival of the large Japanese naval force that would pass on the evening of August 1. Of the 24 torpedoes fired that night by eight of the American PTs, not one hit the Japanese convoy.

[ 46 ] On that moonless night, Kennedy spotted a Japanese destroyer heading north on its return from the base of Kolombangara around 2:00 a.m., and attempted to turn to attack, when PT-109 was suddenly rammed at an angle and cut in half by the destroyer Amagiri , killing two PT-109 crew members.

[ 47 ] [ 48 ] [ 41 ] [ b ] Avoiding surrender, the remaining crew swam toward Plum Pudding Island , 3.5 miles (5.6 km) southwest of the remains of PT-109 , on August 2.

[ 41 ] [ 50 ] Despite re-injuring his back in the collision, Kennedy towed a badly burned crewman named Patrick McMahon [ 51 ] to the island with a life jacket strap clenched between his teeth.

[ 52 ] From there, Kennedy and his subordinate, Ensign George Ross, made forays through the coral islands, searching for help.

[ 53 ] When they encountered an English-speaking native with a canoe, Kennedy carved his location on a coconut shell and requested a boat rescue. Seven days after the collision, with the coconut message delivered, the PT-109 crew were rescued.

[ 54 ] [ 55 ] Almost immediately, the PT-109 rescue became a highly publicized event. The story was chronicled by John Hersey in The New Yorker in 1944 (decades later it was the basis of a successful film ).

[ 55 ] It followed Kennedy into politics and provided a strong foundation for his appeal as a leader.

[ 56 ] Hersey portrayed Kennedy as a modest, self-deprecating hero.

[ 57 ] For his courage and leadership, Kennedy was awarded the Navy and Marine Corps Medal , and the injuries he suffered during the incident qualified him for a Purple Heart .

[ 56 ] After a month's recovery Kennedy returned to duty, commanding PT-59 . On November 2, Kennedy's PT-59 , along with two other PT boats, took part in the rescue of 40 to 50 Marines. The 59 acted as a shield from shore fire as they escaped on two rescue landing craft at the base of the Warrior River on Choiseul Island , taking ten Marines aboard and delivering them to safety.

[ 58 ] Under doctor's orders, Kennedy was relieved of his command on November 18, and sent to the hospital on Tulagi.

[ 59 ] By December 1943, with his health deteriorating, Kennedy left the Pacific front and arrived in San Francisco in early January 1944.

[ 60 ] After receiving treatment for his back injury at the Chelsea Naval Hospital in Massachusetts from May to December 1944, he was released from active duty.

[ 61 ] [ 40 ] Beginning in January 1945, Kennedy spent three months recovering from his back injury at Castle Hot Springs , a resort and temporary military hospital in Arizona.

[ 62 ] [ 63 ] On March 1, 1945, Kennedy retired from the Navy Reserve on physical disability and was honorably discharged with the full rank of lieutenant.

[ 64 ] When later asked how he became a war hero, Kennedy joked: "It was easy. They cut my PT boat in half." [ 65 ] On August 12, 1944, Kennedy's older brother, Joe Jr.

, a Navy pilot, was killed on an air mission. His body was never recovered.

[ 66 ] [ 67 ] The news reached the family's home in Hyannis Port, Massachusetts, a day later. Kennedy felt that Joe Jr.'s reckless flight was partly an effort to outdo him.

[ 68 ] [ 69 ] To console himself, Kennedy set out to assemble a privately published book of remembrances of his brother, As We Remember Joe .

[ 70 ] Journalism (1945) In April 1945, Kennedy's father, who was a friend of William Randolph Hearst , arranged a position for his son as a special correspondent for Hearst Newspapers ; the assignment kept Kennedy's name in the public eye and "expose[d] him to journalism as a possible career".

[ 71 ] He covered the United Nations Conference on International Organization in San Francisco , the British elections , and the Potsdam Conference in Germany.

[ 72 ] U.S. House of Representatives (1947–1953) Kennedy's elder brother, Joe Jr., had been the family's political standard-bearer and was tapped by their father to seek the presidency. After Joe's death, the assignment fell to John as the second eldest.

[ 73 ] Boston mayor Maurice J. Tobin discussed the possibility of John becoming his running mate in 1946 as a candidate for Massachusetts lieutenant governor , but Joe Sr. preferred a congressional campaign that could send John to Washington, where he could have national visibility.

[ 74 ] Kennedy (back row, second from right) and Richard Nixon (far right) participate in a radio broadcast as 1947 freshmen House members.

At the urging of Joe Sr., U.S. Representative James Michael Curley vacated his seat in the solidly Democratic 11th congressional district of Massachusetts to become mayor of Boston in 1946. Kennedy established legal residency at 122 Bowdoin Street across from the Massachusetts State House .

[ 75 ] He won the Democratic primary with 42 percent of the vote, defeating nine other candidates.

[ 76 ] According to Fredrik Logevall, Joe Sr.

spent hours on the phone with reporters and editors, seeking information, trading confidences, and cajoling them into publishing puff pieces on John, ones that invariably played up his war record in the Pacific. He oversaw a professional advertising campaign that ensured ads went up in just the right places the campaign had a virtual monopoly on [Boston] subway space, and on window stickers ("Kennedy for Congress") for cars and homes and was the force behind the mass mailing of Hersey's PT-109 article.

[ 77 ] Though Republicans took control of the House in the 1946 elections , Kennedy defeated his Republican opponent in the general election, taking 73 percent of the vote.

[ 78 ] As a congressman, Kennedy had a reputation for taking little interest in the management of his office or his constituents' concerns, with one of the highest absenteeism rates in the House, although much was explained by illness.

[ 79 ] George Smathers , one of his few political friends at the time, claimed that he was more interested in being a writer than a politician, and at that time he suffered from extreme shyness.

[ 79 ] Kennedy found "most of his fellow congressmen boring, preoccupied as they all seemed to be with their narrow political concerns". The arcane House rules and customs, which slowed legislation, exasperated him.

[ 80 ] Kennedy served in the House for six years, joining the influential Education and Labor Committee and the Veterans' Affairs Committee .

[ 81 ] He concentrated his attention on international affairs, supporting the Truman Doctrine as an appropriate response to the emerging Cold War .

[ 82 ] He also supported public housing and opposed the Labor Management Relations Act of 1947 , which restricted the power of labor unions.

[ 83 ] Though not as vocally anti-communist as Joseph McCarthy , Kennedy supported the Internal Security Act of 1950 , which required communists to register with the government, and he deplored the " loss of China ".

[ 84 ] [ 85 ] Kennedy denounced Truman and the State Department during a speech in Salem, Massachusetts on January 30, 1949 for contributing to the "tragic story of China whose freedom we once fought to preserve. What our young men had saved [in World War II], our diplomats and our President have frittered away." [ 86 ] [ 87 ] Having served as a Boy Scout during his childhood, Kennedy was active in the Boston Council from 1946 to 1955 as district vice chairman, member of the executive board, vice-president, and National Council Representative.

[ 88 ] [ 89 ] Kennedy (center) with Massachusetts delegates at the 1952 Democratic National Convention waving.

To appeal to the large Italian-American voting bloc in Massachusetts, Kennedy delivered a speech in November 1947 supporting a $227 million aid package to Italy. He maintained that Italy was in danger from an "onslaught of the communist minority" and that the country was the "initial battleground in the communist drive to capture Western Europe." [ 90 ] To counter Soviet efforts to take control in Middle Eastern and Asian countries like Indochina , Kennedy wanted the United States to develop nonmilitary techniques of resistance that would not create suspicions of neoimperialism or add to the country's financial burden. The problem, as he saw it, was not simply to be anti-communist but to stand for something that these emerging nations would find appealing.

[ 91 ] Almost every weekend that Congress was in session, Kennedy would fly back to Massachusetts to give speeches to veteran, fraternal, and civic groups, while maintaining an index card file on individuals who might be helpful in a future statewide campaign.

[ 92 ] Contemplating whether to run for Massachusetts governor or the U.S. Senate , Kennedy abandoned interest in the former, believing that the governor "sat in an office, handing out sewer contracts".

[ 93 ] U.S. Senate (1953–1960) See also: 1952 United States Senate election in Massachusetts and 1958 United States Senate election in Massachusetts Campaign slogan for Kennedy's 1952 U.S. Senate campaign in Massachusetts As early as 1949, Kennedy began preparing to run for the Senate in 1952 against Republican three-term incumbent Henry Cabot Lodge Jr.

with the campaign slogan "KENNEDY WILL DO MORE FOR MASSACHUSETTS".

[ 94 ] Joe Sr. again financed his son's candidacy—persuading the Boston Post to switch its support to Kennedy by promising the publisher a $500,000 loan [ 95 ] —while John's younger brother Robert emerged as campaign manager.

[ 96 ] Kennedy's mother and sisters were also highly effective canvassers, hosting a series of " teas " at hotels and parlors across Massachusetts to reach out to women voters.

[ 97 ] [ 98 ] In the presidential election, Republican Dwight D. Eisenhower carried Massachusetts by 208,000 votes, but Kennedy narrowly defeated Lodge by 70,000 votes for the Senate seat.

[ 99 ] The following year, he married Jacqueline Bouvier .

[ 100 ] Kennedy underwent several spinal operations over the next two years. Often absent from the Senate, he was at times critically ill and received Catholic last rites . During his convalescence in 1956, he published Profiles in Courage , a book about U.S. senators who risked their careers for their personal beliefs, for which he won the Pulitzer Prize for Biography in 1957.

[ 101 ] Rumors that this work was ghostwritten by his close adviser and speechwriter , Ted Sorensen , were confirmed in Sorensen's 2008 autobiography.

[ 102 ] At the start of his first term, Kennedy focused on fulfilling the promise of his campaign to do "more for Massachusetts" than his predecessor. Although Kennedy's and Lodge's legislative records were similarly liberal, Lodge voted for the Taft-Hartley Act of 1947 and Kennedy voted against it. On NBC 's Meet the Press , Kennedy excoriated Lodge for not doing enough to prevent the increasing migration of manufacturing jobs from Massachusetts to the South, and blamed the right-to-work provision for giving the South an unfair advantage over Massachusetts in labor costs.

[ 103 ] In May 1953, Kennedy introduced "The Economic Problems of New England", [ 104 ] a 36-point program [ 105 ] to help Massachusetts industries such as fishing , textile manufacturing , watchmaking , and shipbuilding , as well as the Boston seaport.

[ 106 ] Kennedy's policy agenda included protective tariffs , preventing excessive speculation in raw wool , stronger efforts to research and market American fish products , an increase in the Fish and Wildlife Service budget (including funds for US FWS Albatross III ), funds to rehabilitate the South Boston Army Base , shipbuilding contracts at the Fore River Shipyard in Quincy, Massachusetts , and the development of hydroelectric and nuclear power in New England (i.e., Yankee Rowe Nuclear Power Station in Rowe, Massachusetts which began construction in 1958).

[ 107 ] [ 108 ] [ 109 ] Kennedy's suggestions for stimulating the region's economy appealed to both parties by offering benefits to business and labor, and promising to serve national defense. Congress would eventually enact most of the program.

[ 106 ] Kennedy, a Massachusetts Audubon Society supporter, wanted to make sure that the shorelines of Cape Cod remained unsullied by industrialization. On September 3, 1959, Kennedy co-sponsored the Cape Cod National Seashore bill with his Republican colleague Senator Leverett Saltonstall .

[ 110 ] [ 111 ] Kennedy endorsing Adlai Stevenson II for the presidential nomination at the 1956 Democratic National Convention As a senator, Kennedy quickly won a reputation for responsiveness to requests from constituents (i.e., co-sponsoring legislation to provide federal loans to help rebuild communities damaged by the 1953 Worcester tornado ), except on certain occasions when the national interest was at stake.

[ 112 ] [ 113 ] In 1954, Kennedy voted in favor of the Saint Lawrence Seaway which would connect the Great Lakes to the Atlantic Ocean, despite opposition from Massachusetts politicians who argued that the project would hurt the Port of Boston economically.

[ 114 ] In 1954, when the Senate voted to condemn Joseph McCarthy for breaking Senate rules and abusing an Army general, Kennedy was the only Democrat not to cast a vote against him.

[ 115 ] Kennedy drafted a speech supporting the censure. However, it was not delivered because Kennedy was hospitalized for back surgery in Boston.

[ 116 ] Although Kennedy never indicated how he would have voted, the episode damaged his support among members of the liberal community in the 1956 and 1960 elections.

[ 117 ] In 1956, Kennedy gained control of the Massachusetts Democratic Party , [ 118 ] and delivered the state delegation to the party's presidential nominee, Adlai Stevenson II , at the Democratic National Convention in August.

[ 119 ] Stevenson let the convention select the vice presidential nominee . Kennedy finished second in the balloting, losing to Senator Estes Kefauver of Tennessee, but receiving national exposure.

[ 120 ] In 1957, Kennedy joined the Senate's Select Committee on Labor Rackets (also known as the McClellan Committee) with his brother Robert, who was chief counsel, to investigate racketeering in labor-management relations.

[ 121 ] The hearings attracted extensive radio and television coverage where the Kennedy brothers engaged in dramatic arguments with controversial labor leaders, including Jimmy Hoffa of the Teamsters Union . The following year, Kennedy introduced a bill to prevent the expenditure of union dues for improper purposes or private gain; to forbid loans from union funds for illicit transactions; and to compel audits of unions, which would ensure against false financial reports .

[ 122 ] It was the first major labor relations bill to pass either house since the Taft–Hartley Act of 1947 and dealt largely with the control of union abuses exposed by the McClellan Committee but did not incorporate tough Taft–Hartley amendments requested by President Eisenhower. It survived Senate floor attempts to include Taft-Hartley amendments and passed but was rejected by the House.

[ 123 ] "Honest union members and the general public can only regard it as a tragedy that politics has prevented the recommendations of the McClellan committee from being carried out this year," Kennedy announced.

[ 124 ] That same year, Kennedy joined the Senate's Foreign Relations Committee .

[ 125 ] There he supported Algeria's effort to gain independence from France and sponsored an amendment to the Mutual Defense Assistance Act that would provide aid to Soviet satellite nations . Kennedy in 1959 introduced a controversial bill to eliminate from the National Defense Education Act of 1958 a provision requiring loyalty oaths and affidavits from aid recipients.

[ 126 ] Kennedy cast a procedural vote against President Eisenhower's bill for the Civil Rights Act of 1957 and this was considered by some to be an appeasement of Southern Democratic opponents of the bill.

[ 127 ] Kennedy did vote for Title III of the act, which would have given the Attorney General powers to enjoin, but Majority Leader Lyndon B. Johnson agreed to let the provision die as a compromise measure.

[ 128 ] Kennedy also voted for the "Jury Trial Amendment." Many civil rights advocates criticized that vote as one which would weaken the act.

[ 129 ] A final compromise bill, which Kennedy supported, was passed in September 1957.

[ 130 ] As a senator from Massachusetts, which lacked a sizable Black population, Kennedy was not particularly sensitive to the problems of African Americans. Robert Kennedy later reflected, "We weren't thinking of the Negroes of Mississippi or Alabama—what should be done for them. We were thinking of what needed to be done in Massachusetts." [ 131 ] Results of the 1958 U.S. Senate election in Massachusetts by municipality . Kennedy's margin of victory of 874,608 votes was the largest in Massachusetts political history.

[ 132 ] [ 133 ] Most historians and political scientists who have written about Kennedy refer to his U.S. Senate years as an interlude.

[ 134 ] According to historian Robert Dallek , Kennedy called being a senator "the most corrupting job in the world." He complained that they were all too quick to cut deals and please campaign contributors to ensure their political futures. Kennedy, with the luxury of a rich father who could finance his campaigns, could remain independent of any special interest, except for those in his home state of Massachusetts that could align against his reelection.

[ 135 ] According to author Robert Caro , Majority Leader Lyndon Johnson viewed Kennedy as a " playboy ", describing his performance in the Senate and the House as "pathetic" on another occasion, saying that he was "smart enough, but he doesn't like the grunt work".

[ 136 ] Author John T. Shaw acknowledges that while his Senate career is not associated with acts of "historic statesmanship" or "novel political thought," Kennedy made modest contributions as a legislator, drafting more than 300 bills to benefit Massachusetts and the New England region (some of which became law).

[ 137 ] In 1958 , Kennedy was re-elected to the Senate, defeating his Republican opponent, Boston lawyer Vincent J. Celeste, with 73.6 percent of the vote, the largest winning margin in the history of Massachusetts politics.

[ 99 ] In the aftermath of his re-election, Kennedy began preparing to run for president by traveling throughout the U.S. with the aim of building his candidacy for 1960.

[ 138 ] [ 121 ] 1960 presidential election Main article: John F. Kennedy 1960 presidential campaign See also: 1960 Democratic Party presidential primaries and 1960 United States presidential election 1960 presidential campaign poster On January 2, 1960, Kennedy announced his candidacy for the Democratic presidential nomination .

[ 139 ] Though some questioned Kennedy's age and experience, his charisma and eloquence earned him numerous supporters. Kennedy faced several potential challengers, including Senate Majority Leader Lyndon Johnson, Adlai Stevenson II , and Senator Hubert Humphrey .

[ 140 ] Kennedy traveled extensively to build his support. His campaign strategy was to win several primaries to demonstrate his electability to the party bosses , who controlled most of the delegates, and to prove to his detractors that a Catholic could win popular support.

[ 141 ] Victories over Senator Humphrey in the Wisconsin and West Virginia primaries gave Kennedy momentum as he moved on to the 1960 Democratic National Convention in Los Angeles.

[ 140 ] [ 142 ] When Kennedy entered the convention, he had the most delegates, but not enough to ensure that he would win the nomination.

[ 143 ] Stevenson—the 1952 and 1956 presidential nominee—remained very popular, while Johnson also hoped to win the nomination with support from party leaders. Kennedy's candidacy also faced opposition from former President Harry S. Truman , who was concerned about Kennedy's lack of experience. Kennedy knew that a second ballot could give the nomination to Johnson or someone else, and his well-organized campaign was able to earn the support of just enough delegates to win the presidential nomination on the first ballot.

[ 144 ] Kennedy ignored the opposition of his brother Robert, who wanted him to choose labor leader Walter Reuther , [ 145 ] and other liberal supporters when he chose Johnson as his vice-presidential nominee. He believed that the Texas senator could help him win support from the South .

[ 146 ] [ 147 ] In accepting the presidential nomination, Kennedy gave his well-known " New Frontier " speech: For the problems are not all solved and the battles are not all won—and we stand today on the edge of a New Frontier. ... But the New Frontier of which I speak is not a set of promises—it is a set of challenges. It sums up not what I intend to offer the American people, but what I intend to ask of them.

[ 148 ] At the start of the fall general election campaign, the Republican nominee and incumbent Vice President Richard Nixon held a six-point lead in the polls.

[ 149 ] Major issues included how to get the economy moving again, Kennedy's Catholicism, the Cuban Revolution , and whether the space and missile programs of the Soviet Union had surpassed those of the U.S. To address fears that his Catholic faith would impact his decision-making, he told the Greater Houston Ministerial Association on September 12: "I am not the Catholic candidate for president. I am the Democratic Party candidate for president who also happens to be a Catholic. I do not speak for my Church on public matters—and the Church does not speak for me." [ 150 ] He promised to respect the separation of church and state , and not to allow Catholic officials to dictate public policy.

[ 151 ] [ 152 ] Kennedy and Richard Nixon participate in the nation's second televised presidential debate , c.

October 7, 1960 .

The Kennedy and Nixon campaigns agreed to a series of televised debates .

[ 153 ] An estimated 70 million Americans, about two-thirds of the electorate, watched the first debate on September 26.

[ 154 ] Kennedy had met the day before with the producer to discuss the set design and camera placement. Nixon, just out of the hospital after a painful knee injury, did not take advantage of this opportunity and during the debate looked at the reporters asking questions and not at the camera. Kennedy wore a blue suit and shirt to cut down on glare and appeared sharply focused against the gray studio background. Nixon wore a light-colored suit that blended into the gray background; in combination with the harsh studio lighting that left Nixon perspiring, he offered a less-than-commanding presence. By contrast, Kennedy appeared relaxed, tanned, and telegenic, looking into the camera whilst answering questions.

[ 155 ] [ 153 ] It is often claimed that television viewers overwhelmingly believed Kennedy, appearing to be the more attractive of the two, had won, while radio listeners (a smaller audience) thought Nixon had defeated him.

[ 154 ] [ 156 ] [ 157 ] However, only one poll split TV and radio voters like this and the methodology was poor.

[ 158 ] Pollster Elmo Roper concluded that the debates raised interest, boosted turnout, and gave Kennedy an extra two million votes, mostly as a result of the first debate.

[ 159 ] The debates are now considered a milestone in American political history—the point at which the medium of television began to play a dominant role.

[ 101 ] Results of the 1960 presidential election ; the popular vote split between Kennedy and Republican Richard Nixon was less than one percentage point.

Kennedy's campaign gained momentum after the first debate, and he pulled slightly ahead of Nixon in most polls. On Election Day, Kennedy defeated Nixon in one of the closest presidential elections of the 20th century. In the national popular vote, by most accounts , Kennedy led Nixon by just two-tenths of one percent (49.7% to 49.5%), while in the Electoral College , he won 303 votes to Nixon's 219 (269 were needed to win).

[ 160 ] Fourteen electors from Mississippi and Alabama refused to support Kennedy because of his support for the civil rights movement ; they voted for Senator Harry F. Byrd of Virginia, as did an elector from Oklahoma.

[ 160 ] Forty-three years old, Kennedy was the youngest person ever elected to the presidency (though Theodore Roosevelt was a year younger when he succeeded to the presidency after the assassination of William McKinley in 1901).

[ 161 ] [ 162 ] Presidency (1961–1963) Main article: Presidency of John F. Kennedy For a chronological guide, see Timeline of the John F. Kennedy presidency .

Chief Justice Earl Warren administers the presidential oath of office to Kennedy at the Capitol , January 20, 1961.

Kennedy was sworn in as the 35th president at noon on January 20, 1961. In his inaugural address , he spoke of the need for all Americans to be active citizens: "Ask not what your country can do for you—ask what you can do for your country." He asked the nations of the world to join to fight what he called the "common enemies of man: tyranny, poverty, disease, and war itself." [ 163 ] He added: All this will not be finished in the first one hundred days. Nor will it be finished in the first one thousand days, nor in the life of this Administration, nor even perhaps in our lifetime on this planet. But let us begin." In closing, he expanded on his desire for greater internationalism: "Finally, whether you are citizens of America or citizens of the world, ask of us here the same high standards of strength and sacrifice which we ask of you.

[ 163 ] The address reflected Kennedy's confidence that his administration would chart a historically significant course in both domestic policy and foreign affairs. The contrast between this optimistic vision and the pressures of managing daily political realities would be one of the main tensions of the early years of his administration.

[ 164 ] Kennedy scrapped the decision-making structure of Eisenhower, [ 165 ] preferring an organizational structure of a wheel with all the spokes leading to the president; he was willing to make the increased number of quick decisions required in such an environment.

[ 166 ] Though the cabinet remained important, Kennedy generally relied more on his staffers within the Executive Office .

[ 167 ] In spite of concerns over nepotism , Kennedy's father insisted that Robert Kennedy become U.S. Attorney General , and the younger Kennedy became the "assistant president" who advised on all major issues.

[ 168 ] Foreign policy Main article: Foreign policy of the John F. Kennedy administration Foreign trips of Kennedy during his presidency Cold War and flexible response Kennedy's foreign policy was dominated by American confrontations with the Soviet Union, manifested by proxy contests in the global state of tension known as the Cold War . Like his predecessors, Kennedy adopted the policy of containment to stop the spread of communism.

[ 169 ] Fearful of the possibility of nuclear war , Kennedy implemented a defense strategy known as flexible response . This strategy relied on multiple options for responding to the Soviet Union, discouraged massive retaliation , and encouraged mutual deterrence .

[ 170 ] [ 171 ] In contrast to Eisenhower's warning about the perils of the military-industrial complex , Kennedy focused on rearmament. From 1961 to 1964 the number of nuclear weapons increased by 50 percent, as did the number of B-52 bombers to deliver them.

[ 172 ] In January 1961, Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev declared his support for wars of national liberation . Kennedy interpreted this step as a direct threat to the "free world." [ 173 ] [ 174 ] Decolonization and the Congo Crisis President Kennedy with Congolese Prime Minister Cyrille Adoula in 1962 Between 1960 and 1963, twenty-four countries gained independence as the process of decolonization continued. Kennedy set out to woo the leaders and people of the " Third World ," expanding economic aid and appointing knowledgeable ambassadors.

[ 175 ] His administration established the Food for Peace program and the Peace Corps to provide aid to developing countries . The Food for Peace program became a central element in American foreign policy, and eventually helped many countries to develop their economies and become commercial import customers.

[ 176 ] During the election campaign, Kennedy attacked the Eisenhower administration for losing ground on the African continent, [ 177 ] and stressed that the U.S. should be on the side of anti-colonialism and self-determination.

[ 178 ] Kennedy considered the Congo Crisis to be among the most important foreign policy issues facing his presidency, and he supported a UN operation that prevented the secession of Katanga .

[ 179 ] Moïse Tshombe , leader of Katanga, declared its independence from the Congo and the Soviet Union responded by sending weapons and technicians to underwrite their struggle.

[ 178 ] On October 2, 1962, Kennedy signed United Nations bond issue bill to ensure U.S. assistance in financing UN peacekeeping operations in the Congo and elsewhere.

[ 180 ] Peace Corps Main article: Peace Corps Kennedy greets Peace Corps volunteers on August 28, 1961 In one of his first presidential acts, Kennedy signed Executive Order 10924 that officially started the Peace Corps . He named his brother-in-law, Sargent Shriver , as its first director.

[ 181 ] Through this program, Americans volunteered to help developing countries in fields like education, farming, health care, and construction.

[ 182 ] Kennedy believed that countries that received Peace Corps volunteers were less likely to succumb to a communist revolution.

[ 183 ] Tanganyika (present-day Tanzania ) and Ghana were the first countries to participate.

[ 184 ] The organization grew to 5,000 members by March 1963 and 10,000 the year after.

[ 185 ] Since 1961, over 200,000 Americans have joined the Peace Corps, representing 139 countries.

[ 186 ] [ 187 ] Vienna Summit and the Berlin Wall See also: Vienna summit and Berlin Crisis of 1961 Kennedy anxiously anticipated a summit with Nikita Khrushchev. The proceedings for the summit got off to a problematic start when Kennedy reacted aggressively to a routine Khrushchev speech on Cold War confrontation in early 1961. The speech was intended for domestic audiences in the Soviet Union, but Kennedy interpreted it as a personal challenge. His mistake helped raise tensions going into the Vienna summit .

[ 188 ] The summit would cover several topics, but both leaders knew that the most contentious issue would be Berlin , which had been divided in two with the start of the Cold War. The enclave of West Berlin lay within Soviet-allied East Germany , but was supported by the U.S. and other Western powers. The Soviets wanted to reunify Berlin under the control of East Germany, partly due to the large number of East Germans who had fled to West Berlin.

[ 189 ] Kennedy meeting with Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev in Vienna in June 1961 On June 4, 1961, Kennedy met with Khrushchev in Vienna and left the meeting angry and disappointed that he had allowed the premier to bully him, despite the warnings he had received. Khrushchev, for his part, was impressed with the president's intelligence but thought him weak. Kennedy did succeed in conveying the bottom line to Khrushchev on the most sensitive issue before them, a proposed treaty between Moscow and East Berlin . He made it clear that any treaty interfering with U.S. access rights in West Berlin would be regarded as an act of war.

[ 190 ] Shortly after Kennedy returned home, the Soviet Union announced its plan to sign a treaty with East Berlin, abrogating any third-party occupation rights in either sector of the city. Kennedy assumed that his only option was to prepare the country for nuclear war, which he thought had a one-in-five chance of occurring.

[ 191 ] In the weeks immediately following the summit, more than 20,000 people fled from East Berlin to the western sector, reacting to statements from the Soviet Union. Kennedy began intensive meetings on the Berlin issue, where Dean Acheson took the lead in recommending a military buildup alongside NATO allies.

[ 192 ] In a July 1961 speech, Kennedy announced his decision to add $3.25 billion (equivalent to $34.2 billion in 2024) to the defense budget, along with over 200,000 additional troops, stating that an attack on West Berlin would be taken as an attack on the U.S. The speech received an 85% approval rating.

[ 193 ] A month later, both the Soviet Union and East Berlin began blocking any further passage of East Germans into West Berlin and erected barbed-wire fences, which were quickly upgraded to the Berlin Wall . Kennedy acquiesced to the wall, though he sent Vice President Johnson to West Berlin to reaffirm U.S. commitment to the enclave's defense. In the following months, in a sign of rising Cold War tensions, both the U.S. and the Soviet Union ended a moratorium on nuclear weapon testing.

[ 194 ] A brief stand-off between U.S. and Soviet tanks occurred at Checkpoint Charlie in October following a dispute over free movement of Allied personnel. The crisis was defused largely through a backchannel communication the Kennedy administration had set up with Soviet spy Georgi Bolshakov .

[ 195 ] In remarks to his aides on the Berlin Wall, Kennedy noted that "it's not a very nice solution, but a wall is a hell of a lot better than a war." [ 196 ] Bay of Pigs Invasion Main article: Bay of Pigs Invasion See also: Kennedy's betrayal President Kennedy and Jacqueline Kennedy greet members of the 2506 Cuban Invasion Brigade at Miami's Orange Bowl ; c.

December 29, 1962 .

The Eisenhower administration had created a plan to overthrow Fidel Castro 's regime though an invasion of Cuba by a counter-revolutionary insurgency composed of U.S.-trained, anti-Castro Cuban exiles [ 197 ] [ 198 ] led by CIA paramilitary officers.

[ 199 ] Kennedy had campaigned on a hardline stance against Castro, and when presented with the plan that had been developed under the Eisenhower administration, he enthusiastically adopted it regardless of the risk of inflaming tensions with the Soviet Union.

[ 200 ] Kennedy approved the final invasion plan on April 4, 1961.

[ 201 ] On April 15, 1961, eight CIA-supplied B-26 bombers left Nicaragua to bomb Cuban airfields. The bombers missed many of their targets, leaving most of Castro's air force intact.

[ 202 ] On April 17, the 1,500 U.S.-trained Cuban exile invasion force, known as Brigade 2506 , landed at beaches along the Bay of Pigs and immediately came under heavy fire.

[ 203 ] The goal was to spark a widespread popular uprising against Castro, but no such uprising occurred.

[ 204 ] No U.S. air support was provided.

[ 205 ] The invading force was defeated within two days by the Cuban Revolutionary Armed Forces ; [ 206 ] 114 were killed and Kennedy was forced to negotiate for the release of the 1,189 survivors.

[ 207 ] After twenty months, Cuba released the captured exiles in exchange for a ransom of $53 million worth of food and medicine.

[ 208 ] The incident made Castro wary of the U.S. and led him to believe that another invasion would take place.

[ 209 ] Biographer Richard Reeves said that Kennedy focused primarily on the political repercussions of the plan rather than military considerations. When it proved unsuccessful, he was convinced that the plan was a setup to make him look bad.

[ 210 ] He took responsibility for the failure, saying, "We got a big kick in the leg and we deserved it. But maybe we'll learn something from it." [ 211 ] Kennedy's approval ratings climbed afterwards, helped in part by the vocal support given to him by Nixon and Eisenhower.

[ 212 ] He appointed Robert Kennedy to help lead a committee to examine the causes of the failure.

[ 213 ] The Kennedy administration banned all Cuban imports and convinced the Organization of American States (OAS) to expel Cuba.

[ 214 ] Operation Mongoose In late 1961, the White House formed the Special Group (Augmented), headed by Robert Kennedy and including Edward Lansdale , Secretary Robert McNamara , and others. The group's objective—to overthrow Castro via espionage, sabotage, and other covert tactics—was never pursued.

[ 215 ] In November 1961, he authorized Operation Mongoose .

[ 216 ] In March 1962, Kennedy rejected Operation Northwoods , proposals for false flag attacks against American military and civilian targets, [ 217 ] and blaming them on the Cuban government to gain approval for a war against Cuba. However, the administration continued to plan for an invasion of Cuba in the summer of 1962.

[ 216 ] Cuban Missile Crisis Main article: Cuban Missile Crisis Kennedy signs the Proclamation for Interdiction of the Delivery of Offensive Weapons to Cuba in the Oval Office; c.

October 23, 1962 .

In the aftermath of the Bay of Pigs invasion, Khrushchev increased economic and military assistance to Cuba.

[ 218 ] The Soviet Union planned to allocate in Cuba 49 medium-range ballistic missiles , 32 intermediate-range ballistic missiles , 49 light Il-28 bombers and about 100 tactical nuclear weapons .

[ 219 ] The Kennedy administration viewed the growing Cuba-Soviet alliance with alarm, fearing that it could eventually pose a threat to the U.S.

[ 220 ] On October 14, 1962, CIA U-2 spy planes took photographs of the Soviets' construction of intermediate-range ballistic missile sites in Cuba. The photos were shown to Kennedy on October 16; a consensus was reached that the missiles were offensive in nature and posed an immediate nuclear threat.

[ 221 ] Kennedy faced a dilemma: if the U.S. attacked the sites, it might lead to nuclear war with the Soviet Union, but if the U.S. did nothing, it would be faced with the increased threat from close-range nuclear weapons (positioned approximately 90 mi (140 km) away from the Florida coast).

[ 222 ] The U.S. would also appear to the world as less committed to the defense of the Western Hemisphere. On a personal level, Kennedy needed to show resolve in reaction to Khrushchev, especially after the Vienna summit.

[ 223 ] To deal with the crisis, he formed an ad-hoc body of key advisers, later known as EXCOMM , that met secretly between October 16 and 28.

[ 224 ] More than a third of U.S. National Security Council (NSC) members favored an unannounced air assault on the missile sites, but some saw this as " Pearl Harbor in reverse." [ 225 ] There was some concern from the international community (asked in confidence) that the assault plan was an overreaction given that Eisenhower had placed PGM-19 Jupiter missiles in Italy and Turkey in 1958. It also could not be assured that the assault would be 100% effective.

[ 226 ] In concurrence with a majority vote of the NSC, Kennedy decided on a naval blockade (or "quarantine"). On October 22, after privately informing the cabinet and leading members of Congress about the situation, Kennedy announced the naval blockade on national television and warned that U.S. forces would seize "offensive weapons and associated materiel" that Soviet vessels might attempt to deliver to Cuba.

[ 227 ] Kennedy confers with Attorney General Robert Kennedy ; c.

October 1962 .

The U.S. Navy would stop and inspect all Soviet ships arriving off Cuba, beginning October 24. Several Soviet ships approached the blockade line, but they stopped or reversed course.

[ 228 ] The OAS gave unanimous support to the removal of the missiles. Kennedy exchanged two sets of letters with Khrushchev, to no avail.

[ 229 ] UN Secretary General U Thant requested both parties to reverse their decisions and enter a cooling-off period. Khrushchev agreed, but Kennedy did not.

[ 230 ] Kennedy managed to preserve restraint when a Soviet missile unauthorizedly downed a U.S. Lockheed U-2 reconnaissance aircraft over Cuba, killing pilot Rudolf Anderson .

[ 231 ] At the president's direction, Robert Kennedy privately informed Soviet Ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin that the U.S. would remove the Jupiter missiles from Turkey "within a short time after this crisis was over." [ 232 ] On October 28, Khrushchev agreed to dismantle the missile sites, subject to UN inspections.

[ 233 ] The U.S. publicly promised never to invade Cuba and privately agreed to remove its Jupiter missiles from Italy and Turkey, which were by then obsolete and had been supplanted by submarines equipped with UGM-27 Polaris missiles.

[ 234 ] In the aftermath, a Moscow–Washington hotline was established to ensure clear communications between the leaders of the two countries.

[ 235 ] This crisis brought the world closer to nuclear war than at any point before or after, but "the humanity" of Khrushchev and Kennedy prevailed.

[ 236 ] The crisis improved the image of American willpower and the president's credibility. Kennedy's approval rating increased from 66% to 77% immediately thereafter.

[ 237 ] Latin America and communism Further information: Presidency of John F. Kennedy § Latin America See also: Alliance for Progress Kennedy in December 1961 promoting the Alliance for Progress with Venezuelan President Rómulo Betancourt Believing that "those who make peaceful revolution impossible, will make violent revolution inevitable," [ 238 ] [ 239 ] Kennedy sought to contain the perceived threat of communism in Latin America by establishing the Alliance for Progress , which sent aid to some countries and sought greater human rights standards in the region.

[ 240 ] In response to Kennedy's plea, Congress voted for an initial grant of $500 million in May 1961.

[ 241 ] The Alliance for Progress supported the construction of housing, schools, airports, hospitals, clinics and water-purification projects as well as the distribution of free textbooks to students.

[ 242 ] However, the program did not meet many of its goals. Massive land reform was not achieved; populations more than kept pace with gains in health and welfare; and according to one study, only 2 percent of economic growth in 1960s Latin America directly benefited the poor.

[ 243 ] [ 244 ] U.S. presidents after Kennedy were less supportive of the program and by 1973, the permanent committee established to implement the Alliance was disbanded by the OAS.

[ 242 ] The Eisenhower administration, through the CIA, had begun formulating plans to assassinate Castro in Cuba and Rafael Trujillo in the Dominican Republic . When Kennedy took office, he privately instructed the CIA that any plan must include plausible deniability by the U.S. His public position was in opposition.

[ 245 ] In June 1961, the Dominican Republic's leader was assassinated; in the days following, Undersecretary of State Chester Bowles led a cautious reaction by the nation. Robert Kennedy, who saw an opportunity for the U.S., called Bowles "a gutless bastard" to his face.

[ 246 ] Laos See also: Laotian Civil War After the election, Eisenhower emphasized to Kennedy that the communist threat in Southeast Asia required priority; Eisenhower considered Laos to be "the cork in the bottle" in regards to the regional threat.

[ 247 ] In March 1961, Kennedy voiced a change in policy from supporting a "free" Laos to a "neutral" Laos, indicating privately that Vietnam should be deemed America's tripwire for communism's spread in the area.

[ 247 ] Though he was unwilling to commit U.S. forces to a major military intervention in Laos, Kennedy did approve CIA activities designed to defeat Communist insurgents through bombing raids and the recruitment of the Hmong people .

[ 248 ] Vietnam Further information: Presidency of John F. Kennedy § Vietnam See also: Vietnam War Kennedy speaking in a televised press conference on the situation in Southeast Asia , c.

March 23, 1961 Walter Cronkite of CBS News interviewing Kennedy in Cape Cod, Massachusetts on September 2, 1963, about U.S. involvement in Vietnam During his presidency, Kennedy continued policies that provided political, economic, and military support to the South Vietnamese government.

[ 249 ] Vietnam had been divided into a communist North Vietnam and a non-communist South Vietnam after the 1954 Geneva Conference , but Kennedy escalated American involvement in Vietnam in 1961 by financing the South Vietnam army , increasing the number of U.S.

military advisors above the levels of the Eisenhower administration, and authorizing U.S. helicopter units to provide support to South Vietnamese forces.

[ 250 ] On January 18, 1962, Kennedy formally authorized escalated involvement when he signed the National Security Action Memorandum (NSAM) – "Subversive Insurgency (War of Liberation)." [ 251 ] Operation Ranch Hand , a large-scale aerial defoliation effort using the herbicide Agent Orange , began on the roadsides of South Vietnam to combat guerrilla defendants .

[ 252 ] [ 253 ] Though Kennedy provided support for South Vietnam throughout his tenure, Vietnam remained a secondary issue for the Kennedy administration until 1963.

[ 254 ] On September 2, Kennedy declared in an interview with Walter Cronkite of CBS : In the final analysis, it is their war. They are the ones who have to win it or lose it. We can help them, we can give them equipment, we can send our men out there as advisers, but they have to win it, the people of Vietnam, against the Communists... But I don't agree with those who say we should withdraw. That would be a great mistake... [The United States] made this effort to defend Europe. Now Europe is quite secure. We also have to participate—we may not like it—in the defense of Asia.

[ 255 ] [ 256 ] Kennedy increasingly soured on the president of South Vietnam, Ngo Dinh Diem , whose violent crackdown on Buddhist practices galvanized opposition to his leadership. In August 1963, Henry Cabot Lodge Jr.

replaced Frederick Nolting as the U.S. ambassador to South Vietnam. Days after his arrival in South Vietnam, Lodge reported that several South Vietnamese generals sought the assent of the U.S. government to their plan of removing Diem from power. The Kennedy administration was split regarding not just the removal of Diem, but also their assessment of the military situation and the proper U.S. role in the country. After the State Department sent a diplomatic cable to Lodge that ordered him to pressure Diem to remove military authority from his brother, Ngô Đình Nhu , or face potential withdrawal of U.S. support and removal from power, [ 257 ] Kennedy instructed Lodge to offer covert assistance to a coup d'état, excluding assassination.

[ 258 ] On November 1, 1963, a junta of senior military officers executed the coup which led to the arrest and assassinations of Diem and Nhu on November 2.

[ 259 ] By November 1963, there were 16,000 American military personnel in South Vietnam, up from Eisenhower's 900 advisors; [ 260 ] more than one hundred Americans had been killed in action and no final policy decision was made.

[ 261 ] [ 262 ] [ 263 ] In the aftermath of the aborted coup in September 1963, the Kennedy administration reevaluated its policies in South Vietnam. Kennedy rejected the full-scale deployment of ground soldiers but also the total withdrawal of U.S. forces.

[ 264 ] Historians disagree on whether the U.S. military presence in Vietnam would have escalated had Kennedy survived and been re-elected in 1964.

[ 265 ] Fueling the debate are statements made by Secretary of Defense McNamara in the 2003 documentary film The Fog of War that Kennedy was strongly considering pulling out of Vietnam after the 1964 election, [ 266 ] and comments made by Kennedy administration White House Counsel and speechwriter Ted Sorensen in a 2008 memoir suggesting that Kennedy was undecided about what policy direction to take.

[ 267 ] [ 263 ] On October 11, 1963, Kennedy signed NSAM 263 ordering the withdrawal of 1,000 military personnel by the end of the year following the third recommendation of the McNamara–Taylor mission report, which concluded that the training program for the South Vietnamese military had sufficiently progressed to justify the withdrawal.

[ 268 ] [ 269 ] [ 270 ] However, NSAM 263 also approved the first recommendation of the report to continue providing support to South Vietnam to prevent the spread of communism and until the Viet Cong was suppressed, while the third recommendation suggested that even if the majority of the U.S. military objective was completed by the end of 1965 that continued presence of U.S. training personnel in more limited numbers could be necessary if the insurgency was not suppressed.

[ 271 ] [ 272 ] [ 270 ] West Berlin speech Kennedy delivering his speech in West Berlin In 1963, Germany was enduring a time of particular vulnerability due to Soviet aggression to the east as well as the impending retirement of West German Chancellor Adenauer .

[ 273 ] At the same time, French President Charles de Gaulle was trying to build a Franco-West German counterweight to the American and Soviet spheres of influence.

[ 274 ] [ 275 ] [ 276 ] To Kennedy's eyes, this Franco-German cooperation seemed directed against NATO 's influence in Europe.

[ 277 ] To reinforce the U.S. alliance with West Germany, Kennedy travelled to West Germany and West Berlin in June 1963. On June 26, Kennedy toured West Berlin, culminating in a public speech at the city hall in front of hundreds of thousands of enthusiastic Berliners.

[ 278 ] He reiterated the American commitment to Germany and criticized communism and was met with an ecstatic response from the massive audience.

[ 279 ] Kennedy used the construction of the Berlin Wall as an example of the failures of communism: "Freedom has many difficulties, and democracy is not perfect. But we have never had to put a wall up to keep our people in, to prevent them from leaving us." The speech is known for its famous phrase " Ich bin ein Berliner " ("I am a Berliner").

[ 280 ] Middle East Further information: Presidency of John F. Kennedy § Middle East Shah Mohammad Reza Pahlavi of Iran, Kennedy, and U.S. Defense Secretary Robert McNamara in the White House Cabinet Room on April 13, 1962 Kennedy ended the arms embargo that the Truman and Eisenhower administrations had enforced on Israel in favor of increased security ties, becoming the founder of the U.S.-Israeli military alliance . Describing the protection of Israel as a moral and national commitment, he was the first to introduce the concept of a 'special relationship' between the U.S. and Israel.

[ 281 ] In 1962, the Kennedy administration sold Israel a major weapon system, the Hawk antiaircraft missile . Historians differ as to whether Kennedy pursued security ties with Israel primarily to shore up support with Jewish-American voters, or because of his admiration of the Jewish state.

[ 282 ] In December 1961, Abd al-Karim Qasim 's Iraqi government passed Public Law 80, which restricted the partially American-controlled Iraq Petroleum Company (IPC)'s concessionary holding to those areas in which oil was actually being produced (namely, the fields at Az Zubair and Kirkuk ), effectively expropriating 99.5% of the IPC concession. British and U.S. officials demanded that the Kennedy administration place pressure on the Qasim regime.

[ 283 ] In April 1962, the State Department issued new guidelines on Iraq that were intended to increase American influence. Meanwhile, Kennedy instructed the CIA—under the direction of Archibald Bulloch Roosevelt Jr.

—to begin making preparations for a military coup against Qasim.

[ 284 ] The anti-imperialist and anti-communist Iraqi Ba'ath Party overthrew and executed Qasim in a violent coup on February 8, 1963. Despite persistent rumors that the CIA orchestrated the coup, declassified documents and the testimony of former CIA officers indicate that there was no direct American involvement.

[ 285 ] The Kennedy administration was pleased with the outcome and ultimately approved a $55-million arms deal for Iraq.

[ 286 ] Ireland Kennedy's motorcade through Cork , Ireland on June 28, 1963 During his four-day visit to his ancestral home of Ireland beginning on June 26, 1963, [ 287 ] Kennedy accepted a grant of armorial bearings from the Chief Herald of Ireland , received honorary degrees from the National University of Ireland and Trinity College Dublin , attended a State Dinner in Dublin, and was conferred with the freedom of the towns and cities of Wexford, Cork, Dublin, Galway, and Limerick.

[ 288 ] [ 289 ] He visited the cottage at Dunganstown, near New Ross , County Wexford, where his ancestors had lived before emigrating to America.

[ 290 ] Kennedy was the first foreign leader to address the Houses of the Oireachtas , the Irish parliament.

[ 289 ] [ 291 ] [ 292 ] Kennedy later told aides that the trip was the best four days of his life.

[ 293 ] American University speech World Peace Speech Speech from American University by John F. Kennedy, June 10, 1963 (duration 26:47) Problems playing this file? See media help .

On June 10, 1963, Kennedy, at the high point of his rhetorical powers, [ 294 ] delivered the commencement address at American University . Also known as "A Strategy of Peace", not only did Kennedy outline a plan to curb nuclear arms, but he also "laid out a hopeful, yet realistic route for world peace at a time when the U.S. and Soviet Union faced the potential for an escalating nuclear arms race ." [ 295 ] Kennedy also announced that the Soviets had expressed a desire to negotiate a nuclear test ban treaty, and that the U.S. had postponed planned atmospheric tests.

[ 296 ] Nuclear Test Ban Treaty Main article: Partial Nuclear Test Ban Treaty Kennedy signs the Partial Test Ban Treaty , a major milestone in early nuclear disarmament , on October 7, 1963.

Troubled by the long-term dangers of radioactive contamination and nuclear proliferation , Kennedy and Khrushchev agreed to negotiate a nuclear test ban treaty, originally conceived in Adlai Stevenson's 1956 presidential campaign.

[ 297 ] In their Vienna summit meeting in June 1961, Khrushchev and Kennedy reached an informal understanding against nuclear testing, but the Soviet Union began testing nuclear weapons that September. In response, the United States conducted tests five days later.

[ 298 ] Shortly afterwards, new U.S. satellites began delivering images that made it clear that the Soviets were substantially behind the U.S. in the arms race.

[ 299 ] Nevertheless, the greater nuclear strength of the U.S. was of little value as long as the Soviet Union perceived itself to be at parity.

[ 300 ] In July 1963, Kennedy sent W. Averell Harriman to Moscow to negotiate a treaty with the Soviets.

[ 301 ] The introductory sessions included Khrushchev, who later delegated Soviet representation to Andrei Gromyko . It quickly became clear that a comprehensive test ban would not be implemented, due largely to the reluctance of the Soviets to allow inspections to verify compliance.

[ 302 ] Ultimately, the United States, the United Kingdom, and the Soviet Union were the initial signatories to a limited treaty, which prohibited atomic testing on the ground, in the atmosphere, or underwater, but not underground. The U.S. Senate approved the treaty on September 23, 1963, and Kennedy signed it on October 7, 1963.

[ 303 ] France was quick to declare that it was free to continue developing and testing its nuclear defenses.

[ 304 ] Domestic policy New Frontier Main article: New Frontier Kennedy signing the Manpower Development and Training Act , March 15, 1962 Kennedy called his domestic proposals the " New Frontier ".

[ 305 ] However, Kennedy's small margin of victory in the 1960 election, his lack of deep connections to influential members of Congress, and his administration's focus on foreign policy hindered the passage of New Frontier policies.

[ 306 ] In 1961, Kennedy prioritized passing five bills: federal assistance for education, medical insurance for the elderly, housing legislation, federal aid to struggling areas, and an increase in the federal minimum wage.

[ 307 ] Kennedy's bill to increase the federal minimum wage to $1.25 an hour passed in early 1961, but an amendment inserted by conservative leader from Georgia, Carl Vinson , exempted laundry workers from the law.

[ 308 ] Kennedy also won passage of the Area Redevelopment Act and the Housing Act of 1961. The Area Redevelopment Act, a $394 million program, provided federal funding to economically struggling regions (primarily in Appalachia ), while the Housing Act of 1961 provided funds for urban renewal and public housing and authorized federal mortgage loans to those who did not qualify for public housing.

[ 309 ] Kennedy proposed a bill providing for $2.3 billion in federal educational aid to the states, with more money going to states with lower per capita income . Though the Senate passed the education bill, it was defeated in the House by a coalition of Republicans, Southern Democrats, and Catholics.

[ 310 ] Kennedy's health insurance bill, which would have paid for hospitalization and nursing costs for the elderly, failed to pass either house of Congress.

[ 311 ] A bill that would have established the Department of Urban Affairs and Housing was also defeated.

[ 312 ] In 1962, Kennedy won approval of the Manpower Development and Training Act , a three-year program aimed at retraining workers displaced by new technology. Its impact on structural unemployment , however, was minimal.

[ 309 ] At the urging of his sister Eunice , Kennedy made intellectual disabilities a priority for his administration. In 1963, Congress passed the Community Mental Health Act , which provided funding to local mental health community centers and research facilities.

[ 313 ] Trade policy included both domestic and foreign policy. The 1962 Trade Expansion Act passed Congress by wide majorities. It authorized the president to negotiate tariff reductions on a reciprocal basis of up to 50 percent with the European Common Market .

[ 314 ] The legislation paved the way for the Kennedy Round of General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade negotiations, concluding on June 30, 1967, the last day before expiration of the Act.

[ 315 ] Taxes Further information: Presidency of John F. Kennedy § Taxes and the Treasury Walter Heller , who served as the chairman of the CEA, advocated for a Keynesian -style tax cut designed to help spur economic growth, and Kennedy adopted this policy.

[ 316 ] The idea was that a tax cut would stimulate consumer demand, which in turn would lead to higher economic growth, lower unemployment, and increased federal revenues.

[ 317 ] To the disappointment of liberals like John Kenneth Galbraith , Kennedy's embrace of the tax cut shifted his administration's focus away from the proposed old-age health insurance program and other domestic expenditures.

[ 318 ] In January 1963, Kennedy proposed a tax cut that would reduce the top marginal tax rate from 91 to 65 percent, and lower the corporate tax rate from 52 to 47 percent. The predictions according to the Keynesian model indicated the cuts would decrease income taxes by about $10 billion and corporate taxes by about $3.5 billion. The plan included reforms designed to reduce the impact of itemized deductions , as well as provisions to help the elderly and handicapped. Republicans and many Southern Democrats opposed the bill, calling for simultaneous reductions in expenditures, but debate continued throughout 1963.

[ 319 ] Three months after Kennedy died, Johnson pushed the plan through Congress. The Revenue Act of 1964 lowered the top individual rate to 70 percent, and the top corporate rate to 48 percent.

[ 320 ] Economy See also: Recession of 1960–1961 and Kennedy Slide of 1962 President Kennedy delivers his State of the Union Address; c.

January 14, 1963 .

Kennedy ended a period of tight fiscal policies, loosening monetary policy to keep interest rates down and to encourage growth of the economy.

[ 321 ] He presided over the first government budget to top the $100 billion mark, in 1962, and his first budget in 1961 resulted in the nation's first non-war, non-recession deficit .

[ 322 ] The economy, which had been through two recessions in three years and was in one when Kennedy took office, accelerated notably throughout his administration. Despite low inflation and interest rates, the GDP had grown by an average of only 2.2% per annum during the Eisenhower administration (scarcely more than population growth at the time), and it had declined by 1% during Eisenhower's last twelve months in office.

[ 323 ] The economy turned around and prospered during Kennedy's presidency. The GDP expanded by an average of 5.5% from early 1961 to late 1963, [ 323 ] while inflation remained steady at around 1% and unemployment eased.

[ 324 ] Industrial production rose by 15% and motor vehicle sales increased by 40%.

[ 325 ] This sustained rate of growth in GDP and industry continued until around 1969.

[ 323 ] Kennedy was proud that his Labor Department helped keep wages steady in the steel industry, but was outraged in April 1962 when Roger Blough , the president of U.S. Steel , quietly informed Kennedy that his company would raise prices.

[ 326 ] In response, Attorney General Robert Kennedy began a price-fixing investigation against U.S. Steel, and President Kennedy convinced other steel companies to rescind their price increases until finally even U.S. Steel, isolated and in danger of being undersold, agreed to rescind its own price increase.

[ 327 ] An editorial in The New York Times praised Kennedy's actions and stated that the steel industry's price increase "imperil[ed] the economic welfare of the country by inviting a tidal wave of inflation." [ 328 ] Nevertheless, the administration's Bureau of Budget reported the price increase would have caused a net gain for the GDP as well as a net budget surplus.

[ 329 ] The stock market, which had steadily declined since Kennedy's election in 1960, dropped 10% shortly after the administration's action on the steel industry took place.

[ 330 ] Civil rights movement Further information: Presidency of John F. Kennedy § Civil rights See also: Civil rights movement In May 1961, Kennedy appointed Thurgood Marshall to the U.S. Court of Appeals .

Kennedy verbally supported civil rights during his 1960 presidential campaign; he telephoned Coretta Scott King , wife of Martin Luther King Jr.

, who had been jailed while trying to integrate a department store lunch counter. Robert Kennedy called Georgia Governor Ernest Vandiver and obtained King's release from prison, which drew additional Black support to his brother's candidacy.

[ 331 ] Recognizing that conservative Southern Democrats could block legislation, Kennedy did not introduce civil rights legislation on taking office.

[ 332 ] He needed their support to pass his economic and foreign policy agendas, and to support his reelection in 1964.

[ 333 ] Kennedy did appoint many Blacks to office, including civil rights attorney Thurgood Marshall to the U.S. Court of Appeals .

[ 334 ] Kennedy believed the grassroots movement for civil rights would anger many Southern Whites and make it more difficult to pass civil rights laws in Congress, and he distanced himself from it.

[ 335 ] As articulated by Robert Kennedy, the administration's early priority was to "keep the president out of this civil rights mess." [ 336 ] Civil rights movement participants, mainly those on the front line in the South, viewed Kennedy as lukewarm, [ 334 ] especially concerning the Freedom Riders . In May 1961, the Congress of Racial Equality , led by James Farmer , organized integrated Freedom Rides to test a Supreme Court case ruling that declared segregation on interstate transportation illegal.

[ 337 ] The Riders were repeatedly met with mob violence, including by federal and state law enforcement officers.

[ 334 ] Kennedy assigned federal marshals to protect the Riders rather than using federal troops or uncooperative FBI agents.

[ 334 ] Kennedy feared sending federal troops would stir up "hated memories of Reconstruction " among conservative Southern whites.

[ 334 ] The Justice Department then petitioned the Interstate Commerce Commission (ICC) to adhere to federal law. By September 1961, the ICC ruled in favor of the petition.

[ 338 ] On March 6, 1961, Kennedy signed Executive Order 10925 , which required government contractors to "take affirmative action to ensure that applicants are employed and that employees are treated during employment without regard to their race, creed, color, or national origin." [ 339 ] It established the President's Committee on Equal Employment Opportunity .

[ 340 ] In September 1962, James Meredith enrolled at the all-White University of Mississippi but was prevented from entering. In response, Attorney General Robert Kennedy sent 400 federal marshals.

[ 341 ] The Ole Miss riot of 1962 left two dead and dozens injured, prompting Kennedy to send in 3,000 troops to quell the riot.

[ 342 ] Meredith did finally enroll in class. Kennedy regretted not sending in troops earlier and he began to doubt whether the "evils of Reconstruction" he had been taught or believed were true.

[ 334 ] On November 20, 1962, Kennedy signed Executive Order 11063 , which prohibited racial discrimination in federally supported housing.

[ 343 ] Kennedy's Report to the American People on Civil Rights , c.

June 11, 1963 On June 11, 1963, Kennedy intervened when Alabama Governor George Wallace blocked the doorway to the University of Alabama to stop two Black students, Vivian Malone and James Hood , from attending. Wallace moved aside only after being confronted by Deputy Attorney General Nicholas Katzenbach and the Alabama National Guard , which had just been federalized by order of the president. That evening Kennedy gave his famous Report to the American People on Civil Rights speech on national television and radio, launching his initiative for civil rights legislation—to provide equal access to public schools and other facilities, and greater protection of voting rights.

[ 344 ] His proposals became part of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 . The day ended with the murder of an NAACP leader, Medgar Evers , in Mississippi.

[ 345 ] As Kennedy had predicted, the day after his TV speech, and in reaction to it, House Majority leader Carl Albert called to advise him that his two-year signature effort in Congress to combat poverty in Appalachia had been defeated, primarily by the votes of Southern Democrats and Republicans.

[ 346 ] When Arthur Schlesinger Jr. complimented Kennedy on his remarks, Kennedy bitterly replied, "Yes, and look at what happened to area development the very next day in the House." He then added, "But of course, I had to give that speech, and I'm glad that I did." [ 347 ] On June 16, The New York Times published an editorial which argued that while Kennedy had initially "moved too slowly and with little evidence of deep moral commitment" in regards to civil rights he "now demonstrate[d] a genuine sense of urgency about eradicating racial discrimination from our national life." [ 348 ] Kennedy meetings with leaders of the March on Washington in the Oval Office, c.

August 28, 1963 A crowd of over 250,000, predominantly African Americans, gathered in Washington for the civil rights March on Washington for Jobs and Freedom on August 28, 1963. Kennedy initially opposed the march, fearing it would have a negative effect on the prospects for the civil rights bills pending in Congress. These fears were heightened just prior to the march when FBI Director J. Edgar Hoover presented Kennedy with reports that some of King's close advisers, specifically Jack O'Dell and Stanley Levison , were communists.

[ 349 ] When King ignored the administration's warning, Robert Kennedy authorized the FBI to wiretap King and other leaders of the Southern Christian Leadership Conference .

[ 350 ] Although Kennedy only gave written approval for limited wiretapping of King's phones "on a trial basis, for a month or so," [ 351 ] Hoover extended the clearance so his men were "unshackled" to look for evidence in any areas of King's life they deemed worthy.

[ 352 ] The Department of Justice was assigned to coordinate the federal government's involvement in the March on Washington on August 28; several hundred thousand dollars to were channeled to the six sponsors of the March.

[ 353 ] To ensure a peaceful demonstration, the organizers and the president personally edited speeches that were inflammatory and collaborated on all aspects related to times and venues. Thousands of troops were placed on standby. Kennedy watched King's speech on TV and was very impressed. The March was considered a "triumph of managed protest," and not one arrest relating to the demonstration occurred. Afterwards, the March leaders accepted an invitation to the White House to meet with Kennedy and photos were taken. Kennedy felt that the March was a victory for him as well and bolstered the chances for his civil rights bill.

[ 353 ] Three weeks later on Sunday, September 15, a bomb exploded at the 16th Street Baptist Church in Birmingham; by the end of the day, four Black children had died in the explosion, and two others were shot to death in the aftermath.

[ 354 ] Due to this resurgent violence, the civil rights legislation underwent some drastic amendments that critically endangered any prospects for passage of the bill, to the outrage of Kennedy. He called the congressional leaders to the White House and by the following day the original bill, without the additions, had enough votes to get it out of the House committee.

[ 355 ] Gaining Republican support, Senator Everett Dirksen promised the legislation would be brought to a vote preventing a Senate filibuster .

[ 356 ] On July 2, 1964, the guarantees Kennedy proposed in his June 1963 speech became federal law, when President Johnson signed the Civil Rights Act.

[ 356 ] Status of women Kennedy signing the Equal Pay Act of 1963 into law During the 1960 presidential campaign, Kennedy endorsed the concept of equal pay for equal work .

[ 357 ] In December 1961, Kennedy signed an executive order creating the Presidential Commission on the Status of Women to advise him on issues concerning the status of women.

[ 358 ] Former First Lady Eleanor Roosevelt led the commission. The commission's final report was issued in October 1963; it documented the legal and cultural discrimination women in America faced and made several policy recommendations to bring about change.

[ 359 ] On June 10, 1963, Kennedy signed the Equal Pay Act of 1963 , which amended the Fair Labor Standards Act and abolished wage disparity based on sex.

[ 360 ] Crime Further information: Presidency of John F. Kennedy § Crime Under the leadership of the attorney general, the Kennedy administration shifted the focus of the Justice Department, the FBI, and the IRS to organized crime . Kennedy won congressional approval for five bills (i.e., Federal Wire Act of 1961) designed to crack down on interstate racketeering , gambling, and the transportation of firearms.

[ 361 ] [ 362 ] On March 22, 1962, Kennedy signed into law a bill abolishing the mandatory death penalty for first degree murder in the District of Columbia, the only remaining jurisdiction in the United States with such a penalty.

[ 363 ] The death penalty has not been applied in D.C. since 1957 and has now been abolished.

[ 364 ] Agriculture Kennedy had relatively little interest in agricultural issues, but he sought to remedy the issue of overproduction, boost the income of farmers, and lower federal expenditures on agriculture. Under the direction of Secretary of Agriculture Orville Freeman , the administration sought to limit the production of farmers, but these proposals were generally defeated in Congress. To increase demand for domestic agricultural products and help the impoverished, Kennedy launched a pilot Food Stamp program and expanded the federal school lunch program .

[ 365 ] Native American relations Further information: Kinzua Dam § Native Americans , and Seneca nation § Kinzua Dam Construction of the Kinzua Dam flooded 10,000 acres (4,000 hectares) of Seneca nation land that they had occupied under the Treaty of 1794 , and forced 600 Seneca to relocate to Salamanca, New York . Kennedy was asked by the American Civil Liberties Union to halt the project, but he declined, citing a critical need for flood control. He expressed concern about the plight of the Seneca and directed government agencies to assist in obtaining more land, damages, and assistance to mitigate their displacement.

[ 366 ] [ 367 ] Space policy Further information: Presidency of John F. Kennedy § Space policy See also: Space Race and Space policy of the United States Wernher von Braun explains the Saturn system to President Kennedy during his tour at the Cape Canaveral Missile Test Annex on November 16, 1963 In the aftermath of the Soviet launch of Sputnik 1 , the first artificial Earth satellite, NASA proposed a crewed lunar landing by the early 1970s.

[ 368 ] Funding for the program, known as the Apollo program , was far from certain as Eisenhower held an ambivalent attitude.

[ 369 ] Early in his presidency, Kennedy was poised to dismantle the crewed space program, but he postponed any decision out of deference to Vice President Johnson, who had been a strong supporter of the program in the Senate.

[ 370 ] With Jerome Wiesner , Johnson was given a major role in overseeing the administration's space policy, and at Johnson's recommendation Kennedy appointed James E. Webb to head NASA.

[ 371 ] In Kennedy's State of the Union address in 1961, he suggested international cooperation in space. Khrushchev declined, as the Soviets did not wish to reveal the status of their rocketry and space capabilities.

[ 372 ] In April 1961, Soviet cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin became the first person to fly in space, reinforcing American fears about being left behind by the Soviet Union.

[ 373 ] Less than a month later, Alan Shepard became the first American to travel into space, strengthening Kennedy's confidence in NASA.

[ 374 ] The following year, John Glenn , aboard the Mercury craft Friendship 7 , became the first American to orbit the Earth.

[ 375 ] In the aftermath of Gagarin's flight, as well as the failed Bay of Pigs invasion, Kennedy felt pressured to respond to the perceived erosion of American prestige. He asked Johnson to explore the feasibility of beating the Soviets to the Moon . Though he was concerned about the program's costs, Kennedy agreed to Johnson's recommendation that the U.S. commit to a crewed lunar landing as the major objective of the space program. In a May 25 speech to Congress, Kennedy declared, [ 374 ] ... I believe that this nation should commit itself to achieving the goal, before this decade is out, of landing a man on the Moon and returning him safely to the Earth. No single space project in this period will be more impressive to mankind, or more important for the long-range exploration of space; and none will be so difficult or expensive to accomplish.

[ 376 ] Full text Kennedy speaks at Rice University on September 12, 1962 Though Gallup polling showed that many in the public were skeptical of the necessity of the Apollo program, [ 377 ] members of Congress were strongly supportive in 1961 and approved a major increase in NASA's funding. Webb began reorganizing NASA, increasing its staffing level, and building two new centers: a Launch Operations Center for the large Moon rocket northwest of Cape Canaveral Air Force Station , and a Manned Spacecraft Center in Houston. Kennedy took the latter occasion as an opportunity to deliver another speech promoting the space effort on September 12, 1962, in which he said: No nation which expects to be the leader of other nations can expect to stay behind in this race for space. ... We choose to go to the Moon in this decade and do the other things, not because they are easy, but because they are hard.

[ 378 ] Full text On November 21, 1962, in a cabinet meeting with Webb and other officials, Kennedy explained that the Moon shot was important for reasons of international prestige, and that the expense was justified.

[ 379 ] On July 20, 1969, almost six years after Kennedy's death, Apollo 11 landed the first crewed spacecraft on the Moon.

[ 380 ] Judicial appointments Main articles: John F. Kennedy Supreme Court candidates and List of federal judges appointed by John F. Kennedy In 1962, Kennedy appointed justices Byron White and Arthur Goldberg to the Supreme Court .

[ 381 ] Additionally, Kennedy appointed 21 judges to the United States Courts of Appeals , and 102 judges to the United States district courts .

[ 382 ] Assassination Main article: Assassination of John F. Kennedy For a chronological guide, see Timeline of the John F. Kennedy assassination .

Kennedy was assassinated in Dallas at 12:30 p.m.

Central Standard Time on November 22, 1963.

[ 383 ] He was in Texas on a political trip to smooth over frictions in the Democratic Party between liberals Ralph Yarborough and Don Yarborough (no relation) and conservative John Connally .

[ 384 ] While traveling in a presidential motorcade through Dealey Plaza , he was shot once in the back, the bullet exiting via his throat, and once in the head.

[ 385 ] [ 386 ] The Kennedys and the Connallys in the presidential limousine moments before the assassination in Dallas Kennedy was taken to Parkland Hospital , where he was pronounced dead 30 minutes later, at 1:00 p.m.

[ 387 ] He was 46 years old.

Lee Harvey Oswald was arrested for the murder of police officer J. D. Tippit and was subsequently charged with Kennedy's assassination.

[ 388 ] Oswald denied shooting anyone, claiming he was a patsy .

[ 389 ] [ 390 ] On November 24, before he could be prosecuted, he was shot and killed by Jack Ruby .

[ 387 ] Ruby was arrested and convicted for the murder of Oswald. Ruby successfully appealed his conviction but died of cancer on January 3, 1967, while the date for his new trial was being set.

[ 391 ] President Johnson quickly issued an executive order to create the Warren Commission —chaired by Chief Justice Earl Warren —to investigate the assassination. The commission concluded that Oswald acted alone in killing Kennedy and that Oswald was not part of any conspiracy.

[ 392 ] [ 393 ] These conclusions are disputed by many.

[ 394 ] A Gallup Poll in November 2013 showed 61% believed in a conspiracy, and only 30% thought that Oswald did it alone.

[ 395 ] In 1979, the U.S. House Select Committee on Assassinations concluded, with one third of the committee dissenting, "that Kennedy was probably assassinated as a result of a conspiracy ." The committee was unable to identify the other gunmen or the extent of the conspiracy. This conclusion was based largely on audio recordings of the shooting.

[ 396 ] Subsequently, investigative reports from the FBI and a specially appointed National Academy of Sciences Committee determined that "reliable acoustic data do not support a conclusion that there was a second gunman." [ 397 ] The Justice Department later concluded "that no persuasive evidence can be identified to support the theory of a conspiracy".

[ 398 ] Funeral Main articles: State funeral of John F. Kennedy and List of dignitaries at the state funeral of John F. Kennedy Kennedy's family leaving his funeral at the U.S. Capitol Building Kennedy's body was brought back to Washington. On November 23, six military pallbearers carried the flag-draped coffin into the East Room of the White House , where he lay in repose for 24 hours.

[ 399 ] [ 400 ] The coffin was then transported on a horse-drawn caisson to the Capitol to lie in state. Throughout the day and night, hundreds of thousands of people lined up to view the guarded casket, [ 401 ] [ 402 ] with a quarter million passing through the rotunda during the 18 hours of lying in state.

[ 401 ] Kennedy's funeral service was held on November 25, at St. Matthew's Cathedral in Washington, D.C.

[ 403 ] The Requiem Mass was led by Cardinal Richard Cushing , then the Archbishop of Boston .

[ 403 ] It was attended by approximately 1,200 guests, including representatives from over 90 countries.

[ 404 ] [ 405 ] After the service, Kennedy was buried at Arlington National Cemetery in Arlington County, Virginia .

[ 406 ] Personal life, family, and reputation Further information: Kennedy family The Kennedy brothers: Attorney General Robert F. Kennedy , Senator Ted Kennedy , and President John F. Kennedy at the White House in 1963 The Kennedy family is one of the most established political families in the United States, having produced a president, three senators, three ambassadors, and numerous other representatives and public officials. While a congressman, Kennedy embarked on a seven-week trip to India, Japan, Vietnam, and Israel in 1951, at which point he became close with his then 25-year-old brother Robert, as well as his 27-year-old sister Patricia. Because they were several years apart in age, the brothers had previously seen little of each other. This 25,000-mile (40,000 km) journey was the first extended time they had spent together and resulted in their becoming best friends.

[ 407 ] Robert would eventually serve as his brother's attorney general and closest presidential advisor; [ 407 ] he would later run for president in 1968 before his assassination , while another Kennedy brother, Ted, ran for president in 1980 .

[ 408 ] Wife and children Kennedy met his wife, Jacqueline Lee "Jackie" Bouvier , when he was a congressman.

Charles L. Bartlett , a journalist, introduced the pair at a dinner party.

[ 409 ] They were married on September 12, 1953, at St. Mary's Church in Newport, Rhode Island .

[ 410 ] [ 411 ] The newlyweds honeymooned in Mexico before settling in their new home, Hickory Hill , in McLean, Virginia .

[ 412 ] In 1956, they sold their Hickory Hill estate to Kennedy's brother Robert, and bought a townhouse in Georgetown .

[ 413 ] [ 414 ] The Kennedys also resided at an apartment in Boston , their legal residence during John's congressional career, [ 415 ] [ 416 ] and a summer home in Cape Cod, Massachusetts .

[ 417 ] After a miscarriage in 1955 and a stillbirth in 1956 (their daughter Arabella), their daughter Caroline was born in 1957.

John Jr.

, nicknamed "John-John" by the press as a child, was born in late November 1960, 17 days after his father was elected. John Jr. died in 1999 when the small plane he was piloting crashed .

[ 418 ] In August 1963, Jackie gave birth to a son, Patrick . However, he died after two days due to complications from birth.

[ 419 ] Popular image The First Family in Hyannis Port, Massachusetts , 1962 Kennedy and his wife were younger than the presidents and first ladies who preceded them, and both were popular in the media culture in ways more common to pop singers and movie stars than politicians, influencing fashion trends and becoming the subjects of photo spreads in popular magazines. Although Eisenhower had allowed presidential press conferences to be filmed for television, Kennedy was the first president to ask for them to be broadcast live and made good use of the medium.

[ 420 ] In 1961, the Radio-Television News Directors Association presented Kennedy with its highest honor, the Paul White Award, in recognition of his open relationship with the media.

[ 421 ] The Kennedys invited a range of artists, writers and intellectuals to White House dinners, raising the profile of the arts in America. On the White House lawn, they established a swimming pool and tree house, while Caroline attended a preschool with 10 other children inside the home.

[ 422 ] [ 423 ] Vaughn Meader 's First Family comedy album, which parodied the president, the first lady, their family, and the administration, sold about four million copies.

[ 424 ] Health Kennedy was plagued by childhood diseases, including whooping cough , chickenpox , measles , and ear infections. These ailments compelled him to spend a considerable amount of time convalescing . Three months prior to his third birthday, in 1920, Kennedy came down with scarlet fever , a highly contagious and life-threatening disease, and was admitted to Boston City Hospital .

[ 425 ] [ 14 ] Kennedy and Jackie leaving the hospital following his spinal surgery, December 1954 During his years at Choate, Kennedy was beset by health problems that culminated with his emergency hospitalization in 1934 at Yale New Haven Hospital , where doctors suspected leukemia.

[ 426 ] While ill, he became a passionate reader and also a fatalist .

[ 427 ] In June 1934, he was admitted to the Mayo Clinic in Minnesota; the ultimate diagnosis was colitis .

[ 426 ] After withdrawing from Princeton University, Kennedy was hospitalized for observation at Peter Bent Brigham Hospital in Boston. He then spent the spring of 1936 working as a ranch hand outside Benson, Arizona under Jack Speiden .

[ 428 ] Years after Kennedy's death, it was revealed that in September 1947—at age 30 and during his first term in Congress—he was diagnosed by Sir Daniel Davis at The London Clinic with Addison's disease . Davis estimated that Kennedy would not live for another year, while Kennedy hoped he could live for ten.

[ 429 ] In 1966, White House physician Janet Travell disclosed that Kennedy also had hypothyroidism . The presence of two endocrine diseases raises the possibility that Kennedy had autoimmune polyendocrine syndrome type 2 .

[ 430 ] Kennedy suffered from chronic severe back pain, for which he underwent surgery. His condition may have had diplomatic repercussions, as he was reportedly taking a combination of medications to manage the pain during the 1961 Vienna Summit . The combination included hormones, animal organ cells, steroids, vitamins, enzymes, and amphetamines, and possible side effects included hyperactivity, hypertension , impaired judgment, nervousness, and mood swings.

[ 431 ] Kennedy at one time was regularly seen by three doctors, one of whom, Max Jacobson , at first was unknown to the other two, as his mode of treatment was controversial [ 432 ] and used for the most severe bouts of back pain.

[ 433 ] Into late 1961, disagreements existed among Kennedy's doctors concerning the balance of medication and exercise. Kennedy preferred the former because he was short on time and desired immediate relief.

[ 300 ] The president's primary White House physician, George G. Burkley , set up gym equipment in the White House basement, where Kennedy performed stretching exercises three times a week.

[ 434 ] Details of these and other medical issues were not publicly disclosed during Kennedy's lifetime.

[ 435 ] Burkley realized that treatments by Jacobson and Travell, including excessive use of steroids and amphetamines, were medically inappropriate, and took action to remove Kennedy from their care.

[ 436 ] External videos Presentation by Robert Dallek on An Unfinished Life: John F. Kennedy, 1917-1963 , May 20, 2003 , C-SPAN In 2002, Robert Dallek wrote an extensive history of Kennedy's health based on a collection of Kennedy–associated papers from 1955 to 1963, including X-rays and prescription records from Travell. According to Travell's records, during his presidency Kennedy suffered from high fevers; stomach, colon, and prostate issues; abscesses; high cholesterol; and adrenal problems. Travell kept a "Medicine Administration Record", cataloging Kennedy's medications: injected and ingested corticosteroids for his adrenal insufficiency; procaine shots and ultrasound treatments and hot packs for his back; Lomotil, Metamucil, paregoric, phenobarbital, testosterone, and trasentine to control his diarrhea, abdominal discomfort, and weight loss; penicillin and other antibiotics for his urinary-tract infections and an abscess; and Tuinal to help him sleep.

[ 426 ] Affairs and friendships Attorney General Robert F. Kennedy , Marilyn Monroe , and John F. Kennedy talk during the president's May 19, 1962, early birthday party, where Monroe publicly serenaded Kennedy with " Happy Birthday, Mr. President " Kennedy was single in the 1940s while having relationships with Danish journalist Inga Arvad [ 437 ] and actress Gene Tierney .

[ 438 ] During his time as a senator, he had an affair with Gunilla von Post , who later wrote that the future president tried to end his marriage to be with her before having any children with his wife.

[ 439 ] Kennedy was also reported to have had affairs with Marilyn Monroe , [ 440 ] Judith Campbell , [ 441 ] Mary Pinchot Meyer , [ 442 ] Marlene Dietrich , [ 29 ] White House intern Mimi Alford , [ 443 ] and his wife's press secretary , Pamela Turnure .

[ 444 ] There have been several conspiracy theories surrounding the death of Monroe, alleging that Kennedy may have had a part in her death.

[ 445 ] The full extent of Kennedy's relationship with Monroe (who in 1962 famously sang " Happy Birthday, Mr. President " at Kennedy's birthday celebration at Madison Square Garden ) is not known, though it has been reported that they spent a weekend together in March 1962 while he was staying at Bing Crosby 's house.

[ 446 ] Furthermore, people at the White House switchboard noted that Monroe had called Kennedy during 1962.

[ 447 ] J. Edgar Hoover, the FBI director, received reports about Kennedy's indiscretions.

[ 448 ] These included an alleged tryst with a suspected East German spy, Ellen Rometsch . According to historian Michael Beschloss , in July 1963, Hoover reportedly informed Robert Kennedy about the affair with a woman "suspected as a Soviet intelligence agent, someone linked to East German intelligence." Robert reportedly took the matter seriously enough to raise it with leading Democratic and Republican figures in Congress.

[ 449 ] [ 450 ] However, the FBI never turned up "any solid evidence" that Rometsch was a spy or that she had relations with President Kennedy.

[ 451 ] Former Secret Service agent Larry Newman recalled "morale problems" that the president's indiscretions engendered within the Secret Service.

[ 452 ] Kennedy inspired affection and loyalty from the members of his team and his supporters.

[ 453 ] According to Reeves, this included "the logistics of Kennedy's liaisons ... [which] required secrecy and devotion rare in the annals of the energetic service demanded by successful politicians." [ 454 ] Kennedy believed that his friendly relationship with members of the press would help protect him from public revelations about his sex life.

[ 455 ] Sports President John F. Kennedy with the Boston Celtics , January 1963 Kennedy was a fan of Major League Baseball 's Boston Red Sox and the National Basketball Association 's Boston Celtics .

[ 456 ] [ 457 ] Growing up on Cape Cod, Kennedy and his siblings developed a lifelong passion for sailing .

[ 458 ] He also took up golf ; playing  regularly at the Hyannisport Club in Massachusetts and the Palm Beach Country Club in Florida.

[ 456 ] [ 459 ] Religion See also: John F. Kennedy 1960 presidential campaign § Religion Kennedy was the first Catholic elected to the presidency.

[ 460 ] During his childhood, he attended St. Aidan's Church in Brookline, Massachusetts, where he was baptized on June 19, 1917.

[ 461 ] From 1946 until his death in 1963, he served on the advisory board of the Roman Catholic Emmanuel College .

[ 462 ] Historical evaluations and legacy The John F. Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum , in Boston Presidency Further information: Presidency of John F. Kennedy § Historical reputation Historians and political scientists tend to rank Kennedy as an above-average president, and he is usually the highest-ranking president who served less than one full term.

[ 463 ] A 2010 survey by the Gallup Organization , when Americans were asked their opinions of modern presidents, Kennedy was found to be the most-popular, with an 85 percent retrospective approval rating.

[ 464 ] A 2014 survey from The Washington Post of 162 members of the American Political Science Association 's Presidents and Executive Politics section ranked Kennedy 14th highest overall among the 43 persons who have been president, including then-president Barack Obama . The survey found Kennedy to be the most overrated U.S. president.

[ 465 ] A 2017 C-SPAN survey has Kennedy ranked among the top ten presidents.

[ 466 ] A 2023 Gallup survey showed Kennedy with a retrospective approval rating of 90 percent, the highest of all U.S. presidents in recent history.

[ 467 ] Assessments of his policies are mixed.

[ 468 ] [ 469 ] Many of Kennedy's legislative proposals were passed after his death, during the Johnson administration , and Kennedy's death gave those proposals a powerful moral component.

[ 470 ] Kennedy came in third (behind Martin Luther King Jr. and Mother Teresa ) in Gallup's List of Widely Admired People of the 20th century.

[ 471 ] [ 472 ] In 1961, he was awarded the Laetare Medal by the University of Notre Dame , considered the most prestigious award for American Catholics .

[ 473 ] He was posthumously awarded the Pacem in Terris Award ( Latin : Peace on Earth) and the Presidential Medal of Freedom .

[ 474 ] Camelot Official White House portrait of Kennedy, by Aaron Shikler The term "Camelot" is often used to describe his presidency, reflecting both the mythic grandeur accorded Kennedy in death and powerful nostalgia for that era of American history.

[ 475 ] According to Richard Dean Burns and Joseph M. Siracusa, the most popular theme surrounding Kennedy's legacy is its replay of the legend of King Arthur and Camelot from Arthurian Literature .

[ 476 ] In an interview following Kennedy's death, his widow Jacqueline mentioned his affection for the Broadway musical Camelot and quoted its closing lines: "Don't let it be forgot, that once there was a spot, for one brief, shining moment that was known as Camelot." [ 477 ] [ 478 ] Critics, especially historians, have dismissed the Camelot myth as a distortion of Kennedy's actions, beliefs, and policies. However, in the public memory, the years of Kennedy's presidency are still seen as a brief, brilliant, and shining moment.

[ 479 ] [ 480 ] Memorials and eponyms Main article: List of things named after John F. Kennedy Examples of the extensive list include: Idlewild Airport in Queens , New York City, renamed John F. Kennedy International Airport on December 24, 1963 NASA Launch Operations Center in Merritt Island, Florida named the John F. Kennedy Space Center on November 29, 1963.

USS John F. Kennedy (CV-67) , U.S. Navy aircraft carrier ordered in April 1964, launched May 1967, decommissioned August 2007; nicknamed "Big John" Kennedy half dollar , first minted in 1964 John F. Kennedy School of Government , part of Harvard University , renamed in 1966 John F. Kennedy Federal Building in the Government Center section of Boston , opened in 1966 John Fitzgerald Kennedy Memorial , opened in 1970 in Dallas National cultural center was named John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts in 1964, opened in 1971 in Washington, D.C.

John F. Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum on Columbia Point in Boston ; opened in 1979 Statue of John F. Kennedy by Isabel McIlvain on the grounds of the Massachusetts State House in Boston; dedicated on May 29, 1990.

Works Books Kennedy, John F. (1940).

Why England Slept . W. Funk.

ISBN 978-1-44-084990-9 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) Kennedy, John F. (1956).

Profiles in Courage . Harper & Brothers.

ISBN 978-0-06-095544-1 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) Kennedy, John F. (1958).

A Nation of Immigrants . Anti-Defamation League.

ISBN 978-0-06-144754-9 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) Select speeches Kennedy comments on the possible prevention of the Cold War President Kennedy comments on the possible prevention of the Cold War Kennedy's message to Turkey Kennedy's message to Turkish President Cemal Gursel and The Turkish People on the Anniversary of the Death of Kemal Atatürk , November 10, 1963 ( accompanying text ) Problems playing these files? See media help .

Announcement to go to the Moon Announcement by John F. Kennedy to go to the Moon (duration 00:11) Secret Societies speech JFK Secret Societies speech Problems playing these files? See media help .

See also Cultural depictions of John F. Kennedy Electoral history of John F. Kennedy History of the United States (1945–1964) Kennedy Doctrine Lincoln–Kennedy coincidences urban legend List of heads of state and government who were assassinated or executed List of presidents of the United States List of presidents of the United States by previous experience List of United States presidential assassination attempts and plots Presidential transition of John F. Kennedy Presidents of the United States on U.S. postage stamps " Senator, you're no Jack Kennedy " VP debate retort by Senator Lloyd Bentsen, 1988 Notes ^ Theodore Roosevelt was nine months younger than Kennedy when he became president after the assassination of William McKinley , but he was not elected until he was 46 .

^ After the war, Kennedy contacted the captain of the Amagiri , Kohei Hanami, and formed a friendship with him. Hanami later supported Kennedy's election campaign.

[ 49 ] References Citations ^ a b "John F. Kennedy Miscellaneous Information" . John F. Kennedy Presidential Library & Museum. Archived from the original on August 31, 2009 . Retrieved February 22, 2012 .

^ "A History of 83 Beals Street, Brookline, Massachusetts: Birthplace of John Fitzgerald Kennedy" .

National Park Service .

Archived from the original on January 29, 2024 . Retrieved January 29, 2024 .

^ Dallek 2003 , p. 20.

^ "Patrick Joseph Kennedy Personal Papers" .

John F. Kennedy Presidential Library & Museum .

Archived from the original on January 29, 2024 . Retrieved January 29, 2024 .

^ Dallek 2003 , pp. 8−13.

^ Meagher, Michael (2011).

John F. Kennedy: A Biography . Greenwood. p.

8 .

^ "John F. Kennedy" .

Encyclopedia Britannica . November 22, 2023.

Archived from the original on January 18, 2017 . Retrieved January 16, 2017 .

^ MacGregor Burns, James (1960).

John Kennedy: A Political Profile . pp.

22– 23.

^ Logevall, Fredrik (2020).

JFK Coming of Age in the American Century, 1917-1956 . Random House. pp.

50– 51.

ISBN 978-0-8129-9713-2 .

^ Logevall, Fredrik (2020).

JFK Coming of Age in the American Century, 1917–1956 . Random House. p. 57.

ISBN 978-0-8129-9713-2 .

^ a b "John F. Kennedy: Early Years" .

Archived from the original on April 29, 2017 . Retrieved April 17, 2017 .

^ Thomas 2000 , p. 33.

^ Kennedy, Edward M. (2009).

True Compass: A Memoir (1st ed.). Twelve. p.

37 .

ISBN 978-0-446-53925-8 .

^ a b "Life of John F. Kennedy" . John F. Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum.

Archived from the original on February 6, 2019 . Retrieved February 7, 2019 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ O'Brien 2005 , p. 31.

^ Dallek 2003 , p. 34.

^ Dallek 2003 , p. 33.

^ Logevall, Fredrik (2020).

JFK - Volume One .

Penguin . p. 81.

ISBN 978-0-241-97201-4 .

^ a b Kenney 2000 , p. 11.

^ Logevall, Fredrik (2020).

JFK – Volume One .

Penguin . p. 112.

ISBN 978-0-241-97201-4 .

^ "John F. Kennedy's Princeton University undergraduate alumni file" .

Mudd Manuscript Library Blog . November 22, 2013. Archived from the original on August 1, 2016 . Retrieved December 21, 2015 .

^ Logevall, Fredrik (2020).

JFK – Volume One .

Penguin . p. 131.

ISBN 978-0-241-97201-4 .

^ Brinkley 2012 , p. 14.

^ Wills, Chuck (2009).

Jack Kennedy: The Illustrated Life of a President . Chronicle Books LLC. p. 25.

^ Dallek 2003 , p. 54.

^ O'Brien 2005 , p. 93.

^ Logevall, Fredrik (2020).

JFK – Volume One .

Penguin . p. 220.

ISBN 978-0-241-97201-4 .

^ Logevall, Fredrik (2020).

JFK - Volume One .

Penguin . pp.

225– 226.

ISBN 978-0-241-97201-4 .

^ a b Dallek 2003 , p. 58.

^ "Obama joins list of seven presidents with Harvard degrees" .

Harvard Gazette .

Harvard University . November 6, 2008. Archived from the original on August 1, 2016 . Retrieved February 24, 2012 .

^ Dallek 2003 , pp. 61–66.

^ Logevall, Fredrik (2020).

JFK – Volume One .

Penguin . pp.

269– 270.

ISBN 978-0-241-97201-4 .

^ Brinkley 2012 , pp. 15–17.

^ Brinkley 2012 , pp. 183.

^ Kenney 2000 , p. 18.

^ Dallek 2003 , p. 68.

^ Kenney 2000 , p. 21.

^ O'Brien 2005 , pp. 114, 117–118.

^ "John F. Kennedy, Jr" . Veteran Tributes. Archived from the original on August 1, 2016 . Retrieved August 1, 2016 .

^ a b c d "President John Fitzgerald Kennedy (1917–1963)" . Michael W. Pocock and MaritimeQuest.com. Archived from the original on August 1, 2016 . Retrieved August 1, 2016 .

^ a b c d e f "John Fitzgerald Kennedy 29 May 1917 – 22 November 1963" . Naval History and Heritage Command.

Archived from the original on August 1, 2016 . Retrieved August 1, 2016 .

^ Ballard 2002 , pp. 12, 36.

^ a b Brinkley 2012 , pp. 18.

^ Donovan 2001 , pp. 19, 20.

^ "USS PT 109" . Michael W. Pocock and MaritimeQuest.com. Archived from the original on August 1, 2016 . Retrieved August 1, 2016 .

^ Donovan 2001 , pp. 99, 100.

^ "USS PT-109 Final Crew List" . Michael W. Pocock and MaritimeQuest.com. Archived from the original on August 1, 2016 . Retrieved August 1, 2016 .

^ Donovan 2001 , pp. 106.

^ "「きのうの敵は今日の友」― ケネディ大統領と日本人艦長の友情秘話" .

American View (in Japanese). Embassy of the United States of America in Japan. April 5, 2015.

Archived from the original on July 26, 2020 . Retrieved July 26, 2020 .

^ Donovan 2001 , pp. 106–107, 119.

^ https://www.jfklibrary.org/learn/about-jfk/jfk-in-history/john-f-kennedy-and-pt-109 ^ Donovan 2001 , pp. 106–107, 124.

^ Doyle 2015 , pp. 66–106, 134–139.

^ Doyle 2015 , pp. 143–148.

^ a b Brinkley 2012 , pp. 19.

^ a b "John F. Kennedy and PT 109" . John F. Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum. Archived from the original on August 1, 2016 . Retrieved July 9, 2023 .

^ Hersey, John (June 17, 1944). "Survival".

The New Yorker . pp.

31– 44.

^ Donovan 2001 , pp. 172–184, 189.

^ Doyle 2015 , pp. 193.

^ Brinkley 2012 , pp. 20.

^ "Record of John F. Kennedy's Naval Service" .

Naval History & Heritage Command . June 18, 2002. Archived from the original on May 27, 2012 . Retrieved July 9, 2023 .

^ O'Brien 2005 , pp. 179, 180.

^ "Peoria Open Space Master Plan: Chapter 4 – Historic and Cultural Resources" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on February 1, 2014 . Retrieved January 22, 2014 .

^ "JFK: A Timeline of His Life 1917–1963" . St. Petersburg Times. Archived from the original on August 1, 2016 . Retrieved August 1, 2016 .

^ Dallek 2003 , p. 98.

^ Dallek 2003 , p. 106–107.

^ "Joseph P. Kennedy Jr" .

John F. Kennedy Presidential Library & Museum . June 6, 2019.

Archived from the original on December 13, 2023 . Retrieved December 13, 2023 .

^ O'Brien 2005 , pp. 175.

^ Brinkley 2012 , pp. 21.

^ Logevall, Fredrik (2020).

JFK – Volume One .

Penguin . pp.

379– 380.

ISBN 978-0-241-97201-4 .

^ O'Brien 2005 , p. 180.

^ Dallek 2003 , p. 104.

^ Dallek 2003 , p. 118.

^ Dallek 2003 , p. 122.

^ Sorensen, Ted (1965).

Kennedy . Harper & Row. p.

21 .

ISBN 978-1-56852-035-3 .

^ Massachusetts Secretary of Commonwealth: Election Statistics 1946 .

^ Logevall, Fredrik (2020).

JFK: Coming of Age in the American Century, 1917–1956 . Random House. p. 424.

^ Brinkley 2012 , pp. 24–26.

^ a b Caro, Robert (2012). "2. The Rich Man's Son".

The Passage of Power: The Years of Lyndon Johnson . Knopf Doubleday Publishing Group.

^ Dallek 2003 , p. 136–137.

^ Brinkley 2012 , p. 26.

^ Brinkley 2012 , p. 27.

^ Meagher, Michael (2011).

John F. Kennedy: A Biography . Greenwood. p.

32 .

^ Brinkley 2012 , p. 29.

^ Meagher, Michael (2011).

John F. Kennedy: A Biography . Greenwood. p.

33 .

^ Dallek 2003 , p. 160.

^ "Remarks Of Representative John F. Kennedy At The Philip J. Durkin Testimonial Dinner, Salem, Massachusetts, January 30, 1949" .

John F. Kennedy Presidential Library & Museum .

Archived from the original on June 1, 2023 . Retrieved June 1, 2023 .

^ "Fast Facts about John F. Kennedy" . John F. Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum.

Archived from the original on July 30, 2023 . Retrieved February 7, 2019 .

^ Skip (January 2, 1961).

"JFK John F. Kennedy boy scouts" .

Daily JFK .

Archived from the original on April 14, 2018 . Retrieved April 14, 2018 .

^ "Remarks Of Representative John F. Kennedy In The House Of Representatives, Washington, D.C., November 20, 1947" .

John F. Kennedy Presidential Library & Museum .

Archived from the original on June 3, 2023 . Retrieved June 3, 2023 .

^ Dallek 2003 , p. 159–165.

^ Meagher, Michael (2011).

John F. Kennedy: A Biography . Greenwood. p.

35 .

^ Dallek 2003 , p. 168.

^ O'Brien 2005 , p. 254.

^ Giglio 2006 , p. 9.

^ Brinkley 2012 , pp. 29–31.

^ Shaw, John T. (October 15, 2013).

JFK in the Senate . St. Martin's Press. p. 41.

ISBN 978-0-230-34183-8 .

^ Kennedy, Robert F. Jr. (2018).

American Values: Lessons I Learned from My Family . Harper. p. 142.

ISBN 978-0-06-084834-7 .

^ a b "John F. Kennedy" .

Encyclopædia Britannica .

Archived from the original on January 18, 2017 . Retrieved January 16, 2017 .

^ Kenney 2000 , p. 29.

^ a b Edward Smith, Jean (March 1967).

"Kennedy and Defense The formative years" .

Air University Review . Archived from the original on December 12, 2008 . Retrieved September 18, 2007 .

^ Tofel, Richard J. (May 9, 2008).

"In His Own Words" .

The Wall Street Journal .

Archived from the original on February 23, 2015 . Retrieved March 28, 2010 .

^ Savage, Sean J. (2004).

JFK, LBJ, and the Democratic Party . State University of New York Press. p. 11.

^ "Economic Problems Of New England, May 1953: 18–20" .

John F. Kennedy Presidential Library & Museum .

Archived from the original on June 18, 2023 . Retrieved June 18, 2023 .

^ Bryant 2006b , p. 45.

^ a b Dallek 2003 , pp. 181–182.

^ Savage, Sean J. (2015).

The Senator from New England: The Rise of JFK . State University of New York Press. p. 22.

^ MacGregor Burns, James (1960).

John Kennedy: A Political Profile . pp.

120– 121.

^ "The U.S. Senator John F. Kennedy Story" . John F. Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum. Archived from the original on August 2, 2016 . Retrieved August 25, 2015 .

^ "Rachel Carson and JFK, an Environmental Tag Team" .

Audubon . May 8, 2012.

Archived from the original on January 7, 2024 . Retrieved March 31, 2024 .

^ Savage, Sean J. (2015).

The Senator from New England: The Rise of JFK . State University of New York Press. p. 71.

^ "John F. Kennedy" .

Encyclopedia Britannica .

Archived from the original on June 5, 2023 . Retrieved June 5, 2023 .

^ Savage, Sean J. (2015).

The Senator from New England: The Rise of JFK . State University of New York Press. pp. 48, 54– 55.

^ Dallek 2003 , pp. 182–183.

^ Dallek 2003 , p. 189.

^ Dallek, Robert (1991).

Lone Star Rising: Lyndon Johnson and His Times, 1908–1960 . Oxford University Press. p. 458.

^ O'Brien 2005 , pp. 274–279, 394–399.

^ Dallek 2003 , p. 201.

^ Brinkley 2012 , pp. 34–35.

^ Shaw, John T.

"JFK in the Senate: Pathway to the Presidency" . Macmillan . Retrieved August 3, 2016 .

[ permanent dead link ] ^ a b " "JFK's Early Campaign"1957 | The Pop History Dig" .

pophistorydig.com .

Archived from the original on December 28, 2022 . Retrieved December 28, 2022 .

^ Dallek 2003 , p. 219.

^ "John F. Kennedy's Pre-Presidential Voting Record & Stands on Issues (p. 2 of 9)" . John F. Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum. November 8, 2022.

Archived from the original on January 18, 2024 . Retrieved March 31, 2024 .

^ Dallek 2003 , p. 220.

^ Shaw, John T. (2013).

JFK in the Senate . St. Martin's Press. p. 183.

ISBN 978-0-230-34183-8 .

^ "John F. Kennedy's Pre-Presidential Voting Record & Stands on Issues (p. 1 of 9)" . John F. Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum. November 8, 2022.

Archived from the original on December 5, 2023 . Retrieved March 31, 2024 .

^ O'Brien 2005 , p. 370.

^ O'Brien 2005 , pp. 370, 371.

^ O'Brien 2005 , p. 372.

^ O'Brien 2005 , p. 374.

^ Bryant 2006b , pp. 23–24.

^ "John F. Kennedy – Presidential candidate and president" .

Encyclopedia Britannica . July 4, 2023.

Archived from the original on January 18, 2017 . Retrieved January 16, 2017 .

^ Brinkley 2012 , p. 37.

^ Shaw, John T. (2013).

JFK in the Senate . St. Martin's Press. p. 191.

ISBN 978-0-230-34183-8 .

^ Dallek, Robert (2020).

How Did We Get Here?: From Theodore Roosevelt to Donald Trump . Harper. pp.

112– 113.

^ Caro, Robert (2012).

The Passage of Power: The Years of Lyndon Johnson . Knopf Doubleday Publishing Group. p. 33.

^ Shaw, John T. (2013).

JFK in the Senate . St. Martin's Press. p. 193.

ISBN 978-0-230-34183-8 .

^ Brinkley 2012 , pp. 35–36.

^ "Sen. John Kennedy Formally Enters Presidential Race" .

Progress-Bulletin . January 2, 1960. p. 1.

Archived from the original on March 2, 2020 – via Newspapers.com .

^ a b Brinkley 2012 , pp. 38–45.

^ Hilty, James (2000).

Robert Kennedy: Brother Protector . Temple University Press. pp.

135– 136.

^ "The 1960 Democratic Presidential Race" .

PBS American Experience .

^ "The 1960 Democratic Presidential Race" .

PBS American Experience .

Archived from the original on October 17, 2023 . Retrieved November 21, 2023 .

^ Brinkley 2012 , pp. 45–47.

^ Cosgrave, Ben (May 24, 2014).

"Head to Head: JFK and RFK, Los Angeles, July 1960" .

Time Magazine .

Archived from the original on November 14, 2014 . Retrieved March 19, 2018 .

^ Brinkley 2012 , p. 47.

^ "John F. Kennedy: Campaigns and Elections" .

Miller Center . October 4, 2016 . Retrieved August 17, 2024 .

^ Kennedy, John F. (July 15, 1960).

"Address of Senator John F. Kennedy Accepting the Democratic Party Nomination for the Presidency of the United States" .

John F. Kennedy Presidential Library .

Archived from the original on September 19, 2016 . Retrieved August 2, 2016 .

^ Brinkley 2012 , p. 49.

^ "From the Editor Emeritus: When John F. Kennedy won the presidential election of 1960 (October 6, 2017)" .

www.archindy.org .

^ Casey, Shaun A. (2009).

The Making of a Catholic President: Kennedy vs. Nixon 1960 . New York City: Oxford University Press.

^ Lacroix, Patrick (2021).

John F. Kennedy and the Politics of Faith . Lawrence: University Press of Kansas. pp.

21– 44.

^ a b "Campaign of 1960" .

John F. Kennedy Presidential Library & Museum . March 2, 2022.

Archived from the original on October 17, 2023 . Retrieved October 15, 2023 .

^ a b "THE KENNEDY-NIXON PRESIDENTIAL DEBATES, 1960 – The Museum of Broadcast Communications" .

The Museum of Broadcast Communications (MBC). Archived from the original on August 21, 2010 . Retrieved October 8, 2010 .

^ Selverstone, Marc J. (October 4, 2016).

"The Campaign and Election of 1960" .

University of Virginia: Miller Center .

Archived from the original on April 29, 2017 . Retrieved October 29, 2023 .

^ "Nixon" .

American Experience . Season 3. Episode 2. October 15, 1990.

PBS .

WGBH .

Archived from the original on June 15, 2022 . Retrieved June 15, 2022 .

^ "JFK (Part 1)" .

American Experience . Season 25. Episode 7. November 11, 2013. PBS. WGBH.

Archived from the original on September 25, 2019 . Retrieved September 24, 2019 .

^ Bruschke, John; Laura, Divine (March 2017).

"Debunking Nixon's radio victory in the 1960 election: Re-analyzing the historical record and considering currently unexamined polling data" .

The Social Science Journal .

54 (1): 67– 75.

doi : 10.1016/j.soscij.2016.09.007 .

ISSN 0362-3319 .

S2CID 151390817 .

Archived from the original on October 22, 2022 . Retrieved October 22, 2022 .

^ White, Theodore H. (1961).

The Making of the President, 1960 . p. 294.

^ a b Dudley & Shiraev 2008 , p. 83.

^ Hoberek, Andrew, ed. (2015).

The Cambridge Companion to John F. Kennedy . Cambridge Companions to American Studies. New York: Cambridge University Press. p. 1.

ISBN 978-1-107-66316-9 .

^ Reeves 1993 , p. 21.

^ a b Kennedy, John F. (January 20, 1961).

"Inaugural Address" .

John F. Kennedy Presidential Library . Archived from the original on January 11, 2012 . Retrieved February 22, 2012 .

^ Kempe 2011 , p. 52.

^ Reeves 1993 , p. 22.

^ Reeves 1993 , pp. 23, 25.

^ Giglio 2006 , pp. 31–32, 35.

^ "Bobby Kennedy: Is He the 'Assistant President'?" . U.S. News & World Report. February 19, 1962.

Archived from the original on September 15, 2016 . Retrieved January 25, 2024 .

^ Herring 2008 , pp. 704–705.

^ Brinkley 2012 , pp. 76–77.

^ "1961–1968: The Presidencies of John F. Kennedy and Lyndon B. Johnson" .

U.S. Department of State .

Archived from the original on February 16, 2024 . Retrieved November 19, 2023 .

^ Stephen G Rabe, "John F. Kennedy" in Timothy J Lynch, ed., "The Oxford Encyclopedia of American Military and Diplomatic History" (2013) 1:610–615.

^ Larres, Klaus; Ann Lane (2001).

The Cold War: the essential readings . Wiley-Blackwell. p. 103.

ISBN 978-0-631-20706-1 .

^ Schlight, John.

"A War Too Long: The USAF in Southeast Asia 1961–1975" (PDF) .

U.S. Department of Defense . Archived from the original (PDF) on January 27, 2024 . Retrieved January 27, 2024 .

^ Herring 2008 , pp. 711–712.

^ Robert G. Lewis, "What Food Crisis?: Global Hunger and Farmers' Woes." World Policy Journal 25.1 (2008): 29–35.

online Archived January 9, 2020, at the Wayback Machine ^ Michael O'Brien, John F. Kennedy: A biography (2005) pp. 867–68.

^ a b "John F. Kennedy and African Independence" .

John F. Kennedy Presidential Library & Museum . March 6, 2019.

Archived from the original on November 12, 2023 . Retrieved November 19, 2023 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ Giglio 2006 , pp. 239–242.

^ "Remarks on signing U.N. Loan Bill, 2 October 1962" .

John F. Kennedy Presidential Library & Museum .

Archived from the original on November 19, 2023 . Retrieved November 19, 2023 .

^ Dallek 2003 , pp. 338–339.

^ "The Peace Corps: Traveling The World To Live, Work, And Learn" .

John F. Kennedy Presidential Library & Museum .

Archived from the original on January 31, 2024 . Retrieved January 31, 2024 .

^ "Kennedy's Global Challenges" .

U.S. History: From Pre-Columbian to the New Millennium .

Archived from the original on November 19, 2023 . Retrieved November 19, 2023 .

^ "Peace Corps" .

John F. Kennedy Presidential Library & Museum .

Archived from the original on December 2, 2023 . Retrieved January 27, 2024 .

^ Schlesinger 2002 , pp. 606–607.

^ Meisler, Stanley (2011).

When the World Calls: The Inside Story of the Peace Corps and Its First Fifty Years . Beacon Press.

ISBN 978-0-8070-5049-1 .

^ "Peace Corps, Fast Facts" . Archived from the original on August 2, 2016 . Retrieved August 2, 2016 .

^ Kempe 2011 , pp. 76–78.

^ Brinkley 2012 , pp. 74, 77–78.

^ Reeves 1993 , pp. 161–171.

^ Reeves 1993 , p. 175.

^ Reeves 1993 , p. 185.

^ Reeves 1993 , p. 201.

^ Giglio 2006 , pp. 85–86.

^ Kempe 2011 , pp.

478–479 .

^ Updegrove, Mark K. (2022).

Incomparable Grace: JFK in the Presidency . Penguin Publishing Group. p. 118.

^ Schlesinger 2002 , pp. 233, 238.

^ Gleijeses 1995 .

^ Reeves 1993 , pp. 69–73.

^ "50 Years Later: Learning From The Bay Of Pigs" . NPR. April 17, 2011.

Archived from the original on November 1, 2019 . Retrieved September 1, 2016 .

^ Quesada, Alejandro de (2009).

The Bay of Pigs: Cuba 1961 . Elite series #166. Illustrated by Stephen Walsh. Osprey Publishing. p. 17.

^ "The Bay of Pigs" .

John F. Kennedy Presidential Library & Museum .

Archived from the original on February 23, 2021 . Retrieved November 19, 2023 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ Reeves 1993 , pp. 71, 673.

^ Brinkley 2012 , pp. 68–69.

^ Voss, Michael (April 14, 2011).

"Bay of Pigs: The 'perfect failure' of Cuba invasion" .

BBC News .

Archived from the original on December 18, 2023 . Retrieved November 26, 2023 .

^ "The Bay of Pigs Invasion and its Aftermath, April 1961–October 1962" .

U.S. Department of State .

Archived from the original on August 23, 2016 . Retrieved November 26, 2023 .

^ "In Echo Park Many Local Cubans Celebrate Death Of Former President Fidel Castro" .

CBS News . November 26, 2016.

Archived from the original on November 26, 2023 . Retrieved November 26, 2023 .

^ Schlesinger 2002 , pp. 268–294, 838–839.

^ Jean Edward Smith , "Bay of Pigs: The Unanswered Questions", The Nation , April 13, 1964.

^ Reeves 1993 , pp. 95–97.

^ Schlesinger 2002 , pp. 290, 295.

^ Dallek 2003 , pp. 370–371.

^ Hayes, Matthew A. (2019).

"Robert Kennedy and the Cuban Missile Crisis: A Reassertion of Robert Kennedy's Role as the President's 'Indispensable Partner' in the Successful Resolution of the Crisis" (PDF) .

History .

104 (361): 473– 503.

doi : 10.1111/1468-229X.12815 .

ISSN 1468-229X .

S2CID 164907501 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on December 27, 2021 . Retrieved March 31, 2024 .

^ Herring 2008 , pp. 707–708.

^ Reeves 1993 , p. 264.

^ a b "U.S. planned massive Cuba invasion force, the kidnapping of Cuban officials" .

USA Today . October 30, 2017.

Archived from the original on April 12, 2019 . Retrieved April 15, 2019 .

^ "1962 US Joint Chiefs Of Staff Operation Northwoods Unclassified Document Bolsheviks NWO" .

Internet Archive . 1962.

^ Giglio 2006 , pp. 203–205.

^ Giglio, James; Stephen G. Rabe (2003).

Debating the Kennedy presidency . Rowman & Littlefield. p.

39 .

ISBN 978-0-7425-0834-7 .

^ Brinkley 2012 , pp. 113–114.

^ Reeves 1993 , p. 345.

^ "President John F. Kennedy - Cuban Missile Crisis, 1962" .

National Archives .

Archived from the original on September 28, 2023 . Retrieved January 30, 2024 .

^ Reeves 1993 , p. 245.

^ Giglio 2006 , pp. 207–208.

^ Reeves 1993 , p. 387.

^ Reeves 1993 , p. 388.

^ Reeves 1993 , p. 389.

^ Giglio 2006 , p. 220.

^ Reeves 1993 , p. 390.

^ Reeves 1993 , p. 403.

^ "The World on the Brink: John F. Kennedy and the Cuban Missile Crisis" .

John F. Kennedy Presidential Library & Museum .

Archived from the original on November 24, 2023 . Retrieved November 26, 2023 .

^ Giglio 2006 , pp. 225–226.

^ Reeves 1993 , p. 426.

^ Kenney 2000 , pp. 184–186.

^ Herring 2008 , p. 723.

^ Kenney 2000 , p. 189.

^ Reeves 1993 , p. 425.

^ JFK's "Address on the First Anniversary of the Alliance for Progress", White House reception for diplomatic cors of the Latin American republics, March 13, 1962.

Public Papers of the Presidents – John F. Kennedy (1962), p. 223.

^ Kennedy, John F. (John Fitzgerald) (2005).

John F. Kennedy: 1962 : containing the public messages, speeches, and statements of the president, January 20 to December 31, 1962 .

Archived from the original on March 31, 2024 . Retrieved December 29, 2018 .

^ Schlesinger 2002 , pp. 788–789.

^ Glass, Andrew (March 13, 2019).

"JFK proposes an Alliance for Progress for Latin America, March 13, 1961" .

Politico .

Archived from the original on November 26, 2023 . Retrieved November 26, 2023 .

^ a b "Alliance for Progress" . John F. Kennedy Presidential Library & Museum. December 15, 2021.

Archived from the original on November 12, 2023 . Retrieved November 19, 2023 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ "Alliance for Progress" .

Encyclopædia Britannica .

Archived from the original on November 18, 2023 . Retrieved November 19, 2023 .

^ "Alliance for Progress and Peace Corps, 1961–1969" . United States Department of State.

Archived from the original on November 18, 2023 . Retrieved November 19, 2023 .

^ Reeves 1993 , pp. 140–142.

^ Reeves 1993 , p. 152.

^ a b Reeves 1993 , p. 75.

^ Patterson 1996 , p. 498.

^ Dunnigan & Nofi 1999 , p. 257.

^ Giglio 2006 , pp. 256–261.

^ Reeves 1993 , p. 281.

^ Reeves 1993 , p. 259.

^ Dunst, Charles (July 20, 2019).

"The U.S.'s Toxic Agent Orange Legacy" . The Atlantic.

Archived from the original on October 14, 2019 . Retrieved May 13, 2023 .

^ Giglio 2006 , pp. 256–257.

^ "50. Interview With the President" .

U.S. Department of State .

Archived from the original on November 12, 2023 . Retrieved November 12, 2023 .

^ "Interview with Walter Cronkite, Inaugurating a CBS TV News Program, 2 September 1963" . John F. Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum . Retrieved May 7, 2024 .

^ Reeves 1993 , pp. 562–563.

^ Reeves 1993 , p. 617.

^ Giglio 2006 , pp. 262–268.

^ "Vietnam War" . Swarthmore College Peace Collection. Archived from the original on August 3, 2016.

^ "Vietnam War U.S. Military Fatal Casualty Statistics" .

National Archives . August 15, 2016.

Archived from the original on May 26, 2020 . Retrieved January 30, 2024 .

^ "Track the rapid escalation of the Vietnam War under Pres. John F. Kennedy's administration" .

Encyclopedia Britannica .

Archived from the original on January 30, 2024 . Retrieved January 30, 2024 .

^ a b Matthews 2011 , pp. 393–394.

^ Giglio 2006 , pp. 265–266.

^ Ellis, Joseph J. (2000). "Making Vietnam History".

Reviews in American History .

28 (4): 625– 629.

doi : 10.1353/rah.2000.0068 .

S2CID 144881388 .

^ Talbot, David (June 21, 2007).

"Warrior For Peace" .

Time Magazine . Archived from the original on June 28, 2007 . Retrieved March 1, 2012 .

^ Sorensen, Ted (2008).

Counselor: A Life at the Edge of History . New York: HarperCollins . p. 359.

ISBN 978-0060798710 .

^ Bundy, McGeorge (October 11, 1963).

"National Security Action Memorandum # 263" .

JFK Lancer . Archived from the original on August 3, 2016 . Retrieved February 19, 2012 .

^ Dallek 2003 , p. 680.

^ a b McNamara–Taylor Report on Vietnam (PDF) .

cia.gov (Report) . Retrieved May 6, 2024 .

^ Logevall, Frederick (1998), "Vietnam and the Question of What Might Have Been," in Mark J. White, ed.

Kennedy: The New Frontier Revisited , New York: New York University Press, pp. 25, 27, 34–53 ^ National Security Action Memoranda [NSAM]: NSAM 263, South Vietnam (Report).

John F. Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum . Retrieved May 6, 2024 .

^ Reeves 1993 , p. 534.

^ Gehler, Michael; Kaiser, Professor of European Studies Wolfram; Kaiser, Wolfram (2004).

Christian Democracy in Europe Since 19455 . Routledge.

ISBN 978-1-135-75385-6 .

Archived from the original on July 24, 2023 . Retrieved July 24, 2023 .

^ Geis, Anna; Müller, Harald; Schörnig, Niklas (2013).

The Militant Face of Democracy . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-1-107-03740-3 .

Archived from the original on July 24, 2023 . Retrieved July 24, 2023 .

^ Kulski, W. W (1966).

De Gaulle and the World . Syracuse University Press. p.

29 .

de gaulle and germany european counterweight.

^ Ninkovich, Frank (1994).

Modernity and Power . University of Chicago Press.

ISBN 978-0-226-58650-2 .

Archived from the original on July 24, 2023 . Retrieved July 24, 2023 .

^ Daum 2008 , pp. 125–163.

^ Dallek 2003 , p. 624.

^ Daum 2008 , pp. 147–156.

^ Shannon, Vaughn P. (2003).

Balancing Act: US Foreign Policy and the Arab-Israeli Conflict . Aldershot: Ashgate Publishing. p. 55.

ISBN 0754635910 .

^ Zachary K. Goldman, "Ties that bind: John F. Kennedy and the foundations of the American–Israeli alliance: The Cold War and Israel." Cold War History 9.1 (2009): 23–58, quoting Ben-Zvi on p 25.

^ Little, Douglas.

American Orientalism: The United States and the Middle East Since 1945 . The University of North Carolina Press . p. 62.

^ Gibson 2015 , pp. 43–45.

^ Gibson 2015 , pp. 45, 57–58.

^ Gibson 2015 , pp. 60–61, 80.

^ "President John F. Kennedy on His Historic Trip to Ireland" .

Shapell Manuscript Collection . Shapell Manuscript Foundation. Archived from the original on May 17, 2020 . Retrieved November 13, 2013 .

^ Sorensen 1966 , p. 656.

^ a b "Timeline" .

JFKhomecoming . 2013.

Archived from the original on November 11, 2023 . Retrieved March 31, 2024 .

^ "1963: Warm welcome for JFK in Ireland" .

BBC News . June 27, 1963. Archived from the original on August 3, 2016 . Retrieved February 23, 2012 .

^ "Address Before the Irish Parliament in Dublin, June 28, 1963 (Text and audio)" .

John F. Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum . June 28, 1963.

Archived from the original on August 28, 2018 . Retrieved July 3, 2013 .

^ "President Kennedy in Ireland (Text and video)" .

RTÉ Archives .

Archived from the original on September 20, 2023 . Retrieved July 3, 2013 .

^ Ryan, Ray (June 21, 2013).

"The best four days of JFK's life" .

Irish Examiner . Cork.

ISSN 1393-9564 .

Archived from the original on January 27, 2022 . Retrieved February 6, 2022 .

^ Mufson, Steve (August 4, 2015).

"Obama will echo Kennedy's American University nuclear speech from 1963" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on August 5, 2015 . Retrieved August 6, 2015 .

^ Wang, Joy Y. (August 4, 2015).

"Obama to follow in John F. Kennedy's historic footsteps" . MSNBC. Archived from the original on August 3, 2016 . Retrieved August 6, 2015 .

^ Reeves 1993 , p. 514.

^ Reeves 1993 , p. 552.

^ Reeves 1993 , p. 227.

^ Reeves 1993 , p. 229.

^ a b Reeves 1993 , p. 243.

^ Reeves 1993 , p. 542.

^ Reeves 1993 , p. 548.

^ "Nuclear Test Ban Treaty" .

John F. Kennedy Presidential Library & Museum .

Archived from the original on July 19, 2019 . Retrieved November 19, 2023 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ Reeves 1993 , p. 550.

^ Brinkley 2012 , pp. 63–65.

^ Giglio 2006 , pp. 40–41, 100.

^ Giglio 2006 , p. 99.

^ Giglio 2006 , pp. 102–103.

^ a b Giglio 2006 , pp. 105–106.

^ Giglio 2006 , pp. 103–104.

^ Giglio 2006 , pp. 104–105.

^ Giglio 2006 , pp. 106–107.

^ "John F. Kennedy and People with Intellectual Disabilities" .

John F. Kennedy Presidential Library & Museum . December 15, 2021.

Archived from the original on January 21, 2022 . Retrieved November 19, 2023 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ Giglio 2006 , pp. 107–109.

^ Rehm, John B. (April 1968). "Developments in the law and institutions of international economic relations: the Kennedy Round of Trade Negotiations".

The American Journal of International Law .

62 (2).

American Society of International Law : 403– 434.

doi : 10.2307/2196880 .

JSTOR 2196880 .

^ Patterson 1996 , pp. 464–465.

^ Giglio 2006 , p. 125.

^ Giglio 2006 , pp. 136–137.

^ Giglio 2006 , pp. 139–141.

^ Ippolito, Dennis (2004).

Why Budgets Matter: Budget Policy and American Politics . Penn State Press. pp.

173– 175.

ISBN 0-271-02260-4 .

^ Frum 2000 , p. 293.

^ Frum 2000 , p. 324.

^ a b c "BEA: Quarterly GDP figures by sector, 1953–1964" . United States Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis. Archived from the original on March 6, 2012 . Retrieved February 23, 2012 .

^ "Consumer and Gross Domestic Price Indices: 1913 to 2002" (PDF) . U.S. Census Bureau. 2003. Archived from the original (PDF) on May 11, 2005 . Retrieved February 23, 2012 .

^ "Statistical Abstract of the United States, 1964" (PDF) . U.S. Department of Commerce. July 1964.

Archived (PDF) from the original on May 17, 2020 . Retrieved March 28, 2010 .

^ Parmet 1983 , p. 238.

^ Giglio 2006 , pp. 130–134.

^ "Inflation in Steel" .

The New York Times . April 12, 1962.

Archived from the original on March 31, 2024 . Retrieved February 24, 2012 .

^ Reeves 1993 , p. 300.

^ Reeves 1993 , pp. 318–320.

^ Dallek 2003 , pp. 292–293.

^ Brauer 2002 , p. 487.

^ "The Kennedys and the Civil Rights Movement" .

National Park Service .

Archived from the original on June 24, 2023 . Retrieved November 19, 2023 .

^ a b c d e f Brauer 2002 , p. 490.

^ Bryant 2006a , pp. 60, 66.

^ Reeves 1993 , p. 126.

^ "The Modern Civil Rights Movement and The Kennedy Administration" .

John F. Kennedy Presidential Library & Museum .

Archived from the original on December 14, 2018 . Retrieved November 19, 2023 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ Hilty, James (2000).

Robert Kennedy: Brother Protector . Temple University Press. p. 329.

^ wikisource – Executive Order No. 10925 ^ Patterson 1996 , pp. 473–475.

^ "U.S. Marshals Mark 50th Anniversary of the Integration of 'Ole Miss' " .

www.usmarshals.gov . Archived from the original on May 23, 2020 . Retrieved April 25, 2020 .

^ Bryant 2006a , p. 71.

^ Dallek 2003 , p. 580.

^ Reeves 1993 , pp. 521–523.

^ Schlesinger 2002 , p. 966.

^ Reeves 1993 , p. 524.

^ Cohen 2016 , p. 357.

^ Goduti 2012 , p. 206.

^ Garrow, David J.

"The FBI and Martin Luther King" .

The Atlantic .

Archived from the original on April 25, 2017 . Retrieved April 25, 2017 .

^ "Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI)" . Stanford University. May 2, 2017.

Archived from the original on April 15, 2020 . Retrieved December 3, 2019 .

^ Herst 2007 , p. 372.

^ Herst 2007 , pp. 372–374.

^ a b Reeves 1993 , pp. 580–584.

^ Reeves 1993 , pp. 599–600.

^ Reeves 1993 , pp. 628–631.

^ a b Brauer 2002 , p. 492.

^ Giglio 2006 , p. 142.

^ Kennedy, John F. (December 14, 1961).

"Executive Order 10980 – Establishing the President's Commission on the Status of Women" . Online by Gerhard Peters and John T. Woolley, The American Presidency Project.

Archived from the original on May 11, 2011 . Retrieved January 25, 2011 .

^ Reeves 1993 , p. 433.

^ "The Equal Pay Act Turns 40" . Archive.eeoc.gov. Archived from the original on June 26, 2012.

^ Schwartz, David (September 2010).

"Not Undertaking the Almost-Impossible Task: The 1961 Wire Act's Development, Initial Applications, and Ultimate Purpose" .

Gaming Law Review and Economics .

14 (7): 533– 540.

doi : 10.1089/glre.2010.14708 .

Archived from the original on October 1, 2023 . Retrieved November 19, 2023 .

^ Rothchild, John A. (2016).

Research Handbook on Electronic Commerce Law . Edward Elgar Publishing Ltd. p. 453.

ISBN 9781783479924 .

Archived from the original on November 18, 2023 . Retrieved November 19, 2023 .

^ "Legislative Summary: District of Columbia" .

John F. Kennedy Presidential Library .

Archived from the original on May 29, 2015 . Retrieved June 8, 2015 .

^ "Norton Letter to U.S. Attorney Says Death Penalty Trial That Begins Today Part of Troubling and Futile Pattern" . Office of Congresswoman Eleanor Holmes Norton . January 8, 2007. Archived from the original on March 3, 2012 . Retrieved February 23, 2012 .

^ Giglio 2006 , pp. 109–118.

^ Bilharz 2002 , p. 55.

^ Kennedy, John F. (August 11, 1961).

"320 – Letter to the President of the Seneca Nation of Indians Concerning the Kinzua Dam on the Allegheny River" . The American Presidency Project.

Archived from the original on January 12, 2012 . Retrieved February 25, 2012 .

^ Giglio 2006 , pp. 150–151.

^ Murray, Charles; Cox, Catherine Bly (1989).

Apollo: The Race to the Moon . Simon & Schuster. p. 60.

ISBN 0671611011 .

^ Reeves 1993 , p. 138.

^ Giglio 2006 , pp. 151–152.

^ Dallek 2003 , p. 502.

^ Dallek 2003 , p. 393.

^ a b Giglio 2006 , pp. 152–153.

^ "Space Program" .

John F. Kennedy Presidential Library & Museum .

Archived from the original on November 21, 2023 . Retrieved November 21, 2023 .

^ Kennedy, John F. (1961).

"Apollo Expeditions to the Moon: Chapter 2" .

history.nasa.gov .

Archived from the original on July 14, 2019 . Retrieved February 26, 2012 .

^ Young, Hugo; Silcock, Bryan; Dunn, Peter M. (1969).

Journey to Tranquility . London: Jonathon Cape. pp. 109–112 ^ Kennedy, John F. (September 12, 1962).

"President John F. Kennedy: The Space Effort" .

Rice University . Archived from the original on July 8, 2006.

^ Selverstone, Marc (2011).

"JFK and the Space Race" . White House Tapes–Presidential Recordings Program, Miller Center of Public Affairs, University of Virginia. Archived from the original on March 5, 2012 . Retrieved February 26, 2012 .

^ Giglio 2006 , pp. 153–155.

^ "Supreme Court Nominations (1789–Present)" . Washington, D.C.: United States Senate.

Archived from the original on October 7, 2019 . Retrieved February 16, 2022 .

^ "Kennedy Nominees Still Serving Country" (PDF) .

Federal Bar Association .

Archived (PDF) from the original on December 13, 2023 . Retrieved December 13, 2023 .

^ Wicker, Tom (November 23, 1963).

"Kennedy Is Killed By Sniper As He Rides In Car In Dallas; Johnson Sworn In On Plane" .

The New York Times .

^ "Why was U.S. Pres. John F. Kennedy in Texas on November 22, 1963?" .

Encyclopedia Britannica . Retrieved August 17, 2024 .

^ "Doctors attending to Kennedy reported" . November 1963.

Archived from the original on May 28, 2018 . Retrieved May 15, 2018 .

^ Dallek 2003 , p. 694.

^ a b "November 22, 1963: Death of the President" . John F. Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum.

Archived from the original on February 28, 2012 . Retrieved July 25, 2021 .

^ "Lee Harvey Oswald" .

Encyclopedia Britannica . July 29, 2024.

^ Lee Oswald claiming innocence (film) Archived March 26, 2014, at the Wayback Machine , YouTube ^ Warren Commission Hearings, vol. 20, p. 366, Kantor Exhibit No. 3 – Handwritten notes made by Seth Kantor concerning events surrounding the assassination Archived March 28, 2019, at the Wayback Machine ^ "Jack Ruby" .

Encyclopedia Britannica .

^ Brauer 2002 , p. 497.

^ Dallek 2003 , p. 698.

^ Gus Russo and Stephen Molton Archived November 19, 2018, at the Wayback Machine "Did Castro OK the Kennedy Assassination?," American Heritage , Winter 2009.

^ "Majority in U.S. Still Believe JFK Killed in a Conspiracy: Mafia, federal government top list of potential conspirators" . Gallup, Inc. November 15, 2013. Archived from the original on August 1, 2016.

^ "Report of the Select Committee on Assassinations of the U.S. House of Representatives" Archived April 3, 2020, at the Wayback Machine . U.S. House of Representatives. Retrieved November 11, 2013.

^ Council, National Research (1982).

Report of the Committee on Ballistic Acoustics .

doi : 10.17226/10264 .

ISBN 978-0-309-25372-7 .

Archived from the original on March 14, 2022 . Retrieved January 11, 2022 .

^ "PDF Justice Department of JFK-King Reinvestigation" (PDF) .

The Harold Weisberg Archive . p. 5.

Archived (PDF) from the original on November 9, 2021 . Retrieved January 17, 2022 .

^ Associated Press 1963 , pp. 36–37, 56–57, 68 ^ The New York Times 2003 , pp. 197–201 ^ a b White 1965 , p. 16 ^ NBC News 1966 , pp. 106–107, 110, 114–115, 119–123, 133–134 ^ a b White 1965 , p. 17 ^ Associated Press 1963 , p. 93 ^ NBC News 1966 , p. 126 ^ White 1965 , p. 18 ^ a b Reeves 1993 , p. 29.

^ "The Kennedys in Politics" .

PBS American Experience . Retrieved October 7, 2024 .

^ Cover story, Time magazine , January 20, 1961 ^ "Wedding of Jacqueline Bouvier and John F. Kennedy" . John F. Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum . Retrieved February 6, 2016 .

^ Specious allegations in 1997 by UK journalist Terry O'Hanlon Golden, Andrew (July 27, 1997).

"JFK The Bigamist. ... . The Truth At Last; Kennedy was already married when he got wed to Jackie. ... " .

Sunday Mirror .

Archived from the original on September 6, 2023 . Retrieved October 31, 2010 .

and by author Seymour Hersh Reingold, Joyce (March 26, 2008).

"JFK 'Secret Marriage' A Story With Legs" .

Palm Beach Daily News . Archived from the original on May 10, 2011 . Retrieved October 31, 2010 .

that Kennedy had married previously have been soundly disproven. Reeves states that Ben Bradlee , then at Newsweek , inspected FBI files on it, and confirmed the falsehood.

Reeves 1993 , p. 348; for further refutation, see O'Brien 2005 , p. 706.

^ Smith, Sally Bedell (2004).

Grace and Power: The Private World of the Kennedy White House . Random House.

ISBN 978-0-375-50449-5 .

^ O'Brien, p. 291.

^ Brinkley 2012 , p. 36.

^ Logevall, Fredrik (2020).

JFK: Coming of Age in the American Century, 1917-1956 . Random House. pp.

443– 444.

^ Shaw, John T. (2013).

JFK in the Senate . St. Martin's Press. p. 15.

ISBN 978-0-230-34183-8 .

^ O'Brien, p. 292.

^ "Kennedy Plane Found to Be Fully Functional" .

The Washington Post . July 31, 1999.

Archived from the original on May 25, 2010 . Retrieved January 2, 2010 .

^ Blair, William M. (August 10, 1963).

"Kennedys Mourn Death of Infant – Kennedys Mourning Baby Son; Funeral Today Will Be Private" .

The New York Times . p. 1.

Archived from the original on October 20, 2023 . Retrieved December 13, 2023 .

^ Rouse, Robert (March 15, 2006).

"Happy Anniversary to the first scheduled presidential press conference—93 years young!" . American Chronicle. Archived from the original on September 13, 2008.

^ "RTDNA's Kennedy connections" .

Radio Television Digital News Association , November 26, 2013. Archived from the original on August 19, 2017 . Retrieved May 27, 2014 .

^ "Life of Jacqueline B. Kennedy" .

John F. Kennedy Presidential Library & Museum . December 15, 2021.

Archived from the original on December 18, 2023 . Retrieved December 13, 2023 .

^ "The White House Restoration" .

John F. Kennedy Presidential Library & Museum . December 15, 2021.

Archived from the original on December 13, 2023 . Retrieved December 13, 2023 .

^ " "The First Family" (1962)" (PDF) .

Library of Congress .

Archived (PDF) from the original on January 17, 2024 . Retrieved December 20, 2023 .

^ Dallek 2003 , p. 32.

^ a b c Dallek, Robert (December 2002).

"The Medical Ordeals of JFK" .

The Atlantic . Archived from the original on August 1, 2016 . Retrieved March 29, 2015 .

^ Matthews 2011 , p. 15.

^ Dallek 2003 , p. 42.

^ "JFK (Part 1)" .

American Experience . Season 25. Episode 7. November 11, 2013.

PBS .

WGBH .

Archived from the original on September 25, 2019 . Retrieved September 24, 2019 .

^ Mandel, Lee R. (2009).

"Endocrine and Autoimmune Aspects of the Health History of John F. Kennedy" .

Annals of Internal Medicine .

151 (5): 350– 354.

doi : 10.7326/0003-4819-151-5-200909010-00011 .

PMID 19721023 .

^ Kempe 2011 , p. 213.

^ New York Sun September 20, 2005: "Dr. Feelgood" Archived April 10, 2019, at the Wayback Machine Retrieved July 11, 2011 ^ Reeves 1993 , pp. 42, 158–159.

^ Reeves 1993 , p. 244.

^ Online NewsHour with Senior Correspondent Ray Suarez and physician Jeffrey Kelman, "Pres. Kennedy's Health Secrets" , The NewsHour with Jim Lehrer transcript, November 18, 2002 ^ Ghaemi M.D., M.P.H., Nassir (September 14, 2011).

"What Jackie Kennedy Didn't Say—and Didn't Know" .

Psychology Today .

Archived from the original on March 31, 2024 . Retrieved August 22, 2016 .

^ Dallek 2003 , pp. 83–85.

^ Osborne 2006 , p. 195.

^ Kole, William J. (May 5, 2021).

"JFK love letters to Swedish mistress to be sold at auction" .

The Atlanta Journal-Constitution .

Archived from the original on May 7, 2021 . Retrieved May 8, 2021 .

^ Reeves 1993 , pp. 315–316.

^ Reeves 1993 , p. 289.

^ Dallek 2003 , p. 475.

^ Garrow, David J. (May 28, 2003).

"Substance Over Sex In Kennedy Biography" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on January 3, 2013 . Retrieved January 20, 2013 .

^ Dallek 2003 , pp. 475, 476.

^ Kimble, Lindsay (March 18, 2024).

"Meet JFK's Alleged Mistresses – and How Some Met Mysterious Ends" .

People . Retrieved August 26, 2024 .

^ Leaming 2006 , pp. 379–380.

^ Dallek 2003 , p. 581.

^ Dallek 2003 , p. 376.

^ Booknotes interview with historian Michael Beschloss on The Crisis Years: Kennedy and Khrushchev Archived November 2, 2021, at the Wayback Machine (C-SPAN: June 21, 1991) ^ Taylor Branch, " Kennedys and Hoover: How Their Battles Affected King Archived November 2, 2021, at the Wayback Machine " Los Angeles Times (December 18, 1988) ^ Thomas 2000 , pp. 255–256.

^ Larry Sabato, " John F. Kennedy's Final Days Reveal A Man Who Craved Excitement Archived November 2, 2021, at the Wayback Machine " Forbes (October 16, 2013) ^ Barnes 2007 , p. 116.

^ Reeves 1993 , p. 291.

^ Dallek 2003 , p. 478.

^ a b "Shaping Up America: JFK, Sports and the Call to Physical Fitness" .

John F. Kennedy Presidential Library & Museum .

Archived from the original on February 13, 2024 . Retrieved March 19, 2024 .

^ Prince, DeAntae (January 20, 2017).

"Satch Sanders Q&A: The NBA And the White House" .

Sports Illustrated .

Archived from the original on March 19, 2024 . Retrieved March 19, 2024 .

^ "Summertime Sailing" .

John F. Kennedy Presidential Library & Museum . February 28, 2022.

Archived from the original on March 19, 2024 . Retrieved March 19, 2024 .

^ Buccellato, Robert (2021).

Images of America: Presidential Vacations in Florida . Arcadia Publishing. p. 98.

^ "Life of John F. Kennedy" . John F. Kennedy Presidential Library & Museum. April 26, 2023.

Archived from the original on March 21, 2024 . Retrieved March 21, 2024 .

^ "Saint Aidan's Church" . National Park Service.

Archived from the original on March 21, 2024 . Retrieved March 20, 2024 .

^ "Emmanuel Remembers John F. Kennedy" . Emmanuel College Boston . Retrieved May 5, 2025 .

^ Giglio 2006 , pp. 308–309.

^ Saad, Lydia (December 6, 2010).

Kennedy Still Highest-Rated Modern President, Nixon Lowest .

Gallup Organization . Retrieved December 4, 2024.

^ Rottinghaus, Brandon; Vaughn, Justin (February 16, 2015).

"New ranking of U.S. presidents puts Lincoln at No. 1, Obama at 18; Kennedy judged most overrated" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on December 19, 2019 . Retrieved April 28, 2017 .

^ "Presidential Historians Survey 2017" . C-SPAN. 2017.

Archived from the original on April 27, 2017 . Retrieved April 28, 2017 .

^ Jones, Jeffrey M. (July 17, 2023).

"Retrospective Approval of JFK Rises to 90%; Trump at 46%" . Gallup, Inc.

Archived from the original on January 7, 2024 . Retrieved January 7, 2024 .

^ "John F. Kennedy: Impact and Legacy" . Miller Center of Public Affairs, University of Virginia. October 4, 2016.

Archived from the original on March 18, 2017 . Retrieved April 28, 2017 .

^ Brinkley, Alan.

"The Legacy of John F. Kennedy" .

The Atlantic .

Archived from the original on August 29, 2016 . Retrieved September 1, 2016 .

^ Gillman, Todd J. (November 16, 2013).

"JFK's legacy: Kennedy fell short of greatness, yet inspired a generation" . Dallas Morning News . Retrieved April 28, 2017 .

[ permanent dead link ] ^ The Gallup Poll 1999 . Wilmington, DE: Scholarly Resources Inc. 1999. pp.

248–249 .

^ "Greatest of the Century" . Gallup/CNN/USA Today Poll. December 20–21, 1999.

Archived from the original on January 5, 2007 . Retrieved January 5, 2007 .

^ "Recipients" .

The Laetare Medal . University of Notre Dame.

Archived from the original on February 4, 2021 . Retrieved July 31, 2020 .

^ Wetterau, Bruce (1996).

The Presidential Medal of Freedom : winners and their achievements . Washington, D.C.: Congressional Quarterly Inc. p.

58 .

ISBN 1-56802-128-3 . Retrieved September 9, 2019 .

^ Linda Czuba Brigance, "For One Brief Shining Moment: Choosing to Remember Camelot." Studies in Popular Culture 25.3 (2003): 1–12 online Archived September 6, 2023, at the Wayback Machine ^ Richard Dean Burns and Joseph M. Siracusa, Historical Dictionary of the Kennedy-Johnson Era (Rowman & Littlefield, 2015) pp. 75–76.

^ The Personal Papers of Theodore H. White (1915–1986): Series 11. Camelot Documents , John F. Kennedy Presidential Library & Museum quotation: The 1963 LIFE article represented the first use of the term "Camelot" in print and is attributed with having played a major role in establishing and fixing this image of the Kennedy Administration and period in the popular mind.

^ An Epilogue , in LIFE , December 6, 1963, pp. 158–159 ^ Richard Dean Burns and Joseph M. Siracusa, Historical Dictionary of the Kennedy–Johnson Era (Rowman & Littlefield, 2015) pp. 75–76.

^ Jon Goodman, et al., The Kennedy Mystique: Creating Camelot (National Geographic Books, 2006).

Works cited Ballard, Robert D.

(2002).

Collision With History: The Search for John F. Kennedy's PT 109 . Washington, D.C.: National Geographic.

ISBN 978-0-7922-6876-5 .

Barnes, John (2007).

John F. Kennedy on Leadership . New York: AMACOM.

ISBN 978-0-8144-7455-6 .

Bilharz, Joy Ann (2002) [1998].

The Allegany Senecas and Kinzua Dam: Forced Relocation Through Two Generations . Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press.

ISBN 978-0-8032-1282-4 .

Blight, James G.; Lang, Janet M. (2005).

The Fog of War: Eleven Lessons from the Life of Robert S. McNamara . Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield.

ISBN 978-0-7425-4221-1 .

Brauer, Carl M. (2002). "John F. Kennedy". In Graff, Henry (ed.).

The Presidents: A Reference History (2nd ed.). Macmillan Library Reference USA. pp.

481– 498.

ISBN 0-684-80551-0 .

Brinkley, Alan (2012).

John F. Kennedy . New York: Times Books.

ISBN 978-0-8050-8349-1 .

Bryant, Nick (Autumn 2006a).

"Black Man Who Was Crazy Enough to Apply to Ole Miss" .

The Journal of Blacks in Higher Education (53): 31, 60– 71.

JSTOR 25073538 .

Archived from the original on February 10, 2023 . Retrieved March 31, 2024 .

Bryant, Nick (2006b).

The Bystander: John F. Kennedy and the Struggle for Black Equality . Basic Books.

Cohen, Andrew (2016) [2014].

Two Days in June: John F. Kennedy and the 48 Hours That Changed History (illustrated, reprint ed.). Toronto: McClelland & Stewart.

ISBN 978-0-7710-2389-7 .

Archived from the original on March 31, 2024 . Retrieved July 24, 2023 .

Dallek, Robert (2003).

An Unfinished Life: John F. Kennedy, 1917–1963 . Boston: Little, Brown and Co.

ISBN 978-0-316-17238-7 .

Daum, Andreas (2008).

Kennedy in Berlin . New York: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0-521-85824-3 .

Donovan, Robert J.

(2001) [1961].

PT-109: John F. Kennedy in WW II (40th Anniversary ed.). New York: McGraw Hill.

ISBN 978-0-07-137643-3 .

Doyle, William (2015).

PT-109: An American Epic of War, Survival, and the Destiny of John F. Kennedy . New York: Harper-Collins.

ISBN 978-0-06-234658-2 .

Dudley, Robert L.; Shiraev, Eric (2008).

Counting Every Vote: The Most Contentious Elections in American History . Dulles, VA: Potomac Books.

ISBN 978-1-59797-224-6 .

Dunnigan, James ; Nofi, Albert (1999).

Dirty Little Secrets of the Vietnam War . New York: St. Martin's.

ISBN 978-0-312-19857-2 .

Thomas, Evan (2000).

Robert Kennedy: His Life . New York, NY: Simon and Schuster.

ISBN 978-0-684-83480-1 .

Frum, David (2000).

How We Got Here: The '70s . New York: Basic Books.

ISBN 978-0-465-04196-1 .

Gibson, Bryan R. (2015).

Sold Out? US Foreign Policy, Iraq, the Kurds, and the Cold War . New York: Palgrave Macmillan.

ISBN 978-1-137-48711-7 .

Giglio, James N. (2006).

The Presidency of John F. Kennedy (2nd ed.). University Press of Kansas.

Gleijeses, Piero (February 1995). "Ships in the Night: The CIA, the White House and the Bay of Pigs".

Journal of Latin American Studies .

27 (1): 1– 42.

doi : 10.1017/S0022216X00010154 .

ISSN 0022-216X .

S2CID 146390097 .

Goduti, Philip A. Jr. (2012).

Robert F. Kennedy and the Shaping of Civil Rights, 1960–1964 . Jefferson, NC: McFarland.

ISBN 978-0-7864-4943-9 .

Herring, George C. (2008).

From Colony to Superpower; U.S. Foreign Relations Since 1776 . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-507822-0 .

Herst, Burton (2007).

Bobby and J. Edgar: The Historic Face-Off Between the Kennedys and J. Edgar Hoover That Transformed America . New York: Basic Books.

ISBN 978-0-7867-1982-2 .

Kempe, Frederick (2011).

Berlin 1961 . New York: G.P. Putnam's Sons.

ISBN 978-0-399-15729-5 .

Kenney, Charles (2000).

John F. Kennedy: The Presidential Portfolio . New York: PublicAffairs.

ISBN 978-1-891620-36-2 .

Leaming, Barbara (2006).

Jack Kennedy: The Education of a Statesman . New York: W. W. Norton.

ISBN 978-0-393051-61-2 .

Matthews, Chris (2011).

Jack Kennedy: Elusive Hero . New York: Simon & Schuster.

ISBN 978-1-4516-3508-9 .

O'Brien, Michael (2005).

John F. Kennedy: A Biography . New York: Thomas Dunne.

ISBN 978-0-312-28129-8 .

Osborne, Robert (2006).

Leading Ladies: The 50 Most Unforgettable Actresses of the Studio Era . San Francisco: Chronicle Books.

ISBN 978-0-8118-5248-7 .

Parmet, Herbert S. (1983).

JFK: The Presidency of John F. Kennedy . New York: Dial Press.

ISBN 978-0-140-07054-5 .

Patterson, James (1996).

Grand Expectations: The United States 19451974 . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0195117974 .

Reeves, Richard (1993).

President Kennedy: Profile of Power . New York: Simon & Schuster.

ISBN 978-0-671-64879-4 .

Schlesinger, Arthur M. Jr.

(2002) [1965].

A Thousand Days: John F. Kennedy in the White House . Boston: Houghton Mifflin.

ISBN 978-0-618-21927-8 .

Sorensen, Theodore (1966) [1965].

Kennedy (paperback). New York: Bantam.

OCLC 2746832 .

Walton, Hanes Jr.; Smith, Robert C. (2000).

American Politics and the African American Quest for Universal Freedom . New York: Addison, Wesley, Longman.

ISBN 978-0-321-07038-8 .

The Torch is Passed: The Associated Press Story of the Death of a President . New York: Associated Press. 1963.

ISBN 978-0861015689 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) NBC News (1966).

There Was a President . New York: Random House.

White, Theodore Harold (1965).

The Making of the President, 1964 . New York: Atheneum.

The New York Times (2003).

Semple, Robert B. Jr.

(ed.).

Four days in November . New York: St. Martin's Press.

Further reading Main article: Bibliography of John F. Kennedy External links John F. Kennedy at Wikipedia's sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource John F. Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum John Fitzgerald Kennedy National Historic Site Appearances on C-SPAN John F. Kennedy: A Resource Guide – the Library of Congress Extensive Essays on JFK with shorter essays on his cabinet and First Lady – Miller Center of Public Affairs Kennedy Administration from Office of the Historian , United States Government Printing Office Works by or about John F. Kennedy at the Internet Archive Works by John F. Kennedy at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) Works by John F. Kennedy at Project Gutenberg Kennedy Convocation Collection at the Amherst College Archives & Special Collections, documenting one of his last visits before his assassination United States Congress.

"John F. Kennedy (id: K000107)" .

Biographical Directory of the United States Congress .

v t e John F. Kennedy 35th President of the United States (1961–1963) U.S. Senator from Massachusetts (1953–1960) U.S. Representative for MA–11 (1947–1953) Presidency ( timeline ) Transition Inauguration Cabinet Judicial appointments Supreme Court Executive Orders Presidential Proclamations Presidential pardons Presidential limousine Presidential yacht Resolute desk Situation Room Foreign policy Alliance for Progress Arms Control and Disarmament Agency Partial Nuclear Test Ban Treaty Flexible response Kennedy Doctrine Peace Corps Trade Expansion Act Migration and Refugee Assistance Act USAID Vietnam War Cuba: Bay of Pigs Invasion Cuban Project Cuban Missile Crisis ExComm Soviet Union: Berlin Crisis Moscow–Washington hotline Vienna summit New Frontier Communications Satellite Act Community Mental Health Act Equal Pay Act Executive Order 11110 Federal affirmative action Federal housing segregation ban Fifty-mile hikes Food for Peace Pilot Food Stamp Program Presidential Medal of Freedom Space policy Status of Women (Presidential Commission) University of Alabama integration Voter Education Project All-Channel Receiver Act Oil Pollution Act of 1961 Revenue Act of 1962 Consolidated Farm and Rural Development Act of 1961 Wetlands Loan Act Presidential speeches Inaugural address American University speech " We choose to go to the Moon " Report to the American People on Civil Rights " Ich bin ein Berliner " " A rising tide lifts all boats " Remarks at Amherst College on the Arts State of the Union Address 1961 1962 1963 Elections U.S. House of Representatives elections: 1946 1948 1950 U.S. Senate elections in Massachusetts: 1952 1958 1960 presidential primaries 1960 presidential campaign Democratic National Conventions: 1956 1960 U.S. presidential election 1960 debates Personal life Birthplace and childhood home Kennedy Compound Hickory Hill La Querida Wexford Navy service: PT-109 Biuku Gasa and Eroni Kumana Arthur Evans PT-59 Castle Hot Springs Hammersmith Farm Coretta Scott King phone call " Happy Birthday, Mr. President " John F. Kennedy document hoax Books Why England Slept (1940) Profiles in Courage (1956) A Nation of Immigrants (1958) Death Assassination timeline media coverage reactions in popular culture State funeral Riderless horse attending dignitaries Gravesite and Eternal Flame Legacy Bibliography John F. Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum Profile in Courage Award Twenty-fourth Amendment Civil Rights Act of 1964 Apollo 11 Moon landing Equal Employment Opportunity Commission Kennedy Space Center Kennedy Round U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development VISTA Cultural depictions films Kennedy half dollar U.S. postage stamps U.S. five cent stamp Lincoln–Kennedy coincidences Operation Sail Memorials, namesakes Harvard Kennedy School Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts John F. Kennedy Federal Building (Boston) John F. Kennedy International Airport Boston statue Brooklyn bust Dallas memorial Hyannis memorial London bust Nashua bust Portland memorial Runnymede memorial John F. Kennedy Arboretum John F. Kennedy Memorial Bridge John F. Kennedy Special Warfare Center and School John F. Kennedy University (defunct) John F. Kennedy Stadium Kennedy Expressway Mount Kennedy MV John F. Kennedy USS John F. Kennedy (CV-67) USS John F. Kennedy (CVN-79) Yad Kennedy Love Park Family Jacqueline Bouvier (wife) Caroline Kennedy (daughter) John F. Kennedy Jr.

(son) Patrick Bouvier Kennedy (son) Rose Schlossberg (granddaughter) Tatiana Schlossberg (granddaughter) Jack Schlossberg (grandson) Joseph P. Kennedy Sr.

(father) Rose Fitzgerald (mother) Joseph P. Kennedy Jr.

(brother) Rosemary Kennedy (sister) Kathleen Cavendish, Marchioness of Hartington (sister) Eunice Kennedy Shriver (sister) Patricia Kennedy Lawford (sister) Robert F. Kennedy (brother) Jean Kennedy Smith (sister) Ted Kennedy (brother) P. J. Kennedy (grandfather) John F. Fitzgerald (grandfather) Pushinka (dog) Billie and Debbie (hamsters) Sardar (horse) ← Dwight D. Eisenhower Lyndon B. Johnson → Category Offices and distinctions U.S. House of Representatives Preceded by James Michael Curley Member of the U.S. House of Representatives from Massachusetts's 11th congressional district 1947–1953 Succeeded by Tip O'Neill Party political offices Preceded by David I. Walsh Democratic nominee for U.S. Senator from Massachusetts ( Class 1 ) 1952 , 1958 Succeeded by Ted Kennedy Preceded by Adlai Stevenson II Democratic nominee for President of the United States 1960 Succeeded by Lyndon B. Johnson U.S. Senate Preceded by Henry Cabot Lodge Jr.

United States Senator (Class 1) from Massachusetts 1953–1960 Served alongside: Leverett Saltonstall Succeeded by Benjamin A. Smith II Political offices Preceded by Dwight D. Eisenhower President of the United States 1961–1963 Succeeded by Lyndon B. Johnson Honorary titles Preceded by Unknown Soldiers of World War II and the Korean War Persons who have lain in state or honor in the United States Capitol rotunda 1963 Succeeded by Douglas MacArthur Links to related articles v t e Presidents of the United States Presidents and presidencies George Washington ( 1789–1797 ) John Adams ( 1797–1801 ) Thomas Jefferson ( 1801–1809 ) James Madison ( 1809–1817 ) James Monroe ( 1817–1825 ) John Quincy Adams ( 1825–1829 ) Andrew Jackson ( 1829–1837 ) Martin Van Buren ( 1837–1841 ) William Henry Harrison ( 1841 ) John Tyler ( 1841–1845 ) James K. Polk ( 1845–1849 ) Zachary Taylor ( 1849–1850 ) Millard Fillmore ( 1850–1853 ) Franklin Pierce ( 1853–1857 ) James Buchanan ( 1857–1861 ) Abraham Lincoln ( 1861–1865 ) Andrew Johnson ( 1865–1869 ) Ulysses S. Grant ( 1869–1877 ) Rutherford B. Hayes ( 1877–1881 ) James A. Garfield ( 1881 ) Chester A. Arthur ( 1881–1885 ) Grover Cleveland ( 1885–1889 ) Benjamin Harrison ( 1889–1893 ) Grover Cleveland ( 1893–1897 ) William McKinley ( 1897–1901 ) Theodore Roosevelt ( 1901–1909 ) William Howard Taft ( 1909–1913 ) Woodrow Wilson ( 1913–1921 ) Warren G. Harding ( 1921–1923 ) Calvin Coolidge ( 1923–1929 ) Herbert Hoover ( 1929–1933 ) Franklin D. Roosevelt ( 1933–1945 ) Harry S. Truman ( 1945–1953 ) Dwight D. Eisenhower ( 1953–1961 ) John F. Kennedy ( 1961–1963 ) Lyndon B. Johnson ( 1963–1969 ) Richard Nixon ( 1969–1974 ) Gerald Ford ( 1974–1977 ) Jimmy Carter ( 1977–1981 ) Ronald Reagan ( 1981–1989 ) George H. W. Bush ( 1989–1993 ) Bill Clinton ( 1993–2001 ) George W. Bush ( 2001–2009 ) Barack Obama ( 2009–2017 ) Donald Trump ( 2017–2021 ) Joe Biden ( 2021–2025 ) Donald Trump ( 2025–present ) Presidency timelines Washington J. Adams McKinley T. Roosevelt Taft Wilson Harding Coolidge Hoover F. D. Roosevelt Truman Eisenhower Kennedy L. B. Johnson Nixon Ford Carter Reagan G. H. W. Bush Clinton G. W. Bush Obama Trump Biden Category List v t e Democratic Party History Second Party System Third Party System Fourth Party System Fifth Party System Sixth Party System National conventions , presidential tickets , and presidential primaries 1828 (None) : Jackson / Calhoun 1832 (Baltimore) : Jackson / Van Buren 1835 (Baltimore) : Van Buren / R. Johnson 1840 (Baltimore) : Van Buren / None 1844 (Baltimore) : Polk / Dallas 1848 (Baltimore) : Cass / Butler 1852 (Baltimore) : Pierce / King 1856 (Cincinnati) : Buchanan / Breckinridge 1860 (Charleston/Baltimore) : Douglas / H. Johnson ( Breckinridge / Lane , SD ) 1864 (Chicago) : McClellan / Pendleton 1868 (New York) : Seymour / Blair 1872 (Baltimore) : Greeley / Brown 1876 (St. Louis) : Tilden / Hendricks 1880 (Cincinnati) : Hancock / English 1884 (Chicago) : Cleveland / Hendricks 1888 (St. Louis) : Cleveland / Thurman 1892 (Chicago) : Cleveland / Stevenson I 1896 (Chicago) : W. Bryan / Sewall 1900 (Kansas City) : W. Bryan / Stevenson I 1904 (St. Louis) : Parker / H. Davis 1908 (Denver) : W. Bryan / Kern 1912 (Baltimore) : Wilson / Marshall primaries 1916 (St. Louis) : Wilson / Marshall primaries 1920 (San Francisco) : Cox / Roosevelt primaries 1924 (New York) : J. Davis / C. Bryan primaries 1928 (Houston) : Smith / Robinson primaries 1932 (Chicago) : Roosevelt / Garner primaries 1936 (Philadelphia) : Roosevelt / Garner primaries 1940 (Chicago) : Roosevelt / Wallace primaries 1944 (Chicago) : Roosevelt / Truman primaries 1948 (Philadelphia) : Truman / Barkley primaries 1952 (Chicago) : Stevenson II / Sparkman primaries 1956 (Chicago) : Stevenson II / Kefauver primaries 1960 (Los Angeles) : Kennedy / L. Johnson primaries 1964 (Atlantic City) : L. Johnson / Humphrey primaries 1968 (Chicago) : Humphrey / Muskie primaries 1972 (Miami Beach) : McGovern /( Eagleton , Shriver ) primaries 1976 (New York) : Carter / Mondale primaries 1980 (New York) : Carter / Mondale primaries 1984 (San Francisco) : Mondale / Ferraro primaries 1988 (Atlanta) : Dukakis / Bentsen primaries 1992 (New York) : B. Clinton / Gore primaries 1996 (Chicago) : B. Clinton / Gore primaries 2000 (Los Angeles) : Gore / Lieberman primaries 2004 (Boston) : Kerry / Edwards primaries 2008 (Denver) : Obama / Biden primaries 2012 (Charlotte) : Obama / Biden primaries 2016 (Philadelphia) : H. Clinton / Kaine primaries 2020 (Milwaukee/other locations) : Biden / Harris primaries 2024 (Chicago) : Harris / Walz primaries Presidential administrations Jackson (1829–1837) Van Buren (1837–1841) Polk (1845–1849) Pierce (1853–1857) Buchanan (1857–1861) A. Johnson (1868–1869) Cleveland ( 1885–1889 ; 1893–1897 ) Wilson (1913–1921) Roosevelt ( 1933–1941 ; 1941–1945 ) Truman (1945–1953) Kennedy (1961–1963) L. B. Johnson (1963–1969) Carter (1977–1981) Clinton (1993–2001) Obama (2009–2017) Biden (2021–2025) U.S. House leaders , Speakers , and Caucus chairs A. Stevenson (1827–1834) Bell (1834–1835) Polk (1835–1839) J. W. Jones (1843–1845) Davis (1845–1847) Cobb (1849–1851) Boyd (1851–1855) G. W. Jones (1855–1857) Orr (1857–1859) Houston (1859–1861) Niblack / Randall (1869–1871) Niblack (1873–1875) Kerr (1875–1876) Randall (1876–1881) Carlisle (1883–1889) Holman (1889–1891) Crisp (1891–1895) D. B. Culberson (1895–1897) Richardson (1897–1903) Williams (1903–1909) Clark (1909–1921) Kitchin (1921–1923) Garrett (1923–1929) Garner (1929–1933) Rainey (1933–1934) Byrns (1935–1936) Bankhead (1936–1940) Rayburn (1940–1961) McCormack (1962–1971) Albert (1971–1977) O'Neill (1977–1987) Wright (1987–1989) Foley (1989–1995) Gephardt (1995–2003) Pelosi (2003–2023) Jeffries (2023–present) U.S. Senate leaders and Caucus chairs J. W. Stevenson (1873–1877) Wallace (1877–1881) Pendleton (1881–1885) Beck (1885–1890) Gorman (1890–1898) Turpie (1898–1899) J. K. Jones (1899–1903) Gorman (1903–1906) Blackburn (1906–1907) C. A. Culberson (1907–1909) Money (1909–1911) Martin (1911–1913) Kern (1913–1917) Martin (1917–1919) Hitchcock (1919–1920) Underwood (1920–1923) Robinson (1923–1937) Barkley (1937–1949) Lucas (1949–1951) McFarland (1951–1953) Johnson (1953–1961) Mansfield (1961–1977) Byrd (1977–1989) Mitchell (1989–1995) Daschle (1995–2005) Reid (2005–2017) Schumer (2017–present) Chairs of the DNC Hallett McLane Smalley Belmont Schell Hewitt Barnum Brice Harrity Jones Taggart Mack McCombs McCormick Cummings G. White Hull Shaver Raskob Farley Flynn Walker Hannegan McGrath Boyle McKinney Mitchell Butler Jackson Bailey O'Brien Harris O'Brien Westwood Strauss Curtis J. White Manatt Kirk Brown Wilhelm DeLee Dodd / Fowler Romer / Grossman Rendell / Andrew McAuliffe Dean Kaine Wasserman Schultz Perez Harrison Martin State and territorial parties Alabama Alaska Arizona Arkansas California Colorado Connecticut Delaware Florida Georgia Hawaii Idaho Illinois Indiana Iowa Kansas Kentucky Louisiana Maine Maryland Massachusetts Michigan Minnesota Democratic–Farmer–Labor Party Mississippi Missouri Montana Nebraska Nevada New Hampshire New Jersey New Mexico New York North Carolina North Dakota Democratic–Nonpartisan League Party Ohio Oklahoma Oregon Pennsylvania Rhode Island South Carolina South Dakota Tennessee Texas Utah Vermont Virginia Washington West Virginia Wisconsin Wyoming American Samoa District of Columbia Democratic State Committee Guam Northern Mariana Islands Puerto Rico Virgin Islands Democrats Abroad Affiliated groups Congress Senate Caucus Policy Committee Steering and Outreach Committee House Caucus Factions Blue Dog Coalition Congressional Progressive Caucus Squad Justice Democrats New Democrat Coalition Problem Solvers Caucus Campaign committees Democratic Attorneys General Association Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee Democratic Governors Association Democratic Legislative Campaign Committee Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee National Conference of Democratic Mayors Constituency groups College Democrats of America Democrats Abroad National Federation of Democratic Women Stonewall Democrats Stonewall Young Democrats Young Democrats of America High School Democrats of America Strategic groups National Democratic Redistricting Committee National Democratic Training Committee Related Primaries Presidential candidates Debates Superdelegate Chairmanship elections 2005 2009 2013 2017 2021 2025 House caucus leadership elections 2006 2018 Weekly Democratic Address v t e United States senators from Massachusetts Class 1 Dalton Cabot Goodhue Mason Adams Lloyd Gore Ashmun Mellen Mills Webster Choate Webster Winthrop Rantoul Sumner Washburn Dawes Lodge Sr.

Butler Walsh Lodge Jr.

J. Kennedy Smith E. Kennedy Kirk Brown Warren Class 2 Strong Sedgwick Dexter Foster Pickering Varnum Otis Lloyd Silsbee Davis Bates Davis Everett Rockwell Wilson Boutwell Hoar Crane J. Weeks Walsh Gillett Coolidge Lodge Jr.

S. Weeks Saltonstall Brooke Tsongas Kerry Cowan Markey v t e Members of the U.S. House of Representatives from Massachusetts 1st district F. Ames Dexter Goodhue Holten Sedgwick Skinner Sedgwick J. Bacon Eustis Quincy Ward Jr.

Mason Gorham Webster Gorham N. Appleton Gorham A. Lawrence Fletcher A. Lawrence Winthrop N. Appleton Winthrop S. Eliot W. Appleton Scudder T. D. Eliot Hall T. D. Eliot Buffington Crapo R. Davis Randall Wright G. Lawrence Treadway Heselton Conte Olver Neal 2nd district Goodhue Foster W. Lyman Sedgwick Ward Sr.

W. Lyman Shepard J. Crowninshield Story Pickman W. Reed Pickering Silsbee Barstow B. Crowninshield Choate Phillips Saltonstall D. King Rantoul Fay Crocker Buffington O. Ames Harris Long E. Morse Gillett Churchill Bowles Kaynor Granfield Clason Furcolo Boland Neal McGovern 3rd district Gerry Bourne Coffin S. Lyman Mattoon Cutler Nelson Livermore White Pickering Nelson Varnum Nelson Osgood Cushing A. Abbott Duncan Edmands Damrell C. Adams Thomas A. Rice Twichell Whiting I Pierce Field B. Dean Field Ranney L. Morse J. Andrew Walker J. R. Thayer R. Hoar C. Washburn J. A. Thayer Wilder Paige F. Foss Casey Philbin Drinan Donohue Early Blute McGovern N. Tsongas Trahan 4th district Sedgwick Dearborn G. Thatcher Wadsworth Foster L. Lincoln Sr.

Hastings Varnum W. Richardson Dana Stearns Fuller E. Everett Sa. Hoar Parmenter Thompson Palfrey Thompson Sabine Walley Comins A. Rice Hooper Frost J. Abbott L. Morse Collins O'Neil Apsley Weymouth Tirrell Mitchell Wilder Winslow Stobbs P. Holmes Donohue Drinan Frank Kennedy III Auchincloss 5th district Partridge Bourne Freeman L. Williams T. Dwight Ely Mills Lathrop Sibley J. Davis L. Lincoln Jr.

Hudson C. Allen W. Appleton Burlingame W. Appleton Hooper Alley Butler Gooch Banks Bowman L. Morse Hayden Banks Sh. Hoar Stevens Knox B. Ames J. Rogers E. Rogers B. Morse Cronin P. Tsongas Shannon Atkins Meehan N. Tsongas Markey Clark 6th district G. Thatcher Leonard J. Reed Sr.

J. Smith Taggart S. Allen Locke Kendall Grennell Alvord Baker Ashmun G. Davis Upham T. Davis Alley Gooch Banks Butler Thompson Loring Stone Lovering Lodge Cogswell Moody Gardner Lufkin A.P. Andrew G. Bates W. Bates Harrington Mavroules Torkildsen Tierney Moulton 7th district Leonard Ward Sr.

Leonard Bullock Bishop Mitchell Barker Baylies Turner Baylies Hulbert Shaw H. Dwight S. Allen Grennell Briggs J. Rockwell Goodrich Banks Gooch Boutwell Brooks Esty E. Hoar Tarbox Butler W. Russell Stone Cogswell W. Everett Barrett Roberts Phelan Maloney W. Connery L. Connery Lane Macdonald Markey Capuano Pressley 8th district Grout G. Thatcher F. Ames Otis Eustis L. Williams Green Gardner Green J. Reed Jr.

Baylies Sampson Hobart Lathrop Bates Calhoun J. Adams Mann Wentworth Knapp Train Baldwin G. Hoar J. M. S. Williams Warren Claflin Candler W Russell C. H. Allen Greenhalge Stevens McCall Deitrick Dallinger H. Thayer Dallinger Healey Goodwin Macdonald O'Neill Kennedy II Capuano Lynch 9th district Varnum Bishop J. Dean Wheaton J. Reed Jr.

Folger J. Reed Jr.

H. Dwight Briggs Jackson Hastings H. Williams Hale Fowler Little De Witt E. Thayer Bailey A. Walker W. Washburn Crocker G. Hoar W. Rice T. Lyman Ely Burnett Candler G. Williams O'Neil Fitzgerald Conry Keliher Murray Roberts Fuller Underhill Luce R. Russell Luce T. H. Eliot Gifford Nicholson Keith McCormack Hicks Moakley Lynch Keating 10th district Goodhue Sewall Read Hastings Upham J. Allen Brigham Wheaton Morton F Baylies Bailey H. A. S. Dearborn W. Baylies Borden H. Williams Borden Burnell Grinnell Scudder Dickinson Chaffee Delano Dawes Crocker Stevens Seelye Norcross W. Rice J. E. Russell J. Walker McEttrick Atwood Barrows Naphen McNary O'Connell Curley Murray Tague Fitzgerald Tague Douglass Tinkham Herter Curtis Martin Heckler Studds Delahunt Keating 11th district Bradbury Bartlett Cutler Stedman A. Bigelow Brigham B. Adams J. Russell Hobart J. Richardson J. Adams J. Reed Jr.

Burnell Goodrich Trafton Dawes Chapin Robinson Whiting II Wallace Coolidge Draper Sprague Powers Sullivan Peters Tinkham Douglass Higgins Flaherty Curley Kennedy O'Neill Burke Donnelly 12th district H. Dearborn I. Parker Lee S. Thatcher Skinner Larned Bidwell Bacon Dewey Hulbert Strong Kendall L. Bigelow Baylies Hodges J. Adams Robinson F. Rockwell Crosby E. Morse Lovering Powers Weeks Curley Gallivan McCormack Keith Studds 13th district Wadsworth Seaver Ruggles Dowse Eustis J. Reed Jr.

Randall Simpkins Greene Weeks Mitchell Carter Luce Wigglesworth Burke 14th district G. Thatcher Cutts C. King J. Holmes Lovering E. Foss Harris Gilmore Olney Frothingham Wigglesworth Martin 15th district Wadsworth Ilsley Whitman Widgery Bradbury Whitman Greene Leach Martin Gifford 16th district S. Thatcher Cook Tallman S. Davis Brown Orr Hill Thacher Walsh Gifford 17th district Bruce Chandler Gannett F. Carr Wood J. Carr Wilson Kinsley 18th district Wilson T. Rice J. Parker 19th district J. Parker Conner Gage Cushman 20th district Hubbard Parris E. Lincoln At-large Cobb v t e Massachusetts 's delegation(s) to the 80th–86th United States Congress (ordered by seniority) 80th Senate : ▌ L. Saltonstall (R) ▌ H. C. Lodge Jr.

(R) House : ▌ C. Gifford (R) ▌ J. Martin (R) ▌ E. N. Rogers (R) ▌ J. McCormack (D) ▌ R. Wigglesworth (R) ▌ C. Clason (R) ▌ T. Lane (D) ▌ G. Bates (R) ▌ A. Goodwin (R) ▌ C. Herter (R) ▌ P. Philbin (D) ▌ J. Heselton (R) ▌ H. Donohue (D) ▌ J. F. Kennedy (D) ▌ D. Nicholson (R) 81st Senate : ▌ L. Saltonstall (R) ▌ H. C. Lodge Jr.

(R) House : ▌ J. Martin (R) ▌ E. N. Rogers (R) ▌ J. McCormack (D) ▌ R. Wigglesworth (R) ▌ T. Lane (D) ▌ G. Bates (R) ▌ A. Goodwin (R) ▌ C. Herter (R) ▌ P. Philbin (D) ▌ J. Heselton (R) ▌ H. Donohue (D) ▌ J. F. Kennedy (D) ▌ D. Nicholson (R) ▌ F. Furcolo (D) ▌ W. Bates (R) 82nd Senate : ▌ L. Saltonstall (R) ▌ H. C. Lodge Jr.

(R) House : ▌ J. Martin (R) ▌ E. N. Rogers (R) ▌ J. McCormack (D) ▌ R. Wigglesworth (R) ▌ T. Lane (D) ▌ A. Goodwin (R) ▌ C. Herter (R) ▌ P. Philbin (D) ▌ J. Heselton (R) ▌ H. Donohue (D) ▌ J. F. Kennedy (D) ▌ D. Nicholson (R) ▌ F. Furcolo (D) ▌ W. Bates (R) 83rd Senate : ▌ L. Saltonstall (R) ▌ J. F. Kennedy (D) House : ▌ J. Martin (R) ▌ E. N. Rogers (R) ▌ J. McCormack (D) ▌ R. Wigglesworth (R) ▌ T. Lane (D) ▌ A. Goodwin (R) ▌ P. Philbin (D) ▌ J. Heselton (R) ▌ H. Donohue (D) ▌ D. Nicholson (R) ▌ W. Bates (R) ▌ E. Boland (D) ▌ L. Curtis (R) ▌ T. O'Neill (D) 84th Senate : ▌ L. Saltonstall (R) ▌ J. F. Kennedy (D) House : ▌ J. Martin (R) ▌ E. N. Rogers (R) ▌ J. McCormack (D) ▌ R. Wigglesworth (R) ▌ T. Lane (D) ▌ P. Philbin (D) ▌ J. Heselton (R) ▌ H. Donohue (D) ▌ D. Nicholson (R) ▌ W. Bates (R) ▌ E. Boland (D) ▌ L. Curtis (R) ▌ T. O'Neill (D) ▌ T. Macdonald (D) 85th Senate : ▌ L. Saltonstall (R) ▌ J. F. Kennedy (D) House : ▌ J. Martin (R) ▌ E. N. Rogers (R) ▌ J. McCormack (D) ▌ R. Wigglesworth (R) ▌ T. Lane (D) ▌ P. Philbin (D) ▌ J. Heselton (R) ▌ H. Donohue (D) ▌ D. Nicholson (R) ▌ W. Bates (R) ▌ E. Boland (D) ▌ L. Curtis (R) ▌ T. O'Neill (D) ▌ T. Macdonald (D) 86th Senate : ▌ L. Saltonstall (R) ▌ J. F. Kennedy (D) ▌ B. Smith II (D) House : ▌ J. Martin (R) ▌ E. N. Rogers (R) ▌ J. McCormack (D) ▌ T. Lane (D) ▌ P. Philbin (D) ▌ H. Donohue (D) ▌ W. Bates (R) ▌ E. Boland (D) ▌ L. Curtis (R) ▌ T. O'Neill (D) ▌ T. Macdonald (D) ▌ S. Conte (R) ▌ J. Burke (D) ▌ H. Keith (R) v t e Cold War United States Soviet Union NATO Warsaw Pact ANZUS METO SEATO NEATO Rio Pact Non-Aligned Movement 1940s Morgenthau Plan Jamaican political conflict Dekemvriana Guerrilla war in the Baltic states Operation Priboi Operation Jungle Occupation of the Baltic states Cursed soldiers Operation Unthinkable Gouzenko Affair Division of Korea Chinese Civil War Chinese Communist Revolution Indonesian National Revolution Civil conflicts in Vietnam (1945–1949) Operation Beleaguer Operation Blacklist Forty Iran crisis of 1946 Greek Civil War Baruch Plan Corfu Channel incident Hukbalahap rebellion Turkish Straits crisis Restatement of Policy on Germany First Indochina War 1947 Polish parliamentary election Truman Doctrine Asian Relations Conference May 1947 crises Partition of India Indo-Pakistani war of 1947–1948 1947–1949 Palestine war 1947–1948 civil war in Mandatory Palestine 1948 Arab–Israeli War 1948 Palestinian expulsion and flight Marshall Plan Comecon 1948 Czechoslovak coup d'état Incapacitation of the Allied Control Council Al-Wathbah uprising Tito–Stalin split Berlin Blockade Annexation of Hyderabad Madiun Affair Western betrayal Iron Curtain Eastern Bloc Western Bloc Malayan Emergency March 1949 Syrian coup d'état Operation Valuable 1950s Bamboo curtain McCarthyism First Indochina War Korean War Arab Cold War (1952–1979) 1952 Egyptian revolution Iraqi Intifada (1952) Mau Mau rebellion East German uprising of 1953 1953 Iranian coup d'état Pact of Madrid Bricker Amendment 1954 Syrian coup d'état Petrov Affair Domino theory 1954 Geneva Conference 1954 Guatemalan coup d'état Capture of the Tuapse First Taiwan Strait Crisis Jebel Akhdar War Algerian War Kashmir Princess Bandung Conference Geneva Summit (1955) Cyprus Emergency " On the Cult of Personality and Its Consequences " 1956 Poznań protests Hungarian Revolution of 1956 Polish October Suez Crisis " We will bury you " Operation Gladio Syrian Crisis of 1957 Sputnik crisis Ifni War Iraqi 14 July Revolution 1958 Lebanon crisis Second Taiwan Strait Crisis 1959 Mosul uprising 1959 Tibetan uprising Kitchen Debate Cuban Revolution Consolidation of the Cuban Revolution Sino-Soviet split Night Frost Crisis 1960s Congo Crisis Laotian Civil War Vietnam War Simba rebellion 1960 U-2 incident John F. Kennedy Bay of Pigs Invasion 1960 Turkish coup d'état Albanian–Soviet split Iraqi–Kurdish conflict First Iraqi–Kurdish War Berlin Crisis of 1961 Berlin Wall Annexation of Goa Papua conflict Indonesia–Malaysia confrontation Sand War Portuguese Colonial War Angolan War of Independence Guinea-Bissau War of Independence Mozambican War of Independence Cuban Missile Crisis El Porteñazo Sino-Indian War Communist insurgency in Sarawak Ramadan Revolution Eritrean War of Independence North Yemen civil war 1963 Syrian coup d'état Assassination of John F. Kennedy Lyndon B. Johnson Aden Emergency Cyprus crisis of 1963–1964 Shifta War Mexican Dirty War Tlatelolco massacre Guatemalan Civil War Colombian conflict 1964 Brazilian coup d'état Dominican Civil War Rhodesian Bush War Indonesian mass killings of 1965–1966 Transition to the New Order (Indonesia) ASEAN Declaration 1966 Syrian coup d'état Cultural Revolution Cambodian Civil War Argentine Revolution South African Border War Korean DMZ Conflict 12-3 incident Greek junta 1967 Hong Kong riots Years of Lead (Italy) Six-Day War War of Attrition Dhofar War Al-Wadiah War Nigerian Civil War Protests of 1968 May 68 Prague Spring USS Pueblo incident 1968 Polish political crisis Communist insurgency in Malaysia Warsaw Pact invasion of Czechoslovakia 17 July Revolution 1968 Peruvian coup d'état Revolutionary Government 1969 Sudanese coup d'état 1969 Libyan revolution Goulash Communism Sino-Soviet border conflict New People's Army rebellion Note Crisis 1970s Détente Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty Black September Alcora Exercise Corrective Movement (Syria) Western Sahara conflict Communist insurgency in Thailand 1970 Polish protests Koza riot Realpolitik Ping-pong diplomacy 1971 JVP insurrection Corrective revolution (Egypt) 1971 Turkish military memorandum 1971 Sudanese coup d'état 1971 Bolivian coup d'état Four Power Agreement on Berlin Bangladesh Liberation War 1972 visit by Richard Nixon to China North Yemen-South Yemen Border conflict of 1972 First Yemenite War Munich massacre 1972–1975 Bangladesh insurgency Eritrean Civil Wars Paris Peace Accords 1973 Uruguayan coup d'état 1973 Afghan coup d'état 1973 Chilean coup d'état Yom Kippur War 1973 oil crisis Carnation Revolution Ethiopian Civil War Vietnam War Spanish transition to democracy Metapolitefsi Strategic Arms Limitation Talks Second Iraqi–Kurdish War Turkish invasion of Cyprus 15 August 1975 Bangladeshi coup d'état Siege of Dhaka (1975) Sipahi-Janata revolution Angolan Civil War Indonesian invasion of East Timor Cambodian genocide June 1976 protests Mozambican Civil War Oromo conflict Ogaden War 1978 Somali coup attempt Western Sahara War Lebanese Civil War Sino-Albanian split Third Indochina War Cambodian–Vietnamese War Cambodian conflict Operation Condor Dirty War (Argentina) 1976 Argentine coup d'état Egyptian–Libyan War German Autumn Korean Air Lines Flight 902 Nicaraguan Revolution Uganda–Tanzania War NDF Rebellion Chadian–Libyan War Second Yemenite War Grand Mosque seizure Iranian revolution Saur Revolution Sino-Vietnamese War New Jewel Movement 1979 Herat uprising Seven Days to the River Rhine Struggle against political abuse of psychiatry in the Soviet Union 1980s Salvadoran Civil War Soviet–Afghan War Eritrean Civil Wars 1980 and 1984 Summer Olympics boycotts Gera Demands Peruvian Revolution Gdańsk Agreement Solidarity 1980 Turkish coup d'état Ugandan Bush War Gulf of Sidra incident Martial law in Poland Casamance conflict Falklands War 1982 Ethiopian–Somali Border War Ndogboyosoi War United States invasion of Grenada Able Archer 83 Star Wars 1985 Geneva Summit Iran–Iraq War Somali Rebellion Reykjavík Summit 1986 Black Sea incident South Yemen civil war Toyota War 1987 Lieyu massacre Operation Denver 1987–1989 JVP insurrection Lord's Resistance Army insurgency 1988 Black Sea bumping incident 8888 Uprising Solidarity ( Soviet reaction ) Contras Central American crisis Operation RYAN Korean Air Lines Flight 007 People Power Revolution Glasnost Perestroika Bougainville conflict First Nagorno-Karabakh War Afghan Civil War United States invasion of Panama 1988 Polish strikes Polish Round Table Agreement 1989 Tiananmen Square protests and massacre Revolutions of 1989 Fall of the Berlin Wall Fall of the inner German border Velvet Revolution Romanian Revolution Peaceful Revolution 1990s Mongolian Revolution of 1990 Min Ping Yu No. 5540 incident Gulf War Min Ping Yu No. 5202 German reunification Yemeni unification Fall of communism in Albania Breakup of Yugoslavia Dissolution of the Soviet Union 1991 August Coup Dissolution of Czechoslovakia Frozen conflicts Abkhazia China-Taiwan Korea Kosovo South Ossetia Transnistria Sino-Indian border dispute North Borneo dispute Foreign policy Truman Doctrine Containment Eisenhower Doctrine Domino theory Hallstein Doctrine Kennedy Doctrine Peaceful coexistence Ostpolitik Johnson Doctrine Brezhnev Doctrine Nixon Doctrine Ulbricht Doctrine Carter Doctrine Reagan Doctrine Paasikivi–Kekkonen doctrine Rollback Kinmen Agreement Ideologies Capitalism Liberalism Chicago school Conservatism American conservatism Keynesianism Libertarianism Monetarism Neoclassical economics Reaganomics Supply-side economics Democratic capitalism Socialism Communism Marxism–Leninism Castroism Eurocommunism Guevarism Hoxhaism Juche Ho Chi Minh Thought Maoism Trotskyism Stalinism Titoism Other Imperialism Anti-imperialism Nationalism Ultranationalism Chauvinism Ethnic nationalism Racism Zionism Anti-Zionism Fascism Neo-Nazism Islamism Totalitarianism Authoritarianism Autocracy Liberal democracy Illiberal democracy Guided democracy Social democracy Third-worldism White supremacy White nationalism White separatism Apartheid Finlandization Organizations NATO SEATO METO EEC Warsaw Pact Comecon Non-Aligned Movement NN States ASEAN SAARC Safari Club Propaganda Pro-communist Active measures Izvestia Neues Deutschland Pravda Radio Moscow Rudé právo Trybuna Ludu TASS Soviet Life Pro-Western Amerika Crusade for Freedom Paix et Liberté Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty Red Scare Voice of America Technological competition Arms race Nuclear arms race Space Race Historians Gar Alperovitz Thomas A. Bailey Michael Beschloss Archie Brown Warren H. Carroll Adrian Cioroianu John Costello Michael Cox Nicholas J. Cull Norman Davies Willem Drees Robert D. English Herbert Feis Robert Hugh Ferrell André Fontaine Anneli Ute Gabanyi John Lewis Gaddis Lloyd Gardner Timothy Garton Ash Gabriel Gorodetsky Fred Halliday Jussi Hanhimäki John Earl Haynes Patrick J. Hearden Tvrtko Jakovina Tony Judt Harvey Klehr Gabriel Kolko Walter LaFeber Walter Laqueur Melvyn P. Leffler Geir Lundestad Vojtech Mastny Jack F. Matlock Jr.

Thomas J. McCormick Timothy Naftali Marius Oprea David S. Painter William B. Pickett Ronald E. Powaski Yakov M. Rabkin M. E. Sarotte Arthur M. Schlesinger Jr.

Ellen Schrecker Giles Scott-Smith Shen Zhihua Timothy Snyder Athan Theoharis Andrew Thorpe Vladimir Tismăneanu Patrick Vaughan Alex von Tunzelmann Odd Arne Westad William Appleman Williams Jonathan Reed Winkler Rudolph Winnacker Ken Young Espionage and intelligence List of Eastern Bloc agents in the United States Soviet espionage in the United States Russian espionage in the United States American espionage in the Soviet Union and Russian Federation CIA and the Cultural Cold War CIA MI5 MI6 United States involvement in regime change Soviet involvement in regime change MVD KGB Stasi See also Allied intervention in the Russian Civil War Soviet Union–United States relations Soviet Union–United States summits Russia–NATO relations War on terror Brinkmanship Pax Atomica Second Cold War Russian Revolution Category List of conflicts Timeline v t e Buddhist crisis Events Huế Phật Đản (Vesak) shootings Hue chemical attacks Self-immolation of Thích Quảng Đức Double Seven Day scuffle Xá Lợi Pagoda raids 1963 South Vietnamese coup d'état ( reaction ) Arrest and assassination of Ngo Dinh Diem Policy Joint Communiqué Cable 243 Krulak–Mendenhall mission McNamara–Taylor mission Political or religious figures Bui Van Luong Bửu Hội Thích Quảng Đức Michael Forrestal W. Averell Harriman Roger Hilsman Thich Thien Hoa John F. Kennedy Thich Tinh Khiet Victor H. Krulak Henry Cabot Lodge Jr.

Robert McNamara Joseph Mendenhall Ngô Đình Cẩn Ngô Đình Diệm Ngô Đình Nhu Ngô Đình Thục Nguyễn Ngọc Thơ Nguyễn Đình Thuận Madame Nhu Frederick Nolting Thích Trí Quang Maxwell D. Taylor Trần Văn Chương William Trueheart Vũ Văn Mẫu Military figures Lucien Conein Đỗ Cao Trí Đỗ Mậu Dương Văn Minh Huỳnh Văn Cao Lê Quang Tung Lê Văn Kim Nguyễn Hữu Có Nguyễn Khánh Nguyễn Văn Nhung Nguyễn Văn Thiệu Phạm Ngọc Thảo Tôn Thất Đính Trần Kim Tuyến Trần Thiện Khiêm Trần Văn Đôn Journalists Peter Arnett Malcolm Browne David Halberstam Marguerite Higgins Neil Sheehan Related Persecution of Buddhists v t e PT-109 Craft PT boat PT-109 PT-59 Japanese destroyer Amagiri People John F. Kennedy Biuku Gasa and Eroni Kumana Reg Evans Andrew Kirksey and Harold Marney Media 1962 Song 1963 Film 1987 Video game The Search for Kennedy's PT 109 (2002 film) PT 109: An American Epic of War, Survival, and the Destiny of John F. Kennedy (2015 book) Related Kasolo Island (Kennedy Island) v t e Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis Life events Hammersmith Farm Hickory Hill Kennedy Compound La Querida Wexford 1040 Fifth Avenue First Lady of the United States White House restoration Televised White House tour Tour of India and Pakistan White House Historical Association White House Curator Committee for the Preservation of the White House Assassination of John F. Kennedy State funeral of John F. Kennedy John F. Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum Eternal Flame and burial site Fashion Wedding dress Apricot dress Pink Chanel suit Honors and memorials Jacqueline Kennedy Garden Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis High School for International Careers Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis Reservoir Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis School ballet Related Cultural depictions Jackie O (1997 opera) Jackie (2016 film) Family John F. Kennedy (first husband, presidency) Aristotle Onassis (second husband) Maurice Tempelsman (partner) Caroline Kennedy (daughter) John F. Kennedy Jr.

(son) Patrick Bouvier Kennedy (son) Jack Schlossberg (grandson) Rose Schlossberg (granddaughter) Tatiana Schlossberg (granddaughter) John Vernou Bouvier III (father) Janet Lee Bouvier (mother) Lee Radziwill (sister) Hugh D. Auchincloss Jr.

(stepfather) Janet Auchincloss Rutherfurd (half-sister) Edith Ewing Bouvier (aunt) Edith Bouvier Beale (cousin) James T. Lee (grandfather) John Vernou Bouvier Jr.

(grandfather) Pushinka (dog) Billie and Debbie (hamsters) Sardar (horse) Black Jack (horse) v t e Robert F. Kennedy November 20, 1925 – June 6, 1968 64th United States Attorney General, 1961–1964 United States senator from New York, 1965–1968 Life 1948 Palestine visit Senate Committee investigation of Labor and Management Cuban Missile Crisis ExComm Civil rights Freedom Riders Voter Education Project Baldwin–Kennedy meeting 1964 Democratic National Convention Bedford Stuyvesant Restoration Corporation Mississippi Delta tour Kennedy Compound Hickory Hill home Electoral 1964 U.S. Senate election 1968 presidential campaign primaries Boiler Room Girls Speeches Law Day Address (1961) Day of Affirmation Address (1966) Conflict in Vietnam and at Home (1968) University of Kansas (1968) Ball State (1968) On the assassination of Martin Luther King Jr.

(1968) "On the Mindless Menace of Violence" (1968) Books The Enemy Within (1960) The Pursuit of Justice (1964) To Seek a Newer World (1967) Thirteen Days: A Memoir of the Cuban Missile Crisis (1969) Assassination Sirhan Sirhan Ambassador Hotel Conspiracy theories Gravesite Executive Order 14176 Legacy and memorials Robert F. Kennedy Department of Justice Building Robert F. Kennedy silver dollar Robert F. Kennedy Center for Justice and Human Rights Human Rights Award Journalism Award Book Award Robert F. Kennedy Memorial Stadium Brooklyn Memorial Landmark for Peace Memorial Arch of Dignity, Equality, and Justice Kennedy–King College Robert F. Kennedy Community Schools Robert F. Kennedy Bridge USNS Robert F. Kennedy Popular culture Robert F. Kennedy in media Crisis: Behind a Presidential Commitment (1963 documentary) Robert Kennedy Remembered (1968 documentary) "Abraham, Martin and John" (1968 song) The Missiles of October (1974 docudrama) Kennedy (1983 miniseries) Blood Feud (1983 film) Prince Jack (1985 film) Robert Kennedy and His Times (1985 miniseries) Hoover vs. The Kennedys (1987 miniseries) Thirteen Days (2000 film) RFK (2002 film) Bobby (2006 film) RFK Must Die (2007 documentary) The Kennedys (2011 miniseries) Ethel (2012 documentary) Killing Kennedy (2013 film) Jackie (2016 film) Bobby Kennedy for President (2018 miniseries) Family, family tree Ethel Skakel (wife) Kathleen Kennedy (daughter) Joseph Patrick Kennedy (son) Robert F. Kennedy Jr.

(son) Michael LeMoyne Kennedy (son) Kerry Kennedy (daughter) Christopher G. Kennedy (son) Max Kennedy (son) Douglas Harriman Kennedy (son) Rory Kennedy (daughter) Maeve Kennedy McKean (granddaughter) Joseph P. Kennedy III (grandson) Max Kennedy Jr.

(grandson) Joseph P. Kennedy Sr.

(father) Rose Kennedy (mother) Joseph P. Kennedy Jr.

(brother) John F. Kennedy (brother presidency ) Rosemary Kennedy (sister) Kathleen Kennedy Cavendish (sister) Eunice Kennedy Shriver (sister) Patricia Kennedy Lawford (sister) Jean Kennedy Smith (sister) Ted Kennedy (brother) Patrick J. Kennedy (grandfather) Mary Augusta Kennedy (grandmother) John F. Fitzgerald (grandfather) Category v t e Ted Kennedy February 22, 1932 – August 25, 2009 United States Senator from Massachusetts, 1962–2009 Electoral history U.S. Senate elections in Massachusetts: 1962 (special) 1964 1970 1976 1982 1988 1994 2000 2006 1980 United States presidential election ( Democratic primaries ) Ted Kennedy 1980 presidential campaign Books My Senator and Me: A Dog's-Eye View of Washington, D.C.

(2006) True Compass (2009) Speeches The Dream Shall Never Die Family , family tree Joan Bennett Kennedy (first wife) Victoria Reggie Kennedy (second wife, widow) Kara Kennedy (daughter) Edward M. Kennedy Jr.

(son) Patrick J. Kennedy II (son) Joseph P. Kennedy Sr.

(father) Rose Kennedy (mother) Joseph P. Kennedy Jr.

(brother) John F. Kennedy (brother presidency ) Rosemary Kennedy (sister) Kathleen Kennedy (sister) Eunice Kennedy Shriver (sister) Patricia Kennedy Lawford (sister) Robert F. Kennedy (brother) Jean Kennedy Smith (sister) Patrick J. Kennedy I (grandfather) John F. Fitzgerald (grandfather) Related Awards and honors Political positions Kennedy Compound Edward M. Kennedy Institute for the United States Senate Edward M. Kennedy Serve America Act Chappaquiddick incident Mary Jo Kopechne Friends of Ireland Chappaquiddick (2018 film) Category v t e Kennedy family I.

P. J. Kennedy (1858–1929) Joseph P. Kennedy Sr.

(m.) Rose Fitzgerald II.

Joseph P. Kennedy Sr.

(1888–1969) Joseph P. Kennedy Jr.

John F. Kennedy (m.) Jacqueline Bouvier Rosemary Kennedy Kathleen Kennedy (m.) William Cavendish, Marquess of Hartington Eunice Kennedy (m.) Sargent Shriver Patricia Kennedy (m./div.) Peter Lawford Robert F. Kennedy (m.) Ethel Skakel Jean Kennedy (m.) Stephen Edward Smith Edward M. "Ted" Kennedy (m./div. 1st) Joan Bennett ; (m. 2nd) Victoria Reggie III.

John F. Kennedy (1917–1963) Caroline Kennedy (m.) Edwin Schlossberg John F. Kennedy Jr.

(m.) Carolyn Bessette Patrick Bouvier Kennedy Eunice Kennedy Shriver (1921–2009) Bobby Shriver Maria Shriver (m./div.) Arnold Schwarzenegger Timothy Shriver Mark Shriver Anthony Shriver Patricia Kennedy Lawford (1924–2006) Christopher Lawford Robert F. Kennedy (1925–1968) Kathleen Kennedy Townsend Joseph P. Kennedy II Robert F. Kennedy Jr.

(m./sep.) Mary Richardson (m. 3rd) Cheryl Hines Michael LeMoyne Kennedy Kerry Kennedy (m./div.) Andrew Cuomo Christopher G. Kennedy Max Kennedy Douglas Harriman Kennedy Rory Kennedy (m.) Mark Bailey Jean Kennedy Smith (1928–2020) William Kennedy Smith Ted Kennedy (1932–2009) Kara Kennedy Edward M. Kennedy Jr.

Patrick J. Kennedy (m.) Amy Savell IV.

Rose Kennedy Schlossberg Tatiana Celia Kennedy Schlossberg John Bouvier Kennedy Schlossberg Katherine Schwarzenegger (m.) Chris Pratt Patrick Schwarzenegger Joseph P. Kennedy III Maeve Kennedy McKean Max Kennedy Jr.

Related Hickory Hill Kennedy Compound Kennedy curse Merchandise Mart The Kennedys (museum) The Kennedys (miniseries) The Kennedys: After Camelot Category Kennedy family m. = married; div. = divorced; sep. = separated.

v t e ( ← 1952 ) 1956 United States presidential election ( → 1960 ) Republican Party Convention Primaries Candidates Incumbent nominee: Dwight D. Eisenhower Incumbent VP nominee: Richard Nixon Democratic Party Convention Primaries Candidates Nominee: Adlai Stevenson II VP nominee: Estes Kefauver Other candidates: John S. Battle Happy Chandler James C. Davis John F. Kennedy W. Averell Harriman Lyndon B. Johnson Frank Lausche George Bell Timmerman Jr.

Third-party and independent candidates American Vegetarian Party Nominee: Herbert M. Shelton VP nominee: Symon Gould Prohibition Party Nominee: Enoch A. Holtwick VP nominee: Herbert C. Holdridge Socialist Labor Party Nominee: Eric Hass VP nominee: Georgia Cozzini Socialist Party Nominee: Darlington Hoopes VP nominee: Samuel H. Friedman Socialist Workers Party Nominee: Farrell Dobbs VP nominee: Myra Tanner Weiss Independents and other candidates T. Coleman Andrews Gerald L. K. Smith Other 1956 elections : House Senate v t e ( ← 1956 ) 1960 United States presidential election ( → 1964 ) Democratic Party Convention Primaries Candidates Nominee: John F. Kennedy campaign VP nominee: Lyndon B. Johnson Other candidates Ross Barnett Pat Brown Michael DiSalle Paul C. Fisher Hubert Humphrey Lyndon B. Johnson George H. McLain Robert B. Meyner Wayne Morse Albert S. Porter Adlai Stevenson II George Smathers Stuart Symington Republican Party Convention Primaries Candidates Nominee: Richard Nixon campaign VP nominee: Henry Cabot Lodge Jr.

Other candidates Barry Goldwater Henry Cabot Lodge Jr.

James M. Lloyd Nelson Rockefeller Third-party and independent candidates American Vegetarian Party Nominee Symon Gould National States' Rights Party Nominee Orval Faubus VP nominee J. B. Stoner Prohibition Party Nominee Rutherford Decker VP nominee E. Harold Munn Socialist Labor Party Nominee Eric Hass VP nominee Georgia Cozzini Socialist Workers Party Nominee Farrell Dobbs VP nominee Myra Tanner Weiss Independents and other candidates Harry F. Byrd Merritt B. Curtis Lar Daly George Lincoln Rockwell Charles L. Sullivan Gabriel Green Other 1960 elections: House Senate v t e Cabinet of President John F. Kennedy (1961–1963) Cabinet Vice President Lyndon B. Johnson (1961–1963) Secretary of State Dean Rusk (1961–1963) Secretary of the Treasury C. Douglas Dillon (1961–1963) Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara (1961–1963) Attorney General Robert F. Kennedy (1961–1963) Postmaster General J. Edward Day (1961–1963) John A. Gronouski (1963) Secretary of the Interior Stewart Udall (1961–1963) Secretary of Agriculture Orville Freeman (1961–1963) Secretary of Commerce Luther H. Hodges (1961–1963) Secretary of Labor Arthur Goldberg (1961–1962) W. Willard Wirtz (1962–1963) Secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare Abraham Ribicoff (1961–1962) Anthony J. Celebrezze (1962–1963) Cabinet-level Ambassador to the United Nations Adlai Stevenson II (1961–1963) v t e Time Persons of the Year 1927–1950 Charles Lindbergh (1927) Walter Chrysler (1928) Owen D. Young (1929) Mohandas Gandhi (1930) Pierre Laval (1931) Franklin D. Roosevelt (1932) Hugh S. Johnson (1933) Franklin D. Roosevelt (1934) Haile Selassie (1935) Wallis Simpson (1936) Chiang Kai-shek / Soong Mei-ling (1937) Adolf Hitler (1938) Joseph Stalin (1939) Winston Churchill (1940) Franklin D. Roosevelt (1941) Joseph Stalin (1942) George Marshall (1943) Dwight D. Eisenhower (1944) Harry S. Truman (1945) James F. Byrnes (1946) George Marshall (1947) Harry S. Truman (1948) Winston Churchill (1949) The American Fighting-Man (1950) 1951–1975 Mohammed Mosaddeq (1951) Elizabeth II (1952) Konrad Adenauer (1953) John Foster Dulles (1954) Harlow Curtice (1955) Hungarian Freedom Fighters (1956) Nikita Khrushchev (1957) Charles de Gaulle (1958) Dwight D. Eisenhower (1959) U.S. Scientists: George Beadle / Charles Draper / John Enders / Donald A. Glaser / Joshua Lederberg / Willard Libby / Linus Pauling / Edward Purcell / Isidor Rabi / Emilio Segrè / William Shockley / Edward Teller / Charles Townes / James Van Allen / Robert Woodward (1960) John F. Kennedy (1961) Pope John XXIII (1962) Martin Luther King Jr.

(1963) Lyndon B. Johnson (1964) William Westmoreland (1965) The Generation Twenty-Five and Under (1966) Lyndon B. Johnson (1967) The Apollo 8 Astronauts : William Anders / Frank Borman / Jim Lovell (1968) The Middle Americans (1969) Willy Brandt (1970) Richard Nixon (1971) Henry Kissinger / Richard Nixon (1972) John Sirica (1973) King Faisal (1974) American Women: Susan Brownmiller / Kathleen Byerly / Alison Cheek / Jill Conway / Betty Ford / Ella Grasso / Carla Hills / Barbara Jordan / Billie Jean King / Susie Sharp / Carol Sutton / Addie Wyatt (1975) 1976–2000 Jimmy Carter (1976) Anwar Sadat (1977) Deng Xiaoping (1978) Ayatollah Khomeini (1979) Ronald Reagan (1980) Lech Wałęsa (1981) The Computer (1982) Ronald Reagan / Yuri Andropov (1983) Peter Ueberroth (1984) Deng Xiaoping (1985) Corazon Aquino (1986) Mikhail Gorbachev (1987) The Endangered Earth (1988) Mikhail Gorbachev (1989) George H. W. Bush (1990) Ted Turner (1991) Bill Clinton (1992) The Peacemakers: Yasser Arafat / F. W. de Klerk / Nelson Mandela / Yitzhak Rabin (1993) Pope John Paul II (1994) Newt Gingrich (1995) David Ho (1996) Andrew Grove (1997) Bill Clinton / Ken Starr (1998) Jeff Bezos (1999) George W. Bush (2000) 2001–present Rudolph Giuliani (2001) The Whistleblowers: Cynthia Cooper / Coleen Rowley / Sherron Watkins (2002) The American Soldier (2003) George W. Bush (2004) The Good Samaritans: Bono / Bill Gates / Melinda Gates (2005) You (2006) Vladimir Putin (2007) Barack Obama (2008) Ben Bernanke (2009) Mark Zuckerberg (2010) The Protester (2011) Barack Obama (2012) Pope Francis (2013) Ebola Fighters : Dr. Jerry Brown / Dr.

Kent Brantly /  Ella Watson-Stryker / Foday Gollah / Salome Karwah (2014) Angela Merkel (2015) Donald Trump (2016) The Silence Breakers (2017) The Guardians: Jamal Khashoggi / Maria Ressa / Wa Lone / Kyaw Soe Oo / Staff of The Capital (2018) Greta Thunberg (2019) Joe Biden / Kamala Harris (2020) Elon Musk (2021) Volodymyr Zelenskyy / Spirit of Ukraine (2022) Taylor Swift (2023) Donald Trump (2024) v t e Pulitzer Prize for Biography or Autobiography (1951–1975) Margaret Louise Coit (1951) Merlo J. Pusey (1952) David J. Mays (1953) Charles A. Lindbergh (1954) William S. White (1955) Talbot Faulkner Hamlin (1956) John F. Kennedy (1957) Douglas Southall Freeman , John Alexander Carroll and Mary Wells Ashworth (1958) Arthur Walworth (1959) Samuel Eliot Morison (1960) David Donald (1961) Leon Edel (1963) Walter Jackson Bate (1964) Ernest Samuels (1965) Arthur M. Schlesinger Jr.

(1966) Justin Kaplan (1967) George Frost Kennan (1968) Benjamin Lawrence Reid (1969) Thomas Harry Williams (1970) Lawrance Thompson (1971) Joseph P. Lash (1972) W. A. Swanberg (1973) Louis Sheaffer (1974) Robert Caro (1975) Complete list ( 1917–1925 ) ( 1926–1950 ) ( 1951–1975 ) ( 1976–2000 ) ( 2001–2025 ) v t e National Football Foundation Gold Medal winners 1958: Dwight D. Eisenhower 1959: Douglas MacArthur 1960: Herbert Hoover & Amos Alonzo Stagg 1961: John F. Kennedy 1962: Byron "Whizzer" White 1963: Roger Blough 1964: Donold B. Lourie 1965: Juan T. Trippe 1966: Earl H. "Red" Blaik 1967: Frederick L. Hovde 1968: Chester J. LaRoche 1969: Richard Nixon 1970: Thomas J. Hamilton 1971: Ronald Reagan 1972: Gerald Ford 1973: John Wayne 1974: Gerald B. Zornow 1975: David Packard 1976: Edgar B. Speer 1977: Louis H. Wilson 1978: Vincent dePaul Draddy 1979: William P. Lawrence 1980: Walter J. Zable 1981: Justin W. Dart 1982: Silver Anniversary Awards (NCAA) - All Honored Jim Brown , Willie Davis , Jack Kemp , Ron Kramer , Jim Swink 1983: Jack Kemp 1984: John F. McGillicuddy 1985: William I. Spencer 1986: William H. Morton 1987: Charles R. Meyer 1988: Clinton E. Frank 1989: Paul Brown 1990: Thomas H. Moorer 1991: George H. W. Bush 1992: Donald R. Keough 1993: Norman Schwarzkopf 1994: Thomas S. Murphy 1995: Harold Alfond 1996: Gene Corrigan 1997: Jackie Robinson 1998: John H. McConnell 1999: Keith Jackson 2000: Fred M. Kirby II 2001: Billy Joe "Red" McCombs 2002: George Steinbrenner 2003: Tommy Franks 2004: William V. Campbell 2005: Jon F. Hanson 2006: Joe Paterno & Bobby Bowden 2007: Pete Dawkins & Roger Staubach 2008: John Glenn 2009: Phil Knight & Bill Bowerman 2010: Bill Cosby 2011: Robert Gates 2012: Roscoe Brown 2013: National Football League & Roger Goodell 2014: Tom Catena & George Weiss 2015: Condoleezza Rice 2016: Archie Manning 2017: None awarded 2018: Aaron Feis & Jason Seaman 2019: Mark Harmon v t e Assassination of John F. Kennedy John F. Kennedy Lee Harvey Oswald Assassination Assassination rifle Timeline J. D. Tippit John Connally Nellie Connally Jacqueline Kennedy Pink Chanel suit James Tague William Greer Roy Kellerman Clint Hill Zapruder film Abraham Zapruder Dealey Plaza Texas School Book Depository Sixth Floor Museum Presidential limousine Parkland Hospital Witnesses Ike Altgens Lee Bowers Jean Hill Marie Muchmore Orville Nix Three tramps Babushka Lady Mary Moorman Umbrella man Aftermath Media coverage Autopsy Reactions Johnson inauguration Jack Ruby Jack Ruby Shoots Lee Harvey Oswald Ruby v. Texas Dictabelt recording Robert N. McClelland (surgeon) Charles Baxter (physician) Malcolm Perry (physician) Earl Rose (coroner) Dallas memorial Conspiracy theories Badge Man CIA Single-bullet theory 1992 Assassination Records Act Executive Order 14176 In popular culture State funeral Foreign dignitaries Burial site and Eternal Flame Black Jack Investigations Warren Commission Jim Garrison investigation House Select Committee on Assassinations Researchers Related Ruth Paine Home Lee Harvey Oswald Rooming House Category v t e Pacem in Terris Peace and Freedom Award laureates 1960s 1964: John Howard Griffin / John F. Kennedy 1965: Martin Luther King Jr.

1966: R. Sargent Shriver 1967: A. Philip Randolph 1968: James Groppi 1969: Saul Alinsky 1970s 1971: Dorothy Day 1974: Harold Hughes 1975: Hélder Câmara 1976: Mother Teresa 1979: Thomas Gumbleton 1980s 1980: Crystal Lee Sutton / Ernest Leo Unterkoefler 1982: George F. Kennan 1983: Helen Caldicott 1985: Joseph Bernardin 1986: Maurice John Dingman 1987: Desmond Tutu 1989: Eileen Egan 1990s 1990: Mairead Maguire 1991: María Julia Hernández 1992: César Chávez 1993: Daniel Berrigan 1995: Jim Wallis 1996: Samuel Ruiz 1997: Jim and Shelley Douglass 2000s 2000: George G. Higgins 2001: Lech Wałęsa 2002: Gwen Hennessey / Dorothy Hennessey 2004: Arthur Simon 2005: Donald Mosley 2007: Salim Ghazal 2008: Marvin Mottet 2009: Hildegard Goss-Mayr 2010s 2010: John Dear 2011: Álvaro Leonel Ramazzini Imeri 2012: Kim Bobo 2013: Jean Vanier 2014: Simone Campbell 2015: Thích Nhất Hạnh 2016: Gustavo Gutiérrez 2017: Widad Akreyi 2019: Dalai Lama 2019: Munib Younan 2020s 2022: Norma Pimentel 2023: Atiya Aftab / Sheryl Olitzky 2024: Chad Pregracke 2025: Silvio José Báez Ortega v t e Individuals lain in state , in honor and in repose in the United States State funerals in the United States Lain in state US Capitol rotunda Clay (1852) Lincoln (1865, funeral ) Stevens (1868) Sumner (1874) Wilson (1875) Garfield (1881) Logan (1886) McKinley (1901) L'Enfant (1909) Dewey (1917) Unknown Soldier for World War I (1921) Harding (1923) W. H. Taft (1930) Pershing (1948) R. A. Taft (1953) Unknown Soldiers for World War II and the Korean War (1958) Kennedy (1963, funeral ) MacArthur (1964) H. Hoover (1964) Eisenhower (1969) Dirksen (1969) J. E. Hoover (1972) Johnson (1973) Humphrey (1978) Blassie / Unknown Soldier for the Vietnam War (1984) Pepper (1989) Reagan (2004, funeral ) Ford (2006–07, funeral ) Inouye (2012) McCain (2018) Bush (2018, funeral ) Lewis (2020) Dole (2021) Reid (2022) Carter (2024–25, funeral ) National Statuary Hall Cummings (2019) Ginsburg (2020, funeral ) Young (2022) House Chamber Hooper (1875) Herbert C. Hoover Building Brown (1996) Old Senate Chamber Chase (1873) Lain in honor US Capitol rotunda Chestnut and Gibson (1998) Parks (2005) Graham (2018) Sicknick (2021) Evans (2021) Williams (2022) Lain in repose East Room Harrison (1841) Taylor (1850) Lincoln (1865, funeral ) McKinley (1901) Harding (1923) Roosevelt (1945) Kennedy (1963, funeral ) Great Hall of the US Supreme Court Warren (1974) Marshall (1993) Burger (1995) Brennan (1997) Blackmun (1999) Rehnquist (2005) Scalia (2016) Stevens (2019) Ginsburg (2020, funeral ) O'Connor (2023) Senate Chamber Byrd (2010) Lautenberg (2013) Bold : Presidents and chief justices Portals : 1960s Biography Civil Rights Movement History Liberalism Massachusetts Politics United States Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Chile Greece Korea Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Finland Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii Artists ULAN MusicBrainz RKD Artists FID People US Congress Trove Deutsche Biographie Deutsche Synchronkartei DDB Other IdRef NARA SNAC 2 3 4 Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7889cf5cc‐ng2fz
Cached time: 20250818121823
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 5.238 seconds
Real time usage: 5.931 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 58734/1000000
Revision size: 238296/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 1700781/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 488520/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 21/100
Expensive parser function count: 64/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 1290762/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 2.970/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 25304218/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 4676.518      1 -total
 32.23% 1507.093      2 Template:Reflist
 15.66%  732.354      2 Template:Navboxes
 15.51%  725.348    246 Template:Sfn
 14.16%  661.992    101 Template:Cite_book
 13.33%  623.346    117 Template:Cite_web
 10.48%  490.293      1 Template:Infobox_officeholder
  7.99%  373.863     27 Template:Navbox
  4.61%  215.477      7 Template:USCongRep-row
  4.08%  190.734     14 Template:Hanging_indent Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:5119376:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818121823 and revision id 1306560652. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=John_F._Kennedy&oldid=1306560652 " Categories : John F. Kennedy 1917 births 1963 deaths 20th-century American journalists 20th-century American male writers 20th-century American naval officers 20th-century American non-fiction writers 20th-century Roman Catholics 20th-century Massachusetts politicians 20th-century members of the United States House of Representatives 20th-century presidents of the United States 20th-century United States senators 1956 United States vice-presidential candidates People murdered in 1963 Activists for African-American civil rights Alumni of the London School of Economics American anti-communists American expatriates in the Solomon Islands American founders American male journalists American male non-fiction writers American Roman Catholic writers Assassinated presidents of the United States Bouvier family Burials at Arlington National Cemetery Candidates in the 1960 United States presidential election Canterbury School (Connecticut) alumni Catholic politicians from Massachusetts Choate Rosemary Hall alumni Deaths by firearm in Texas Democratic Party members of the United States House of Representatives from Massachusetts Democratic Party presidents of the United States Democratic Party United States senators from Massachusetts Emmanuel College (Massachusetts) people Harvard College alumni Journalists from Massachusetts Kennedy family Laetare Medal recipients Liberalism in the United States Military personnel from Massachusetts National presidents assassinated in the 20th century Opposition to Fidel Castro American people of the Pacific theatre of World War II People associated with the assassination of John F. Kennedy People from Barnstable, Massachusetts People from Georgetown (Washington, D.C.) People murdered in Texas People of the Cold War People of the Congo Crisis Politicians assassinated in 1963 Politicians from Boston Politicians from Brookline, Massachusetts Presidential Medal of Freedom recipients Presidents of the United States Pulitzer Prize for Biography or Autobiography winners Recipients of the Navy and Marine Corps Medal Riverdale Country School alumni Space advocates Star class sailors Time Person of the Year United States government officials of the Vietnam War United States Navy personnel of World War II United States Navy reservists Writers from Boston Hidden categories: Source attribution CS1 Japanese-language sources (ja) All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from April 2019 Articles with permanently dead external links Webarchive template wayback links Articles with dead external links from May 2020 Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages Wikipedia extended-confirmed-protected pages Use American English from August 2019 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use mdy dates from September 2024 Articles with hAudio microformats CS1 errors: ISBN date Pages using Sister project links with wikidata mismatch People appearing on C-SPAN Articles with Internet Archive links Articles with LibriVox links Articles with Project Gutenberg links S-bef: 'before' parameter includes the word 'unknown' Articles containing video clips This page was last edited on 18 August 2025, at 12:17 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents John F. Kennedy 175 languages Add topic

