Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Major drainage basins of the world Toggle Major drainage basins of the world subsection 1.1 Ocean basins 1.2 Largest river basins 1.3 Endorheic drainage basins 2 Importance Toggle Importance subsection 2.1 Geopolitical boundaries 2.2 Hydrology 2.3 Geomorphology 2.4 Ecology 2.5 Resource management 3 Catchment factors Toggle Catchment factors subsection 3.1 Topography 3.2 Shape 3.3 Size 3.4 Soil type 3.5 Land use 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Drainage basin 97 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch العربية Aragonés Asturianu Azərbaycanca বাংলা Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) भोजपुरी Български Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Cebuano Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge Galego ГӀалгӀай 한국어 Hausa Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Italiano עברית ಕನ್ನಡ ქართული Қазақша Kernowek Kiswahili Kreyòl ayisyen Кыргызча Ladin Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Lombard Magyar Македонски मराठी მარგალური Bahasa Melayu Мокшень Монгол မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands नेपाली 日本語 Нохчийн Nordfriisk Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Олык марий Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Plattdüütsch Polski Português Română Русский Саха тыла Shqip සිංහල Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் Татарча / tatarça ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Türkmençe Українська اردو Vèneto Tiếng Việt Walon 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Land area where water converges to a common outlet "Catchment" and "Catchment basin" redirect here. For the human geography concept, see Catchment area .

The Mississippi River drains the largest area of any U.S.

river, much of it agricultural regions. Agricultural runoff and other water pollution that flows to the outlet is the cause of the hypoxic or dead zone in the Gulf of Mexico .

A drainage basin is an area of land in which all flowing surface water converges to a single point, such as a river mouth , or flows into another body of water , such as a lake or ocean . A basin is separated from adjacent basins by a perimeter, the drainage divide , [ 1 ] made up of a succession of elevated features, such as ridges and hills . A basin may consist of smaller basins that merge at river confluences , forming a hierarchical pattern .

[ 2 ] Other terms for a drainage basin are catchment area , catchment basin , drainage area , river basin , water basin , [ 3 ] [ 4 ] and impluvium .

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] In North America, they are commonly called a watershed , though in other English-speaking places, " watershed " is used only in its original sense, that of the drainage divide line.

[ citation needed ] A drainage basin's boundaries are determined by watershed delineation , a common task in environmental engineering and science.

In a closed drainage basin, or endorheic basin , rather than flowing to the ocean, water converges toward the interior of the basin, known as a sink , which may be a permanent lake, a dry lake , or a point where surface water is lost underground .

[ 8 ] Drainage basins are similar but not identical to hydrologic units , which are drainage areas delineated so as to nest into a multi-level hierarchical drainage system . Hydrologic units are defined to allow multiple inlets, outlets, or sinks. In a strict sense, all drainage basins are hydrologic units, but not all hydrologic units are drainage basins.

[ 8 ] Major drainage basins of the world [ edit ] For a more comprehensive list, see List of drainage basins by area .

Major continental divides , showing how terrestrial drainage basins drain into the oceans. Grey areas are endorheic basins that do not drain to the oceans Ocean basins [ edit ] About 48.71% of the world's land drains to the Atlantic Ocean .

[ citation needed ] In North America , surface water drains to the Atlantic via the Saint Lawrence River and Great Lakes basins, the Eastern Seaboard of the United States, the Canadian Maritimes , and most of Newfoundland and Labrador . Nearly all of South America east of the Andes also drains to the Atlantic, as does most of Western and Central Europe and the greatest portion of western Sub-Saharan Africa , as well as Western Sahara and part of Morocco .

The two major Mediterranean Seas of the world also flow to the Atlantic. The Caribbean Sea and Gulf of Mexico basin includes most of the U.S. interior between the Appalachian and Rocky Mountains , a small part of the Canadian provinces of Alberta and Saskatchewan , eastern Central America , the islands of the Caribbean and the Gulf, and a small part of northern South America. The Mediterranean Sea basin, with the Black Sea , includes much of North Africa , east-central Africa (through the Nile River ), Southern , Central, and Eastern Europe , Turkey , and the coastal areas of Israel , Lebanon , and Syria .

The Arctic Ocean drains most of Western Canada and Northern Canada east of the Continental Divide , northern Alaska and parts of North Dakota , South Dakota , Minnesota , and Montana in the United States, the north shore of the Scandinavian Peninsula in Europe, central and northern Russia, and parts of Kazakhstan and Mongolia in Asia , which totals to about 17% of the world's land.

[ 9 ] Just over 13% of the land in the world drains to the Pacific Ocean .

[ 9 ] Its basin includes much of China, eastern and southeastern Russia, Japan, the Korean Peninsula , most of Indochina, Indonesia and Malaysia, the Philippines, all of the Pacific Islands , the northeast coast of Australia , and Canada and the United States west of the Continental Divide (including most of Alaska), as well as western Central America and South America west of the Andes.

The Indian Ocean 's drainage basin also comprises about 13% of Earth's land. It drains the eastern coast of Africa, the coasts of the Red Sea and the Persian Gulf , the Indian subcontinent , Burma, and most parts of Australia .

[ 10 ] Largest river basins [ edit ] The five largest river basins (by area), from largest to smallest, are those of the Amazon (7 million km 2 ), the Congo (4 million km 2 ), the Nile (3.4 million km 2 ), the Mississippi (3.22 million km 2 ), and the Río de la Plata (3.17 million km 2 ). The three rivers that drain the most water, from most to least, are the Amazon, Ganges , and Congo rivers.

Endorheic drainage basins [ edit ] Endorheic basin in Central Asia Main article: Endorheic basin Endorheic basin are inland basins that do not drain to an ocean. Endorheic basins cover around 18% of the Earth's land. Some endorheic basins drain to an Endorheic lake or Inland sea . Many of these lakes are ephemeral or vary dramatically in size depending on climate and inflow. If water evaporates or infiltrates into the ground at its terminus, the area can go by several names, such playa, salt flat, dry lake , or alkali sink .

The largest endorheic basins are in Central Asia , including the Caspian Sea , the Aral Sea , and numerous smaller lakes. Other endorheic regions include the Great Basin in the United States, much of the Sahara Desert , the drainage basin of the Okavango River ( Kalahari Basin ), highlands near the African Great Lakes , the interiors of Australia and the Arabian Peninsula , and parts in Mexico and the Andes . Some of these, such as the Great Basin, are not single drainage basins but collections of separate, adjacent closed basins.

In endorheic bodies of water where evaporation is the primary means of water loss, the water is typically more saline than the oceans. An extreme example of this is the Dead Sea .

[ citation needed ] Importance [ edit ] Geopolitical boundaries [ edit ] Drainage basins have been historically important for determining territorial boundaries, particularly in regions where trade by water has been important. For example, the English crown gave the Hudson's Bay Company a monopoly on the fur trade in the entire Hudson Bay basin, an area called Rupert's Land .

Bioregional political organization today includes agreements of states (e.g., international treaties and, within the US, interstate compacts ) or other political entities in a particular drainage basin to manage the body or bodies of water into which it drains. Examples of such interstate compacts are the Great Lakes Commission and the Tahoe Regional Planning Agency .

Hydrology [ edit ] Drainage basin of the Ohio River , part of the Mississippi River drainage basin In hydrology , the drainage basin is a logical unit of focus [ clarification needed ] for studying the movement of water within the hydrological cycle . The process of finding a drainage boundary is referred to as watershed delineation . Finding the area and extent of a drainage basin is an important step in many areas of science and engineering.

Most of the water that discharges from the basin outlet originated as precipitation falling on the basin.

[ 11 ] A portion of the water that enters the groundwater system beneath the drainage basin may flow towards the outlet of another drainage basin because groundwater flow directions do not always match those of their overlying drainage network. Measurement of the discharge of water from a basin may be made by a stream gauge located at the basin's outlet. Depending on the conditions of the drainage basin, as rainfall occurs some of it seeps directly into the ground. This water will either remain underground, slowly making its way downhill and eventually reaching the basin, or it will permeate deeper into the soil and consolidate into groundwater aquifers.

[ 12 ] As water flows through the basin, it can form tributaries that change the structure of the land. There are three different main types, which are affected by the rocks and ground underneath. Rock that is quick to erode forms dendritic patterns, and these are seen most often. The two other types of patterns that form are trellis patterns and rectangular patterns.

[ 13 ] Rain gauge data is used to measure total precipitation over a drainage basin, and there are different ways to interpret that data. In the unlikely event that the gauges are many and evenly distributed over an area of uniform precipitation, using the arithmetic mean method will give good results. In the Thiessen polygon method, the drainage basin is divided into polygons with the rain gauge in the middle of each polygon assumed to be representative for the rainfall on the area of land included in its polygon. These polygons are made by drawing lines between gauges, then making perpendicular bisectors of those lines form the polygons. The isohyetal method involves contours of equal precipitation are drawn over the gauges on a map. Calculating the area between these curves and adding up the volume of water is time-consuming.

Isochrone maps can be used to show the time taken for runoff water within a drainage basin to reach a lake, reservoir or outlet, assuming constant and uniform effective rainfall.

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] [ 16 ] [ 17 ] Geomorphology [ edit ] Drainage basins are the principal hydrologic unit considered in fluvial geomorphology . A drainage basin is the source for water and sediment that moves from higher elevation through the river system to lower elevations as they reshape the channel forms.

Ecology [ edit ] Top-down illustration of a dendritic drainage basin. The dashed line is the main water divide of the hydrography basin.

Digital terrain map of the Latorița River 's drainage basin in Romania Drainage basins are important in ecology . As water flows over the ground and along rivers it can pick up nutrients , sediment , and pollutants . With the water, they are transported towards the outlet of the basin, and can affect the ecological processes along the way as well as in the receiving water body .

Modern use of artificial fertilizers , containing nitrogen (as nitrates ), phosphorus , and potassium , has affected the mouths of drainage basins. The minerals are carried by the drainage basin to the mouth, and may accumulate there, disturbing the natural mineral balance. This can cause eutrophication where plant growth is accelerated by the additional material.

Resource management [ edit ] Further information: Watershed management Because drainage basins are coherent entities in a hydrological sense, it has become common to manage water resources on the basis of individual basins. In the U.S. state of Minnesota , governmental entities that perform this function are called " watershed districts ".

[ 18 ] In New Zealand, they are called catchment boards. Comparable community groups based in Ontario, Canada, are called conservation authorities . In North America, this function is referred to as " watershed management ".
In Brazil , the National Policy of Water Resources, regulated by Act n° 9.433 of 1997, establishes the drainage basin as the territorial division of Brazilian water management.

When a river basin crosses at least one political border, either a border within a nation or an international boundary, it is identified as a transboundary river . Management of such basins becomes the responsibility of the countries sharing it.

Nile Basin Initiative , OMVS for Senegal River , Mekong River Commission are a few examples of arrangements involving management of shared river basins.

Management of shared drainage basins is also seen as a way to build lasting peaceful relationships among countries.

[ 19 ] Catchment factors [ edit ] The catchment is the most significant factor determining the amount or likelihood of flooding .

Catchment factors are: topography , shape, size, soil type, and land use (paved or roofed areas). Catchment topography and shape determine the time taken for rain to reach the river, while catchment size, soil type, and development determine the amount of water to reach the river.

Topography [ edit ] Generally, topography plays a big part in how fast runoff will reach a river. Rain that falls in steep mountainous areas will reach the primary river in the drainage basin faster than flat or lightly sloping areas (e.g., > 1% gradient).

Shape [ edit ] Shape will contribute to the speed with which the runoff reaches a river. A long thin catchment will take longer to drain than a circular catchment.

Size [ edit ] Size will help determine the amount of water reaching the river, as the larger the catchment the greater the potential for flooding. It is also determined on the basis of length and width of the drainage basin.

Soil type [ edit ] Soil type will help determine how much water reaches the river. The runoff from the drainage area is dependent on the soil type. Certain soil types such as sandy soils are very free-draining, and rainfall on sandy soil is likely to be absorbed by the ground. However, soils containing clay can be almost impermeable and therefore rainfall on clay soils will run off and contribute to flood volumes. After prolonged rainfall even free-draining soils can become saturated , meaning that any further rainfall will reach the river rather than being absorbed by the ground. If the surface is impermeable the precipitation will create surface run-off which will lead to higher risk of flooding; if the ground is permeable, the precipitation will infiltrate the soil.

[ 5 ] Land use [ edit ] Land use can contribute to the volume of water reaching the river, in a similar way to clay soils. For example, rainfall on roofs, pavements , and roads will be collected by rivers with almost no absorption into the groundwater .
A drainage basin is an area of land where all flowing surface water converges to a single point, such as a river mouth, or flows into another body of water, such as a lake or ocean.

See also [ edit ] Wetlands portal Continental Divide of the Americas – Principal hydrological divide of North and South America Integrated catchment management – Environmental planning Interbasin transfer – Transfer of water from one river basin to another International Journal of River Basin Management ( JRBM ) International Network of Basin Organizations Main stem – Final large channel of a riverine system River basin management plans – Water resources management River bifurcation – Forking of a river into its distributaries Tenaja – Natural water basin Time of concentration Catchment hydrology References [ edit ] ^ "drainage basin" .

The Physical Environment . University of Wisconsin–Stevens Point. Archived from the original on March 21, 2004.

^ "What is a watershed and why should I care?" . University of Delaware. Archived from the original on 2012-01-21 . Retrieved 2008-02-11 .

^ Lambert, David (1998).

The Field Guide to Geology . Checkmark Books. pp.

130–13 .

ISBN 0-8160-3823-6 .

^ Uereyen, Soner; Kuenzer, Claudia (9 December 2019).

"A Review of Earth Observation-Based Analyses for Major River Basins" .

Remote Sensing .

11 (24): 2951.

Bibcode : 2019RemS...11.2951U .

doi : 10.3390/rs11242951 .

^ a b Huneau, F.; Jaunat, J.; Kavouri, K.; Plagnes, V.; Rey, F.; Dörfliger, N. (2013-07-18). "Intrinsic vulnerability mapping for small mountainous karst aquifers, implementation of the new PaPRIKa method to Western Pyrenees (France)".

Engineering Geology .

161 . Elsevier: 81– 93.

Bibcode : 2013EngGe.161...81H .

doi : 10.1016/j.enggeo.2013.03.028 .

Efficient management is strongly correlated to the proper protection perimeter definition around springs and proactive regulation of land uses over the spring's catchment area ("impluvium").

^ Lachassagne, Patrick (2019-02-07).

"Natural mineral waters" . Encyclopédie de l'environnement . Retrieved 2019-06-10 .

In order to preserve the long-term stability and purity of natural mineral water, bottlers have put in place "protection policies" for the impluviums (or catchment areas) of their sources. The catchment area is the territory on which the part of precipitated rainwater and/or snowmelt that infiltrates the subsoil feeds the mineral aquifer and thus contributes to the renewal of the resource. In other words, a precipitated drop on the impluvium territory may join the mineral aquifer; ...

^ Labat, D.; Ababou, R.; Manginb, A. (2000-12-05). "Rainfall–runoff relations for karstic springs. Part I: convolution and spectral analyses".

Journal of Hydrology .

238 ( 3– 4): 123– 148.

Bibcode : 2000JHyd..238..123L .

doi : 10.1016/S0022-1694(00)00321-8 .

The non-karstic impluvium comprises all elements of the ground surface and soils that are poorly permeable, on a part of which water is running while also infiltrating on another minor part. This superficial impluvium, if it exists, constitutes the first level of organization of the drainage system of the karstic basin.

^ a b "Hydrologic Unit Geography" . Virginia Department of Conservation & Recreation. Archived from the original on 14 December 2012 . Retrieved 21 November 2010 .

^ a b Vörösmarty, C. J.; Fekete, B. M.; Meybeck, M.; Lammers, R. B. (2000).

"Global system of rivers: Its role in organizing continental land mass and defining land-to-ocean linkages" .

Global Biogeochemical Cycles .

14 (2): 599– 621.

Bibcode : 2000GBioC..14..599V .

doi : 10.1029/1999GB900092 .

ISSN 1944-9224 .

S2CID 129463497 .

^ "Largest Drainage Basins in the World" .

WorldAtlas . 17 May 2018.

^ "drainage basin Definition, Example, & Facts" .

Encyclopedia Britannica . Retrieved 2021-10-22 .

^ "Watersheds and Drainage Basins" .

U.S. Geological Survey . June 8, 2019.

Archived from the original on 2021-10-22 . Retrieved 2021-10-22 .

^ Earle, Steven (2015-09-01).

"13.2 Drainage Basins" .

Physical Geology . BCcampus Open Publishing.

Archived from the original on Apr 15, 2024.

^ Bell, V. A.; Moore, R. J. (1998).

"A grid-based distributed flood forecasting model for use with weather radar data: Part 1. Formulation" (PDF) .

Hydrology and Earth System Sciences .

2 (2/3).

Copernicus Publications : 265– 281.

Bibcode : 1998HESS....2..265B .

doi : 10.5194/hess-2-265-1998 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on Jan 18, 2024 – via HAL.

^ Subramanya, K (2008).

Engineering Hydrology . Tata McGraw-Hill. p. 298.

ISBN 978-0-07-064855-5 .

^ "EN 0705 isochrone map" .

UNESCO . Archived from the original on November 22, 2012 . Retrieved March 21, 2012 .

^ "Isochron Map" . Archived from the original on 2021-09-03 . Retrieved 2021-09-03 .

^ "Twin Cities Metropolitan Area (TCMA) Watersheds" .

Minnesota Pollution Control Agency . 2010-09-07 . Retrieved 2021-09-22 .

^ bin Talal, Hassan; Waslekar, Sundeep (25 November 2013).

"Water Cooperation for a Secure World" .

www.strategicforesight.com .

v t e River morphology Large-scale features Alluvial plain Drainage basin Drainage system (geomorphology) Estuary Strahler number (stream order) River valley River delta River sinuosity Alluvial rivers Anabranch Avulsion (river) Bar (river morphology) Braided river Channel pattern Cut bank Floodplain Meander Meander cutoff Mouth bar Oxbow lake Point bar Riffle Rapids Riparian zone River bifurcation River channel migration River mouth Slip-off slope Stream pool Thalweg Bedrock river Canyon Knickpoint Plunge pool Bedforms Ait Antidune Dune Current ripple Regional processes Aggradation Base level Degradation (geology) Erosion and tectonics River rejuvenation Mechanics Deposition (geology) Water erosion Exner equation Hack's law Helicoidal flow Playfair's law Sediment transport List of rivers that have reversed direction Category v t e Rivers , streams and springs Rivers ( lists ) Alluvial river Braided river Blackwater river Channel Channel pattern Channel types Confluence Distributary Drainage basin Mountain river Subterranean river River bifurcation River ecosystem River source Tributary Streams Arroyo Beck Bourne Burn Chalk stream Coulee Current Stream bed Stream channel Streamflow Stream gradient Stream pool Perennial stream Winterbourne Springs ( list ) Estavelle/Inversac Geyser Holy well Hot spring list list in the US Karst spring list Mineral spring Ponor Rhythmic spring Spring horizon Sedimentary processes and erosion Abrasion Anabranch Aggradation Armor Bed load Bed material load Granular flow Debris flow Deposition Dissolved load Downcutting Erosion Headward erosion Knickpoint Palaeochannel Progradation Retrogradation Saltation Secondary flow Sediment transport Suspended load Wash load Water gap Fluvial landforms Ait Alluvial fan Antecedent drainage stream Avulsion Bank Bar Bayou Billabong Canyon Chine Cut bank Estuary Floating island Fluvial terrace Gill Gulch Gully Glen Meander scar Mouth bar Oxbow lake Riffle-pool sequence Point bar Ravine Rill River island Rock-cut basin Sedimentary basin Sedimentary structures Strath Thalweg River valley Wadi Fluvial flow Helicoidal flow International scale of river difficulty Log jam Meander Plunge pool Rapids Riffle Shoal Stream capture Waterfall list of waterfalls Whitewater Surface runoff Agricultural wastewater First flush Urban runoff Floods and stormwater 100-year flood Crevasse splay Flash flood Flood Urban flooding Non-water flood Flood barrier Flood control Flood forecasting Flood-meadow Floodplain Flood pulse concept Flooded grasslands and savannas Inundation Storm Water Management Model Return period Point source pollution Effluent Industrial wastewater Sewage River measurement and modelling Baer's law Baseflow Bradshaw model Discharge (hydrology) Drainage density Exner equation Groundwater model Hack's law Hjulström curve Hydrograph Hydrological model Hydrological transport model Infiltration (hydrology) Main stem Playfair's law Relief ratio River Continuum Concept Rouse number Runoff curve number Runoff model (reservoir) Stream gauge Universal Soil Loss Equation WAFLEX Wetted perimeter Volumetric flow rate River engineering Aqueduct Balancing lake Canal Check dam Dam Drop structure Daylighting Detention basin Erosion control Fish ladder Floodplain restoration Flume Infiltration basin Leat Levee River morphology Retention basin Revetment Riparian-zone restoration Stream restoration Weir River sports Canyoning Fly fishing Rafting River surfing Riverboarding Stone skipping Triathlon Whitewater canoeing Whitewater kayaking Whitewater slalom Related Aquifer Aquatic toxicology Body of water Hydraulic civilization Limnology Riparian zone River valley civilization River cruise Sacred waters Surface water Wild river Rivers by length Rivers by discharge rate Drainage basins Whitewater rivers Flash floods River name etymologies Countries without rivers v t e Wetlands Types and landforms Natural Backswamp Bayou Beach meadow Blackwater river Bofedales Bog Blanket bog Cataract bog Coastal bog Kermi bog Plateau bog Polygonal bog Raised bog String bog Upland bog Callows Carr Alder carr Ciénega Clearwater river Cypress dome Dambo Fen Fen-meadow Poor fen Rich fen Flark Flood-meadow Flooded grasslands and savannas Grass valley Guelta Hamun Igapó Ings Interdunal wetland Intertidal wetland Kettle Lagg Marsh Brackish marsh Freshwater marsh Inland salt marsh Salt marsh Tidal marsh High marsh Low marsh Mere Misse Moorland Mudflat Muskeg Oasis Pakihi Palsa Palustrine wetland Peatland, mire, and quagmire Pocosin Pond Pothole Reed bed Salt pannes and pools Slough Swamp Coniferous swamp Freshwater swamp forest Mangrove forest Myristica swamp Peat swamp forest Shrub swamp Wet meadow Várzea forest Vernal pool Whitewater river Yaéré Artificial Bog garden Constructed wetland Converted wetland Swale Water-meadow Life List of wetland plants List of fen plants Sphagnum Soil mechanics Acrotelm Histosol Peat Sapric or muck Tropical peat Hydric soil Marsh gas Ombrotrophic Processes Halosere Hydrosere Paludification Salt marsh dieback Classifications A Directory of Important Wetlands in Australia National Wetlands Inventory Ramsar Classification System for Wetland Type Conservation Clean Water Act Greenhouse gas emissions from wetlands Marsh organ Ramsar Convention Ramsar site List Salt marsh die-off Wetland indicator status Organizations Bangladesh Haor and Wetland Development Board Delta Waterfowl Foundation Ducks Unlimited Irish Peatland Conservation Council Meadowview Biological Research Station Society of Wetland Scientists Wetlands International Wildfowl & Wetlands Trust Related articles Aquatic ecosystem Bog body Bog butter Bog iron Bog-wood List of bogs Drainage basin Estuary Riparian zone River delta Telmatology Turbary Will-o'-the-wisp Wetlands portal Category Authority control databases National United States France BnF data Czech Republic Israel Other NARA Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐lxtr4
Cached time: 20250815094927
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.607 seconds
Real time usage: 0.821 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 4345/1000000
Revision size: 24560/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 122599/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 3686/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 12/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 103523/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.382/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 25146344/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  673.130      1 -total
 26.91%  181.107      1 Template:Reflist
 15.40%  103.686     10 Template:Annotated_link
 15.40%  103.672     10 Template:Cite_web
 12.44%   83.766      5 Template:Navbox
 10.72%   72.140      1 Template:Lang
 10.23%   68.850      1 Template:River_morphology
  8.69%   58.512      1 Template:Short_description
  6.64%   44.706      1 Template:Redirect2
  5.72%   38.507      1 Template:Authority_control Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:191162:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250815094927 and revision id 1294231159. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Drainage_basin&oldid=1294231159 " Categories : Drainage basins Fluvial landforms Freshwater ecology Geomorphology Hydrology Rivers Water and the environment Water streams Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from May 2025 Articles with unsourced statements from January 2017 Articles containing Spanish-language text Articles with unsourced statements from April 2023 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from October 2024 This page was last edited on 6 June 2025, at 12:50 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Drainage basin 97 languages Add topic

