Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Traditional 1.2 Modern 1.2.1 Conservation 1.2.2 Shore diving 1.2.3 Boat diving 1.2.4 Blue water hunting 1.2.5 Freshwater hunting 1.2.6 Without diving 2 Equipment Toggle Equipment subsection 2.1 Speargun 2.2 Polespear 2.3 Hawaiian slings 2.4 Wetsuit 2.5 Weight belt or vest 2.6 Fins 2.7 Diving knife or cutters 2.8 Kill spike 2.9 Buoy and floatline 2.10 Gloves 2.11 Stringer 2.12 Snorkel and diving mask 2.13 Diver down flag 3 Management 4 Competitive spearfishing 5 Notable spearfishers 6 See also 7 References 8 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Spearfishing 21 languages العربية Català Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Lietuvių Nederlands 日本語 Português Română Русский Simple English Suomi 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Hunting for fish using a spear "Spearfisherman" redirects here. For the former diving gear company, see Spearfisherman (company) .

For the targeted social engineering attack, see spear-phishing .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Spearfishing" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( July 2011 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Spearfisher Monument in Croatia Spearfishing is fishing using handheld elongated, sharp-pointed tools such as a spear , gig , or harpoon , to impale the fish in the body. It was one of the earliest fishing techniques used by mankind , and has been deployed in artisanal fishing throughout the world for millennia. Early civilizations were familiar with the custom of spearing fish from rivers and streams using sharpened sticks.

Modern spearfishing usually involves the use of underwater swimming gear and slingshot -like elastic spearguns or compressed gas powered pneumatic spearguns, which launch a tethered dart -like projectile to strike the target fish. Specialised techniques and equipment have been developed for various types of aquatic environments and target fish. Spearfishing uses no bait and is highly selective, with no by-catch , but inflicts lethal injury to the fish and thus precludes catch and release .

Spearfishing may be done using free-diving , snorkelling , or scuba diving techniques, but spearfishing while using scuba equipment is illegal in some countries. The use of mechanically powered spearguns is also outlawed in some countries and jurisdictions such as New Zealand .

History [ edit ] Fisherman with a spear in a wall painting from the tomb of Usheret in Thebes, 18 Dynasty, around 1430 BC A Hawaiian spearfisher (1909).

Spearfishing with barbed poles ( harpoons ) was widespread in palaeolithic times.

[ 1 ] Cosquer Cave in Southern France contains cave art over 16,000 years old, including drawings of seals which appear to have been harpooned.

[ citation needed ] There are references to fishing with spears in ancient literature; though, in most cases, the descriptions do not go into detail. An early example from the Bible is in Job 41:7 : Canst thou fill his [Leviathan] skin with barbed irons? or his head with fish spears?

.

The Greek historian Polybius ( ca 203 BC–120 BC), in his Histories , describes hunting for swordfish by using a harpoon with a barbed and detachable head.

[ 2 ] Greek author Oppian of Corycus wrote a major treatise on sea fishing, the Halieulica or Halieutika , composed between 177 and 180. This is the earliest such work to have survived intact. Oppian describes various means of fishing including the use of spears and tridents.

[ 3 ] In a parody of fishing, a type of gladiator called retiarius carried a trident and a casting-net . He fought the murmillo , who carried a short sword and a helmet with the image of a fish on the front.

[ 4 ] Copper harpoons were known to the seafaring Harappans [ 5 ] well into antiquity.

[ 6 ] Early hunters in India include the Mincopie people, aboriginal inhabitants of India 's Andaman and Nicobar islands, who have used harpoons with long cords for fishing since early times.

[ 7 ] Poseidon/Neptune sculpture in Copenhagen Port Mosaic, 4th century BC, showing a retiarius or "net fighter", with a trident and cast net, fighting a secutor .

Dutch fishermen using tridents in the 17th century Traditional [ edit ] Head of an arrow used for fishing, from Guyana .

Spear fishing is an ancient method of fishing and may be conducted with an ordinary spear or a specialised variant such as an eel spear [ 8 ] [ 9 ] or the trident . A small trident-type spear with a long handle is used in the American South and Midwest for gigging bullfrogs with a bright light at night, or for gigging carp and other fish in the shallows.

Modern [ edit ] Traditional spear fishing is restricted to shallow waters, but the development of the speargun , diving mask and swimfins allows fishing in deeper waters. Some freedivers are able to hold their breath for more than five minutes, a diver with underwater breathing equipment can dive for much longer periods.

In the 1920s, sport spearfishing using only watertight swimming goggles became popular on the Mediterranean coast of France and Italy . This led to development of the modern diving mask , fins and snorkel . The world's first English- and French-language modern spearfishing  books, Guy Gilpatric's The Compleat Goggler and Raymond Pulvénis's La Chasse aux Poissons , appeared in 1938 and 1940 respectively. Modern scuba diving had its genesis in the systematic use of rebreathers by Italian sport spearfishers during the 1930s. This practice came to the attention of the Italian Navy , which developed its frogman unit , which affected World War II .

[ 10 ] By 1940 small groups of people in California, USA had been spearfishing for less than 10 years. Most used imported gear from Europe, while innovators Charlie Sturgill, Jack Prodanovich, [ 11 ] and Wally Potts [ 12 ] invented and built innovative equipment for California's divers.

[ 11 ] Spearfishing mask with single integrated breathing tube manufactured during the 1950s by the United Service Agency based in the French city of Nice.

In the aftermath of World War II, as the supply of the necessary raw materials improved and peacetime encouraged the development of public leisure pursuits and international tourism, the pioneers of modern spearfishing began serial production of underwater hunting equipment. Featured at length in Gilpatric's The Compleat Goggler , expatriate Russian Alec Kramarenko and American Charles Wilen founded their United Service Agency in the southern French city of Nice to manufacture a wide range of spearfishing gear, including diving masks with built-in snorkels enabling swimmers to breathe face down on the surface of the water for long periods while stalking their prey unencumbered by the constant oral presence of a mouthpiece.

During the 1960s, attempts to have spearfishing recognised as an Olympic sport were unsuccessful. Instead, two organisations, the International Underwater Spearfishing Association [ 13 ] (IUSA) and the International Bluewater Spearfishing Records Committee (IBSRC), list world record catches by species according to rules to ensure fair competition. Spearfishing is illegal in many bodies of water, and some locations only allow spearfishing during certain seasons.

Conservation [ edit ] Spearfishing has been implicated in local disappearances of some species, including the Atlantic goliath grouper on the Caribbean island of Bonaire , the Nassau grouper in the barrier reef off the coast of Belize and the giant black sea bass in California , which have all been listed as endangered.

[ citation needed ] Modern spearfishing has shifted focus onto catching only what one needs and targeting sustainable fisheries. As gear evolved in the 1960s and 1970s spearfishers typically viewed the ocean as an unlimited resource and often sold their catch. This practice is now heavily frowned upon in prominent spearfishing nations for promoting unsustainable methods and encouraging taking more fish than is needed. In countries such as Australia and South Africa where the activity is regulated by state fisheries, spearfishing has been found to be the most  environmentally friendly form of fishing due to being highly selective, having no by-catch, causing no habitat damage, nor creating pollution or harm to protected endangered species.

[ 14 ] In 2007, the Australian Bluewater Freediving Classic became the first spearfishing tournament to be accredited and was awarded 4 out of 5 stars based on environmental, social, safety and economic indicators.

[ 15 ] Shore diving [ edit ] Spearfisherman hunting Yellowfin tuna in the Ryukyu Islands Shore diving is perhaps the most common form of spearfishing [ 16 ] [ 17 ] and simply involves entering and exiting the sea from beaches or headlands and hunting around ocean structures, [ 18 ] usually reef , but also rocks, kelp or sand. Usually shore divers hunt at depths of 5–25 metres (16–82 ft), depending on location. In some locations, divers can experience drop-offs from 5 to 40 metres (16 to 131 ft) close to the shore line.

Sharks and reef fish can be abundant in these locations. In subtropical areas, sharks may be less common, but other challenges face the shore diver, such as managing entry and exit in the presence of big waves. Headlands are favoured for entry because of their proximity to deeper water, but timing is important so the diver does not get pushed onto rocks by waves. Beach entry can be safer, but more difficult due to the need to repeatedly dive through the waves until the surf line is crossed. Divers may enter from a relatively exposed headland, for convenience, then swim to a more protected part of the shore for their exit from the water.

Shore dives produce mainly reef fish, but oceangoing pelagic fish are also caught from shore dives in some places, and can be specifically targeted.

Shore diving can be done with trigger-less spears such as pole spears or Hawaiian slings , but more commonly triggered devices such as spearguns.

[ citation needed ] Speargun setups to catch and store fish include speed rigs [ clarification needed ] and fish stringers.

Boat diving [ edit ] Boats, ships, kayaks, or even jetski can be used to access offshore reefs or ocean structure. Man-made structures such as oil rigs and Fish Aggregating Devices (FADs) are also fished. Sometimes a boat is necessary to access a location that is close to shore, but inaccessible by land.

Methods and gear used for boat diving are similar to shore diving or blue water hunting, depending on the target prey.

Boat diving is a worldwide activity. Hot spots include Mozambique , the Three Kings islands of New Zealand ( yellowtail ), Gulf of Mexico oil rigs ( cobia , grouper ) and the Great Barrier Reef ( wahoo , dogtooth tuna ). The deepwater fishing grounds off Cape Point, (Cape Town, South Africa) have become popular with trophy hunting , freediving spearfishers in search of Yellowfin Tuna.

[ citation needed ] Blue water hunting [ edit ] Blue water hunting involves diving in open ocean waters for pelagic species. It involves accessing usually very deep and clear water and chumming for large pelagic fish species such as marlin , tuna , wahoo , or giant trevally . Blue water hunting is often conducted in drifts; the boat driver drops divers and allow them to drift in the current for up to several kilometres before collecting them. Blue water hunters can go for hours without seeing any fish, and without any ocean structure or a visible bottom the divers can experience sensory deprivation and have difficulty determining the size of a solitary fish. One technique to overcome this is to note the size of the fish's eye in relation to its body. Large specimens have a proportionally smaller eye.

The creation of the Australian Bluewater Freediving Classic in 1995 in northern New South Wales was a way of creating interest and promotion of this format of underwater hunting, and contributed to the formation of the International Bluewater Spearfishing Records Committee .

[ citation needed ] The IBSRC formed in 1996, was the first dedicated organization worldwide, created by recognized world leaders in blue-water hunting, to record the capture of pelagic species by blue-water hunters.

[ citation needed ] The Blue Water World Cup in La Ventana, BCS, Mexico has also brought a large amount of notoriety to the sport. Started in 2006 by Dennis Haussler. Elite spearfishers from all over the world compete in a 4 day format that involves very selective spearing of pelagic species, with Wahoo, AmberJack, Dorado, Roosterfish, Marlin and Tuna being the target species. The diving is dynamic and challenging with depths that vary from 15 ft to over 100 ft.

Notably, some blue water hunters use large multi-band wooden guns and make use of breakaway rigs to catch and subdue their prey. If the prey is large and still has fight left after being subdued, a second gun can provide a kill shot at a safe distance. This is acceptable to IBSRC and IUSA regulations as long as the spearo loads it himself in the water.

[ 19 ] Blue water hunting is conducted worldwide, but notable hot spots include Baja Mexico ( yellowfin tuna , wahoo ), Southern California ( bluefin tuna ), Tanzania ( dogtooth tuna , wahoo and yellowfin tuna ), Mozambique ( dogtooth tuna , wahoo and giant turrum ), South Africa ( Yellowfin tuna , Spanish Mackerel , wahoo, marlin and giant turrum), Australia (dogtooth tuna, wahoo and Spanish Mackerel) and the South Pacific (dogtooth tuna).

Freshwater hunting [ edit ] A common carp shot with a band-powered speargun by a diver using snorkelling gear, Minnesota, US Freshwater pike catch in Finland Many US states allow spearfishing in lakes and rivers, but most of them restrict divers to shooting only rough fish such as carp , gar , bullheads , suckers, etc. Some US states do allow the taking of certain gamefish such as sunfish , crappies , striped bass , catfish and walleyes . Freshwater hunters typically have to deal with widely varying seasonal changes in water clarity due to flooding, algae blooms and lake turnover. Some especially hardy midwestern and north central scuba divers go spearfishing under the ice in the winter when water clarity is at its best.

[ citation needed ] In the summer the majority of freshwater spearfishers use snorkelling gear rather than scuba since many of the fish they pursue are in relatively shallow water. Carp shot by freshwater spearfishers typically end up being used as fertilizer, bait for trappers, or are occasionally donated to zoos.

[ citation needed ] Without diving [ edit ] Further information: gigging Night spear fishing, Amazon basin, Peru Menominees spearfishing salmon at night by torchlight and canoe on Fox River A Hupa man with his spear Inuk hunter with harpoon in kayak, Hudson Bay, circa 1908-1914 Spearfishing with a hand-held spear from land, shallow water or boat has been undertaken for thousands of years. The fisher must account for optical refraction at the water's surface, which makes fish appear higher in their line of sight than they are. By experience, the fisher learns to aim lower. Calm and shallow waters are favored for spearing fish from above the surface, as water clarity is of utmost importance. Many people who grew up on farms in the midwest U.S. in the 1940s-'60s recall going spearing for carp with pitchforks when their fields flooded in the spring. Spearfishing in this manner has some similarities to bowfishing .

[ 20 ] Equipment [ edit ] This is a list of equipment commonly used in spearfishing. Not all of it is necessary and spearfishing is often undertaken with minimal gear.

Speargun [ edit ] A speargun is an underwater fishing tool designed to launch a tethered short spear at a fish or other marine animal (e.g. a lobster ). The most popular spearguns are elastically powered by natural latex rubber bands like a slingshot , while pneumatic powered spearguns are also used, but are less powerful.

[ 21 ] Polespear [ edit ] Polespears or hand spears consist of a long shaft with point at one end and an elastic loop at the other for propulsion. They also come in a wide variety, from aluminum or titanium metal, to fiberglass or carbon fiber . Often they are screwed together from smaller pieces or able to be folded down for ease of transport. In 1951 Charlie Sturgill beat the competition (who were all using spearguns) with his own pole spear design.

[ 22 ] Hawaiian slings [ edit ] Hawaiian slings consist of an elastic band attached to a tube, through which a spear is launched.

[ 23 ] Wetsuit [ edit ] Wetsuits designed specifically for spearfishing are often two-piece (jacket and high waisted pants or  'long-john' style pants with shoulder straps) and are black or are fully or partially camouflage.

Weight belt or vest [ edit ] Weight belt and vest are used to compensate for wetsuit buoyancy and help the diver descend to depth.  Rubber belts which can be quickly released in an emergency have proven to be particularly popular for spearfishing worldwide. This is because the rubber stretches when fitted and retracts as the body and wetsuit compress underwater, keeping them in place more effectively than non-stretch webbing belts, which tend to slide around more underwater as they loosen with depth.

[ 24 ] Most spearfishing equipment manufacturers now offer rubber weight belts.

[ citation needed ] Fins [ edit ] Longfins are the most common type of fins used by modern freedivers and spearfishermen. The length of the freediving longfin blade provides energy and oxygen consumption benefits during all phases of the dive. Longfin blades are constructed with a variety of materials, including plastic, fiberglass, and carbon fiber. Many hunters chose longfins with camouflage color patters. The foot pocket is closed and not adjustable. For many decades, women divers faced significant difficulty finding proper fitting foot pockets for freediving longfins, as the industry is vastly dominated by men. Only in recent years have more companies offered foot pockets that fit women and youth divers. The industry also offers more variety in fin blades that vary in thickness to offer different levels of kicking resistance for divers. Properly fitting foot pockets and appropriately matched fin blades are essential for freediving form.

The types of fins used by SCUBA divers are generally shorter, bulky, and not favored for freediving. SCUBA diving fins usually feature an open heel design with buckles and straps. The fin blades often have bright colors and may be split down the middle.

Bodysurfing fins have also been used successfully by many spearfishermen.

Diving knife or cutters [ edit ] A utility knife or side cutter (typically made of saltwater corrosion-resistant material such as stainless steel or titanium alloy ) is carried as a safety precaution in case the diver becomes tangled in a spearline or floatline. It can also be used to deliver a coup de grâce and kill the fish quickly.

Kill spike [ edit ] In lieu of a knife, a sharpened metal spike can be used to kill the fish quickly and humanely upon capture.

Ikejime is a Japanese term for kill-spiking a fish, a method traditionally used by Japanese fishermen. Killing the fish quickly is believed to improve the flavor of the flesh by limiting the buildup of lactic acid in the fish's muscles.

[ citation needed ] It also reduces chance of attracting opportunistic sharks by stopping the fish thrashing.

Buoy and floatline [ edit ] A buoy is usually tethered to the spearfisher's speargun or directly to the spear. A buoy helps to subdue large fish. It can also assist in storing fish. But is more importantly used as a safety device to warn boat drivers there is diver in the area - usually by being large, brightly colored and flying a dive flag (the red flag with white diagonal stripe in the USA or the blue & white "alpha" flag elsewhere in the world). A typical spearo dive float will be torpedo-shaped, orange or red in colour with a volume of between 7 and 36 litres and display a dive flag on a short mast.

[ citation needed ] However, other designs, such as inflatable mini-dinghy, planche (box), Tommy Botha (big game) [ clarification needed ] and body-boards are also used.

[ citation needed ] A floatline connects the buoy to the speargun or to the weight-belt. Often made from braided polyester , they are also frequently made from mono-filament encased in an airtight plastic tube, or made from stretchable bungee cord .

[ citation needed ] Gloves [ edit ] Cut-resistant gloves protect the hands when retrieving fish from coral or rock crevices, when loading the bands on rubber powered spearguns and from the teeth and spines of struggling fish. They are also used for thermal protection in colder water.

Stringer [ edit ] Fish stringers are used to store speared fish while diving. Usually a length of cable, cord, string or monofilament terminated by a loop (and sometimes a swivel) at one end and a large stainless steel pin/spike at the other. The pin is typically 15–30 cm long, 4-8mm diameter, with a sharp point at one end, and with the cable threaded through a hole, usually in the middle, so the spike functions as a toggle once threaded. The pin can optionally be used as an iki jime spike, to dispatch speared fish. It can alternatively be a large, shaped loop of stainless steel.

[ clarification needed ] The stringer may be attached to the dive float, especially in areas of high shark activity, although some divers will use a clip to attach their stringer to their weight belt, or the base of their speargun.

[ 25 ] Snorkel and diving mask [ edit ] Spearfishing snorkels and diving masks are similar to those used for scuba diving , although spearfishing masks usually have two eye lenses and a lower internal volume.

Diver down flag [ edit ] The "Diver Down" flag (also called a "dive flag") is a warning flag floating on the water to indicate to other boats , personal watercrafts and aircraft that there is a diver below. When in use, it signals to other boats to keep clear, watch for divers in the water, and approach at a slow speed.

Management [ edit ] Office of the Hellenic Federation of Underwater Activity & Sport Fishing Spearfishing is intensively managed throughout the world.

The use of SCUBA equipment for spearfishing is now illegal in many parts of the world, although it remains legal and popular within many parts of the United States. Within the EU, the use of SCUBA for spearfishing is now illegal, in addition to a ban on spearfishing at night.

[ 26 ] European countries that are not within EU law do not have this regulation. The use of SCUBA is banned from CMAS Spearfishing Competition events.

Australia allows only recreational spearfishing and generally only breath-hold free diving. State & territory governments impose numerous restrictions, demarcating Marine Protected Areas, Closed Areas, Protected Species, size/bag limits and equipment. Most of the authorities have different set of rules, recommendations, and regulations to be followed when it comes to spearfishing; for example; Dive Newcastle recommends spearfishing being accompanied by a friend.

[ 27 ] The body principally concerned with spearfishing is the Australian Underwater Federation , Australia's peak recreational diving body. The AUF's vision for spearfishing is "Safe, Sustainable, Selective, Spearfishing". The AUF provides membership, advocacy and organises competitions.

[ 28 ] Regulations governing spearfishing in Tanzania have been the subject of controversy. Commercial spearfishing is illegal [ 29 ] while spearfishing for sport is legal but requires that Tanzanian citizens hold a specific sport spearfishing license.

[ 29 ] Foreigners may spearfish for sport only if they are accompanied by a registered and authorized sport spearfishing charter operator.

[ 30 ] Norway has a relatively large ratio of coastline to population, and has one of the most liberal spearfishing rules in the northern hemisphere. Spearfishing with scuba gear is widespread among recreational divers. Restrictions in Norway are limited to anadrome species, like Atlantic salmon , sea trout , and lobster .

[ 31 ] In Mexico a regular fishing permit allows spearfishing, but not electro-mechanical spearguns. Spearfishing with scuba gear is illegal and the use of power heads as well. Penalties are severe and include fines, confiscation of gear and even imprisonment.

[ 32 ] United States has different spearfishing regulations for each state. In Florida spearfishing is restricted to several hundred yards offshore in many areas and the usage of a powerhead is prohibited within state waters. Many types of fish are currently under heavy bag restrictions.

[ citation needed ] In California only recreational spearfishing is allowed. California also imposes numerous restrictions, demarcating Marine protected areas , closed areas, protected species, size/bag limits and equipment.

[ 33 ] Spearfishing in Puerto Rico has its own set of rules. Here you are allowed to freedive with a speargun in marine waters. Spearfishing with scuba gear or in freshwater is not allowed.

[ 34 ] In the UK, while spearfishing is not explicitly regulated, it is instead subject to both local (typically bye-laws ) and national-level legislation relating to permitted fish species and minimum size limits.  For example, it is not permitted to spearfish in freshwater and the non-tidal reaches of rivers.

[ 35 ] Under recent EU guidelines, recreational spearfishing is now explicitly permitted in the EU's Atlantic waters.

[ citation needed ] Competitive spearfishing [ edit ] Further information: Freediving § Competitive spearfishing Competitive spearfishing is defined by the world governing body CMAS as "the hunting and capture of fish underwater without the aid of artificial breathing devices, using gear that depends entirely on the physical strength of the competitor." They publish a set of competition rules that are used by affiliated organisations.

[ 36 ] [ 37 ] Since 1994, spearfishing has been at the Micronesian Games , with modern spearfishing making its debut in 2006.

[ 38 ] [ 39 ] Notable spearfishers [ edit ] This is an alphabetic list of spearfishers who are confirmed by a reliable source or an existing Wikipedia article.

Rob Allen - South Africa [ 40 ] Olivier Bardoux - France [ 41 ] James Borja - Guam [ 42 ] Tommy Botha - South Africa [ 43 ] Mike Cassidy - Guam [ 44 ] Peter Crawford - England, 13 times UK champion [ 45 ] Ben Cropp – Australian documentary filmmaker, conservationist and spearfisherman Ray Flores - Guam [ 46 ] Michael Genereux - Guam [ 47 ] Wally Gibbons [ 48 ] Guy Gilpatric – American journalist James Grant - New Zealand [ 49 ] David J. Hochman - World Record Holder, Men's Speargun, Striped Bass, 31.0 kg/68.4 lbs; Men's Polespear, Striped Bass, 23.8 kg/52.4 lbs [ 50 ] Harold Holt – Prime Minister of Australia from 1966 to 1967 - Australian prime minister [ 51 ] Cameron Kirkconnell - 12x world record holder [ 52 ] [ 40 ] Mohammed Jassim Al-Kuwari - Qatar [ 40 ] George "Doc" Lopez – Freediver and spearfisherman Terry Maas - USA [ 40 ] Clint Madracheluib - Palau [ 53 ] Barry Paxman - Australia [ 40 ] Raymond Pulvénis - France; equipment inventor and manufacturer; author of first French book entirely dedicated to spearfishing ( La chasse aux poissons , 1940) [ 54 ] [ 55 ] Felix Sasamoto - Northern Mariana Islands [ 56 ] Gérard Ségura - France [ 57 ] Moy Shmull - Palau [ 58 ] Dr Adam Smith - Australian national champion, scientist, author of Underwater fishing in Australia and New Zealand [ 59 ] Charlie Sturgill - USA; US National spearfishing champion 1951; innovator of modern spearfishing equipment [ 22 ] Ron Taylor – Australian diver and shark cinematographer Valerie Taylor – Australian underwater photographer Valentine Thomas - former Lawyer and current spearfisher and sustainability advocate [ 60 ] Daryl Wong - USA equipment maker [ 61 ] See also [ edit ] Underwater target shooting – Breathhold underwater sport of target shooting with a speargun in a swimming pool.

Gaffing – Hooked pole for pulling fish out of water Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Bowfishing – Fishing with archery equipment References [ edit ] ^ Guthrie, Dale Guthrie (2005) The Nature of Paleolithic Art.

Page 298. University of Chicago Press.

ISBN 0-226-31126-0 ^ Polybius, "Fishing for Swordfish" , Histories Book 34.3 ( Evelyn S. Shuckburgh , translator). London, New York: Macmillan, 1889. Reprint Bloomington, 1962.

^ Henderson, Jeffrey.

"General Index to Oppian" .

Loeb Classical Library .

^ "Retiarius Gladiator | Retiarius" .

www.warriorsandlegends.com .

^ Ray, Himanshu Prabha (2003). The Archaeology of Seafaring in Ancient South Asia. Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 0-521-01109-4 . page 93 ^ F.R. Allchin in South Asian Archaeology 1975: Papers from the Third International Conference of the Association of South Asian Archaeologists in Western Europe, Held in Paris (December 1979) edited by J.E.van Lohuizen-de Leeuw. Brill Academic Publishers, Incorporated. Page 106 ISBN 90-04-05996-2 ^ Edgerton; et al. (2002). Indian and Oriental Arms and Armour. Courier Dover Publications.

ISBN 0-486-42229-1 . page 74 ^ "Water: The Riches of Clare" .

www.clarelibrary.ie . Clare County Library. Archived from the original on 9 April 2023 . Retrieved 18 October 2017 .

^ Alice Ross .

"Getting a Feel for the Eel" .

Journal of Antiques and Collectibles . Archived from the original on 13 August 2009 . Retrieved 18 October 2017 .

^ Quick, D. (1970).

"A History Of Closed Circuit Oxygen Underwater Breathing Apparatus" .

Royal Australian Navy, School of Underwater Medicine .

RANSUM -1-70. Archived from the original on May 9, 2008 . Retrieved 2008-04-25 .

^ a b "San Diego Union-Tribune Obituaries: Complete listing of San Diego Union-Tribune Obituaries powered by Legacy.com" .

San Diego Union-Tribune . Retrieved 26 January 2016 .

^ "Wally Potts, 83; Pioneering Diver, Spear Fisherman" .

Los Angeles Times . 16 February 2002 . Retrieved 26 January 2016 .

^ "iusarecords.com" . iusarecords.com . Retrieved 2014-03-24 .

^ Smith, Adam; Nakaya, Seiji (21–24 May 2002).

Spearfishing – is it ecologically sustainable?

(PDF) . 3rd World Recreational Fishing Conference. 21–24 May 2002. pp.

19– 22. Archived from the original (PDF) on 20 June 2012 . Retrieved 21 August 2013 .

^ Sawynok, Bill; Diggles, Ben; Harrison, John (2008).

2006/057: Development of a national environmental management and accreditation system for business/public recreational fishing competitions (PDF) . Frenchville Qld: Recfish Australia. pp. 15, 32.

ISBN 978-0-9775165-5-1 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2016-03-04 . Retrieved 21 August 2013 .

^ "Shore Dive Spearfishing" . August 23, 2015.

^ "Spearfishing Shore Dive Tips and Tricks" .

ultimatespearfishing.com . Archived from the original on 2015-05-10.

^ "Guide for Shore dive spearfishing, how to plan and prepare" . August 13, 2015.

^ "IUSA Rules" .

www.iusarecords.com . Retrieved 2021-12-06 .

^ Otto Gabriel; Klaus Lange; Erdmann Dahm; Thomas Wendt (26 August 2005).

Fish Catching Methods of the World . Wiley.

ISBN 978-0-85238-280-6 .

^ "Rubber vs Pneumatic Spearguns" .

Adreno Spearfishing Blog - Speargun & Wetsuit Online Megastore - Spearfishing - Freediving - Snorkeling - Brisbane - Australia . Retrieved 26 January 2016 .

^ a b Sellers, Bob (August 31, 2004).

"Charlie Sturgill" (PDF) .

fathomiers.net . Retrieved April 24, 2017 .

^ Steven M. Barsky (1997).

Spearfishing for Skin and Scuba Divers . Best Publishing Company.

ISBN 978-0-941332-59-0 .

^ Bennett, Travis (8 August 2017).

"Spearfishing tips - The correct way to setup your weight belt for spearfishing" .

www.maxspearfishing.com . Max Spearfishing . Retrieved 4 September 2017 .

^ Bennett, Travis (29 August 2017).

"Spearfishing accessories - Why You Need a Spearfishing Stringer" .

www.maxspearfishing.com . Max Spearfishing . Retrieved 18 October 2017 .

^ "Clear rules on prohibited fishing gear and more flexibility for EU fishermen | News | European Parliament" .

www.europarl.europa.eu . November 21, 2017.

^ "5 Things to Know About Spearfishing for Beginners" .

Dive Newcastle Scuba & Equipment . 2023-05-04 . Retrieved 2023-10-25 .

^ "Australian Underwater Federation - Spearfishing" . Australian Underwater Federation. 24 June 2012 . Retrieved 14 May 2015 .

^ a b "Zanzibar Fisheries Act no.8 of 1988" (PDF) .

^ "Approval for the Establishment of Recreational Sport Spearfishing of Zanzibar" (PDF) .

^ "Spearfishing in Norway" . Archived from the original on September 27, 2007.

^ "Sportfishing regulations, Conapesca Mexico San Diego Office" . Conapesca San Diego. Archived from the original on 2013-09-06 . Retrieved 2014-03-24 .

^ "Ocean Fishing: Laws and Regulations" . Dfg.ca.gov . Retrieved 2014-03-24 .

^ "Is Spearfishing Legal in the US, Australia, and the UK?)" . Outuro. 3 December 2020 . Retrieved 3 December 2020 .

^ Legal FAQs - Spearfishing in the UK , https://www.gospearfishing.co.uk/spearfishing-uk-legal-faqs/ . Retrieved on 23 July 2022.

^ "About Spearfishing" .

www.cmas.org . World Underwater Federation (CMAS). Archived from the original on 23 March 2023 . Retrieved 25 August 2017 .

^ "Underwater Fishing (Spear fishing) International Rules - English version" .

www.cmas.org . World Underwater Federation (CMAS). 23 January 2015 . Retrieved 25 August 2017 .

^ Pacific Magazine: Volume 18 . Pacific Magazine Corporation. 1993. p. 64.

^ "About Us" .

Aquasmith .

Archived from the original on September 8, 2024 . Retrieved September 8, 2024 .

^ a b c d e "Onefish Legends" .

Spearo DvD . Archived from the original on 23 April 2015 . Retrieved 14 April 2015 .

^ "21st Euro-African Spearfishing Championship" .

CMAS .

Archived from the original on 13 September 2024 . Retrieved 13 September 2024 .

^ "Results - 2014 Micronesian Games - Spearfishing" .

GameDay .

Archived from the original on September 8, 2024 . Retrieved September 8, 2024 .

^ Mass, Terry (2005).

"South African legend opens the tuna grounds" .

BlueWater Freedivers . Retrieved 14 April 2015 .

^ "Team Guam at the Micronesian Games in Yap" .

USA Today .

Archived from the original on September 12, 2024 . Retrieved September 12, 2024 .

^ "Jerseyman wins Open Spearfishing title" . Jersey Spearfishing Club. 2003 . Retrieved 15 September 2014 .

^ "Results - 2014 Micronesian Games - Spearfishing" .

GameDay .

Archived from the original on September 8, 2024 . Retrieved September 8, 2024 .

^ Tomas, Jojo Santo (July 16, 2018).

"Micronesian Games: Guam medals in individual spearfishing, 10,000-meter runs" .

USA Today .

Archived from the original on September 8, 2024 . Retrieved September 8, 2024 .

^ "In the depths of adventure" . 18 September 2006 . Retrieved 23 September 2017 .

^ "Man fights off shark, then stitches himself up" . 27 January 2014.

^ "International Underwater Spearfishing Association World Record 31.0 kg, 68.4 lbs Bass, Striped Morone saxatilis Record Category: Men Speargun" .

International Underwater Spearfishing Association . July 4, 2008 . Retrieved 20 April 2020 .

^ "National and personal tragedy" .

The Australian Women's Weekly . Vol. 35, no. 32. Australia. 3 January 1968. p. 4 . Retrieved 2 April 2018 – via National Library of Australia.

^ "Spearfishing with Cameron Kirkconnell" .

Onefish . Archived from the original on 18 October 2015 . Retrieved 14 April 2015 .

^ "Results - 2014 Micronesian Games - Spearfishing" .

GameDay .

Archived from the original on September 8, 2024 . Retrieved September 8, 2024 .

^ Vianney Mascret (2010) L'aventure sous-marine : Histoire de la plongée sous-marine de loisir en scaphandre autonome en France (1865-1985) . Thesis, Claude Bernard University, Lyon. p. 168. Full-text document at http://halshs.archives-ouvertes.fr/docs/00/83/90/91/PDF/TH2010_Mascret_Vianney.pdf . Retrieved 7 February 2019.

^ Patrick Mouton (1987) Roger Pulvénis « Père » de la chasse sous-marine , le journal de la mer . Retrieved on 12 January 2020.

^ "Micronesian Games - CNMI" .

GameDay .

Archived from the original on September 8, 2024 . Retrieved September 8, 2024 .

^ "A la chasse sous-marine : les tridents" .

www.chasse-sous-marine.com (in French).

Archived from the original on 11 July 2021 . Retrieved 13 September 2024 .

^ "Spearfishing Competition 7th Micronesian Games" .

GameDay . August 7, 2010.

Archived from the original on September 8, 2024 . Retrieved September 8, 2024 .

^ AUF Life Members (2020) "Biography Adam Smith AUF Life Member" downloaded at https://auf.com.au/auf/biographies-of-auf-life-members/#Adam-Smith 1 August 2023 ^ "Valentine Thomas – The spearfishing woman" .

^ "Wong Spearguns" . Retrieved 29 April 2020 .

Further reading [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Spearfishing .

Jones, Len (2002).

Len Jones' guide to freedive spearfishing (Australian ed.). Adrenaline Spearfishing Supplies.

ISBN 978-0-9580308-0-9 .

Smith, Adam K (2000).

Underwater fishing in Australia and New Zealand . Mountain Ocean & Travel Publications.

ISBN 978-0-646-40642-8 .

Spearfishing is it ecologically sustainable?

Archived 2007-09-28 at the Wayback Machine A paper given at the World Recreational Fishing Conference, Darwin, Australia by Adam Smith and Seji Nakaya Terry Maas (1998).

Bluewater Hunting & Freediving . Ventura, CA: BlueWater Freedivers.

ISBN 0-9644966-3-1 .

Best locations for Spearfishing in the UK v t e Fishing equipment and methods Fishing tackle Fish hook Circle hook Gaff Hookset Sniggle Fishing line Braided Knots Monofilament Multifilament Power pro Swivel Fishing sinker Arlesey Bomb Bombarda Downrigger Sandsinker Fishing rod Bamboo fly rod Fishing reel Fishing rod tapers Fly rod building Fishing bait Bait fish Boilies Chum Clonk Groundbait Vermicompost Worm charming Plastic bait Deadsticking Plastic worm Fishing lures Artificial fly Heddon Little Cleo Mormyshka Original Floater Plug Sabiki Spinnerbait Spoon lure Spoonplug Surface lure Swimbait Topwater lure Zara Spook Bite indicators Fishing float Pellet waggler Shortfloating Quiver tip Fishing rig Carolina rig Chod rig Drop shot rig Hair rig Texas rig Apparel Creel Diving mask Hip boot Personal flotation device Snorkel Waders Wetsuit Other Fish stringer Tackle box Fishing techniques Gathering Abalone Ama divers Clam digging Flounder tramping Gathering seafood by hand Noodling Pearl hunting Scallop aquaculture Trout binning Trout tickling Spears Bowfishing Gigging Harpoon Hawaiian sling Polespear Spearfishing Speargun Trident Fishing lines Angling Dropline Drum lines Handline fishing Jiggerpole Jigging Jug fishing Longline fishing Spin fishing Tip-up Trolling Trotline Fishing nets Cast net Cheena vala Drift net Ghost nets Gill net Glass floats Haaf net Hand net Ice jigger Lampara net Lampuki net Lave net Lift net Salambaw Seine net Surrounding net Tangle net Trawl net Turtle excluder device Fish traps Almadraba Barrier net Corf Crab trap Double-Heart of Stacked Stones Eel buck Fish corral Fish nest Fish wheel Fishing basket Fishing weir Lobster trap Putcher fishing Trabucco Other Basnig Blast fishing Cormorant fishing Cyanide fishing Dredging Electrofishing Electric pulse fishing Fish aggregating device Fish toxins Fishfinder Fishing light attractor Flossing Ice fishing Kite fishing Muro-ami Otter fishing Pa-aling Payaos Shrimp baiting Snagging v t e Fisheries and fishing topic areas Fisheries Aquaculture Diversity of fish Fish diseases and parasites Fish farming Fisheries management Fisheries science Individual fishing quota Sustainable fishery Overfishing Wild fisheries Fishing Artisanal fishing Fisherman Fishing vessel History of fishing Industry List of harvested aquatic animals by weight By country Commercial fishing Marketing Markets Processing Products Seafood Recreation Angling Big-game fishing Catch and release Fishing tournaments Fly fishing Techniques Destructive fishing practices Fish trap Fishfinder Fishing net Gathering seafood by hand Handline fishing Spearfishing Trawling Trolling Tackle Artificial flies Bait Bite indicators Hook Line Lures Rod Sinker Locations Fish ponds Fishing banks Fishing villages Marine habitats Crime Bering Sea Anti-Poaching Operations Coral poaching Freshwater eel poaching and smuggling Illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing Arctic Glossary Index Outline Category v t e Underwater diving Diving activities Diving modes Atmospheric pressure diving Freediving Saturation diving Scuba diving Snorkeling Surface oriented diving Surface-supplied diving Unmanned diving Diving equipment Cleaning and disinfection of personal diving equipment Human factors in diving equipment design List of diving equipment manufacturers Basic equipment Diving mask Snorkel Swimfin Breathing gas Bailout gas Bottom gas Breathing air Decompression gas Emergency gas supply Heliox Hydreliox Hydrox Nitrox Oxygen Travel gas Trimix Buoyancy and trim equipment Avelo diving system Buoyancy compensator Power inflator Dump valve Variable buoyancy pressure vessel Diving weighting system Ankle weights Integrated weights Trim weights Weight belt Decompression equipment Decompression buoy Decompression chamber Decompression cylinder Decompression trapeze Dive computer Diving bell Diving shot Diving stage Jersey upline Jonline Diving suit Atmospheric diving suit JIM suit Newtsuit Dry suit Sladen suit Standard diving suit Rash vest Wetsuit Dive skins Hot-water suit Helmets and masks Anti-fog Diving helmet Free-flow helmet Lightweight demand helmet Orinasal mask Reclaim helmet Shallow water helmet Standard diving helmet Diving mask Band mask Full-face mask Half mask Instrumentation Bottom timer Depth gauge Dive computer Dive timer Diving watch Helium release valve Electro-galvanic oxygen sensor Pneumofathometer Submersible pressure gauge Mobility equipment Diver propulsion vehicle Human torpedo Wet sub Diving bell Closed bell Wet bell Diving stage Swimfin Monofin PowerSwim Towboard Safety equipment Alternative air source Octopus regulator Pony bottle Bolt snap Buddy line Dive light Diver's cutting tool Diver's knife Diver's telephone Through-water communications Underwater acoustic communication Diving bell Diving safety harness Emergency gas supply Bailout block Bailout bottle Lifeline Screw gate carabiner Emergency locator beacon Rescue tether Safety helmet Shark-proof cage Snoopy loop Navigation equipment Distance line Diving compass Dive reel Line marker Surface marker buoy Silt screw Underwater breathing apparatus Atmospheric diving suit Diving cylinder Burst disc Scuba cylinder valve Diving helmet Reclaim helmet Diving regulator Mechanism of diving regulators Regulator malfunction Regulator freeze Single-hose regulator Twin-hose regulator Full-face diving mask Open-circuit scuba Scuba set Bailout bottle Decompression cylinder Independent doubles Manifolded twin set Scuba manifold Pony bottle Scuba configuration Sidemount Sling cylinder Diving rebreathers Carbon dioxide scrubber Carleton CDBA Clearance Divers Life Support Equipment Cryogenic rebreather CUMA DSEA Dolphin Halcyon PVR-BASC Halcyon RB80 IDA71 Interspiro DCSC LAR-5 LAR-6 LAR-V LARU Mark IV Amphibian Porpoise Ray Siebe Gorman CDBA Salvus Siva Surface-supplied diving equipment Air line Diver's umbilical Diving air compressor Gas panel Hookah Scuba replacement Snuba Standard diving dress Diving equipment manufacturers AP Diving Apeks Aqua Lung America Aqua Lung/La Spirotechnique Beuchat René Cavalero Cis-Lunar Cressi-Sub Dacor DESCO Dive Xtras Divex Diving Unlimited International Drägerwerk Faber Fenzy Maurice Fernez Technisub Oscar Gugen Heinke HeinrichsWeikamp Johnson Outdoors Mares Morse Diving Nemrod Oceanic Worldwide Porpoise Shearwater Research Siebe Gorman Submarine Products Suunto Diving support equipment Access equipment Boarding stirrup Diver lift Diving bell Diving ladder Diving platform (scuba) Diving stage Downline Jackstay Launch and recovery system Messenger line Moon pool Breathing gas handling Air filtration Activated carbon Hopcalite Molecular sieve Silica gel Booster pump Carbon dioxide scrubber Cascade filling system Diver's pump Diving air compressor Diving air filter Water separator High pressure breathing air compressor Low pressure breathing air compressor Gas blending Gas blending for scuba diving Gas panel Gas reclaim system Gas storage bank Gas storage quad Gas storage tube Helium analyzer Nitrox production Membrane gas separation Pressure swing adsorption Oxygen analyser Electro-galvanic oxygen sensor Oxygen compatibility Decompression equipment Air-lock Built-in breathing system Decompression tables Diving bell Bell cursor Closed bell Clump weight Launch and recovery system Wet bell Diving chamber Diving stage Recreational Dive Planner Saturation system Platforms Dive boat Canoe and kayak diving Combat rubber raiding craft Liveaboard Subskimmer Diving support vessel HMS Challenger (K07) Underwater habitat Aquarius Reef Base Continental Shelf Station Two Helgoland Habitat Scott Carpenter Space Analog Station SEALAB Tektite habitat Remotely operated underwater vehicles 8A4-class ROUV ABISMO Atlantis ROV Team COTSBot CURV Deep Drone Épaulard Global Explorer ROV Goldfish-class ROUV Kaikō ROV Kaşif ROUV Long-Term Mine Reconnaissance System Mini Rover ROV OpenROV ROV KIEL 6000 ROV PHOCA Scorpio ROV Sea Dragon-class ROV Seabed tractor Seafox drone SeaPerch SJT-class ROUV T1200 Trenching Unit VideoRay UROVs Safety equipment Diver down flag Diving shot ENOS Rescue-System Hyperbaric lifeboat Hyperbaric stretcher Jackstay Jonline Reserve gas supply General Diving spread Air spread Saturation spread Hot water system Sonar Underwater acoustic positioning system Underwater acoustic communication Freediving Activities Aquathlon Apnoea finswimming Freediving Haenyeo Pearl hunting Ama Snorkeling Spearfishing Underwater football Underwater hockey Underwater rugby Underwater target shooting Competitions Nordic Deep Vertical Blue Disciplines Constant weight (CWT) Constant weight bi-fins (CWTB) Constant weight without fins (CNF) Dynamic apnea (DYN) Dynamic apnea without fins (DNF) Free immersion (FIM) No-limits apnea (NLT) Static apnea (STA) Skandalopetra diving Variable weight apnea (VWT) Variable weight apnea without fins Equipment Diving mask Diving suit Hawaiian sling Polespear Snorkel (swimming) Speargun Swimfins Monofin Water polo cap Freedivers Deborah Andollo Simone Arrigoni Peppo Biscarini Michael Board Sara Campbell Derya Can Göçen Goran Čolak Carlos Coste Robert Croft Mandy-Rae Cruickshank Yasemin Dalkılıç Leonardo D'Imporzano Flavia Eberhard Şahika Ercümen Emma Farrell Francisco Ferreras Pierre Frolla Flavia Eberhard Mehgan Heaney-Grier Elisabeth Kristoffersen Andriy Yevhenovych Khvetkevych Loïc Leferme Enzo Maiorca Jacques Mayol Audrey Mestre Karol Meyer Kate Middleton Stéphane Mifsud Alexey Molchanov Natalia Molchanova Dave Mullins Patrick Musimu Guillaume Néry Herbert Nitsch Umberto Pelizzari Liv Philip Annelie Pompe Stig Severinsen Tom Sietas Martin Štěpánek Walter Steyn Tanya Streeter William Trubridge Devrim Cenk Ulusoy Fatma Uruk Danai Varveri Alessia Zecchini Nataliia Zharkova Kateryna Sadurska Hazards Barotrauma Drowning Freediving blackout Deep-water blackout Shallow-water blackout Hypercapnia Hypothermia Historical Ama Octopus wrestling Swimming at the 1900 Summer Olympics – Men's underwater swimming Organisations AIDA International Scuba Schools International Australian Underwater Federation British Freediving Association Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins Performance Freediving International Professional diving Occupations Ama Commercial diver Commercial offshore diver Hazmat diver Divemaster Diving instructor Diving safety officer Diving superintendent Diving supervisor Haenyeo Media diver Police diver Public safety diver Scientific diver Underwater archaeologist Military diving Army engineer diver Canadian Armed Forces Divers Clearance diver Frogman Minentaucher Royal Navy ships diver United States military divers U.S. Navy diver U.S.Navy master diver Military diving units 7th Marine Brigade Clearance Diving Branch (RAN) Commando Hubert Combat Divers Service (Lithuania) Comando Raggruppamento Subacquei e Incursori Teseo Tesei Decima Flottiglia MAS Frogman Corps (Denmark) Fuerzas Especiales Fukuryu GRUMEC Grup Gerak Khas Jagdkommando JW Formoza JW GROM JW Komandosów Kommando Spezialkräfte Marine KOPASKA MARCOS Marine Commandos Marinejegerkommandoen Marine Raider Regiment Minedykkerkommandoen Namibian Marine Corps Operational Diving Unit Naval Diving Unit (Singapore) Naval Service Diving Section Naval Special Operations Command Operational Diving Division (SA Navy) Royal Engineers Russian commando frogmen Sappers Divers Group Shayetet 13 Special Air Service Special Air Service Regiment Special Actions Detachment Special Boat Service Special Boat Squadron (Sri Lanka) Special Forces Command (Turkey) Special Forces Group (Belgium) Special Operations Battalion (Croatia) Special Service Group (Navy) Special Warfare Diving and Salvage Tactical Divers Group US Marine Corps Force Reconnaissance US Marine Corps Reconnaissance Battalions US Navy SEALs Underwater Construction Teams Underwater Demolition Command Underwater Demolition Team Underwater Offence (Turkish Armed Forces) UNGERIN Underwater work Commercial offshore diving Dive leader Diver training Recreational diver training Hazmat diving Hyperbaric welding Marine construction Offshore construction Underwater construction Media diving Pearl hunting Police diving Potable water diving Public safety diving Scientific diving Ships husbandry Sponge diving Submarine pipeline Underwater archaeology Archaeology of shipwrecks Underwater cutting and welding Underwater demolition Underwater inspection Nondestructive testing Underwater logging Underwater photography Underwater search and recovery Underwater searches Underwater videography Underwater survey Salvage diving SS Egypt Kronan La Belle SS Laurentic RMS Lusitania Mars Mary Rose USS Monitor HMS Royal George Vasa Diving contractors COMEX Helix Energy Solutions Group International Marine Contractors Association Tools and equipment Abrasive waterjet Airlift Baited remote underwater video In-water surface cleaning Brush cart Cavitation cleaning Pressure washing Pigging Hot stab Lifting bag Remotely operated underwater vehicle Thermal lance Tremie Water jetting Underwater weapons Limpet mine Speargun Hawaiian sling Polespear Underwater firearm Gyrojet Mk 1 Underwater Defense Gun Powerhead Underwater pistols Heckler & Koch P11 SPP-1 underwater pistol Underwater revolvers AAI underwater revolver Underwater rifles ADS amphibious rifle APS underwater rifle ASM-DT amphibious rifle QBS-06 Recreational diving Recreational dive sites Index of recreational dive sites List of wreck diving sites Outline of recreational dive sites Specialties Altitude diving Cave diving Deep diving Ice diving Muck diving Open-water diving Rebreather diving Sidemount diving Solo diving Technical diving Underwater photography Wreck diving Diver organisations British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Cave Divers Association of Australia (CDAA) Cave Diving Group (CDG) Comhairle Fo-Thuinn (CFT) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas (FEDAS) Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins (FFESSM) International Association for Handicapped Divers (IAHD) Quintana Roo Speleological Survey (QRSS) Woodville Karst Plain Project (WKPP) Diving tourism industry Dive center Diving in Timor-Leste Diving in the Maldives Environmental impact of recreational diving Scuba diving tourism Scuba diving in the Cayman Islands Shark tourism Sinking ships for wreck diving sites Underwater diving in Guam Diving events and festivals Diversnight Underwater Bike Race Diving safety Human factors in diving equipment design Human factors in diving safety Life-support system Safety-critical system Scuba diving fatalities Underwater diving emergency Water safety Water surface searches Diving hazards List of diving hazards and precautions Environmental Current Delta-P Entanglement hazard Overhead Silt out Wave action Equipment Freeflow Use of breathing equipment in an underwater environment Failure of diving equipment other than breathing apparatus Single point of failure Physiological Cold shock response Decompression Nitrogen narcosis Oxygen toxicity Seasickness Uncontrolled decompression Diver behaviour and competence Incompetence Overconfidence effect Panic Task loading Trait anxiety Willful violation Consequences Barotrauma Decompression sickness Drowning Hypothermia Hypoxia Hypercapnia Hyperthermia Non-freezing cold injury Diving procedures Ascending and descending Emergency ascent Boat diving Canoe and kayak diving Buddy diving buddy check Decompression Decompression practice Pyle stop Ratio decompression Dive briefing Dive log Dive planning Rule of thirds Scuba gas planning Diver communications Diver rescue Diver training Doing It Right Drift diving Gas blending for scuba diving Night diving Rebreather diving Scuba gas management Solo diving Wall diving Risk management Checklist Hazard identification and risk assessment Hazard analysis Job safety analysis Risk assessment Hyperbaric evacuation and rescue Risk control Hierarchy of hazard controls Incident pit Lockout–tagout Permit To Work Redundancy Safety data sheet Situation awareness Diving team Bellman Chamber operator Diver medical technician Diver's attendant Diving supervisor Diving systems technician Gas man Life support technician Stand-by diver Equipment safety Breathing gas quality Testing and inspection of diving cylinders Hydrostatic test Sustained load cracking Diving regulator Breathing performance of regulators Occupational safety and health Association of Diving Contractors International International Marine Contractors Association Code of practice Contingency plan Diving regulations Emergency response plan Diving safety officer Diving superintendent Diving supervisor Operations manual Standard operating procedure Diving medicine Diving disorders List of signs and symptoms of diving disorders Cramp Motion sickness Surfer's ear Pressure related Alternobaric vertigo Barostriction Barotrauma Air embolism Aerosinusitis Barodontalgia Dental barotrauma Middle ear barotrauma Pulmonary barotrauma Compression arthralgia Decompression illness Dysbarism Oxygen Freediving blackout Hyperoxia Hypoxia Oxygen toxicity Inert gases Avascular necrosis Decompression sickness Dysbaric osteonecrosis Inner ear decompression sickness Isobaric counterdiffusion Taravana High-pressure nervous syndrome Hydrogen narcosis Nitrogen narcosis Carbon dioxide Hypercapnia Hypocapnia Breathing gas contaminants Carbon monoxide poisoning Immersion related Asphyxia Drowning Hypothermia Immersion diuresis Instinctive drowning response Laryngospasm Salt water aspiration syndrome Swimming-induced pulmonary edema Treatment Demand valve oxygen therapy First aid Hyperbaric medicine Hyperbaric treatment schedules In-water recompression Oxygen therapy Therapeutic recompression Personnel Diving Medical Examiner Diving Medical Practitioner Diving Medical Technician Hyperbaric nursing Screening Atrial septal defect Effects of drugs on fitness to dive Fitness to dive Psychological fitness to dive Research Researchers in diving physiology and medicine Arthur J. Bachrach Albert R. Behnke Peter B. Bennett Paul Bert George F. Bond Robert Boyle Alf O. Brubakk Albert A. Bühlmann John R. Clarke Guybon Chesney Castell Damant Kenneth William Donald William Paul Fife John Scott Haldane Robert William Hamilton Jr.

Henry Valence Hempleman Leonard Erskine Hill Brian Andrew Hills Felix Hoppe-Seyler Christian J. Lambertsen Simon Mitchell Charles Momsen Neal W. Pollock John Rawlins Charles Wesley Shilling Edward D. Thalmann Jacques Triger Diving medical research organisations Aerospace Medical Association Divers Alert Network (DAN) Diving Diseases Research Centre (DDRC) Diving Medical Advisory Council (DMAC) European Diving Technology Committee (EDTC) European Underwater and Baromedical Society (EUBS) National Board of Diving and Hyperbaric Medical Technology Naval Submarine Medical Research Laboratory Royal Australian Navy School of Underwater Medicine Rubicon Foundation South Pacific Underwater Medicine Society (SPUMS) Undersea and Hyperbaric Medical Society (UHMS) United States Navy Experimental Diving Unit (NEDU) Law Civil liability in recreational diving Diving regulations Duty of care List of legislation regulating underwater diving Investigation of diving accidents Convention on the Protection of the Underwater Cultural Heritage History of underwater diving History of decompression research and development History of dive computers History of Diving Museum History of scuba diving List of researchers in underwater diving Lyons Maritime Museum Man in the Sea Museum Timeline of atmospheric diving suits Timeline of diving technology Pearling in Western Australia US Navy decompression models and tables Archeological sites SS Commodore USS Monitor Queen Anne's Revenge Whydah Gally Underwater art and artists The Diver Jason deCaires Taylor Engineers and inventors Jerónimo de Ayanz y Beaumont William Beebe Georges Beuchat Giovanni Alfonso Borelli Joseph-Martin Cabirol John R. Clarke Jacques Cousteau Charles Anthony Deane John Deane Louis de Corlieu Auguste Denayrouze Ted Eldred Henry Fleuss Émile Gagnan Karl Heinrich Klingert Peter Kreeft Christian J. Lambertsen Yves Le Prieur John Lethbridge Ernest William Moir Joseph Salim Peress Auguste Piccard Joe Savoie Willard Franklyn Searle Gordon Smith Augustus Siebe Pierre-Marie Touboulic Jacques Triger Historical equipment Aqua-Lung RV Calypso SP-350 Denise Magnesium torch Nikonos Porpoise regulator Standard diving dress Sub Marine Explorer Vintage scuba Diver propulsion vehicles Advanced SEAL Delivery System Cosmos CE2F series Dry Combat Submersible Human torpedo Motorised Submersible Canoe Necker Nymph R-2 Mala-class swimmer delivery vehicle SEAL Delivery Vehicle Shallow Water Combat Submersible Siluro San Bartolomeo Welfreighter Wet Nellie Military and covert operations Raid on Alexandria (1941) Sinking of the Rainbow Warrior Scientific projects 1992 cageless shark-diving expedition Mission 31 Awards and events Hans Hass Award International Scuba Diving Hall of Fame London Diving Chamber Dive Lectures NOGI Awards Women Divers Hall of Fame Incidents Dive boat incidents Sinking of MV Conception Diver rescues Alpazat cave rescue Tham Luang cave rescue Early diving John Day (carpenter) Charles Spalding Ebenezer Watson Freediving fatalities Stephen Keenan Loïc Leferme Audrey Mestre Nicholas Mevoli Natalia Molchanova Offshore diving incidents Byford Dolphin diving bell accident Drill Master diving accident Star Canopus diving accident Stena Seaspread diving accident Venture One diving accident Waage Drill II diving accident Wildrake diving accident Professional diving fatalities Roger Baldwin John Bennett Victor F. Guiel Jr.

Francis P. Hammerberg Craig M. Hoffman Peter Henry Michael Holmes Johnson Sea Link accident Edwin Clayton Link Gerard Anthony Prangley Per Skipnes Robert John Smyth Albert D. Stover Richard A. Walker Lothar Michael Ward Joachim Wendler Bradley Westell Arne Zetterström Scuba diving fatalities 1973 Mount Gambier cave diving accident Ricardo Armbruster Allan Bridge David Bright Berry L. Cannon Cotton Coulson Cláudio Coutinho E. Yale Dawson Deon Dreyer Milan Dufek Sheck Exley Maurice Fargues Fernando Garfella Palmer Guy Garman Steve Irwin death Jim Jones Henry Way Kendall Artur Kozłowski Yuri Lipski Kirsty MacColl Linnea Mills Agnes Milowka François de Roubaix Chris and Chrissy Rouse Dave Shaw Wesley C. Skiles Dewey Smith Rob Stewart Esbjörn Svensson Josef Velek Publications Manuals NOAA Diving Manual U.S. Navy Diving Manual Basic Cave Diving: A Blueprint for Survival Underwater Handbook Bennett and Elliott's physiology and medicine of diving Encyclopedia of Recreational Diving The new science of skin and scuba diving Professional Diver's Handbook Basic Scuba Standards and Codes of Practice Code of Practice for Scientific Diving (UNESCO) DIN 7876 IMCA Code of Practice for Offshore Diving ISO 24801 Recreational diving services — Requirements for the training of recreational scuba divers General non-fiction The Darkness Beckons Goldfinder The Last Dive Shadow Divers The Silent World: A Story of Undersea Discovery and Adventure Research List of Divers Alert Network publications Dive guides Training and registration Diver training Competence and assessment Competency-based learning Refresher training Skill assessment Diver training standard Diving instructor Diving school Occupational diver training Commercial diver training Military diver training Public safety diver training Scientific diver training Recreational diver training Introductory diving ISO training standards Teaching method Muscle memory Overlearning Stress exposure training Skills Combat sidestroke Diver navigation Diver trim Ear clearing Frenzel maneuver Valsalva maneuver Finning techniques Scuba skills Buddy breathing Low impact diving Diamond Reef System Surface-supplied diving skills Underwater searches Recreational scuba certification levels Core diving skills Advanced Open Water Diver Autonomous diver CMAS* scuba diver CMAS** scuba diver Introductory diving Low Impact Diver Master Scuba Diver Open Water Diver Supervised diver Leadership skills Dive leader Divemaster Diving instructor Master Instructor Specialist skills Rescue Diver Solo diver Diver training certification and registration organisations European Underwater Federation (EUF) International Diving Regulators and Certifiers Forum (IDRCF) International Diving Schools Association (IDSA) International Marine Contractors Association (IMCA) List of diver certification organizations National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) Nautical Archaeology Society Recreational diver course referral World Recreational Scuba Training Council (WRSTC) Commercial diver certification authorities Australian Diver Accreditation Scheme (ADAS) Commercial diver registration in South Africa Divers Institute of Technology Health and Safety Executive (HSE) Department of Employment and Labour Commercial diving schools Divers Academy International Norwegian diver school Free-diving certification agencies AIDA International (AIDA) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Performance Freediving International (PI) Scuba Schools International (SSI) Recreational scuba certification agencies American Canadian Underwater Certifications (ACUC) American Nitrox Divers International (ANDI) Association nationale des moniteurs de plongée (ANMP) British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Comhairle Fo-Thuinn (CFT) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas (FEDAS) Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins (FFESSM) Federazione Italiana Attività Subacquee (FIAS) Global Underwater Explorers (GUE) International Association for Handicapped Divers (IAHD) International Association of Nitrox and Technical Divers (IANTD) International Life Saving Federation (ILS) Israeli Diving Federation (TIDF) National Academy of Scuba Educators (NASE) National Association of Underwater Instructors (NAUI) Nederlandse Onderwatersport Bond (NOB) Professional Association of Diving Instructors (PADI) Professional Diving Instructors Corporation (PDIC) Professional Technical and Recreational Diving (ProTec) Rebreather Association of International Divers (RAID) Sub-Aqua Association (SAA) Scuba Diving International (SDI) Scuba Educators International (SEI) Scuba Schools International (SSI) Türkiye Sualtı Sporları Federasyonu (TSSF) United Diving Instructors (UDI) YMCA SCUBA Program Scientific diver certification authorities American Academy of Underwater Sciences (AAUS) CMAS Scientific Committee Technical diver certification agencies American Nitrox Divers International (ANDI) British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Diving Science and Technology (DSAT) Federazione Italiana Attività Subacquee (FIAS) International Association of Nitrox and Technical Divers (IANTD) Professional Association of Diving Instructors (PADI) Professional Diving Instructors Corporation (PDIC) Professional Technical and Recreational Diving (ProTec) Rebreather Association of International Divers (RAID) Trimix Scuba Association (TSA) Technical Extended Range (TXR) Cave diving Cave Divers Association of Australia (CDAA) Cave Diving Group (CDG) Global Underwater Explorers (GUE) National Speleological Society#Cave Diving Group (CDG) National Association of Underwater Instructors (NAUI) Technical Diving International (TDI) Military diver training centres Defence Diving School Navy Diving Salvage and Training Center Underwater Escape Training Unit Military diver training courses United States Marine Corps Combatant Diver Course Underwater sports Surface snorkeling Finswimming Snorkeling/breath-hold Spearfishing Underwater football Underwater hockey Australia Turkey Underwater rugby Colombia United States Underwater target shooting Breath-hold Aquathlon Apnoea finswimming Freediving Open Circuit Scuba Immersion finswimming Sport diving Underwater cycling Underwater orienteering Underwater photography Rebreather Underwater photography Sports governing organisations and federations International AIDA International Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques ) National AIDA Hellas Australian Underwater Federation British Freediving Association British Octopush Association British Underwater Sports Association Comhairle Fo-Thuinn Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins South African Underwater Sports Federation Türkiye Sualtı Sporları Federasyonu Underwater Society of America ) Competitions 14th CMAS Underwater Photography World Championship Underwater Hockey World Championships Underwater Orienteering World Championships Underwater Rugby World Championships Underwater divers Pioneers of diving Eduard Admetlla i Lázaro Aquanaut Mary Bonnin Amelia Behrens-Furniss James F. Cahill Jacques Cousteau Billy Deans Dottie Frazier Trevor Hampton Hans Hass Hannes Keller Dick Rutkowski Teseo Tesei Arne Zetterström Underwater scientists archaeologists and environmentalists Michael Arbuthnot Robert Ballard George Bass Mensun Bound Louis Boutan Jeffrey Bozanic Hugh Bradner Cathy Church Eugenie Clark James P. Delgado Sylvia Earle John Christopher Fine George R. Fischer Anders Franzén Honor Frost Fernando Garfella Palmer David Gibbins Graham Jessop Swietenia Puspa Lestari Pilar Luna Robert F. Marx Anna Marguerite McCann Innes McCartney Charles T. Meide Mark M. Newell Lyuba Ognenova-Marinova John Peter Oleson Mendel L. Peterson Richard Pyle Andreas Rechnitzer William R. Royal Margaret Rule Gunter Schöbel Stephanie Schwabe Myriam Seco E. Lee Spence Robert Sténuit Peter Throckmorton Cristina Zenato Scuba record holders Pascal Bernabé Jim Bowden Mark Ellyatt Sheck Exley Nuno Gomes Claudia Serpieri Krzysztof Starnawski Underwater filmmakers and presenters Samir Alhafith David Attenborough Ramón Bravo Jean-Michel Cousteau Richie Kohler Paul Rose Andy Torbet Ivan Tors Andrew Wight James Cameron Underwater photographers Doug Allan Tamara Benitez Georges Beuchat Adrian Biddle Jonathan Bird Eric Cheng Neville Coleman Jacques Cousteau John D. Craig Ben Cropp Bernard Delemotte David Doubilet Candice Farmer John Christopher Fine Rodney Fox Ric Frazier Stephen Frink Peter Gimbel Monty Halls Hans Hass Henry Way Kendall Rudie Kuiter Joseph B. MacInnis Luis Marden Agnes Milowka Noel Monkman Pete Oxford Steve Parish Zale Parry Pierre Petit Leni Riefenstahl Peter Scoones Brian Skerry Wesley C. Skiles E. Lee Spence Philippe Tailliez Ron Taylor Valerie Taylor Albert Tillman John Veltri Stan Waterman Michele Westmorland John Ernest Williamson J. Lamar Worzel Underwater explorers Caves Graham Balcombe Sheck Exley Martyn Farr Jochen Hasenmayer Jill Heinerth Jarrod Jablonski Brian Kakuk William Hogarth Main Tom Mount Jack Sheppard Bill Stone Reefs Arthur C. Clarke Wrecks Leigh Bishop John Chatterton Clive Cussler Bill Nagle Valerie van Heest Aristotelis Zervoudis Aquanauts Andrew Abercromby Joseph M. Acaba Clayton Anderson Richard R. Arnold Serena Auñón-Chancellor Michael Barratt (astronaut) Robert A. Barth Robert L. Behnken Randolph Bresnik Timothy J. Broderick Justin Brown Berry L. Cannon Scott Carpenter Gregory Chamitoff Steve Chappell Catherine Coleman Robin Cook Craig B. Cooper Fabien Cousteau Philippe Cousteau Timothy Creamer Jonathan Dory Pedro Duque Sylvia Earle Jeanette Epps Sheck Exley Albert Falco Andrew J. Feustel Michael Fincke Satoshi Furukawa Ronald J. Garan Jr.

Michael L. Gernhardt Christopher E. Gerty David Gruber Chris Hadfield Jeremy Hansen José M. Hernández John Herrington Paul Hill Akihiko Hoshide Mark Hulsbeck Emma Hwang Norishige Kanai Les Kaufman Scott Kelly Karen Kohanowich Timothy Kopra Dominic Landucci Jon Lindbergh Kjell N. Lindgren Michael López-Alegría Joseph B. MacInnis Sandra Magnus Thomas Marshburn Matthias Maurer K. Megan McArthur Craig McKinley Jessica Meir Simone Melchior Dorothy Metcalf-Lindenburger Andreas Mogensen Karen Nyberg John D. Olivas Takuya Onishi Luca Parmitano Nicholas Patrick Tim Peake Thomas Pesquet Marc Reagan Garrett Reisman Kathleen Rubins Dick Rutkowski Tara Ruttley David Saint-Jacques Josef Schmid Robert Sheats Dewey Smith Steve Squyres Heidemarie Stefanyshyn-Piper Robert Sténuit Hervé Stevenin Nicole Stott James Talacek Daniel M. Tani Robert Thirsk Bill Todd Mark T. Vande Hei Koichi Wakata Rex J. Walheim Shannon Walker John Morgan Wells Joachim Wendler Douglas H. Wheelock Peggy Whitson Dafydd Williams Jeffrey Williams Sunita Williams Reid Wiseman Kimiya Yui Writers and journalists Michael C. Barnette Victor Berge Philippe Diolé Gary Gentile Bret Gilliam Bob Halstead Hillary Hauser Trevor Jackson Steve Lewis John Mattera Rescuers Craig Challen Richard Harris Rick Stanton John Volanthen Frogmen Lionel Crabb Ian Edward Fraser Sydney Knowles James Joseph Magennis Commercial salvors Keith Jessop Science of underwater diving List of researchers in underwater diving Diving physics Metre sea water Neutral buoyancy Underwater acoustics Modulated ultrasound Underwater vision Underwater computer vision Diving physiology Blood shift Cold shock response Diving reflex Equivalent narcotic depth Maximum operating depth Physiological response to water immersion Thermal balance of the underwater diver Underwater vision Work of breathing Decompression theory Decompression models: Bühlmann decompression algorithm Haldane's decompression model Reduced gradient bubble model Thalmann algorithm Thermodynamic model of decompression Varying Permeability Model Equivalent air depth Oxygen window Physiology of decompression Diving environments Underwater exploration Deep-sea exploration Classification List of diving environments by type Altitude diving Benign water diving Confined water diving Deep diving Inland diving Inshore diving Muck diving Night diving Open-water diving Black-water diving Blue-water diving Penetration diving Cave diving Torricellian chamber Ice diving Wreck diving Recreational dive sites Underwater environment Underwater diving environment Impact Environmental impact of recreational diving Low impact diving Other Bathysphere Defense against swimmer incursions Diver detection sonar Offshore survey Rugged compact camera Underwater domain awareness Underwater vehicle Deep-submergence vehicle Aluminaut DSV Alvin American submarine NR-1 Bathyscaphe Archimède FNRS-2 FNRS-3 Harmony class bathyscaphe Sea Pole -class bathyscaphe Trieste II Deepsea Challenger Ictineu 3 JAGO Jiaolong Konsul -class submersible Limiting Factor Russian submarine Losharik Mir Nautile Pisces -class deep submergence vehicle DSV Sea Cliff DSV Shinkai DSV Shinkai 2000 DSV Shinkai 6500 DSV Turtle DSV-5 Nemo Submarine rescue International Submarine Escape and Rescue Liaison Office Submarine Escape and Rescue system (Royal Swedish Navy) McCann Rescue Chamber Submarine rescue ship Deep-submergence rescue vehicle LR5 LR7 MSM-1 Mystic -class deep-submergence rescue vehicle DSRV-1 Mystic DSRV-2 Avalon NATO Submarine Rescue System Priz -class deep-submergence rescue vehicle Russian deep submergence rescue vehicle AS-28 Russian submarine AS-34 ASRV Remora SRV-300 Submarine Rescue Diving Recompression System Type 7103 DSRV URF (Swedish Navy) Submarine escape Escape trunk Submarine escape training facility Submarine Escape Training Facility (Australia) Escape set Davis Submerged Escape Apparatus Momsen lung Steinke hood Submarine Escape Immersion Equipment Special interest groups Artificial Reef Society of British Columbia CMAS Europe Coral Reef Alliance Divers Alert Network Green Fins Finger Lakes Underwater Preserve Association Karst Underwater Research Nautical Archaeology Program Nautical Archaeology Society Naval Air Command Sub Aqua Club PADI AWARE Reef Check Reef Life Survey Rubicon Foundation Save Ontario Shipwrecks SeaKeys Sea Research Society Society for Underwater Historical Research Society for Underwater Technology Underwater Archaeology Branch, Naval History & Heritage Command Neutral buoyancy facilities for Astronaut training Neutral Buoyancy Laboratory Neutral buoyancy pool Neutral buoyancy simulation as a training aid Neutral Buoyancy Simulator Space Systems Laboratory Yuri Gagarin Cosmonaut Training Center Other Nautilus Productions Helicopter Aircrew Breathing Device Scuba diving therapy Seabed mining Category Commons Glossary Indexes: Dive sites Divers Diving Outline Portal v t e Hunting topics History Ancient Egypt Hunter-gatherer Medieval hunting Imperial hunt of the Qing dynasty North American hunting technologies Forms Bat-fowling Beagling Bowhunting Big-game hunting Coursing Game stalkering Gigging Green hunting Falconry Eagles Field sports Fowling Handgun hunting Internet hunting Layout hunting Montería Muttonbirding Persistence hunting Pest control Plume hunting Spotlighting Trophy hunting Trapping Trail hunting Treeing Upland hunting Varmint hunting Venatio Waterfowl hunting Equipment Camouflage Game call Duck call Ghillie suit Hunting bag Hunting weapon Air gun Assegai Bow and arrow Bear spear Boar spear Boomerang Blowgun Crossbow Pistol Punt gun Rifle Spear-thrower Shotgun Sword Throwing stick Silencer Shooting brake Shooting sticks Game Alligator Bear Big five Bison Boar Raccoon Deer Stalking Fox Hare Human Headhunting Jackal Mink Plains game Rabbit Rook Tiger Turkey Turtle Lion Quail Wolf With dogs Seal Squirrel Poaching Whale Aboriginal Dolphin drive hunting Subsistence hunting of the bowhead whale Infrastructure Buffalo jump Buffalo pound Chase (land) Deer park (England) Deer forest Desert kite Game larder Game reserve Game farm Guest ranch Hunting blind Bird hide Salter Sporting lodge Jagdschloss Wolf trap By location Australia Dugong Kangaroo Azerbaijan Tiger Cambodia Chad Elephant Greenland Reindeer India Tiger poaching Rhino poaching in Assam Kenya Elephant New Zealand Helicopter-based hunting in Fiordland Pakistan Trophy hunting Russia Romania Spain Switzerland Federal hunting reserves Tonga Pigeon United States Alaska United Kingdom Driven grouse shooting Regulation and conservation Bag Bag limits Conservation officer Deer management Game Act 1831 Game law Game preservation Hunting license Hunting Act 2004 Hunting season Poaching Sustainable hunting Culture Bambi effect Blooding Canned hunt Car hawking Duck ague Falconry training and technique Fair chase Field dressing Gamekeepers in the United Kingdom Gillie Hunting dog Gun dog Hunting magic List of hunting deities List of big-game hunters Opposition to hunting Parahawking Professional hunter Killing of Cecil the lion Raptor persecution Safety orange Safari Take Tracking Wild Hunt White hunter Organizations Boone and Crockett Club Countryside Alliance Ducks Unlimited Federation of Associations for Hunting and Conservation of the EU Finnish Hunters' Association Hunt Saboteurs Association Humane Society of the United States League Against Cruel Sports North American Falconers Association People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals Safari Club International Other Bowfishing Bounty hunter Blood sport Drag hunting Field trial Fur trade Ghost hunting Hunting hypothesis Hunting strategy Honey hunting Insect collecting Mushroom hunting Orchid hunting Overview of gun laws by nation Pearl hunting Spearfishing Wildlife farming Authority control databases National United States Latvia Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐6r6bd
Cached time: 20250814220256
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.265 seconds
Real time usage: 1.500 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 9722/1000000
Revision size: 48581/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 707250/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 10621/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 10/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 244638/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.682/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 28542066/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1014.365      1 -total
 33.02%  334.926      1 Template:Reflist
 19.39%  196.653     45 Template:Cite_web
 15.16%  153.774      2 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
 12.12%  122.918      9 Template:Annotated_link
 10.13%  102.740     39 Template:Navbox
  9.08%   92.109     15 Template:Citation_needed
  8.58%   87.011      1 Template:Underwater_diving
  7.26%   73.658     15 Template:Fix
  7.07%   71.695      1 Template:Fishing_tackle Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:306254:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814220256 and revision id 1305534772. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Spearfishing&oldid=1305534772 " Categories : Spearfishing Underwater sports Hidden categories: CS1: long volume value CS1: unfit URL CS1 French-language sources (fr) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from July 2011 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from May 2017 Articles with unsourced statements from July 2018 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from May 2017 Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets via Module:Annotated link Commons category link from Wikidata Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 12 August 2025, at 16:34 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Spearfishing 21 languages Add topic

