Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography Toggle Biography subsection 1.1 Birth and early background 1.2 Jena, Leipzig, Wittenberg: legal studies 1.3 Tennstedt: Relationship with Sophie von Kühn 1.4 Freiberg: The Mining Academy 1.5 Weissenfels: The final years 2 Legacy Toggle Legacy subsection 2.1 As romantic poet 2.2 As philosophical thinker 3 Magical idealism 4 Religious views 5 Writings Toggle Writings subsection 5.1 Poetry 5.2 Unfinished novels 5.3 Fragments 5.4 Political writings 5.5 Collected and miscellaneous works in English 5.6 Collected works (in German) 6 Influence 7 References 8 Sources 9 Further reading 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Novalis 70 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch العربية Aragonés Arpetan Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه বাংলা Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Brezhoneg Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Interlingue Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Kernowek Kreyòl ayisyen Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Magyar Македонски Malagasy მარგალური مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Plattdüütsch Polski Português Română Русский Sardu Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska ไทย Türkçe Українська Winaray 吴语 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia German poet and writer (1772–1801) For other uses, see Novalis (disambiguation) .

Novalis 1799 portrait Born Georg Philipp Friedrich Freiherr von Hardenberg ( 1772-05-02 ) 2 May 1772 Wiederstedt , Electorate of Saxony , Holy Roman Empire Died 25 March 1801 (1801-03-25) (aged 28) Weissenfels , Electorate of Saxony Pen name Novalis Occupation Writer, philosopher, poet, aristocrat, mystic, mineralogist, civil engineer Nationality German Alma mater University of Jena Leipzig University University of Wittenberg Mining Academy of Freiberg Period 1791–1801 Genre Poetry novels fragments speeches Subject Philosophy natural science religion politics Literary movement Jena Romanticism [ 1 ] Signature Georg Philipp Friedrich Freiherr von Hardenberg (2 May 1772 – 25 March 1801), pen name Novalis ( / n oʊ ˈ v ɑː l ɪ s / ; German: [noˈvaːlɪs] ), was a German aristocrat and polymath , who was a poet, novelist, philosopher and mystic . He is regarded as an influential figure of Jena Romanticism .

Novalis was born into a minor aristocratic family in Electoral Saxony . He was the second of eleven children; his early household observed a strict Pietist faith. He studied law at the University of Jena , the University of Leipzig , and the University of Wittenberg . While at Jena, he published his first poem and befriended the playwright and fellow poet Friedrich Schiller . In Leipzig, he then met Friedrich Schlegel , becoming lifelong friends. Novalis completed his law degree in 1794 at the age of 22. He then worked as a legal assistant in Tennstedt immediately after graduating. There, he met Sophie von Kühn . The following year Novalis and Sophie became secretly engaged. Sophie became severely ill soon after the engagement and died just after her 15th birthday. Sophie's early death had a life-long impact on Novalis and his writing.

Novalis enrolled at the Freiberg University of Mining and Technology in 1797, where he studied a wide number of disciplines including electricity, medicine, chemistry, physics, mathematics, mineralogy and natural philosophy . He conversed with many of the formative figures of the Early Germanic Romantic period, including Goethe , Friedrich Schelling , Jean Paul and August Schlegel . After finishing his studies, Novalis served as a director of salt mines in Saxony and later in Thuringia . During this time, Novalis wrote major poetic and literary works, including Hymns to the Night . In 1800, he began showing signs of illness, which is thought to have been either tuberculosis or cystic fibrosis , and died on 25 March 1801 at the age of 28.

Novalis's early reputation as a romantic poet was primarily based on his literary works, which were published by his friends Friedrich Schlegel and Ludwig Tieck shortly after his death, in 1802. These works include the collection of poems, Hymns to the Night and Spiritual Hymns , and his unfinished novels, Heinrich von Ofterdingen and The Novices at Sais . Schlegel and Tieck published only a small sample of his philosophical and scientific writings.

The depth of Novalis's knowledge in fields like philosophy and natural science came to be more broadly appreciated with the more extensive publication of his notebooks in the twentieth century. Novalis was not only well read in his chosen disciplines; he also sought to integrate his knowledge with his art. This goal can be seen in his use of the fragment , a form that he wrote in alongside Friedrich Schlegel, and published in Schlegel's journal Athenaeum . The fragment allowed him to synthesize poetry, philosophy, and science into a single art form that could be used to address a wide variety of topics. Just as Novalis's literary works have established his reputation as a poet, the notebooks and fragments have subsequently established his intellectual role in the formation of Early German Romanticism.

Biography [ edit ] Birth and early background [ edit ] Oberwiederstedt castle Novalis, baptized Georg Philipp Friedrich, was the Freiherr (Baron) von Hardenberg , born in 1772 at his family estate in the Electorate of Saxony , the Schloss Oberwiederstedt, in the village of Wiederstedt , [ 2 ] : 24 which is now located in the present-day town of Arnstein . Hardenberg descended from ancient, Lower Saxon nobility. Novalis's father was Heinrich Ulrich Erasmus Freiherr von Hardenberg (1738–1814), the estate owner and a salt-mine manager. His mother was Auguste Bernhardine (née von Böltzig ) (1749–1818), who was Heinrich's second wife. Novalis was the second of eleven children.

[ 3 ] : 5–7 Although Novalis had an aristocratic pedigree, his family was not wealthy.

[ 4 ] Novalis's early education was strongly influenced by Pietism . His father was a member of the Herrnhuter Unity of Brethren branch of the Moravian Church [ 5 ] and maintained a strict pietist household. Until the age of nine, Novalis was taught by private tutors who were trained in pietist theology; subsequently, he attended a Herrnhut school in Neudietendorf for three years.

[ 3 ] : 6–7 Coat-of-arms of the Hardenberg family When he was twelve, Novalis was put under the charge of his uncle Gottlob Friedrich Wilhelm Freiherr von Hardenberg (1728-1800), Land commander of the Teutonic Order , who lived at his rural estate in Lucklum .

[ 2 ] : 26 Novalis's uncle introduced him to the late Rococo world, where Novalis was exposed to enlightenment ideas as well as the contemporary literature of his time, including the works of the French Encyclopedists , Goethe , Lessing and Shakespeare .

[ 3 ] : 8 At seventeen, Novalis attended the Martin Luther Gymnasium in Eisleben , near Weissenfels where his family had moved in 1785. At the gymnasium, he learned rhetoric and ancient literature.

[ 2 ] : 26 Jena, Leipzig, Wittenberg: legal studies [ edit ] Between 1790 and 1794, Novalis went to university to study law. He first attended the University of Jena . While there, he studied Immanuel Kant 's philosophy under Karl Reinhold , [ 1 ] and it was there that he first became acquainted with Fichte 's philosophy.

[ 2 ] : 27 He also developed a close relationship with playwright and philosopher Schiller . Novalis attended Schiller's lectures on history [ 3 ] : 11 and tended to Schiller when he was suffering from a particularly severe flare-up of his chronic tuberculosis .

[ 6 ] In 1791, he published his first work, a poem dedicated to Schiller, "Klagen eines Jünglings" ("Lament of a Youth"), in the magazine Der Neue Teutsche Merkur , an act that was partly responsible for Novalis's father withdrawing him from Jena and looking into another university where Novalis would attend more carefully to his studies.

[ 7 ] In the following year, Novalis's younger brother, Erasmus, enrolled at the University of Leipzig , and Novalis went with him to continue his legal studies.  In 1792, he met the literary critic Friedrich Schlegel , the younger brother of August.

[ 3 ] : 13 Friedrich became one of Novalis's closest lifetime friends.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] : 97 A year later, Novalis matriculated to the University of Wittenberg where he completed his law degree.

[ 10 ] Tennstedt: Relationship with Sophie von Kühn [ edit ] After graduating from Wittenberg , Novalis moved to Tennstedt to work as an actuary for a district administrator, [ 10 ] Cölestin August Just, who became both his friend and biographer.

[ 2 ] While working for Just in 1795, Novalis met the 12-year-old Sophie von Kühn , who at that time was considered old enough to receive suitors.

[ 11 ] : 17 He became infatuated with her on their first meeting, and the effect of this infatuation appeared to transform his personality.

[ 3 ] : 19 In 1795, two days before Sophie turned thirteen they got secretly engaged. Later that year Sophie's parents gave their consent for the two to become engaged: [ 12 ] : 128 Novalis's brother Erasmus supported the couple, but the rest of Novalis's family resisted agreeing to the engagement due to Sophie's unclear aristocratic pedigree.

[ 11 ] : 25 Sophie von Kühn Novalis remained intellectually active during his employment at Tennstedt. It is possible that Novalis met Fichte, as well as the poet Friedrich Hölderlin , in person while visiting Jena in 1795.

[ 13 ] Between 1795 and 1796, he created six sets of manuscripts, posthumously collected under the title Fichte Studies , that primarily address Fichte's work but cover a range of philosophical topics.

[ 14 ] Novalis continued his philosophical studies in 1797, writing notebooks responding to the works of Kant, Frans Hemsterhuis , and Adolph Eschenmayer .

[ 15 ] Novalis's ongoing reflections upon Fichte's ideas, particularly those in the Wissenschaftslehre ( Foundations of the Science of Knowledge ) formed part of the foundation for his later philosophical and literary works: [ 16 ] Novalis focused on Fichte's argument that the concept of identity assumes a tension between self (i.e., "I") and object (i.e., "not-I").

[ 17 ] Novalis's critique of Fichte arose from Novalis's literary commitments: [ 18 ] Novalis suggests that the tension between self and object that Fichte asserts is actually a tension between language and imagination.

[ 19 ] Later, Novalis would take his critique further, suggesting that identity is not the separation of subject and object, but a dynamic process of equal partners in mutual communication. Novalis's viewpoint is summarized in his aphorism "Statt Nicht-Ich -- Du!" ("Instead of 'not-I', you").

[ 17 ] In the final months of 1795, Sophie began to suffer declining health due to a liver tumor [ 20 ] that was thought to be caused by tuberculosis.

[ 21 ] As a result, she underwent liver surgery in Jena, which was performed without anesthesia.

[ 11 ] : 24 In January 1797, Novalis was appointed auditor to the salt works at Weissenfels. To earn a stable income for his intended marriage, he accepted the position and moved to Weissenfels to assume his duties. Sophie, on the other hand, stayed with her family.

[ 2 ] : 31 Sophie once more became extremely ill, during which time Novalis's parents finally relented and agreed to the couple's engagement. However, two days after her fifteenth birthday, Sophie died, while Novalis was still in Weissenfels. Four months later, Novalis's brother Erasmus, who had been diagnosed with tuberculosis, also died.

[ 21 ] The death of Sophie, as well as his younger brother, affected Novalis deeply. Their deaths catalyzed his more intensive commitment to poetic expression.

[ 11 ] : 1–2 Sophie's death also became the central inspiration for one of the few works Novalis published in his lifetime, Hymnen an die Nacht ( Hymns to the Night ).

[ 22 ] [ 9 ] : 143 Freiberg: The Mining Academy [ edit ] At the end of 1797, Novalis entered the Mining Academy of Freiberg in Saxony to become qualified as a member of the staff for the salt works at Weissenfels. His principal mentor at the academy was the geologist, Abraham Werner .

[ 2 ] : 49 While at the academy, Novalis immersed himself in a wide range of studies, including electricity, galvanism, alchemy, medicine, chemistry, physics, mathematics, and natural philosophy.

[ 23 ] He was also able to expand his intellectual social circle. On his way to Freiberg, he met Friedrich Schelling , and they later went on an art tour of Dresden together. He visited Goethe and Friedrich Schlegel's older brother, August, in Weimar and met the writer Jean Paul in Leipzig.

[ 3 ] : 27 Novalis house plaque, Freiberg In December 1798, Novalis became engaged for the second time. His fiancée was Julie von Charpentier, a daughter of Johann Friedrich Wilhelm Toussaint von Charpentier, the chair of mining studies at the University of Leipzig.

[ 2 ] : 41 Unlike his relationship with Sophie, Novalis's affection for Julie developed more gradually. He initially saw his affection for Julie as a more "earthly" passion compared to his "heavenly" passion for Sophie, though he gradually softened this distinction with time. Eventually his feelings for Julie became the subject of some of his poetry, including the Spiritual Songs written in the last years of his life.

[ 24 ] Novalis and Julie remained engaged until Novalis's death in 1801, and she tended him during his final illness.

[ 2 ] : 43 In Freiberg, he remained active with his literary work. It was at this time that he began a collection of notes for a project to unite the separate sciences into a universal whole.

[ 25 ] In this collection, Das allgemeine Brouillon (Notes for a General Encyclopedia) , Novalis began integrating his knowledge of natural science into his literary work. This integration can be seen in an unfinished novel he composed during this time, Die Lehrlinge zu Sais ( The Novices at Sais ), which incorporated natural history from his studies as well as ideas from his Fichte studies into a meditation on poetry and love as keys to understanding nature.

[ 26 ] More specifically, he began thinking about how to incorporate his recently acquired knowledge of mining to his philosophical and poetic worldview. In this respect, he shared a commonality with other German authors of the Romantic age by connecting his studies in the mining industry, which was undergoing then the first steps to industrialization, with his literary work.

[ 27 ] This connection between his scientific interest in mining, philosophy and literature came to fruition later when he began composing his second unfinished novel, Heinrich von Ofterdingen .

[ 28 ] Novalis's grave in Weissenfels Novalis also began to be noticed as a published author at this time. In 1798, Novalis's fragments appeared in the Schlegel brother's magazine, Athenaeum .

[ 9 ] : 163 These works included Blüthenstaub ( Pollen ), Glauben und Liebe oder der König und die Königin ( Faith and Love or the King and the Queen ), and Blumen ( Flowers ).

[ 5 ] The publication of Pollen saw the first appearance of his pen name , "Novalis". His choice of pen name was taken from his 13th-century ancestors who named themselves de Novali , after their settlement Grossenrode , which is called magna Novalis in Latin.

[ 29 ] Novalis can also be interpreted as "one who cultivates new land", which connotes the metaphoric role that Novalis saw for himself.

[ 11 ] : 7 This metaphoric sense of his pen name can be seen in the epigraph of Pollen , the first work he published as Novalis: "Friends, the soil is poor, we must scatter seed abundantly for even a moderate harvest".

[ 30 ] Weissenfels: The final years [ edit ] In early 1799, Novalis had completed his studies at Leipzig and returned to the management of salt mines in Weissenfels.

[ 3 ] : 29–30 By December, he became an assessor of the salt mines and a director, and at the end of 1800, the 28-year-old Novalis was appointed an Amtmann for the district of Thuringia , [ 2 ] : 42 a position comparable to a contemporary magistrate .

While on a trip to Jena in the summer of 1799, Novalis met Ludwig Tieck , who became one of his closest friends and greatest intellectual influences in the last two years of his life.

[ 3 ] : 30–34 They became part of an informal social circle that formed around the Schlegel brothers, which has been come to be known as the Jena Romantics or Frühromantiker ("early romantics").

[ 31 ] The interests of the Jena Romantics extended to philosophy as well as literature and aesthetics, [ 32 ] and has been considered as a philosophical movement in its own right.

[ 33 ] Under the influence of Tieck, Novalis studied the works of the seventeenth-century mystic, Jakob Böhme , with whom he felt a strong affinity.

[ 34 ] He also became deeply engaged with the Platonic aesthetics of Hemsterhuis, [ 35 ] as well as the writings of the theologian and philosopher Friedrich Schleiermacher .

[ 3 ] : 32 Schleiermacher's work inspired Novalis to write his essay, Christenheit oder Europa ( Christianity or Europe ), [ 36 ] a call to return Europe to a cultural and social unity whose interpretation continues to be a source of controversy.

[ 37 ] During this time, he also wrote his poems known as Geistliche Lieder ( Spiritual Songs ) [ 5 ] and began his novel Heinrich von Ofterdingen .

[ 12 ] From August 1800, Novalis began to cough up blood. At the time, he was diagnosed with tuberculosis. However, recent research suggests that he may have suffered from cystic fibrosis , a genetic disorder that may have been responsible for the early death of many of his siblings, including his brother Erasmus.

[ 21 ] After a severe hemorrhage in November, he was temporarily moved to Dresden for medical reasons. In January, he requested to be with his parents in Weissenfels. He died there on 25 March 1801 at the age of twenty-eight.

[ 12 ] He was buried in Weissenfels's Alter Friedhof ( Old Cemetery ).

Legacy [ edit ] Philipp Otto Runge 's pen-and-ink drawing Night (1803). Runge's Romantic use of allegorical symbolism was influenced by his reading of Novalis.

[ 38 ] As romantic poet [ edit ] When he died, Novalis had only published Pollen , Faith and Love , Blumen , and Hymns to the Night . Most of Novalis's writings, including his novels and philosophical works, were neither completed nor published in his lifetime. This problem continues to obscure a full appreciation of his work.

[ 39 ] His unfinished novels Heinrich von Ofterdingen and The Novices at Sais and numerous other poems and fragments were published posthumously by Ludwig Tieck and Friedrich Schlegel. However, their publication of Novalis's more philosophical fragments was disorganized and incomplete. A systematic and more comprehensive collection of Novalis's fragments from his notebooks was not available until the twentieth century.

[ 20 ] During the nineteenth century, Novalis was primarily seen as a passionate love-struck poet who mourned the death of his beloved and yearned for the hereafter.

[ 40 ] He was known as the poet of the blue flower , a symbol of romantic yearning from Novalis's unfinished Novel Heinrich von Ofterdingen that became an key emblem for German Romanticism.

[ 41 ] His fellow Jena Romantics, such as Friedrich Schlegel, Tieck, and Schleiermacher, also describe him as a poet who dreamt of a spiritual world beyond this one.

[ 42 ] Novalis's diagnosis of tuberculosis, which was known as the white plague , contributed to his romantic reputation.

[ 41 ] Because Sophie von Kühn was also thought to have died from tuberculosis, Novalis became the poet of the blue flower who was reunited with his beloved through the death of the white plague.

[ 21 ] The image of Novalis as romantic poet became enormously popular. When Novalis's biography by his long-time friend August Cölestin Just was published in 1815, Just was criticized for misrepresenting Novalis's poetic nature because he had written that Novalis was also a hard-working mine inspector and magistrate.

[ 11 ] Even the literary critic Thomas Carlyle , whose essay on Novalis played a major role in introducing him to the English-speaking world and took Novalis's philosophical relationship to Fichte and Kant seriously, [ 43 ] emphasized Novalis as a mystic poet in the style of Dante .

[ 44 ] The author and theologian George MacDonald , who translated Novalis's Hymns to the Night in 1897 into English, [ 45 ] also understood him as a mystic poet.

[ 46 ] As philosophical thinker [ edit ] In the twentieth century, Novalis's writings were more thoroughly and systematically collected than previously. The availability of these works provide further evidence that his interests went beyond poetry and novels and has led to a reassessment of Novalis's literary and intellectual goals.

[ 47 ] He was deeply read in science, law, philosophy, politics and political economy and left an abundance of notes on these topics. His early work displays his ease and familiarity with these diverse fields. His later works also include topics from his professional duties. In his notebooks, Novalis also reflected on the scientific, aesthetic, and philosophical significance of his interests. In his Notes for a Romantic Encyclopaedia , he worked out connections between the different fields he studied as he sought to integrate them into a unified worldview.

[ 48 ] Novalis's philosophical writings are often grounded in nature. His works explore how personal freedom and creativity emerge in the affective understanding of the world and others. He suggests that this can only be accomplished if people are not estranged from the earth.

[ 49 ] : 55 In Pollen , Novalis writes "We are on a mission: Our calling is the cultivation of the earth", [ 30 ] arguing that human beings come to know themselves through experiencing and enlivening nature.

[ 49 ] : 55 Novalis's personal commitment to understanding one's self and the world through nature can be seen in Novalis's unfinished novel, Heinrich von Ofterdingen , in which he uses his knowledge of natural science derived from his work overseeing salt mining to understand the human condition.

[ 28 ] Novalis's commitment to cultivating nature has even been considered as a potential source of insight for a deeper understanding of the environmental crisis.

[ 50 ] Magical idealism [ edit ] Philipp Otto Runge 's Der kleine Morgen ( Little Morning ) (1808) was also inspired by Novalis's ideas.

[ 51 ] Novalis's personal worldview—informed by his education, philosophy, professional knowledge, and pietistic background—has become known as magical idealism , a name derived from Novalis's reference in his 1798 notebooks to a type of literary prophet, the magischer Idealist ( magical idealist ).

[ 52 ] In this worldview, philosophy and poetry are united.

[ 25 ] Magical idealism is Novalis's synthesis of the German idealism of Fichte and Schelling with the creative imagination.

[ 53 ] The goal of the creative imagination is to break down the barriers between language and world, as well as the subject and object.

[ 52 ] The magic is the enlivening of nature as it responds to our will.

[ 25 ] Another element of Novalis's magical idealism is his concept of love . In Novalis's view, love is a sense of relationship and sympathy between all beings in the world, [ 53 ] which is considered both the basis of magic and its goal.

[ 25 ] From one perspective, Novalis's emphasis on the term magic represents a challenge to what he perceived as the disenchantment that came with modern rationalistic thinking.

[ 54 ] : 88 In modern interpretation from the rationalistic perspective, however, Novalis's use of magic and love in his writing is a performative act of his philosophical and literary goals. These words are meant to startle readers into attentiveness, making them aware of his use of the arts, particularly poetry with its metaphor and symbolism, to explore and unify various understandings of nature in his all-embracing investigations.

[ 55 ] Magical idealism also addresses the idea of health.

[ 53 ] Novalis derived his theory of health from the Scottish physician John Brown 's system of medicine , which sees illness as a mismatch between sensory stimulation and internal state.

[ 56 ] Novalis extends this idea by suggesting that illness arises from a disharmony between the self and the world of nature.

[ 53 ] This understanding of health is immanent: the "magic" is not otherworldly, it is based on the body and mind's relationship to the environment.

[ 57 ] According to Novalis, health is maintained when we use our bodies as means to sensitively perceive the world rather than to control the world: the ideal is where the individual and the world interplay harmoniously.

[ 33 ] It has been argued that there is an anxiety in Novalis's sense of magical idealism that denies actual touch, which leads inevitably to death, and replaces it with an idea of "distant touch".

[ 58 ] Religious views [ edit ] Caspar David Friedrich 's Monk by the Sea (ca. 1808). Friedrich was also influenced by Novalis's and the Jena Romantics ' aesthetic theories.

[ 59 ] Novalis's religious perspective remains a subject of debate. Novalis's early rearing in a Pietist household affected him through this life.

[ 2 ] : 25 The impact of his religious background on his writings are particularly clear in his two major poetic works.

Hymns to the Night contains many Christian symbols and themes.

[ 3 ] : 68–78 And, Novalis's Spiritual Songs , which were posthumously published in 1802 were incorporated into Lutheran hymnals; Novalis called the poems "Christian Songs", and they were intended to be published in the Athenaeum under the title Specimens From a New Devotional Hymn Book .

[ 3 ] : 78 One of his final works, which was posthumously named Die Christenheit oder Europa ( Christianity or Europe ) when it was first published in full in 1826, has generated a great deal of controversy regarding Novalis's religious views.

[ 37 ] This essay, which Novalis himself had simply entitled Europa , called for European unity in Novalis's time by poetically referencing a mythical Medieval golden age when Europe was unified under the Catholic Church.

[ 60 ] One view of Novalis's work is that it maintains a traditional Christian outlook. Novalis's brother Karl writes that during his final illness, Novalis would read the works of the theologians Nicolaus Zinzendorf and Johann Kaspar Lavater , as well as the Bible .

[ 8 ] On the other hand, during the decades following Novalis's death, German intellectuals, such as the author Karl Hillebrand and the literary critic Hermann Theodor Hettner thought that Novalis was essentially a Catholic in his thinking.

[ 42 ] In the twentieth century, this view of Novalis has sometimes led to negative assessments of his work.

Hymns to the Night has been described as an attempt by Novalis to use religion to avoid the challenges of modernity, [ 61 ] and Christianity or Europe has been described variously as desperate prayer, a reactionary manifesto or a theocratic dream.

[ 37 ] Another view of Novalis's work is that it reflects a Christian mysticism.

[ 3 ] After Novalis died, the Jena Romantics wrote of him as a seer who would bring forth a new gospel: [ 42 ] one who lived his life as one aiming toward the spiritual while looking at death as a means of overcoming human limitation [ 62 ] in a revolutionary movement toward God.

[ 22 ] In this more romantic view, Novalis was a visionary who saw contemporary Christianity as a stage to an even higher expression of religion [ 63 ] where earthly love rises to a heavenly love [ 64 ] as death itself is defeated by that love.

[ 65 ] At the end of the nineteenth century, the playwright and poet Maurice Maeterlinck also described Novalis as a mystic. However, Maeterlinck acknowledged the impact of Novalis's intellectual interests on his religious views, describing Novalis as a "scientific mystic" and comparing him to the physicist and philosopher Blaise Pascal .

[ 66 ] More recently, Novalis's religious outlook has been analysed from the point of view of his philosophical and aesthetic commitments.

[ 67 ] In this view, Novalis's religious thought was based on his attempts to reconcile Fichte's idealism, in which the sense of self arises in the distinction of subject and object, with Baruch Spinoza 's naturalistic philosophy , in which all being is one substance. Novalis sought a single principle through which the division between ego and nature becomes mere appearance.

[ 67 ] As Novalis's philosophical thinking on religion developed, it became influenced by the Platonism of Hemsterhuis, as well as the Neoplatonism of Plotinus . Accordingly, Novalis aimed to synthesize naturalism and theism into a "religion of the visible cosmos".

[ 68 ] Novalis believed that individuals could obtain mystic insight, but religion can remain rational: God could be a Neoplatonic object of intellectual intuition and rational perception, the logos that structures the universe.

[ 67 ] In Novalis's view, this vision of the logos is not merely intellectual, but moral too, as Novalis states "god is virtue itself".

[ 49 ] : 78 This vision includes Novalis's idea of love, in which self and nature united in a mutually supportive existence.

[ 69 ] This understanding of Novalis's religious project is illustrated by a quote from one of his notes in his Fichte-Studien ( Fichte Studies ):  "Spinoza ascended as far as nature- Fichte to the 'I', or the person, I ascend to the thesis of God".

[ 68 ] According to this Neoplatonic reading of Novalis, his religious language can be understood using the "magic wand of analogy", [ 70 ] a phrase Novalis used in Europe and Christianity to clarify how he meant to use history in that essay.

[ 71 ] This use of analogy was partly inspired by Schiller, who argued that analogy allows facts to be connected into a harmonious whole, [ 53 ] and by his relationship with Friedrich Schlegel, who sought to explore the revelations of religion through the union of philosophy and poetry.

[ 72 ] The "magic wand of analogy" allowed Novalis to use metaphor, analogy and symbolism to bring together the arts, science, and philosophy in his search for truth.

[ 55 ] This view of Novalis's writing suggests that his literary language must be read carefully. His metaphors and images- even in works like Hymns to the Night - are not only mystical utterances, [ 73 ] they also express philosophical arguments.

[ 74 ] Read in this perspective, a work like Novalis's Christianity or Europe is not a call to return to a lost golden age. Rather, it is an argument in poetic language, phrased in the mode of a myth, [ 60 ] for a cosmopolitan vision of a unity [ 37 ] that brings together past and future, ideal and real, to engage the listener in an unfinished historical process.

[ 36 ] Writings [ edit ] Poetry [ edit ] Posthumous Romantic portrait of Novalis from 1845 by Friedrich Eduard Eichens (based on Franz Gareis's 1799 painting) Novalis is best known as a German Romantic poet.

[ 25 ] His two sets of poems, Hymns to the Night and Spiritual Songs , are considered his major lyrical achievements.

[ 20 ] Hymns to the Night were begun in 1797 after the death of Sophie von Kühn. About eight months after they were completed, a revised edition of the poems was published in the Athenaeum . The Spiritual Songs , which were written in 1799, were posthumously published in 1802. Novalis called the poems Christian Songs , and they were intended to be entitled Specimens From a New Devotional Hymn Book . After his death many of the poems were incorporated into Lutheran hymn-books.

[ 3 ] : 78–87 Novalis also wrote a number of other occasional poems, which can be found in his collected works.

[ 20 ] Translations of poems into English include: Hymns to the Night "Hymns to the Night" .

Hymns and Thoughts on Religion by Novalis . Translated by W. Hastie . Edinburgh, Scotland: T. & T. Clark. 1888.

"Hymns to the Night" .

Novalis: His Life, Thoughts and Works . Translated by Hope, M. J. Chicago: McClurg. 1891.

"Hymns to the Night" .

Rampolli . Translated by MacDonald, George . 2005 [1897] – via Project Gutenberg .

Hymns to the Night . Translated by Higgins, Dick . Kingston, NY: McPherson & Company. 1988.

This modern translation includes the German text (with variants) en face .

Spiritual Songs "Spiritual Songs" .

Hymns and Thoughts on Religion by Novalis . Translated by Hastie, W.

Edinburg, Scotland: T. & T. Clark. 1888.

"Spiritual Hymns" .

The Disciples at Saïs and Other Fragments . Translated by F. V. M. T; U. C. B.

London: Methuen. 1903.

"Spiritual Songs" .

Rampolli . Translated by MacDonald, George . Chicago: T. & T. Clark. 2005 [1897] – via Project Gutenberg .

Hymns to the Night/Spiritual Songs . Translated by MacDonald, George . with foreword by Prokofieff, Sergei O.

London: Temple Lodge Publishing. 2001.

ISBN 9780904693416 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: others ( link ) Unfinished novels [ edit ] Novalis wrote two unfinished novel fragments, Heinrich von Ofterdingen and Die Lehrlinge zu Sais ( The Novices at Sais ), both of which were published posthumously by Tieck and Schlegel in 1802. The novels both aim to describe a universal world harmony with the help of poetry.

The Novices at Sais contains the fairy tale "Hyacinth and Rose Petal".

Heinrich von Ofterdingen is the work in which Novalis introduced the image of the blue flower .

Heinrich von Ofterdingen was conceived as a response to Goethe's Wilhelm Meister's Apprenticeship , a work that Novalis had read with enthusiasm but judged as being highly unpoetical.

[ 66 ] He disliked Goethe making the economical victorious over the poetic in the narrative, so Novalis focused on making Heinrich von Ofterdingen triumphantly poetic.

[ 75 ] Both of Novalis's novels also reflect human experience through metaphors related to his studies in natural history from Freiburg.

[ 26 ] Translations of Novels into English include: Novalis's handwriting (excerpt from Heinrich von Ofterdingen ) Heinrich von Ofterdingen Henry von Ofterdingen: A Romance . Cambridge, England: John Owens. 1842.

(Translated by Frederick S. Stallknecht and Edward C. Sprague.) [ 76 ] "Heinrich von Ofterdingen" .

Novalis: His Life, Thoughts and Works . Translated by Hope, M. J. Chicago: McClurg. 1891.

Henry von Ofterdingen . Translated by Hilty, Palmer. Long Grove, IL: Waveland Press. 1990.

The Novices at Sais "The Disciples at Saïs" .

The Disciples at Saïs and Other Fragments . Translated by F. V. M. T; U. C. B.

London: Methuen. 1903.

The Novices of Sais . Translated by Manheim, Ralph . Brooklyn, NY: Archipelago Books . 2005.

This translation was originally published in 1949 and includes illustrations by Paul Klee .

Fragments [ edit ] Together with Friedrich Schlegel, Novalis developed the fragment as a literary artform in German. For Schlegel, the fragment served as a literary vehicle that mediated apparent oppositions. Its model was the fragment from classical sculpture, whose part evoked the whole, or whose finitude evoked infinite possibility, via the imagination.

[ 77 ] The use of the fragment allowed Novalis to easily express himself on any issue of intellectual life he wanted to address, [ 35 ] and it served as a means of expressing Schlegel's ideal of a universal "progressive universal poesy", that fused "poetry and prose into an art that expressed the totality of both art and nature".

[ 78 ] This genre particularly suited Novalis as it allowed him to express himself in a way that kept both philosophy and poetry in a continuous relationship.

[ 55 ] His first major use of the fragment as a literary form, Pollen , was published  in the Athenaeum in 1798.

[ 35 ] English translations include: Pollen "Pollen" .

Writings of Novalis, Volume 2 – via Wikisource .

This and subsequent wikisource references are translations from Minor, Jakob (1907).

Novalis Schriften, Volume 2 [ Writings of Novalis, Volume 2 ] (in German). Jena, Germany: Eugene Diederichs. pp.

110– 139.

This version of Pollen is the one published in the Athenaeum in 1798, which was edited by Schlegel.

[ 79 ] and includes four of Schlegel's fragments in fine print.

Gelley, Alexander (1991). "Miscellaneous Remarks (Original Version of Pollen)".

New Literary History .

22 (2): 383– 406.

doi : 10.2307/469045 .

JSTOR 469045 .

( registration required ) This version is translated from Novalis's unpublished original manuscript.

"Pollen".

Novalis: Philosophical Writings . Translated by Stoljar, Margaret Mahoney. Albany, NY: State University of New York Press. 1997.

This version is also translated from Novalis's unpublished original manuscript.

Political writings [ edit ] This article is part of a series on Conservatism in Germany Ideologies Agrarian Christian democracy Liberal Ordo Ritter School Monarchism Nationalist Neue Rechte Völkisch Paternalistic Prussianism Cameralistic Socialist Romanticism Right-Hegelianism Historical School Value Principles Authority Christian values Duty Elitism Aristocracy Meritocracy Federalism Gemeinschaft Geopolitik Germanisation Heimat Imperialism In Treue fest Kultur Medievalism Monarchism Organicism Patriotism Political theology Prussian virtues Sittlichkeit Social market economy Sonderweg Subsidiarity Volk Volksgeist History Holy Roman Empire The Junkers German Confederation Carlsbad Decrees Anti-Socialist Laws German Reich German Empire State Socialism Völkisch movement George-Kreis Leipzig school Freikorps Monarchism in Bavaria after 1918 Perceived Weimar decadence Conservative Revolution Oster conspiracy 20 July plot Historikerstreit Heidelberg Manifesto German reunification Erklärung 2018 Intellectuals Fichte Freyer Gadamer von Galen George Gehlen Gogarten Görres Hamann Hartmann Heidegger Hegel Herder Hielscher von Hildebrand Hoppe Jünger (Ernst) Jünger (Friedrich) Kantorowicz Klages Kommerell Koselleck Langbehn von Lilienfeld Lorenz Löwith Lübbe Mann (early) Maschke Moeller van den Bruck Müller Nolte Novalis Otto Pieper Plessner von Ranke Reck-Malleczewen Ritter (Gerhard) Ritter (Joachim) Röpke Rüstow von Salomon Scheler Schelsky Schlegel Schmitt Sieferle Sloterdijk Sombart Spaemann Spengler Steinbuch von Treitschke Voegelin Weber Literature Addresses to the German Nation (1806) Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1820) The National System (1837) Degeneration (1892) Ressentiment (1912) Reflections of a Nonpolitical Man (1918) The Decline of the West (1918, 1922) Ideology and Utopia (1929) Man and Technics (1931) The Concept of the Political (1932) On the Marble Cliffs (1939) Man (1940) Diary of a Man in Despair (1947) Man in the Age of Technology (1949) The Questionnaire (1951) Fascism in Its Epoch (1963) Envy (1966) Moral und Hypermoral (1969) Germany Abolishes Itself (2010) Finis Germania (2017) Commentators Anrich Aust Bolz Broder Deschner Thomas Fasbender Herman Höhler Hoven Joffe Krause Landt Kuby Hermann Löns Löwenthal Mann (Golo) Maurer Nagel Nebel Noelle-Neumann Otte Pirinçci Röhl Safranski Sarrazin von Schrenck-Notzing Schwilk Stein Strauss (Botho) Stürmer Tichy Weißmann Zehrer Zitelmann Politicians Adenauer Ancillon Barschel von Bismarck von Bose Brüning Fehrenbach Filbinger von Gerlach Goerdeler Held von Hindenburg Hugenberg Jongen Jung Kapp Kohl Krah Lengsfeld Maaßen von Merkatz Merz Michaelis von Papen Petry von Radowitz Rauschning Ritter von Kahr von Roon Schäffer Schäffler von Schleicher Stresemann vom Stein Stoecker von Storch Strauss Wagener Weidel von Westarp Wilhelm II Winnig Jurists Böckenförde von Gierke Möser Quabbe von Savigny Schmitt Stahl Wackenroder Wagener Activists Kohlmann Kubitschek Seibt Billy Six von Stauffenberg Stürzenberger von Thurn und Taxis (Elisabeth) von Thurn und Taxis (Gloria) Parties Active Alternative for Germany (AfD) Bavaria Party (BP) Bündnis Deutschland (BD) Christian Democratic Union of Germany (CDU) Christian Social Union in Bavaria (CSU) Centre Party Ecological Democratic Party (ÖDP) Family Party of Germany The Republicans (REP) Values Union (WU) We Citizens (WB) Defunct Bavarian People's Party (BVP) Conservative Party Free Conservative Party (FKP) German Conservative Party (DkP) German Freedom Party German National People's Party (DNVP) German Party (DP) German People's Party (DVP) Organizations Aufbau Vereinigung Bibliothek des Konservatismus Desiderius-Erasmus-Stiftung Die Deutschen Konservativen Forum of German Catholics Gerhard Löwenthal Prize German Burschenschaft German Taxpayers Federation Citizens' Movement Pax Europa Hanns Seidel Foundation Hans Filbinger Foundation Identitäre Aktion Institut für Staatspolitik Konrad Adenauer Foundation PEGIDA Studienzentrum Weikersheim Tradition und Leben Defunct Der Stahlhelm, Bund der Frontsoldaten Germany Foundation Queen Louise League Media Die Achse des Guten Antaios (Defunct) Bild Cato Cicero COMPACT Deutsche Rundschau Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung Junge Freiheit Kreuzzeitung (Defunct) Politically Incorrect Preußische Allgemeine Zeitung Süddeutsche Monatshefte Der Türmer Verlag Antaios Die Welt Welt am Sonntag Related topics Alternative Mitte Bavarian nationalism Böckenförde dilemma European New Right Conservatism in Austria Conservatism in Switzerland Criticism of multiculturalism Cultural pessimism Freischwebende Intelligenz Immigration to Germany Criminality Remigration Metapolitics Politics of Germany Liberalism Stahlhelm-Fraktion Conservatism portal Germany portal v t e During his lifetime, Novalis wrote two works on political themes, Faith and Love or the King and the Queen and his speech Europa , which was posthumously named Christianity or Europe . In addition to their political focus, both works share a common theme of poetically arguing for the importance of "faith and love" to achieve human and communal unification.

[ 37 ] Because these works poetically address political concerns, their meaning continues to be the subject of disagreement. Their interpretations have ranged from being seen as reactionary manifestos celebrating hierarchies to utopian dreams of human solidarity.

[ 80 ] Faith and Love or the King and the Queen was published in Yearbooks of the Prussian Monarchy in 1798 just after King Wilhelm Frederick III and his popular wife Queen Louise ascended to the throne of Prussia.

[ 35 ] In this work, Novalis addresses the king and queen, emphasizing their importance as role models for creating an enduring state of interconnectedness both on the individual and collective level.

[ 81 ] Though a substantial portion of the essay was published, Frederick Wilhelm III censored the publication of additional installments as he felt it held the monarchy to impossibly high standards. The work is also notable in that Novalis extensively used the literary fragment to make his points.

[ 37 ] Europa was written and originally delivered to a private group of friends in 1799. It was intended for the Athenaeum ; after it was presented, Schlegel decided not to publish it. It was not published in full until 1826.

[ 37 ] It is a poetical, cultural-historical speech with a focus on a political utopia with regard to the Middle Ages. In this text Novalis tries to develop a new Europe which is based on a new poetical Christendom which shall lead to unity and freedom. He got the inspiration for this text from a book written by Schleiermacher, Über die Religion ( On Religion ). The work was a response to the French Revolution and its implications for the French enlightenment, which Novalis saw as catastrophic. It anticipated the growing German and Romantic critiques of the then-current enlightenment ideologies in the search for a new European spirituality and unity.

[ 3 ] : 87–98 Below  are some available English translations, as well as two excerpts that illustrate how Europa has variously been interpreted.

Faith and Love or the King and the Queen "Faith and Love or the King and the Queen" .

Writings of Novalis, Volume 2 – via Wikisource .

This version follows the published version in that it treats the first six fragments as part of a prelude, so it is numbered differently than later versions. Page links in wikisource document can be used to compare the English translation to German original.

"Faith and Love or the King and the Queen".

Novalis: Philosophical Writings . Translated by Stoljar, Margaret Mahoney. Albany, NY: State University of New York Press. 1997.

"Novalis, Faith and Love ".

The Early Political Writings of the German Romantics . Translated by Beiser, Frederick C. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press. 1996.

Europa (posthumously named Christianity or Europe ) "Novalis, "Christendom or Europe" [Die Christenheit oder Europa] (1799)" (PDF) .

German History in Documents and Images (GHDI) . Translated by Passage, Charles E. Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 November 2020.

"The Future of Christendom [excerpt from Europa ]" .

Hymns and Thoughts on Religion by Novalis . Translated by Hastie, W.

Edinburg, Scotland: T. & T. Clark. 1888.

Seth, Catriona; von Kulessa, Rotrand (eds.).

" Spiritual Advent [excerpt from Europa ]" .

The Idea of Europe: Enlightenment Perspectives . Translated by Seth, Catriona. Cambridge, England: Open Book Press, 2017.

JSTOR j.ctt1sq5v84.50 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location ( link ) Collected and miscellaneous works in English [ edit ] Additional works that have been translated into English are listed below. Most of the works reflect Novalis's more philosophical and scientific sides, most of which were not systematically collected, published, and translated until the 20th century. Their publication has called for a reassessment of Novalis and his role as a thinker as well as an artist.

[ 79 ] Philosophical and political works "Monologue" .

Earlham College . Translated by Güven, Fervit. Archived from the original on 29 January 2020.

In Monologue , Novalis discuss the limits and nature of language.

[ 82 ] Writings of Novalis, Volume 2 – via Wikisource .

This translation of Jacob Minor's version of Novalis's collected works includes Pollen , Faith and Love or the King and Queen , and Monologue . It also includes Klarisse , Novalis's brief description Sophie von Kühn.

Bernstein, Jay, ed. (2003).

Classic and Romantic German Aesthetics . Translated by Crick, Joyce P. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.

This collection contains a selection of Novalis's fragments, as well as his work Dialogues . This volume also has collections of fragments by Friedrich Schlegel and Hölderlin.

Stoljar, Margaret Mahoney, ed. (1997).

Novalis: Philosophical Writings . Translated by Stoljar, Margaret Mahoney. Albany, NY: State University of New York Press.

This volume contains several of Novalis' works, including Pollen or Miscellaneous Observations , one of the few complete works published in his lifetime (though it was altered for publication by Friedrich Schlegel); Logological Fragments I and II ; Monologue , a long fragment on language; Faith and Love or The King and Queen , a collection of political fragments also published during his lifetime; On Goethe ; extracts from Das allgemeine Broullion or General Draft ; and his essay Christendom or Europe .

Beiser, Frederick C., ed. (1996).

The Early Political Writings of the German Romantics . Translated by Beiser, Frederick C. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.

This volume includes Pollen , Faith and Love or the King and Queen , Political Aphorisms , Christianity or Europe: A Fragment . It also has works by Friedrich Schlegel and Schleiermacher.

Notebooks Kellner, Jane, ed. (2003).

Fichte Studies . Translated by Kellner, Jane. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.

This book is in the same series as the Classic and Romantic German Aesthetics.

Contains Novalis's notes as he read and responded to Fichte's The Science of Knowledge .

Wood, David W., ed. (2007).

Novalis: Notes for a Romantic Encyclopaedia (Das Allgemeine Brouillon) . Translated by Wood, David W. Albany, NY: State University of New York Press.

( The first 50 of the 1151 entries are available online .) This is an English translation of Novalis's unfinished project for a "universal science". It contains his thoughts on philosophy, the arts, religion, literature and poetry, and his theory of "Magical Idealism". The Appendix contains substantial extracts from Novalis' Freiberg Natural Scientific Studies 1798/1799 .

Journals Donehower, Bruce., ed. (2007).

The Birth of Novalis: Friedrich von Hardenberg's Journal of 1797, with Selected Letters and Documents . Translated by Donehower, Bruce. Albany, NY: State University of New York Press.

This book includes Novalis's letters and journals around the time of Sophie's illness, as well as early biographies on Novalis.

Novalis Museum at Weissenfels Collected works (in German) [ edit ] Novalis's works were originally issued in two volumes by his friends Ludwig Tieck and Friedrich Schlegel (2 vols. 1802; a third volume was added in 1846). Editions of Novalis's collected works have since been compiled by C. Meisner and Bruno Wille (1898), by Ernst Heilborn (3 vols., 1901), and by J. Minor (4 vols., 1907).

Heinrich von Ofterdingen was published separately by J. Schmidt in 1876.

[ 83 ] The most current version of Novalis's collected works, a German-language, six-volume edition of Novalis works Historische-Kritische Ausgabe - Novalis Schriften (HKA), is edited by Richard Samuel, Hans-Joachim Mähl & Gerhard Schulz. It is published by Kohlhammer Verlag , Stuttgart, 1960–2006.

Novalis's Collected Works (Available online.) Novalis Schriften ( Novalis's Writings ) (edited by Ludwig Tieck and Friedrich Schlegel; in German with Fraktur font), Berlin, Germany: G. Reimer, 1837 (fifth edition). This is the collection that originally established Novalis's reputation.

Volume I Volume II Novalis Schriften (edited by Jakob Minor ; in German with Fraktur font) Jena, Germany: Eugene Diederiche, 1907. This a more comprehensive and better organized collection than Tieck and Schlegel's.

Volume I: Poetry Volume II: Longer prose pieces, includes Europa and Faith and Love or the King and Queen Volume III: Various fragments Volume IV: Includes the unfinished novels Novalis's Correspondence was edited by J. M. Raich in 1880. See R. Haym Die romantische Schule (Berlin, 1870); A. Schubart, Novalis' Leben, Dichten und Denken (1887); C. Busse, Novalis' Lyrik (1898); J. Bing, Friedrich von Hardenberg (Hamburg, 1899), E. Heilborn, Friedrich von Hardenberg (Berlin, 1901).

[ 83 ] Influence [ edit ] The political philosopher Karl Marx 's metaphorical argument that religion was the opium of the people was prefigured by Novalis's statement in Pollen where he describes " philistines " with the following analogy, "Their so-called religion works just like an opiate: stimulating, sedating, stilling pain through innervation".

[ 24 ] : 145 Hungarian philosopher György Lukács derived his concept of philosophy as transcendental homelessness from Novalis. In his 1914–15 essay Theory of the Novel quotes Novalis at the top of the essay, "Philosophy is really homesickness—the desire to be everywhere at home." [ 84 ] The essay unfolds closely related to this notion of Novalis—that modern philosophy "mourns the absence of a pre-subjective, pre-reflexive anchoring of reason" [ 85 ] and is searching to be grounded but cannot achieve this aim due to philosophy's modern discursive nature. Later, however, Lukács repudiated Romanticism, writing that Novalis's "cult of the immediate and the unconscious necessarily leads to a cult of night and death, of sickness and decay." [ 86 ] The musical composer Richard Wagner 's libretto for the opera Tristan und Isolde contains strong allusions to Novalis's symbolic language, [ 87 ] especially the dichotomy between the Night and the Day that animates his Hymns to the Night.

[ 88 ] The literary critic Walter Pater includes Novalis's quote, "Philosophiren ist dephlegmatisiren, vivificiren" ("to philosophize is to throw off apathy, to become revived") [ 18 ] in his conclusion to Studies in the History of the Renaissance .

The esotericist and philosopher Rudolf Steiner spoke in various lectures (now published) about Novalis and his influence on anthroposophy .

[ 89 ] The literary critic, philosopher and photographer's Franz Roh term magischer Realismus that he coined in his 1925 book Nach-Expressionismus, Magischer Realismus: Probleme der neuesten europäischen Malerei ( Post-expressionism, Magic Realism: Problems in Recent European Painting ) may have been inspired by Novalis's term magischer Realist .

[ 56 ] André Breton and the Surrealists were greatly influenced by Novalis.

[ 90 ] Breton cited Novalis extensively in his study of art history, L'Art Magique , as well.

The 20th-century philosopher Martin Heidegger uses a Novalis fragment, "Philosophy is really homesickness, an urge to be at home everywhere" in the opening pages of The Fundamental Concepts of Metaphysics .

[ 91 ] The UK Charity "Novalis Trust" which provides care and education for individuals with additional needs.

[ 92 ] The author Hermann Hesse 's writing was influenced by Novalis's poetry, [ 93 ] and  Hesse's last full-length novel Glasperlenspiel ( The Glass Bead Game ) contains a passage that appears to restate one of the fragments  in Novalis's Pollen .

[ 94 ] The artist and activist Joseph Beuys 's aphorism "Everyone is an artist" was inspired by Novalis, [ 95 ] who wrote "Every person should be an artist" in Faith and Love or the King and the Queen .

The author Jorge Luis Borges refers often to Novalis in his work.

[ 52 ] The krautrock band Novalis took their name from Novalis and used his poems for lyrics on their albums.

Novalis records, which are produced by AVC Audio Visual Communications AG, Switzerland, was named in tribute to Novalis's writings.

The avant-garde filmmaker Stan Brakhage made the short film First Hymn to the Night – Novalis in 1994. The film, which visually incorporates the text of Novalis's poem, was issued on Blu-ray and DVD in an anthology of Brakhage's films by Criterion Collection .

The artist and animator Chris Powell created the award-winning animated film Novalis . The title character is a robot named after Novalis.

Novalis has also influenced film theory by way of Jacques Rancière , who employs various elements of German Idealism and Romanticism in his philosophical work on critical philosophy and the regimes of art.

[ 96 ] The composer, guitarist, and electronic music artist Erik Wøllo titled one of his songs "Novalis".

Penelope Fitzgerald based her historical novel The Blue Flower on Novalis's love affair with Sophie and her influence on his art.

References [ edit ] ^ a b Redfield, Marc (2012).

"Philosophy- Early German Romanticism: Schlegel, Novalis, Hölderlin" . In Faflak, Joel; Wright, Julia M. (eds.).

A Handbook of Romanticism Studies . New York: John Wiley & Sons. p. 334.

^ a b c d e f g h i j k Just, Cölestin August (1891) [1805].

"Life of Novalis" .

Novalis: His Life, Thoughts, and Works . Translated by Hope, Margaret Jane. Chicago: A. C. McClurg. pp.

23– 50.

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o Hiebel, Frederick (1954).

Novalis:German Poet—European Thinker—Christian Mystic . Vol. 10. Chapel Hill, NC: University of North Carolina Press.

doi : 10.5149/9781469657554_hiebel .

ISBN 9781469657554 .

JSTOR 10.5149/9781469657554_hiebel .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ Kermode, Frank (2009) [5 October 1995]. "Dark Fates [Review of The Blue Flower by Penelope Fitzgerald]".

Bury Place Papers:Essays from the London Review of Books . London: London Review of Books.

ISBN 9781873092040 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: publisher location ( link ) ^ a b c Pick, Bernhard (1910).

Introduction .

Devotional Songs of Novalis . By Novalis . Pick, Bernard (ed.). Chicago: Open Court. pp.

3– 18.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: publisher location ( link ) ^ Snell, Robert (2012).

"Psychoanalysis and Mysticism" .

Uncertainties, Mysteries, Doubts: Romanticism and the Analytic Attitude . New York: Routledge. p. 31.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: publisher location ( link ) ^ Saul, Nicholas (1982). "Novalis's "Geistige Gegenwart" and His Essay "Die Christenheit Oder Europa" ".

The Modern Language Review .

77 (2): 361– 377.

doi : 10.2307/3726818 .

JSTOR 3726818 .

( registration required ) ^ a b von Hardenberg, Karl (2007) [1802].

"Karl von Hardenberg: Biography of His Brother Novalis" . In Donehower, Bruce (ed.).

The Birth of Novalis: Friedrich Von Hardenberg's Journal of 1797, with Selected Letters and Documents . Albany, NY: State University of New York Press. p. 106.

ISBN 9780791480687 .

^ a b c Wulf, Andrea (2022).

Magnificent Rebels: The First Romantics and the Invention of Self . Knopf Doubleday Publishing.

ISBN 9780525657118 .

^ a b Kneller, Jane (2003).

"Chronology" .

Fichte Studies . By Novalis. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 9780521643924 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: publisher location ( link ) ^ a b c d e f Donehower, Bruce (2007) [1802].

"Introduction" . In Donehower, Bruce (ed.).

The Birth of Novalis: Friedrich von Hardenberg's Journal of 1797, with Selected Letters and Documents . Albany, NY: State University of New York Press. pp.

1– 34.

ISBN 9780791480687 .

^ a b c Tieck, Ludwig (2007) [1815].

"Ludwig Tieck "Biography of Novalis, 1815" . In Donehower, Bruce (ed.).

The Birth of Novalis: Friedrich von Hardenberg's Journal of 1797, with Selected Letters and Documents . Albany, NY: State University of New York Press. pp.

126– 136.

ISBN 9780791480687 .

^ Gjesdal, Kristin (2020), "Georg Friedrich Philipp von Hardenberg [Novalis]" , in Zalta, Edward N. (ed.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Fall 2020 ed.), Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University, archived from the original on 6 September 2020 , retrieved 22 October 2020 ^ Waibel, Violetta L. (2004).

"Review of Jane Kneller (Ed.) Novalis Studies " .

Notre Dame Philosophical Reviews: An Electronic Journal . Archived from the original on 23 August 2020 . Retrieved 22 October 2020 .

^ Mason, Eudo C.

(1967). "New Light on the Thought of Novalis: Volume 2 of the Stuttgart Edition".

The Modern Language Review .

62 (1): 86– 91.

doi : 10.2307/3724113 .

JSTOR 3724113 .

( registration required ) ^ Newman, Gail (1989). "The Status of the Subject in Novalis's Heinrich von Ofterdingen and Kleist's Die Marquise von O...

".

The German Quarterly .

62 (1): 59– 71.

doi : 10.2307/407036 .

JSTOR 407036 .

( registration required ) ^ a b Seyhan, Azade (2012).

"Representation and Criticism" .

Representation and Its Discontents: The Critical Legacy of German Romanticism . Berkeley, CA: University of California Press. pp.

90– 92.

^ a b Laman, Barbara (2004).

"German Romantic Theory and Joyce's Early Works" .

James Joyce and German Theory: The Romantic School and All That . Madison,NJ: Fairleigh Dickinson University Press. p. 37.

ISBN 9781611472844 .

^ Aldouri, Hamman (2019).

"Before Hegel: Schiller, Novalis and Aufhebung " .

Cosmos and History .

15 (1): 10– 30.

^ a b c d Mason, Eudo C.

(1961). "Novalis Re-Edited and Reassessed".

The Modern Language Review .

56 (4): 538– 552.

doi : 10.2307/3721616 .

JSTOR 3721616 .

( registration required ) ^ a b c d Barroso, Maria Do Sameiro (2019).

"Insights on the History of Tuberculosis: Novalis and the Romantic Idealization" .

Antropologia Portuguesa .

36 (36): 7– 25.

ResearchGate : 337898914 ^ a b Wessell, Leonard P. Jr. (1975). "Novalis' Revolutionary Religion of Death".

Studies in Romanticism .

14 (4): 425– 452.

doi : 10.2307/25599987 .

JSTOR 25599987 .

( registration required ) ^ Johnson, Laurie (1998). " "Wozu überhaupt ein Anfang?" Memory and History in "Heinrich von Ofterdingen" ".

Colloquia Germanica .

31 (1): 33.

JSTOR 23981057 .

( registration required ) ^ a b O'Brien, William Arctander (1995).

"After Sophie: Julie von Charpentier" .

Novalis, Signs of Revolution, Literature . Durham, NC: Duke University Press. pp.

66– 70.

ISBN 9780822315193 .

^ a b c d e Wood, David D. (2007).

"Introduction: The Unknown Novalis" (PDF) .

Notes for a Romantic Encyclopaedia: Die Allgemeine Brouillon . By Novalis. Albany, NY: State University of New York Press. pp.

ix– xxx.

ISBN 9780791469736 .

^ a b Mahoney, Dennis F. (1992). "Human History as Natural History in "The Novices of Sais" and "Heinrich von Ofterdingen" ".

Historical Reflections / Réflexions Historiques .

18 (3): 111– 124.

JSTOR 41292842 .

( registration required ) ^ Ziolkowski, Theodore (1992).

"The Mind: Image of the Soul" .

German Romanticism And Its Institutions . Princeton,NJ: Princeton University Press. pp.

18– 26.

^ a b Erlin, Matt (2014).

"Products of the Imagination: Mining, Luxury, and the Romantic Artist in Novalis's Heinrich von Ofterdingen" .

Necessary Luxuries: Books, Literature, and the Culture of Consumption in Germany, 1770–1815 . Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press. pp.

175– 202.

ISBN 9780801453045 .

JSTOR 10.7591/j.ctt5hh26b.11 .

^ Mahoney, Dennis F. (7 September 2004).

"Novalis" . In Knapp, Gerhard P. (ed.).

The Literary Encyclopedia . United Kingdom: The Literary Dictionary Company.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: publisher location ( link ) ^ a b Gelley, Alexander (1991). "Novalis, Miscellaneous Remarks [Original Version of Pollen]".

New Literary History .

22 (2): 383– 406.

doi : 10.2307/469045 .

JSTOR 469045 .

( registration required ) ^ Redding, Paul (2009).

"The Jena Romanticism of Friedrich Schlegel and Friedrich Schelling" .

Continental Idealism: Leibniz to Nietzsche . New York: Routledge. pp.

116– 134.

doi : 10.4324/9780203876954 .

ISBN 9781134068432 . Archived from the original on 23 October 2020.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: publisher location ( link ) ^ Rush, Fred (2005). "Review of The Romantic Imperative: The Concept of Early German Romanticism".

Mind .

114 (455): 709– 713.

JSTOR 3489014 .

( registration required ) ^ a b Beiser, Frederick C.

(2003).

The Romantic Imperative: The Concept of Early German Romanticism . Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

ISBN 9780674011809 .

^ Mayer, Paola (1999).

"An Interrupted Reception: Novalis" .

Jena Romanticism and Its Appropriation of Jakob Böhme: Theosophy, Hagiography, Literature . Montreal: McGill-Queen's University Press. p. 82.

ISBN 9780773518520 .

^ a b c d Stoljar, Margaret Mahoney (1997).

Introduction .

Novalis: Philosophical Writings . By Novalis. New York: Routledge. pp.

1– 22.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: publisher location ( link ) ^ a b Smith, John H. (2011). "Living Religion as Vanishing Mediator: Schleiermacher, Early Romanticism, and Idealism".

The German Quarterly .

84 (2): 143.

JSTOR 41237070 .

( registration required ) ^ a b c d e f g Kleingeld, Paula (2008).

"Romantic Cosmopolitanism: Novalis's "Christianity or Europe" " .

Journal of the History of Philosophy .

46 (2): 269– 284.

doi : 10.1353/hph.0.0005 . Archived from the original on 24 October 2020.

^ Littlejohns, Richard (2003). "Philipp Otto Runge's "Tageszeiten" and Their Relationship to Romantic Nature Philosophy".

Studies in Romanticism .

42 (1): 55– 74.

doi : 10.2307/25601603 .

JSTOR 25601603 .

( registration required ) ^ Wood, David D. (2002).

"Novalis: Kant Studies (1797)" .

The Philosophical Forum .

32 (4): 328– 338.

doi : 10.1111/0031-806X.00072 .

^ Haase, Donald (1979). "Romantic Facts and Critical Myths: Novalis' Early Reception in France".

The Comparist .

3 : 23– 31.

JSTOR 44366652 .

( registration required ) ^ a b Robles, Nicolas Roberto (2020).

"Novalis: The White Plague and the Blue Flower" .

Hektoen International .

12 (3).

ISSN 2155-3017 . Archived from the original on 7 November 2020.

^ a b c Haussmann, J. F. (1912). "German Estimates of Novalis from 1800-1850".

Modern Philology .

9 (2): 399– 415.

doi : 10.1086/386867 .

JSTOR 432442 .

S2CID 161077351 .

( registration required ) ^ Harrold, F. (1930). "Carlyle and Novalis".

Studies in Philology .

27 (21): 47– 63.

JSTOR 4172052 .

( registration required ) ^ Carlyle, Thomas (1852) [1829].

"Novalis" . In Emerson, Ralph Waldo (ed.).

Critical and Miscellaneous essays . Philadelphia, PA: A. Hart. pp.

167– 186.

^ Novalis (1897) [1800], "Novalis-Hymns to the Night: Translated by George MacDonald and found in Rampolli (1897)" , The George MacDonald WWW Page: Home to the George MacDonald Society , translated by MacDonald, George , archived from the original on 10 April 2020 , retrieved 18 October 2020 ^ Partridge, Michael (2014).

"George MacDonald & Novalis" .

The George MacDonald WWW Page: Home to the George MacDonald Society . Archived from the original on 10 April 2020 . Retrieved 23 October 2020 .

^ Ziolkowski, Theodore (1996). "Novalis: Signs of Revolution by Wm. Arctander O'Brien [Book Review]".

Modern Philology .

94 (2): 240– 246.

JSTOR 437966 .

( registration required ) ^ Kneller, Jane (5 September 2008).

"Review of Novalis, David Wood (Ed., Tr.) Notes for a Romantic Encyclopaedia: Das Allgemeine Brouillon " .

Notre Dame Philosophical Reviews .

9 .

ISSN 1538-1617 .

^ a b c Nassar, Dalia (2013). "Romanticizing Nature and Self".

The Romantic Absolute: Being and Knowing in Early German Romantic Philosophy, 1795-1804 . University of Chicago Press. p. 55.

ISBN 9780226084237 .

^ Becker, Christian; Manstetten, Reiner (2004). "Nature as a You: Novalis' Philosophical Thought and the Modern Ecological Crisis".

Environmental Values .

13 (1): 101– 118.

JSTOR 30301971 .

( registration required ) ^ "Philipp Otto Runge, Small Morning (1808)" .

German History in Documents and Images . 2003. Archived from the original on 4 November 2020.

^ a b c Warnes, Christopher (2006). "Magical Realism and the Legacy of German Idealism".

The Modern Language Review .

101 (2): 488– 498.

doi : 10.2307/20466796 .

JSTOR 20466796 .

S2CID 170406207 .

( registration required ) ^ a b c d e Cahen-Maurel, Laure (2019).

"Novalis's Magical Idealism: A Threefold Philosophy of the Imagination, Love and Medicine" (PDF) .

Symphilosophie: International Journal of Philosophical Romanticism .

1 : 129– 165. Archived from the original (PDF) on 26 October 2020.

^ Josephson-Storm, Jason A. (2017).

The Myth of Disenchantment: Magic, Modernity, and the Birth of the Human Sciences . Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

ISBN 978-0-226-40336-6 .

^ a b c Kneller, Jane (2010).

"Early German romanticism: The Challenge of Philosophizing" . In Moyar, Dean (ed.).

The Routledge Companion to Nineteenth Century Philosophy . London: Routledge. pp.

295– 327.

ISBN 9781135151119 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: publisher location ( link ) ^ a b Warnes, Christopher (2009).

Magical Realism and the Postcolonial Novel: Between Faith and Irreverence . London: Palgrave Macmillan UK. p. 19.

ISBN 978-0-230-23443-7 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: publisher location ( link ) ^ Neubauer, John (1971).

"The Anthropology and Physiology of Magic" .

Bifocal Vision: Novalis' Philosophy of Nature and Disease . Vol. 68. Durham, NC: University of Carolina Press. pp.

57– 75.

doi : 10.5149/9781469658070_neubauer .

ISBN 9781469658063 .

JSTOR 10.5149/9781469658070_neubauer.7 .

^ Krell, David Farrell (1998).

Contagion: Sexuality, Disease and Death in German Idealism and Romanticism . Indianapolis, IN: Indiana State University. pp.

21– 22.

^ Miller, Phillip B. (1974). "Anxiety and Abstraction: Kleist and Brentano on Caspar David Friedrich".

Art Journal .

33 (3): 205– 210.

JSTOR 775783 .

( registration required ) ^ a b Littlejohns, Richard (2007).

"Everlasting Peace and Medieval Europe: Romantic Myth-Making in Novalis's Europa " .

Myths of Europe . Leiden, Netherlands: Brill. pp.

176– 182.

^ Monroe, Jonathan (1983). "Novalis' "Hymnen an die Nacht" and the Prose Poem "avant la lettre" ".

Studies in Romanticism .

22 (1): 93– 110.

doi : 10.2307/25600414 .

JSTOR 25600414 .

( registration required ) ^ Wernaer, Robert M. (1910).

"Novalis and His Hymns to the Night" .

Romanticism and the Romantic School in Germany . New York: D. Appleton. p. 212.

^ Willoughby, L. A. (1938). "German Affinities with the Oxford Movement".

The Modern Language Review .

29 (1): 52– 56.

doi : 10.2307/3716061 .

JSTOR 3716061 .

( registration required ) ^ Toy, Walter D. (1918). "The Mysticism of Novalis".

Studies in Philology .

15 (1): 14– 22.

JSTOR 4171721 .

( registration required ) ^ Rehder, Helmut (1948). "Novalis and Shakespeare".

PMLA .

63 (2): 604– 624.

doi : 10.2307/459430 .

JSTOR 459430 .

S2CID 163195393 .

( registration required ) ^ a b Maeterlinck, Maurice (1912).

"Novalis" .

On Emerson and Other Essays . Translated by Moses, Montrose J.

New York: Dodd, Mead and Company. pp.

51– 88.

^ a b c Beiser, Frederick C.

(2003).

"Novalis' Magic Idealism" .

German Idealism: The Struggle Against Subjectivism, 1781–1801 . Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

ISBN 0674007697 .

^ a b Crowe, Benjamin D. (2008).

"On 'The Religion of the Visible Universe': Novalis and the Pantheism Controversy" (PDF) .

British Journal for the History of Philosophy .

16 (1): 125– 146.

doi : 10.1080/09608780701789335 .

S2CID 170382946 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 29 October 2020.

^ O'Meara, John (2014).

The Way of Novalis: An Exposition on the Process of His Achievement . Ottawa, Canada: HcP. p. 94.

^ Dieckmann, Liselotte (1955). "The Metaphor of Hieroglyphics in German Romanticism".

Compariative Literature .

7 (4): 306– 312.

doi : 10.2307/1769042 .

JSTOR 1769042 .

( registration required ) ^ Novalis (1799).

" "Christendom or Europe"[ Die Christenheit oder Europa ]" (PDF) .

German History in Documents and Images .

^ Weltman, J. (1975). "The Religion of Friedrich Schlegel".

Modern Language Review .

31 (4): 539– 544.

doi : 10.2307/3716141 .

JSTOR 3716141 .

( registration required ) ^ Freeman, Veronica.

The Poetization of Mystical Constructs in the Work of Novalis (PhD). University of Florida.

^ Gwee, S. L.

(2011). "Night in Novalis, Schelling, and Hegel".

Studies in Romanticism .

50 (1): 105– 124.

JSTOR 23056008 .

( registration required ) ^ Hahn, Hans-Joachim (2004).

"Heinrich Von Ofterdingen 1802: Novel by Novalis" .

Encyclopedia of the Romantic Era, 1760-1850 . Oxfordshire, England: Taylor & Francis. pp.

485– 486.

^ Crocker, Samuel R., ed. (1873).

"Notes and Queries" .

The Literary World, Vols 3-4 . p. 137,154.

^ Tanehisa, Otabe (1918).

"Friedrich Schlegel and the Idea of the Fragment: A Contribution to Romantic Aesthetics" (PDF) .

Aesthetics .

13 (1): 59– 68. Archived from the original (PDF) on 22 December 2018.

^ Schlegel, Friedrich (1798).

"Athenaeum Fragments" .

German History in Documents and Images . Retrieved 30 October 2018 .

^ a b Gelley, Alexander (1991). "Novalis, Miscellaneous Remarks: Introduction".

New Literary History .

22 (2): 377– 381.

doi : 10.2307/469044 .

JSTOR 469044 .

( registration required ) ^ Rosellini, Jay Julian (2000).

"Predecessors and Predilections: A Problematic Legacy" .

Literary Skinheads? Writing from the Right in a Reunified Germany . West Lafayette, IN: Purdue University Press. pp.

3– 26.

ISBN 9781557532060 .

^ Matala de Mazza, Ethel (2009). "Romantic Politics and Society". In Saul, Nicholas (ed.).

The Cambridge Companion to German Romanticism (PDF) . pp.

191– 207. Archived from the original (PDF) on 14 August 2017.

^ Schaber, Steven C. (1974). "Novalis' "Monolog" and Hofmannsthal's "Ein Brief": Two Poets in Search of a Language".

The German Quarterly .

47 (2): 204– 214.

doi : 10.2307/403360 .

JSTOR 403360 .

( registration required ) ^ a b Chisholm 1911 .

^ Novalis, 1772-1801. (2007).

Notes for a romantic encyclopaedia : Das Allgemeine Brouillon . Wood, David W., 1968-. Albany: State University of New York Press. p. 155.

ISBN 978-1-4294-7128-2 .

OCLC 137659435 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list ( link ) ^ Gjesdal, Kristin (2014), "Georg Friedrich Philipp von Hardenberg [Novalis]" , in Zalta, Edward N. (ed.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Fall 2014 ed.), Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University , retrieved 15 September 2020 ^ Lukacs, György (1947).

"Romanticism (Die Romantik als Wendung in der deutschen Literatur)" .

Fortschritt und Reaktion in der deutschen Literatur . Translated by P., Anton. Berlin: Aufbau-Verlag.

^ Scott, Jill (1998). "Night and Light in Wagner's Tristan und Isolde and Novalis's Hymnen an die Nacht: Inversion and Transfiguration".

University of Toronto Quarterly .

67 (4): 774– 780.

doi : 10.3138/utq.67.4.774 .

S2CID 170123721 .

^ Hutcheon, Linda; Hutcheon, Michael (1999). "Death Drive: Eros and Thanatos in Wagner's "Tristan und Isolde" ".

Cambridge Opera Journal .

11 (3): 267– 293.

doi : 10.1017/S0954586700005073 .

JSTOR 823612 .

S2CID 194063366 .

( registration required ) ^ Steiner, Rudolf (2015) [1908-1909], Novalis: On his Hymns to the Night , translated by von Maltitz, Hannah, archived from the original on 18 July 2019 , retrieved 29 November 2018 ^ Wallace Fowlie, "Surrealism in 1960: A Backward Glance", Poetry , Vol. 95, No. 6 (Mar., 1960), p. 371.

^ Heidegger, Martin (2001) [1929].

The Fundamental Concepts of Metaphysics: World, Finitude, Solitude . Translated by McNeill, William; Walker, Nicholas (Reprint ed.). Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press. p. 5.

ISBN 9780253214294 .

^ Achieving more together Novalis-Trust.

^ Mileck, Joseph (1983). "Hermann Hesse and German Romanticism: An Evolving Relationship".

The Journal of English and Germanic Philology .

82 (2): 168– 185.

JSTOR 27709146 .

( registration required ) ^ Ziolkowski, Theodore (1996). "Hermann Hesse's Chiliastic Vision".

Monateshefte .

53 (4): 199– 210.

JSTOR 30161816 .

( registration required ) ^ Adamopoulos, Konstantin (2015).

"Everyone is an Artist: The Participative Anthroposophy of the Artist Joseph Bueys" .

Fikrun Wa Fann: A Publication of the Goethe-Institut . Translated by Collins, Charlotte. Archived from the original on 15 March 2016.

^ Kitchen, Will. (2023) Film, Negation and Freedom: Capitalism and Romantic Critique . London and New York: Bloomsbury Academic, pp. 47-76 Sources [ edit ] Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911).

"Novalis" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 19 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 829.

Further reading [ edit ] Ameriks, Karl (ed.).

The Cambridge Companion to German Idealism . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2000 Arena, Leonardo Vittorio, La filosofia di Novalis , Milano: Franco Angeli, 1987 (in Italian ) Behler, Ernst.

German Romantic Literary Theory . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1993 Beiser, Frederick.

German Idealism . Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 2002. Argues that the early romantics should be understood as serious philosophical thinkers.  Novalis's philosophical commitments are discussed in detail.

Berman, Antoine .

L'épreuve de l'étranger. Culture et traduction dans l'Allemagne romantique: Herder, Goethe, Schlegel, Novalis, Humboldt, Schleiermacher, Hölderlin .

, Paris, Gallimard, Essais, 1984.

ISBN 978-2-07-070076-9 (in French ) Carlyle, Thomas (1829).

"Novalis" .

Critical and Miscellaneous Essays : Volume II . The Works of Thomas Carlyle in Thirty Volumes. Vol. XXVII. New York: Charles Scribner's Sons (published 1904). pp.

1– 55.

Fitzgerald, Penelope .

The Blue Flower . Boston, MA: Mariner Books, 1995. A novelization of Novalis' early life, development and relationship with Sophie von Kühn.

Haywood, Bruce .

Novalis, the veil of imagery; a study of the poetic works of Friedrich von Hardenberg , 1772–1801 , 's-Gravenhage, Mouton, 1959; Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1959.

Krell, David Farrell.

Contagion: Sexuality, Disease, and Death in German Idealism and Romanticism . Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1998. First part addresses what Krell calls Novalis's "Thaumaturgic Idealism".

Kuzniar, Alice.

Delayed Endings . Georgia: University of Georgia Press, 1987. Explores Novalis's and Hölderlin's use of nonclosure to create a new Romantic sense of narrative time.

Lacoue-Labarthe, Phillipe and Jean-Luc Nancy.

The Literary Absolute: The Theory of Literature in German Romanticism.

. Albany: State University of New York Press, 1988.

Molnár, Geza von.

Novalis' "Fichte Studies" .

O’Brien, William Arctander.

Novalis: Signs of Revolution . Durham: Duke University Press, 1995.

ISBN 0-8223-1519-X Pfefferkorn, Kristin.

Novalis: A Romantic's Theory of Language and Poetry . New Haven: Yale University Press, 1988.

Prokofieff, Sergei O.

Eternal Individuality. Towards a Karmic Biography of Novalis . Temple Lodge Publishing, London 1992.

External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Novalis .

Works by or about Novalis at Wikisource Works by Novalis at Project Gutenberg Works by or about Novalis at the Internet Archive Works by Novalis at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) Novalis by Anna Ezekiel, Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy Novalis by Kristin Gjesdal, Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy Novalis: Hymns to The Night – a translation of the work by George MacDonald Oberwiederstedt Manor , birthplace of Novalis and home to the International Novalis Society and the Novalis Foundation (in German ) Aquarium: Friedrich von Hardenberg im Internet – a multi-lingual website for information on Novalis, including translations, reviews, general discussions, odd trivia and scholarly articles. (Last updated in 2007.) "Novalis" .

New International Encyclopedia . 1905.

"Novalis" .

Encyclopedia Americana . 1920.

Excerpts from Henry of Ofterdingen with illustrations (mostly paintings by Caspar David Friedrich) v t e Romanticism Countries Denmark England (literature) France (literature) Germany Japan Norway Poland Russia (literature) Scotland Spain (literature) Sweden (literature) Movements Ancients Bohemianism Coppet group Counter-Enlightenment Dark Düsseldorf School German historical school Gothic revival Hudson River School Indianism Jena Lake Poets Nationalist Nazarene movement Neo Pre Sturm und Drang Post Purismo Transcendentalism Ukrainian school Ultra Wallenrodism Themes Blue flower British Marine Gesamtkunstwerk Gothic fiction Hero Byronic Romantic Historical fiction Mal du siècle Medievalism Noble savage Nostalgia Ossian Pantheism Rhine Romantic genius Wanderlust Weltschmerz White Mountain art Writers Brazil Abreu Alencar Manuel Antônio de Almeida Alves Assis Azevedo Barreto Dias Guimarães Macedo Magalhães Reis Taunay Varela France Baudelaire Bertrand Chateaubriand Dumas Gautier Hugo Lamartine Mérimée Musset Nerval Nodier Staël Vigny Germany A. v. Arnim B. v. Arnim Beer Brentano Eichendorff Fouqué Goethe Brothers Grimm Günderrode Gutzkow Hauff Heine Hoffmann Hölderlin Jean Paul Kleist Mörike Novalis Schwab Tieck Uhland Great Britain Barbauld Blake Anne Brontë C. Brontë E. Brontë Burns Byron Carlyle Clare Coleridge de Quincey Maria Edgeworth Keats Maturin Polidori Radcliffe Mary Robinson Scott Seward M. Shelley P. B. Shelley Southey Wordsworth Poland Fredro Krasiński Józef Ignacy Kraszewski Malczewski Mickiewicz Norwid Potocki Wincenty Pol Słowacki Portugal Castelo Branco Castilho João de Deus Dinis Garrett Herculano Soares dos Passos Romania Mihail Kogălniceanu Constantin Negruzzi Vasile Alecsandri Dimitrie Bolintineanu Mihai Eminescu George Coșbuc Octavian Goga Alexandru Macedonski Barbu Ștefănescu Delavrancea Russia Baratynsky Batyushkov Gogol Karamzin Küchelbecker Lermontov Pushkin Tyutchev Vyazemsky Zhukovsky Serbia Jakšić Kostić Njegoš Radičević Stojadinović-Srpkinja Zmaj Spain Bécquer Rosalía de Castro Espronceda Gutiérrez Saavedra Zorrilla U.S.

Bryant Cooper Emerson Hawthorne Josiah Gilbert Holland Irving Longfellow Lowell Poe Other Abovian Alfieri Andersen Baratashvili Botev Chavchavadze Foscolo Frashëri Geijer Grundtvig Heliade Isaacs Lenau Leopardi Mácha Manzoni Maturin Oehlenschläger Orbeliani Prešeren Raffi Runeberg Shevchenko Topelius Vörösmarty Wergeland Musicians Austria Bruckner Czerny Hummel Mahler Schubert Thalberg Wolf Czechia Dvořák Moscheles Reicha Smetana Voříšek France Adam Alkan Auber Berlioz Fauré Halévy Méhul Onslow Saint-Saëns Germany Beethoven Brahms Bruch Kalkbrenner Loewe Marschner Fanny Mendelssohn Felix Mendelssohn Meyerbeer Moszkowski C. Schumann R. Schumann Spohr Strauss Wagner Weber Great Britain Elgar Holst Vaughan Williams Hungary Erkel Goldmark Heller Hubay Joachim Liszt Italy Bellini Busoni Cherubini Donizetti Paganini Respighi Rossini Spontini Verdi Poland Bortkiewicz Chopin Lipiński Moniuszko Paderewski Stolpe Tausig Wieniawski Russia Arensky Balakirev Borodin Cui Glinka Lyapunov Medtner Mussorgsky Rachmaninoff Rimsky-Korsakov Rubinstein Scriabin Tchaikovsky Serbia Hristić Konjović Mokranjac Stanković U.S.

Chadwick Beach Foote Foster Joplin MacDowell Sousa Other Bennett Berwald Field Franck Grieg Sibelius Sor Philosophers Belinsky Berchet Burke Carlyle Chaadayev Coleridge Constant Emerson Fichte Goethe Hazlitt Hegel Khomyakov Lamennais Larra Maistre Mazzini Michelet Müller Novalis Quinet Rousseau Schelling Schiller A. Schlegel F. Schlegel Schleiermacher Senancour Snellman Staël Thoreau Tieck Wackenroder Visual artists Aivazovsky Bierstadt Blake Bonington Bryullov Chassériau Church Constable Cole Corot Dahl David d'Angers Delacroix Edelfelt Friedrich Fuseli Gallen-Kallela Géricault Girodet Głowacki Goya Gude Hayez Janmot Jones Kiprensky Koch Lampi Leutze Martin Michałowski Palmer Porto-Alegre Préault Révoil Richard Rude Runge Saleh Scheffer Stattler Stroy Tidemand Tropinin Turner Veit Ward Wiertz Scholars Abraham Abrams Barzun Beiser Berlin Blanning Bloom Blume Dahlhaus Ferber Frye Janion Lacoue-Labarthe Lovejoy de Man Nancy Porthan Ricks Rosen Wellek Related topics Coleridge's theory of life German idealism List of romantics List of Romantic poets Middle Ages in history Opium and Romanticism Romantic ballet Romantic epistemology Romantic medicine Romantic poetry Romantic psychology Romanticism and economics Romanticism and the French Revolution Romanticism in science Bacon Evolution theory Wanderer above the Sea of Fog ← Age of Enlightenment Modernism → Category v t e Idealism Forms Absolute British Actual Canadian German Italian Monistic Epistemological Platonic Subjective Objective Transcendental Indian Monistic (Shaivism) Magical (thaumaturgic) Buddhist (consciousness-only) Practical Political Related topics Metaphysics Idea Plato's Theory of Ideas Anti-realism Consciousness-only Rationalism Panpsychism Phenomenalism Idealistic pluralism Idealistic Studies v t e Conservatism Schools by region International Authoritarian Corporatist Cultural Fiscal Green Liberal Moderate National Paternalistic Populist Pragmatic Progressive Reactionary Religious Social Traditionalist Ultra Asia China Chiangism Confucianism Neo New Dai Jitao Thought Neoauthoritarianism Iran Khomeinism Monarchist Principlist Israel Fundamentalist Jewish Kahanism Zionism Neo Religious Revisionist Japan Minzoku Neo Nippon Kaigi Shōwa Statism State Shinto South Korea Ilminism New Right Turkey Democratic Erdoğanism Neo-Ottomanism Other Bangladesh Hong Kong India Malaysia Pakistan Ziaism Singapore Taiwan Chiangism Europe France Action Française Bonapartism Gaullism Integral nationalism Legitimism Maurrassisme Nouvelle Droite Orléanism Révolution nationale Sarkozysm Ultra-royalism Germany Agrarian Hegelian Historical School Neue Rechte Ordoliberalism Prussianism Cameralistic Socialist Revolutionary Young Ritter School Romanticism State Socialism Völkisch Italy Berlusconism Historical Right Italian school of elitism Neo-Bourbonism Sanfedismo Poland Golden Liberty Kaczyzm Monarchist National Democracy Sarmatism Russia Duginism Eurasianism Monarchist Black-hundredism Tsarism Putinism Slavophilia Pochvennichestvo Spain Alfonsism Carlism Carloctavismo Carlo-francoism Francoism National Catholicism Integrism Mellismo Maurism Neocatholicism Noucentisme United Kingdom Cameronism Civic Compassionate Muscular liberalism Jacobitism Neo-Jacobite Revival Neo One-nationism Powellism Thatcherism Toryism High Red Social Other Austria Belgium Rexism Denmark Finland Georgia Monarchist Greece Metaxism Populist Hungary Iceland Luxembourg Netherlands Norway Portugal Miguelist Integralismo Lusitano Romania Monarchist Serbia Monarchist Sweden Switzerland Ukraine Latin America Argentina Federal Peronism Maurrasismo Menemism Nacionalismo Orthodox Peronism Brazil Bolsonarism Coronelism Integralism Janismo Monarchist Patrianovism Populism Chile Gremialismo Pinochetism Other Belize Colombia Rojismo Uribism Cuba Guatemala Mexico Cristero Panama Peru Fujimorism Odriismo Uruguay Herrerism Riverism Ruralismo Venezuela Perezjimenismo North America Canada Populism Trumpism Clerico-nationalism Social Toryism Blue Red Pink United States Compassionate Libertarian Fusionism Paleo Tea Party Movement Neo Old Right Paleo Reaganism Social Traditionalist Trumpism Oceania Australia Centre Right National Right New Zealand Philosophy Principles Ancestral worship Authority Traditional Class collaboration Consociationalism Clericalism Collective identity Confessionalism Cultural assimilation Cultural heritage Cultural values Culture of life Pro-Life Discipline Duty Elitism Aristocracy Meritocracy Noblesse oblige Ethical order Familialism Family values Fundamentalism Gender role Complementarianism Honour Imperialism Loyalty Monarchism Royalist Natural law Natural Order Norms Conventions Customs Mores Ordered liberty Organicism Organized religion Orthodoxy Patriotism Nationalism Personalism Philosophical realism Moral realism Private property Protectionism Public morality Rule of law Social hierarchy Social institutions Social order Solidarity Sovereignty State religion Stewardship Subsidiarity Tradition Intellectuals Bainville Barruel Belloc Bonald Buckley Jr.

Burke Burnham Carlyle Chateaubriand Chesterton Coleridge Comte Cortés Dávila Dostoevsky Eliot Evola Fardid Gentz Haller Hitchens Hume Iorga Johnson Jünger Karamzin Kirk Kuehnelt-Leddihn La Mennais Le Bon Le Play Leontiev Lewis Maistre Mansfield Maurras Menéndez More Müller Newman Nisbet Novalis Oakeshott Corrêa de Oliveira Peterson Ranke Renan Rivarol Röpke Santayana Savigny Schlegel Schmitt Scruton Solzhenitsyn Sowell Spann Spengler Stahl Strauss Taine Tocqueville Uvarov Voegelin Politics Organisations European Conservatives and Reformists Party European People's Party Identity and Democracy International Democrat Union International Monarchist League Muslim Brotherhood Tradition, Family, Property Politicians Abe Adams Adenauer Andreotti Berlusconi Bismarck Bolsonaro GW Bush Canning Chiang Churchill Diefenbaker Disraeli Dmowski Dollfuss Erdoğan Franco Fujimori de Gaulle Harper Horthy John Paul II Kaczyński Khamenei Khomeini Kohl Le Pen Lee Macdonald Mannerheim Marcos Maurras Menzies Metaxas Metternich Mobutu Modi Netanyahu Orbán Park Pérez Jiménez Pinochet Pitt Powell Prat de la Riba Putin Reagan Salazar Salisbury Smith Stolypin Suharto Thatcher Trujillo Trump Vajpayee de Valera Zia Zemmour Religion Christian democracy Christian politics Theonomy Christian right Theoconservatism Confucianism Hindutva Jewish conservatism Religious Zionism Islamism Islamic economics Theravada Buddhist economics Traditionalist Catholicism Catholic social teaching Distributism Integralism Ultramontanism Traditionalist School Historical background Ancien régime Bourbon Restauration Congress of Vienna Concert of Europe Conservative Order Counter-Enlightenment German Romanticism Holy Alliance Ultra-royalism Related Ideologies Agrarianism Clerical fascism Communitarianism Conservative liberalism Corporatism Localism Anti-communism Anti-gender movement Anti-Masonry Aristocracy Black conservatism United States Desecularization Postsecularism Conservative feminism Conservative wave Counter-revolutionary Elite theory Ethnopluralism Hispanic and Latino conservatism in the United States LGBTQ conservatism Neo-feudalism Neo-medievalism Opposition to LGBTQ rights Para-fascism Political Evangelicalism in Latin America Political theology Radical right Europe United States Reactionary Neo- Right realism Right-wing politics Authoritarianism New European Small-c conservatives Conservatism portal Politics portal v t e Social philosophy Concepts Agency Anomie Convention Cosmopolitanism Customs Cultural heritage Culturalism Inter Mono Multi Culture Counter Familialism History Honour Human nature Identity Formation Ideology Institutions Invisible hand Loyalty Modernity Morality Public Mores National character Natural law Personhood Reification Ressentiment Rights Sittlichkeit Social alienation Social norms Spontaneous order Stewardship Traditions Values Family Volksgeist Worldview Schools Budapest School Catholic social teaching Distributism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Social Frankfurt School Personalism Philosophers Ancient Confucius Laozi Mencius Mozi Xunzi Medieval Alpharabius Aquinas Avempace Bruni Ibn Khaldun Maimonides Ibn Tufayl Early modern Calvin Erasmus Guicciardini Locke Luther Milton Montaigne Müntzer 18th and 19th centuries Arnold Bentham Bonald Burke Carlyle Comte Condorcet Emerson Engels Fichte Fourier Franklin Hegel Helvétius Herder Hume Jefferson Kant Kierkegaard Le Bon Le Play Marx Mill Nietzsche Owen Renan Rousseau Royce Ruskin Smith Spencer de Staël Stirner Taine Thoreau Tocqueville Vico Vivekananda Voltaire 20th and 21st centuries Adorno Agamben Arendt Aron Badiou Baudrillard Bauman Benoist Berlin Butler Camus de Beauvoir Debord Deleuze Dewey Du Bois Durkheim Eco Evola Foucault Fromm Gandhi Gehlen Gentile Gramsci Guénon Habermas Han Heidegger Hoppe Irigaray Kirk Kołakowski Kropotkin Land Lasch MacIntyre Marcuse Maritain Negri Niebuhr Nussbaum Oakeshott Ortega Pareto Polanyi Radhakrishnan Röpke Santayana Scruton Shariati Simmel Skinner Sombart Sowell Spengler Strauss Taylor Voegelin Walzer Weber Weil Zinn Žižek Works De Officiis (44 BC) Oration on the Dignity of Man (1486) A Vindication of Natural Society (1756) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Civilization and Its Discontents (1930) The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction (1935) The Second Sex (1949) One-Dimensional Man (1964) The Society of the Spectacle (1967) The History of Sexuality (1976) The Culture of Narcissism (1979) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) Gender Trouble (1990) The Malaise of Modernity (1991) Intellectuals and Society (2010) See also Agnotology Axiology Critical theory Cultural criticism Cultural pessimism Ethics Historism Historicism Humanities Philosophy of culture Philosophy of education Philosophy of history Political philosophy Social criticism Social science Social theory Sociology Category Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands 2 Norway Latvia Croatia Chile Greece Argentina Korea Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Finland Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii zbMATH Artists MusicBrainz Discography of American Historical Recordings FID People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC RISM Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Novalis&oldid=1303380539 " Categories : 1772 births 1801 deaths Novalis People from Mansfeld-Südharz People from the Electorate of Saxony German Lutherans Writers from Saxony-Anhalt German monarchists Romantic philosophers Romantic poets Natural philosophers Leipzig University alumni Hardenberg family 18th-century German poets 19th-century German poets 19th-century German male writers 19th-century deaths from tuberculosis German male poets German-language poets Tuberculosis deaths in Germany 18th-century pseudonymous writers 19th-century pseudonymous writers Protestant mystics German Christian mystics German idealists Hidden categories: CS1 errors: ISBN date CS1 maint: publisher location Pages with login required references or sources CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Good articles Use dmy dates from March 2022 Pages with German IPA Articles containing German-language text Articles containing Latin-language text CS1 maint: others CS1 German-language sources (de) CS1 maint: location Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Articles with Project Gutenberg links Articles with Internet Archive links Articles with LibriVox links Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the New International Encyclopedia Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the Encyclopedia Americana with a Wikisource reference Articles containing French-language text Articles containing Italian-language text This page was last edited on 30 July 2025, at 17:09 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Novalis 70 languages Add topic

