Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life and education 2 Career 3 Bibliography 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Rosalind Hursthouse 8 languages Català Español فارسی Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska 日本語 Русский Suomi Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia New Zealand philosopher (born 1943) Rosalind Hursthouse FRSNZ Born Mary Rosalind Hursthouse ( 1943-11-10 ) 10 November 1943 (age 81) Bristol, England Nationality New Zealander Awards Fellow of the Royal Society of New Zealand Education Education Victoria University of Wellington University of Auckland , BA, MA Somerville College, Oxford , BPhil, DPhil Thesis Action, Emotion and Motive Philosophical work Era Contemporary philosophy Region Western philosophy School Analytic philosophy , virtue ethics , Aristotelianism Institutions University of Auckland Open University University of Oxford Main interests Applied ethics , normative ethics , ancient philosophy , action theory Notable works On Virtue Ethics Notable ideas Neo-Aristotelianism , v-rules, Plato 's requirement on the virtues Relatives Richmond Hursthouse (great-grandfather) Charles Wilson Hursthouse (great-granduncle) Charles Flinders Hursthouse (great-great-granduncle) Rosalind Hursthouse FRSNZ (born 10 November 1943) is a British-born New Zealand moral philosopher noted for her work on virtue ethics . She is one of the leading exponents of contemporary virtue ethics, though she has also written extensively on philosophy of action , history of philosophy , moral psychology , and biomedical ethics . Hursthouse is Professor Emerita of Philosophy at the University of Auckland and Fellow of the Royal Society of New Zealand .

Hursthouse's book On Virtue Ethics (1999) has been a seminal contribution to the contemporary revival of virtue theory (" aretaic turn ") and is often cited as the definitive exposition of neo-Aristotelian virtue ethics, which links morally right action , virtuous character , and human flourishing . Her book has been described by Roger Crisp as "the comprehensive statement modern virtue ethics has been awaiting for forty years." [ 1 ] According to Simon Blackburn , "With this book virtue ethics finally comes of age... This volume will effortlessly take its place as the defining exposition of the view." [ 1 ] Hursthouse has also made significant contributions to current debates on moral status , ethical dilemmas , moral emotions , ethical naturalism , human nature , and practical wisdom .

Hursthouse was a student of Elizabeth Anscombe and Philippa Foot , from whom she draws inspiration for much of her work in virtue ethics. Indeed, many consider On Virtue Ethics to be the spiritual successor to Anscombe's 1958 article " Modern Moral Philosophy " as well as Foot's manuscript on ethical naturalism , which has since been published as Natural Goodness (2001).

[ 2 ] Early life and education [ edit ] Rosalind Hursthouse (née Mary Rosalind) was born in Bristol, England on 10 November 1943 to William (Bill) Weldon Oliver Hursthouse (10 July 1914 – 19 April 2017) and Jessie (Jay) Hursthouse (née Jessie E. Simmonds) (19 May 1914 – 26 October 1987), but she and her younger brother, William, grew up in Wellington, New Zealand .

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] She is a member of the notable Atkinson–Hursthouse–Richmond family of New Zealand and a descendant of the Hursthouse family of England, which traces back to the first John Hursthouse who immigrated from Holland in the 1600s.

[ 6 ] As a 17-year-old, Hursthouse was inspired to study philosophy by her aunt, Mary Fearon Hursthouse, after an argument at the dinner table.

[ 7 ] She enrolled the next year at Victoria University of Wellington and then transferred to the University of Auckland , where she earned her BA (1964) and MA (1965) in Philosophy and was subsequently appointed as Junior Lecturer in Philosophy.

[ 8 ] In 1966, Hursthouse (as Rosalind Mary Hursthouse) went up to the University of Oxford to read for the BPhil (1968) on a postgraduate scholarship, [ 8 ] going on to read for the DPhil (1974) at Somerville College while working as Stipendiary Lecturer in Philosophy at Corpus Christi College , making her the first woman to teach at an all men's college in Oxford.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] [ 11 ] While at Somerville, Hursthouse was mentored by Elizabeth Anscombe and Philippa Foot , both of whom would become for her lifelong friends and sources of philosophical inspiration.

[ 12 ] Career [ edit ] After teaching at the University of Auckland and Corpus Christi College , Hursthouse joined the ranks of the founding faculty of the Open University to work with disadvantaged students and adult learners who had little to no background in philosophy.

[ 13 ] In 1975, she was appointed as lecturer at the Open University , where she remained for the next 25 years, eventually as Senior Lecturer and as Head of Department (1991–1997).

[ 8 ] By 1991, Hursthouse had "burst upon the international philosophical scene for the first time" with the following three articles: [ 14 ] "Arational Actions", which made a break with the view that the explanation of action by reference to reasons (an "intention") is also a species of event-causal explanation in the sense familiar from the work of Donald Davidson . By showing that some bona fide intentional actions are explained arationally, Hursthouse argues, by counterexample, that Davidson's account of reasons as causes of action is mistaken. Hursthouse turns her philosophical attention, and ours, to the kinds of reasons asked for and given by human beings in the explanation of human behaviour : the behaviour of emotional , rational , social , political , linguistic , lawful animals .

"Virtue Theory and Abortion", in which Hursthouse outlined the structure of a new version of Aristotelian virtue ethics, defended it against possible objections and applied it to the issue of abortion. She argues that whereas most discussions of abortion focus on the issue of who has rights to make decisions regarding the foetus, a decision made within one's rights could still be callous or cowardly, meaning that it would be ethically problematic and potentially devastating for the person making it, whatever the status of the foetus and the reproductive rights of women.

[ 15 ] The paper, which combines theory and application, was an early exemplar of Hursthouse's distinctive approach to philosophical ethics. Hursthouse demonstrates the emphasis in neo-Aristotelian virtue ethics on the lives of situated human agents (including the consequences of their actions), and the salient capabilities, character traits, and reasons involved in truly acting well, or as well as possible, within whatever situation an agent may find herself.

"After Hume's Justice", which offered a neo-Aristotelian account of social justice that was deeply influenced by Ludwig Wittgenstein . Hursthouse argues that a modern political philosophy that prioritises the good — virtue and human flourishing — over the right, and takes ethics to be prior to, and continuous with, politics, can nevertheless accommodate individual human rights .

[ 16 ] While Hursthouse has applied virtue ethics to practical issues in Beginning Lives and Ethics, Humans, and Other Animals, her most important contribution to philosophy is On Virtue Ethics.

In the first section, she shows how neo-Aristotelian virtue ethics provides action guidance and illuminates ethical dilemmas . In the second section, Hursthouse offers the first virtue-based account of acting "from a sense of duty ," bringing out the significance of moral emotions . In the third and final section, she considers the question, "Which character traits are the virtues?" This is the most controversial and widely discussed part of her book. Hursthouse's answer is that the virtues are the character traits which tend to not only benefit their possessor but also, relatedly, make their possessor a good human being — based, in part, on quasi-scientific "ethical but non‐evaluative beliefs about human nature and how human life goes" (" Plato 's Requirement on the Virtues").

[ 1 ] At the end of her book, Hursthouse says, "Atheists may find it hard to recognise the point nowadays, but believing that human nature is harmonious is part of the virtue of hope. Something at least very like it used to be called belief in (God's) Providence; to believe in Providence was part of the virtue of hope; to doubt it is to fall prey to the vice of despair. And that seems to me to be right." [ 1 ] Despite this, she is an atheist.

[ 17 ] Since writing On Virtue Ethics , Hursthouse has held visiting positions at the University of California, Los Angeles , the University of California, San Diego , the University of Auckland , the University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill , Stanford University , and the University of California, Berkeley (Mills Distinguished Visiting professor in Moral and Intellectual Philosophy and Civil Polity).

[ 8 ] In 2002, Hursthouse accepted an appointment as Professor of Philosophy at the University of Auckland (serving as Head of department until 2005) in order to return home to New Zealand and be with her aging father.

[ 8 ] [ 11 ] In 2016, she was elected as Fellow of the Royal Society of New Zealand [ 13 ] [ 18 ] and  retired from her academic career at the University of Auckland , where she is now Professor Emerita of Philosophy.

[ 19 ] Bibliography [ edit ] 'The Central Doctrine of the Mean' in The Blackwell Guide to Aristotle’s Nicomachean Ethics , ed. Richard Kraut, Blackwell, 2006, pp. 96–115.

'Are Virtues the Proper Starting Point for Ethical Theory?' in Contemporary Debates in Moral Theory , ed. James Dreier, Blackwell, 2006, pp. 99–112.

‘Virtue Ethics’ Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy Online , 2003 'Virtue Ethics vs Rule-Consequentialism: A Reply to Brad Hooker', Utilitas Vol 14, March 2002 pp 41–53.

Ethics, Humans and Other Animals , Routledge, 2000 (written as a part of an Open University course).

On Virtue Ethics , Oxford University Press, 1999. For the author's account of how this book came to be written, go to OUP site 'Virtue and Human Nature' in Hume Studies double issue, November 1999/February 2000.

'Intention' in Logic, Cause and Action , ed. Roger Teichmann, Cambridge University Press, 2000.

'Virtue Ethics and the Emotions' in Virtue Ethics , ed. Daniel Statman, Edinburgh University Press, 1997.

'Hume's Moral and Political Philosophy' in History of Philosophy, Vol. 5, British Philosophy and the Enlightenment , ed. Stuart Brown, Routledge, 1996.

'The Virtuous Agent's Reasons: a reply to Bernard Williams' in the Proceedings of the Keeling Colloquium on Aristotle on Moral Realism , ed. Robert Heinaman, UCL Press, 1995.

'Normative Virtue Ethics' in How Should One Live?

ed. Roger Crisp, OUP, 1995.

'Applying Virtue Ethics' in Virtues and Reasons, Festschrift for Philippa Foot , eds. Rosalind Hursthouse, Gavin Lawrence, Warren Quinn, OUP, 1995.

'Arational Actions' in The Journal of Philosophy , Vol. LXXXVIII 1991.

'Virtue Theory and Abortion' in Philosophy and Public Affairs , Vol. 20, 1990–91.

'After Hume's Justice' in Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society , Vol. XCL, 1990/91.

References [ edit ] ^ a b c d Hursthouse, Rosalind (2001).

On Virtue Ethics (Paperback ed.). Oxford University Press.

ISBN 9780199247998 .

^ Annas, Julia (2012).

"The Philosopher's Path" .

Proceedings and Addresses of the American Philosophical Association .

86 (2): 77– 91.

ISSN 0065-972X .

JSTOR 43661299 .

One of most pleasing results of the turn to virtue ethics has been that the insights of thinkers like Elizabeth Anscombe and Philippa Foot, which had been around but not really taken in, have now been seriously taken up and developed. In fact, virtue ethics has in many ways gone beyond them, especially since the transforming work of Rosalind Hursthouse's book On Virtue Ethics.

^ "Mary R Hursthouse - Ancestry.com" .

www.ancestry.co.uk . Retrieved 6 September 2023 .

^ "Jessie Hursthouse - Ancestry.com" .

www.ancestry.co.uk . Retrieved 16 September 2023 .

^ "William HURSTHOUSE Obituary (2017) - The New Zealand Herald" .

Legacy.com . Retrieved 6 September 2023 .

^ "Hursthouse Family" .

winsomegriffin.com . Retrieved 6 September 2023 .

^ Cheng, Derek (5 January 2006).

"The X-pert Files: Rosalind Hursthouse" .

The New Zealand Herald . Retrieved 19 February 2016 .

^ a b c d e Annas Julia, Reid Jeremy (2022).

Virtue and Action: Selected Papers . Oxford University Press. pp.

1– 20.

ISBN 978-0192895844 .

^ Patrick, Harriet (December 2019).

"A Brief History of Women's Arrival at Corpus" (PDF) .

The Pelican Record .

LV : 19– 24.

^ Harrison, Brian (December 2018).

"The Secret History of Corpus SCR" (PDF) .

The Pelican Record .

LIV : 39– 56.

^ a b Team, Flagstaff (5 September 2018).

"Interview: philosopher Rosalind Hursthouse" .

The Devonport Flagstaff . Retrieved 30 August 2023 .

^ Lipscomb, Benjamin J.B. (2022).

The Women Are Up to Something: How Elizabeth Anscombe, Philippa Foot, Mary Midgley, and Iris Murdoch Revolutionized Ethics The Women Are Up to Something: How Elizabeth Anscombe, Philippa Foot, Mary Midgley, and Iris Murdoch Revolutionized Ethics . Oxford University Press. pp.

171– 199.

ISBN 978-0197541074 .

^ a b "2016 Professor Rosalind Hursthouse FRSNZ" .

Royal Society Te Apārangi . Retrieved 30 August 2023 .

^ Slote, Michael (2010).

"Hursthouse, Rosalind" . In Graham, Oppy; Trakakis, N.N. (eds.).

A Companion to Philosophy in Australia & New Zealand (PDF) (Web ed.). Monash University Publishing.

ISBN 978-0-9806512-1-8 . Retrieved 18 September 2011 .

Hursthouse is best known as a virtue ethicist, and most of her work, both theoretical and applied, has exemplified that approach.

^ Daniel Russell (2010). Oppy, Graham; Trakakis, N. N. (eds.).

A Companion to Philosophy in Australia & New Zealand . Clayton, Australia: Monash University Publishing. p. 575.

ISBN 978-0-9806512-0-1 .

^ Michael Slote (2010). Oppy, Graham; Trakakis, N. N. (eds.).

A Companion to Philosophy in Australia & New Zealand . Clayton, Australia: Monash University Publishing. pp.

213– 214.

ISBN 978-0-9806512-0-1 .

^ "Profile for Rosalind Hursthouse - PhilPapers" .

philpapers.org . Retrieved 11 September 2023 .

^ "List of all Fellows with surnames G–I" . Royal Society of New Zealand. 2017 . Retrieved 24 April 2017 .

^ "About Rosalind Hursthouse" .

profiles.auckland.ac.nz . Retrieved 30 August 2023 .

External links [ edit ] Media related to Rosalind Hursthouse at Wikimedia Commons University of Auckland, Profile of Rosalind Hursthouse Hursthouse's entry in Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy on virtue ethics Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Australia Czech Republic Netherlands Norway Greece Poland Israel Catalonia Academics CiNii PhilPeople People Trove Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Rosalind_Hursthouse&oldid=1291331544 " Categories : 21st-century New Zealand philosophers Aristotelian philosophers New Zealand women philosophers Living people Academics of the Open University Academic staff of the University of Auckland Analytic philosophers Virtue ethicists 20th-century New Zealand philosophers 1943 births Atkinson–Hursthouse–Richmond family Fellows of the Royal Society of New Zealand 20th-century New Zealand women writers 21st-century New Zealand women writers Alumni of Somerville College, Oxford Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use New Zealand English from October 2020 All Wikipedia articles written in New Zealand English Use dmy dates from September 2014 Articles with hCards Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 20 May 2025, at 14:59 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Rosalind Hursthouse 8 languages Add topic

