Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Sculptures 1.2 Casts 1.3 Science 1.4 Forensic science 2 See also 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Death mask 34 languages العربية Беларуская Català Čeština Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית ქართული Magyar مازِرونی Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Русский Simple English Slovenščina Suomi Svenska தமிழ் Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Wax or plaster cast made of a person's face following death For other uses, see Death Mask (disambiguation) .

The death mask of 18th century sailor Richard Parker Posthumous portrait bust of Henry VII of England by Pietro Torrigiano , supposedly made using his death mask A death mask is a likeness (typically in wax or plaster cast ) of a person's face after their death , usually made by taking a cast or impression from the corpse. Death masks may be mementos of the dead or be used for creation of portraits .  The main purpose of the death mask from the Middle Ages until the 19th century was to serve as a model for sculptors in creating statues and busts of the deceased person. Not until the 1800s did such masks become valued for themselves.

[ 1 ] In other cultures a death mask may be a funeral mask , an image placed on the face of the deceased before burial rites, and normally buried with them. The best known of these are the masks used in ancient Egypt as part of the mummification process, such as the mask of Tutankhamun , and those from Mycenaean Greece such as the Mask of Agamemnon . When taken from a living subject, such a cast is called a life mask .

In some European countries, it was common for death masks to be used as part of the effigy of the deceased, displayed at state funerals; the coffin portrait was an alternative.

Mourning portraits were also painted, showing the subject lying in repose . During the 18th and 19th centuries, masks were also used to permanently record the features of unknown corpses for purposes of identification. This function was later replaced by post-mortem photography .

History [ edit ] Sculptures [ edit ] Masks of deceased people are part of traditions in many countries. The most important process of the funeral ceremony in ancient Egypt was the mummification of the body, which, after prayers and consecration, was put into a sarcophagus enameled and decorated with gold and gems. A special element of the rite was a sculpted mask, put on the face of the deceased. This mask was believed to strengthen the spirit of the mummy and guard the soul from evil spirits on its way to the afterworld. The best known mask is Tutankhamun's mask . Made of gold and gems, the mask conveys the highly stylized features of the ancient ruler. Such masks were not, however, made from casts of the features; rather, the mummification process itself preserved the features of the deceased.

In 1876, the archaeologist Heinrich Schliemann discovered in Mycenae six graves, which he was confident belonged to kings and ancient Greek heroes— Agamemnon , Cassandra , Evrimdon and their associates. To his surprise, the skulls were covered with gold masks. It is now thought most unlikely that the masks actually belonged to Agamemnon and other heroes of the Homeric epics ; in fact they are several centuries older. The lifelike character of Roman portrait sculptures has been attributed to the earlier Roman use of wax to preserve the features of deceased family members (the imagines maiorum ). The wax masks were subsequently reproduced in more durable stone.

[ 2 ] The use of masks in the ancestor cult is also attested in Etruria . Excavations of tombs in the area of the ancient city of Clusium (modern Chiusi , Tuscany ) have yielded a number of sheet-bronze masks dating from the Etruscan late orientalizing period .

[ 3 ] In the 19th century, it was thought that they were related to the Mycenaean examples, but whether they served as actual death masks cannot be proven. The most credited hypothesis holds that they were originally fixed to cinerary urns, to give them a human appearance. In Orientalising Clusium, the anthropomorphization of urns was a prevalent phenomenon that was strongly rooted in local religious beliefs.

Casts [ edit ] Bronze death mask of Napoleon 19th-century death mask of an infant The Roman élites used during the funerals "death masks" which were in fact casts made during life. These masks were displayed, after one's death in his family's atrium as a sign of social and political prominence. This usage was already established by the 2nd century BC and continued to be used into the 4th and perhaps as late as the 6th century AD.

[ 4 ] In the late Middle Ages , the masks were not interred with the deceased. Instead, they were used in funeral ceremonies and were later kept in libraries, museums, and universities. Death masks were taken not only of deceased royalty and nobility ( Henry VIII , Sforza ), but also of eminent people: composers, dramaturges , military and political leaders, philosophers, poets, and scientists, such as Dante Alighieri , Ludwig van Beethoven , Max Reger , Napoleon Bonaparte (whose death mask was taken on the island of Saint Helena ), Filippo Brunelleschi , Frédéric Chopin , Oliver Cromwell (whose death mask is preserved at Warwick Castle ), Joseph Haydn , John Keats , Franz Liszt , Blaise Pascal , Nikola Tesla (commissioned by his friend Hugo Gernsback and now displayed in the Nikola Tesla Museum ), Torquato Tasso , Richard Wagner and Voltaire .

In Russia, the death mask tradition dates back to the times of Peter the Great , whose death mask was taken by Carlo Bartolomeo Rastrelli . Also well known are the death masks of Nicholas I , and Alexander I . Stalin's death mask is on display at the Stalin Museum in Gori, Georgia . One of the first real Ukrainian death masks was that of the poet Taras Shevchenko , taken by Peter Clodt von Jürgensburg in St. Petersburg , Russia .

[ 5 ] In early spring of 1860 and shortly before his death in April 1865, two life masks were created of President Abraham Lincoln .

[ 6 ] Science [ edit ] Two men in the process of making a death mask, c.

1908 Death masks were increasingly used by scientists from the late 18th century onwards to record variations in human physiognomy . The life mask was also increasingly common at this time, taken from living people.

Forensic science [ edit ] L'Inconnue de la Seine Before the widespread availability of photography , the facial features of unidentified bodies were sometimes preserved by creating death masks so that relatives of the deceased could recognize them if they were seeking a missing person.

[ citation needed ] One mask, known as L'Inconnue de la Seine , recorded the face of an unidentified young girl who, around the age of 16, according to one man's story, had been found drowned in the Seine River in Paris around the late 1880s. A cast of her face was made by a morgue worker who explained that "her beauty was breathtaking and showed few signs of distress at the time of passing. So bewitching that I knew beauty as such must be preserved." The cast was also compared to the Mona Lisa and other famous paintings and sculptures. Copies of the mask were fashionable in Parisian Bohemian society, and the face of Resusci Anne , the world's first CPR training mannequin , introduced in 1960, was modeled after the mask.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] See also [ edit ] Plastered human skulls Portrait Sculpture References [ edit ] ^ Wallechinsky, Irving; Wallace, Irving (1978).

The People's Almanac #2 . New York: Bantam Books. pp.

1189–1192 .

ISBN 0553011375 .

^ H.W. Janson with Dora Jane Janson , History of Art: A Survey of the Major Visual Arts from the Dawn of History to the Present Day , Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey , Prentice-Hall , and New York , Harry N. Abrams , 1962, p. 141.

^ N. Steensma, Some considerations on the function and meaning of the Etruscan bronze "masks" from Chiusi (seventh century BC), in: H. Duinker, E. Hopman & J. Steding (eds.), Proceedings of the 11th annual Symposium Onderzoek Jonge Archeologen , Groningen 2014, pp. 65–74 Archived 2017-04-10 at the Wayback Machine .

^ "Rose, .Brian"Recreating Roman Wax Masks" Expedition Magazine 56.3 (2014): n. pag. Expedition Magazine. Penn Museum, 2014 Web. 31 Jan 2022" .

Archived from the original on 21 June 2021 . Retrieved 31 January 2022 .

^ Virtual Museum of Death Mask Archived 2018-03-08 at the Wayback Machine URL accessed on December 4, 2006.

^ "Portraits of the Presidents" .

National Portrait Gallery, Smithsonian Institution . Smithsonian Institution. 21 August 2015.

Archived from the original on 19 April 2014 . Retrieved 21 November 2013 .

^ Laerdal company website: The Girl from the River Seine Archived 2012-03-24 at the Wayback Machine URL accessed on January 8, 2013 ^ Gordon, AS.

"A death mask to help save lives" (PDF) . Wexford, Pennsylvania: Sudden Cardiac Arrest Foundation.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 22 October 2022 . Retrieved 17 October 2022 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Death masks .

The International Life Cast Museum Laurence Hutton Collection of Life and Death Masks Archived 2006-03-07 at the Wayback Machine Collection of Death Masks History of death masks, Pictures of death masks and historical resources [ dead link ] Episode of Radiolab discussing death masks (specifically L'Inconnue de la Seine ) v t e Death In medicine Cell death Necrosis Avascular necrosis Coagulative necrosis Liquefactive necrosis Gangrenous necrosis Caseous necrosis Fat necrosis Fibrinoid necrosis Temporal lobe necrosis Programmed cell death AICD Anoikis Apoptosis Autophagy Intrinsic apoptosis Necroptosis Paraptosis Parthanatos Phenoptosis Pseudoapoptosis Pyroptosis Autolysis Autoschizis Eschar Immunogenic cell death Ischemic cell death Pyknosis Karyorrhexis Karyolysis Mitotic catastrophe Suicide gene Abortion Accidental death Autopsy Brain death Brainstem death Clinical death DOA Death by natural causes Death rattle Dysthanasia End-of-life care Euthanasia Lazarus sign Lazarus syndrome Medical declaration of death Organ donation Terminal illness Unnatural death Lists Causes of death by rate Notable deaths by year Expressions related to death Natural disasters People by cause of death Premature obituaries Preventable causes of death Unusual deaths List of ways people dishonor the dead List of ways people honor the dead Mortality Birthday effect Child mortality Excess mortality Gompertz–Makeham law of mortality Infant mortality Karoshi Maternal death Maternal mortality in fiction Memento mori Micromort Mortality rate RAMR Mortality salience Perinatal mortality After death Body Stages Pallor mortis Livor mortis Algor mortis Rigor mortis Putrefaction Decomposition Skeletonization Fossilization Preservation Cryopreservation Cryonics Neuropreservation Embalming Maceration Mummification Plastination Prosection Taxidermy Disposal Burial Natural burial Sky burial Ocean burial Cremation Dismemberment Excarnation Promession Resomation Beating heart cadaver Body donation Cadaveric spasm Coffin birth Death erection Dissection Gibbeting Postmortem caloricity Post-mortem interval Other aspects Carrion Cemetery Consciousness after death Afterlife Tukdam Customs Crematorium Desecration of graves Eternal oblivion Examination Funeral Grief Internet Midwife Mourning Online mourning Obituary Reincarnation Palingenesis Saṃsāra Resurrection Underworld Viewing Vigil Wake Paranormal Ghosts Near-death experience Near-death studies Necromancy Out-of-body experience Reincarnation research Séance Legal Abortion law Administration Capital punishment Cause of death Civil death Coroner Death-qualified jury Death certificate Declared death in absentia Death row Dying declaration Inquest Legal death Murder Necropolitics Prohibition of dying Right to die Suspicious death Trust law Will Fields Death tech [ pt ] Forensic pathology Funeral director Mortuary science Necrobiology Post-mortem chemistry Post-mortem photography Taphonomy Biostratinomy Thanatology Other Apparent death Chinese burial money Coins for the dead Dark tourism Darwin Awards Death and culture Death anniversary Death anxiety Death deity Personification of death Dying-and-rising god Psychopomp Death camp Death drive Death education Death from laughter Death hoax Death knell Death march Death messenger Death notification Death panel Death poem Death pose Death-positive movement Death squad Death threat Death trajectory Dignified death Extinction Festival of the Dead Fascination with death Hierarchy of death Homicide Immortality Last rites Longevity Martyr Museum of Death Necronym Necrophilia Necrophobia Philosophy of death Predation Sacrifice human Suicide Assisted suicide Thanabot [ ca ] Thanatosensitivity Category Outline v t e Death and mortality in art Themes All flesh is grass Carpe diem Consolatio Danse Macabre Death and the Maiden Lamentation of Christ Macabre Memento mori Mono no aware Sic transit gloria mundi Ubi sunt Personifications of death Vanitas Forms Architecture Cenotaph Memorial Tomb Music Funeral march Requiem Poetry Death poem Dirge Elegy Elegiac Pastoral elegy Keening Lament Obituary poetry Threnody Prose Epitaph Funerary text Tragedy Visual arts Calavera Funerary art Cadaver monument Death mask Gravestone Post-mortem photography Wreath Other Mummy Artwork Architecture Capela dos Ossos Capuchin Crypt Catacombs of Paris Sedlec Ossuary Skull Chapel Capuchin Catacombs of Palermo Film The Seventh Seal Music Danse macabre Death and Transfiguration Der Tod und das Mädchen Erlkönig Totentanz Painting Et in Arcadia ego Guercino Poussin Death and Fire Death and Life Death and the Maiden Death and the Miser Gather Ye Rosebuds While Ye May La Calavera Catrina Plague Pyramid of Skulls Roman Widow Self-Portrait with Death Playing the Fiddle Skull of a Skeleton with Burning Cigarette Sleep and His Half-Brother Death The Ambassadors The Garden of Death The Shadow of Death The Three Ages of Man and Death The Triumph of Death Poetry " And death shall have no dominion " " Because I could not stop for Death " " Erlkönig " " Do not go gentle into that good night " Prose Ars moriendi Bardo Thodol Book of Job Book of the Dead Left Ginza Hamlet's soliloquy The Masque of the Red Death Authority control databases National Germany Japan Czech Republic Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Death_mask&oldid=1294602439 " Categories : Visual arts genres Death customs Funeral-related industry Death masks Masks Casting (manufacturing) Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing French-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2023 Commons category link from Wikidata All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from July 2022 This page was last edited on 8 June 2025, at 18:21 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Death mask 34 languages Add topic

