Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Origin 2 See also 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Supergranulation 21 languages العربية Беларуская Català Čeština Eesti فارسی Français 한국어 Italiano Македонски 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Română Русский Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Convective pattern on the Sun's surface Supegranulation in the chromosphere of Sun.

In solar physics and observation , supergranulation is a pattern of convection cells in the Sun's photosphere . The individual convection cells are typically referred to as supergranules . The pattern was discovered in the 1950s by A.B. Hart [ 1 ] using Doppler velocity measurements showing horizontal flows on the photosphere (flow speed about 300 to 500 m/s, a tenth of that in the smaller granules ). Later work (1960s) by Leighton, Noyes and Simon established a typical size of about 30000 km for supergranules with a lifetime of about 24 hours.

[ 2 ] Origin [ edit ] Supergranulation has long been interpreted as a specific convection scale , but its origin is not precisely known. Although the presence of granules in the solar photosphere is a well-documented phenomenon, there is still much debate on the true nature or even the existence of higher-order granulation patterns. Some authors suggest the existence of three distinct scales of organization: granulation (with typical diameters of 150–2500 km), mesogranulation (5000–10000 km) and supergranulation (over 20000 km). Granules are typically considered as being signs of convective cells forming a hierarchic structure: supergranules would be thus fragmented in their uppermost layers into smaller mesogranules, which in turn would split into even smaller granules at their surface. The solar material would flow downward in dark "lanes" separating granules with the divisions between supergranules being the biggest concentrations of cold gas, analogous to rivers connecting smaller tributaries . It should however be stressed that this picture is highly speculative and might turn out to be false in the light of future discoveries. Recent studies [ 3 ] show some evidence that mesogranulation was a ghost feature caused by averaging procedures.

See also [ edit ] Dopplergram References [ edit ] ^ Hart, A. B. (1 February 1956).

"Motions in the Sun at the Photospheric Level: VI. Large-Scale Motions in the Equatorial Region" .

Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society .

116 (1): 38– 55.

doi : 10.1093/mnras/116.1.38 .

^ Freedman, Roger A.; Kaufmann III, William J. (2008).

Universe . New York, USA: W. H. Freeman and Company . pp.

762 .

ISBN 978-0-7167-8584-2 .

^ "Living Reviews in Solar Physics" .

springer.com .

External links [ edit ] a SOHO/MDI Dopplergram showing supergranular speed pattern NASA: The Sun Does The Wave Information at Nature.com Michel Rieutord and François Rincon, "The Sun’s Supergranulation", Living Rev. Solar Phys. 7, (2010), 2.

online article (cited on June 15, 2010).

v t e The Sun Internal structure Core Radiative zone Tachocline Convection zone Atmosphere Photosphere Supergranulation Granule Faculae Sunspot Ellerman bomb Chromosphere Plage Spicule Moreton wave Corona Transition region Coronal hole Coronal loop Coronal mass ejection Nanoflare Prominence Helmet streamer Supra-arcade downflows Alfvén surface Moss Variation Solar cycle List of solar cycles Active region Solar maximum Solar minimum Sunspot number Solar wind Solar wind turbulence Magnetic switchback Flare Helioseismology Heliosphere Corotating interaction region Current sheet Termination shock Heliosheath Heliopause Bow shock Related Eclipse In mythology and culture Lunar eclipse Heliophysics In culture Solar deity List Sun in fiction Solar activity Solar astronomy Solar dynamo Solar energy Solar neutrino Solar observation Solar phenomena Solar physics Solar radio emission Solar System Solar telescope Solar time Space climate Space weather Standard solar model Star Sunlight radiation Spectral class G-type main-sequence star Exploration Solar observatory List of heliophysics missions Category:Missions to the Sun Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Supergranulation&oldid=1253371239 " Category : Solar phenomena Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 25 October 2024, at 16:53 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Supergranulation 21 languages Add topic

