Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Subdisciplines of architectural engineering Toggle Subdisciplines of architectural engineering subsection 1.1 Mechanical, electrical, and plumbing (MEP) 1.2 Structural Engineering 1.3 Sustainable Engineering 1.4 Building Envelope Engineering 1.5 Fire Protection Engineering 1.6 Acoustical Engineering 2 The architectural engineer (PE) in the United States 3 The architect as architectural engineer 4 Education Toggle Education subsection 4.1 Architectural engineering as a single integrated field of study 5 See also Toggle See also subsection 5.1 Associations 6 References Toggle the table of contents Architectural engineering 37 languages العربية Asturianu বাংলা Català Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی 한국어 हिन्दी Ido Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Limburgs Magyar Bahasa Melayu Монгол Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Română Русский Seeltersk Српски / srpski Suomi Tagalog தமிழ் Türkçe Українська اردو West-Vlams Winaray 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Engineering discipline of engineering systems of buildings This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Architectural engineering" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( December 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article possibly contains original research .

Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations . Statements consisting only of original research should be removed.

( December 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) César Pelli 's Ratner Athletic Center uses cables and masts as load-bearing devices Architectural engineering or architecture engineering , also known as building engineering , is a discipline that deals with the engineering and construction of buildings , such as environmental, structural, mechanical, electrical, computational, embeddable, and other research domains. It is related to Architecture , Mechatronics Engineering , Computer Engineering , Aerospace Engineering , and Civil Engineering , but distinguished from Interior Design and Architectural Design as an art and science of designing infrastructure through these various engineering disciplines, from which properly align with many related surrounding engineering advancements.

[ 1 ] From reduction of greenhouse gas emissions to the construction of resilient buildings, architectural engineers are at the forefront of addressing several major challenges of the 21st century. They apply the latest scientific knowledge and technologies to the design of buildings . Architectural engineering as a relatively new licensed profession emerged in the 20th century as a result of the rapid technological developments. Architectural engineers are at the forefront of two major historical opportunities that today's world is immersed in: (1) that of rapidly advancing computer-technology, and (2) the parallel revolution of environmental sustainability.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Architects and architectural engineers both play crucial roles in building design and construction, but they focus on different aspects. Architectural engineers specialize in the technical and structural aspects, ensuring buildings are safe, efficient, and sustainable. Their education blends architecture with engineering, focusing on structural integrity, mechanical systems, and energy efficiency. They design and analyze building systems, conduct feasibility studies, and collaborate with architects to integrate technical requirements into the overall design. Architects, on the other hand, emphasize the aesthetic, functional, and spatial elements, developing design concepts and detailed plans to meet client needs and comply with regulations. Their education focuses on design theory , history, and artistic aspects, and they oversee the construction process to ensure the design is correctly implemented.

Subdisciplines of architectural engineering [ edit ] Mechanical, electrical, and plumbing (MEP) [ edit ] Main article: Mechanical, electrical, and plumbing MEP systems in a building Mechanical engineering and electrical engineering engineers are specialists when engaged in the building design fields.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] This is known as mechanical, electrical, and plumbing (MEP) throughout the United States, or building services engineering in the United Kingdom, Canada, and Australia.

[ 8 ] Mechanical engineers often design and oversee the heating, ventilation and air conditioning (HVAC), plumbing , and rainwater systems. Plumbing designers often include design specifications for simple active fire protection systems, but for more complicated projects, fire protection engineers are often separately retained. Electrical engineers are responsible for the building's power distribution , telecommunication , fire alarm , signalization, lightning protection and control systems , as well as lighting systems .

Structural Engineering [ edit ] Main article: Structural engineering Structural engineering involves the analysis and design of the built environment (buildings, bridges, equipment supports, towers and walls).

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] Those concentrating on buildings are sometimes informally referred to as "building engineers". Structural engineers require expertise in strength of materials , structural analysis , and in predicting structural load such as from weight of the building, occupants and contents, and extreme events such as wind, rain, ice, and seismic design of structures which is referred to as earthquake engineering . Architectural engineers sometimes incorporate structural as one aspect of their designs; the structural discipline when practiced as a specialty works closely with architects and other engineering specialists.

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] Sustainable Engineering [ edit ] Main article: Sustainable engineering Sustainable engineering involves designing or operating systems to use energy and resources in a way that maintains environmental balance and ensures that future generations can meet their own needs without compromising the natural environment.

[ 13 ] Architectural engineers are influenced by sustainable engineering principles in their education, training, and practice, integrating sustainable design strategies to create buildings and structures that minimize environmental impact and enhance energy efficiency.

Building Envelope Engineering [ edit ] Main article: Building envelope Building enclosure and façade engineering involves the design and management of the outer shell of a building, which acts as a barrier between the interior and exterior environments. This includes walls, roofs, windows, doors, and other components that collectively ensure the building is protected from external elements such as air, water, heat, light, and noise.

The building envelope plays a crucial role in maintaining indoor comfort by controlling temperature, humidity, and airflow. It also contributes to the building's energy efficiency by minimizing heat loss in the winter and heat gain in the summer. Engineers in this field work on making sure the envelope is structurally sound, aesthetically pleasing, and performs effectively to meet various functional requirements.

Fire Protection Engineering [ edit ] Main article: Fire protection engineering Fire protection engineering is a subfield of building engineering focused on the design and application of systems and practices that prevent, control, and mitigate the impact of fires. This discipline aims to protect people, property, and the environment from the destructive effects of fire through a combination of preventive measures, detection systems, and response strategies.

Fire protection engineers use their expertise to analyze potential fire scenarios , model the spread of fire and smoke, and design systems that effectively protect lives and property. They collaborate with architects, builders, and safety officials to integrate fire protection measures into the overall design and operation of buildings and facilities.

Acoustical Engineering [ edit ] Main article: Acoustical engineering Acoustical or acoustics engineering in building design focuses on controlling sound within and around buildings to create a comfortable and functional auditory environment. This discipline involves the study and application of principles to manage noise levels, improve sound quality, and ensure effective sound insulation .

Acoustical engineers work closely with architects, builders, and other engineers to integrate sound control measures into the overall design of a building. They use advanced modeling and simulation tools to predict how sound will behave in different spaces and employ various materials and techniques to achieve the desired acoustic performance. Their goal is to create environments that are acoustically comfortable, meeting the specific needs of the building's occupants and its intended use.

The architectural engineer (PE) in the United States [ edit ] Main article: Architectural engineer (PE) In many jurisdictions of the United States, the architectural engineer is a licensed engineering professional.

[ 14 ] Usually a graduate of an EAC/ABET-accredited architectural engineering university program preparing students to perform whole-building design in competition with architect-engineer teams; [ 15 ] or for practice in one of structural, mechanical or electrical fields of building design, but with an appreciation of integrated architectural requirements. Although some states require a BS degree from an EAC/ABET-accredited engineering program, with no exceptions, about two thirds of the states accept BS degrees from ETAC/ABET-accredited architectural engineering technology programs to become licensed engineering professionals. Architectural engineering technology graduates, with applied engineering skills, often gain further learning with an MS degree in engineering and/or NAAB-accredited Masters of Architecture to become licensed as both an engineer and architect. This path requires the individual to pass state licensing exams in both disciplines. States handle this situation differently on experienced gained working under a licensed engineer and/or registered architect prior to taking the examinations. This education model is more in line with the educational system in the United Kingdom where an accredited MEng or MS degree in engineering for further learning is required by the Engineering Council to be registered as a Chartered Engineer . The National Council of Architectural Registration Boards (NCARB) facilitate the licensure and credentialing of architects but requirements for registration often vary between states. In the state of New Jersey, a registered architect is allowed to sit for the PE exam and a professional engineer is allowed to take the design portions of the Architectural Registration Exam (ARE), to become a registered architect.

Formal architectural engineering education, following the engineering model of earlier disciplines, developed in the late 19th century, and became widespread in the United States by the mid-20th century.  With the establishment of a specific "architectural engineering" NCEES Professional Engineering registration examination in the 1990s, and first offering in April 2003, architectural engineering became recognized as a distinct engineering discipline in the United States. Up to date NCEES account allows engineers to apply to other states PE license "by comity".

In most license-regulated jurisdictions, architectural engineers are not entitled to practice architecture unless they are also licensed as architects.  Practice of structural engineering in high-risk locations, e.g., due to strong earthquakes, or on specific types of higher importance buildings such as hospitals, may require separate licensing as well.  Regulations and customary practice vary widely by state or city.

The architect as architectural engineer [ edit ] See also: Architect § Professional requirements In some countries, the practice of architecture includes planning, designing and overseeing the building's construction, and architecture, as a profession providing architectural services , is referred to as "architectural engineering". In Japan, a "first-class architect" plays the dual role of architect and building engineer, although the services of a licensed "structural design first-class architect"(構造設計一級建築士) are required for buildings over a certain scale.

[ 16 ] [ 17 ] [ 18 ] In some languages, such as Korean and Arabic , "architect" is literally translated as "architectural engineer". In some countries, an "architectural engineer" (such as the ingegnere edile in Italy) is entitled to practice architecture and is often referred to as an architect.

[ citation needed ] These individuals are often also structural engineers. In other countries, such as Germany, Austria, Iran, and most of the Arab countries, architecture graduates receive an engineering degree ( Dipl.-Ing. – Diplom-Ingenieur ).

[ 19 ] In Spain, an "architect" has a technical university education and legal powers to carry out building structure and facility projects.

[ 20 ] In Brazil, architects and engineers used to share the same accreditation process (Conselho Federal de Engenheiros, Arquitetos e Agrônomos (CONFEA) – Federal Council of Engineering, Architecture and Agronomy). Now the Brazilian architects and urbanists have their own accreditation process (CAU – Architecture and Urbanism Council). Besides traditional architecture design training, Brazilian architecture courses also offer complementary training in engineering disciplines such as structural, electrical, hydraulic and mechanical engineering. After graduation, architects focus in architectural planning, yet they can be responsible to the whole building, when it concerns to small buildings (except in electric wiring, where the architect autonomy is limited to systems up to 30kVA, and it has to be done by an Electrical Engineer), applied to buildings, urban environment, built cultural heritage, landscape planning, interiorscape planning and regional planning.

[ 21 ] [ 22 ] [ 23 ] In Greece licensed architectural engineers are graduates from architecture faculties that belong to the Polytechnic University, [ 24 ] obtaining an "Engineering Diploma". They graduate after 5 years of studies and are fully entitled architects once they become members of the Technical Chamber of Greece (TEE – Τεχνικό Επιμελητήριο Ελλάδος).

[ 25 ] [ 26 ] The Technical Chamber of Greece has more than 100,000 members encompassing all the engineering disciplines as well as architecture. A prerequisite for being a member is to be licensed as a qualified engineer or architect and to be a graduate of an engineering and architecture schools of a Greek university, or of an equivalent school from abroad. The Technical Chamber of Greece is the authorized body to provide work licenses to engineers of all disciplines as well as architects, graduated in Greece or abroad. The license is awarded after examinations. The examinations take place three to four times a year. The Engineering Diploma equals a master's degree in ECTS units (300) according to the Bologna Accords.

[ 27 ] Education [ edit ] Further information: Engineer's degree The architectural, structural, mechanical and electrical engineering branches each have well established educational requirements that are usually fulfilled by completion of a university program.

[ 28 ] In Canada, a CEAB-accredited engineer degree is the minimum academic requirement for registration as a P.Eng ( professional engineer ) anywhere in Canada and the standard against which all other engineering academic qualifications are measured.

[ 29 ] A graduate of a non-CEAB-accredited program must demonstrate that his or her education is at least equivalent to that of a graduate of a CEAB-accredited program.

[ 29 ] In Vietnam , the engineer's degree is called Bằng kỹ sư , the first degree after five years of study. The Ministry of Education of Vietnam has also issued separate regulations for the naming of degrees not in accordance with international regulation.

[ 30 ] [ 31 ] [ 32 ] An air handling unit is used for the heating and cooling of air in a central location (click on image for legend). Bringing together knowledge of acoustic engineering and HVAC is one example of the multi-disciplined nature of architectural engineering Architectural engineering as a single integrated field of study [ edit ] Main article: Building engineering education Its multi-disciplinary engineering approach is what differentiates architectural engineering from architecture (the field of the architect): which is an integrated, separate and single, field of study when compared to other engineering disciplines.

Through training in and appreciation of architecture, the field seeks integration of building systems within its overall building design. Architectural engineering includes the design of building systems including heating, ventilation and air conditioning (HVAC) , plumbing, fire protection , electrical , lighting , architectural acoustics , and structural systems. In some university programs, students are required to concentrate on one of the systems; in others, they can receive a generalist architectural or building engineering degree.

See also [ edit ] Architecture portal Engineering portal Architectural drawing Architectural technologist Architectural technology Building engineer Building officials Civil engineering Construction engineering Contour crafting DIN 276 History of architectural engineering International Building Code Fire protection engineering Mechanical, electrical, and plumbing Outline of architecture Storm hardening Associations [ edit ] Architectural Engineering Institute (AEI) of American Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE) American Institute of Architects (AIA) American Society of Heating, Refrigerating and Air-Conditioning Engineers (ASHRAE) American Society of Plumbing Engineers (ASPE) Associated General Contractors (AGC) Illuminating Engineering Society (IES) Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE) National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) National Society of Professional Engineers (NPSE) Society of Fire Protection Engineers (SFPE) U.S. Green Building Council (USGBC) References [ edit ] ^ Definition of architectural engineering.

Merriam Webster Dictionary .

^ "Penn State Engineering: Architectural Engineering | What is architectural engineering?" .

www.ae.psu.edu . Retrieved 2020-11-24 .

^ "What is Architectural Engineering?" .

Civil, Architectural and Environmental Engineering . The University of Texas at Austin.

^ "What is Mechanical Engineering?" . 28 December 2018.

^ "mechanical engineering" .

The American Heritage Dictionary of the English Language (Fourth ed.) . Retrieved 19 September 2014 .

^ Ronalds, B.F. (2016).

Sir Francis Ronalds: Father of the Electric Telegraph . London: Imperial College Press.

ISBN 978-1-78326-917-4 .

^ Ronalds, B.F. (2016). "Sir Francis Ronalds and the Electric Telegraph".

International Journal for the History of Engineering & Technology .

86 : 42– 55.

doi : 10.1080/17581206.2015.1119481 .

S2CID 113256632 .

^ "Building Services Engineers Bring Buildings to Life" .

Chartered Institution of Building Services Engineers .

^ "FAO online publication" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on November 19, 2016.

^ "What is a structural engineer" .

RMG Engineers . 2015-11-30.

Archived from the original on 2015-12-08 . Retrieved 2015-11-30 .

^ "Some Useful Numbers on the Engineering Properties of Materials (Geologic and Otherwise)" (PDF) . Stanford University. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2012-06-16 . Retrieved 2013-12-05 .

^ "ETABS receives "Top Seismic Product of the 20th Century" Award" (PDF) .

Press Release . Structure Magazine. 2006. Archived from the original (PDF) on November 27, 2012 . Retrieved April 20, 2012 .

^ "Sustainable Development" .

International Institute for Sustainable Development . Retrieved 2024-07-22 .

^ "Licensure" . NCEES. Archived from the original on 2012-11-01 . Retrieved 2013-10-20 .

^ "Architectural Engineering Institute | ASCE" .

www.asce.org . Archived from the original on 2014-12-22.

^ "Architects / Building Engineers in Japan" (PDF) . The Japan Architectural Education and Information Center. p. 5. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2013-11-24 . Retrieved 2014-08-16 .

^ "What's the difference between an architect and a building designer?" .

BUILD . Retrieved 2021-03-03 .

^ Murray, Peter (1986).

Burckhardt, Jacob (ed.).

The Architecture of the Italian Renaissance .

Knopf Doubleday Publishing Group . p. 242.

ISBN 0-8052-1082-2 .

^ "Bundesarchitektenkammer e.V." www.bak.de . Archived from the original on April 27, 2007.

^ "BOE-A-1999-21567 Ley 38/1999, de 5 de noviembre, de Ordenación de la Edificación" .

www.boe.es .

^ "Resolução 1010/05 – Conselho Federal de Engenharia, Arquitetura e Urbanismo – CONFEA" . Archived from the original on May 15, 2013.

^ LEI nº 12.378, de 2010 – Presidência da República ^ Jakel, Keli.

"Professional Home Organization Services Denver" .

organizedbykeli.com .

^ Polytechnic (Greece) ^ "TEE" .

TEE .

^ "Role & Objectives" . Technical Chamber of Greece. Archived from the original on 2011-08-14.

^ Bologna Process#Qualifications Framework of the European Higher Education Area ^ Antoly I. Bologomov (1974).

Comparability of Engineering Courses and Degrees (PDF) . Paris: The UNESCO Press. pp.

49– 58.

^ a b "Canadian Engineering Accreditation Board - APEGM" . Archived from the original on 2014-02-02 . Retrieved 2014-11-09 .

^ thanhnien.vn (2019-12-31).

"Bằng kỹ sư tương đương bằng thạc sĩ" .

thanhnien.vn (in Vietnamese) . Retrieved 2023-11-10 .

^ "Kỹ sư tốt nghiệp bằng giỏi: 'Tôi từng hối hận vì đã vào đại học' " .

VietNamNet News (in Vietnamese) . Retrieved 2023-11-10 .

^ thanhnien.vn (2022-12-17).

"Hàng loạt ngành chuyển từ đào tạo kỹ sư sang cử nhân" .

thanhnien.vn (in Vietnamese) . Retrieved 2023-11-10 .

v t e Engineering History Outline List of engineering branches Specialties and interdisciplinarity Civil Architectural Coastal Construction Earthquake Ecological Environmental Sanitary Geological Geotechnical Hydraulic Mining Municipal/urban Offshore River Structural Transportation Traffic Railway Mechanical Acoustic Aerospace Automotive Biomechanical Energy Manufacturing Marine Naval architecture Railway Sports Thermal Tribology Electrical Broadcast outline Control Electromechanics Electronics Microwaves Optical Power Radio-frequency Signal processing Telecommunications Chemical Biochemical/bioprocess Biological Bioresource Genetic Tissue Chemical reaction Electrochemical Food Molecular Paper Petroleum Process Reaction Materials Biomaterial Ceramics Corrosion Metallurgy Molecular Nanotechnology Polymers Semiconductors Surfaces Computer AI Computer Cybersecurity Data Networks Robotics Software Engineering education Bachelor of Engineering Bachelor of Science Master's degree Doctorate Graduate certificate Engineer's degree Licensed engineer Related topics Engineer Glossaries Engineering A–L M–Z Aerospace engineering Civil engineering Electrical and electronics engineering Mechanical engineering Structural engineering Other Agricultural Audio Automation Biomedical Bioinformatics Clinical Health technology Pharmaceutical Rehabilitation Building services MEP Design Explosives Facilities Fire Forensic Climate Geomatics Graphics Industrial Information Instrumentation Instrumentation and control Logistics Management Mathematics Mechatronics Military Nuclear Ontology Packaging Physics Privacy Safety Security Survey Sustainability Systems Textile Category Commons Wikiproject Portal v t e Tallest buildings and structures By category Buildings ( History ) By region Africa Asia Indian subcontinent Southeast Europe Baltic states Scandinavia Oceania Southern Hemisphere The Americas North America Central America Latin America South America By country Afghanistan Albania Algeria Argentina Australia Austria Azerbaijan Bangladesh Bolivia Bosnia and Herzegovina Brazil Bulgaria Cambodia Canada Chile China Hong Kong Macau Colombia Croatia Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Ecuador Egypt Estonia Finland France Georgia Germany Greece Iceland India Indonesia Iran Ireland Israel Italy Japan Kazakhstan Kenya Kosovo Kuwait Latvia Lebanon Lithuania Malaysia Malta Mexico Monaco Mongolia Morocco Myanmar Netherlands Nigeria North Korea North Macedonia Norway New Zealand Panama Pakistan Paraguay Peru Philippines Poland Portugal Qatar Romania Russia Saudi Arabia Serbia Singapore Slovakia Slovenia South Africa South Korea Spain Sweden Switzerland Taiwan Tanzania Thailand Turkey Ukraine United Arab Emirates United Kingdom United States By state Uruguay Venezuela Vietnam Zimbabwe Lists 100+ floors Architects Buildings by height to roof By city Cities with most skyscrapers Countries with most skyscrapers Churches Eastern Orthodox Naves Demolished Designed by women Early skyscrapers Hindu temples Industrial Megatall Mosques Minarets Educational Future Hospitals Hotels Most expensive Residential Skyscrapers by floor area Supertall Twin buildings Visionary buildings Wood Structures of any type ( History ) By region Africa Asia Indian subcontinent West Asia Europe former Soviet Union The Americas South America By country Afghanistan Albania Algeria Armenia Australia Austria Bahrain Belgium Bulgaria Canada China Czech Republic Denmark Egypt Estonia Finland France Germany Greece Hungary Iceland India Indonesia Iran Ireland Italy Japan Kosovo Luxembourg Mongolia Morocco Myanmar Netherlands New Zealand Norway Philippines Poland Portugal Romania Saudi Arabia Serbia Slovakia South Africa Spain Sri Lanka Sweden Switzerland Thailand Tunisia Turkey Turkmenistan United Kingdom United States By state By type Uzbekistan Lists Before the 20th century Bridges Chimneys Clock towers Cooling towers Crosses Dams Demolished Domes Elevator test towers Flagpoles Ferris wheels Freestanding steel Hyperboloid Lighthouses Mines Oil platforms Pyramids Roller coasters Statues Colossal sculpture in situ Hindu deity Twin structures Visionary structures Wood Related topics Air traffic obstacle Antenna height considerations Architectural engineering Construction Early skyscrapers Fires Groundscraper Guyed mast Height restriction laws Largest buildings Megaprojects Megastructure Skyscraper Skyscraper Index Storey Tower block Vanity height v t e Heating, ventilation, and air conditioning Fundamental concepts Air changes per hour (ACH) Bake-out Building envelope Convection Dilution Domestic energy consumption Enthalpy Fluid dynamics Gas compressor Heat pump and refrigeration cycle Heat transfer Humidity Infiltration Latent heat Noise control Outgassing Particulates Psychrometrics Sensible heat Stack effect Thermal comfort Thermal destratification Thermal mass Thermodynamics Vapour pressure of water Technology Absorption-compression heat pump Absorption refrigerator Air barrier Air conditioning Antifreeze Automobile air conditioning Autonomous building Building insulation materials Central heating Central solar heating Chilled beam Chilled water Constant air volume (CAV) Coolant Cross ventilation Dedicated outdoor air system (DOAS) Deep water source cooling Demand controlled ventilation (DCV) Displacement ventilation District cooling District heating Electric heating Energy recovery ventilation (ERV) Firestop Forced-air Forced-air gas Free cooling Heat recovery ventilation (HRV) Hybrid heat Hydronics Ice storage air conditioning Kitchen ventilation Mixed-mode ventilation Microgeneration Passive cooling Passive daytime radiative cooling Passive house Passive ventilation Radiant heating and cooling Radiant cooling Radiant heating Radon mitigation Refrigeration Renewable heat Room air distribution Solar air heat Solar combisystem Solar cooling Solar heating Thermal insulation Thermosiphon Underfloor air distribution Underfloor heating Vapor barrier Vapor-compression refrigeration (VCRS) Variable air volume (VAV) Variable refrigerant flow (VRF) Ventilation Water heat recycling Components Air conditioner inverter Air door Air filter Air handler Air ionizer Air-mixing plenum Air purifier Air source heat pump Attic fan Automatic balancing valve Back boiler Barrier pipe Blast damper Boiler Centrifugal fan Ceramic heater Chiller Condensate pump Condenser Condensing boiler Convection heater Compressor Cooling tower Damper Dehumidifier Duct Economizer Electrostatic precipitator Evaporative cooler Evaporator Exhaust hood Expansion tank Fan Fan coil unit Fan filter unit Fan heater Fire damper Fireplace Fireplace insert Freeze stat Flue Freon Fume hood Furnace Gas compressor Gas heater Gasoline heater Grease duct Grille Ground-coupled heat exchanger Ground source heat pump Heat exchanger Heat pipe Heat pump Heating film Heating system HEPA High efficiency glandless circulating pump High-pressure cut-off switch Humidifier Infrared heater Inverter compressor Kerosene heater Louver Mechanical room Oil heater Packaged terminal air conditioner Plenum space Pressurisation ductwork Process duct work Radiator Radiator reflector Recuperator Refrigerant Register Reversing valve Run-around coil Sail switch Scroll compressor Solar chimney Solar-assisted heat pump Space heater Smoke canopy Smoke damper Smoke exhaust ductwork Thermal expansion valve Thermal wheel Thermostatic radiator valve Trickle vent Trombe wall TurboSwing Turning vanes Ultra-low particulate air (ULPA) Whole-house fan Windcatcher Wood-burning stove Zone valve Measurement and control Air flow meter Aquastat BACnet Blower door Building automation Carbon dioxide sensor Clean air delivery rate (CADR) Control valve Gas detector Home energy monitor Humidistat HVAC control system Infrared thermometer Intelligent buildings LonWorks Minimum efficiency reporting value (MERV) Normal temperature and pressure (NTP) OpenTherm Programmable communicating thermostat Programmable thermostat Psychrometrics Room temperature Smart thermostat Standard temperature and pressure (STP) Thermographic camera Thermostat Thermostatic radiator valve Professions, trades, and services Architectural acoustics Architectural engineering Architectural technologist Building services engineering Building information modeling (BIM) Deep energy retrofit Duct cleaning Duct leakage testing Environmental engineering Hydronic balancing Kitchen exhaust cleaning Mechanical engineering Mechanical, electrical, and plumbing Mold growth, assessment, and remediation Refrigerant reclamation Testing, adjusting, balancing Industry organizations AHRI AMCA ASHRAE ASTM International BRE BSRIA CIBSE Institute of Refrigeration IIR LEED SMACNA UMC Health and safety Indoor air quality (IAQ) Passive smoking Sick building syndrome (SBS) Volatile organic compound (VOC) See also ASHRAE Handbook Building science Fireproofing Glossary of HVAC terms Warm Spaces World Refrigeration Day Template:Fire protection Template:Home automation Template:Solar energy v t e Construction Types Home construction Offshore construction Underground construction Tunnel construction History Architecture Construction Industrialization Infrastructure Structural engineering Timeline of architecture Water supply and sanitation World's tallest buildings Professions Architect Building engineer Building estimator Building officials Chartered Building Surveyor Civil engineer Civil estimator Clerk of works Project manager Quantity surveyor Site manager Structural engineer Superintendent Trades workers ( List ) Banksman Boilermaker Bricklayer Carpenter Concrete finisher Construction foreman Construction worker Electrician Glazier Ironworker Millwright Plasterer Plumber Roofer Steel fixer Welder Organizations American Institute of Constructors (AIC) American Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE) Asbestos Testing and Consultancy Association (ATAC) Associated General Contractors of America (AGC) Association of Plumbing and Heating Contractors (APHC) Build UK Construction History Society Chartered Institution of Civil Engineering Surveyors (CICES) Chartered Institute of Plumbing and Heating Engineering (CIPHE) Civil Engineering Contractors Association (CECA) The Concrete Society Construction Management Association of America (CMAA) Construction Specifications Institute (CSI) FIDIC Home Builders Federation (HBF) Lighting Association National Association of Home Builders (NAHB) National Association of Women in Construction (NAWIC) National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) National Kitchen & Bath Association (NKBA) National Railroad Construction and Maintenance Association (NRC) National Tile Contractors Association (NTCA) Railway Tie Association (RTA) Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors (RICS) Scottish Building Federation (SBF) Society of Construction Arbitrators By country India Iran Japan Romania Taiwan Turkey United Kingdom United States Regulation Building code Construction law Site safety Zoning Architecture Style List Industrial architecture British Indigenous architecture Interior architecture Landscape architecture Vernacular architecture Engineering Architectural engineering Building services engineering Civil engineering Coastal engineering Construction engineering Structural engineering Earthquake engineering Environmental engineering Geotechnical engineering Methods List Earthbag construction Modern methods of construction Monocrete construction Slip forming Other topics Building material List of building materials Millwork Builder's signature Builders' rites Construction bidding Construction delay Construction equipment theft Cornerstone Floor loan Construction management Construction waste Demolition Design–build Design–bid–build DFMA Heavy equipment Interior design Illegal construction Lists of buildings and structures Megaproject Megastructure Plasterwork Damp Proofing Parge coat Roughcast Harling Real estate development Real-estate bubble Stonemasonry Sustainability Topping out Unfinished building Urban design Urban planning Outline Category Authority control databases National Germany Other Historical Dictionary of Switzerland NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐t5gdl
Cached time: 20250817085359
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.686 seconds
Real time usage: 0.862 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2581/1000000
Revision size: 26234/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 252708/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 10064/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 16/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 145402/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.386/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 7501968/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  627.986      1 -total
 36.86%  231.470      1 Template:Reflist
 27.59%  173.287     23 Template:Cite_web
 18.53%  116.370      7 Template:Navbox
 14.11%   88.618      1 Template:Engineering_fields
 12.98%   81.516      1 Template:Multiple_issues
 11.83%   74.294      1 Template:Short_description
  8.48%   53.275      1 Template:More_citations_needed
  8.46%   53.149      2 Template:Ambox
  6.55%   41.148      2 Template:Pagetype Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:19278728:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817085359 and revision id 1305222890. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Architectural_engineering&oldid=1305222890 " Categories : Building engineering Engineering occupations Architecture occupations Architectural design Engineering disciplines Hidden categories: CS1 Vietnamese-language sources (vi) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from December 2022 All articles needing additional references Articles that may contain original research from December 2022 All articles that may contain original research Articles with multiple maintenance issues All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from November 2019 This page was last edited on 10 August 2025, at 19:50 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Architectural engineering 37 languages Add topic

