Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 The Shaft 2 Background 3 Accident 4 Body recovery 5 Investigation and findings Toggle Investigation and findings subsection 5.1 Equipment 5.2 Allegation of contaminated air 6 Historical perspective and impact 7 References Toggle the table of contents 1973 Mount Gambier cave diving accident 2 languages Français Română Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Scuba cave diving incident in South Australia Mount Gambier cave diving accident Date 28 May 1973 ( 1973-05-28 ) Time ~1:30 pm Location The Shaft (sinkhole near Mount Gambier , South Australia ) Cause Lost exploring cave Participants John H. Bockerman Peter S. Burr Christine M. Millott Glen Millott Stephen L. Millott Larry Reynolds Gordon G. Roberts Robert J. Smith Joan Harper (did not dive) Outcome Deaths of Stephen L. and Christine M. Millott, Gordon G. Roberts, and John H. Bockerman The 1973 Mount Gambier cave diving accident was a scuba diving incident on 28 May 1973 at a flooded sinkhole known as "The Shaft" near Mount Gambier in South Australia . The incident claimed the lives of four recreational scuba divers: siblings Stephen L. and Christine M. Millott, Gordon G. Roberts, and John H. Bockerman.

[ 1 ] The four divers explored beyond their own planned limits, without the use of a guideline, and subsequently became lost, eventually exhausting their breathing air and drowning , with their bodies all recovered over the next year.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] To date, they are the only known fatalities at the site.

[ 4 ] Four other divers from the same group survived.

The incident was influential in the restriction of access to cave diving venues in Australia, the formation of the Cave Divers Association of Australia later that year, and the development of the South Australian Police Underwater Recovery Squad.

[ 2 ] The Shaft [ edit ] Section through The Shaft. Despite knowing their maximum depths, the total lengths of the northwest and southwest tunnels shown above are unknown.

The entrance to the sinkhole known as "The Shaft" was discovered in 1938 in a field known as Thompson's Paddock, on a farm near Allendale East, a few kilometres south of Mount Gambier, when one of a team of horses stumbled over a small hole about a 1 foot (0.30 m) across, which proved to be a solution shaft opening into a large sinkhole. The hole was later opened up to about 1 metre (3.3 ft) diameter for exploration access.

[ 2 ] In the mid-1960s a local diver climbed down the rain-enlarged 0.8 metres (2.6 ft) opening into the cave’s 17-metre (56 ft) wide lake chamber and made the first descent to a depth of about 21 metres (69 ft).

[ 5 ] The cave is one of several deep solution features in porous limestone in this part of south Australia.

[ 2 ] The main chamber is about 140 metres (460 ft) long and 80 metres (260 ft) wide. Water level is about 7 metres (23 ft) below ground level, and the hole is considerably wider at this point. A rock pile directly under the surface opening rises to a minimum depth of about 36 metres (118 ft). A tunnel extends to the northwest to a depth of about 80 metres (260 ft), and another to the east reaches a maximum depth of 124 metres (407 ft). Because of the size of the hole and the height of the drop, divers and equipment are lowered into the chamber separately using a hoist system.

[ 5 ] The name is claimed to be derived from the bright shaft of sunlight which penetrates through the entrance to the depths on a sunny day.

[ 5 ] The first reasonably accurate map of the cavern was made in 1984 after the newly formed CDAA Research Group made mapping and photographic dives showing the chamber to be roughly oval in shape. There was another exploration in June 1992, but the deepest sections were surveyed and mapped in 2002/03. The eastern tunnel is obstructed by restrictions at about 57 metres (187 ft) and continues downwards to 124 metres (407 ft) before becoming horizontal, and further access is blocked by a rock pile.

[ 5 ] Despite knowing their maximum depths, however, the total lengths of the northwest and southwest tunnels are unknown, and they may extend as far as the southern shores as part of the intricate freshwater-drainage system flowing through the mountains in the area.

The Shaft is on private land and is restricted to divers accredited with the CDAA.

[ 5 ] Background [ edit ] On 26 May 1973, a group of nine divers arrived at Mount Gambier in South Australia with the intention of cave diving at "The Shaft," a 3 feet (0.91 m) wide sinkhole opening leading to a large underwater cavern, famous among divers for its clear water and interesting internal structure.

[ 5 ] John H. Bockerman, Peter S. Burr, Christine M. Millott, Glen Millott, Stephen L. Millott, Larry Reynolds, Gordon G. Roberts, and Robert J. Smith were the eight divers intending to venture into the cave; a ninth group member, Joan Harper, had decided she would not be diving, and would instead remain beside the sinkhole, preparing hot soup and assisting the group in other ways.

[ 2 ] The day prior to the accident, the group signed the guestbook at the farmhouse of B.V. Ashby, [ 6 ] and completed a successful dive at the sinkhole, extending a shot line approximately 150 feet (46 m) into the water and reaching the primary point of interest known as the "rock pile", a central pile of limestone rubble about 40 meters directly below the sinkhole entrance. They briefly explored the perimeter of the rock pile before surfacing. With their shot line already in place, the group planned to return the next morning and continue exploring the cavern.

[ 2 ] The group arrived at the sinkhole on the morning of 28 May after refilling their 72 cubic feet (2.0 m 3 ) cylinders at Mount Gambier, and quickly descended to the rock pile. Reports from the divers indicate that they had not planned to explore beyond "the edge", a narrow and downward-sloping continuation of the cave on one side of the main chamber, far from the natural light shaft provided by the sinkhole opening. The rock pile was generally considered the boundary for safe recreational diving; the surrounding cavern was dark, unexplored, covered in loose silt and limestone rubble, and continued downward to depths where the effects of nitrogen narcosis become extreme if the breathing gas is not diluted by helium . Even at the depths of the rock pile perimeter, the effects of narcosis would have been significant, which may have already been impacting the judgement of the divers.

[ 2 ] While the initial descent went smoothly, the eight divers neglected several recognised safety procedures early in the dive. The shot line did not extend all the way to the cavern floor, and was not equipped with extra air tanks, nor were the divers prepared with adequate air management strategies . The group had not established specific diving partners , and they did not use any form of safety guide line ; Glen Millott later stated they did not use safety lines because eight separate lines in such a confined space would have created a dangerous situation for the divers. Robert Smith, who had dived at the sinkhole on eight previous occasions and established most of the dive plan, was not expecting the other members of the group to venture as far into the cave as they did.

[ 2 ] Accident [ edit ] Separate accounts from the four surviving divers were pieced together with the help of former Chief Superintendent Wallace B. Budd to establish a timeline of what happened to the four victims. At the perimeter of the rock pile, Smith began to feel the effects of nitrogen narcosis. His depth gauge read approximately 180 feet (55 m). An experienced diver, familiar with the symptoms of narcosis, Smith signaled to his group that he was returning to the top of the rock pile. The group signaled that they were going to continue exploring. Smith stayed by the rock pile, circling it for around 8 minutes while searching for animal bones. He then saw the torch of Glen Millott returning from the direction the others had gone. Glen Millott had been monitoring his air, and knew that he was out of time; he had attempted to tap Christine Millott on the arm and remind her that her time was also up, but the two were separated before he could. Smith and Glen Millott met and surfaced together to find that Larry Reynolds had already returned from his dive. Half a minute later, Peter Burr surfaced with almost no air left in his tank.

[ 2 ] Knowing the others would have similarly low air supplies, Glen Millott quickly put on a spare tank and returned to the water. He descended to a depth of 225 feet (69 m), where the cliff began to drop off. At the edge, he found Stephen L. Millott's torch and camera. Significant amounts of silt had been disturbed, and the visibility had reduced to nearly zero. Glen Millott had no choice but to decompress and return to the surface. By the time he surfaced, an ambulance had arrived at the sinkhole. Peter Burr returned to the cavern for one more look, but found nobody. By that point, the group was aware that they were looking for bodies, and not survivors.

[ 2 ] At the end of the planned dive, upon turning around to return to the surface, the surviving divers saw Christine Millott and Gordon Roberts attempt to ascend quickly back to the rock pile. However, instead of ascending  along the slope they went down, they swam straight up, possibly because they were worried their air would be exhausted soon. The two divers swam directly upward into a dome in the ceiling which had no exit. Reynolds reported seeing their torches frantically searching for an exit before Roberts signaled back that they were lost.

[ clarification needed ] According to Reynolds, Christine Millott and Gordon Roberts looked "frightened." This was the last time the two were seen. Likely suffering from nitrogen narcosis, and surrounded in silt allowing minimal visibility, the two failed to find an exit. They exhausted their air supply and drowned; their bodies were later found together below the ceiling dome they had failed to escape. Reports suggest that Christine Millott and Gordon Roberts may have been holding each other, as they knew their death was imminent. Their bodies were found together.

[ 2 ] Further down and around the same time, one surviving diver says they witnessed a member of their group swimming strongly downward further into the cave. This was John Bockerman, who was likely under the effects of severe nitrogen narcosis, and may have been unaware that he was swimming to his death. His body was located about 20 feet (6.1 m) further from where he was last seen, and was at the greatest depth of the four victims.

[ 2 ] The fourth casualty, Stephen L. Millott, may have been seen lost beneath the cave ceiling shortly before the surviving divers surfaced. Although his torch and camera were found deep at the base of the rock pile, his body was found under an overhang at a depth of only 50 feet (15 m). Compared with the other victims, little is known about Stephen L.'s final moments, but he was wearing a buoyancy vest, and to have been found under an overhang it is likely that he was buoyant at the time of death.

[ 2 ] Body recovery [ edit ] A search of the cave by the police Underwater Recovery Squad to a depth of 200 feet (61 m) was initiated on 29 May 1973, the day after the accident. The search was brief, and no bodies were found. The team was aware that they were underprepared for a dive in such conditions, and the operation was described by Chief Inspector Wallace Budd of the South-Eastern Division police headquarters in Mount Gambier as a "learn as you go exercise." [ 2 ] [ 7 ] A second attempt was made on 30 May, again unsuccessful. The police search was ultimately postponed as the team sought Naval expertise on the dive, the training for which was expected to take several months.

[ 2 ] The following January, the landowners permitted a television film crew, making a documentary on cave diving in the Lower South East, to enter the sinkhole. On 22 January 1974, after several days of diving in other caves in the area, the crew descended to a depth of 50 feet (15 m) and, using professional lighting equipment, illuminated the cave "like daylight." [ 2 ] A technician looking in the direction of two of his teammates noticed what appeared to be a third person behind them. Further inspection revealed that it was a body in a wetsuit. The team turned the light away immediately and surfaced together to report their findings. According to the crew, the body was not filmed. On the morning of 23 January 1974, police arrived at the sinkhole and dove to a depth of 50 feet (15 m), where they found a body floating under a ledge against the sloped cavern roof. The body was immediately towed out, and police divers continued searching to a depth of 180 feet (55 m), finding nothing else. The body was initially only identifiable by the equipment it was wearing, and official identification required dental records. The body was found to be that of Stephen L. Millott.

[ 2 ] The landowners, growing increasingly uncomfortable with the remaining three bodies stuck on their property, approached an amateur diving team from Melbourne to begin recovery efforts. However, the police diving team was finalising their recovery preparations around the same time.

[ 2 ] On 9 March 1974, R. G. Trayner and a team of divers entered "The Shaft" equipped with substantially improved diving gear. At a depth of 185 feet (56 m), Trayner saw a body below him laying on its back. On further examination, he found a second body directly beneath it. These were the bodies of Christine Millott and Gordon Roberts. 20 feet (6.1 m) deeper, Trayner also located the body of John Bockerman beneath a rock ledge. He attempted to move the body into a more easily recoverable position, but abandoned the effort knowing he did not have sufficient air.

[ 2 ] The next day, the divers attempted to return and recover the bodies, but did not succeed, and the effort was called off after the water became too murky. Several more dives were attempted, but the bodies could not be relocated. Finally, on the third day of diving, the bodies were found, and Christine Millott and Gordon Roberts were recovered from a depth of 195 feet (59 m) on 11 March 1974. Attempts were made to recover Bockerman's body from a depth of 215 feet (66 m) the following morning, but the divers aborted the recovery because of the onset of nitrogen narcosis.

[ 2 ] The divers were sent home for a month to recover from the extended efforts and to further train for the final body recovery, which was the most challenging because of its extreme depth and position. The final dive plan included one day of diving to secure location of the body using a guide line, a rest day for the divers to recover from potential narcotic effects, though narcotic effects are now known to dissipate immediately on ascending, with no after effects, [ 8 ] [ 9 ] and a third day to recover the body. The divers experienced significant narcosis during both days of diving, but their improved equipment and procedures ensured the operation went as planned, and John H. Bockerman's body was recovered from the cave on 9 April 1974, 11 months and 11 days after the accident.

[ 2 ] Investigation and findings [ edit ] The cause of death in all four divers was found to be lack of air with terminal drowning.

[ 2 ] In the autopsy of Stephen L. Millott, the three possible modes of fatal injury considered were air embolism – a consequence of lung overpressure injury usually due to ascent while holding the breath – but the evidence of lung barotrauma would no longer have been detectable after such a long period, death as a consequence of breathing gas contamination, which was ruled out through tests of air remaining in the cylinder and lack of evidence of carbon monoxide in tissue samples, or death by drowning, which was supported by evidence of diatom residue in the lung tissue, indicating that there had been water entry before or possibly after death. Embolism was also found to be unlikely from the accounts of the survivors.

[ 2 ] The coroner, Special Magistrate R.F.Stokes, concluded that the four divers overstayed their bottom time, ran out of air and died of hypoxia, the usual consequence of fatal drowning. A further finding was that although all the divers claimed to be experienced, and four of them were instructors, none of them were experienced sink-hole divers (cave divers), and that no appropriate safety precautions had been taken, referring specifically to the lack of a fail-safe return to surface system, staged emergency decompression cylinders, any recognised safety system (such as a buddy system), and that no-one clearly had responsibility for planning the dive and safety of the group.

[ 2 ] Equipment [ edit ] The equipment used by the divers was typical of the era, and when inspected under forensically valid conditions was found to be of good quality and in good condition. Of 16 cylinders inspected by the police, 14 were 72 cubic feet (2.0 m 3 ) and two were 50 cubic feet (1.4 m 3 ), connected as a twin set. At least some of the cylinders relied on a manually operated reserve valve to release the air intended as a safety margin, which was common at the time. The cylinders had been brought to the site with air filled in Sydney, but some had been refilled at Mount Gambier after the first dive. Analysis of the cylinder contents found that the air was not contaminated by carbon monoxide, though two of the cylinders recovered from the deceased had partly flooded after being emptied by their users and sinking back to the bottom, indicating that the air had been completely used up, and had corroded during the months of immersion. Air in the cylinders used by the survivors was found to be within relevant recommendations for breathing air for diving. A sample of air taken from the Mount Gambier compressor was analysed and also found to be within standards, and the compressor in good condition, with the intake clear of possible sources of contamination.

[ 2 ] Allegation of contaminated air [ edit ] Following the accident, Robert Smith alleged that he experienced severe nitrogen narcosis at 180 feet (55 m) on the initial dive, but experienced no narcotic effects after grabbing a spare tank and returning to depth to search for the others. He also claimed to be experienced at diving to depths up to 300 feet (91 m) (on air) without experiencing notable narcotic effects. The tank he took on the first dive had been filled at Mount Gambier, while the spare tank taken for his second dive to search for the missing divers had been filled back in Sydney. Smith is quoted as saying there was "something wrong with the local air", and proceeded to claim that contamination during the filling of the cylinders at Mount Gambier may have been the cause of the four fatalities.

[ 2 ] An expert in diving medicine , Dr A. B. Mc. Cant , was consulted regarding the accident and specifically tasked with the examination of the cylinders recovered from Smith and the rest of the party. After extensive examination, and laboratory tests on the cylinder contents he concluded that the allegations of impure air were "entirely without foundation". Dr Cant had previously expressed an opinion that the group had neglected a number of safety measures in the planning and execution of the dive, and that these factors ultimately led to the incident.

[ 2 ] Historical perspective and impact [ edit ] See also: Cave diving § History , and Cave Divers Association of Australia The limestone aquifer in the Mount Gambier area is up to 150 metres (490 ft) thick and is fed by rain. Flow is from northwest to south east through the porous rock, to exit at springs on the coast such as Ewens Ponds . Several sinkholes (cenotes) have formed in areas where large volumes of rock have dissolved and the roofs of the voids later collapsed. Parts of some of these sinkholes can be dived with direct access to the surface or with visible daylight – classified as cavern diving , while other parts are beyond daylight and are classified as cave diving .

[ 10 ] From the early 1960s divers began to dive The Shaft, the Black Hole , Kilsby sinkhole and Picanninnie Ponds , with divers coming in from Victoria and New South Wales . Most of these dives were conducted in sight of natural daylight using standard open water equipment and techniques, including the typical single cylinder with J-valve reserve and no pressure gauge, single demand valve , a wetsuit and a weightbelt , but not often a buoyancy compensator . Single low powered dive lights were used, and caving reels had not yet become available.

[ 10 ] A small minority of divers started exploring the dark zones of sinkholes and true caves, and experimented with equipment which was to develop into modern cave diving equipment. Some experiment with base-fed lifelines highlighted their limitations in true caves, while working satisfactorily in most sinkhole environments. Consequently cave reels were developed from about 1968, allowing the laying of static temporary and permanent guideline by the diver. Very few twin cylinders were in use, and mostly they were manifolded to a single outlet. Redundant air supplies started to be introduced in the 1970s, but were resisted because of cost.

Octopus regulators became accepted as cave diving equipment around 1976, and as sinkhole diving equipment a few years later.

[ 10 ] The "air-clear" water conditions experienced in the sinkholes and caves found in the Lower South East (now called the Limestone Coast ) of South Australia (SA) have attracted many visiting divers, with the first cave and sinkhole dives taking place in the very late 1950s.

[ 11 ] Until the mid-1980s divers generally used single diving cylinders , and homemade torches and reels , resulting in most of their explorations being limited.  Mixed-gas and rebreather technologies can now be used in many sites. The area is usually known within the cave diving community as the Mount Gambier region . It is estimated that about 8000 dives had been done in The Shaft by the time of the incident.

[ 2 ] A series of incidents between 1969 and 1974 in the former Lower South East in which 11 divers died (including a triple and a quadruple fatality) in the karst features Kilsby sinkhole , Piccaninnie Ponds , Death Cave (also known as Alleyns Cave ) and The Shaft , caused much public comment and a government inquiry to report on safety of scuba diving in sinkholes was announced by Des Corcoran , the deputy premier of South Australia, on 29 May, [ 7 ] which led to the formation of the Cave Divers Association of Australia Inc. (CDAA) in September 1973 and the closing of sinkholes to persons not assessed by the CDAA.

[ 12 ] The introduction of a testing program by the CDAA in 1974, which involved the assessment of prospective cave divers' cave diving ability, led to a reduced fatality rate.  In 1989, this testing system was replaced by a training system which consists of three levels of qualification – Basic Cave , Cave Diver and Advanced Cave Diver .

[ 13 ] [ 10 ] Five further deaths have occurred in the region since 1974; two died at Piccaninnie Ponds in 1984, one person died at Kilsbys Hole in 2010, and two people died in separate incidents at Tank Cave in 2011 including noted cave diver Agnes Milowka .

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] [ 16 ] [ 17 ] This incident had immediate and long term consequences for the South Australian Police Underwater Recovery Squad, which had been formed in 1957 with the purpose of underwater search and recovery of bodies, stolen property, and other evidence associated with crime. Additional training and improved equipment were considered necessary for the body search and recovery operations, which expanded the scope of their capacities and have been cited as a turning point in the history of the unit.

[ 2 ] References [ edit ] ^ "Divers return to search 'Death Hole' for bodies".

The Border Watch . Vol. 113, no. 13681. Mount Gambier, SA. 31 May 1973. pp. 1, 24.

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t u v w x y z aa ab ac Budd, Wallace B. (October–December 1991).

"Police Diving: The Shaft" (PDF) .

Australian Police : 123– 137. Archived from the original (PDF) on 27 September 2021 . Retrieved September 23, 2021 – via Cave Divers.

^ "Cave Diving Fatalities: The Shaft (1973)" .

www.wavesncaves.com .

Archived from the original on 1 December 2021 . Retrieved 1 December 2021 .

^ Staight, Kerry (August 13, 2019).

"Cave divers flock to South Australian farms to explore what lies beneath" .

ABC News .

Archived from the original on September 24, 2021 . Retrieved September 23, 2021 .

^ a b c d e f "Exploring the depths: The Shaft" .

Border Watch . September 7, 2017.

Archived from the original on September 22, 2021 . Retrieved September 23, 2021 .

^ Agars, Graeme; Brice, Chris (29 May 1973). "Four Scuba Divers Die in S-E Sinkhole".

The Advertiser . Vol. 113, no. 35746. Adelaide, SA. p. 1.

^ a b "Government acts on cave safety".

The Border Watch . Vol. 113, no. 13680. Mount Gambier, SA. 29 May 1973. pp. 1, 24.

^ Bennett, Peter; Rostain, Jean Claude (2003). "Inert Gas Narcosis". In Brubakk, Alf O; Neuman, Tom S (eds.).

Bennett and Elliott's physiology and medicine of diving (5th ed.). United States: Saunders.

ISBN 0-7020-2571-2 .

OCLC 51607923 .

^ Hamilton, R.W.; Kizer, K.W., eds. (1985).

"Nitrogen Narcosis" .

29th Undersea and Hyperbaric Medical Society Workshop (Publication Number 64WS(NN)4-26-85). Undersea and Hyperbaric Medical Society. Archived from the original on 2008-08-20.

^ a b c d Doolette, David; Prust, Philip (September 1999).

"Cave Diving in Australia" .

SPUMS Journal .

29 (3). South Pacific Underwater Medicine Society: 158– 161.

Archived from the original on 2022-01-11 . Retrieved 2021-12-06 – via ResearchGate.

^ Heighes, Valerie ; Eerie descent into a skindiver's paradise – South Australia's amazing Piccaninny Ponds The Australian Women's Weekly , Wednesday 18 August 1965, page 8, 9, 10 [1] Archived 2022-01-11 at the Wayback Machine ^ Lewis, Ian; Stace, Peter (1977), Summary of Cave Diving Deaths in Australia , Occasional Paper No. 1; Conference on Cave Diving, August 1977, Mt Gambier, South Australia: Cave Divers Association of Australia, pp.

6– 13, archived from the original on 2021-12-02 , retrieved 2021-12-02 ^ "Training" . Cave Divers Association of Australia.

Archived from the original on 10 April 2013 . Retrieved 6 April 2013 .

^ Horne, Peter (1987).

South Australian Diving Fatalities 1950–1982 (2nd ed.). Adelaide: Peter Horne. pp.

60– 63.

ISBN 0959438335 .

Archived from the original on 2021-12-02 . Retrieved 2021-12-02 .

^ Staff reporters (15 March 2010).

"Diver forced to leave dying mate to drown in cave" .

The Age .

Archived from the original on 24 March 2014 . Retrieved 6 April 2013 .

^ "Grim task to retrieve lost diver Agnes" .

The Sydney Morning Herald . 28 February 2011.

Archived from the original on 17 February 2013 . Retrieved 6 April 2013 .

^ Dougherty, Tom (17 October 2011).

"Victorian man dies while cave diving in Tank Cave, Mt Gambier" .

Herald Sun . Retrieved 6 April 2013 .

v t e Recreational dive sites Reef diving regions Akumal Aliwal Shoal Marine Protected Area Aliwal Shoal Amed (Bali) Anilao Apo Island Apo Reef Arrecifes de Cozumel National Park Bay of Pigs Belize Barrier Reef Biscayne National Park Bohol Sea Bowie Seamount Bunaken Bunaken National Park Cahuita National Park Calve Island Capurganá Ċirkewwa Cliff Villa Peninsula Cozumel Dhilba Guuranda-Innes National Park Edmonds Underwater Park El Ikhwa Islands False Bay Għar Qawqla Gili Islands Great Barrier Reef Great Southern Reef Guadalupe Island Biosphere Reserve Haql Hol Chan Marine Reserve iSimangaliso Marine Protected Area Sodwana Bay John Pennekamp Coral Reef State Park Kadmat Island Ko Tao Lighthouse Reef Mantanani Islands Malapascua Martin's Haven Marsa Alam Mengalum Molasses Reef Molokini Neptune Islands Osprey Reef Palancar Reef Panglao, Bohol Pescador Island Petit Saint Vincent Poor Knights Islands Porteau Cove Provincial Park Puerto Galera Punta Cana Ras Muhammad National Park Rondo Island Rottnest Island San Andrés (island) San Pedro Nolasco Island Shaʽb Abu Nuħas Shadwan Island Similan Islands Sipadan Socorro Island Sound of Mull St. Crispin's Reef Table Mountain National Park Marine Protected Area Taganga Tiga Tsitsikamma Marine Protected Area Tubbataha Reef Utila Wakatobi Regency Weh Island Whittle Rock Reef dive sites Azure Window Cod Hole Daedalus Reef Darwin's Arch Devil's Throat at Punta Sur Elphinstone Reef Eyemouth Fanadir Frederiksted Pier French Reef Fowey Rocks Light Gamul Kebir Hilsea Point Rock Inland Sea, Gozo Kennack Sands The Manacles Magic Point Octopus Hole Pope's Eye Portsea Hole Second Valley Sund Rock St Abbs Stingray City, Grand Cayman Wolf Rock Artificial reefs Edithburgh jetty Gibraltar Artificial Reef Merkanti Reef Port Hughes jetty Port Noarlunga jetty Rapid Bay jetty Shark River Reef South Channel Fort Osborne Reef Underwater artworks Cancún Underwater Museum Christ of the Abyss Circle of Heroes Kristu tal-Baħħara Molinere Underwater Sculpture Park Snorkelling sites Fungus Rock Wreck diving regions Bullhead Point Historical and Archeological District Calve Island Chuuk Lagoon Coron Bay Edmonds Underwater Park Shipwrecks of Isle Royale Loch Long Maritime Heritage Trail – Battle of Saipan Michigan Underwater Preserves Pearl and Hermes Atoll Porteau Cove Provincial Park Robben Island Marine Protected Area Scapa Flow Shipwrecks of Cape Town Table Mountain National Park Marine Protected Area Tulagi Tulamben Thunder Bay National Marine Sanctuary List of shipwrecks in the Thunder Bay National Marine Sanctuary Ve Skerries Wardang Island Western Rocks, Isles of Scilly Whitefish Point Underwater Preserve Wisconsin Shipwreck Coast National Marine Sanctuary List of shipwrecks in the Wisconsin Shipwreck Coast National Marine Sanctuary Wreck Alley, San Diego Wreck dive sites 115 (barge) A HMS A1 HMS A3 USS Aaron Ward Abessinia USS Accokeek HMAS Adelaide Admiral Sampson Adolphus Busch Aeolian Sky USS Aeolus Agat World War II Amtrac Ajax Akka Albert C. Field USS Algol Algoma Al Munassir Amaryllis America USS Anderson Andrea Doria Antilla Antilles USS Apogon Appomattox Aquila Aratama Maru Arctic USS Arkansas Arratoon Apcar USS Arthur W. Radford Atlanta USS Atlanta Australasia B Bärenfels HMAS Bayonet Ben Doran Benwood Bianca C.

USCGC Bibb Binnendijk USS Blenny HMS Boadicea Booya HMSAS Bloemfontein Breda Brian Davis HMAS Brisbane HMHS Britannic Bud Bar Bungsberg Byron C HMAS Canberra HMCS Cape Breton USCGC Cape Henlopen Captain Keith Tibbetts Carl D. Bradley USS Carlisle Carnatic Carthaginian II Cayuga Cedarville Chaudière Christina Nilsson ROCS Chen Hai Chester A. Congdon City of Bangor City of Everett City of Launceston Clan Ranald Clifton USCGC Comanche Comet Constandis HMAS Coogee SMS Cormoran Cornelia B. Windiate HMS Coronation Crusader Cuba Cumberland USS Curb USCGC Cuyahoga D Dania Daniel Lyons David Tucker SMS Dresden D.R. Hanna USCGC Duane Dunraven Dwight L. Moody E Eagle Eastfield Eber Ward Edgar E. Clark HMT Elk Ellengowan USS Emmons SS Emperor RMS Empress of Ireland Erie L. Hackley Espagne Etruria F HMS Falmouth Fifi Fleetwing SS Francisco Morazan Francis Hinton Frank O'Connor F. T. Barney Fujikawa Maru Fumizuki G Gallinipper SATS General Botha USNS General Hoyt S. Vandenberg George A. Marsh George Dewey George M. Cox Georg Thiele HMS Ghurka USS Gilliam Glenlyon Glen Strathallan SAS Good Hope HMAS Goorangai Gothenburg Grace A. Channon Grecian Green Bay Gregory Poole Gunilda H MT Haven SS Henry Chisholm MT Hephaestus Hermann Künne HMS Hermes Herzogin Cecilie SS Hesper Hilma Hooker Hispania Home HMS Hood HMAS Hobart I Igara USS Indra SS Ironsides SS Isaac M. Scott Island City J HMAS J1 HMAS J2 HMAS J4 HMAS J5 James Eagan Layne J.S. Seaverns SS John B. Cowle John M. Osborn SS John Mitchell Jura K SS Kamloops Kashi Maru PS Keystone State King Cruiser USS Kittiwake Kizugawa Maru SMS Kronprinz Kyarra Kyle Spangler L PS Lady Elgin Lady Thetis HMS Laforey SS Lakeland USS Lamson USAT Liberty SS Louisiana Louis Sheid SS L.R. Doty USS LST-507 Lumberman M HMS M2 HMCS Mackenzie Madeira SMS Markgraf SS Marquette Mayflower (scow) Mikhail Lermontov Maine Maloja HMS Maori SS Maori SS Margaret Olwill Marguerite SS Mauna Loa USAT Meigs Mendi MV Mercedes I USCGC Mesquite Metamora SS Midland City USS Mindanao Minnedosa SS Miowera SS Milwaukee USS Mizpah Miztec USCGC Mohawk Mohegan RMS Moldavia SS Monarch SS Monrovia HMS Montagu SS M.M. Drake MV RMS Mulheim USS Muliphen SS Myron N Nagato Niagara Niagara (tug) HMCS Nipigon SS Norman Northerner O Oceana SS Onoko USS Oriskany Oslofjord Ozone P P29 P31 SS Panay SS Papoose Pedernales Persier HMAS Perth SS Pewabic SAS Pietermaritzburg USS Pilotfish Piłsudski SS Pioneer USCGC Point Swift Pool Fisher SS Port Kembla HMS Port Napier Preußen President Coolidge HMS Prince of Wales Q Queen Victoria R R.P. Resor Radaas USS Rankin Rainbow Warrior Regina HMS Repulse RMS Rhone Riva Palacio Robert C. Pringle Robert Wallace USS Rochester Rondo Rosehill Rosinco Rotorua Rouse Simmons Royal Adelaide Royal Charter Rozi Russia S HMS Safari Sagamore HMCS Saguenay Sakawa Salem Express Samuel Mather Samuel P. Ely Sanko Harvest USS Saratoga HMCS Saskatchewan S.C. Baldwin USS Schurz USS Scuffle USS Scrimmage HMS Scylla Selah Chamberlain HMS Sidon USCGC Spar South Australian USS Spiegel Grove Sport Stanegarth Stanwood Stella Stepas Darius HMS St Lawrence Superior City HMAS Swan Sweepstakes T Tahoe USCGC Tamaroa USS Tarpon Thesis Thistlegorm Thomas Friant Thomas Wilson Thunderbolt Toa Maru HMAS Tobruk Tokai Maru Torrey Canyon SAS Transvaal Treasure HMNZS Tui U U-40 U-352 U-1195 Um El Faroud V V 1605 Mosel Varvassi USS Vermilion Vernon Vienna W HMNZS Waikato Walter L M Russ HMS Warrior Washingtonian Waubuno HMNZS Wellington Wexford William C. Moreland Wisconsin USS Wilkes-Barre Y USS Yancey YO-257 Yongala HMCS Yukon Z Zenobia Zealandia Zingara Cave dive sites Cave diving regions of the world Cave dive sites: Blauhöhle Blue hole Blue Hole (Red Sea) Great Blue Hole Blue Hole (Guam) Boesmansgat Cenote Dzibilchaltun Chinhoyi Caves Cocklebiddy, Western Australia Devil's Throat at Punta Sur Engelbrecht Cave Fossil Cave Hranice Abyss Jordbrugrotta Kilsby sinkhole Molnár János Cave Nereo Cave Piccaninnie Ponds Pluragrotta Pollatoomary Ricks Spring The Shaft Sistema Dos Ojos Sistema Huautla Sistema Nohoch Nah Chich Sistema Ox Bel Ha Sistema Sac Actun Uamh an Claonaite Vortex Spring Wakulla Springs Wondergat Zacatón Freshwater dive sites Blue Hole (New Mexico) Blue Lake (Utah) Dinorwic quarry Dorothea quarry Dutch Springs Ewens Ponds Homestead caldera Little Blue Lake Logue Brook Dam Ponce de Leon Spring Rum Jungle Silfra Vortex Spring Wast Water Wazee Lake Training sites Blue Abyss Capernwray Dive Centre Deep Dive Dubai Deepspot Eccleston Quarry Hotel Terme Millepini National Diving and Activity Centre Nemo 33 Seacrest Cove 2 Slickstones Quarry, Cromhall Stoney Cove Swanage Pier Related topics Black-water diving Blue-water diving Low impact diving Recreational diving Scuba diving Scuba diving tourism Underwater archaeology Underwater diving Wall diving Outline of recreational dive sites Category: Underwater diving sites Index of recreational dive sites Portal:Underwater diving v t e Underwater diving Diving activities Diving modes Atmospheric pressure diving Freediving Saturation diving Scuba diving Snorkeling Surface oriented diving Surface-supplied diving Unmanned diving Diving equipment Cleaning and disinfection of personal diving equipment Human factors in diving equipment design List of diving equipment manufacturers Basic equipment Diving mask Snorkel Swimfin Breathing gas Bailout gas Bottom gas Breathing air Decompression gas Emergency gas supply Heliox Hydreliox Hydrox Nitrox Oxygen Travel gas Trimix Buoyancy and trim equipment Avelo diving system Buoyancy compensator Power inflator Dump valve Variable buoyancy pressure vessel Diving weighting system Ankle weights Integrated weights Trim weights Weight belt Decompression equipment Decompression buoy Decompression chamber Decompression cylinder Decompression trapeze Dive computer Diving bell Diving shot Diving stage Jersey upline Jonline Diving suit Atmospheric diving suit JIM suit Newtsuit Dry suit Sladen suit Standard diving suit Rash vest Wetsuit Dive skins Hot-water suit Helmets and masks Anti-fog Diving helmet Free-flow helmet Lightweight demand helmet Orinasal mask Reclaim helmet Shallow water helmet Standard diving helmet Diving mask Band mask Full-face mask Half mask Instrumentation Bottom timer Depth gauge Dive computer Dive timer Diving watch Helium release valve Electro-galvanic oxygen sensor Pneumofathometer Submersible pressure gauge Mobility equipment Diver propulsion vehicle Human torpedo Wet sub Diving bell Closed bell Wet bell Diving stage Swimfin Monofin PowerSwim Towboard Safety equipment Alternative air source Octopus regulator Pony bottle Bolt snap Buddy line Dive light Diver's cutting tool Diver's knife Diver's telephone Through-water communications Underwater acoustic communication Diving bell Diving safety harness Emergency gas supply Bailout block Bailout bottle Lifeline Screw gate carabiner Emergency locator beacon Rescue tether Safety helmet Shark-proof cage Snoopy loop Navigation equipment Distance line Diving compass Dive reel Line marker Surface marker buoy Silt screw Underwater breathing apparatus Atmospheric diving suit Diving cylinder Burst disc Scuba cylinder valve Diving helmet Reclaim helmet Diving regulator Mechanism of diving regulators Regulator malfunction Regulator freeze Single-hose regulator Twin-hose regulator Full-face diving mask Open-circuit scuba Scuba set Bailout bottle Decompression cylinder Independent doubles Manifolded twin set Scuba manifold Pony bottle Scuba configuration Sidemount Sling cylinder Diving rebreathers Carbon dioxide scrubber Carleton CDBA Clearance Divers Life Support Equipment Cryogenic rebreather CUMA DSEA Dolphin Halcyon PVR-BASC Halcyon RB80 IDA71 Interspiro DCSC LAR-5 LAR-6 LAR-V LARU Mark IV Amphibian Porpoise Ray Siebe Gorman CDBA Salvus Siva Surface-supplied diving equipment Air line Diver's umbilical Diving air compressor Gas panel Hookah Scuba replacement Snuba Standard diving dress Diving equipment manufacturers AP Diving Apeks Aqua Lung America Aqua Lung/La Spirotechnique Beuchat René Cavalero Cis-Lunar Cressi-Sub Dacor DESCO Dive Xtras Divex Diving Unlimited International Drägerwerk Faber Fenzy Maurice Fernez Technisub Oscar Gugen Heinke HeinrichsWeikamp Johnson Outdoors Mares Morse Diving Nemrod Oceanic Worldwide Porpoise Shearwater Research Siebe Gorman Submarine Products Suunto Diving support equipment Access equipment Boarding stirrup Diver lift Diving bell Diving ladder Diving platform (scuba) Diving stage Downline Jackstay Launch and recovery system Messenger line Moon pool Breathing gas handling Air filtration Activated carbon Hopcalite Molecular sieve Silica gel Booster pump Carbon dioxide scrubber Cascade filling system Diver's pump Diving air compressor Diving air filter Water separator High pressure breathing air compressor Low pressure breathing air compressor Gas blending Gas blending for scuba diving Gas panel Gas reclaim system Gas storage bank Gas storage quad Gas storage tube Helium analyzer Nitrox production Membrane gas separation Pressure swing adsorption Oxygen analyser Electro-galvanic oxygen sensor Oxygen compatibility Decompression equipment Air-lock Built-in breathing system Decompression tables Diving bell Bell cursor Closed bell Clump weight Launch and recovery system Wet bell Diving chamber Diving stage Recreational Dive Planner Saturation system Platforms Dive boat Canoe and kayak diving Combat rubber raiding craft Liveaboard Subskimmer Diving support vessel HMS Challenger (K07) Underwater habitat Aquarius Reef Base Continental Shelf Station Two Helgoland Habitat Scott Carpenter Space Analog Station SEALAB Tektite habitat Remotely operated underwater vehicles 8A4-class ROUV ABISMO Atlantis ROV Team COTSBot CURV Deep Drone Épaulard Global Explorer ROV Goldfish-class ROUV Kaikō ROV Kaşif ROUV Long-Term Mine Reconnaissance System Mini Rover ROV OpenROV ROV KIEL 6000 ROV PHOCA Scorpio ROV Sea Dragon-class ROV Seabed tractor Seafox drone SeaPerch SJT-class ROUV T1200 Trenching Unit VideoRay UROVs Safety equipment Diver down flag Diving shot ENOS Rescue-System Hyperbaric lifeboat Hyperbaric stretcher Jackstay Jonline Reserve gas supply General Diving spread Air spread Saturation spread Hot water system Sonar Underwater acoustic positioning system Underwater acoustic communication Freediving Activities Aquathlon Apnoea finswimming Freediving Haenyeo Pearl hunting Ama Snorkeling Spearfishing Underwater football Underwater hockey Underwater rugby Underwater target shooting Competitions Nordic Deep Vertical Blue Disciplines Constant weight (CWT) Constant weight bi-fins (CWTB) Constant weight without fins (CNF) Dynamic apnea (DYN) Dynamic apnea without fins (DNF) Free immersion (FIM) No-limits apnea (NLT) Static apnea (STA) Skandalopetra diving Variable weight apnea (VWT) Variable weight apnea without fins Equipment Diving mask Diving suit Hawaiian sling Polespear Snorkel (swimming) Speargun Swimfins Monofin Water polo cap Freedivers Deborah Andollo Simone Arrigoni Peppo Biscarini Michael Board Sara Campbell Derya Can Göçen Goran Čolak Carlos Coste Robert Croft Mandy-Rae Cruickshank Yasemin Dalkılıç Leonardo D'Imporzano Flavia Eberhard Şahika Ercümen Emma Farrell Francisco Ferreras Pierre Frolla Flavia Eberhard Mehgan Heaney-Grier Elisabeth Kristoffersen Andriy Yevhenovych Khvetkevych Loïc Leferme Enzo Maiorca Jacques Mayol Audrey Mestre Karol Meyer Kate Middleton Stéphane Mifsud Alexey Molchanov Natalia Molchanova Dave Mullins Patrick Musimu Guillaume Néry Herbert Nitsch Umberto Pelizzari Liv Philip Annelie Pompe Stig Severinsen Tom Sietas Martin Štěpánek Walter Steyn Tanya Streeter William Trubridge Devrim Cenk Ulusoy Fatma Uruk Danai Varveri Alessia Zecchini Nataliia Zharkova Kateryna Sadurska Hazards Barotrauma Drowning Freediving blackout Deep-water blackout Shallow-water blackout Hypercapnia Hypothermia Historical Ama Octopus wrestling Swimming at the 1900 Summer Olympics – Men's underwater swimming Organisations AIDA International Scuba Schools International Australian Underwater Federation British Freediving Association Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins Performance Freediving International Professional diving Occupations Ama Commercial diver Commercial offshore diver Hazmat diver Divemaster Diving instructor Diving safety officer Diving superintendent Diving supervisor Haenyeo Media diver Police diver Public safety diver Scientific diver Underwater archaeologist Military diving Army engineer diver Canadian Armed Forces Divers Clearance diver Frogman Minentaucher Royal Navy ships diver United States military divers U.S. Navy diver U.S.Navy master diver Military diving units 7th Marine Brigade Clearance Diving Branch (RAN) Commando Hubert Combat Divers Service (Lithuania) Comando Raggruppamento Subacquei e Incursori Teseo Tesei Decima Flottiglia MAS Frogman Corps (Denmark) Fuerzas Especiales Fukuryu GRUMEC Grup Gerak Khas Jagdkommando JW Formoza JW GROM JW Komandosów Kommando Spezialkräfte Marine KOPASKA MARCOS Marine Commandos Marinejegerkommandoen Marine Raider Regiment Minedykkerkommandoen Namibian Marine Corps Operational Diving Unit Naval Diving Unit (Singapore) Naval Service Diving Section Naval Special Operations Command Operational Diving Division (SA Navy) Royal Engineers Russian commando frogmen Sappers Divers Group Shayetet 13 Special Air Service Special Air Service Regiment Special Actions Detachment Special Boat Service Special Boat Squadron (Sri Lanka) Special Forces Command (Turkey) Special Forces Group (Belgium) Special Operations Battalion (Croatia) Special Service Group (Navy) Special Warfare Diving and Salvage Tactical Divers Group US Marine Corps Force Reconnaissance US Marine Corps Reconnaissance Battalions US Navy SEALs Underwater Construction Teams Underwater Demolition Command Underwater Demolition Team Underwater Offence (Turkish Armed Forces) UNGERIN Underwater work Commercial offshore diving Dive leader Diver training Recreational diver training Hazmat diving Hyperbaric welding Marine construction Offshore construction Underwater construction Media diving Pearl hunting Police diving Potable water diving Public safety diving Scientific diving Ships husbandry Sponge diving Submarine pipeline Underwater archaeology Archaeology of shipwrecks Underwater cutting and welding Underwater demolition Underwater inspection Nondestructive testing Underwater logging Underwater photography Underwater search and recovery Underwater searches Underwater videography Underwater survey Salvage diving SS Egypt Kronan La Belle SS Laurentic RMS Lusitania Mars Mary Rose USS Monitor HMS Royal George Vasa Diving contractors COMEX Helix Energy Solutions Group International Marine Contractors Association Tools and equipment Abrasive waterjet Airlift Baited remote underwater video In-water surface cleaning Brush cart Cavitation cleaning Pressure washing Pigging Hot stab Lifting bag Remotely operated underwater vehicle Thermal lance Tremie Water jetting Underwater weapons Limpet mine Speargun Hawaiian sling Polespear Underwater firearm Gyrojet Mk 1 Underwater Defense Gun Powerhead Underwater pistols Heckler & Koch P11 SPP-1 underwater pistol Underwater revolvers AAI underwater revolver Underwater rifles ADS amphibious rifle APS underwater rifle ASM-DT amphibious rifle QBS-06 Recreational diving Recreational dive sites Index of recreational dive sites List of wreck diving sites Outline of recreational dive sites Specialties Altitude diving Cave diving Deep diving Ice diving Muck diving Open-water diving Rebreather diving Sidemount diving Solo diving Technical diving Underwater photography Wreck diving Diver organisations British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Cave Divers Association of Australia (CDAA) Cave Diving Group (CDG) Comhairle Fo-Thuinn (CFT) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas (FEDAS) Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins (FFESSM) International Association for Handicapped Divers (IAHD) Quintana Roo Speleological Survey (QRSS) Woodville Karst Plain Project (WKPP) Diving tourism industry Dive center Diving in Timor-Leste Diving in the Maldives Environmental impact of recreational diving Scuba diving tourism Scuba diving in the Cayman Islands Shark tourism Sinking ships for wreck diving sites Underwater diving in Guam Diving events and festivals Diversnight Underwater Bike Race Diving safety Human factors in diving equipment design Human factors in diving safety Life-support system Safety-critical system Scuba diving fatalities Underwater diving emergency Water safety Water surface searches Diving hazards List of diving hazards and precautions Environmental Current Delta-P Entanglement hazard Overhead Silt out Wave action Equipment Freeflow Use of breathing equipment in an underwater environment Failure of diving equipment other than breathing apparatus Single point of failure Physiological Cold shock response Decompression Nitrogen narcosis Oxygen toxicity Seasickness Uncontrolled decompression Diver behaviour and competence Incompetence Overconfidence effect Panic Task loading Trait anxiety Willful violation Consequences Barotrauma Decompression sickness Drowning Hypothermia Hypoxia Hypercapnia Hyperthermia Non-freezing cold injury Diving procedures Ascending and descending Emergency ascent Boat diving Canoe and kayak diving Buddy diving buddy check Decompression Decompression practice Pyle stop Ratio decompression Dive briefing Dive log Dive planning Rule of thirds Scuba gas planning Diver communications Diver rescue Diver training Doing It Right Drift diving Gas blending for scuba diving Night diving Rebreather diving Scuba gas management Solo diving Wall diving Risk management Checklist Hazard identification and risk assessment Hazard analysis Job safety analysis Risk assessment Hyperbaric evacuation and rescue Risk control Hierarchy of hazard controls Incident pit Lockout–tagout Permit To Work Redundancy Safety data sheet Situation awareness Diving team Bellman Chamber operator Diver medical technician Diver's attendant Diving supervisor Diving systems technician Gas man Life support technician Stand-by diver Equipment safety Breathing gas quality Testing and inspection of diving cylinders Hydrostatic test Sustained load cracking Diving regulator Breathing performance of regulators Occupational safety and health Association of Diving Contractors International International Marine Contractors Association Code of practice Contingency plan Diving regulations Emergency response plan Diving safety officer Diving superintendent Diving supervisor Operations manual Standard operating procedure Diving medicine Diving disorders List of signs and symptoms of diving disorders Cramp Motion sickness Surfer's ear Pressure related Alternobaric vertigo Barostriction Barotrauma Air embolism Aerosinusitis Barodontalgia Dental barotrauma Middle ear barotrauma Pulmonary barotrauma Compression arthralgia Decompression illness Dysbarism Oxygen Freediving blackout Hyperoxia Hypoxia Oxygen toxicity Inert gases Avascular necrosis Decompression sickness Dysbaric osteonecrosis Inner ear decompression sickness Isobaric counterdiffusion Taravana High-pressure nervous syndrome Hydrogen narcosis Nitrogen narcosis Carbon dioxide Hypercapnia Hypocapnia Breathing gas contaminants Carbon monoxide poisoning Immersion related Asphyxia Drowning Hypothermia Immersion diuresis Instinctive drowning response Laryngospasm Salt water aspiration syndrome Swimming-induced pulmonary edema Treatment Demand valve oxygen therapy First aid Hyperbaric medicine Hyperbaric treatment schedules In-water recompression Oxygen therapy Therapeutic recompression Personnel Diving Medical Examiner Diving Medical Practitioner Diving Medical Technician Hyperbaric nursing Screening Atrial septal defect Effects of drugs on fitness to dive Fitness to dive Psychological fitness to dive Research Researchers in diving physiology and medicine Arthur J. Bachrach Albert R. Behnke Peter B. Bennett Paul Bert George F. Bond Robert Boyle Alf O. Brubakk Albert A. Bühlmann John R. Clarke Guybon Chesney Castell Damant Kenneth William Donald William Paul Fife John Scott Haldane Robert William Hamilton Jr.

Henry Valence Hempleman Leonard Erskine Hill Brian Andrew Hills Felix Hoppe-Seyler Christian J. Lambertsen Simon Mitchell Charles Momsen Neal W. Pollock John Rawlins Charles Wesley Shilling Edward D. Thalmann Jacques Triger Diving medical research organisations Aerospace Medical Association Divers Alert Network (DAN) Diving Diseases Research Centre (DDRC) Diving Medical Advisory Council (DMAC) European Diving Technology Committee (EDTC) European Underwater and Baromedical Society (EUBS) National Board of Diving and Hyperbaric Medical Technology Naval Submarine Medical Research Laboratory Royal Australian Navy School of Underwater Medicine Rubicon Foundation South Pacific Underwater Medicine Society (SPUMS) Undersea and Hyperbaric Medical Society (UHMS) United States Navy Experimental Diving Unit (NEDU) Law Civil liability in recreational diving Diving regulations Duty of care List of legislation regulating underwater diving Investigation of diving accidents Convention on the Protection of the Underwater Cultural Heritage History of underwater diving History of decompression research and development History of dive computers History of Diving Museum History of scuba diving List of researchers in underwater diving Lyons Maritime Museum Man in the Sea Museum Timeline of atmospheric diving suits Timeline of diving technology Pearling in Western Australia US Navy decompression models and tables Archeological sites SS Commodore USS Monitor Queen Anne's Revenge Whydah Gally Underwater art and artists The Diver Jason deCaires Taylor Engineers and inventors Jerónimo de Ayanz y Beaumont William Beebe Georges Beuchat Giovanni Alfonso Borelli Joseph-Martin Cabirol John R. Clarke Jacques Cousteau Charles Anthony Deane John Deane Louis de Corlieu Auguste Denayrouze Ted Eldred Henry Fleuss Émile Gagnan Karl Heinrich Klingert Peter Kreeft Christian J. Lambertsen Yves Le Prieur John Lethbridge Ernest William Moir Joseph Salim Peress Auguste Piccard Joe Savoie Willard Franklyn Searle Gordon Smith Augustus Siebe Pierre-Marie Touboulic Jacques Triger Historical equipment Aqua-Lung RV Calypso SP-350 Denise Magnesium torch Nikonos Porpoise regulator Standard diving dress Sub Marine Explorer Vintage scuba Diver propulsion vehicles Advanced SEAL Delivery System Cosmos CE2F series Dry Combat Submersible Human torpedo Motorised Submersible Canoe Necker Nymph R-2 Mala-class swimmer delivery vehicle SEAL Delivery Vehicle Shallow Water Combat Submersible Siluro San Bartolomeo Welfreighter Wet Nellie Military and covert operations Raid on Alexandria (1941) Sinking of the Rainbow Warrior Scientific projects 1992 cageless shark-diving expedition Mission 31 Awards and events Hans Hass Award International Scuba Diving Hall of Fame London Diving Chamber Dive Lectures NOGI Awards Women Divers Hall of Fame Incidents Dive boat incidents Sinking of MV Conception Diver rescues Alpazat cave rescue Tham Luang cave rescue Early diving John Day (carpenter) Charles Spalding Ebenezer Watson Freediving fatalities Stephen Keenan Loïc Leferme Audrey Mestre Nicholas Mevoli Natalia Molchanova Offshore diving incidents Byford Dolphin diving bell accident Drill Master diving accident Star Canopus diving accident Stena Seaspread diving accident Venture One diving accident Waage Drill II diving accident Wildrake diving accident Professional diving fatalities Roger Baldwin John Bennett Victor F. Guiel Jr.

Francis P. Hammerberg Craig M. Hoffman Peter Henry Michael Holmes Johnson Sea Link accident Edwin Clayton Link Gerard Anthony Prangley Per Skipnes Robert John Smyth Albert D. Stover Richard A. Walker Lothar Michael Ward Joachim Wendler Bradley Westell Arne Zetterström Scuba diving fatalities 1973 Mount Gambier cave diving accident Ricardo Armbruster Allan Bridge David Bright Berry L. Cannon Cotton Coulson Cláudio Coutinho E. Yale Dawson Deon Dreyer Milan Dufek Sheck Exley Maurice Fargues Fernando Garfella Palmer Guy Garman Steve Irwin death Jim Jones Henry Way Kendall Artur Kozłowski Yuri Lipski Kirsty MacColl Linnea Mills Agnes Milowka François de Roubaix Chris and Chrissy Rouse Dave Shaw Wesley C. Skiles Dewey Smith Rob Stewart Esbjörn Svensson Josef Velek Publications Manuals NOAA Diving Manual U.S. Navy Diving Manual Basic Cave Diving: A Blueprint for Survival Underwater Handbook Bennett and Elliott's physiology and medicine of diving Encyclopedia of Recreational Diving The new science of skin and scuba diving Professional Diver's Handbook Basic Scuba Standards and Codes of Practice Code of Practice for Scientific Diving (UNESCO) DIN 7876 IMCA Code of Practice for Offshore Diving ISO 24801 Recreational diving services — Requirements for the training of recreational scuba divers General non-fiction The Darkness Beckons Goldfinder The Last Dive Shadow Divers The Silent World: A Story of Undersea Discovery and Adventure Research List of Divers Alert Network publications Dive guides Training and registration Diver training Competence and assessment Competency-based learning Refresher training Skill assessment Diver training standard Diving instructor Diving school Occupational diver training Commercial diver training Military diver training Public safety diver training Scientific diver training Recreational diver training Introductory diving ISO training standards Teaching method Muscle memory Overlearning Stress exposure training Skills Combat sidestroke Diver navigation Diver trim Ear clearing Frenzel maneuver Valsalva maneuver Finning techniques Scuba skills Buddy breathing Low impact diving Diamond Reef System Surface-supplied diving skills Underwater searches Recreational scuba certification levels Core diving skills Advanced Open Water Diver Autonomous diver CMAS* scuba diver CMAS** scuba diver Introductory diving Low Impact Diver Master Scuba Diver Open Water Diver Supervised diver Leadership skills Dive leader Divemaster Diving instructor Master Instructor Specialist skills Rescue Diver Solo diver Diver training certification and registration organisations European Underwater Federation (EUF) International Diving Regulators and Certifiers Forum (IDRCF) International Diving Schools Association (IDSA) International Marine Contractors Association (IMCA) List of diver certification organizations National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) Nautical Archaeology Society Recreational diver course referral World Recreational Scuba Training Council (WRSTC) Commercial diver certification authorities Australian Diver Accreditation Scheme (ADAS) Commercial diver registration in South Africa Divers Institute of Technology Health and Safety Executive (HSE) Department of Employment and Labour Commercial diving schools Divers Academy International Norwegian diver school Free-diving certification agencies AIDA International (AIDA) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Performance Freediving International (PI) Scuba Schools International (SSI) Recreational scuba certification agencies American Canadian Underwater Certifications (ACUC) American Nitrox Divers International (ANDI) Association nationale des moniteurs de plongée (ANMP) British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Comhairle Fo-Thuinn (CFT) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas (FEDAS) Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins (FFESSM) Federazione Italiana Attività Subacquee (FIAS) Global Underwater Explorers (GUE) International Association for Handicapped Divers (IAHD) International Association of Nitrox and Technical Divers (IANTD) International Life Saving Federation (ILS) Israeli Diving Federation (TIDF) National Academy of Scuba Educators (NASE) National Association of Underwater Instructors (NAUI) Nederlandse Onderwatersport Bond (NOB) Professional Association of Diving Instructors (PADI) Professional Diving Instructors Corporation (PDIC) Professional Technical and Recreational Diving (ProTec) Rebreather Association of International Divers (RAID) Sub-Aqua Association (SAA) Scuba Diving International (SDI) Scuba Educators International (SEI) Scuba Schools International (SSI) Türkiye Sualtı Sporları Federasyonu (TSSF) United Diving Instructors (UDI) YMCA SCUBA Program Scientific diver certification authorities American Academy of Underwater Sciences (AAUS) CMAS Scientific Committee Technical diver certification agencies American Nitrox Divers International (ANDI) British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Diving Science and Technology (DSAT) Federazione Italiana Attività Subacquee (FIAS) International Association of Nitrox and Technical Divers (IANTD) Professional Association of Diving Instructors (PADI) Professional Diving Instructors Corporation (PDIC) Professional Technical and Recreational Diving (ProTec) Rebreather Association of International Divers (RAID) Trimix Scuba Association (TSA) Technical Extended Range (TXR) Cave diving Cave Divers Association of Australia (CDAA) Cave Diving Group (CDG) Global Underwater Explorers (GUE) National Speleological Society#Cave Diving Group (CDG) National Association of Underwater Instructors (NAUI) Technical Diving International (TDI) Military diver training centres Defence Diving School Navy Diving Salvage and Training Center Underwater Escape Training Unit Military diver training courses United States Marine Corps Combatant Diver Course Underwater sports Surface snorkeling Finswimming Snorkeling/breath-hold Spearfishing Underwater football Underwater hockey Australia Turkey Underwater rugby Colombia United States Underwater target shooting Breath-hold Aquathlon Apnoea finswimming Freediving Open Circuit Scuba Immersion finswimming Sport diving Underwater cycling Underwater orienteering Underwater photography Rebreather Underwater photography Sports governing organisations and federations International AIDA International Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques ) National AIDA Hellas Australian Underwater Federation British Freediving Association British Octopush Association British Underwater Sports Association Comhairle Fo-Thuinn Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins South African Underwater Sports Federation Türkiye Sualtı Sporları Federasyonu Underwater Society of America ) Competitions 14th CMAS Underwater Photography World Championship Underwater Hockey World Championships Underwater Orienteering World Championships Underwater Rugby World Championships Underwater divers Pioneers of diving Eduard Admetlla i Lázaro Aquanaut Mary Bonnin Amelia Behrens-Furniss James F. Cahill Jacques Cousteau Billy Deans Dottie Frazier Trevor Hampton Hans Hass Hannes Keller Dick Rutkowski Teseo Tesei Arne Zetterström Underwater scientists archaeologists and environmentalists Michael Arbuthnot Robert Ballard George Bass Mensun Bound Louis Boutan Jeffrey Bozanic Hugh Bradner Cathy Church Eugenie Clark James P. Delgado Sylvia Earle John Christopher Fine George R. Fischer Anders Franzén Honor Frost Fernando Garfella Palmer David Gibbins Graham Jessop Swietenia Puspa Lestari Pilar Luna Robert F. Marx Anna Marguerite McCann Innes McCartney Charles T. Meide Mark M. Newell Lyuba Ognenova-Marinova John Peter Oleson Mendel L. Peterson Richard Pyle Andreas Rechnitzer William R. Royal Margaret Rule Gunter Schöbel Stephanie Schwabe Myriam Seco E. Lee Spence Robert Sténuit Peter Throckmorton Cristina Zenato Scuba record holders Pascal Bernabé Jim Bowden Mark Ellyatt Sheck Exley Nuno Gomes Claudia Serpieri Krzysztof Starnawski Underwater filmmakers and presenters Samir Alhafith David Attenborough Ramón Bravo Jean-Michel Cousteau Richie Kohler Paul Rose Andy Torbet Ivan Tors Andrew Wight James Cameron Underwater photographers Doug Allan Tamara Benitez Georges Beuchat Adrian Biddle Jonathan Bird Eric Cheng Neville Coleman Jacques Cousteau John D. Craig Ben Cropp Bernard Delemotte David Doubilet Candice Farmer John Christopher Fine Rodney Fox Ric Frazier Stephen Frink Peter Gimbel Monty Halls Hans Hass Henry Way Kendall Rudie Kuiter Joseph B. MacInnis Luis Marden Agnes Milowka Noel Monkman Pete Oxford Steve Parish Zale Parry Pierre Petit Leni Riefenstahl Peter Scoones Brian Skerry Wesley C. Skiles E. Lee Spence Philippe Tailliez Ron Taylor Valerie Taylor Albert Tillman John Veltri Stan Waterman Michele Westmorland John Ernest Williamson J. Lamar Worzel Underwater explorers Caves Graham Balcombe Sheck Exley Martyn Farr Jochen Hasenmayer Jill Heinerth Jarrod Jablonski Brian Kakuk William Hogarth Main Tom Mount Jack Sheppard Bill Stone Reefs Arthur C. Clarke Wrecks Leigh Bishop John Chatterton Clive Cussler Bill Nagle Valerie van Heest Aristotelis Zervoudis Aquanauts Andrew Abercromby Joseph M. Acaba Clayton Anderson Richard R. Arnold Serena Auñón-Chancellor Michael Barratt (astronaut) Robert A. Barth Robert L. Behnken Randolph Bresnik Timothy J. Broderick Justin Brown Berry L. Cannon Scott Carpenter Gregory Chamitoff Steve Chappell Catherine Coleman Robin Cook Craig B. Cooper Fabien Cousteau Philippe Cousteau Timothy Creamer Jonathan Dory Pedro Duque Sylvia Earle Jeanette Epps Sheck Exley Albert Falco Andrew J. Feustel Michael Fincke Satoshi Furukawa Ronald J. Garan Jr.

Michael L. Gernhardt Christopher E. Gerty David Gruber Chris Hadfield Jeremy Hansen José M. Hernández John Herrington Paul Hill Akihiko Hoshide Mark Hulsbeck Emma Hwang Norishige Kanai Les Kaufman Scott Kelly Karen Kohanowich Timothy Kopra Dominic Landucci Jon Lindbergh Kjell N. Lindgren Michael López-Alegría Joseph B. MacInnis Sandra Magnus Thomas Marshburn Matthias Maurer K. Megan McArthur Craig McKinley Jessica Meir Simone Melchior Dorothy Metcalf-Lindenburger Andreas Mogensen Karen Nyberg John D. Olivas Takuya Onishi Luca Parmitano Nicholas Patrick Tim Peake Thomas Pesquet Marc Reagan Garrett Reisman Kathleen Rubins Dick Rutkowski Tara Ruttley David Saint-Jacques Josef Schmid Robert Sheats Dewey Smith Steve Squyres Heidemarie Stefanyshyn-Piper Robert Sténuit Hervé Stevenin Nicole Stott James Talacek Daniel M. Tani Robert Thirsk Bill Todd Mark T. Vande Hei Koichi Wakata Rex J. Walheim Shannon Walker John Morgan Wells Joachim Wendler Douglas H. Wheelock Peggy Whitson Dafydd Williams Jeffrey Williams Sunita Williams Reid Wiseman Kimiya Yui Writers and journalists Michael C. Barnette Victor Berge Philippe Diolé Gary Gentile Bret Gilliam Bob Halstead Hillary Hauser Trevor Jackson Steve Lewis John Mattera Rescuers Craig Challen Richard Harris Rick Stanton John Volanthen Frogmen Lionel Crabb Ian Edward Fraser Sydney Knowles James Joseph Magennis Commercial salvors Keith Jessop Science of underwater diving List of researchers in underwater diving Diving physics Metre sea water Neutral buoyancy Underwater acoustics Modulated ultrasound Underwater vision Underwater computer vision Diving physiology Blood shift Cold shock response Diving reflex Equivalent narcotic depth Maximum operating depth Physiological response to water immersion Thermal balance of the underwater diver Underwater vision Work of breathing Decompression theory Decompression models: Bühlmann decompression algorithm Haldane's decompression model Reduced gradient bubble model Thalmann algorithm Thermodynamic model of decompression Varying Permeability Model Equivalent air depth Oxygen window Physiology of decompression Diving environments Underwater exploration Deep-sea exploration Classification List of diving environments by type Altitude diving Benign water diving Confined water diving Deep diving Inland diving Inshore diving Muck diving Night diving Open-water diving Black-water diving Blue-water diving Penetration diving Cave diving Torricellian chamber Ice diving Wreck diving Recreational dive sites Underwater environment Underwater diving environment Impact Environmental impact of recreational diving Low impact diving Other Bathysphere Defense against swimmer incursions Diver detection sonar Offshore survey Rugged compact camera Underwater domain awareness Underwater vehicle Deep-submergence vehicle Aluminaut DSV Alvin American submarine NR-1 Bathyscaphe Archimède FNRS-2 FNRS-3 Harmony class bathyscaphe Sea Pole -class bathyscaphe Trieste II Deepsea Challenger Ictineu 3 JAGO Jiaolong Konsul -class submersible Limiting Factor Russian submarine Losharik Mir Nautile Pisces -class deep submergence vehicle DSV Sea Cliff DSV Shinkai DSV Shinkai 2000 DSV Shinkai 6500 DSV Turtle DSV-5 Nemo Submarine rescue International Submarine Escape and Rescue Liaison Office Submarine Escape and Rescue system (Royal Swedish Navy) McCann Rescue Chamber Submarine rescue ship Deep-submergence rescue vehicle LR5 LR7 MSM-1 Mystic -class deep-submergence rescue vehicle DSRV-1 Mystic DSRV-2 Avalon NATO Submarine Rescue System Priz -class deep-submergence rescue vehicle Russian deep submergence rescue vehicle AS-28 Russian submarine AS-34 ASRV Remora SRV-300 Submarine Rescue Diving Recompression System Type 7103 DSRV URF (Swedish Navy) Submarine escape Escape trunk Submarine escape training facility Submarine Escape Training Facility (Australia) Escape set Davis Submerged Escape Apparatus Momsen lung Steinke hood Submarine Escape Immersion Equipment Special interest groups Artificial Reef Society of British Columbia CMAS Europe Coral Reef Alliance Divers Alert Network Green Fins Finger Lakes Underwater Preserve Association Karst Underwater Research Nautical Archaeology Program Nautical Archaeology Society Naval Air Command Sub Aqua Club PADI AWARE Reef Check Reef Life Survey Rubicon Foundation Save Ontario Shipwrecks SeaKeys Sea Research Society Society for Underwater Historical Research Society for Underwater Technology Underwater Archaeology Branch, Naval History & Heritage Command Neutral buoyancy facilities for Astronaut training Neutral Buoyancy Laboratory Neutral buoyancy pool Neutral buoyancy simulation as a training aid Neutral Buoyancy Simulator Space Systems Laboratory Yuri Gagarin Cosmonaut Training Center Other Nautilus Productions Helicopter Aircrew Breathing Device Scuba diving therapy Seabed mining Category Commons Glossary Indexes: Dive sites Divers Diving Outline Portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=1973_Mount_Gambier_cave_diving_accident&oldid=1306290889 " Categories : Cave diving History of South Australia History of scuba diving Underwater diving deaths Underwater diving sites in Australia May 1973 in Australia Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Wikipedia articles needing clarification from December 2021 This page was last edited on 17 August 2025, at 00:29 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents 1973 Mount Gambier cave diving accident 2 languages Add topic

