Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview 2 History Toggle History subsection 2.1 Origins 2.2 Early 20th century 2.3 1960s futures research 2.4 Forecasting further development 3 Forecasting and futures techniques Toggle Forecasting and futures techniques subsection 3.1 Future management 3.2 Alternative possible futures 3.3 Weak signals, the future sign and wild cards 3.4 Near-term predictions 3.5 Trend analysis and forecasting 3.5.1 Megatrends 3.5.2 Potential trends 3.5.3 Potential future scenarios 3.5.4 Branching trends 3.5.5 Life cycle of a trend 3.5.6 Life cycle of technologies 4 Education 5 Applications of foresight and specific fields Toggle Applications of foresight and specific fields subsection 5.1 General applicability and use of foresight products 5.2 Imperial cycles and world order 5.3 Education 5.4 Science fiction 5.5 Government agencies 5.6 Risk analysis and management 6 Futurists 7 Books Toggle Books subsection 7.1 APF's list of most significant futures works 7.2 Other popular foresight books 7.3 Periodicals and journals 8 Organizations Toggle Organizations subsection 8.1 Foresight professional networks 8.2 Public-sector foresight organizations 8.3 Non-governmental foresight organizations 9 See also 10 References 11 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Futures studies 54 languages Afrikaans العربية Azərbaycanca Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Bosanski Català Čeština Cymraeg Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Қазақша Кыргызча ລາວ Latina Magyar Bahasa Melayu Монгол Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча پښتو Polski Português Română Русский Shqip Simple English Slovenčina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikibooks Wikiquote Wikiversity Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Study of postulating possible, probable, and preferable futures "Futurology" redirects here. For other uses, see Futurology (disambiguation) .

For the study of the "futures" financial instrument, see futures contract and futures exchange .

Not to be confused with Futurism .

Moore's law is an example of futurology; it is a statistical collection of past and present trends with the goal of accurately extrapolating future trends.

Futures studies Concepts Accelerating change Cashless society Global catastrophic risk Future Earth Mathematics Race Climate Space exploration Universe Historical materialism Kondratiev wave Kardashev scale Moore's law Peak oil Population cycle Resource depletion Singularity Swanson's law Techniques Backcasting Causal layered analysis Chain-linked model Consensus forecast Cross impact analysis Delphi Real-time Delphi Foresight Future-proof Futures wheel Future workshop Horizon scanning Reference class forecasting Scenario planning Systems analysis Threatcasting Trend analysis Technology assessment and forecasting Critical design Design fiction Exploratory engineering FTA Hype cycle Science fiction prototyping Speculative design TRL Technology scouting Related topics Futarchy Transhumanism v t e Part of a series on Human history ↑ Prehistory ( Stone Age ) ( Pleistocene epoch ) Holocene Timelines Neolithic – Contemporary ( 10,000 BCE – present ) Age of the human race Recorded history ( Common Era ) Earliest records Protohistory Proto-writing Ancient Copper Age Bronze Age Iron Age Axial Age Classical antiquity Late antiquity Africa North America South America Oceania East Asia South Asia Southeast Asia West Asia Europe Postclassical Timeline Africa Americas Oceania East Asia South Asia Southeast Asia West Asia Europe Renaissance Modern Early modern Late modern Contemporary Africa North America South America Oceania East Asia South Asia Southeast Asia West Asia Europe See also Age of Discovery Modernity Postmodernity Futurology Political history ↓ Future v t e Time Major concepts Past Present Future Eternity of the world Fields of study Archaeology Chronology History Horology Metrology Paleontology Futurology Philosophy Presentism Eternalism Event Fatalism Religion Mythology Creation End time Day of Judgement Immortality Afterlife Reincarnation Kalachakra Measurement Standards ISO 8601 Metric Hexadecimal Science Naturalism Chronobiology Cosmogony Evolution Radiometric dating Ultimate fate of the universe Time in physics Related topics Motion Space Spacetime Time travel v t e Futures studies , futures research or futurology is the systematic, interdisciplinary and holistic study of social and technological advancement, and other environmental trends, often for the purpose of exploring how people will live and work in the future. Predictive techniques, such as forecasting , can be applied, but contemporary futures studies scholars emphasize the importance of systematically exploring alternatives.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] In general, it can be considered as a branch of the social sciences and an extension to the field of history. Futures studies (colloquially called "futures" by many of the field's practitioners) seeks to understand what is likely to continue and what could plausibly change. Part of the discipline thus seeks a systematic and pattern-based understanding of past and present, and to explore the possibility of future events and trends.

[ 4 ] Unlike the physical sciences where a narrower, more specified system is studied, futurology concerns a much bigger and more complex world system. The methodology and knowledge are much less proven than in natural science and social sciences like sociology and economics. There is a debate as to whether this discipline is an art or science, and it is sometimes described as pseudoscience ; [ 5 ] [ 6 ] nevertheless, the Association of Professional Futurists was formed in 2002, [ 7 ] developing a Foresight Competency Model in 2017, [ 8 ] and it is now possible to study it academically, for example at the FU Berlin in their master's course.

[ 9 ] To encourage inclusive and cross-disciplinary discussions about futures studies, UNESCO declared December 2 as World Futures Day.

[ 10 ] Overview [ edit ] Futurology is an interdisciplinary field that aggregates and analyzes trends, with both lay and professional methods, to compose possible futures. It includes analyzing the sources, patterns, and causes of change and stability in an attempt to develop foresight. Around the world the field is variously referred to as futures studies , futures research, strategic foresight , futuristics , futures thinking , [ 11 ] futuring , and futurology . Futures studies and strategic foresight are the academic field's most commonly used terms in the English-speaking world.

[ 12 ] Foresight was the original term and was first used in this sense by H. G. Wells in 1932.

[ 13 ] "Futurology" is a term common in encyclopedias, though it is used almost exclusively by nonpractitioners today, at least in the English-speaking world. "Futurology" is defined as the "study of the future".

[ 14 ] The term was coined by German professor Ossip K. Flechtheim in the mid-1940s, who proposed it as a new branch of knowledge that would include a new science of probability . This term has fallen from favor in recent decades because modern practitioners stress the importance of alternative, plausible, preferable and plural futures, rather than one monolithic future, and the limitations of prediction and probability, versus the creation of possible and preferable futures.

[ 15 ] Three factors usually distinguish futures studies from the research conducted by other disciplines (although all of these disciplines overlap, to differing degrees). First, futures studies often examines trends to compose possible, probable, and preferable futures along with the role "wild cards" can play on future scenarios. Second, futures studies typically attempts to gain a holistic or systemic view based on insights from a range of different disciplines, generally focusing on the STEEP [ 16 ] categories of Social, Technological, Economic, Environmental and Political. Third, futures studies challenges and unpacks the assumptions behind dominant and contending views of the future. The future thus is not empty but fraught with hidden assumptions. For example, many people expect the collapse of the Earth's ecosystem in the near future, while others believe the current ecosystem will survive indefinitely. A foresight approach would seek to analyze and highlight the assumptions underpinning such views.

As a field, futures studies expands on the research component, by emphasizing the communication of a strategy and the actionable steps needed to implement the plan or plans leading to the preferable future. It is in this regard, that futures studies evolves from an academic exercise to a more traditional business-like practice, looking to better prepare organizations for the future.

Futures studies does not generally focus on short term predictions such as interest rates over the next business cycle , or of managers or investors with short-term time horizons. Most strategic planning, which develops goals and objectives with time horizons of one to three years, is also not considered futures. Plans and strategies with longer time horizons that specifically attempt to anticipate possible future events are definitely part of the field. Learning about medium and long-term developments may at times be observed from their early signs.

[ 17 ] As a rule, futures studies is generally concerned with changes of transformative impact, rather than those of an incremental or narrow scope.

The futures field also excludes those who make future predictions through professed supernatural means.

To complete a futures study, a domain is selected for examination. The domain is the main idea of the project, or what the outcome of the project seeks to determine. Domains can have a strategic or exploratory focus and must narrow down the scope of the research. It examines what will, and more importantly, will not be discussed in the research.
Futures practitioners study trends focusing on STEEP (Social, Technological, Economic, Environments and Political) baselines. Baseline exploration examine current STEEP environments to determine normal trends, called baselines. Next, practitioners use scenarios to explore different futures outcomes. Scenarios examine how the future can be different.
1. Collapse Scenarios seek to answer: What happens if the STEEP baselines fall into ruin and no longer exist? How will that impact STEEP categories?
2. Transformation Scenarios: explore futures with the baseline of society transiting to a "new" state. How are the STEEP categories effected if society has a whole new structure?
3. New Equilibrium: examines an entire change to the structure of the domain. What happens if the baseline changes to a "new" baseline within the same structure of society?

[ 18 ] History [ edit ] Origins [ edit ] The original visualization of the Tableau Economique by Quesnay , 1759 Johan Galtung and Sohail Inayatullah argue that the search for grand patterns goes all the way back to Sima Qian (145–90 BC) and Ibn Khaldun (1332–1406).

[ 19 ] Early western examples include Sir Thomas More 's Utopia (1516) in which a future society has overcome poverty and misery.

[ 20 ] Advances in mathematics in the 17th century prompted attempts to calculate statistical and probabilistic concepts.

Objectivity became linked to knowledge that could be expressed in numerical data. In 18th century Britain, investors established mathematical formulas to assess the future value of an asset . In 1758 the French economist François Quesnay proceeded to establish a quantitative model of the entire economy, known as the Tableau Economique , so that future production could be planned. Meanwhile, Anne Robert Jacques Turgot first articulated the law of diminishing returns . In 1793 the Chinese bureaucrat Hong Liangji forecasted future population growth .

[ 21 ] The Industrial Revolution was on the verge of spreading across the European continent, when in 1798 Thomas Malthus published An essay on the principle of Population as it affects the Future Improvement of Society . Malthus questioned optimistic utopias and theories of progress . Malthus' fear about the survival of the human race is regarded as an early European dystopia .

[ 22 ] Starting in the 1830s, Auguste Comte developed theories of social evolution and claimed that metapatterns could be discerned in social change.

[ 23 ] In the 1870s Herbert Spencer blended Compte's theories with Charles Darwin 's biological evolution theory .

Social Darwinism became popular in Europe and the USA. By the late 19th century, the belief in human progress and the triumph of scientific invention prevailed and science fiction became a popular future narrative. In 1888 William Morris published News from Nowhere , in which he theorized about how working time could be reduced.

[ 24 ] Early 20th century [ edit ] Title page of Wells's The War That Will End War (1914) The British H. G. Wells established the genre of "true science fiction" at the turn of the century. Well's works were supposedly based on sound scientific knowledge. Wells became a forerunner of social and technological forecasting. A series of techno-optimistic newspaper articles and books were published between 1890 and 1914 in the US and Europe.

[ 25 ] After World War I the Italian Futurism movement led by Filippo Tommaso Marinetti glorified modernity . Soviet futurists, such as Vladimir Mayakovsky , David Burliuk , and Vasily Kamensky struggled against official communist cultural policy throughout the 20th century. In Japan, futurists gained traction after World War I by denouncing the Meiji era and glorifying speed and technological progress.

[ 26 ] With the end of World War I interest in statistical forecasting intensified.

[ 27 ] In statistics, a forecast is a calculation of a future event's magnitude or probability . Forecasting calculates the future, while an estimate attempts to establish the value of an existing quantity .

[ 28 ] In the United States, President Hoover established a Research Committee on Social Trends in 1929 headed by William F. Ogburn . Past statistics were used to chart trends and project those trends into the future.

Planning became part of the political decision-making process after World War II as capitalist and communist governments across the globe produced predictive forecasts.

[ 27 ] The RAND Corporation was founded in 1945 to assist the US military with post-war planning. The long-term planning of military and industrial Cold War efforts peaked in the 1960s when peace research emerged as a counter-movement [ 29 ] and the positivist idea of "the one predictable future" was called into question.

[ 30 ] 1960s futures research [ edit ] In 1954 Robert Jungk published a critique of the US and the supposed colonization of the future in Tomorrow is already Here .

Fred L. Polak published Images of the Future in 1961, it has become a classic text on imagining alternative futures.

[ 31 ] In the 1960s, human-centered methods of future studies were developed in Europe by Bertrand de Jouvenel and Johan Galtung . The positivist idea of a single future was challenged by scientists such as Thomas Kuhn , Karl Popper , and Jürgen Habermas .

[ 32 ] Future studies established itself as an academic field when social scientists began to question positivism as a plausible theory of knowledge and instead turned to pluralism . At the 1967 First international Future Research Conference" in Oslo research on urban sprawl , hunger , and education was presented. In 1968 Olaf Helmer of the RAND Corporation conceded "One begins to realize that there is a wealth of possible futures and that these possibilities can be shaped in different ways". Future studies worked on the basis that a multitude of possible futures could be estimated, forecast, and manipulated.

[ 33 ] Futures studies was developed as an empirical research field. Inspired by Herman Kahn 's publications, future studies employed techniques such as scenario planning , game theory , and computer simulations . Historians, political scientists and sociologists who engaged in critical futures studies, such as Ossip K. Flechtheim , and Johan Galtung , laid the foundations of peace and conflict studies as an academic discipline.

[ 34 ] The international academic dialogue on futures studies became institutionalized in the form of the World Futures Studies Federation (WFSF), founded in 1967. The first doctoral program on the Study of the Future, was founded in 1969 at the University of Massachusetts by Christopher Dede and Billy Rojas. Dede also founded a master's degree program in 1975 at the University of Houston–Clear Lake . In 1976, the M.A. Program in Public Policy in Alternative Futures at the University of Hawaii at Manoa was established.

[ 35 ] Forecasting further development [ edit ] Alvin & Heidi Toffler 's bestseller Future Shock in 1970 generated mainstream attention for futures studies on the post-industrial economy . It popularized the metaphor of waves to describe the economic and social changes the United States was experiencing. The authors identified the first wave as agricultural society , the second wave as industrial society and the nascent third wave as information society .

[ 36 ] In the 1970s, future studies focused less on Cold War scenarios and instead grappled on the impact of accelerated globalization . Pioneers of global future studies include Pierre Wack of Royal Dutch Shell , the Interfuture group at the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) and the Club of Rome . The Club of Rome challenged the political status quo in 1972 with the report The Limits to Growth by putting computer simulations of economic growth alongside projections of population growth .

[ 37 ] World3 Model Standard Run as shown in The Limits to Growth The 1972 report The Limits to Growth established environmental degradation firmly on the political agenda. The environmental movement demanded of industry and policymakers to consider long-term implications when planning and investing in power plants and infrastructure.

[ 38 ] The 1990s saw a surge in futures studies in preparation for the United Nations' Millennium Development Goals , which were adopted in 2000 as international development goals for the year 2015. Throughout the 1990s large technology foresight programs were launched which informed national and regional strategies on science, technology and innovation .

[ 39 ] Prior to the 1990s foresight was rarely used to describe future studies, futurology or forecasting . Foresight prognosis relied in part on the methodologies developed by the French pioneers of prospectives research, including Bertrand de Jouvenel . Foresight practitioners attempted to gather and evaluate evidence based insights for the future. Foresight research output focused on identifying challenges and opportunities, which was presented as intelligence at a strategic level. Practitioners tended to focus on particular companies or economic regions, while making no attempt to plan for specific problems.

[ 40 ] In the 1990s several future studies practitioners attempted to synthesize a coherent framework for the futures studies research field, including Wendell Bell 's two-volume work, The Foundations of Futures Studies , and Ziauddin Sardar 's Rescuing all of our Futures .

[ 41 ] Forecasting and futures techniques [ edit ] Main articles: Forecasting and Futures techniques Futures techniques or methodologies may be viewed as "frameworks for making sense of data generated by structured processes to think about the future".

[ 42 ] There is no single set of methods that are appropriate for all futures research. Different futures researchers intentionally or unintentionally promote use of favored techniques over a more structured approach. Selection of methods for use on futures research projects has so far been dominated by the intuition and insight of practitioners; but can better identify a balanced selection of techniques via acknowledgement of foresight as a process together with familiarity with the fundamental attributes of most commonly used methods.

[ 43 ] Futurology is sometimes described by scientists as a pseudoscience , [ 5 ] [ 6 ] as it often deals with speculative scenarios and long-term predictions that can be difficult to test using traditional scientific methods.

Futurists use a diverse range of forecasting and foresight methods including: Framework Foresight Prediction markets Causal layered analysis (CLA) Environmental scanning Horizon scanning Scenario method Education and Learning [ 44 ] Delphi method , including real-time Delphi Future history Monitoring Backcasting (eco-history) Cross-impact analysis Futures workshops Three Horizons (3H) [ 45 ] Seeds of Good Anthropocenes [ 46 ] Anticipatory action learning [ 47 ] Predictive analytics Failure mode and effects analysis Futures wheel Technology roadmapping Social network analysis Systems engineering Trend analysis Morphological analysis Technology forecasting Theory U Future management [ edit ] The aim of an executive officer when engaging in future management is to assist people and organizations to comprehend the future. Executive officers who work for a business organization will want to understand the future better than the competitors of their employer. Therefore future management is a systematic process and results in a leading edge.

[ 48 ] Alternative possible futures [ edit ] Futurists use scenarios to map alternative possible futures. Scenario planning is a structured examination of a variety of hypothetical futures. In the 21st century alternative possible future planning has been a powerful tool for understanding social-ecological systems because the future is uncertain. Questions are posed to scientists, business owners, government officials, landowners, and nonprofit representatives to establish a development plan for an urban area, region, industry, or economy.

[ 49 ] However, alternative possible futures loose credibility, should they be entirely utopian or dystopian. One of those stages involves the study of emerging issues, such as megatrends , trends and weak signals . Megatrends are major long-term phenomena that change slowly, are often interlinked and cannot be transformed in an instant.

[ 50 ] Many corporations use futurists as part of their risk management strategy, for horizon scanning and emerging issues analysis, and to identify wild cards .

[ 51 ] Understanding a range of possibilities can enhance the recognition of opportunities and threats. Every successful and unsuccessful business engages in futuring to some degree—for example in research and development, innovation and market research, anticipating competitor behavior and so on.

[ 52 ] [ 53 ] Role-playing is another way that possible futures can be collectively explored, as in the research lab Civilization's Waiting Room .

[ 54 ] Weak signals, the future sign and wild cards [ edit ] In futures research "weak signals" may be understood as advanced, noisy and socially situated indicators of change in trends and systems that constitute raw informational material for enabling anticipatory action. There is some confusion about the definition of weak signal by various researchers and consultants. Sometimes it is referred as future oriented information, sometimes more like emerging issues. The confusion has been partly clarified with the concept 'the future sign', by separating signal, issue and interpretation of the future sign.

[ 55 ] A weak signal can be an early indicator of coming change, and an example might also help clarify the confusion. On May 27, 2012, hundreds of people gathered for a "Take the Flour Back" demonstration at Rothamsted Research in Harpenden, UK, to oppose a publicly funded trial of genetically modified wheat. This was a weak signal for a broader shift in consumer sentiment against genetically modified foods. When Whole Foods mandated the labeling of GMOs in 2013, this non-GMO idea had already become a trend and was about to be a topic of mainstream awareness.

"Wild cards" refer to low-probability and high-impact events "that happen quickly" and "have huge sweeping consequences", and materialize too quickly for social systems to effectively respond.

[ 56 ] Elina Hiltunen notes that wild cards are not new, though they have become more prevalent.

[ 57 ] One reason for this may be the increasingly fast pace of change.

[ 58 ] Oliver Markley proposed four types of wild cards: [ 59 ] Type I Wild Card: low probability, high impact, high credibility Type II Wild Card: high probability, high impact, low credibility Type III Wild Card: high probability, high impact, disputed credibility Type IV Wild Card: high probability, high impact, high credibility He posits that it is important to track the emergence of "Type II Wild Cards" that have a high probability of occurring, but low credibility that it will happen. This focus is especially important to note because it is often difficult to persuade people to accept something they do not believe is happening, until they see the wild card. An example is climate change. This hypothesis has gone from Type I (high impact and high credibility, but low probability where science was accepted and thought unlikely to happen) to Type II (high probability, high impact, but low credibility as policy makers and lobbyists push back against the science), to Type III (high probability, high impact, disputed credibility) — at least for most people: There are still some who probably will not accept the science until the Greenland ice sheet has completely melted and sea-level has risen the seven meters estimated rise.

This concept may be embedded in standard foresight projects and introduced into anticipatory decision-making activity in order to increase the ability of social groups adapt to surprises arising in turbulent business environments. Such sudden and unique incidents might constitute turning points in the evolution of a certain trend or system. Wild cards may or may not be announced by weak signals, which are incomplete and fragmented data from which relevant foresight information might be inferred. Sometimes, mistakenly, wild cards and weak signals are considered as synonyms, which they are not.

[ 60 ] One of the most often cited examples of a wild card event in recent history is 9/11. Nothing had happened in the past that could point to such a possibility and yet it had a huge impact on everyday life in the United States, from simple tasks like how to travel via airplane to deeper cultural values. Wild card events might also be natural disasters, such as Hurricane Katrina , which can force the relocation of huge populations and wipe out entire crops or completely disrupt the supply chain of many businesses. Although wild card events cannot be predicted, after they occur it is often easy to reflect back and convincingly explain why they happened.

Near-term predictions [ edit ] A long-running tradition in various cultures, and especially in the media, involves various spokespersons making predictions for the upcoming year at the beginning of the year. These predictions are thought-provokers, which sometimes base themselves on current trends in culture (music, movies, fashion, politics). Sometimes these predictions are hopeful guesses about what major events might take place over the course of the next year.

When predicted events fail to take place, the authors of the predictions may state that misinterpretation of the "signs" and omens that they evidently managed to observe themselves.

Marketers have increasingly started to embrace futures studies, in an effort to benefit from an increasingly competitive marketplace with fast production cycles .

Trend analysis and forecasting [ edit ] Megatrends [ edit ] Trends come in different sizes. A megatrend extends over many generations, and in cases of climate, megatrends can cover periods prior to human existence. They describe complex interactions between many factors. The increase in population from the palaeolithic period to the present provides an example. Megatrends are likely to produce greater change than any previous one, because technology is causing trends to unfold at an accelerating pace.

[ 61 ] The concept was popularized by the 1982 book Megatrends by futurist John Naisbitt .

[ 62 ] Potential trends [ edit ] Possible new trends grow from innovations, projects, beliefs or actions and activism that have the potential to grow and eventually go mainstream in the future.

Potential future scenarios [ edit ] Among potential future scenarios, s-risks (short for risks of astronomical suffering) highlight the importance of considering outcomes where advanced technologies or large-scale systems result in immense suffering. These risks may arise from unintended consequences, such as poorly aligned artificial intelligence, or deliberate actions, like malicious misuse of technology. Addressing s-risks involves ethical foresight and robust frameworks to prevent scenarios where suffering could persist or multiply across vast scales, including in space exploration or simulated realities . This focus expands the scope of future studies, emphasizing not just survival but the quality of life in possible futures.

[ 63 ] Branching trends [ edit ] Very often, trends relate to one another the same way as a tree-trunk relates to branches and twigs. For example, a well-documented movement toward equality between men and women might represent a branch trend. The trend toward reducing differences in the salaries of men and women in the Western world could form a twig on that branch.

Life cycle of a trend [ edit ] Understanding the technology adoption cycle helps futurists monitor trend development. Trends start as weak signals by small mentions in fringe media outlets, discussion conversations or blog posts, often by innovators. As these ideas, projects, beliefs or technologies gain acceptance, they move into the phase of early adopters.
In the beginning of a trend's development, it is difficult to tell if it will become a significant trend that creates changes or merely a trendy fad that fades into forgotten history. Trends will emerge as initially unconnected dots but eventually coalesce into persistent change.

[ 64 ] Consumption trend development has changed significantly in the 19th century and throughout the 20th century because developed countries are now rules by a meritocracy , not the aristocracy . Consumers who are able to pay for a product that is available for purchase do not necessarily take into account the lifestyle choices of high income earners. Therefore trend may bubble up or trickle down. However, when it comes to the diffusion of innovation and technology adoption life cycle various tools are used. Including meme theory and tipping point .

[ 65 ] Life cycle of technologies [ edit ] Gartner hype cycle used to visualize technological life stages of maturity, adoption, and social application Gartner created their hype cycle to illustrate the phases a technology moves through as it grows from research and development to mainstream adoption. The unrealistic expectations and subsequent disillusionment that virtual reality experienced in the 1990s and early 2000s is an example of the middle phases encountered before a technology can begin to be integrated into society.

[ 66 ] Education [ edit ] Education in the field of futures studies has taken place for some time. Beginning in the United States in the 1960s, it has since developed in many different countries. Futures education encourages the use of concepts, tools and processes that allow students to think long-term, consequentially, and imaginatively. It generally helps students to: conceptualize more just and sustainable human and planetary futures.

develop knowledge and skills of methods and tools used to help people understand, map, and influence the future by exploring probable and preferred futures.

understand the dynamics and influence that human, social and ecological systems have on alternative futures.

conscientize responsibility and action on the part of students toward creating better futures.

Thorough documentation of the history of futures education exists, for example in the work of Richard A. Slaughter (2004), [ 67 ] David Hicks, Ivana Milojević [ 68 ] to name a few.

While futures studies remains a relatively new academic tradition, numerous tertiary institutions around the world teach it. These vary from small programs, or universities with just one or two classes, to programs that offer certificates and incorporate futures studies into other degrees, (for example in planning , business, environmental studies, economics, development studies, science and technology studies). Various formal Masters-level programs exist on six continents. Finally, doctoral dissertations around the world have incorporated futures studies (see e.g. Rohrbeck, 2010; [ 69 ] von der Gracht, 2008; [ 70 ] Hines, 2012 [ 71 ] ). A recent survey documented approximately 50 cases of futures studies at the tertiary level.

[ 72 ] A Futures Studies program is offered at Tamkang University , Taiwan. Futures Studies is a required course at the undergraduate level, with between three and five thousand students taking classes on an annual basis. Housed in the Graduate Institute of Futures Studies is an MA Program. Only ten students are accepted annually in the program. Associated with the program is the Journal of Futures Studies .

[ 73 ] The longest running Future Studies program in North America was established in 1975 at the University of Houston–Clear Lake .

[ 74 ] It moved to the University of Houston in 2007 and renamed the degree to Foresight. The program was established on the belief that if history is studied and taught in an academic setting, then so should the future. Its mission is to prepare professional futurists. The curriculum incorporates a blend of the essential theory, a framework and methods for doing the work, and a focus on application for clients in business, government, nonprofits, and society in general.

[ 75 ] As of 2003, over 40 tertiary education establishments around the world were delivering one or more courses in futures studies. The World Futures Studies Federation [ 76 ] has a comprehensive survey of global futures programs and courses. The Acceleration Studies Foundation maintains an annotated list of primary and secondary graduate futures studies programs.

[ 77 ] A MA Program in Futures Studies has been offered at Free University of Berlin since 2010.

[ 78 ] A MSocSc and PhD program in Futures Studies is offered at the University of Turku , Finland.

[ 79 ] The University of Stellenbosch Business School in South Africa offers a PGDip in Future Studies as well as a MPhil in Future Studies degree.

[ 80 ] Applications of foresight and specific fields [ edit ] General applicability and use of foresight products [ edit ] Several corporations and government agencies use foresight products to both better understand potential risks and prepare for potential opportunities as an anticipatory approach. Several government agencies publish material for internal stakeholders as well as make that material available to broader public. Examples of this include the US Congressional Budget Office long term budget projections, [ 81 ] the National Intelligence Center, [ 82 ] and the United Kingdom Government Office for Science.

[ 83 ] Much of this material is used by policy makers to inform policy decisions and government agencies to develop long-term plan. Several corporations, particularly those with long product development lifecycles, use foresight and future studies products and practitioners in the development of their business strategies. The Shell Corporation is one such entity.

[ 84 ] Foresight professionals and their tools are increasingly being used in both the private and public areas to help leaders deal with an increasingly complex and interconnected world.

Imperial cycles and world order [ edit ] Imperial cycles represent an "expanding pulsation" of "mathematically describable" macro-historic trend.

[ 85 ] Chinese philosopher Kang Youwei and French demographer Georges Vacher de Lapouge stressed in the late 19th century that the trend cannot proceed indefinitely on the finite surface of the globe. The trend is bound to culminate in a world empire. Kang Youwei predicted that the matter will be decided in a contest between Washington and Berlin; Vacher de Lapouge foresaw this contest as being between the United States and Russia and wagered the odds were in the United States' favour.

[ 86 ] Both published their futures studies before H. G. Wells introduced the science of future in his Anticipations (1901).

Four later anthropologists—Hornell Hart, Raoul Naroll , Louis Morano, and Robert Carneiro —researched the expanding imperial cycles. They reached the same conclusion that a world empire is not only pre-determined but close at hand and attempted to estimate the time of its appearance.

[ 87 ] Education [ edit ] As foresight has expanded to include a broader range of social concerns all levels and types of education have been addressed, including formal and informal education. Many countries are beginning to implement Foresight in their Education policy. A few programs are listed below: Finland's FinnSight 2015 [ 88 ] – Implementation began in 2006 and though at the time was not referred to as "Foresight" they tend to display the characteristics of a foresight program.

Singapore's Ministry of Education Master plan for Information Technology in Education [ 89 ] – This third Masterplan continues what was built on in the 1st and 2nd plans to transform learning environments to equip students to compete in a knowledge economy .

The World Future Society, founded in 1966, is the largest and longest-running community of futurists in the world. WFS established and built futurism from the ground up—through publications, global summits, and advisory roles to world leaders in business and government.

[ 90 ] By the early 2000s, educators began to independently institute futures studies (sometimes referred to as futures thinking) lessons in K-12 classroom environments.

[ 91 ] To meet the need, non-profit futures organizations designed curriculum plans to supply educators with materials on the topic. Many of the curriculum plans were developed to meet common core standards . Futures studies education methods for youth typically include age-appropriate collaborative activities, games, systems thinking and scenario building exercises.

[ 92 ] There are several organizations devoted to furthering the advancement of Foresight and Future Studies worldwide.

Teach the Future emphasizes foresight educational practices appropriate for K-12 schools. Warmer Sun Education is a global online learning community for K-12 students and their parents to learn about exponential progress , emerging technologies and their applications and exploring possible pathways to solve humanity's grand challenges . The University of Houston has a Master's (MS) level graduate program through the College of Technology as well as a certificate program for those interested in advanced studies. The Department of Political Science and College of Social Sciences at the University of Hawaii Manoa has the Hawaii Research Center for Future Studies which offers a Master's (MA) in addition to a Doctorate (PhD).

Science fiction [ edit ] Wendell Bell and Ed Cornish acknowledge science fiction as a catalyst to future studies, conjuring up visions of tomorrow.

[ 93 ] Science fiction's potential to provide an "imaginative social vision" is its contribution to futures studies and public perspective. Productive sci-fi presents plausible, normative scenarios.

[ 93 ] Jim Dator attributes the foundational concepts of "images of the future" to Wendell Bell, for clarifying Fred Polak's concept in Images of the Future, as it applies to futures studies.

[ 94 ] [ 95 ] Similar to futures studies' scenarios thinking, empirically supported visions of the future are a window into what the future could be. However, unlike in futures studies, most science fiction works present a single alternative, unless the narrative deals with multiple timelines or alternative realities, such as in the works of Philip K. Dick , and a multitude of small and big screen works.

[ 96 ] Pamela Sargent states, "Science fiction reflects attitudes typical of this century." She gives a brief history of impactful sci-fi publications, like The Foundation Trilogy by Isaac Asimov , and Starship Troopers by Robert A. Heinlein .

[ 97 ] Alternate perspectives validate sci-fi as part of the fuzzy "images of the future".

[ 95 ] Brian David Johnson is a futurist and author who uses science fiction to help build the future. He has been a futurist at Intel, and is now the resident futurist at Arizona State University. "His work is called 'future casting'—using ethnographic field studies, technology research, trend data, and even science fiction to create a pragmatic vision of consumers and computing." Brian David Johnson has developed a practical guide to using science fiction as a tool for futures studies.

Science fiction prototyping combines the past with the present, including interviews with notable science fiction authors to provide the tools needed to "design the future with science fiction." Science Fiction Prototyping has five parts: [ 98 ] Pick your science concept and build an imaginative world The scientific inflection point The consequences, for better, or worse, or both, of the science or technology on the people and your world The human inflection point Reflection, what did we learn?

"A full Science Fiction Prototyping (SFP) is 6–12 pages long, with a popular structure being; an introduction, background work, the fictional story (the bulk of the SFP), a short summary and a summary (reflection). Most often science fiction prototypes extrapolate current science forward and, therefore, include a set of references at the end." [ 98 ] Ian Miles reviews The New Encyclopedia of Science Fiction , identifying ways Science Fiction and Futures Studies "cross-fertilize, as well as the ways in which they differ distinctly." Science Fiction cannot be simply considered fictionalized Futures Studies. It may have aims other than foresight or "prediction, and be no more concerned with shaping the future than any other genre of literature." [ 99 ] It is not to be understood as an explicit pillar of futures studies, due to its inconsistency of integrated futures research. Additionally, Dennis Livingston, a literature and Futures journal critic says, "The depiction of truly alternative societies has not been one of science fiction's strong points, especially" preferred, normative envisages.

[ 100 ] The strengths of the genre as a form of futurist thinking are discussed by Tom Lombardo, who argues that select science fiction "combines a highly detailed and concrete level of realism with theoretical speculation on the future", "addresses all the main dimensions of the future and synthesizes all these dimensions into integrative visions of the future", and "reflects contemporary and futurist thinking", therefore it "can be viewed as the mythology of the future." [ 101 ] It is notable that although there are no hard limits on horizons in future studies and foresight efforts, typical future horizons explored are within the realm of the practical and do not span more than a few decades.

[ 102 ] Nevertheless, there are hard science fiction works that can be applicable as visioning exercises that span longer periods of time when the topic is of a significant time scale, such as is in the case of Kim Stanley Robinson 's Mars trilogy , which deals with the terraforming of Mars and extends two centuries forward through the early 23rd century.

[ 103 ] In fact, there is some overlap between science fiction writers and professional futurists such as in the case of David Brin .

[ 104 ] [ 105 ] Arguably, the work of science fiction authors has seeded many ideas that have later been developed (be it technological or social in nature)—from early works of Jules Verne and H.G. Wells to the later Arthur C. Clarke and William Gibson .

[ 106 ] [ 107 ] Beyond literary works, futures studies and futurists have influenced film and TV works. The 2002 movie adaptation of Philip K. Dick's short story, Minority Report , had a group of consultants to build a realistic vision of the future, including futurist Peter Schwartz.

[ 108 ] TV shows such as HBO's Westworld and Channel 4/Netflix's Black Mirror follow many of the rules of futures studies to build the world, the scenery and storytelling in a way futurists would in experiential scenarios and works.

[ 109 ] [ 110 ] Science Fiction novels for Futurists: William Gibson, Neuromancer , Ace Books, 1984. (Pioneering cyberpunk novel) Kim Stanley Robinson, Red Mars , Spectra, 1993. (Story on the founding a colony on Mars) Bruce Sterling, Heavy Weather , Bantam, 1994. (Story about a world with drastically altered climate and weather) Iain Banks' Culture novels (Space operas in distance future with thoughtful treatments of advanced AI) Government agencies [ edit ] Several governments have formalized strategic foresight agencies to encourage long range strategic societal planning, with most notable are the governments of Singapore, Finland, and the United Arab Emirates. Other governments with strategic foresight agencies include Canada's Policy Horizons Canada and the Malaysia's Malaysian Foresight Institute .

The Singapore government's Centre for Strategic Futures (CSF) is part of the Strategy Group within the Prime Minister's Office. Their mission is to position the Singapore government to navigate emerging strategic challenges and harness potential opportunities.

[ 111 ] Singapore's early formal efforts in strategic foresight began in 1991 with the establishment of the Risk Detection and Scenario Planning Office in the Ministry of Defence.

[ 112 ] In addition to the CSF, the Singapore government has established the Strategic Futures Network, which brings together deputy secretary-level officers and foresight units across the government to discuss emerging trends that may have implications for Singapore.

[ 112 ] Since the 1990s, Finland has integrated strategic foresight within the parliament and Prime Minister's Office.

[ 113 ] The government is required to present a "Report of the Future" each parliamentary term for review by the parliamentary Committee for the Future. Led by the Prime Minister's Office, the Government Foresight Group coordinates the government's foresight efforts.

[ 113 ] Futures research is supported by the Finnish Society for Futures Studies (established in 1980), the Finland Futures Research Centre (established in 1992), and the Finland Futures Academy (established in 1998) in coordination with foresight units in various government agencies.

[ 113 ] The annual Dubai Future Forum conference (2024) In the United Arab Emirates, Sheikh Mohammed bin Rashid, Vice President and Ruler of Dubai, announced in September 2016 that all government ministries were to appoint Directors of Future Planning. Sheikh Mohammed described the UAE Strategy for the Future as an "integrated strategy to forecast our nation's future, aiming to anticipate challenges and seize opportunities".

[ 114 ] The Ministry of Cabinet Affairs and Future (MOCAF) is mandated with crafting the UAE Strategy for the Future and is responsible for the portfolio of the future of UAE.

[ 115 ] Since 2002, the UAE has hosted the Dubai Future Forum at the Museum of the Future , which it claims is the largest gathering of futurists in the world.

[ 116 ] In 2018, the United States General Accountability Office (GAO) created the Center for Strategic Foresight to enhance its ability to "serve as the agency's principal hub for identifying, monitoring, and analyzing emerging issues facing policymakers." The center is composed of non-resident Fellows who are considered leading experts in foresight, planning and future thinking.

[ 117 ] In September 2019 they hosted a conference on space policy and "deep fake" synthetic media to manipulate online and real-world interactions.

[ 118 ] Risk analysis and management [ edit ] Main article: Risk management 1932 Shell advertisement poster by the British surrealist painter Paul Nash Foresight is a framework or lens which could be used in risk analysis and management in a medium- to long-term time range. A typical formal foresight project would identify key drivers and uncertainties relevant to the scope of analysis.

[ 119 ] One classic example of such work was how foresight work at the Royal Dutch Shell international oil company led to envision the turbulent oil prices of the 1970s as a possibility and better embed this into company planning. Yet the practice at Shell focuses on stretching the company's thinking rather than in making predictions. Its planning is meant to link and embed scenarios in "organizational processes such as strategy making, innovation, risk management, public affairs, and leadership development." [ 120 ] Risks may arise from the development and adoption of emerging technologies and/or social change . Special interest lies on hypothetical future events that have the potential to damage human well-being on a global scale posing a global catastrophic risk .

[ 121 ] Such events may cripple or destroy modern civilization or, in the case of existential risks, even cause human extinction .

[ 122 ] Potential global catastrophic risks include but are not limited to climate change , AI takeover , nanotechnology , nuclear warfare , total war , and pandemics . The aim of a professional futurist would be to identify conditions that could lead to these events to create "pragmatically feasible roads to alternative futures." [ 123 ] Futurists [ edit ] Main article: Futurist Futurists are practitioners of the foresight profession, which seeks to provide organizations and individuals with images of the future to help them prepare for contingencies and to maximize opportunities. A foresight project begins with a question that ponders the future of any given subject area, including technology, medicine, government and business. Futurists engage in environmental scanning to search for drivers of change and emerging trends that may have an effect on the focus topic. The scanning process includes reviewing social media platforms, researching already prepared reports, engaging in Delphi studies, reading articles and any other sources of relevant information and preparing and analyzing data extrapolations. Then, through one of a number of highly structured methods [ 124 ] futurists organize this information and use it to create multiple future scenarios for the topic, also known as a domain. The value of preparing many different versions of the future rather than a singular prediction is that they provide a client with the ability to prepare long-range plans that will weather and optimize a variety of contexts.

[ 125 ] Books [ edit ] APF's list of most significant futures works [ edit ] The Association for Professional Futurists recognizes the Most Significant Futures Works for the purpose of identifying and rewarding the work of foresight professionals and others whose work illuminates aspects of the future.

[ 126 ] Author Title Bertrand de Jouvenel L'Art de la conjecture (The Art of Conjecture), 2008 [ 127 ] Donella Meadows The Limits to Growth , 2008 [ 128 ] Peter Schwartz The Art of the Long View , 2008 [ 129 ] Ray Kurzweil The Age of Spiritual Machines: When Computers Exceed Human Intelligence , 2008 [ 130 ] Jerome C. Glenn & Theodore J. Gordon Futures Research Methodology Version 2.0 , 2008 [ 131 ] Jerome C. Glenn & Theodore J. Gordon The State of the Future , 2008 Jared Diamond Collapse: How Societies Choose to Fail or Succeed , 2008 [ 132 ] Richard Slaughter The Biggest Wake up Call in History , 2012 Richard Slaughter The Knowledge Base of Futures Studies , 2008 Worldwatch Institute State of the World , 2008 Nassim Nicholas Taleb The Black Swan: The Impact of the Highly Improbable , 2012 [ 133 ] Tim Jackson (economist) Prosperity Without Growth , 2012 [ 134 ] Jørgen Randers 2052: A Global Forecast for the Next Forty Years , 2013 Stroom den Haag Food for the City , 2013 Andy Hines & Peter C. Bishop Teaching About the Future , 2014 [ 135 ] James A. Dator Advancing Futures – Futures Studies in Higher Education Ziauddin Sardar Future: All that Matters , 2014 Emma Marris Rambunctious Garden: Saving Nature in a Post-Wild World , 2014 Sohail Inayatullah What Works: Case Studies in the Practice of Foresight , 2016 [ 136 ] Dougal Dixon After Man: A Zoology of the Future Other popular foresight books [ edit ] Physics of the Future: How Science Will Shape Human Destiny and Our Daily Lives by the Year 2100 ( Michio Kaku ) The Future of the Mind: The Scientific Quest to Understand, Enhance, and Empower the Mind ( Michio Kaku ) The Age of Intelligent Machines ( Ray Kurzweil ) The Singularity Is Near: When Humans Transcend Biology ( Ray Kurzweil ) Abundance: The Future Is Better Than You Think ( Peter Diamandis ) Brave New World ( Aldous Huxley ) The Next 100 Years: A Forecast for the 21st Century ( George Friedman ) Future Shock ( Alvin & Heidi Toffler ) Thinking About the Future ( Andy Hines and Peter C. Bishop ) The Third Wave ( Alvin & Heidi Toffler ) Futurewise: Six Faces of Global Change ( Patrick Dixon ) Our Final Hour ( Martin Rees ) The Revenge of Gaia ( James Lovelock ) The Skeptical Environmentalist ( Bjørn Lomborg ) Surviving 1,000 Centuries Can We Do It?

(Roger-Maurice Bonnet and Lodewijk Woltjer ) Paris in the Twentieth Century ( Jules Verne ) The Communist Manifesto ( Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels ) Homo Deus: A Brief History of Tomorrow ( Yuval Noah Harari , 2016) Warnings :  Finding Cassandras to Stop Catastrophes , Richard A. Clarke and R. P. Eddy Periodicals and journals [ edit ] European Journal of Futures Research Foresight Futures The Futurist ( World Future Society ) Futures & Foresight Science International Journal of Forecasting Journal of Futures Studies Technological Forecasting and Social Change World Futures [ 137 ] World Futures Review [ 138 ] Organizations [ edit ] Foresight professional networks [ edit ] World Future Society World Futures Studies Federation World Future Council Association of Professional Futurists The Millennium Project Dubai Future Forum Public-sector foresight organizations [ edit ] National Intelligence Council NASA Institute for Advanced Concepts Government Office for Science (United Kingdom) MiGHT – Malaysian Industry Government Group for High Technology Non-governmental foresight organizations [ edit ] RAND Corporation Hudson Institute Club of Rome Institute for the Future International Futures Forum Institute for Futures Studies Copenhagen Institute for Futures Studies Tellus Institute Global Business Network Global Scenario Group The Millennium Project The Venus Project Long Now Foundation Machine Intelligence Research Institute Strategic Foresight Group Future of Humanity Institute World Future Council (Germany) See also [ edit ] Accelerating change – Perceived increase in the rate of technological change throughout history Emerging technologies – Technologies whose development, practical applications, or both are still largely unrealized Futurism (Christianity) – Christian eschatological view Foresight (psychology) – Behavior-based backcasting & forecasting factors List of emerging technologies – New technologies actively in development Hypothetical technology – Technology that does not exist yet Intelligence assessment – Evaluation of sensitive state, military, commercial, or scientific information Near future in fiction – Popular chronological setting in cyberpunk and other science fiction genres Outline of futures studies – Overview of and topical guide to futures studies Planning – Regarding the activities required to achieve a desired goal (forethought) Post-scarcity economy – Situation in which all goods are available to all free of charge Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Post-work society – Form of society Technology forecasting – Predicting the future of technology Technological revolution – Period of rapid technological change Technological unemployment – Unemployment caused by technological change Future of Earth References [ edit ] ^ James Joseph O'Toole (2017).

"Futurology | social science" .

Encyclopedia Britannica . Retrieved 11 May 2020 .

^ "Futurology | Definition of Futurology by Lexico" .

Lexico Dictionaries | English . Archived from the original on March 25, 2020 . Retrieved 11 May 2020 .

^ Voros, Joseph (2017-02-24).

"The Futures Cone, use and history" .

The Voroscope . Retrieved 2020-07-13 .

^ "Futurology" .

Wordnet Search 3.1 . Princeton University . Retrieved 16 March 2013 .

^ a b Futurology-Oxford Dictionary . 2008.

Mainly a pseudo-science, given the complexities of social, political, economic, technological, and natural factors.

^ a b William, F. Williams (2013-12-02).

Encyclopedia of Pseudoscience: From Alien Abductions to Zone Therapy . Routledge. pp.

122– 123.

ISBN 9781135955229 .

Many scientists reject the notion of futurology being a science, while others quibble at the use of the unscholarly word 'futurology'.

^ Hines, Andy (2004). "The History and Development of the Association of Professional Futurists".

The Knowledge Base of Futures Studies .

^ Hines, Andy; Gary, Jay; Daheim, Cornelia; van der Laan, Luke (2017).

"Building foresight capacity: Toward a Foresight Competency Model" (PDF) .

World Futures Review .

9 (3): 123– 141.

doi : 10.1177/1946756717715637 .

S2CID 115261787 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2021-11-08 . Retrieved 2021-05-29 .

^ "Zukunftsforschung" .

www.ewi-psy.fu-berlin.de (in German). 2 December 2013 . Retrieved 30 October 2021 .

^ "World Futures Day | UNESCO" .

www.unesco.org . Retrieved 2022-12-12 .

^ Benedikter, Roland (2025).

"Futures thinking becomes a priority for all globalized societies" .

Discover Global Society .

3 (1): 7.

doi : 10.1007/s44282-024-00128-7 .

^ Sardar, Z. (2010) The Namesake: Futures; futures studies; futurology; futuristic; Foresight – What's in a name? Futures, 42 (3), pp. 177–184.

^ Wells, H.G. (1932) 1987. Wanted: Professors of Foresight!

Futures Research Quarterly V3N1 (Spring): p. 89-91.

^ "SCIENCE GLOSSARY" .

tripod.com . Archived from the original on 2007-05-06 . Retrieved 2007-06-05 .

^ Bishop, Peter; Hines, Andy (2012).

Teaching about the Future . Houndsmill, UK: Palgrave Macmillan.

ISBN 978-0230363496 .

^ "What is STEEP Analysis?" .

PESTLE Analysis . 2015-02-11 . Retrieved 6 March 2017 .

^ Hiltunen, Elina (2010).

Weak Signals in Organizational Futures Learning . Helsinki: Acta Universitatis oeconomicae Helsingiensis.

ISBN 978-952-60-1022-9 .

^ Hines, Andy ; Bishop, Peter C.

(2007).

Thinking about the Future: Guidelines for Strategic Foresight . Social Technologies.

ISBN 978-0978931704 .

^ Hester, Ryan (2018).

Historical Research: Theory and Methods . EDTECH. p. 113.

ISBN 9781839474187 .

^ Anderson, Janna.

"Futures Studies Timeline" .

www.elon.edu . Archived from the original (PDF) on 22 July 2016 . Retrieved 25 February 2018 .

^ Paul, Heike, ed. (2019).

Critical Terms in Futures Studies . Springer International Publishing. p. 128.

ISBN 9783030289874 .

^ Gidley, Jennifer (2017).

The Future: A Very Short Introduction . Oxford University Press. p. 37.

ISBN 9780198735281 .

^ Gidley, Jennifer (2017).

The Future: A Very Short Introduction . Oxford University Press. p. 38.

ISBN 9780198735281 .

^ Gidley, Jennifer (2017).

The Future: A Very Short Introduction . Oxford University Press. pp.

38– 39.

ISBN 9780198735281 .

^ Gidley, Jennifer (2017).

The Future: A Very Short Introduction . Oxford University Press. p. 40.

ISBN 9780198735281 .

^ Paul, Heike, ed. (2019).

Critical Terms in Futures Studies . Springer International Publishing. p. 133.

ISBN 9783030289874 .

^ a b Gidley, Jennifer (2017).

The Future: A Very Short Introduction . Oxford University Press. p. 42.

ISBN 9780198735281 .

^ Paul, Heike, ed. (2019).

Critical Terms in Futures Studies . Springer International Publishing. p. 127.

ISBN 9783030289874 .

^ Gidley, Jennifer (2017).

The Future: A Very Short Introduction . Oxford University Press. p. 43.

ISBN 9780198735281 .

^ Gidley, Jennifer (2017).

The Future: A Very Short Introduction . Oxford University Press. p. 46.

ISBN 9780198735281 .

^ Gidley, Jennifer (2017).

The Future: A Very Short Introduction . Oxford University Press. p. 51.

ISBN 9780198735281 .

^ Gidley, Jennifer (2017).

The Future: A Very Short Introduction . Oxford University Press. p. 52.

ISBN 9780198735281 .

^ Gidley, Jennifer (2017).

The Future: A Very Short Introduction . Oxford University Press. p. 54.

ISBN 9780198735281 .

^ Brassett, Jamie; O'Reilly, John, eds. (2021).

A Creative Philosophy of Anticipation . Taylor & Francis. p. 129.

ISBN 9781000376081 .

^ Hester, Ryan (2018).

Historical Research: Theory and Methods . EDTECH. pp.

115– 116.

ISBN 9781839474187 .

^ McAule, John; Duberley, Joanne; Johnson, Phil (2007).

Organization Theory: Challenges and Perspectives . Prentice Hall/Financial Times. p. 210.

ISBN 9780273687740 .

^ Brassett, Jamie; O'Reilly, John, eds. (2021).

A Creative Philosophy of Anticipation . Taylor & Francis. pp.

129– 130.

ISBN 9781000376081 .

^ Miles, Ian; Saritas, Ozcan; Sokolov, Alexander, eds. (2016).

Foresight for Science, Technology and Innovation . Springer International Publishing. pp.

1– 2.

ISBN 9783319325743 .

^ Miles, Ian; Saritas, Ozcan; Sokolov, Alexander, eds. (2016).

Foresight for Science, Technology and Innovation . Springer International Publishing. p. 2.

ISBN 9783319325743 .

^ Miles, Ian; Saritas, Ozcan; Sokolov, Alexander, eds. (2016).

Foresight for Science, Technology and Innovation . Springer International Publishing. p. 4.

ISBN 9783319325743 .

^ Hester, Ryan (2018).

Historical Research: Theory and Methods . EDTECH. p. 116.

ISBN 9781839474187 .

^ Conway, Maree.

"An Overview of Foresight Methodologies" (PDF) .

S2CID 37706239 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 26 February 2018 . Retrieved 25 February 2018 .

^ Popper, Rafael (2008). "How are foresight methods selected?".

Foresight .

10 (6): 62– 89.

doi : 10.1108/14636680810918586 .

^ "World Future Society" .

World Future Society . Retrieved 2 May 2018 .

^ "Future Stewards" .

futurestewards.com . Retrieved 2024-10-03 .

^ Pivo, Dylan.

"Seeds of Good Anthropocenes – identifying socially-ecological bright spots that could grow & connect to produce a better anthropocene" .

Seeds of Good Anthropocenes . Retrieved 2024-10-03 .

^ Inayatullah, Sohail (2006-08-01).

"Anticipatory action learning: Theory and practice" .

Futures . Futures studies and action research.

38 (6): 656– 666.

doi : 10.1016/j.futures.2005.10.003 .

ISSN 0016-3287 .

^ Pero Micic (2010).

The Five Futures Glasses: How to See and Understand More of the Future with the Eltville Model . Palgrave Macmillan UK. p. 14.

ISBN 9780230275317 .

^ Marissa F. McBride; Kathleen F. Lambert; Emily S. Huff; Kathleen A. Theoharides; Patrick Field; Jonathan R. Thompson (2017).

"Increasing the effectiveness of participatory scenario development through codesign" (PDF) . Harvard Forest.

^ "Megatrends" . Sitra . Retrieved 2020-07-13 .

^ A sample presentation on risk management ^ Rohrbeck, Rene (2010) Corporate Foresight: Towards a Maturity Model for the Future Orientation of a Firm , Springer Series: Contributions to Management Science, Heidelberg and New York, ISBN 978-3-7908-2625-8 ^ Rohrbeck, R. H.G. Gemuenden (2010) Corporate Foresight: Its Three Roles in Enhancing the Innovation Capacity of a Firm" Technological Forecasting and Social Change ^ Erslev, Malthe Stavning (2022-10-18).

"A Mimetic Method: Rendering Artificial Intelligence Imaginaries through Enactment" .

A Peer-Reviewed Journal About .

11 (1): 34– 49.

doi : 10.7146/aprja.v11i1.134305 .

ISSN 2245-7755 .

S2CID 253177355 .

^ Hiltunen, Elina (2008). "The future sign and its three dimensions".

Futures .

40 (3): 247– 260.

doi : 10.1016/j.futures.2007.08.021 .

^ Hiltunen, Elina (November 2006). "Was it Wild Card or Just Our Blindness to Gradual Change?".

Journal of Futures Studies .

11 (2): 61– 74.

^ Petersen (1999). "Out of the Blue: How to Anticipate Big Future Surprises (as referenced in Hiltunen, Elina, Was it Wild Card or Just Our Blindness to Gradual Change?)".

Journal of Futures Studies .

11 (2): 61– 74.

^ "Wild Cards: The Nature of Big Future Surprises « Kurzweil" . Retrieved 2020-07-13 .

^ Markley, Oliver (2011). "A new methodology for anticipating STEEP surprises".

Technological Forecasting & Social Change . 78(2011) (6): 1079– 1097.

doi : 10.1016/j.techfore.2011.01.008 .

S2CID 53690126 .

^ differences of weak signals and wild cards ^ Norton, Leslie P. (Dec 27, 2019). "The 2020s Will Bring Massive Change. Why Society Might Not Be Ready".

Barron's . (Online), New York.

^ Naisbitt, John (1982).

Megatrends: Ten New Directions Transforming Our Lives. Warner Books . Warner Communications.

ISBN 978-0-446-35681-7 .

^ "A Typology of S-Risks" .

Center for Reducing Suffering . Retrieved 2025-01-02 .

^ Webb, Amy (2016).

The Signals Are Talking (1st ed.). PublicAffairs. pp.

47– 50.

ISBN 9781610396660 .

^ William Higham (2009).

The Next Big Thing: Spotting and Forecasting Consumer Trends for Profit . Kogan Page. p. 158.

ISBN 9780749458430 .

^ "Keynote Remixed: What Happened to Virtual Reality" .

^ Slaughter, Richard A. (2004).

Futures Beyond Dystopia: Creating Social Foresight . London: RoutledgeFalmer.

^ "Articles by Ivana Milojevic; Futures Studies at Metafuture.org" .

metafuture.org . Archived from the original on 2009-11-14.

^ Rohrbeck, R. (2010) Corporate Foresight: Towards a Maturity Model for the Future Orientation of a Firm .

Dissertation . Springer, ISBN 978-3-7908-2625-8 ^ von der Gracht, H. A. (2008) The future of logistics: scenarios for 2025 .

Dissertation . Gabler, ISBN 978-3-8349-1082-0 ^ Hines, A. (2012) The Role of an Organizational Futurist in Integrating Foresight into Organizations .

Dissertation .

Leeds Metropolitan University ^ "HOME" .

wfsf.org .

^ "Journal of Future Studies" . Tamsui, Taipei, Taiwan.: Graduate Institute of Futures Studies, Tamkang University. Archived from the original on 2007-12-08 . Retrieved 2008-01-20 .

^ Teaching about the Future, by Peter C. Bishop and Andy Hines, 2012 ^ Hines. A. (2014, September/October). A training ground for professional futurists.

The Futurist , 43.

^ WFSF Directory of Tertiary Futures Education Archived 2009-10-25 at the Wayback Machine ^ "Foresight and Futures Studies – Global Academic Programs" . Accelerating.org. 2005-11-04. Archived from the original on 2011-08-06 . Retrieved 2009-07-20 .

^ "www.master-zukunftsforschung.de" . Archived from the original on 2014-01-04 . Retrieved 2020-01-29 .

^ "Finland Futures Research Centre" .

www.utu.fi . Retrieved 2020-07-13 .

^ "Postgraduate Diploma in Future Studies | PGDip Future" .

USB . Retrieved 2021-10-12 .

^ "Long-Term Budget Projections" .

Congressional Budget Office .

^ "National Intelligence Council" .

dni.gov . Archived from the original on 2015-03-01.

^ "Foresight projects" .

www.gov.uk . 25 August 2023.

^ "Shell Scenarios" .

shell.com . Archived from the original on 2015-03-07.

^ Hornell Hart, "The Logistic Growth of Political Areas", Social Forces , 26, (1948): 396–7; Raoul Naroll , "Imperial Cycles and World Order", Peace Research Society , 7, (1967): 100–101.

^ K'ang Yu-wei , The One World Philosophy , (tr. Thompson, Lawrence G., London, 1958), pp 79–80, 85; George Vacher de Lapouge , L'Aryen: Son Rôle Social , (Nantes: 1899), chapter "L`Avenir des Aryens." ^ Hornell, Hart, "The Logistic Growth of Political Areas", Social Forces , 26, (1948): 396–408;
Raoul, Naroll, "Imperial Cycles and World Order", Peace Research Society , 7, (1967): 83–101;
Louis A., Marano, "A Macrohistoric Trend Towards World Government", Behavior Science Notes , 8, (1973): 35–40;
Robert Carneiro, "Political Expansion as an Expression of the Principle of Competitive Exclusion", Studying War: Anthropological Perspective , eds. Reyna, Stephen P. & Dawns, Richard Erskine, Gordon and Breach, New Hampshire, 1994;
Robert Carneiro, "The Political Unification of the World", Cross Cultural Survey , 38/2, (2004), 162–177.

^ "FinnSight 2015" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2010-11-05 . Retrieved 2015-03-02 .

^ "Ministry of Education, Singapore: Press Releases – MOE Launches Third Masterplan for ICT in Education" .

moe.gov.sg . Archived from the original on 2015-03-18.

^ "World Future Society" .

World Future Society . Archived from the original on 26 September 2017 . Retrieved 2 May 2018 .

^ Strong, Kay; Bishop, Peter (2011-06-05).

"Case Study: Futurizing the K-12 Teaching Practice" .

Journal of Futures Studies . Tamkang University, Tamsui Campus . Retrieved 23 February 2018 .

^ Mack, Timothy C.

"Good Roads and Potholes: Teaching Foresight to Younger Children" (PDF) . Journal of Futures Studies . Retrieved 25 February 2018 .

^ a b Morgan, Matthew J. "On the Fringes: Future Opportunities for Futures Studies." Futures Research Quarterly 19.3 (2003): 5–20. Web. 4 March 2015 ^ Dator, Jim. "Wendell Bell: The Futurist Who Would Put My Grandmother in Prison." Futures 43.6 (2011): 578–82. Web. 4 May 2015 ^ a b Polak, Fred, and Boulding, Elise. The Image of the Future. (1973). Print.

^ Borrelli, Christopher (13 January 2017).

"Alternate timelines and side-by-side universes no longer just for science fiction" .

chicagotribune.com . Retrieved 2019-02-24 .

^ Women in science fiction. Sargent Pamela. (1975) Futures, 7 (5), pp. 433–441.

^ a b "Creative Robotix – Science Fiction Prototyping – TimEE" .

www.instructables.com . Retrieved 2020-02-23 .

^ Fiction and forecasting. Ian Miles. (1990) Futures, 22 (1), pp. 83–91 ^ Science Fiction Survey. Dennis Livingston. Futures, Volume 4, Issue 1, March 1972, Pages 97–98 ^ Lombardo, Tom (July 2005).

"Science Fiction as the Mythology of the Future" (PDF) .

Center for Future Consciousness . Archived from the original (PDF) on April 13, 2021 . Retrieved February 25, 2019 .

^ The Futures Toolkit: Tools for Futures Thinking and Foresight Across UK Government . UK Government Office of Science. 2017. p. 3.

^ Rogers, Adam (2018-10-22).

"The Sci-Fi Novelist Who Writes Like the Past to Warn of the Future" .

Wired .

ISSN 1059-1028 . Retrieved 2019-02-24 .

^ "David Brin, Our Conversation with a Futurist" .

Innovation & Tech Today . 2016-12-13 . Retrieved 2019-02-24 .

^ "worlds of David Brin" .

www.davidbrin.com . Retrieved 2019-02-24 .

^ Cartwright, Vanessa (2015-09-19).

"Savvy sci-fi futurists: 21 science fiction writers who predicted inventions way ahead of their time" .

Ross Dawson . Retrieved 2019-02-24 .

^ "Science Fiction Novels That Have Predicted the Future" .

futurism.media . Retrieved 2019-02-24 .

^ WIRED Staff (2012-06-21).

"Inside Minority Report's 'Idea Summit,' Visionaries Saw the Future" .

Wired .

ISSN 1059-1028 . Retrieved 2019-02-24 .

^ Shapiro, Lila (October 10, 2016).

"How Realistic Is Westworld? We Asked a Futurist" .

Vulture . Retrieved February 25, 2019 .

^ Weller, Chris.

"14 terrifying predictions from 'Black Mirror' that could become reality" .

Business Insider . Retrieved 2019-02-24 .

^ "Singapore Centre for Strategic Futures Mission" .

Centre for Strategic Futures, Singapore . 3 July 2015. Archived from the original on 10 December 2016 . Retrieved 24 February 2017 .

^ a b Kuosa, Tuoma (2011).

Practising Strategic Foresight in Government: The Case of Finland, Singapore, and the European Union (PDF) (2011 ed.). Singapore: S. Rajaratnam School of International Studies. p. 47.

ISBN 978-981-08-8860-2 . Retrieved 22 February 2018 .

^ a b c Boston, Jonathan (2017).

Governing for the Future: Designing Democratic Institutions for a Better Tomorrow (2017 ed.). Bradford, UK: Emerald Group Publishing Limited. pp.

403– 420.

ISBN 978-1-78635-056-5 .

^ "Sheikh Mohammed bin Rashid announces UAE Strategy for the Future | The National" . Retrieved 2017-02-25 .

^ "UAE Future Strategy" (PDF) .

United Arab Emirates Ministry of Cabinet Affairs & The Future . Archived from the original (PDF) on 25 February 2017 . Retrieved 24 February 2017 .

^ "Dubai Hosts the Third Edition of the Dubai Future Forum – Travel And Tour World" . 2024-12-06 . Retrieved 2024-12-11 .

^ "Center for Strategic Foresight" .

^ "Deep Space & Deep Fakes: New "Center for Strategic Foresight" Launched" . September 10, 2019. Archived from the original on 2020-02-18.

^ Bishop, Peter (2015).

Thinking about the Future: Guidelines for Strategic Foresight, 2nd Edition . Hinesight. p. 371.

ISBN 9780996773409 .

^ Kupers, Roland; Wilkinson, Angela.

"Living in the Futures" .

Harvard Business Review (May 2013 ed.).

^ Bostrom, Nick (2008).

Global Catastrophic Risks (PDF) . Oxford University Press. p. 1.

^ Bostrom, Nick (March 2002).

"Existential Risks: Analyzing Human Extinction Scenarios and Related Hazards" .

Journal of Evolution and Technology .

9 .

^ Steinmuller, Karlheinz; Petersen, John L. (2009).

Futures Research Methodology . The Millenium Project.

^ Hines, Andy (14 August 2017). "Framework foresight for exploring emerging student needs".

On the Horizon .

25 (3): 145– 156.

doi : 10.1108/OTH-03-2017-0013 .

^ Sarpong, David; Amst, Martin Nils; Gaspar, Tamás (14 September 2015). "Strategia Sapiens – strategic foresight in a new perspective".

Foresight .

17 (5): 405– 426.

doi : 10.1108/FS-03-2015-0017 .

^ "Most Significant Futures Works – Association of Professional Futurists" .

apf.org . Retrieved 2 May 2018 .

^ de Jouvenel, Bertrand (2008).

L'Art de la conjecture . Transaction Publishers.

ISBN 978-1412847483 .

^ Meadows, Donella (2004).

Limits to Growth . Chelsea Green Pub.

ISBN 978-1931498586 .

^ Schwartz, Peter (2008).

The Art of the Long View . Crown.

ISBN 978-0385267328 .

^ Kurzweil, Ray (2008).

The Age of Spiritual Machines: When Computers Exceed Human Intelligence . Penguin.

ISBN 978-0140282023 .

^ Glenn, Jerome C. (2008).

Futures Research Methodology . Millennium Project.

ISBN 978-0981894119 .

^ Diamond, Jared (2011).

Collapse: How Societies Choose to Fail or Succeed . Penguin.

ISBN 978-0143117001 .

^ Taleb, Nassim Nicholas (2010).

The Black Swan . Random House Publishing.

ISBN 978-0812973815 .

^ Jackson, Tim (December 2016).

Prosperity Without Growth . Routledge.

ISBN 978-1138935419 .

^ Hines, Andy (2012-06-26).

Teaching About the Future . Palgrave Macmillan UK.

ISBN 978-0230363496 .

^ Inayatullah, Sohail (August 2015).

What Works: Case Studies in the Practice of Foresight . p. 299.

^ "World Futures: The Journal of New Paradigm Research" .

^ "World Futures Review" .

Further reading [ edit ] James Gleick , "The Prophet Business" (review of Glenn Adamson , A Century of Tomorrows: How Imagining the Future Shapes the Present , Bloomsbury, 2024, 336 pp.), The New York Review of Books , vol. LXXII, no. 3 (27 February 2025), pp. 6, 8, 10. "[Glenn] Adamson, having exposed ... strains of failed futurology, suggests nonetheless that we ... should continue to make our best guesses ... always remembering that every prediction is a statement about the present ... For ... fourteen years, Wikipedia has included a[n] entry titled 'Timeline of the Far Future' ... An editor responsible for one recent addition justified it with the comment, 'Adds a bit of hope.' A different editor deleted it a few seconds later." (p. 10).

v t e Design Outline Designer Disciplines Communication design Advertising Book design Brand design Exhibit design Film title design Graphic design Motion Postage stamp design Print design Illustration Information design Instructional design News design Photography Retail design Signage / Traffic sign design Typography / Type design Video design Visual merchandising Environmental design Architecture Architectural lighting design Building design Passive solar Ecological design Environmental impact design Garden design Computer-aided Healthy community design Hotel design Interior architecture Interior design EID Keyline design Landscape architecture Sustainable Landscape design Spatial design Urban design Industrial design Automotive design Automotive suspension design CMF design Corrugated box design Electric guitar design Furniture design Sustainable Hardware interface design Motorcycle design Packaging and labeling Photographic lens design Product design Production design Sensory design Service design Interaction design Experience design EED Game design Level design Video game design Hardware interface design Icon design Immersive design Information design Interactive design Sonic interaction design User experience design User interface design Web design Other applied arts Public art design Ceramic / glass design Fashion design Costume design Jewellery design Floral design Game art design Property design Scenic design Sound design Stage/set lighting design Textile design Other design & engineering Algorithm design Behavioural design Boiler design Database design Drug design Electrical system design Experimental design Filter design Geometric design Work design Integrated circuit design Circuit design Physical design Power network design Mechanism design Nuclear weapon design Nucleic acid design Organization design Process design Processor design Protein design Research design Social design Software design Spacecraft design Strategic design Systems design Test design Approaches Active Activity-centered Adaptive web Affective Brainstorming By committee By contract C-K theory Closure Configuration Contextual Continuous Cradle-to-cradle Creative problem-solving Creativity techniques Critical Design fiction Defensive Design–bid–build Design–build architect-led Diffuse Domain-driven Ecological design Energy neutral Engineering design process Probabilistic design Ergonomic Error-tolerant Evidence-based Fault-tolerant Feminist For assembly For behaviour change For manufacturability For Six Sigma For testing For the environment For X Framework-oriented Functional Generative Geodesign HCD High-level Hostile Inclusive Integrated Integrated topside Intelligence-based Iterative KISS principle Low-level Metadesign Mind mapping Modular New Wave Object-oriented Open Over Parametric Participatory Platform-based Policy-based Prevention through Process-centered Public interest Opinion poll Public opinion Rational Regenerative Reliability engineering Research-based Responsibility-driven RWD Safe-life Speculative Sustainable Systemic SOD Tableless web Theory of constraints Top-down and bottom-up Transformation Transgenerational TRIZ Universal Design for All Usage-centered Use-centered User-centered Empathic User innovation Value-driven Value sensitive Privacy by Quality by Secure by Design choice computing controls culture flow justice leadership management marker methods pattern research science sprint strategy theory thinking Tools Intellectual property Organizations Awards Tools AAD Architectural model Blueprint Comprehensive layout CAD CAID Virtual home design software CAutoD Design quality indicator Electronic design automation Flowchart Mockup Design specification Design system Prototype Sketch Storyboard Technical drawing HTML editor Website wireframe Intellectual property Clean-room design Community design Design around Design infringement Design patent Fashion design copyright Geschmacksmuster Industrial design rights European Union Organizations American Institute of Graphic Arts Chartered Society of Designers Design and Industries Association Design Council International Forum Design Design Research Society Awards European Design Award German Design Award Good Design Award (Museum of Modern Art) Good Design Award (Chicago Athenaeum) Graphex IF Product Design Award James Dyson Award Prince Philip Designers Prize Related topics Agile Concept art Conceptual design Creative industries Cultural icon .design Dominant design Enterprise architecture Form factor Futures studies Indie design Innovation management Intelligent design Lean startup New product development OODA loop Philosophy of design Process simulation Reference design Slow design STEAM fields Unintelligent design Visualization Wicked problem Design attributes brief change classic competition architectural student director education elements engineer firm history knowledge language life load museum optimization paradigm principles rationale review specification studies studio technology v t e Time Key concepts Past Present Future Eternity Measurement and standards Chronometry UTC Universal Time TAI Unit of time Orders of magnitude (time) Measurement systems Italian six-hour clock Thai six-hour clock 12-hour clock 24-hour clock Relative hour Daylight saving time Chinese Decimal Hexadecimal Hindu Metric Roman Sidereal Solar Time zone Calendars Main types Solar Lunar Lunisolar Gregorian Julian Hebrew Islamic Solar Hijri Chinese Hindu Panchang Maya List Clocks Main types astronomical astrarium atomic quantum hourglass marine sundial watch 24-hour wristwatch mechanical stopwatch water-based Cuckoo clock Digital clock Grandfather clock History Timeline Chronology History Astronomical chronology Big History Calendar era Deep time Periodization Regnal year Timeline Philosophy of time A series and B series B-theory of time Chronocentrism Duration Endurantism Eternal return Eternalism Event Moving spotlight theory Perdurantism Presentism Temporal finitism Temporal parts The Unreality of Time Religion Mythology Ages of Man Destiny Immortality Dreamtime Kāla Time and fate deities Father Time Wheel of time Kalachakra Human experience and use of time Chronemics Generation time Mental chronometry Music tempo time signature Rosy retrospection Tense–aspect–mood Time management Yesterday – Today – Tomorrow Time in science Geology Geological time age chron eon epoch era period Geochronology Geological history of Earth Physics Absolute space and time Arrow of time Chronon Coordinate time Instant Proper time Spacetime Theory of relativity Time domain Time translation symmetry Time reversal symmetry Other fields Chronological dating Chronobiology Circadian rhythms Clock reaction Glottochronology Time geography Related Leap year Memory Moment Six-hour day Space System time Tempus fugit Time capsule Time immemorial Time travel Category Commons v t e Technology and related concepts Major technologies Necessities Agriculture Domestication Grafting Working animal Clothing Sewing machine Cooking Beer Bread Cheese Milling Wine Food storage Pottery Sanitation Plumbing Toilet Tool / Equipment Blade Hammer Plough Wedge Weapon Gun Social Accounting Calculation Abacus Calendar Cryptography Lock and key Money Banknote Coin Musical instrument Phonograph Toy Game Video game Writing Book Map Printing press Typewriter Construction Aqueduct Canal Irrigation Arch Bridge Building Fortification Foundation Scaffolding Tower Dam Caisson Stonemasonry Road Tunnel Transport Aircraft Aerostat Airplane Seaplane Compass Elevator Horseback riding Stirrup Jet engine Rocket Motor vehicle Railroad Train Scuba set Spacecraft Satellite Space station Space suit Watercraft Sailing Ship Submarine Manufacturing 3D printing Carpentry Casting Injection moulding Lost-wax casting Mass production Assembly line Interchangeable parts Machine tool Welding Simple machine Axle Bearing Ball bearing Belt Chain Lever Catapult Crane Shadoof Linkage Cam Clutch Four-bar linkage Piston Rack and pinion Pendulum Screw Archimedes' screw Propeller Spring Valve Wheel Block and tackle Flywheel Gear Potter's wheel Pulley Wing Machinery Agricultural machinery Appliance Dishwasher Washing machine Engine Electric motor Internal combustion Turbine Waterwheel Windmill Heavy equipment Hydraulics Cylinder Manifold Pump Mechanism Clock Differential Epicyclic gearing Gimbal Gyroscope Whippletree MEMS Pneumatics Compressor Jackhammer Rivet gun Vacuum pump Robotics Arm Leg Energy Fire Charcoal Oven Energy storage Battery Geothermal power Heat exchanger Heat pump Nuclear Power Weapon Oil drilling Fracking Refrigeration Air conditioning Refrigerator Solar power Photovoltaics Material Cement Concrete Ceramic Brick Chipped stone Glass Masonry Metallurgy Aluminum Bronze Ironworking Steel Nanomaterials Paper Plastic Rammed earth Recycling Rubber Vulcanization Textile Loom Spinning wheel Biotechnology Birth control Blood transfusion Dentistry Genetic engineering CRISPR gene editing Genetic testing PCR Hospital Medical imaging Medication Anesthesia Antibiotic Prosthesis Surgery Vaccine Chemical Cosmetics Detergent Soap Dye Explosive Dynamite Fireworks Gunpowder TNT Fertilizer Haber process Laboratory glassware Pesticide Pigment Separation Chromatography Distillation Filtration Spectrometer Synthesis Electromagnetism Electromagnet Laser Optical disc Lens Eyeglasses Magnetic storage Microwave oven Mirror Optical fiber Optical instrument Microscope Telescope Particle accelerator Photography Camera Motion picture Radar Telecommunications Mobile phone Radio Telegraph Telephone Television Electricity Circuit AC Circuit breaker DC Electrical grid Fuse Generator Switch Transformer Electric light Fluorescent Incandescent LED Neon Electronics Capacitor Circuit board Resistor Inductor Vacuum tube Lightning rod Multimeter Oscilloscope Semiconductor Diode Integrated circuit Transistor Superconductor Computer Artificial intelligence Hardware CPU GPU Modem Motherboard Mouse RAM Router Storage Touchscreen Networking Client–server model Email Internet Peer-to-peer Social media World Wide Web Programming language Software Compiler Database GUI Graphics software Operating system Spreadsheet Web browser Word processor Perspectives Criticism Appropriate technology Low technology Luddite Neo-Luddism Precautionary principle Ecotechnology Environmental technology Clean technology Sustainable design Sustainable engineering Policy & politics Government by algorithm Intellectual property Patent Trade secret Persuasive technology Science policy Strategy of Technology Technology assessment Technorealism Progressivism Futures studies Technology forecasting Technological utopianism Technocracy movement Technological singularity Transhumanism Studies Diffusion of innovations Technology transfer History Timeline of historic inventions Philosophy Social construction of technology Technological determinism Technology acceptance model Related concepts Applied science Agronomy Architecture Construction Engineering Forensics Forestry Logistics Medicine Mining Navigation Surveying Innovation Design High tech Invention Mature technology Research and development Technological convergence Technology lifecycle Category Outline Portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Futures_studies&oldid=1305841448 " Categories : Futures studies Future Interdisciplinary subfields Systems thinking Hidden categories: CS1 German-language sources (de) CS1: long volume value Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Pages using sidebar with the child parameter Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets via Module:Annotated link This page was last edited on 14 August 2025, at 11:21 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Futures studies 54 languages Add topic

