Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Definition matrix 2 Examples Toggle Examples subsection 2.1 Excludable 2.2 Semi-Excludable 2.3 Non-Excludable 3 Implications and inefficiency 4 Economic theory 5 See also 6 References 7 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Excludability 7 languages العربية Deutsch Français 한국어 Português Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Degree to which consumption of a good can be restricted This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Excludability" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( June 2018 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Air, whether it is clean or polluted, cannot exclude anyone from its use, and so it is considered a non-excludable "good". A good can be non-excludable regardless of how desirable it could be to be excluded from consuming it (such as smog or pollution in a city).

In economics, excludability is the degree to which a good , service or resource can be limited to only paying customers, or conversely, the degree to which a supplier, producer or other managing body (e.g. a government) can prevent consumption of a good. In economics , a good, service or resource is broadly assigned two fundamental characteristics; a degree of excludability and a degree of rivalry .

Excludability was originally proposed in 1954 by American economist Paul Samuelson where he formalised the concept now known as public goods , i.e. goods that are both non-rivalrous and non-excludable.

[ 1 ] Samuelson additionally highlighted the market failure of the free-rider problem that can occur with non-excludable goods. Samuelson's theory of good classification was then further expanded upon by Richard Musgrave in 1959, Garrett Hardin in 1968 who expanded upon another key market inefficiency of non-excludable goods; the tragedy of the commons .

[ 2 ] Excludability is not an inherent characteristic of a good. Therefore, excludability was further expanded upon by Elinor Ostrom in 1990 to be a continuous characteristic, as opposed to the discrete characteristic proposed by Samuelson (who presented excludability as either being present or absent).

[ 1 ] Ostrom's theory proposed that excludability can be placed on a scale that would range from fully excludable (i.e. a good that could theoretically fully exclude non-paying consumers) to fully non-excludable (a good that cannot exclude non-paying customers at all).

[ 3 ] This scale allows producers and providers more in-depth information that can then be used to generate more efficient price equations (for public goods in particular), that would then maximize benefits and positive externalities for all consumers of the good [ 4 ] Definition matrix [ edit ] Main article: Goods § Goods classified by exclusivity and competitiveness Examples [ edit ] Excludable [ edit ] Public transit (bus) farebox, Vancouver The easiest characteristic of an excludable good is that the producer, supplier or managing body of the good, service or resource have been able to restrict consumption to only paying consumers, and excluded non-paying consumers. If a good has a price attached to it, whether it's a one time payment like in the case of clothing or cars, or an ongoing payment like a subscription fee for a magazine or a per-use fee like in the case of public transport, it can be considered to be excludable to some extent.

A common example is a movie in a cinema. Paying customers are given a ticket that would entitle them to a single showing of the movie, and this is checked and ensured by ushers, security and other employees of the cinema. This means that a viewing of the movie is excludable and non-paying consumers are unable to experience the movie.

Semi-Excludable [ edit ] Ranging between being fully excludable and non-excludable is a continuous scale of excludability that Ostrom developed.

[ 3 ] Within this scale are goods that either attempt to be excludable but cannot effective or efficiently enforce this excludability. One example concerns many forms of information such as music, movies, e-books and computer software. All of these goods have some price or payment involved in their consumption, but are also susceptible to piracy and copyright infringements . This can result in many non-paying consumers being able to experience and benefit from the goods of a single purchase or payment.

Non-Excludable [ edit ] A good, service or resource that is unable to prevent or exclude non-paying consumers from experiencing or using it can be considered non-excludable.

An architecturally pleasing building, such as Tower Bridge , creates an aesthetic non-excludable good, which can be enjoyed by anyone who happens to look at it.  It is difficult to prevent people from gaining this benefit. A lighthouse acts as a navigation aid to ships at sea in a manner that is non-excludable since any ship out at sea can benefit from it.

Implications and inefficiency [ edit ] Public goods will generally be underproduced and undersupplied in the absence of government subsidies, relative to a socially optimal level. This is because potential producers will not be able to realize a profit (since the good can be obtained for free) sufficient to justify the costs of production. In this way, the provision of non-excludable goods typically generates positive externality , as benefits spill over to those who don't pay, which classically leads to market inefficiency. In extreme cases this can result in the good not being produced at all, or it being necessary for the government to organize its production and distribution.

A classic example of the inefficiency caused by non-excludability is the tragedy of the commons (which Hardin, the author, later corrected to the 'tragedy of the unmanaged commons' because it is based on the notion of an entirely rule-less resource) where a shared, non-excludable, resource becomes subject to over-use and over-consumption, which destroys the resource in the process.

Economic theory [ edit ] Brito and Oakland (1980) study the private, profit-maximizing provision of excludable public goods in a formal economic model.

[ 5 ] They take into account that the agents have private information about their valuations of the public good. Yet, Brito and Oakland only consider posted-price mechanisms, i.e. there are ad-hoc constraints on the class of contracts. Also taking distribution costs and congestion effects into account, Schmitz (1997) studies a related problem, but he allows for general mechanisms.

[ 6 ] Moreover, he also characterizes the second-best allocation rule, which is welfare-maximizing under the constraint of nonnegative profits. Using the incomplete contracts theory, Francesconi and Muthoo (2011) explore whether public or private ownership is more desirable when non-contractible investments have to be made in order to provide a (partly) excludable public good.

[ 7 ] See also [ edit ] Rivalry Free rider problem Tragedy of the Commons References [ edit ] ^ a b Samuelson, Paul (Nov 1954). "The Pure Theory of Public Expenditure".

The Review of Economics and Statistics .

36 (4): 387– 389.

doi : 10.2307/1925895 .

JSTOR 1925895 .

^ Hardin, Garrett (1968-12-13).

"The Tragedy of the Commons" .

Science .

162 (3859): 1243– 1248.

Bibcode : 1968Sci...162.1243H .

doi : 10.1126/science.162.3859.1243 .

ISSN 0036-8075 .

PMID 5699198 .

^ a b Ostrom, Elinor (2010-06-01).

"Beyond Markets and States: Polycentric Governance of Complex Economic Systems" .

American Economic Review .

100 (3): 641– 672.

doi : 10.1257/aer.100.3.641 .

ISSN 0002-8282 .

S2CID 2371158 .

^ Blomquist, Sören; Christiansen, Vidar (2005-01-01).

"The Role of Prices for Excludable Public Goods" .

International Tax and Public Finance .

12 (1): 61– 79.

doi : 10.1007/s10797-005-6395-z .

hdl : 10419/75780 .

ISSN 1573-6970 .

S2CID 16804457 .

^ Brito, Dagobert L.; Oakland, William H. (1980). "On the Monopolistic Provision of Excludable Public Goods".

The American Economic Review .

70 (4): 691– 704.

JSTOR 1803565 .

^ Schmitz, Patrick W. (1997).

"Monopolistic Provision of Excludable Public Goods under Private Information" .

Public Finance .

52 (1): 89– 101.

^ Francesconi, Marco; Muthoo, Abhinay (2011).

"Control Rights in Complex Partnerships" (PDF) .

Journal of the European Economic Association .

9 (3): 551– 589.

doi : 10.1111/j.1542-4774.2011.01017.x .

ISSN 1542-4766 .

Further reading [ edit ] Excludability, in: Joseph E. Stiglitz : Knowledge as a Global Public Good , World Bank . Last accessed 29 May 2007.

Copy at the Internet Archive v t e Types of goods Anti-rival goods Capital goods Club goods Common goods Common-pool resource Complementary goods vs.

Substitute goods vs.

Independent goods Composite goods Credence goods (Non-)durable goods (Post-)experience goods Final goods Free goods vs.

Positional goods Giffen goods Global commons Global public goods Inferior goods Information goods Intangible goods Intermediate goods Luxury goods Merit goods and demerit goods Neutral goods Normal goods Necessity goods Ordinary goods Private goods Household goods Public goods Digital public goods (Non-)rivalrous goods and (Non-)excludable goods Search goods Superior goods Used goods Veblen goods v t e Property By owner Collective Common Communal Community Crown Customary Cooperative Private Public Self Social State Unowned By nature Croft Estate (landed) Intangible Intellectual indigenous Personal Tangible real Commons Common land Common-pool resource Digital Global Information Knowledge Theory Bundle of rights Commodity fictitious commodities Common good (economics) Excludability First possession appropriation homestead principle Free-rider problem Game theory Georgism Gift economy Labor theory of property Law of rent rent-seeking Legal plunder Natural rights Ownership Property rights primogeniture usufruct women's Right to property Rivalry Tragedy of the commons anticommons Applications Acequia (watercourse) Ejido (agrarian land) Estate legal literary real Forest types Huerta Inheritance executor Land tenure Property law alienation easement restraint on alienation real estate title Rights Air Fishing Forest-dwelling (India) Freedom to roam Grazing pannage Hunting Land aboriginal indigenous squatting Littoral Mineral Bergregal Right of way Water prior-appropriation riparian Disposession / redistribution Bioprospecting biopiracy Collectivization Eminent domain Enclosure Eviction Expropriation Farhud Forced migration population transfer repatriation Illegal fishing Illegal logging Land Back Land reform Legal plunder Piracy Poaching Primitive accumulation Privatization Regulatory taking Slavery bride buying human trafficking spousal husband-selling wife selling wage Tax inheritance poll progressive property Theft Scholars ( key work ) Frédéric Bastiat The Law Ronald Coase Friedrich Engels The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State Henry George Progress and Poverty Garrett Hardin David Harvey John Locke Two Treatises of Government Karl Marx Das Kapital Marcel Mauss The Gift John Stuart Mill Elinor Ostrom Karl Polanyi The Great Transformation Pierre-Joseph Proudhon What Is Property?

David Ricardo Murray N. Rothbard The Ethics of Liberty Jean-Jacques Rousseau The Social Contract Adam Smith The Wealth of Nations Categories: Property Property law by country Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Excludability&oldid=1303694108 " Category : Goods (economics) Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from June 2018 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 1 August 2025, at 14:21 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Excludability 7 languages Add topic

