Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Flowering plants Toggle Flowering plants subsection 1.1 Corona 2 References 3 Bibliography 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Perianth 35 languages Aragonés Asturianu Беларуская Català Čeština Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge Galego Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Latina Lombard Magyar Македонски മലയാളം Nederlands 日本語 Plattdüütsch Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Српски / srpski Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Non-reproductive part of a flower A mature flower. In this example, the perianth is separated into a calyx (sepals) and corolla (petals) The perianth ( perigonium , perigon or perigone in monocots ) is the non-reproductive part of a flower . It is a structure consisting of the calyx (sepals) and the corolla (petals); in perigones it consists of the tepals . It forms an envelope surrounding the sexual organs,. The term perianth is derived from Greek περί ( peri , "around") and άνθος ( anthos , "flower"), while perigonium is derived from περί ( peri ) and γόνος ( gonos , "seed, sex organs").
In the mosses and liverworts ( Marchantiophyta ), the perianth is the sterile (neither male nor female) tube-like tissue that surrounds the female reproductive structure or developing sporophyte .

Flowering plants [ edit ] Main articles: Calyx and Corolla In flowering plants , the perianth may be described as being either dichlamydeous / heterochlamydeous in which the calyx and corolla are clearly separate, or homochlamydeous , in which they are indistinguishable (and the sepals and petals are collectively referred to as tepals ). When the perianth is in two whorls, it is described as biseriate . While the calyx may be green, known as sepaloid , it may also be brightly coloured, and is then described as petaloid . When the undifferentiated tepals resemble petals, they are also referred to as "petaloid", as in petaloid monocots or liliod monocots, orders of monocots with brightly coloured tepals. The corolla and petals have a role in attracting pollinators , but this may be augmented by more specialised structures like the corona (see below).

When the perianth consists of separate tepals the term apotepalous is used, or syntepalous if the tepals are fused to one another. The petals may be united to form a tubular corolla ( gamopetalous or sympetalous ). If either the petals or sepals are entirely absent, the perianth can be described as being monochlamydeous .

Types of perianth Achlamydeous floral meristem without a corolla or calyx Monochlamydeous perianth with non-petaloid calyx only Monochlamydeous perianth with corolla only or homochlamydeous perigonium with tepals Dichlamydeous/heterochlamydeous perianth with separate whorls Both sepals and petals may have stomata and veins, even if vestigial. In some taxa, for instance some magnolias and water lilies , the perianth is arranged in a spiral on nodes, rather than whorls. Flowers with spiral perianths tend to also be those with undifferentiated perianths.

Corona [ edit ] Ligulate floret, typical for some members of the family Asteraceae : A.

inferior ovary B.

The calyx is a crown-shaped pappus , called a corona .

C.

Anthers are united in a tube around the style, though the filaments are separate.

D.

A ligulate petal extends from the tubular corolla.

E.

style and stigmas An additional structure in some plants (e.g.

Narcissus , Passiflora (passion flower) , some Hippeastrum , Liliaceae ) is the corona (paraperigonium, paraperigon, or paracorolla), a ring or set of appendages of adaxial tissue arising from the corolla or the outer edge of the stamens. It is often positioned where the corolla lobes arise from the corolla tube.

[ 1 ] There can be more than one corona in a flower. The milkweeds ( Asclepias spp.) have three very different coronas, which collectively form a flytrap pollination scheme.  Some passionflowers ( Passiflora spp.) have as many as eight coronas arranged in concentric whorls.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] The pappus of Asteraceae , considered to be a modified calyx, is also called a corona if it is shaped like a crown.

[ 1 ] Flower of Narcissus showing an outer white corolla with a central yellow corona (paraperigonium) Flower of Passiflora incarnata showing corona of fine appendages between petals and stamens References [ edit ] ^ a b Beentje, H.; Williamson, J. (2010).

The Kew Plant Glossary: an Illustrated Dictionary of Plant Terms . Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew: Kew Publishing.

^ Lawrence, George H.M. (1951).

Taxonomy of Vascular Plants . New York: The MacMillan Company. p. 616.

^ Engler and Prantl Naturlichen Pflanzenfamilian  Band 21  page 503 (figure 232b) Bibliography [ edit ] Simpson, Michael G. (2011).

Plant Systematics . Academic Press.

ISBN 978-0-08-051404-8 . Retrieved 12 February 2014 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Petals .

The dictionary definition of perianth at Wiktionary v t e Botany History Outline Subdisciplines Archaeobotany Astrobotany Bryology Dendrology Ethnobotany Paleobotany Phycology Phytochemistry Phytogeography Geobotany Plant anatomy Plant ecology Plant intelligence Plant pathology Plant physiology Plant groups Algae Archaeplastida Bryophyte Non-vascular plants Vascular plants Fern Lycophyte Spermatophytes Gymnosperm Angiosperm Plant anatomy Plant morphology ( glossary ) Plant cells Cell wall Phragmoplast Plastid Plasmodesma Vacuole Tissues Cork Ground tissue Mesophyll Meristem Storage organs Vascular tissue Vascular bundle Wood Vegetative Bulb Root Rhizoid Rhizome Shoot Bud Leaf Cataphyll Petiole Sessility Stem Reproductive (incl. Flower) Archegonium Antheridium Androecium Pollen Stamen Anther Filament Staminode Tapetum Flower Aestivation Flower development Floral diagram Floral formula Floral symmetry Whorl Fruit Anatomy Berry Capsule Nut Pyrena Seed Dispersal Endosperm Gametophyte Gynandrium Gynoecium Carpel Ovary Locule Ovule Stigma Style Hypanthium (Floral cup) Inflorescence Bract Pedicellate Raceme Umbel Perianth Tepal Petal Sepal Plant embryo Receptacle Sporophyll Sporophyte Surface structures Cuticle Epicuticular wax Epidermis Nectar Stoma Thorns, spines, and prickles Trichome Plant physiology Materials Aleurone Apical dominance Bulk flow Cellulose Nutrition Photosynthesis Chlorophyll Phytomelanin Plant hormones Respiration Gas Exchange Cellular respiration Sap Starch Sugar Transpiration Turgor pressure Plant growth and habit Habit Cushion plants Rosettes Shrubs Prostrate shrubs Subshrubs Succulent plants Trees Vines Lianas Herbaceous plants Secondary growth Woody plants Reproduction Evolution Ecology Alternation of generations Double fertilization Evolutionary development Evolutionary history timeline Flora Germination Pollination Artificial Pollinators Pollen tube Self Sporangium Microsporangia Microspore Megasporangium Megaspore Spore Plant taxonomy Biological classification Botanical nomenclature Botanical name Correct name Author citation International Code of Nomenclature (ICN) ICN for Cultivated Plants (ICNCP) Cultivated plant taxonomy Citrus taxonomy Cultigen Cultivar Group Grex History of plant systematics Herbarium International Association for Plant Taxonomy (IAPT) Plant taxonomy systems Taxonomic rank Practice Agronomy Floriculture Forestry Horticulture Phytochemical Lists Related Botanical terms Botanists by author abbreviation Botanical expeditions Individual trees Oldest trees Superlative trees Tallest trees Plants Category NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐cktdx
Cached time: 20250814234819
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.468 seconds
Real time usage: 0.642 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 987/1000000
Revision size: 5717/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 35151/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 852/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 3/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 41112/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.340/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 15893676/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  560.389      1 -total
 20.25%  113.479      1 Template:Botany
 17.73%   99.364      1 Template:Reflist
 17.24%   96.627      4 Template:Transliteration
 16.78%   94.014      3 Template:Cite_book
 14.33%   80.325      1 Template:Commons_category
 14.06%   78.765      1 Template:Sister_project
 13.80%   77.311      1 Template:Side_box
 11.96%   67.008      1 Template:Short_description
 10.28%   57.602      2 Template:Gallery Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:1770564:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814234819 and revision id 1305312403. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Perianth&oldid=1305312403 " Category : Plant anatomy Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Commons category link is locally defined This page was last edited on 11 August 2025, at 09:20 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Perianth 35 languages Add topic

