Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Formation 2 Recognition 3 Analysis 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Crenulation 5 languages Español Nederlands Português Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia You can help expand this article with text translated from the corresponding article in Spanish .

Click [show] for important translation instructions.

Machine translation, like DeepL or Google Translate , is a useful starting point for translations, but translators must revise errors as necessary and confirm that the translation is accurate, rather than simply copy-pasting machine-translated text into the English Wikipedia.

Do not translate text that appears unreliable or low-quality. If possible, verify the text with references provided in the foreign-language article.

You must provide copyright attribution in the edit summary accompanying your translation by providing an interlanguage link to the source of your translation. A model attribution edit summary is Content in this edit is translated from the existing Spanish Wikipedia article at [[:es:Crenulación]]; see its history for attribution.

You may also add the template {{Translated|es|Crenulación}} to the talk page .

For more guidance, see Wikipedia:Translation .

Not to be confused with Crenellation .

In a geological context, crenulation or crenulation cleavage is a fabric formed in metamorphic rocks such as phyllite , schist and some gneiss by two or more stress directions causing the formation of the superimposed foliations .

Formation [ edit ] Crenulations form when an early planar fabric is overprinted by a later planar fabric. Crenulations form by recrystallisation of mica minerals during metamorphism . Micaceous minerals form planar surfaces known as foliations perpendicular to the principal stress fields.
If a rock is subjected to two separate deformations and the second deformation is at some other angle to the original, growth of new micas on the foliation planes will create a new foliation plane perpendicular to the plane of principal stress. The angular intersection of the two foliations causes a diagnostic texture called a crenulation , which may involve folding of the earlier mica foliations by the later foliation.

Recognition [ edit ] Example of a large-scale crenulation forming kink-folds, Nathans Mine, Glengarry Basin, W.A., showing the superposition of F5 foliation on earlier F3-F4 foliation. A mechanical pencil is seen for scale comparison.

Recognising a crenulation in a rock may require inspecting the rock with a hand-lens or petrographic microscope in thin section . Crenulations may be very cryptic, and there may be several recorded within a rock and especially, entrained within porphyroblasts .

Crenulations may manifest as kinking of previous foliation, such that the original foliation appears to be lined or inscribed by a later foliation.

In more advanced states, the later foliation will tend to form distinct foliation planes cross-cutting the earlier foliation, resulting in breaking, warping, and micro-scale folding of the earlier foliation into the new foliation.

When the crenulation foliation begins to dominate it may totally or almost completely wipe out the original foliation. This process occurs at different rates in rocks and beds of different lithology and chemical composition so that it is usually valuable to look at a variety of outcrops to gain a better appreciation of the effect of crenulation or discover the orientation or presence of earlier foliations.

Crenulation may also be the incipient foliation plane which precipitates shearing. In this case, it is often likely that the crenulation acts as a shear plane and it may be difficult to reconstruct earlier foliations and rock units across the crenulation foliation.

Analysis [ edit ] Crenulations, because they are the result of a second (or more) foliation, preserve important information on not only the stresses which formed the crenulation foliation, but the orientation of previous foliations . 
Firstly, the crenulation must be analysed to determine the initial foliation, termed S 1 , and the overprinting subsequent foliation. The intersection of these two planes forms an intersection lineation . This intersection lineation, L 1-2 may approximate the plunge of F2 interference folds .

The initial impact of a crenulation foliation may be cryptic, microscopic growth of new minerals at an angle to previous foliations. This may occur only in certain compositions of the rocks which favor growth of minerals under the P-T conditions at that time.

In more brittle conditions, especially in highly micaceous rocks, a crenulation may appear as ' kink bands , where S1 foliations are kinked by the S2 foliation so that the original minerals are broken or deformed. This may not result in new mineral growth.

Eventually, the crenulation foliation overprints the S1 foliation. In extreme cases, the S2 foliation will obliterate the previous foliation, especially in wet rocks which have compositions amenable to growth of minerals at that time. In this case, porphyroblasts may be the only means in which to observe earlier foliations, assuming they have inclusion trails of the S1 foliation.

See also [ edit ] List of rock textures Metamorphism Rock microstructure Structural geology Shear (geology) References [ edit ] Vernon, Ron H., 2004, A Practical Guide to Rock Microstructure, Oxford University Press, Oxford.

ISBN 0-521-89133-7 v t e Structural geology Underlying theory Deformation mechanism Lamé's stress ellipsoid Mohr–Coulomb theory Mohr's circle Overburden pressure Rock mechanics Strain Strain partitioning Stress Stress field Tension Measurement conventions Brunton compass Inclinometer Orthographic projection Rake Stereographic projection Strike and dip Large-scale tectonics Accretionary wedge Allochthon Autochthon Back-arc basin Continental collision Convergent boundary Décollement Divergent boundary Extensional tectonics Fault block Fenster Fold and thrust belt Fold mountains Foreland basin Graben Half-graben Horse Horst Horst and graben Intra-arc basin Inversion Klippe List of tectonic plate interactions Mélange Mountain formation Nappe Obduction Orogeny Passive margin Plate tectonics Pull-apart basin Rift valley Rift Saddle Strike-slip tectonics Structural basin Suture Syneclise Terrane Thick-skinned deformation Thin-skinned deformation Thrust tectonics Fracturing Columnar jointing Dike Exfoliation joint Fissure Joint Vein Faulting Asperity Cataclasite Cataclastic rock Detachment fault Disturbance Fault friction Fault mechanics Fault scarp Fault trace Thrust fault Transfer zone Transform fault Foliation and lineation Cleavage Compaction Crenulation Fissility Oblique foliation Pressure solution Rock microstructure Slickenside Stylolite Tectonic phase Tectonite Folding Anticline Chevron Detachment fold Dome Homocline Monocline Syncline Vergence Boudinage Competence Kinematic analysis 3D fold evolution Paleostress inversion Paleostress Section restoration Shear zone Mylonite Pure shear Shear Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Crenulation&oldid=1180953956 " Categories : Structural geology Metamorphic rocks Hidden category: Science and technology articles needing translation from Spanish Wikipedia This page was last edited on 19 October 2023, at 21:59 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Crenulation 5 languages Add topic

