Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Origins 2 Theory 3 Critical practices 4 References Toggle the table of contents Geocriticism 8 languages العربية Español فارسی Français Galego हिन्दी Italiano Română Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Method of literary analysis and literary theory Geocriticism is a method of literary analysis and literary theory that incorporates the study of geographic space. The term designates a number of different critical practices.  In France, Bertrand Westphal has elaborated the concept of géocritique in several works.

[ 1 ] In the United States, Robert Tally has argued for a geocriticism as a critical practice suited to the analysis of what he has termed "literary cartography".

[ 2 ] Origins [ edit ] Some of the first expressly geocritical writings emerged from symposia organized by  Westphal at the University of Limoges . Westphal's foundational essay, "Pour une approche géocritique des textes" [ 3 ] constitutes a manifesto for geocriticism.  Westphal's theory is elaborated in greater detail in his Geocriticism: Real and Fictional Spaces , translated by Tally, who also provides a brief introduction.  But there are also many works addressing similar themes and using similar methods that might be considered geocritical, even if the term "geocriticism" is not used.

Theory [ edit ] In Westphal's theory, geocriticism is based on three theoretical concepts: spatio-temporality, transgressivity, and referentiality.

The idea that space and time form a continuum ( space-time ) is a tenet of modern physics. In the field of literary theory, geocriticism is an interdisciplinary method of literary analysis that focuses not only on such temporal data as relations between the life and times of the author (as in biographical criticism), the history of the text (as in textual criticism ), or the story (as studied by narratology ), but also on spatial data. Geocriticism therefore has affinities with geography, architecture, urban studies, and so on; it also correlates to philosophical concepts such as deterritorialization .

Following the work of Michel Foucault , Gilles Deleuze , Henri Lefebvre and Mikhail Bakhtin , among others, a geocritical approach to literature recognizes that representations of space are often transgressive, crossing the boundaries of established norms while also reestablishing new relations among people, places, and things. Cartography is no longer seen as the exclusive province of the state or the government; rather, various agents or groups may be responsible for representing the geographic spaces at the same time and with different effects. In practice, therefore, geocriticism is multifocal, examining a variety of topics at once, thus differentiating itself from practices that focus on the singular point of view of the traveller or protagonist.

Geocriticism also assumes a literary referentiality between world and text, or, in other words, between the referent and its representation. By questioning the relations between a given space's nature and its actually existing condition, the geocritical approach allows for a study of fiction that points also to the theory of possible worlds, such as may be seen in the work on third space by the American geographer Edward Soja ( Thirdspace ). Tally's book Spatiality , an introduction to spatiality studies in literature and critical theory, includes a chapter on geocriticism.

Critical practices [ edit ] Geocriticism frequently involves the study of places described in the literature by various authors, but it can also study the effects of literary representations of a given space. An example of the range of geocritical practices can be found in Tally's collection Geocritical Explorations: Space, Place, and Mapping in Literary and Cultural Studies .

Geocriticism derives some of its practices from precursors whose theoretical work helped establish space as a valid topic for literary analysis.  For example, in The Poetics of Space and elsewhere, Gaston Bachelard studied literary works to develop a typology of places according to their connotations. Maurice Blanchot's writings have legitimized the idea of literary space, an imaginary place for the creation of the work of literature. One might also look at the developments of cultural studies and especially postcolonial studies, such as Raymond Williams 's The Country and the City or Edward Said 's Culture and Imperialism , which employ what Said has called a "geographical inquiry into historical experience." [ 4 ] Fredric Jameson 's concept of cognitive mapping and his theoretical engagement with the postmodern condition also highlight the importance of spatial representation and aesthetic productions, including literature, film, architecture, and design.  In The Atlas of European Novel, 1800-1900 , Franco Moretti has examined the diffusion of literary spaces in Europe, focusing on the complex relationship between the text and space. Moretti has also promulgated a theory of literary history, or literary geography, that would use maps to bring to light new connections between the texts studied and their social spaces.

[ 5 ] And, in his study of Herman Melville's literary cartography, Robert Tally has offered a geocritical approach to certain texts.

[ 6 ] Geocriticism has intellectual and methodological affiliations with such fields as Literature and the Environment or ecocriticism , regional literature, urban studies, sociological and philosophical approaches to literature, and utopian studies.

References [ edit ] Notes ^ See Westphal, La Géocritique, Réel, Fiction, Espace , Paris, Éditions de Minuit, 2007.

^ See, e.g., Tally's "Geocriticism and Classic American Literature" and Spatiality .

^ Available in French online at http://www.vox-poetica.net/sflgc/biblio/gcr.html Archived 2013-10-17 at the Wayback Machine ^ Said, Culture and Imperialism , p.7.

^ See Moretti, Graphs, Maps, Trees .

^ See Tally, Melville, Mapping and Globalization .

Further reading Bachelard, Gaston.

The Poetics of Space . Trans. Maria Jolas. Boston: Beacon Press, 1969.

Blanchot, Maurice.

The Space of Literature . Trans. Ann Smock. Lincoln, NE: University of Nebraska Press, 1989.

Foucault, Michel.

"Of Other Spaces" .

Harvey, David.

The Condition of Postmodernity . Oxford: Blackwell, 1989.

Jameson, Fredric.

Postmodernism, or, The Cultural Logic of Late Capitalism . Durham, NC: Duke University Press. 1991.

Jameson, Fredric.

The Geopolitical Aesthetic: Cinema and Space in the World System . Bloomington: Indiana University Press. 1992.

Moretti, Franco.

An Atlas of the European Novel, 1800-1900 . London: Verso, 1998.

Moretti, Franco.

Graphs, Maps, Trees: Abstract Models for a Literary History .  London: Verso, 2005.

Said, Edward.

Culture and Imperialism .  New York: Knopf, 1993.

Soja, Edward.

Postmodern Geographies . London: Verso, 1989.

Soja, Edward.

Thirdspace: Journeys to Los Angeles and Other Real-and-Imagined Places . Oxford: Blackwell, 1996.

Tally, Robert T. (ed.) Geocritical Explorations: Space, Place, and Mapping in Literary and Cultural Studies . New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2011.

Tally, Robert T.

"Geocriticism and Classic American Literature." Archived 2012-02-19 at the Wayback Machine Tally, Robert T.

Melville, Mapping and Globalization: Literary Cartography in the American Baroque Writer . London: Continuum Books, 2009.

Tally, Robert T.

Spatiality . The New Critical Idiom. London and New York: Routledge, 2013 Tally, Robert T.

Utopia in the Age of Globalization: Space, Representation, and the World System . New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2013 Wells-Lynn, Amy. "The Intertextual, Sexually-Coded Rue Jacob: A Geocritical Approach to Djuna Barnes, Natalie Barney, and Radclyffe Hall." South Central Review 22.3 (Fall 2005) 78-112.

Westphal, Bertrand.

Le Monde plausible, Espace, Lieu, Carte , Paris, Éditions de Minuit, 2011.

Westphal, Bertrand. Flabbi, Lorenzo.

Espaces, tourismes, esthétiques , Limoges, Pulim, 2010.

Westphal, Bertrand.

Geocriticism: Real and Fictional Spaces , trans. Robert T. Tally Jr.  New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2011.

Westphal, Bertrand.

La Géocritique, Réel, Fiction, Espace , Paris, Éditions de Minuit, 2007.

Westphal, Bertrand. Bertrand Westphal, Pour une approche géocritique des textes . Vox Poetica, 2005.

v t e Literary criticism Literary theory Archetypal criticism Biographical criticism Chicago school Cultural materialism Darwinian criticism Deconstruction Descriptive poetics Ecocriticism Feminist criticism Formalism Geneva school Geocriticism Marxist criticism New Criticism New historicism Postcolonial criticism Postcritique Psychoanalytic criticism Reader-response criticism Russian formalism Semiotic criticism Sociological criticism Source criticism Thing theory Theorists and critics Plato Aristotle Horace Longinus Plotinus St. Augustine Boethius Aquinas Dante Boccaccio de Pizan Valmiki Lu Ji Sidney Tasso Bacon Hobbes Corneille Dryden Boileau-Despréaux Locke Pope Addison Vico Burke (Edmund) Hume Johnson Young Lessing Reynolds Diderot Kant Wollstonecraft Blake Schiller Schlegel Wordsworth de Staël Schelling Coleridge von Humboldt Keats Schopenhauer Peacock Shelley von Goethe Hegel Leopardi De Sanctis Carlyle Mill Emerson Sainte-Beuve Lowell Poe Arnold Taine Baudelaire Marx Kierkegaard Nietzsche Pater Zola France Wilde Mallarmé Tolstoy Croce Gramsci Eco Freud de Saussure Lévi-Strauss Hulme Benjamin Shklovsky Eliot Jung Trotsky Woolf Richards Bakhtin Bataille Ransom Lacan Lukács Valéry Burke (Kenneth) Cassirer Brooks Mukařovský Sartre de Beauvoir Adorno Jakobson Frye Bachelard Gombrich Heidegger Chomsky Derrida Barthes Foucault Poulet Williams Trilling Kristeva de Man Bloom Achebe Said Deleuze Guattari Girard Cixous Iser White Gadamer Ricoeur Abrams Geertz Marinetti Tzara Breton Loy de Andrade Hu Paz v t e Environmental humanities Art Crop art Environmental art Environmental sculpture Land art Landscape painting Photography conservation landscape nature wildlife Sculpture trail Site-specific art Sustainable art Culture Cultural ecology Cultural landscape Ecolinguistics Ecological anthropology Ecosemiotics Environmental anthropology Ethnoecology Traditional ecological knowledge Literature Ecocomposition Ecocriticism Ecopoetry Geocriticism Nature writing Outdoor literature Philosophy Aesthetics of nature Critical realism Deep ecology Ecofeminism Ecophenomenology Ecosophy Environmental ethics Environmental justice Environmental philosophy Predation problem Social ecology Religion Ecotheology Environmental theology Religion and environmentalism Spiritual ecology Stewardship Other Anthrozoology Ecomusicology Environmental communication Environmental education adult arts-based Environmental history Environmental interpretation Environmental journalism Environmental law Outdoor education Political representation of nature Psychogeography Thematic interpretation Related Animal studies Bioethics Biophilia hypothesis Do it yourself ( ethic ) Natural history ( museums ) Popular science Property theory ( common property ) Sexecology Science, technology and society science studies Simple living Slow food Spirit of place Sustainability studies Applied Arts and Crafts movement Acoustic ecology Biomimicry Ecological design Ecomuseum Educational trail Environmental design Landscape architecture assessment planning Nature center New Urbanism Sustainable architecture Sustainable design Sustainable fashion Themed walk Environment portal Category Commons Journals Degrees Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Geocriticism&oldid=1305999086 " Categories : Literary criticism Geography Environmental humanities Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 15 August 2025, at 09:28 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Geocriticism 8 languages Add topic

