Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Synopsis 2 Simulated reality 3 Critical discussion Toggle Critical discussion subsection 3.1 Dream skepticism 4 See also 5 Notes 6 References Toggle the table of contents Dream argument 12 languages العربية Eesti Español فارسی Français Jawa Nederlands Polski Português Suomi Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Postulation about the act of dreaming The Dream of Human Life , by unknown artist , based on Michelangelo’s drawing The Dream, c.

1533 The dream argument is the postulation that the act of dreaming provides preliminary evidence that the senses we trust to distinguish reality from illusion should not be fully trusted, and therefore, any state that is dependent on our senses should at the very least be carefully examined and rigorously tested to determine whether it is in fact reality.

Synopsis [ edit ] Part of a series on René Descartes Philosophy Cartesianism Rationalism Foundationalism Mechanism Doubt and certainty Existence of God Dream argument Cogito, ergo sum Evil demon Trademark argument Causal adequacy principle Mind–body dichotomy Analytic geometry Coordinate system Cartesian circle Folium Rule of signs Cartesian diver Balloonist theory Wax argument Res cogitans Res extensa Works Rules for the Direction of the Mind The Search for Truth The World Discourse on the Method La Géométrie Meditations on First Philosophy Principles of Philosophy Passions of the Soul People Christina, Queen of Sweden Francine Descartes v t e While dreaming , one does not normally realize one is dreaming . On more rare occasions, the dream may be contained inside another dream with the very act of realizing that one is dreaming, itself, being only a dream that one is not aware of having. This has led philosophers to wonder whether it is possible for one ever to be certain, at any given point in time, that one is not in fact dreaming, or whether indeed it could be possible for one to remain in a perpetual dream state and never experience the reality of wakefulness at all.

[ citation needed ] In Western philosophy this philosophical puzzle was referred to by Plato ( Theaetetus 158b-d), Aristotle ( Metaphysics 1011a6), and the Academic Skeptics .

[ 1 ] It is now best known from René Descartes ' Meditations on First Philosophy . The dream argument has become one of the most prominent skeptical hypotheses .

[ citation needed ] In Eastern philosophy this type of argument is sometimes referred to as the " Zhuangzi paradox ": He who dreams of drinking wine may weep when morning comes; he who dreams of weeping may in the morning go off to hunt. While he is dreaming he does not know it is a dream, and in his dream he may even try to interpret a dream. Only after he wakes does he know it was a dream. And someday there will be a great awakening when we know that this is all a great dream. Yet the stupid believe they are awake, busily and brightly assuming they understand things, calling this man ruler, that one herdsman—how dense! Confucius and you are both dreaming! And when I say you are dreaming, I am dreaming, too. Words like these will be labeled the Supreme Swindle. Yet, after ten thousand generations, a great sage may appear who will know their meaning, and it will still be as though he appeared with astonishing speed.

[ 2 ] The Yogachara philosopher Vasubandhu (4th to 5th century C.E.) referenced the argument in his "Twenty verses on appearance only." The dream argument came to feature prominently in Mahayana and Tibetan Buddhist philosophy. Some schools of thought ( e.g.

, Dzogchen ) consider perceived reality to be literally unreal. As Chögyal Namkhai Norbu puts it: "In a real sense, all the visions that we see in our lifetime are like a big dream ..." [ 3 ] In this context, the term 'visions' denotes not only visual perceptions , but also appearances perceived through all senses , including sounds , smells , tastes , and tactile sensations , and operations on perceived mental objects.

Simulated reality [ edit ] See also: Simulated reality and Simulation hypothesis Dreaming provides a springboard for those who question whether our own reality may be an illusion. The ability of the mind to be tricked into believing a mentally generated world is the "real world" means at least one variety of simulated reality is a common, even nightly event.

[ 4 ] Those who argue that the world is not simulated must concede that the mind—at least the sleeping mind—is not itself an entirely reliable mechanism for attempting to differentiate reality from illusion.

[ 5 ] Whatever I have accepted until now as most true has come to me through my senses. But occasionally I have found that they have deceived me, and it is unwise to trust completely those who have deceived us even once.

— René Descartes [ 6 ] Critical discussion [ edit ] In the past, philosophers John Locke and Thomas Hobbes have separately attempted to refute Descartes's account of the dream argument. Locke claimed that one cannot experience pain in dreams. Various scientific studies conducted within the last few decades provided evidence against Locke's claim by concluding that pain in dreams can occur, but on very rare occasions.

[ 7 ] Philosopher Ben Springett has said that Locke might respond to this by stating that the agonizing pain of stepping into a fire is non-comparable to stepping into a fire in a dream. Hobbes claimed that dreams are susceptible to absurdity while the waking life is not.

[ 8 ] Many contemporary philosophers have attempted to refute dream skepticism in detail (see, e.g., Stone (1984)).

[ 9 ] Ernest Sosa (2007) devoted a chapter of a monograph to the topic, in which he presented a new theory of dreaming and argued that his theory raises a new argument for skepticism, which he attempted to refute. In A Virtue Epistemology: Apt Belief and Reflective Knowledge , he states: "in dreaming we do not really believe; we only make-believe." [ 10 ] Jonathan Ichikawa (2008) and Nathan Ballantyne & Ian Evans (2010) have offered critiques of Sosa's proposed solution. Ichikawa argued that as we cannot tell whether our beliefs in waking life are truly beliefs and not imaginings, like in a dream, we are still not able to tell whether we are awake or dreaming.

The dream hypothesis is also used to develop other philosophical concepts, such as Valberg's personal horizon : what this world would be internal to if this were all a dream.

[ 11 ] Dream skepticism [ edit ] Norman Malcolm in his monograph "Dreaming" (published in 1959) elaborated on Wittgenstein's question as to whether it really mattered if people who tell dreams "really had these images while they slept, or whether it merely seems so to them on waking".  He argues that the sentence "I am asleep" is a senseless form of words; that dreams cannot exist independently of the waking impression; and that skepticism based on dreaming "comes from confusing the historical and dream telling senses...[of]...the past tense" (page 120).  In the chapter: "Do I Know I Am Awake ?" he argues that we do not have to say: "I know that I am awake" simply because it would be absurd to deny that one is awake.

Philosopher Daniel Dennett expanded on this idea with his cassette tape hypothesis of dreaming.

[ 12 ] He conjectured that dreams are not real conscious experiences, and are instead pseudo-memories that emerge upon awakening from sleep. These pseudo-memories do not correspond to any real dream experiences, and are instead strictly fabrications of experiences that never occurred.

Philosopher Jennifer Windt has counter-argued against dream skepticism, drawing on the psychology of lucid dreaming , and has advanced a conceptual framework of dreaming as real imaginative experiences.

[ 13 ] See also [ edit ] Brain in a vat Cartesian doubt Consensus reality Evil demon False awakening Maya (illusion) Multiverse Reality in Buddhism Simulated reality Social simulation Solipsism Zhuangzi (book)#"The Butterfly Dream" Notes [ edit ] ^ Epictetus , Discourses Book I, Chapter 5, Section 6 ^ 莊子, 齊物論, 12.

Zhuàngzi , "Discussion on making all things equal," 12.

from Zhuàngzi, Burton Watson trans., Chuang Tzu (New York: Columbia University Press, 1996), 43.

ISBN 978-0-231-10595-8 [1] ^ Chögyal Namkhai Norbu Dream Yoga And The Practice Of Natural Light Edited and introduced by Michael Katz, Snow Lion Publications, Ithaca, NY, ISBN 1-55939-007-7 , pp. 42, 46, 48, 96, 105.

^ Joseph Barbera, Henry Moller , Dreaming, Virtual Reality, and Presence .

^ Mazzoni, Giuliana A.L.; Loftus, Elizabeth F. (December 1996). "When Dreams Become Reality".

Consciousness and Cognition .

5 (4): 442– 462.

doi : 10.1006/ccog.1996.0027 .

PMID 9063610 .

S2CID 44810529 .

^ René Descartes, Meditations on First Philosophy .

^ Knoth, Inga Sophia; Schredl, Michael (23 May 2011). "Physical pain, mental pain and malaise in dreams".

International Journal of Dream Research : 17– 23.

doi : 10.11588/ijodr.2011.1.9074 .

^ "Dreaming, Philosophy of – Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy" .

utm.edu .

^ Stone, Jim (May 1984). "Dreaming and certainty".

Philosophical Studies .

45 (3): 353– 368.

doi : 10.1007/BF00355443 .

S2CID 170975067 .

^ Sosa, Ernest (2007). A Virtue Epistemology: Apt Belief and Reflective Knowledge. New York: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-929702-3 .

[ page needed ] ^ Valberg, J.J. (2007).

Dream, Death, and the Self . Princeton University Press.

ISBN 9780691128597 .

[ page needed ] ^ Dennett, Daniel C. (1976). "Are Dreams Experiences?".

The Philosophical Review .

85 (2): 151– 171.

doi : 10.2307/2183728 .

JSTOR 2183728 .

^ Windt, Jennifer M. (2015).

Dreaming: A Conceptual Framework for Philosophy of Mind and Empirical Research . The MIT Press.

ISBN 978-0-262-02867-7 .

JSTOR j.ctt17kk7qt . Retrieved June 24, 2024 .

References [ edit ] Ballantyne, Nathan; Evans, Ian (2010).

"Sosa's Dream" (PDF) .

Philosophical Studies .

148 (2): 249– 252.

doi : 10.1007/s11098-008-9309-y .

S2CID 11833056 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2021-11-26 . Retrieved 2017-02-03 .

Ichikawa, Jonathan (2008). "Skepticism and the Imagination Model of Dreaming".

The Philosophical Quarterly .

58 (232): 519– 527.

doi : 10.1111/j.1467-9213.2007.546.x .

Sosa, Ernest (2007).

A Virtue Epistemology: Apt Belief and Reflective Knowledge . New York: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-929702-3 .

Stone, Jim (1984). "Dreaming and Certainty".

Philosophical Studies .

45 (3): 353– 368.

doi : 10.1007/BF00355443 .

S2CID 170975067 .

Malcolm, N. (1959) Dreaming London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 2nd Impression 1962.

v t e Paradoxes Philosophical Analysis Buridan's bridge Dream argument Epicurean Fiction Fitch's knowability Free will Goodman's Hedonism Liberal Meno's Mere addition Moore's Newcomb's Nihilism Omnipotence Preface Rule-following Sorites Theseus' ship White horse Zeno's Logical Barber Berry Bhartrhari's Burali-Forti Court Crocodile Curry's Epimenides Free choice paradox Grelling–Nelson Kleene–Rosser Liar Card No-no Pinocchio Quine's Yablo's Opposite Day Paradoxes of set theory Richard's Russell's Socratic Hilbert's Hotel Temperature paradox Barbershop Catch-22 Chicken or the egg Drinker Entailment Lottery Plato's beard Raven Ross's Unexpected hanging " What the Tortoise Said to Achilles " Heat death paradox Olbers's paradox Economic Allais Antitrust Arrow information Bertrand Braess' Competition Income and fertility Downs–Thomson Easterlin Edgeworth Ellsberg European Gibson's Giffen good Icarus Jevons Leontief Lerner Lucas Mandeville's Mayfield's Metzler Plenty Productivity Prosperity Scitovsky Service recovery St. Petersburg Thrift Toil Tullock Value Decision theory Abilene Apportionment Alabama New states Population Arrow's Buridan's ass Chainstore Condorcet's Decision-making Downs Ellsberg Fenno's Fredkin's Green Hedgehog's Inventor's Kavka's toxin puzzle Morton's fork Navigation Newcomb's Parrondo's Preparedness Prevention Prisoner's dilemma Tolerance Willpower List Category v t e Philosophical skepticism Skeptical philosophies Academic Skepticism Ajñana Cartesian Charvaka Humeanism Pyrrhonism Solipsism Skeptical philosophers Sanjaya Belatthiputta Xenophanes Xeniades Metrodorus of Chios Anaxarchus Nausiphanes Pyrrho Timon Academic skeptics Arcesilaus Diocles of Cnidus Lacydes Telecles and Evander Hegesinus Carneades Hagnon of Tarsus Metrodorus of Stratonicea Aristanax Clitomachus Charmadas Aeschines of Neapolis Philo of Larissa Cicero Gaius Aurelius Cotta Dio of Alexandria Aenesidemus Favorinus Agrippa Sextus Empiricus Jayarāśi Bhaṭṭa Nicholas of Autrecourt Montaigne Pierre Charron Francisco Sanches Uriel da Costa William Chillingworth René Descartes Simon Foucher Pierre Bayle David Hume Gottlob Ernst Schulze William Drummond Benson Mates Peter Unger Robert Fogelin Skeptical scenarios Acatalepsy Aporia Brain in a vat Dream argument Epoche Evil demon Five-minute hypothesis Münchhausen trilemma Ignoramus et ignorabimus Problem of the criterion Problem of induction Reductio ad absurdum Regress argument Simulation hypothesis Suspension of judgment Wax argument Responses Here is one hand Semantic externalism Process reliabilism Epistemic closure Contextualism Relativism Skeptical philosophical literature Barhaspatya sutras Academica ( Cicero ) Outlines of Pyrrhonism Against the Dogmatists Against the Mathematicians Essays ( Montaigne ) Discourse on the Method A Treatise of Human Nature Aenesidemus Types of skepticism Radical Local Moral Scientific Religious Jewish skeptics Pseudoskepticism Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Dream_argument&oldid=1306342364 " Categories : Concepts in epistemology Academic skepticism Arguments in philosophy of mind Internalism and externalism Reality Philosophical skepticism Science fiction themes Philosophical paradoxes Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from October 2021 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from May 2018 Articles with unsourced statements from December 2016 This page was last edited on 17 August 2025, at 06:59 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Dream argument 12 languages Add topic

