Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Formation Toggle Formation subsection 1.1 Varieties 2 In geology and geography 3 Uses 4 Gallery 5 See also 6 References Toggle References subsection 6.1 Other works cited 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Greywacke 30 languages العربية Беларуская Català Čeština Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara Français Gaeilge Italiano ქართული Қазақша Кыргызча Nederlands 日本語 Norsk nynorsk Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Plattdüütsch Polski Português Русский Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Svenska Тоҷикӣ Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Graywacke ) Sandstone with angular grains in a clay-fine matrix Photomicrographs of feldspathic (L) and lithic (R) greywacke. The top images are in plane-polarized light ; the bottom images are in cross-polarized light . Cements fill the pore spaces.

Closeup of Pharaoh Menkaure 's greywacke statue, 25th century BCE, from the Egyptian Museum in Cairo Greywacke or graywacke ( German : Grauwacke ' a grey, earthy rock ' ) is a variety of sandstone generally characterized by its hardness (6–7 on Mohs scale ), dark color, and poorly sorted angular grains of quartz , feldspar , and small rock fragments or sand-size lithic fragments set in a compact, clay -fine matrix. It is a texturally immature sedimentary rock generally found in Paleozoic strata . The larger grains can be sand- to gravel-sized, and matrix materials generally constitute more than 15% of the rock by volume.

Formation [ edit ] The origin of greywacke was unknown until turbidity currents and turbidites were understood, since, according to the normal laws of sedimentation , gravel , sand and mud should not be laid down together.

Geologists now attribute its formation to submarine avalanches or strong turbidity currents. These actions churn sediment and cause mixed-sediment slurries, in which the resulting deposits may exhibit a variety of sedimentary features. Supporting the turbidity origin theory is the fact that deposits of greywacke are found on the edges of the continental shelves , at the bottoms of oceanic trenches , and at the bases of mountain formational areas. They also occur in association with black shales of deep-sea origin.

As a rule, greywackes do not contain fossils , but organic remains may be common in the finer beds associated with them. Their component particles are usually not very rounded or polished, and the rocks have often been considerably indurated by recrystallization , such as the introduction of interstitial silica . In some districts, the greywackes are cleaved, but they show phenomena of this kind much less perfectly than the slates.

[ 1 ] Although the group is so diverse that it is difficult to characterize mineralogically, it has a well-established place in petrographical classifications because these peculiar composite arenaceous deposits are very frequent among Silurian and Cambrian rocks, and are less common in Mesozoic or Cenozoic strata.

[ citation needed ] Their essential features are their gritty character and their complex composition. By increasing metamorphism , greywackes frequently pass into mica- schists , chloritic schists and sedimentary gneisses .

[ 1 ] Varieties [ edit ] The term "greywacke" can be confusing, since it can refer to either the immature (rock fragment) aspect of the rock or its fine-grained (clay) component.

Greywackes are mostly grey, brown, yellow, or black, dull-colored sandy rocks that may occur in thick or thin beds along with shales and limestones . Some varieties include feldspathic greywacke , rich in feldspar , and lithic greywacke , rich in other tiny rock fragments. They can contain a very great variety of minerals , the principal ones being quartz, orthoclase and plagioclase feldspars, calcite , iron oxides and graphitic, carbonaceous matters, together with (in the coarser kinds) fragments of such rocks as felsite , chert , slate , gneiss , various schists , and quartzite . Among other minerals found in them are biotite , chlorite , tourmaline , epidote , apatite , garnet , hornblende , augite , sphene and pyrites . The cementing material may be siliceous or argillaceous and is sometimes calcareous .

[ 1 ] In geology and geography [ edit ] Greywackes are abundant in Wales , the south of Scotland , the Longford-Down Massif [ 2 ] in Ireland and the Lake District National Park of England ; they compose the majority of the main Southern Alps that make up the backbone of New Zealand . Both feldspathic and lithic greywacke have been recognized in Ecca Group in South Africa .

[ 3 ] Greywackes are also found in parts of the Eastern Desert east of the Nile .

[ 4 ] They were an early object of geological study in Britain where the Geological Society was founded in 1807, and excited much public interest in geology.

[ 5 ] Greywacke was interesting because it was found in many places in Britain and its occurrence in particular places was evidence of the pattern of geological strata that had been laid down.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] Uses [ edit ] Greywacke stone has been used as a building material and a sculptural material across many eras and societies. Its oldest known uses date to the early third millennium BCE , in Egypt's early dynastic period .  Its wide use in sculpture and vessels is thought to have been due to its fine grain size and resistance to fracturing, making it suitable for fine detail and intricate shapes.

[ 4 ] Aside from its structural uses, greywacke stone (or molds taken from it) is valuable to practitioners of traditional motion picture miniature photography , because due to its unusually mixed nature, it remains looking natural when portraying a wide range of miniature scale ratios, from 1:1 to as high as 1:600.

[ 8 ] Gallery [ edit ] A greywacke rock Wall of greywacke at Möhne Reservoir dam, Germany See also [ edit ] Greywacke zone Torlesse Greywacke References [ edit ] ^ a b c Flett 1911 .

^ "The Geological Heritage of County Longford" (PDF) . The County Longford Geological Heritage Project . Retrieved 25 October 2022 .

^ Baiyegunhi, Christopher; Liu, Kuiwu; Gwavava, Oswald (2017-10-28).

"Modal composition and tectonic provenance of the sandstones of Ecca Group, Karoo Supergroup in the Eastern Cape Province, South Africa" .

Open Geosciences .

9 (1): 491– 508.

Bibcode : 2017OGeo....9...38B .

doi : 10.1515/geo-2017-0038 .

ISSN 2391-5447 .

^ a b "Ancient Egyptian Materials: Greywacke (schist)" .

www.hallofmaat.com . Retrieved 2023-09-01 .

^ Bryson, Bill (October 27, 2009).

A Short History of Nearly Everything (Kindle ed.). Crown. p. 80 . Retrieved July 24, 2022 .

In 1839, when Roderick Murchison published The Silurian System, a plump and ponderous study of a type of rock called greywacke, it was an instant best seller...

^ Bryson, Bill.

Short History of Nearly Everything (Kindle ed.). Crown. p. 85.

Martin J. S. Rudwick's excellent and somber account of the issue, The Great Devonian Controversy.

^ Davidson, Nick (2021).

The greywacke: how a priest, a soldier and a schoolteacher uncovered 300 million years of history . London: Profile Books.

ISBN 1788163788 .

^ Adam Savage's Tested (2022-07-19).

Worldbuilding a "Bigature" for Wētā Workshop Unleashed!

.

youtube.com . Retrieved 2023-03-27 .

Other works cited [ edit ] This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Flett, John Smith (1911). " Greywacke ". In Chisholm, Hugh (ed.).

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 12 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 592.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Greywacke .

Franciscan Greywacke/Shales National Park Service site Presidio v t e Types of rocks Igneous rock Adakite Alkali feldspar granite Andesite Anorthosite Aplite Basalt Alkali basalt Picrite basalt Basaltic trachyandesite Mugearite Shoshonite Basanite Blairmorite Boninite Carbonatite Charnockite Enderbite Dacite Diabase Diorite Napoleonite Dunite Essexite Foidolite Gabbro Granite Granodiorite Granophyre Harzburgite Hornblendite Hyaloclastite Icelandite Ignimbrite Ijolite Kimberlite Komatiite Lamproite Lamprophyre Latite Lherzolite Monzogranite Monzonite Nepheline syenite Nephelinite Norite Obsidian Pegmatite Peridotite Phonolite Phonotephrite Porphyry Pumice Pyroxenite Quartz diorite Quartz monzonite Quartzolite Rhyodacite Rhyolite Comendite Pantellerite Scoria Shonkinite Sovite Syenite Tachylyte Tephriphonolite Tephrite Tonalite Trachyandesite Benmoreite Trachybasalt Hawaiite Trachyte Troctolite Trondhjemite Tuff Websterite Wehrlite Sedimentary rock Argillite Arkose Banded iron formation Breccia Calcarenite Chalk Chert Claystone Coal Conglomerate Coquina Diamictite Diatomite Dolomite Evaporite Flint Geyserite Greywacke Gritstone Itacolumite Jaspillite Laterite Lignite Limestone Lumachelle Marl Mudstone Oil shale Oolite Phosphorite Sandstone Shale Siltstone Sylvinite Tillite Travertine Tufa Turbidite Varve Wackestone Metamorphic rock Anthracite Amphibolite Blueschist Cataclasite Eclogite Gneiss Granulite Greenschist Hornfels Calcflinta Itabirite Litchfieldite Marble Migmatite Mylonite Metapelite Metapsammite Phyllite Pseudotachylite Quartzite Schist Serpentinite Skarn Slate Suevite Talc carbonate Soapstone Tectonite Whiteschist Specific varieties Adamellite Appinite Aphanite Borolanite Blue Granite Epidosite Felsite Flint Ganister Gossan Hyaloclastite Ijolite Jadeitite Jasperoid Kenyte Lapis lazuli Larvikite Litchfieldite Llanite Luxullianite Mangerite Novaculite Pietersite Pyrolite Rapakivi granite Rhomb porphyry Rodingite Shonkinite Taconite Tachylite Teschenite Theralite Unakite Variolite Wad Authority control databases National Germany United States Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Greywacke&oldid=1293335583 " Categories : Sandstone Sedimentary rocks Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing German-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2007 Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 1 June 2025, at 04:25 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Greywacke 30 languages Add topic

