Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 History 3 Relations with other sciences Toggle Relations with other sciences subsection 3.1 Anthropology 3.2 Agriculture 3.3 Astronomy 3.4 History 3.5 Liturgy 4 References Toggle the table of contents Heortology 7 languages Deutsch Français Polski Português Русский Српски / srpski Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Science of rituals and celebrations This article may require cleanup to meet Wikipedia's quality standards . The specific problem is: Citations should appear within the prose after the authoritative information.

Please help improve this article if you can.

( June 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Heortology or eortology is a science that deals with the origin and development of religious festivals , [ 1 ] and more specifically the study of the history and criticism of liturgical calendars and martyrologies .

[ 2 ] Etymology [ edit ] The noun eortology comes from the ancient Greek compound of the term ἑορτή "feast" and the suffix - logia which means "study". Thus, eortology is the study of festivals, especially their history and meaning in the church year .

[ 3 ] History [ edit ] Christian heortology dates back at least to Johann Adam Trummerer's Eortologia Anagrammaike published in 1607.

[ 4 ] German Lutheran theologian Michael Lilienthal published a German-language heortology in 1724 to show the origin of Christian celebrations.

[ 5 ] Wilhelm Dibelius published the second eortological study of the Christian rite in German in 1841.

[ 6 ] In parallel with modern archaeology , studies also examined the question of the rites of Greek and Roman antiquity, following the work of August Mommsen , published in Leipzig in 1864 under the title of Heortologie: Antiquarische Untersuchungen über die städtischen Feste der Athener .

[ 7 ] Christian heortology particularly developed at the instigation of the Jesuit Nikolaus Nilles and the liturgical movement from the end of the 19th century. Prominent heortologists were the Sulpician Pierre Batiffol who published History of the Roman Breviary in 1893, Hartmann Grisar who published Analecta Romana in 1899, and the canon Louis Duchesne who published studies on the Origins of Christian worship . German scholar Karl Adam Heinrich Kellner published Heortologie, oder, das Kirchenjahr und die Heiligenfeste in ihrer geschichtlichen Entwicklung in Freiburg im Breisgau in 1901.

[ 8 ] As the Second Ecumenical Vatican Council approached, many heortologists published major works, such as Missarum Sollemnia: Genetic Explanation of the Roman Mass by the Jesuit Josef Andreas Jungmann , published first in German in 1948. At the same time, Mircea Eliade focused on the importance of religious thought on contemporary society through his heortological studies of primitive religions.

Relations with other sciences [ edit ] Heortology is related to many other disciplines such as social anthropology, astronomy, history and liturgy.

Anthropology [ edit ] Heortology has considerable importance in anthropology , as it associates time cycles with civilizations and civilizational patterns. Sociology, with Émile Durkheim as its precursor, raises the question of the importance of religion and, in particular, of religious celebrations, in society.

Anthropological philosophy questions the link that exists between collective celebrations and individual questions and fears. To what extent is the general perception of truths reflected in cults, rites and customs? A precursor of this problematic was Johan Huizinga with his book Homo Ludens . The study of the feasts that narrate the life of a saint or other character is of paramount importance, both from a philosophical and sociological point of view.

Agriculture [ edit ] Since agriculture was an important determinant of the sustainability of most ancient civilizations and is heavily influenced by annual cycles, it is normally heortology relies on the sciences of agriculture to explain the recurrence of the festivities.

Astronomy [ edit ] Heortology is also based on notions of astronomy . Certain festivities move over the years, either because they are linked to the cycles of the lunar evolution, or because they take into account the year of 360 days, i.e. 365 days, without counting the hours of difference between the complete return of the Earth around the Sun and revolutions around it.

Other cyclic temporal recurrence patterns have been found, such as the changing phases of Venus relative to Earth, influencing the timing of certain festivities.

History [ edit ] Heortology also relies on the science of history to understand the origin and evolution of rituals. A festival is generally a re-enactment of a solemn, legendary or real act. Thus, ancient civilizations commemorate as the victory of a hero over a serpent-god, or the betrothal of the Earth to the Sun while for Christians, Easter is the solemn celebration of the resurrection of Jesus Christ .

Liturgy [ edit ] Heortology, which is closely related to the liturgy itself, contributes to the importance of the latter in dogmatic and disciplinary dissertations.

References [ edit ] ^ Lichtenberger, Frédéric (1878).

Encyclopédie des sciences religieuses (in French). Sandoz et Fischbacher. p. 725.

^ Josip, Stadler (1896).

Gli studii eortologici e l'opera del P. Nilles . Bessarione: pubblicazione periodica di studi orientali (in Italian). E. Loescher & C. p. 475.

^ "heortology" .

Merriam-Webster . Retrieved 2024-01-28 .

^ Trummerer, Johann Adam (1607).

Eortologia Anagrammatikē, Sive Memoria Anniversaria Festorum Totius Anni Praecipuorum (in Latin). Bertschius.

^ Lilienthal, Michael (1724).

Eortologia das ist Catechetischer Unterricht von denen Evangelischen Festen und derselben gebührenden eyerung der Gemeine Gottes, etc (in German).

^ Dibelius, Wilhelm (1841).

Christliche Heortologie, oder die heiligen Zeiten der Christen: nach ihrem Ursprunge, ihrer Bedeutung und ihrer Feier dargestellt (in German). Kümmel.

^ Mommsen, August (1864).

Heortologie: antiquarische Untersuchungen über die städtischen Feste der Athener (in German). Teubner.

^ Kellner, Heinrich A. (1901).

Heortologie oder das Kirchenjahr und die Heiligenfeste in ihrer geschichtlichen Entwicklung (in German). Herder.

v t e Time in religion and mythology Aeon Calendar Deities Destiny Divination Eschatology Eternity Aevum Heortology Golden Age Prophecy Wheel of the Year Yuga v t e Parties and festivals Sorted by occasions, purposes or attributes Types Wedding -related Bachelor party Bachelorette party Bridal shower Engagement party Wedding reception Eid al-Adha Eid al-Fitr Banquets Eid cuisine State banquet Ball Debutante ball Hunt ball Symposium House parties Family reunion Cocktail party Housewarming party Sleepover LAN party Rent party Public parties Festivals Holidays Spring break Mischief Night New Year's Eve Arts festival Film awards seasons Religious festival Christmas Carnival Feasts Fools Food festival Beer Wine Harvest festival Social season Garden Tulip Winter Light Solstice Heortology Fairs World's fair State fair County fair Trade fair Picnic Block party Subway party Tailgate party Anniversary Jubilee Ceremony Children's party Baby shower Class reunion Costume party Masquerade party Drag party Toga party Naked party Crayfish party Cuddle party Dance party Prom Homecoming Foam party Hurricane party Kitty party Pamper party Parade Marching Pizza party Quiet party Ritual Stop light party Tea party Clothing Western dress codes Formal White tie Morning dress Semi-formal Black tie Black lounge suit Informal Suit Casual Wedding dress Contemporary Bridal crown Dress Evening gown Ball gown Debutante Opera gloves Cocktail dress Garters Casual Equipment Balloon Balloon modelling Confetti Cotton candy Deely bobber Float Glow stick Groucho glasses Party hat New Year's glasses Party bus Party horn Party popper Serpentine streamer Society portal Media Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Heortology&oldid=1199884650 " Categories : Religious festivals Social sciences Hidden categories: CS1 French-language sources (fr) CS1 Italian-language sources (it) CS1 Latin-language sources (la) CS1 German-language sources (de) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing cleanup from June 2022 All pages needing cleanup Cleanup tagged articles with a reason field from June 2022 Wikipedia pages needing cleanup from June 2022 This page was last edited on 28 January 2024, at 05:51 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Heortology 7 languages Add topic

