Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Definition 3 Classification in Roman Law Toggle Classification in Roman Law subsection 3.1 Sources 3.1.1 Contracts 3.1.2 Delicts 3.1.3 Quasi-contracts 3.1.4 Quasi-delicts 3.2 Subject matter 4 See also 5 References Toggle References subsection 5.1 Citations 5.2 Sources 5.3 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Law of obligations 41 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Беларуская Български Чӑвашла Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Français 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Íslenska Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Kurdî Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Română Русский Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Branch of private law The law of obligations is one branch of private law under the civil law legal system and so-called "mixed" legal systems. It is the body of rules that organizes and regulates the rights and duties arising between individuals. The specific rights and duties are referred to as obligations , and this area of law deals with their creation, effects and extinction.

An obligation is a legal bond ( vinculum iuris ) by which one or more parties (obligants) are bound to act or refrain from acting. An obligation thus imposes on the obligor a duty to perform, and simultaneously creates a corresponding right to demand performance by the obligee to whom performance is to be tendered.

History [ edit ] The word originally derives from the Latin "obligare" which comes from the root "lig" which suggests being bound, as one is to God for instance in "re-ligio".

[ 1 ] This term first appears in Plautus' play Truculentus at line 214.

Obligations did not originally form part of Roman Law , which mostly concerned issues of succession, property, and family relationships. It developed as a solution to a gap in the system, when one party committed a wrong against another party. These situations were originally governed by a basic customary law of revenge.

[ 2 ] This undesirable situation eventually evolved into a system of liability in which people were initially encouraged and later essentially compelled to accept monetary compensation from the wrongdoer or their family instead of seeking vengeance. This marked an important shift in the law from vengeance toward compensation. The state supported this effort by standardizing amounts for certain wrongs. Thus the earliest form of Obligation law derives out of what we would today call Delict.

[ 3 ] However, liability in this form did not yet include the idea that the debtor "owed" monetary compensation to the creditor, it was merely a means of avoiding punishment. If the debtor or his family didn't have the means to pay then the old rules still applied as outlined in the Twelve Tables , specifically Table III.

[ 4 ] This section, despite how harsh it may appear to us, was originally developed as a means to protect debtors from the excessive abuses of creditors.

[ 5 ] Definition [ edit ] Justinian first defines an obligation ( obligatio ) [ 6 ] in his Institutes , Book 3, section 13 as "a legal bond, with which we are bound by necessity of performing some act according to the laws of our State." [ 7 ] He further separates the law of obligations into contracts , delicts , quasi-contracts , and quasi-delicts .

Nowadays, obligation, as applied under civilian law, means a legal tie ( vinculum iuris ) by which one or more parties (obligants) are bound to perform or refrain from performing specified conduct (prestation).

[ 8 ] Thus an obligation encompasses both sides of the equation, both the obligor's duty to render prestation and the obligee's right to receive prestation. It differs from the common-law concept of obligation which only encompasses the duty aspect.

Every obligation has four essential requisites otherwise known as the elements of obligation. They are: the obligor : obligant duty-bound to fulfill the obligation; he who has a duty.

the obligee : obligant entitled to demand the fulfillment of the obligation; he who has a right.

the subject matter, the prestation: the performance to be tendered.

a legal bond , the vinculum juris: the cause that binds or connects the obligants to the prestation.

Classification in Roman Law [ edit ] Sources [ edit ] Obligations arising out of the will of the parties are called voluntary , and those imposed by operation of law are called involuntary . Sometimes these are called conventional and obediential. The events giving rise to obligations may be further distinguished into specified categories.

voluntary: unilateral promise ( pollicitatio ) - undertaking by promisor only to perform, not requiring the promisee's agreement contract quasi-contract negotiorum gestio - duty to repay an intervenor ( gestor ) who has managed the affairs or property of another ( dominus negotii ) who was unable to so solutio indebiti - undue payment or delivery of a thing to another ( accipiens ), who is then obligated to return the thing to the payer ( solvens ) involuntary: delicts and quasi-delicts (equivalent to the common-law tort ).

unjust enrichment ( condictio indebiti ) One of the first known classifications was made by Gaius in his Institutes , who divided obligations into obligations ex contractu (obligations arising from agreements) and obligations ex delicto (obligations arising from civil wrongs and crimes). However, since this dichotomy was too simplistic, in his later work Res cottidianae Gaius classified all obligations into the aforementioned obligations ex contractu , obligations ex delicto , and obligations ex variis causarum figuris , which was a heterogeneous category that was supposed to include all the cases of obligations not arising from torts or contracts.

The most precise Roman classification of obligations was featured in Justinian's Institutes (not to be confused by Gaius' Institutes ), which classified them as obligations arising from contracts ( ex contractu ), those arising from torts ( ex maleficio ), those arising from quasi-contracts ( quasi ex contractu ), and those arising from quasi-delicts ( quasi ex maleficio ).

[ 9 ] Contracts [ edit ] See also: Contract A contract can be broadly defined as an agreement that is enforceable at law.

Gaius classified contracts into four categories which are: contracts consensu , verbal contracts, contracts re , and contracts litteris . But this classification cannot cover all the contracts, such as pacts and innominate contracts; thus, it is no longer used. According to many modern legal scholars, the most important classification of contracts is that of contracts consensu, which only require the consent of wills to create obligations, and formal contracts, which have to be concluded in a specific form in order to be valid (for example, in many European countries a contract regulating the purchase of real estate must be concluded in a special written form that is validated by a public notary ).

[ 10 ] Delicts [ edit ] See also: Obligatio ex delicto Quasi-contracts [ edit ] Quasi-contracts are supposed to be sources of obligations very similar to contracts, but the main difference is that they are not created by an agreement of wills. The main cases are negotiorum gestio (conducting of another person's affairs without their authorization), unjust enrichment , and solutio indebiti .

[ 11 ] This Roman classification is quite controversial for today's standards, since many of these cases would be considered as completely different from contracts (most notably unjust enrichment), and would instead be classified as delicts or special sources of obligations. They are formed by implication from circumstances regardless of the assent or dissent of parties. They are called quasi-contracts. The following are the examples of quasi-contractual obligations under the Roman law; Quasi-delicts [ edit ] See also: Obligatio ex delicto § Obligationes quasi ex delicto The designation comprised a group of actions that are very similar to delicts, but lacking one of key elements of delicts. It includes res suspensae , responsibility for things poured or thrown out of buildings, responsibility of shippers/innkeepers/stablekeepers, and erring judges. For example, the responsibility of inn keepers creates obligations when certain things left by guests in the lodging are destroyed, damaged or lost by the innkeeper's assistants or employees . In this case, the innkeeper is responsible for the damages to the guest's property, even though he did not cause them personally.

[ 12 ] Subject matter [ edit ] Obligations are classified according to the nature of the performance (prestation): real obligation - related somehow to immovable property [ 13 ] obligation to give - obligations to give or possession, or enjoyment [ 14 ] specific obligation - delivery of a determinate thing when it is particularly designated or physically separated from all others of the same class [ 15 ] generic obligation - delivery of a generic thing [ 15 ] personal obligations - undertakings either to do or not do all kinds of work or service positive personal obligation - undertaking or obligation to do negative personal obligation - forbearance or obligation to not do See also [ edit ] Right Solidary obligations Swiss Code of Obligations References [ edit ] Citations [ edit ] ^ Zimmermann 1996 , p. 1.

^ see for example: Exodus 21.23-25 ^ Zimmermann 1996 , pp. 2–3.

^ XII tables, specifically Table III "Debt" ^ Zimmermann 1996 , p. 3.

^ Albanese, Bernardo. "Papimano e la definizione di obligatio in J, 3, 13, pr." (1984) 50 SDHI 166 sqq.

^ Justinian. "Institute." Trans. John B. Moyle. (Oxford: Oxford University Press. 1889) at 132 ^ J.-L. Baudouin, P.-G. Jobin, & N. Vézina, Les Obligations , 6th edn. (Cowansville: Yvon Blais, 2005), 19.

^ Bujuklić, Žika (2015).

Rimsko privatno pravo . Pravni fakultet Univerziteta u Beogradu. pp.

350– 351.

ISBN 978-86-7630-579-7 .

^ Perović, Slobodan (1980).

Obligaciono pravo . Privredna štampa.

^ Bujuklić, Žika (2015).

Rimsko privatno pravo . Pravni fakultet Univerziteta u Beogradu. p. 425.

ISBN 978-86-7630-579-7 .

^ Bujuklić, Žika (2015).

Rimsko privatno pravo . Pravni fakultet Univerziteta u Beogradu. pp.

430– 432.

ISBN 978-86-7630-579-7 .

^ "Legal definition of Real obligation" . legal-glossary.org. 9 March 2014. Archived from the original on March 9, 2014 . Retrieved 2014-03-09 .

^ "Gifts and Nations: The Obligation to Give, Receive [ sic ], and Repay" .

^ a b "Laws on Obligation and Contracts - Contract Law Essays" . 30 May 2020.

Sources [ edit ] Zimmermann, Reinhard (1996).

The Law of Obligations: Roman Foundations of the Civilian Tradition . Oxford University Press.

doi : 10.1093/acprof:oso/9780198764267.001.0001 .

ISBN 9780198764267 .

Further reading [ edit ] Stefano Bertea.

A theory of legal obligation . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2019.

Siel Demeyere.

Real obligations at the edge of contract and property . Cambridge: Intersentia, 2020.

Martin Hogg.

Obligations . Edinburgh: Avizandum, 2003.

Martin Hogg.

Obligations: law and language . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2017.

Alain A. Levasseur et al.

Louisiana law of obligations: a methodological and comparative perspective; cases, texts and materials , 2nd edn. Durham, NC: Carolina Academic Press, 2023.

Dário Moura Vicente.

Comparative law of obligations . Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar, 2023.

Daniel P. Visseur, ed.

The limits of the law of obligations . Kenwyn, SA: Juta, 1997.

Reinhard Zimmermann.

The new German law of obligations: historical and comparative perspectives . Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2006.

English law Andrew Burrows, ed.

Principles of the English law of obligations . Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2015.

Geoffrey Samuel.

Law of obligations and legal remedies , 2nd edn. London/Sydney: Cavendish, 2001.

Geoffrey Samuel.

Law of obligations . Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar, 2010.

Philippines law Hector de Leon & Hector de Leon, Jr.

Law on obligations and contracts , 12th edn. Manila: REX Book Store, 2021.

Andrix D. Domingo.

Obligations and contracts: Laws, principles, and jurisprudence , 4th edn. Benguet: Coaching for Results, 2020.

Elmer T. Rabuya.

Obligations and contracts . Manila: REX Book Store, 2019.

v t e Law Core subjects Administrative law Civil law Constitutional law Contract Criminal law Crime Deed Doctrine Equity Evidence International law Law of obligations Private law Procedure Civil Criminal Property law Public law Punishment Corporal Restitution and unjust enrichment Statutory law Tort Disciplines Abortion law Agricultural law Animal law Aviation law Amnesty law Banking law Bankruptcy Commercial law Competition law Conflict of laws Construction law Consumer protection Corporate law Cyberlaw Drugs law Election law Energy law Entertainment law (Media law) Environmental law Family law Financial law Financial regulation Health law Immigration law Intellectual property International criminal law International labour law International human rights International slavery laws International trade law Jurimetrics Labour Landlord–tenant law Law of war Legal archaeology Legal fiction Maritime law Marriage law Military law Music law Nationality law Probate Estate Will and testament Product liability Public international law Refugee law Space law Sports law State of emergency Tax law Transport law Trust law Unenforced law Sources of law Charter Legal code / Statutory law Constitution Custom Divine law Divine right Human rights Legitimacy Letters patent Man-made law Natural law Natural and legal rights Case law Precedent Law reports Legal treatise Regulations Law making Ballot measure Codification Decree Edict Executive order Proclamation Legislation Delegated legislation Regulation Rulemaking Promulgation Ratification Repeal Treaty Concordat Statutory law Statute Act of parliament Act of Congress Basic structure doctrine Legal systems Civil law Common law Chinese law Legal pluralism Religious law Canon law Catholic canon law Hindu law Jain law Jewish law Parsi law Sharia Roman law Byzantine law Socialist law Statutory law Xeer Yassa Legal theory Anarchist Contract theory Comparative law Expressive function Feminist Law and economics Legal ethics Legal formalism History Libertarian International legal theory Principle of legality Principle of typicality Pseudolaw Rule of law Rule of man Sociology Jurisprudence Adjudication Administration of justice Admission to practice law Constitutionalism Criminal justice Court-martial Disbarment Dispute resolution Fiqh Lawsuit/Litigation Legal opinion Legal remedy Damages Deterrence (penology) Proportionality Reparations Legal status Judge Justice of the peace Magistrate Judgment Judicial activism Judicial interpretation Judicial misconduct Kangaroo court Judicial review Jurisdiction Jury Justice Practice of law Attorney Barrister Counsel Lawyer Legal representation Prosecutor Solicitor Question of fact Question of law Trial Trial advocacy Trier of fact Ultra vires Verdict Legal institutions Barristers' chambers Bureaucracy The bar The bench Civil society Court Ecclesiastical Court of equity Election commission Executive Judiciary Law enforcement Agency Legal education Law school Legal industry by country Legislature Military Police Political party Tribunal History History of the legal profession History of the American legal profession Women in law Law portal Category Index Outline Authority control databases National United States Japan Czech Republic Latvia Israel Other Yale LUX Portal : Law NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐8g2tb
Cached time: 20250811235518
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.380 seconds
Real time usage: 0.486 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1204/1000000
Revision size: 13029/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 47516/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 888/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 4/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 45439/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.251/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 6088113/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  404.312      1 -total
 29.20%  118.074      1 Template:Reflist
 24.45%   98.846      1 Template:Law
 23.88%   96.531      1 Template:Navbox
 21.93%   88.679      5 Template:Cite_book
 15.20%   61.459      1 Template:Short_description
  8.75%   35.378      2 Template:Pagetype
  8.69%   35.148      1 Template:Authority_control
  8.56%   34.590      3 Template:Sfn
  6.88%   27.809      3 Template:See_also Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:214035:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250811235518 and revision id 1298402766. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Law_of_obligations&oldid=1298402766 " Category : Law of obligations Hidden categories: CS1: unfit URL Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 2 July 2025, at 07:54 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Law of obligations 41 languages Add topic

