Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Works Toggle Works subsection 2.1 Geography 2.2 History 3 See also 4 References Toggle References subsection 4.1 Citations 4.2 General and cited references 5 Further reading 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Abulfeda 38 languages العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা Català Deutsch Español فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Kurdî Latina Magyar മലയാളം Malti مصرى Bahasa Melayu 日本語 Norsk bokmål Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча پنجابی Polski Português Română Русский Slovenščina کوردی Svenska Татарча / tatarça Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська اردو 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Abu'l-Fida ) Kurdish historian, geographer and leader (1273–1331) For the lunar crater, see Abulfeda (crater) .

Abulfeda Born November 1273 Damascus , Mamluk Sultanate Died 27 October 1331 (1331-10-27) (aged 57) Hama , Mamluk Sultanate Occupation(s) Geographer , Historian , Ayyubid prince , Local governor of Hama Children Al-Afdal Muhammad Philosophical work Notable works Taqwim al-Buldan [ 1 ] Concise History of Humanity [ 1 ] al-Tariq al-Rashad Ila Taerif al-Mamalik wal-Bilad [ 1 ] Ismāʿīl bin ʿAlī bin Maḥmūd bin Muḥammad bin ʿUmar bin Shāhanshāh bin Ayyūb bin Shādī bin Marwān [ 2 ] ( Arabic : إسماعيل بن علي بن محمود بن محمد بن عمر بن شاهنشاه بن أيوب بن شادي بن مروان ), better known as Abū al-Fidāʾ or Abulfeda (Arabic: أبو الفداء ; November 1273 – 27 October 1331), [ 3 ] was a Mamluk -era Kurdish geographer , historian , Ayyubid prince and local governor of Hama .

[ 4 ] Life [ edit ] Abu'l-Fida was born in Damascus , [ 5 ] where his father Malik ul-Afdal, brother of Emir Al-Mansur Muhammad II of Hama , had fled from the Mongols . Abu'l-Fida was an Ayyubid prince of Kurdish origin.

[ 6 ] In his boyhood he devoted himself to the study of the Qur'an and the sciences, but from his twelfth year onward, he was almost constantly engaged in military expeditions, chiefly against the Crusaders .

[ 7 ] In 1285 he was present at the attack on a stronghold of the Knights of St. John , and took part in the sieges of Tripoli , Acre and Qal'at ar-Rum . In 1298 he entered the service of the Mamluk sultan Malik al-Nasir and after twelve years was invested by him with the governorship of Hama . In 1312 he became prince with the title Malik us-Salhn , and in 1320 received the hereditary rank of sultan with the title Malik ul-Mu'ayyad .

[ 7 ] He died in 1331.

[ 7 ] Works [ edit ] Geography [ edit ] Taqwim al-Buldan ("A Sketch of the Countries") is, like much of the history, founded on the works of his predecessors, including the works of Ptolemy and Muhammad al-Idrisi . A long introduction on various geographical matters is followed by twenty-eight sections dealing in tabular form with the chief towns of the world. After each name are given the longitude, latitude, climate, spelling, and then observations generally taken from earlier authors. Parts of the work were published and translated as early as 1650 in Europe .

[ 7 ] In his works Abu'l-Fida correctly mentions the latitude and longitude of the city of Quanzhou in China .

[ 8 ] The book also contains the first known explanation of the circumnavigator's paradox. Abu'l-Fida wrote that a person who completed a westward circumnavigation of the world would count one fewer day than a stationary observer, since he was traveling in the same direction as the apparent motion of the sun in the sky. A person traveling eastward would count one more day than a stationary observer.

[ 9 ] This phenomenon was confirmed two centuries later, when the Magellan–Elcano expedition (1519–1522) completed the first circumnavigation. After sailing westward around the world from Spain, the expedition called at Cape Verde for supplies on Wednesday, 9 July 1522 (ship's time). However, the locals told them that it was actually Thursday, 10 July 1522.

[ 10 ] History [ edit ] His Concise History of Humanity ( Arabic : المختصر في أخبار البشر Tarikh al-Mukhtasar fi Akhbar al-Bashar , also An Abridgment of the History at the Human Race , or History of Abu al-Fida تاريخ أبى الفداء ) was written between 1315 and 1329 as a continuation of The Complete History by Ali ibn al-Athir (c. 1231). It is in the form of annals extending from the creation of the world to the year 1329.

[ 11 ] It is divided into two parts, one covering the history of pre-Islamic Arabia and the other the history of Islam until 1329. It was kept up to date by other Arab historians,  by Ibn al-Wardi until 1348, and by Ibn al-Shihna until 1403. It was translated into Latin , [ 12 ] French and English and was the main work of Muslim historiography used by 18th-century orientalists including Jean Gagnier (1670–1740) and Johann Jakob Reiske (1754).

See also [ edit ] List of Kurdish philosophers List of Muslim historians Abulfeda , a crater on the Moon which was named after him References [ edit ] Citations [ edit ] ^ a b c فەرهەنگی زانیاری قاموس الأعلام ئینسایکلۆپیدیای کورد . pp.

١٤– ١٣.

^ Encyclopaedia Islamica . 16 October 2015.

^ Gibbs (1986), p. 119 ^ Encyclopedia of the History of Science, Technology and Medicine in Non-Western Cultures, (edited by) Helaine Selin, pp. 7–8, Kluwer Academic Publishers, Netherlands, 1997 Identifiants et Référentiels Sudoc Pour L'Enseignement Supérieur et la Recherche – Abū al-Fidā (1273–1331) (in French) ^ Chambers Biographical Dictionary , ISBN 0-550-18022-2 , page 5 ^ The Moslem World . Nile Mission Press. 1922 . Retrieved 5 December 2022 .

^ a b c d One or more of the preceding sentences incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911). " Abulfeda ".

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 1 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 80.

^ The Travels of Ibn Batūta: With Notes, Illustrative of the History , p. 211, at Google Books ^ Gunn, Geoffrey C. (15 October 2018).

Overcoming Ptolemy: The Revelation of an Asian World Region . Lanham, Maryland: Lexington Books. pp.

47– 48.

ISBN 9781498590143 .

^ Winfree, Arthur T. (2001).

The Geometry of Biological Time (2nd ed.). New York: Springer Science & Business Media. p. 10.

ISBN 978-1-4757-3484-3 .

^ Helaine Selin, Encyclopaedia of the History of Science, Technology, and Medicine in Non-Westen Cultures (1997), p. 7.

^ Henricus Orthobius Fleischer, Abulfedae historia anteislamica, arabice: E duobus codicibus bibliothecae regiae Parisiensis, 101 et 615 , F.C.W. Vogel (1831).

General and cited references [ edit ] Gibb, H. A. R.

(1986).

"Abu'l Fidā" .

The Encyclopaedia of Islam . Vol. 1: A–B . Leiden, The Netherlands: Brill. pp.

118– 119.

Studies on Abul-Fida' al-Ḥamawi (1273–1331 A.D.) by Farid Ibn Faghül, Carl Ehrig-Eggert, E. Neubauer. Institute for the History of Arabic-Islamic Science (Institut für Geschichte der Arabisch-Islamischen Wissenschaften) at the Johann Wolfgang Goethe University, Frankfurt am Main, Germany, 1992.

Encyclopedie de l'Islam (in French) , 2nd ed. E.J. Brill, Leiden and G.P. Maisonneuve, Paris, 1960.

Further reading [ edit ] de Slane, Baron (1872).

"Autobiographie d'Abou 'L-Fedā: Extraite de sa chronicle" .

Recueil des Historiens des Croisades: Historiens Orientaux (in French). Vol. 1. Paris: Imprimerie Nationale. pp.

166– 186, 745– 751.

External links [ edit ] Vernet, J. (2008) [1970–80].

"Abu'l-Fidāʾ Ismāʿīl Ibn ʿAlī Ibn Maḥmūd Ibn ... Ayyūb, ʿImād Al-Dīn" .

Complete Dictionary of Scientific Biography . Encyclopedia.com.

Abulfedae tabulae quaedam geographicae, nunc primum Arab. ed., Lat. vertit, notis illustr. H.F ... (1835) Abul Fida Ismail Ibn Hamwi at the Salaam Biographical Dictionary Tabari The Scholars of Hama v t e Rulers of the Ayyubid dynasty Sultans of Egypt (1171–1250) Saladin al-Aziz Uthman al-Mansur Nasir al-Din al-Adil I al-Kamil al-Adil II as-Salih Ayyub al-Muazzam Turanshah Shajar al-Durr al-Ashraf Musa Emirs of Damascus (1174–1260) Saladin al-Afdal al-Adil I al-Mu'azzam Isa an-Nasir Dawud al-Ashraf Musa as-Salih Ismail as-Salih Ayyub al-Muazzam Turanshah an-Nasir Yusuf Emirs of Aleppo (1177–1260) az-Zahir Ghazi al-Aziz Muhammad Dayfa Khatun (regent) an-Nasir Yusuf Emirs of Homs (1175–1262) Asad ad-Din Shirkuh Muhammad ibn Shirkuh al-Mujahid al-Mansur Ibrahim al-Ashraf Musa Emirs of Hama (1175–1341) al-Muzaffar I Umar al-Mansur I Muhammad al-Nasir Kilij Arslan al-Muzaffar II Mahmud al-Mansur II Muhammad al-Muzaffar III Mahmud al-Mu'ayyad Abu al-Fida al-Afdal Muhammad Emirs of Diyar Bakr (1180–1260) al-Awhad Ayyub al-Ashraf Musa al-Muzaffar Ghazi al-Kamil Muhammad Emirs of Yemen and Hejaz (1173–1228) Turan-Shah Tughtakin ibn Ayyub al-Muizz Ismail an-Nasir Ayyub al-Muzaffar Sulaiman al-Mas'ud Yusuf Emirs of Baalbek (1175–1260) Ibn al-Muqaddam Turan-Shah Farrukhshah Bahramshah al-Ashraf Musa as-Salih Ismail as-Salih Ayyub Saʿd al-Din al-Humaidi an-Nasir Yusuf v t e Muslim historians Historians 7th century Aban bin Uthman Urwah ibn Zubayr Ibn Shihab al-Zuhri 8th century Hisham ibn al-Kalbi Ibn Ishaq Al-Waqidi Abu Mikhnaf Sayf ibn Umar Al-Mada'ini Ibn Lahi'a Issa ibn Abi al-Muhajir 9th century Ibn ʽAbd al-Hakam Khalifah ibn Khayyat Ibn Hisham Ya'qubi Al-Tabari Al-Baladhuri Ibn Sa'd Al-Zubayr ibn Bakkar Al-Azraqi Abu Hanifa Dinawari Ibn Qutaybah Al-Mada'ini 10th century Ibn al-Nadim Ibn Duraid Ibn al-Qūṭiyya Al-Masudi Miskawayh al-Suli Al-Qadi al-Nu'man Abu al-Arab Abu Muhammad al-Hamdani Al-Musabbihi al-Kindi Ibn al-Saghir 11th century Arabic Ibn Faradi Ibn Hayyan Said al-Andalusi Al-Udri Al-Bakri Ibn Hazm Hilal al-Sabi' Al-Khatib al-Baghdadi Al-Quda'i Ibn Bassam Persian Abu'l-Fadl Bayhaqi Abu Sa'id Gardezi 12th century Arabic Mohammed al-Baydhaq Ibn al-Jawzi Abd al-Latif al-Baghdadi Ibn al-Qalanisi Ibn ʽAsakir Usama ibn Munqidh Imad ad-Din al-Isfahani Baha ad-Din ibn Shaddad Ibn Hammad Al-Jawwani Ibn al-Sam'ani Persian Muhammad bin Ali Rawandi 13th century Arabic Yaqut al-Hamawi 'Abd al-Wahid al-Marrakushi Ibn Amira Ibn Jubayr Ibn al-Kardabūs Ibn al-Adim Ibn al-Athir Sibt ibn al-Jawzi Ibn Khallikan Al-Qifti Ibn Abi Zar Persian Ibn Bibi Muhammad Aufi Ibn Isfandiyar Minhaj-i-Siraj Ata-Malik Juvayni Rashid-al-Din Hamadani 14th century Arabic Abu'l-Fida Ibn Idhari Al-Dhahabi Ibn Battuta Ibn al-Khatib Ibn Fadlallah al-Umari Ibn Kathir Ibn al-Tiqtaqa Ibn al-Furat Al-Mufaddal Ibn Khaldun al-ʽAsqalani Persian Hamdallah Mustawfi Wassaf Ziauddin Barani Hafiz-i Abru 15th century Arabic al-Maqrizi Ibn Taghribirdi Al-Sakhawi Al-Suyuti Ibn Ghazi al-Miknasi Persian Sharaf ad-Din Ali Yazdi Mirkhvand Mullah Nadiri Zahir al-Din Mar'ashi Fazlallah Khunji Isfahani Idris Bitlisi Yahya bin Ahmad Sirhindi Turkish Oruç Bey Aşıkpaşazade Enveri Ibn Kemal Neshri Tursun Beg 16th century Arabic Ibn Iyas Mujir al-Din Abd al-Aziz al-Fishtali Ibn al-Qadi Mar'i al-Karmi Persian Abu'l-Fazl ibn Mubarak Muhammad Khwandamir ʽAbd al-Qadir Badayuni Nizamuddin Ahmad Firishta Iskandar Beg Munshi Sharafkhan Bidlisi Turkish Mustafa Âlî Lûtfi Pasha Matrakçı Nasuh Sadeddin Effendi Mustafa Selaniki Taşköprüzade 17th century Arabic Ahmed Mohammed al-Maqqari Katib Çelebi Ibn al-Imad al-Hanbali Persian Shaikh Inayat Allah Kamboh Muhammad Saleh Kamboh Abd al-Fattah Fumani Mohsin Fani Turkish Ottoman Ibrahim Petchevi Solakzade Mehmed Hemdemi Kâtip Çelebi Munejjim Bashi Silahdar Findiklili Mehmed Agha Osman Aga of Temesvar Mustafa Naima Al-Hasan al-Burini Abdi Pasha Chagatai Abu al-Ghazi Bahadur Kurdish Ahmad Khani 18th century Arabic Mohammed al-Ifrani Mohammed al-Qadiri Khalil al-Muradi al-Zayyani al-Jabarti Persian Mirza Mehdi Khan Astarabadi Abol-Hasan Golestaneh Turkish Ahmed Resmî Efendi 19th century Arabic Ahmad ibn Khalid al-Nasiri Mohammad Farid Ahmad ibn Abi Diyaf Jurji Zaydan Persian Jalal al-Din Mirza Qajar Agha Ahmad Ali Reza-Qoli Khan Hedayat Turkish Ottoman Ali Amiri Ahmed Cevdet Pasha Ahmed Cevad Pasha Azerbaijani Mirza Adigozal bey Ahmad bey Javanshir Karim agha Shakikhanov Kurdish Mahmud Bayazidi Mastoureh Ardalan Notable works The Meadows of Gold History of the Prophets and Kings Mu'jam al-Buldan Concise History of Humanity The Complete History Al-Bidaya wa'l-Nihaya The Remaining Signs of Past Centuries Futuh al-Buldan Kitab al-I'tibar Al-Milal wa al-Nihal History of the Caliphs Kitab al-Rawd al-Mitar Tarikh al-Yaqubi Muqaddimah Book of Idols Rihla Concepts Isnad Islamic calendar Biographical evaluation Biographical dictionary Hadith studies Tabaqat Isra'iliyyat v t e Geography and cartography in the medieval Islamic world Geographers 9th century Al-Khwarizmi Abu Hanifa Dinawari Ya'qubi Sulaiman al-Tajir 10th century Ibn Khordadbeh Ahmad ibn Rustah Ahmad ibn Fadlan Abu Zayd al-Balkhi Abu Muhammad al-Hasan al-Hamdani Al-Masudi Istakhri Khashkhash Ibn Saeed Ibn Aswad Ibn Hawqal Ibn al-Faqih Al-Muqaddasi Buzurg ibn Shahriyar Qudama ibn Ja'far 11th century Al-Biruni Abu Saʿīd Gardēzī Al-Bakri Mahmud al-Kashgari Domiyat 12th century al-Zuhri Muhammad al-Idrisi Abu'l Abbas al-Hijazi 13th century Ibn Jubayr Saadi Shirazi Yaqut al-Hamawi Ibn Said al-Maghribi Ibn al-Nafis Ibn al-Mujawir 14th century Al-Dimashqi Abu'l-Fida Ibn al-Wardi Hamdallah Mustawfi Ibn Battuta Lin Nu 15th century Abd-al-Razzāq Samarqandī Ghiyāth al-dīn Naqqāsh Ahmad ibn Mājid Zheng He Ma Huan Fei Xin 16th century Sulaiman Al Mahri Piri Reis Mir Ahmed Nasrallah Thattvi Amīn Rāzī 17th century Evliya Çelebi Works Book of Roads and Kingdoms (al-Bakrī) Book of Roads and Kingdoms (ibn Khordadbeh) Tabula Rogeriana Kitab al-Rawd al-Mitar Mu'jam Al-Buldan Rihla The Meadows of Gold Piri Reis map Kitab al-Kharaj Influences Geography (Ptolemy) Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Greece Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Belgium Academics CiNii People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef İslâm Ansiklopedisi Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Abulfeda&oldid=1299782612 " Categories : 1273 births 1331 deaths 13th-century Kurdish people 14th-century Kurdish people 14th-century Arabic-language writers 14th-century geographers 14th-century Ayyubid rulers 14th-century Syrian historians Ayyubid emirs of Hama Geographers of the medieval Islamic world Kurdish scientists Kurdish historians Kurdish geographers Kurdish scholars Historians from the Mamluk Sultanate Writers from Damascus Hidden categories: Articles with French-language sources (fr) Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from October 2024 Articles with hCards Articles containing Arabic-language text CS1: long volume value CS1 French-language sources (fr) This page was last edited on 10 July 2025, at 09:58 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Abulfeda 38 languages Add topic

