Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Role in the Calculus War 3 Notes 4 References Toggle the table of contents Acta Eruditorum 18 languages Català Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Français 한국어 Italiano עברית Қазақша Nederlands Polski Português Română Русский Svenska Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia European scientific journal (1682–1782) Academic journal Nova Acta Eruditorum Language Latin Publication details Former name(s) Acta Eruditorum History 1682–1782 Standard abbreviations ISO 4 ( alt ) · Bluebook ( alt ) NLM · MathSciNet ISO 4 Nova Acta Erud.

Acta Eruditorum (from Latin : Acts of the Erudite ) was the first scientific journal of the German-speaking lands of Europe , published from 1682 to 1782.

[ 1 ] History [ edit ] Acta Eruditorum was founded in 1682 in Leipzig by Otto Mencke , who became its first editor, [ 1 ] with support from Gottfried Leibniz in Hanover , [ 2 ] who contributed 13 articles over the journal's first four years.

[ 3 ] It was published by Johann Friedrich Gleditsch , with sponsorship from the Duke of Saxony , and was patterned after the French Journal des savants and the Italian Giornale de'letterati . The journal was published monthly, entirely in Latin, and contained excerpts from new writings, reviews, small essays and notes. Most of the articles were devoted to the natural sciences and mathematics, including contributions (apart from Leibniz) from, e.g., Jakob Bernoulli , Humphry Ditton , Leonhard Euler , Ehrenfried Walther von Tschirnhaus , Pierre-Simon Laplace and Jérôme Lalande , but also from humanists and philosophers such as Veit Ludwig von Seckendorff , Stephan Bergler , Christian Thomasius and Christian Wolff .

After Otto Mencke 's death in 1707, Acta Eruditorum was directed by his son, Johann Burckhardt Mencke, who died in 1732. The journal had changed its name by then to Nova Acta Eruditorum . Beginning in 1756 it was led by Karl Andreas Bel.

Role in the Calculus War [ edit ] Although Mencke once exchanged letters and publications with Isaac Newton , Newton was not a correspondent of Acta .

[ 4 ] The dispute between Newton and Leibniz over credit for the development of differential calculus started with a contribution by Leibniz to the May 1697 issue of Acta Eruditorum , in response to which Fatio de Duillier , feeling slighted by being omitted from Leibniz's list of the best mathematicians of Europe, announced that Newton had discovered calculus before Leibniz and the last had probably even relied on Newton's achievements. In the following acrimonious squabble, Acta by and large acted as a mouthpiece for Leibniz's camp, much as Philosophical Transactions did for Newton's. Mencke tried to tone down the dispute, but rebuttals from both sides were too forceful. "Where Mencke was powerless to call the tune, he did his utmost at least to set the tone," says H. Laeven in his description of the row.

[ 4 ] This dispute also influenced Acta to express the feelings of national cohesion and defining German scholarship within the international field of influence.

[ 4 ] Notes [ edit ] ^ a b "MAA Euler Archive, information page for the journal Acta Eruditorum " . Archived from the original on 2012-02-08 . Retrieved 2008-03-09 .

^ Leibniz , article in the Nordisk Familjebok home encyclopedia, 2nd ed. (in Swedish) ^ Antognazza, Maria Rosa (2009).

Leibniz: An Intellectual Biography . Cambridge. p. 239.

^ a b c Laeven, H. (1990).

The Acta Eruditorum under the Editorship of Otto Mencke. The History of an International Learned Journal between 1682 and 1707 . Translated by L. Richards. Amsterdam: APA-Holland University Press.

References [ edit ] H. Laeven, "The "Acta Eruditorum" under the Editorship of Otto Mencke. The History of an International Learned Journal between 1682 and 1707" , trans. L. Richards, Amsterdam: APA-Holland University Press, 1990. Electronic version available through repository of University Library Nijmegen.

A.H. Laeven and L.J.M. Laeven-Aretz, "The authors and reviewers of the Acta Eruditorum 1682-1735" , Molenhoek, The Netherlands, 2014. [electronic publication]. Identifies and lists all authors and reviewers of individual contributions between 1682 and 1735. Available through repositories of University Library Leipzig and University Library Nijmegen.

(Nova) Acta Eruditorum Archived 2019-09-07 at the Wayback Machine : table of contents, 1682-1776 Authority control databases International VIAF National Germany Israel Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Acta_Eruditorum&oldid=1303515888 " Categories : Academic journals established in 1682 Publications disestablished in 1782 Defunct journals Multidisciplinary academic journals Magazines published in Leipzig Latin-language journals Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata ISSN needed Pages calling infobox journal with no website parameter Articles containing Latin-language text Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 31 July 2025, at 12:45 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Acta Eruditorum 18 languages Add topic

