Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Aboriginal water source Toggle Aboriginal water source subsection 1.1 Cleaning and maintaining the well 2 Recording well locations 3 White explorers and the wells 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Soakage (source of water) 1 language Simple English Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Source of water in the deserts of Australia A soakage , or soak, is a source of water in Australian deserts .

It is called thus because the water generally seeps into the sand, and is stored below, sometimes as part of an ephemeral river or creek.

Aboriginal water source [ edit ] Soakages were traditionally important sources of water for Aboriginal Australians in the desert, being the most dependable source in times of drought in Australia .

Aboriginal peoples would scoop out the sand or mud using a coolamon or woomera , often to a depth of several metres, until clean water gathered in the base of the hole. Knowing the precise location of each soakage was extremely valuable knowledge. It is also sometimes called a native well .

Anthropologist Donald Thomson wrote: For a white man the difficulty in this country is that there is no way in which he can find the wells and soaks unless he does so by chance, and certainly nothing to indicate that the well is there, nor as a rule, even when the terrain and at least its superficial geological formation, the lie of the country, is examined, is there anything to explain the presence of water when he does find it ...

A lifetime of experience, backed by the traditional knowledge that is handed down from generation to generation, enables these people [the Pintupi in this instance] to judge, without having to visit a well that they know, whether it will still contain water and whether, if dry, with the sides fallen in and the well full of debris, it is worth cleaning out.

[ 1 ] : 85 Cleaning and maintaining the well [ edit ] Wells were covered to keep them free from fouling by animals. This involved blocking the well with dead branches and uprooted trees. When the wells fell into disrepair, people would bail the well, using the coolamon to throw slush against the wall. This would set like a cement wash and help to hold loose sand, preventing it from falling into the water.

Wells could be up to fifteen feet deep, with small toe holds cut into the walls.

[ 1 ] : 23 Recording well locations [ edit ] Donald Thomson writes: Just before we left, the old men recited to me the names of more than fifty waters – wells, rockholes and claypans ... this, in an area that the early explorers believed to be almost waterless, and where all but a few were, in 1957, still unknown to the white man. And on the eve of our going, Tjappanongo ( Tjapanangka ) produced spear-throwers , on the backs of which were designs deeply incised, more or less geometric in form. Sometimes with a stick, or with his finger, he would point to each well or rock hole in turn and recite its name, waiting for me to repeat it after him. Each time, the group of old men listened intently and grunted in approval – "Eh!" – or repeated the name again and listened once more. This process continued with the name of each water until they were satisfied with my pronunciation, when they would pass on to the next.
I realized that here was the most important discovery of the expedition – that what Tjappanongo and the old men had shown me was really a map, highly conventionalized, like the works on a " message" or "letter" stick of the Aborigines, of the waters of the vast terrain over which the Bindibu hunted.

[ 2 ] White explorers and the wells [ edit ] In the nineteenth century, both Warburton and Carnegie recorded that they had run down Aboriginal residents with camels and captured and chained them to compel them to reveal their secret sources of water. This action left a lasting impression on Aboriginal residents of desert regions, who would have handed accounts of this down through successive generations.

[ 1 ] : 7 In the 1930s, when H. H. Finlayson made his journeys through the desert by camel, he noted that a gelded male camel, after a hard three-and-a-half-day journey in intense heat without water, drank 150 litres (33 imperial gallons) by actual measure without stopping, and fifteen minutes later, another 45 L (10 imp gal).

This sheds light on the resentment built up among the Aboriginal population against explorers for the exploitation and, by enlarging well entrances and digging out springs, the devastation of their precious water supplies to satisfy camel teams.

[ 1 ] : 135 Don McLeod (Aboriginal rights activist, see Pilbara ) also tells a story of clashes over soak water at the time of the gold rushes in Western Australia: During the time of the Laverton rush, the Blackfellows tried to keep their meager water supplies hidden from the knowledge of white prospectors since their horses and camels quickly exhausted the limited soaks.

McLeod relates a story told to him by an old prospector by the name of Long, observing an Aboriginal man and woman: The man took the throwing stick he was carrying and worked it into the sand. He then broke off a hollow reed and, placing it in the hole he had thus developed, lay down on his stomach and appeared to suck up something through the reed. His companion repeated his movements before they quietly moved on...

Without delay Long, with the aid of a shovel, proved the existence of a soak of sweet water, from which he replenished his supplies...Only a few days later in the same place, another prospector had the same Blackfellow bailed up, threatening to shoot him unless he revealed a source of water. This was certainly not an untypical bush encounter. However, [they were] interrupted by yet another prospector riding a camel. The Blackfellow took advantage of the confusion and threw a spear into the bush and escaped.

On the diggings, a hue and cry was raised over this alleged murderous attack and a party was quickly organised to set out and teach the Blackfellows a lesson – for daring to protect their water. Mustering what guns they could, the punitive party went out to what later became known as Skull Creek, and shot every Blackfellow they could find. The bodies were buried in shallow graves.

[ 3 ] See also [ edit ] Bindibu Expedition Canning Stock Route Claypan Groundwater Waterhole Soak dike References [ edit ] ^ a b c d Thomson, Donald, Bindibu Country , Nelson Publishing, Melbourne, 1975.

^ Thomson, Donald F., "The Bindibu Expedition: exploration among the desert Aborigines of Western Australia", The Geographical Journal , vol. 128, part 1 (March 1962), pp. 1–14, [143]–157, 262-278. [Q 306.0899915 THO] ^ Don McLeod, How the West was Lost , self-published, Port Hedland, 1984, pp27-28 External links [ edit ] Look up soakage (source of water) in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Us Mob - Finding water in the desert v t e Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islanders Peoples Aboriginal Australians Communities Aboriginal groups Tasmanians Torres Strait Islanders Victorians Western Australians Individuals Activists Musicians People from politics and public service Performing artists Sportspeople Visual artists Writers Culture Astronomy Bora Corroboree Country Deadly Awards Deities The Dreaming Enumeration Elders Flags Aboriginal Torres Strait Islander Kinship Kurdaitcha Literature of Indigenous Australians Marn Grook Message stick NAIDOC Week National Indigenous Human Rights Awards Outstation movement Religion and mythology Riji Seasons Sacred sites Smoking ceremony Songlines Traditional custodianship Tjurunga Torres Strait Islands Language(s) Avoidance speech Australian Aboriginal English Macro-Gunwinyguan languages Australian Creole Language groups Loanwords into English Palawa Pama–Nyungan languages Placenames Sign languages Taboo on the dead Torres Strait English Torres Strait Island languages Organisations ATSIC Aboriginal Medical Service Aborigines Advancement League Aborigines Progressive Association AIATSIS Australian Aboriginal Progressive Association Australian Aborigines' League Mass media National Congress of Australia's First Peoples National Indigenous Council Office of the Registrar of Indigenous Corporations Politics Registered Aboriginal Party Reconciliation Australia National Reconciliation Week Sorry Day TSRA Land councils Central Land Council Kimberley Land Council Maralinga Tjarutja Metropolitan Local Aboriginal Land Council NSW Aboriginal Land Council Northern Land Council South West Aboriginal Land and Sea Council Tiwi Land Council Bushcraft Boomerang Buka Bush bread Bush tucker Bush medicine Coolamon Dugout canoe Fibrecraft Fire-stick farming Food groups Humpy Possum-skin cloak Scarred tree Soaks Spinifex resin Sweets Waddy Woomera Arts Artefacts Bark painting Contemporary visual art Dance Didgeridoo Dreaming Music Music groups Rock NATSIA Award Papunya Tula Sandpainting Vibe Visual art Yininmadyemi History Aboriginal Land Rights Act 1976 Australian Frontier Wars Bathurst War Hawkesbury and Nepean Wars Caledon Bay crisis Cummeragunja walk-off Day of Mourning Gurindji Strike Historical figures History Prehistory Australian history wars King plates Massacres Black War Missions Native police Native Title Act 1993 New Deal for Aborigines Pilbara strike Pintupi Nine Stolen Generations Apology Tent embassy Western Australia Issues 1967 Referendum Constitutional recognition Crime Health Land rights Native title Protected Area Media portrayal Northern Territory National Emergency Response Self-determination Reconciliation Stolen Generations Half-Caste Act Uluru Statement from the Heart Treaty Truth Voice Voting rights NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐gvfdc
Cached time: 20250812030956
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.232 seconds
Real time usage: 0.307 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2058/1000000
Revision size: 7712/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 45318/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 5516/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 18/100
Expensive parser function count: 2/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 0/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 14454/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.118/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 3655535/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  252.260      1 -total
 27.94%   70.483      1 Template:Indigenous_Australians
 27.57%   69.551      2 Template:Navbox
 23.90%   60.283      1 Template:Short_description
 13.39%   33.782      4 Template:Quote
 12.94%   32.653      4 Template:Rp
 12.89%   32.528      2 Template:Pagetype
 11.06%   27.905      4 Template:R/superscript
  9.81%   24.736      1 Template:Wiktionary
  9.23%   23.275      1 Template:Sister_project Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:7685674:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812030956 and revision id 1218558602. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Soakage_(source_of_water)&oldid=1218558602 " Categories : Geography of Australia History of Indigenous Australians Australian Aboriginal bushcraft Australian English Water Hydrology Aquifers Water wells Exploration of Western Australia Agriculture in Australia Water supply and sanitation in Australia Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use Australian English from July 2018 All Wikipedia articles written in Australian English Use dmy dates from July 2018 This page was last edited on 12 April 2024, at 12:39 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Soakage (source of water) 1 language Add topic

