Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Psychological theory Toggle Psychological theory subsection 2.1 Five basic orientations 2.2 Fromm's influence on other notable psychologists 3 Critique of Freud 4 Political ideas and activism 5 Criticism 6 Works Toggle Works subsection 6.1 Early work in German 6.2 Later works in English 7 See also 8 Explanatory notes 9 References 10 Further reading 11 External links Toggle the table of contents Erich Fromm 69 languages Afrikaans العربية Aragonés Asturianu Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Bosanski Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Kurdî Кыргызча Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Nordfriisk Norsk bokmål Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Polski Português Română Русский Scots Shqip Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt Winaray 吴语 Yorùbá 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia German-American sociologist and psychoanalyst (1900–1980) For the tennis player, see Eric Fromm .

Erich Fromm Fromm in 1974 Born Erich Seligmann Fromm March 23, 1900 Frankfurt am Main , German Empire Died March 18, 1980 (1980-03-18) (aged 79) Muralto , Ticino , Switzerland Education Education University of Frankfurt am Main Heidelberg University ( PhD , 1922) Philosophical work Era 20th-century philosophy Region Western philosophy School Continental philosophy Frankfurt School psychoanalysis Marxist humanism humanistic Judaism Institutions University of Frankfurt am Main Columbia University Main interests Social psychology , social theory Notable ideas Being and having as modes of existence , security versus freedom , social character , character orientation Part of a series on the Frankfurt School Major works Dialectic of Enlightenment Eclipse of Reason Eros and Civilization Escape from Freedom Minima Moralia Negative Dialectics One-Dimensional Man Reason and Revolution The Structural Transformation of the Public Sphere The Theory of Communicative Action " The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction " Notable theorists Adorno Apel Benjamin Fromm Forst Grünberg Geuss Habermas Honneth Horkheimer Jaeggi Kluge Kracauer Kirchheimer Kompridis Kuhlmann Löwenthal Marcuse McCarthy Negt Neumann Offe Pollock Schmidt Sohn-Rethel Wellmer Wingert Important concepts Advanced capitalism Antipositivism Communicative rationality Critical theory Culture industry Dialectic Legitimation crisis Non-identity Popular culture Praxis Privatism Psychoanalysis Related topics Cultural Marxism conspiracy theory Freudo-Marxism Marxist humanism Recognition Reification Social alienation Western Marxism Philosophy portal Society portal v t e Part of a series of articles on Psychoanalysis Sigmund Freud's couch Concepts Psychosexual development Psychosocial development (Erikson) Unconscious Preconscious Consciousness Psychic apparatus Id, ego and superego Ego defenses Projection Introjection Libido Drive Transference Countertransference Resistance Denial Dreamwork Cathexis Important figures Abraham Adler Balint Bion Breuer Chodorow Erikson Fairbairn Ferenczi Freud (Anna) Freud (Sigmund) Fromm Guattari Horney Irigaray Jacobson Jones Jung Kohut Klein Kristeva Lacan Laing Laplanche Mahler Rank Reich Spielrein Stekel Strachey Sullivan Winnicott Žižek Important works The Interpretation of Dreams (1899) The Psychopathology of Everyday Life (1901) Three Essays on the Theory of Sexuality (1905) Psychology of the Unconscious (1912) Beyond the Pleasure Principle (1920) The Ego and the Id (1923) Civilization and Its Discontents (1930) The Mass Psychology of Fascism (1933) The Four Fundamental Concepts of Psychoanalysis (1964) Anti-Oedipus (1972) The Sublime Object of Ideology (1989) Schools of thought Adlerian Ego psychology Jungian Lacanian Interpersonal Intersubjective Marxist Object relations Reichian Relational Self psychology Training Boston Graduate School of Psychoanalysis British Psychoanalytic Council British Psychoanalytical Society Columbia University Center for Psychoanalytic Training and Research International Psychoanalytical Association World Association of Psychoanalysis List of schools of psychoanalysis See also Child psychoanalysis Depth psychology Psychodynamics Psychoanalytic theory Psychology portal v t e Erich Seligmann Fromm ( / f r ɒ m / ; German: [fʁɔm] ; March 23, 1900 – March 18, 1980) was a German-American social psychologist , psychoanalyst , sociologist , humanistic philosopher , and democratic socialist . He was a German Jew who fled the Nazi regime and settled in the United States. He was one of the founders of The William Alanson White Institute of Psychiatry, Psychoanalysis and Psychology in New York City and was associated with the Frankfurt School of critical theory .

[ 1 ] [ n 1 ] Life [ edit ] Erich Fromm was born on March 23, 1900, at Frankfurt am Main , the only child of Rosa (née Krause) and Naphtali Fromm.

[ 2 ] He started his academic studies in 1918 at the University of Frankfurt am Main with two semesters of jurisprudence . During the summer semester of 1919, Fromm studied at the University of Heidelberg , where he began studying sociology under Alfred Weber (brother of sociologist Max Weber ), psychiatrist-philosopher Karl Jaspers , and Heinrich Rickert . Fromm received his Ph.D.

in sociology from Heidelberg in 1922 with a dissertation under the title Das jüdische Gesetz. Ein Beitrag zur Soziologie des Diaspora-Judentums ( The Jewish Law: A Contribution to the Sociology of Jewish Diaspora ).

Fromm at the time became strongly involved in Zionism , under the influence of the religious Zionist rabbi Nehemia Anton Nobel.

[ 3 ] He was very active in Jewish Studentenverbindungen and other Zionist organisations.
But he soon turned away from Zionism, saying that it conflicted with his ideal of a "universalist Messianism and Humanism".

[ 4 ] During the mid-1920s, he trained to become a psychoanalyst through Frieda Reichmann 's psychoanalytic sanatorium in Heidelberg . They married in 1926, but separated shortly after and divorced in 1942. He began his own clinical practice in 1927. In 1930 he joined the Frankfurt Institute for Social Research and completed his psychoanalytical training.

After the Nazi takeover of power in Germany, Fromm moved first to Geneva and then, in 1934, to Columbia University in New York. Together with Karen Horney and Harry Stack Sullivan , Fromm belongs to a Neo-Freudian school of psychoanalytical thought. Horney and Fromm each had a marked influence on the other's thought, with Horney illuminating some aspects of  psychoanalysis for Fromm and the latter elucidating sociology for Horney. Their relationship ended in the late 1930s.

[ 5 ] After leaving Columbia, Fromm helped form the New York branch of the Washington School of Psychiatry in 1943, and in 1946 co-founded the William Alanson White Institute of Psychiatry, Psychoanalysis, and Psychology. He was on the faculty of Bennington College from 1941 to 1949, and taught courses at the New School for Social Research in New York from 1941 to 1959.

When Fromm moved to Mexico City in 1949, he became a professor at the National Autonomous University of Mexico (UNAM) and established a psychoanalytic section at the medical school there. Meanwhile, he taught as a professor of psychology at Michigan State University from 1957 to 1961 and as an adjunct professor of psychology at the graduate division of Arts and Sciences at New York University after 1962. He taught at UNAM until his retirement, in 1965, and at the Mexican Society of Psychoanalysis (SMP) until 1974. In 1974, he moved from Mexico City to Muralto , Switzerland, and died at his home in 1980, five days before his eightieth birthday. All the while, Fromm maintained his own clinical practice and published a series of books.

Fromm was reportedly an atheist [ 6 ] [ n 2 ] but described his position as " nontheistic mysticism ".

[ 7 ] Psychological theory [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

( May 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Beginning with his first seminal work of 1941, Escape from Freedom (known in Britain as The Fear of Freedom ), Fromm's writings were notable as much for their social and political commentary as for their philosophical and psychological underpinnings. Indeed, Escape from Freedom is viewed as one of the founding works of political psychology . His second important work, Man for Himself:  An Inquiry into the Psychology of Ethics , first published in 1947, continued and enriched the ideas of Escape from Freedom . Taken together, these books outlined Fromm's theory of human character, which was a natural outgrowth of Fromm's theory of human nature. Fromm's most popular book was The Art of Loving , an international bestseller first published in 1956, which recapitulated and complemented the theoretical principles of human nature found in Escape from Freedom and Man for Himself —principles which were revisited in many of Fromm's other major works.

Central to Fromm's world view was his interpretation of the Talmud and Hasidism . He began studying Talmud as a young man under Rabbi J. Horowitz and later under Rabbi Salman Baruch Rabinkow, a Chabad Hasid . While working towards his doctorate in sociology at the University of Heidelberg , Fromm studied the Tanya by the founder of Chabad, Rabbi Shneur Zalman of Liadi . Fromm also studied under Nehemia Nobel and Ludwig Krause while studying in Frankfurt. Fromm's grandfather and two great-grandfathers on his father's side were rabbis , and a great uncle on his mother's side was a noted Talmudic scholar.  However, Fromm turned away from orthodox Judaism in 1926, towards secular interpretations of scriptural ideals.

The cornerstone of Fromm's humanistic philosophy is his interpretation of the biblical story of Adam and Eve 's exile from the Garden of Eden .  Drawing on his knowledge of the Talmud, Fromm pointed out that being able to distinguish between good and evil is generally considered to be a virtue, but that biblical scholars generally consider Adam and Eve to have sinned by disobeying God and eating from the Tree of Knowledge . However, departing from traditional religious orthodoxy on this, Fromm extolled the virtues of humans taking independent action and using reason to establish moral values rather than adhering to authoritarian moral values.

Beyond a simple condemnation of authoritarian value systems, Fromm used the story of Adam and Eve as an allegorical explanation for human biological evolution and existential angst, asserting that when Adam and Eve ate from the Tree of Knowledge, they became aware of themselves as being separate from nature while still being part of it.  This is why they felt "naked" and "ashamed":  they had evolved into human beings , conscious of themselves, their own mortality, and their powerlessness before the forces of nature and society, and no longer united with the universe as they were in their instinctive , pre-human existence as animals.  According to Fromm, the awareness of a disunited human existence is a source of guilt and shame , and the solution to this existential dichotomy is found in the development of one's uniquely human powers of love and reason. However, Fromm distinguished his concept of love from unreflective popular notions as well as Freudian paradoxical love (see the criticism by Marcuse below ).

Fromm considered love an interpersonal creative capacity rather than an emotion , and he distinguished this creative capacity from what he considered to be various forms of narcissistic neuroses and sado-masochistic tendencies that are commonly held out as proof of "true love". Indeed, Fromm viewed the experience of "falling in love" as evidence of one's failure to understand the true nature of love, which he believed always had the common elements of care , responsibility , respect , and knowledge .  Drawing from his knowledge of the Hebrew Bible , Fromm pointed to the story of Jonah , who did not wish to save the residents of Nineveh from the consequences of their sin, as demonstrative of his belief that the qualities of care and responsibility are generally absent from most human relationships . Fromm also asserted that few people in modern society had respect for the autonomy of their fellow human beings, much less the objective knowledge of what other people truly wanted and needed.

Fromm believed that freedom was an aspect of human nature that we either embrace or escape. He observed that embracing our freedom of will was healthy, whereas escaping freedom through the use of escape mechanisms was the root of psychological conflicts. Fromm outlined three of the most common escape mechanisms: Automaton conformity : changing one's ideal self to conform to a perception of society's preferred type of personality, losing one's true self in the process; Automaton conformity displaces the burden of choice from self to society; Authoritarianism : giving control of oneself to another. By submitting one's freedom to someone else, this act removes the freedom of choice almost entirely.

Destructiveness : any process which attempts to eliminate others or the world as a whole, all to escape freedom. Fromm said that "the destruction of the world is the last, almost desperate attempt to save myself from being crushed by it".

[ 8 ] The word biophilia was frequently used by Fromm as a description of a productive psychological orientation and " state of being ".  For example, in an addendum to his book The Heart of Man:  Its Genius For Good and Evil , Fromm wrote as part of his humanist credo : "I believe that the man choosing progress can find a new unity through the development of all his human forces, which are produced in three orientations.  These can be presented separately or together: biophilia, love for humanity and nature, and independence and freedom." [ 9 ] Erich Fromm postulated the following basic needs: Need Description Transcendence Being thrown into the world without their consent, humans have to transcend their nature by destroying or creating people or things.

[ 10 ] Humans can destroy through malignant aggression, or killing for reasons other than survival, but they can also create and care about their creations.

[ 10 ] Rootedness Rootedness is the need to establish roots and to feel at home again in the world.

[ 10 ] Productively, rootedness enables us to grow beyond the security of our mother and establish ties with the outside world.

[ 10 ] With the nonproductive strategy, we become fixated and afraid to move beyond the security and safety of our mother or a mother substitute.

[ 10 ] Sense of Identity The drive for a sense of identity is expressed nonproductively as conformity to a group and productively as individuality.

[ 10 ] Frame of orientation Understanding the world and our place in it.

Excitation and Stimulation Actively striving for a goal rather than simply responding.

Unity A sense of oneness between one person and the "natural and human world outside." Effectiveness The need to feel accomplished.

[ 11 ] Fromm's thesis of the "escape from freedom" is epitomized in the following passage.  The "individualized man" referenced by Fromm is man bereft of the "primary ties" of belonging (such as nature, family, etc.), also expressed as "freedom from": There is only one possible, productive solution for the relationship of individualized man with the world: his active solidarity with all men and his spontaneous activity, love and work, which unite him again with the world, not by primary ties but as a free and independent individual.... However, if the economic, social and political conditions... do not offer a basis for the realization of individuality in the sense just mentioned, while at the same time people have lost those ties which gave them security, this lag makes freedom an unbearable burden.  It then becomes identical with doubt, with a kind of life which lacks meaning and direction. Powerful tendencies arise to escape from this kind of freedom into submission or some kind of relationship to man and the world which promises relief from uncertainty, even if it deprives the individual of his freedom.

— Erich Fromm [ 12 ] Five basic orientations [ edit ] Main article: Character orientation In his book Man for Himself , Fromm spoke of " orientation of character ".  He differentiates his theory of character from that of Freud by focusing on two ways an individual relates to the world. Freud analyzed character in terms of libido organization, whereas Fromm says that in the process of living, we relate to the world by: 1) acquiring and assimilating things—"Assimilation", and 2) reacting to people—"Socialization". Fromm asserted that these two ways of relating to the world were not instinctive, but an individual's response to the peculiar circumstances of his or her life; he also believed that people are never exclusively one type of orientation. These two ways of relating to life's circumstances lead to basic character-orientations.

Fromm lists four types of nonproductive character orientation, which he called receptive, exploitative, hoarding, and marketing, and one positive character orientation, which he called productive. Receptive and exploitative orientations are basically how an individual may relate to other people and are socialization attributes of character. A hoarding orientation is an acquiring and assimilating materials/valuables character trait. The marketing orientation arises in response to the human situation in the modern era. The current needs of the market determine value. It is a relativistic ethic. In contrast, the productive orientation is an objective ethic. Despite the existential struggles of humanity, each human has the potential for love, reason and productive work in life. Fromm writes, "It is the paradox of human existence that man must simultaneously seek for closeness and for independence; for oneness with others and at the same time for the preservation of his uniqueness and particularity. ...the answer to this paradox – and to the moral problems of man – is productiveness." Fromm's influence on other notable psychologists [ edit ] Fromm's four non-productive orientations were subject to validation through a psychometric test, The Person Relatedness Test by Elias H. Porter, PhD in collaboration with Carl Rogers , PhD at the University of Chicago's Counseling Center between 1953 and 1955.  Fromm's four non-productive orientations also served as basis for the LIFO test, first published in 1967 by Stuart Atkins, Alan Katcher, PhD, and Elias Porter , PhD and the Strength Deployment Inventory , first published in 1971 by Elias H. Porter, PhD.

[ 13 ] Fromm also influenced his student Sally L. Smith who went on to become the founder of the Lab School of Washington and the Baltimore Lab School.

[ 14 ] Critique of Freud [ edit ] Fromm examined the life and work of Sigmund Freud at length. He identified a discrepancy between early and later Freudian theory: namely that, prior to World War I, Freud had described human drives as a tension between desire and repression, but after the end of the war, began framing human drives as a struggle between biologically universal Life and Death ( Eros and Thanatos ) instincts.  Fromm charged Freud and his followers with never acknowledging the contradictions between the two theories.

Fromm also criticized Freud's dualistic thinking. According to Fromm, Freudian descriptions of human consciousness as struggles between two poles were narrow and limiting.  Fromm also condemned Freud as a misogynist unable to think outside the patriarchal milieu of early 20th century Vienna. However, in spite of these criticisms, Fromm nonetheless expressed a great respect for Freud and his accomplishments. Fromm contended that Freud was one of the "architects of the modern age", alongside Albert Einstein and Karl Marx , but emphasized that he considered Marx both far more historically important than Freud and a finer thinker.

[ 15 ] Political ideas and activism [ edit ] Fromm's best known work, Escape from Freedom , focuses on the human urge to seek a source of authority and control upon reaching a freedom that was thought to be an individual's true desire. Fromm's critique of the modern political order and capitalist system led him to seek insights from medieval feudalism . In Escape from Freedom , he discerned a certain value in the lack of individual freedom, rigid structure, and obligations required of the members of medieval society: What characterizes medieval in contrast to modern society is its lack of individual freedom…But altogether a person was not free in the modern sense, neither was he alone and isolated.  In having a distinct, unchangeable, and unquestionable place in the social world from the moment of birth, man was rooted in a structuralized whole, and thus life had a meaning which left no place, and no need for doubt… There was comparatively little competition.  One was born into a certain economic position which guaranteed a livelihood determined by tradition, just as it carried economic obligations to those higher in the social hierarchy.

[ 16 ] The culmination of Fromm's social and political philosophy came in his 1955 book The Sane Society , which argued in favor of a humanistic and democratic socialism . Building primarily upon the early works of Karl Marx , Fromm sought to re-emphasise the ideal of freedom, missing from most Soviet Marxism and more frequently found in the writings of libertarian socialists and liberal theoreticians. Fromm's brand of socialism rejected both Western capitalism and Soviet communism , which he saw as dehumanizing, and which resulted in the virtually universal modern phenomenon of alienation .

Fromm became one of the founders of socialist humanism , promoting the early writings of Marx and his humanist messages to the US and Western European public. He engaged with a Christian-Marxist intellectual dialogue group organized by Milan Machovec and others in 1960s Communist Czechoslovakia .

[ 17 ] In the early 1960s, Fromm published two books dealing with Marxist thought ( Marx's Concept of Man and Beyond the Chains of Illusion: My Encounter with Marx and Freud ). In 1965, working to stimulate the Western and Eastern cooperation between Marxist humanists, Fromm published a series of articles entitled Socialist Humanism: An International Symposium .  In 1966, the American Humanist Association named him Humanist of the Year.

For a period, Fromm was also active in U.S. politics. He joined the Socialist Party of America in the mid-1950s, and did his best to help them provide an alternative viewpoint to McCarthyist trends in some US political thought. This alternative viewpoint was best expressed in his 1961 paper May Man Prevail? An Inquiry into the Facts and Fictions of Foreign Policy . However, as a co-founder of SANE , Fromm's strongest political activism was in the international peace movement , fighting against the nuclear arms race and U.S. involvement in the Vietnam War . After supporting Senator Eugene McCarthy 's losing bid for the Democratic presidential nomination , Fromm more or less retreated from the American political scene, although he did write a paper in 1974 entitled Remarks on the Policy of Détente for a hearing held by the U.S. Senate Committee on Foreign Relations . Fromm was awarded the Nelly Sachs Prize in 1979.

Criticism [ edit ] In Eros and Civilization , Herbert Marcuse is critical of Fromm: In the beginning, he was a radical theorist, but later he turned to conformity. Marcuse also noted that Fromm, as well as his close colleagues Sullivan and Karen Horney, removed Freud's libido theory and other radical concepts, which thus reduced psychoanalysis to a set of idealist ethics, which only embrace the status quo .

[ 18 ] Fromm's response, in both The Sane Society [ 19 ] and in The Anatomy of Human Destructiveness , [ 20 ] argues that Freud indeed deserves substantial credit for recognizing the central importance of the unconscious, but also that he tended to reify his own concepts that depicted the self as the passive outcome of instinct and social control, with minimal volition or variability. Fromm argues that later scholars such as Marcuse accepted these concepts as dogma, whereas social psychology requires a more dynamic theoretical and empirical approach. In reference to Fromm's leftist political activism as a public intellectual, Noam Chomsky said "I liked Fromm's attitudes but thought his work was pretty superficial".

[ 21 ] Works [ edit ] Early work in German [ edit ] Das jüdische Gesetz. Ein Beitrag zur Soziologie des Diaspora -Judentums . Promotion, 1922.

ISBN 3-453-09896-X .

Über Methode und Aufgaben einer analytischen Sozialpsychologie . Zeitschrift für Sozialforschung, Bd. 1, 1932, S. 28–54.

Die psychoanalytische Charakterologie und ihre Bedeutung für die Sozialpsychologie . Zeitschrift für Sozialforschung, Bd. 1, 1932, S. 253–277.

Sozialpsychologischer Teil. In: Studien über Autorität und Familie . Forschungsberichte aus dem Institut für Sozialforschung. Alcan, Paris 1936, S. 77–135.

Zweite Abteilung: Erhebungen (Erich Fromm u.a.). In: Studien über Autorität und Familie. Forschungsberichte aus dem Institut für Sozialforschung. Alcan, Paris 1936, S. 229–469.

Die Furcht vor der Freiheit , 1941 (In English, "Fear/Dread of Freedom").

ISBN 3-423-35024-5 Psychoanalyse & Ethik , 1946.

ISBN 3-423-35011-3 Psychoanalyse & Religion , 1949.

ISBN 3-423-34105-X ( The Dwight H. Terry Lectureship 1949/1950 ) Later works in English [ edit ] Escape from Freedom (US), The Fear of Freedom (UK) (1941) ISBN 978-0-8050-3149-2 Man for Himself: An Inquiry into the Psychology of Ethics (1947) ISBN 978-0-8050-1403-7 Psychoanalysis and Religion (1950) ISBN 978-0-300-00089-4 The Forgotten Language: An Introduction to the Understanding of Dreams, Fairy Tales, and Myths (1951) ISBN 978-0-03-018436-9 The Sane Society (1955) ISBN 978-0-415-60586-1 The Art of Loving (1956) ISBN 978-0-06-112973-5 Sigmund Freud's Mission: An Analysis of his Personality and Influence (1959) Zen Buddhism and Psychoanalysis (1960) ISBN 978-0-285-64747-3 May Man Prevail? An Inquiry into the Facts and Fictions of Foreign Policy (1961) ISBN 978-0-385-00035-2 Marx's Concept of Man (1961) ISBN 978-0-8264-7791-0 Beyond the Chains of Illusion: My Encounter with Marx and Freud (1962) ISBN 978-0-8264-1897-5 The Dogma of Christ and Other Essays on Religion, Psychology and Culture (1963) ISBN 978-0-415-28999-3 The Heart of Man: Its Genius for Good and Evil (1964) ISBN 978-0-06-090795-2 (editor) Socialist Humanism: An International Symposium , (1965) You Shall Be as Gods: A Radical Interpretation of the Old Testament and Its Tradition (1966) ISBN 978-0-8050-1605-5 The Revolution of Hope: Toward a Humanized Technology (1968) ISBN 978-1-59056-183-6 The Nature of Man (1968) ISBN 978-0-86562-082-7 The Crisis of Psychoanalysis: Essays on Freud, Marx and Social Psychology (1970) ISBN 978-0-449-30792-2 (with Michael Maccoby ).

Social Character in a Mexican Village: A Sociopsychoanalytic Study (1970) ISBN 978-1-56000-876-7 The Anatomy of Human Destructiveness (1973) ISBN 978-0-8050-1604-8 To Have or To Be?

(1976) ISBN 978-0-8050-1604-8 Greatness and Limitation of Freud's Thought (1979) ISBN 978-0-06-011389-6 On Disobedience and Other Essays (1981) ISBN 978-0-8164-0500-8 The Working Class in Weimar Germany: A Psychological and Sociological Study (1984) ISBN 0-907582-09-5 For the Love of Life (1986) ISBN 0-02-910930-2 The Revision of Psychoanalysis (1992) ISBN 0-8133-1451-8 The Art of Being (1993) ISBN 978-0-8264-0673-6 The Art of Listening (1994) ISBN 978-0-8264-1132-7 On Being Human (1994) ISBN 0-8264-0576-2 The Essential Erich Fromm: Life Between Being and Having (1995) ISBN 978-0-8264-1133-4 Love, Sexuality, and Matriarchy: About Gender (1997) Edited and with an introduction by Rainer Funk.

The Erich Fromm Reader (1999) ISBN 1-57392-479-2 Beyond Freud: From Individual to Social Psychoanalysis (2010) ISBN 978-1-59056-185-0 The Pathology of Normalcy (2010) ISBN 978-1-59056-184-3 See also [ edit ] American philosophy Ernst Simmel Group narcissism List of American philosophers Psychoanalytic sociology Psychohistory Explanatory notes [ edit ] ^ For a second name he was given that of his grandfather on his father's side, hence Seligmann Pinchas Fromm, although the registry office in Frankfurt does not record him as such, but as Erich Seligmann Fromm. Furthermore, his parents addressed his mail to "Erich S. Fromm".

[ 1 ] ^ About the same time he stopped observing Jewish religious rituals and rejected a cause he had once embraced, Zionism. He "just didn't want to participate in any division of the human race, whether religious or political," he explained decades later (Wershba, p. 12), by which time he was a confirmed atheist.

[ 6 ] References [ edit ] ^ a b Funk, Rainer.

Erich Fromm: His Life and Ideas . Translated by Ian Portman, Manuela Kunkel. New York: Continuum International Publishing Group, 2003.

ISBN 0-8264-1519-9 , ISBN 978-0-8264-1519-6 .

p. 13 .

^ "MSU Libraries" .

lib.msu.edu .

^ Klaus Widerström: Einführung in das Leben Erich Fromms.

Erich Fromm Dokumentationszentrum, 2013 [1] ^ Alfred Lévy: Erich Fromm: Humanist zwischen Tradition und Utopie . Königshausen & Neumann, 2002, ISBN 978-3-8260-2242-5, p. 13.

^ Paris, Bernard J. (1998) Horney & Humanistic Psychoanalysis – Personal History Archived May 23, 2011, at the Wayback Machine . International Karen Horney Society.

^ a b Keay Davidson: "Fromm, Erich Pinchas", American National Biography Online, Feb. 2000 (accessed April 28, 2008) ^ Fromm, E. (1966). You shall be as Gods, A Fawcett Premier Book, p. 18:"Hence, I wish to make my position clear at the outset. If I could define my position approximately, I would call it that of a nontheistic mysticism." ^ Fromm, Erich (1941).

Escape from Freedom . New York: Henry Holt and Company, LLC. p. 177.

^ Fromm, Erich (1997).

On Being Human . London: The Continuum International Publishing Group Ltd. p. 101.

^ a b c d e f "Erich Fromm & Humanistic Psychoanalysis" .

TheGlaringFacts.com . November 12, 2011. Archived from the original on January 21, 2013.

^ Engler, Barbara (2008).

Personality Theories . Boston: Houghton Mifflin Harcourt Publishing Company. p. 137.

(based on The Sane Society and The Anatomy of Human Destructiveness ) ^ Fromm, Erich (1941).

Escape from Freedom . New York: Rinehart. pp.

36– 37, 31, 256– 57.

^ "Relationship Awareness Theory Overview" .

personalstrengths.us . Personal Strengths Publishing. Archived from the original on May 28, 2013 . Retrieved January 28, 2013 .

^ Liberman & Kiriki,1951 ^ Fromm, Erich.

Beyond the Chains of Illusion: My Encounter with Marx & Freud . London: Sphere Books, 1980, p. 11 ^ Fromm, Erich "Escape from Freedom" New York: Rinehart & Co., 1941, p. 41 – 42 ^ Žďárský, Pavel (2011).

Milan Machovec a jeho filosofická antropologie v 60. letech XX. století [Milan Machovec and His Philosophical Anthropology in the 1960s]. Prague: Charles University, Faculty of Education, Department of Civic Education and Philosophy. Dissertation, supervised by Anna Hogenová [ cs ] .

^ John Rickert, The Fromm-Marcuse debate revisited, 1986 in "Theory and Society", vol. 15, pp. 351–400. Martinus Nijhoff Publishers, Dordrecht ^ Erich Fromm, [1955] 1990 The Sane Society , New York: Henry Holt ^ Erich Fromm, [1973] 1992, The Anatomy of Human Destructiveness , New York: Henry Holt.

^ Barsky, Robert (1997).

Noam Chomsky: A Life of Dissent . Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. p.

134 .

Further reading [ edit ] De Rodrigo, Enrique, Neoliberalismo y otras patologías de la normalidad. Conversando nuestro tiempo con Erich Fromm (in Spanish) . Madrid: PenBooks, 2015.

ISBN 978-84-608-1648-5 .

Deslandes, Ghislain , "Escape from freedom: Revisiting Erich Fromm in the light of Contemporary Authoritarianism", Organization Studies (journal) , 2018.

Friedman, Lawrence J., The Lives of Erich Fromm: Love's Prophet . New York: Columbia University Press, 2013.

ISBN 978-0231162586 .

Funk, Rainer, "Life and Work of Erich Fromm" ( Archived July 30, 2018, at the Wayback Machine ), Logos , 6:3, Summer 2007 Funk, Rainer, Erich Fromm: His Life and Ideas An Illustrated Biography . Continuum: New York, 2000.

ISBN 978-0826412249 .

Jensen, Walter A., Erich Fromm's Contributions to Sociological Theory . Kalamazoo, MI: Printmill, 2017.

ISBN 978-0970491947 .

External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Erich Fromm .

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Erich Fromm .

Publications by and about Erich Fromm in the catalogue Helveticat of the Swiss National Library Erich Fromm online – Official website about Erich Fromm, his Life and Work: Documents, information about the Institute, Study Center, Foundation, Literary Estate and events.

erich-fromm.de – Erich Fromm Archives; Literary Estate International Erich Fromm Society International Foundation Erich Fromm (in Italian) 1958 Mike Wallace interview Archived July 25, 2013, at the Wayback Machine , hrc.utexas.edu Интервью с Майком Уоллесом: в гостях Эрих Фромм , 1958 Mike Wallace interview (in Russian) Russian translation by Anzhela Cherkashyna doi : 10.5281/zenodo.10672 Fear from Freedom Chapter V "Mechanisms of Escape from Freedom" , Erich Fromm (1942) FBI file on Erich Fromm Erich Fromm at the Encyclopædia Britannica v t e Critical theory Origins Frankfurt School Freudo-Marxism Concepts Outline of critical theory Reconstructivism Derivatives Archetypal literary criticism Deconstructivism New historicism Technocriticism Critical ...

animal studies applied linguistics cartography consciousness criminology data studies design discourse analysis ethnography geography geopolitics historiography international relations theory language awareness legal studies literacy management studies medical anthropology pedagogy mathematics pedagogy university studies practice psychiatry psychology queer theory race theory regionalism security studies social theory social work technical practice terrorism studies Theorists Theodor W. Adorno Walter Benjamin Erich Fromm Jürgen Habermas Axel Honneth Max Horkheimer Otto Kirchheimer Siegfried Kracauer Leo Löwenthal Herbert Marcuse Friedrich Pollock Alfred Schmidt Related Binary opposition Critical rationalism Critical realism perception social sciences Theological Cultural Marxism conspiracy theory Hermeneutics of suspicion Immanent critique Phallogocentrism Privilege (social inequality) 2020s controversies around critical race theory v t e Social philosophy Concepts Agency Anomie Convention Cosmopolitanism Customs Cultural heritage Culturalism Inter Mono Multi Culture Counter Familialism History Honour Human nature Identity Formation Ideology Institutions Invisible hand Loyalty Modernity Morality Public Mores National character Natural law Personhood Reification Ressentiment Rights Sittlichkeit Social alienation Social norms Spontaneous order Stewardship Traditions Values Family Volksgeist Worldview Schools Budapest School Catholic social teaching Distributism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Social Frankfurt School Personalism Philosophers Ancient Confucius Laozi Mencius Mozi Xunzi Medieval Alpharabius Aquinas Avempace Bruni Ibn Khaldun Maimonides Ibn Tufayl Early modern Calvin Erasmus Guicciardini Locke Luther Milton Montaigne Müntzer 18th and 19th centuries Arnold Bentham Bonald Burke Carlyle Comte Condorcet Emerson Engels Fichte Fourier Franklin Hegel Helvétius Herder Hume Jefferson Kant Kierkegaard Le Bon Le Play Marx Mill Nietzsche Owen Renan Rousseau Royce Ruskin Smith Spencer de Staël Stirner Taine Thoreau Tocqueville Vico Vivekananda Voltaire 20th and 21st centuries Adorno Agamben Arendt Aron Badiou Baudrillard Bauman Benoist Berlin Butler Camus de Beauvoir Debord Deleuze Dewey Du Bois Durkheim Eco Evola Foucault Fromm Gandhi Gehlen Gentile Gramsci Guénon Habermas Han Heidegger Hoppe Irigaray Kirk Kołakowski Kropotkin Land Lasch MacIntyre Marcuse Maritain Negri Niebuhr Nussbaum Oakeshott Ortega Pareto Polanyi Radhakrishnan Röpke Santayana Scruton Shariati Simmel Skinner Sombart Sowell Spengler Strauss Taylor Voegelin Walzer Weber Weil Zinn Žižek Works De Officiis (44 BC) Oration on the Dignity of Man (1486) A Vindication of Natural Society (1756) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Civilization and Its Discontents (1930) The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction (1935) The Second Sex (1949) One-Dimensional Man (1964) The Society of the Spectacle (1967) The History of Sexuality (1976) The Culture of Narcissism (1979) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) Gender Trouble (1990) The Malaise of Modernity (1991) Intellectuals and Society (2010) See also Agnotology Axiology Critical theory Cultural criticism Cultural pessimism Ethics Historism Historicism Humanities Philosophy of culture Philosophy of education Philosophy of history Political philosophy Social criticism Social science Social theory Sociology Category v t e Political philosophy Terms Authority Citizenship‎ Duty Elite Emancipation Freedom Government Hegemony Hierarchy Justice Law Legitimacy Liberty Monopoly Nation Obedience Peace People Pluralism Power Progress Propaganda Property Regime Revolution Rights Ruling class Society Sovereignty‎ State Utopia War Government Aristocracy Oligarchy Autocracy Bureaucracy Dictatorship Democracy Ochlocracy Gerontocracy Meritocracy Monarchy Tyranny Plutocracy Technocracy Theocracy Ideologies Agrarianism Anarchism Capitalism Christian democracy Colonialism Communism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Corporatism Distributism Environmentalism Fascism Feminism Feudalism Imperialism Islamism Liberalism Libertarianism Localism Marxism Monarchism Multiculturalism Nationalism Nazism Populism Republicanism Social Darwinism Social democracy Socialism Third Way Concepts Balance of power Bellum omnium contra omnes Body politic Clash of civilizations Common good Consent of the governed Divine right of kings Family as a model for the state Monopoly on violence Natural law Negative and positive rights Night-watchman state Noble lie Noblesse oblige Open society Ordered liberty Original position Overton window Separation of powers Social contract State of nature Statolatry Supermajority Tyranny of the majority Philosophers Antiquity Aristotle Chanakya Cicero Confucius Han Fei Lactantius Mencius Mozi Plato political philosophy Polybius Shang Sun Tzu Thucydides Xenophon Middle Ages Al-Farabi Aquinas Averroes Bruni Dante Gelasius al-Ghazali Ibn Khaldun Marsilius Muhammad Nizam al-Mulk Ockham Plethon Wang Early modern period Boétie Bodin Bossuet Calvin Campanella Filmer Grotius Guicciardini Hobbes political philosophy James Leibniz Locke Luther Machiavelli Milton More Müntzer Pufendorf Spinoza Suárez 18th and 19th centuries Bakunin Bastiat Beccaria Bentham Bolingbroke Bonald Burke Carlyle Comte Condorcet Constant Cortés Engels Fichte Fourier Franklin Godwin Haller Hegel Herder Hume Iqbal Jefferson Kant political philosophy Le Bon Le Play Madison Maistre Marx Mazzini Mill Montesquieu Nietzsche Owen Paine Renan Rousseau Sade Saint-Simon Smith Spencer de Staël Stirner Taine Thoreau Tocqueville Tucker Voltaire 20th and 21st centuries Agamben Ambedkar Arendt Aron Badiou Bauman Benoist Berlin Bernstein Burnham Chomsky Dmowski Du Bois Dugin Dworkin Evola Foucault Fromm Fukuyama Gandhi Gentile Gramsci Guénon Habermas Hayek Hoppe Huntington Kautsky Khomeini Kirk Kropotkin Laclau Lenin Luxemburg Mansfield Mao Marcuse Maurras Michels Mises Mosca Mouffe Negri Nozick Nussbaum Oakeshott Ortega Pareto Popper Qutb Rand Rawls Röpke Rothbard Russell Sartre Schmitt Scruton Shariati Sorel Spann Spengler Strauss Sun Taylor Voegelin Walzer Weber Works Republic (c. 375 BC) Politics (c. 350 BC) On the Republic (51 BC) Treatise on Law (c. 1274) Monarchy (1313) The Prince (1532) Leviathan (1651) Two Treatises of Government (1689) The Spirit of Law (1748) The Social Contract (1762) Reflections on the Revolution in France (1790) Rights of Man (1791) Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1820) Democracy in America (1835–1840) The Communist Manifesto (1848) On Liberty (1859) The Revolt of the Masses (1929) The Road to Serfdom (1944) The Open Society and Its Enemies (1945) The Origins of Totalitarianism (1951) A Theory of Justice (1971) The End of History and the Last Man (1992) Related Authoritarianism Collectivism and individualism Conflict theories Contractualism Critique of political economy Egalitarianism Elite theory Elitism History of political thought Institutional discrimination Jurisprudence Justification for the state Political ethics Political spectrum Left-wing politics Centrism Right-wing politics Political theology Political violence Separation of church and state Separatism Social justice Statism Totalitarianism Category:Political philosophy Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Chile Greece Argentina Korea Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Catalonia Academics CiNii Mathematics Genealogy Project Google Scholar Artists FID People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Erich_Fromm&oldid=1305402424 " Categories : 1900 births 1980 deaths 20th-century German philosophers 20th-century American psychologists Narcissism writers American anti-capitalists American anti–nuclear weapons activists American atheists American democratic socialists American ethicists American expatriates in Mexico American humanists American Marxists American social psychologists Analysands of Hanns Sachs Anti-consumerists Columbia University faculty European democratic socialists Frankfurt School philosophers Freudo-Marxism German anti-capitalists German atheists German humanists German male writers German psychoanalysts German social psychologists Heidelberg University alumni History of psychiatry Jewish American psychologists Jewish psychoanalysts Jewish atheists Jewish emigrants from Nazi Germany to the United States Jewish humanists Jewish philosophers Jewish socialists Marxist humanists Marxist theorists Marxist writers Michigan State University faculty Academic staff of the National Autonomous University of Mexico New York University alumni Writers from Frankfurt Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use mdy dates from September 2011 Articles with hCards Pages with German IPA Articles needing additional references from May 2023 All articles needing additional references Articles with Spanish-language sources (es) Commons category link from Wikidata Articles with Italian-language sources (it) Articles with Russian-language sources (ru) Articles containing French-language text Articles containing German-language text Articles containing Latin-language text Articles containing video clips This page was last edited on 11 August 2025, at 21:16 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Erich Fromm 69 languages Add topic

