Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Publications 2 Notes 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Mario Tronti 14 languages Català Deutsch Español Français Italiano Lombard مصرى Nederlands Polski Português Русский Svenska Українська Volapük Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Italian philosopher and politician (1931–2023) This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .

Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( June 2018 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article is written like a personal reflection, personal essay, or argumentative essay that states a Wikipedia editor's personal feelings or presents an original argument about a topic.

Please help improve it by rewriting it in an encyclopedic style .

( August 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Mario Tronti Official portrait, 2013 Member of the Senate of the Republic In office 15 March 2013 – 23 March 2018 Constituency Lombardy In office 23 April 1992 – 14 April 1994 Constituency Lazio Personal details Born ( 1931-07-24 ) 24 July 1931 Rome , Italy Died 7 August 2023 (2023-08-07) (aged 92) Ferentillo , Italy Political party PCI (till 1991) PDS (1991–1998) DS (1998–2007) PD (2007–2023) Occupation Academic, politician This article is part of a series on Communism in Italy People Battisti Bertinotti Berlinguer Berardi Bordiga Bombacci Cafiero Cagol Colletti Covelli Cossutta Curcio Damen Della Volpe Di Vittorio Diliberto Gennari Feltrinelli Federici Ferrando Ferrero Fortichiari Galleani Gramsci Grieco Iotti Lama Lazzari Losurdo Longo Maitan Malatesta Napolitano Natta Negri Occhetto Panzieri Pasolini Scuderi Screpanti Spinelli Togliatti Toscano Tronti Vattimo Vendola Virno History Biennio Rosso XVII Congress of the PSI I Congress of the PCd'I Proština rebellion Aventine Secession Italian Resistance Red Republic of Caulonia Third De Gasperi government Portella della Ginestra massacre May 1947 crises Manifesto of the 101 Years of Lead Hot Autumn Primavalle fire Assassination of Sergio Ramelli Kidnapping and murder of Aldo Moro Mitterrand doctrine Movement of 1977 Murder of Francesco Di Cataldo Kidnapping of Ciro Cirillo Historic Compromise Ideologies Anarchist communism Autonomism Bordigism Christian communism Council communism Eurocommunism Italian road to socialism Left communism Leninism Marxism–Leninism Maoism Stalinism Marxist humanism Migliorismo Neo-Gramscianism Neo-Marxism Post-Marxism Trotskyism Western Marxism Workerism Principles Anti-clericalism Anti-fascism Anti-imperialism Antimilitarism Class conflict Cultural hegemony Counterhegemony Euroscepticism Feminism Organic centralism Passive revolution Proletarian internationalism Secularism Solidarity Subalterns Current organisations Lotta Comunista (Communist Struggle) Anticapitalist Left CARC Party Communist Alternative Party Communist Front Communist Party Communist Refoundation Party GC Communist Struggle Countercurrent Italian Communist Party (2016) Italian General Confederation of Labour Italian Marxist–Leninist Party Network of Communists People's Union Revolutionary Communist Party Trotskyist League of Italy Unified Communist Party of Italy Workers' Communist Party Defunct organisations Armed Proletarians for Communism Autonomia Operaia Communist Party of Italy (2014) Communist Party of Italy (Marxist–Leninist) Communist Party of Italy (Marxist–Leninist) Red Line Critical Left Front Line Italian Communist Party FGCI The Left – The Rainbow Lotta Continua Movement of Unitarian Communists October 22 Group Party of the Christian Left Party of Italian Communists FGCI Popular Democratic Front Proletarian Democracy Proletarian Unity Party Red Brigades Volante Rossa Workers' Power Media Liberazione il manifesto Pattuglia Il Pioniere Il Politecnico La Plebe Quaderni piacentini Quaderni Rossi Rinascita Società l'Unità Vie Nuove Related topics Anarchism in Italy Bandiera Rossa Bella ciao Christian left Christian socialism Democratic socialism Fischia il vento History of Italy Italian neorealism Politics of Italy Prison Notebooks Social democracy Socialism in Italy Craxism Communism portal Italy portal v t e Mario Tronti (24 July 1931 – 7 August 2023) was an Italian philosopher and politician, considered one of the founders of the theory of operaismo in the 1960s.

[ 1 ] An active member of the Italian Communist Party (PCI) during the 1950s, he was, with Raniero Panzieri , amongst the founders of the Quaderni Rossi (Red Notebooks) review from which he split in 1963 to found the Classe Operaia (Working Class) review. This evolving journey progressively distanced him from the PCI, without him ever formally leaving, and engaged him in the radical experiences of operaismo. Such experience, considered by many to be the matrix of Italian Autonomist Marxism in the 1960s, was characterised by challenging the roles of the traditional organisations of the workers' movement (the unions and the parties) and the direct engagement, without intermediaries, with the working class itself and to the struggles in the factories.

Influenced philosophically by the work of Galvano Della Volpe , which led him to distance himself from the thinking of Antonio Gramsci , or at least the official version promulgated by the PCI, Tronti dedicated himself to the formulation of a politics, basing theory on practice, which could renew traditional Marxism and contribute to re-opening the revolutionary road in the West.

Faced with mass revolt by Western workers in the 1960s, Tronti's operaismo was able to propose a modern analysis of class relations and above all refocus attention of the subjective factor, claiming the central political role of the working class. His ideas found an echo in 1966, with the publication of Operai e capitale (Workers and Capital), a book that would exercise a notable influence on the protests of the youth and, more generally, on the wave of mobilization that was initiated in the following years.

Tronti died on 7 August 2023, at the age of 92.

[ 2 ] Publications [ edit ] Tra materialismo dialettico e filosofia della prassi. Gramsci e Labriola , in A. Caracciolo et G. Scalia (éd.), La città futura. Saggi sulla figura e il pensiero di Antonio Gramsci , Feltrinelli, Milano, 1959 (éd.), Scritti inediti di economia politica di Marx , Editori Riuniti , Roma, 1963 Baldi, Camillo , in A.M. Ghisalberti (éd.), Dizionario Biografico degli Italiani 5 , Istituto dell'Enciclopedia Italiana, Roma, 1963 Operai e capitale , Einaudi, Torino, 1966 (DeriveApprodi, Roma, 2006) Hegel politico , Istituto dell'Enciclopedia italiana, Roma, 1975 Sull'autonomia del politico , Feltrinelli, Milano, 1977 Stato e rivoluzione in Inghilterra , Il Saggiatore, Milano, 1977 (en collab. avec G. Napolitano, A. Accornero et M. Cacciari), Operaismo e centralità operaia , Editori Riuniti, Roma, 1978 (éd.), Il politico. Antologia di testi del pensiero politico. 1 : Da Machiavelli a Cromwell , Feltrinelli, Milano, 1979 Soggetti, crisi, potere , A. Piazzi et A. De Martinis (éd.), Cappelli, Bologna, 1980 ; Il tempo della politica , Editori Riuniti, Roma, 1980 Con le spalle al futuro. Per un altro dizionario politico , Editori Riuniti, Roma, 1992 ; Berlinguer. Il Principe disarmato , Edizioni Sisifo, Roma, 1994 La politica al tramonto , Einaudi, Torino, 1998 Rileggendo "La libertà comunista" , in G. Liguori (éd.), Galvano Della Volpe. Un altro marxismo , Edizioni Fahrenheit 451, Roma, 2000 (éd. avec P. Favilli), Classe operaia. Le identità : storia e prospettiva , Angeli, Milano, 2001 Cenni di Castella , Edizioni Cadmo, Fiesole, 2001 Per la critica della democrazia politica , in M. Tari (éd.), Guerra e democrazia , ManifestoLibri, Roma, 2005 Id.

et al.

, Politica e destino , Sossella editore, Roma, 2006 (avec les contributions de divers auteurs sur la pensée de Mario Tronti) Notes [ edit ] ^ Pizzolato, Nicola (August 2017).

"A new revolutionary practice: operaisti and the 'refusal of work' in 1970's Italy" .

Estudos Históricos (Rio de Janeiro) .

30 (61): 449– 464.

doi : 10.1590/S2178-14942017000200008 .

^ "È morto a 92 anni Mario Tronti, politico e filosofo teorico dell'operaismo" . Repubblica. 7 August 2023 . Retrieved 7 August 2023 .

References [ edit ] Alcaro M., Dellavolpismo e nuova sinistra , Dedalo, Bari, 1977 ; Basso C., Gozzini C. et Sguazzino D. (éd.), Bibliografia delle opere e degli scritti di Mario Tronti , Dipartimento di Filosofia-Università degli Studi di Siena, Sienne, 2001 ; Berardinelli A., Stili dell'estremismo. Critica del pensiero essenziale , Editori Riuniti, Roma, 2001 ; Borio G., Pozzi F., Roggero G., Futuro anteriore : dai Quaderni rossi ai movimenti globali. Ricchezze e limiti dell'operaismo italiano , DeriveApprodi, Rome, 2002 ; Leo R., "Per una storia di Classe Operaia", dans la revue Bailamme , n° 26, giugno 2000 ; Gobbi R., Com'eri bella, classe operaia. Storia fatti e misfatti dell'operaismo italiano , Longanesi, Milano, 1989 ; Mezzadra S., Operaismo , in R. Esposito et C. Galli (éd.), Enciclopedia del pensiero politico. Autori, concetti, dottrine , Laterza, Roma-Bari, 2000 ; Peduzzi A., Lo spirito della politica e il suo destino. L'autonomia del politico, il suo tempo , Ediesse-Crs, Roma, 2006 ; Preve C., La teoria in pezzi. La dissoluzione del paradigma teorico operaista , Dedalo, Bari, 1984 ; Turchetto M., De l'ouvrier masse à l'entrepreneurialité commune : la trajectoire déconcertante de l'opéraïsme italien , in J. Bidet et E, Kouvélakis (éd.), Dictionnaire Marx contemporain , PUF, Paris, 2001 ; Wright S., Storming Heaven. Class Composition and Struggle in Italian Autonomist Marxism , Pluto Press, London, 2002.

Michele Filippini, Leaping Forward. Mario Tronti and the History of Political Workerism (Jan Van Eyck Academie ISBN 90-72076-68-0 ) Anastasi, A., The Weapon of Organisation: Mario Tronti's Political Revolution in Marxism.

Common Notions. 2020.

Vocations of the Political: Mario Tronti and Max Weber - CRMEP BOOKS 3 (ed.

Howard Caygill ). 2021.

Available Free Online.

External links [ edit ] L'intégralité de l'ouvrage Ouvriers et Capital avec suppléments, sur le site de Multitudes .

"Storia e critica del concetto di democrazia" (intervention de M. Tronti, 29 January 2005), disponible aussi en fichier audio Site web italien pour la philosophie : Mario Tronti Conricerca-Futuro Anteriore Class Against Class (avec des textes de Tronti en anglais) "Antagonism and Insurrection in Italian "Operaismo"" (article de A. Toscano) "Lotta contro gli idoli" (intervention de M. Tronti pour Rai Educational, 27 February 2001) "Laboratorio Tronti" "The young Mario Tronti" - a dossier on, and collection of, some of Tronti's early writings (introduction by Andrew Anastasi) Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Czech Republic Portugal Netherlands Poland Vatican Israel Catalonia Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Mario_Tronti&oldid=1293511759 " Categories : 1931 births 2023 deaths 20th-century Italian philosophers 21st-century Italian philosophers Academic staff of the University of Siena Democrats of the Left politicians Democratic Party (Italy) politicians Democratic Party of the Left politicians Italian Communist Party politicians Italian magazine founders Labor studies scholars Politicians from Rome Sapienza University of Rome alumni Senators of Legislature XI of Italy Senators of Legislature XVII of Italy Workerism Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles lacking in-text citations from June 2018 All articles lacking in-text citations Wikipedia articles with style issues from August 2023 All articles with style issues Use dmy dates from August 2023 This page was last edited on 2 June 2025, at 03:59 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Mario Tronti 14 languages Add topic

