Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Description 2 Popular culture 3 See also 4 Notes 5 References 6 Further reading 7 External links Toggle the table of contents The Triumph of Death 28 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Беларуская Български Català Deutsch Español Euskara Français Galego Հայերեն Hrvatski Italiano עברית Latina Latviešu مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Русский Shqip Slovenščina Svenska Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Painting by Pieter Bruegel the Elder This article is about the painting by Pieter Bruegel the Elder. For other uses, see The Triumph of Death (disambiguation) .

The Triumph of Death Artist Pieter Bruegel the Elder Year c. 1562 Medium oil on panel Dimensions 117 cm × 162 cm (46 in × 63.8 in) Location Museo del Prado , Madrid The Triumph of Death is an oil panel painting by Pieter Bruegel the Elder painted c. 1562.

[ 1 ] It has been in the Museo del Prado in Madrid since 1827.

[ 2 ] Description [ edit ] The painting shows a panorama of an army of skeletons wreaking havoc across a blackened, desolate landscape. Fires burn in the distance, and the sea is littered with shipwrecks.

[ 3 ] A few leafless trees stud hills otherwise bare of vegetation. Fish lie rotting on the shores of a corpse-choked pond. Art historian James Snyder emphasizes the "scorched, barren earth, devoid of any life as far as the eye can see." [ 1 ] In this setting, legions of skeletons advance on the living, who either flee in terror or try in vain to fight back. In the foreground, skeletons haul a wagon full of skulls. In the upper left corner, others ring the bell that signifies the death knell of the world. People are herded into a coffin-shaped trap decorated with crosses, while skeletons, some on horseback, kill people with scythes . The horse-riding skeletons probably allude to the Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse . The painting depicts people of different social backgrounds – from peasants and soldiers to nobles as well as a king and a cardinal – being taken by death indiscriminately.

[ 4 ] The Triumph of Death by Pieter Bruegel the Elder. 1562 ( Museo del Prado ) 1597 version of The Triumph of Death by Jan Brueghel the Younger ( Eggenberg Palace, Graz ) 1626 version of The Triumph of Death attributed to Pieter Bruegel the Younger (unknown private collection) 1608 (?) version of The Triumph of Death attributed to Pieter Bruegel the Younger ( Kunstmuseum Basel ) A skeleton parodies human happiness by playing a hurdy-gurdy , while the wheels of his cart crush a man as if his life is of no importance. A woman has fallen in the path of the death cart. She has a slender thread which is about to be cut by the scissors in her other hand—Bruegel's interpretation of Atropos . Nearby, another woman in the path of the cart holds in her hand a spindle and distaff , classical symbols of the fragility of human life—another Bruegel interpretation of Clotho and Lachesis .

A starving dog nibbles at the face of a dead child lying still within its dead mother's embrace. Just beside her, a cardinal is helped towards his fate by a skeleton who mockingly wears the red hat , while a dying king's barrels of gold and silver coins are looted by yet another skeleton, oblivious to the fact that a skeleton is warning him with an empty hourglass that his life is about to literally run out of time. The foolish and miserly monarch's last thoughts still compel him to reach out for his useless and vain wealth, seeming unaware of the need for repentance. In the centre, an awakening religious pilgrim has his throat cut by a robber-skeleton for his money purse. Above the murder, skeleton-fishermen catch people in a net.

In the bottom right-hand corner, a dinner has been broken up and the diners are putting up a futile resistance. They have drawn their swords in order to fight the skeletons dressed in winding-sheets. No less hopelessly, the court jester takes refuge beneath the dinner table. The backgammon board and the playing cards have been scattered, while a skeleton thinly disguised with a mask (possibly the face of a corpse) empties away the wine flasks. Of the menu of the interrupted meal, all that can be seen are a few pallid rolls of bread and an appetiser apparently consisting of a pared human skull. Above the table are two women. The one on the left struggles in vain while being embraced by a skeleton, in a hideous parody of after-dinner amorousness . The woman on the right is horrified  with the realisation of mortality when a skeleton in a hooded robe mockingly seems to bring another dish, also consisting of human bones, to the table.

[ 5 ] In the bottom right-hand corner, a musician plays a lute while his lady sings. Both are oblivious to the fact that, behind both of them, the skeleton that plays along is grimly aware that the couple can not escape their inevitable doom. A cross sits in the centre of the painting. The painting shows aspects of everyday life in the mid-sixteenth century, when the risk of plague was very severe.  Clothes are clearly depicted, as are pastimes such as playing cards and backgammon . It shows objects such as musical instruments, an early mechanical clock , scenes including a funeral service , and various methods of execution, including the breaking wheel , the gallows , burning at the stake , and the headsman about to behead a victim who has just taken wine and communion. In one scene, a human is the prey of a skeleton-hunter and his dogs.

In another scene at the left, skeletons drag victims down to be drowned in a pond. A man with a grinding stone around his neck is about to be thrown into the pond by the skeletons—an echoing of Matthew 18.6 and Luke 17.2 . On the bridge just above at the right, a skeleton is about to strike a prostrate victim with a falchion .

Bruegel combines two distinct visual traditions within the panel. These represent both the native tradition of Northern woodcuts of the Dance of Death , and the Italian conception of the Triumph of Death .  Classic examples of his frescoes can now be seen in the Palazzo Sclafani in Palermo and in the Camposanto Monumentale at Pisa .

[ 6 ] Popular culture [ edit ] The Triumph of Death appears as a background image for the text intro of the second part of the Monty Python sketch The Spanish Inquisition .

Sylvia Plath describes the painting, particularly the lovers in the lower right-hand corner, in her poem “Two Views of a Cadaver Room.” Heavy metal band Black Sabbath released a compilation album titles Black Sabbath Greatest Hits in 1977 which used the painting as the front and back covers.

[ 7 ] In Underworld , a 1996 novel by Don DeLillo , FBI director J. Edgar Hoover becomes utterly intrigued by the painting after seeing it reproduced in torn pages of Life magazine and eventually obtains a print of it.

The painting plays a pivotal role in The Rich Man's House , 2019, the final novel by Australian writer Andrew McGahan , with its theme of inevitable mortality. The rich man of the title (called Richman) has acquired the painting from the Museo del Prado and it hangs in pride of place in his mountaintop house.

[ 8 ] The painting appears in Interview with the Vampire , by Anne Rice , as a mural in the entrance to the vampire Armand’s realm which lies below his Paris theatre.

See also [ edit ] List of paintings by Pieter Bruegel the Elder 100 Great Paintings The Chariot of Death , painting by Théophile Schuler Notes [ edit ] ^ a b Snyder, James (1985).

Northern Renaissance Art: Painting, Sculpture, the Graphic Arts from 1350 to 1575 . New York: Harry N. Abrams. p. 486.

ISBN 0-8109-1081-0 .

^ Pallucchini, Anna; Ragghianti, Carlo Ludovico; Collobi, Licia Ragghianti (1968).

Prado, Madrid . Great Museums of the World. New York: Newsweek. p.

134 .

^ According to the Italian Wikipedia the background of a tower "Particular of the triumph of the death of Pieter Bruegel the Elder (the Prado, Madrid), in which the profile of (Fortification of Reggio Calabria ) and the Tower of Pentimele is recognized in the background, the Flemish painter was in Reggio in the sixteenth century and in this work refers to his notes of voyage in which It describes the attack of the Pirates of Dragut on the beach of the quarter of arches." ^ Woodward, Richard B. (February 14, 2009).

"Death Takes No Holiday" .

The Wall Street Journal . Retrieved December 22, 2011 .

^ G. Gluck, Pieter Bruegel the Elder , London (1958), s.v.

"Triumph of Death". See also Rose-Marie and Rainer Hagen, Bruegel: The Complete Paintings. aka Pieter Bruegel the Elder: peasants, fools and demons , Taschen (2004).

^ P. Thon, "Bruegel's Triumph of Death Reconsidered", Renaissance Quarterly Vol. 21, No. 3, Autumn, 1968.

^ "Black Sabbath – Greatest Hits compilation album released in 1977 on the NEMS Record Label. The illustration on the album front cover is El Triunfo de la Muerte by Pieter Bruegel, Hard Rock, Heavy Metal Vinyl Album Gallery #vinylrecords" .

vinyl-records.nl . Retrieved 2023-03-08 .

^ McGahan, Andrew (2019).

The Rich Man's House . Sydney: Allen & Unwin.

ISBN 978-1-76052-982-6 .

References [ edit ] This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911). " Breughel, Pieter ".

Encyclopædia Britannica (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press.

Further reading [ edit ] Friedländer, M.J., Early Netherlandish Painting. Volume XIV: Pieter Bruegel , (Engl. transl.) Leyden (1976).

Gibson, W.S. (1977).

Bruegel . London.

ISBN 978-0-19-519953-6 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) Grossman, F. (1973).

Pieter Bruegel: Complete Edition of the Paintings (3rd ed.). London.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) Stechow, W. (1969).

Pieter Bruegel . New York.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to The Triumph of Death by Pieter Bruegel (I) .

www.Pieter-Bruegel-The-Elder.org 99 works by Pieter Bruegel the Elder Creativity Brueghel laid the foundation of the Netherlands School v t e Pieter Bruegel the Elder Paintings List of paintings Parable of the Sower (1557) Naval Battle in the Gulf of Naples (1558–1562) The Fight Between Carnival and Lent (1559) Netherlandish Proverbs (1559) Children's Games (1560) Landscape with the Fall of Icarus (c. 1560) The Triumph of Death ( c.

1562 ) The Fall of the Rebel Angels (1562) The Suicide of Saul (1562) Two Monkeys (1562) Dull Gret (1563) Adoration of the Magi in the Snow (1563) The Tower of Babel (1563) Landscape with the Flight into Egypt (1563) Adoration of the Kings (1564) The Death of the Virgin (1564) The Procession to Calvary (1564) Christ and the Woman Taken in Adultery (1565) The Gloomy Day (1565) The Harvesters (1565) The Hay Harvest (1565) The Return of the Herd (1565) The Wine of Saint Martin's Day ( c.

1565 –1568) The Hunters in the Snow (1565) Winter Landscape with a Bird Trap (1565) Massacre of the Innocents ( c.

1565 –1567) The Census at Bethlehem (1566) The Sermon of Saint John the Baptist (1566) The Wedding Dance (1566) Conversion of Paul (1567) The Land of Cockaigne (1567) The Peasant Wedding (1567) The Peasant Dance ( c.

1567 ) The Beggars (1568) The Peasant and the Nest Robber (1568) The Blind Leading the Blind (1568) The Magpie on the Gallows (1568) The Misanthrope (1568) The Storm at Sea ( c.

1569 ) Drawings The Painter and The Buyer (1565) Related Brueghel family Pieter Brueghel the Younger (son) Jan Brueghel the Elder (son) Jan Brueghel the Younger (grandson) Breugel, Netherlands Son en Breugel The Mill and the Cross (2011 film) Bruegel (crater) 9664 Brueghel Bruegel (think tank) v t e Museo del Prado Buildings Villanueva building Casón del Buen Retiro Hall of Realms Cloister of Saint Jerome Paintings Spanish Esquivel : José de Espronceda Gisbert : Execution of Torrijos and his Companions on the Beach at Málaga Goya : Allegory of Industry – Asmodea – Atropos – Blind Man's Bluff – Boys Playing Soldiers – Charles IV of Spain and His Family – Los caprichos – Christ Crucified – The Clothed Maja – The Colossus – The Countess of Chinchon – Los disparates – The Dog – The Drunk Mason – The Duchess of Alba and la Beata – Fight with Cudgels – Josefa Bayeu – Judith and Holofernes – La Leocadia – Man Mocked by Two Women – La novillada – Portrait of the Marchioness of Santa Cruz – Men Reading – The Milkmaid of Bordeaux – The Naked Maja – The Parasol – A Pilgrimage to San Isidro – Pilgrimage to the Fountain of San Isidro – Saturn Devouring His Son – The Second of May 1808 – Self-Portrait at 69 years – Summer – The Third of May 1808 – Two Old Men – Two Old Ones Eating Soup – The Victorious Hannibal Seeing Italy from the Alps for the First Time – Witches' Flight – Witches' Sabbath (The Great He-Goat) El Greco : The Nobleman with his Hand on his Chest – Adoration of the Shepherds – Doña María de Aragón Altarpiece – Annunciation – Christ Carrying the Cross – The Fable – The Flight into Egypt – Holy Face of Jesus – Holy Trinity – Julián Romero and Saint Julian – Portrait of a Doctor – Portrait of a Gentleman – Portrait of a Young Nobleman – Portrait of an Elderly Man – Portrait of an Unknown Gentleman – Portrait of Jerónimo de Cevallos – Portrait of Rodrigo Vázquez de Arce – Saint Andrew and Saint Francis – Saint Anthony of Padua – Saint Bernardino of Siena [1] – Saint James the Great – Saint John the Evangelist – Saint Paul – Saint Sebastian – Saint Thomas the Apostle – Holy Trinity – The Saviour – Virgin Mary Luna : The Death of Cleopatra Maíno : Adoration of the Magi – Portrait of a Gentleman – The Recovery of Bahía de Todos los Santos Murillo : Adoration of the Shepherds (1650) – Aranjuez Immaculate Conception – The Christ Child and the Infant John the Baptist with a Shell – Christ on the Cross (1675, 1677) – The Conversion of Saint Paul – The Good Shepherd – The Holy Family with a Little Bird – The Immaculate Conception of El Escorial – The Immaculate Conception of Los Venerables – The Martyrdom of Saint Andrew – Our Lady of the Rosary – The Patrician's Dream – Rebecca and Eleazar Pradilla : Doña Joanna the Mad Ribera : Jacob's Dream – Democritus – Isaac and Jacob – Ixion – Tityos – The Martyrdom of Saint Philip – The Blind Sculptor Sánchez Gallque : The Mulattos of Esmeraldas [2] Velázquez : Las Meninas – The Triumph of Bacchus – Las Hilanderas – The Surrender of Breda – Mars Resting – Equestrian Portrait of Philip IV – Equestrian Portrait of Elisabeth of France – Equestrian Portrait of Prince Balthasar Charles – Equestrian Portrait of Philip III – Equestrian Portrait of Margarita of Austria – Equestrian Portrait of the Count-Duke of Olivares – Adoration of the Magi – Apollo in the Forge of Vulcan – Christ Crucified – Coronation of the Virgin – View of the Garden of the Villa Medici – Prince Balthasar Charles as a Hunter – Portrait of the Infante Don Carlos – Doña Antonia de Ipeñarrieta y Galdós and Her Son Don Luis – The Jester Barbarroja – The Jester Calabacillas – The Jester Don Diego de Acedo – The Jester Don John of Austria – Portrait of Francisco Lezcano – Infanta Margarita Teresa in a Pink Dress – Portrait of Maria Anna – Portrait of Juan Martínez Montañés – The Nun Jerónima de la Fuente – Portrait of Pablo de Valladolid – Portrait of Philip IV in Armour – Portrait of Mariana of Austria – Portrait of Sebastián de Morra Zurbarán : Agnus Dei – The Death of Hercules – The Defence of Cádiz Against the English – Hercules and the Hydra – Hercules Separates Mounts Calpe and Abylla – Hercules Fighting the Nemean Lion – Saint Elizabeth of Portugal – Saint Luke Painting the Crucifixion – Saint Peter Nolasco's Vision of Saint Peter the Apostle – Still Life with Pots – The Vision of Saint Peter Nolasco Dutch, Flemish, German Anonymous : The Fountain of Life Baldung : The Ages and Death Bosch : The Garden of Earthly Delights – Adoration of the Magi – Cutting the Stone – The Haywain Triptych – Head of a Halberdier – The Seven Deadly Sins and the Four Last Things – The Temptation of St Anthony Bouts : Triptych with Scenes from the Life of the Virgin Bruegel the Elder : The Triumph of Death – The Wine of Saint Martin's Day – Excursion in the Countryside of Infanta Isabel Clara Eugenia – Life in the Countryside – The Infanta Isabel Clara Eugenia in the Mariemont Park (with de Momper) – Landscape (with de Momper) – The Five Senses (with Rubens) Campin : Marriage of the Virgin – Werl Triptych de Crayer : Caritas Romana (1625) David : Rest on the Flight into Egypt Dürer : Adam and Eve – Self-Portrait van Dyck : Self-portrait with Sir Endymion Porter – The Betrayal of Christ – The Brazen Serpent – Diana and a Nymph Surprised by a Satyr – Saint Rosalia – The Crowning with Thorns van Hemessen : The Surgeon Francken the Younger : The Sciences and the Arts Jordaens : Apollo as Victor over Pan – Meleager and Atalanta – The Painter's Family Memling : Adoration of the Magi Mengs : Portrait of José Nicolás de Azara de Momper : Landscape with Sea and Mountains – A Farm – Flemish Market and Washing Place – Landscape with Skaters – The Infanta Isabel Clara Eugenia in the Mariemont Park (with Brueghel the Elder) – Landscape (with Brueghel the Elder) Patinir : Landscape with Charon Crossing the Styx Rembrandt : Judith at the Banquet of Holofernes Rubens : The Judgement of Paris (1638) – The Three Graces – Adoration of the Magi – The Dance of the Villagers – Diana and Callisto – Equestrian Portrait of the Duke of Lerma – The Fall of Man – The Garden of Love – The Birth of the Milky Way – The Rape of Europa – The Rape of Ganymede – Saint George and the Dragon – Saturn – The Triumph of the Church – Deucalion and Pyrrha – The Five Senses (with Brueghel the Elder) Stom : The Incredulity of Saint Thomas Strobel : Feast of Herod with the Beheading of St John the Baptist Teniers the Younger : Archduke Leopold Wilhelm in his Painting Gallery in Brussels (1651) Verhaecht : Alpine Landscape van der Weyden : The Descent from the Cross – Durán Madonna Italian Fra Angelico : Annunciation Anguissola : Portrait of Elisabeth of Valois – Portrait of Infanta Isabella Clara Eugenia [3] – Portrait of Giovanni Battista Caselli Barocci : Nativity Bellini : Madonna and Child with Saint Mary Magdalene and Saint Ursula Botticelli : The Story of Nastagio Degli Onesti, part one Caravaggio : David and Goliath Carracci : Assumption of the Virgin – Mural Paintings from the Herrera Chapel – Venus, Adonis and Cupid Correggio : Noli me tangere – Madonna and Child with the Infant John the Baptist A. Gentileschi : The Birth of Saint John the Baptist O. Gentileschi : The Finding of Moses (1633) Leonardo : Mona Lisa (by his studio) Lotto : Portrait of Marsilio Cassotti and His Bride Faustina Mantegna : Death of the Virgin Parmigianino : Holy Family with Angels – Portrait of Camilla Gonzaga and Her Three Sons – Portrait of Pier Maria Rossi di San Secondo – Saint Barbara Raphael : Portrait of a Cardinal – Christ Falling on the Way to Calvary – Madonna of the Rose – Visitation – La Perla (with Romano) Romano : Holy Family under an Oak Tree Andrea del Sarto : Sacrifice of Isaac Tintoretto : Christ Washing the Disciples' Feet – Joseph and Potiphar's Wife – Judith and Holofernes (by his studio) – The Washing of the Feet Tiepolo : The Immaculate Conception Titian : The Bacchanal of the Andrians – Equestrian Portrait of Charles V – The Fall of Man – Alfonso d'Avalos Addressing his Troops – Danaë Receiving the Golden Rain (1565) – The Entombment – La Gloria – Virgin and Child Between Saints Anthony of Padua and Roch – Mater Dolorosa with Clasped Hands – Philip II in Armour – Portrait of Charles V with a Dog – Portrait of Federico II Gonzaga – Portrait of Isabella of Portugal – Sisyphus – Tityus – Religion saved by Spain – Salome - Self-Portrait (1567) – Saint Margaret and the Dragon – Venus and Adonis (1554) – Venus and Musician (1550, 1555) – The Virgin and Child with Saint George and Saint Dorothy – The Worship of Venus Veronese : Venus and Adonis – Christ Among the Doctors – The Finding of Moses French Anonymous : Agony in the Garden Baudry : The Pearl and the Wave van Loo : The Family of Philip V (1743) Lorrain : Landscape with St Paula of Rome Embarking at Ostia – The Ford – Landscape with St María de Cervelló – Landscape with the Burial of St Serapia – Landscape with the Finding of Moses – Landscape with the Temptation of St Anthony – Landscape with Tobias and Raphael Poussin : Parnassus – Landscape with Three Figures – Saint Cecilia Ranc : The Family of Philip V (1723) – Portrait of Ferdinand VI as a Boy Watteau : Marriage Contract and Country Dancing Vouet : Time Defeated by Love, Beauty and Hope Other British paintings Sculptures Rome The Apotheosis of Claudius Castor and Pollux [1] On display at El Greco Museum in Toledo [2] On display at Museo de América in Madrid [3] On display at the Spanish Embassy in Paris Category v t e Death and mortality in art Themes All flesh is grass Carpe diem Consolatio Danse Macabre Death and the Maiden Lamentation of Christ Macabre Memento mori Mono no aware Sic transit gloria mundi Ubi sunt Personifications of death Vanitas Forms Architecture Cenotaph Memorial Tomb Music Funeral march Requiem Poetry Death poem Dirge Elegy Elegiac Pastoral elegy Keening Lament Obituary poetry Threnody Prose Epitaph Funerary text Tragedy Visual arts Calavera Funerary art Cadaver monument Death mask Gravestone Post-mortem photography Wreath Other Mummy Artwork Architecture Capela dos Ossos Capuchin Crypt Catacombs of Paris Sedlec Ossuary Skull Chapel Capuchin Catacombs of Palermo Film The Seventh Seal Music Danse macabre Death and Transfiguration Der Tod und das Mädchen Erlkönig Totentanz Painting Et in Arcadia ego Guercino Poussin Death and Fire Death and Life Death and the Maiden Death and the Miser Gather Ye Rosebuds While Ye May La Calavera Catrina Plague Pyramid of Skulls Roman Widow Self-Portrait with Death Playing the Fiddle Skull of a Skeleton with Burning Cigarette Sleep and His Half-Brother Death The Ambassadors The Garden of Death The Shadow of Death The Three Ages of Man and Death The Triumph of Death Poetry " And death shall have no dominion " " Because I could not stop for Death " " Erlkönig " " Do not go gentle into that good night " Prose Ars moriendi Bardo Thodol Book of Job Book of the Dead Left Ginza Hamlet's soliloquy The Masque of the Red Death ‹ The template below ( Authority control (arts) ) is being considered for deletion. See templates for discussion to help reach a consensus. › Authority control databases National Germany Other RKD ID Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=The_Triumph_of_Death&oldid=1301873655 " Categories : Paintings by Pieter Bruegel the Elder Paintings in the Museo del Prado by Flemish artists 1560s paintings Paintings about death Anti-war paintings Fiction about skeletons Skulls in art Horses in art Musical instruments in art Epidemics in art Paintings of dogs Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica CS1 maint: location missing publisher Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles containing Spanish-language text This page was last edited on 22 July 2025, at 05:09 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents The Triumph of Death 28 languages Add topic

