Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life 2 Contested election as bishop of Carthage 3 Controversy over the lapsed 4 Persecution under Valerian 5 Writings 6 Biography 7 Theology Toggle Theology subsection 7.1 Sacraments 7.2 Church 7.3 Other 8 Veneration 9 References 10 Sources Toggle Sources subsection 10.1 English Translations of Works by St. Cyprian 10.2 Others 11 External links Toggle the table of contents Cyprian 51 languages العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca Беларуская Български Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Furlan Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული Kiswahili Latina Lietuvių Magyar Malagasy മലയാളം مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Napulitano Norsk bokmål Polski Português Română Русский Shqip Simple English Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська اردو 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Bishop of Carthage and Christian writer (c. 210–258) This article is about the bishop of Carthage. For other Cyprians, see Cyprian (disambiguation) .

Saint Cyprian Bishop of Carthage See Carthage Appointed 248 or 249 AD Term ended 14 September 258 AD Predecessor Donatus I Successor Carpophorus Personal details Born c.

210 [ 1 ] Carthage , [ 2 ] Roman Empire Died 14 September 258 (aged 47–48) Carthage, Roman Empire Sainthood Feast day 16 September ( Catholic Church , Western Rite Orthodoxy , and Lutheran ) 31 August ( Eastern Orthodox ) 26 September ( Anglican ) 14 September (historical Sarum Use ) Venerated in Catholic Church Oriental Orthodox Churches Eastern Orthodox Church Lutheranism Anglicanism Patronage North Africa , Berbers [ 3 ] [ 4 ] Cyprian ( / ˈ s ɪ p r i ən / ; Latin : Thascius Caecilius Cyprianus ; c.

210 to 14 September 258 AD [ 1 ] ) was a bishop of Carthage and an early Christian writer of Berber descent, many of whose Latin works are extant. He is recognized as a saint in the Western and Eastern churches.

He was born around the beginning of the 3rd century in North Africa , perhaps at Carthage , [ 5 ] where he received a classical education. Soon after converting to Christianity, he became a bishop in 249. A controversial figure during his lifetime, his strong pastoral skills, firm conduct during the Novatianist controversy and outbreak of the Plague of Cyprian (named for his description of it), and eventual martyrdom at Carthage established his reputation and proved his sanctity in the eyes of the Church.

His skilful Latin rhetoric led to his being considered the pre-eminent Latin writer of Western Christianity until Jerome and Augustine .

[ 6 ] Early life [ edit ] Cyprian was born into a rich pagan Roman African [ 5 ] Carthaginian family sometime during the early third century. His original name was Thascius; he took the additional name Caecilius in memory of the priest to whom he owed his conversion.

[ 7 ] Before his conversion, he was a leading member of a legal fraternity in Carthage, an orator, a "pleader in the courts", and a teacher of rhetoric.

[ 8 ] After a "dissipated youth", Cyprian was baptized when he was thirty-five years old, [ 2 ] c.

245 AD . After his baptism , he gave away a portion of his wealth to the poor of Carthage , as befitted a man of his status.

In the early days of his conversion, he wrote an Epistola ad Donatum de gratia Dei and the Testimoniorum Libri III that adhere closely to the models of Tertullian , who influenced his style and thinking. Cyprian described his own conversion and baptism in the following words: When I was still lying in darkness and gloomy night, I used to regard it as extremely difficult and demanding to do what God's mercy was suggesting to me... I myself was held in bonds by the innumerable errors of my previous life, from which I did not believe I could possibly be delivered, so I was disposed to acquiesce in my clinging vices and to indulge my sins... But after that, with the help of the water of new birth, the stain of my former life was washed away, and a light from above, serene and pure, was infused into my reconciled heart... a second birth restored me to a new man. Then, in a wondrous manner, every doubt began to fade... I clearly understood that what had first lived within me, enslaved by the vices of the flesh, was earthly and that what, instead, the Holy Spirit had wrought within me was divine and heavenly.

[ 9 ] Contested election as bishop of Carthage [ edit ] Not long after his baptism, he was ordained a deacon and soon afterwards a priest. Sometime between July 248 and April 249, he was elected bishop of Carthage , a popular choice among the poor who remembered his patronage as demonstrating good equestrian style. However, his rapid rise did not meet with the approval of senior members of the clergy in Carthage, [ 6 ] [ 10 ] an opposition that did not disappear during his episcopate .

Not long afterwards, the entire community was put to an unwanted test. Christians in North Africa had not suffered persecution for many years; the Church was assured and lax. In early 250, the Decian persecution began.

[ 11 ] Emperor Decius issued an edict, the text of which is lost, ordering sacrifices to the gods to be made throughout the Empire .

[ 12 ] Jews were specifically exempted from that requirement.

[ 13 ] Cyprian chose to go into hiding, rather than face potential execution. While some clergy saw that decision as a sign of cowardice, Cyprian defended himself by saying that he had fled in order not to leave the faithful without a shepherd during the persecution and that his decision to continue to lead them, although from a distance, was in accordance with divine will. Moreover, he pointed to the actions of the Apostles and Jesus himself: "And therefore the Lord commanded us in the persecution to depart and to flee; and both taught that this should be done, and Himself did it. For as the crown is given by the condescension of God, and cannot be received unless the hour comes for accepting it, whoever abiding in Christ departs for a while does not deny his faith, but waits for the time..." [ 14 ] Controversy over the lapsed [ edit ] The persecution was especially severe at Carthage, according to Church sources. Many Christians fell away and were thereafter referred to as " Lapsi " ( fallen ).

[ 11 ] The majority had obtained signed statements ( libelli ) certifying that they had sacrificed to the Roman gods to avoid persecution or confiscation of property. In some cases, Christians had actually sacrificed, whether under torture or otherwise. Cyprian found those libellatici especially cowardly and demanded that they and the rest of the lapsi undergo public penance before being readmitted to the Church.

Mosaic of Saint Cyprian of Carthage in the Basilica of Sant'Apollinare Nuovo in Ravenna However, in Cyprian's absence, some priests disregarded his wishes by readmitting the lapsed to communion with little or no public penance. Some of the lapsi presented a second libellus purported to bear the signature of some martyr or confessor who, it was held, had the spiritual prestige to reaffirm individual Christians. That system was not limited to Carthage, but on a wider front by its charismatic nature, it clearly constituted a challenge to institutional authority in the Church, in particular to that of the bishop. Hundreds or even thousands of lapsi were readmitted that way against the express wishes of Cyprian and the majority of the Carthaginian clergy, who insisted upon earnest repentance.

[ 6 ] A schism then broke out in Carthage, as the laxist party, led largely by the priests who had opposed Cyprian's election, attempted to block measures taken by him during his period of absence. After fourteen months, Cyprian returned to the diocese and in letters addressed to the other North African bishops defended having left his post. After issuing a tract, "De lapsis" ( On the Fallen ), he convoked a council of North African bishops at Carthage to consider the treatment of the lapsed and the apparent schism of Felicissimus (251). Cyprian took a middle course between the followers of Novatus of Carthage, who were in favour of welcoming back all with little or no penance, and Novatian of Rome , who would not allow any of those who had lapsed to be reconciled.

[ 15 ] The council in the main sided with Cyprian and condemned Felicissimus though no acts of that council survive.

The schism continued as the laxists elected a certain Fortunatus as bishop in opposition to Cyprian. At the same time, the rigorist party in Rome, who refused reconciliation to any of the lapsed, elected Novatian as bishop of Rome in opposition to Pope Cornelius . The Novatianists also secured the election of a certain Maximus as a rival bishop of their own at Carthage. Cyprian now found himself wedged between laxists and rigorists, but the polarisation highlighted the firm but moderate position adopted by Cyprian and strengthened his influence by wearing down the numbers of his opponents. Moreover, his dedication during the time of a great plague and famine gained him still further popular support.

[ 15 ] Cyprian comforted his brethren by writing his De mortalitate and in his De eleemosynis exhorted them to active charity towards the poor and set a personal example. He defended Christianity and the Christians in the apologia Ad Demetrianum , directed against a certain Demetrius, and countered pagan claims that Christians were the cause of the public calamities.

Persecution under Valerian [ edit ] Relic of Cyprian in Kornelimünster Abbey In late 256, a new persecution of the Christians broke out under Emperor Valerian , and Pope Sixtus II was executed in Rome.

[ 6 ] In Africa, Cyprian prepared his people for the expected edict of persecution by his De exhortatione martyrii and set an example when he was brought before the Roman proconsul Aspasius Paternus (30 August 257).

[ 6 ] He refused to sacrifice to the pagan deities and firmly professed Christ .

The proconsul banished him to Curubis, now Korba , where, to the best of his ability, he comforted his flock and his banished clergy. In a vision, he believed he saw his approaching fate. When a year had passed, he was recalled and kept practically a prisoner in his own villa in expectation of severe measures after a new and more stringent imperial edict arrived, which Christian writers subsequently claimed demanded the execution of all Christian clerics.

[ 6 ] On 13 September 258, Cyprian was imprisoned on the orders of the new proconsul , Galerius Maximus . The public examination of Cyprian by Galerius Maximus, on 14 September 258, has been preserved: [ 12 ] Galerius Maximus : "Are you Thascius Cyprianus?" Cyprian : "I am." Galerius : "The most sacred Emperors have commanded you to conform to the Roman rites." Cyprian : "I refuse." Galerius : "Take heed for yourself." Cyprian : "Do as you are bid; in so clear a case I may not take heed." Galerius , after briefly conferring with his judicial council, with much reluctance pronounced the following sentence: "You have long lived an irreligious life, and have drawn together a number of men bound by an unlawful association, and professed yourself an open enemy to the gods and the religion of Rome; and the pious, most sacred and august Emperors ... have endeavoured in vain to bring you back to conformity with their religious observances; whereas therefore you have been apprehended as principal and ringleader in these infamous crimes, you shall be made an example to those whom you have wickedly associated with you; the authority of law shall be ratified in your blood." He then read the sentence of the court from a written tablet: "It is the sentence of this court that Thascius Cyprianus be executed with the sword." Cyprian : "Thanks be to God." The execution was carried out at once in an open place near the city. A vast multitude followed Cyprian on his last journey. He removed his garments without assistance, knelt down, and prayed. After he blindfolded himself, he was beheaded by the sword. The body was interred by Christians near the place of execution.

[ 6 ] Cyprian's martyrdom was followed by the martyrdom of eight of his disciples in Carthage.

[ 16 ] Writings [ edit ] For writings falsely attributed to Cyprian, see Pseudo-Cyprian .

Cyprian's works were edited in volumes 3 and 4 of the Patrologia Latina .

He was not a speculative theologian, his writings being always related to his pastoral ministry.

[ 17 ] The first major work was a monologue spoken to a friend called Ad Donatum, detailing his own conversion, the corruption of Roman government and the gladiatorial spectacles, and pointing to prayer as "the only refuge of the Christian".

[ 6 ] Another early written work was the Testimonia ad Quirinum . During his exile from Carthage Cyprian wrote his most famous treatise, De Ecclesiae Catholicae Unitate ( On the Unity of the Catholic Church ) and on returning to his see, he issued De Lapsis ( On the Fallen ). Another important work is his Treatise on the Lord's Prayer . Doubtless only part of his written output has survived, and this must apply especially to his correspondence, of which some sixty letters are extant, in addition to some of the letters he received.

Cyprian of Carthage is often confused with Cyprian of Antioch , reputedly a magician before his conversion. A number of grimoires , such as Libellus Magicus , are thus mistakenly attributed to Cyprian of Carthage.

Biography [ edit ] Pontius the Deacon wrote a biography of Cyprian titled The Life and Passion of St. Cyprian , which details the saint's early life, his conversion, notable acts, and martyrdom under Valerian.

Theology [ edit ] Sacraments [ edit ] Cyprian believed in infant baptism and infant communion .

[ 18 ] Cyprian, however, spoke against the efficacy of baptism performed by heretics and insisted on their rebaptism, and he believed that the Eucharist cannot be properly consecrated outside the Church.

[ 19 ] [ 20 ] Cyprian was one of the earliest of the Church Fathers to enunciate clearly and unambiguously the doctrine of baptismal regeneration ("the idea that salvation happens at and by water baptism duly administered"): "While he attributed all the saving energy to the grace of God, he considered the 'laver of saving water' the instrument of God that makes a person 'born again,' receiving a new life and putting off what he had previously been. The 'water of new birth' animated him to new life by the Spirit of holiness working through it." [ 21 ] Church [ edit ] Cyprian believed that the lapsed could be re-admitted to the Church after penance and he opposed the Novatians .

[ 22 ] [ 23 ] Cyprian believed the see of Peter (Rome) is the direct heir of Peter.

[ 24 ] While Cyprian believed that all the apostles were equal and that all the bishops followed the Apostles in succession, Cyprian emphasized the unity of the Church under a single cathedra (chair): "he [Jesus Christ] assigns a like power to all the apostles, yet he founded a single chair [ cathedra ], and he established by his own authority a source and an intrinsic reason for that unity. Indeed, the others were that also which Peter was [i.e., apostles], but a primacy is given to Peter, whereby it is made clear that there is but one Church and one chair. So too, all [the apostles] are shepherds, and the flock is shown to be one, fed by all the apostles in single-minded accord." [ 25 ] [ 26 ] Other [ edit ] Cyprian was amillennial .

[ 27 ] Augustine argued that Cyprian taught the gift of perseverance .

[ 28 ] Cyprian argued that each day of the Genesis creation account consisted of 1,000 years.

[ 29 ] Veneration [ edit ] Churches were erected over his tomb and over the place of his death. In later centuries, however, these churches were destroyed by the Vandals . The graves of such saints as Cyprian and Martin of Tours came to be regarded as "contact points between Heaven and Earth", and they became the centres of new, redefined, Christian urban communities.

[ 30 ] A surviving homily from Augustine on Cyprian's feast day indicates that his following was fairly widespread throughout Africa by the fourth century.

Charlemagne is said to have had the bones transferred to France; and Lyons , Arles , Venice , Compiègne , and Roenay in Flanders all have claimed to possess part of the martyr's relics.

The Catholic Church celebrates his feast day together with that of his good friend Pope Cornelius on 16 September, [ 8 ] and in the Catholic Middle Ages the Sarum use observed it on the day of his death, 14 September. The Eastern Orthodox Church commemorates him on 31 August.

[ 31 ] Lutherans now commemorate him on 16 September, while Anglicans celebrate his feast usually either on 13 September (e.g. the Anglican Church of Australia) or 15 September (the present-day Church of England Calendar of saints ) remembers him with a Lesser Festival .

References [ edit ] ^ a b The Liturgy of the Hours according to the Roman Rite: Vol. IV.

New York: Catholic Book Publishing Company, 1975. p. 1406.

^ a b Benedict XVI 2008 , p. 51.

^ Lanzi, Fernando (2004).

Saints and Their Symbols: Recognizing Saints in Art and in Popular Images . Liturgical Press. p. 80.

ISBN 9780814629703 .

Cyprian von Karthago. This bishop of Carthage was one of the most important saints of Christian Africa in the third century; he is patron of North Africa and the Berbers.

^ Dupont, Anthony (2020).

The Bible in Christian North Africa: Part I: Commencement to the Confessiones of Augustine (ca. 180 to 400 CE) . Walter de Gruyter GmbH & Co KG. p. 194.

ISBN 9781614516491 .

^ a b Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911).

"Cyprian, Saint" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 7 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. pp.

694– 695.

^ a b c d e f g h Chapman, Henry Palmer (1908).

"St. Cyprian of Carthage" . In Herbermann, Charles (ed.).

Catholic Encyclopedia . Vol. 4. New York: Robert Appleton Company.

^ Butler, Alban. "St. Cyprian, Archbishop of Carthage, Martyr", The Lives of the Saints , Vol, IX, 1866 ^ a b Butler's Lives of the Saints , (Michael Walsh, ed.), New York: HarperCollins Publishers, 1991, p. 289.

^ Cyprian, Ad Donatum , 3-4 ^ Oshitelu, G.A., The African Fathers of the Early Church , Ibadan, Nigeria, 2002 ^ a b Benedict XVI 2008 , p. 52.

^ a b W. H. C. Frend (1984).

The Rise of Christianity . Fortress Press, Philadelphia. p. 319.

ISBN 978-0-8006-1931-2 .

^ Graeme Clarke (2005).

Third-Century Christianity . In The Cambridge Ancient History, Volume XII: The Crisis of Empire, edited by Alan Bowman, Averil Cameron, and Peter Garnsey. Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 0-521-30199-8 .

^ Cyprian.

De Lapsis .

^ a b Foley, Leonard O.F.M., "St. Cyprian", Saint of the Day , (revised by Pat McCloskey O.F.M.), Franciscan Media ^ Butler 1866 , p. 198.

^ Benedict XVI 2008 , p. 53.

^ Johnson, Maxwell E. (24 March 2016).

The Rites of Christian Initiation: Their Evolution and Interpretation Revised and Expanded Edition . Liturgical Press.

ISBN 978-0-8146-6274-8 .

^ Kilmartin, Edward J. (30 November 1998).

The Eucharist in the West: History and Theology . Liturgical Press.

ISBN 978-0-8146-6204-5 .

^ Ray, Stephen K. (1 January 1999).

Upon this Rock: St. Peter and the Primacy of Rome in Scripture and the Early Church . Ignatius Press.

ISBN 978-0-89870-723-6 .

^ Olson 1999 , p. 118.

^ Stewart, Jon (5 December 2016).

Volume 4: Kierkegaard and the Patristic and Medieval Traditions . Routledge.

ISBN 978-1-351-87460-1 .

^ "CATHOLIC ENCYCLOPEDIA: Novatian and Novatianism" . 3 April 2019. Archived from the original on 3 April 2019 . Retrieved 12 July 2022 .

^ Ray, Stephen K. (1 January 1999).

Upon this Rock: St. Peter and the Primacy of Rome in Scripture and the Early Church . Ignatius Press.

ISBN 978-0-89870-723-6 .

^ Roberts, Alexander; Donaldson, James; Coxe, Cleveland (1886).

Ante-Nicene Fathers (5 ed.). Christian Literature Publishing Co.

^ Desert, Anthony of the (12 January 2012).

The Gates of Hades Prevaileth Not: Heresies, Schisms, & Other Errancies Renounced by the Eastern Church . iUniverse.

ISBN 978-1-4620-5863-1 .

^ Hill, Charles Evan; Hill, Charles E. (2001).

Regnum Caelorum: Patterns of Millennial Thought in Early Christianity . Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing.

ISBN 978-0-8028-4634-1 .

^ Komline, Han-luen Kantzer (13 November 2019).

Augustine on the Will: A Theological Account . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-094882-5 .

^ "What the Early Church Believed: Creation and Genesis" .

Catholic Answers . Retrieved 29 July 2022 .

The first seven days in the divine arrangement contain seven thousand years" (Treatises 11:11 [A.D. 250]).

^ Arnold, John H., The Oxford Handbook of Medieval Christianity , OUP Oxford, 2014 ISBN 9780191015014 ^ "Cyprian the Hieromartyr & Bishop of Carthage", Greek Orthodox Archdiocese of America Sources [ edit ] English Translations of Works by St. Cyprian [ edit ] St. Cyprian.

The lapsed. The unity of the Catholic Church , translated and annotated by Maurice Bévenot, SJ), 1957 ( Ancient Christian Writers , 25) ISBN 9780809102600 The Letters of St. Cyprian of Carthage, translated and annotated by G.W. Clarke [ de ] ), 4 vols., 1984-89 (Ancient Christian Writers, 43–44, 46–47) ISBN 9780809103416 , 9780809103423 , 9780809103690 , 9780809103706 Brent, Allen , editor and translator, "St Cyprian of Carthage: Selected Treatises," St. Vladimir's Seminary Press, 2007, ISBN 0-88141-312-7 Brent, Allen, editor and translator, "St Cyprian of Carthage: Selected Letters," St. Vladimir's Seminary Press, 2007, ISBN 0-88141-313-5 Butler, Alban (1866), The Lives of the Fathers, Martyrs, and Other Principal Saints , vol. 2, James Duffy , retrieved 23 August 2021 Campbell, Phillip, editor, "The Complete works of Saint Cyprian" Evolution Publishing, 2013, ISBN 1-935228-11-0 Christian Classics Ethereal Library: Cyprian texts Others [ edit ] Daniel, Robin, "This Holy Seed: Faith, Hope and Love in the Early Churches of North Africa", (Chester, Tamarisk Publications, 2010: from www.opaltrust.org) ISBN 0-9538565-3-4 Olson, Roger E. (1999).

The Story of Christian Theology: Twenty Centuries of Tradition Reform . InterVarsity Press.

ISBN 978-0-8308-1505-0 .

J.M. Tebes, "Cyprian of Carthage: Christianity and Social World in the 3rd. century" , Cuadernos de Teología 19, (2000) (in Spanish) Benedict XVI (2008).

The Fathers . Our Sunday Visitor.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Saint Cyprian .

Wikiquote has quotations related to Cyprian .

English Wikisource has original works by or about: Thaschus Cæcilius Cyprianus Pontius the Deacon (Pontius Diaconis), "The Life and Passion of Cyprian, Bishop and Martyr" "The Plague of AD 251" Works by Cyprian at the IntraText Digital Library, with concordance and frequency lists Acta proconsularia S. Cypriani Multilanguage Opera Omnia Pope, Charles. "The Life of Saint Cyprian of Carthage" Works by Cyprian at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) https://www.patheos.com/blogs/nightowlmeditations/2019/04/saints-and-witchcraft-the-patron-saints-of-witches/ v t e Saints of the Catholic Church Dicastery for the Causes of Saints Stages of canonization : Servant of God → Venerable → Blessed → Saint Virgin Mary Mother of God (Theotokos) Immaculate Conception Perpetual virginity Assumption Marian apparition Titles of Mary Joseph (husband) Apostles Andrew Barnabas Bartholomew James of Alphaeus James the Great John Jude Matthew Matthias Paul Peter Philip Simon Thomas Archangels Gabriel Michael in the Catholic Church Raphael Confessors Anatolius Anthony of Kiev Athanasius the Confessor Chariton the Confessor Dominic Edward the Confessor Francis of Assisi Francis Borgia Homobonus John Henry Newman Lazarus Zographos Louis Bertrand Martin de Porres Martin of Tours Maximus the Confessor Michael of Synnada Paphnutius the Confessor Paul I of Constantinople Peter Claver Salonius Sergius of Radonezh Theophanes the Confessor Pio of Pietrelcina Disciples Apollos Mary of Bethany Mary Magdalene Priscilla and Aquila Silvanus Stephen Timothy Titus Seventy disciples Doctors of the Church Gregory the Great Ambrose Augustine of Hippo Jerome John Chrysostom Basil of Caesarea Gregory of Nazianzus Athanasius of Alexandria Cyril of Alexandria Cyril of Jerusalem John of Damascus Bede the Venerable Ephrem the Syrian Thomas Aquinas Bonaventure Anselm of Canterbury Isidore of Seville Peter Chrysologus Leo the Great Peter Damian Bernard of Clairvaux Hilary of Poitiers Alphonsus Liguori Francis de Sales Peter Canisius John of the Cross Robert Bellarmine Albertus Magnus Anthony of Padua Lawrence of Brindisi Teresa of Ávila Catherine of Siena Thérèse of Lisieux John of Ávila Hildegard of Bingen Gregory of Narek Irenaeus John Henry Newman Evangelists Matthew Mark Luke John Church Fathers Alexander of Alexandria Alexander of Jerusalem Ambrose of Milan Anatolius Athanasius of Alexandria Augustine of Hippo Caesarius of Arles Caius Cappadocian Fathers Clement of Alexandria Clement of Rome Cyprian of Carthage Cyril of Alexandria Cyril of Jerusalem Damasus I Desert Fathers Desert Mothers Dionysius of Alexandria Dionysius of Corinth Dionysius Ephrem the Syrian Epiphanius of Salamis Fulgentius of Ruspe Gregory the Great Gregory of Nazianzus Gregory of Nyssa Hilary of Poitiers Hippolytus of Rome Ignatius of Antioch Irenaeus of Lyons Isidore of Seville Jerome of Stridonium John Chrysostom John of Damascus Maximus the Confessor Melito of Sardis Quadratus of Athens Papias of Hierapolis Peter Chrysologus Polycarp of Smyrna Theophilus of Antioch Victorinus of Pettau Vincent of Lérins Zephyrinus Martyrs Abda and Abdisho Boris and Gleb Charles de Foucauld Canadian Martyrs Carthusian Martyrs Child Martyrs of Tlaxcala Christina of Persia Dominguito del Val Devasahayam Pillai Dismas the Good Thief Forty Martyrs of England and Wales Four Crowned Martyrs Gerard of Csanád Great Martyr The Holy Innocents Irish Martyrs John Fisher Korean Martyrs Lorenzo Ruiz Martyrs of Lübeck Luigi Versiglia Martyrology Martyrs of Albania Martyrs of Algeria Martyrs of Cajonos Martyrs of Compiègne Martyrs of Drina Martyrs of China Martyrs of Gorkum Martyrs of Japan 21 Martyrs of Libya Martyrs of La Rioja Martyrs of Damascus Martyrs of Laos Martyrs of Natal Martyrs of Otranto Martyrs of Prague Martyrs of Sandomierz Martyrs of the Spanish Civil War Martyrs of Zenta Maximilian Kolbe Óscar Romero Pedro Calungsod Perpetua and Felicity Peter Chanel Pietro Parenzo Philomena Saints of the Cristero War Stephen Teresa Benedicta of the Cross Titus Brandsma 17 Thomasian Martyrs Thomas Becket Thomas More Three Martyrs of Chimbote Ulma Family Uganda Martyrs Vietnamese Martyrs Valentine of Rome Victor and Corona Zanitas and Lazarus of Persia Missionaries Ansgar Augustine of Canterbury Boniface Cyril and Methodius Damien of Molokai Evermode of Ratzeburg Francis Xavier François de Laval Gregory the Illuminator Junípero Serra Nino of Georgia Patrick of Ireland Remigius Sava of Serbia Patriarchs Adam Abel Abraham Isaac Jacob Joseph Joseph (father of Jesus) David Noah Solomon Matriarchs Popes Adeodatus I Adeodatus II Adrian III Agapetus I Agatho Alexander I Anacletus Anastasius I Anicetus Anterus Benedict II Boniface I Boniface IV Caius Callixtus I Celestine I Celestine V Clement I Cornelius Damasus I Dionysius Eleuterus Eugene I Eusebius Eutychian Evaristus Fabian Felix I Felix III Felix IV Gelasius I Gregory I Gregory II Gregory III Gregory VII Hilarius Hormisdas Hyginus Innocent I John I John XXIII John Paul II Julius I Leo I Leo II Leo III Leo IV Leo IX Linus Lucius I Marcellinus Marcellus I Mark Martin I Miltiades Nicholas I Paschal I Paul I Paul VI Peter Pius I Pius V Pius X Pontian Sergius I Silverius Simplicius Siricius Sixtus I Sixtus II Sixtus III Soter Stephen I Stephen IV Sylvester I Symmachus Telesphorus Urban I Victor I Vitalian Zachary Zephyrinus Zosimus Prophets Agabus Amos Anna Baruch ben Neriah David Elijah Ezekiel Habakkuk Haggai Hosea Isaiah Jeremiah Job Joel John the Baptist Jonah Judas Barsabbas Malachi Melchizedek Micah Moses Nahum Obadiah Samuel Seven Maccabees and their mother Simeon Zechariah (prophet) Zechariah (NT) Zephaniah Virgins Agatha of Sicily Agnes of Rome Angela of the Cross Æthelthryth Bernadette Soubirous Catherine of Bologna Brigid of Kildare Catherine Labouré Catherine of Siena Cecilia Clare of Assisi Eulalia of Mérida Euphemia Faustina Kowalska Faustina and Liberata of Como Genevieve Hiltrude of Liessies Joan of Arc Josephine Bakhita Kateri Tekakwitha Lucy of Syracuse Maria Goretti María de las Maravillas de Jesús Narcisa de Jesús Patricia of Naples Rosalia Rose of Lima Teresa of the Andes Teresa of Calcutta Trasilla and Emiliana Ubaldesca Taccini See also Calendar of saints Four Holy Marshals Fourteen Holy Helpers Martyr of charity Military saints Athleta Christi Miles Christianus Church Militant Seven Champions Venerated couples Virtuous pagan Catholic Church portal Saints portal Links to related articles v t e History of Catholic theology Key figures General History of the Catholic Church Timeline History of the papacy Papal primacy Ecumenical councils Catholic Bible Vulgate Biblical canon History of Christian theology Early Church Paul Clement of Rome First Epistle of Clement Didache Ignatius of Antioch Polycarp Epistle of Barnabas The Shepherd of Hermas Aristides of Athens Justin Martyr Epistle to Diognetus Irenaeus Montanism Tertullian Origen Antipope Novatian Cyprian Constantine to Pope Gregory I Eusebius Athanasius of Alexandria Arianism Pelagianism Nestorianism Monophysitism Ephrem the Syrian Hilary of Poitiers Cyril of Jerusalem Basil of Caesarea Gregory of Nazianzus Gregory of Nyssa Ambrose John Chrysostom Jerome Augustine of Hippo John Cassian Orosius Cyril of Alexandria Peter Chrysologus Pope Leo I Boethius Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite Pope Gregory I Early Middle Ages Isidore of Seville John Climacus Maximus the Confessor Monothelitism Ecthesis Bede John of Damascus Iconoclasm Transubstantiation dispute Predestination disputes Paulinus II of Aquileia Alcuin Benedict of Aniane Rabanus Maurus Paschasius Radbertus John Scotus Eriugena High Middle Ages Roscellinus Gregory of Narek Berengar of Tours Peter Damian Anselm of Canterbury Joachim of Fiore Peter Abelard Decretum Gratiani Bernard of Clairvaux Peter Lombard Anselm of Laon Hildegard of Bingen Hugh of Saint Victor Dominic de Guzmán Robert Grosseteste Francis of Assisi Anthony of Padua Beatrice of Nazareth Bonaventure Albertus Magnus Boetius of Dacia Henry of Ghent Thomas Aquinas Siger of Brabant Thomism Roger Bacon Mysticism and reforms Ramon Llull Duns Scotus Dante Alighieri William of Ockham Richard Rolle John of Ruusbroec Catherine of Siena Bridget of Sweden Meister Eckhart Johannes Tauler Walter Hilton The Cloud of Unknowing Heinrich Seuse Geert Groote Devotio Moderna Julian of Norwich Thomas à Kempis Nicholas of Cusa Marsilio Ficino Girolamo Savonarola Giovanni Pico della Mirandola Reformation Counter-Reformation Erasmus Thomas Cajetan Thomas More John Fisher Johann Eck Francisco de Vitoria Thomas of Villanova Ignatius of Loyola Francisco de Osuna John of Ávila Francis Xavier Teresa of Ávila Luis de León John of the Cross Peter Canisius Luis de Molina ( Molinism ) Robert Bellarmine Francisco Suárez Lawrence of Brindisi Francis de Sales Baroque period to French Revolution Tommaso Campanella Pierre de Bérulle Pierre Gassendi René Descartes Mary of Jesus of Ágreda António Vieira Jean-Jacques Olier Louis Thomassin Jacques-Bénigne Bossuet François Fénelon Cornelius Jansen ( Jansenism ) Blaise Pascal Nicolas Malebranche Giambattista Vico Alphonsus Liguori Louis de Montfort Maria Gaetana Agnesi Alfonso Muzzarelli Johann Michael Sailer Clement Mary Hofbauer Bruno Lanteri 19th century Joseph Görres Félicité de La Mennais Luigi Taparelli Antonio Rosmini Ignaz von Döllinger John Henry Newman Henri Lacordaire Jaime Balmes Gaetano Sanseverino Giovanni Maria Cornoldi Wilhelm Emmanuel Freiherr von Ketteler Giuseppe Pecci Joseph Hergenröther Tommaso Maria Zigliara Matthias Joseph Scheeben Émile Boutroux Modernism Neo-scholasticism Léon Bloy Désiré-Joseph Mercier Friedrich von Hügel Vladimir Solovyov Marie-Joseph Lagrange George Tyrrell Maurice Blondel Thérèse of Lisieux 20th century G. K. Chesterton Reginald Garrigou-Lagrange Joseph Maréchal Pierre Teilhard de Chardin Jacques Maritain Étienne Gilson Ronald Knox Georges Bernanos Dietrich von Hildebrand Gabriel Marcel Marie-Dominique Chenu Romano Guardini Edith Stein Fulton Sheen Henri de Lubac Dorothy Day Henri Daniel-Rops Jean Guitton Josemaría Escrivá Nouvelle théologie Karl Rahner Yves Congar Bernard Lonergan Emmanuel Mounier Jean Daniélou Hans Urs von Balthasar Marcel Lefebvre Frederick Copleston Alfred Delp Edward Schillebeeckx Thomas Merton René Girard Hans Küng Johann Baptist Metz Jean Vanier Henri Nouwen 21st century Pope John Paul II Alice von Hildebrand Carlo Maria Martini Pope Benedict XVI Gustavo Gutiérrez Alasdair MacIntyre Walter Kasper Raniero Cantalamessa Michał Heller Peter Kreeft Jean-Luc Marion Tomáš Halík Aidan Nichols Scott Hahn Catholicism portal v t e History of the Catholic Church General History of the Catholic Church By country or region Ecclesiastical history Timeline Papacy Papal primacy Catholic ecumenical councils First seven Catholic Bible Biblical canon Vulgate Crusading movement History of the Roman Curia Religious institutes Christian monasticism Catholic culture Art Role in civilization Vatican City Papal States Latin Church Eastern Catholic Churches Early Church (30–325/476) Origins and Apostolic Age (30–100) Jesus Ministry Crucifixion Resurrection Great Commission Holy Spirit Mary John the Baptist Apostles in the New Testament Commissioning Peter John Paul Stephen Council of Jerusalem Split with Judaism New Testament Background Gospels Acts Pauline epistles General epistles Revelation Ante-Nicene period (100–325) Persecution Church Fathers Apostolic Fathers Pope Clement I Polycarp Ignatius Irenaeus Justin Martyr Canon Tertullian Origen Late antiquity (313–476) Great Church (180–451) Roman state church (380–451) Constantine the Great Christianity Arian controversy Archbasilica of Saint John Lateran Old St. Peter's Basilica First Council of Nicaea Pope Sylvester I First Council of Constantinople Biblical canon Jerome Vulgate Council of Ephesus Council of Chalcedon Early Middle Ages Benedict of Nursia Monasticism Second Council of Constantinople Pope Gregory I Gregorian chant Third Council of Constantinople Saint Boniface Byzantine Iconoclasm Second Council of Nicaea Charlemagne Pope Leo III Fourth Council of Constantinople East–West Schism High Middle Ages Pope Urban II Investiture Controversy Clash against the empire Crusades Universities Scholasticism First Council of the Lateran Second Council of the Lateran Third Council of the Lateran Pope Innocent III Latin Empire Francis of Assisi Fourth Council of the Lateran Inquisition First Council of Lyon Second Council of Lyon Bernard of Clairvaux Late Middle Ages Thomas Aquinas Pope Boniface VIII Western Schism Avignon Papacy Pope Clement V Council of Vienne Knights Templar Catherine of Siena Pope Alexander VI Age of Discovery Protestant Reformation Counter-Reformation Protestant Reformation Catholic Counter-Reformation Exsurge Domine Dissolution of the monasteries Council of Trent Thomas More Pope Leo X Society of Jesus Ignatius of Loyola Francis Xavier Pope Pius V Tridentine Mass Teresa of Ávila John of the Cross Peter Canisius Philip Neri Robert Bellarmine European wars of religion Thirty Years' War Baroque period to the French Revolution Pope Innocent XI Pope Benedict XIV Suppression of the Society of Jesus Age of Enlightenment Anti-clericalism Pope Pius VI Shimabara Rebellion Edict of Nantes Dechristianization of France during the French Revolution 19th century Pope Pius VII Pope Pius IX United States Dogma of the Immaculate Conception of the Virgin Mary Our Lady of La Salette Our Lady of Lourdes First Vatican Council Papal infallibility Pope Leo XIII Mary of the Divine Heart Prayer of Consecration to the Sacred Heart Rerum novarum 20th century Pope Pius X Our Lady of Fátima Persecutions of the Catholic Church and Pius XII Pope Pius XII Pope Pius XII 1942 consecration to the Immaculate Heart of Mary Dogma of the Assumption of the Virgin Mary Lateran Treaty Nazi Germany Mit brennender Sorge Pope John XXIII Pacem in terris Second Vatican Council Ecumenism Judaism Pope Paul VI ( coronation ) Pope John Paul I Mother Teresa USSR Pope John Paul II HIV/AIDS World Youth Day 1995 21st century Sexual abuse scandal Islam World Youth Day 2000 2002 2005 2008 2011 2013 2016 2019 2023 Pope Benedict XVI Pope Francis Laudato si' Patriarch Kirill COVID-19 pandemic Pope Leo XIV Vatican City portal Catholicism portal v t e Latin Church Patriarchates (by order of precedence ) Current Rome (' Patriarch of the West '): Pope Leo XIV (with cathedra in Archbasilica of Saint John Lateran ) Jerusalem : Pierbattista Pizzaballa East Indies : Filipe Neri Ferrão Lisbon : Rui Valério Venice : Francesco Moraglia Defunct Carthage (?−1964) Alexandria (1276–1964) Antioch (1098–1964) Constantinople (1204–1964) West Indies (1524–1963) Aquileia (560–1751) Ethiopia (1555–1663) Grado (560–1451) History Apostolic succession History of the papacy Papal primacy Historical development First Martyrs Great Church Early African church Vulgate East–West Schism Scholasticism Crusades Western Schism Age of Discovery Humanism Protestant Reformation Council of Trent Counter-Reformation Vatican I Vatican II 1983 Code of Canon Law Apostolic sees Rome Peter Paul Syracuse Peter Malta Paul Milan Barnabas Santiago de Compostela James Church Fathers Tertullian Cyprian Hilary of Poitiers * Ambrose * Pope Damasus I Jerome * Augustine of Hippo * Pope Gregory I * Isidore of Seville * Language Ecclesiastical Latin Liturgical use of Latin Liturgical rites Liturgical days Current Ambrosian Rite Rite of Braga Mozarabic Rite Rite of Lyon Roman Rite Mass of Paul VI (Ordinary form) Tridentine Mass Extraordinary form Anglican Use Zaire Use Orders Benedictine Rite Carmelite Rite Carthusian Rite Cistercian Rite Dominican Rite Norbertine Rite Defunct African Rite Aquileian Rite British Celtic Rite Durham Rite Hereford Use Sarum Use York Use Gallican Rite Missa Nautica Missa sicca Missa Venatoria Pre-Tridentine Mass See also Latin cross Latin Church in the Middle East Latins Turkey Titular sees Eastern Catholic Churches Conference of the Latin Bishops of the Arab Regions Western Rite Orthodoxy * also Doctors of the Church Category v t e Catholic Church Index Outline Glossary Lists of Catholics History Timeline Ecclesiastical Legal Early Church Jesus Christ Ministry Crucifixion Resurrection Great Commission Apostles Succession Petrine primacy Church Fathers Apostolic Fathers History of the papacy Primacy Great Church Ante-Nicene period Constantine First seven ecumenical councils Nicaea I Chalcedon Late antiquity Biblical canon Monasticism Middle Ages Islamic conquests Pope Gregory I Papal States Schism (1054) Investiture Controversy Crusades Schism (1378) Inquisition Universities Scholasticism Age of Discovery Modern era Protestantism Protestant Reformation Catholic Reformation Trent Thirty Years' War Enlightenment French Revolution Nazism Vatican II Communism Sexual abuse scandal Islam COVID-19 pandemic Theology Bible Tradition Catechism General God Trinity Kingdom Body Divine grace Dogma Nicene Creed Original sin Saints Salvation Sermon on the Mount Ten Commandments Vulgate Official Bible Sixtine Vulgate Sixto-Clementine Vulgate Nova Vulgata Worship Ecclesiology Communitas perfecta Councils Ecumenism Four marks One true church Catholic Infallibility Mystici Corporis Christi People of God Three states Subsistit in In canon law Sacraments Baptism Confirmation Eucharist Penance Anointing of the Sick Last rites Holy orders Matrimony Mariology Assumption History Immaculate Conception Mariology of the popes Mariology of the saints Mother of God Perpetual virginity Veneration See also: Josephology Philosophy Natural law Moral theology Personalism Social teaching Philosophers Philosophy of canon law See also: Science Evolution Separation of church and state Relations Politics Saints Holy Family Mary Joseph Patriarchs Prophets Archangels Martyrs Doctors of the Church Evangelists Confessors Disciples Virgins Organisation Hierarchy Canon law Laity Precedence By country Holy See ( List of popes ) Pope Leo XIV Ecumenical councils College of Cardinals List Advisers Roman Curia Dicasteries Synod of Bishops Properties Vatican City Index Outline Apostolic Palace Lateran Treaty Roman Rota St. Peter's Basilica Swiss Guard Vatican Museums Polity ( Holy orders ) Diocese Episcopal conference Eparchy Bishop Patriarch Major Primate Metropolitan Archbishop Diocesan Coadjutor Auxiliary Titular Emeritus Parish Priest Deacon Consecrated life Religious : Superior Abbot , Abbess General Provincial Prior, Prioress Grand master Brother Friar Monk Sister Nun Hermit Novice Master Oblate Postulant Particular churches sui iuris Latin Church Eastern Catholic Churches Albanian Armenian Belarusian Bulgarian Chaldean Coptic Croatian and Serbian Eritrean Ethiopian Georgian Greek Hungarian Italo-Albanian Macedonian Maronite Melkite Romanian Russian Ruthenian Slovak Syriac Syro-Malabar Syro-Malankara Ukrainian Catholic liturgy Eastern Catholic liturgy Alexandrian Antiochian Armenian Byzantine East Syriac West Syriac Malankara Latin Ambrosian Braga Mozarabic Roman Paul VI Tridentine Anglican Zaire Culture Art Marian Artists Writers Church buildings Altarpieces Folk Library Museums Music Distinctions Role in civilisation See also: Criticism of the Catholic Church Anti-Catholicism Media Holy See Press Office Vatican Media Vatican News Vatican Television Center Vatican Radio Vatican Press [ it ] L'Osservatore Romano Acta Apostolicae Sedis Annuario Pontificio Religious orders , institutes , societies Assumptionists Annonciades Augustinians Basilians Benedictines Bethlehemites Blue nuns Camaldoleses Camillians Carmelites Carthusians Cistercians Clarisses Conceptionists Crosiers Dominicans Franciscans Good Shepherd Sisters Hieronymites Jesuits Legionaries Mercedarians Minims Olivetans Oratorians Piarists Premonstratensians Redemptoristines Servites Theatines Trappists Trinitarians Visitandines Associations of the faithful Confraternities Lay Marian Youth Workers Third orders Saint Dominic Lay Carmelites Discalced Saint Francis Secular Military orders Fimcap Catholic Action Charismatic Renewal Communion and Liberation Sant'Egidio Focolare International Alliance of Catholic Knights Scouting Legion of Mary Neocatechumenal Way Opus Dei Schoenstatt Charities Aid to the Church in Need Caritas Catholic Charities USA Home Missions Relief Services CIDSE Pax Christi Society of Saint Vincent de Paul See also: Health care Schools Universities Catholic Church portal Category Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Croatia Greece 2 Korea Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Finland Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii 2 People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐nn7dx
Cached time: 20250817043604
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.164 seconds
Real time usage: 1.582 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 6013/1000000
Revision size: 27765/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 376024/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 107700/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 18/100
Expensive parser function count: 12/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 151043/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.693/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 25528924/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1139.618      1 -total
 21.02%  239.594      1 Template:Reflist
 15.17%  172.889     16 Template:Cite_book
 13.27%  151.180      1 Template:Infobox_Christian_leader
 12.57%  143.258      1 Template:Infobox
 11.90%  135.595      7 Template:Navbox
 10.91%  124.337      3 Template:Sister_project
 10.81%  123.221      1 Template:Langx
 10.74%  122.414      3 Template:Side_box
  8.42%   95.940      1 Template:Catholic_saints Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:37899:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817043604 and revision id 1305145433. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Cyprian&oldid=1305145433 " Categories : 200s births 258 deaths 3rd-century bishops of Carthage 3rd-century Christian martyrs 3rd-century executions 3rd-century Romans 3rd-century Christian theologians 3rd-century writers in Latin Ancient Christians involved in controversies Anglican saints Berber Christians Christian martyrs executed by decapitation Church Fathers Converts to Christianity from ancient Roman religions Executed ancient Roman people Executed Tunisian people Post–Silver Age Latin writers Roman Catholic writers Saints from Roman Africa Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Articles incorporating a citation from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from July 2022 Articles containing Latin-language text Articles with Spanish-language sources (es) Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles with LibriVox links Year of birth uncertain This page was last edited on 10 August 2025, at 09:17 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Cyprian 51 languages Add topic

