Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 History 3 Archaeology Toggle Archaeology subsection 3.1 Hippodamian plan 3.2 Urban area 3.3 Palace 4 Language 5 See also 6 References Toggle References subsection 6.1 Bibliography 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Pella 49 languages العربية Արեւմտահայերէն Asturianu Български Català Cebuano Čeština Cymraeg Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar Македонски മലയാളം मराठी Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Română Русский Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska ไทย Українська اردو Tiếng Việt Winaray 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 40°45′17″N 22°31′16″E ﻿ / ﻿ 40.754669°N 22.521050°E ﻿ / 40.754669; 22.521050 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Capital of the ancient kingdom of Macedon This article is about the ancient capital of Macedonia. For other uses, see Pella (disambiguation) .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Pella" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( May 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Pella Πέλλα The main courtyard of the House of Dionysos Pella Location within Greece Show map of Macedonian Plain (356 BC) Pella Location within Europe Show map of Greece Pella Pella (Europe) Show map of Europe Location Pella , Central Macedonia , Greece Coordinates 40°45′17″N 22°31′16″E ﻿ / ﻿ 40.754669°N 22.521050°E ﻿ / 40.754669; 22.521050 History Cultures Ancient Greece Site notes Website pella-museum.gr Architecture Architectural styles Ancient Greek Pella ( Greek : Πέλλα ) is an ancient city located in Central Macedonia , Greece . It served as the capital of the ancient Greek kingdom of Macedon . Currently, it is located 1 km outside the modern town of Pella .

Pella was probably founded at the beginning of the 4th century BC by Archelaus I as the new capital of Macedon, supplanting Aigai . The city was the birthplace of Philip II in 382 BC, and of Alexander the Great , his son, in 356 BC. Pella quickly became the largest and richest city in Macedonia and flourished particularly under the rule of Cassander and Antigonus II . In 168 BC the city was sacked by the Romans during the Third Macedonian War and entered a long period of decline, its importance eclipsed by that of the nearby Thessalonica .

Etymology [ edit ] The name is probably derived from the word pella , ( Ancient Greek : πέλλα ), "stone" which seems to appear in some other toponyms in Greece like Pellene .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] Julius Pokorny reconstructs the word from the Proto-Indo-European root peli-s, pel-s, Vedic Sanskrit : pāsāna, stone (from *pars, *pels), Greek : πέλλα , λίθος , stone, Hesychius (*pelsa), Pashto : parša (*plso), cliff, Germanic : *falisa, German : Fels, Old Norse : fell (*pelso), Illyrian : *pella, *palla.

[ 4 ] Solders in an essay on Hesychius glossary has referenced πέλλα (pella), λίθος (stone) as an ancient Macedonian word. With the prefix "α" it forms the word ἀπέλλα , apella , "fence, enclosure of stones".

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Robert Beekes relates the word πέλλα with the name of the city, but suggests that it probably has pre-Greek origin.

[ 5 ] History [ edit ] House of Dionysus (325–300 BC).

Lion hunt mosaic Stag Hunt Mosaic from the House of the Abduction of Helen.

Shops along the eastern edge of the agora.

In antiquity, Pella was a strategic port connected to the Thermaic Gulf by a navigable inlet , but the harbour and gulf have since silted up, leaving the site inland.

Pella is first mentioned [ 6 ] in relation to Xerxes ' campaign and in relation to Macedonian expansion and the war against Sitalces , the king of the Thracians .

[ 7 ] It was probably built as the commercial capital of the kingdom of Macedon by Archelaus I , [ 8 ] complementing the older palace-city of Aigai [ 9 ] although there appears to be some possibility that it may have been created by Amyntas III .

Archelaus invited the painter Zeuxis , the greatest painter of the time, to decorate his palace. He also later hosted the poet Timotheus of Miletus and the Athenian playwright Euripides who finished his days there writing and producing Archelaus . Euripides' Bacchae was first staged here, about 408 BC. According to Xenophon , in the beginning of the 4th century BC Pella was the largest Macedonian city.

[ 10 ] It was the birthplace and seats of Philip II , in 382 BC and of Alexander the Great , his son, in 356 BC. It was already a walled city in the time of Philip II and he made the city of great international importance.

It became the largest and richest city in Macedonia and flourished particularly under Cassander 's rule who redesigned and expanded it. The reign of Antigonus most likely represented the height of the city's prosperity, as this is the period which has left the most archaeological remains. The famous poet Aratus died in Pella c. 240 BC.

Pella is further mentioned by Polybius and Livy as the capital of Philip V and of Perseus during the Macedonian Wars fought against the Roman Republic .

In 168 BC, it was sacked by the Romans , and its treasury transported to Rome. Livy reported how the city looked in 167 BC to Lucius Aemilius Paulus Macedonicus , the Roman who defeated Perseus at the Battle of Pydna : ...[Paulus] observed that it was not without good reason that it had been chosen as the royal residence. It is situated on the south-west slope of a hill and surrounded by a marsh too deep to be crossed on foot either in summer or winter. The citadel the "Phacus," which is close to the city, stands in the marsh itself, projecting like an island, and is built on a huge substructure which is strong enough to carry a wall and prevent any damage from the infiltration from the water of the lagoon. At a distance it appears to be continuous with the city wall, but it is really separated by a channel which flows between the two walls and is connected with the city by a bridge. Thus it cuts off all means of access from an external foe, and if the king shut anyone up there, there could be no possibility of escape except by the bridge, which could be very easily guarded.

[ 11 ] Pella was declared capital of the 3rd administrative division of the Roman province of Macedonia , and was possibly the seat of the Roman governor. Activity continued to be vigorous until the early 1st century BC and, crossed by the Via Egnatia , [ 12 ] Pella remained a significant point on the route between Dyrrachium and Thessalonica .

In about 90 BC the city was destroyed by an earthquake ; shops and workshops dating from the catastrophe have been found with remains of their merchandise, though the city was eventually rebuilt over its ruins.

Cicero stayed there in 58 BC, though by then the provincial seat had already transferred to Thessalonica Pella was promoted to a Roman Colony sometime between 45 and 30 BC and its currency was marked Colonia Iulia Augusta Pella .

Augustus settled peasants there whose land he had usurped to give to his veterans.

[ 13 ] But, unlike other Macedonian colonies such as Philippi , Dion , and Cassandreia , it never came under the jurisdiction of ius Italicum or Roman law. Four pairs of colonial magistrates ( duumvirs quinquennales ) are known for this period.

The ruin of the city is described by Dio Chrysostom [ 14 ] and Lucian though their accounts may be exaggerated, as the Roman city occupied the west of the original capital and coinage indicates prosperity.

Despite its decline, archaeology has shown that the southern part of the city near the lagoon continued to be occupied until the 4th century.

[ 15 ] In about AD 180, Lucian of Samosata could describe it in passing as "now insignificant, with very few inhabitants".

[ 16 ] It later temporarily bore the name Diocletianopolis .

[ 17 ] In the Byzantine period, the Roman site was occupied by a fortified village.

[ citation needed ] Excavations there by the Greek Archaeological Service begun in 1957 revealed large, well-built houses with colonnaded courts and rooms with mosaic floors portraying such scenes as a lion hunt and Dionysus riding a panther. In modern times it finds itself as the starting point of the Alexander The Great Marathon , in honour of the city's ancient heritage.

[ 18 ] Archaeology [ edit ] The site was explored by 19th-century voyagers including Holand [ who?

] , François Pouqueville , Félix de Beaujour , Cousinéry, Delacoulonche, Hahn [ who?

] , Gustave Glotz and Struck, based on the descriptions provided by Titus Livius . The first excavation was begun by G. Oikonomos in 1914–15. The modern systematic exploration of the site began in 1953 and work has continued since then uncovering significant parts of the extensive city.

In February 2006, a farmer accidentally uncovered the largest tomb ever found in Greece. The names of the noble ancient Macedonian family are still on inscriptions and painted sculptures and walls have survived. The tomb dates to the 2nd or 3rd century BC.

[ 19 ] Overall, archaeologists have uncovered 1,000 tombs at Pella since 2000, but these only represent an estimated 5% of those at the site. In 2009 43 graves containing rich and elaborate grave goods were found and in 2010 37 tombs dating from 650 to 280 BC were discovered containing rich ancient Macedonian artifacts ranging from ceramics to precious metals. One of the tombs was the final resting place of a warrior from the 6th century BC with a bronze helmet with a gold mouthplate, weapons and jewellery.

[ 20 ] Since 2011, much of the Palace of Pella has been excavated and from 2017 parts of it have been restored.

[ 21 ] It is expected to open to the public in 2024.

Many artefacts are displayed in the Archaeological Museum of Pella .

Hippodamian plan [ edit ] Schematic plan of Pella The city proper was located south of and below the palace. Designed on a grid plan as envisaged by Hippodamus , it consists of parallel streets which intersect at right angles and form a grid of eight rows of rectangular blocks. The blocks are of a consistent width—each approximately 45 m—and of a length which varies from 111 m to 152 m, 125 metres being the most common. The streets are from 9 to 10 metres wide, except for the middle East–West arterial, which is up to 15 metres wide. This street is the primary access to the central public agora , which occupied a space of ten blocks. Two North-South streets are also a bit wider than the rest, and serve to connect the city to the port further South. This type of plan dates to the first half of the 4th century BC, and is very close to the ideal in design, though it distinguishes itself by large block size; Olynthus in Chalcidice for example had blocks of 86.3×35 metres. On the other hand, later Hellenistic urban foundations have blocks comparable to those of Pella: 112×58 m in Laodicea ad Mare , or 120×46 m in Aleppo .

Urban area [ edit ] The city is built on the former island of Phacos, a promontory which dominated the sea to the south in the Hellenistic period . The city wall mentioned by Livy is only partly known. It consists of a rampart of crude bricks (~ 50 cm square) raised on a stone foundation; some of which has been located North of the palace, and some in the South next to the lake. Inside the ramparts, three hills occupy the North.

In pride of place in the centre of the city is the Agora, built in the last quarter of the 4th century BC and an architectural gem, unique in conception and size; it covered ~ 7 hectares or 10 city blocks. Pella is one of the first known cities to have had an extensive piped water supply to individual house and waste water disposal from most of the city.

The agora was surrounded by the shaded colonnades of stoas , and streets of enclosed houses with frescoed walls round inner courtyards. The first trompe-l'œil wall murals imitating perspective views ever seen were on walls at Pella. There were temples to Aphrodite, Cybele and Demeter . Pella's pebble-mosaic floors are famous: some reproduce Greek paintings; one shows a lion-griffin attacking a stag, a familiar motif also of Scythian art, another depicts Dionysus riding a leopard. These mosaics adorned the floors of rich houses, often named after their representations, [ 22 ] particularly the Houses of Helen and Dionysus.

Palace [ edit ] Plan of the House of Dionysos and aerial photo Bathtubs in the public baths The palace is situated on a 70 m high hill north of the city, a strategic position commanding the entire area and occupying a vast area of 75,000 m 2 . It consisted of several large architectural groupings on terraces ascending from south-west to north-east, each with a series of rooms around a central courtyard, generally with porticos. The oldest parts date from the time of Philip II, 350-330 BC, and the palace was further developed over time.

[ 23 ] The south facade of the palace, towards the city, consisted of one large (at least 153 metres long) portico, constructed on a 2 m-high foundation. The relationship between the four principal complexes is defined by an interruption in the portico occupied by a triple propylaeum , 15 m high, which gave the palace an imposing monumental air when seen from the city below. Archaeologists have identified a palaestra and baths dating from the reign of Cassander .

The size of the complex indicates that, unlike the palace at Vergina , this was not only a royal residence or a grandiose monument but also a place of government which was required to accommodate a significant portion of the administrative apparatus of the kingdom.

Language [ edit ] The Pella curse tablet at the Archaeological Museum of Pella The question of what language was spoken in ancient Macedonia has been debated. The discovery of the Pella curse tablet in 1986, found in Pella, has a text written in a distinct Doric Greek idiom.

[ 24 ] Ιt contains a curse ( Greek : κατάδεσμος, katadesmos ) inscribed on a lead scroll, dated to c. 375–350 BC. It was published in the Hellenic Dialectology Journal in 1993 and is one of four texts [ 25 ] found that might represent a local dialectal form of ancient Greek in Macedonia, all identifiable as Doric. These confirm that a Doric Greek dialect was spoken in Macedonia, as was expected from the West Greek forms of names found in Macedonia. As a result, the curse tablet has been put forward as a strong argument that the Ancient Macedonian language was a dialect of North-Western Greek , part of the Doric dialects.

[ 26 ] See also [ edit ] List of ancient Greek cities References [ edit ] ^ a b S.Solders Der unsprüngliche Apollon AfRw. XXXII, 1935 S.142ff :  M.Nilsson (1967): Die Geschichte der Griechische Religion Vol. I. C.F.Verlag München, p. 204 ^ a b M.Nilsson (1967): Die Geschichte der Griechische Religion Vol. I. C.F.Verlag München, p. 558 ^ Αlso: Pellana , Pella (Thessaly) , Pallene etc.

^ Julius Pokorny : Indogermanisches Etymologisches Wörterbuch p. 807 .

Pokorny p. 807 ^ R. S. P. Beekes : Etymological Dictionary of Greek , Brill, 2009, p. 1168 ^ Herodotus VII, 123 ^ Thucydides II, 99,4 and 100,4 ^ "Greece: Pella" .

World Archaeology . 2012-03-28 . Retrieved 2024-11-22 .

^ J. Roisman, I. Worthington.

A Companion to Ancient Macedonia , John Wiley and Sons, 2010.

p. 92 ^ Xenophon: Hellenica, 5.2.13 ^ Titus Livius History of Rome Vol. VI ^ Strabo VII, 323 ^ Dio Cassius LI, 4 ^ Or.

33.27 ^ "The Archaeological Museum of Pella | Multimedia" .

Latsis Foundation . Archived from the original on 26 September 2017 . Retrieved 30 April 2017 .

^ Lucian of Samosata: Alexander the false prophet , The Tertullian Project .

^ Richard Talbert , ed. (2000).

Barrington Atlas of the Greek and Roman World . Princeton University Press. p. 50, and directory notes accompanying.

ISBN 978-0-691-03169-9 .

^ Presentation Archived 2015-07-02 at the Wayback Machine . Alexander the Great Marathon. Retrieved on 2010-04-28.

^ "Greek tomb find excites experts" .

BBC News Online . 2006-02-12 . Retrieved 2006-06-12 .

^ "The History Blog » Blog Archive » 37 more ancient Macedonian tombs found in Pella" .

www.thehistoryblog.com . 18 September 2010 . Retrieved 30 April 2017 .

(see picture) ^ "THE PALACE – The archaeological investigation – KINGDOM OF MACEDON – THE PALACE OF PELLA" . Retrieved 2024-11-22 .

^ Sideris A., "La représentation en réalité virtuelle de la Maison de Dionysos à Pella, créée par la Fondation du Monde Hellénique" , in Descamps-Lequime S., Charatzopoulou K. (éds.), Au royaume d’Alexandre le Grand. La Macédoine antique. Catalogue of the exhibition in the Louvre museum , Paris 2011, pp. 682–683.

^ "THE PALACE – Description – Architectural phases – KINGDOM OF MACEDON – THE PALACE OF PELLA" . Retrieved 2024-11-22 .

^ Fantuzzi & Hunter 2004 , p. 376; Voutiras 1998 , p. 25; Fortson 2010 , p. 464; Bloomer 2005 , p. 195.

^ O’Neil, James.

26th Conference of the Australasian Society for Classical Studies , 2005.

^ Masson & Dubois 2000 , p. 292: "...<<Macedonian Language>> de l' Oxford Classical Dictionary , 1996, p. 906: <<Macedonian may be seen as a Greek dialect, characterized by its marginal position and by local pronunciation (like Βερενίκα for Φερενίκα etc.)>>." Bibliography [ edit ] Bloomer, Martin (2005).

The Contest of Language: Before and Beyond Nationalism . Notre Dame, Indiana: University of Notre Dame Press.

ISBN 0-268-02190-2 .

Fantuzzi, Marco; Hunter, Richard L. (2004).

Tradition and Innovation in Hellenistic Poetry . Cambridge, United Kingdom: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 0-521-83511-9 .

Fortson, Benjamin W. (2010).

Indo-European Language and Culture: An Introduction (Second ed.). West Sussex, United Kingdom: John Wiley and Sons Limited.

ISBN 978-1-4051-8896-8 .

Masson, Olivier; Dubois, Laurent (2000).

Onomastica Graeca Selecta . Geneva, Switzerland: Librairie Droz.

ISBN 2-600-00435-1 .

Voutiras, Emmanuel (1998).

Dionysophōntos Gamoi: Marital Life and Magic in Fourth Century Pella . Amsterdam, the Netherlands: J.C. Gieben.

ISBN 90-5063-407-9 .

Despoina Papakonstantinou - Diamantourou, Πέλλα Ι, Ιστορική επισκόπησις και μαρτυρίαι , Βιβλιοθήκη τῆς ἐν Ἀθήναις Ἀρχαιολογικῆς Ἑταιρείας 70 (1971) [ permanent dead link ] - ( Pella Ι, istoriki episkopisis kai martyriai - in Greek) Ph. Petsas, Pella. Alexander the Great's Capital , Thessaloniki, 1977.

(in French) F. Papazoglou, Les villes de Macédoine romaine , BCH Suppl. 16, 1988, pp 135–139.

(in French) R. Ginouvès, et al., La Macédoine , CNRS Éditions, Paris, 1993, pp 90–98.

Ch. J. Makaronas, Pella: Capital of Ancient Macedonia , pp 59–65, in Scientific American , Special Issue, "Ancient Cities", c 1994.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Ancient Pella .

Pleiades gazetteer entry for Pella/Diokletianoupolis Princeton Encyclopedia of Classical Sites (via Perseus) Macedonian Heritage Greek Ministry of Culture Local Newspaper House of Dionysos in Pella , 3D Architectural Reconstruction v t e Macedonia (Greece) People Ancient Macedonians List Macedonians (Greeks) List Jews of Thessaloniki Slavic speakers Macedonian Bulgarians , Ethnic Macedonians Aromanians Megleno-Romanians History Ancient Macedonia History Government Kings Wars of Alexander the Great Wars of the Diadochi Macedonian Wars Roman Macedonia Barbarian invasions Theme of Macedonia Theme of Thessalonica Theme of Strymon Sack of Thessalonica (904) Byzantine–Bulgarian wars Sack of Thessalonica (1185) Kingdom of Thessalonica Empire of Thessalonica Byzantine civil war of 1321–1328 Byzantine civil war of 1341–1347 Zealots of Thessalonica Byzantine–Ottoman wars Siege of Thessalonica (1422–1430) Ottoman Greece Rumelia Eyalet Greek War of Independence Manastir Vilayet Sanjak of Monastir Sanjak of Serfiğe Salonica Vilayet Sanjak of Drama Sanjak of Salonica Sanjak of Siroz Macedonian Struggle Balkan Wars Macedonian front Provisional Government of National Defence Axis occupation Greek Civil War Macedonia naming dispute Prespa agreement Administration Ministry of Macedonia and Thrace Western Macedonia Central Macedonia Eastern Macedonia and Thrace Economy Agios Dimitrios Power Plant Amyntaio Power Plant Drama coal mine Gerakini mine Olympias mine Piavitsa mine Port of Kavala Port of Thessaloniki Prinos oil field Ptolemaida-Florina coal mine Skouries mine Stratoni mine Thessaloniki International Fair Major cities Thessaloniki Kavala Kastoria Serres Veria Katerini Edessa Florina Drama Naousa Kozani Siatista Kilkis Other Nature Axios River Doiran Lake Falakro Galikos River Haliacmon Lake Kerkini Lake Koroneia Lake Orestiada Lake Prespa Small Prespa Lake Lake Vegoritida Lake Volvi Mount Paiko Nestos (river) Mount Olympus Pangaion Hills Pindus ( Pindus National Park ) Petralona cave Strymon River Vasilitsa Vermio Mountains Seli Verno Voras Mountains Islands : Thasos Ammouliani Monuments Agios Athanasios Alexandrion (Litochoro) Amphipolis Lion of Amphipolis Kasta Tomb Dion Archaeological Park Hellenistic theatre Mount Athos Mieza ( Tomb of Judgement , Tomb of the Palmettes ) Byzantine monuments of Thessaloniki Pella Philippi Platamon Castle Vergina ( Aigai ) Museums : Archaeological Museum of Amphipolis , Aiani Archaeological Museum , Archaeological Museum of Dion , Archaeological Museum of Pella , Archaeological Museum of Thessaloniki , Museum of Byzantine culture Culture Vergina Sun Flag Music Cuisine Greek Macedonia Portal Authority control databases International VIAF FAST WorldCat National United States Spain Greece Israel Geographic Pleiades Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Pella&oldid=1300563530 " Categories : Ancient Pella 1914 archaeological discoveries Ancient Greece Ancient Greek archaeological sites in Central Macedonia Capitals of former nations Cities in ancient Macedonia Former populated places in Greece Pella (municipality) Populated places established in the 4th century BC Populated places in ancient Macedonia Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from May 2023 All articles needing additional references Coordinates on Wikidata Articles containing Greek-language text Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from October 2021 All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from January 2022 All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from March 2021 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with French-language sources (fr) Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 15 July 2025, at 03:07 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Pella 49 languages Add topic

