Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Vallombrosa as a tourist destination 2 The forest 3 In art 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Vallombrosa 6 languages Italiano Македонски Нохчийн Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Татарча / tatarça Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 43°44′N 11°32′E ﻿ / ﻿ 43.733°N 11.533°E ﻿ / 43.733; 11.533 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Hamlet in Reggello, Tuscany, Italy Vallombrosa is a toponym which indicates both a forest and a frazione , located within this forest, in the territory of the Commune of Reggello , in the Metropolitan City of Florence , in the Italian region of Tuscany .

The village of Vallombrosa ("shaded valley") lies among forests, and was originally the location of a hermitage dedicated to Santa Maria d'Acquabella . Later, the large Benedictine Vallombrosa Abbey was built and remains a major landmark of the region.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] The Reggello Vallombrosa meteorological station is located there.

In the Vallombrosa area lies a nature reserve of the same name, as well as the renowned Vallombrosa Arboretum and a vast lawn, very popular in the summer period, especially by the inhabitants of Florence looking for rustic relaxation.

Vallombrosa as a tourist destination [ edit ] The fame of the Vallombrosa-Saltino complex as a health resort was born in the second half of 19th century, and reached its peak at the beginning of the 20th century, thanks in part to the railway Sant'Ellero-Saltino, long since abandoned.

Italy's annexation of Trentino following WWI led to a decided loss of interest for Vallombrosa and Saltino, as Italian vacationers preferred the new Alpine destinations, relegating those two vacation spots to a local interest.

Despite this constant decline, the town seemed to find, starting in 1960, a tourist revitalization with the construction of a ski resort on the peak of the neighboring Monte Secchieta. The natural ski area that was created allowed Vallombrosa, thanks to its proximity to Florence , to offer an elitist tourist image compared to other mountain tourist resorts in Tuscany. The closure of the ski facilities, which took place in 1988, was not followed up, partially due to lively controversy over the environmental damage that might result from invasive plant species.

[ 3 ] The closure left the site without the possibility of offering alternatives to tourists in the winter period.

The forest [ edit ] After the creation of the Kingdom of Italy, the Vallombrosa forest was transferred to the State and in 1977 it was declared a Biogenetic Nature Reserve . Until 2016, it was managed by the State Forestry Corps and subsequently by the Biodiversity Department of the Vallombrosa Carabinieri.

Today is a Protected Natural Area of 1,279 hectares where there are numerous hiking trails many of which are also suitable for horseback riding or mountain biking . The trail network is connected with the paths of the Forest of Sant'Antonio, with the bottom valley of the Upper Valdarno and with the Park of the Casentino Forests.

The Reserve hosts the Experimental Arboretums and the tallest tree in Ital y, a 62.45-meter tall Douglas fir called "The Italian Tree King." In art [ edit ] Pala di Vallombrosa, Pietro Perugino (1500) Wall mural in Grossi Florentino , executed by students of Napier Waller under supervision Vallambrosa Apartment-House, O. Henry , The Third Ingredient See also [ edit ] Arboreti di Vallombrosa References [ edit ] ^ "Vallombrosa" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Encyclopædia Britannica.

^ Cruickshank, J. W.; Cruickshank, A. M. (1912).

"Vallombrosa" .

The Smaller Tuscan Towns . New York: Henry Holt & Co. pp.

187– 188.

^ "attacco alla Foresta di Vallombrosa (attack on the Valombrosa Forest)" .

peacelink.it . 30 May 2004. Archived from the original on 30 May 2004.

External links [ edit ] "Vallombrosa, Italy: a detailed visitor guide to the monastery at Vallombrosa" .

italythisway.com .

"Vallombrosa Abbey and Reserve," .

discovertuscany.com .

Visit Reggello Authority control databases International VIAF WorldCat National United States France BnF data Czech Republic Israel Other Yale LUX 43°44′N 11°32′E ﻿ / ﻿ 43.733°N 11.533°E ﻿ / 43.733; 11.533 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Vallombrosa&oldid=1230986346 " Categories : Reggello Forests of Italy Nature reserves in Italy Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Coordinates on Wikidata This page was last edited on 25 June 2024, at 20:23 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Vallombrosa 6 languages Add topic

