Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Introduction 2 The timeline Toggle The timeline subsection 2.1 Colombian Liberal Party 2.2 Liberal Revolutionary Movement 2.3 People's Power 2.4 New Liberalism 2.5 Uribism 3 Liberal leaders 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Liberalism in Colombia Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Part of a series on Liberalism Schools Classical Conservative Cultural Economic Green Muscular National Neo Neoclassical New Ordo Radical Religious Christian Catholic Islamic Jewish Secular Social Techno Principles Consent of the governed Due process Democracy Economic globalization Equality Gender Legal Federalism Freedom Economic Market Trade Press Religion Speech Harm principle Internationalism Invisible hand Labor theory of property Laissez-faire Liberty Negative Positive Limited government Market economy Natural monopoly Open society Permissive society Popular sovereignty Property Private Public Rights Civil and political Minority Natural and legal To own property To bear arms Rule of law Secularism Secular humanism Separation of church and state Separation of powers Social contract Social justice Social services Welfare state Whig history History Glorious Revolution Age of Enlightenment Atlantic Revolutions American Revolution French Revolution Revolutions of 1848 Vormärz Prague Spring Revolutions of 1989 Arab Spring Intellectuals Milton Locke Spinoza Montesquieu Voltaire Rousseau Smith Kant Turgot Burke Priestley Paine Beccaria Condorcet Bentham Korais De Gouges Robespierre Wollstonecraft Staël Say Humboldt Constant Ricardo Guizot Lamennais List Bastiat Martineau Emerson Tocqueville Mill Spencer Arnold Acton Weber Hobhouse Croce Cassirer Mises Ortega Keynes Collingwood Čapek Hu Hayek Popper Aron Berlin Friedman Rawls Sen Nozick Kymlicka Badawi Politicians Jefferson Kołłątaj Madison Artigas Bolívar Broglie Lamartine Macaulay Kossuth Deák Cobden Mazzini Juárez Lincoln Gladstone Cavour Sarmiento Mommsen Naoroji Itagaki Levski Kemal Deakin Milyukov Lloyd George Venizelos Ståhlberg Gokhale Rathenau Madero Einaudi King Roosevelt Pearson Ohlin Kennedy Jenkins Balcerowicz Verhofstadt Obama Macron Organizations Africa Liberal Network Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe Party Arab Liberal Federation Council of Asian Liberals and Democrats European Democratic Party European Liberal Youth International Alliance of Libertarian Parties International Federation of Liberal Youth Liberal International Liberal Network for Latin America Liberal parties Liberal South East European Network Renew Europe Regional variants Europe Latin America Albania Armenia Australia Austria Bangladesh Belgium Bolivia Brazil Bulgaria Canada Chile China Hong Kong Colombia Costa Rica Croatia Cuba Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Ecuador Egypt Estonia Finland France Georgia Germany Greece Venizelism Honduras Hungary India Iran Israel Italy Liberism Japan Latvia Lithuania Luxembourg Mexico Moldova Montenegro Netherlands New Zealand Nicaragua Nigeria North Macedonia Norway Panama Paraguay Peru Philippines Poland Cracovian Portugal Romania Russia Senegal Serbia Slovakia Slovenia South Africa South Korea Spain Sweden Switzerland Taiwan Thailand Tunisia Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom Cobdenism Gladstonian Manchester Whiggism United States Arizona School Classical Jeffersonian Modern Uruguay Venezuela Zimbabwe Related topics Abortion debate Pro-Choice Anti-authoritarianism Anti-clericalism Anti-communism Bias in American academia Bias in the media Capitalism Democratic Centrism Radical Economic freedom Egalitarianism Empiricism Humanism Individualism Anarchist Land value tax Liberal autocracy Liberal conservatism Feminist Equity Internationalist Libertarianism Left Right Pirate Party Progressivism Sexually liberal feminism Utilitarianism Liberalism portal Politics portal v t e This article gives an overview of liberalism in Colombia . It is limited to liberal parties with substantial support, mainly proved by having had a representation in parliament. The sign ⇒ means a reference to another party in that scheme. For inclusion in this scheme it is not necessary for the parties to have labeled themselves as a liberal party.

Introduction [ edit ] Liberalism in Colombia is organized as the opposition to conservatism. The Colombian Liberal Party, founded in 1849, still exists as a dominant party, usually achieving the largest voter turnouts and electoral victories in congress and regional elections. It has also been a strong contender in recent presidential elections. It joined the Socialist International , despite historically being considered a party relatively left of center and somewhat prone to populism , according to some critics.

Its traditional position can be considered to be somewhere in the middle between liberalism and social democracy . Several current leaders of the party in the late 20th and early 21st centuries claim to be seeking to move the party closer to the social democratic left.

The timeline [ edit ] Colombian Liberal Party [ edit ] 1849: The Colombian Liberal Party ( Partido Liberal Colombiano ) is founded 1960: Dissident liberals formed the ⇒ Revolutionary Liberal Movement 1967/1968: Most of the movement returned to the party 1979: Dissident liberals formed ⇒ New Liberalism.

Nuevo liberalismo 1981: Dissident liberals formed ⇒ People's Power.

Liberal Revolutionary Movement [ edit ] 1960: A dissident faction of the ⇒ Colombian Liberal Party formed the Liberal Revolutionary Movement ( Movimiento Revolucionario Liberal ) (MRL) 1967: Most of the party returned to the ⇒ Colombian Liberal Party 1968: The party disappeared.

People's Power [ edit ] 1981: A dissident faction of the ⇒ Colombian Liberal Party formed People's Power ( Poder Popular ).

1990s: The party returns to the ⇒ Colombian Liberal Party.

New Liberalism [ edit ] 1979: A dissident faction of the ⇒ Colombian Liberal Party formed New Liberalism ( Nuevo Liberalismo ).

1987: Most of the party and its leaders returned to the ⇒ Colombian Liberal Party.

1989: Luis Carlos Galán assassinated.

1990s: The party disappeared.

2021: The party was refounded.

Uribism [ edit ] 1990s: Many small liberal regional movements are formed as dissidents factions of the main Liberal Party (Independent Civic Movement, LIDER Movement, New Colombia Movement, Liberal Oxigen Movement, Civic Popular Convergence, Let's Go Colombia, 98 Movement, Colombia My Country, Democratic Reconstruction Movement, Colombian Popular Party, Citizen's Movement) 2002: Some regional dissident factions return to the main Liberal Party. Other factions regroup in new political movements, most of them associated with the dissidential liberal president Álvaro Uribe (ALAS, United Popular Movement, National Progressist Movement, MORAL, MIPOL, Citizen's Convergence, Let's Go Colombia, Civic Popular Convergence, Radical Change Party , We are Colombia, Colombia Always, New Liberalism, Popular Will, Independent Civic Movement and Social Security Movement) 2003: The political reform allows parliamentarists to regroup themselves. The main Liberal Party becomes oppositor to Uribe's government, while all pro-Uribe members of the liberal party join other parties. The New Party (Nuevo Partido) is formed to unite all pro-Uribe liberals, however, not all of them join this group, as some of them joined Radical Change Party. Most of the previous factions unite in only three parties: Democratic Colombia Party, Living Colombia Movement and Citizen's Convergence Party.

2006: The New Party, along with some members of the liberal party, some of Radical Change, minor liberal and independent movements, plus a small group of conservatives, form the Social National Unity Party , most known as Party of the U, which is currently the biggest party of Colombia. Radical Change Party grows with the fusion with independent liberal and Christian movements. Other three liberal small parties had representation: Democratic Colombia Party, Living Colombia Movement and Citizen's Convergence Party.

2010: Half of the parliamentaries from Radical Change Party switch to Party of the U. The three small liberal movements (Democratic Colombia Party, Living Colombia Movement and Citizen's Convergence Party) unite to become the National Integration Party (PIN).

Liberal leaders [ edit ] Partido Liberal: Jorge Eliécer Gaitán - Alfonso López Michelsen - Luis Carlos Galán - César Gaviria See also [ edit ] History of Colombia Politics of Colombia List of political parties in Colombia References [ edit ] v t e Liberalism in Latin America and the Caribbean Caribbean Antigua and Barbuda Aruba Bahamas Barbados Cuba Curaçao Dominica Dominican Republic Grenada Haiti Jamaica Puerto Rico Saint Kitts and Nevis Saint Lucia Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Sint Maarten Trinidad and Tobago Central America Belize Costa Rica El Salvador Guatemala Honduras Nicaragua Panama North America Mexico South America Argentina Bolivia Brazil Chile Colombia Ecuador French Guiana Guyana Paraguay Peru Suriname Uruguay Venezuela Dependencies not included.

Semi-autonomous territories are in italics.

v t e Liberalism in South America Sovereign states Argentina Bolivia Brazil Chile Colombia Ecuador Guyana Paraguay Peru Suriname Uruguay Venezuela Dependencies and other territories Falkland Islands French Guiana South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Liberalism_in_Colombia&oldid=1183852096 " Categories : Liberalism by country Political movements in Colombia Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description with empty Wikidata description Articles with excerpts This page was last edited on 6 November 2023, at 22:13 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Liberalism in Colombia Add languages Add topic

