Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Origins and early usage Toggle Origins and early usage subsection 1.1 By the left 1.1.1 Anarchists 1.1.2 Classical and orthodox Marxists 1.1.3 Communist left and council communists 1.1.4 Trotskyists 1.1.5 Maoists and anti-revisionist Marxist–Leninists 1.2 By liberal economists 1.3 By Italian Fascists 2 In Western countries and European studies Toggle In Western countries and European studies subsection 2.1 State monopoly capitalism 2.1.1 Political implications 2.1.2 Criticism 3 Current forms in the 21st century Toggle Current forms in the 21st century subsection 3.1 People's Republic of China 3.2 Republic of China (Taiwan) 3.3 Norway 3.4 Singapore 4 See also 5 References 6 Further reading 7 External links Toggle the table of contents State capitalism 33 languages العربية Български Català Čeština Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ລາວ Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча پښتو Polski Português Русский Simple English Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Ownership or control of an economy by a government This article is about a variant of capitalism . For the concept of the functions of the state under capitalism, see Capitalist state .

Part of a series on Capitalism Concepts Austerity Business Business cycle Businessperson Capital Capital accumulation Capital markets Company Corporation Competition Competition law Definitions Economic interventionism Economic liberalism Economic surplus Entrepreneurship Fictitious capital Financial market Free price system Free market Goods and services Investor Invisible hand Visible hand Liberalization Marginalism Money Private property Privatization Profit Rent seeking Supply and demand Surplus value Value Wage labour Economic systems Anglo-Saxon Authoritarian Corporate Dirigist Free-market Humanistic Laissez-faire Liberal Libertarian Market Mercantilist Mixed Monopoly National Neoliberal Nordic Private Raw Regulated market Regulatory Rhine Social Political State State-sponsored Welfare Economic theories American Austrian Chartalism MMT Chicago Classical Institutional Keynesian Neo- New Post- Market monetarism Critique of political economy Critique of work Marxist Monetarist Neoclassical New institutional Supply-side Ideologies Anarcho Authoritarian Classical liberalism Democratic Dirigisme Eco Gladstonian Humanistic Inclusive Liberal Liberalism Libertarian Neo Neoliberalism Objectivism Ordoliberalism Privatism Right-libertarianism Third Way Origins Age of Enlightenment Capitalism and Islam Commercial Revolution Feudalism Industrial Revolution Mercantilism Primitive accumulation Physiocracy Simple commodity production Development Advanced Consumer Community Corporate Crony Finance Global Illiberal Late Marxist Merchant Progressive Rentier State monopoly Technological Intellectuals Smith Bentham Malthus Say Ricardo Mill (James) Bastiat Mill (John Stuart) Marx Walras Marshall Pareto Veblen Weber von Mises Schumpeter Keynes Hayek Rand Weaver Coase Friedman Rothbard Sowell Becker Hoppe Related topics Anti-capitalism Capitalist propaganda Capitalist realism Capitalist state Consumerism Crisis theory Criticism of capitalism Critique of political economy Critique of work Cronyism Culture of capitalism Evergreening Exploitation of labour Globalization History History of theory Market economy Periodizations of capitalism Perspectives on capitalism Post-capitalism Speculation Spontaneous order Venture philanthropy Wage slavery Capitalism portal Business portal Economics portal v t e Part of a series on Economic systems Major types Capitalism Socialism By ideology Associative Capitalist Corporate Democratic Laissez-faire Mercantilist Neo- Neoliberal Social market State Welfare Democratic Developmentalism Distributist Fascist Feminist Freiwirtschaft Georgist Green Nationalist Protectionist Religious Buddhist economics Christian Sabbath economics Islamic Socialist Communist Market socialist Mutualist Participatory Socialist market Socialist-oriented market State Syndicalist Social credit Traditionalist Corporatist Feudalism By coordination Closed (autarky) Decentralized Digital Dirigist Dual Gift Informal Market Mixed Natural Open Planned Robinson Crusoe Sharing Subsistence Underground Vertical archipelago Virtual By regional model Asian East Asian Chinese Singaporean Keralan European Anglo-Saxon German Nordic Dutch Rhenish Soviet Latin America Socialism of the 21st century Sectors Common ownership Private Public Voluntary Property types Collective ownership Commons ( Common ownership ) Private property State ownership Social ownership Transition Collectivization Communization Corporatization Demutualization Deregulation Expropriation Financialization Liberalization Marketization Municipalization Mutualization Nationalization Privatization Socialization Marxist Coordination Barter Market Free Open Regulated Planning In kind Cybernetics Indicative Material balancing Price Self-managed Peer-to-peer Sharing Open access Other types Attention Commons-based peer production Expeditionary Hunter-gatherer Inclusive Democracy Information Manorialism Newly industrialized Palace Plantation Plutonomy Post-capitalist Post-industrial Post-scarcity Resource-based Token Traditional Transition World Business portal Economics portal v t e State capitalism is an economic system in which the state undertakes business and commercial economic activity and where the means of production are nationalized as state-owned enterprises (including the processes of capital accumulation , centralized management and wage labor ). The definition can also include the state dominance of corporatized government agencies (agencies organized using business-management practices) or of public companies (such as publicly listed corporations ) in which the state has controlling shares.

[ 1 ] A state-capitalist country is one where the government controls the economy and essentially acts as a single huge corporation , extracting surplus value from the workforce in order to invest it in further production.

[ 2 ] This designation applies regardless of the political aims of the state, even if the state is nominally socialist .

[ 3 ] Some scholars argue that the economy of the Soviet Union and of the Eastern Bloc countries modeled after it, including Maoist China , were state capitalist systems, and some western commentators believe that the current economies of China and Singapore also constitute a mixture of state-capitalism with private capitalism .

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] [ 8 ] The label "state capitalism" is used by various authors in reference to a private capitalist economy controlled by a state, i.e. a private economy that is subject to economic planning and interventionism . It has also been used to describe the controlled economies of the Great Powers during World War I (1914–1918).

[ 9 ] Alternatively, state capitalism may refer to an economic system where the means of production are privately owned, but the state has considerable control over the allocation of credit and investment .

[ 10 ] This was the case with Western European countries during the post-war consensus and with France during the period of dirigisme after World War II .

[ 11 ] Other examples include Singapore under Lee Kuan Yew [ 12 ] [ 13 ] [ 14 ] [ 15 ] and Turkey, [ 16 ] as well as military dictatorships during the Cold War and fascist regimes such as Nazi Germany .

[ 17 ] [ 18 ] [ 19 ] [ 20 ] The phrase "state capitalism" has also come to be used (sometimes interchangeably with " state monopoly capitalism ") to describe a system where the state intervenes in the economy to protect and advance the interests of large-scale businesses .

Noam Chomsky , a libertarian socialist , applies the term "state capitalism" to the economy of the United States , where large enterprises that are deemed by " the powers that be " as " too big to fail " receive publicly-funded government bailouts that mitigate the firms' assumption of risk and undermine market laws , and where private production is largely funded by the state at public expense, but private owners reap the profits.

[ 21 ] [ 22 ] [ 23 ] This practice is contrasted with the ideals of both socialism and laissez-faire capitalism.

[ 24 ] There are various theories and critiques of state capitalism, some of which existed before the Russian October Revolution of 1917. The common themes among them identify that the workers do not meaningfully control the means of production and that capitalist social relations and production for profit still occur within state capitalism, fundamentally retaining the capitalist mode of production . In Socialism: Utopian and Scientific (1880), Friedrich Engels argued that state ownership does not do away with capitalism by itself, but rather would be the final stage of capitalism, consisting of ownership and management of large-scale production and communication by the bourgeois state . He argued that the tools for ending capitalism are found in state capitalism.

[ 25 ] In Imperialism, the Highest Stage of Capitalism (1916), Lenin claimed that World War I had transformed laissez-faire capitalism into monopolist state capitalism.

[ 26 ] Origins and early usage [ edit ] Friedrich Engels , who argued that state ownership does not do away with capitalism by itself [ 27 ] In Socialism: Utopian and Scientific (1880), Friedrich Engels described state ownership , i.e. state capitalism, as follows: If the crisis revealed the incapacity of the bourgeoisie any longer to control the modern productive forces, the conversion of the great organizations for production and communication into joint-stock companies and state property shows that for this purpose the bourgeoisie can be dispensed with. All the social functions of the capitalists are now carried out by salaried employees. The capitalist has no longer any social activity save the pocketing of revenues, the clipping of coupons, and gambling on the stock exchange, where the different capitalists fleece each other of their capital. Just as at first the capitalist mode of production displaced the workers, so now it displaces the capitalists, relegating them to the superfluous population even if not in the first instance to the industrial reserve army.

[ 25 ] Engels argued that the tools for ending capitalism are found in state capitalism, further writing: But neither the conversion into joint stock companies nor into state property deprives the productive forces of their character as capital. In the case of joint-stock companies this is obvious. And the modern state, too, is only the organization with which bourgeois society provides itself in order to maintain the general external conditions of the capitalist mode of production against encroachments either by the workers or by individual capitalists. The modern state, whatever its form, is then the state of the capitalists, the ideal collective body of all the capitalists. The more productive forces it takes over as its property, the more it becomes the real collective body of the capitalists, the more citizens it exploits. The workers remain wage-earners, proletarians. The capitalist relationship isn't abolished; it is rather pushed to the extreme. But at this extreme it is transformed into its opposite. State ownership of the productive forces is not the solution of the conflict, but it contains within itself the formal means, the key to the solution.

[ 25 ] Mikhail Bakunin , who criticized state socialism as state capitalism, predicting that if the Marxists were successful in seizing power, they would create a party dictatorship Wilhelm Liebknecht , who criticized Otto von Bismarck 's State Socialism policy as being "really State capitalism" Engels described state capitalism as a new form or variant of capitalism.

[ 27 ] In 1896, following Engels, the German Social Democrat Wilhelm Liebknecht said: "Nobody has combated State Socialism more than we German Socialists ; nobody has shown more distinctively than I that State Socialism is really State capitalism." [ 28 ] It has been suggested that the concept of state capitalism can be traced back to Mikhail Bakunin 's critique during the First International of the potential for state exploitation under Marxist-inspired socialism, or to Jan Wacław Machajski 's argument in The Intellectual Worker (1905) that socialism was a movement of the intelligentsia as a class, resulting in a new type of society he termed state capitalism .

[ 29 ] [ 30 ] [ 31 ] [ 32 ] [ 33 ] For anarchists, state socialism is equivalent to state capitalism, hence oppressive and merely a shift from private capitalists to the state being the sole employer and capitalist.

[ 34 ] In Imperialism, the Highest Stage of Capitalism and Imperialism and World Economy , both Vladimir Lenin and Nikolai Bukharin , respectively, had similarly identified the growth of state capitalism as one of the main features of capitalism in its imperialist epoch.

[ 35 ] [ 36 ] [ 37 ] In The State and Revolution , Lenin wrote that "the erroneous bourgeois reformist assertion that monopoly capitalism or state-monopoly capitalism is no longer capitalism, but can now be called "state socialism" and so on, is very common".

[ 38 ] During World War I , using Lenin's idea that tsarism was taking a Prussian path to capitalism, the Bolshevik Nikolai Bukharin identified a new stage in the development of capitalism in which all sectors of national production and all important social institutions had become managed by the state—he termed this new stage state capitalism .

[ 39 ] After the October Revolution , Lenin used the term state capitalism positively. In spring 1918, during a brief period of economic liberalism prior to the introduction of war communism and again during the New Economic Policy (NEP) of 1921, Lenin justified the introduction of state capitalism controlled politically by the dictatorship of the proletariat to further central control and develop the productive forces , [ 40 ] making the following point: [ 41 ] Reality tells us that state capitalism would be a step forward. If in a small space of time we could achieve state capitalism, that would be a victory.

[ 42 ] [ 43 ] Lenin argued the state should temporarily run the economy which would eventually be taken over by workers.

[ 44 ] To Lenin, state capitalism did not mean the state would run most of the economy, but that state capitalism would be one of five elements of the economy: [ 45 ] State capitalism would be a step forward as compared with the present state of affairs in our Soviet Republic. If in approximately six months' time state capitalism became established in our Republic, this would be a great success and a sure guarantee that within a year socialism will have gained a permanently firm hold.

[ 45 ] By the left [ edit ] As a term and concept, state capitalism has been used by various socialists , including anarchists , Marxists , Leninists , left communists , Marxist–Leninists and Trotskyists .

Anarchists [ edit ] Emma Goldman (left) and Murray Bookchin (right) were two prominent anarchists who argued that the Soviet Union was state capitalist and criticized the Bolsheviks for it.

Perhaps the earliest critique of the Soviet Union as state capitalist was formulated by the Russian anarchists as documented in Paul Avrich 's work on Russian anarchism.

[ 46 ] The Russian anarchists' claim would become standard in anarchist works. Of the Soviet Union, the prominent anarchist Emma Goldman wrote an article from 1935 titled "There Is No Communism in Russia" in which she argued: Such a condition of affairs may be called state capitalism, but it would be fantastic to consider it in any sense Communistic [...] Soviet Russia, it must now be obvious, is an absolute despotism politically and the crassest form of state capitalism economically.

[ 47 ] When speaking about Marxism , Murray Bookchin said the following: Marxism, in fact, becomes ideology. It is assimilated by the most advanced forms of state capitalist movement — notably Russia. By an incredible irony of history, Marxian 'socialism' turns out to be in large part the very state capitalism that Marx failed to anticipate in the dialectic of capitalism. The proletariat, instead of developing into a revolutionary class within the womb of capitalism, turns out to be an organ within the body of bourgeois society [...] Lenin sensed this and described 'socialism' as 'nothing but state capitalist monopoly made to benefit the whole people'. This is an extraordinary statement if one thinks out its implications, and a mouthful of contradictions.

[ 48 ] While speaking about Leninism , the authors of An Anarchist FAQ say: Rather than present an effective and efficient means of achieving revolution, the Leninist model is elitist, hierarchical and highly inefficient in achieving a socialist society. At best, these parties play a harmful role in the class struggle by alienating activists and militants with their organisational principles and manipulative tactics within popular structures and groups. At worst, these parties can seize power and create a new form of class society (a state capitalist one) in which the working class is oppressed by new bosses (namely, the party hierarchy and its appointees).

[ 49 ] Classical and orthodox Marxists [ edit ] Part of a series on Marxism Outline Theoretical works Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844 The Condition of the Working Class in England The German Ideology Wage Labour and Capital The Communist Manifesto The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte Grundrisse Capital Critique of the Gotha Programme Dialectics of Nature The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State What Is to Be Done?

The Accumulation of Capital Philosophical Notebooks Terrorism and Communism The State and Revolution Essays on Marx's Theory of Value History and Class Consciousness Prison Notebooks The Black Jacobins On Practice Dialectic of Enlightenment A Critique of Soviet Economics The Long Revolution Guerrilla Warfare The Wretched of the Earth Reading Capital The Society of the Spectacle Pedagogy of the Oppressed Ideology and Ideological State Apparatuses Ways of Seeing How Europe Underdeveloped Africa Social Justice and the City Women, Race and Class Marxism and the Oppression of Women Imagined Communities Hegemony and Socialist Strategy The Sublime Object of Ideology Time, Labor and Social Domination The Age of Extremes The Origin of Capitalism Empire Late Victorian Holocausts Change the World Without Taking Power Caliban and the Witch An Introduction to the Three Volumes of Karl Marx's Capital Capitalist Realism Capital in the Anthropocene Philosophy Alienation Dialectical materialism Ideology Philosophy of nature Philosophy in the Soviet Union Reification Marxist ethics Critique of political economy Capital ( accumulation ) Crisis theory Commodity Concrete and abstract labor Factors of production Falling profit-rate tendency Means of production Mode of production Capitalist Socialist Productive forces Scientific socialism State monopoly capitalism Surplus product Socially necessary labour time Value-form Wage labour Sociology Base and superstructure Bourgeoisie Class Class consciousness Classless society Commodity fetishism Communist society Critical theory Cultural hegemony Democracy Dictatorship of the proletariat Soviet Radical Democratic centralism Exploitation False consciousness Human nature Immiseration Imperialism Lumpenproletariat Metabolic rift Proletariat Private property Relations of production State theory Working class History Class struggle Historical determinism Primitive accumulation Proletarian revolution World revolution Theory of historical trajectory Aspects Aesthetics Archaeology Criminology Cultural Marxism Cultural Studies Ethics Film theory Geography Historiography Literary criticism Marxism and religion Sociology Philosophy Common variants Structural Autonomist Marxism–Leninism Guevarism Maoism Neo-Gramscianism Regulation school Third-worldist Titoism Trotskyism Hegelian Budapest School Frankfurt School Humanist Neue Marx-Lektüre Open Praxis School Both Black Classical Communization Feminist Leninism Neo Post Western Other variants Analytical Austromarxism Hispanic marxism Centrist Eurocommunism Instrumental Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Nkrumaism Political Revisionist Situationist Socialism with Chinese characteristics Wertkritik People Marx Engels Morris Lafargue Rubin Kautsky Plekhanov Du Bois Connolly Lenin Luxemburg Liebknecht Kollontai Stalin Trotsky Grossman Zinoviev Bloch Lukács Korsch Bukharin Ho Serge Gramsci Pashukanis Bordiga Benjamin Mao Basu Mariátegui Horkheimer Dutt Brecht Marcuse Kalecki Fromm Cox Lefebvre James Adorno Padmore Sartre Deutscher Beauvoir Sombart Nkrumah Sweezy Emmanuel Hill Bettelheim Draper Jones Hobsbawm Althusser Hinton Williams Freire Cunhal Lara Mandel Sivanandan Miliband Cabral Thompson Bauman Fanon Berger Castro Guevara Liebman Heller Guattari Mészáros O'Connor Wallerstein Mies Tronti Debord Amin Hall Nairn Parenti Negri Jameson Dussel Harvey Laclau Bahro Poulantzas Vattimo Badiou Harnecker Altvater Ismail Anderson Löwy Vogel Sison Easthope Rancière Berman Przeworski Cohen Therborn Losurdo Postone Rodney Bannerji Spivak Newton Wood Federici Wolff Balibar Eagleton Kurz Rowbotham Mouffe Geras Brenner Davis Massey Cleaver Bishop Haraway Panitch Clarke Jessop Davis Wright Fraser Burawoy Holloway Rose Screpanti Tamás Hampton Cano Žižek Berardi Sankara Hennessy McDonnell Douzinas Roediger Foster West Ghandy Marcos Heinrich Prashad Kelley Dean Lordon Linera Fisher Li Prestes Coulthard Malm Seymour Toscano Bhattacharya Moufawad-Paul Srnicek Horvat Hamza Saito Journals Antipode Capital & Class Capitalism Nature Socialism Constellations Critique: Journal of Socialist Theory Historical Materialism Mediations Monthly Review New Left Review Race & Class Rethinking Marxism Science & Society Socialist Register Related topics 21st-century communist theorists Anarchism Creative destruction Conflict theory Criticism of Marxism Communism Communalism Economic determinism History of communism Left-wing politics Marxian economics New Left Old Left Municipalism Political ecology Socialism Authoritarian Democratic Market Reformist Revolutionary Social Utopian Left-wing populism Universal class Vulgar Marxism Economism Worker cooperative Workers' council Communism portal Economics portal Philosophy portal Politics portal Socialism portal v t e Immediately after the Russian Revolution, many Western Marxists questioned whether socialism was possible in Russia. Specifically, Karl Kautsky said: It is only the old feudal large landed property which exists no longer. Conditions in Russia were ripe for its abolition but they were not ripe for the abolition of capitalism. Capitalism is now once again celebrating a resurrection, but in forms that are more oppressive and harrowing for the proletariat than of old.

Instead of assuming higher industrialised forms, private capitalism has assumed the most wretched and shabby forms of black marketeering and money speculation. Industrial capitalism has developed to become state capitalism. Formerly state officials and officials from private capital were critical, often very hostile towards each other.

Consequently the working man found that his advantage lay with one or the other in turn. Today the state bureaucracy and capitalist bureaucracy are merged into one—that is the upshot of the great socialist revolution brought about by the Bolsheviks. It constitutes the most oppressive of all despotisms that Russia has ever had to suffer.

[ 50 ] After 1929, exiled Mensheviks such as Fyodor Dan began to argue that Stalin's Russia constituted a state capitalist society.

[ 51 ] In the United Kingdom, the orthodox Marxist group the Socialist Party of Great Britain independently developed a similar doctrine. Although initially beginning with the idea that Soviet capitalism differed little from western capitalism, they later began to argue that the bureaucracy held its productive property in common, much like the Catholic Church 's.

[ 52 ] As John O'Neill notes: Whatever other merits or problems their theories had, in arguing that the Russian revolution was from the outset a capitalist revolution they avoided the ad hoc and post hoc nature of more recent Maoist- and Trotskyist-inspired accounts of state capitalism, which start from the assumption that the Bolshevik revolution inaugurated a socialist economy that at some later stage degenerated into capitalism.

[ 53 ] Writing in the Menshevik journal Socialist Courier on 25 April 25, Rudolf Hilferding rejected the concept of state capitalism, noting that as practiced in the Soviet Union it lacked the dynamic aspects of capitalism such as a market which set prices or a set of entrepreneurs and investors which allocated capital. According to Hilferding, state capitalism was not a form of capitalism, but rather a form of totalitarianism .

[ 54 ] Communist left and council communists [ edit ] Part of a series on Left communism Concepts Anti-Leninism Anti-Stalinist left Class consciousness Class struggle Communism Mass strike Organic centralism Proletarian internationalism Workers' council World revolution Movements Bordigism In China Communization Council communism Situationist International People Jan Appel Amadeo Bordiga Arrigo Cervetto Marc Chirik Onorato Damen Bruno Fortichiari Herman Gorter Paul Mattick Grandizo Munis Gavril Myasnikov Sylvia Pankhurst Anton Pannekoek Lorenzo Parodi Otto Rühle Karl Schröder Julien Coupat Organizations Extant Communist Struggle Communist Workers' Organisation International Communist Current International Communist Party Internationalist Communist Party The Invisible Committee Defunct Anti-Parliamentary Communist Federation Communist Bulletin Group Communist League Communist Workers' International Communist Workers' Party of Germany Forward Hunan Provincial Proletarian Revolutionary Great Alliance Committee International Socialists of Germany League for Proletarian Culture Left Communists Marxist Working Group Revolutionary Socialist Party Revolutionary Workers Ferment Socialism or Barbarism Solidarity Workers' Group Workers' Opposition Workers' Socialist Federation Workers' Truth Tiqqun Related topics Autonomism Classical Marxism Impossibilism Industrial unionism Ultra-leftism Workerism Communism portal Socialism portal Politics portal v t e Another early analysis of the Soviet Union as state capitalist came from various groups advocating left communism . One major tendency of the 1918 Russian communist left criticised the re-employment of authoritarian capitalist relations and methods of production. As Valerian Osinsky in particular argued, "one-man management" (rather than the democratic factory committees workers had established and Lenin abolished) [ 55 ] and the other impositions of capitalist discipline would stifle the active participation of workers in the organisation of production.

Taylorism converted workers into the appendages of machines and piece work imposed individualist rather than collective rewards in production so instilling petty bourgeois values into workers. In sum, these measures were seen as the re-transformation of proletarians within production from collective subject back into the atomised objects of capital. The working class, it was argued, had to participate consciously in economic as well as political administration. In 1918, this tendency within the left communists emphasized that the problem with capitalist production was that it treated workers as objects. Its transcendence lay in the workers' conscious creativity and participation, which is reminiscent of Marx's critique of alienation .

[ 56 ] This type of criticism was revived on the left of the Russian Communist Party after the 10th Congress in 1921, which introduced the New Economic Policy (NEP). Many members of the Workers' Opposition and the Decists (both later banned) and two new underground left communist groups, Gavril Myasnikov 's Workers' Group and the Workers' Truth group, developed the idea that Russia was becoming a state capitalist society governed by a new bureaucratic class.

[ 30 ] [ 57 ] The most developed version of this idea was in a 1931 booklet by Myasnikov.

[ 58 ] The left and council communist traditions outside Russia consider the Soviet system as state capitalist, [ 59 ] [ 60 ] [ 61 ] although some left communists such as Amadeo Bordiga also referred to it as simply capitalism or capitalist mode of production .

[ 37 ] [ 62 ] Otto Rühle , a major German left communist, developed this idea from the 1920s and it was later articulated by Dutch council communist Anton Pannekoek in "State Capitalism and Dictatorship" (1936).

[ 63 ] Trotskyists [ edit ] Part of a Politics series Third camp Concepts Bureaucratic collectivism State capitalism Prominent figures Carter Draper Harrington Howe Jacobson Matgamna Namazie Shachtman Groups Alliance for Workers' Liberty International Socialists Left Worker-communist Party of Iraq New Politics Worker-communist Party of Iran Workers' Party Related topics Leninism Marxism Trotskyism Communism portal Socialism portal Politics portal v t e Leon Trotsky stated that the term state capitalism "originally arose to designate the phenomena which arise when a bourgeois state takes direct charge of the means of transport or of industrial enterprises" and is therefore a "partial negation" of capitalism.

[ 64 ] However, Trotsky rejected that description of the Soviet Union , claiming instead that it was a degenerated workers' state . After World War II , most Trotskyists accepted an analysis of the Soviet bloc countries as being deformed workers' states . However, alternative opinions within the Trotskyist tradition have developed the theory of state capitalism as a new class theory to explain what they regard as the essentially non-socialist nature of the Soviet Union, Cuba , China and other self-proclaimed socialist states .

The discussion goes back to internal debates in the Left Opposition during the late 1920s and early 1930s.

Ante Ciliga , a member of the Left Opposition imprisoned at Verkhne-Uralsk in the 1930s, described the evolution of many within the Left Opposition to a theory of state capitalism influenced by Gavril Myasnikov 's Workers Group and other left communist factions.

[ 30 ] [ 65 ] [ 66 ] Following his release and his return to activity in the International Left Opposition , Ciliga "was one of the first, after 1936, to raise the theory [of state capitalism] in Trotskyist circles".

[ 30 ] George Orwell , who was an anti-Stalinist leftist like Ciliga, used the term in his Homage to Catalonia (1938).

After 1940, dissident Trotskyists developed more theoretically sophisticated accounts of state capitalism. One influential formulation has been that of the Johnson–Forest Tendency of C. L. R. James and Raya Dunayevskaya , who formulated her theory in the early 1940s on the basis of a study of the first three Five Year Plans alongside readings of Marx's early humanist writings .

[ 67 ] [ 68 ] [ 69 ] Their political evolution would lead them away from Trotskyism.

[ 70 ] Another is that of Tony Cliff , associated with the International Socialist Tendency and the British Socialist Workers Party (SWP), dating back to the late 1940s. Unlike Johnson–Forest, Cliff formulated a theory of state capitalism that would enable his group to remain Trotskyists, albeit heterodox ones.

[ 71 ] A relatively recent text by Stephen Resnick and Richard D. Wolff , titled Class Theory and History , explores what they term state capitalism in the former Soviet Union, continuing a theme that has been debated within Trotskyist theory for most of the past century.

Other terms used by critical left-wing theorists in discussing Soviet-style societies include bureaucratic collectivism , deformed workers' states , degenerated workers' states and the " new class ".

Maoists and anti-revisionist Marxist–Leninists [ edit ] In the common program set up by the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference in 1949, in effect the country's interim constitution, state capitalism meant an economic system of corporatism. It provided as follows: "Whenever necessary and possible, private capital shall be encouraged to develop in the direction of state capitalism".

[ 72 ] From 1956 to the late 1970s, the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) and their Maoist or anti-revisionist adherents around the world often described the Soviet Union as state capitalist, essentially using the accepted Marxist definition, albeit on a different basis and in reference to a different span of time from either the Trotskyists or the left-communists. Specifically, the Maoists and their descendants use the term state capitalism as part of their description of the style and politics of Nikita Khrushchev and his successors as well as to similar leaders and policies in other self-styled "socialist" states.

[ 73 ] This was involved in the ideological Sino–Soviet split .

After Mao Zedong 's death, amidst the supporters of the Cultural Revolution and the Gang of Four , most extended the state capitalist formulation to China itself and ceased to support the CCP which likewise distanced itself from these former fraternal groups. The related theory of Hoxhaism was developed in 1978, largely by Socialist Albanian President Enver Hoxha , who insisted that Mao himself had pursued state capitalist and revisionist economic policies.

[ 74 ] Most current communist groups descended from the Maoist ideological tradition still adopt the description of both China and the Soviet Union as being state capitalist from a certain point in their history onwards—most commonly, the Soviet Union from 1956 to its collapse in 1991 and China from 1976 to the present. Maoists and anti-revisionists also sometimes use the term social imperialism to describe socialist states that they consider to be actually capitalist in essence—their phrase, "socialist in words, imperialist in deeds" denotes this.

By liberal economists [ edit ] Murray Rothbard , who advanced a right-libertarian analysis of state capitalism Murray Rothbard , an anarcho-capitalist philosopher, used the term state capitalism interchangeably with the term state monopoly capitalism and used it to describe a partnership of government and big business in which the state intervenes on behalf of large capitalists against the interests of consumers.

[ 75 ] [ 76 ] Ludwig von Mises , who described state capitalism as a form of state socialism Rothbard distinguished it from laissez-faire capitalism , where big business is not protected from market forces. This usage dates from the 1960s, when Harry Elmer Barnes described the post-New Deal economy of the United States as "state capitalism". More recently, Andrei Illarionov , former economic adviser to Russian President Vladimir Putin , resigned in December 2005, protesting Russia's "embracement of state capitalism".

[ 77 ] The term state capitalism is not used by classical liberals to describe the public ownership of the means of production. The explanation why was given by the Austrian School economist Ludwig von Mises , who argued: The socialist movement takes great pains to circulate frequently new labels for its ideally constructed state. Each worn-out label is replaced by another which raises hopes of an ultimate solution of the insoluble basic problem of Socialism — until it becomes obvious that nothing has been changed but the name. The most recent slogan is "State Capitalism." It is not commonly realized that this covers nothing more than what used to be called Planned Economy and State Socialism, and that State Capitalism, Planned Economy, and State Socialism diverge only in non-essentials from the "classic" ideal of egalitarian Socialism.

[ 78 ] By Italian Fascists [ edit ] Benito Mussolini , who claimed that the modern phase of capitalism is state socialism "turned on its head" On economic issues, Italian Fascist leader Benito Mussolini claimed in 1933 that were Fascism to follow the modern phase of capitalism, its path would "lead inexorably into state capitalism, which is nothing more nor less than state socialism turned on its head. In either event, [whether the outcome be state capitalism or state socialism] the result is the bureaucratization of the economic activities of the nation".

[ 79 ] Mussolini claimed that capitalism had degenerated in three stages, starting with dynamic or heroic capitalism (1830–1870), followed by static capitalism (1870–1914) and then reaching its final form of decadent capitalism, also known as supercapitalism beginning in 1914.

[ 80 ] Mussolini denounced supercapitalism for causing the "standardization of humankind" and for causing excessive consumption.

[ 81 ] Mussolini claimed that at this stage of supercapitalism "[it] is then that a capitalist enterprise, when difficulties arise, throws itself like a dead weight into the state's arms. It is then that state intervention begins and becomes more necessary. It is then that those who once ignored the state now seek it out anxiously".

[ 82 ] Due to the inability of businesses to operate properly when facing economic difficulties, Mussolini claimed that this proved that state intervention into the economy was necessary to stabilize the economy.

[ 82 ] Mussolini claimed that dynamic or heroic capitalism and the bourgeoisie could be prevented from degenerating into static capitalism and then supercapitalism only if the concept of economic individualism were abandoned and if state supervision of the economy was introduced.

[ 83 ] Private enterprise would control production, but it would be supervised by the state.

[ 84 ] Italian Fascism presented the economic system of corporatism as the solution that would preserve private enterprise and property while allowing the state to intervene in the economy when private enterprise failed.

[ 83 ] In Western countries and European studies [ edit ] An alternate definition is that state capitalism is a close relationship between the government and private capitalism such as one in which the private capitalists produce for a guaranteed market. An example of this would be the military–industrial complex in which autonomous entrepreneurial firms produce for lucrative government contracts and are not subject to the discipline of competitive markets.

Both the Trotskyist definition and this one derive from discussion among Marxists at the beginning of the 20th century, most notably Nikolai Bukharin , who in his book Imperialism and World Economy thought that advanced, imperialist countries exhibited the latter definition and considered (and rejected) the possibility that they could arrive at the former.

State capitalism is practised by a variety of Western countries with respect to certain strategic resources important for national security . These may involve private investment as well. A government may own or even monopolize oil production or transport infrastructure to ensure availability in the case of war. Examples include Neste , Equinor and OMV .

There are limits according to arguments that state capitalism exists to ensure that wealth creation does not threaten the ruling elite's political power which remains unthreatened by tight connections between the government and the industries while state capitalist fears of capitalism's creative destruction , the threat of revolution and any significant changes in the system result in the persistence of industries that have outlived their economic usefulness and an inefficient economic environment that is ill-equipped to inspire innovation.

Several European scholars and political economists have used the term to describe one of the three major varieties of capitalism that prevail in the modern context of the European Union . This approach is mainly influenced by Schmidt's (2002) article on The Futures of European Capitalism , in which she divides modern European capitalism in three groups, namely market, managed and state. Here, state capitalism refers to a system where high coordination between the state, large companies and labour unions ensures economic growth and development in a quasi- corporatist model.

The author cites France and to a lesser extent Italy as the prime examples of modern European state capitalism.

[ 85 ] A general theory of capitalist forms, whereby state capitalism is a particular case, was developed by Ernesto Screpanti , who argued that Soviet-type economies of the 20th century used state capitalism to sustain processes of primitive accumulation.

[ 86 ] In their historical analysis of the Soviet Union, Marxist economists Richard D. Wolff and Stephen Resnick identify state capitalism as the dominant class system throughout the history of the Soviet Union.

[ 87 ] State monopoly capitalism [ edit ] The theory of state monopoly capitalism was initially a neo-Stalinist doctrine popularised after World War II . The term refers to an environment where the state intervenes in the economy to protect large monopolistic or oligopolistic businesses from competition by smaller firms.

[ 9 ] The main principle of the ideology is that big business, having achieved a monopoly or cartel position in most markets of importance, fuses with the government apparatus. A kind of financial oligarchy or conglomerate therefore results, whereby government officials aim to provide the social and legal framework within which giant corporations can operate most effectively. This is a close partnership between big business and government, and it is argued [ by whom?

] that the aim is to integrate labour-unions completely in that partnership.

State monopoly capitalist (stamocap) theory aims to define the final historical stage of capitalism following monopoly capitalism, consistent with Lenin's definition of the characteristics of imperialism in his short pamphlet of the same name. Occasionally the stamocap concept also appears in neo-Trotskyist theories of state capitalism as well as in libertarian anti-state theories. The analysis made [ by whom?

] is usually identical in its main features, but very different political conclusions are drawn from it.

Political implications [ edit ] The strategic political implication of stamocap theory towards the end of the Joseph Stalin era and afterwards was that the labour movement should form a people's democratic alliance under the leadership of the communist party with the progressive middle classes and small business against the state and big business (called monopoly for short). Sometimes this alliance was also called the anti-monopoly alliance. At the 1965 Afro-Asian Conference, delivered at the Second Economic Seminar of Afro-Asian Solidarity in Algeri, Che Guevara argued that "[e]ver since monopoly capital took over the world, it has kept the greater part of humanity in poverty, dividing all the profits among the group of the most powerful countries. The standard of living in those countries is based on the extreme poverty of our countries".

[ 88 ] Criticism [ edit ] When Eugen Varga introduced the theory, orthodox Stalinist economists attacked it as incompatible with the doctrine that state planning was a feature only of socialism and that "under capitalism anarchy of production reigns".

[ 89 ] Critics of the stamocap theory (e.g.

Ernest Mandel and Leo Kofler ) claimed the following [ citation needed ] : Stamocap theory wrongly implied that the state could somehow overrule inter-capitalist competition , the laws of motion of capitalism and market forces generally, supposedly cancelling out the operation of the law of value .

Stamocap theory lacked any sophisticated account of the class basis of the state and the real linkages between governments and elites. It postulated a monolithic structure of domination which in reality did not exist in that way.

Stamocap theory failed to explain the rise of neoliberal ideology in the business class, which claims precisely that an important social goal should be a reduction of the state's influence in the economy.

Stamocap theory failed to show clearly what the difference was between a socialist state and a bourgeois state, except that in a socialist state the communist party, or rather its central committee, played the leading political role. In that case, the class-content of the state itself was defined purely in terms of the policy of the ruling political party or its central committee.

Current forms in the 21st century [ edit ] State capitalism is distinguished from capitalist mixed economies where the state intervenes in markets to correct market failures or to establish social regulation or social welfare provisions in the following way: the state operates businesses for the purpose of accumulating capital and directing investment in the framework of either a free market or a mixed-market economy. In such a system, governmental functions and public services are often organized as corporations , companies or business enterprises.

In the state capitalism of the twenty-first century, the domestic and global aspects are more closely linked.  In such a context, the state's intervention in the economy is associated with the strategy of countries to attain international prominence.  Models of state capitalist strategies can be identified as a countries' endeavor to gain greater international political power by integrating domestic economic policies with foreign policy.

[ 90 ] Governments have been utilizing successful national corporations (national champions) to pursue mergers and acquisitions abroad, thereby enhancing their influence in various sectors of the global market.

[ 91 ] People's Republic of China [ edit ] Further information: Party-state capitalism Many analysts assert that China is one of the main examples of state capitalism in the 21st century.

[ 92 ] [ 93 ] [ 94 ] In his book The End of the Free Market: Who Wins the War Between States and Corporations , political scientist Ian Bremmer describes China as the primary driver for the rise of state capitalism as a challenge to the free market economies of the developed world, particularly in the aftermath of the 2008 financial crisis .

[ 95 ] Bremmer draws a broad definition of state capitalism as such: [ 96 ] In this system, governments use various kinds of state-owned companies to manage the exploitation of resources that they consider the state's crown jewels and to create and maintain large numbers of jobs. They use select privately owned companies to dominate certain economic sectors.
They use so-called sovereign wealth funds to invest their extra cash in ways that maximize the state's profits. In all three cases, the state is using markets to create wealth that can be directed as political officials see fit. And in all three cases, the ultimate motive is not economic (maximizing growth) but political (maximizing the state's power and the leadership's chances of survival). This is a form of capitalism but one in which the state acts as the dominant economic player and uses markets primarily for political gain.

Following on Bremmer, Aligica, and Tarko [ 97 ] further develop the theory that state capitalism in countries like modern day China and Russia is an example of a rent-seeking society. They argue that following the realization that the centrally planned socialist systems could not effectively compete with capitalist economies, formerly Communist Party political elites are trying to engineer a limited form of economic liberalization that increases efficiency while still allowing them to maintain political control and power.

In his article "We're All State Capitalists Now", British historian and Laurence A. Tisch Professor of History at Harvard University Niall Ferguson warns against "an unhelpful oversimplification to divide the world into 'market capitalist' and 'state capitalist' camps. The reality is that most countries are arranged along a spectrum where both the intent and the extent of state intervention in the economy vary".

[ 96 ] He then notes: "The real contest of our time is not between a state-capitalist China and a market-capitalist America, with Europe somewhere in the middle. It is a contest that goes on within all three regions as we all struggle to strike the right balance between the economic institutions that generate wealth and the political institutions that regulate and redistribute it." [ 96 ] In the common program set up by the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference in 1949, in effect the country's interim constitution, state capitalism meant an economic system of corporatism. It provided as follows: "Whenever necessary and possible, private capital shall be encouraged to develop in the direction of state capitalism." [ 98 ] Analysis of the Chinese model and the socialist market economy by the economists Julan Du and Chenggang Xu finds that the contemporary economic system of the People's Republic of China represents a state capitalist system as opposed to a market socialist system. The reason for this categorization is the existence of financial markets in the Chinese economic system, which are absent in the market socialist literature and in the classic models of market socialism ; and that state profits are retained by enterprises rather than being equitably distributed among the population in a basic income / social dividend or similar scheme, which are major features in the market socialist literature. They conclude that China is neither a form of market socialism nor a stable form of capitalism.

[ 99 ] The Chinese government maintains that these reforms are actually the primary stage of socialism [ 100 ] and the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) remains nominally dedicated to establishing a socialist society and subsequently developing into full communism.

[ 101 ] This was reiterated by General Secretary of the Chinese Communist Party Xi Jinping at the 2023 G20 New Delhi summit .

[ citation needed ] Republic of China (Taiwan) [ edit ] Some Taiwanese economists referred to Taiwan's economic model during the Kuomintang dictatorship period as party-state capitalism .

During this era, Taiwan's economy had been classified as a state capitalist system influenced by its Leninist model of political control. Today, Taiwan's economy includes a number of state-owned enterprises, but the state's role in the economy has shifted from that of an entrepreneur to a minority investor in companies alongside the democratization agenda of the late 1980s.

[ 102 ] Norway [ edit ] According to The Economist , Norway is "embracing state capitalism", as the government of Norway , funded by the government's ownership of the country's oil reserves, has ownership stakes in many of the country's largest publicly listed companies, owning 37% of the Oslo stock market [ 103 ] and operates the country's largest non-listed companies including Avinor and Statkraft . There are legal limits however, as the Government Pension Fund of Norway is not allowed to own more than 15% of any single Norwegian company.

[ 104 ] Singapore [ edit ] Singapore has attracted some of the world's most powerful corporations through business-friendly legislation and through the encouragement of Western-style corporatism, with close cooperation between the state and corporations. Singapore's large holdings of government-linked companies and the state's close cooperation with business are defining aspects of the economy of Singapore. Singapore's government owns controlling shares in many government-linked companies and directs investment through sovereign wealth funds , an arrangement that has been cited as state capitalism when defined as "system in which the state functions as the leading economic actor and uses markets primarily for political gain".

[ 105 ] Listed companies in which the government is the controlling shareholder account for 37% of the total stock market capitalization in Singapore.

[ 106 ] See also [ edit ] Authoritarian socialism Chiangism Chinese economic reform Christian finance Collective capitalism Communist state Constitutional economics Corporate capitalism Corporatization Crony capitalism Developmental state Distributism East Asian model of capitalism Economics of fascism Gaullism Indicative planning List of socialist states Mercantilism Mixed economy Ordoliberalism Political capitalism Political economy Preussentum und Sozialismus Rentier state Rhine capitalism Social market economy State-owned enterprise Statism Tiger Cub Economies Tripartism Types of capitalism References [ edit ] ^ Williams, Raymond (1985) [1976]. "Capitalism".

Keywords: A Vocabulary of Society . Oxford paperbacks (revised ed.). New York: Oxford University Press. p.

52 .

ISBN 9780195204698 . Retrieved 26 June 2020 – via Google Books.

A new phrase, state-capitalism, has been widely used in mC20, with precedents from eC20, to describe forms of state ownership in which the original conditions of the definition – centralized ownership of the means of production, leading to a system of wage-labour – have not really changed.

^ Compare: Dossani, Sameer (10 February 2009).

"Chomsky: Understanding the Crisis — Markets, the State and Hypocrisy" .

Foreign Policy In Focus . Institute for Policy Studies. Archived from the original on 12 October 2009 . Retrieved 1 December 2023 .

Noam Chomsky: [...] From roughly 1950 until the early 1970s there was a period of unprecedented economic growth and egalitarian economic growth. [...]  Many economists called it the golden age of modern capitalism — they should call it state capitalism because government spending was a major engine of growth and development.

^ Binns, Peter (March 1986).

"State Capitalism" .

Education for Socialists (1). Socialist Party of Great Britain . Retrieved 26 June 2020 – via Marxists Internet Archive.

^ Howard, M. C.; King, J. E. (2001).

"'State Capitalism' in the Soviet Union" .

History of Economics Review .

34 (1): 110–126.

doi : 10.1080/10370196.2001.11733360 . Retrieved 26 June 2020 via – History of Economic Thought Society of Australia.

^ Epstein, Gady (31 August 2010).

"The Winners And Losers In Chinese Capitalism" .

Forbes . Retrieved 26 June 2020 .

^ "The rise of state capitalism" .

The Economist . 21 January 2012.

ISSN 0013-0613 . Retrieved 26 June 2020 .

^ Ferguson, Niall (9 February 2012).

"We're All State Capitalists Now" .

Foreign Policy . Retrieved 28 October 2015 .

^ Araújo, Heriberto; Cardenal, Juan Pablo (1 June 2013).

"China's Economic Empire" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 26 June 2020 .

^ a b Coleman, Janet; Conolly, Willam; Miller, David; Ryan, Alan, eds. (1991).

The Blackwell Encyclopaedia of Political Thought (reprinted ed.). Wifey/Blackwell Publishing.

ISBN 9780631179443 ^ Bakunin, Mikhail (1971) [1873].

Statism and Anarchy .

"Critique of the Marxist Theory of the State" . In Dolgoff, Sam, ed.

Bakunin on Anarchy: Selected Works by the Activist-Founder of World Anarchism . London: George Allen and Unwin.

ISBN 978-0394717838 .

^ Schmidt, Vivien A. (November 2004).

"French capitalism transformed, yet still a third variety of capitalism" .

Economy and Society .

32 (4): 526– 554.

doi : 10.1080/0308514032000141693 .

S2CID 145716949 .

^ Berger, Mark T. (August 1997). "Singapore's Authoritarian Capitalism: Asian Values, Free Market Illusions, and Political Dependency by Christopher Lingle". "Book Reviews".

The Journal of Asian Studies . Cambridge University Press.

56 (3) 853–854.

doi : 10.1017/S0021911800035129 .

JSTOR i325583  i325583 .

^ Lingle, Christopher; Owens, Amanda J.; Rowley, Charles K., eds. (Summer 1998). "Singapore and Authoritarian Capitalism".

The Locke Luminary .

I (1).

^ Budhwar, Pawan S., ed. (2004).

Managing Human Resources in Asia-Pacific . Psychology Press. p. 221.

ISBN 9780415300063 .

^ Bhasin, Balbir B. (2007).

"Fostering Entrepreneurship: Developing a Risktaking Culture in Singapore" .

New England Journal of Entrepreneurship .

10 (2): 39–50.

ISSN 1550-333X . Retrieved 23 April 2020.

^ Note for example: Ricz, Judit (17 February 2023). "Introduction: Emerging Market Economies and Alternative Development Paths". In Ricz, Judit; Gerőcs, Tamás (eds.).

The Political Economy of Emerging Markets and Alternative Development Paths . International Political Economy Series – ISSN 2662-2491. Cham: Springer Nature. p. 11.

ISBN 9783031207020 . Retrieved 1 December 2023 .

[...] the role of state-owned enterprises, the manufacturing sector, various types of rents and the specificities of the Belarusian and Turkish state capitaliusm.

^ Bel, Germà (April 2006).

"Against the mainstream: Nazi privatization in 1930s Germany" (PDF) .

Economic History Review .

63 (1). University of Barcelona: 34– 55.

doi : 10.1111/j.1468-0289.2009.00473.x .

hdl : 2445/11716 .

S2CID 154486694 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2011-07-20 . Retrieved 8 July 2020 .

^ Gat, Azar (August 2007).

"The Return of Authoritarian Great Powers" .

Foreign Affairs .

86 (4). Council on Foreign Relations: 59– 69.

JSTOR 20032415 .

^ Fuchs, Christian (29 June 2017).

"The Relevance of Franz L. Neumann's Critical Theory in 2017: Anxiety and Politics in the New Age of Authoritarian Capitalism" (PDF) .

Media, Culture & Society .

40 (5): 779– 791.

doi : 10.1177/0163443718772147 .

S2CID 149705789 . Retrieved 8 July 2020 .

^ Fuchs, Christian (27 April 2018).

"Authoritarian Capitalism, Authoritarian Movements, Authoritarian Communication" (PDF) .

TripleC .

15 (2): 637– 650.

doi : 10.1177/0163443718772147 .

S2CID 149705789 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 13 October 2019 . Retrieved 8 July 2020 .

^ Chomsky, Noam (18 May 2005).

"State and Corp. Noam Chomsky interviewed by uncredited interviewer" .

Znet Germany . Retrieved 26 June 2020 – via Chomsky.info.

^ Chomsky, Noam (7 April 2011).

The State-Corporate Complex: A Threat to Freedom and Survival (Speech). University of Toronto . Retrieved 26 June 2020 – via Chomsky.info.

^ Chomsky, Noam; Segantini, Tommaso (22 September 2015).

"History Doesn't Go In a Straight Line" .

Jacobin . Retrieved 26 June 2020 .

^ Johnson, Allan G. (2000).

The Blackwell Dictionary of Sociology . Blackwell Publishing. p. 306.

ISBN 0-631-21681-2 .

[ need quotation to verify ] In 2008, the U.S. National Intelligence Council used the term in Global Trends 2025: A World Transformed to describe the development of China, India and Russia.

^ a b c Engels, Friedrich (1970) [1880].

Socialism: Utopian and Scientific .

"Historical Materialism" .

Marx/Engels Selected Works .

3 .  Moscow: Progress Publishers. pp. 95–151 – via Marxists Internet Archive.

^ Lenin, Vladimir (1963) [1916].

Imperialism, the Highest Stage of Capitalism .

"Concentration of Production and Monopolies" .

Lenin Selected Works .

1 . Moscow: Progress Publishers. pp. 667–776.

ISBN 9780141192567 – via Marxists Internet Archive.

^ a b Engels (1976).

Herr Eugen Dührings omvälvning av vetenskapen (Anti-Dühring) (2nd ed.). Lund: Arbetarkultur. pp.

382– 385.

ISBN 91-7014-078-2 .

^ Liebknecht, Wilhelm (August 1986).

"Our Recent Congress" .

Justice : 4 . Retrieved 26 June 2020 – via Marxists Internet Archive.

^ Bottomore, T. B. (1961).

Elites and Society . London: Watts. p. 54.

^ a b c d Fox, Michael S. (Spring 1991).

"Ante Ciliga, Trotskii, and State Capitalism: Theory, Tactics, and Reevaluation during the Purge Era, 1935–1939" (PDF) .

Slavic Review .

50 (1). Cambridge University Press: 127– 143.

doi : 10.2307/2500604 .

JSTOR 2500604 .

S2CID 155654843 . Archived from the original on 27 October 2009 . Retrieved 26 June 2020 – via GeoCities.

{{ cite journal }} :  CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown ( link ) ^ Gouldner, A. W. (November 1982). "Marx's Last Battle: Bakunin and the First International".

Theory and Society . Springer.

11 (6): pp. 853–884.

JSTOR 657194 Gouldner argues that Bakunin formulated an original critique of Marxism as "the ideology, not of the working class, but of a new class of scientific intelligentsia—who would corrupt socialism, make themselves a new elite, and impose their rule on the majority" (pp. 860–861).

^ Shatz, Marshall S. (1989).

Jan Waclaw Machajski: A Radical Critic of the Russian Intelligentsia and Socialism . Russian and East European Studies. Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press.

ISBN 978-0822985143 . Archived from the original on 26 October 2009 . Retrieved 26 October 2009 – via GeoCities.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown ( link ) ^ Slavic Review (Spring 1991). Cambridge University Press.

50 (1): 127–143.

JSTOR i322594 Published in Croatian translation in Časopis za suvremenu povijest [ Journal of Contemporary History ] (1994). Zagreb. (3): 427–450.

^ McKay, Iain, ed. (2012).

"Why is state socialism just state capitalism?" .

An Anarchist FAQ . Vol. II. Stirling: AK Press.

ISBN 9781849351225 . Archived from the original on 19 December 2009 . Retrieved 26 June 2020 – via Infoshop.

^ Lenin, Vladimir (1948) [1916].

Imperialism, the Highest Stage of Capitalism . London: Lawrence and Wishart.

ISBN 9780141192567 – via Marxists Internet Archive.

^ Bukharin, Nikolai (1929) [1917].

Imperialism and World Economy . International Publishers. p. 157 – via Marxists Internet Archive.

^ a b Communist Workers Organisation (2000).

"Trotsky, Trotskyism, Trotskyists: From Revolution to Social Democracy" .

"Trotsky and the Origins of Trotskyism" . "The Nature of the USSR". Internationalist Communist Tendency. Retrieved 22 June 2020.

^ Lenin, Vladimir (1964) [1917].

The State and Revolution .

"Supplementary Explanations by Engels" .

Lenin Collected Works .

25 . Moscow: Progress Publishers. pp. 381–492 – via Marxists Internet Archive.

^ Bukharin, Nikolai (1972) [1915].

Imperialism and World Economy . London: Merlin. p. 158.

ISBN 978-0850361551 .

^ Aufheben Collective (2015).

What Was the USSR?: Towards a Theory of the Deformation of Value Under State Capitalism . Edmont: Thoughtcrime Ink.

ISBN 9780981289731 . Archived from the original on 18 March 2004 . Retrieved 26 June 2020 – via GeoCities.

^ Lenin, Vladimir (1972) [1918].

Session of the All-Russia C.E.C.

Vol. 27 (4th English ed.). Moscow: Progress Publishers. pp.

279– 313 . Retrieved 26 June 2020 – via Marxists Internet Archive.

{{ cite book }} : |work= ignored ( help ) ^ Lenin, Vladimir (1972) [1918].

Session of the All-Russia C.E.C.

Vol. 27 (4th English ed.). Moscow: Progress Publishers. p. 293 . Retrieved 26 June 2020 – via Marxists Internet Archive.

{{ cite book }} : |work= ignored ( help ) ^ Pena, David S. (22 September 2007).

"Tasks of Working-Class Governments under the Socialist-oriented Market Economy" .

Political Affairs . Archived from the original on 5 September 2008 . Retrieved 26 June 2020 .

^ Lenin, Vladimir (1964) [1917].

"The Economic Basis of the Withering Away of the State" .

The State and Revolution . Vol. 25. Moscow: Progress Publishing. pp.

381– 492 . Retrieved 26 June 2020 – via Marxists Internet Archive.

{{ cite book }} : |work= ignored ( help ) ^ a b Lenin, Vladimir (1965) [1921].

The Tax in Kind (The Significance of the New Policy and Its Conditions) . Vol. 32. Translated by Sdobnikov, Tury (1st English ed.). Moscow: Progress Publishing. pp.

329– 365 . Retrieved 26 June 2020 – via Marxists Internet Archive.

{{ cite book }} : |work= ignored ( help ) ^ Paul Avrich, 1967, The Russian Anarchists , Princeton University Press, chapter 7.

^ Emma Goldman (1935).

"There Is No Communism in Russia" .

The Anarchist Library .

^ Murray Bookchin (1971).

"Listen, Marxist!" .

The Anarchist Library .

^ "An Anarchist FAQ – H.5 What was the Kronstadt Rebellion? (What is vanguardism and why do anarchists reject it?)" . Infoshop . Retrieved 1 January 2016 .

^ Kautsky, K. 1919 [1983]. Terrorism and Communism. Cited from P. Goode (ed.), Karl Kautsky: Selected Political Writings. London: Macmillan, 1983, cited in 'State Capitalism' in the Soviet Union M.C. Howard and J.E. King ^ Liebich, A. 1987. 'Marxism and totalitarianism: Rudolf Hilferding and the Mensheviks', Dissent 34, Spring, pp. 223–40 ^ State capitalism: the wages system under new management / Adam Buick and John Crump. Basingstoke : Macmillan, 1986.

ISBN 0-333-36775-8 ^ Buick, Adam; Crump, John; O'Neill, John (July–September 1988).

State Capitalism: The Wages System Under New Management .

Political Quarterly .

59 (3): 398–399.

^ Rudolf Hilferding (April 25, 1940).

"State Capitalism or Totalitarian State Economy" .

marxists.org . Socialist Courier . Retrieved June 17, 2018 .

A capitalist economy is governed by the laws of the market (analyzed by Marx) and the autonomy of these laws constitutes the decisive symptom of the capitalist system of production ^ Maurice Brinton (1970).

"The Bolsheviks and Workers' Control: The State and Counter-Revolution" .

www.marxists.org . Retrieved 1 January 2016 .

^ Jerome, W. and Buick, A. 1967. 'Soviet state capitalism? The history of an idea', Survey 62, January, pp. 58–71.

^ EH Carr, The Interregnum 1923–1924 , London, 1954, p80 ^ Marshall Shatz "Makhaevism after Machajski" . Archived from the original on October 27, 2009 . Retrieved 2014-04-07 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown ( link ) ^ Bordiga, Amadeo (1952).

"Dialogue With Stalin" . Translated by Libri Incogniti.

Il Programma Comunista . Retrieved 11 November 2019.

^ Mattick, Paul (1978).

"Otto Rühle and the German Labour Movement" .

Anti-Bolshevik Communism . London: Merlin Press.

ISBN 9780850362237 .

^ Goldner, Loren (1995). "Amadeo Bordiga, the Agrarian Question and the International Revolutionary Movement".

Critique: Journal of Socialist Theory .

23 (1): 73– 100.

doi : 10.1080/03017609508413387 .

^ Aufheben (2015).

What Was the USSR?: Towards a Theory of the Deformation of Value Under State Capitalism .

"Part III: Left Communism and the Russian Revolution" . Edmont: Thoughtcrime Ink.

ISBN 9780981289731 . Retrieved 8 July 2020 – via The Anarchist Library.

^ Pannekoek, Anton (January 1937).

"State Capitalism and Dictatorship" .

International Council Correspondence .

III (1). Retrieved 26 June 2020.

^ Trotsky, Leon (2004).

The Revolution Betrayed . Eastman, Max. Mineola, New York: Dover: Newton Abbot: David & Charles.

ISBN 0-486-43398-6 . Retrieved 31 May 2007 .

^ Ciliga, Ante (1938).

Au pays du grand mensonge .

^ Philippe Bourrinet, " An Ambiguous Journey " ^ Dunayevskaya, Raya (1941).

"The Union of Soviet Socialist Republics is a Capitalist Society" .

Internal Discussion Bulletin of the Workers Party . Retrieved 23 April 2020.

^ Dunayevskaya, Raya (1946).

"The Nature of the Russian Economy" .

The New International .

XII (10): 313–317.

XIII (1/January 1947): 27–30. Retrieved 23 April 2020.

^ Boggs, Grace Lee; Dunayevskaya, Ray; James, C. L. R. (1986).

State Capitalism and World Revolution . Chicago: Charles H. R. Publishing Company.

ISBN 9780882860794 . Retrieved 23 April 2020.

^ State-capitalism and World Revolution by Johnson-Forest , Socialist Workers Party, 1950.

^ Aufheben Cliff and the neo-Trotskyist theory of the USSR as state capitalist in What Was The USSR?

^ "Modern History Sourcebook: The Common Program of The Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference, 1949" .

Fordham University . Retrieved 19 January 2019 .

^ The Economics of Revisionism by the Irish Communist Organisation, 1967.

^ Imperialism and the Revolution by Enver Hoxha, 1978.

^ Rothbard, Murray (1973).

"A Future of Peace and Capitalism" . In James H. Weaver (ed.).

Modern Political Economy . Boston: Allyn and Bacon . Retrieved 2007-05-31 .

^ Rothbard, Murray (2000).

"Egalitarianism as a revolt against nature and other essays" . Left and right: the prospects for liberty. Auburn, Ala.: Ludwig von Mises Institute.

{{ cite journal }} : Cite journal requires |journal= ( help ) ^ Andrei, Illarionov (2006-01-25).

"When the state means business" .

International Herald and Tribune .

^ Von Mises, Ludwig (1979).

Socialism: An Economic and Sociological Analysis . Indianapolis: LibertyClassics.

ISBN 0-913966-63-0 . Retrieved 31 May 2007 .

^ Mussolini, Benito; "Address to the National Corporative Council (14 November 1933)".

Fascism: Doctrine and Institutions . Fertig, 1978.

^ Falasca-Zamponi, Simonetta.

Fascist Spectacle: The Aesthetics of Power in Mussolini's Italy . University of California Press, 2000. pp. 136.

^ Falasca-Zamponi, Simonetta.

Fascist Spectacle: The Aesthetics of Power in Mussolini's Italy . University of California Press, 2000. pp. 137.

^ a b Mussolini, Benito; Schnapp, Jeffery Thompson (ed.); Sears, Olivia E. (ed.); Stampino, Maria G. (ed.). "Address to the National Corporative Council (14 November 1933) and Senate Speech on the Bill Establishing the Corporations (abridged; 13 January 1934)".

A Primer of Italian Fascism . University of Nebraska Press, 2000. pp. 158.

^ a b Salvemini, Gaetano.

Under the Axe of Fascism . READ BOOKS, 2006. pp. 134.

^ Salvemini. p. 134.

^ Schmidt, Vivien (November 2003). "French Capitalism Transformed, yet still a Third Variety of Capitalism".

Economy and Society .

32 (4). Economy and Society Vol. 32 N. 4: 526– 554.

doi : 10.1080/0308514032000141693 .

S2CID 145716949 .

^ Ernesto Screpanti, Capitalist Forms and the Essence of Capitalism, "Review of International Political Economy", vol. 6, n. 1, 1999; Ernesto Screpanti, The Fundamental Institutions of Capitalism, Routledge, London 2001.

^ Resnick, Stephen; Wolff, Richard D. (2002).

Class Theory and History: Capitalism and Communism in the U.S.S.R.

London: Routledge.

^ Guevara, Che (24 February 1965).

"At the Afro-Asian Conference in Algeria" . In Deutschmann, David (2003).

Che Guevara Reader: Writings on Politics & Revolution (2nd expanded ed.). New York: Che Guevara Studies Center and Ocean Press.

ISBN 9781876175696 . Retrieved 8 July 2020 – via Marxists Internet Archive.

^ The Case of Eugene Varga Raya Dunayevskaya 1949.

^ Do Vale, Helder Ferreira &  Costa, Lilian. "State capitalism in a changing global order: Brazil and China’s strategies for greater global influence", Research in Globalization, Volume 9, 2024, 100265, ISSN 2590-051X, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.resglo.2024.100265 .

^ Musacchio, A. & Lazzarini, S.G. "Reinventing State Capitalism: Leviathan in Business", Brazil and Beyond
Harvard University Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts (2014) ^ Pearson, Margaret M.; Rithmire, Meg; Tsai, Kellee S. (2022-10-01).

"China's Party-State Capitalism and International Backlash: From Interdependence to Insecurity" .

International Security .

47 (2): 135– 176.

doi : 10.1162/isec_a_00447 .

ISSN 0162-2889 .

^ "The visible hand" .

The Economist .

ISSN 0013-0613 . Retrieved 2022-11-12 .

^ Do Vale, Helder Ferreira & Costa, Lilian. "State capitalism in a changing global order: Brazil and China’s strategies for greater global influence", Research in Globalization, Volume 9, 2024, 100265, ISSN 2590-051X, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.resglo.2024.100265 ^ Dyer, Geoff (13 September 2010).

"State capitalism: China's 'market-Leninism' has yet to face biggest test" .

Financial Times .

Archived from the original on 2022-12-10 . Retrieved 2010-12-08 .

^ a b c Ferguson, Niall (10 February 2012).

"We're All State Capitalists Now" .

Foreign Policy . Archived from the original on 8 September 2014 . Retrieved 11 March 2017 .

^ Aligica, Paul and Vlad Tarko (2012). "State Capitalism and the Rent-SeekingConjecture", Constitutional Political Economy 23(4): 357–379 ^ "Modern History Sourcebook: The Common Program of The Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference, 1949" . Fordham University . Retrieved 19 January 2019 .

^ Market Socialism or Capitalism? Evidence from Chinese Financial Market Development , by Julan Du and Chenggang Xu. 2005. IEA 2005 Round Table on Market and Socialism.

^ Poythress, Vern S. (January 2013). "An Information-Based Semiotic Analysis of Theories Concerning theories".

Semiotica .

2013 (193).

doi : 10.1515/sem-2013-0005 .

ISSN 1613-3692 .

^ Hou, Qiang (19 October 2017).

"CPC creates Xi Jinping Thought on Socialism with Chinese Characteristics for a New Era" . Xinhua News Agency. Archived from the original on February 27, 2018 . Retrieved 8 October 2020 .

^ Dittmer, Lowell (2017).

Taiwan and China: Fitful Embrace . University of California Press. p. 118.

ISBN 978-0520295988 .

A decade after Taiwan made its democratic transition, the KMT's Leninist control model has yet to fade from the decision-making process. In short, both China's and Taiwan's state capitalism have their roots in the Leninist legacy. [...] To be specific, Taiwan's state capitalism has experienced a transformation from 'leviathan as entrepreneur' in the pre-1989 period to 'leviathan as a minority investor' with the agenda of democratization in the late 1980s.

^ "Norway: The rich cousin – Oil makes Norway different from the rest of the region, but only up to a point" .

The Economist . 2 February 2013 . Retrieved 1 January 2016 .

^ "Investment management" .

Folketrygdfondet . 2014-03-28. Archived from the original on 2022-01-06 . Retrieved 2022-01-06 .

^ "The True Meaning of the 'Singapore Model': State Capitalism and Urban Planning" , by Shatkin, Gavin. Retrieved October 18, 2012, from Association of American Geographers.

^ Tan, Cheng Han; Puchniak, Dan W.; Varottil, Umakanth (2015). "State-Owned Enterprises in Singapore: Historical Insights into a Potential Model for Reform".

Columbia Journal of Asian Law .

28 : 61– 97.

SSRN 2580422 .

Further reading [ edit ] Guy Ankerl, Beyond Monopoly Capitalism and Monopoly Socialism. Cambridge MA, Schenkman, 1978, ISBN 0-87073-938-7 Nikolai Bukharin , Imperialism and World Economy .

Gerd Hardach, Dieter Karras and Ben Fine, A short history of socialist economic thought.

, pp. 63–68.

Bob Jessop, The capitalist state .

Charlene Gannage, "E. S. Varga and the Theory of State Monopoly Capitalism", in Review of Radical Political Economics 12(3), Fall 1980, pages 36–49.

Johnn Fairley, French Developments in the Theory of State Monopoly Capitalism , in: Science and Society ; 44(3), Fall 1980, pages 305–25.

Ernest Mandel , Late Capitalism , pp. 515–522.

Ernest Mandel, Historical Materialism and the Capitalist State .

Paul Boccara et al., Le Capitalisme Monopoliste d'Etat . Paris: Editions Sociales, 1971 (2 vols).

G. N. Sorvina et al., "The Role of the State in the System of State Monopoly Capitalism", in: The Teaching of Political Economy: A Critique of Non Marxian Theories . Moscow: Progress, 1984, pages 171–179.

Ben Fine & Laurence Harris, Re-reading Capital.

Jacques Valier, Le Parti Communiste Francais et le Capitalisme Monopoliste D'Etat , 1976 Valentin Dyachenko, Как марксизм из науки превращался в утопию. Размышления о деформации теории Маркса и причинах краха советского проекта. (How Marxism turns from a science into a utopia. Reflections on the deformation of Marx's theory and the causes of the collapse of the Soviet project.) — Москва:, 2015.

Alexander Ostrovsky, Существовал ли социализм в СССР? (Did socialism exist in the USSR?) // Альтернативы № 4, 2011.

Avenir Solovyov, Общественный строй России — вчера, сегодня, завтра (Короткие ответы на острые вопросы) (The social system of Russia — yesterday, today, tomorrow (Short answers to acute questions)).

— Кострома: Б. и. 1994.

Do Vale, Helder F. & Costa, Lilian. "State capitalism in a changing global order: Brazil and China’s strategies for greater global influence", Research in Globalization, Volume 9, 2024, 100265, ISSN 2590-051X, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.resglo.2024.100265 .

External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to State capitalism .

Library resources about State capitalism Resources in your library Resources in other libraries The Economist debate on State and liberal capitalism.

In Defense of Marxism by Leon Trotsky – A collection of essays and letters to members of the US Socialist Workers Party from 1939 to 1940.

Our Recent Congress, Justice 1896 by Wilhelm Liebknecht What was the USSR?

by Aufheben at the Wayback Machine (archived October 27, 2009) State Capitalism in Russia by Tony Cliff Toward a Theory of State Capitalism: Ultimate Decision-Making and Class Structure Libertarian analysis by Walter E. Grinder and John Hagel.

Against the Theory of State Capitalism by Ted Grant The Russian Question: A debate between Raya Dunayevskaya and Max Shachtman (May 1947 with August 2005 commentary) Imperialism and World Economy by Nikolai Bukharin State Capitalism and Dictatorship by Anton Pannekoek The Theory of "State Capitalism" , by Ernest Mandel (June 1951) The Marxian Concept of Capital and the Soviet Experience: Essay in the Critique of Political Economy Archived 2011-08-04 at the Wayback Machine by Paresh Chattopadhyay Collection of left-communist links that dismiss the bolshevik state capitalism.

"The Nature of the Russian Economy" a 1946 Polemic written by Raya Dunayevskaya (then writing as Freddie Forest), founder of Marxist Humanism , arguing for a state capitalist position within the Marxist movement.

"Trotskyism after Trotsky: The origins of the International Socialists" Summarization of three key points on which Cliff and the International Socialist Tendency deviated from what is traditionally the orthodox Trotskyist position.

"C.L.R. James on Marx's Capital and State Capitalism" Archived 2013-05-10 at the Wayback Machine State Capitalism Comes of Age , Foreign Affairs , May/June 2009 The End of The Free Market: Who Wins the War between States and Corporations , by Ian Bremmer , (May 2010) The Age of Monopoly-Finance Capital by John Bellamy Foster , Monthly Review , February 2010 v t e Capitalism Aspects and perspectives General Anarchy of production Business cycle Centralization Competition Competition law Depression definitions of capitalism Deregulation Economic bubble Economic development Economic liberalism Economic planning Entrepreneurship Ecopreneurship Externality Financial crisis Financial Revolution Globalization Global labor arbitrage History of capitalist theory Industrial Revolution Invention Market economy Market failure Merchantilism Meritocracy Multinational corporation Nationalization Oligopoly Perspectives on capitalism by school of thought Privatization Profit Property rights Recession Regulation Wage labour Wealth Ideology Anglo-Saxon Authoritarian Conservative Corporate Democratic Dirigist Free-market Humanistic Laissez-faire Liberal Libertarian Market Mercantilist Mixed Monopoly National Neo Neoliberal Nordic Private Raw Regulated market Regulatory Rhine Social State State-sponsored Welfare Cultural aspects Advertising American Dream Black Friday Consumerism Decentralization Economic freedom Economic mobility Individualism Liberalism Liberty Mainstream Philanthropy Private foundation Private property Rule of law Social alienation Spontaneous order Social aspects Corporatism Economic inequality Employment Freedom of association Labour market flexibility Labour supply Productivity Prosperity Syndicate Social venture capital Unemployment Criticism Anti-capitalism Capitalist propaganda Critique of political economy Critique of work Market fundamentalism Marxism Wage slavery Antithesis Anarchism Anarcho-communism Anarcho-primitivism Anarcho-syndicalism Collectivist anarchism Communalism Communism Economic democracy Eco-socialism Free-market socialism Green anarchism Individualist anarchism Libertarian socialism Market anarchism Market socialism Mutualism Post-capitalism Post-scarcity economy Sharing economy Social anarchism Socialism Syndicalism v t e Marxist phraseology and terminology Philosophy and politics ( Marxist ) Barracks communism Base and superstructure Bourgeoisie Bourgeois democracy Bourgeois nationalism Bourgeois revolution Bourgeois right Bourgeois socialism Capitalist mode of production Class struggle Commodification Dialectics Dictatorship of the proletariat Historical materialism Imperialism Liquidationism Lumpenproletariat Means of labor Metabolic rift Petite bourgeoisie Primitive accumulation of capital Proletarian internationalism Proletarian revolution Pure communism Revisionism Revolutionary spontaneity Revolutionary wave Scientific socialism Socialist mode of production Super-imperialism Theoretician Two-stage theory Wage slavery Workers of the world, unite!

Workers' council Workers' control World communism World revolution Sociology and economics ( Marxian ) Critique of political economy Accumulation of capital Capital Capitalist mode of production Crisis of capitalism Commanding heights of the economy Commodity Commodity production Dominant ideology Exchange value Free association Law of value Materialism Means of production Mode of production Productive forces Production for use Relations of production Ruling class Simple commodity production Socialist mode of production Socially necessary labour time Socialization Social murder Subject of labor Surplus value Use value Value Worker cooperative Marxist–Leninist Anti-revisionism Cadre Central Committee Democratic centralism Dual power Enemy of the people Foco General line of the party National liberation New class People's democracy Politburo Political rehabilitation Popular front Real socialism Revisionism Revolutionary terror Secretariat Self-criticism Socialist accumulation Socialism in one country Social fascism Social imperialism Soviet democracy Democracy in Marxism United front Vanguardism Trotskyist Deformed workers' state Degenerated workers' state French Turn Permanent revolution Social revolution Transitional demand Uneven and combined development United front World revolution Maoist Antagonistic contradiction Anti-revisionism Capitalist roader Continuous revolution theory The East wind prevails over the West wind Four Olds Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Mass line New Democracy Whole-process people's democracy One Divides Into Two People's war Political power grows out of the barrel of a gun Revisionism Revolutionary base area Revolution is not a dinner party Social imperialism Struggle session Other People's Multiparty Democracy v t e Socialism History - Outline Schools of thought 21st century Agrarian Communist Democratic Ethical Feminist Green Guild Labourism Syndicalism Liberal Market Marxian Nationalist Reformist Revolutionary Scientific Social democracy Utopian Fourierism Icarianism Owenism Saint-Simonianism Technocracy Libertarian ( from below ) Anarchism Collectivist Communist Free-market Left-wing laissez-faire Green Individualist Insurrectionary Magonism Mutualism Neozapatismo Platformism Communalism Social Syndicalist Left-libertarianism Libertarian Marxism Left communism Council communism Luxemburgism Mao-Spontex Trotskyism Pabloism Posadism Orthodox Third camp Authoritarian ( from above ) Barracks Nechayevism Blanquism Bolshevism Leninism Marxism–Leninism Brezhnevism Castroism Ceaușism Guevarism Ho Chi Minh Thought Hoxhaism Husakism Juche Kadarism Khrushchevism Maoism Dengism Maoism–Third Worldism Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Marxism–Leninism–Maoism–Gonzalo Thought Marxism–Leninism–Maoism–Prachanda Path Xi Jinping Thought Stalinism Neo-Stalinism National Tkachevism State Lassallism Religious Buddhist Christian anarchism communism Islamic Jewish Regional variants African African-Caribbean Arab Bolivarian Chinese Communist Nationalist Chiangist European Eurocommunism Indian Israeli Indonesian Melanesian Mexican Soviet In one country Real Sri Lankan Third World Yugoslav Key topics and issues Anti-revisionism Criticism of capitalism Criticism of socialism Critique of political economy Critique of work Class struggle Democracy Dictatorship of the proletariat Egalitarianism Equal liberty Equality of opportunity Equality of outcome History of anarchism History of communism History of socialism History of social democracy Impossibilism " The Internationale " Internationalism Socialist Internationals First International Second International Third International Fourth International Fifth International Socialist International Land reform Left-wing politics Mixed economy Mode of production Nanosocialism Nationalization Planned economy Post-capitalism Proletarian revolution Reformism Revisionism Socialisation of production Socialist economics Socialist market economy Socialist state State capitalism State-owned enterprise Trade union Welfare state Workers' council Concepts Adhocracy Basic income Calculation in kind Common ownership Cooperative ownership Decentralized planning Direct democracy Economic democracy Economic planning Equal opportunity Free association of producers Industrial democracy Labor-time calculation Labour voucher Organizational self-management Production for use Public ownership Social dividend Socialist mode of production Technocracy Workplace democracy People 16th c.

Tommaso Campanella Thomas More 18th c.

Gracchus Babeuf Louis Antoine de Saint-Just Victor d'Hupay Gabriel Bonnot de Mably Sylvain Maréchal Étienne-Gabriel Morelly 19th c.

Stephen Pearl Andrews Mikhail Bakunin John Goodwyn Barmby Enrico Barone August Bebel Edward Bellamy Eduard Bernstein Louis Blanc Louis Auguste Blanqui Philippe Buchez Georg Büchner Philippe Buonarroti Francisco Largo Caballero Étienne Cabet Edward Carpenter Nikolay Chernyshevsky James Connolly Victor Prosper Considerant Claire Démar Théodore Dézamy W. E. B. Du Bois Prosper Enfantin Friedrich Engels Charles Fourier Emma Goldman William Batchelder Greene Charles Hall Alexander Herzen Thomas Hodgskin Jean Jaurès Mother Jones Karl Kautsky Peter Kropotkin Paul Lafargue Ferdinand Lassalle Pyotr Lavrov Alexandre Ledru-Rollin Pierre Leroux Helen Macfarlane Errico Malatesta Karl Marx Louise Michel Nikolay Mikhaylovsky William Morris Robert Owen Antonie Pannekoek Giovanni Pascoli Constantin Pecqueur Georgi Plekhanov Pierre-Joseph Proudhon Luis Emilio Recabarren Henri de Saint-Simon Mikhail Saltykov-Shchedrin George Sand Friedrich Wilhelm Schulz Eugène Sue Lysander Spooner Fred M. Taylor William Thompson Pyotr Tkachev Benjamin Tucker Suzanne Voilquin Alfred Russel Wallace Josiah Warren Wilhelm Weitling Oscar Wilde 20th c.

Tariq Ali Salvador Allende Inejirō Asanuma Hafez al-Assad Clement Attlee Aung San Deng Xiaoping Jiang Zemin Henri Barbusse Jyoti Basu Simone de Beauvoir Walter Benjamin Tony Benn Léon Blum Grace Lee Boggs Murray Bookchin Bertolt Brecht Aristide Briand Nikolai Bukharin Cornelius Castoriadis Noam Chomsky M. N. Roy G. D. H. Cole Jeremy Corbyn Marcel Déat Guy Debord Eugene V. Debs John Dewey Alexander Dubček Albert Einstein Faiz Ahmad Faiz Muammar Gaddafi Einar Gerhardsen Mikhail Gorbachev Maxim Gorky Antonio Gramsci Safdar Hashmi Eric Hobsbawm Saddam Hussein Dolores Ibárruri Pablo Iglesias Posse Jayaprakash Narayan Russell Jacoby Kim Jong-il Kim Il Sung Martin Luther King Jr.

Alexandra Kollontai James Larkin E. M. S. Namboodiripad Jack Layton Henri Lefebvre Claude Lefort Vladimir Lenin György Lukács Rosa Luxemburg Lu Xun Alasdair MacIntyre Nestor Makhno Nelson Mandela José Carlos Mariátegui Adrien Marquet Mao Dun Salama Moussa François Mitterrand Imre Nagy Gamal Abdel Nasser Jawaharlal Nehru Ernst Niekisch Ne Win George Orwell Sylvia Pankhurst Fred Paterson Karl Polanyi Pierre Renaudel B. T. Ranadive Bertrand Russell Gaetano Salvemini Bernie Sanders Jean-Paul Sartre Arthur Scargill Léopold Sédar Senghor George Bernard Shaw Sukarno Sun Yat-sen R. H. Tawney E. P. Thompson Ernst Toller Leon Trotsky Ram Manohar Lohia H. G. Wells Cornel West Clara Zetkin Howard Zinn J. Posadas 21st c.

Pedro Castillo Hugo Chávez Bob Crow Hu Jintao Kemal Kılıçdaroğlu Kim Jong Un Hasan Piker Lula da Silva Evo Morales Yanis Varoufakis Xi Jinping Vaush Organizations International socialist organizations Socialist parties See also Economic calculation problem Marxist philosophy New Left Old Left Socialism by country Socialist calculation debate Categories Socialism WikiProject Socialism portal Communism portal Organized Labour portal Authority control databases : National Germany NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐744bd5f668‐rsrpz
Cached time: 20250812115654
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.276 seconds
Real time usage: 1.513 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 7335/1000000
Revision size: 82113/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 397536/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 12065/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 15/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 385761/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.687/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 8312700/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1080.728      1 -total
 47.64%  514.819      1 Template:Reflist
 17.04%  184.148     15 Template:Cite_book
 14.38%  155.425      5 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 10.28%  111.067     15 Template:Cite_journal
  9.52%  102.848      1 Template:Capitalism_sidebar
  9.37%  101.295      5 Template:Navbox
  6.16%   66.525      1 Template:Short_description
  6.13%   66.207     11 Template:Cite_news
  5.51%   59.508     11 Template:Cite_web Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:29665:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812115654 and revision id 1303802545. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=State_capitalism&oldid=1303802545 " Categories : State capitalism Capitalism Economic systems Political terminology Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles needing factual verification from December 2023 CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown CS1 errors: periodical ignored CS1 errors: missing periodical Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Pages using multiple image with manual scaled images Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from November 2024 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from November 2024 Articles with unsourced statements from February 2024 Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 2 August 2025, at 04:00 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents State capitalism 33 languages Add topic

