Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Example 2 Conclusions of Zermelo's theorem 3 Publication history 4 Details 5 Zermelo's theorem and backward induction 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Zermelo's theorem (game theory) 8 languages Español Français Italiano עברית Português Svenska 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia In board games that cannot end in a draw, one of the two players has a winning strategy For Zermelo's theorem in set theory, see well-ordering theorem .

In game theory , Zermelo's theorem is a theorem about finite two-person games of perfect information in which the players move alternately and in which chance does not affect the decision making process. It says that if the game cannot end in a draw, then one of the two players must have a winning strategy (i.e. can force a win). An alternate statement is that for a game meeting all of these conditions except the condition that a draw is not possible, then either the first-player can force a win, or the second-player can force a win, or both players can at least force a draw.

[ 1 ] The theorem is named after Ernst Zermelo , a German mathematician and logician, who proved the theorem for the example game of chess in 1913.

Example [ edit ] Zermelo's theorem can be applied to all finite-stage two-player games with complete information and alternating moves. The game must satisfy the following criteria: there are two players in the game; the game is of perfect information; the board game is finite; the two players can take alternate turns; and there is no chance element present. Zermelo has stated that there are many games of this type; however his theorem has been applied mostly to the game chess.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] When applied to chess , Zermelo's theorem states "either White can force a win, or Black can force a win, or both sides can force at least a draw".

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Zermelo's algorithm is a cornerstone algorithm in game-theory; however, it can also be applied in areas outside of finite games. 
Apart from chess, Zermelo's theorem is applied across all areas of computer science . In particular, it is applied in model checking and value interaction .

[ 4 ] Conclusions of Zermelo's theorem [ edit ] Zermelo's work shows that in two-person zero-sum games with perfect information, if a player is in a winning position, then that player can always force a win no matter what strategy the other player may employ. Furthermore, and as a consequence, if a player is in a winning position, it will never require more moves than there are positions in the game (with a position defined as position of pieces as well as the player next to move).

[ 1 ] Publication history [ edit ] In 1912, during the Fifth International Congress of Mathematicians in Cambridge, Ernst Zermelo gave two talks. The first one covered axiomatic and genetic methods in the foundation of mathematical disciplines, and the second speech was on the game of chess. The second speech prompted Zermelo to write a paper on game theory. Being an avid chess player, Zermelo was concerned with application of set theory to the game of chess. Zermelo's original paper describing the theorem, Über eine Anwendung der Mengenlehre auf die Theorie des Schachspiels , was published in German in 1913. It can be considered as the first known paper on game theory.

[ 5 ] Ulrich Schwalbe and Paul Walker translated Zermelo's paper into English in 1997 and published the translation in the appendix to Zermelo and the Early History of Game Theory .

[ 1 ] Details [ edit ] Zermelo considers the class of two-person games without chance, where players have strictly opposing interests and where only a finite number of positions are possible. Although in the game only finitely many positions are possible, Zermelo allows infinite sequences of moves since he does not consider stopping rules. Thus, he allows for the possibility of infinite games. Then he addresses two problems: What does it mean for a player to be in a 'winning' position and is it possible to define this in an objective mathematical manner?

If the player is in a winning position, can the number of moves needed to force the win be determined?

To answer the first question, Zermelo states that a necessary and sufficient condition is the nonemptyness of a certain set, containing all possible sequences of moves such that a player wins independently of how the other player plays. But should this set be empty, the best a player could achieve would be a draw. So Zermelo defines another set containing all possible sequences of moves such that a player can postpone his loss for an infinite number of moves, which implies a draw. This set may also be empty, i.e., the player can avoid his loss for only finitely many moves if his opponent plays correctly. But this is equivalent to the opponent being able to force a win. This is the basis for all modern versions of Zermelo's theorem.

About the second question, Zermelo claimed that it will never take more moves than there are positions in the game. His proof is a proof by contradiction : Assume that a player can win in a number of moves larger than the number of positions. By the pigeonhole principle , at least one winning position must have appeared twice. So the player could have played at the first occurrence in the same way as he does at the second and thus could have won in fewer moves than there are positions.

In 1927, a Hungarian mathematician Dénes Kőnig revised Zermelo's paper and pointed out some gaps in the original work. First of all, Kőnig argues that Zermelo did not prove that a player, for example White, who is in a winning position is always able to force a win by making moves smaller than the number of positions in the game. Zermelo argued that White can change its behaviour at the first possibility of any related winning position and win without repetition. However, Kőnig maintains that this argument is not correct as it is not enough to reduce the number of moves in a single game below the number of possible positions. Thus, Zermelo claimed, but did  not show, that a winning player can always win without repetition. The second objection by Kőnig is that the strategy 'do the same at the first occurrence of a position as at the second and thus win in fewer moves' cannot be made if it is Black's turn to move in this position. However, this argument is not correct because Zermelo considered two positions different whether Black or White makes a move.

[ 5 ] Zermelo's theorem and backward induction [ edit ] It has been believed that Zermelo used backward induction as his method of proof. However, recent research on the Zermelo's theorem demonstrates that backward induction was not used to explain the strategy behind chess. Contrary to the popular belief, chess is not a finite game without at least one of the fifty move rule or threefold repetition rule. Strictly speaking, chess is an infinite game therefore backward induction does not provide the minmax theorem in this game.

[ 6 ] Backward induction is a process of reasoning backward in time. It is used to analyse and solve extensive form games of perfect information. This method analyses the game starting at the end, and then works backwards to reach the beginning. In the process, backward induction determines the best strategy for the player that made the last move. Then the ultimate strategy is determined for the next-to last moving player of the game. The process is repeated again determining the best action for every point in the game has been found. Therefore, backward induction determines the Nash equilibrium of every subgame in the original game.

[ 4 ] There is a number of reasons as to why backward induction is not present in the Zermelo's original paper: Firstly, a recent study by Schwalbe and Walker (2001) demonstrated that Zermelo's paper contained basic idea of backward induction; however Zermelo did not make a formal statement on the theorem. Zermelo's original method was the idea of non-repetition. The first mention of backward induction was provided by László Kalmár in 1928. Kalmár generalised the work of Zermelo and Kőnig in his paper "On the Theory of Abstract Games". Kalmár was concerned with the question: "Given a winning position, how quickly can a  win be forced?". His paper showed that winning without repetition is possible given that a player is a winning position. Kalmár's proof of non-repetition was proof by backward induction. In his paper, Kalmár introduced the concept of subgame and tactic. Kalmár's central argument was that a position can be a  winning position only if a player can win in a finite number of moves. Also, a winning position for player A is always a losing position for player B.

[ 7 ] References [ edit ] ^ a b c Schwalbe, Ulrich; Walker, Paul.

"Zermelo and the Early History of Game Theory" (PDF) .

^ a b MacQuarrie, John (January 2005).

"Mathematics and Chess, Fundamentals" .

Archived from the original on January 12, 2017.

^ a b Aumann, R. J. (1989).

Lectures on Game Theory (PDF) . Boulder, CO: Westview Press. p. 1.

^ a b Wooldridge, Michael (17 March 2015). "Thinking Backward with Professor Zermelo".

IEEE Intelligent Systems .

30 (2): 62– 67.

doi : 10.1109/MIS.2015.36 .

S2CID 12397521 .

^ a b Ebbinghaus, Heinz-Dieter (14 October 2010).

Ernst Zermelo: An Approach to His Life and Work (2 ed.). Berlin: Springer. p. 150.

ISBN 9783642080500 . Retrieved 26 April 2021 .

^ Ewerhart, Christian (May 2002).

"Backward Induction and the Game-Theoretic Analysis of Chess" (PDF) .

Games and Economic Behavior .

39 (2): 206– 214.

doi : 10.1006/game.2001.0900 .

^ Schwalbe, Ulrich; Paul, Walker (January 2001).

"Zermelo and the Early History Game Theory" .

Games and Economic Behavior .

34 (1): 123– 137.

doi : 10.1006/game.2000.0794 . Retrieved 26 April 2021 .

External links [ edit ] Original Paper (in German) Ulrich Schwalbe, Paul Walker, Zermelo and the Early History of Game Theory , Games and Economic Behavior, Volume 34, 2001, 123-137, online v t e Game theory Glossary Game theorists Games Traditional game theory Definitions Asynchrony Bayesian regret Best response Bounded rationality Cheap talk Coalition Complete contract Complete information Complete mixing Confrontation analysis Conjectural variation Contingent cooperator Coopetition Cooperative game theory Dynamic inconsistency Escalation of commitment Farsightedness Game semantics Hierarchy of beliefs Imperfect information Incomplete information Information set Move by nature Mutual knowledge Non-cooperative game theory Non-credible threat Outcome Perfect information Perfect recall Ply Preference Rationality Sequential game Simultaneous action selection Spite Strategic complements Strategic dominance Strategic form Strategic interaction Strategic move Strategy Subgame Succinct game Topological game Tragedy of the commons Uncorrelated asymmetry Equilibrium concepts Backward induction Bayes correlated equilibrium Bayesian efficiency Bayesian game Bayesian Nash equilibrium Berge equilibrium Bertrand–Edgeworth model Coalition-proof Nash equilibrium Core Correlated equilibrium Cursed equilibrium Edgeworth price cycle Epsilon-equilibrium Gibbs equilibrium Incomplete contracts Inequity aversion Individual rationality Iterated elimination of dominated strategies Markov perfect equilibrium Mertens-stable equilibrium Nash equilibrium Open-loop model Pareto efficiency Payoff dominance Perfect Bayesian equilibrium Price of anarchy Program equilibrium Proper equilibrium Quantal response equilibrium Quasi-perfect equilibrium Rational agent Rationalizability Rationalizable strategy Satisfaction equilibrium Self-confirming equilibrium Sequential equilibrium Shapley value Strong Nash equilibrium Subgame perfect equilibrium Trembling hand equilibrium Strategies Appeasement Bid shading Cheap talk Collusion Commitment device De-escalation Deterrence Escalation Fictitious play Focal point Grim trigger Hobbesian trap Markov strategy Max-dominated strategy Mixed strategy Pure strategy Tit for tat Win–stay, lose–switch Games All-pay auction Battle of the sexes Nash bargaining game Bertrand competition Blotto game Centipede game Coordination game Cournot competition Deadlock Dictator game Trust game Diner's dilemma Dollar auction El Farol Bar problem Electronic mail game Gift-exchange game Guess 2/3 of the average Keynesian beauty contest Kuhn poker Lewis signaling game Matching pennies Obligationes Optional prisoner's dilemma Pirate game Prisoner's dilemma Public goods game Rendezvous problem Rock paper scissors Stackelberg competition Stag hunt Traveler's dilemma Ultimatum game Volunteer's dilemma War of attrition Theorems Arrow's impossibility theorem Aumann's agreement theorem Brouwer fixed-point theorem Competitive altruism Folk theorem Gibbard–Satterthwaite theorem Gibbs lemma Glicksberg's theorem Kakutani fixed-point theorem Kuhn's theorem One-shot deviation principle Prim–Read theory Rational ignorance Rational irrationality Sperner's lemma Zermelo's theorem Subfields Algorithmic game theory Behavioral game theory Behavioral strategy Compositional game theory Contract theory Drama theory Graphical game theory Heresthetic Mean-field game theory Negotiation theory Quantum game theory Social software Key people Albert W. Tucker Alvin E. Roth Amos Tversky Antoine Augustin Cournot Ariel Rubinstein David Gale David K. Levine David M. Kreps Donald B. Gillies Drew Fudenberg Eric Maskin Harold W. Kuhn Herbert Simon Herbert Scarf Hervé Moulin Jean Tirole Jean-François Mertens Jennifer Tour Chayes Ken Binmore Kenneth Arrow Leonid Hurwicz Lloyd Shapley Martin Shubik Melvin Dresher Merrill M. Flood Olga Bondareva Oskar Morgenstern Paul Milgrom Peyton Young Reinhard Selten Robert Aumann Robert Axelrod Robert B. Wilson Roger Myerson Samuel Bowles Suzanne Scotchmer Thomas Schelling William Vickrey Combinatorial game theory Core concepts Combinatorial explosion Determinacy Disjunctive sum First-player and second-player win Game complexity Game tree Impartial game Misère Partisan game Solved game Sprague–Grundy theorem Strategy-stealing argument Zugzwang Games Chess Chomp Clobber Cram Domineering Hackenbush Nim Notakto Subtract a square Sylver coinage Toads and Frogs Mathematical tools Mex Nimber On Numbers and Games Star Surreal number Winning Ways for Your Mathematical Plays Search algorithms Alpha–beta pruning Expectiminimax Minimax Monte Carlo tree search Negamax Paranoid algorithm Principal variation search Key people Claude Shannon John Conway John von Neumann Evolutionary game theory Core concepts Bishop–Cannings theorem Evolution and the Theory of Games Evolutionarily stable set Evolutionarily stable state Evolutionarily stable strategy Replicator equation Risk dominance Stochastically stable equilibrium Weak evolutionarily stable strategy Games Chicken Stag hunt Applications Cultural group selection Fisher's principle Mobbing Terminal investment hypothesis Key people John Maynard Smith Robert Axelrod Mechanism design Core concepts Algorithmic mechanism design Bayesian-optimal mechanism Incentive compatibility Market design Monotonicity Participation constraint Revelation principle Strategyproofness Vickrey–Clarke–Groves mechanism Theorems Myerson–Satterthwaite theorem Revenue equivalence Applications Digital goods auction Knapsack auction Truthful cake-cutting Other topics Bertrand paradox Chainstore paradox Computational complexity of games Helly metric Multi-agent system PPAD-complete Mathematics portal Commons WikiProject Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Zermelo%27s_theorem_(game_theory)&oldid=1305907828 " Categories : Game theory History of mathematics Mathematical theorems Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 14 August 2025, at 20:07 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Zermelo's theorem (game theory) 8 languages Add topic

