Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Xylophagous insects 2 Examples of wood-eating animals 3 References Toggle the table of contents Xylophagy 22 languages العربية Català Čeština Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Euskara فارسی Français Igbo Italiano עברית Magyar Nederlands Polski Română Русский Svenska Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Digestion of wood Not to be confused with Xylophagia, a form of Pica .

This article relies largely or entirely on a single source .

Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page . Please help improve this article by introducing  citations to additional sources .

Find sources: "Xylophagy" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( November 2018 ) Worker termite Xylophagy is a term used in ecology to describe the habits of an herbivorous animal whose diet consists primarily (often solely) of wood . The word derives from Greek ξυλοφάγος ( xulophagos ) "eating wood", from ξύλον ( xulon ) "wood" and φαγεῖν ( phagein ) "to eat". Animals feeding only on dead wood are called sapro -xylophagous or saproxylic .

Xylophagous insects [ edit ] Most such animals are arthropods , primarily insects of various kinds, in which the behavior is quite common, and found in many different orders .

[ 1 ] It is not uncommon for insects to specialize to various degrees; in some cases, they limit themselves to certain plant groups (a taxonomic specialization), and in others, it is the physical characteristics of the wood itself (e.g., state of decay, hardness, whether the wood is alive or dead, or the choice of heartwood versus sapwood versus bark ).

[ 1 ] Many xylophagous insects have symbiotic protozoa and/or bacteria in their digestive system which assist in the breakdown of cellulose ; others (e.g., the termite family Termitidae ) possess their own cellulase . Others, especially among the groups feeding on decaying wood, derive much of their nutrition from the digestion of various fungi that are growing amidst the wood fibers. Such insects often carry the spores of the fungi in special structures on their bodies (called " mycangia "), and infect the host tree themselves when they are laying their eggs.

[ 1 ] Examples of wood-eating animals [ edit ] Cossidae moths Cockroaches in the genus Cryptocercus and in the subfamily Panesthiinae Dioryctria sylvestrella , the maritime pine borer, a snout moth in the Pyralidae family Gribbles Horntails Panaque (catfish) Sesiidae moths Shipworms Termites Wood-boring beetles , including various bark beetles , jewel beetles and longhorn beetles Woodlice Amphipods [ 2 ] Squat lobster [ 3 ] References [ edit ] ^ a b c Ulyshen, Michael D. (2016-02-01). "Wood decomposition as influenced by invertebrates".

Biological Reviews .

91 (1): 70– 85.

doi : 10.1111/brv.12158 .

ISSN 1469-185X .

PMID 25424353 .

S2CID 5826744 .

^ Deep-Sea, Shrimp-like Creatures Survive by Eating Wood ^ Wood-eating squat lobsters of the deep - Arthropoda v t e Feeding behaviours Carnivores adult Arachnophagy Avivore Corallivore Durophagy Egg predation Entomophagy Hematophagy Insectivore Lepidophagy Man-eating animal Molluscivore Mucophagy Myrmecophagy Ophiophagy Piscivore Spongivore Vermivore reproductive Oophagy Paedophagy Placentophagy Breastfeeding Weaning cannibalistic Human cannibalism Autocannibalism Sexual cannibalism Herbivores Folivore Florivore Frugivore Graminivore Seed predation Nectarivore Mellivory Palynivore Xylophagy Osteophagy Cellular Phagocytosis Myzocytosis Others Microbivory Bacterivore Fungivore Coprophagia Detritivore Geophagia Omnivore Planktivore Saprophagy Xenophagy Lithotroph Plastivore Pica Methods Predation Ambush predator Apex predator Egg predator Intraguild predator Pursuit predator Aquatic predation Lunge feeder Pivot feeder Ram feeder Suction feeder Bait balls Bottom feeder Feeding frenzy Filter feeder Browsing Cattle feeding Fodder Grazing Forage Hypercarnivore Hypocarnivore Mesocarnivore Parasitism Kleptoparasitism Scavenger Surplus killing Trophallaxis Antipredator adaptation Carnivorous plant Carnivorous fungus Carnivorous protist Category:Eating behaviors Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Xylophagy&oldid=1296420964 " Categories : Herbivory Dead wood Wood decomposition Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from November 2018 All articles needing additional references Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text This page was last edited on 19 June 2025, at 22:30 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Xylophagy 22 languages Add topic

