Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Works Toggle Works subsection 1.1 The Exorcists Manual 1.2 The Esagil-kīn-apli catalogue 1.3 Alamdimmû 1.4 The Sakikkū (SA.GIG) 2 Inscriptions 3 Notes 4 References Toggle the table of contents Esagil-kin-apli 2 languages Deutsch Slovenščina Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Chief scholar of Adad-apla-iddina Esagil-kin-apli , was the ummânū , or chief scholar, of Babylonian king Adad-apla-iddina , 1067–1046 BCE, as he appears on the Uruk List of Sages and Scholars (165 BCE) [ i 1 ] listed beside him and is best known for his Diagnostic Handbook, Sakikkū (SA.GIG), a medical treatise which uses symptoms to ascertain etiology, frequently supernatural, and prognosis, which became the received text during the first millennium.

He was a “prominent citizen of Borsippa ” from a learned family as he was referred to as the “son” of Assalluḫi-mansum, the apkallu , or sage, of Hammurabi ’s time, c. 1792–1750 BCE.

Works [ edit ] The Exorcists Manual [ edit ] The Exorcists Manual , also known as KAR 44, [ i 2 ] is sometimes described as a vademecum or handbook and is a compendium of the works all those aspiring to master the āšipūtu or craft of exorcism, should be cognizant. These include exorcism rituals, royal rituals, medical knowledge, incantations and omen series.

[ 1 ] It begins, "Incipits of the Series belonging to the art of exorcism ( mašmaššūtu ), established ( kunnu ) for instruction ( izhu ) and testing ( tāmartu ), all to be read out." [ 2 ] It is actually composed of two manuals, the first concerning kakugallūtu , “exorcism corpus,” and išippūtu , “esoteric knowledge,” and the second of which begins on the reverse line 4 stating that what follows on lines 5 to 20 is the manual of the exorcist according to the scholar Esagil-kin-apli and then goes on to list works such as the great omen series of astrological (Enūma Anu Enlil) and terrestrial (Šumma Ālu) portents.

[ 3 ] The Esagil-kīn-apli catalogue [ edit ] Subtitled the niṣirti E [ zida ], “secret of Ezida,” this is extant in a Neo-Assyrian and a Neo-Babylonian copy.

[ i 3 ] It provides a biographical introduction and then Esagil-kīn-apli provides an explanation for the new edition of the diagnostic compendium SA.GIG ( Sakikkû ) and the physiognomic series Alamdimmû , which he describes “(Regarding) the twin series, their arrangement is one.” Although the Catalogue of Texts and Authors credits the authorship of the two works to the god Ea, it is this catalogue together with the codicil on the Sakikkû which suggest otherwise. The catalogue opens with an index of sorts, providing incipits for each of the tablets together with the number of their lines.

[ 4 ] Alamdimmû [ edit ] Šumma alamdimmû , “if the form,” contains physiognomic omens on twenty-seven tablets. In his catalogue, Esagil-kin-apli describes the work as: “... (concerning) external form and appearance (and how they imply) the fate of the man that Ea and Assaluḫi/Marduk (?) ordained in heaven.” The term alamdimmû , “form” or “figure,” comes from the Sumerian alam.dímu. Following the first twelve tablets of the Šumma alamdimmû proper, the work is subdivided into sections beginning with Šumma nigdimdimmû , “if the appearance” or “shape,” on two tablets, whose extant copies are too fragmentary to interpret.

[ 5 ] The section named Šumma kataduggû , “if the utterance,” on one tablet describes the consequences of utterances and habitual conduct and shares characteristics with omens from the Šumma ālu , “if a city,” terrestrial omen series. The section beginning Šumma sinništu qaqqada rabât , “if a woman’s head is large,” on two tablets provides omens based on the appearance of a woman. The Šumma liptu section, “if a spot” or “mole,” was probably complete on nine tablets, eight devoted to the location of blemishes on males and one on females. The final tablet, Šumma šer’ān pūt imittišu ittenebbi , “if the vein on the right side of his forehead throbs,” concerns itself with involuntary movements.

[ 6 ] The Sakikkū (SA.GIG) [ edit ] In the colophons of the two extant catalogues of diagnostic and physiognomic omens, the origin of the Sakikkū , “symptoms,” (Sumerian: SA.GIG: “diseased veins/muscles”) is given. Esagil-kīn-apli relates that he assembled the diagnostic omens to produce the received text for the first millennium during the reign of Adad-apla-iddina. He says of these omens, “that since long ago had not been organized into a new edition but was tangled like threads and had no master edition.” [ nb 1 ] The primary purpose of the diagnosis was to identify the divine sender of the disease, as this was perceived to be a message from a deity. He applies a logical set of axioms and assumptions, including the need to inspect the symptoms of a patient in order to come up with a diagnosis, and arranges the more than 3,000 entries systematically from head to foot, left (inauspicious) to right (auspicious), and in the color sequence red/brown, yellow/green, black or white, and two shades of uncertain hue on 40 tablets as this is the number of the god Ea who gave man diagnostic knowledge.

It is divided into six chapters of unequal length and starts with a two-tablet section beginning “when the exorcist goes to the house of a sick person,” [ nb 2 ] which provides the omens that one might encounter on the way such as a multi-colored pig (patient has dropsy).

[ 7 ] The second chapter, “when you approach the sick man,” is arranged a capite ad calcem , “inspection from the head to the feet,” and was attributed to the authorship of the deity Ea. It was complete in twelve tablets, the first seven of which are devoted to the head. The third chapter on infectious diseases, “if he is sick for one day and…” includes the course of the disease.

[ 8 ] The fourth chapter exclusively deals with neurological syndromes including epilepsy, seizures, strokes, ghosts and gods and contains the few magical prescriptions contained within the work. The catalogue names the five tablets [ nb 3 ] of this chapter, “if miqtu (a “fall”) falls upon him and…,” “if a man’s face has been struck by palsy,” “if the hand of a spirit turns him into an an.ta.šub.ba (sudden seizure “fallen from heaven”),” “if Lugal.ùr.ra is born with him,” and “if he is ill and opens his mouth all the time.” [ 9 ] The fifth chapter, consisting of five tablets, possibly treats with specific diseases such as those evidenced by skin lesions and fever. The 33rd tablet is dedicated to giving the name to a disease based upon its nature. The sixth and final chapter, also consisting of five tablets on the woman and infants, “if a fertile woman is pregnant,” concerns gynecology, in which the gender and fortune of the unborn child are diagnosed by the symptoms encountered during the course of the pregnancy, such as the change in shape and color of the nipples.

[ 8 ] Inscriptions [ edit ] ^ W 20030,7 the Seleucid List of Sages and Scholars , obverse line 16, recovered from Anu’s Bīt Rēš temple during the 1959/60 excavation.

^ KAR 44 at CDLI (ref. P369026) rev 5-20.

^ From Nimrud, ND 4358 + 4366, and from Babylon, BM 41237 + 46607 + 47163.

Notes [ edit ] ^ ša ul-tu ul-la zarâ(sur.[gibil]) [la] ṣab.tu 4 ù kīma(gim) qê.gu meš parkū/egrū.(gib)[ meš -ma gabarâ(gaba.ri)] là īšû(tuku).

^ enūma anta bīt marsi āšipu illku… ^ Tablets XXVI (BM 47753 from Babylon), XXVII (SU51/92+ from Sultantepe), XXVIII, XXIX and XXX although the latter is not extant.

References [ edit ] ^ Dale Launderville (2011).

Celibacy in the Ancient World . The Liturgical Press. p. 408.

^ Markham J. Geller (2010).

Ancient Babylonian Medicine: Theory and Practice . Wiley-Blackwell. p.

137 .

^ A. R. George (2003).

The Babylonian Gilgamesh epic: introduction, critical edition and cuneiform Texts, Volume 1 . Oxford University Press. p. 30.

^ M J Geller (2000). "Incipits and Rubrics".

Wisdom, Gods and literature . Eisenbrauns. pp. 226, 242– 254.

^ Francesca Rochberg (2004).

The heavenly writing: divination, horoscopy, and astronomy in Mesopotamian Culture . Cambridge University Press. pp.

87 –88.

^ M Popovic (2007).

Reading the Human Body . Brill. pp.

72 –85.

^ Irving L. Finkel (1988). "Adad-apla-iddina, Esagil-kin-apli, and the series SA.GIG". In Erle Leichty; Maria Dej Ellis (eds.).

A Scientific Humanist: Studies in Memory of Abraham Sachs . Philadelphia: University Museum. pp.

143– 59.

^ a b Heeβel, N. P. (2004). "Diagnosis, divination and disease: Towards an understanding of the rationale behind the Babylonian Diagnostic Handbook.". In Horstmanshoff, H. F. J.; Stol, M.; Van Tilburg, C. (eds.).

Magic and rationality in Ancient Near Eastern and Graeco-Roman medicine . Brill. pp.

97 –116.

^ Marten Stol (1993).

Epilepsy in Babylonia . Styx Pub. pp.

55– 56.

v t e The Exorcists Manual (KAR 44) Museum number: VAT 8275 1–3 Here is the complete list of the titles of the works of Magic that have been established for teaching and reference: The God Kulla Mîs-pî (Washing of the mouth) Nišûtu ēní (enthronement of a priest) Amāt Apsî (Formulae of the Apsu) † Ginutaqū (Touching of the reed) † Šuluḫḫē ilī (Ablution rites of the Gods) † 4–5 Ki’utuku (conjurations by Šamaš) Šu’illaku (conjurations by the Lifted Hand) Dingir-šà-dib-ba (The Irate Gods) Népeš Du’uzu (Conjuratory operations for the month of Du'uzu) † Sakkû šarrūti (Royal rituals) † 6–7 The Sakikkū (SA.GIG) (Diagnostic Handbook) Alamdimmû (Physionomy) Nigdimdimmû (Behavior) Kataduggû (Elocution) Mê ellûti (The Pure Waters) Utukkū lemnūtu Atta mannu (Who Are You?) Ḫulbazizi 8–10 Purification rituals Asakkū marṣūtu Zisurrû (Magic circle of flour) Sag-gig-ga-meš (Headache) Muruṣ kišâdi (Neckaches) Tu-ra kìlib-ba (All illness) The Demon Lillu Ardat-lili Ṣalam pûḫi (Substitution figurines) 11–12 Bīt rimki (Bath house) Bīt mēseri (Ritual enclosure) Mîs-pî (For washing the mouth) Ru’âtu lemnêtu (Evil Sorceries) Arrâtu lemnêtu (Evil Maledictions) Ušburrudû (To dissolve sorcery) Namerimburrudû 13–14 Ki’utuku (conjurations by Šamaš, of the Gods and Men) Ušburrudû Namerimburrudû Šibiṭ šāri (Blast of wind) † The Demoness Lamaštu Conjurations against All Evil ( Namburbi ) Maqlû (Combustion) Šurpu (Cremation) To change bad dreams into good † Ša-zi-ga (The Lifting of the Heart) 15–16 Erîtu rakistu (Pregnant Woman Impeached) † Sinništu šupšuqatu (Woman in difficulty) † Ṣeḫru nûhu (To calm a baby) Muruṣ îni (Eye-ache) Muruṣ šinnî (Toothache) Būšānu -disease (Frozen mouth) 17–18 Muruṣ libbi (Stomach ache) Muruṣ ḫašî (Lung-disease) Šipāt murṣi kalama (Incantation against all sorts of illness) Dam appi parâsu (To cut off the nose-bleed) Âra parâsu (Vomiting) † Nišḫa parâsu (Diarrhea) 19–20 Šinni ṣīri bulluṭu (To curse a snake-bite) Zuqaqīpa bulluṭu (To heal scorpion-bites) To heal Samānu (red disease) Šēp lemutti (to expel ‘foot of evil’) Di’u, šibṭu, mutānu šutuqi (To avert di'u plague and epidemic) Niqê šumḫuri (To cause offerings to be received) 21–22 Namburbi ritual of the city, house, field and canal Daily offerings to Nisaba U 4 -dè-ra-ra dib-bé-da (To avert torrential rain) † Zu-buru-dabbeda (To avert ʺlocust toothʺ) To ...... to the desert † 23–24 Edin-na dib-bé-da (To pass without danger through the desert) gi lú-kúr nu-te-ge 26 -e-dè (To prevent the arrow of the enemy from touching the client) Ki-šú al-dib (To keep his army fighting) To purify the stables of the cattle large and small, as well as the horses † 25–26 Divinations according to falling stars, the flight of birds, the behavior of oxen and cattle, ominous sounds, flour, dice and of all the Gods Abnu šikinšu (The Stone which looks like this) Šammu šikinšu (The Plant which looks like this) Ṭuppī-abnāti (Stone Tablets) Ṭuppī-šammī (Plant Tablets) Tablets of Necklaces and Pendants † 27–28 The following are the titles of Esagil-kin-apli 's magical works.

All the prescriptions of the Touching of the Reed, which Ea has authored Kikiṭṭu (Ceremonies) and Šerkugû (Sacred Chants) 29–30 All that exists concerning the Rites against Bewitchment, and Rites of the Dissolution of the Evil Omens of Heaven and Earth ( Namburbi ) The Totality of Wisdom † The Secret of Magic † 31–32 The Sealed Book of the Order of Heaven and Earth † The Mystery of the Apsu † Šipātu aḫātu (Extraordinary Conjurations) † Šipir šimmat rimuti u sagalli (Prescriptions against paralysis) † Sagallû (Muscle disease) SA.GIG All the prescriptions against .......

33–34 Bulṭi miqit šamê (Remedies for the Evil Above) Bêl ūri (Evil of the Lord of the Roof) Šudingirrakku (Seizure of a God) Qât Ištar (Seizure of a Goddess) Šugidimmakku (Seizure of a Ghost) Alû lemnu The Demon Lemmu Mukīl rēš lemutti (The Harbinger) Šunamerimmakku (Seizure by a broken oath) Qât amêlūtu (Seizure by a man) 35–38 The remedies for all similar diseases, completely, All of the symptoms of diseases, The prescriptions relating to the diseases of women. * Until the time when, having become a Master of the entire Art of Magic, you possess the secret. After which you will learn to hear and interpret the commentaries as well as the list of correspondences, and to practice the rituals in both Sumerian and Akkadian.

39–40 In This Way Your Sanctuary....

I Have Wandered In Despair...

Enuma Anu Enlil Šumma ālu ina melê šakin And also to reason and debate in order to reach a consensus 41–43 Upon the one who is vigorous, wise, and penetrating to Great Knowledge, the Two Gods, the Lords (Ea and Marduk), will confer Vast Understanding. Unto this one these Gods will grant a Guardian Angel, whose name will be pronounced unto the Most Distant Times. Copied and collated with a most ancient copy. A tablet belonging to Kisir- d Nabu, son of d Šamaš-ibni, magician of the Ešara.

† Work not extant Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Esagil-kin-apli&oldid=1223552748 " Categories : 11th-century BC people Babylonian people Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 12 May 2024, at 22:04 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Esagil-kin-apli 2 languages Add topic

