Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology Toggle Etymology subsection 1.1 Derivation from classical Latin 1.2 Derivation from Old English 2 Valuation of a farm 3 Historical use Toggle Historical use subsection 3.1 Roman Empire 3.2 Feudal England 3.3 Medieval Egypt 3.4 Ottoman Empire 3.5 Other uses 4 Advantages 5 Disadvantages 6 Modern-day Toggle Modern-day subsection 6.1 Indian sub-continent 6.2 United States of America 7 Disambiguation Toggle Disambiguation subsection 7.1 Privatized tax collection 7.2 Factoring 7.3 Simple commutation 8 See also 9 References 10 Further reading 11 External links Toggle the table of contents Tax farming 9 languages العربية Беларуская Deutsch Français Bahasa Indonesia 日本語 Русский Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Technique of financial management For other uses, see Farm (disambiguation) .

"Tax farmer" redirects here. For the notorious tax farmers of pre-revolutionary France, see Ferme générale .

Farming or tax-farming is  a technique of financial management in which the management of a variable revenue stream is assigned by legal contract to a third party and the holder of the revenue stream receives fixed periodic rents from the contractor. It is most commonly used in public finance , where governments (the lessors ) lease or assign the right to collect and retain the whole of the tax revenue to a private financier (the farmer), who is charged with paying fixed sums (sometimes called "rents", but with a different meaning from the common modern term) into the treasury .

Farming in this sense has nothing to do with agriculture , other than in a metaphorical sense.

Etymology [ edit ] There are two possible origins for farm .

Derivation from classical Latin [ edit ] Some sources derive "farm" with its French version ferme , most notably used in the context of the Fermiers Generaux ,  from the mediaeval Latin firma , meaning "a fixed agreement, contract", ultimately from the classical Latin adjective firmus , firma , firmum , meaning "firm, strong, stout, steadfast,  immoveable, sure, to be relied upon".

[ 1 ] The modern agricultural sense of the word stems from the same origin, in that  a medieval land-"holder" (no-one "owned" land but the king himself under his allodial title) under feudal land tenure might let  it (i.e. lease it out) under a contract as a going concern (not as a sub-infeudated fee ), that is to say as a unit producing a revenue stream, together with its workers and livestock, for exploitation by a tenant who was licensed by the contract, or firma , to keep all the revenue he could extract from the holding in exchange for fixed rents. Thus the rights to the revenue stream produced by the land had been farmed by the lessor. Because this was the form of the farming transaction most known to popular society, the word "farmer" became synonymous with a tenant of an agricultural holding.

Derivation from Old English [ edit ] According to other sources, the word farm comes from Middle English ferme ("farm, rent, revenue; revenue collected from a farmer; factor, stewardship, meal, feast"), from Old English feorm, farm ("provision, stores of food, supplies, possessions; provisions supplied to the king or a lord by a tenant or vassal; rent, feast, benefit, assylum"), from Proto-Germanic * firmō, *firχumō ("means of living, subsistence"), from Proto-Indo-European * perk w u- ("life, strength, force"). It is related to other Old English words such as feormehām ("farm"), feormere ("purveyor, grocer"), feormian ("to provision, sustain"), and feorh ("life, spirit"). The Old English word is stated by these sources as having unusually been  borrowed by Medieval Latin as firma or ferma and to have provided the Old French ferme "farm", Occitan ferma "farm". This is refuted by those sources which state firma to derive from classical Latin firmus .

[ 2 ] The word continued the same senses of "rent, farmed office, source of revenue, feast". The meaning "rent, fixed payment", which was already present in the Old English word, was further strengthened due to the word's resemblance to the unrelated (so say these sources) Latin firmus ("firm, solid"), and firmitas ("security, firmness").

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] Valuation of a farm [ edit ] The tenant of a farm can only make a profit after carefully assessing its value. While modern financial management theory employs scientific formulae for such calculations, astute financiers of the past would have understood them well, whether done mentally or by making marks in the sand.

To determine the maximum rent they are willing to pay, the tenant estimates the long-term average yearly gross value of the revenue stream, based on past records and accounts, adjusting for any new circumstances affecting the future. They then deduct a risk element and a discount for the time value of money.

The risk is related to the possibility of some debts forming the revenue stream being defaulted on or paid late, leading to variability in the revenue. The resulting figure becomes the maximum rent the tenant offers to the farm's lessor. The tenant's profit is the excess of revenues extracted from the farm, less the rents, administration, levying, and collection expenses.

The tenant's skills lie in negotiating a favorable rent by overstating the riskiness of the cash flow stream and effectively managing the assigned debts as a skilled debt-collector and manager. They must ensure their ability to enforce debt payments, including resorting to legal action and paying standard fees for bringing a lawsuit under the government authority that is the farm's lessor. The tenant acts as a principal, not the lessor's agent.

Historical use [ edit ] Roman Empire [ edit ] Main article: Publican Tax farming was originally a Roman practice whereby the burden of tax collection was reassigned by the Roman State to private individuals or groups. In essence, these individuals or groups paid the taxes for a certain area and for a certain period of time and then attempted to cover their outlay by collecting money or saleable goods from the people within that area.

[ 5 ] The system was set up by Gaius Gracchus in 123 BC primarily to increase the efficiency of tax collection within Rome itself but the system quickly spread to the Provinces .

[ 6 ] Within the Roman Empire, these private individuals and groups which collected taxes in lieu of the bid (i.e. rent) they had paid to the state were known as publicani , of whom the best known is  the disciple of Jesus Matthew the Apostle , a publicanus in the village of Capernaum in the province of Galilee . The system was widely abused, and reforms were enacted by Augustus and Diocletian .

[ 7 ] Feudal England [ edit ] Medieval English kings frequently made grants "in fee -farm", a form of feudal tenure . An example is the following writ of King William II (1087–1100) granting a hundred court to be held in fee-farm by Thorney Abbey : William, king of the English, to all the sheriffs and barons of Huntingdonshire , greeting. Know that I have granted the Hundred of Normancross to the abbot and monks of Thorney to be held in fee-farm for an annual rent of 100 shillings which I order them to pay to my sheriff at Huntingdon. And I forbid any of my officers to do them injury or insult in respect of this.

[ 8 ] Medieval Egypt [ edit ] The Chief Rabbi of Egypt , Sar Shalom ben Moses was accused of tax farming, which led to his excommunication by Maimonides .

[ 9 ] Ottoman Empire [ edit ] Main article: Iltizam See also: Taxation in the Ottoman Empire The iltizam ( Ottoman Turkish : التزام ) is a non-heritable tax-farming system and was established under Sultan Mehmet II ; however this changed by the 18th century and holders of grants-for-life ( malikâne ) developed their own landowning class.

[ 10 ] It was officially terminated in 1856 during the Tanzimat reforms.

[ 11 ] Other uses [ edit ] Besides the Romans, historical examples include the tax collection methods of the Ptolemies , Seljuks , Mamluks , Ottomans , the French State prior to Louis XVI (see ferme générale ), and Russia prior to 1862 and the Dutch East Indies (see pacht ) prior to the twentieth century. In many cases, such as the Abbasid practice of Iqta , these rights were granted by an authority, in this example the caliph, for services rendered or promised. In the Byzantine pronoia system, similar rights were often purchased from the crown. Though such arrangements in some respects seem similar to the feudal system, there are significant disparities, including continuance of state power and, at least in the case of pronoia , theoretical time limits on the grant. In many cases, including those mentioned, tax rights were not transferable or divisible, unlike feudal fiefdoms.

Sometimes, as in the case of Miguel de Cervantes , the tax farmer was a government employee, paid a salary, and all money collected went to the government.

[ citation needed ] Advantages [ edit ] Tax farming was an important step in the history of economic development by providing a method for collecting taxes across a large area without the need for a tax-collecting bureaucracy , or during periods when such a bureaucracy is unworkable or impossible to maintain. Systems of tax farming similar to the Roman model were used in Ptolemaic Egypt , various medieval Western European countries, the Ottoman and Mughal empires, and in Qing dynasty China.  As states become stronger, buoyed up by revenues brought in by tax farming, the practice was discontinued in favour of centralized tax collection systems. In part this was because tax farming systems tended to rely on wealthy individuals outside the state machinery, gangs , and secret societies .

[ 12 ] Disadvantages [ edit ] The key flaw in the tax farming system is the tension between the state, which seeks a long-term source of taxation revenue, and the tax farmers, who seek to make a profit on their investment in as short a time as possible. As a result, tax-farmers often abuse the taxpayers in various ways, tending them to switch their economic activity from strategic long-term projects to short-term revenue generation. In barter systems, tax farmers commonly undervalue taxes in kind , reselling the goods to create a second profit source. Such abuses stifle economic growth by restricting the ability of the tradesman to reinvest in his business, limiting the quantity of taxes generated over the long-term.

[ citation needed ] Modern-day [ edit ] Indian sub-continent [ edit ] In Bangladesh and India tolls on bridges and roads and dues from public properties such as lakes and forests are often leased to private persons or firms.

[ citation needed ] United States of America [ edit ] After the 2008 financial crisis, the city of Chicago needed money and a deal was made to sell all 36,000 of the parking meter spots in the city for 75 years for 1.15 billion dollars to a firm called Chicago Parking Meters .

Disambiguation [ edit ] Privatized tax collection [ edit ] Tax farming is not synonymous with modern privatized tax collection , where private individuals or companies collect taxes and pass them to the state in return for a commission or fee, without bearing any risk consequent of default by the taxpayer. Tax farming is speculative , meaning that the tenant of the farm bears the full risk of defaulted debts. In addition, a tenant is often required as a term of the lease to make an early rent payment, which must be financed from his own resources until the revenue stream subject to the farm has started to be collected.

Factoring [ edit ] In the United Kingdom , some tax collection of "lower value debts" by HMRC has been outsourced to debt collection agencies from July 2010.

[ 13 ] However, debt collection agencies, like invoice factors, are not truly farmers of revenue streams, as they do not bear any risk of default. Rather they make loans in expectation of future receipts, such loans being always recoverable and secured on the income stream itself.

Simple commutation [ edit ] In 1999 the National Board of Revenue in Bangladesh (NBR) negotiated with cigarette producing firms a minimum amount of value added tax (VAT) that should be paid per month even though  VAT is an ad valorem tax, that is to say of variable yield. The NBR took this step because under the self-clearance system monitoring of production and sales of cigarettes proved to be difficult. It was agreed that if the cigarette producing firms paid the minimum revenue fixed by the NBR, physical monitoring would be withdrawn. The NBR resorted to this technique of financial management  to avoid the large costs of monitoring while gaining more in revenue with certainty.

[ 14 ] See also [ edit ] Fee farm grant Hollow state Maona Octroi Pacht : the system of tax farming in the Dutch East Indies Privatized tax collection Public-private partnership References [ edit ] ^ Larousse Dictionnaire de la Langue Francaise Lexis , Paris, 1993 "Ferme: contrat par lequel un proprietaire abandonne a un locataire l'exploitation d'un domaine moyennant le paiement d'un loyer" (contract by which a proprietor transfers the exploitation of a holding to a tenant by means of the payment of a rent);  Cassell's Latin Dictionary, ed. Marchant & Charles ^ Larousse, op.cit.

^ Century Dictionary and Cyclopedia, "farm".

^ Mantello, Rigg, Medieval Latin: an introduction and bibliographical guide , 11.3 ^ Howatson M. C.: Oxford Companion to Classical Literature, Oxford University Press, 1989, ISBN 0-19-866121-5 ^ Balsdon J.: Roman Civilization, Pelican, 1965 ^ Roman-taxes at unrv.com ^ Douglas, David C. & Greenaway, George W., (eds.),  English Historical Documents 1042–1189, London, 1959. Part II, Government & Administration, part C, The Sheriff & Local Government, p. 433 ^ Rustow, Marina (2010-10-01).

"Sar Shalom ben Moses ha-Levi" .

Encyclopedia of Jews in the Islamic World .

^ Hourani, Albert (1991).

A History of the Arab Peoples . England, UK: Faber and Faber Limited. p. 234.

ISBN 978-0-674-39565-7 .

^ "Iltizām | tax system" .

Encyclopedia Britannica . Retrieved 2021-09-23 .

^ John Butcher and Howard Dick, The Rise and Fall of Revenue Farming: Business Elites and the Emergence of the Modern State . St. Martin's Press, 1993 ^ [1] Archived 2011-05-14 at the Wayback Machine [2] Archived 2010-07-31 at the Wayback Machine ^ Chowdhury, Faizul L.

NBR's attempt at Tax Farming - fixed amount of VAT on Cigarettes in 1999 , 2007 : Desh Prokashon, Dhaka.

Further reading [ edit ] Chowdhury, F. L. (2007), NBR's attempt at Tax Farming – fixed VAT on Cigarettes in 1999 , Desh Prokashon, Dhaka.

Levi, M. Of (1988), Rule and Revenue , California Series on Social Choice and Political Economy (13), University of California Press.

Stella, P. (1992), Tax Farming: A Radical Solution for Developing Country Tax Problems?

(September 1992). IMF Working Paper No. 92/70.

External links [ edit ] Roman Taxes Authority control databases National United States France BnF data Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐rxtqm
Cached time: 20250814220440
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.325 seconds
Real time usage: 0.412 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1323/1000000
Revision size: 16240/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 19667/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 2256/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 9/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 25176/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.228/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 15227230/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  374.381      1 -total
 24.97%   93.472      1 Template:Reflist
 19.87%   74.384      1 Template:Langx
 17.52%   65.584      1 Template:Authority_control
 14.13%   52.909      1 Template:Short_description
 12.01%   44.968      1 Template:ISBN
 11.14%   41.692      3 Template:Citation_needed
  9.65%   36.136      3 Template:Fix
  7.72%   28.913      2 Template:Pagetype
  5.32%   19.904      6 Template:Category_handler Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:1527309:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814220440 and revision id 1299079623. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Tax_farming&oldid=1299079623 " Categories : Tax farming History of taxation Land tenure Public finance Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Ottoman Turkish (1500-1928)-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from September 2019 Articles with unsourced statements from March 2011 This page was last edited on 6 July 2025, at 12:32 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Tax farming 9 languages Add topic

