Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 See also 2 References Toggle the table of contents List of individual rocks 1 language Magyar Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia The following is a list of notable rocks and stones.

This list is incomplete ; you can help by adding missing items .

( November 2018 ) Image Name Location Comments Agglestone Rock Dorset Large sandstone rock said to have been thrown by the Devil Al Naslaa Nafud desert , Saudi Arabia Large sandstone rock vertically split neatly into two parts, each balanced on a small pedestal.

Amersfoortse Kei Amersfoort , Utrecht , Netherlands Boulder buried in 1672 and dug up in 1903.

Barstyčiai stone Barstyčiai , Lithuania Largest boulder in Lithuania.

Battle of Ethandun memorial near Bratton Castle , Wiltshire , South West England A memorial to the Battle of Edington .

Batu Batikam Tanah Datar Regency , Indonesia A sacred stone with a hole in it.

Big Bertha Lunar Sample Laboratory Facility , Houston , Texas , United States Breccia Moon rock containing an Earth-origin meteorite collected by Apollo 14 astronauts. The meteorite is the oldest known rock originating from Earth, being approximately 4 billion years old.

Big Muley Lunar Sample Laboratory Facility , Houston , Texas , United States Anorthosite Moon rock collected by Apollo 16 astronauts. It is approximately 3.9 billion years old and is the largest Moon rock brought from the Moon.

Black Rock Tooele County , Utah , United States Large rock on the shoreline of Great Salt Lake .

Black Stone Kaaba , Great Mosque , Mecca , Saudi Arabia A highly respected Islamic stone set in the Kaaba's corner.

Blarney Stone Blarney Castle , Blarney , Ireland A stone that is part of the battlement of Blarney Castle . According to legend, kissing the stone endows the kisser with great eloquence/flattery.

Blowing Stone Kingston Lisle , Oxfordshire , England , United Kingdom A sarsen .

Boston Stone Boston , Massachusetts , United States A round stone embedded in the wall of a building.

Bowder Stone Borrowdale , Cumbria , United Kingdom Large andesite boulder; historic tourist attraction.

Braddock's Rock Washington, D.C.

, United States The supposed landing spot of General Edward Braddock in 1755 during the French and Indian War . Located at the bottom of a well.

Brutus Stone Totnes , Devon , England Granite boulder and supposed stone onto which the mythical founder of Britain first stood.

Camel Rock Tesuque , New Mexico , United States Natural landmark composed of pink sandstone measuring approximately 40 feet high (~12m) and 100 feet long (~30.5m).

Carreg y Bwci Llanycrwys , Wales Carreg y Fendith St Dogmaels , Wales Supposed stone from which the Abbot of St Dogamaels Abbey blessed the fishing fleet. A significant echo is present.

Cloch Labhrais County Waterford , Ireland Large split glacial boulder subject of a legend similar to that of the Blarney Stone. According to legend, the stone can reveal whether someone is lying.

Cloughmore Rostrevor , County Down , Northern Ireland Granite boulder; tourist attraction.

Colossus of Ostermunzel Ostermunzel , Lower Saxony , Germany Gneiss glacial erratic stone transported 1km after discovery.

Commandment Rock Lane Cove National Park , Sydney , New South Wales , Australia Large rock with the Fifth Commandment and Aboriginal symbols carved into it.

Coronation Stone Kingston upon Thames , England Coronation stone of several Anglo-Saxon kings.

Culbone Stone Somerset , England Sandstone standing stone.

Damestenen near Svendborg , Denmark Largest glacial erratic in Denmark.

The Diamond Stone [ 1 ] near Avebury , Wiltshire , South West England A large sarsen megalith .

Diederichs's stone Qingdao , China Stone site of a former German monument originally dedicated in 1898.

Dighton Rock Berkley , Massachusetts , United States Boulder with petroglyphs of unknown origin.

Doane Rock Eastham , Massachusetts , United States Glacial erratic boulder named after John Doane .

Dog Rock Albany, Western Australia Large, natural granite outcrop shaped like a dog's head.

Foundation Stone Jerusalem , Israel Sacred stone located in the Dome of the Rock .

Frog Rock Bainbridge Island , Washington , United States Glacial erratic landmark composed of two boulders painted to look like a frog in 1971.

Frog Rock Eastford , Connecticut , United States Glacial erratic landmark composed of a single boulder painted to look like a frog in 1881.

Genesis Rock Lunar Sample Laboratory Facility , Houston , Texas , United States Anorthosite Moon rock collected by Apollo 15 astronauts.

Giant's Boot Giant's Causeway , County Antrim , Northern Ireland Giant Rock near Landers , California , United States Freestanding boulder in the Mojave Desert .

Giebichenstein boulder Stöckse , Lower Saxony , Germany One of the largest erratic boulders in northern Germany Glen Rock Glen Rock , New Jersey , United States Gneiss glacial erratic and town namesake.

Glover's Rock Pelham Bay Park , The Bronx , New York City , New York , United States Granite boulder with a bronze plaque commemorating the Battle of Pell's Point . Supposed spot where John Glover stood during the battle.

Gotobiki-iwa Kamikura Shrine, Shingū , Wakayama Prefecture , Japan Sacred granite rock Great Scott Lunar Sample Laboratory Facility , Houston , Texas , United States Basalt Moon rock collected by Apollo 15 astronauts.

Great Stone of Fourstones Forest of Bowland , England Glacial deposit carved with steps and used as a boundary marker along the Lancashire–Yorkshire county border.

Green Mountain Giant Whitingham , Vermont , United States Glacial erratic from the Green Mountains.

Haleets Bainbridge Island , Washington , United States Sandstone boulder inscribed with petroglyphs and survey mark.

Hamza Stone Giresun Island , Turkey Boulder with ancient religious significance.

Heel Stone Stonehenge , Wiltshire , England Sarsen stone 80m from the center of Stonehenge Henderson Stone Glencoe, Highland , Scotland Granite boulder associated with the Massacre of Glencoe .

The Hitching Stone North Yorkshire , England Sandstone block that lies at the borders of historic counties.

Hippo's Yawn Western Australia Rock resembling a yawning hippopotamus.

Hollywood Stone Hollywood , County Wicklow , Ireland Granite boulder with a labyrinth pattern carved into it, discovered in 1908.

Howard's Rock Clemson Memorial Stadium , Clemson , South Carolina , United States A rock that forms part of a tradition in American football games in the stadium.

Húsafell Stone Húsafell , Iceland Legendary stone used as a test of physical strength.

Indian God Rock Rockland Township , Venango County , Pennsylvania , United States Sandstone boulder with petroglyphs.

Initial Rock Billings County , North Dakota , United States Rock with the names of General Custer 's men carved into in 1876.

Inscription Rock Kelleys Island , Ohio , United States Limestone rock carved with native petroglyphs.

Jefferson Rock Harpers Ferry , West Virginia , United States Shale rock where Thomas Jefferson stood in 1783.

Judaculla Rock Cullowhee , North Carolina , United States Soapstone rock with petroglyphs of significance for the Cherokee.

Jupiter Stone Temple of Jupiter , Capitoline Hill , Rome , Italy Stone upon which oaths were sworn in ancient Rome.

Khuwalung Saptakoshi River , Koshi Province , Nepal Rock in a river sacred to the Kirati people .

Kjeragbolten Kjerag , Forsand , Rogaland , Norway A glacial till sitting in a crevasse.

Kummakivi Ruokolahti, Finland A large balancing rock ( glacial erratic ).

Lake Lawrence erratic Thurston County , Washington , United States Glacial erratic boulder near Lake Lawrence.

Levitated Mass Los Angeles , California , United States Artwork.

[ 2 ] Lia Fáil Hill of Tara , County Meath , Ireland Coronation stone for the High Kings of Ireland.

Little Rock Little Rock , Arkansas , United States Arkansas River landmark and survey marker that became the eponym of Little Rock.

Logan Rock St Levan , Cornwall , England Granite rocking stone moved and returned in 1824.

London Stone 111 Cannon Street , City of London , England Historic limestone landmark.

The Longstones [ 3 ] near Beckhampton , Wiltshire , South West England Standing stones named Adam and Eve.

Lunar basalt 70017 Lunar Sample Laboratory Facility , Houston , Texas , United States Basalt Moon rock collected by Apollo 17 astronauts and partially divided into goodwill display samples.

Madison Boulder Madison , New Hampshire , United States Large granite glacial erratic and National Natural Landmark.

Maen Huail Ruthin , Denbighshire , Wales Supposed stone upon which King Arthur beheaded Hueil mab Caw .

Malia altar stone Malia , Crete , Greece Minoan altar stone with hieroglyphs.

Maqam Ibrahim Great Mosque , Mecca , Saudi Arabia A sacred stone associated with the building of the Kaaba .

Maqam Ibrahim Salihin Aleppo , Syria A sacred stone associated with Abraham .

Map Rock Owyhee County , Idaho , United States Large basalt rock with petroglyph map of Snake River .

Memorial Rock Montezuma County , Colorado , United States Largest boulder along State Highway 145 ; designated a landmark in 2019.

Nietzsche Stein Lake Silvaplana , Grisons , Switzerland Pyramidal stone nearby to which Friedrich Nietzsche conceived of the main idea in Thus Spoke Zarathustra Pierres du Niton Lake Geneva , Switzerland Boulders in Lake Geneva and reference point of altimetry in Switzerland Obama Kissing Rock Hyde Park , Chicago , Illinois , United States Monument at the location of the first kiss of Barack and Michelle Obama .

Octopus stone Osaka Castle , Osaka , Japan Megalith at Osaka Castle near Sakura Gate with a feature resembling an octopus.

Okotoks Erratic Foothills County , Alberta , Canada Also known as Big Rock, a large split boulder on the Canadian Prairies.

Omak Rock Colville Indian Reservation , Washington , United States Balancing rock near Omak Lake .

El Peñón de Guatapé Antioquia , Colombia Landmark inselberg with a 708 steps built staircase.

Piedra Santa Araucanía Region , Chile Rock outcrop significant to folk Catholicism.

Pietra Alta Piedmont , Italy Prominent glacial erratic left by the Riss glaciation .

Plymouth Rock Plymouth , Massachusetts , United States Supposed landing site of the Pilgrims in 1620.

The Rock Northwestern University , Evanston , Illinois , United States Quartzite rock placed on campus in 1902; landmark painted various colors and with various messages.

Rock Corral Barlow Road , Oregon , United States Glacial erratic and landmark on the Oregon Trail.

Rollstone Boulder Fitchburg , Massachusetts , United States Granite boulder relocated in 1929.

Rosetta Stone British Museum , London , England Granodiorite stele created in 196 BC and rediscovered in 1799.

Rosetta Stone (replica) King's Library , British Museum , London , England Replica of the stone as it was originally displayed, touchable.

Rosetta Stone (replica) Champollion Museum , Vif , Isère , France Replica of the stone in an optical theater.

Sacred Rock Presque Isle County , Michigan , United States Boulder on the shore of Lake Huron .

Seatbelt Basalt Lunar Sample Laboratory Facility , Houston , Texas , United States Basalt Moon rock collected by Apollo 15 astronauts.

Sentinel Rock Sentinel Rock State Park , Vermont A huge glacial boulder overlooking the valley around it.

Sessho-seki Nasu , Tochigi Prefecture , Japan According to legend, it is said to kill anyone who comes into contact with it. Split in 2022.

Shabaka Stone British Museum , London , England Ancient Egyptian relic with hieroglyphs later used as a millstone.

Shelter Rock Greentree , North Hills , New York , United States Glacial erratic used as a shelter by Native Americans.

Shorakapok Rock Inwood Hill Park , New York City , New York , United States Site where Manhattan Island was "sold" in 1626.

Shuggling Stone Glen village, Dunfanaghy , Ireland Wobbly granite boulder.

Silchester Ogham stone Reading Museum , Reading , Berkshire , England Pillar stone with an ogham inscription discovered in 1893.

Skystone Bonney Lake , Washington , United States Andesite boulder rediscovered in 1999.

Solovetsky Stone Arkhangelsk , Russia Monument to victims of Soviet political repression. Boulder from the Solovetsky Islands.

Solovetsky Stone Lubyanka Square , Moscow , Russia Monument to victims of Soviet political repression erected in 1990. Boulder brought from the Solovetsky Islands.

Solovetsky Stone Troitskaya Square, Saint Petersburg , Russia Monument to victims of Soviet political repression erected in 2002. Boulder brought from the Solovetsky Islands.

Split Rock Pelham Bay Park , The Bronx , New York City , New York , United States Granite boulder. Location near where Anne Hutchinson and her family settled and were later massacred.

Standing Rock Standing Rock , Alabama , United States Sandstone boulder that gave the town its name.

Standing Rock/Íŋyaŋ Wosláta Fort Yates , North Dakota , United States Stone sacred to the Sioux.

Stone of Scone Perth Museum , Perth , Scotland Sandstone block used as a coronation stone by the monarchs of Scotland, England, Great Britain, and the United Kingdom.

Stone of Scone (replica) Scone Palace , Scone , Perthshire , Scotland Replica of the Stone next to a 17th-century chapel.

Stone of Scone (replica) Casa Loma , Toronto , Ontario , Canada Replica of the Stone and Coronation Chair kept in a house museum.

Stone of the Guanches Afur , Tenerife , Canary Islands , Spain Engraved tuff stone stele related to the process of Guanche mummification .

Stone of Tmutarakan Hermitage Museum , Saint Petersburg , Russia Marble stone with an 11th-century inscription discovered in 1792.

Sunday Rock South Colton New York , United States Glacial erratic moved in 1925 and 1965.

Thurgartstone East Ayrshire , Scotland Glacial erratic with religious significance.

Tirslund Rock near Brørup , Denmark Granite boulder that legend connects to Harald Bluetooth .

Tracy's Rock Taurus–Littrow , Moon Boulder at the Apollo 17 landing site named after the daughter of astronaut Gene Cernan Tripod Rock Kinnelon , New Jersey , United States Gneiss boulder balanced on three smaller boulders.

Troctolite 76535 Lunar Sample Laboratory Facility , Houston , Texas , United States Moon rock collected by Apollo 17 astronauts.

Twelve-angled stone Cuzco , Peru Diorite stone part of a wall of an Inca palace.

Unspunnen Stone Interlaken , Canton of Bern , Switzerland Aare granite from Haslital.

Uluru (Ayers Rock) Northern Territory , Australia A large sandstone monolith near the center of Australia.

Wave Rock Western Australia , Australia A natural rock formation that is shaped like a tall breaking ocean wave .

Wedgwood Rock Wedgwood , Seattle , Washington , United States Glacial erratic in a residential neighborhood.

West Maple Omaha Rock Omaha , Nebraska , United States Boulder in a parking lot that became famous on the internet.

Witches' Stone St Martins , Perth and Kinross , Scotland Supposed location where Shakespeare 's Macbeth meets with two witches. First mentioned in 1806.

Wolf Rock Mansfield , Connecticut , United States Glacial erratic perched atop a 40-foot cliff on a 108-acre nature preserve.

Yeager Rock Waterville Plateau, Washington , United States Glacial erratic; part of the Sims Corner Eskers and Kames National Natural Landmark.

Zanata Stone Museo de la Naturaleza y Arqueología , Tenerife , Canary Islands , Spain Engraved stone stele discovered in 1992.

See also [ edit ] List of largest meteorites on Earth List of longest natural arches List of rock formations List of rock formations that resemble human beings List of rocks on Mars Lists of rocks in Western Australia List of standing stones Monoliths Moon rocks Stolen and missing Moon rocks Stones of Scotland Glacial erratic of Estonia of Rügen of Washington State , United States of Island County, Washington of King County, Washington of Kitsap County, Washington of Snohomish County, Washington of the Puget Sound region References [ edit ] ^ "SU1070 : The Diamond Stone" .

geograph . Retrieved 3 November 2018 .

^ "Levitated Mass" .

Gagosian Quarterly . 2014-08-18 . Retrieved 2024-01-01 .

^ "SU0869 : Adam and Eve - the Beckhampton Longstones" .

geograph . Retrieved 3 November 2018 .

v t e Meteorites by name Largest meteorites on Earth A–B Aarhus Abee Adelie Land Adhi Kot Adzhi-Bogdo Agen Akbarpur Albareto Aletai Allan Hills 77005 Allan Hills A81005 Allan Hills 84001 Allegan Allende Ambapur Nagla Andura Angers Angra dos Reis Ankober Anlong Annaheim Appley Bridge Arbol Solo Archie Arroyo Aguiar Assisi Atoka Avanhandava Baszkówka Beardsley Bendegó Bellsbank Bench Crater (Moon) Benton Białystok Blithfield Block Island (Mars) Bovedy Brachina Brahin Braunschweig Brenham Buzzard Coulee C–D Campo del Cielo Canyon Diablo Cape York Carancas Chambord Chassigny Chelyabinsk Chergach Chinga Chinguetti Claxton Coahuila Cranbourne D'Orbigny Dronino E–F Eagle Station El Ali Elbogen Ensisheim Esquel Fukang G–H Gao–Guenie Gay Gulch Gebel Kamil Gibeon Goose Lake Grant Hadley Rille (Moon) Heat Shield Rock (Mars) High Possil Hoba Homestead Hraschina Huckitta I–J Imilac Itqiy K–L Kaidun Kainsaz Karoonda Kesen Khatyrka Krasnojarsk L'Aigle Lac Dodon Loreto Łowicz M–N Mackinac Island (Mars) Mbosi Middlesbrough Millbillillie Mineo Monte Milone Moss Mundrabilla Muonionalusta Murchison Nakhla Nantan Neuschwanstein Northwest Africa 3009 Northwest Africa 7034 Northwest Africa 7325 Norton County Novato O–P Oileán Ruaidh (Mars) Old Woman Oldenburg Omolon Orgueil Ornans Osseo Ourique Pallasovka Paragould Park Forest Pavlovka Peace River Peekskill Penouille Příbram Pultusk Q–R Qidong Richardton Renazzo S–T Santa Rosa de Viterbo Meteorite Santa Vitoria do Palmar Sayh al Uhaymir 169 Seymchan Shelter Island (Mars) Shergotty Sikhote-Alin Sołtmany Springwater St-Robert Stannern Strathmore Sulagiri Sutter's Mill Sylacauga Tagish Lake Tamdakht Tenham Tissint Tlacotepec Toluca Treysa Tsarev Twannberg U–V Veliky Ustyug Vermillion W–X Weston Willamette Winchcombe Winona Wold Cottage Y–Z Yamato 691 Yamato 791197 Yardymly Zagami Zaisho Zaklodzie List: Meteorite fall NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐api‐ext.codfw.main‐86985f5756‐bqd6h
Cached time: 20250812150114
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1]
CPU time usage: 0.388 seconds
Real time usage: 0.532 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1293/1000000
Revision size: 29148/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 36446/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 533/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 16/100
Expensive parser function count: 1/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 20615/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.137/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 4618225/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  216.207      1 -total
 35.48%   76.719      1 Template:Reflist
 31.38%   67.853      3 Template:Cite_web
 30.07%   65.005      1 Template:Meteorites_by_name
 29.34%   63.434      1 Template:Navbox
 18.94%   40.940      1 Template:Short_description
 14.59%   31.550      1 Template:Expand_list
 12.36%   26.725      2 Template:Pagetype
  8.69%   18.781      1 Template:Ambox
  6.90%   14.922      4 Template:Main_other Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:58946628:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812150114 and revision id 1305522096. Rendering was triggered because: unknown Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=List_of_individual_rocks&oldid=1305522096 " Categories : Lists of rocks Stones Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Incomplete lists from November 2018 This page was last edited on 12 August 2025, at 15:00 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents List of individual rocks 1 language Add topic

