Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Structure Toggle Structure subsection 1.1 Upper group 1.1.1 Right hepatic vein 1.1.2 Middle hepatic vein 1.1.3 Left hepatic vein 1.2 Lower group 2 Clinical significance 3 Additional images 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Hepatic veins 14 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Català Čeština Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara Français 한국어 Italiano Nederlands Polski Română Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia One of two sets of veins connected to the liver Blood vessels Hepatic veins Volume rendering of an abdominal CT , with hepatic veins annotated by arrows. The aorta and branches is seen in center.

The hepatic veins are the veins of the liver, two of which are shown in this diagram.

Details Precursor Vitelline veins Drains from Liver Source Hepatic portal vein Drains to Inferior vena cava Artery Hepatic artery Identifiers Latin venae hepaticae MeSH D006503 TA98 A12.3.09.005 TA2 4994 FMA 14337 Anatomical terminology [ edit on Wikidata ] In human anatomy , the hepatic veins are the veins that drain venous blood from the liver into the inferior vena cava (as opposed to the hepatic portal vein which conveys blood from the gastrointestinal organs to the liver [ 1 ] : 1212 ). There are usually three large upper hepatic veins draining from the left, middle, and right parts of the liver, as well as a number (6-20) of lower hepatic veins.

[ 2 ] All hepatic veins are valveless.

[ 3 ] Structure [ edit ] All the hepatic veins drain into the inferior vena cava . The hepatic veins are divided into an upper and a lower group.

[ 2 ] Upper group [ edit ] The upper group consists of three hepatic veins [ 2 ] - the right, middle, and left hepatic veins [ 1 ] : 1212 - draining the central veins from the right, middle, and left regions of the liver and are larger than the lower group of veins.

[ 2 ] The veins of the upper group drain into the suprahepatic part of the inferior vena cava (i.e. part superior to the liver).

[ 1 ] : 1212 Right hepatic vein [ edit ] The right hepatic vein is the longest and largest of all the hepatic veins. It drains the liver segments VI and VII in their entirety, and variably participates in the drainage of segments V and VIII; the extent of drainage of the latter two segments by the right hepatic veins as opposed to the middle hepatic vein and possible variant accessory veins determines the calibre of the right hepatic vein. It arises anteriorly near the inferior border of the liver, coursing along the right portal fissure to drain into the inferior vena cava near the superior margin of the caudate lobe. It usually reaches the inferior vena cava as a single vessel, but sometimes drains into it as two separate trunks.

[ 1 ] : 1212 Middle hepatic vein [ edit ] The middle hepatic vein drains the central portion of the liver, draining segments IV, V, and VIII. The middle hepatic vein most often joins the left hepatic vein to form a short common trunk to drain jointly into the inferior vena cava; the middle hepatic vein drains into the inferior vena cava as a separate vessel in less than 10% of individuals.

[ 1 ] : 1212 Left hepatic vein [ edit ] The left hepatic vein usually drains liver segments II and III, and occasionally also segment IV. The umbilical fissue vein is a major tributary of the left hepatic vein.

[ 1 ] : 1213 The left hepatic vein most often forms a short common trunk with the middle hepatic vein before these jointly drain into the inferior vena cava.

[ 1 ] : 1212 Lower group [ edit ] The lower group consists of 6-20 smaller hepatic veins which drain the right lobe and the caudate lobe , are in contact with the hepatic tissue, and are valveless.

[ 2 ] All veins of the lower group drain into the retrohepatic part of the inferior vena cava (i.e. part posterior to the liver).

[ 1 ] : 1212 The lower group consists of 1-5 veins draining the liver segment I, and may consist of (inconsistently present) accessory inferior hepatic vein, accessory middle right hepatic vein, and several smaller retrohepatic veins draining the right lobe of the liver.

[ 1 ] : 1213 Clinical significance [ edit ] The hepatic veins (and their variant anatomy) are relevant in liver resection and transplantation, and in Budd–Chiari syndrome .

[ 1 ] Budd–Chiari syndrome is a condition caused by blockage of the hepatic veins, such as by a blood clot . It presents with a "classical triad" of abdominal pain, ascites, and liver enlargement. It occurs in 1 out of a million individuals. The syndrome can be fulminant, acute, chronic, or asymptomatic.

[ citation needed ] The independent lower veins draining the liver segment I directly into the inferior vena cava are unaffected by obstruction of the large hepatic veins, leading to compensatory hypertrophy.

[ 1 ] : 1213 The hepatic veins may be connected with the portal veins in a TIPS procedure.

[ citation needed ] Additional images [ edit ] Animated volume rendered CT scan of abdominal and pelvic blood vessels.

Posterior abdominal wall, after removal of the peritoneum, showing kidneys, suprarenal capsules, and great vessels. (Hepatic veins labeled at center top.) Human embryo with heart and anterior body-wall removed to show the sinus venosus and its tributaries.

Longitudinal section of a hepatic vein.

Hepatic vein Normal spectral Doppler waveform of hepatic venous flow Subcostal view of hepatic vein and surrounding organs by point of care ultrasound (POCUS) References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e f g h i j k Gray's anatomy : the anatomical basis of clinical practice . Susan Standring (Forty-second ed.). [New York]. 2021.

ISBN 978-0-7020-7707-4 .

OCLC 1201341621 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) CS1 maint: others ( link ) ^ a b c d e Albert, Daniel; et al. (2012).

Dorland's illustrated medical dictionary (32nd ed.). Philadelphia, PA: Saunders/Elsevier. p. 2040.

ISBN 978-1-4160-6257-8 .

^ "Hepatic Veins" .

www.meddean.luc.edu . Retrieved 2023-07-04 .

External links [ edit ] Hepatic veins - Ultrasound - University of the Health Sciences in Bethesda, Maryland v t e Veins of the abdomen and pelvis To azygos system ascending lumbar subcostal IVC ( Systemic ) To IVC or left renal vein inferior phrenic hepatic central veins of liver liver sinusoid suprarenal renal gonadal ovarian ♀ / testicular ♂ pampiniform plexus ♂ lumbar common iliac Common iliac Unpaired median sacral vein Internal iliac posterior: iliolumbar superior gluteal lateral sacral anterior: inferior gluteal obturator uterine ♀ uterine plexus ♀ vesical vesical plexus prostatic plexus  ♂ deep of penis  ♂ / clitoris ♀ posterior scrotal ♂ / labial ♀ vaginal plexus/vein ♀ middle rectal internal pudendal inferior rectal bulb of penis  ♂ / vestibule ♀ rectal plexus External iliac inferior epigastric deep circumflex iliac vein Portal vein ( Portal ) Splenic short gastric left gastroepiploic pancreatic inferior mesenteric superior rectal left colic Superior mesenteric right gastroepiploic pancreaticoduodenal jejunal ileal middle colic right colic ileocolic appendicular Direct cystic left gastric / esophageal right gastric paraumbilical Authority control databases Terminologia Anatomica Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Hepatic_veins&oldid=1300972245 " Category : Veins of the torso Hidden categories: CS1 maint: location missing publisher CS1 maint: others Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Short description is different from Wikidata Anatomy NAV infobox with use of other NAV parameters All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from November 2022 This page was last edited on 17 July 2025, at 11:55 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Hepatic veins 14 languages Add topic

