Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Work 3 References Toggle References subsection 3.1 Citations 3.2 Bibliography 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Andronicus of Cyrrhus 16 languages العربية Català Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Français Hausa Magyar Bahasa Melayu Polski Português Русский Slovenščina Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Svenska Türkçe Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Greek astronomer The Tower of the Winds , Athens Andronicus of Cyrrhus or Andronicus Cyrrhestes ( Latin ; Ancient Greek : Ἀνδρόνικος Κυρρήστης , Andrónikos Kyrrhēstēs ; fl.

c.

100 BC ) was a Macedonian astronomer best known for designing the Tower of the Winds in Roman Athens .

Life [ edit ] Little is known about the life of Andronicus, although his father is recorded as Hermias. It is usually assumed that he came from the Cyrrhus in Macedonia rather than the one in Syria .

[ 1 ] Work [ edit ] Andronicus is usually credited with the construction of the Tower of the Winds in the Roman forum at Athens around 50 BC, a considerable portion of which still exists.

[ 2 ] It is octagonal, with figures of the eight principal winds ( Anemoi ) carved on the appropriate side.

[ 3 ] Originally, a bronze figure of Triton was placed on the summit that was turned round by the wind so that the rod in his hand pointed to the correct wind direction , an idea replicated with subsequent wind vanes .

[ 4 ] The interior housed a large clepsydra and there were multiple sundials on the exterior, so that it functioned as a kind of early clocktower .

He also built a multifaced sundial for the Temple of Poseidon on the island of Tinos .

References [ edit ] Citations [ edit ] ^ "Biographies KYRROS (Ancient city) SYRIA - GTP - Greek Travel Pages" .

www.gtp.gr . Retrieved 2025-03-04 .

^ "Andronicus of Cyrrhus | Greek astronomer" .

Encyclopedia Britannica . Retrieved 2021-07-13 .

^ Noble & al. (1968) , p. 353.

^ Chisholm (1911) , p. 23.

Bibliography [ edit ] This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911). " Andronicus of Cyrrhus ".

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 1 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 976.

Noble, Joseph V.; et al. (1968), "The Water Clock in the Tower of the Winds", American Journal of Archaeology , vol. 72 .

External links [ edit ] Tenos island - Epigraphical Database - IG XII,5 891 v t e Ancient Greek astronomy Astronomers Aglaonice Agrippa Anaximander Andronicus Apollonius Aratus Aristarchus Aristyllus Attalus Autolycus Bion Callippus Cleomedes Cleostratus Conon Eratosthenes Euctemon Eudoxus Geminus Heraclides Hicetas Hipparchus Hippocrates of Chios Hypsicles Menelaus Meton Oenopides Philip of Opus Philolaus Posidonius Ptolemy Pytheas Seleucus Sosigenes of Alexandria Sosigenes the Peripatetic Strabo Thales Theodosius Theon of Alexandria Theon of Smyrna Timocharis Works Almagest (Ptolemy) Catasterismi (Eratosthenes) Little Astronomy On Sizes and Distances (Hipparchus) On the Sizes and Distances (Aristarchus) On the Heavens (Aristotle) Instruments Antikythera mechanism Armillary sphere Astrolabe Dioptra Equatorial ring Gnomon Mural instrument Triquetrum Concepts Callippic cycle Celestial spheres Circle of latitude Counter-Earth Deferent and epicycle Equant Geocentrism Heliocentrism Hipparchic cycle Inferior and superior planets Metonic cycle Octaeteris Solstice Spherical Earth Sublunary sphere Zodiac Influences Babylonian astronomy Egyptian astronomy Influenced Medieval European science Indian astronomy Medieval Islamic astronomy Authority control databases International VIAF Artists ULAN Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Andronicus_of_Cyrrhus&oldid=1278691742 " Categories : Ancient Greek astronomers Ancient Macedonian scientists Ancient Macedonians in Athens Roman-era Macedonians 2nd-century BC births 1st-century BC deaths 2nd-century BC astronomers Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica Year of birth unknown Year of death unknown This page was last edited on 4 March 2025, at 01:05 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Andronicus of Cyrrhus 16 languages Add topic

