Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Definition and etymology Toggle Definition and etymology subsection 1.1 Eudaimonia and areté 1.2 Eudaimonia and happiness 2 Classical views on eudaimonia and aretē Toggle Classical views on eudaimonia and aretē subsection 2.1 Socrates 2.2 Plato 2.3 Aristotle 2.4 Pyrrho 2.5 Epicurus 2.6 The Stoics 3 Modern conceptions Toggle Modern conceptions subsection 3.1 "Modern Moral Philosophy" 3.2 Modern psychology 3.3 Positive psychology on eudaimonia 4 See also 5 References 6 Further reading Toggle Further reading subsection 6.1 Primary sources 6.2 Secondary sources 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Eudaimonia 25 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Bosanski Català Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Svenska Türkçe Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Human flourishing in ancient Greek philosophy For the moth, see Eudaemonia (moth) . For other uses, see Eudaemon (disambiguation) .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Eudaimonia" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( December 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Eudaimonia ( / j uː d ɪ ˈ m oʊ n i ə / ; Ancient Greek : εὐδαιμονία [eu̯dai̯moníaː] ) is a Greek word literally translating to the state or condition of good spirit , and which is commonly translated as happiness or welfare .

In the works of Aristotle , eudaimonia was the term for the highest human good in older Greek tradition. It is the aim of practical philosophy-prudence, including ethics and political philosophy , to consider and experience what this state really is and how it can be achieved. It is thus a central concept in Aristotelian ethics and subsequent Hellenistic philosophy , along with the terms aretē (most often translated as virtue or excellence ) and phronesis ('practical or ethical wisdom').

[ 1 ] Discussion of the links between ēthikē aretē (virtue of character) and eudaimonia (happiness) is one of the central concerns of ancient ethics, and a subject of disagreement. As a result, there are many varieties of eudaimonism.

Definition and etymology [ edit ] In terms of its etymology, eudaimonia is an abstract noun derived from the words eû ("good, well") and daímōn ("spirit, deity").

[ 2 ] Semantically speaking, the word δαίμων ( daímōn ) derives from the same root of the Ancient Greek verb δαίομαι ( daíomai , "to divide") allowing the concept of eudaimonia to be thought of as an "activity linked with dividing or dispensing, in a good way".

Definitions , a dictionary of Greek philosophical terms attributed to Plato himself but believed by modern scholars to have been written by his immediate followers in the Academy , provides the following definition of the word eudaimonia : "The good composed of all goods; an ability which suffices for living well; perfection in respect of virtue; resources sufficient for a living creature." In his Nicomachean Ethics (§21; 1095a15–22), Aristotle says that everyone agrees that eudaimonia is the highest good for humans, but that there is substantial disagreement on what sort of life counts as doing and living well; i.e. eudaimon: Verbally there is a very general agreement; for both the general run of men and people of superior refinement say that it is [eudaimonia], and identify living well and faring well with being happy; but with regard to what [eudaimonia] is they differ, and the many do not give the same account as the wise. For the former think it is some plain and obvious thing like pleasure, wealth or honour... [1095a17].

[ 3 ] Head of Aristotle . Roman copy in marble of the mid-1st century from the Greek original c.

320 BC Eudaimonia and areté [ edit ] One important move in Greek philosophy to answer the question of how to achieve eudaimonia is to bring in another important concept in ancient philosophy, aretē (' virtue '). Aristotle says that the eudaimonic life is one of "virtuous activity in accordance with reason" [1097b22–1098a20]; even Epicurus , who argues that the eudaimonic life is the life of pleasure, maintains that the life of pleasure coincides with the life of virtue. So, the ancient ethical theorists tend to agree that virtue is closely bound up with happiness ( areté is bound up with eudaimonia ). However, they disagree on the way in which this is so. A major difference between Aristotle and the Stoics, for instance, is that the Stoics believed moral virtue was in and of itself sufficient for happiness (eudaimonia). For the Stoics, one does not need external goods, like physical beauty, in order to have virtue and therefore happiness.

[ 4 ] One problem with the English translation of areté as virtue is that we are inclined to understand virtue in a moral sense, which is not always what the ancients had in mind. For Aristotle, areté pertains to all sorts of qualities we would not regard as relevant to ethics, for example, physical beauty. So it is important to bear in mind that the sense of virtue operative in ancient ethics is not exclusively moral and includes more than states such as wisdom, courage, and compassion. The sense of virtue which areté connotes would include saying something like "speed is a virtue in a horse", or "height is a virtue in a basketball player". Doing anything well requires virtue, and each characteristic activity (such as carpentry, flute playing, etc.) has its own set of virtues. The alternative translation excellence (a desirable quality) might be helpful in conveying this general meaning of the term. The moral virtues are simply a subset of the general sense in which a human being is capable of functioning well or excellently.

Eudaimonia and happiness [ edit ] Eudaimonia implies a positive and divine state of being that humanity is able to strive toward and possibly reach. A literal view of eudaimonia means achieving a state of being similar to a benevolent deity, or being protected and looked after by a benevolent deity. As this would be considered the most positive state to be in, the word is often translated as happiness although incorporating the divine nature of the word extends the meaning to also include the concepts of being fortunate, or blessed. Despite this etymology, however, discussions of eudaimonia in ancient Greek ethics are often conducted independently of any supernatural significance.

In his Nicomachean Ethics (1095a15–22) Aristotle says that eudaimonia means 'doing and living well'.

[ 3 ] It is significant that synonyms for eudaimonia are living well and doing well. In the standard English translation, this would be to say that, " happiness is doing well and living well." The word happiness does not entirely capture the meaning of the Greek word. One important difference is that happiness often connotes being or tending to be in a certain pleasant state of mind. For example, when one says that someone is "a very happy person", one usually means that they seem subjectively contented with the way things are going in their life. They mean to imply that they feel good about the way things are going for them. In contrast, Aristotle suggests that eudaimonia is a more encompassing notion than feeling happy since events that do not contribute to one's experience of feeling happy may affect one's eudaimonia.

Eudaimonia depends on all the things that would make us happy if we knew of their existence, but quite independently of whether we do know about them. Ascribing eudaimonia to a person, then, may include ascribing such things as being virtuous, being loved and having good friends. But these are all objective judgments about someone's life: they concern whether a person is really being virtuous, really being loved, and really having fine friends. This implies that a person who has evil sons and daughters will not be judged to be eudaimonic even if he or she does not know that they are evil and feels pleased and contented with the way they have turned out (happy). Conversely, being loved by your children would not count towards your happiness if you did not know that they loved you (and perhaps thought that they did not), but it would count towards your eudaimonia. So, eudaimonia corresponds to the idea of having an objectively good or desirable life, to some extent independently of whether one knows that certain things exist or not. It includes conscious experiences of well-being, success, and failure, but also a whole lot more. (See Aristotle's discussion: Nicomachean Ethics, book 1.10–1.11.) Because of this discrepancy between the meanings of eudaimonia and happiness , some alternative translations have been proposed.

W.D. Ross suggests 'well-being' and John Cooper proposes flourishing . These translations may avoid some of the misleading associations carried by "happiness" although each tends to raise some problems of its own. In some modern texts therefore, the other alternative is to leave the term in an English form of the original Greek, as eudaimonia .

Classical views on eudaimonia and aretē [ edit ] Socrates [ edit ] French painter David portrayed the philosopher in The Death of Socrates (1787).

What is known of Socrates ' philosophy is almost entirely derived from Plato's writings. Scholars typically divide Plato's works into three periods: the early, middle, and late periods. They tend to agree also that Plato's earliest works quite faithfully represent the teachings of Socrates and that Plato's own views, which go beyond those of Socrates, appear for the first time in the middle works such as the Phaedo and the Republic .

As with all ancient ethical thinkers, Socrates thought that all human beings wanted eudaimonia more than anything else (see Plato, Apology 30b, Euthydemus 280d–282d, Meno 87d–89a). However, Socrates adopted a quite radical form of eudaimonism (see above): he seems to have thought that virtue is both necessary and sufficient for eudaimonia. Socrates is convinced that virtues such as self-control, courage, justice, piety, wisdom and related qualities of mind and soul are absolutely crucial if a person is to lead a good and happy (eudaimon) life. Virtues guarantee a happy life eudaimonia. For example, in the Meno , with respect to wisdom, he says: "everything the soul endeavours or endures under the guidance of wisdom ends in happiness" ( Meno 88c).

[ 5 ] In the Apology , Socrates clearly presents his disagreement with those who think that the eudaimon life is the life of honour or pleasure, when he chastises the Athenians for caring more for riches and honour than the state of their souls.

Good Sir, you are an Athenian, a citizen of the greatest city with the greatest reputation for both wisdom and power; are you not ashamed of your eagerness to possess as much wealth, reputation, and honors as possible, while you do not care for nor give thought to wisdom or truth or the best possible state of your soul? (29e) [ 6 ] ... [I]t does not seem like human nature for me to have neglected all my own affairs and to have tolerated this neglect for so many years while I was always concerned with you, approaching each one of you like a father or an elder brother to persuade you to care for virtue . (31a–b; italics added) [ 7 ] It emerges a bit further on that this concern for one's soul, that one's soul might be in the best possible state, amounts to acquiring moral virtue. So Socrates' pointing out that the Athenians should care for their souls means that they should care for their virtue, rather than pursuing honour or riches. Virtues are states of the soul. When a soul has been properly cared for and perfected, it possesses the virtues. Moreover, according to Socrates, this state of the soul, moral virtue, is the most important good. The health of the soul is incomparably more important for eudaimonia than (e.g.) wealth and political power. Someone with a virtuous soul is better off than someone who is wealthy and honoured but whose soul is corrupted by unjust actions. This view is confirmed in the Crito , where Socrates gets Crito to agree that the perfection of the soul, virtue, is the most important good: And is life worth living for us with that part of us corrupted that unjust action harms and just action benefits? Or do we think that part of us, whatever it is, that is concerned with justice and injustice, is inferior to the body? Not at all. It is much more valuable...? Much more... (47e–48a) [ 7 ] Here, Socrates argues that life is not worth living if the soul is ruined by wrongdoing.

[ 8 ] In summary, Socrates seems to think that virtue is both necessary and sufficient for eudaimonia. A person who is not virtuous cannot be happy, and a person with virtue cannot fail to be happy. We shall see later on that Stoic ethics takes its cue from this Socratic insight.

Plato [ edit ] Plato's great work of the middle period, the Republic , is devoted to answering a challenge made by the sophist Thrasymachus , that conventional morality, particularly the virtue of justice, actually prevents the strong man from achieving eudaimonia. Thrasymachus's views are restatements of a position which Plato discusses earlier on in his writings, in the Gorgias , through the mouthpiece of Callicles . The basic argument presented by Thrasymachus and Callicles is that justice (being just) hinders or prevents the achievement of eudaimonia because conventional morality requires that we control ourselves and hence live with un-satiated desires. This idea is vividly illustrated in book 2 of the Republic when Glaucon , taking up Thrasymachus' challenge, recounts a myth of the magical ring of Gyges . According to the myth, Gyges becomes king of Lydia when he stumbles upon a magical ring, which, when he turns it a particular way, makes him invisible, so that he can satisfy any desire he wishes without fear of punishment. When he discovers the power of the ring he kills the king, marries his wife and takes over the throne.

[ 9 ] The thrust of Glaucon's challenge is that no one would be just if he could escape the retribution he would normally encounter for fulfilling his desires at whim. But if eudaimonia is to be achieved through the satisfaction of desire, whereas being just or acting justly requires suppression of desire, then it is not in the interests of the strong man to act according to the dictates of conventional morality. (This general line of argument reoccurs much later in the philosophy of Nietzsche .) Throughout the rest of the Republic , Plato aims to refute this claim by showing that the virtue of justice is necessary for eudaimonia.

The argument of the Republic is lengthy and complex. In brief, Plato argues that virtues are states of the soul, and that the just person is someone whose soul is ordered and harmonious, with all its parts functioning properly to the person's benefit. In contrast, Plato argues that the unjust man's soul, without the virtues, is chaotic and at war with itself, so that even if he were able to satisfy most of his desires, his lack of inner harmony and unity thwart any chance he has of achieving eudaimonia. Plato's ethical theory is eudaimonistic because it maintains that eudaimonia depends on virtue. On Plato's version of the relationship, virtue is depicted as the most crucial and the dominant constituent of eudaimonia.

[ 10 ] The School of Athens by Raffaello Sanzio , 1509, showing Plato (left) and Aristotle (right) Aristotle [ edit ] Happiness in Aristotle's Nicomachean Ethics 23 June 2020, audio recording by Sara Sgarlata ( DOI: 10.5281/zenodo.3905301 ) Problems playing this file? See media help .

Aristotle's account is articulated in the Nicomachean Ethics and the Eudemian Ethics . In outline, for Aristotle, eudaimonia involves activity, exhibiting virtue ( aretē sometimes translated as excellence) in accordance with reason . This conception of eudaimonia derives from Aristotle's essentialist understanding of human nature , the view that reason ( logos sometimes translated as rationality ) is unique to human beings and that the ideal function or work ( ergon ) of a human being is the fullest or most perfect exercise of reason. Basically, well-being (eudaimonia) is gained by proper development of one's highest and most human capabilities and human beings are "the rational animal". It follows that eudaimonia for a human being is the attainment of excellence ( areté ) in reason.

According to Aristotle, eudaimonia actually requires activity , action, so that it is not sufficient for a person to possess a squandered ability or disposition. Eudaimonia requires not only good character but rational activity. Aristotle clearly maintains that to live in accordance with reason means achieving excellence thereby. Moreover, he claims this excellence cannot be isolated and so competencies are also required appropriate to related functions. For example, if being a truly outstanding scientist requires impressive math skills,  one might say "doing mathematics well is necessary to be a first rate scientist". From this it follows that eudaimonia, living well, consists in activities exercising the rational part of the psyche in accordance with the virtues or excellency of reason [1097b22–1098a20]. Which is to say, to be fully engaged in the intellectually stimulating and fulfilling work at which one achieves well-earned success. The rest of the Nicomachean Ethics is devoted to filling out the claim that the best life for a human being is the life of excellence in accordance with reason. Since the reason for Aristotle is not only theoretical but practical as well, he spends quite a bit of time discussing excellence of character, which enables a person to exercise his practical reason (i.e., reason relating to action) successfully.

Aristotle's ethical theory is eudaimonist because it maintains that eudaimonia depends on virtue. However, it is Aristotle's explicit view that virtue is necessary but not sufficient for eudaimonia. While emphasizing the importance of the rational aspect of the psyche, he does not ignore the importance of other goods such as friends, wealth, and power in a life that is eudaimonic. He doubts the likelihood of being eudaimonic if one lacks certain external goods such as good birth , good children , and beauty . So, a person who is hideously ugly or has "lost children or good friends through death" (1099b5–6), or who is isolated, is unlikely to be eudaimon. In this way, "dumb luck" ( chance ) can preempt one's attainment of eudaimonia.

Pyrrho [ edit ] Part of a series on Pyrrhonism Pyrrhonists Pyrrho Timon of Phlius Aenesidemus Agrippa the Skeptic Sextus Empiricus Concepts Ataraxia Acatalepsy Adiaphora Aporia Dogma Epoché Similar philosophies Academic skepticism Modern influence Münchhausen trilemma Benson Mates Robert Fogelin Philosophy portal v t e Pyrrho Pyrrho was the founder of Pyrrhonism . A summary of his approach to eudaimonia was preserved by Eusebius , quoting Aristocles of Messene , quoting Timon of Phlius , in what is known as the "Aristocles passage".

Whoever wants eudaimonia must consider these three questions: First, how are pragmata (ethical matters, affairs, topics) by nature? Secondly, what attitude should we adopt towards them? Thirdly, what will be the outcome for those who have this attitude?" Pyrrho's answer is that "As for pragmata they are all adiaphora (undifferentiated by a logical differentia), astathmēta (unstable, unbalanced, not measurable), and anepikrita (unjudged, unfixed, undecidable). Therefore, neither our sense-perceptions nor our doxai (views, theories, beliefs) tell us the truth or lie; so we certainly should not rely on them. Rather, we should be adoxastoi (without views), aklineis (uninclined toward this side or that), and akradantoi (unwavering in our refusal to choose), saying about every single one that it no more is than it is not or it both is and is not or it neither is nor is not.

[ 11 ] With respect to aretē, the Pyrrhonist philosopher Sextus Empiricus said: If one defines a system as an attachment to a number of dogmas that agree with one another and with appearances , and defines a dogma as an assent to something non-evident, we shall say that the Pyrrhonist does not have a system. But if one says that a system is a way of life that, in accordance with appearances, follows a certain rationale, where that rationale shows how it is possible to seem to live rightly ("rightly" being taken, not as referring only to aretē, but in a more ordinary sense) and tends to produce the disposition to suspend judgment , then we say that he does have a system.

[ 12 ] Epicurus [ edit ] Epicurus identified eudaimonia with the life of pleasure.

Epicurus ' ethical theory is hedonistic . His views were very influential for the founders and best proponents of utilitarianism , Jeremy Bentham and John Stuart Mill . Hedonism is the view that pleasure is the only intrinsic good and that pain is the only intrinsic bad. An object, experience or state of affairs is intrinsically valuable if it is good simply because of what it is. Intrinsic value is to be contrasted with instrumental value. An object, experience or state of affairs is instrumentally valuable if it serves as a means to what is intrinsically valuable. To see this, consider the following example. Suppose a person spends their days and nights in an office, working at not entirely pleasant activities for the purpose of receiving money. Someone asks them "why do you want the money?", and they answer: "So, I can buy an apartment overlooking the ocean, and a red sports car." This answer expresses the point that money is instrumentally valuable because its value lies in what one obtains by means of it—in this case, the money is a means to getting an apartment and a sports car and the value of making this money dependent on the price of these commodities.

Epicurus identifies the good life with the life of pleasure. He understands eudaimonia as a more or less continuous experience of pleasure and, also, freedom from pain and distress. But Epicurus does not advocate that one pursue any and every pleasure. Rather, he recommends a policy whereby pleasures are maximized "in the long run". In other words, Epicurus claims that some pleasures are not worth having because they lead to greater pains, and some pains are worthwhile when they lead to greater pleasures. The best strategy for attaining a maximal amount of pleasure overall is not to seek instant gratification but to work out a sensible long term policy.

[ 13 ] Ancient Greek ethics is eudaimonist because it links virtue and eudaimonia, where eudaimonia refers to an individual's well-being. Epicurus' doctrine can be considered eudaimonist since Epicurus argues that a life of pleasure will coincide with a life of virtue.

[ 14 ] He believes that we do and ought to seek virtue because virtue brings pleasure. Epicurus' basic doctrine is that a life of virtue is the life that generates the most pleasure, and it is for this reason that we ought to be virtuous. This thesis—the eudaimon life is the pleasurable life—is not a tautology as "eudaimonia is the good life" would be: rather, it is the substantive and controversial claim that a life of pleasure and absence of pain is what eudaimonia consists in.

One important difference between Epicurus' eudaimonism and that of Plato and Aristotle is that for the latter virtue is a constituent of eudaimonia, whereas Epicurus makes virtue a means to happiness. To this difference, consider Aristotle's theory. Aristotle maintains that eudaimonia is what everyone wants (and Epicurus would agree). He also thinks that eudaimonia is best achieved by a life of virtuous activity in accordance with reason. The virtuous person takes pleasure in doing the right thing as a result of a proper training of moral and intellectual character (See e.g., Nicomachean Ethics 1099a5). However, Aristotle does not think that virtuous activity is pursued for the sake of pleasure. Pleasure is a byproduct of virtuous action: it does not enter at all into the reasons why virtuous action is virtuous. Aristotle does not think that we literally aim for eudaimonia. Rather, eudaimonia is what we achieve (assuming that we are not particularly unfortunate in the possession of external goods) when we live according to the requirements of reason. Virtue is the largest constituent in a eudaimon life.
By contrast, Epicurus holds that virtue is the means to achieve happiness. His theory is eudaimonist in that he holds that virtue is indispensable to happiness; but virtue is not a constituent of a eudaimon life, and being virtuous is not (external goods aside) identical with being eudaimon. Rather, according to Epicurus, virtue is only instrumentally related to happiness. So whereas Aristotle would not say that one ought to aim for virtue in order to attain pleasure, Epicurus would endorse this claim.

The Stoics [ edit ] Zeno thought happiness was a "good flow of life".

Stoic philosophy begins with Zeno of Citium c.

300 BC , and was developed by Cleanthes (331–232 BC) and Chrysippus ( c.

280 – c.

206 BC ) into a formidable systematic unity.

[ 15 ] Zeno believed happiness was a "good flow of life"; Cleanthes suggested it was "living in agreement with nature", and Chrysippus believed it was "living in accordance with experience of what happens by nature." [ 15 ] Stoic ethics is a particularly strong version of eudaimonism. According to the Stoics, virtue is necessary and sufficient for eudaimonia. (This thesis is generally regarded as stemming from the Socrates of Plato's earlier dialogues.) We saw earlier that the conventional Greek concept of arete is not quite the same as that denoted by virtue , which has Christian connotations of charity, patience, and uprightness, since arete includes many non-moral virtues such as physical strength and beauty. However, the Stoic concept of arete is much nearer to the Christian conception of virtue, which refers to the moral virtues. However, unlike Christian understandings of virtue, righteousness or piety, the Stoic conception does not place as great an emphasis on mercy, forgiveness, self-abasement (i.e. the ritual process of declaring complete powerlessness and humility before God), charity and self-sacrificial love, though these behaviors/mentalities are not necessarily spurned by the Stoics (they are spurned by some other philosophers of Antiquity). Rather Stoicism emphasizes states such as justice, honesty, moderation, simplicity, self-discipline, resolve, fortitude, and courage (states which Christianity also encourages).

The Stoics make a radical claim that the eudaimon life is the morally virtuous life. Moral virtue is good, and moral vice is bad, and everything else, such as health, honour and riches, are merely "neutral".

[ 15 ] The Stoics therefore are committed to saying that external goods such as wealth and physical beauty are not really good at all. Moral virtue is both necessary and sufficient for eudaimonia. In this, they are akin to Cynic philosophers such as Antisthenes and Diogenes in denying the importance to eudaimonia of external goods and circumstances, such as were recognized by Aristotle, who thought that severe misfortune (such as the death of one's family and friends) could rob even the most virtuous person of eudaimonia. This Stoic doctrine re-emerges later in the history of ethical philosophy in the writings of Immanuel Kant , who argues that the possession of a "good will" is the only unconditional good. One difference is that whereas the Stoics regard external goods as neutral, as neither good nor bad, Kant's position seems to be that external goods are good, but only so far as they are a condition to achieving happiness.

Modern conceptions [ edit ] "Modern Moral Philosophy" [ edit ] Interest in the concept of eudaimonia and ancient ethical theory more generally had a revival in the 20th century.

G. E. M. Anscombe in her article " Modern Moral Philosophy " (1958) argued that duty-based conceptions of morality are conceptually incoherent for they are based on the idea of a "law without a lawgiver".

[ 16 ] She claims a system of morality conceived along the lines of the Ten Commandments depends on someone having made these rules.

[ 17 ] Anscombe recommends a return to the eudaimonistic ethical theories of the ancients, particularly Aristotle, which ground morality in the interests and well-being of human moral agents, and can do so without appealing to any such lawgiver.

Julia Driver in the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy explains: Anscombe's article Modern Moral Philosophy stimulated the development of virtue ethics as an alternative to Utilitarianism, Kantian Ethics, and Social Contract theories. Her primary charge in the article is that, as secular approaches to moral theory, they are without foundation. They use concepts such as "morally ought", "morally obligated", "morally right", and so forth that are legalistic and require a legislator as the source of moral authority . In the past God occupied that role, but systems that dispense with God as part of the theory are lacking the proper foundation for meaningful employment of those concepts.

[ 18 ] Modern psychology [ edit ] See also: Happiness , Positive psychology , and Well-being - Contributing factors and research findings Eudaimonic well-being in 166 nations based on Gallup World Poll data Models of eudaimonia in psychology and positive psychology emerged from early work on self-actualization and the means of its accomplishment by researchers such as Erik Erikson , Gordon Allport , and Abraham Maslow ( hierarchy of needs ).

[ 19 ] Theories include Diener's tripartite model of subjective well-being , Ryff's Six-factor Model of Psychological Well-being , Keyes work on flourishing , and Seligman 's contributions to positive psychology and his theories on authentic happiness and P.E.R.M.A. Related concepts are happiness , flourishing , quality of life , contentment , [ 20 ] and meaningful life .

The Japanese concept of ikigai has been described as eudaimonic well-being, as it "entails actions of devoting oneself to pursuits one enjoys and is associated with feelings of accomplishment and fulfillment." [ 21 ] Positive psychology on eudaimonia [ edit ] The "Questionnaire for Eudaimonic Well-Being" developed in Positive Psychology lists six dimensions of eudaimonia: [ 22 ] self-discovery; perceived development of one's best potentials; a sense of purpose and meaning in life; investment of significant effort in pursuit of excellence; intense involvement in activities; and enjoyment of activities as personally expressive.

See also [ edit ] Philosophy portal Ataraxia Eudaemon (mythology) Eudaemons Eupraxsophy Humanism Negative hedonism Social quality Summum bonum References [ edit ] ^ Rosalind Hursthouse (July 18, 2007).

"Virtue Ethics" .

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Retrieved 2010-06-05 .

But although modern virtue ethics does not have to take the form known as "neo-Aristotelian", almost any modern version still shows that its roots are in ancient Greek philosophy by the employment of three concepts derived from it. These are areté (excellence or virtue), phronesis (practical or moral wisdom), and Eudaimonia (usually translated as happiness or flourishing). As modern virtue ethics has grown and more people have become familiar with its literature, the understanding of these terms has increased, but it is still the case that readers familiar only with modern philosophy tend to misinterpret them.

^ Verena von Pfetten (4 September 2008).

"5 Things Happy People Do" .

Huffington Post . Retrieved 2010-06-05 .

But researchers now believe that eudaimonic well-being may be more important. Cobbled from the Greek eu ("good") and daimon ("spirit" or "deity"), eudaimonia means striving toward excellence based on one's unique talents and potential—Aristotle considered it to be the noblest goal in life. In his time, the Greeks commonly believed that one was blessed at birth with a personal daimon embodying the highest possible expression of one's nature. One way they envisioned the daimon was as a golden figurine that would be revealed by cracking away an outer layer of cheap pottery (the person's baser exterior). The effort to know and realize one's most golden self—"personal growth," in today's vernacular—is now the central concept of eudaimonia, which has also come to include continually taking on new challenges and fulfilling one's sense of purpose in life.

^ a b Aristotle, also David Ross, Lesley Brown (1980).

"The Nicomachean Ethics" . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0199213610 . Retrieved 2010-06-05 .

Verbally there is very general agreement, for both the general run of men and people of superior refinement...

{{ cite news }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ Long, A. A. (1968). "Aristotle's Legacy to Stoic Ethics".

Bulletin of the Institute of Classical Studies .

15 : 74.

doi : 10.1111/j.2041-5370.1968.tb00064.x .

^ Tesar, Marek; Peters, Michael A. (2019-11-26).

"Heralding ideas of well-being: A philosophical perspective" .

Educational Philosophy and Theory .

52 (9): 923– 927.

doi : 10.1080/00131857.2019.1696731 .

ISSN 0013-1857 .

S2CID 212866149 .

^ Uncertain (19 September 2008).

"How "God" functioned in Socrates' life" . DD: Religion. Archived from the original on 26 February 2010 . Retrieved 2010-06-05 .

Men of Athens, I am grateful and I am your friend, but I will obey the god rather than you, and as long as I draw breath and am able, I shall not cease to practice philosophy, to exhort you and in my usual way to point out to any of you whom I happen to meet: "Good Sir, you are an Athenian, a citizen of the greatest city with the greatest reputation for both wisdom and power; are you not ashamed of your eagerness to possess as much wealth, reputation and honors as possible, while you do not care for nor give thought to wisdom or truth, or the best possible state of your soul?" ^ a b "Crito" , Plato: Euthyphro; Apology of Socrates; and Crito , Oxford University Press, 1924, doi : 10.1093/oseo/instance.00254377 , ISBN 978-0198140153 , retrieved 2021-12-04 {{ citation }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ Richard Parry (Aug 7, 2009).

"Ancient Ethical Theory" .

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Retrieved 2010-06-05 .

Socrates says that a man worth anything at all does not reckon whether his course of action endangers his life or threatens death. He looks only at one thing—whether what he does is just or not, the work of a good or of a bad man (28b–c).

^ Plato (1979).

The Republic . John Wiley & Sons, Inc. pp. Book 2, pp. 81–104.

^ Frede, Dorothea (2017), "Plato's Ethics: An Overview" , in Zalta, Edward N. (ed.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Winter 2017 ed.), Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University , retrieved 2021-12-04 ^ Beckwith, Christopher I. (2015).

Greek Buddha: Pyrrho's Encounter with Early Buddhism in Central Asia (PDF) .

Princeton University Press . pp.

22– 23.

ISBN 978-1400866328 .

^ Sextus Empiricus Outlines of Pyrrhonism Book I Chapter 8 ^ Sedley, David (2016), "Epicurus (341–271 BC)" , Routledge Encyclopedia of Philosophy , London: Routledge, doi : 10.4324/9780415249126-a050-1 , ISBN 978-0415250696 , retrieved 2021-12-07 ^ Principal Doctrines, 5 https://monadnock.net/epicurus/principal-doctrines.html ^ a b c Dirk Baltzly (Feb 7, 2008).

"Stoicism" .

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Retrieved 2010-06-05 .

But what is happiness? The Epicureans' answer was deceptively straightforward: the happy life is the one which is most pleasant. (But their account of what the highest pleasure consists of was not at all straightforward.) Zeno's answer was "a good flow of life" (Arius Didymus, 63A) or "living in agreement", and Cleanthes clarified that with the formulation that the end was "living in agreement with nature" (Arius Didymus, 63B). Chrysippus amplified this to (among other formulations) "living in accordance with experience of what happens by nature"; later Stoics inadvisably, in response to Academic attacks, substituted such formulations as "the rational selection of the primary things according to nature". The Stoics' specification of what happiness consists in cannot be adequately understood apart from their views about value and human psychology.

^ "The ethics of virtue: The Ethics of Virtue and the Ethics of Right Action" . wutsamada.com. 2010-06-05 . Retrieved 2010-06-05 .

legalistic ethics rest on the incoherent notion of a "law" without a lawgiver: DCT unacceptable; and the alternative sources of moral "legislation" are inadequate substitutes ^ G. E. M. Anscombe (January 1958).

"Modern Moral Philosophy" . Vol. 33, no. 124. Philosophy. Archived from the original on 2010-01-31 . Retrieved 2010-06-05 .

The first is that it is not profitable for us at present to do moral philosophy; that should be laid aside at any rate until we have an adequate philosophy of psychology, in which we are conspicuously lacking. The second is that the concepts of obligation, and duty—moral obligation and moral duty, that is to say—and of what is morally right and wrong, and of the moral sense of "ought", ought to be jettisoned if this is psychologically possible; because they are survivals, or derivatives from survivals, from an earlier conception of ethics which no longer generally survives, and are only harmful without it. My third thesis is that the differences between the well‑known English writers on moral philosophy from Sidgwick to the present day are of little importance.

^ Julia Driver (Jul 21, 2009).

"Gertrude Elizabeth Margaret Anscombe: 5.1 Virtue Ethics" .

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Retrieved 2010-06-05 .

In the past God occupied that role, but systems that dispense with God as part of the theory are lacking the proper foundation for meaningful employment of those concepts.

^ Ryff, C. D. (1989).

"Happiness is everything, or is it? Explorations on the meaning of psychological well-being" .

Journal of Personality and Social Psychology .

57 (6): 1069– 1081.

doi : 10.1037/0022-3514.57.6.1069 .

hdl : 11323/11028 .

^ Graham, Michael C. (2014).

Facts of Life: ten issues of contentment . Outskirts Press. pp.

6– 10.

ISBN 978-1478722595 .

^ Kumano, Michiko (2018-06-01). "On the Concept of Well-Being in Japan: Feeling Shiawase as Hedonic Well-Being and Feeling Ikigai as Eudaimonic Well-Being".

Applied Research in Quality of Life .

13 (2): 419– 433.

doi : 10.1007/s11482-017-9532-9 .

ISSN 1871-2576 .

S2CID 149162906 .

^ Kjell, Oscar (2011).

"Sustainable Well-Being: A Potential Synergy Between Sustainability and Well-Being Research." Review of General Psychology , vol. 15, no. 3, pp. 255–266.

doi : 10.1037/a0024603 Further reading [ edit ] Primary sources [ edit ] Aristotle.

The Nicomachean Ethics , translated by Martin Ostwald . New York: The Bobbs-Merrill Company. 1962 —— The Complete Works of Aristotle, vol. 1 and 2 (rev. ed.), edited by Jonathan Barnes (1984).

Bollingen Foundation .1995.

ASIN B000J0HP5E Cicero . "On Ends" in De Finibus Bonorum et Malorum , translated by H. Rackham, Loeb Classical Library. Cambridge: Harvard University Press . 1914. Latin text with old-fashioned and not always philosophically precise English translation.

Epicurus . "Letter to Menoeceus, Principal Doctrines, and Vatican Sayings." pp. 28–40 in Hellenistic Philosophy: Introductory Readings (2nd ed.), edited by B. Inwood and L. Gerson. Indianapolis: Hackett Publishing Co. 1998.

ISBN 0872203786 .

Plato .

Plato's Complete Works , edited by John M. Cooper , translated by D. S. Hutchinson. Indianapolis: Hackett Publishing Co. 1997.

ISBN 0872203492 .

Secondary sources [ edit ] Ackrill, J. L. (1981) Aristotle the Philosopher . Oxford: Oxford University Press .

ISBN 0192891189 Anscombe, G. E. M. (1958) "Modern Moral Philosophy".

Philosophy 33; repr. in G.E.M. Anscombe (1981), vol. 3, 26–42.

Broadie, Sarah W. (1991) Ethics with Aristotle . Oxford: Oxford University Press.

ASIN B000VM6T34 Irwin, T. H. (1995) Plato's Ethics , Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Long, A. A., and D.N. Sedley, The Hellenistic Philosophers , vol 1 and 2 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press , 1987) McMahon, Darrin M.

(2005).

Happiness: A History . Atlantic Monthly Press.

ISBN 0871138867 —— (2004) "The History of Happiness: 400 B.C. – A.D. 1780." Daedalus (Spring 2004).

Norton, David L.

(1976) Personal Destinies , Princeton University Press.

Sellars, J. (2014).

Stoicism . Routledge.

Urmson, J. O.

(1988) Aristotle's Ethics . Oxford: Blackwell.

Vlastos, G. (1991) Socrates: Ironist and Moral Philosopher . Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press .

ISBN 0801497876 External links [ edit ] Wikisource has the text of the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica article " Eudaemonism ".

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Eudaimonia .

Ancient Ethical Theory , Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy Aristotle's Ethics , Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy Aristotle: Ethics , Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy v t e Aristotelianism Overview Aristotle Works Lyceum Ideas and interests Logic Apodicticity Category of being Future contingents Genus–differentia Irrelevant conclusion Syllogism Physics accident Active intellect Antiperistasis Essence Eternity of the world Four causes Hexis Horror vacui Hylomorphism Hypokeimenon Minima naturalia Ousia Passive intellect Potentiality and actuality Substance theory Substantial form Sublunary sphere Theory of universals Unmoved mover Biology Rational animal Ethics Akrasia Arete Eudaimonia Eutrapelia Golden mean Magnanimity Nemesis Philia Phronesis Pleonexia Practical syllogism Politics Mixed government Natural slavery Rhetoric Lexis Paradeigma Poetics Anagnorisis Catharsis Classical unities Diegesis Hamartia Mimesis Mythos Opsis Peripeteia Telos Tragic hero Works Organon Categories On Interpretation Prior Analytics Posterior Analytics Topics Sophistical Refutations Physics Physics On the Heavens On Generation and Corruption Meteorology On the Soul On Animals History Parts Movement Progression Generation Metaphysics Metaphysics Ethics and politics Nicomachean Ethics Eudemian Ethics Politics Constitution of the Athenians Rhetoric and poetics Rhetoric Poetics Parva Naturalia Sense and Sensibilia On Memory On Sleep On Dreams On Divination in Sleep On Length and Shortness of Life On Youth, Old Age, Life and Death, and Respiration Lost Protrepticus Pseudepigrapha On Breath On Colors On Plants On Indivisible Lines On Melissus, Xenophanes, and Gorgias On the Universe On Things Heard Physiognomonics On Marvellous Things Heard Mechanics Problems The Situations and Names of Winds On Virtues and Vices Economics Rhetoric to Alexander Magna Moralia Related topics Transmission of the Greek Classics Commentaries on Aristotle Conimbricenses Metabasis paradox Views on women Wheel paradox Mathematical realism List of writers influenced by Aristotle Category Philosophy portal v t e Epicureanism Philosophers Greek Founders Epicurus Metrodorus Polyaenus Hermarchus Students of Epicurus Idomeneus of Lampsacus Colotes Carneiscus Leontion Themista Leonteus Batis Nikidion Scholarchs of The Garden Epicurus Hermarchus Polystratus Dionysius Basilides Apollodorus Zeno of Sidon Phaedrus Patro Philonides of Laodicea Diogenes of Seleucia Diogenes of Tarsus Demetrius Lacon Roman Alcaeus and Philiscus Amafinius Rabirus Titus Albucius Catius Calpurnius Piso Philodemus Atticus Lucretius Siro Diogenes of Oenoanda Works On Nature Canon Principal Doctrines Letters of Epicurus To Herodotus To Pythocles To Menoeceus To Mother De rerum natura English Herculaneum papyri Paris 4 Vatican Sayings Concepts Atomism Ataraxia Clinamen Epilogism Eudaimonia Free will Hedone Javelin argument Otium Parrhesia Phantasiai Epicurean paradox Principle of Multiple Explanations Problem of the criterion Related articles Villa of the Papyri Epicuri de grege porcum Epikoros Epicurea Pierre Gassendi v t e Stoicism Philosophers Greek Scholarchs of the Stoa Zeno of Citium Cleanthes Chrysippus Zeno of Tarsus Diogenes of Babylon Antipater of Tarsus Panaetius Aristo of Chios Sphaerus Persaeus Herillus Dioscorides Crates of Mallus Zenodotus Apollodorus of Seleucia Boethus of Sidon Dardanus Mnesarchus Dionysius of Cyrene Hecato of Rhodes Diotimus the Stoic Posidonius Geminus Diodotus Antipater of Tyre Apollonides Athenodorus Cananites Roman Publius Rutilius Rufus Quintus Lucilius Balbus Cato the Younger Quintus Sextius Attalus Papirius Fabianus Seneca Cornutus Chaeremon of Alexandria Paconius Agrippinus Persius Helvidius Priscus Arulenus Rusticus Musonius Rufus Thrasea Paetus Rubellius Plautus Barea Soranus Publius Egnatius Celer Mara bar Serapion Euphrates Epictetus Hierocles Claudius Maximus Basilides Apollonius of Chalcedon Junius Rusticus Marcus Aurelius ( Philosophy ) Philosophical concepts Logic Logos Adiaphora Katalepsis Diairesis Physics Physis Fire Pneuma Ethics Pathos Apatheia Eudaimonia Kathekon Negative visualization Oikeiôsis Prohairesis Sophos Works On Passions (Chrysippus) Paradoxa Stoicorum Letters to Lucilius (Seneca) Seneca's Essays De Providentia De Brevitate Vitae De Vita Beata De Beneficiis De Clementia De Tranquillitate Animi De Ira De Otio De Constantia Sapientis Seneca's Consolations Lectures (Musonius Rufus) Discourses of Epictetus Enchiridion of Epictetus Meditations of Marcus Aurelius Stoicorum Veterum Fragmenta Related articles Stoa Poikile Stoic Opposition Neostoicism v t e Ancient Greek schools of philosophy Proto-philosophy Epimenides Pherecydes Seven Sages Thales Solon Pittacus Bias Periander Cleobulus Chilon Pre-Socratic ( list ) Ionian Milesian Thales Anaximander Anaximenes Heraclitean Heraclitus Cratylus Diogenes Italian Pythagorean Pythagoras Hippasus Philolaus Archytas Lamiskos Alcmaeon Brontinus Theano Damo Calliphon Hermotimus Metrodorus of Cos Arignote Myia Eurytus more...

Skeptic Xenophanes Xeniades Eleatic Parmenides Zeno Melissus Hippo Pluralist Ionian Anaxagoras Archelaus Metrodorus of Lampsacus Italian Empedocles Acron Pausanias Atomist Leucippus Democritus Sophist Ionian Protagoras Prodicus Hippias Thrasymachus Damon more...

Italian Gorgias Callicles Lycophron Dionysodorus Euthydemus more...

Classical Socrates ( students ) Xenophon Cynic Antisthenes Diogenes Crates Menippus more...

Cyrenaic Aristippus Aristippus the Younger Theodorus the Atheist Hegesias of Cyrene Anniceris more...

Eretrian Phaedo of Elis Menedemus Asclepiades of Phlius Megarian Euclid of Megara Ichthyas Thrasymachus of Corinth Eubulides Stilpo Nicarete Pasicles Bryson Dialecticians Clinomachus Apollonius Cronus Euphantus Dionysius Diodorus Cronus Philo Alexinus Panthoides Platonic Plato Speusippus Xenocrates more...

Peripatetic Aristotle ( Aristotelianism ) Theophrastus Strato of Lampsacus Lyco of Troas Alexander of Aphrodisias more...

Hellenistic Pyrrhonist Pyrrho Timon of Phlius Aenesidemus Agrippa the Skeptic Sextus Empiricus more...

Stoic Zeno of Citium Cleanthes Chrysippus Panaetius Posidonius Seneca Lucius Annaeus Cornutus Musonius Rufus Epictetus Arrian Marcus Aurelius more...

Epicurean Epicurus Metrodorus Zeno of Sidon Philodemus Lucretius Diogenes of Oenoanda more...

Academic Skeptic Arcesilaus Carneades Philo of Larissa Cicero more...

Middle Platonic Antiochus Eudorus of Alexandria Philo of Alexandria Plutarch Gaius Apuleius Alcinous Galen more...

Neopythagorean Nigidius Figulus Apollonius of Tyana Moderatus of Gades Nicomachus Numenius of Apamea more...

Neoplatonist Ammonius Saccas Plotinus students Origen Porphyry Iamblichus Julian Plutarch of Athens Syrianus Proclus Ammonius Hermiae Damascius Simplicius more...

Second Sophistic Nicetes of Smyrna Dio Chrysostom Favorinus Lucian Philostratus more...

NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐vbjqg
Cached time: 20250814214915
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.833 seconds
Real time usage: 1.023 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 3166/1000000
Revision size: 45127/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 243054/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 1717/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 9/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 150403/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.501/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 17187343/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  814.738      1 -total
 29.72%  242.102      1 Template:Reflist
 14.93%  121.639      4 Template:Cite_encyclopedia
 13.97%  113.782      1 Template:Langx
 13.26%  108.024     21 Template:Navbox
 11.14%   90.774      1 Template:Pyrrhonism_sidebar
 10.92%   88.962      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
  8.23%   67.043      1 Template:Short_description
  6.85%   55.832      1 Template:Morerefs
  6.09%   49.653      1 Template:Ambox Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:189616:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814214915 and revision id 1292102039. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Eudaimonia&oldid=1292102039 " Categories : Concepts in ancient Greek ethics Concepts in ancient Greek philosophy of mind Happiness Theories in ancient Greek philosophy Virtue Virtue ethics Well-being Hidden categories: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list CS1: unfit URL CS1 errors: ISBN date Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from December 2024 All articles needing additional references Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Pages with Greek IPA Articles with hAudio microformats Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 25 May 2025, at 06:14 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Eudaimonia 25 languages Add topic

