Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Pronunciation of his name 2 Physical appearance 3 Life Toggle Life subsection 3.1 Early life and education, 1817–1837 3.2 Return to Concord, 1837–1844 3.3 "Civil Disobedience" and the Walden years, 1845–1850 3.4 Later years, 1851–1862 3.5 Tuberculosis and death 3.6 Nature and human existence 3.7 Relationship to Autistic Community 3.8 Sexuality 3.9 Politics 3.10 Intellectual interests, influences, and affinities 3.10.1 Indian sacred texts and philosophy 3.10.2 Biology 4 Influence 5 Critical reception 6 Selected works 7 See also 8 References 9 Further reading 10 External links Toggle External links subsection 10.1 Texts Toggle the table of contents Henry David Thoreau 86 languages Afrikaans العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca বাংলা Беларуская Български Brezhoneg Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Føroyskt Français Frysk Gaeilge Gàidhlig Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Kotava Kurdî Кыргызча Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar Malagasy മലയാളം मराठी მარგალური مصرى Nederlands नेपाली 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی پښتو Polski Português Română Русский Sardu Scots Simple English سنڌي Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська اردو Vèneto Tiếng Việt Winaray 吴语 Yorùbá 粵語 Zazaki 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American philosopher (1817–1862) "Thoreau" redirects here. For other uses, see Thoreau (disambiguation) .

Henry David Thoreau Thoreau in 1856 Born David Henry Thoreau ( 1817-07-12 ) July 12, 1817 Concord, Massachusetts , U.S.

Died May 6, 1862 (1862-05-06) (aged 44) Concord, Massachusetts, U.S.

Education Alma mater Harvard College Philosophical work Era 19th-century philosophy Region Western philosophy School Transcendentalism [ 1 ] Main interests Ethics poetry religion politics biology philosophy history Notable ideas Abolitionism tax resistance development criticism civil disobedience conscientious objection direct action environmentalism simple living Signature Henry David Thoreau (born David Henry Thoreau ; July 12, 1817 – May 6, 1862) was an American naturalist , essayist , poet , and philosopher .

[ 2 ] A leading transcendentalist , [ 3 ] he is best known for his book Walden , a reflection upon simple living in natural surroundings, and his essay " Civil Disobedience " (originally published as "Resistance to Civil Government"), an argument in favor of citizen disobedience against an unjust state.

Thoreau's books, articles, essays, journals, and poetry amount to more than 20 volumes. Among his lasting contributions are his writings on natural history and philosophy , in which he anticipated the methods and findings of ecology and environmental history , two sources of modern-day environmentalism . His literary style interweaves close observation of nature, personal experience, pointed rhetoric , symbolic meanings, and historical lore, while displaying a poetic sensibility, philosophical austerity , and attention to practical detail.

[ 4 ] He was also deeply interested in the idea of survival in the face of hostile elements, historical change, and natural decay; at the same time he advocated abandoning waste and illusion in order to discover life's true essential needs.

[ 4 ] Thoreau was a lifelong abolitionist , delivering lectures that attacked the fugitive slave law while praising the writings of Wendell Phillips and defending the abolitionist John Brown . Thoreau's philosophy of civil disobedience later influenced the political thoughts and actions of notable figures such as Leo Tolstoy , Mahatma Gandhi , and Martin Luther King Jr.

[ 5 ] Thoreau is sometimes referred to retrospectively as an anarchist , [ 6 ] [ 7 ] but may perhaps be more properly regarded as a proto-anarchist .

Pronunciation of his name [ edit ] Amos Bronson Alcott and Thoreau's aunt each wrote that "Thoreau" is pronounced like the word thorough ( / ˈ θ ʌr oʊ / THURR -oh —in General American , [ 8 ] [ 9 ] but more precisely / ˈ θ ɔːr oʊ / THAWR -oh —in 19th-century New England).

Edward Waldo Emerson wrote that the name should be pronounced "Thó-row", with the h sounded and stress on the first syllable.

[ 10 ] Among modern-day American English speakers, it is perhaps more commonly pronounced / θ ə ˈ r oʊ / thə- ROH —with stress on the second syllable.

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] Physical appearance [ edit ] Thoreau had a distinctive appearance, with a nose that he called his "most prominent feature".

[ 13 ] Of his appearance and disposition, Ellery Channing wrote: [ 14 ] His face, once seen, could not be forgotten. The features were quite marked: the nose aquiline or very Roman, like one of the portraits of Caesar (more like a beak, as was said); large overhanging brows above the deepest set blue eyes that could be seen, in certain lights, and in others gray,—eyes expressive of all shades of feeling, but never weak or near-sighted; the forehead not unusually broad or high, full of concentrated energy and purpose; the mouth with prominent lips, pursed up with meaning and thought when silent, and giving out when open with the most varied and unusual instructive sayings.

Life [ edit ] Early life and education, 1817–1837 [ edit ] Thoreau's birthplace, the Wheeler-Minot Farmhouse in Concord, Massachusetts Henry David Thoreau was born David Henry Thoreau [ 15 ] in Concord, Massachusetts , into the "modest New England family" [ 16 ] of John Thoreau, a pencil maker, and Cynthia Dunbar. His father was of French Protestant descent.

[ 17 ] His paternal grandfather had been born on the UK crown dependency island of Jersey .

[ 18 ] His maternal Scottish-American grandfather, Asa Dunbar, led Harvard's 1766 student " Butter Rebellion ", [ 19 ] the first recorded student protest in the American colonies.

[ 20 ] David Henry was named after his recently deceased paternal uncle, David Thoreau. He began to call himself Henry David after he finished college; he never petitioned to make a legal name change.

[ 21 ] He had two older siblings, Helen and John Jr., and a younger sister, Sophia Thoreau .

[ 22 ] None of the children married.

[ 23 ] Helen (1812–1849) died at age 37, [ 23 ] from tuberculosis . John Jr. (1814–1842) died at age 27, [ 24 ] of tetanus after cutting himself while shaving.

[ 25 ] Henry David (1817–1862) died at age 44, of tuberculosis.

[ 26 ] Sophia (1819–1876) survived him by 14 years, dying at age 56, [ 23 ] of tuberculosis.

[ 27 ] He studied at Harvard College between 1833 and 1837. He lived in Hollis Hall [ 28 ] and took courses in rhetoric , classics, philosophy, mathematics, and science.

[ 29 ] He was a member of the Institute of 1770 [ 30 ] (now the Hasty Pudding Club ). According to legend, Thoreau refused to pay the five-dollar fee (approximately equivalent to $157 in 2024) for a Harvard master's diploma, which he described thus: Harvard College offered it to graduates "who proved their physical worth by being alive three years after graduating, and their saving, earning, or inheriting quality or condition by having Five Dollars to give the college".

[ 31 ] He commented, "Let every sheep keep its own skin", [ 32 ] a reference to the tradition of using sheepskin vellum for diplomas.

Thoreau's birthplace still exists on Virginia Road in Concord. The house has been restored by the Thoreau Farm Trust, [ 33 ] a nonprofit organization, and is now open to the public.

Return to Concord, 1837–1844 [ edit ] The traditional professions open to college graduates—law, the church, business, medicine—did not interest Thoreau, [ 34 ] : 25 so in 1835 he took a leave of absence from Harvard, during which he taught at a school in Canton, Massachusetts , living for two years at an earlier version of today's Colonial Inn in Concord. His grandfather owned the earliest of the three buildings that were later combined.

[ 35 ] After he graduated in 1837, Thoreau joined the faculty of the Concord public school, but he resigned after a few weeks rather than administer corporal punishment .

[ 34 ] : 25 He and his brother John then opened the Concord Academy, a grammar school in Concord, in 1838.

[ 34 ] : 25 They introduced several progressive concepts, including nature walks and visits to local shops and businesses. The school closed when John became fatally ill from tetanus in 1842 after cutting himself while shaving.

[ 36 ] [ 37 ] He died in Henry's arms.

[ 38 ] Upon graduation Thoreau returned home to Concord, where he met Ralph Waldo Emerson through a mutual friend.

[ 16 ] Emerson, who was 14 years his senior, took a paternal and at times patron-like interest in Thoreau, advising the young man and introducing him to a circle of local writers and thinkers, including Ellery Channing , Margaret Fuller , Bronson Alcott , and Nathaniel Hawthorne and his son Julian Hawthorne , who was a boy at the time.

Emerson urged Thoreau to contribute essays and poems to a quarterly periodical, The Dial , and lobbied the editor, Margaret Fuller, to publish those writings. Thoreau's first essay published in The Dial was "Aulus Persius Flaccus", [ 39 ] an essay on the Roman poet and satirist, in July 1840.

[ 40 ] It consisted of revised passages from his journal, which he had begun keeping at Emerson's suggestion. The first journal entry, on October 22, 1837, reads, " 'What are you doing now?' he asked. 'Do you keep a journal?' So I make my first entry to-day." [ 41 ] Thoreau was a philosopher of nature and its relation to the human condition. In his early years he followed transcendentalism , a loose and eclectic idealist philosophy advocated by Emerson, Fuller, and Alcott. They held that an ideal spiritual state transcends, or goes beyond, the physical and empirical, and that one achieves that insight via personal intuition rather than religious doctrine. In their view, Nature is the outward sign of inward spirit, expressing the "radical correspondence of visible things and human thoughts", as Emerson wrote in Nature (1836).

1967 U.S. postage stamp honoring Thoreau, designed by Leonard Baskin On April 18, 1841, Thoreau moved in with the Emersons .

[ 42 ] There, from 1841 to 1844, he served as the children's tutor; he was also an editorial assistant, repairman and gardener. For a few months in 1843, he moved to the home of William Emerson on Staten Island , [ 43 ] and tutored the family's sons while seeking contacts among literary men and journalists in the city who might help publish his writings, including his future literary representative Horace Greeley .

[ 44 ] : 68 Thoreau returned to Concord and worked in his family's pencil factory, which he would continue to do alongside his writing and other work for most of his adult life. He resurrected the process of making good pencils with inferior graphite by using clay as a binder.

[ 45 ] The process of mixing graphite and clay, known as the Conté process, had been first patented by Nicolas-Jacques Conté in 1795.  Thoreau made profitable use of a graphite source found in New Hampshire that had been purchased in 1821 by his uncle, Charles Dunbar. The company's other source of graphite had been Tantiusques , a mine operated by Native Americans in Sturbridge, Massachusetts . Later, Thoreau converted the pencil factory to produce plumbago, a name for graphite at the time, which was used in the electrotyping process.

[ 46 ] Once back in Concord, Thoreau went through a restless period. In April 1844 he and his friend Edward Hoar accidentally set a fire that consumed 300 acres (120 hectares) of Walden Woods.

[ 47 ] "Civil Disobedience" and the Walden years, 1845–1850 [ edit ] Thoreau sites at Walden Pond I went to the woods because I wished to live deliberately, to front only the essential facts of life, and see if I could not learn what it had to teach, and not, when I came to die, discover that I had not lived. I did not wish to live what was not life, living is so dear; nor did I wish to practice resignation, unless it was quite necessary. I wanted to live deep and suck out all the marrow of life, to live so sturdily and Spartan-like as to put to rout all that was not life, to cut a broad swath and shave close, to drive life into a corner, and reduce it to its lowest terms, and, if it proved to be mean, why then to get the whole and genuine meanness of it, and publish its meanness to the world; or if it were sublime, to know it by experience, and be able to give a true account of it in my next excursion.

— Henry David Thoreau, "Where I Lived, and What I Lived For", in Walden [ 48 ] Thoreau felt a need to concentrate and work more on his writing. In 1845, Ellery Channing told Thoreau, "Go out upon that, build yourself a hut, & there begin the grand process of devouring yourself alive. I see no other alternative, no other hope for you." [ 49 ] Thus, on July 4, 1845, Thoreau embarked on a two-year experiment in simple living , moving to a small house he had built on land owned by Emerson in a second growth forest around the shores of Walden Pond , having had a request to build a hut on Flints Pond , near that of his friend Charles Stearns Wheeler , denied by the landowners due to the Fairhaven Bay incident.

[ 50 ] [ 51 ] The house was in "a pretty pasture and woodlot" of 14 acres (5.7 hectares) that Emerson had bought, [ 52 ] 1 + 1 ⁄ 2 miles (2.5 kilometers) from his family home.

[ 53 ] Whilst there, he wrote his only extended piece of literary criticism, " Thomas Carlyle and His Works ".

[ 54 ] Original title page of Walden , with an illustration from a drawing by Thoreau's sister Sophia On July 24 or July 25, 1846, Thoreau ran into the local tax collector , Sam Staples, who asked him to pay six years of delinquent poll taxes . Thoreau refused because of his opposition to the Mexican–American War and slavery , and he spent a night in jail because of this refusal. The next day Thoreau was freed when someone, likely to have been his aunt, paid the tax, against his wishes.

[ 5 ] The experience had a strong effect on Thoreau. In January and February 1848, he delivered lectures on "The Rights and Duties of the Individual in relation to Government", [ 55 ] explaining his tax resistance at the Concord Lyceum . Bronson Alcott attended the lecture, writing in his journal on January 26: Heard Thoreau's lecture before the Lyceum on the relation of the individual to the State—an admirable statement of the rights of the individual to self-government, and an attentive audience. His allusions to the Mexican War, to Mr.

Hoar 's expulsion from Carolina, his own imprisonment in Concord Jail for refusal to pay his tax, Mr. Hoar's payment of mine when taken to prison for a similar refusal, were all pertinent, well considered, and reasoned. I took great pleasure in this deed of Thoreau's.

— Bronson Alcott, Journals [ 56 ] Thoreau revised the lecture into an essay titled " Resistance to Civil Government " (also known as "Civil Disobedience"). It was published by Elizabeth Peabody in the Aesthetic Papers in May 1849. Thoreau had taken up a version of Percy Shelley 's principle in the political poem " The Mask of Anarchy " (1819), which begins with the powerful images of the unjust forms of authority of his time and then imagines the stirrings of a radically new form of social action.

[ 57 ] At Walden Pond, Thoreau completed a first draft of A Week on the Concord and Merrimack Rivers , an elegy to his brother John, describing their trip to the White Mountains in 1839. Thoreau did not find a publisher for the book and instead printed 1,000 copies at his own expense; fewer than 300 were sold.

[ 42 ] : 234 He self-published on the advice of Emerson, using Emerson's publisher, Munroe, who did little to publicize the book.

Reconstruction of the interior of Thoreau's cabin Replica of Thoreau's cabin and a statue of him near Walden Pond In August 1846, Thoreau briefly left Walden to make a trip to Mount Katahdin in Maine , a journey that was later recorded in "Ktaadn", the first part of The Maine Woods .

Thoreau left Walden Pond on September 6, 1847.

[ 42 ] : 244 At Emerson's request, he immediately moved back to the Emerson house to help Emerson's wife, Lidian, manage the household while her husband was on an extended trip to Europe.

[ 58 ] Over several years, as he worked to pay off his debts, he continuously revised the manuscript of what he eventually published as Walden, or Life in the Woods in 1854, recounting the two years, two months, and two days he had spent at Walden Pond. The book compresses that time into a single calendar year, using the passage of the four seasons to symbolize human development. Part memoir and part spiritual quest, Walden at first won few admirers, but later critics have regarded it as a classic American work that explores natural simplicity, harmony, and beauty as models for just social and cultural conditions.

The American poet Robert Frost wrote of Thoreau, "In one book ... he surpasses everything we have had in America." [ 59 ] The American author John Updike said of the book, "A century and a half after its publication, Walden has become such a totem of the back-to-nature, preservationist, anti-business, civil-disobedience mindset, and Thoreau so vivid a protester, so perfect a crank and hermit saint, that the book risks being as revered and unread as the Bible." [ 60 ] Thoreau moved out of Emerson's house in July 1848 and stayed at a house on nearby Belknap Street. In 1850, he moved into a house at 255 Main Street , where he lived until his death.

[ 61 ] In the summer of 1850, Thoreau and Channing journeyed from Boston to Montreal and Quebec City . These would be Thoreau's only travels outside the United States.

[ 62 ] It is as a result of this trip that he developed lectures that eventually became A Yankee in Canada . He jested that all he got from this adventure "was a cold".

[ 63 ] [ 64 ] Later years, 1851–1862 [ edit ] Thoreau in 1854 In 1851, Thoreau became increasingly fascinated with natural history and narratives of travel and expedition. He read avidly on botany and often wrote observations on this topic into his journal. He admired William Bartram and Charles Darwin 's Voyage of the Beagle . He kept detailed observations on Concord's nature lore, recording everything from how the fruit ripened over time to the fluctuating depths of Walden Pond and the days certain birds migrated. The point of this task was to "anticipate" the seasons of nature, in his word.

[ 65 ] [ 66 ] He became a land surveyor and continued to write increasingly detailed observations on the natural history of the town, covering an area of 26 square miles (67 square kilometers), in his journal, a two-million-word document he kept for 24 years. He also kept a series of notebooks, and these observations became the source of his late writings on natural history, such as "Autumnal Tints", "The Succession of Trees", and "Wild Apples", an essay lamenting the destruction of the local wild apple species.

With the rise of environmental history and ecocriticism as academic disciplines, several new readings of Thoreau began to emerge, showing him to have been both a philosopher and an analyst of ecological patterns in fields and woodlots.

[ 67 ] [ 68 ] For instance, "The Succession of Forest Trees", shows that he used experimentation and analysis to explain how forests regenerate after fire or human destruction, through the dispersal of seeds by winds or animals. In this lecture, first presented to a cattle show in Concord, and considered his greatest contribution to ecology, Thoreau explained why one species of tree can grow in a place where a  different tree did previously. He observed that squirrels often carry nuts far from the tree from which they fell to create stashes. These seeds are likely to germinate and grow should the squirrel die or abandon the stash. He credited the squirrel for performing a "great service ... in the economy of the universe." [ 69 ] Walden Pond He traveled to Canada East once, Cape Cod four times, and Maine three times; these landscapes inspired his "excursion" books, A Yankee in Canada , Cape Cod , and The Maine Woods , in which travel itineraries frame his thoughts about geography, history and philosophy. Other travels took him southwest to Philadelphia and New York City in 1854 and west across the Great Lakes region in 1861, when he visited Niagara Falls , Detroit, Chicago, Milwaukee , St. Paul and Mackinac Island .

[ 70 ] He was provincial in his own travels, but he read widely about travel in other lands. He devoured all the first-hand travel accounts available in his day, at a time when the last unmapped regions of the earth were being explored. He read Magellan and James Cook ; the arctic explorers John Franklin , Alexander Mackenzie and William Parry ; David Livingstone and Richard Francis Burton on Africa; Lewis and Clark ; and hundreds of lesser-known works by explorers and literate travelers.

[ 71 ] Astonishing amounts of reading fed his endless curiosity about the peoples, cultures, religions and natural history of the world and left its traces as commentaries in his voluminous journals. He processed everything he read, in the local laboratory of his Concord experience. Among his famous aphorisms is his advice to "live at home like a traveler".

[ 72 ] After John Brown's raid on Harpers Ferry , many prominent voices in the abolitionist movement distanced themselves from Brown or damned him with faint praise . Thoreau was disgusted by this, and he composed a key speech, " A Plea for Captain John Brown ", which was uncompromising in its defense of Brown and his actions. Thoreau's speech proved persuasive: the abolitionist movement began to accept Brown as a martyr, and by the time of the American Civil War entire armies of the North were literally singing Brown's praises . As a biographer of Brown put it, "If, as Alfred Kazin suggests, without John Brown there would have been no Civil War, we would add that without the Concord Transcendentalists, John Brown would have had little cultural impact." [ 73 ] Thoreau in his second and final photographic sitting, August 1861.

Tuberculosis and death [ edit ] Thoreau contracted tuberculosis in 1835 and suffered from it sporadically afterwards. In 1860, following a late-night excursion to count the rings of tree stumps during a rainstorm, he became ill with bronchitis .

[ 74 ] [ 75 ] [ 76 ] His health declined, with brief periods of remission, and he eventually became bedridden. Recognizing the terminal nature of his disease, Thoreau spent his last years revising and editing his unpublished works, particularly The Maine Woods and Excursions , and petitioning publishers to print revised editions of A Week and Walden . He wrote letters and journal entries until he became too weak to continue. His friends were alarmed at his diminished appearance and were fascinated by his tranquil acceptance of death. When he was asked him in his last weeks if he had made his peace with God, Thoreau responded, "I did not know we had ever quarreled." [ 77 ] Grave of Thoreau at Sleepy Hollow Cemetery in Concord Geodetic Marker at Thoreau's gravesite Aware he was dying, Thoreau's last words were "Now comes good sailing", followed by two lone words, "moose" and "Indian".

[ 78 ] He died on May 6, 1862, at age 44.

Amos Bronson Alcott planned the service and read selections from Thoreau's works, and Channing presented a hymn.

[ 79 ] Emerson wrote the eulogy spoken at the funeral.

[ 80 ] Thoreau was buried in the Dunbar family plot; his remains and those of members of his immediate family were eventually moved to Sleepy Hollow Cemetery in Concord, Massachusetts.

Nature and human existence [ edit ] Most of the luxuries and many of the so-called comforts of life are not only not indispensable, but positive hindrances to the elevation of mankind.

— Thoreau [ 81 ] Thoreau was an early advocate of recreational hiking and canoeing , of conserving natural resources on private land, and of preserving wilderness as public land. He was a highly skilled canoeist; Nathaniel Hawthorne , after a ride with him, noted that "Mr. Thoreau managed the boat so perfectly, either with two paddles or with one, that it seemed instinct with his own will, and to require no physical effort to guide it." [ 82 ] He was not a strict vegetarian, though he said he preferred that diet [ 83 ] and advocated it as a means of self-improvement. He wrote in Walden , "The practical objection to animal food in my case was its uncleanness; and besides, when I had caught and cleaned and cooked and eaten my fish, they seemed not to have fed me essentially. It was insignificant and unnecessary, and cost more than it came to. A little bread or a few potatoes would have done as well, with less trouble and filth." [ 84 ] Thoreau's famous quotation, near his cabin site at Walden Pond Thoreau neither rejected civilization nor fully embraced wilderness. Instead he sought a middle ground, the pastoral realm that integrates nature and culture. His philosophy required that he be a didactic arbitrator between the wilderness he based so much on and the spreading mass of humanity in North America. He decried the latter endlessly but felt that a teacher needs to be close to those who needed to hear what he wanted to tell them. The wildness he enjoyed was the nearby swamp or forest, and he preferred "partially cultivated country". His idea of being "far in the recesses of the wilderness" of Maine was to "travel the logger's path and the Indian trail", but he also hiked on pristine land.

In an essay titled, "Henry David Thoreau, Philosopher", environmental historian Roderick Nash wrote, "Thoreau left Concord in 1846 for the first of three trips to northern Maine. His expectations were high because he hoped to find genuine, primeval America. But contact with real wilderness in Maine affected him far differently than had the idea of wilderness in Concord. Instead of coming out of the woods with a deepened appreciation of the wilds, Thoreau felt a greater respect for civilization and realized the necessity of balance." [ 85 ] Of alcohol, Thoreau wrote, "I would fain keep sober always. ... I believe that water is the only drink for a wise man; wine is not so noble a liquor. ... Of all ebriosity, who does not prefer to be intoxicated by the air he breathes?" [ 84 ] Relationship to Autistic Community [ edit ] While Henry David Thoreau was never formally diagnosed with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) or another related condition, some people in the autistic community strongly identify with Thoreau's lived experience, as described in his essays.

[ 86 ] It is speculated that Thoreau may have had ASD himself; Julie Brown, author of "Writers on the Spectrum: How Autism and Asperger's Syndrome Have Influenced Literary Writing", claims that Thoreau "demonstrated so many traits of Asperger's Syndrome (AS) that it seems very likely he was affected by it".

[ 86 ] Brown specifically names Thoreau's social difficulties and desire for solitude, strict routines and desire for sameness, formation of identity through oppositional behavior, and restrictive and intense interests, citing examples from Thoreau's essays.

[ 86 ] For example, in Walden , Thoreau describes the (perceived) superiority of a simple diet and a limited wardrobe, as well as his construction of a rather spartan living space in the woods; Brown connects these traits to the repetitive, simple diets and clothing of other people with Asperger's Syndrome, and asserts that the small size and limited decoration of Thoreau's living space was a sign of his desire for consistency and simplicity, which she asserts are "rooted in his place on the autism spectrum".

[ 86 ] Sexuality [ edit ] Thoreau never married and was childless. In 1840, when he was 23, he proposed to eighteen-year old Ellen Sewall , but she refused him, on the advice of her father.

[ 87 ] Sophia Foord proposed to him, but he rejected her.

[ 88 ] Thoreau's sexuality has long been the subject of speculation, including by his contemporaries. Critics have called him heterosexual , homosexual , or asexual .

[ 89 ] [ 90 ] There is no evidence to suggest he had physical relations with anyone, man or woman. Bronson Alcott wrote that Thoreau "seemed to have no temptations. All those strong wants that do battle with other men's nature, he knew not." [ 91 ] Some scholars have suggested that homoerotic sentiments run through his writings and concluded that he was homosexual.

[ 89 ] [ 92 ] [ 93 ] The elegy "Sympathy" was inspired by the eleven-year-old Edmund Sewall, who had just spent five days in the Thoreau household in 1839.

[ 94 ] One scholar has suggested that he wrote the poem to Edmund because he could not bring himself to write it to Edmund's sister Anna, [ 95 ] and another that Thoreau's "emotional experiences with women are memorialized under a camouflage of masculine pronouns", [ 96 ] but other scholars dismiss this.

[ 89 ] [ 97 ] It has been argued that the long paean in Walden to the French-Canadian woodchopper Alek Therien, which includes allusions to Achilles and Patroclus , is an expression of conflicted desire.

[ 98 ] In some of Thoreau's writing there is the sense of a secret self.

[ 99 ] In 1840 he writes in his journal: "My friend is the apology for my life. In him are the spaces which my orbit traverses".

[ 100 ] Thoreau was strongly influenced by the moral reformers of his time, and this may have instilled anxiety and guilt over sexual desire.

[ 101 ] Politics [ edit ] John Brown "Treason" Broadside, 1859 Thoreau was fervently against slavery and actively supported the abolitionist movement.

[ 1 ] He participated as a conductor in the Underground Railroad , delivered lectures that attacked the Fugitive Slave Law , and in opposition to the popular opinion of the time, supported radical abolitionist militia leader John Brown and his party.

[ 1 ] Two weeks after the ill-fated raid on Harpers Ferry and in the weeks leading up to Brown's execution, Thoreau delivered a speech to the citizens of Concord, Massachusetts, in which he compared the American government to Pontius Pilate and likened Brown's execution to the crucifixion of Jesus Christ : Some eighteen hundred years ago Christ was crucified; this morning, perchance, Captain Brown was hung. These are the two ends of a chain which is not without its links. He is not Old Brown any longer; he is an angel of light.

[ 4 ] In " The Last Days of John Brown ", Thoreau described the words and deeds of John Brown as noble and an example of heroism.

[ 102 ] In addition, he lamented the newspaper editors who dismissed Brown and his scheme as "crazy".

[ 102 ] Thoreau was a proponent of limited government and individualism . Although he was hopeful that mankind could potentially have, through self-betterment, the kind of government which "governs not at all", he distanced himself from contemporary "no-government men" ( anarchists ), writing: "I ask for, not at once no government, but at once a better government." [ 103 ] Thoreau deemed the evolution from absolute monarchy to limited monarchy to democracy as "a progress toward true respect for the individual" and theorized about further improvements "towards recognizing and organizing the rights of man".

[ 103 ] Echoing this belief, he went on to write: "There will never be a really free and enlightened State until the State comes to recognize the individual as a higher and independent power, from which all its power and authority are derived, and treats him accordingly." [ 103 ] It is on this basis that Thoreau could so strongly inveigh against the British administration and Catholicism in A Yankee in Canada . Despotic authority, Thoreau argued, had crushed the people's sense of ingenuity and enterprise; the Canadian habitants had been reduced, in his view, to a perpetual childlike state. Ignoring the recent rebellions, he argued that there would be no revolution in the St. Lawrence River valley.

[ 64 ] [ 104 ] Although Thoreau believed resistance to unjustly exercised authority could be both violent (exemplified in his support for John Brown) and nonviolent (his own example of tax resistance as described in "Resistance to Civil Government"), he regarded pacifist nonresistance as temptation to passivity, [ 105 ] writing: "Let not our Peace be proclaimed by the rust on our swords, or our inability to draw them from their scabbards; but let her at least have so much work on her hands as to keep those swords bright and sharp." [ 105 ] Furthermore, in a formal lyceum debate in 1841, he debated the subject "Is it ever proper to offer forcible resistance?", arguing the affirmative.

[ 106 ] Likewise, his condemnation of the Mexican–American War did not stem from pacifism, but rather because he considered Mexico "unjustly overrun and conquered by a foreign army" as a means to expand the slave territory.

[ 107 ] Thoreau was ambivalent towards industrialization and capitalism . On one hand he regarded commerce as "unexpectedly confident and serene, adventurous, and unwearied" [ 4 ] and expressed admiration for its associated cosmopolitanism , writing: I am refreshed and expanded when the freight train rattles past me, and I smell the stores which go dispensing their odors all the way from Long Wharf to Lake Champlain, reminding me of foreign parts, of coral reefs, and Indian oceans, and tropical climes, and the extent of the globe. I feel more like a citizen of the world at the sight of the palm-leaf which will cover so many flaxen New England heads the next summer [ 4 ] On the other hand, he wrote disparagingly of the factory system: I cannot believe that our factory system is the best mode by which men may get clothing. The condition of the operatives is becoming every day more like that of the English; and it cannot be wondered at, since, as far as I have heard or observed, the principal object is, not that mankind may be well and honestly clad, but, unquestionably, that the corporations may be enriched.

[ 4 ] Thoreau also favored the protection of animals and wild areas, free trade , and taxation for schools and highways, [ 1 ] and espoused views that at least in part align with what is today known as bioregionalism . He disapproved of the subjugation of Native Americans, slavery, philistinism , technological utopianism , and what can be regarded in today's terms as consumerism , mass entertainment, and frivolous applications of technology.

[ 1 ] Intellectual interests, influences, and affinities [ edit ] Indian sacred texts and philosophy [ edit ] Thoreau was influenced by Indian spiritual thought . In Walden , there are many overt references to the sacred texts of India . For example, in the first chapter ("Economy"), he writes: "How much more admirable the Bhagvat-Geeta than all the ruins of the East!" [ 4 ] American Philosophy: An Encyclopedia classes him as one of several figures who "took a more pantheist or pandeist approach by rejecting views of God as separate from the world", [ 108 ] also a characteristic of Hinduism .

Furthermore, in "The Pond in Winter", he equates Walden Pond with the sacred Ganges river , writing: In the morning I bathe my intellect in the stupendous and cosmogonal philosophy of the Bhagvat Geeta since whose composition years of the gods have elapsed, and in comparison with which our modern world and its literature seem puny and trivial; and I doubt if that philosophy is not to be referred to a previous state of existence, so remote is its sublimity from our conceptions. I lay down the book and go to my well for water, and lo! there I meet the servant of the Brahmin, priest of Brahma and Vishnu and Indra, who still sits in his temple on the Ganges reading the Vedas, or dwells at the root of a tree with his crust and water jug. I meet his servant come to draw water for his master, and our buckets as it were grate together in the same well. The pure Walden water is mingled with the sacred water of the Ganges.

[ 4 ] Thoreau was aware his Ganges imagery could have been factual. He wrote about ice harvesting at Walden Pond. And he knew that New England's ice merchants were shipping ice to foreign ports, including Calcutta .

[ 109 ] Additionally, Thoreau followed various Hindu customs, including a diet largely consisting of rice ("It was fit that I should live on rice, mainly, who loved so well the philosophy of India." [ 4 ] ), flute playing (reminiscent of the favorite musical pastime of Krishna ), [ 110 ] and yoga .

[ 111 ] In an 1849 letter to his friend H.G.O. Blake, he wrote about yoga and its meaning to him: Free in this world as the birds in the air, disengaged from every kind of chains, those who practice yoga gather in Brahma the certain fruits of their works. Depend upon it that, rude and careless as I am, I would fain practice the yoga faithfully. The yogi, absorbed in contemplation, contributes in his degree to creation; he breathes a divine perfume, he hears wonderful things. Divine forms traverse him without tearing him, and united to the nature which is proper to him, he goes, he acts as animating original matter. To some extent, and at rare intervals, even I am a yogi.

[ 112 ] Biology [ edit ] Bird eggs found by Thoreau and given to the Boston Society of Natural History . Those in the nest are of yellow warbler , the other two of red-tailed hawk .

Thoreau read contemporary works in the new science of biology, including the works of Alexander von Humboldt , Charles Darwin , and Asa Gray (Charles Darwin's staunchest American ally).

[ 113 ] Thoreau was deeply influenced by Humboldt, especially his work Cosmos .

[ 114 ] In 1859, Thoreau purchased and read Darwin's On the Origin of Species . Unlike many natural historians at the time, including Louis Agassiz who publicly opposed Darwinism in favor of a static view of nature, Thoreau was immediately enthusiastic about the theory of evolution by natural selection and endorsed it, [ 115 ] stating: The development theory implies a greater vital force in Nature, because it is more flexible and accommodating, and equivalent to a sort of constant new creation. (A quote from On the Origin of Species follows this sentence.) [ 113 ] Influence [ edit ] A bust of Thoreau from the Hall of Fame for Great Americans at the Bronx Community College This article is part of a series on Libertarianism in the United States Schools Agorism Anarcho-capitalism Austro Authoritarian Autarchism Bleeding-heart Christian Conservative Consequentialist Feminist Fusionism Geo Green Market anarchism Minarchism Natural-rights Neo Paleo Panarchism Paternalist Propertarianism Socialist Techno Transhumanist Voluntaryism Principles Anti-imperialism Civil libertarianism Constitutionalism Counter-economics Decentralization Departurism Economic freedom Evictionism Free banking Free market Free-market environmentalism Free migration Free trade Free will Freedom of association Freedom of contract Freedom of speech Homestead principle Individuality Individualism Liberty Limited government Localism Marriage privatization Natural rights and legal rights Non-aggression principle Non-interventionism Non-politics Non-voting Open border Polycentric law Private defense agency Private property Public choice theory Restorative justice Right to bear arms Right to privacy Rugged Individualism Self-ownership Single tax Small government Spoiled ballot Spontaneous order Stateless society Tax resistance Title-transfer theory of contract Voluntary association Voluntary society History Age of Enlightenment Abolitionism in the United States Classical liberalism Anti-Federalists Transcendentalism Individualist anarchism in the United States Old Right New Left New Right Freedom School Economics Austrian School Economic liberalism Fiscal conservatism Georgism Laissez-faire Neoliberalism Supply-side economics Intellectuals Andrews Barnett Block Boudreaux Brennan Caplan Carson Chamberlain Chartier Chodorov Cowen Ebeling Epstein Franklin D. Friedman M. Friedman P. Friedman R. Friedman Galambos Garrett George Griffin Gordon Harper Hazlitt Heinlein Hess Hoppe Hospers Huemer Jefferson Kinsella Konkin R. Lane Liggio LeFevre Machan Mencken Menger Mises Nock Nozick Paterson Rand Raico Read Robertson Rockwell Rothbard Samuels Schulman Sciabarra Scott Skousen Smith Spooner Somin Sowell Sumner Sutton Stephenson Szasz Taleb Thoreau Tuccille Tucker Volokh Wilder Williams Wilson (Clyde) Wilson (Robert) Politicians Amash Barr Brakey Burt Chafee Cleveland Flake Goldwater Jacobs Johnson Jorgensen Lee Massie McAfee Nolan Oliver Paul (Rand) Paul (Ron) Polis Sanford Sarwark Sununu Ventura Weld Wu Commentators Chamberlain Gillespie Gutfeld Jones Kauffman McElroy Miller Napolitano Postrel Pugsley Rogan Smith Soave Stone Stossel Welch Will Woods Activists Ben Garrison Jillette Koch (Charles) Koch (David) Reitman Kubrick Smith Prince Teller Thiel Literature The Anarchist Cookbook Anarchy, State, and Utopia The Betrayal of the American Right The Case Against Education Civil Disobedience Conceived in Liberty The Creature from Jekyll Island Defending the Undefendable The Discovery of Freedom End the Fed The Ethics of Liberty For a New Liberty Free to Choose The Future and Its Enemies The God of the Machine It Usually Begins with Ayn Rand Liberty The Machinery of Freedom Man, Economy and State The Moon is a Harsh Mistress The Mainspring of Human Progress The Market for Liberty The Myth of the Rational Voter No, They Can't No Treason New Libertarian Manifesto Our Enemy, the State The Problem of Political Authority Progress and Poverty Protection or Free Trade Radicals for Capitalism Seeing Like a State To Serve and Protect The Unconstitutionality of Slavery Issues Abortion Capital punishment Criticism Foreign affairs Immigration Intellectual property Internal debates LGBT rights Objectivism Political parties Politics State Theories of law Symbols Come and take it Gadsden flag Idols Ron Swanson Patrick Bateman Walter White Organizations Cato Institute Federalist Society Free State Project Foundation for Economic Education International Alliance of Libertarian Parties Libertarian Party Liberty International Mises Institute Reason Foundation Reason (magazine) Students for a Democratic Society Students for Liberty Young Americans for Liberty Movements American militia movement Boogaloo movement Dark Enlightenment Objectivist movement Objectivism Sovereign citizen movement Comparable Libertarianism in Hong Kong Libertarianism in the United Kingdom ( England ) Related Conservatism in the United States Left-libertarianism Liberalism in the United States Libertarian Democrat Libertarian Republican Libertarian science fiction On Democracy in America Outline of libertarianism Right-libertarianism Liberalism portal Conservatism portal Libertarianism portal United States portal v t e This article is part of a series on Anarchism in the United States Ideologies Anarcho-capitalism Anarcho-pacifism Autarchism Chicago idea Green anarchism Individualist anarchism Philosophical anarchism History Cincinnati Time Store Most–Grottkau debate Haymarket affair Homestead strike Assassination of William McKinley Immigration Act of 1903 Ferrer Center and Colony Immigration Act of 1918 Galleanisti First Red Scare 1919 bombings Palmer Raids Sacco and Vanzetti Libertarian Book Club and League Counterculture of the 1960s Protests of 1968 Battle of Seattle Occupy Wall Street Qilombo Capitol Hill Occupied Protest People Abbott Alston Andrews Appleton Austin Balagoon Bari Berkman Best Biehl Bookchin Bushnell Carson Chomsky Cleyre Cornell Czologsz Day Dixon Dolgoff Duffy Turner Emerson Ervin Esteve Fielden Fischer Galleani Goldman Goodman Grace Graeber Greene Hahnel Haldeman-Julius Hammond Harman Heywood (Angela) Heywood (Ezra) Hill Hoffman Holmes Ingalls Kaczynski Konkin Labadie Lingg Lloyd Lum Magón Milstein Most Parsons Perlman Sale Schwab (Justus) Schwab (Michael) Solanas Spies Spooner Thoreau Tucker Waisbrooker Walker Warren Wilson Winn Wolff Zerzan Zinn Active Organizations ABC No Rio Anarcho-Syndicalist Review Anti-Racist Action Beehive Design Collective Catholic Worker Movement Common Ground Collective CrimethInc.

Earth Liberation Front Indecline Industrial Workers of the World Institute for Anarchist Studies Institute for Social Ecology Kate Sharpley Library Labadie Collection Metropolitan Anarchist Coordinating Council MOVE Profane Existence Red Emma's Ruckus Society Zizians Defunct Organizations Cincinnati Time Store Curious George Brigade Diggers Don't Just Vote, Get Active Ferrer Center and Colony George Jackson Brigade Institute for Applied Autonomy International Working People's Association Libertarian Book Club and League Love and Rage New England Non-Resistance Society New York Social Revolutionary Club Portland Anarchist Road Care Qilombo Right to Existence Group Spanish Camp Tenacious Unicorn Ranch Union of Russian Workers Up Against the Wall Motherfucker Vanguard Group Why? Group Youth International Party Media Publications AK Press Autonomedia The Blast Catholic Worker Cronaca Sovversiva Fifth Estate Free Society Freiheit Golos Truda Liberty Loompanics Mother Earth PM Press Regeneración Vanguard The Word Works " Resistance to Civil Government " (1849) " To the Workingmen of America " (1883) Anarchism and Other Essays (1910) Now and After (1929) In Defense of Anarchism (1970) Post-Scarcity Anarchism (1971) " The Abolition of Work " (1986) Industrial Society and Its Future (1995) From Bakunin to Lacan (2001) Understanding Power (2002) Fragments of an Anarchist Anthropology (2004) Direct Action: An Ethnography (2009) Related topics American Left Anarchism in Puerto Rico Libertarianism in the U.S.

Labor history of the United States Minarchism Socialism in the U.S.

Anarchism portal Libertarianism portal United States portal v t e Part of a series on Green anarchism Schools of thought Anarcho-primitivism Deep ecology Green syndicalism Social ecology Total liberation Theory and practice Animal rights Anti-authoritarianism Anti-capitalism Anti-consumerism Bioregionalism Decentralization Degrowth Deindustrialization Direct action Ecocentrism Environmental protection Municipalism Naturalism Neo-Luddism Neo-Malthusianism Primitive communism Radical environmentalism Return to nature Rewilding Simple living Unity in diversity People Abbey Bari Best Biehl Bookchin Camenisch Carter Glendinning Jensen Kropotkin Morris Næss Perlman Reclus Sale Semprún Snyder Thoreau Zerzan Books and publications Walden, or life in the woods (1854) Fields, Factories, and Workshops (1899) Mutual Aid: A Factor of Evolution (1902) Post-Scarcity Anarchism (1971) The Ecology of Freedom (1982) Green Anarchist (1984) Future Primitive and Other Essays (1994) Related topics Anarchism Anti-capitalism Anti-consumerism Eco-socialism Green politics Libertarian socialism Naturism Anarchism portal Environment portal Politics portal v t e Thoreau's careful observations and devastating conclusions have rippled into time, becoming stronger as the weaknesses Thoreau noted have become more pronounced ... Events that seem to be completely unrelated to his stay at Walden Pond have been influenced by it, including the national park system, the British labor movement, the creation of India, the civil rights movement, the hippie revolution, the environmental movement, and the wilderness movement. Today, Thoreau's words are quoted with feeling by liberals, socialists, anarchists, libertarians, and conservatives alike.

— Ken Kifer, Analysis and Notes on Walden: Henry Thoreau's Text with Adjacent Thoreauvian Commentary [ 116 ] Thoreau's political writings had little influence during his lifetime, as "his contemporaries did not see him as a theorist or as a radical", viewing him instead as a naturalist. They either dismissed or ignored his political essays, including "Civil Disobedience". The only two complete books (as opposed to essays) that were published in his lifetime, Walden and A Week on the Concord and Merrimack Rivers (1849), both dealt with Nature , in which he "loved to wander".

[ 16 ] His obituary was lumped in with others, rather than as a separate article, in an 1862 yearbook.

[ 117 ] Critics and the public continued either to disdain or to ignore Thoreau for years, but the publication of extracts from his journal in the 1880s by his friend H.G.O. Blake, and of a definitive set of Thoreau's works by the Riverside Press between 1893 and 1906, led to the rise of what literary historian F.L. Pattee called a "Thoreau cult".

[ 118 ] Thoreau's writings went on to influence many public figures. Political leaders and reformers like Mohandas Gandhi , U.S. President John F. Kennedy , American civil rights activist Martin Luther King Jr.

, U.S. Supreme Court Justice William O. Douglas , and Russian author Leo Tolstoy all spoke of being strongly affected by Thoreau's work, particularly "Civil Disobedience", as did " right-wing theorist Frank Chodorov [who] devoted an entire issue of his monthly, Analysis , to an appreciation of Thoreau".

[ 119 ] Thoreau also influenced many artists and authors including Edward Abbey , Willa Cather , Marcel Proust , William Butler Yeats , Sinclair Lewis , Ernest Hemingway , Upton Sinclair , [ 120 ] E. B. White , Lewis Mumford , [ 121 ] Frank Lloyd Wright , Alexander Posey , [ 122 ] and Gustav Stickley .

[ 123 ] Thoreau also influenced naturalists like John Burroughs , John Muir , E. O. Wilson , Edwin Way Teale , Joseph Wood Krutch , B. F. Skinner , David Brower , and Loren Eiseley , who Publishers Weekly called "the modern Thoreau".

[ 124 ] Thoreau's friend William Ellery Channing published his first biography, Thoreau the Poet-Naturalist , in 1873.

[ 125 ] English writer Henry Stephens Salt wrote a biography of Thoreau in 1890, which popularized Thoreau's ideas in Britain: George Bernard Shaw , Edward Carpenter , and Robert Blatchford were among those who became Thoreau enthusiasts as a result of Salt's advocacy.

[ 126 ] Mohandas Gandhi first read Walden in 1906, while working as a civil rights activist in Johannesburg , South Africa. Gandhi first read " Civil Disobedience " while he sat in a South African prison for the crime of nonviolently protesting discrimination against the Indian population in the Transvaal . The essay galvanized Gandhi, who wrote and published a synopsis of Thoreau's argument, calling what he termed its "incisive logic ... unanswerable" and referring to Thoreau as "one of the greatest and most moral men America has produced." [ 127 ] [ 128 ] He told American reporter Webb Miller , "[Thoreau's] ideas influenced me greatly. I adopted some of them and recommended the study of Thoreau to all of my friends who were helping me in the cause of Indian Independence . Why I actually took the name of my movement from Thoreau's essay 'On the Duty of Civil Disobedience', written about 80 years ago." [ 129 ] Martin Luther King Jr.

noted in his autobiography that his first encounter with the idea of nonviolent resistance was reading "On Civil Disobedience" in 1944 while attending Morehouse College . He wrote in his autobiography that it was, Here, in this courageous New Englander's refusal to pay his taxes and his choice of jail rather than support a war that would spread slavery's territory into Mexico, I made my first contact with the theory of nonviolent resistance. Fascinated by the idea of refusing to cooperate with an evil system, I was so deeply moved that I reread the work several times. I became convinced that noncooperation with evil is as much a moral obligation as is cooperation with good. No other person has been more eloquent and passionate in getting this idea across than Henry David Thoreau. As a result of his writings and personal witness, we are the heirs of a legacy of creative protest. The teachings of Thoreau came alive in our civil rights movement; indeed, they are more alive than ever before. Whether expressed in a sit-in at lunch counters; a freedom ride into Mississippi; a peaceful protest in Albany, Georgia; a bus boycott in Montgomery, Alabama; these are outgrowths of Thoreau's insistence that evil must be resisted and that no moral man can patiently adjust to injustice.

[ 130 ] American psychologist B. F. Skinner wrote that he carried a copy of Thoreau's Walden with him in his youth.

[ 131 ] In Walden Two (published in 1948), Skinner wrote about a fictional utopian community of about 1,000 members inspired by the life of Henry Thoreau.

[ 132 ] Thoreau and his fellow Transcendentalists from Concord, Massachusetts were also a major inspiration for the American composer Charles Ives , whose 1915 Piano Sonata No. 2 , known as the Concord Sonata , features "impressionistic pictures of Emerson and Thoreau", and includes a part for flute, Thoreau's instrument, in its 4th movement.

[ 133 ] Actor Ron Thompson did a dramatic portrayal of Henry David Thoreau in the 1976 NBC television series The Rebels .

[ 134 ] [ 135 ] [ 136 ] Thoreau's ideas have affected and resonated with various strains in the anarchist movement, with Emma Goldman referring to him as "the greatest American anarchist".

[ 137 ] Green anarchism and anarcho-primitivism in particular have both derived inspiration and ecological points-of-view from the writings of Thoreau.

John Zerzan included Thoreau's text "Excursions" (1863) in his edited compilation of works in the anarcho-primitivist tradition titled Against civilization: Readings and reflections .

[ 138 ] Additionally, Murray Rothbard , the founder of anarcho-capitalism , has opined that Thoreau was one of the "great intellectual heroes" of his movement.

[ 119 ] Thoreau was also an important influence on late 19th-century anarchist naturism .

[ 139 ] [ 140 ] Globally, Thoreau's concepts also held importance within individualist anarchist circles [ 141 ] [ 142 ] in Spain, [ 139 ] [ 140 ] [ 141 ] France, [ 141 ] [ 143 ] and Portugal.

[ 144 ] For the 200th anniversary of his birth, publishers released several new editions of his work: a recreation of Walden 's 1902 edition with illustrations, a picture book with excerpts from Walden , and an annotated collection of Thoreau's essays on slavery.

[ 145 ] The United States Postal Service issued a commemorative stamp honoring Thoreau on May 23, 2017, in Concord, MA.

[ 146 ] Critical reception [ edit ] Thoreau's work and career received little attention from his contemporaries until 1865, when the North American Review published James Russell Lowell 's review of various papers of Thoreau's that Emerson had collected and edited.

[ 147 ] Lowell's essay, Letters to Various Persons , [ 148 ] which he republished as a chapter in his book, My Study Windows , [ 149 ] derided Thoreau as a humorless poseur trafficking in commonplaces, a sentimentalist lacking in imagination, a " Diogenes in his barrel", resentfully criticizing what he could not attain.

[ 150 ] Lowell's caustic analysis influenced Scottish author Robert Louis Stevenson , [ 150 ] who criticized Thoreau as a "skulker", saying "He did not wish virtue to go out of him among his fellow-men, but slunk into a corner to hoard it for himself." [ 151 ] Nathaniel Hawthorne had mixed feelings about Thoreau. He noted that "He is a keen and delicate observer of nature—a genuine observer—which, I suspect, is almost as rare a character as even an original poet; and Nature, in return for his love, seems to adopt him as her especial child, and shows him secrets which few others are allowed to witness." [ 152 ] On the other hand, he also wrote that Thoreau "repudiated all regular modes of getting a living, and seems inclined to lead a sort of Indian life among civilized men".

[ 153 ] [ 154 ] In a similar vein, poet John Greenleaf Whittier detested what he deemed to be the "wicked" and "heathenish" message of Walden , claiming that Thoreau wanted man to "lower himself to the level of a woodchuck and walk on four legs".

[ 155 ] In response to such criticisms, the English novelist George Eliot , writing decades later for the Westminster Review , characterized such critics as uninspired and narrow-minded: People—very wise in their own eyes—who would have every man's life ordered according to a particular pattern, and who are intolerant of every existence the utility of which is not palpable to them, may pooh-pooh Mr. Thoreau and this episode in his history, as unpractical and dreamy.

[ 156 ] Thoreau himself also responded to the criticism in a paragraph of his work Walden by highlighting what he felt was the irrelevance of their inquiries: I should not obtrude my affairs so much on the notice of my readers if very particular inquiries had not been made by my townsmen concerning my mode of life, which some would call impertinent, though they do not appear to me at all impertinent, but, considering the circumstances, very natural and pertinent. Some have asked what I got to eat; if I did not feel lonesome; if I was not afraid; and the like. Others have been curious to learn what portion of my income I devoted to charitable purposes; and some, who have large families, how many poor children I maintained. ... Unfortunately, I am confined to this theme by the narrowness of my experience. Moreover, I, on my side, require of every writer, first or last, a simple and sincere account of his own life, and not merely what he has heard of other men's lives; ... I trust that none will stretch the seams in putting on the coat, for it may do good service to him whom it fits.

[ 157 ] Recent criticism has accused Thoreau of hypocrisy, misanthropy , and being sanctimonious , based on his writings in Walden , [ 158 ] although these criticisms have been regarded as highly selective.

[ 159 ] [ 160 ] [ 161 ] Selected works [ edit ] Many of Thoreau's works were not published during his lifetime, including his journals and numerous unfinished manuscripts.

"Aulus Persius Flaccus" (1840) The Service (1840) " A Walk to Wachusett " (1842) " Paradise (to be) Regained " (1843) "The Landlord" (1843) " Sir Walter Raleigh " (1844) " Herald of Freedom " (1844) " Wendell Phillips Before the Concord Lyceum " (1845) " Reform and the Reformers " (1846–48) " Thomas Carlyle and His Works " (1847) A Week on the Concord and Merrimack Rivers (1849) " Resistance to Civil Government ", or "Civil Disobedience"", or "On the Duty of Civil Disobedience"" (1849) "An Excursion to Canada" (1853) " Slavery in Massachusetts " (1854) Walden (1854) " A Plea for Captain John Brown " (1859) " Remarks After the Hanging of John Brown " (1859) " The Last Days of John Brown " (1860) " Walking " (1862) "Autumnal Tints" (1862) "Wild Apples: The History of the Apple Tree" (1862) "The Fall of the Leaf" (1863) Excursions (1863) " Life Without Principle " (1863) "Night and Moonlight" (1863) "The Highland Light" (1864) The Maine Woods (1864) "Cape Cod" (1865) "Letters to Various Persons" (1865) A Yankee in Canada, with Anti-Slavery and Reform Papers (1866) "Early Spring in Massachusetts" (1881) "Summer" (1884) "Winter" (1888) "Autumn" (1892) Miscellanies (1894) Familiar Letters of Henry David Thoreau (1894) Poems of Nature (1895) Some Unpublished Letters of Henry D. and Sophia E. Thoreau (1898) The First and Last Journeys of Thoreau (1905) Journal of Henry David Thoreau (1906) The Correspondence of Henry David Thoreau edited by Walter Harding and Carl Bode (Washington Square: New York University Press, 1958) "The Bluebird Carries the Sky on His Back" (Stanyan, 1970) "The Dispersion of Seeds" published as Faith in a Seed (Island Press, 1993) The Indian Notebooks (1847–1861) selections by Richard F. Fleck Wild Fruits (Unfinished at his death, W.W. Norton, 1999) See also [ edit ] American philosophy List of American philosophers List of peace activists Thoreau Society Walden Woods Project References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e Furtak, Rick.

"Henry David Thoreau" .

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Archived from the original on August 13, 2013 . Retrieved July 27, 2013 .

^ "Henry David Thoreau | Biography & Works" .

Encyclopædia Britannica .

Archived from the original on March 16, 2019 . Retrieved July 8, 2019 .

^ Howe, Daniel Walker, What Hath God Wrought: The Transformation of America, 1815–1848 .

ISBN 978-0195078947 , p. 623.

^ a b c d e f g h i Thoreau, Henry David.

A Week on the Concord and Merrimack Rivers / Walden / The Maine Woods / Cape Cod . Library of America.

ISBN 0940450275 .

^ a b Rosenwald, Lawrence. " The Theory, Practice and Influence of Thoreau's Civil Disobedience ". William Cain, ed. (2006).

A Historical Guide to Henry David Thoreau . Cambridge: Oxford University Press.

Archived at archive.today (archived October 14, 2013) ^ Seligman, Edwin Robert Anderson; Johnson, Alvin Saunders, eds. (1937).

Encyclopaedia of the Social Sciences , p. 12.

^ Gross, David, ed.

The Price of Freedom: Political Philosophy from Thoreau's Journals . p. 8.

ISBN 978-1434805522 . "The Thoreau of these journals distrusted doctrine, and, though it is accurate I think to call him an anarchist, he was by no means doctrinaire in this either." ^ THUR-oh or Thor-OH? And How Do We Know?

Archived March 23, 2017, at the Wayback Machine Thoreau Reader .

^ Thoreau's Walden Archived October 30, 2013, at the Wayback Machine , under the sidebar "Pronouncing Thoreau".

^ See the note on pronouncing the name at the Thoreau Institute at Walden Woods Archived July 27, 2019, at the Wayback Machine .

^ "Thoreau" .

Dictionary.com . 2013.

Archived from the original on August 27, 2021 . Retrieved February 17, 2013 .

^ Wells, J.C. (1990) Pronunciation Dictionary , s.v. "Thoreau". Essex, UK: Longman.

^ Thoreau, Henry David (1865).

"Chapter 10 A. Provincetown" .

Cape Cod . Archived from the original on August 22, 2017 . Retrieved February 13, 2007 .

^ Harding, Walter.

"The Days of Henry Thoreau" .

thoreau.eserver.org .

Archived from the original on November 14, 2016 . Retrieved February 9, 2015 .

^ Nelson, Randy F. (1981).

The Almanac of American Letters . Los Altos, California: William Kaufmann. p. 51.

ISBN 086576008X .

^ a b c Wendy McElroy (July 30, 2005).

"Henry David Thoreau and 'Civil Disobedience' " .

LewRockwell.com .

Archived from the original on June 20, 2015 . Retrieved May 21, 2023 .

^ Henry David Thoreau: A Biography . Twenty-First Century Books. 2006.

ISBN 978-0822558934 .

^ "RootsWeb's WorldConnect Project: Ancestors of Mary Ann Gillam and Stephen Old" .

Archived from the original on October 16, 2008 . Retrieved September 2, 2008 .

^ History of the Fraternity System Archived July 4, 2009, at the Wayback Machine .

^ "First Student Protest in the United States" . Archived from the original on December 15, 2019.

^ Henry David Thoreau Archived October 31, 2006, at the Wayback Machine , "Meet the Writers." Barnes & Noble.com ^ Biography of Henry David Thoreau Archived August 6, 2019, at the Wayback Machine . americanpoems.com ^ a b c "Helen and Sophia Thoreau, Henry David's Amazing Sisters" .

New England Historical Society . September 19, 2020 . Retrieved May 15, 2022 .

^ Blanding, Thomas (1980).

"Beans, Baked and Half-Baked (13)" .

The Concord Saunterer .

15 (1): 16– 22.

ISSN 1068-5359 .

^ Myerson, Joel (1994).

"Barzillai Frost's Funeral Sermon on the Death of John Thoreau Jr" .

Huntington Library Quarterly .

57 (4): 367– 376.

doi : 10.2307/3817844 .

ISSN 0018-7895 .

JSTOR 3817844 .

^ "Thoreau's Life | The Thoreau Society" .

www.thoreausociety.org . Retrieved May 16, 2022 .

^ Herrick, Gerri L. (1978).

"Sophia Thoreau – "Cara Sophia" " .

The Concord Saunterer .

13 (3): 5– 12.

ISSN 1068-5359 .

JSTOR 23393396 .

^ Roman, John (June 24, 2021).

"The Homes of Henry David Thoreau" .

Electrum Magazine . Retrieved May 16, 2022 .

^ "The Writings of Henry D. Thoreau" .

thoreau.library.ucsb.edu . Retrieved May 16, 2022 .

^ "Organizations Thoreau Joined" . Thoreau Society. Archived from the original on May 3, 2013 . Retrieved June 26, 2014 .

^ "Thoreau's Diploma".

American Literature . Vol. 17, May 1945. pp. 174–175.

^ Walter Harding (June 4, 1984).

"Live Your Own Life" .

Geneseo Summer Compass . Archived from the original on January 29, 2006 . Retrieved November 21, 2009 .

^ "Thoreau Farm" .

thoreaufarm.org .

Archived from the original on October 30, 2019 . Retrieved April 23, 2013 .

^ a b c Sattelmeyer, Robert (1988).

Thoreau's Reading: A Study in Intellectual History with Bibliographical Catalogue .

Chapter 2 Archived September 8, 2015, at the Wayback Machine . Princeton: Princeton University Press.

^ The History of Concord, Massachusetts, Vol. I, Colonial Concord, Volume 1 , Alfred Sereno Hudson (1904), p. 311 ^ Dean, Bradley P. " A Thoreau Chronology Archived June 20, 2017, at the Wayback Machine ".

^ Myerson, Joel (1994). "Barzillai Frost's Funeral Sermon on the Death of John Thoreau Jr".

Huntington Library Quarterly .

57 (4): 367– 376.

doi : 10.2307/3817844 .

JSTOR 3817844 .

^ Woodlief, Ann. " Henry David Thoreau Archived October 9, 2019, at the Wayback Machine ".

^ "Aulus Persius Flaccus" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on September 25, 2012.

^ " 'The Dial' " . Walden.org. Archived from the original on October 18, 2015.

^ Thoreau, Henry David (2007).

I to Myself: An Annotated Selection from the Journal of Henry D. Thoreau . Jeffrey S. Cramer, ed. New Haven: Yale University Press. p. 1.

^ a b c Cheever, Susan (2006).

American Bloomsbury: Louisa May Alcott, Ralph Waldo Emerson, Margaret Fuller, Nathaniel Hawthorne, and Henry David Thoreau; Their Lives, Their Loves, Their Work . Detroit: Thorndike Press. p. 90.

ISBN 078629521X .

^ Salt, H.S. (1890).

The Life of Henry David Thoreau . London: Richard Bentley & Son. p.

69 .

^ Sanborn, F.B., ed. (1906).

The Writings of Henry David Thoreau . Vol. VI, Familiar Letters .

Chapter 1, "Years of Discipline" Archived September 7, 2015, at the Wayback Machine . Boston: Houghton Mifflin.

^ Petroski, Henry (1992).

The Pencil: A History of Design and Circumstance . New York: Knopf. pp.

104 –125.

ISBN 978-0679734154 .

^ Conrad, Randall. (Fall 2005).

"Machine in the Wetland: Re-imagining Thoreau's Plumbago-Grinder" Archived June 9, 2007, at the Wayback Machine .

Thoreau Society Bulletin Archived December 23, 2007, at the Wayback Machine 253.

^ A Chronology of Thoreau's Life, with Events of the Times Archived February 13, 2016, at the Wayback Machine . The Thoreau Project, Calliope Film Resources. Accessed June 11, 2007.

^ Grammardog Guide to Walden . Grammardog. p. 25.

ISBN 1608570843 .

^ Packer 2007 , p.

183 .

^ "Flint's Pond" . Lincoln Land Conservation Trust and Rural Land Foundation . Retrieved May 6, 2023 .

^ Meltzer, Milton (2006).

Henry David Thoreau: A Biography . Twenty-First Century Books. p. 23.

ISBN 978-0822558934 .

^ Richardson.

Emerson: The Mind on Fire . p. 399.

^ "Google Maps" .

Archived from the original on January 25, 2020 . Retrieved October 13, 2018 .

^ Gravett, Sharon L. (1995).

"Carlyle's Demanding Companion: Henry David Thoreau" .

Carlyle Studies Annual (15). Saint Joseph's University Press: 21– 31.

JSTOR 44946086 .

^ Thoreau, H.D., letter to Ralph Waldo Emerson, February 23, 1848.

^ Alcott, Bronson (1938).

Journals . Boston: Little, Brown.

^ "Morrissociety.org" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on January 5, 2011.

^ "Thoreausociety.org" . Archived from the original on November 29, 2010.

^ Frost, Robert (1968). Letter to Wade Van Dore, June 24, 1922, in Twentieth Century Interpretations of Walden . Richard Ruland, ed. Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice Hall. p. 8.

LCCN 68-14480 .

^ Updike, John (2004). "A Sage for All Seasons".

The Guardian Archived August 27, 2021, at the Wayback Machine .

^ Ehrlich, Eugene; Carruth, Gorton (1982).

The Oxford Illustrated Literary Guide to the United States . New York: Oxford University Press. p. 45.

ISBN 0195031865 .

^ Weisman, Adam Paul (Autumn 1995). "Postcolonialism in North America: Imaginative Colonization in Henry David Thoreau's 'A Yankee in Canada' and Jacques Poulin's 'Volkswagen Blues' ".

The Massachusetts Review .

36 (3): 478– 479.

^ Thoreau, Henry David (1961).

A Yankee in Canada . Montreal: Harvest House. p.

13 .

^ a b Lacroix, Patrick (Fall 2017). "Finding Thoreau in French Canada: The Ideological Legacy of the American Revolution".

American Review of Canadian Studies .

47 (3): 266– 279.

doi : 10.1080/02722011.2017.1370719 .

S2CID 148808283 .

^ Letters to H. G. O. Blake Archived June 17, 2011, at the Wayback Machine . Walden.org ^ Thoreau, Henry David (1862). "Autumnal Tints".

The Atlantic Monthly , October. pp. 385–402.

Reprint Archived March 7, 2010, at the Wayback Machine . Retrieved November 21, 2009.

^ Thorson, Robert M. (2013).

Walden's Shore: Henry David Thoreau and Nineteenth-Century Science . Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press.

ISBN 978-0674724785 .

^ Primack, Richard B. (June 13, 2013).

"Tracking Climate Change with the Help of Henry David Thoreau" .

Archived from the original on September 23, 2015 . Retrieved September 23, 2015 .

^ Worster, Donald (1977).

Nature's Economy . New York: Cambridge University. pp.

69– 71.

ISBN 0521452732 .

^ Thoreau, Henry David (1970).

The Annotated Walden . Philip Van Doren Stern, ed. pp. 96, 132.

^ Christie, John Aldrich (1965).

Thoreau as World Traveler . New York: Columbia University Press.

^ Letters of H. G. O. Blake Archived June 17, 2011, at the Wayback Machine in The Writings of Henry David Thoreau: The Digital Collection .

^ Reynolds, David S. (2005).

John Brown, Abolitionist . Knopf. p. 4.

^ Richardson, Robert D. Jr. (1993). "Introduction". In Dean, Bradley P. (ed.).

Faith in a Seed: The First Publication of Thoreau's Last Manuscript . Washington, D.C.: Island Press. p. 17.

^ About Thoreau: Thoreau, the Man Archived June 20, 2016, at the Wayback Machine .

^ Thoreau Chronology Archived June 20, 2017, at the Wayback Machine .

^ Critchley, Simon (2009).

The Book of Dead Philosophers . New York: Random House. p. 181.

ISBN 978-0307472632 .

Archived from the original on August 27, 2021 . Retrieved June 20, 2015 .

^ "The Writer's Almanac" . American Public Media. Archived from the original on July 8, 2017 . Retrieved June 1, 2017 .

^ Packer, Barbara L. (2007).

The Transcendentalists . Athens, Georgia: University of Georgia Press. p. 272.

ISBN 978-0820329581 .

^ Emerson, Ralph Waldo (August 1862).

"Thoreau" .

The Atlantic . pp. 239–.

^ Walden, or Life in the Woods (Chapter 1: "Economy") ^ Nathaniel Hawthorne, Passages From the American Note-Books, entry for September 2, 1842.

^ Brooks, Van Wyck.

The Flowering of New England . New York: E.P. Dutton and Company, Inc., 1952. p. 310 ^ a b Cheever, Susan (2006).

American Bloomsbury: Louisa May Alcott, Ralph Waldo Emerson, Margaret Fuller, Nathaniel Hawthorne, and Henry David Thoreau; Their Lives, Their Loves, Their Work . Detroit: Thorndike Press. Large print edition. p. 241.

ISBN 078629521X .

^ Nash, Roderick.

Wilderness and the American Mind: Henry David Thoreau: Philosopher .

^ a b c d Brown, Julie (2010).

Writers on the Spectrum: How Autism and Asperger's Syndrome Have Influenced Literary Writing . Philadelphia, PA: Jessica Kingsley Publishers. pp.

60– 79.

ISBN 978-1843109136 .

^ Knoles, Thomas (2016).

"Introduction" .

American Antiquarian Society . Archived from the original on June 5, 2023 . Retrieved December 17, 2021 .

She was in Watertown when Henry wrote to her with his own proposal, probably in early November [1840]...'I wrote to H.T. that evening. I never felt so badly at sending a letter in my life.' ^ "Sophia Ford: The Great Love Henry David Thoreau Didn't Want" .

New England Historical Society . November 16, 2014 . Retrieved June 4, 2020 .

^ a b c Harding, Walter (1991). "Thoreau's Sexuality".

Journal of Homosexuality 21.3. pp. 23–45.

^ Quinby, Lee (1999).

Millennial Seduction . Cornell University Press. p.

68 .

ISBN 978-0801486012 .

^ Harding, Walter (1991).

"Thoreau's Sexuality" (PDF) .

Journal of Homosexuality .

21 (3). State University College, Genseco, New York: 23– 45.

doi : 10.1300/J082v21n03_02 .

PMID 1880400 .

^ Bronski, Michael (2012).

A Queer History of the United States . Beacon Press. p. 50.

ISBN 978-0807044650 .

^ Michael, Warner (1991). "Walden's Erotic Economy" in Comparative American Identities: Race, Sex and Nationality in the Modern Text . Hortense Spillers, ed. New York: Routledge. pp. 157–173.

^ Robbins, Paula Ivaska (September–October 2011). "The Natural Thoreau".

The Gay and Lesbian Review .

ProQuest 890209875 .

^ Richardson, Robert; Moser, Barry (1986).

Henry Thoreau: A Life of the Mind . University of California Press. pp. 58–63.

^ Canby, Henry Seidel (1939).

Thoreau . Houghton Mifflin. p. 117.

^ Katz, Jonathan Ned (1992).

Gay American History: Lesbians and Gay Men in the USA . New York: Meridian. pp. 481–492.

^ López, Robert Oscar (2007). "Thoreau, Homer and Community", in Henry David Thoreau . Harold Bloom, ed. New York: Infobase Publishing. pp. 153–174.

^ Summers, Claude J The Gay and Lesbian Literary Heritage , Routledge, New York, 2002, p. 202 ^ Bergman, David, ed. (2009).

Gay American Autobiography: Writings From Whitman to Sedaris . University of Wisconsin Press. p. 10 ^ Lebeaux, Richard (1984).

Thoreau's Seasons . University of Massachusetts Press. p. 386, n. 31.

^ a b The Last Days of John Brown Archived December 22, 2010, at the Wayback Machine from the Writings of Henry David Thoreau: The Digital Collection ^ a b c Thoreau, Henry David.

"On the Duty of Civil Disobedience, 1849, original title: Resistance to Civil Government" .

The Project Gutenberg . Retrieved May 20, 2023 .

^ Thoreau, Henry David (1961).

A Yankee in Canada . Montreal: Harvest House. pp.

105–107 .

^ a b The Service Archived December 22, 2010, at the Wayback Machine from the Writings of Henry David Thoreau: The Digital Collection ^ Transcendental Ethos Archived September 19, 2013, at the Wayback Machine from The Thoreau Reader ^ "The Walden Woods Project" .

Walden.org . Archived from the original on June 20, 2016.

^ John Lachs and Robert Talisse (2007).

American Philosophy: An Encyclopedia . Routledge. p. 310.

ISBN 978-0415939263 .

^ Dickason, David G. (1991).

"The Nineteenth-Century Indo-American Ice Trade: An Hyperborean Epic" .

Modern Asian Studies .

25 (1): 53– 89.

doi : 10.1017/S0026749X00015845 .

ISSN 0026-749X .

JSTOR 312669 .

S2CID 144932927 .

Archived from the original on April 18, 2021 . Retrieved April 18, 2021 .

^ "Simplicity Day 2020: How Bhagavad Gita inspired American philosopher Henry David Thoreau" .

Times of India . July 12, 2020.

Archived from the original on April 18, 2021 . Retrieved April 18, 2021 .

^ Davis, Richard H. (January 2018).

"Henry David Thoreau, Yogi" .

Common Knowledge .

24 (1): 56– 89.

doi : 10.1215/0961754X-4253822 .

ISSN 0961-754X .

S2CID 148836840 – via Duke University Press.

^ Miller, Barbara S. "Why Did Henry David Thoreau Take the Bhagavad-Gita to Walden Pond?" Parabola 12.1 (Spring 1986): 58–63.

^ a b Berger, Michael Benjamin.

Thoreau's Late Career and The Dispersion of Seeds: The Saunterer's Synoptic Vision .

ISBN 157113168X , p. 52.

^ Wulf, Andrea.

The Invention of Nature: Alexander Humboldt's New World . New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 2015, p. 250.

^ Cain, William E.

A Historical Guide to Henry David Thoreau .

ISBN 0195138635 , p. 146.

^ Analysis and Notes on Walden: Henry Thoreau's Text with Adjacent Thoreauvian Commentary Archived March 18, 2006, at the Wayback Machine by Ken Kifer, 2002 ^ Appletons' annual cyclopaedia and register of important events of the year: 1862 . New York: D. Appleton & Company. 1863. p. 666.

^ Pattee, Fred Lewis, A History of American Literature Since 1870 , Ch.VII, pp. 138–139 (Appleton: New York, London, 1915).

^ a b Rothbard, Murray .

Confessions of a Right-Wing Liberal Archived June 18, 2015, at the Wayback Machine , Ramparts , VI, 4, June 15, 1968 ^ Maynard, W. Barksdale, Walden Pond: A History . Oxford University Press, 2005. p. 265 ^ Mumford, Lewis, The Golden Day: A Study in American Experience and Culture . Boni and Liveright, 1926. pp. 56–59, ^ Posey, Alexander.

Lost Creeks: Collected Journals . (Edited by Matthew Wynn Sivils) University of Nebraska Press, 2009. p. 38 ^ Saunders, Barry.

A Complex Fate: Gustav Stickley and the Craftsman Movement . Preservation Press, 1996. p. 4 ^ Kifer, Ken Analysis and Notes on Walden: Henry Thoreau's Text with Adjacent Thoreauvian Commentary Archived March 18, 2006, at the Wayback Machine ^ Channing, William Ellery; Merrymount Press; Sanborn, F.B. (Franklin Benjamin); Updike, Daniel Berkeley (1902).

Thoreau, the poet-naturalist, with Memorial verses . University of California Libraries. Boston, C.E. Goodspeed.

^ Hendrick, George and Oehlschlaeger, Fritz (eds.) Toward the Making of Thoreau's Modern Reputation , University of Illinois Press, 1979.

^ McElroy, Wendy (May 4, 2011) Here, the State Is Nowhere to Be Seen Archived September 13, 2014, at the Wayback Machine , Mises Institute ^ "Although he was practicing civil disobedience before he read Thoreau's essay, Gandhi was quick to point out the debt he owed to Thoreau and other thinkers like him". Shawn Chandler Bingham, Thoreau and the sociological imagination : the wilds of society . Lanham, Md. : Rowman and Littlefield Publishers, 2008.

ISBN 978-0742560581 p. 31.

^ Miller, Webb. I Found No Peace. Garden City, 1938. 238–239 ^ King, M.L.

Autobiography of Martin Luther King, Jr.

Archived March 8, 2007, at the Wayback Machine chapter two ^ Skinner, B.F., A Matter of Consequences ^ Skinner, B.F., Walden Two (1948) ^ Burkholder, James Peter.

Charles Ives and His World.

Princeton University Press, 1996 (pp. 50–51) ^ "Tele-Vuesdate=Sunday, June 6, 1976" .

Independent Press-Telegram .

Long Beach, California . p. 170.

Archived from the original on November 5, 2018 . Retrieved October 27, 2015 .

^ "TV Log" .

Redlands Daily Facts .

Redlands, California . June 5, 1976. p. 10.

Archived from the original on September 29, 2015 . Retrieved October 27, 2015 .

^ Actor Ron Thompson as Henry David Thoreau in The Rebels .

NBC . June 6, 1976.

Archived from the original on December 11, 2021.

^ Goldman, Emma (1917).

Anarchism and Other Essays . Mother Earth Publishing Association. p.

62 .

^ Zerzan, John.

Against Civilization: Readings And Reflections .

Archived from the original on August 7, 2020 . Retrieved December 13, 2017 – via Amazon.

^ a b "El naturismo libertario en la Península Ibérica (1890–1939) by Jose Maria Rosello" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on January 2, 2016.

^ a b Ortega, Carlos.

"Anarchism, Nudism, Naturism" .

Archived from the original on September 9, 2020 . Retrieved July 20, 2018 .

^ a b c " 'La insumisión voluntaria. El anarquismo individualista Español durante la dictadura y la segunda República (1923–1938)' by Xavier Diez" . Archived from the original on May 26, 2006.

^ "Les anarchistes individualistes du début du siècle l'avaient bien compris, et intégraient le naturisme dans leurs préoccupations. Il est vraiment dommage que ce discours se soit peu à peu effacé, d'antan plus que nous assistons, en ce moment, à un retour en force du puritanisme (conservateur par essence)." "Anarchisme et naturisme, aujourd'hui." by Cathy Ytak Archived February 25, 2009, at the Wayback Machine ^ Recension des articles de l'En-Dehors consacrés au naturisme et au nudisme Archived October 14, 2008, at the Wayback Machine ^ Freire, João. "Anarchisme et naturisme au Portugal, dans les années 1920" in Les anarchistes du Portugal . [Bibliographic data necessary for this ref.] ^ Williams, John (July 7, 2017).

"Alcoholism in America" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 .

Archived from the original on August 4, 2017 . Retrieved August 23, 2017 .

^ "American Philatelic Society" .

stamps.org .

Archived from the original on August 6, 2018 . Retrieved August 10, 2018 .

^ Pattee, A History of American Literature Since 1870 , pp. 137–138.

^ "Lowell, James Russell, "Letters to Various Persons", in The North American Review , Vol. CI, No. 209, pp. 597–608 (October 1865)" .

The North American Review .

101 (209): 597– 608. 1865.

JSTOR 25107873 .

^ Lowell, James Russell (May 6, 1871).

"My study windows" . Boston : Houghton, Mifflin – via Internet Archive.

^ a b Pattee, A History of American Literature Since 1870 , p. 138.

^ Stevenson, Robert Louis (1880).

"Henry David Thoreau: His Character and Opinions" .

Cornhill Magazine . Archived from the original on October 12, 2006 . Retrieved December 3, 2021 .

Now Thoreau's content and ecstasy in living was, we may say, like a plant that he had watered and tended with womanish solicitude; for there is apt to be something unmanly, something almost dastardly, in a life that does not move with dash and freedom, and that fears the bracing contact of the world. In one word, Thoreau was a skulker ^ Nathaniel Hawthorne, Passages From the American Note-Books , entry for September 2, 1842.

^ Hawthorne, The Heart of Hawthorne's Journals , p. 106.

^ Borst, Raymond R.

The Thoreau Log: A Documentary Life of Henry David Thoreau, 1817–1862.

New York: G.K. Hall, 1992.

^ Wagenknecht, Edward.

John Greenleaf Whittier: A Portrait in Paradox . New York: Oxford University Press, 1967: 112.

^ The New England Quarterly , Vol. 6, No. 4 (Dec., 1933), pp. 733–746 ^ Thoreau Walden (1854) ^ Schultz, Kathryn (October 19, 2015).

"Henry David Thoreau, Hypocrite" .

The New Yorker . Archived from the original on October 19, 2015 . Retrieved October 19, 2015 .

^ "Why do we love Thoreau? Because he was right" . Medium. October 19, 2015. Archived from the original on October 19, 2015 . Retrieved October 19, 2015 .

^ Malesic, Jonathan (October 19, 2015).

"Henry David Thoreau's Radical Optimism" .

New Republic . Archived from the original on October 19, 2015 . Retrieved October 19, 2015 .

^ Hohn, Donovan (October 21, 2015).

"Everybody Hates Henry" .

New Republic . Archived from the original on October 26, 2015 . Retrieved October 21, 2015 .

Further reading [ edit ] Balthrop‐Lewis, Alda. "Exemplarist Environmental Ethics: Thoreau's Political Ascetism against Solution Thinking." Journal of Religious Ethics 47.3 (2019): 525–550.

Bode, Carl .

Best of Thoreau's Journals . Southern Illinois University Press. 1967.

Botkin, Daniel.

No Man's Garden Buell, Lawrence.

The Environmental Imagination: Thoreau, Nature Writing, and the Formation of American Culture (Harvard UP, 1995) Cafaro, Philip.

Thoreau's Living Ethics: "Walden" and the Pursuit of Virtue (U of Georgia Press, 2004) Chodorov, Frank .

The Disarming Honesty of Henry David Thoreau Archived September 14, 2014, at the Wayback Machine Conrad, Randall.

Who He Was & Why He Matters Archived October 12, 2006, at the Wayback Machine Cramer, Jeffrey S.

Solid Seasons: The Friendship of Henry David Thoreau and Ralph Waldo Emerson (Counterpoint Press, 2019).

Dean, Bradley P. ed., Letters to a Spiritual Seeker . New York: W.W. Norton & Company, 2004.

Finley, James S., ed.

Henry David Thoreau in Context (Cambridge UP, 2017).

Furtak, Rick, Ellsworth, Jonathan, and Reid, James D., eds.

Thoreau's Importance for Philosophy . New York: Fordham University Press, 2012.

Gionfriddo, Michael. "Thoreau, the Work of Breathing, and Building Castles in the Air: Reading Walden's 'Conclusion'." The Concord Saunterer 25 (2017): 49–90 online Archived April 17, 2021, at the Wayback Machine .

Guhr, Sebastian.

Mr. Lincoln & Mr. Thoreau . S. Marix Verlag, Wiesbaden 2021.

Harding, Walter.

The Days of Henry Thoreau . Princeton University Press, 1982.

Hendrick, George. "The Influence of Thoreau's 'Civil Disobedience' on Gandhi's Satyagraha." The New England Quarterly 29, no. 4 (December 1956). 462–471.

Hess, Scott (2019). "Walden Pond as Thoreau's Landscape of Genius".

Nineteenth-Century Literature .

74 (2): 224– 250.

doi : 10.1525/ncl.2019.74.2.224 .

ISSN 0891-9356 .

S2CID 204481348 .

Howarth, William.

The Book of Concord: Thoreau's Life as a Writer . Viking Press, 1982 Judd, Richard W.

Finding Thoreau: The Meaning of Nature in the Making of an Environmental Icon (2018) excerpt Archived July 23, 2021, at the Wayback Machine McGregor, Robert Kuhn.

A Wider View of the Universe: Henry Thoreau's Study of Nature (U of Illinois Press, 1997).

Marble, Annie Russell .

Thoreau: His Home, Friends and Books . New York: AMS Press. 1969 [1902] Myerson, Joel et al.

The Cambridge Companion to Henry David Thoreau . Cambridge University Press. 1995 Nash, Roderick.

Henry David Thoreau, Philosopher Paolucci, Stefano.

"The Foundations of Thoreau's 'Castles in the Air'" Archived August 27, 2021, at the Wayback Machine , Thoreau Society Bulletin , No. 290 (Summer 2015), 10. (See also the Full Unedited Version of the same article.) Parrington, Vernon.

Main Current in American Thought Archived September 1, 2006, at the Wayback Machine . V 2 online. 1927 Parrington, Vernon L.

Henry Thoreau: Transcendental Economist Archived June 12, 2007, at the Wayback Machine Petroski, Henry. "H.D. Thoreau, Engineer." American Heritage of Invention and Technology , Vol. 5, No. 2, pp. 8–16 Petrulionis, Sandra Harbert, ed., Thoreau in His Own Time: A Biographical Chronicle of His Life, Drawn From Recollections, Interviews, and Memoirs by Family, Friends, and Associates.

Iowa City: University of Iowa Press, 2012.

ISBN 1609380878 Richardson, Robert D.

Henry Thoreau: A Life of the Mind . University of California Press Berkeley and Los Angeles. 1986.

ISBN 0520063465 Riggenbach, Jeff (2008).

"Thoreau, Henry David (1817–1862)" . In Hamowy, Ronald (ed.).

The Encyclopedia of Libertarianism .

Thousand Oaks, California : Sage . pp.

506– 507.

doi : 10.4135/9781412965811.n309 .

ISBN 978-1412965804 .

LCCN 2008009151 .

OCLC 750831024 .

Archived from the original on September 30, 2020 . Retrieved June 20, 2015 .

Riggenbach, Jeff (July 15, 2010).

"Henry David Thoreau: Founding Father of American Libertarian Thought" .

Mises Daily .

Archived from the original on September 14, 2014 . Retrieved September 13, 2014 .

Ridl, Jack. " Moose. Indian.

Archived August 27, 2021, at the Wayback Machine " Scintilla (poem on Thoreau's last words) Schneider, Richard Civilizing Thoreau: Human Ecology and the Emerging Social Sciences in the Major Works Rochester, New York . Camden House. 2016.

ISBN 978-1571139603 Smith, David C. "The Transcendental Saunterer: Thoreau and the Search for Self." Savannah, Georgia : Frederic C. Beil, 1997.

ISBN 0913720747 Sullivan, Mark W.  "Henry David Thoreau in the American Art of the 1950s." The Concord Saunterer:  A Journal of Thoreau Studies , New Series, Vol. 18 (2010), pp. 68–89.

Sullivan, Mark W.

Picturing Thoreau:  Henry David Thoreau in American Visual Culture.

Lanham, Maryland :  Lexington Books, 2015 Tauber, Alfred I .

Henry David Thoreau and the Moral Agency of Knowing . University of California, Berkeley. 2001.

ISBN 0520239156 Henry David Thoreau Archived March 4, 2016, at the Wayback Machine – Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy Henry David Thoreau Archived December 4, 2010, at the Wayback Machine – Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy Thorson, Robert M.

The Boatman: Henry David Thoreau's River Years (Harvard UP, 2017), on his  scientific study of the Concord River in the late 1850s.

Thorson, Robert M.

Walden's Shore: Henry David Thoreau and Nineteenth-Century Science (2015).

Thorson, Robert M.

The Guide to Walden Pond: An Exploration of the History, Nature, Landscape, and Literature of One of America's Most Iconic Places (2018).

Traub, Courtney (2015). " 'First-Rate Fellows': Excavating Thoreau's Radical Egalitarian Reflections in a Late Draft of 'Allegash' ".

The Concord Saunterer: A Journal of Thoreau Studies .

23 : 74– 96.

Walls, Laura Dassow .

Seeing New Worlds: Henry David Thoreau and 19th Century Science . University of Wisconsin. 1995.

ISBN 0299147444 Walls, Laura Dassow .

Henry David Thoreau: A Life . The University of Chicago Press. 2017.

ISBN 978-0226344690 Ward, John William . 1969 Red, White, and Blue: Men, Books, and Ideas in American Culture . New York: Oxford University Press External links [ edit ] English Wikisource has original works by or about: Henry David Thoreau Wikiquote has quotations related to Henry David Thoreau .

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Henry David Thoreau .

Wikisource has the text of the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica article " Thoreau, Henry David ".

Library resources about Henry David Thoreau Online books Resources in your library Resources in other libraries By Henry David Thoreau Online books Resources in your library Resources in other libraries The Thoreau Society The Thoreau Edition "Writings of Emerson and Thoreau" from C-SPAN 's American Writers: A Journey Through History Texts [ edit ] Works by Henry David Thoreau in eBook form at Standard Ebooks Works by Henry David Thoreau at Project Gutenberg Works by Henry D. Thoreau at Faded Page (Canada) Works by or about Henry David Thoreau at the Internet Archive Works by Henry David Thoreau at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) Works by Thoreau at Open Library Poems by Thoreau Archived October 19, 2017, at the Wayback Machine at the Academy of American Poets The Thoreau Reader Archived April 5, 2006, at the Wayback Machine by The Thoreau Society The Writings of Henry David Thoreau at The Walden Woods Project Scans of Thoreau's Land Surveys at the Concord Free Public Library Henry David Thoreau Online – The Works and Life of Henry D. Thoreau v t e Henry David Thoreau Books A Week on the Concord and Merrimack Rivers (1849) Walden (1854) Speeches " Remarks After the Hanging of John Brown " (1859) Essays " The Service " (1840) " A Walk to Wachusett " (1842) " Paradise (to be) Regained " (1843) " Sir Walter Raleigh " (1844) " Herald of Freedom " (1844) " Wendell Phillips Before the Concord Lyceum " (1845) " Reform and the Reformers " (1846–1848) " Thomas Carlyle and His Works " (1847) " Civil Disobedience " (1849) " Slavery in Massachusetts " (1854) " A Plea for Captain John Brown " (1859) " The Last Days of John Brown " (1860) " Walking " (1861) " Life Without Principle " (1863) Excursions anthology (1863) Poems " The Old Marlborough Road " Related Thoreau Society The Writings of Henry D. Thoreau Wheeler-Minot Farmhouse (birthplace) Thoreau–Alcott House Concord Museum Walden Pond Walden Woods Project The Night Thoreau Spent in Jail (1969 play) Thoreau: A Sublime Life (2012 comic book) Links to related articles v t e Anarchism Concepts Anarchy Anarchist Black Cross Anarchist criminology Anationalism Anti-authoritarianism Anti-capitalism Anti-militarism Affinity group Autonomous social center Black bloc Classless society Class struggle Consensus decision-making Conscientious objector Critique of work Decentralization Deep ecology Direct action Free love Freethought Horizontalidad Individualism Law Mutual aid Participatory politics Permanent autonomous zone Prefigurative politics Proletarian internationalism Propaganda of the deed Refusal of work Revolution Rewilding Sabotage Security culture Self-ownership Social ecology Sociocracy Somatherapy Spontaneous order Squatting Temporary autonomous zone Union of egoists Voluntary association Workers' council Issues Animal rights Capitalism Education Love and sex Nationalism Religion Violence Schools of thought Classical Individualist Egoist Illegalist Naturist Philosophical Mutualist Social Collectivist Communist Magonist Post-classical Feminist Green Primitivist Social ecology Independence Insurrectionary Pacifist Religious Christian Buddhist Jewish Without adjectives Contemporary Black Free-market Postcolonial Post-anarchist Post-left Queer Types of federation Affinity group Anarcho-syndicalism Platformism Anarchist synthesis Union of egoists Economics Communization Cooperative Cost the limit of price Decentralized planned economy Free association General strike Gift economy Give-away shop Labor voucher Market socialism Mutual bank Mutual credit Social ownership Wage slavery Workers' self-management Culture A las Barricadas Anarchist bookfair Anarcho-punk Anarchy in the U.K.

Architecture Arts DIY ethic Escuela Moderna Films Freeganism Infoshop Independent Media Center The Internationale Lifestylism May Day " No gods, no masters " Popular education " Property is theft!

" Radical cheerleading Radical environmentalism Self-managed social center Symbolism History French Revolution Revolutions of 1848 Spanish Regional Federation of the IWA Paris Commune Hague Congress Cantonal rebellion Haymarket affair Trial of the Thirty International Conference of Rome Ferrer movement Strandzha Commune Congress of Amsterdam Tragic Week High Treason Incident Manifesto of the Sixteen German Revolution of 1918–1919 Bavarian Soviet Republic 1919 United States bombings Biennio Rosso Kronstadt rebellion Makhnovshchina Amakasu Incident Alt Llobregat insurrection Anarchist insurrection of January 1933 Anarchist insurrection of December 1933 Spanish Revolution of 1936 Barcelona May Days Red inverted triangle Labadie Collection Provo May 1968 Kate Sharpley Library Carnival Against Capital 1999 Seattle WTO protests Really Really Free Market Occupy movement People Alston Armand Ba Bakunin Berkman Bonanno Bookchin Bourdin Chomsky Cleyre Day Durruti Ellul Ervin Faure Ferrer Feyerabend Giovanni Godwin Goldman González Prada Graeber Guillaume He-Yin Kanno Kōtoku Kropotkin Landauer Liu Magón Makhno Maksimov Malatesta Mett Michel Most Parsons Pi i Margall Pouget Proudhon Raichō Reclus Rocker Santillán Spooner Stirner Thoreau Tolstoy Tucker Volin Ward Warren Yarchuk Zerzan Lists Anarcho-punk bands Books Fictional characters Films Jewish anarchists Musicians Periodicals By region Africa Albania Algeria Andorra Argentina Armenia Australia Austria Azerbaijan Bangladesh Belarus Belgium Bolivia Bosnia and Herzegovina Brazil Bulgaria Canada Chile China Colombia Costa Rica Croatia Cuba Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Dominican Republic Ecuador Egypt El Salvador Estonia Finland France French Guiana Georgia Germany Greece Guatemala Hong Kong Hungary Iceland India Indonesia Iran Ireland Israel Italy Japan Korea Latvia Malaysia Mexico Monaco Mongolia Morocco Netherlands New Zealand Nicaragua Nigeria Norway Panama Paraguay Peru Philippines Poland Portugal Romania Russia Serbia Singapore South Africa Spain Sweden Switzerland Syria ( DAANES ) Taiwan Timor-Leste Tunisia Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom United States ( Puerto Rico ) Uruguay Venezuela Vietnam Related topics Anarcho-capitalism Anti-corporatism Anti-consumerism Anti-fascism Anti-globalization Anti-statism Anti-war movement Autarchism Autonomism Communism Definition of anarchism and libertarianism Dual power IWA Labour movement Left communism Left-libertarianism Libertarianism Libertarian socialism Marxism National-anarchism Relationship between Friedrich Nietzsche and Max Stirner Situationist International Socialism Spontaneous order Anarchism portal Category Outline v t e Mahatma Gandhi Life events and movements Indian Ambulance Corps Tolstoy Farm Bardoli Satyagraha Champaran Satyagraha Kheda Satyagraha Indian independence movement Non-cooperation movement Chauri Chaura incident Purna Swaraj flag Salt March Dharasana Satyagraha Vaikom Satyagraha Aundh Experiment Gandhi–Irwin Pact Second Round Table Conference Padayatra Poona Pact Natal Indian Congress Quit India speech Gujarat Vidyapith University Harijan Sevak Sangh India ashrams (Kochrab Sabarmati Sodepur Khadi Sevagram) List of fasts Assassination Philosophy Practices and beliefs Composite nationalism Gandhism Economics trusteeship Education Sarvodaya Satyagraha Swadeshi Swaraj Eleven vows Gandhi cap Publications Harijan Hind Swaraj (Indian Home Rule) Indian Opinion The Story of My Experiments with Truth Mangal Prabhat Young India Seven Social Sins Navajivan Trust Gandhi Heritage Portal Influences " A Letter to a Hindu " Ahimsa ( nonviolence ) Bhagavad Gita Henry David Thoreau ( Civil Disobedience (essay) ) Civil disobedience Fasting Hinduism Khadi John Ruskin Parsee Rustomjee Leo Tolstoy ( The Kingdom of God Is Within You ) The Masque of Anarchy Narmad Pacifism Sermon on the Mount Shravan Shrimad Rajchandra Henry Stephens Salt Tirukkuṛaḷ Unto This Last Gandhi's translation " Raghupati Raghava Raja Ram " " Ekla Chalo Re " " Hari Tuma Haro " " Vaishnava Jana To " Vegetarianism Associates Swami Anand C. F. Andrews Jamnalal Bajaj Shankarlal Banker Sarla Behn Vinoba Bhave Brij Krishna Chandiwala Sudhakar Chaturvedi Jugatram Dave Mahadev Desai Dada Dharmadhikari Kanu Gandhi Shiv Prasad Gupta Umar Hajee Ahmed Jhaveri J. C. Kumarappa Hermann Kallenbach Abdul Ghaffar Khan Acharya Kripalani Mirabehn Mohanlal Pandya Vallabhbhai Patel Narhari Parikh Mithuben Petit Chakravarti Rajagopalachari Bibi Amtus Salam Sonja Schlesin Anugrah Narayan Sinha Shri Krishna Sinha Rettamalai Srinivasan V. A. Sundaram Abbas Tyabji Ravishankar Vyas Kishorlal Mashruwala Legacy Artistic depictions Gandhigiri Gandhi Peace Award Gandhi Peace Foundation Gandhi Peace Prize Mahatma Gandhi Kashi Vidyapith Indian currency (Gandhi Series, Gandhi New Series, Indian rupee ) Indian 10 Rupee postage stamp Family Karamchand Gandhi (father) Kasturba (wife) Harilal (son) Manilal (son) Ramdas (son) Devdas (son) Maganlal (cousin) Samaldas (nephew) Arun (grandson) Ela (granddaughter) Rajmohan (grandson) Gopalkrishna (grandson) Ramchandra (grandson) Kanu (grandson) Kanu (grandnephew) Tushar (great-grandson) Leela (great-granddaughter) Influenced 14th Dalai Lama Aung San Suu Kyi Abhay Bang Abdul Ghaffar Khan Brajkishore Prasad C. Rajagopalachari Eknath Easwaran Droupadi Murmu François Bayrou Gopaldas Ambaidas Desai Govind Ballabh Pant Ho Chi Minh James Bevel James Lawson Jawaharlal Nehru Joan Bondurant Lal Bahadur Shastri Lanza del Vasto Maulana Azad Martin Luther King Jr.

Maria Lacerda de Moura Mehdi Bazargan Morarji Desai Narendra Modi Nelson Mandela Rajendra Prasad Ramjee Singh Steve Biko Sane Guruji Vinoba Bhave Vallabhbhai Patel Memorials Statues Ghana India Patna National Salt Satyagraha Memorial New Delhi South Africa Johannesburg Pietermaritzburg UK Parliament Square Tavistock Square U.S.

Davis Denver Houston Milwaukee New York San Francisco San Jose Washington, D.C.

Observances Gandhi Jayanti International Day of Non-Violence Martyrs' Day Season for Nonviolence Other Aga Khan Palace Gandhi Bhawan Gandhi Mandapam Gandhi Market Bookstores Gandhi Promenade Gandhi Smriti Gandhi Memorial Gandhi Memorial Museum, Madurai Gandhi Smarak Sangrahalaya Gandhi Teerth Gandhi Temple, Bhatara Kaba Gandhi No Delo Kirti Mandir Mahatma Gandhi College Mahatma Gandhi Marine National Park Mahatma Gandhi Memorial Centre, Matale Mani Bhavan Mahatma Gandhi Museum, Rajkot National Gandhi Museum Raj Ghat Roads named after Gandhi Sabarmati Ashram Satyagraha House v t e Hall of Fame for Great Americans inductees John Adams John Quincy Adams Jane Addams Louis Agassiz Susan B. Anthony John James Audubon George Bancroft Clara Barton Henry Ward Beecher Alexander Graham Bell Daniel Boone Edwin Booth Louis Brandeis Phillips Brooks William Cullen Bryant Luther Burbank Andrew Carnegie George Washington Carver William Ellery Channing Rufus Choate Henry Clay Grover Cleveland James Fenimore Cooper Peter Cooper Charlotte Cushman James Buchanan Eads Thomas Alva Edison Jonathan Edwards Ralph Waldo Emerson David Farragut Stephen Foster Benjamin Franklin Robert Fulton Josiah W. Gibbs William C. Gorgas Ulysses S. Grant Asa Gray Alexander Hamilton Nathaniel Hawthorne Joseph Henry Patrick Henry Oliver Wendell Holmes Sr.

Oliver Wendell Holmes Jr.

Mark Hopkins Elias Howe Washington Irving Andrew Jackson Thomas J. Jackson Thomas Jefferson John Paul Jones James Kent Sidney Lanier Robert E. Lee Abraham Lincoln Henry Wadsworth Longfellow James Russell Lowell Mary Lyon Edward MacDowell James Madison Horace Mann John Marshall Matthew Fontaine Maury Albert A. Michelson Maria Mitchell James Monroe Samuel F. B. Morse William T. G. Morton John Lothrop Motley Simon Newcomb Thomas Paine Alice Freeman Palmer Francis Parkman George Peabody William Penn Edgar Allan Poe Walter Reed Franklin D. Roosevelt Theodore Roosevelt Augustus Saint-Gaudens William Tecumseh Sherman John Philip Sousa Joseph Story Harriet Beecher Stowe Gilbert Stuart Sylvanus Thayer Henry David Thoreau Mark Twain Lillian Wald Booker T. Washington George Washington Daniel Webster George Westinghouse James McNeill Whistler Walt Whitman Eli Whitney John Greenleaf Whittier Emma Willard Frances Willard Roger Williams Woodrow Wilson Orville Wright Wilbur Wright v t e Simple living Practices Barter Cord-cutting DIY ethic Downshifting Dry toilet Fasting Forest gardening Freeganism Frugality Gift economy Intentional community Local currency Low-impact development No frills Off-the-grid Permaculture Regift Sattvic diet Self-sufficiency Slow living Slow movement (culture) Subsistence agriculture Sustainable living Sustainable sanitation Veganism Vegetarianism War tax resistance WWOOF Religious and spiritual Amish Aparigraha Asceticism Detachment Distributism Jesus movement Mendicant Mindfulness Monasticism New Monasticism Plain dress Plain people Quakers Rastafari Temperance Testimony of simplicity Tolstoyan movement Twelve Tribes communities Secular movements Back-to-the-land Car-free Environmental Hippie Open Source Ecology Slow Small house Tiny house Transition town Notable writers Wendell Berry Ernest Callenbach G. K. Chesterton Duane Elgin Mahatma Gandhi Richard Gregg Tom Hodgkinson Harlan Hubbard Satish Kumar Helen Nearing Scott Nearing Peace Pilgrim Nick Rosen Dugald Semple E. F. Schumacher George Skene Keith Henry David Thoreau Leo Tolstoy Valluvar Modern-day adherents Mark Boyle Robin Greenfield Ted Kaczynski Pentti Linkola Jim Merkel Peace Pilgrim Suelo Thomas Media " Anekdote zur Senkung der Arbeitsmoral " Escape from Affluenza The Good Life The Moon and the Sledgehammer Mother Earth News The Power of Half Small Is Beautiful Walden Related Affluenza Agrarianism Amateurism Anarcho-primitivism Anti-consumerism Appropriate technology Bohemianism Consumerism Critique of work Deep ecology Degrowth Ecological footprint Food miles Front Porch Republic Green anarchism The good life Global warming Hedonophobia Intentional living commune Rainbow Gathering Itinerant Low-technology Nonviolence Peak oil Sustainability Work–life interface v t e Social philosophy Concepts Agency Anomie Convention Cosmopolitanism Customs Cultural heritage Culturalism Inter Mono Multi Culture Counter Familialism History Honour Human nature Identity Formation Ideology Institutions Invisible hand Loyalty Modernity Morality Public Mores National character Natural law Personhood Reification Ressentiment Rights Sittlichkeit Social alienation Social norms Spontaneous order Stewardship Traditions Values Family Volksgeist Worldview Schools Budapest School Catholic social teaching Distributism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Social Frankfurt School Personalism Philosophers Ancient Confucius Laozi Mencius Mozi Xunzi Medieval Alpharabius Aquinas Avempace Bruni Ibn Khaldun Maimonides Ibn Tufayl Early modern Calvin Erasmus Guicciardini Locke Luther Milton Montaigne Müntzer 18th and 19th centuries Arnold Bentham Bonald Burke Carlyle Comte Condorcet Emerson Engels Fichte Fourier Franklin Hegel Helvétius Herder Hume Jefferson Kant Kierkegaard Le Bon Le Play Marx Mill Nietzsche Owen Renan Rousseau Royce Ruskin Smith Spencer de Staël Stirner Taine Thoreau Tocqueville Vico Vivekananda Voltaire 20th and 21st centuries Adorno Agamben Arendt Aron Badiou Baudrillard Bauman Benoist Berlin Butler Camus de Beauvoir Debord Deleuze Dewey Du Bois Durkheim Eco Evola Foucault Fromm Gandhi Gehlen Gentile Gramsci Guénon Habermas Han Heidegger Hoppe Irigaray Kirk Kołakowski Kropotkin Land Lasch MacIntyre Marcuse Maritain Negri Niebuhr Nussbaum Oakeshott Ortega Pareto Polanyi Radhakrishnan Röpke Santayana Scruton Shariati Simmel Skinner Sombart Sowell Spengler Strauss Taylor Voegelin Walzer Weber Weil Zinn Žižek Works De Officiis (44 BC) Oration on the Dignity of Man (1486) A Vindication of Natural Society (1756) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Civilization and Its Discontents (1930) The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction (1935) The Second Sex (1949) One-Dimensional Man (1964) The Society of the Spectacle (1967) The History of Sexuality (1976) The Culture of Narcissism (1979) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) Gender Trouble (1990) The Malaise of Modernity (1991) Intellectuals and Society (2010) See also Agnotology Axiology Critical theory Cultural criticism Cultural pessimism Ethics Historism Historicism Humanities Philosophy of culture Philosophy of education Philosophy of history Political philosophy Social criticism Social science Social theory Sociology Category v t e Political philosophy Terms Authority Citizenship‎ Duty Elite Emancipation Freedom Government Hegemony Hierarchy Justice Law Legitimacy Liberty Monopoly Nation Obedience Peace People Pluralism Power Progress Propaganda Property Regime Revolution Rights Ruling class Society Sovereignty‎ State Utopia War Government Aristocracy Oligarchy Autocracy Bureaucracy Dictatorship Democracy Ochlocracy Gerontocracy Meritocracy Monarchy Tyranny Plutocracy Technocracy Theocracy Ideologies Agrarianism Anarchism Capitalism Christian democracy Colonialism Communism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Corporatism Distributism Environmentalism Fascism Feminism Feudalism Imperialism Islamism Liberalism Libertarianism Localism Marxism Monarchism Multiculturalism Nationalism Nazism Populism Republicanism Social Darwinism Social democracy Socialism Third Way Concepts Balance of power Bellum omnium contra omnes Body politic Clash of civilizations Common good Consent of the governed Divine right of kings Family as a model for the state Monopoly on violence Natural law Negative and positive rights Night-watchman state Noble lie Noblesse oblige Open society Ordered liberty Original position Overton window Separation of powers Social contract State of nature Statolatry Supermajority Tyranny of the majority Philosophers Antiquity Aristotle Chanakya Cicero Confucius Han Fei Lactantius Mencius Mozi Plato political philosophy Polybius Shang Sun Tzu Thucydides Xenophon Middle Ages Al-Farabi Aquinas Averroes Bruni Dante Gelasius al-Ghazali Ibn Khaldun Marsilius Muhammad Nizam al-Mulk Ockham Plethon Wang Early modern period Boétie Bodin Bossuet Calvin Campanella Filmer Grotius Guicciardini Hobbes political philosophy James Leibniz Locke Luther Machiavelli Milton More Müntzer Pufendorf Spinoza Suárez 18th and 19th centuries Bakunin Bastiat Beccaria Bentham Bolingbroke Bonald Burke Carlyle Comte Condorcet Constant Cortés Engels Fichte Fourier Franklin Godwin Haller Hegel Herder Hume Iqbal Jefferson Kant political philosophy Le Bon Le Play Madison Maistre Marx Mazzini Mill Montesquieu Nietzsche Owen Paine Renan Rousseau Sade Saint-Simon Smith Spencer de Staël Stirner Taine Thoreau Tocqueville Tucker Voltaire 20th and 21st centuries Agamben Ambedkar Arendt Aron Badiou Bauman Benoist Berlin Bernstein Burnham Chomsky Dmowski Du Bois Dugin Dworkin Evola Foucault Fromm Fukuyama Gandhi Gentile Gramsci Guénon Habermas Hayek Hoppe Huntington Kautsky Khomeini Kirk Kropotkin Laclau Lenin Luxemburg Mansfield Mao Marcuse Maurras Michels Mises Mosca Mouffe Negri Nozick Nussbaum Oakeshott Ortega Pareto Popper Qutb Rand Rawls Röpke Rothbard Russell Sartre Schmitt Scruton Shariati Sorel Spann Spengler Strauss Sun Taylor Voegelin Walzer Weber Works Republic (c. 375 BC) Politics (c. 350 BC) On the Republic (51 BC) Treatise on Law (c. 1274) Monarchy (1313) The Prince (1532) Leviathan (1651) Two Treatises of Government (1689) The Spirit of Law (1748) The Social Contract (1762) Reflections on the Revolution in France (1790) Rights of Man (1791) Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1820) Democracy in America (1835–1840) The Communist Manifesto (1848) On Liberty (1859) The Revolt of the Masses (1929) The Road to Serfdom (1944) The Open Society and Its Enemies (1945) The Origins of Totalitarianism (1951) A Theory of Justice (1971) The End of History and the Last Man (1992) Related Authoritarianism Collectivism and individualism Conflict theories Contractualism Critique of political economy Egalitarianism Elite theory Elitism History of political thought Institutional discrimination Jurisprudence Justification for the state Political ethics Political spectrum Left-wing politics Centrism Right-wing politics Political theology Political violence Separation of church and state Separatism Social justice Statism Totalitarianism Category:Political philosophy Portals : Biography Environment Poetry Politics United States Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Greece Korea Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Finland Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii Artists ULAN MusicBrainz People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef NARA SNAC 2 Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐7rrfw
Cached time: 20250817043623
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 2.446 seconds
Real time usage: 2.954 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 16550/1000000
Revision size: 109178/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 671098/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 139667/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 21/100
Expensive parser function count: 15/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 487749/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.473/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 27573419/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 2250.541      1 -total
 28.69%  645.782      1 Template:Reflist
 20.41%  459.322      1 Template:Navboxes
 13.97%  314.334      7 Template:Navbox
 11.82%  266.052      1 Template:Anarchism
 10.93%  246.087      9 Template:Excerpt
  9.95%  223.979      1 Template:Infobox_philosopher
  7.41%  166.660     33 Template:Cite_web
  5.92%  133.314      3 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
  5.70%  128.195      5 Template:Side_box Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:43421:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817043623 and revision id 1303224286. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Henry_David_Thoreau&oldid=1303224286 " Categories : Henry David Thoreau 1817 births 1862 deaths 19th-century American diarists 19th-century American essayists 19th-century American naturalists 19th-century American non-fiction writers 19th-century American poets 19th-century American philosophers 19th-century deaths from tuberculosis American abolitionists American anarchist writers American environmentalists American lecturers American male essayists American male non-fiction writers American male poets American nature writers American naturists American nomads American non-fiction environmental writers American opinion journalists American people of English descent American people of French descent American people of Jersey descent American people of Scottish descent American philosophers of culture American philosophers of mind American philosophers of science American political philosophers American spiritual writers American surveyors American tax resisters American travel writers Anti-consumerists Burials at Sleepy Hollow Cemetery (Concord, Massachusetts) Civil disobedience Critics of work and the work ethic Ecological succession Hall of Fame for Great Americans inductees Harvard College alumni Hasty Pudding alumni Hikers Pantheists People from Concord, Massachusetts Philosophers from Massachusetts Philosophers of history Poets from Massachusetts Proto-anarchists Simple living advocates Tuberculosis deaths in Massachusetts Underground Railroad people Writers from Massachusetts Abolitionists from Massachusetts Hidden categories: Webarchive template archiveis links Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use mdy dates from May 2025 Biography with signature Articles with hCards Commons link from Wikidata Articles with Project Gutenberg links Articles with Internet Archive links Articles with LibriVox links Articles with excerpts Articles containing French-language text Articles containing German-language text Articles containing Latin-language text This page was last edited on 29 July 2025, at 19:12 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Henry David Thoreau 86 languages Add topic

