Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Functions and centres Toggle Functions and centres subsection 2.1 Maastricht Upper Area Control Centre 3 Membership criteria Toggle Membership criteria subsection 3.1 List of members 3.2 Comprehensive Agreement States 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Eurocontrol 37 languages العربية Български Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Français Galego 한국어 हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Magyar Nederlands 日本語 Nordfriisk Norsk bokmål Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Română Русский Slovenčina Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia European air traffic organisation European Organisation for the Safety of Air Navigation Formation 1963 [ 1 ] Headquarters Brussels , Belgium Membership 42 member states Budget € 505.8 million (as of 2014) [ 2 ] Employees 1,945 (as of 2014) [ 2 ] Website eurocontrol.int The European Organisation for the Safety of Air Navigation , commonly known as Eurocontrol (stylised EUROCONTROL ), is an international organisation working to achieve safe and seamless air traffic management across Europe . Founded in 1963, Eurocontrol currently has 42 member states with headquarters in Brussels , Belgium . It has several local sites as well, including an Innovation Hub in Brétigny-sur-Orge , France , the Aviation Learning Centre (ALC) in Luxembourg , and the Maastricht Upper Area Control Centre (MUAC) in Maastricht , the Netherlands . The organisation employs approximately two thousand people, and operates with an annual budget in excess of half a billion euros .

[ 2 ] Although Eurocontrol is not an agency of the European Union , the EU has delegated parts of its Single European Sky regulations to Eurocontrol, making it the central organisation for coordination and planning of air traffic control for all of Europe.

[ 3 ] The EU itself is a signatory of Eurocontrol and all EU member states are presently also members of Eurocontrol.

[ 4 ] The organisation works with national authorities, air navigation service providers , civil and military airspace users, airports , and other organisations. Its activities involve all gate-to-gate air navigation service operations: strategic and tactical flow management, controller training, regional control of airspace, safety-proofed technologies and procedures, and collection of air navigation charges.

The eruption of Eyjafjallajökull in 2010 disrupted air traffic over large parts of Europe Eurocontrol takes center stage in managing air traffic disruptions within Europe to guarantee the continuity of safe and efficient air operations during crises. For instance, the 2010 Icelandic Volcanic Ash Crisis saw the involvement of Eurocontrol in providing relevant data to the national authorities and air traffic control agencies to reduce airspace closure to a minimum. Moreover, during the COVID-19 pandemic , Eurocontrol supported the monitoring of the steep decline in air traffic through strategic responses toward the adjustment of flight plans and, therefore, mitigating operational challenges. Much of these efforts are managed through the Network Manager function of Eurocontrol , which enables the real-time monitoring of air traffic and oversees the implementation of contingency plans during emergencies such as natural calamities, industrial strikes, and adverse weather. This would be the necessary central coordination that sustains the resilience of Europe's air traffic network during crises.

History [ edit ] Headquarters of Eurocontrol in Brussels The Eurocontrol Convention was signed in 1960 and ratified in 1963. Before the convention entered into force in 1963, there were already indications that the matter of national sovereignty would complicate the full implementation of the organisation's founding mission. The first European plan for a harmonised air traffic control (ATC) system, proposed in 1962, was beset by the refusal of both France and Britain to comply, largely due to reasons closely linked with their national military airspace control. The other four original members (the Federal Republic of Germany , Belgium , the Netherlands and Luxembourg ) agreed in 1964 to set up a single international air traffic control centre to manage their upper airspace, settling in the Dutch city of Maastricht .

[ 5 ] The European Parliament at the time expressed concern about the lack of clear intergovernmental agreements to ensure common air traffic control services across the continent. In 1979, Eurocontrol signed a working cooperation agreement with the European Commission , attempting to create a synergy of Eurocontrol's technical expertise and EU's regulatory authorities. Several initiatives originating in this period become a lasting element of the organisation, such as the Eurocontrol forecasting service, which became STATFOR, as well as the Aeronautical Information Service. By 1986, the pressure on the European ATC network was so big that a new, wider mandate was already being considered for Eurocontrol, with much of the initiative coming from ECAC ’s Ministers of Transport.  Subsequently, ECAC urged all of its member states to join Eurocontrol.

[ 5 ] A meeting of Eurocontrol members A revised Eurocontrol Convention was signed in 1997, renewing the organisation's optimism for greater political support, surpassing the original vision of the 1960 Convention. In June 1998, Eurocontrol, the European Space Agency (ESA) and the European Commission (EC) also signed an agreement formalising cooperation in the realm of satellite navigation systems and services. In 1999 the European Commission presented its plan for a Single European Sky (SES) to the European Parliament, followed by two high-Level groups (HLG). The HLG reports on SES led to the establishment of the European Aviation Safety Agency (EASA) and reinforced the European Commission's role as the sole European aviation safety regulator, while acknowledging Eurocontrol's technical expertise in the implementation of said regulations.

[ 5 ] The early 2000s were marred by several fatal accidents in Europe, such as the 2001 Linate Airport runway collision and the 2002 Überlingen mid-air collision , both of which were related to air traffic navigation shortcomings. The pressure was further compounded by the September 11 attacks , increasing the need for a rapid Europe-wide regulatory and coordinating body. By May 2003, Eurocontrol and NATO had signed a memorandum of cooperation, followed by a similar memorandum with the European Commission in December 2003. In February 2004, Eurocontrol started work on first mandates from the European Commission and in April 2004, it adopted the Single European Sky Regulations (Package 1). In March 2006, the European Commission's Single European Sky ATM Research (SESAR) Program was launched by the Stakeholder Consultation Group (SCG) under Eurocontrol's aegis.

[ 5 ] Functions and centres [ edit ] Eurocontrol provides a set of different services: Maastricht Upper Area Control Centre (MUAC) Network Manager Operations Centre (NMOC) – coordinates flight plans and actual traffic.

EAD – centralised access to AIS information.

Central Route Charges Office (CRCO) – collects en-route (and aerodrome approach) charges on behalf of Air Navigation Service providers ( ANSPs ).

Eurocontrol Innovation Hub (EIH)– research, simulations, drones and UAM.

EUROCONTROL Aviation Learning Centre (ALC) – training and e-learning.

Maastricht Upper Area Control Centre [ edit ] Eurocontrol's Maastricht Upper Area Control Centre (MUAC), ICAO designator EDYY, [ 6 ] located at Maastricht Aachen Airport , provides air traffic control for traffic above 24,500 ft over Belgium , Luxembourg , the Netherlands , and north-west Germany . In 2017 it became the first multinational, cross-border, civil-military, air navigation service provider since it integrated the military air traffic control of the German and Dutch upper airspace.

It is the third busiest upper area area control centre (ACC) in Europe after the London Area Control Centre and Karlsruhe ACC in terms of traffic numbers, but the first in terms of flight hours and distance.

MUAC has put in operation innovative technology and productivity enhancements: a new generation Flight Data Processing System, [ 7 ] Integrated Flow Management Position, [ 8 ] the Short Term Conflict Alert (STCA), Controller Pilot Data Link Communications (CPDLC) and stripless controller working positions.

Typically, air traffic control sectors at MUAC can handle 55 or more flights per hour. The average flight duration is approximately 21 minutes and typically 80% of the traffic is climbing from or descending to the major European airports of London , Brussels , Paris , Frankfurt , Amsterdam and Berlin .
Maastricht UAC has undoubtedly one of the most complex airspace structures in the world and the traffic flow (up to 5,670 aircraft a day) can be disrupted by the many surrounding military airspaces.

Membership criteria [ edit ] Overlap of organisational memberships among Eurocontrol members – Eurocontrol members shown in shades of blue: ECAC , Eurocontrol, ECAA , EU ECAC , Eurocontrol, ECAA ECAC , Eurocontrol ECAC , ECAA ECAC To be considered for membership of Eurocontrol, a country must meet all of the following criteria: [ 9 ] Be European Member of the Council of Europe Have existing accreditation to both ICAO and ECAC List of members [ edit ] Member Since Relationship with the EU Belgium 1963 EU Member France 1963 EU Member Germany 1963 EU Member Luxembourg 1963 EU Member Netherlands 1963 EU Member United Kingdom 1963 Former EU Member Ireland 1965 EU Member Portugal 1986 EU Member Greece 1988 EU Member Malta 1989 EU Member Turkey 1989 EU Candidate Cyprus 1991 EU Member Hungary 1992 EU Member Switzerland 1992 Has bilateral treaties with EU, including Schengen and enforcement of EU passenger rights.

Austria 1993 EU Member Denmark 1994 EU Member Norway 1994 EEA Member Slovenia 1995 EU Member Sweden 1995 EU Member Czech Republic 1996 EU Member Romania 1996 EU Member Italy 1996 EU Member Slovakia 1997 EU Member Spain 1997 EU Member Monaco 1997 Bulgaria 1997 EU Member Croatia 1997 EU Member North Macedonia 1998 EU Candidate Moldova 2000 EU Candidate Finland 2001 EU Member European Union 2002 In parallel with member states Albania 2002 EU Candidate Ukraine 2004 EU Candidate Poland 2004 EU Member Bosnia and Herzegovina 2004 EU Candidate Serbia 2005 EU Candidate Lithuania 2006 EU Member Armenia 2006 Montenegro 2007 EU Candidate Latvia 2011 EU Member Georgia [ 10 ] 2012 EU Candidate Estonia [ 11 ] 2015 EU Member Iceland [ 12 ] 2025 EEA Member Comprehensive Agreement States [ edit ] In addition to membership, EUROCONTROL also concludes the so-called Comprehensive Agreements, which enhances the organisation's cooperation with non-European countries that are closely tied to the continent's aviation network.

[ 13 ] Member Since Notes Morocco April 29, 2016 Israel June 2, 2016 See also [ edit ] Europe portal Aviation portal Belgium portal Air travel disruption after the 2010 Eyjafjallajökull eruption Controlled and Harmonised Aeronautical Information Network (CHAIN) E-Learning Developers' Community of Practice European Union Aviation Safety Agency (EASA) European Civil Aviation Conference (ECAC) European Cockpit Association European Common Aviation Area (ECAA) The European Convergence and Implementation Plan (ECIP) List of the busiest airports in Europe by passenger traffic Single European Sky SKYbrary Weather Information Exchange Model References [ edit ] ^ member states by accession date Archived 2017-03-16 at the Wayback Machine Eurocontrol.int.

^ a b c Eurocontrol: Annual Report 2014 , p. 67.

^ Eurocontrol, SES mandate on Standardised European Rules of the Air (SERA) implementing rule for airspace – Part A - COMPLETED Archived 2017-08-03 at the Wayback Machine , 31 January 2011.

^ Eurocontrol, Frequently Asked Questions (FAQ) on Eurocontrol Archived 2017-05-31 at the Wayback Machine , Retrieved: 4 May 2016.

^ a b c d McInally, John (December 2010).

"Eurocontrol History Book" (PDF) . Eurocontrol. Archived from the original (PDF) on 12 March 2016.

^ "Controller-Pilot Data-Link Communications at Maastricht UAC" .

Eurocontrol . Archived from the original on 8 September 2018 . Retrieved 8 September 2018 .

^ "MUAC'S New generation FDPS" .

www.eurocontrol.int .

^ Integrated flow management position - Enhancing air traffic flow and capacity management. Eurocontrol, 22 February 2017 [ permanent dead link ] ^ Peter Tannhäuser, Head of Legal Service, EUROCONTROL: Models for future cooperation [ permanent dead link ] , p. 3, Published: 27 November 2013, Retrieved: 4 May 2016 ^ "Georgia became a member of EUROCONTROL" .

gcaa.ge . Civil Aviation Agency of Georgia. Archived from the original on 8 February 2018 . Retrieved 9 December 2012 .

^ "Estonia set to join EUROCONTROL" .

www.eurocontrol.int .

^ "Iceland becomes 42ⁿᵈ Member State of EUROCONTROL" .

www.eurocontrol.int .

^ "Comprehensive Agreement States" .

eurocontrol.int . EUROCONTROL website. Archived from the original on 19 June 2016 . Retrieved 3 June 2016 .

External links [ edit ] Official site "History of EUROCONTROL" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2005-05-24.

(375 KiB ) "Being in control at Eurocontrol" , article in Crossroads by Rinnie Oey Executive Overview: Jane's Air Traffic Control Skyway magazine v t e Foreign relations of the European Union Bilateral relations See also : Economic relationships with third countries Africa Algeria Cape Verde Egypt Libya Morocco South Africa Sudan Tunisia Americas Argentina trade Brazil Canada Colombia Cuba Greenland Mexico Peru United States Uruguay Asia Bahrain Bangladesh China India Indonesia Iran Iraq Israel Japan Jordan Kazakhstan Lebanon Malaysia Nepal North Korea Pakistan Palestine † Philippines South Korea Syria Taiwan Vietnam Yemen Europe Internal Croatia Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Poland Slovenia External Albania Andorra Armenia Accession negotiations Azerbaijan Belarus Bosnia and Herzegovina Faroe Islands Georgia Accession negotiations Iceland Kosovo † Liechtenstein Moldova Accession negotiations Monaco Montenegro North Macedonia Northern Cyprus † Norway Russia San Marino Serbia Sovereign Military Order of Malta Switzerland Turkey Accession negotiations Ukraine Accession negotiations United Kingdom Vatican City Oceania Australia Micronesia New Zealand Papua New Guinea Former Yugoslavia General Overseas territories of member states European microstates Largest trading partners Association Agreements Free trade agreements European Union Sanctions †= Disputed state, may not be recognised as an independent state by some or all European Union members.

Multilateral relations and initiatives Organisations Arab League ASEAN Council of Europe ECHR G7 ICC IOC Mercosur NATO UN Initiatives African, Caribbean and Pacific Group of States Asia–Europe Meeting CARIFORUM Customs Union Eastern Partnership Energy Community Euro-Latin American Parliamentary Assembly European Common Aviation Area European Economic Area Euro-Mediterranean free trade area Euro-Mediterranean Partnership Euronest Economic Partnership Agreements EU CBRN Risk Mitigation CoE Initiative Neighbourhood Policy Northern Dimension Mediterranean Union Stabilisation and Association Process Administration and policies Foreign and Security Policy Global Strategy Neighbourhood Policy Enlargement Security and Defence Policy Administration Humanitarian Aid and Civil Protection Department Directorate-General for International Cooperation and Development External Action Service Foreign Affairs Council High Representative Josep Borrell Parliamentary Foreign Affairs Committee Foreign Policy Instruments Service Diplomatic missions of the EU ( ambassadors ) / to the EU Special Representatives Funding Instrument for Pre-Accession Assistance Global Europe v t e Common Security and Defence Policy of the European Union Leadership High Representative Director General of the Military Staff/Director of the Military Planning and Conduct Capability Director of the Civilian Planning and Conduct Capability Chairman of the Military Committee European Council Foreign Affairs Council Structure External Action Service Command structure on the civilian/military strategic and operational levels ( Military Planning and Conduct Capability within the Military Staff , Civilian Planning and Conduct Capability , Joint Support Coordination Cell ) Intelligence and Situation Centre ( Club de Berne ) Crisis Management and Planning Directorate Security & Defence College Agencies Defence Agency Institute for Security Studies Satellite Centre Council preparatory  bodies Committee of Permanent Representatives Political and Security Committee Politico-Military Group Military Committee Committee for Civilian Aspects of Crisis Management European Commission bodies Directorate-General for Defence Industry and Space Funding Defence Fund Policies Security Strategy Everything but Arms Annual Review Equipment Galileo navigation system Secure Software-defined Radio (PESCO) Decorations Service medal Medal for Extraordinary Meritorious Service Monitor mission medal Related Permanent Structured Cooperation (PESCO) Headline Goal 2010 Military Erasmus Military Mobility (PESCO) Intelligence School (PESCO) Kortenberg building NATO relations ( Berlin Plus agreement , Joint Declaration ) Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National Germany United States France BnF data Norway Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Eurocontrol&oldid=1303904269 " Categories : Aviation authorities Organizations based in Europe Air traffic controller schools Air traffic control in Europe Aviation safety organizations Organizations established in 1963 International organisations based in Belgium Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from March 2024 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with dead external links from December 2019 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 2 August 2025, at 19:23 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Eurocontrol 37 languages Add topic

