Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Background 2 Broadcaster Seal of Approval 3 Publications 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents National Weather Association 1 language Français Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia National Weather Association NWA logo Abbreviation NWA Formation December 15, 1975 ( 1975-12-15 ) Founder Jerry LaRue Type Professional association Legal status 501(c)(6) non-profit Headquarters Norman , Oklahoma , U.S.

Coordinates 35°13′21″N 97°26′22″W ﻿ / ﻿ 35.2226°N 97.4395°W ﻿ / 35.2226; -97.4395 Region served United States (primarily) Membership c. 2500 President Gail Hartfield Subsidiaries Local and student chapters Website nwas .org The National Weather Association ( NWA ), founded in 1975, is an American professional association with a mission to support and promote excellence in operational meteorology and related activities.

Background [ edit ] The National Weather Association is, along with the American Meteorological Society (AMS), one of the two principal meteorological organizations in the USA.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] The NWA focuses on operational meteorology, i.e., weather forecasting and the application of forecasts to human affairs. To accomplish this, the Association's objectives are: [ 3 ] to provide a medium for all persons interested in weather, including climate, forecasting, observations, observational systems and related research and development for the publishing of letters, pamphlets, periodicals, papers, and Web pages concerning activities in said fields; to provide information, publications, materials, and seminars that will promote forecasting, analysis, observations, training, and education in the meteorological disciplines.

There are dozens of local and student chapters of the National Weather Association.

[ 4 ] The national organization, as well as some local chapters, conduct conferences on various aspects of operational meteorology (i.e., weather forecasting and presentation). The NWA's primary assembly is the NWA Annual Meeting .

[ 5 ] The NWA awards scholarships [ 6 ] and grants [ 7 ] to mostly undergraduate students, but they do award some scholarships and grants to graduate students majoring in meteorology or a related field of study. The NWA also annually bestows awards to outstanding practicing meteorologists.

[ 8 ] NWA engages in advocacy activities, such as releasing policy statements on topics including use of storm shelters , climate change , FCC broadcasting issues, and positions on weather observation systems. The organization also hosts WeatherReadyFest , an annual public outreach event which draws thousands to a different science museum each year ahead of their annual meeting.

[ 9 ] Broadcaster Seal of Approval [ edit ] NWA Seal of Approval Like the AMS' Certified Broadcast Meteorologist Seal, the NWA also has a Seal of Approval for broadcasters. Sealholders must pass a multiple choice test on meteorological principles and submit tapes to a panel of fellow weathercasters for review. Unlike the AMS seal , a college degree in meteorology or the physical sciences is not required, although there is a minimum experience requirement (a broadcaster must have three full years of on-air experience, or two full years of five-day-a-week forecasting, to qualify for the seal).

[ 10 ] The NWA also offers a digital seal, with the goal of distinguishing scientifically based credible weather content on the internet from all others.

Publications [ edit ] The National Weather Association publishes the following scientific journals: [ 11 ] Journal of Operational Meteorology (2013–present) Electronic Journal of Operational Meteorology (2000 - 2012) National Weather Digest (1976 - 2012) See also [ edit ] American Geophysical Union WeatherReadyFest References [ edit ] ^ Wyatt Everhart, "National Weather Association Meets", ABC2 website, 10/20/2011, [1] ^ "Glossary", Weather.com, http://www.weather.com/glossary/n.html ^ About the National Weather Association Archived 2015-12-31 at the Wayback Machine ^ "NWA Local Chapters" . Archived from the original on 2013-11-27 . Retrieved 2014-03-30 .

^ "NWA Events" . Archived from the original on 2014-03-31 . Retrieved 2014-03-30 .

^ NWA Scholarships Archived 2015-11-26 at the Wayback Machine ^ "NWA Grants" . Archived from the original on 2007-10-27 . Retrieved 2014-03-30 .

^ NWA Annual Awards Program ^ "WeatherReady Fest - National Weather Association Foundation" .

National Weather Association Foundation . Retrieved 2018-08-27 .

^ NWA Seal of Approval procedure - NWAS.org Archived 2015-09-14 at the Wayback Machine ^ NWA Publications External links [ edit ] National Weather Association (NWA) Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National United States Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=National_Weather_Association&oldid=1190295243 " Categories : Meteorological societies Professional associations based in the United States Scientific organizations based in the United States Organizations based in Oklahoma 1975 establishments in the United States Scientific organizations established in 1975 Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Infobox mapframe without OSM relation ID on Wikidata Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Pages using the Kartographer extension This page was last edited on 17 December 2023, at 02:30 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents National Weather Association 1 language Add topic

