Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Education 2 Academic activities 3 Translated works 4 References Toggle the table of contents Ali Akbar Rashad 3 languages العربية বাংলা فارسی Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Iranian Ayatollah and philosopher Ali Akbar Rashad Born 1955 (age 69–70) [ 1 ] Philosophical work Era 20th-century philosophy Region Islamic philosophy School Islamic jurisprudence Main interests Philosophy of religion , Islamic theology Notable ideas Ibtina theory Logic of understanding religion Ali Akbar Rashad (born 1955) is an Iranian philosopher and Islamic scholar who pioneered the Ibtina Theory , a theory for explaining the process and mechanism of "religious knowledge" formation.

[ 2 ] He is currently a professor at the Islamic Research Institute for Culture and Thought as well as a member of the Supreme Cultural Revolution Council (SCRC). He is also the founder and chair of Imam Reza Islamic seminary. The has presented articles and delivered speeches at conferences and scientific and philosophical conventions and conferences in different countries including Germany , the United States , the United Arab Emirates , England , Bosnia , Pakistan , Turkey , Russia , Sudan , Syria , Saudi Arabia , France , India , and Greece among others.

Education [ edit ] Ali Akbar Rashad is a graduate of Tehran and Qom Islamic seminaries ; he completed his introductory and first grade of Islamic seminary education, in Tehran between 1967 and 1970.  Then, he went to Qom to further his education in 1970, and was admitted to Grand Ayatollah Golpayegani's Islamic Seminary school, which was considered the first scheduled educational center conducted on the new seminary methodology. He completed the second grade in this seminary school. He also took Ayatollah Shabzendehdar Shirazi's exegesis and Islamic doctrine lessons, and religions ( Judaism , Christianity , Baháʼí Faith and the secretary of Wahhabism , ) lessons presented by Abd-ol-Gha'em Shooshtari during the very same period.

[ 3 ] Academic activities [ edit ] Rashad has been teaching higher levels of principles of jurisprudence, philosophy of religion , philosophy and mysticism in the "Islamic seminary of Tehran" as well as the philosophy of religion and discourse and logic of Understanding Religion at university of Tehran and university of Mashhad for the past thirty years.

In the past ten years, IICT has compiled, or has been compiling, four different encyclopedias under professor Rashad's supervision: The Encyclopedia of Imam Ali (published in 13 volumes) The Encyclopedia of Qur'an (six out of twenty five volumes completed) The Encyclopedia of the Holy Prophet's Conduct (fifteen volumes; in press).

The Encyclopedia of Fatimah Culture  (six volumes).

Translated works [ edit ] Title Language Format Philosophy of Religion Arabic Book Sacred Democracy Arabic Book Philosophy of religion English Book Sacred Democracy English Book Philosophy of religion Malay Book Violence and Tolerance French Book Sacred Democracy Spanish Book Philosophy of Religion Azeri Book A Critique on John Hick's Religious Pluralism English Book The Necessity of the Provision of Philosophy of Religion, Logic of Exploring Religion, etc.

English Article The Expanse of the Functionality and Practicability of Reason in Intellection and Actualization of Religion English Article Sense Devoid of Sense English Article Philosophy of Religious Insight English Article Is Rumi a Religious Pluralist?

English Article Religion and Democracy Arabic Article Investigating tradition Arabic Article The Expanse of the Functionality and Practicability of Reason in Intellection and Actualization of Religion Arabic Article Principles of Tolerance Arabic Article Philosophy of Principles Arabic Article Ibtina Theory (1) Arabic Article Ibtina Theory (2) Arabic Article References [ edit ] ^ "Home" .

en.iict.ac.ir .

^ "Prof. Dr. Ali Akba Rashadi : CV" (PDF) . En.iict.ac.ir. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2016-03-04 . Retrieved 2015-05-29 .

^ His official website in Persian: http://rashad.iict.ac.ir Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National Germany Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ali_Akbar_Rashad&oldid=1209529287 " Categories : 20th-century Iranian philosophers Islamic philosophers Philosophers of religion Iranian ayatollahs 21st-century Muslim scholars of Islam 20th-century Islamic religious leaders 21st-century Iranian philosophers 21st-century Islamic religious leaders Academic staff of the Research Institute for Islamic Culture and Thought Iran's Book of the Year Awards recipients 1955 births Living people Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with hCards This page was last edited on 22 February 2024, at 09:49 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Ali Akbar Rashad 3 languages Add topic

