Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Notable alumni 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents The Cornell Lunatic Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Magazine The Cornell Lunatic Categories Humor magazine Founder Joey Green Founded 1978, Cornell University First issue April 1, 1978 Based in Ithaca, New York , U.S.

Language English Website www .cornelllunatic .com The Cornell Lunatic is the college humor magazine at Cornell University , founded on April 1, 1978, by Joey Green .

History [ edit ] During Green's two-year tenure as editor, the Lunatic was a 72-page glossy magazine of satire and parody published once a semester. The Lunatic staff was responsible for many pranks on campus, including a parody of the 1979 Cornell–Yale Homecoming Football Game program, sold by the Lunatic staff as the real thing at the football stadium, resulting in Green's arrest and near expulsion from the university.

[ 1 ] Today, the Lunatic continues to publish once a semester, and the magazine is distributed on campus for free.

Material from the Cornell Lunatic from 1978 to 1981 was reprinted in the 1982 trade paperback book, Hellbent on Insanity, a collection of the best college humor, published by Holt, Rinehart & Winston and edited by Green, fellow Lunatic alumnus Alan Corcoran, and Bruce Handy, [ 2 ] former editor of the Stanford Chaparral .

The Lunatic 's spring 1983 issue, celebrating the magazine's fifth anniversary, featured contributions by professional cartoonists Mort Walker , B.K. Taylor , Robert Leighton , Shary Flenniken , Bobby London , Ron Hauge , Lloyd Dangle , Mimi Pond , and Ed Subitzky .

Over the years, the Cornell Lunatic has featured interviews with comedians John Cleese , Jay Mohr , and Ron Funches , [ 3 ] and endorsements by comedians Jon Stewart , Bill Maher , Norm Macdonald , Andy Dick , author Dave Barry , and filmmaker Kevin Smith .

[ 4 ] In the spring of 2005, the Lunatic staff distributed a full-scale parody of The Cornell Daily Sun on campus.

On March 29, 2008, more than fifty Lunatic alumni and guests gathered at the Cornell Club of New York in Manhattan to celebrate the Lunatic ' s 30th anniversary and the publication of the book Lunacy: The Best of the Cornell Lunatic.

[ 5 ] In March 2016, the Lunatic hosted a night of comedy at Willard Straight Hall featuring comedian Eric Schwartz , aka Smooth-E.

[ 6 ] Honorary members of the Cornell Lunatic Alumni Association include Firesign Theatre 's Phil Proctor , American Bystander editor and publisher Michael Gerber , and The Simpsons producer Mike Reiss .

Throughout the 2020 coronavirus pandemic, the Lunatic continued to produce digital issues, returning to print in Fall 2021. They hosted comedian and actor Ronny Chieng for a virtual event in April 2021.

[ 7 ] Later that year, the club established a second formal mascot, "Honse," a horse with an unspecified illness. As of 2022, the club boasts nearly 30 members and is one of the strongest comedy groups on Cornell's campus.

Notable alumni [ edit ] The Cornell Lunatic's official mascot, Honse.

Honse, rendered in chalk, in a 2022 oeuvre.

Some notable alumni from the magazine include: Glenn Adamson , editor of The Journal of Modern Craft , author, and museum curator Jeff Bercovici, [ 8 ] author and Los Angeles Times Business editor Lawrence Carrel, [ 9 ] financial author and contributor to the Wall Street Journal and Forbes Adam-Troy Castro , science fiction, fantasy, and horror novelist, and winner of the 2008 Philip K. Dick Award Alan Corcoran, [ 10 ] humor book author Adam C. Engst , technology writer and author Jordan Fabian, [ 11 ] White House correspondent at Bloomberg Noah Goldstein, [ 12 ] author and UCLA management professor Marie Gottschalk , author and University of Pennsylvania political science professor Joey Green , author and humorist Joyce Hendley, [ 13 ] nutrition author Amanda Ann Klein, [ 14 ] author Scott Lapatine, founder and editor-in-chief of Stereogum Jill Holtzman Leichter, [ 15 ] editor of the All About Birds Regional Field Guides Farhad Manjoo , New York Times opinion columnist Sendhil Mullainathan , author and Harvard economics professor J.T. Myers, [ 16 ] Virgin Music Group co-CEO Adam Osterweil, [ 17 ] children's book author Robert Pottle, [ 18 ] children's poet Marco Recuay, [ 19 ] Emmy Award-winning visual effects artist Jeff Seeman, [ 20 ] screenwriter Naren Shankar , producer of The Expanse and CSI Chris Spear, [ 21 ] technology author Colleen Wainwright, [ 22 ] TedX speaker Robyn Lipsky Weintraub, [ 23 ] New York Times and New Yorker crossword puzzle author Stefanie Weiss, [ 24 ] Washington Post columnist and feature writer Jeremy Wolff, [ 25 ] travel writer and professional photographer References [ edit ] ^ Sun, The Cornell Daily (March 9, 2010).

"Joey Green '80 Brings Out Laughs in Bethe House" .

The Cornell Daily Sun . Retrieved October 6, 2022 .

^ "Bruce Handy" .

Simon & Schuster . Retrieved October 2, 2022 .

^ "The Lunatic Presents: A Conversation with Ron Funches" .

The Cornell Lunatic . December 21, 2017 . Retrieved October 3, 2022 .

^ "Our Readers" .

The Cornell Lunatic . Retrieved October 3, 2022 .

^ Rosenthal, Scott (April 1, 2008).

"Cornell Lunatic Alum Publishes Humor Book" .

The Cornell Daily Sun . Retrieved October 6, 2022 .

^ University, Office of Web Communications, Cornell.

"The Cornell Lunatic presents Eric Schwartz aka Smooth-E" .

Cornell . Retrieved October 3, 2022 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ Chari, Ayesha (April 21, 2021).

"Life Lessons From An Evening with Ronny Chieng" .

The Cornell Daily Sun . Retrieved October 6, 2022 .

^ "Jeff Bercovici" .

Los Angeles Times . July 5, 2022 . Retrieved September 29, 2022 .

^ "Lawrence Carrel" .

www.amazon.com . Retrieved September 29, 2022 .

^ "Alan Corcoran" .

www.amazon.com . Retrieved September 29, 2022 .

^ "Jordan Fabian" .

www.bloomberg.com . Retrieved September 29, 2022 .

^ Management, UCLA Anderson School of (June 15, 2021).

"Goldstein" .

UCLA Anderson School of Management . Retrieved September 29, 2022 .

^ "Joyce Hendley, M.S." EatingWell . Retrieved September 29, 2022 .

^ "Amanda Ann Klein" .

www.amazon.com . Retrieved September 29, 2022 .

^ "New Regional Bird Guides Simplify Identification" .

Cornell Chronicle . Retrieved September 29, 2022 .

^ Benitez-Eves, Tina (September 13, 2022).

"Universal Music Launches Virgin Music Group, Encompassing Virgin, InGrooves and MTheory Label" .

American Songwriter . Retrieved October 2, 2022 .

^ "Search Results" .

Kirkus Reviews . Retrieved September 29, 2022 .

^ Foundation, Poetry (September 29, 2022).

"Robert Pottle" .

Poetry Foundation . Retrieved September 29, 2022 .

^ "Marco Recuay" .

Television Academy . Retrieved September 29, 2022 .

^ "Jeff Seeman" .

IMDb . Retrieved October 10, 2022 .

^ "Chris Spear" .

www.amazon.com . Retrieved September 29, 2022 .

^ TEDxConcordiaUPortland - Colleen Wainwright - What I Did On My Summer Vacation , April 15, 2012 , retrieved September 29, 2022 ^ "Robyn Weintraub" .

The New Yorker .

^ Weiss, Stefanie (April 9, 2012).

"How hearing loops can help" .

Washington Post .

ISSN 0190-8286 . Retrieved October 2, 2022 .

^ "Jeremy Wolff Photo Collage" .

jeremywolff.com . Retrieved September 29, 2022 .

External links [ edit ] Cornell Lunatic Website v t e Cornell University Located in : Ithaca, NY and New York City Colleges Agriculture and Life Sciences NYS Architecture, Art, and Planning Arts and Sciences Business Management Hotel Admin.

Applied Economics Computing and Information Science Engineering Graduate Human Ecology NYS Industrial and Labor Relations NYS Public Policy Law Medicine Medical Sciences Tri-Institutional Qatar Veterinary NYS Athletics Teams Baseball Basketball ( Men's , Women's ) Football Ice hockey ( Men's , Women's ) Men's lacrosse Men's soccer Men's squash Wrestling Venues Barton Hall Berman Field Hoy Field Jones Golf Course Lynah Rink Newman Arena Schoellkopf Field Culture All Sports Competition Give My Regards to Davy Harvard (hockey) rivalry Touchdown (mascot) Campus Campuses Central North Tech West Buildings A.D. White House Arboretum Art Museum Bailey Hall Balch Hall Barnes Hall Botanic Gardens Bradfield Hall Brain Collection Caldwell Hall Center for Advanced Computing Computing and Communications Center Comstock Hall Dairy Deke Fernow Hall Fuertes Observatory Goldwin Smith Hall Libraries Llenroc Hartung–Boothroyd Observatory McGraw Tower Morrill Hall Olin Library Ornithology Lab Press Rice Hall Risley Residential College Sage Chapel Sage Hall Statue of Ezra Cornell Stimson Hall Synchrotron Telluride House Thompson Institute Uris Library Straight Hall History People Ezra Cornell Henry W. Sage Andrew Dickson White Former Stone Hall Roberts Hall East Roberts Hall Cornell gorge suicides Irving Literary Society Morrill Land-Grant Acts New York State College of Forestry at Cornell Cornelliana Chimes Club of New York Dragon Day Far Above Cayuga's Waters Slope Day Songs People Alumni Faculty Presidents Trustees Publications Administrative Science Quarterly arXiv Cornell Chronicle Cornell Lunatic Cornell Policy Review Cornell Review Daily Sun Diacritics Epoch ILR Review International Affairs Review International Law Journal Journal of Empirical Legal Studies Journal of Law and Public Policy Law Review Legal Information Institute Oyez Project New German Critique Philosophical Review Student life Catholic Community Chorus Fraternities and sororities Aleph Samach Quill and Dagger Sphinx Head Glee Club Hotel Ezra Cornell Marching Band Messenger Lectures Pep Band WVBR-FM Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=The_Cornell_Lunatic&oldid=1290012114 " Categories : 1978 establishments in New York (state) Biannual magazines published in the United States College humor magazines Cornell University publications Magazines established in 1978 Magazines published in New York (state) Satirical magazines published in the United States Student magazines published in the United States Hidden categories: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list Articles with short description Short description with empty Wikidata description Use mdy dates from March 2025 This page was last edited on 12 May 2025, at 07:20 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents The Cornell Lunatic Add languages Add topic

