Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early modern period Toggle Early modern period subsection 1.1 16th century 1.2 17th–18th centuries 1.3 Anti-Turkism by Ottomans 2 Modern history Toggle Modern history subsection 2.1 Arab World 2.1.1 Iraq 2.1.2 Libya 2.1.3 Saudi Arabia 2.1.4 Syria 2.1.5 United Arab Emirates 2.2 Kurds 3 Europe Toggle Europe subsection 3.1 Albania 3.2 Bulgaria 3.3 Belgium 3.4 Cyprus 3.5 France 3.6 Germany 3.7 Greece 3.8 Netherlands 3.9 Malta 4 Former Soviet Union Toggle Former Soviet Union subsection 4.1 Armenia 4.2 Georgia 4.3 Russia 4.4 Uzbekistan 5 Former Yugoslavia Toggle Former Yugoslavia subsection 5.1 North Macedonia 5.2 Serbia 5.3 Bosnian War 6 Other countries Toggle Other countries subsection 6.1 United States 6.2 Israel 6.3 New Zealand 7 In contemporary media Toggle In contemporary media subsection 7.1 Movies 7.1.1 Dracula Untold 7.1.2 Midnight Express 7.1.3 Saturday Night Live 8 Expressions containing the word "Turk" in various languages 9 See also 10 References 11 Bibliography 12 External links Toggle the table of contents Anti-Turkish sentiment 15 languages العربية Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه Български Čeština Deutsch فارسی Français Հայերեն Русский Shqip Simple English کوردی Српски / srpski Türkçe Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Hostility, fear or intolerance against Turkish peoples Part of a series on Discrimination Forms Institutional Reverse Structural Statistical Systemic Taste-based Attributes Age Caste Class Disability Economic Genetic Hair texture Height Language Dialect Looks Mental disorder Nationality or citizenship Race / Ethnicity Reverse Skin color Scientific racism Rank Sex Reverse Sexual orientation Species Size Viewpoint Social Arophobia Anti-albinism Acephobia Adultism Anti-altruistic Anti-autism Anti-homelessness Anti-drug addicts Anti-intellectualism Anti-intersex Anti-left handedness Anti-Masonry Aporophobia Audism Biphobia Clannism Elitism Endophobia Ephebiphobia Health mental in poverty Fatphobia Gayphobia Gerontophobia Heterosexism HIV/AIDS stigma Hypergamy Homophobia In-group Leprosy stigma Lesbophobia Against men Misandry Misogyny Misogynoir Nepotism Outgroup Perpetual foreigner Pregnancy Sectarianism Supremacism Aryanism Black Hutu Chauvinism Han Female Human Nordicism Male Ultranationalism White Transphobia Non-binary Transmisogyny Trans men Vegaphobia Xenophilia Xenophobia Religious Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Race or ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people Manifestations Algorithmic bias Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Blood libel Bullying Cancel culture Capital punishment for homosexuality Carnism Compulsory sterilization Corrective rape Counter-jihad Cultural genocide Defamation Democide Dog whistle Domicide Economic Education Academic In curricula Sexism Eliminationism Eliminationist antisemitism Employment Enemy of the people Environmental racism Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnocide Excellence Gender-based dress codes Cosmetics policy High heel policy Forced conversion Freak show Gay bashing Gendercide Transgender genocide Genital modification and mutilation Circumcision Female genital mutilation Intersex medical interventions Genocide examples Glass ceiling Hate crime Disability hate crime Violence against LGBTQ people Violence against transgender people Hate group Hate speech Institutional discrimination Institutional racism Homeless dumping Housing Hypergamy Age disparity Indian rolling International inequality Kill Haole Day Lavender scare LGBTQ+ grooming conspiracy theory Linguicide Lynching Media bias Minority stress Moral exclusion Mortgage Native American mascots Braves Blackhawks Chiefs Occupational Apartheid Inequality Injustice Segregation Opposition to immigration Paper genocide Persecution Pogrom Political Political repression Ideological repression Purge Racialization Religious persecution Religious terrorism Religious violence Religious war Scapegoating Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Sentencing disparity Sexual harassment Sex-selective abortion Slut-shaming Structural abuse Structural discrimination Structural evil Structural inequality Structural violence Untermensch Trans bashing Victimisation Violence against women White flight White genocide conspiracy theory Wife selling Witch hunt Policies Algorithmic wage discrimination Age of candidacy Apartheid in South Africa in Israel Blood purity Blood quantum Breadwinner model Conscription and sexism Disabilities Catholic Jewish Disparate impact Fagging Gender pay gap Gender roles Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Gerontocracy Gerrymandering Ghetto benches Internment Jewish quota Opposition to LGBTQ rights MSM blood donation restrictions No kid zone Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota) One-drop rule Racial quota Racial steering Redlining Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting) Segregation age racial Jim Crow laws Nuremberg Laws Segregation academy religious sexual in Islam Social exclusion Sodomy law State atheism State religion Ugly law Voter suppression White Australia policy Countermeasures Affirmative action Anti-discrimination law Anti-racism Audit study Autism rights movement Gender-blind Blind audition Constitutional colorblindness Cross-sex friendship Cultural assimilation Cultural pluralism Diversity, equity, and inclusion Diversity training Empowerment Fat acceptance movement Feminism Fighting Discrimination Golden Rule Hate speech laws by country Human rights Intersex human rights Korenizatsiia LGBTQ rights Mad pride Music in the movement against apartheid Racial integration Reappropriation Rock Against Sexism Self-determination Social integration Stop Murder Music Toleration Transgender rights movement Universal suffrage Women's rights Related topics Allophilia Amatonormativity Bias Capital punishment for homosexuality Cisnormativity Civil liberties Criminalization of homosexuality Dehumanization Diseases of despair Ethnic penalty Figleaf Heteronormativity Historical eugenics Internalized oppression Intersectionality Masculism Oikophobia Oppression Police brutality Polyculturalism Power distance Prejudice Prisoner abuse Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racism by country Racial color blindness Religious intolerance Second-generation gender bias Snobbery Social equity Social exclusion Social model of disability Social privilege Christian male white Social stigma Speciesism Stereotype The talk v t e "The dying, half-naked 'Turk' slips down along with his weapons. The body of the vanquished serves as a stepping stone for the transfigured Christian to ascending toward heaven. The baroque apotheosis (1738) above the Capistrano pulpit on the north side of St Stephen's Cathedral in Vienna shows John of Capistrano , canonized in 1690, as the vanquisher of the 'Turks'. Moreover, until after 1945 the inscription "1683 -schau Mahomet, du Hunt" (1683 -Look Muhammad, You Dog) hung resplendent above the main entrance of the cathedral. It was only removed by order of Cardinal Franz König ." [ 1 ] Anti-Turkish sentiment , also known as Anti-Turkism ( Turkish : Türk karşıtlığı ), or Turkophobia (Turkish: Türkofobi ) is hostility, intolerance, or xenophobia against Turkish people , Turkish culture , and the Turkish language .

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] The term refers to not only against Turks across all regions, but also against the subjects of the Ottoman Empire , as well as descendants of ethnic Turks such as Syrian Turkmen and Iraqi Turkmen . It is also applied to groups who developed in part under the influence of Turkish culture and traditions while converting to Islam, especially during the time of the Ottoman Empire, such as Albanians , Bosniaks and other smaller ethnic groups around Balkans .

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ page needed ] Early modern period In the early modern period , the fall of Constantinople and the Ottoman wars in Europe —part of European Christians ' effort to stem the expansion of the Ottoman Empire , the predecessor to Turkey—helped fuel the development of anti-Turkism. By the middle of the 15th century, special masses called missa contra Turcos ( Latin for "mass against Turks") were held in various places in Europe [ 6 ] [ 7 ] to spread the message that victory over the Ottomans was only possible with the help of God and that a Christian community was therefore necessary to withstand the Turks.

[ 6 ] [ 8 ] 16th century As the Ottomans expanded their empire west, Western Europe came into more frequent contact with the Turks, often militarily.

During the Fourth Ottoman–Venetian War , the Ottomans conquered Cyprus .

In the 16th century, around 2,500 publications about the Turks—including more than 1,000 in German —were released in Europe, spreading the image of the "bloodthirsty Turk". From 1480 to 1610, twice as many books were published about the Turkish threat to Europe than about the discovery of the New World . Bishop Johann Faber of Vienna claimed, "There are no crueler and more audacious villains under the heavens than the Turks, who spare no age or sex and mercilessly cut down young and old alike and pluck unripe fruit from the wombs of mothers." [ 7 ] Original prints from the 16th century at the Hungarian National Museum depict a Turkish warrior butchering infants.

During this time, the Ottoman Empire also invaded the Balkans and besieged Vienna , sparking widespread fear in Europe, and especially in Germany .

[ 9 ] Martin Luther , the German leader of the Protestant Reformation , took advantage of these fears by asserting that the Turks were "the agents of the Devil who, along with the Antichrist located in the heart of the Catholic Church, Rome, would usher in the Last Days and the Apocalypse".

[ 10 ] Luther believed that the Ottoman invasion was God's punishment of Christians for allowing corruption in the Holy See and the Catholic Church .

[ 11 ] In 1518, when he defended his 95 Theses , Luther claimed that God had sent the Turks to punish Christians just as he had sent war, plague , and earthquakes . (In response, Pope Leo X issued a papal bull in which he threatened Luther with excommunication and portrayed him as a troublemaker who advocated capitulation to the Turks.) [ 7 ] In his writings On War Against the Turk and Military Sermon Against the Turks , Luther was "consistent in his theological conception of the Turks as a manifestation of God's chastising rod". He and his followers also espoused the view that the Ottoman–Habsburg Wars were a conflict "between Christ and Antichrist" or "between God and the devil".

[ 12 ] Spurred by this argument, the Portuguese Empire , seeking to capture more land in East Africa and other parts of the world, used any encounter with the "Terrible Turk" as "a prime opportunity to establish credentials as champions of the faith on par with other Europeans".

[ 13 ] Stories of the "dog-Turk" reinforced the negative image. The dog-Turk was claimed to be a man-eating being, half-animal and half-human, with a dog 's head and tail. After the Battle of Vienna in 1683, the image of the dog-Turk became a figure used to ridicule Turks in carnival processions and masquerades, where "dog-Turk" characters began to appear alongside witches and clowns.

[ 7 ] 17th–18th centuries In Sweden , the Turks were portrayed as the archenemies of Christianity. A book by the parish priest Erland Dryselius of Jönköping , published in 1694, was titled Luna Turcica eller Turkeske måne, anwissjandes lika som uti en spegel det mahometiske vanskelige regementet, fördelter uti fyra qvarter eller böcker ("Turkish moon showing as in a mirror the dangerous Mohammedan rule, divided into four quarters or books"). In sermons, the Swedish clergy preached about the Turks' cruelty and bloodthirstiness, and how they systematically burned and plundered the areas they conquered. In a Swedish schoolbook published in 1795, Islam was described as "the false religion that had been fabricated by the great deceiver Muhammad, to which the Turks to this day universally confess" .

[ 7 ] In 1718, James Puckle demonstrated two versions of his new invention, the Puckle gun : a tripod-mounted, single-barreled flintlock weapon fitted with a revolving cylinder, designed to prevent intruders from boarding a ship. The first version, intended for use against Christian enemies, fired conventional round bullets. The second, intended for use against the Muslim Ottomans, fired square bullets, designed by Kyle Tunis, which were believed to be more damaging and would, according to Puckle's patent , convince the Turks of the "benefits of Christian civilization".

[ 14 ] Voltaire and other European writers described the Turks as tyrants who destroyed Europe's heritage; with Voltaire characterizing Turks as "tyrants of the women and enemies of arts" and "barbarian usurpers who must be chased out of Europe." [ 7 ] In his book Orientalism , Edward Said noted, "Until the end of the seventeenth century the 'Ottoman peril' lurked alongside Europe to represent for the whole of Christian civilization a constant danger, and in time European civilization incorporated that peril and its lore, its great events, figures, virtues, and vices, as something woven into the fabric of life." [ 15 ] Anti-Turkism by Ottomans See also: Turkish nationalism Within the ruling class, Ottomans, called themselves " Osmanlı ", to note a person of higher intellect and education with proficiency in Persian and Arabic literature, while the word "Turk" was used to discriminate against the nomad Turkomans of the steppes and Khurasan , and the illiterate Anatolian peasantry, and ethnic slurs such as Eşek Türk (donkey Turk) and Kaba Türk (rude Turk) were used to describe them. Other expressions included were "Turk-head" and "Turk-person".

[ 16 ] [ 17 ] [ 18 ] Within the Ottoman Empire, the term of " Etrak-i bi-idrak " was sometimes used to denote the Yörük backwoodsmen , bumpkins , and nomad Turkomans in Anatolia . " Etrak-i bi-idrak ", an Ottoman play on words, meant "the ignorant Turk". Another similar phrase was " Türk-i-bed-lika " which meant "the ugly-faced Turk".

[ 19 ] [ 20 ] Özay Mehmet , an academic of Turkish Cypriot descent, wrote in his book Islamic Identity and Development: Studies of the Islamic Periphery : [ 21 ] The ordinary Turks [Turkmen, or Yörüks] did not have a sense of belonging to a ruling ethnic group. In particular, they had a confused sense of self-image. Who were they: Turks, Muslims or Ottomans? Their literature was sometimes Persian, sometimes Arabic, but always courtly and elitist. There was always a huge social and cultural distance between the Imperial centre and the Anatolian periphery. As Bernard Lewis expressed it: "In the Imperial society of the Ottomans the ethnic term Turk was little used, and then chiefly in a rather derogatory sense, to designate the Turcoman nomads or, later, the ignorant and uncouth Turkish-speaking peasants of the Anatolian villages." (Lewis 1968: 1)
In the words of a British observer of the Ottoman values and institutions at the start of the twentieth century: "The surest way to insult an Ottoman gentleman is to call him a 'Turk'. His face will straightway wear the expression a Londoner's assumes, when he hears himself frankly styled a Cockney . He is no Turk, no savage, he will assure you, but an Ottoman subject of the Sultan, by no means to be confounded with certain barbarians styled Turcomans, and from whom indeed, on the male side, he may possibly be descended." (Davey 1907: 209) Modern history See also: Turkish minorities in the former Ottoman Empire and World War I Before the 1960s, Turkey had a relatively low rate of emigration.

[ 22 ] However, after the adoption of a new constitution in 1961, Turkish citizens began to migrate elsewhere.

[ 23 ] Gradually, Turks became a "prominent ethnic minority group" in some Western countries.

[ 24 ] [ 25 ] But from the beginning, they were subject to discrimination. At times, when host countries adopted more immigrant-friendly policies, "only the Turkish workers were excluded" from them.

[ 26 ] In various European languages, the word "Turk" has acquired a meaning similar to " barbarian " or "heathen", [ 7 ] [ 27 ] [ 28 ] or is used as a slur or curse.

[ 7 ] [ 29 ] As a result, the word also has some negative connotations in the United States .

[ 30 ] Arab World The Arab World has a long history of mixed relations with the Turks back from the Ottoman Empire . In the past, the Ottoman conquest had absorbed a large number of Arab countries into its map, ultimately opened a chapter of a complicated relationship between Turks and Arabs. While both are Muslim majority, subsequent conflict of interests and the growing Turkification and nationalist movement had led to growing anti-Arabism among Turks, especially following the Arab Revolt during the First World War .

[ 31 ] Iraq See also: Iraqi Turkmen , 1924 Kirkuk massacre , Gavurbağı massacre , 1959 Kirkuk massacre , 1991 Altun Kupri massacre , 1996 Erbil massacre , Iraqi Turkmen genocide , and Persecution of Iraqi Turkmen in Ba'athist Iraq The fear of Turkish influence has always dominated Iraq and as such, relationship between Iraq and Turkey has always been tense.

[ 32 ] The position of the Iraqi Turkmen has changed from being administrative and business classes of the Ottoman Empire to an increasingly discriminated against minority.

[ 33 ] Since the demise of the Ottoman Empire, the Iraqi Turkmen have been victims of several massacres, such as the Kirkuk Massacre of 1959 . Furthermore, under the Ba'ath Party , the persecution of Iraqi Turkmen increased , with several leaders being executed in 1979 [ 33 ] as well as the Iraqi Turkmen community being victims of Arabization policies by the state, and Kurdification by Kurds seeking to push them forcibly out of their homeland.

[ 34 ] Thus, they have suffered from various degrees of suppression and assimilation that ranged from political persecution and exile to terror and ethnic cleansing . Despite being recognized in the 1925 constitution as a constitutive entity, the Iraqi Turkmen were later denied this status; hence, cultural rights were gradually taken away and activists were sent to exile.

[ 33 ] In 1924, the Iraqi Turkmen were seen as a disloyal remnant of the Ottoman Empire , with a natural tie to Mustafa Kemal Atatürk 's new Turkish nationalist ideology emerging in the Republic of Turkey .

[ 35 ] The Iraqi Turkmen living in the region of Kirkuk were perceived as posing a threat to the stability of Iraq, particularly as they did not support the ascendancy of King Faisal I to the Iraqi throne.

[ 35 ] On May 4, these tensions boiled over into violence when soldiers from the Iraq Levies - a levied force raised by the British government after the First World War and consisting primarily of Assyrians - clashed with Turkmen in a Kirkuk market square after a dispute between an Assyrian soldier and a Turkmen shopkeeper. In the ensuing fracas, 200 Turkmen were killed by Assyrian soldiers.

[ 35 ] Around 20 Iraqi Turkmen civilians were killed by the Iraqi police including women and children on 12 July 1946 in Gavurbağı, Kirkuk .

[ 36 ] [ 37 ] The Kirkuk massacre of 1959 came about due to the Iraqi government allowing the Iraqi Communist Party , which in Kirkuk was largely Kurdish, to target the Iraqi Turkmen.

[ 33 ] [ 38 ] With the appointment of Maarouf Barzinji, a Kurd, as the mayor of Kirkuk in July 1959, tensions rose following the 14 July revolution celebrations, with animosity in the city polarizing rapidly between the Kurds and Iraqi Turkmen. On 14 July 1959, fights broke out between the Iraqi Turkmen and Kurds, leaving some 20 Iraqi Turkmen dead.

[ 39 ] Furthermore, on 15 July 1959, Kurdish soldiers of the Fourth Brigade of the Iraqi army mortared Iraqi Turkmen residential areas, destroying 120 houses.

[ 39 ] [ 40 ] Order was restored on 17 July by military units from Baghdad . The Iraqi government referred to the incident as a "massacre" [ 41 ] and stated that between 31 and 79 Iraqi Turkmen were killed and some 130 injured.

[ 39 ] Turks protesting in Amsterdam , the banner reads: 'Kirkuk is an Iraqi city with Turkmen characteristics'.

In 1980, Saddam Hussein 's government adopted a policy of assimilation of its minorities. Due to government relocation programs, thousands of Iraqi Turkmen were relocated from their traditional homelands in northern Iraq and replaced by Arabs, in an effort to Arabize the region.

[ 42 ] Furthermore, Iraqi Turkmen villages and towns were destroyed to make way for Arab migrants, who were promised free land and financial incentives. For example, the Ba'ath regime recognized that the city of Kirkuk was historically an Iraqi Arab city and remained firmly in its cultural orientation.

[ 38 ] Thus, the first wave of Arabization saw Arab families move from the center and south of Iraq into Kirkuk to work in the expanding oil industry. Although the Iraqi Turkmen were not actively forced out, new Arab quarters were established in the city and the overall demographic balance of the city changed as the Arab migrations continued.

[ 38 ] Several presidential decrees and directives from state security and intelligence organizations indicate that the Iraqi Turkmen were a particular focus of attention during the Ba'athist Arabization campaigns in northern Iraq . For example, the Iraqi Military Intelligence issued directive 1559 on 6 May 1980 ordering the deportation of Iraqi Turkmen officials from Kirkuk, issuing the following instructions: "identify the places where Turkmen officials are working in governmental offices [in order] to deport them to other governorates in order to disperse them and prevent them from concentrating in this governorate [Kirkuk]".

[ 43 ] In addition, on 30 October 1981, the Revolution's Command Council issued decree 1391, which authorized the deportation of Iraqi Turkmen from Kirkuk with paragraph 13 noting that "this directive is specially aimed at Turkmen and Kurdish officials and workers who are living in Kirkuk".

[ 43 ] As primary victims of these Arabization policies, the Iraqi Turkmen suffered from land expropriation and job discrimination, and therefore would register themselves as "Arabs" in order to avoid discrimination.

[ 44 ] Thus, ethnic cleansing was an element of the Ba'thist policy aimed at reducing the influence of the Iraqi Turkmen in northern Iraq's Kirkuk.

[ 45 ] Those Iraqi Turkmen who remained in cities such as Kirkuk were subject to continued assimilation policies; [ 45 ] school names, neighborhoods, villages, streets, markets and even mosques with names of Turkic origin were changed to names that emanated from the Ba'th Party or from Arab heroes.

[ 45 ] Moreover, many Iraqi Turkmen villages and neighborhoods in Kirkuk were simply demolished, particularly in the 1990s.

[ 45 ] Over 135 Turkmens were massacred in 1991 during the Gulf War by the Iraqi Army .

[ 46 ] [ 47 ] Iraqi Turkmen woman holding a placard written in Turkish : Kerkük'ü hiçbir güç Kürtleştiremez ("No power can Kurdify Kirkuk").

The Kurds claimed de facto sovereignty over land that Iraqi Turkmen regards as theirs. For the Iraqi Turkmen, their identity is deeply inculcated as the rightful inheritors of the region as a legacy of the Ottoman Empire.

[ 48 ] Thus, it is claimed that the Kurdistan Region and Iraqi government has constituted a threat to the survival of the Iraqi Turkmen through strategies aimed at eradicating or assimilating them.

[ 48 ] The largest concentration of Iraqi Turkmen tended to be in Tal Afar . The formation of the Kurdistan Region in 1991 created high animosity between the Kurds and Iraqi Turkmen, resulting in some Iraqi Turkmen being victims of Kurdification , according to the Liam Anderson. The largest concentration of Iraqi Turkmen tended to be in the de facto capital of Erbil , a city in which they had assumed prominent administrative and economic positions. Thus, they increasingly came into dispute and often conflict with the ruling powers of the city, which after 1996 was the Kurdistan Democratic Party of Massoud Barzani .

[ 49 ] According to Anderson and Stansfield, in the 1990s, tension between the Kurds and Iraqi Turkmen inflamed as the KDP and the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan (PUK) were institutionalized as the political hegemons of the region and, from the perspective of the Iraqi Turkmen, sought to marginalize them from the positions of authority and to subsume their culture with an all-pervading Kurdistani identity. With the support of Ankara , a new political front of Turkmen parties, the Iraqi Turkmen Front (ITF), was formed on 24 April 1995.

[ 49 ] The relationship between the Iraqi Turkmen Front and the KDP was tense and deteriorated as the decade went on. Iraqi Turkmen associated with the Iraqi Turkmen Front complained about harassment by Kurdish security forces.

[ 49 ] In March 2000, the Human Rights Watch reported that the KDP's security attacked the offices of the ITF in Erbil, killing two guards, following a lengthy period of disputes between the two parties.

[ 49 ] In 2002, the KDP created an Iraqi Turkmen political organization, the Turkmen National Association, that supported the further institutionalization of the Kurdistan Region. This was viewed by pro-ITF Iraqi Turkmen as a deliberate attempt to "buy off" Iraqi Turkmen opposition and break their bonds with Ankara .

[ 50 ] Promoted by the KDP as the "true voice" of the Iraqi Turkmen, the Turkmen National Association has a pro-Kurdistani stance and has effectively weakened the ITF as the sole representative voice of the Iraqi Turkmen.

[ 50 ] Beginning in 2003, there were riots between Kurds and Turkmen in Kirkuk, a city that Turkmen view as historically theirs.

[ 51 ] According to United Nations reports, the KRG and Peshmerga were "illegally policing Kirkurk, abducting Turkmen and Arabs and subjecting them to torture". In Tal Afar, between 2003 and 2006, 1,350 Turkmens died and thousands of houses were damaged or demolished, resulting in 4,685 displaced families, largely stemming from sectarian tensions. Later, the Islamic State committed the Iraqi Turkmen genocide .

[ 51 ] Libya See also: Libyan civil war (2014–2020) As for the result of the current Libyan conflict since 2014, Libya was divided into two, where the Government of National Accord in Tripoli enjoys military support from Turkey. This has fueled tensions between Ankara and the Tobruk-based government , and anti-Turkish policies have been pursued by them, [ example needed ] In 2019, the Tobruk-based army had arrested Turkish nationals, accusing them of sponsoring terrorism.

[ 52 ] In 2020, over 15 Turkish nationals have been taken into custody for the same reason.

[ 53 ] Haftar had also ordered shooting down any Turkish ships and interests, banning flights to Turkey.

[ 54 ] Saudi Arabia See also: Wahhabi War Saudi Arabia has a very tense relationship with Turkey, owing it to Ottoman-Saudi War when the Saudis were defeated by the Ottomans, which contributed to the Turkish rule for another century before the collapse of the Ottoman Empire, and its alliance with the Al-Rashid family against the Al-Saud .

[ 55 ] [ 56 ] The tensions rekindled in the 21st century with Erdoğan's desire to "revive the Ottoman Empire", which draws Saudi Arabia to be more antagonistic to Turkey.

[ 57 ] [ 58 ] Saudi Arabia has since then made numerous policies, such as labeling the Ottoman Empire as the occupants of Arabia, financing movies that are deemed anti-Turkish, [ 59 ] [ 60 ] and recently, banning Turkish websites and leading boycotts against Turkey.

[ 61 ] [ 62 ] Syria From the French mandate era to the Assad regime, the Turkish culture and language have perished for a section of the Syrian Turkmen community.

[ 63 ] Many Syrian Turkmen have become Arabized and assimilated in areas where they form a minority. Consequently, Arabization is mainly an exception in areas where the Syrian Turkmen live in areas where they form a significant population, where they have continued to maintain their Turkish identity and language despite discriminative state policies.

[ 63 ] Since the Turkish annexation of Sanjak of Alexandretta , there is a strong anti-Turkish sentiment among the Syrian population.

[ 64 ] For the Syrians, the annexation of Alexandretta became a national wound and a symbol of increasing Turkish meddling of Syrian affairs. This had led to the beginning of anti-Turkish discrimination, intensified under the government of Hafez al-Assad and the Arabization process. Syrian Turkmen, suffered discrimination over employment and education and were forbidden from writing and publishing in their native Turkish dialect.

[ 65 ] Syrian Turkmen occupied a low rung on the societal ladder, as reported by Al Bawaba , it was stated that Assad always sought to benefit his politically dominant Shiite religious minority. The report quoted Bayırbucak Turkmen as highlighting, "They would take Alawites first no matter what, even if they had degrees, Turkmen couldn't find jobs".

[ 66 ] With the beginning of the Syrian Civil War , Syrian Turkmen had sided with the Syrian opposition , [ 67 ] which fed the growth of anti-Turkism in Syria. The Syrian Armed Forces , with Russian support, often bombed Syrian Turkmen positions as well as increased xenophobic attacks against Turkmen, accusing them of being Ankara's stooge.

[ 68 ] United Arab Emirates In December 2017, the UAE's foreign minister, Abdullah bin Zayed Al Nahyan , shared a tweet that claimed an Ottoman general had robbed Medina during Ottoman rule. Emirati diplomat Anwar Gargash then added, "The sectarian and partisan view is not an acceptable alternative, and the Arab world will not be led by Tehran or Ankara." [ 69 ] Kurds Further information: Kurdish-Turkish conflict See also: Human rights of Kurdish people in Turkey A 2013 study showed that 13.2% of the Kurds in Turkey had a negative view of Turks. Other numbers include 22.3% who would not accept a Turkish son/daughter-in-law and 5% who would not want to live next to a Turk. The study also showed that left-oriented Kurds were less likely to show tolerance towards Turks, while religious affiliation did not play any significance.

[ 70 ] Europe According to Fatma Müge Göçek the main reasons for anti-Turkish sentiment in Western Europe are Armenian genocide denial and the role of Turkish migrant workers in the economy.

[ 71 ] Albania In the People's Socialist Republic of Albania , Islamic culture and life was destroyed through state policies and a group of Albanian historians, often with nationalist perspectives promoted in their literature "the Turkish savagery" and Albanian Christian resistance toward the Ottoman Empire. Scholars who opposed anti-Turkish and anti-Muslim narratives were subjected to ostracism and penalties.

[ 72 ] In the 2010s, opposition to Turkey building mosques in Albania or exerting its political influence exists among part of the population. They view Turkey as an interfering or autocratic power and Islam as a negative imposed Ottoman legacy.

[ 73 ] [ 74 ] Bulgaria See also: Harmanli massacre , Razgrad incident , Exodus of Turks from Bulgaria (1950–1951) , Revival Process , 1989 expulsion of Turks from Bulgaria , and Banya Bashi Mosque clashes Turkish refugees from the Veliko Tarnovo district coming into Shumen (1877).

The Bulgarian Martyresses , by Konstantin Makovsky (1877). A painting from the April Uprising , it sparked outrage in the West against Turkish atrocities in Bulgaria .

Before 1878, Turks accounted for an estimated one-third of the population of Bulgaria.

[ 75 ] In 1876, approximately 70% of the country's arable land belonged to Turks. This number declined from 1923 to 1949, when an estimated 220,000 Turks moved from Bulgaria to Turkey, a migration encouraged by the Turkish government.

Another wave of about 155,000 left Bulgaria from 1949 to 1951, many of them forcibly expelled.

[ 76 ] [ 77 ] In 1984, the government implemented Bulgarisation policies to culturally assimilate Bulgarian Turks. Approximately 800,000 Turks were forced to adopt Bulgarian names. Furthermore, Bulgarian Turks were not allowed to use their Muslim names, speak Turkish in public places, or attend Muslim ceremonies.

[ 78 ] This assimilation campaign was labelled as an attempt for national revival and was called "The Revival Process".

[ 79 ] On 24 December 1984, in the village of Mlechino , Bulgarian police and security forces shot at Turkish protesters when some 200 Turkish villagers from nearby smaller towns gathered to protest for the return of their passports and reinstatement of their Turkish names.

In many Turkish populated areas in Bulgaria, People from smaller towns and villages attempted to gather in larger towns with a government official with greater jurisdiction, to protest against the assimilation policies. These towns were often barricaded by Bulgarian security forces.

[ 80 ] On 25 December 1984, close to the town of Benkovski , some 3,000 Turkish protesters from the nearby smaller villages confronted Bulgarian security forces and demanded to have their original identification papers back. The Bulgarian security forces managed to disperse the crowd and urged them to go back to their villages and inquire from the local mayors. After returning to their towns and discovering that the local municipality didn't have their passports and ID documentation the crowd marched back towards the town of Benkovski on the next day (26 December 1984). About 500 armed personnel from Bulgarian security forces were in position. The police presence in the area was previously increased under the guise of "exercise manoeuvres". When the crowd of 2,000 Turkish villagers approached the Bulgarian security forces opened fire with automatic weapons, wounding 8 people and killing 4. One of the killed was a 17-month-old Turkish baby.

[ 81 ] The victims were from the villages of Kayaloba , Kitna and Mogiljane. The gunshot wounds suggest that the security force had been aiming at the midsection of the bodies. The captured demonstrators were faced down on the snow for 2 hours and blasted with cold water coming from the fire fighting trucks. In a report by Atanas Kadirev the head of the Ministry of Interior Forces in Kardzhali stated "It was interesting how they endured the entire water from the fire fighters' cisterns ". The temperature that day was minus 15 degrees Celsius.

[ 80 ] [ 82 ] On the same day, 26 December 1984, in the village of Gruevo , situated in Momchilgrad county, the Turkish community temporarily resisted the entry of security forces vehicles into the village by burning truck tires on the main road, but the security forces returned at night with reinforcements. The electricity to the village was cut. The villagers organized at the village entrance but were blasted with water from fire trucks . The security forces opened fire at the villagers and several civilians were wounded and killed. The wounded were refused medical treatment. There are reports of incarcerated Turks allegedly committing suicide while held for police questioning.

[ 83 ] [ 84 ] [ 85 ] In demonstrations in Momchilgrad at least one 16-year-old was shot and killed and there are reports of casualties also in Dzhebel .

The Bulgarian Ministry of Interior stated "during these few Christmas days there have been some 11 demonstrations in which approximately 11,000 Turks participated." A large number of the arrested protesters were later sent to the Belene labour camp at the gates of which it is written " All Bulgarian citizens are equal under the laws of the People's Republic of Bulgaria" [ 80 ] One of the most notable confrontations between the ethnic Turk population and the Bulgarian State Security apparatus and army was in the village of Yablanovo during January 1985 where the Turkish population resisted the tanks of the 3rd Bulgarian Army for 3 days. When the village was overrun the town hall was made into a temporary Command Centre where imprisoned Turks were tortured. The torture and violation was later continued in the underground cellars of the Ministry of Interior in the city of Sliven .

[ 86 ] Over 30 people are reported killed during the events in Yablanovo.

[ 87 ] These events led to the beginning of the revival of the Turkish minority identity in Bulgaria and protests took place in some of the bigger settlements in the southern and northern Turk enclaves. Moreover, the Turkish community received the solidarity of Bulgarian intellectuals and opponents of the regime.

[ 79 ] This led, a few years later, to the biggest exodus in Europe since World War II : After the Bulgaria–Turkey border was opened in June 1989, approximately 350,000 Turks left Bulgaria on tourist visas in the span of three months.

[ 88 ] Eventually, more than 150,000 Turks returned to Bulgaria—especially after the removal of Todor Zhivkov from power—but more than 200,000 chose to remain in Turkey permanently.

[ 89 ] Former Bulgarian prime minister, Boyko Borisov , has been accused of having anti-Turkish tendencies.

[ 90 ] In December 2009, he backed a referendum, proposed by the nationalist party Attack ( Bulgarian : Атака), on whether to allow daily Turkish-language news broadcasts on Bulgarian National Television , although he later withdrew his support.

[ 91 ] Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, then the Turkish prime minister, "expressed his concern of rising anti-Turkish sentiments in Bulgaria" [ 92 ] to the Bulgarian prime minister. The Turkish Foreign Ministry also "expressed its concern over the rising heated rhetoric in Bulgaria".

[ 93 ] According to a report by Ivan Dikov, "not just Атака but a large number of Bulgarians have resented the news in Turkish".

[ 91 ] Borisov also referred to Turks (and Romani ) as "bad human material" in 2009.

[ 94 ] The vice president of the Party of European Socialists , Jan Marinus Wiersma , said Borisov had "crossed the invisible line between right wing populism and extremism".

[ 95 ] Some Bulgarian historians consider Bulgars , a semi-nomadic Turkic people, as Iranian. According to Raymond Detrez , the Iranian theory is rooted in the periods of anti-Turkish sentiment in Bulgaria and is ideologically motivated.

[ 96 ] Since 1989, anti-Turkish rhetoric is now reflected in the theories that challenge the thesis of the proto-Bulgars' Turkic origin. Alongside the Iranian or Aryan theory, there appeared arguments favoring an autochthonous origin.

[ 97 ] Example for recent confrontation between the Turkish population of Bulgaria and Bulgarian politicians is Banya Bashi Mosque clashes Belgium See also: Turks in Belgium There are approximately 290,000 Turkish citizens living in Belgium , The majority of whom left to Belgium in the 1950s. In the past several years, many right and left wings Belgian political parties criticized domestic Turkish politics and called for banning or deporting Turkish immigrants.

[ 98 ] [ 99 ] In 2015, a female employee shouted " Dirty Turk" ( in Dutch : 'Vuile Turk') at a Supervisor of Turkish origin in the Volvo car factory in Ghent , which led to a Strike action by Turkish workers at the factory.

[ 100 ] [ 101 ] Filip Dewinter a right-wing Flemish nationalist party member said in May 2017 at TV-program De Zevende Dag, [ 102 ] The solution is for Turkish minorities in Flemish region, another method should be applied not only integrate Turks into Flemish culture but assimilate Turks. Leave identity behind leaving culture behind and fully assimilate in our society, if not so return to the country of origin is the only solution.

Cyprus See also: Bloody Christmas (1963) ; 1964 Famagusta incident ; Alaminos massacre ; Maratha, Santalaris and Aloda massacre ; Tochni massacre ; and Turkish Cypriot enclaves See also: Cyprus problem and List of massacres in Cyprus The island of Cyprus became an independent state in 1960, with power shared between Greek Cypriots and Turkish Cypriots under the London–Zürich Agreements . But in December 1963, in events that became known as Bloody Christmas in which 364 Turks were killed, [ 103 ] Turkish Cypriots were ousted from the republic and Greek Cypriots began a military campaign against them, leading to 11 years of ethnic clashes.

[ 104 ] Turkish Cypriots bore the heavier cost in terms of casualties, and some 25,000—about a fifth of the population of Turkish Cypriots—were internally displaced .

[ 105 ] Thousands of Turkish Cypriot houses left behind were ransacked or completely destroyed. They lived as refugees for at least ten years, until the 1974 Turkish invasion.

[ 105 ] By the late 1960s, approximately 60,000 Turkish Cypriots had left their homes and moved into enclaves .

[ 106 ] This resulted in an exodus of Turkish Cypriots, with the majority migrating to the United Kingdom and others to Turkey, North America , and Australia .

[ 107 ] On 13 February 1963 Greeks and Greek Cypriots attacked the Turkish Cypriot quarter of Limassol with tanks killing 16 and injuring 35 Turks.

[ 108 ] Between 11 and 13 May 1964, Cypriot Police executed much as 28 Turkish Cypriot civilians in Famagusta and Akrotiri and Dhekelia .

[ 109 ] [ 110 ] On 14 and 15 November 1967, Greek Cypriots murdered 26 Turkish Cypriots during their retreat from Kofinou .

[ 111 ] [ page needed ] Numerous atrocities against the Turkish Cypriot community were committed in response to the Turkish invasion of Cyprus . In the Maratha, Santalaris and Aloda massacre by EOKA B, 126 people were killed on 14 August 1974.

[ 112 ] [ 113 ] The United Nations described the massacre as a crime against humanity , by saying "constituting a further crime against humanity committed by the Greek and Greek Cypriot gunmen." [ 114 ] In the Tochni massacre , 85 Turkish Cypriot inhabitants were massacred.

[ 115 ] During the Alaminos massacre , 13 or 15 Turkish men were executed.

[ 116 ] The Washington Post covered another atrocity in which it is written that: "In a Greek raid on a small Turkish village near Limassol, 36 people out of a population of 200 were killed. The Greeks said that they had been given orders to kill the inhabitants of the Turkish villages before the Turkish forces arrived." [ 117 ] In Limassol, upon the fall of the Turkish Cypriot enclave to the Cypriot National Guard on 20 July 1974, the Turkish Cypriot quarter was burned, women raped and children shot according to Turkish Cypriot and Greek Cypriot eyewitness accounts.

[ 118 ] [ 119 ] 1300 people were then led to a prison camp.

[ 120 ] On 12 July 2020, The primate of the Church of Cyprus, Archbishop Chrysostomos II has expressed his opinions regarding the reversion of the Hagia Sophia museum to a mosque stating that "The Turks have remained uncivilized, they are rude, and they will remain [this way]." He added that "Turkey has learned to destroy, it has learned to appropriate the cultures of others and sometimes, when it does not benefit it, it destroys them and falsely presents cultures as its own." [ 121 ] France See also: 1984 Châteaubriant shooting Germany See also: Turks in Germany , 1984 Duisburg arson attack , 1992 Mölln arson attack , 1993 Solingen arson attack , and National Socialist Underground murders The Solingen arson attack of 1993 , in which neo-Nazis set fire to a Turkish family's home, was one of the most severe instances of xenophobic violence in modern Germany.

Turks are "the most prominent ethnic minority group in contemporary Germany", [ 122 ] and discrimination and violence against them are common.

[ 123 ] [ 124 ] In public discourse and popular jokes, they are often portrayed as "ludicrously different in their food tastes, dress, names, and even in their ability to develop survival techniques".

[ 125 ] The number of violent acts by right-wing extremists in Germany increased dramatically between 1990 and 1992.

[ 126 ] On November 25, 1992, three Turkish residents were killed in a firebombing in Mölln , a town in northern Germany.

[ 127 ] [ 128 ] And on May 29, 1993, in an arson attack in Solingen , five members of a Turkish family that had resided in Germany for 23 years were burnt to death.

[ 129 ] Several neighbors heard someone shout " Heil Hitler !" before dousing the front porch and door with gasoline and setting fire to the home.

[ 130 ] Most Germans condemned these attacks, and many marched in candlelight processions.

[ 131 ] According to Greg Nees, "because Turks are both darker-skinned and Muslim, conservative Germans are largely against granting them citizenship".

[ 132 ] Greece See also: Turks of the Dodecanese , Cretan Turks , Turks in Western Thrace , 1990 Komotini events , Navarino massacre , Massacre of Tripoli , Greco-Turkish War (1919–22) § Greek massacres of Turks , Greco-Turkish War (1919–22) § Greek scorched-earth policy , Yalova Peninsula massacres , Menemen massacre , and Fire of Manisa A member of the European parliament from the Greek far-right Golden Dawn party, former army lieutenant general Eleftherios Synadinos has been expelled from a European Parliament plenary session after a racist remark, stating that "As it has been expressed in scientific literature, the Turks are dirty and polluted. Turks are like wild dogs when they play but when they have to fight against their enemies they run away. The only effective way to deal with the Turks is with decisive and resolute attitudes." [ 133 ] Ioannis Lagos , who has been a Greek lawmaker serving as a Member of the European Parliament , [ 134 ] has tore a Turkish flag made of paper into pieces in January 2020 during a session of debate for the humanitarian situation on the Greek islands due to illegal immigrations.

[ 135 ] The former Greek Minister for Foreign Affairs Theodoros Pangalos stated in 2002 that Turks have been being allowed "to drag their bloodstained boots across the carpet" in the European Union capitals and has labelled Turks as "bandits, murderers, and rapists".

[ 136 ] Netherlands See also: Turks in the Netherlands , Afrikaanderwijk riots , and Schiedam riots Turks are the largest ethnic minority group in the Netherlands.

[ 137 ] The first recorded attack on Turks in the Netherlands were the Afrikaanderwijk riots .

[ 138 ] Although policies toward Turks in the Netherlands are more progressive than those in many other European countries, such as Germany, [ 139 ] in a report on the Netherlands in 2008, the European Commission against Racism and Intolerance wrote that the Turkish minority had been particularly affected by "stigmatization of and discrimination against members of minority groups".

[ 140 ] The report also noted that "the tone of Dutch political and public debate around integration and other issues relevant to ethnic minorities has experienced a dramatic deterioration".

[ 140 ] According to the European Network Against Racism , an international organization supported by the European Commission , half of all Turks in the Netherlands report having experienced racial discrimination.

[ 141 ] The network also noted "dramatic growth" of Islamophobia . In 2001, another international organization, the European Monitoring Centre on Racism and Xenophobia , highlighted a negative trend in Dutch attitudes towards minorities, compared with average European Union results.

[ 142 ] That analysis also noted that, compared to other Europeans, the Dutch were "more in favor of cultural assimilation of minorities" rather than "cultural enrichment by minority groups".

Malta The Maltese have a colourful vocabulary stemming from their fight against the Ottoman Empire during the Great Siege of Malta in 1565. For example, the expression tgħammed tork is used when the sun is visible during rainfall; it means "a Turk has been baptised", which was considered a rare event. The phrase twieled tork ("a Turk was born") is also used. Another expression is ħaqq għat-torok ("curse on the Turks"), used when something goes wrong.

[ 143 ] Former Soviet Union See also: Turks in the former Soviet Union , Deportation of the Meskhetian Turks , and Deportation of the Crimean Tatars Armenia See also: Armenian genocide , Armenian genocide denial , Hamidian massacres , Armenian–Tatar massacres of 1905–07 , Adana massacre , Armenian Secret Army for the Liberation of Armenia , Armenia–Turkey relations , Late Ottoman genocides , and List of Turkish diplomats assassinated by Armenian militant organisations According to a survey conducted in 2007, 78% of Armenians see Turkey as a threat.

[ 144 ] Georgia See also: Meskhetian Turks Georgians look with a wary eye to Turkey's growing Neo-Ottomanism and the rise in popularity of irredentist maps showing Turkey with borders expanded into the former Ottoman Empire , usually including Adjara .

[ 145 ] Although some Turks have since come back to Meskheti (which is near the Turkish-Georgian border), the Georgians and Armenians who settled in their homes have vowed to take up arms against any who return. Many Georgians have also argued that the Meskhetian Turks should be sent to Turkey, "where they belong" .

[ 146 ] Russia See also: Tatarophobia A World War I Russian propaganda poster depicting a Turk running away from a Russian According to Stanford University history professor Robert D. Crews, Russia has been historically more tolerant towards Turkic people than any other European administrations, and many Turkic people ( Volga Tatars , Bashkirs , Karachays , Nogais , Kazakhs , Chuvash , for example), most of them Muslims, were fairly treated under Tsarist Russia . However, not all Turkic peoples received such generous treatment, for instance, Crimean Tatars under Russian Tsarist administration were forced to leave their houses for Turkey due to Russian colonial politics in the Crimean peninsula .

In the Soviet Union , the NKVD and the Red Army carried out ethnic cleansing during World War II through mass deportations of Turks.

[ 147 ] In June 1945, Vyacheslav Molotov , the Soviet minister of foreign affairs, formally demanded that Turkey surrender three provinces ( Kars , Ardahan , and Artvin ), and Moscow was also preparing to support Armenian claims to several other provinces. War against Turkey seemed possible, and Joseph Stalin wanted to drive out Turks (especially in Meskheti ) who were likely to be hostile to Soviet intentions.

[ 148 ] The campaign is relatively poorly documented, but Soviet sources suggest that 115,000 Turks were deported, mainly to Central Asia . Most of them settled in Uzbekistan , [ 149 ] but many others died along the way.

[ 150 ] More recently, some Turks in Russia, especially Meskhetian Turks in Krasnodar , have faced human rights violations, including deprivation of citizenship and prohibitions on employment and owning property.

[ 151 ] Since 2004, many Turks have left the Krasnodar region for the United States as refugees. They are still barred from full repatriation to Georgia.

[ 152 ] Vladimir Zhirinovsky claimed that "nothing will happen to the world even if the entire Turkic nation perishes".

[ 153 ] Uzbekistan See also: Meskhetian Turks § 1989 deportation from Uzbekistan to other Soviet countries , and Fergana massacre While Turkey and Uzbekistan have a fair relationship for being commonly Turkic , some tensions were witnessed.

In 1989, 103 people died and more than 1,000 were wounded in ethnic clashes between Turks and Uzbeks . Some 700 houses were destroyed, and more than 90,000 Meskhetian Turks were driven out of Uzbekistan.

[ 154 ] Many Turks see these events as their "second deportation". Those who remained in Uzbekistan complained of ethnic discrimination.

[ 155 ] Former Yugoslavia See also: Turks in Bosnia and Herzegovina , Turks in Croatia , Turks in Kosovo , Turks in North Macedonia , Turks in Montenegro , Turks in Serbia , and Turk (term for Muslims) Iconostasis in the Church of the Ascension of Jesus, Skopje from 1867, North Macedonia . The Beheading of John the Baptist is carried out by figures stylized like Ottoman Turks.

After the Ottoman Empire fell in the early 20th century, many Turks fled as Muhacirs (refugees). Others intermarried or simply identified themselves as Yugoslavs or Albanians to avoid stigma and persecution.

[ 156 ] Historically, from the Ottoman conquest through the 19th century, many ethnically non-Turkish groups—especially the Muslim Slavs of the Balkans —were referred to in local languages as Turks . This usage is common in literature, including in the works of Ivan Mažuranić and Petar II Petrović-Njegoš . The religious ideology of Christoslavism , coined by Michael Sells , holds that " Slavs are Christian by nature and that any conversion from Christianity is a betrayal of the Slavic race".

[ 157 ] Under this ideology, as seen in Croatian and Serbian nationalism , South Slavic Muslims are not regarded as part of their ethnic kin; by virtue of their Muslim faith , they become "Turks".

[ 158 ] North Macedonia When North Macedonia proclaimed its independence in 1991, the Macedonian state implemented nationalist politics, which aimed to assimilate Macedonian Muslims into a broader category of " Macedonians ". The government banned education in Turkish in all regions to "prevent Turkification ". This, however, was met with resistance by Muslims who did not support the association and wanted to learn Turkish and continue their education in Turkish. The protests failed, although one person applied to the European Court of Human Rights . The case revolved around rights to education in the mother tongue.

[ 159 ] Serbia During the Great Eastern Crisis more than 10,000 Muslims, including Turks , were forced to left the territory of the Serbian Principality in 1862.

[ 160 ] Bosnian War Ratko Mladić , Radovan Karadžić 's military chief and fellow convicted criminal of genocide , crimes against humanity and war crimes, [ 161 ] described the conquest of Srebrenica and the ensuing massacre as an opportunity for "the Serbs to avenge themselves on the Turks".

[ 162 ] On July 11, 1995, the town of Srebrenica fell to the Bosnian Serb Army . Its commander Ratko Mladić made his infamous statement at the same day, which has been used against him during International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia , while he and his entourage posing for cameras with the town in the background: [ 163 ] [ 164 ] [ 165 ] Here we are, on July 11, 1995, in Serb Srebrenica. On the eve of yet another great Serb holiday, we give this town to the Serb people as a gift. Finally, after the Rebellion against the Dahis , the time has come to take revenge on the Turks in this region.

Other countries United States Anti-Turkism first appeared in the United States during World War I , when the Armenian genocide began and was reported by American newspapers.

[ 166 ] These reports had reinforced a sense of solidarity to Armenians and increasingly anti-Turkish rhetorics in the United States, with the Turks being equally seen as a barbaric people.

[ 167 ] [ 168 ] Israel See also: Antisemitism in Turkey As a result of the increasing Anti-Zionist and antisemitic sentiment by Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, and growing Israeli assertiveness, in particular toward the issue over the Armenian genocide , Turkish-Israeli relations have been greatly damaged.

[ 169 ] However, Israelis have generally reserved criticism for only the Turkish government, partly due to their tie with fellow Turkic Azerbaijan .

[ citation needed ] After the 2010 Gaza flotilla raid , where 10 Turks were killed, and the subsequent diplomatic crisis between Israel and Turkey, the number of Israeli tourists to Turkey shrunk to 100,000 as Israelis preferred to "refrain from visiting the country that was seen to be hostile to them".

In 2019, Benjamin Netanyahu 's son, Yair Netanyahu , published a tweet remarking that Istanbul was once called Constantinople , a centre of Orthodox Christianity before "Turkish occupation" of the city, sparking a political crisis between Turkey and Israel.

[ 170 ] On 12 July 2020, a group of nine Israelis made up of Christians and Jews burned the Turkish flag at the Turkish embassy in Tel Aviv in response to Erdoğan's decision to convert Hagia Sophia back into a mosque. They were later detained by Israeli police.

[ 171 ] On 10 February 2023, Israeli top rabbi Shmuel Eliyahu claimed that the earthquake that devastated Turkey was "a divine punishment" because the Turkish government had "defamed" Israel.

[ 172 ] New Zealand See also: Christchurch mosque shootings and New Zealand–Turkey relations The guns and magazines used by Brenton Tarrant, the perpetrator of the Christchurch mosque shootings , were covered in white writing naming historical events, people, and motifs related to historical conflicts, wars, and battles between Muslims and European Christians, [ 173 ] [ 174 ] [ 175 ] [ 176 ] as well as the names of recent Islamic terrorist attack victims and the names of far-right attackers.

[ 177 ] Notable references from Ottoman history included Skanderbeg (an Albanian nobleman who led an uprising against the Ottoman Empire), Antonio Bragadin (a Venetian officer who broke an agreement and killed Turkish captives), 1683 (which is the date of the Second Siege of Vienna ), Miloš Obilić (who is said to have killed the Ottoman Emperor Murat I in Battle of Kosovo in 1389), János Hunyadi (who had blocked Ottoman attempts to take Belgrade ), Ernst Rüdiger von Starhemberg (who defeated the Ottomans in 1683), the Battle of Kahlenberg (which marked the beginning of the Ottoman withdrawal from the Siege of Vienna) and "Turkofagos" (Turk eater), the nickname of Greek War of Independence revolutionary Nikitaras , [ 173 ] which he used to shoot 91 people with, 51 fatal (one Turkish [ 178 ] ) and 40 wounded.

[ 179 ] His 'manifesto' specifically refers to Turks and utters threats against Turkey, that Istanbul 's mosques will be destroyed and Hagia Sophia will be Christianized .

[ 179 ] He also identifies himself as a "kebab removalist", referencing to the anti-Muslim ' remove kebab ' meme often used by the far-right ultra-nationalists and Islamophobes , that originated from Serbia and the Fourteen Words .

[ 180 ] He was also playing an associated propaganda song in his car before the shooting.

[ 181 ] In contemporary media Movies Dracula Untold See also: Dracula Untold The film has been accused of Islamophobia for the vilification of Mehmed II and for portraying the figure of Vlad the Impaler as a hero even though, according to Turkish journalist Elest Ali Korkmaz, he "indiscriminately killed Turks and Bulgarians " in real history.

[ 182 ] Midnight Express See also: Midnight Express (film) Midnight Express is criticized for its unfavorable portrayal of Turkish people.

In her 1991 book Turkish Reflections: A Biography of Place , Mary Lee Settle wrote: 'The Turks I saw in Lawrence of Arabia and Midnight Express were like cartoon caricatures, compared to the people I had known and lived among for three of the happiest years of my life.' [ 183 ] Pauline Kael , in reviewing the film for The New Yorker , commented, 'This story could have happened in almost any country, but if Billy Hayes had planned to be arrested to get the maximum commercial benefit from it, where else could he get the advantages of a Turkish jail? Who wants to defend Turks? (They don't even constitute enough of a movie market for Columbia Pictures to be concerned about how they are represented.)' [ 184 ] One reviewer, writing for World Film Directors , wrote: " Midnight Express is 'more violent, as a national hate-film than anything I can remember', 'a cultural form that narrows horizons, confirming the audience's meanest fears and prejudices and resentments'." [ 185 ] David Denby of New York criticized Midnight Express as 'merely anti-Turkish, and hardly a defense of prisoners' rights or a protest against prison conditions'.

[ 186 ] Denby said also that all Turks in the movie — guardian or prisoner — were portrayed as 'losers' and 'swine', and that 'without exception [all the Turks] are presented as degenerate, stupid slobs'.

Turkish Cypriot film director Derviş Zaim wrote a thesis at the University of Warwick on the representation of Turks in the film, in which he concluded that the one-dimensional portrayal of the Turks as 'terrifying' and 'brutal' served merely to reinforce the sensational outcome, and was likely influenced by such factors as Orientalism and capitalism.

[ 187 ] Saturday Night Live See also: Saturday Night Live Greek actress Nia Vardalos , participated in a Saturday Night Live episode where Turks were portrayed as dirty, smoking, ragtag, nose picking and anti-Armenian characters, which was heavily criticized by the Turkish Forum, a network of expat Turks which protested NBC and asked for a public apology, and the show received heavy criticism by the Turks on the internet.

[ 188 ] Expressions containing the word "Turk" in various languages France : In old French, terms such as " C'est un vrai Turc" ("A true Turk") were used to refer to brutish and cruel individuals.

[ 189 ] Italy : In contemporary Italian, phrases such as " bestemmia come un Turco " ("Cursing like a Turk") and " puzza come un Turco " ("Stinking like a Turk") were used. The phrase "fumare come un turco" ("Smoking like a Turk") is used to indicate excessive consumption of tobacco.

[ 190 ] Netherlands : Some offensive expressions are "Eruit zien als een Turk" ("to look like a Turk"), which means to "seem filthy", "repulsive", or "Rijden als een Turk" ("to drive like a Turk"), meaning "to drive recklessly".

[ 191 ] Germany : The common German expression "etwas türken" ("to turk something") is used to describe the act of faking something.

[ 192 ] Norway : In Norwegian is used the expression "Sint som en tyrker" which means "angry as a Turk".

[ 193 ] Romania : In Romanian language it is common to call "a Turk" somebody who is stubborn and not able to understand.

[ 194 ] Spain : Spanish people used to say "turco" when they wanted to insult another person.

[ 7 ] United Kingdom : In English, phrases such as " Johnny Turk ", " out-paramour the Turk ", " turn Turk " and " young Turk " were historically used.

[ citation needed ] Sweden : In Swedish there is a racist ryhme phrase "turk på burk smakar urk" (literally "canned Turk tastes bleh"), which has been associated with anti-Turkish sentiment.

[ 195 ] Iran : In persian, saying "Torkeh Khaar" is a racist slur against turkish people in Iran and translates to "Turkish Donkey" [ citation needed ] Colombia , Venezuela : In Colombia and Venezuela, people used to say "turco" to refer to tricksters, usurers and descendants of Arabs who migrated during the Ottoman Empire.

[ 196 ] See also Turkey portal Xenophobia and discrimination in Turkey List of massacres in Turkey Human rights in Turkey Anti-Azerbaijani sentiment Anti-Hungarian sentiment Anti–Middle Eastern sentiment Anti-Mongolianism Index of racism-related articles Insulting Turkishness Islamophobia List of massacres of Turkish people Persecution of Iraqi Turkmen in Ba'athist Iraq Persecution of Muslims Persecution of Muslims during the Ottoman contraction Racism against Asians Red Jews Remove Kebab Tatarophobia References ^ Andre, Gingrich (April 2015).

"The Nearby Frontier: Structural Analyses of Myths of Orientalism" .

Researchgate .

^ Libaridian, Gerard J. (2004).

Modern Armenia: people, nation, state . Transaction Publishers. p.

193 .

ISBN 978-0-7658-0205-7 .

One consequence of the shift from anti-communism to anti-Turkism was that an important segment of the Diaspora lived through moments ...

^ Khalidi, Rashid (1991).

The origins of Arab nationalism . Columbia University Press. p.

18 .

ISBN 978-0-231-07435-3 .

In the first place, Arabist ideology, including a bitter anti-Turkism, was fully formulated long before the Young Turk revolution ^ The Muslim World League Journal . Vol. 23. the University of Virginia: Press and Publications Department, Muslim World League. 1995. p. 36.

^ Fuller, Graham E.; Air Force, United States; Army, United States (1993-04-01).

From Eastern Europe to Western China . Rand Corporation.

ISBN 978-0-8330-1374-3 .

^ a b Jensen, Janus Møller (2007).

Denmark and the Crusades . BRILL. p. 117.

ISBN 978-9004155794 .

^ a b c d e f g h i "Turkey, Sweden and the EU: Experiences and Expectations" (PDF) . Swedish Institute for European Policy Studies. April 2006. pp.

6– 8. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2009-03-06 . Retrieved 2015-09-06 .

^ Kirkman, Andrew (2010-04-22).

The Cultural Life of the Early Polyphonic Mass . Cambridge University Press. p. 121.

ISBN 978-0-521-11412-7 . Retrieved 2015-09-06 .

^ Wengert, Timothy J. (2004-01-04).

Harvesting Martin Luther's Reflections on Theology, Ethics, and the Church – Timothy J. Wengert . Eerdmans Publishing Company.

ISBN 978-0-8028-2486-8 . Retrieved 2015-09-06 .

^ Foley, Sean (2009). "Muslims and Social Change in the Atlantic Basin".

Journal of World History .

20 (3): 377– 398.

doi : 10.1353/jwh.0.0064 .

S2CID 145391152 .

Project MUSE 316491 .

^ Smith, R. O. (2007). Luther, the Turks, and Islam. Currents in Theology and Mission, 34(5), 351–365 : "Luther's statement of explanation created yet more contention. Indeed, it was singled out for condemnation in Exsurge Domine, the papal bull of ex-communication directed at Luther by Pope Leo X on 15 June 1520. Among the "destructive, pernicious, scandalous, and seductive" errors enumerated in the bull is an essentialized version of Luther's position: "To go to war against the Turks is to resist God who punishes our iniquities through them." (11) But even before Exsurge Domine, Luther tied his struggles with Rome to the war against the Turk. Prior to the beginning of the Leipzig Debate with Johannes Eck in June 1519, Luther wrote to his friend Wencenlaus Linck, "I think I can demonstrate that today Rome is worse than the Turk." ^ Wengert, Timothy J. (2004-01-04).

Harvesting Martin Luther's Reflections on Theology, Ethics, and the Church – Timothy J. Wengert . Eerdmans Publishing Company. p. 185.

ISBN 978-0-8028-2486-8 . Retrieved 2015-09-06 .

^ Casale, Giancarlo. (2007). "Global Politics in the 1580s: One Canal, Twenty Thousand Cannibals, and an Ottoman Plot to Rule the World".

Journal of World History .

18 (3): 267– 296.

doi : 10.1353/jwh.2007.0020 .

S2CID 144507249 .

Project MUSE 223606 .

^ "h2g2 – The Machine Gun 1718–1914 – Edited Entry" .

bbc.co.uk . 2003-01-27 . Retrieved 2015-09-06 .

^ Edward Said. " Orientalism ", (1978), p. 59–60 ^ Moosa, Matti (February 1, 1988).

Extremist Shiites: The Ghulat Sects . Syracuse University Press. p. 430.

ISBN 978-0-8156-2411-0 – via Google Books.

^ Stavrianos, Leften Stavros (July 24, 2000).

The Balkans Since 1453 . Hurst. p. 93.

ISBN 978-1-85065-551-0 – via Google Books.

^ Vucinich, Wayne S. (June 1, 1979).

The Ottoman Empire, its record and legacy . R. E. Krieger Pub. Co. p. 63.

ISBN 978-0-88275-785-8 – via Google Books.

^ Miller, Aleksei I.; Rieber, Alfred J. (2004-01-01).

Imperial Rule . Central European University Press. p. 33.

ISBN 978-963-9241-98-5 .

^ Fijnaut, Cyrille; Paoli, Letizia (2007-01-21).

Organised Crime in Europe: Concepts, Patterns and Control Policies in the European Union and Beyond . Springer Science & Business Media. p. 206.

ISBN 978-1-4020-2765-9 .

^ Ozay Mehmet, Islamic Identity and Development: Studies of the Islamic Periphery, Routledge, 1990. pg 115 ^ Schwartz, J. M. (1977). "Review of the book Turkish workers in Europe, 1960–1975: A socio-economic reappraisal , by Nermin Abadan-Unat".

Contemporary Sociology .

6 (5): 559– 560.

doi : 10.2307/2065344 .

JSTOR 2065344 .

^ Unat, N. A. (1995). Turkish migration to Europe. In R. Cohen (Ed.), The Cambridge survey of world migration (p. 279). Cambridge University Press.

^ Hübner, E., & Rohlfs, H. H. (1992).

Jahrbuch der Bundesrepublik Deutschland: 1992/93 . München: Beck.

OCLC 28132828 ^ Micallef, R (2004). "Turkish Americans: Performing identities in a transnational setting".

Journal of Muslim Minority Affairs .

24 (2): 233– 241.

doi : 10.1080/1360200042000296636 .

S2CID 144573280 .

^ Hahamovitch, C. (2003). "Creating perfect immigrants: Guest workers of the world in historical perspective 1".

Labor History .

44 (1): 69– 94.

doi : 10.1080/0023656032000057010 .

S2CID 143191894 .

^ "AENJ 1.1: Stigma, racism and power" .

aen.org.nz . Archived from the original on 2012-03-12 . Retrieved 2007-06-05 .

^ "De Telegraaf-i [] Binnenland – Van Dale vrijuit" . Krant.telegraaf.nl. 2001-11-15 . Retrieved 2015-09-06 .

^ "REACTII LA PROPUNEREA JURNALULUI NATIONAL/De la rom la referendum" . Archived from the original on August 18, 2011 . Retrieved May 18, 2009 .

^ McCarthy, Justin (2010-08-15).

The Turk in America . University of Utah Press.

ISBN 978-1-60781-013-1 .

^ Bekdil, Burak (14 January 2018).

"Turkey, the Arab World Is Just Not That into You" .

Middle East Forum .

^ Iraq, Joe Parkinson in Istanbul and Sam Dagher in Erbil (January 17, 2012).

"Iraq Lashes Out at Turkey as Sunni-Shiite Rift Grows" .

Wall Street Journal – via www.wsj.com.

^ a b c d Stansfield 2007 , 72.

^ Anderson & Stansfield 2009 , 62.

^ a b c Anderson & Stansfield 2009 , 63.

^ BARDAKÇI, Murat (30 January 2005).

"Kerkük katliamlarını 'Irak'a ayıp olur' diye eskiden sansür ederdik" .

www.hurriyet.com.tr (in Turkish) . Retrieved 2020-11-29 .

^ "Gâvurbağı Katliamı (12 Temmuz 1946) – Türkmen Basın Ajansı" .

www.tbajansi.com . Archived from the original on 2022-01-20 . Retrieved 2020-11-29 .

^ a b c Anderson & Stansfield 2009 , 64.

^ a b c Anderson & Stansfield 2009 , 34.

^ Ghanim, David (2011), Iraq's Dysfunctional Democracy , ABC-CLIO, p. 380 ^ Entessar, Nader (2010), Kurdish Politics in the Middle East , Rowman & Littlefield, p. 79 ^ Jenkins 2008 , 15.

^ a b Anderson & Stansfield 2009 , 65.

^ International Crisis Group 2006 , 5 ^ a b c d Anderson & Stansfield 2009 , 66.

^ Altunköprü the ancient name of Türkmen Township ^ "Al-Haddad offers condolences to Turkmen people on anniversary of Kirkuk, Altun Kupri, Tuzhurmatu and Taza massacres" . 27 March 2019.

^ a b Anderson & Stansfield 2009 , 67.

^ a b c d Anderson & Stansfield 2009 , 68.

^ a b Anderson & Stansfield 2009 , 69.

^ a b The Legacy of Iraq by Benjamin Isakhan Edinburgh University Press.

^ "Haftar's forces down Turkish drone, arrest Turkish nationals" .

iranpress.com . Retrieved Oct 28, 2020 .

^ "15 Turks held by Haftar forces in Libya since February – Nordic Monitor" .

nordicmonitor.com . 8 April 2020.

^ "Libya's Haftar orders forces to attack Turkish ships, bans flights to Turkey" .

Al Arabiya English . Jun 29, 2019 . Retrieved Oct 28, 2020 .

^ Çiçek, M. Talha (May 24, 2017).

"The tribal partners of empire in Arabia: the Ottomans and the Rashidis of Najd, 1880–1918" .

New Perspectives on Turkey .

56 : 105– 130.

doi : 10.1017/npt.2017.7 .

^ Koru, Selim (July 24, 2015).

"Turkey's 200-Year War against 'ISIS' " .

The National Interest .

^ "The Nonsense of "Neo-Ottomanism" " .

War on the Rocks . May 29, 2020.

^ "Turkey's Dangerous New Exports: Pan-Islamist, Neo-Ottoman Visions and Regional Instability" .

Middle East Institute .

^ Wafy, Muhammed Nafih (24 June 2020).

"Why Saudi Arabia's revisionist erasure of its Ottoman history will backfire" .

alaraby .

^ " 'Kingdoms of Fire' sheds light on dark Ottoman rule" .

gulfnews.com . 9 December 2019.

^ "Saudis call for boycott of Turkish products in protest against 'Ankara's plots' " .

Al Arabiya English . December 17, 2018.

^ "Saudi Arabia blocks websites of two Turkish media" .

Atalayar . 14 April 2020.

^ a b Turkmen: A Minority Influential in Syrian Culture , Enab Baladi , 2019 ^ "Syria's "Lost Province": The Hatay Question Returns" .

Carnegie Middle East Center .

^ "Syrian Turkmen: Fighting to Survive" .

www.aljazeera.com .

^ "Syria's Turkmen exception" .

Al Bawaba (English). 25 February 2016.

Archived from the original on 15 November 2016 . Retrieved 14 November 2016 .

^ al-Khateb, Khaled (August 6, 2019).

"Syrian Turkmen groups return from Turkey to support opposition" .

Al-Monitor .

^ Welle (www.dw.com), Deutsche.

"Turkmens: an ethnic group at the center of the Syrian conflict | DW | 25.11.2015" .

DW.COM .

^ "In first remarks since retweet feud, UAE diplomat says Arabs won't be led by Turkey" .

Reuters . December 27, 2017 – via www.reuters.com.

^ Sarigil, Zeki; Karakoc, Ekrem (2017). "Inter-ethnic (In)tolerance between Turks and Kurds: Implications for Turkish Democratisation".

South European Society & Politics .

22 (2).

Routledge . pages 207 & 209.

doi : 10.1080/13608746.2016.1164846 .

hdl : 11693/37189 .

S2CID 155156303 .

^ Göçek, Fatma Müge (2015).

Denial of violence : Ottoman past, Turkish present, and collective violence against the Armenians, 1789–2009 . Oxford University Press. p. 32.

ISBN 978-0-19-933420-9 .

OCLC 870211367 .

^ Kopanski, Atuallah Bogdan (1997).

"Islamization of Albanians in the Middle Ages: The primary sources and the predicament of the modern historiography" .

Islamic Studies .

36 (2/3): 192.

^ Colborne, Michael; Edwards, Maxim (12 September 2018).

"In Albania, new Turkish mosque stirs old resentments" . The Christian Science Monitor . Retrieved 10 January 2021 .

^ "Albania Suspended Between Gulen and Erdogan – Inside Over" . 18 September 2019 . Retrieved Oct 28, 2020 .

^ Crampton, R. J. (2005-11-24).

A Concise History of Bulgaria – R. J. Crampton . Cambridge University Press. p. 111.

ISBN 978-0-521-61637-9 . Retrieved 2015-09-06 .

^ Minahan 2002 , 1613.

^ R. J. Crampton, 2007, Bulgaria, pp. 431–433 ^ Katsikas 2010 , 65.

^ a b Dr. Dainov, Evgenii: "Transition, Violence and the Role of NGOs: the Case of Bulgaria" [1] ^ a b c "СЕГА – Технология на злото" . Segabg.com. 4 August 2011. Archived from the original on 15 April 2009 . Retrieved 27 September 2015 .

^ "България | ДПС и НДСВ почетоха жертвите на преименуването" . Dnevnik.bg. 26 December 2001 . Retrieved 27 September 2015 .

^ "Кръвта от 1984 г. или защо в Момчилград има шведски граждани" .

e-vestnik.bg (in Bulgarian). 2008-05-14 . Retrieved 2022-11-20 .

^ "Bulgaristan Türkü'nün 26 Aralık damgalı acı öyküsü" .

bnr.bg (in Turkish) . Retrieved 2021-01-31 .

^ "Bulgaristan Türklerinin 32 yıl önce yaşadığı acının yıl dönümü" .

www.trthaber.com (in Turkish). 26 December 2016 . Retrieved 2021-01-31 .

^ Welle (www.dw.com), Deutsche.

"Bulgaristan Türkleri'nin acı yıldönümü | DW | 24.12.2014" .

DW.COM (in Turkish) . Retrieved 2021-01-31 .

^ ХАЛИФ, Омар, ЦАНКОВА, Диана: "Апокрифната Ябланска епопея: Българи и турци заедно се възправиха срещу диктатурата на Тодор Живков II" www.sedembg.com "Апокрифната Ябланска епопея" . Archived from the original on 16 April 2009 . Retrieved 17 October 2008 .

^ "StackPath" (PDF) .

www.imir-bg.org . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2007-09-26 . Retrieved 2022-11-20 .

^ Neuburger 2004 , 82.

^ Eminov 1997 , 97.

^ Doran, Peter B (July 18, 2009).

"Bulgarian election raises red flags" .

guardian.co.uk .

United Kingdom : Guardian News and Media Limited . Retrieved January 12, 2010 .

^ a b Dikov, Ivan (December 30, 2009).

"The Bulgaria 2009 Review: Domestic Politics" .

Sofia , Bulgaria : Novinite Ltd.

Sofia News Agency . Retrieved January 12, 2010 .

^ "Erdogan to Borisov: Radical Statements Target Turkish Minority in Bulgaria" .

Sofia , Bulgaria : Novinite Ltd.

Sofia News Agency . December 18, 2009 . Retrieved January 12, 2010 .

^ Dikov, Ivan (December 30, 2009).

"The Bulgaria 2009 Review: Diplomacy" .

Sofia , Bulgaria : Novinite Ltd.

Sofia News Agency . Retrieved January 12, 2010 .

^ "Mayor of Sofia brands Roma, Turks and retirees 'bad human material' " . Telegraph. 2009-02-06.

Archived from the original on 2022-01-12 . Retrieved 2015-09-06 .

^ "Challenge to EPP over leader's statement on bad human material" . Socialistgroup.eu. 6 February 2009. Archived from the original on 23 March 2012.

^ Detrez, Raymond (2005).

Developing Cultural Identity in the Balkans: Convergence Vs. Divergence . Peter Lang. p. 29.

ISBN 9789052012971 .

^ Dobre, Claudia-Florentina; Ghita, Cristian Emilian (2018-01-29).

Quest for a Suitable Past: Myths and Memory in Central and Eastern Europe . Central European University Press. p. 142.

ISBN 978-963-386-136-3 .

^ "infosheet" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2008-12-18.

^ "Belgian Turks discrimination" (PDF) .

^ " 'Vuile Turk' kost Volvo Gent 600 auto's" .

Het Nieuwsblad (in Flemish). 2 May 2015 . Retrieved 2020-12-23 .

^ "Racisme-incident bij toeleverancier verlamt Volvo" .

De Standaard (in Flemish). 2 May 2015 . Retrieved 2020-12-23 .

^ Peeters, Nick (2017-04-23).

"Dewinter: "Probleem niet bij Erdogan maar met gefaald multiculturalisme" " .

SCEPTR (in Dutch) . Retrieved 2020-12-23 .

[ permanent dead link ] ^ Papadakis 2005 , 82.

^ Demirtaş-Coşkun 2010 , 39.

^ a b Kliot 2007 , 59.

^ Tocci 2004 , 53.

^ Hüssein 2007 , 18.

^ Stephen, Michael (1997).

The Cyprus Question . British-Northern Cyprus Parliamentary Group.

^ "Katliam emrini Rum Genelkurmay'ı vermiş" .

CNN Türk (in Turkish). 9 August 2018 . Retrieved 2020-03-24 .

^ sabah, daily (2018-08-08).

" 'Kill 10 Turks for each slain Greek,' Greek Cypriot forces told amid pre-division violence" .

Daily Sabah . Retrieved 2020-06-05 .

^ Stephen, Michael (1997).

The Cyprus Question . British-Northern Cyprus Parliamentary Group.

^ Oberling, Pierre (1982).

The Road to Bellapais: The Turkish Cypriot Exodus to Northern Cyprus . Social Science Monographs.

ISBN 978-0-88033-000-8 .

^ Cassia, Paul Sant (2005).

Bodies of Evidence: Burial, Memory and the Recovery of Missing Persons in Cyprus . Berghahn Books.

ISBN 978-1-57181-646-7 .

^ Information, United Nations Office of Public (July 1974).

UN Monthly Chronicle . United Nations, Office of Public Information.

^ Cassia, Paul Sant (2005).

Bodies of Evidence: Burial, Memory and the Recovery of Missing Persons in Cyprus . Berghahn Books.

ISBN 978-1-57181-646-7 .

^ "Greek Cypriot investigation admits war crimes committed against Turkish Cypriots in 1974" . 2019-11-28 . Retrieved 2025-04-02 .

^ The Washington Post , 23 July 1974 ^ Facts on File Yearbook 1974 . Facts on File. 1975. p. 590.

ISBN 978-0-87196-033-7 .

^ Oberling, Pierre (1982).

The Road to Bellapais: The Turkish Cypriot Exodus to Northern Cyprus . Boulder: Social Science Monographs. pp.

164– 5.

ISBN 978-0-88033-000-8 .

[...] children were shot in the street and the Turkish quarter of Limassol was burnt out by the National Guard.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: publisher location ( link ) ^ Higgins, Rosalyn (1969).

United Nations Peacekeeping: Europe, 1946–1979 . Oxford University Press. p. 375.

ISBN 978-0-19-218322-4 .

^ Antonopoulos, Paul (13 July 2020).

"Cypriot Archbishop: Turks remain uncivilized who only destroy and appropriate the cultures of others" . Greek City Times . Retrieved 9 August 2020 .

^ Klink, A.; Wagner, U. (1999). "Discrimination against ethnic minorities in Germany: Going back to the field".

Journal of Applied Social Psychology .

29 (2): 402– 423.

doi : 10.1111/j.1559-1816.1999.tb01394.x .

^ Shohat, M.; Musch, J. (2003). "Online auctions as a research tool: A field experiment on ethnic discrimination".

Swiss Journal of Psychology .

62 (2): 139– 145.

doi : 10.1024//1421-0185.62.2.139 .

doi : 10.1024//1421-0185.62.2.139 ^ R. Cohen. (1995). Labour migration to western Europe after 1945. In R. Cohen (Ed.), The Cambridge survey of world migration . (p. 279). Cambridge University Press.

^ Toelken, B.

(1985). "Turkenrein" and "Turken, Rausl"—Images of fear and aggression in German Gastarbeitterwitze. In N. Furniss & I. Basgoz (Eds.), Turkish workers in Europe: An interdisciplinary study . (p. 155). Indiana: Indiana University Turkish Studies.

^ Ramet 1999 , 72.

^ Solsten 1999 , 406.

^ Staab 1998 , 144.

^ Dummett 2001 , 142.

^ Lee 1999 , 331.

^ Cornelius, Martin & Hollifield 1994 , 213 ^ Nees 2000 , 155.

^ "Schulz expels Golden Dawn MEP from EU Parliament" .

europarl.europa.eu . Neos Kosmos. 10 March 2016 . Retrieved 9 August 2020 .

^ "MEPs European Parliament – Ioannis LAGOS" . Retrieved 20 June 2021 .

^ "Neo-Nazi MEP penalized for tearing up Turkish flag" .

ekathimerini.com . Retrieved 20 June 2021 .

^ "Island of troubles" .

The Economist . Retrieved 22 June 2021 .

^ "CBS Statline" .

^ " "Safety cannot improve with just the law and a baton" | Erasmus School of Law | Erasmus University Rotterdam" .

www.eur.nl . Retrieved 2024-02-25 .

^ Mendes, H. F. (1994).

Managing the multicultural society: The policy making process . Paper presented at the Conference on Today's Youth and Xenophobia: Breaking the Cycle. Wassenaar, Netherlands: Netherlands Institute for Advanced Study.

^ a b " Third report on the Netherlands . Strasbourg, FRANCE: The European Commission against Racism and Intolerance" (PDF) . ECRI. 2008. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2009-02-14 . Retrieved 2015-09-06 .

^ Dinsbach, W.; Walz, G.; Boog, I. (2009).

" ENAR shadow report 2008: Racism in the Netherlands . Brussels, Netherlands: ENAR Netherlands" (PDF) . Cms.horus.be. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2011-10-07 . Retrieved 2015-09-06 .

^ Thalhammer, E., Zucha, V., Enzenhofer, E., Salfinger, B., & Ogris, G. (2001).

Attitudes towards minority groups in the European Union: A special analysis of the Eurobarometer 2000 survey on behalf of the European Monitoring Centre on racism and xenophobia . Vienna, Austria: EUMC Sora.

"Attitudes towards minority groups in the European Union" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2007-11-10 . Retrieved 2010-01-10 .

^ "Introduction" (PDF) . Thinksite.eu. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2015-04-26 . Retrieved 2015-09-06 .

^ "Survey of Armenia Public Opinion" (PDF) . International Republican Institute. January 21, 2008.

^ "eurasianet.org – Georgians Wary of Turkey's Rising Influence in Batumi" . Archived from the original on 2018-05-21 . Retrieved 2018-05-20 .

^ Cornell 2001 , 183.

^ Ther & Siljak 2001 , 4.

^ Bennigsen & Broxup 1983 , 30.

^ Cohen & Deng 1998 , 263.

^ "Meskhetian Genocide by Russia" .

Topix .

^ Barton, Heffernan & Armstrong 2002 , 9 ^ Coşkun 2009 , 5.

^ Radical Right in Central and Eastern Europe Since 1989, 2010, ISBN 9780271043791 , pp. 272 ^ Schnabel & Carment 2004 , 63.

^ Drobizheva, Gottemoeller & Kelleher 1998 , 296 ^ Knowlton 2005 , 66.

^ Steven L. Jacobs (2009).

Confronting Genocide: Judaism, Christianity, Islam . Lexington Books. pp. 82–.

ISBN 978-0-7391-3589-1 .

^ Omer Bartov; Phyllis Mack (1 January 2001).

In God's Name: Genocide and Religion in the Twentieth Century . Berghahn Books. pp. 183–.

ISBN 978-1-57181-302-2 .

^ Zadrożna, Anna (2017).

"Reconstructing the past in a post-Ottoman village: Turkishness in a transnational context" .

Nationalities Papers .

45 (4): 524– 539.

doi : 10.1080/00905992.2017.1287690 .

ISSN 0090-5992 .

^ Özkan, Ayşe.

"Kanlıca Konferansı Sonrasında Müslümanların Sırbistan'dan Çıkarılmaları ve Osmanlı Devleti'nin Sırbistan'dan Çekilişi (1862-1867)" .

Akademik Bakış .

5 (11).

^ Daily report: East Europe, Issues 191-210 . Front Cover United States. Foreign Broadcast Information Service. p. 38.

^ "Karadzic predicted Muslim bloodbath, Bosnian war crimes trial hears" .

The Guardian . 27 October 2009 . Retrieved 1 July 2021 .

^ "Survivors recount Bosnia's Srebrenica genocide, 25 years on" .

The Aljazeera . Retrieved 1 July 2021 .

^ Suljagic, Emir (19 October 2020).

"How the Bosnian Serb Assembly Redefined Bosniaks as Enemy 'Turks' " .

The Balkan Transitional Justice programme . Balkan Investigate Reporting Network . Retrieved 1 July 2021 .

^ Boghani, Priyanka.

"Timeline: Ratko Mladić and His Role in War Crimes During the Bosnian War" .

FRONTLINE . PBS . Retrieved 1 July 2021 .

^ Kifner, John.

"Armenian Genocide of 1915: An Overview – New York Times" .

archive.nytimes.com . Retrieved Oct 28, 2020 .

^ Payaslian, Simon (2005). "The US and the Armenian Genocide: Review Article".

Middle East Journal .

59 (1): 132– 140.

JSTOR 4330101 .

^ "STATISTICS OF TURKEY'S GENOCIDE AND MASS MURDER" .

www.hawaii.edu . Retrieved Oct 28, 2020 .

^ "Erdogan's Anti-Semitism Has Done Great Harm to Turkey" .

Israelhayom . Retrieved 2021-02-03 .

^ "Erdogan slams Israel PM and son over anti-Turkey tweets" .

Middle East Monitor . Mar 19, 2019 . Retrieved Oct 28, 2020 .

^ Firat, Esat (13 July 2020).

"Israeli group burns Turkish flag over Hagia Sophia move" .

^ "Top national religious rabbi says deadly quake in Turkey, Syria is divine justice" .

The Times of Israel . 11 February 2023.

^ a b "New Zealand mosque shooter names his 'idols' on weapons he used in massacre" .

Daily Sabah . Istanbul. 15 March 2019.

Archived from the original on 15 March 2019 . Retrieved 11 February 2021 .

^ Coalson, Robert.

"Christchurch Attacks: Suspect Took Inspiration From Former Yugoslavia's Ethnically Fueled Wars" .

Radiofreeeurope/Radioliberty . Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty . Retrieved 15 March 2019 .

^ Zivanovic, Maja (15 March 2019).

"New Zealand Mosque Gunman 'Inspired by Balkan Nationalists' " .

Balkaninsight.com . Balkaninsight . Retrieved 15 March 2019 .

^ "Mosque shooter brandished material glorifying Serb nationalism" .

www.aljazeera.com . Al Jazeera.

Archived from the original on 15 March 2019 . Retrieved 16 March 2019 .

^ "New Zealand terror suspect wrote Italian shooter's name on his gun" .

www.thelocal.it . 15 March 2019 . Retrieved 17 March 2019 .

^ "Turkish man wounded in Christchurch mosque attack dies" .

www.aljazeera.com . Retrieved 2020-10-18 .

^ a b "Why is Turkey at the heart of the Christchurch terrorist's anger?" .

Why is Turkey at the heart of the Christchurch terrorist's anger?

. Retrieved 2020-10-18 .

^ Purtill, James (2019-03-15).

"Fuelled by a toxic, alt-right echo chamber, Christchurch shooter's views were celebrated online" .

triple j . Retrieved 2020-10-18 .

^ "Mosque shooter brandished material glorifying Serb nationalism" .

www.aljazeera.com . Retrieved 2020-10-18 .

^ Ali, Elest (2014-10-24).

"Is 'Dracula Untold' An Islamophobic Movie?" .

The New Republic .

ISSN 0028-6583 . Retrieved 2020-10-18 .

^ Settle, Mary Lee (1991).

Turkish reflections : a biography of a place (1st ed.). Prentice Hall Press.

ISBN 0-13-917675-6 .

OCLC 23357619 .

^ Kael, Pauline (1980).

When the Lights Go Down (1st ed.). Holt, Rinehart and Winston.

ISBN 0-03-042511-5 .

OCLC 5286142 .

^ Wakeman, John, ed. (1988).

World Film Directors . New York: T.H. W. Wilson Co.

^ "Author's preface" , Mishpokhe , Berlin, Boston: De Gruyter, pp.

11– 16, 1978-12-31, doi : 10.1515/9783110801057-002 , ISBN 978-3-11-080105-7 , retrieved 2020-10-18 ^ "APPENDIX A – CORRECTIVE TURKISH VIEWER COMMENT (IMDb)" , The Midnight Express Phenomenon , Gorgias Press, pp.

143– 144, 2010-12-31, doi : 10.31826/9781463225735-009 , ISBN 978-1-4632-2573-5 , retrieved 2020-10-18 ^ "ABD Televizyonu NBC'de Türkiye'ye ağır hakaret" .

www.hurriyet.com.tr (in Turkish). 12 November 2002 . Retrieved 2020-10-19 .

^ "Arşivlenmiş kopya" . Archived from the original on 3 March 2016 . Retrieved 25 March 2020 .

^ "Perché si dice fumare come un turco?" .

Focus.it (in Italian) . Retrieved 2022-07-26 .

^ "Van Dale vrijuit" .

De Telegraaf (in Dutch). 15 November 2001 . Retrieved 19 October 2021 .

^ "Türken im Sinne von "fälschen, verfälschen" im Deutschen" .

GRA (in German). 20 June 2024 . Retrieved 7 July 2024 .

^ Just W. Flood (1884).

Fra hav og strand: en tylt fortællinger (in Norwegian). p. 24.

^ "turc – definiție și paradigmă" .

Dexonline (in Romanian).

Dicționarul explicativ al limbii române . Retrieved 19 October 2021 .

^ Priftis, Marcus (31 August 2012).

"Turk på burk och svensk rasism" .

Svenska Dagbladet . Retrieved 2023-12-03 .

^ "Turco, turca | Diccionario de americanismos" . 24 July 2025.

Bibliography Anderson, Liam D.; Stansfield, Gareth R. V. (2009), Crisis in Kirkuk: The Ethnopolitics of Conflict and Compromise , University of Pennsylvania Press, ISBN 978-0-8122-4176-1 Aydıngün, Ayşegül; Harding, Çigğdem Balım; Hoover, Matthew; Kuznetsov, Igor; Swerdlow, Steve (2006), Meskhetian Turks: An Introduction to their History, Culture, and Resettelment Experiences (PDF) , Center for Applied Linguistics, archived from the original (PDF) on 2007-07-14 Barton, Frederick D.; Heffernan, John; Armstrong, Andrea (2002), Being Recognised as Citizens (PDF) , Commission on Human Security, archived from the original (PDF) on 2011-07-17 Bennigsen, Alexandre; Broxup, Marie (1983).

The Islamic threat to the Soviet state . London: Croom Helm.

ISBN 0-7099-0619-6 .

Blacklock, Denika (2005), FINDING DURABLE SOLUTIONS FOR THE MESKHETIANS (PDF) , EUROPEAN CENTRE FOR MINORITY ISSUES, archived from the original (PDF) on 2010-06-02 Çetin, Turhan (2008), "THE SOCIO-ECONOMIC OUTCOMES OF THE LAST TURKISH MIGRATION (1989) FROM BULGARIA TO TURKEY", Turkish Studies , 3 (7): 241– 270 Cohen, Roberta; Deng, Francis Mading (1998), The Forsaken People: Case Studies of the Internally Displaced , Brookings Institution Press, ISBN 978-0-8157-1514-6 .

Cornelius, Wayne; Martin, Philip; Hollifield, James (1994), Controlling Immigration: A Global Perspective , Stanford University Press, ISBN 978-0-8047-2498-2 .

Cornell, Svante E. (2001), Small nations and great powers: a study of ethnopolitical conflict in the Caucasus , Routledge, ISBN 978-0-7007-1162-8 .

Coşkun, Ufuk (2009), AHISKA/MESKHETIAN TURKS IN TUCSON: AN EXAMINATION OF ETHNIC IDENTITY (PDF) , UNIVERSITY OF ARIZONA, archived from the original (PDF) on 2012-01-11 Demirtaş-Coşkun, Birgül (2010), "Reconsidering the Cyprus Issue: An Anatomy of Failure og European Catalyst (1995–2002)", in Laçiner, Sedat; Özcan, Mehmet; Bal, İhsan (eds.), USAK Yearbook of International Politics and Law 2010, Vol. 3 , USAK Books, ISBN 978-605-4030-26-2 .

Drobizheva, Leokadia; Gottemoeller, Rose; Kelleher, Catherine McArdle (1998), Ethnic Conflict in the Post-Soviet World: Case Studies and Analysis , M.E. Sharpe, ISBN 978-1-56324-741-5 .

Dummett, Michael (2001), On Immigration and Refugees , Routledge, ISBN 978-0-415-22707-0 .

Eminov, Ali (1997), Turkish and other Muslim minorities in Bulgaria , Routledge, ISBN 978-0-415-91976-0 .

Hirschon, Renée (2003), Crossing the Aegean: An Appraisal of the 1923 Compulsory Population Exchange Between Greece and Turkey , Berghahn Books, ISBN 978-1-57181-562-0 .

Hüssein, Serkan (2007), Yesterday & Today: Turkish Cypriots of Australia , Serkan Hussein, ISBN 978-0-646-47783-1 .

International Crisis Group (2006).

Iraq and the Kurds: The Brewing Battle Over Kirkuk (PDF) (Report). International Crisis Group.

Jenkins, Gareth (2008).

"Turkey and Northern Iraq: An Overview" (PDF) . The Jamestown Foundation. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2012-01-12 . Retrieved 2011-12-10 .

Katsikas, Stefanos (2010), Bulgaria and Europe: Shifting Identities , Anthem Press, ISBN 978-1-84331-846-0 .

Kliot, Nurat (2007).

"Resettlement of refugees in Finland and Cyprus: a comparative analysis and possible lessons for Israel" . In Kacowicz, Arie Marcelo; Lutomski, Pawel (eds.).

Population Resettlement in International Conflicts: A Comparative Study . Lexington Books. p. 59.

ISBN 978-0-7391-1607-4 .

Knowlton, MaryLee (2005), Macedonia , Marshall Cavendish, ISBN 978-0-7614-1854-2 .

Lee, Martin (1999), The Beast Reawakens , Taylor & Francis, ISBN 978-0-415-92546-4 .

Levinson, David (1998), Ethnic groups worldwide: a ready reference handbook , Greenwood Publishing Group, ISBN 978-1-57356-019-1 .

Minahan, James (2002), Encyclopedia of the Stateless Nations: L-R , Greenwood Publishing Group, ISBN 978-0-313-32111-5 .

Nees, Greg (2000), Germany: Unraveling an Enigma , Intercultural Press, ISBN 978-1-877864-75-9 .

Neuburger, Mary (2004), The Orient within: Muslim minorities and the negotiation of nationhood in modern Bulgaria , Cornell University Press, ISBN 978-0-8014-4132-5 .

Papadakis, Yiannis (2005), Echoes from the Dead Zone: Across the Cyprus divide , I.B.Tauris, ISBN 978-1-85043-428-3 .

Ramet, Sabrina (1999), The Radical Right in Central and Eastern Europe Since 1989 , Penn State Press, ISBN 978-0-271-01811-9 .

Savvides, Philippos K (2004), "Partition Revisited: The International Dimension and the Case of Cyprus", in Danopoulos, Constantine Panos; Vajpeyi, Dhirendra K.; Bar-Or, Amir (eds.), Civil-military relations, nation building, and national identity: comparative perspectives , Greenwood Publishing Group, ISBN 978-0-275-97923-2 .

Schnabel, Albrecht; Carment, David (2004).

Conflict prevention from rhetoric to reality, Volume 1 . Lexington Books.

ISBN 0-7391-0738-0 .

.

Solsten, Eric (1999), Germany: A Country Study , DIANE Publishing, ISBN 978-0-7881-8179-5 .

Staab, Andreas (1998), National Identity in Eastern Germany: Inner Unification or Continued Separation?

, Greenwood Publishing Group, ISBN 978-0-275-96177-0 .

Stansfield, Gareth R. V. (2007).

Iraq : people, history, politics . Cambridge: Polity.

ISBN 978-0-7456-3227-8 .

Ther, Philipp; Siljak, Ana (2001), Redrawing nations: ethnic cleansing in East-Central Europe, 1944–1948 , Rowman & Littlefield, ISBN 978-0-7425-1094-4 .

Tocci, Nathalie (2004), EU accession dynamics and conflict resolution: catalysing peace or consolidating partition in Cyprus?

, Ashgate Publishing, ISBN 978-0-7546-4310-4 .

Tocci, Nathalie (2007), The EU and conflict resolution: promoting peace in the backyard , Routledge, ISBN 978-0-415-41394-7 .

External links Media related to Anti-Turkism at Wikimedia Commons Turkey in the Eye of the Beholder:Tracking Perceptions on Turkey through Political Cartoons by Sinan Erensü and Yaşar Adanalı Patriotism versus Patria by Vartan Harutiunyan Representation of Turkishness in Hollywood by Aslihan Tokgoz TURKOPHOBIA:Its Social and Historical Roots By Sabirzyan BADRETDIN The Unspeakable Turk political cartoons (in Turkish) Marco Türklere ders vermek istemiş!

v t e Anti-national sentiment Race or ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people State American Australian British Canadian Chilean Empire of Japan Inter-Korean North South Israeli Zionist People's Republic of China Qing Other Western Related topics Ethnic hatred v t e Racism Types of racism Aversive Colorism Covert Cultural Cyber Environmental Formal Gendered Institutional Internalized Patent Laissez-faire Linguistic Neocolonial Romantic Scientific Societal Substantive Symbolic Manifestations of racism Anti-miscegenation laws Apartheid Biological determinism Discrimination based on nationality Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic jokes Ethnic slurs Ethnic stereotype Hate crime Hate speech Hate group Hypodescent / Hyperdescent Racial capitalism Racialization Racial hierarchy Racial nationalism Racial profiling Racial segregation Racism by region Global apartheid Africa South Africa Zimbabwe Asia China Japan North Korea South Korea Thailand Vietnam Arab world Libya Saudi Arabia Sudan Australia Europe Denmark France Germany Italy Poland Portugal Russia Soviet Union Spain Ukraine United Kingdom Middle East Iran Israel Palestine Turkey North America Canada United States Mexico South America Argentina Brazil Chile Racism by target Arab Asians Chinese Chinese Americans Zainichi Chinese Japanese Japanese Americans Japanese Koreans Korean Zainichi Koreans Vietnamese Black African Americans Arab Women Mexican Native Americans Jewish Anti-racism Jewish Americans In Jewish communities LGBT Middle Eastern Muslim Romani Slavic Wine industry Racial supremacy Black supremacy White supremacy White Related topics Ableism Alt-right Anti-racism Casteism Ethnic plastic surgery Go back to where you came from Herrenvolk democracy Interminority racism in the United States Hispanics/Latinos Lynching Passing Perpetual foreigner Psychometrics of racism Race and sexuality Race card Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racial misrepresentation Racial figleaf Racial integration Racial quota Racism in sport in Australia Reverse racism Sociology of race and ethnic relations Xenophobia Category Commons Index v t e Discrimination Forms Institutional Reverse Structural Statistical Systemic Taste-based Attributes Age Caste Class Disability Economic Genetic Hair texture Height Language Dialect Looks Mental disorder Nationality or citizenship Race / Ethnicity Reverse Skin color Scientific racism Rank Sex Reverse Sexual orientation Species Size Viewpoint Social Arophobia Anti-albinism Acephobia Adultism Anti-altruistic Anti-autism Anti-homelessness Anti-drug addicts Anti-intellectualism Anti-intersex Anti-left handedness Anti-Masonry Aporophobia Audism Biphobia Clannism Elitism Endophobia Ephebiphobia Health mental in poverty Fatphobia Gayphobia Gerontophobia Heterosexism HIV/AIDS stigma Hypergamy Homophobia In-group Leprosy stigma Lesbophobia Against men Misandry Misogyny Misogynoir Nepotism Outgroup Perpetual foreigner Pregnancy Sectarianism Supremacism Aryanism Black Hutu Chauvinism Han Female Human Nordicism Male Ultranationalism White Transphobia Non-binary Transmisogyny Trans men Vegaphobia Xenophilia Xenophobia Religious Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Race / Ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people Manifestations Algorithmic bias Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Blood libel Bullying Cancel culture Capital punishment for homosexuality Carnism Compulsory sterilization Corrective rape Counter-jihad Cultural genocide Defamation Democide Dog whistle Domicide Economic Education Academic In curricula Sexism Eliminationism Eliminationist antisemitism Employment Enemy of the people Environmental racism Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnocide Excellence Gender-based dress codes Cosmetics policy High heel policy Forced conversion Freak show Gay bashing Gendercide Transgender genocide Genital modification and mutilation Circumcision Female genital mutilation Intersex medical interventions Genocide examples Glass ceiling Hate crime Disability hate crime Violence against LGBTQ people Violence against transgender people Hate group Hate speech Institutional discrimination Institutional racism Homeless dumping Housing Hypergamy Age disparity Indian rolling International inequality Kill Haole Day Lavender scare LGBTQ+ grooming conspiracy theory Linguicide Lynching Media bias Minority stress Moral exclusion Mortgage Native American mascots Braves Blackhawks Chiefs Occupational Apartheid Inequality Injustice Segregation Opposition to immigration Paper genocide Persecution Pogrom Political Political repression Ideological repression Purge Racialization Religious persecution Religious terrorism Religious violence Religious war Scapegoating Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Sentencing disparity Sexual harassment Sex-selective abortion Slut-shaming Structural abuse Structural discrimination Structural evil Structural inequality Structural violence Untermensch Trans bashing Victimisation Violence against women White flight White genocide conspiracy theory Wife selling Witch hunt Discriminatory policies Algorithmic wage discrimination Age of candidacy Apartheid in South Africa in Israel Blood purity Blood quantum Breadwinner model Conscription and sexism Disabilities Catholic Jewish Disparate impact Fagging Gender pay gap Gender roles Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Gerontocracy Gerrymandering Ghetto benches Internment Jewish quota Opposition to LGBTQ rights MSM blood donation restrictions No kid zone Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota) One-drop rule Racial quota Racial steering Redlining Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting) Segregation age racial Jim Crow laws Nuremberg Laws Segregation academy religious sexual in Islam Social exclusion Sodomy law State atheism State religion Ugly law Voter suppression White Australia policy Countermeasures Affirmative action Anti-discrimination law Anti-racism Audit study Autism rights movement Gender-blind Blind audition Constitutional colorblindness Cross-sex friendship Cultural assimilation Cultural pluralism Diversity, equity, and inclusion Diversity training Empowerment Fat acceptance movement Feminism Fighting Discrimination Golden Rule Hate speech laws by country Human rights Intersex human rights Korenizatsiia LGBTQ rights Mad pride Music in the movement against apartheid Racial integration Reappropriation Rock Against Sexism Self-determination Social integration Stop Murder Music Toleration Transgender rights movement Universal suffrage Women's rights Related topics Allophilia Amatonormativity Bias Capital punishment for homosexuality Cisnormativity Civil liberties Criminalization of homosexuality Dehumanization Diseases of despair Ethnic penalty Figleaf Heteronormativity Historical eugenics Internalized oppression Intersectionality Masculism Oikophobia Oppression Police brutality Polyculturalism Power distance Prejudice Prisoner abuse Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racism by country Racial color blindness Religious intolerance Second-generation gender bias Snobbery Social equity Social exclusion Social model of disability Social privilege Christian male white Social stigma Speciesism Stereotype The talk Category Commons v t e Turkey History Ancient and Middle Ages Prehistory of Anatolia Classical Anatolia Byzantine Anatolia Seljuks and Beyliks Seljuk Empire Battle of Manzikert Sultanate of Rum Anatolian beyliks Ottoman Empire Rise Classical Age Conquest of Constantinople Transformation Ottoman Old Regime Tulip era Decline and modernization Tanzimat First Constitutional Era Second Constitutional Era Dissolution Partition Republic of Türkiye War of Independence Proclamation of the republic Atatürk's reforms Language reform Secularism One-party period Multi-party period Overviews Constitutional Economic Ottoman Military Topics Turkic migration Oghuz Turks Turkification Ancient peoples of Anatolia History of Anatolia History of Thrace Geography Regions (west to east) Marmara region Aegean region Mediterranean region Black Sea region Central Anatolia region Eastern Anatolia region Southeastern Anatolia region Topics Climate Climate change Earthquakes East Anatolian Fault North Anatolian Fault Environmental issues Air pollution Waste management Fauna Flora and vegetation Geology Lakes Mountains National parks Rivers Turkish Riviera Wildlife Government Branches Legislative Executive Cabinet Judicial Constitutional Court Court of Cassation Court of Jurisdictional Disputes Council of State Politics Censorship Elections Parliamentary elections Presidential elections Electoral system Political parties Referendums Topics Administrative divisions Foreign relations Intelligence Services Ministry of the Interior National Police Gendarmerie The constitutional system Turkish Armed Forces Air Force Land Navy Economy Automotive Banking and Finance Construction Currency Defense Energy Coal Gas Oil Renewables Free trade agreements Science and technology Telecommunications Tourism Transportation Aviation Turkish Airlines Railways Demographics Turkish people Ethnic Kurds Minorities Languages Turkish language Religion Islam in Turkey Cities and towns Istanbul Ankara İzmir Immigration Life expectancy Society Education Universities Health care Human rights LGBT rights Individuals Law enforcement Crime Corruption Terrorism Marriage Poverty Women in Turkey Culture Anthem Architecture Seljuk Ottoman Art Carpet Cinema Cuisine Ottoman Festivals Flag Folk dance Folklore Illumination Intangible cultural heritage Literature Media TV Newspapers Radio stations Miniature Music Names Painting Postage stamps Pottery Sports Football Oil wrestling Theater TV series Video games Wine World heritage sites Portal Category Commons WikiProject Outline v t e Turkic topics Languages Afshar Altai Northern Southern Äynu Azerbaijani Bashkir Bulgar Chagatai Chulym Chuvash Crimean Tatar Cuman Dolgan Fuyü Gïrgïs Gagauz Ili Turki Karachay-Balkar Karaim Karakalpak Karamanli Turkish Kazakh Khakas Khalaj Khazar Khorasani Turkic Kipchak Krymchak Kumyk Kipchak languages Kyrgyz Nogai Old Turkic Ottoman Turkish Pecheneg Qashqai Sakha/Yakut Salar Shor Siberian Tatar Tatar Telengit Tofa Turkish Turkmen Tuvan Urum Uyghur Uzbek Western Yugur Alphabets Old Turkic Common Turkic Cyrillic Old Uyghur Persian Peoples Afshars Altaians Chelkans , Kumandins , Telengits , Teleuts , Tubalars Azerbaijanis in Iran , Armenia , Georgia 1 Balkars Bashkirs Chulyms Chuvash Crimean Karaites Crimean Tatars Dolgans Gagauz Karachays Karakalpaks Kazakhs in China 1 Khakas Khalaj Khorasani Turks Krymchaks Kyrgyz in China 1 Kumyks Naimans Nogais Qarai Turks Qashqai Salar Shors Siberian Tatars Baraba Tatars Chat Tatars Kalmak Tatars Eushta Tatars Zabolotnie Tatars Tobol Tatars Tatars Astrakhan , Chinese , Finnish , Lipka , Kryashens , Mishar , Nağaybäk , Volga Tofalar Turkmens Afghan , Iranian 1 Turkish in Abkhazia , Algeria , Bosnia and Herzegovina , Bulgaria , Croatia , Crete , Cyprus , Dodecanese , Egypt , Iraq , Israel , Kosovo , Lebanon , Libya , North Macedonia , Meskhetia (Ahiska) , Montenegro , Romania , Serbia , Syria , Tunisia , Western Thrace , Yemen 1 Tuvans Uyghurs Uzbeks in Afghanistan 1 Yakuts (Sakha) Yugurs Extinct Turkic groups Bulaqs Bulgars Cumans Dughlats Göktürks Karluks Khazars Kimek Kipchaks K'o-sa Oghuz Turks Shatuo Türgesh Uzes Politics Grey Wolves Kemalism Burkhanism Jadid Pan-Turkism Turkesism Turanism ( Hungarian ) Origins Turkestan Mongolia History Timeline of the Göktürks Timeline 500–1300 Migration Turkification Nomadic empire Turco-Mongol Tian Shan / Altai Mountains Otuken Oğuz Locations Sovereign states Azerbaijan Kazakhstan Kyrgyzstan Northern Cyprus 2 Turkey Turkmenistan Uzbekistan Autonomous areas Altai Republic Bashkortostan Chuvashia Crimea Gagauzia Kabardino-Balkaria Karachay-Cherkessia Karakalpakstan Khakassia Nakhchivan Sakha Tatarstan Tuva Xinjiang Studies Old Turkic script Proto-Turkic language Turkology Religions Turkic mythology Tengrism Shamanism Aiyy Faith Tibetan Buddhism Islam Alevism Batiniyya Bayramiye Bektashi Order Burkhanism Christianity Hurufism Khalwati order Malamatiyya Qadiri Qalandariyya Rifaʽi * Safaviyya Zahediyeh Vattisen Yaly Traditional sports Kyz kuu Jereed Kokpar Jigit Chovgan Organizations Organization of Turkic States International Organization of Turkic Culture (TÜRKSOY) Parliamentary Assembly (TURKPA) Turkic Academy Organization of the Eurasian Law Enforcement Agencies with Military Status (TAKM) World Turks Qurultai 1 These are traditional areas of settlement; the Turkic group has been living in the listed country/region for centuries and should not be confused with modern diasporas.

2 State with limited international recognition .

NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7889cf5cc‐s52vr
Cached time: 20250818085759
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 2.875 seconds
Real time usage: 3.323 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 13802/1000000
Revision size: 119893/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 631388/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 14181/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 88/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 738532/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.931/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 19239412/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 2723.722      1 -total
 41.29% 1124.665      1 Template:Reflist
 17.50%  476.662     77 Template:Cite_web
 15.10%  411.261      1 Template:Discrimination_sidebar
 15.02%  409.211      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 11.97%  326.123     10 Template:Excerpt
  8.71%  237.314     35 Template:Citation
  8.19%  223.066     37 Template:Cite_book
  4.56%  124.281     25 Template:See_also
  4.31%  117.319     37 Template:Harvnb Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:4150342:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818085759 and revision id 1306477518. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Anti-Turkish_sentiment&oldid=1306477518 " Categories : Anti-Turkish sentiment Anti-national sentiment Hidden categories: CS1 Turkish-language sources (tr) CS1 Bulgarian-language sources (bg) CS1 Flemish-language sources (nl-be) CS1 Dutch-language sources (nl) All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from February 2024 Articles with permanently dead external links CS1 maint: publisher location CS1 Italian-language sources (it) CS1 German-language sources (de) CS1 Norwegian-language sources (no) CS1 Romanian-language sources (ro) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pages Articles with excerpts Articles containing Turkish-language text Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from December 2020 All articles needing examples Articles needing examples from February 2021 Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from August 2024 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2021 Articles with unsourced statements from November 2024 Commons category link from Wikidata Articles with Turkish-language sources (tr) This page was last edited on 17 August 2025, at 23:27 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Anti-Turkish sentiment 15 languages Add topic

