Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Mozambique Channel Eddies 2 See also 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Mozambique Current 29 languages Afrikaans العربية Azərbaycanca Беларуская Català Deutsch Eesti Español Euskara فارسی 한국어 हिन्दी Hrvatski Íslenska Italiano Кыргызча Lietuvių Монгол Nederlands नेपाल भाषा 日本語 Norsk nynorsk Polski Русский Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Warm ocean current in the Indian Ocean visualisation of ocean currents The Mozambique Current is an ocean current in the Indian Ocean , usually defined as warm surface waters flowing south along the African east coast in the Mozambique Channel , between Mozambique and the island of Madagascar .

The classical definition of the Mozambique Current is that it is a strong, steady, western boundary current . Modern research has challenged that assumption, and indicates that rather than a strong western boundary current, there are often a series of large anti-cyclonic eddies in the channel. Direct evidence for these eddies has been found in satellite altimetry data, [ 1 ] ship borne surveys, [ 2 ] and moored current meter records.

[ 3 ] These same current meter records, that were over two years in length, failed to show a strong, consistent current along the Mozambican coast, largely dispelling the notion of a steady Mozambique Current. Nonetheless, it is impossible to rule out the possibility that the Mozambique Current may appear intermittently, for short durations. Indeed, numerical model simulations in the Mozambique Channel show the appearance of a current on the Mozambican Coast, during periods between eddies.

Mozambique Channel Eddies [ edit ] Mozambique Channel Eddies are large, warm, anti-cyclonic eddies that propagate southwards in the Mozambique Channel. These eddies may have diameters of up to 300 km, and maximum swirl velocities of nearly 1 m/s.

[ 2 ] The exact causal mechanism, and location of the eddies formation is still debated. The frequency of eddy occurrence reduces from around seven per year in the north of the Channel, to around four per year in the south.

[ 1 ] Once the eddies exit the Mozambique Channel, they contribute to the variability of the Agulhas Current , including the generation of the Natal Pulse, and Agulhas Rings.

See also [ edit ] Ocean current Indian Ocean Mozambique Madagascar References [ edit ] ^ a b Schouten, M., W. de Ruijter, P. van Leeuwen, and R. Ridderinkhof (2003), Eddies and variability in the Mozambique Channel. Deep-Sea Research Part II,50, 1987-2003.

^ a b De Ruijter, W. P. M., H. Ridderinkhof, J. R. E. Lutjeharms, M. Schouten, and C. Veth (2002), Observations of flow in the Mozambique Channel, Geophys. Res. Lett., 29, 1401-1403 ^ Ridderingkhof, H., and W. de Ruijter (2003), Moored current observations in the Mozambique Channel, Deep-Sea Research Part II, 50, 1933-1955.

External links [ edit ] New Concepts on the Flow in the Mozambique Channel Mozambique Channel Drogue Study Archived 2007-03-13 at the Wayback Machine Delagoa Bay Drifter Study Archived 2007-03-13 at the Wayback Machine Satellite Observations of the Agulhas Current System v t e Ocean currents and gyres Currents Arctic Ocean East Greenland North Icelandic Norwegian Transpolar Drift Stream Atlantic Ocean Angola Antilles Azores Baffin Island Benguela Brazil Canary Cape Horn Caribbean East Greenland East Iceland Falkland Florida Guinea Gulf Stream Irminger Labrador Lomonosov Loop North Atlantic North Brazil North Equatorial Norwegian Portugal South Atlantic South Equatorial West Greenland West Spitsbergen Indian Ocean Agulhas Agulhas Return East Madagascar Equatorial Counter Indian Monsoon Indonesian Throughflow Leeuwin Madagascar Mozambique North Madagascar Somali South Equatorial West Australian Pacific Ocean Alaska Aleutian California Cromwell Davidson East Australian East Korea Warm Equatorial Counter Humboldt Indonesian Throughflow Kamchatka Kuroshio Mindanao North Equatorial North Korea Cold North Pacific Oyashio South Equatorial Tasman Front Southern Ocean Antarctic Circumpolar Tasman Outflow Gyres Major gyres Indian Ocean Gyre North Atlantic Gyre South Atlantic Gyre North Pacific Gyre South Pacific Gyre Other gyres Beaufort Gyre Ross Gyre Weddell Gyre Related Atmospheric circulation Boundary current Coriolis force Ekman transport Marine debris Marine garbage patches Great Pacific Indian Ocean North Atlantic South Pacific Thermohaline circulation Environment portal Oceans portal v t e Countries and territories bordering the Indian Ocean Africa Comoros Djibouti Egypt Eritrea France Mayotte Réunion Kenya Madagascar Mauritius Mozambique Seychelles Somalia Somaliland South Africa Sudan Tanzania Asia Bahrain Bangladesh Christmas Island (Australia) Cocos (Keeling) Islands (Australia) India Indonesia Iran Iraq Israel Jordan Kuwait Malaysia Maldives Myanmar Oman Pakistan Qatar Saudi Arabia Singapore Sri Lanka Thailand Timor-Leste United Arab Emirates Yemen Other Antarctica Australian Antarctic Territory French Southern and Antarctic Lands Heard Island and McDonald Islands Australia Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Mozambique_Current&oldid=1169672523 " Categories : Currents of the Indian Ocean Mozambique Channel Geography of Madagascar Geography of Mozambique Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 10 August 2023, at 14:56 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Mozambique Current 29 languages Add topic

