Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Geography 2 Vegetation 3 History 4 Main sights 5 Transportation 6 Culture 7 See also 8 References 9 Other sources 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Salina, Sicily 39 languages العربية Беларуская Български Brezhoneg Català Cebuano Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Hrvatski Italiano עברית Latina Lietuvių Magyar مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Русский Sicilianu Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Svenska Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikivoyage Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 38°33′55″N 14°50′00″E ﻿ / ﻿ 38.56528°N 14.83333°E ﻿ / 38.56528; 14.83333 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Island in Messina, Italy Salina Dydime ( Greek ) Island Aerial view of Salina from the southwest Salina Location in Italy Coordinates: 38°33′55″N 14°50′00″E ﻿ / ﻿ 38.56528°N 14.83333°E ﻿ / 38.56528; 14.83333 Country Italy Metropolitan City Messina Comune Santa Marina Salina , Malfa , Leni Area • Total 26.38 km 2 (10.19 sq mi) Highest elevation 962 m (3,156 ft) Population • Total 2,300 • Density 87/km 2 (230/sq mi) The Aeolian Islands.

Port of Santa Maria di Salina.

Salina ( Italian pronunciation: [saˈliːna] ) is one of the Aeolian Islands north of Sicily , Southern Italy . It is the second largest island in the archipelago.

Salina is divided between three comuni : Santa Marina on the eastern coast, Malfa to the north, and Leni to the south-west. From Leni down towards the sea is the village of Rinella.  Above the village of Leni is Valdichiesa in the center of the island. The other smaller villages are Capo Faro , Pollara and Lingua .

There are currently approximately 2,300 residents living on the island.

[ 1 ] Geography [ edit ] Salina has a total surface area of 26.38 km 2 (10 sq mi). It is included on the World Heritage List especially because of its worth for vulcanology. It is composed of six volcanoes: the oldest ones are at Pizzo di Corvo , Monte Rivi and close to Capo Faro, although these are barely recognisable from a morphological point of view, while the volcano-layer of Monte Fossa delle Felci at 962 m (3,156 ft) is the highest peak in the archipelago and Monte dei Porri 860 m (2,822 ft) are both almost perfectly preserved.  A lower crater lies just above sea level near the small village of Pollara , on the north west corner of the island, half of which has fallen into the sea.

The most recent eruption on Salina occurred on the western part of the island about 13,000 years ago and formed the semi-circular crater of Pollara; its activity was mainly explosive and produced large pumice deposits.

All that remains of the endogenic activities are some post-volcanic phenomena called “gurgling” and a thermal spring at Pertuso. The gurgling phenomena are at Rinella and are basically caused by the emission of underwater gas (hydrogen sulphate) and vapours. When this phenomenon is at its most active it can lift the sea-bed.

Vegetation [ edit ] From a distance Salina looks entirely green with two rounded high mountains and a smooth coastline. More than 400 different types of plants grow on the island and grapes , olives and capers are cultivated.

Salina was the first among the Aeolian islands to protect its environment with a natural preserve, known as the Riserva Naturale del Fossa delle Felci e dei Porri .

The mountainsides of the island are covered with ferns , poplars , chestnut trees and typical Mediterranean vegetation including with caper bushes, prickly pear cactus . and a variety of orchards, olive groves and vineyards. The island is the only production area of the Malvasia white wine. There has also been a local revival of the production of superior-quality low-acid olive oil.

It is claimed that Salina produces the best capers in the world and during the first weekend of June there is an annual caper festival.

[ 2 ] History [ edit ] A Greek settlement, from the fourth century BC through to the times of Imperial Rome, once lay on the modern-day site of the small town of Santa Marina. A number of tombs from this era have been discovered further inland. Several traces of Greek and Roman culture have been found on the island.

In the Hellenic Age the island was named "Didyme" (Δίδυμη), a Greek name which refers to the two mountains as "twins". The island was inhabited as far back as the Bronze Age and has been developed and then abandoned many times over the subsequent millennia.

Areas on the island, including the two mountain peaks, were designated as a natural reserve in 1981.

Main sights [ edit ] The salt lake in Lingua was once a site for production of sea salt , hence the name Salina ("salt mill" in Italian).

On the slopes of the Fossa , several Roman tombs have been excavated.

Sanctuary of the Madonna del Terzito, located  between Malfa and Leni in the saddle known as Valdichiesa between the twin volcanoes, and built in 1630. The religious centre of Salina, it attracts pilgrims on the main feast day of July 23 every year.

Santa Marina Salina is the most lively part of the island. This commune is where many visitors are first dropped off and contains boutiques and specialty shops.

[ 3 ] In the 18th century the ruins of a typical Imperial Roman villa were noted here but have since sunk into the ground.

Transportation [ edit ] Salina has two ports, Santa Marina and Rinella, served by ferries and hydrofoils. Hydrofoil service is active from Naples, Palermo, Reggio Calabria, Messina and Milazzo.

There is a regular bus service connecting all the villages on the island. A main road connects Lingua, Santa Marina, Malfa and Pollara; a side road runs between the two volcanoes to Leni and Rinella.

Culture [ edit ] Salina was mentioned by Alexandre Dumas in the memoirs of his journey to the Eolian islands.

[ 4 ] The 1994 Michael Radford film Il Postino: The Postman was filmed on the island of Procida and on Salina.

[ 5 ] Salina is also a setting in the novel sequence Vango [ fr ] , by Timothée de Fombelle .

See also [ edit ] List of volcanoes in Italy List of islands of Italy References [ edit ] ^ "Salina | Visit Sicily official page" .

Visit Sicily . 2015-10-12 . Retrieved 2021-10-31 .

^ Johnny Morris (9 March 2009).

"Salina, Italy: The great slow food caper" .

The Daily Telegraph . Food and wine holidays . Retrieved 3 December 2015 .

^ Maria Pasquale.

"Salina: Italy's secret gourmet island" .

CNN . Retrieved 2021-10-31 .

^ Le Capitaine Aréna ^ Fodor's The Amalfi Coast, Capri & Naples . Fodor's Travel Guide. 2014.

ISBN 9781908206947 .

Other sources [ edit ] Ezio Giunta, ed. (2005). "Salina".

Estateolie 2005 - the Essential Guide (English Version of Tourist Guidebook) : 66– 79.

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Salina (island) .

External links [ edit ] Love Salina: new, official Salina tourism web portal. (Italian, English, German, Spanish) Archived 2020-02-19 at the Wayback Machine "Salina" .

Global Volcanism Program .

Smithsonian Institution . Retrieved 2021-06-25 .

Portals : Geography Islands Italy v t e Aeolian Islands Main islands Alicudi Filicudi Lipari Panarea Salina Stromboli Vulcano Islets and skerries Faraglioni di Lipari [ it ] Isola Basiluzzo [ it ] Isola Bella Isola Bottaro [ it ] Isola Dattilo [ it ] Isole Panarelli [ it ] La Canna [ it ] Lisca Bianca [ it ] Lisca Nera [ it ] Pietra del Bagno [ it ] Pietra Quaglietto [ it ] Scoglio Bastimento Scoglio Faraglione [ it ] Scoglio Giafante [ it ] Scoglio Loca Scoglio Montenassari [ it ] Scoglio Nave [ it ] Scoglio Sirene [ it ] Scoglio Sorcio Scoglio Spinazzola [ it ] Strombolicchio v t e Ancient Greece Timeline History Geography Periods Cycladic civilization Minoan civilization Mycenaean Greece Greek Dark Ages Archaic Greece Classical Greece Hellenistic Greece Roman Greece Geography Aegean Sea Aeolis Crete Cyrenaica Cyprus Doris Epirus Hellespont Ionia Ionian Sea Macedonia Magna Graecia Peloponnesus Pontus Taurica Ancient Greek colonies City states Politics Military City states Argos Athens Byzantion Chalcis Corinth Ephesus Miletus Pergamon Eretria Kerkyra Larissa Megalopolis Thebes Megara Rhodes Samos Sparta Lissus (Crete) Kingdoms Bithynia Cappadocia Epirus Greco-Bactrian Kingdom Indo-Greek Kingdom Macedonia Pergamon Pontus Ptolemaic Kingdom Seleucid Empire Federations / Confederations Doric Hexapolis ( c.

1100 – c.

560 BC ) Italiote League ( c.

800 –389 BC) Ionian League (c. 650–404 BC) Peloponnesian League ( c.

550 –366 BC) Amphictyonic League ( c.

595 –279 BC) Acarnanian League (c. 500–31 BC) Hellenic League (499–449 BC) Delian League (478–404 BC) Chalcidian League (430–348 BC) Boeotian League (c. 424–c. 395 BC) Aetolian League (c. 400–188 BC) Second Athenian League (378–355 BC) Thessalian League (374–196 BC) Arcadian League (370–c. 230 BC) Epirote League (370–168 BC) League of Corinth (338–322 BC) Euboean League (c. 300 BC–c. 300 AD) Achaean League (280–146 BC) Politics Boule Free city Koinon Proxeny Stasis Tagus Tyrant Athenian Agora Areopagus Ecclesia Graphe paranomon Heliaia Ostracism Spartan Ekklesia Ephor Gerousia Macedon Synedrion Koinon Military Wars Athenian military Scythian archers Antigonid Macedonian army Army of Macedon Ballista Cretan archers Hellenistic armies Hippeis Hoplite Hetairoi Macedonian phalanx Military of Mycenaean Greece Phalanx Peltast Pezhetairos Sarissa Sacred Band of Thebes Sciritae Seleucid army Spartan army Strategos Toxotai Xiphos Xyston People List of ancient Greeks Rulers Kings of Argos Archons of Athens Kings of Athens Kings of Commagene Diadochi Kings of Macedonia Kings of Paionia Attalid kings of Pergamon Kings of Pontus Ptolemaic dynasty Seleucid dynasty Kings of Sparta Tyrants of Syracuse Artists & scholars Astronomers Geographers Historians Mathematicians Philosophers Playwrights Poets Seven Sages Writers Philosophers Anaxagoras Anaximander Anaximenes Antisthenes Aristotle Democritus Diogenes of Sinope Empedocles Epicurus Gorgias Heraclitus Hypatia Leucippus Parmenides Plato Protagoras Pythagoras Socrates Thales Zeno Authors Aeschylus Aesop Alcaeus Archilochus Aristophanes Bacchylides Euripides Herodotus Hesiod Hipponax Homer Ibycus Lucian Menander Mimnermus Panyassis Philocles Pindar Plutarch Polybius Sappho Simonides Sophocles Stesichorus Theognis Thucydides Timocreon Tyrtaeus Xenophon Others Athenian statesmen Lawgivers Olympic victors Tyrants By culture Ancient Greek tribes Thracian Greeks Ancient Macedonians Society Culture Society Agriculture Calendar Clothing Coinage Cuisine Economy Education Emporium Euergetism Festivals Folklore Homosexuality Law Olympic Games Pederasty Philosophy Prostitution Religion Slavery Warfare Wedding customs Wine Arts and science Architecture Greek Revival architecture Astronomy Literature Mathematics Medicine Music Musical system Pottery Sculpture Technology Theatre Religion Funeral and burial practices Mythology Deities Temple Twelve Olympians Underworld Sacred places Eleusis Delphi Delos Dion Dodona Mount Olympus Olympia Structures Athenian Treasury Lion Gate Long Walls Philippeion Theatre of Dionysus Tunnel of Eupalinos Temples Aphaea Artemis Athena Nike Erechtheion Hephaestus Hera, Olympia Parthenon Samothrace Zeus, Olympia Language Proto-Greek Mycenaean Homeric Dialects Aeolic Arcadocypriot Attic Doric Epirote Ionic Locrian Macedonian Pamphylian Koine Writing Linear A Linear B Cypriot syllabary Greek alphabet Greek numerals Attic numerals Greek colonisation Magna Graecia Mainland Italy Alision Brentesion Caulonia Chone Croton Cumae Elea Heraclea Lucania Hipponion Hydrus Krimisa Laüs Locri Medma Metauros Metapontion Neápolis Pandosia (Lucania) Poseidonia Pixous Rhegion Scylletium Siris Sybaris Sybaris on the Traeis Taras Terina Thurii Sicily Akragas Akrai Akrillai Apollonia Calacte Casmenae Catana Gela Helorus Henna Heraclea Minoa Himera Hybla Gereatis Hybla Heraea Kamarina Leontinoi Megara Hyblaea Messana Naxos Segesta Selinous Syracuse Tauromenion Thermae Tyndaris Aeolian Islands Didyme Euonymos Ereikousa Hycesia Lipara/Meligounis Phoenicusa Strongyle Therassía Cyrenaica Balagrae Barca Berenice Cyrene ( Apollonia ) Ptolemais Iberian Peninsula Akra Leuke Alonis Emporion Helike Hemeroscopion Kalathousa Kypsela Mainake Menestheus's Limin Illicitanus Limin/Portus Illicitanus Rhode Salauris Zacynthos Illyria Aspalathos Apollonia Aulon Epidamnos Epidauros Issa Melaina Korkyra Nymphaion Orikon Pharos Tragurion Thronion Black Sea basin North coast Akra Borysthenes Charax Chersonesus Dioscurias Gorgippia Hermonassa Kalos Limen Kepoi Kerkinitis Kimmerikon Myrmekion Nikonion Nymphaion Olbia Pantikapaion Phanagoria Pityus Tanais Theodosia Tyras Tyritake South coast Abonoteichos Amisos Anchialos Apollonia Athina Bathus Dionysopolis Cotyora Cytorus Eupatoria Heraclea Kerasous Mesambria Odessos Oinòe Phasis Polemonion Rhizos Salmydessus Sesamus Sinope Thèrmae Tium Trapezous Tripolis Zaliche Lists Cities in Epirus People Place names Stoae Temples Theatres Category Portal Outline Authority control databases International VIAF National Germany United States Czech Republic Israel Geographic Pleiades Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Salina,_Sicily&oldid=1303813290 " Categories : Aeolian Islands Former municipalities of Sicily Volcanoes of Italy Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Greek-language text Coordinates on Wikidata Pages with Italian IPA Commons category link is on Wikidata Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 2 August 2025, at 05:49 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Salina, Sicily 39 languages Add topic

