Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Academic activities 3 Technical contributions to mathematics Toggle Technical contributions to mathematics subsection 3.1 Calabi conjecture 3.2 Scalar curvature and general relativity 3.3 Omori−Yau maximum principle 3.4 Differential Harnack inequalities 3.5 Donaldson−Uhlenbeck−Yau theorem 3.6 Geometric variational problems 3.7 Geometric rigidity theorems 3.8 Minkowski problem and Monge–Ampère equation 3.9 Mirror symmetry 3.10 Comparison geometry 3.11 Spectral geometry 3.12 Discrete and computational geometry 4 Honors and awards 5 Major publications 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Shing-Tung Yau 38 languages العربية تۆرکجه বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Беларуская Català Čeština Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français 客家語 / Hak-kâ-ngî 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Kernowek Kreyòl ayisyen Latviešu မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча پنجابی Polski Português Русский Slovenčina Slovenščina Suomi Українська Tiếng Việt 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Chinese-American mathematician (born 1949) Not to be confused with his brother, Stephen Shing-Toung Yau .

In this Chinese name , the family name is Yau .

Shing-Tung Yau Born ( 1949-04-04 ) April 4, 1949 (age 76) Shantou , Guangdong , Republic of China Nationality China (1949-1990) American (since 1990) Alma mater Chinese University of Hong Kong University of California, Berkeley ( PhD ) Known for Analysis and geometry of the Plateau problem and minimal surfaces Bernstein's problem for maximal surfaces Bogomolov–Miyaoka–Yau inequality Donaldson–Uhlenbeck–Yau theorem Frankel conjecture Geometry of positive scalar curvature Gradient estimates for partial differential equations Minkowski problem Monge–Ampère equation Omori−Yau maximum principle Positive mass theorem Resolution of the Calabi conjecture and construction of Calabi–Yau manifolds Resolution of the Willmore conjecture in the non-embedded case SYZ conjecture and mirror symmetry Thomas–Yau conjecture Spouse Yu-yun Kuo Children Michael Yau, Isaac Chiu Awards John J. Carty Award (1981) Veblen Prize (1981) Fields Medal (1982) Crafoord Prize (1994) National Medal of Science (1997) Wolf Prize (2010) Shaw Prize (2023) Scientific career Fields Mathematics Institutions Tsinghua University Harvard University University of California, San Diego Stanford University Stony Brook University Institute for Advanced Study Thesis On the Fundamental Group of Compact Manifolds of Non-Positive Curvature (1971) Doctoral advisor Shiing-Shen Chern Doctoral students Richard Schoen (Stanford, 1977) Robert Bartnik (Princeton, 1983) Mark Stern (Princeton, 1984) Huai-Dong Cao (Princeton, 1986) Gang Tian (Harvard, 1988) Jun Li (Stanford, 1989) Wanxiong Shi (Harvard, 1990) Lizhen Ji (Northeastern, 1991) Kefeng Liu (Harvard, 1993) Mu-Tao Wang (Harvard, 1998) Chiu-Chu Melissa Liu (Harvard, 2002) Valentino Tosatti (Harvard, 2009) Shing-Tung Yau ( / j aʊ / ; Chinese : 丘成桐 ; pinyin : Qiū Chéngtóng ; born April 4, 1949) is a Chinese-American mathematician . He is the director of the Yau Mathematical Sciences Center at Tsinghua University and professor emeritus at Harvard University . Until 2022, Yau was the William Caspar Graustein Professor of Mathematics at Harvard, at which point he moved to Tsinghua.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Yau was born in Shantou in 1949, moved to British Hong Kong at a young age, and then moved to the United States in 1969. He was awarded the Fields Medal in 1982, in recognition of his contributions to partial differential equations , the Calabi conjecture , the positive energy theorem , and the Monge–Ampère equation .

[ 3 ] Yau is considered one of the major contributors to the development of modern differential geometry and geometric analysis .
The impact of Yau's work are also seen in the mathematical and physical fields of convex geometry , algebraic geometry , enumerative geometry , mirror symmetry , general relativity , and string theory , while his work has also touched upon applied mathematics , engineering , and numerical analysis .

Biography [ edit ] Yau was born in Shantou , Guangdong , Republic of China in 1949 to Hakka parents.

[YN19] His ancestral hometown is Jiaoling County , China.

[YN19] His mother, Yeuk Lam Leung, was from Meixian District , China; his father, Chen Ying Chiu ( 丘鎭英 ), was a Republic of China Kuomintang scholar of philosophy, history, literature, and economics.

[YN19] He was the fifth of eight children.

[ 4 ] During the Communist takeover of mainland China when he was only a few months old, his family moved to British Hong Kong where his schooling was (except for English classes) entirely in the Cantonese language instead of his parents' native Hakka Chinese language .

[YN19] He was not able to revisit until 1979, at the invitation of Hua Luogeng , when mainland China entered the reform and opening era .

[YN19] They lived in Yuen Long at first, and then moved to Shatin in 1954.

[YN19] They had financial troubles from having lost all of their possessions, and his father and second-oldest sister died when he was thirteen.

[YN19] Yau began to read and appreciate his father's books, and became more devoted to schoolwork. After graduating from Pui Ching Middle School , he studied mathematics at the Chinese University of Hong Kong from 1966 to 1969, without receiving a degree due to graduating early.

[YN19] He left his textbooks with his younger brother, Stephen Shing-Toung Yau , who then decided to major in mathematics as well.

Yau left for the Ph.D. program in mathematics at University of California, Berkeley in the fall of 1969. Over the winter break, he read the first issues of the Journal of Differential Geometry , and was deeply inspired by John Milnor 's papers on geometric group theory .

[ 5 ] [YN19] Subsequently, he formulated a generalization of Preissman's theorem , and developed his ideas further with Blaine Lawson over the next semester.

[ 6 ] Using this work, he received his Ph.D. the following year, in 1971, under the supervision of Shiing-Shen Chern .

[ 7 ] He spent a year as a member of the Institute for Advanced Study at Princeton before joining Stony Brook University in 1972 as an assistant professor. In 1974, he became an associate professor at Stanford University .

[ 8 ] In 1976, he took a visiting faculty position at UCLA and married physicist Yu-Yun Kuo, whom he knew from his time as a graduate student at Berkeley.

[ 8 ] In 1979, he moved back to the Institute for Advanced Study and he became a professor there in 1980.

[ 8 ] In 1984, he took a chair professorship at University of California, San Diego .

[ 9 ] In 1987, he moved to Harvard University .

[ 8 ] [ 10 ] In April 2022, Yau retired from Harvard, where he was William Caspar Graustein Professor of Mathematics Emeritus.

[ 8 ] In the same year, he moved to Tsinghua University as a professor of mathematics.

[ 8 ] [ 2 ] According to Yau's autobiography, he became " stateless " in 1978 after the British Consulate revoked his Hong Kong residency due to his United States permanent residency status .

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] Regarding his status when receiving his Fields Medal in 1982, Yau stated "I am proud to say that when I was awarded the Fields Medal in mathematics, I held no passport of any country and should certainly be considered Chinese." [ 13 ] Yau remained "stateless" until 1990, when he obtained United States citizenship.

[ 11 ] [ 14 ] With science journalist Steve Nadis, Yau has written a non-technical account of Calabi-Yau manifolds and string theory , [YN10] [ 15 ] a history of Harvard's mathematics department, [NY13] a case for the construction of the Circular Electron Positron Collider in China, [NY15] [ 16 ] [ 17 ] an autobiography, [YN19] [ 18 ] and a book on the relation of geometry to physics.

[NY24] Academic activities [ edit ] Yau has made major contributions to the development of modern differential geometry and geometric analysis . As said by William Thurston in 1981: [ 19 ] We have rarely had the opportunity to witness the spectacle of the work of one mathematician affecting, in a short span of years, the direction of whole areas of research. In the field of geometry, one of the most remarkable instances of such an occurrence during the last decade is given by the contributions of Shing-Tung Yau.

His most widely celebrated results include the resolution (with Shiu-Yuen Cheng ) of the boundary-value problem for the Monge-Ampère equation , the positive mass theorem in the mathematical analysis of general relativity (achieved with Richard Schoen ), the resolution of the Calabi conjecture , the topological theory of minimal surfaces (with William Meeks ), the Donaldson-Uhlenbeck-Yau theorem (done with Karen Uhlenbeck ), and the Cheng−Yau and Li−Yau gradient estimates for partial differential equations (found with Shiu-Yuen Cheng and Peter Li ). Many of Yau's results (in addition to those of others) were written into textbooks co-authored with Schoen.

[SY94] [SY97] In addition to his research, Yau is the founder and director of several mathematical institutes, mostly in China.

John Coates has commented that "no other mathematician of our times has come close" to Yau's success at fundraising for mathematical activities in mainland China and Hong Kong.

[ 6 ] During a sabbatical year at National Tsinghua University in Taiwan , Yau was asked by Charles Kao to start a mathematical institute at the Chinese University of Hong Kong . After a few years of fundraising efforts, Yau established the multi-disciplinary Institute of Mathematical Sciences in 1993, with his frequent co-author Shiu-Yuen Cheng as associate director. In 1995, Yau assisted Yongxiang Lu with raising money from Ronnie Chan and Gerald Chan 's Morningside Group for the new Morningside Center of Mathematics at the Chinese Academy of Sciences . Yau has also been involved with the Center of Mathematical Sciences at Zhejiang University , [ 20 ] at Tsinghua University , [ 21 ] at National Taiwan University , [ 22 ] and in Sanya .

[ 23 ] More recently, in 2014, Yau raised money to establish the Center of Mathematical Sciences and Applications (of which he is the director), the Center for Green Buildings and Cities, and the Center for Immunological Research, all at Harvard University.

[ 24 ] Modeled on an earlier physics conference organized by Tsung-Dao Lee and Chen-Ning Yang , Yau proposed the International Congress of Chinese Mathematicians , which is now held every three years. The first congress was held at the Morningside Center from December 12 to 18, 1998. He co-organizes the annual "Journal of Differential Geometry" and "Current Developments in Mathematics" conferences. Yau is an editor-in-chief of the Journal of Differential Geometry , [ 25 ] Asian Journal of Mathematics , [ 26 ] and Advances in Theoretical and Mathematical Physics .

[ 27 ] As of 2021, he has advised over seventy Ph.D. students.

[ 7 ] In Hong Kong, with the support of Ronnie Chan , Yau set up the Hang Lung Award for high school students. He has also organized and participated in meetings for high school and college students, such as the panel discussions Why Math? Ask Masters!

in Hangzhou , July 2004, and The Wonder of Mathematics in Hong Kong, December 2004. Yau also co-initiated a series of books on popular mathematics, "Mathematics and Mathematical People".

In 2002 and 2003, Grigori Perelman posted preprints to the arXiv claiming to prove the Thurston geometrization conjecture and, as a special case, the renowned Poincaré conjecture . Although his work contained many new ideas and results, his proofs lacked detail on a number of technical arguments.

[ 28 ] Over the next few years, several mathematicians devoted their time to fill in details and provide expositions of Perelman's work to the mathematical community.

[ 29 ] A well-known August 2006 article in the New Yorker written by Sylvia Nasar and David Gruber about the situation brought some professional disputes involving Yau to public attention.

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] Alexander Givental alleged that Bong Lian, Kefeng Liu , and Yau illegitimately took credit from him for resolving a well-known conjecture in the field of mirror symmetry . Although it is undisputed that Lian−Liu−Yau's article appeared after Givental's, they claim that his work contained gaps that were only filled in following work in their own publication; Givental claims that his original work was complete. Nasar and Gruber quote an anonymous mathematician as agreeing with Givental.

[ 30 ] In the 1980s, Yau's colleague Yum-Tong Siu accused Yau's Ph.D. student Gang Tian of plagiarizing some of his work. At the time, Yau defended Tian against Siu's accusations.

[YN19] In the 2000s, Yau began to amplify Siu's allegations, saying that he found Tian's dual position at Princeton University and Peking University to be highly unethical due to his high salary from Peking University compared to other professors and students who made more active contributions to the university.

[ 31 ] [YN19] Science Magazine covered the broader phenomena of such positions in China, with Tian and Yau as central figures.

[ 32 ] Nasar and Gruber say that, having allegedly not done any notable work since the middle of the 1980s, Yau tried to regain prominence by claiming that Xi-Ping Zhu and Yau's former student Huai-Dong Cao had solved the Thurston and Poincaré conjectures, only partially based on some of Perelman's ideas. Nasar and Gruber quoted Yau as agreeing with the acting director of one of Yau's mathematical centers, who at a press conference assigned Cao and Zhu thirty percent of the credit for resolving the conjectures, with Perelman receiving only twenty-five (with the rest going to Richard Hamilton ). A few months later, a segment of NPR 's All Things Considered covering the situation reviewed an audio recording of the press conference and found no such statement made by either Yau or the acting director.

[ 33 ] Yau claimed that Nasar and Gruber's article was defamatory and contained several falsehoods, and that they did not give him the opportunity to represent his own side of the disputes. He considered filing a lawsuit against the magazine, claiming professional damage, but says he decided that it wasn't sufficiently clear what such an action would achieve.

[YN19] He established a public relations website, with letters responding to the New Yorker article from several mathematicians, including himself and two others quoted in the article.

[ 34 ] In his autobiography, Yau said that his statements in 2006 such as that Cao and Zhu gave "the first complete and detailed account of the proof of the Poincaré conjecture" should have been phrased more carefully. Although he does believe Cao and Zhu's work to be the first and most rigorously detailed account of Perelman's work, he says he should have clarified that they had "not surpassed Perelman's work in any way." [YN19] He has also maintained the view that (as of 2019) the final parts of Perelman's proof should be better understood by the mathematical community, with the corresponding possibility that there remain some unnoticed errors.

Technical contributions to mathematics [ edit ] Yau has made a number of major research contributions, centered on differential geometry and its appearance in other fields of mathematics and science. In addition to his research, Yau has compiled influential sets of open problems in differential geometry, including both well-known old conjectures with new proposals and problems. Two of Yau's most widely cited problem lists from the 1980s have been updated with notes on progress as of 2014.

[ 35 ] Particularly well-known are a conjecture on existence of minimal hypersurfaces and on the spectral geometry of minimal hypersurfaces .

Calabi conjecture [ edit ] Further information: Calabi conjecture In 1978, by studying the complex Monge–Ampère equation , Yau resolved the Calabi conjecture , which had been posed by Eugenio Calabi in 1954.

[Y78a] As a special case, this showed that Kähler-Einstein metrics exist on any closed Kähler manifold whose first Chern class is nonpositive. Yau's method adapted earlier work of Calabi, Jürgen Moser , and Aleksei Pogorelov , developed for quasilinear elliptic partial differential equations and the real Monge–Ampère equation , to the setting of the complex Monge–Ampère equation.

[ 36 ] [ 37 ] [ 38 ] [ 39 ] In differential geometry , Yau's theorem is significant in proving the general existence of closed manifolds of special holonomy ; any simply-connected closed Kähler manifold which is Ricci flat must have its holonomy group contained in the special unitary group , according to the Ambrose–Singer theorem .

[ 40 ] Examples of compact Riemannian manifolds with other special holonomy groups have been found by Dominic Joyce and Peter Kronheimer , although no proposals for general existence results, analogous to Calabi's conjecture, have been successfully identified in the case of the other groups.

[ 37 ] In algebraic geometry , the existence of canonical metrics as proposed by Calabi allows one to give equally canonical representatives of characteristic classes by differential forms . Due to Yau's initial efforts at disproving the Calabi conjecture by showing that it would lead to contradictions in such contexts, he was able to draw striking corollaries to the conjecture itself.

[Y77] In particular, the Calabi conjecture implies the Miyaoka–Yau inequality on Chern numbers of surfaces, in addition to homotopical characterizations of the complex structures of the complex projective plane and of quotients of the two-dimensional complex unit ball .

[ 36 ] [ 40 ] A special case of the Calabi conjecture asserts that a Kähler metric of zero Ricci curvature must exist on any Kähler manifold whose first Chern class is zero.

[ 36 ] In string theory , it was discovered in 1985 by Philip Candelas , Gary Horowitz , Andrew Strominger , and Edward Witten that these Calabi–Yau manifolds , due to their special holonomy, are the appropriate configuration spaces for superstrings. For this reason, Yau's resolution of the Calabi conjecture is considered to be of fundamental importance in modern string theory.

[ 41 ] [ 42 ] [ 43 ] The understanding of the Calabi conjecture in the noncompact setting is less definitive.

Gang Tian and Yau extended Yau's analysis of the complex Monge−Ampère equation to the noncompact setting, where the use of cutoff functions and corresponding integral estimates necessitated the conditional assumption of certain controlled geometry near infinity.

[TY90] This reduces the problem to the question of existence of Kähler metrics with such asymptotic properties; they obtained such metrics for certain smooth quasi-projective complex varieties . They later extended their work to allow orbifold singularities .

[TY91] With Brian Greene , Alfred Shapere, and Cumrun Vafa , Yau introduced an ansatz for a Kähler metric on the set of regular points of certain surjective holomorphic maps, with Ricci curvature approximately zero.

[G+90] They were able to apply the Tian−Yau existence theorem to construct a Kähler metric which is exactly Ricci-flat. The Greene−Shapere−Vafa−Yau ansatz and its natural generalization, now known as a semi-flat metric , has become important in several analyses of problems in Kähler geometry.

[ 44 ] [ 45 ] Scalar curvature and general relativity [ edit ] Further information: Positive energy theorem The positive energy theorem, obtained by Yau in collaboration with his former doctoral student Richard Schoen , can be described in physical terms: In Einstein's theory of general relativity , the gravitational energy of an isolated physical system is nonnegative.

However, it is a precise theorem of differential geometry and geometric analysis , in which physical systems are modeled by Riemannian manifolds with nonnegativity of a certain generalized scalar curvature . As such, Schoen and Yau's approach originated in their study of Riemannian manifolds of positive scalar curvature, which is of interest in and of itself. The starting point of Schoen and Yau's analysis is their identification of a simple but novel way of inserting the Gauss–Codazzi equations into the second variation formula for the area of a stable minimal hypersurface of a three-dimensional Riemannian manifold. The Gauss–Bonnet theorem then highly constrains the possible topology of such a surface when the ambient manifold has positive scalar curvature.

[SY79a] [ 46 ] [ 47 ] Schoen and Yau exploited this observation by finding novel constructions of stable minimal hypersurfaces with various controlled properties.

[SY79a] Some of their existence results were developed simultaneously with similar results of Jonathan Sacks and Karen Uhlenbeck , using different techniques. Their fundamental result is on the existence of minimal immersions with prescribed topological behavior. As a consequence of their calculation with the Gauss–Bonnet theorem, they were able to conclude that certain topologically distinguished three-dimensional manifolds cannot have any Riemannian metric of nonnegative scalar curvature.

[ 48 ] [ 49 ] Schoen and Yau then adapted their work to the setting of certain Riemannian asymptotically flat initial data sets in general relativity . They proved that negativity of the mass would allow one to invoke the Plateau problem to construct stable minimal surfaces which are geodesically complete . A noncompact analogue of their calculation with the Gauss–Bonnet theorem then provides a logical contradiction to the negativity of mass. As such, they were able to prove the positive mass theorem in the special case of their Riemannian initial data sets.

[SY79c] [ 50 ] Schoen and Yau extended this to the full Lorentzian formulation of the positive mass theorem by studying a partial differential equation proposed by Pong-Soo Jang. They proved that solutions to the Jang equation exist away from the apparent horizons of black holes, at which solutions can diverge to infinity.

[SY81] By relating the geometry of a Lorentzian initial data set to the geometry of the graph of such a solution to the Jang equation, interpreting the latter as a Riemannian initial data set, Schoen and Yau proved the full positive energy theorem.

[ 50 ] Furthermore, by reverse-engineering their analysis of the Jang equation, they were able to establish that any sufficient concentration of energy in general relativity must be accompanied by an apparent horizon.

[SY83] Due to the use of the Gauss–Bonnet theorem, these results were originally restricted to the case of three-dimensional Riemannian manifolds and four-dimensional Lorentzian manifolds. Schoen and Yau established an induction on dimension by constructing Riemannian metrics of positive scalar curvature on minimal hypersurfaces of Riemannian manifolds which have positive scalar curvature.

[SY79b] Such minimal hypersurfaces, which were constructed by means of geometric measure theory by Frederick Almgren and Herbert Federer , are generally not smooth in large dimensions, so these methods only directly apply up for Riemannian manifolds of dimension less than eight. Without any dimensional restriction, Schoen and Yau proved the positive mass theorem in the class of locally conformally flat manifolds.

[SY88] [ 36 ] In 2017, Schoen and Yau published a preprint claiming to resolve these difficulties, thereby proving the induction without dimensional restriction and verifying the Riemannian positive mass theorem in arbitrary dimension.

Gerhard Huisken and Yau made a further study of the asymptotic region of Riemannian manifolds with strictly positive mass. Huisken had earlier initiated the study of volume-preserving mean curvature flow of hypersurfaces of Euclidean space .

[ 51 ] Huisken and Yau adapted his work to the Riemannian setting, proving a long-time existence and convergence theorem for the flow. As a corollary, they established a new geometric feature of positive-mass manifolds, which is that their asymptotic regions are foliated by surfaces of constant mean curvature .

[HY96] Omori−Yau maximum principle [ edit ] Traditionally, the maximum principle technique is only applied directly on compact spaces , as maxima are then guaranteed to exist. In 1967, Hideki Omori found a novel maximum principle which applies on noncompact Riemannian manifolds whose sectional curvatures are bounded below. It is trivial that approximate maxima exist; Omori additionally proved the existence of approximate maxima where the values of the gradient and second derivatives are suitably controlled. Yau partially extended Omori's result to require only a lower bound on Ricci curvature ; the result is known as the Omori−Yau maximum principle.

[Y75b] Such generality is useful due to the appearance of Ricci curvature in the Bochner formula , where a lower bound is also typically used in algebraic manipulations. In addition to giving a very simple proof of the principle itself, Shiu-Yuen Cheng and Yau were able to show that the Ricci curvature assumption in the Omori−Yau maximum principle can be replaced by the assumption of the existence of cutoff functions with certain controllable geometry.

[CY75] [ 36 ] [ 52 ] [ 53 ] [ 54 ] Yau was able to directly apply the Omori−Yau principle to generalize the classical Schwarz−Pick lemma of complex analysis .

Lars Ahlfors , among others, had previously generalized the lemma to the setting of Riemann surfaces . With his methods, Yau was able to consider the setting of a mapping from a complete Kähler manifold (with a lower bound on Ricci curvature) to a Hermitian manifold with holomorphic bisectional curvature bounded above by a negative number.

[Y78b] [ 40 ] [ 54 ] Cheng and Yau extensively used their variant of the Omori−Yau principle to find Kähler−Einstein metrics on noncompact Kähler manifolds, under an ansatz developed by Charles Fefferman . The estimates involved in the method of continuity were not as difficult as in Yau's earlier work on the Calabi conjecture, due to the fact that Cheng and Yau only considered Kähler−Einstein metrics with negative scalar curvature. The more subtle question, where Fefferman's earlier work became important, is to do with geodesic completeness . In particular, Cheng and Yau were able to find complete Kähler-Einstein metrics of negative scalar curvature on any bounded, smooth, and strictly pseudoconvex subset of complex Euclidean space .

[CY80] These can be thought of as complex geometric analogues of the Poincaré ball model of hyperbolic space .

[ 40 ] [ 55 ] Differential Harnack inequalities [ edit ] Yau's original application of the Omori−Yau maximum principle was to establish gradient estimates for a number of second-order elliptic partial differential equations .

[Y75b] Given a function on a complete and smooth Riemannian manifold which satisfies various conditions relating the Laplacian to the function and gradient values, Yau applied the maximum principle to various complicated composite expressions to control the size of the gradient. Although the algebraic manipulations involved are complex, the conceptual form of Yau's proof is strikingly simple.

[ 56 ] [ 52 ] Yau's novel gradient estimates have come to be called "differential Harnack inequalities" since they can be integrated along arbitrary paths in to recover inequalities which are of the form of the classical Harnack inequalities , directly comparing the values of a solution to a differential equation at two different input points. By making use of Calabi's study of the distance function on a Riemannian manifold, Yau and Shiu-Yuen Cheng gave a powerful localization of Yau's gradient estimates, using the same methods to simplify the proof of the Omori−Yau maximum principle.

[CY75] Such estimates are widely quoted in the particular case of harmonic functions on a Riemannian manifold, although Yau and Cheng−Yau's original results cover more general scenarios.

[ 56 ] [ 52 ] In 1986, Yau and Peter Li made use of the same methods to study parabolic partial differential equations on Riemannian manifolds.

[LY86] [ 52 ] Richard Hamilton generalized their results in certain geometric settings to matrix inequalities. Analogues of the Li−Yau and Hamilton−Li−Yau inequalities are of great importance in the theory of Ricci flow , where Hamilton proved a matrix differential Harnack inequality for the curvature operator of certain Ricci flows, and Grigori Perelman proved a differential Harnack inequality for the solutions of a backwards heat equation coupled with a Ricci flow.

[ 57 ] [ 56 ] Cheng and Yau were able to use their differential Harnack estimates to show that, under certain geometric conditions, closed submanifolds of complete Riemannian or pseudo-Riemannian spaces are themselves complete. For instance, they showed that if M is a spacelike hypersurface of Minkowski space which is topologically closed and has constant mean curvature, then the induced Riemannian metric on M is complete.

[CY76a] Analogously, they showed that if M is an affine hypersphere of affine space which is topologically closed, then the induced affine metric on M is complete.

[CY86] Such results are achieved by deriving a differential Harnack inequality for the (squared) distance function to a given point and integrating along intrinsically defined paths.

Donaldson−Uhlenbeck−Yau theorem [ edit ] Further information: Hermitian Yang–Mills connection In 1985, Simon Donaldson showed that, over a nonsingular projective variety of complex dimension two, a holomorphic vector bundle admits a hermitian Yang–Mills connection if and only if the bundle is stable. A result of Yau and Karen Uhlenbeck generalized Donaldson's result to allow a compact Kähler manifold of any dimension.

[UY86] The Uhlenbeck–Yau method relied upon elliptic partial differential equations while Donaldson's used parabolic partial differential equations, roughly in parallel to Eells and Sampson's epochal work on harmonic maps . The results of Donaldson and Uhlenbeck–Yau have since been extended by other authors. Uhlenbeck and Yau's article is important in giving a clear reason that stability of the holomorphic vector bundle can be related to the analytic methods used in constructing a hermitian Yang–Mills connection. The essential mechanism is that if an approximating sequence of hermitian connections fails to converge to the required Yang–Mills connection, then they can be rescaled to converge to a subsheaf which can be verified to be destabilizing by Chern–Weil theory .

[ 38 ] [ 58 ] Like the Calabi–Yau theorem, the Donaldson–Uhlenbeck–Yau theorem is of interest in theoretical physics.

[ 42 ] In the interest of an appropriately general formulation of supersymmetry , Andrew Strominger included the hermitian Yang–Mills condition as part of his Strominger system , a proposal for the extension of the Calabi−Yau condition to non-Kähler manifolds.

[ 41 ] Ji-Xiang Fu and Yau introduced an ansatz for the solution of Strominger's system on certain three-dimensional complex manifolds , reducing the problem to a complex Monge−Ampère equation, which they solved.

[FY08] Yau's solution of the Calabi conjecture had given a reasonably complete answer to the question of how Kähler metrics on compact complex manifolds of nonpositive first Chern class can be deformed into Kähler–Einstein metrics.

[Y78a] Akito Futaki showed that the existence of holomorphic vector fields can act as an obstruction to the direct extension of these results to the case when the complex manifold has positive first Chern class.

[ 40 ] A proposal of Calabi's suggested that Kähler–Einstein metrics exist on any compact Kähler manifolds with positive first Chern class which admit no holomorphic vector fields.

[Y82b] During the 1980s, Yau and others came to understand that this criterion could not be sufficient. Inspired by the Donaldson−Uhlenbeck−Yau theorem, Yau proposed that the existence of Kähler–Einstein metrics must be linked to stability of the complex manifold in the sense of geometric invariant theory , with the idea of studying holomorphic vector fields along projective embeddings, rather than holomorphic vector fields on the manifold itself.

[Y93] [Y14a] Subsequent research of Gang Tian and Simon Donaldson refined this conjecture, which became known as the Yau–Tian–Donaldson conjecture relating Kähler–Einstein metrics and K-stability . In 2019, Xiuxiong Chen , Donaldson, and Song Sun were awarded the Oswald Veblen Prize for resolution of the conjecture.

[ 59 ] Geometric variational problems [ edit ] Further information: Willmore conjecture In 1982, Li and Yau resolved the Willmore conjecture in the non-embedded case.

[LY82] More precisely, they established that, given any smooth immersion of a closed surface in the 3-sphere which fails to be an embedding, the Willmore energy is bounded below by 8π. This is complemented by a 2012 result of Fernando Marques and André Neves , which says that in the alternative case of a smooth embedding of the 2-dimensional torus S 1 × S 1 , the Willmore energy is bounded below by 2π 2 .

[ 60 ] Together, these results comprise the full Willmore conjecture, as originally formulated by Thomas Willmore in 1965. Although their assumptions and conclusions are quite similar, the methods of Li−Yau and Marques−Neves are distinct. Nonetheless, they both rely on structurally similar minimax schemes. Marques and Neves made novel use of the Almgren–Pitts min-max theory of the area functional from geometric measure theory ; Li and Yau's approach depended on their new "conformal invariant", which is a min-max quantity based on the Dirichlet energy . The main work of their article is devoted to relating their conformal invariant to other geometric quantities.

William Meeks and Yau produced some foundational results on minimal surfaces in three-dimensional manifolds, revisiting points left open by older work of Jesse Douglas and Charles Morrey .

[MY82] [ 46 ] Following these foundations, Meeks, Leon Simon , and Yau gave a number of fundamental results on surfaces in three-dimensional Riemannian manifolds which minimize area within their homology class.

[MSY82] They were able to give a number of striking applications. For example, they showed that if M is an orientable 3-manifold such that every smooth embedding of a 2-sphere can be extended to a smooth embedding of the unit ball, then the same is true of any covering space of M . Interestingly, Meeks-Simon-Yau's paper and Hamilton's foundational paper on Ricci flow , published in the same year, have a result in common, obtained by very distinct methods: any simply-connected compact 3-dimensional Riemannian manifold with positive Ricci curvature is diffeomorphic to the 3-sphere.

Geometric rigidity theorems [ edit ] In the geometry of submanifolds , both the extrinsic and intrinsic geometries are significant. These are reflected by the intrinsic Riemannian metric and the second fundamental form . Many geometers have considered the phenomena which arise from restricting these data to some form of constancy. This includes as special cases the problems of minimal surfaces , constant mean curvature , and submanifolds whose metric has constant scalar curvature .

The archetypical example of such questions is Bernstein's problem , as completely settled in famous work of James Simons , Enrico Bombieri , Ennio De Giorgi , and Enrico Giusti in the 1960s. Their work asserts that a minimal hypersurface which is a graph over Euclidean space must be a plane in low dimensions, with counterexamples in high dimensions.

[ 61 ] The key point of the proof of planarity is the non-existence of conical and non-planar stable minimal hypersurfaces of Euclidean spaces of low dimension; this was given a simple proof by Richard Schoen , Leon Simon , and Yau.

[SSY75] Their technique of combining the Simons inequality with the formula for second variation of area has subsequently been used many times in the literature.

[ 46 ] [ 62 ] Given the "threshold" dimension phenomena in the standard Bernstein problem, it is a somewhat surprising fact, due to Shiu-Yuen Cheng and Yau, that there is no dimensional restriction in the Lorentzian analogue: any spacelike hypersurface of multidimensional Minkowski space which is a graph over Euclidean space and has zero mean curvature must be a plane.

[CY76a] Their proof makes use of the maximum principle techniques which they had previously used to prove differential Harnack estimates.

[CY75] Later they made use of similar techniques to give a new proof of the classification of complete parabolic or elliptic affine hyperspheres in affine geometry .

[CY86] In one of his earliest papers, Yau considered the extension of the constant mean curvature condition to higher codimension , where the condition can be interpreted either as the mean curvature being parallel as a section of the normal bundle , or as the constancy of the length of the mean curvature. Under the former interpretation, he fully characterized the case of two-dimensional surfaces in Riemannian space forms , and found partial results under the (weaker) second interpretation.

[Y74] Some of his results were independently found by Bang-Yen Chen .

[ 63 ] Extending Philip Hartman and Louis Nirenberg 's earlier work on intrinsically flat hypersurfaces of Euclidean space, Cheng and Yau considered hypersurfaces of space forms which have constant scalar curvature .

[ 64 ] The key tool in their analysis was an extension of Hermann Weyl 's differential identity used in the solution of the Weyl isometric embedding problem.

[CY77b] Outside of the setting of submanifold rigidity problems, Yau was able to adapt Jürgen Moser 's method of proving Caccioppoli inequalities, thereby proving new rigidity results for functions on complete Riemannian manifolds. A particularly famous result of his says that a subharmonic function cannot be both positive and L p integrable unless it is constant.

[Y76] [ 52 ] [ 65 ] Similarly, on a complete Kähler manifold , a holomorphic function cannot be L p integrable unless it is constant.

[Y76] Minkowski problem and Monge–Ampère equation [ edit ] The Minkowski problem of classical differential geometry can be viewed as the problem of prescribing Gaussian curvature . In the 1950s, Louis Nirenberg and Aleksei Pogorelov resolved the problem for two-dimensional surfaces, making use of recent progress on the Monge–Ampère equation for two-dimensional domains. By the 1970s, higher-dimensional understanding of the Monge–Ampère equation was still lacking. In 1976, Shiu-Yuen Cheng and Yau resolved the Minkowski problem in general dimensions via the method of continuity , making use of fully geometric estimates instead of the theory of the Monge–Ampère equation.

[CY76b] [ 66 ] As a consequence of their resolution of the Minkowski problem, Cheng and Yau were able to make progress on the understanding of the Monge–Ampère equation.

[CY77a] The key observation is that the Legendre transform of a solution of the Monge–Ampère equation has its graph's Gaussian curvature prescribed by a simple formula depending on the "right-hand side" of the Monge–Ampère equation. As a consequence, they were able to prove the general solvability of the Dirichlet problem for the Monge–Ampère equation, which at the time had been a major open question except for two-dimensional domains.

[ 66 ] Cheng and Yau's papers followed some ideas presented in 1971 by Pogorelov, although his publicly available works (at the time of Cheng and Yau's work) had lacked some significant detail.

[ 67 ] Pogorelov also published a more detailed version of his original ideas, and the resolutions of the problems are commonly attributed to both Cheng–Yau and Pogorelov.

[ 68 ] [ 66 ] The approaches of Cheng−Yau and Pogorelov are no longer commonly seen in the literature on the Monge–Ampère equation, as other authors, notably Luis Caffarelli , Nirenberg, and Joel Spruck , have developed direct techniques which yield more powerful results, and which do not require the auxiliary use of the Minkowski problem.

[ 68 ] Affine spheres are naturally described by solutions of certain Monge–Ampère equations, so that their full understanding is significantly more complicated than that of Euclidean spheres, the latter not being based on partial differential equations . In the parabolic case, affine spheres were completely classified as paraboloids by successive work of Konrad Jörgens , Eugenio Calabi , and Pogorelov. The elliptic affine spheres were identified as ellipsoids by Calabi. The hyperbolic affine spheres exhibit more complicated phenomena. Cheng and Yau proved that they are asymptotic to convex cones, and conversely that every (uniformly) convex cone corresponds in such a way to some hyperbolic affine sphere.

[CY86] They were also able to provide new proofs of the previous classifications of Calabi and Jörgens–Calabi–Pogorelov.

[ 66 ] [ 69 ] Mirror symmetry [ edit ] Further information: Mirror symmetry (string theory) and SYZ conjecture A Calabi–Yau manifold is a compact Kähler manifold which is Ricci-flat; as a special case of Yau's verification of the Calabi conjecture, such manifolds are known to exist.

[Y78a] Mirror symmetry, which is a proposal developed by theoretical physicists dating from the late 1980s, postulates that Calabi−Yau manifolds of complex dimension three can be grouped into pairs which share certain characteristics, such as Euler and Hodge numbers. Based on this conjectural picture, the physicists Philip Candelas , Xenia de la Ossa , Paul Green, and Linda Parkes proposed a formula of enumerative geometry which encodes the number of rational curves of any fixed degree in a general quintic hypersurface of four-dimensional complex projective space . Bong Lian, Kefeng Liu , and Yau gave a rigorous proof that this formula holds.

[LLY97] A year earlier, Alexander Givental had published a proof of the mirror formulas; according to Lian, Liu, and Yau, the details of his proof were only successfully filled in following their own publication.

[ 30 ] The proofs of Givental and Lian–Liu–Yau have some overlap but are distinct approaches to the problem, and each have since been given textbook expositions.

[ 70 ] [ 71 ] The works of Givental and of Lian−Liu−Yau confirm a prediction made by the more fundamental mirror symmetry conjecture of how three-dimensional Calabi−Yau manifolds can be paired off. However, their works do not logically depend on the conjecture itself, and so have no immediate bearing on its validity. With Andrew Strominger and Eric Zaslow , Yau proposed a geometric picture of how mirror symmetry might be systematically understood and proved to be true.

[SYZ96] Their idea is that a Calabi−Yau manifold with complex dimension three should be foliated by special Lagrangian tori, which are certain types of three-dimensional minimal submanifolds of the six-dimensional Riemannian manifold underlying the Calabi−Yau structure. Mirror manifolds would then be characterized, in terms of this conjectural structure, by having dual foliations. The Strominger−Yau−Zaslow (SYZ) proposal has been modified and developed in various ways since 1996. The conceptual picture that it provides has had a significant influence in the study of mirror symmetry, and research on its various aspects is currently an active field. It can be contrasted with the alternative homological mirror symmetry proposal by Maxim Kontsevich . The viewpoint of the SYZ conjecture is on geometric phenomena in Calabi–Yau spaces, while Kontsevich's conjecture abstracts the problem to deal with purely algebraic structures and category theory .

[ 37 ] [ 44 ] [ 70 ] [ 71 ] Comparison geometry [ edit ] In one of Yau's earliest papers, written with Blaine Lawson , a number of fundamental results were found on the topology of closed Riemannian manifolds with nonpositive curvature.

[LY72] Their flat torus theorem characterizes the existence of a flat and totally geodesic immersed torus in terms of the algebra of the fundamental group . The splitting theorem says that the splitting of the fundamental group as a maximally noncommutative direct product implies the isometric splitting of the manifold itself. Similar results were obtained at the same time by Detlef Gromoll and Joseph Wolf .

[ 72 ] [ 73 ] Their results have been extended to the broader context of isometric group actions on metric spaces of nonpositive curvature .

[ 74 ] Jeff Cheeger and Yau studied the heat kernel on a Riemannian manifold. They established the special case of Riemannian metrics for which geodesic spheres have constant mean curvature , which they proved to be characterized by radial symmetry of the heat kernel.

[CY81] Specializing to rotationally symmetric metrics, they used the exponential map to transplant the heat kernel to a geodesic ball on a general Riemannian manifold. Under the assumption that the symmetric "model" space under-estimates the Ricci curvature of the manifold itself, they carried out a direct calculation showing that the resulting function is a subsolution of the heat equation . As a consequence, they obtained a lower estimate of the heat kernel on a general Riemannian manifold in terms of lower bounds on its Ricci curvature.

[ 75 ] [ 76 ] In the special case of nonnegative Ricci curvature, Peter Li and Yau were able to use their gradient estimates to amplify and improve the Cheeger−Yau estimate.

[LY86] [ 52 ] A well-known result of Yau's, obtained independently by Calabi, shows that any noncompact Riemannian manifold of nonnegative Ricci curvature must have volume growth of at least a linear rate.

[Y76] [ 52 ] A second proof, using the Bishop–Gromov inequality instead of function theory, was later found by Cheeger, Mikhael Gromov , and Michael Taylor .

Spectral geometry [ edit ] Further information: spectral geometry Given a smooth compact Riemannian manifold, with or without boundary, spectral geometry studies the eigenvalues of the Laplace–Beltrami operator , which in the case that the manifold has a boundary is coupled with a choice of boundary condition, usually Dirichlet or Neumann conditions.

Paul Yang and Yau showed that in the case of a closed two-dimensional manifold, the first eigenvalue is bounded above by an explicit formula depending only on the genus and volume of the manifold.

[YY80] [ 46 ] Earlier, Yau had modified Jeff Cheeger 's analysis of the Cheeger constant so as to be able to estimate the first eigenvalue from below in terms of geometric data.

[Y75a] [ 77 ] In the 1910s, Hermann Weyl showed that, in the case of Dirichlet boundary conditions on a smooth and bounded open subset of the plane, the eigenvalues have an asymptotic behavior which is dictated entirely by the area contained in the region. His result is known as Weyl's law . In 1960, George Pólya conjectured that the Weyl law actually gives control of each individual eigenvalue, and not only of their asymptotic distribution. Li and Yau proved a weakened version of Pólya's conjecture, obtaining control of the averages of the eigenvalues by the expression in the Weyl law.

[LY83] [ 78 ] In 1980, Li and Yau identified a number of new inequalities for Laplace–Beltrami eigenvalues, all based on the maximum principle and the differential Harnack estimates as pioneered five years earlier by Yau and Cheng−Yau.

[LY80] Their result on lower bounds based on geometric data is particularly well-known, [ 79 ] [ 56 ] [ 52 ] and was the first of its kind to not require any conditional assumptions.

[ 80 ] Around the same time, a similar inequality was obtained by isoperimetric methods by Mikhael Gromov , although his result is weaker than Li and Yau's.

[ 75 ] In collaboration with Isadore Singer , Bun Wong, and Shing-Toung Yau , Yau used the Li–Yau methodology to establish a gradient estimate for the quotient of the first two eigenfunctions.

[S+85] Analogously to Yau's integration of gradient estimates to find Harnack inequalities, they were able to integrate their gradient estimate to obtain control of the fundamental gap, which is the difference between the first two eigenvalues. The work of Singer–Wong–Yau–Yau initiated a series of works by various authors in which new estimates on the fundamental gap were found and improved.

[ 81 ] In 1982, Yau identified fourteen problems of interest in spectral geometry, including the above Pólya conjecture.

[Y82b] A particular conjecture of Yau's, on the control of the size of level sets of eigenfunctions by the value of the corresponding eigenvalue, was resolved by Alexander Logunov and Eugenia Malinnikova , who were awarded the 2017 Clay Research Award in part for their work.

[ 82 ] Discrete and computational geometry [ edit ] Xianfeng Gu and Yau considered the numerical computation of conformal maps between two-dimensional manifolds (presented as discretized meshes), and in particular the computation of uniformizing maps as predicted by the uniformization theorem . In the case of genus-zero surfaces, a map is conformal if and only if it is harmonic, and so Gu and Yau are able to compute conformal maps by direct minimization of a discretized Dirichlet energy .

[GY02] In the case of higher genus, the uniformizing maps are computed from their gradients, as determined from the Hodge theory of closed and harmonic 1-forms.

[GY02] The main work is thus to identify numerically effective discretizations of the classical theory. Their approach is sufficiently flexible to deal with general surfaces with boundary.

[GY03] [ 83 ] With Tony Chan , Paul Thompson , and Yalin Wang, Gu and Yau applied their work to the problem of matching two brain surfaces, which is an important issue in medical imaging . In the most-relevant genus-zero case, conformal maps are only well-defined up to the action of the Möbius group . By further optimizing a Dirichlet-type energy which measures the mismatch of brain landmarks such as the central sulcus , they obtained mappings which are well-defined by such neurological features.

[G+04] In the field of graph theory , Fan Chung and Yau extensively developed analogues of notions and results from Riemannian geometry. These results on differential Harnack inequalities, Sobolev inequalities , and heat kernel analysis, found partly in collaboration with Ronald Graham and Alexander Grigor'yan, were later written into textbook form as the last few chapters of her well-known book "Spectral Graph Theory".

[ 84 ] Later, they introduced a Green's function as defined for graphs, amounting to a pseudo-inverse of the graph Laplacian .

[CY00] Their work is naturally applicable to the study of hitting times for random walks and related topics.

[ 85 ] [ 86 ] In the interest of finding general graph-theoretic contexts for their results, Chung and Yau introduced a notion of Ricci-flatness of a graph.

[ 84 ] A more flexible notion of Ricci curvature, dealing with Markov chains on metric spaces , was later introduced by Yann Ollivier. Yong Lin, Linyuan Lu, and Yau developed some of the basic theory of Ollivier's definition in the special context of graph theory, considering for instance the Ricci curvature of Erdős–Rényi random graphs .

[LLY11] Lin and Yau also considered the curvature–dimension inequalities introduced earlier by Dominique Bakry and Michel Émery, relating it and Ollivier's curvature to Chung–Yau's notion of Ricci-flatness.

[LY10] They were further able to prove general lower bounds on Bakry–Émery and Ollivier's curvatures in the case of locally finite graphs.

[ 87 ] Honors and awards [ edit ] Yau has received honorary professorships from many Chinese universities, including Hunan Normal University , Peking University , Nankai University , and Tsinghua University . He has honorary degrees from many international universities, including Harvard University , Chinese University of Hong Kong , and University of Waterloo . He is a foreign member of the National Academies of Sciences of China, India, and Russia.

His awards include: 1975–1976, Sloan Fellow .

1981, Oswald Veblen Prize in Geometry .

1981, John J. Carty Award for the Advancement of Science , United States National Academy of Sciences .

[ 88 ] 1982, Fields Medal , for  "his contributions to partial differential equations, to the Calabi conjecture in algebraic geometry , to the positive mass conjecture of general relativity theory, and to real and complex Monge–Ampère equations." 1982, elected to the American Academy of Arts and Sciences 1982, Guggenheim Fellowship .

1984–1985, MacArthur Fellow .

1991, Humboldt Research Award , Alexander von Humboldt Foundation , Germany.

1993, elected to the United States National Academy of Sciences 1994, Crafoord Prize .

[ 89 ] 1997, United States National Medal of Science .

2003, China International Scientific and Technological Cooperation Award, for  "his outstanding contribution to PRC in aspects of making progress in sciences and technology, training researchers." 2010, Wolf Prize in Mathematics , for "his work in geometric analysis and mathematical physics".

[ 90 ] 2018, Marcel Grossmann Awards , "for the proof of the positivity of total mass in the theory of general relativity and perfecting as well the concept of quasi-local mass, for his proof of the Calabi conjecture, for his continuous inspiring role in the study of black holes physics." [ 91 ] 2023, Shaw Prize in Mathematical Sciences.

[ 92 ] Major publications [ edit ] Research articles.

Yau is the author of over five hundred articles. The following, among the most cited, are surveyed above: LY72.

Lawson, H. Blaine Jr.

; Yau, Shing Tung (1972).

"Compact manifolds of nonpositive curvature" .

Journal of Differential Geometry .

7 ( 1– 2): 211– 228.

doi : 10.4310/jdg/1214430828 .

MR 0334083 .

Zbl 0266.53035 .

Y74.

Yau, Shing Tung (1974). "Submanifolds with constant mean curvature. I".

American Journal of Mathematics .

96 (2): 346– 366.

doi : 10.2307/2373638 .

JSTOR 2373638 .

MR 0370443 .

Zbl 0304.53041 .

CY75.

Cheng, S. Y.

; Yau, S. T. (1975). "Differential equations on Riemannian manifolds and their geometric applications".

Communications on Pure and Applied Mathematics .

28 (3): 333– 354.

doi : 10.1002/cpa.3160280303 .

MR 0385749 .

Zbl 0312.53031 .

SSY75.

Schoen, R.

; Simon, L.

; Yau, S. T. (1975).

"Curvature estimates for minimal hypersurfaces" .

Acta Mathematica .

134 ( 3– 4): 275– 288.

doi : 10.1007/BF02392104 .

MR 0423263 .

Zbl 0323.53039 .

Y75a.

Yau, Shing Tung (1975).

"Isoperimetric constants and the first eigenvalue of a compact Riemannian manifold" .

Annales Scientifiques de l'École Normale Supérieure . Quatrième Série.

8 (4): 487– 507.

doi : 10.24033/asens.1299 .

MR 0397619 .

Zbl 0325.53039 .

Y75b.

Yau, Shing Tung (1975). "Harmonic functions on complete Riemannian manifolds".

Communications on Pure and Applied Mathematics .

28 (2): 201– 228.

doi : 10.1002/cpa.3160280203 .

MR 0431040 .

Zbl 0291.31002 .

CY76a.

Cheng, Shiu Yuen ; Yau, Shing Tung (1976). "Maximal space-like hypersurfaces in the Lorentz–Minkowski spaces".

Annals of Mathematics . Second Series.

104 (3): 407– 419.

doi : 10.2307/1970963 .

JSTOR 1970963 .

MR 0431061 .

Zbl 0352.53021 .

CY76b.

Cheng, Shiu Yuen ; Yau, Shing Tung (1976). "On the regularity of the solution of the n -dimensional Minkowski problem".

Communications on Pure and Applied Mathematics .

29 (5): 495– 516.

doi : 10.1002/cpa.3160290504 .

MR 0423267 .

Zbl 0363.53030 .

SY76.

Schoen, Richard ; Yau, Shing Tung (1976). "Harmonic maps and the topology of stable hypersurfaces and manifolds with non-negative Ricci curvature".

Commentarii Mathematici Helvetici .

51 (3): 333– 341.

doi : 10.1007/BF02568161 .

MR 0438388 .

S2CID 120845708 .

Zbl 0361.53040 .

Y76.

Yau, Shing Tung (1976).

"Some function-theoretic properties of complete Riemannian manifold and their applications to geometry" .

Indiana University Mathematics Journal .

25 (7): 659– 670.

doi : 10.1512/iumj.1976.25.25051 .

MR 0417452 .

Zbl 0335.53041 .

(Erratum: doi : 10.1512/iumj.1982.31.31044 ) CY77a.

Cheng, Shiu Yuen ; Yau, Shing Tung (1977). "On the regularity of the Monge–Ampère equation det(∂ 2 u/∂x i ∂x j ) = F(x,u) ".

Communications on Pure and Applied Mathematics .

30 (1): 41– 68.

doi : 10.1002/cpa.3160300104 .

MR 0437805 .

Zbl 0347.35019 .

CY77b.

Cheng, Shiu Yuen ; Yau, Shing Tung (1977).

"Hypersurfaces with constant scalar curvature" .

Mathematische Annalen .

225 (3): 195– 204.

doi : 10.1007/BF01425237 .

MR 0431043 .

S2CID 33626481 .

Zbl 0349.53041 .

Y77.

Yau, Shing Tung (1977).

"Calabi's conjecture and some new results in algebraic geometry" .

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America .

74 (5): 1798– 1799.

Bibcode : 1977PNAS...74.1798Y .

doi : 10.1073/pnas.74.5.1798 .

MR 0451180 .

PMC 431004 .

PMID 16592394 .

Zbl 0355.32028 .

Y78a.

Yau, Shing Tung (1978). "On the Ricci curvature of a compact Kähler manifold and the complex Monge–Ampère equation. I".

Communications on Pure and Applied Mathematics .

31 (3): 339– 411.

doi : 10.1002/cpa.3160310304 .

MR 0480350 .

Zbl 0369.53059 .

Y78b.

Yau, Shing Tung (1978). "A general Schwarz lemma for Kähler manifolds".

American Journal of Mathematics .

100 (1): 197– 203.

doi : 10.2307/2373880 .

JSTOR 2373880 .

MR 0486659 .

Zbl 0424.53040 .

SY79a.

Schoen, R.

; Yau, Shing Tung (1979). "Existence of incompressible minimal surfaces and the topology of three-dimensional manifolds with nonnegative scalar curvature".

Annals of Mathematics . Second Series.

110 (1): 127– 142.

doi : 10.2307/1971247 .

JSTOR 1971247 .

MR 0541332 .

Zbl 0431.53051 .

SY79b.

Schoen, R.

; Yau, S. T. (1979).

"On the structure of manifolds with positive scalar curvature" .

Manuscripta Mathematica .

28 ( 1– 3): 159– 183.

doi : 10.1007/BF01647970 .

MR 0535700 .

S2CID 121008386 .

Zbl 0423.53032 .

SY79c.

Schoen, Richard ; Yau, Shing Tung (1979).

"On the proof of the positive mass conjecture in general relativity" .

Communications in Mathematical Physics .

65 (1): 45– 76.

Bibcode : 1979CMaPh..65...45S .

doi : 10.1007/BF01940959 .

MR 0526976 .

S2CID 54217085 .

Zbl 0405.53045 .

CY80.

Cheng, Shiu Yuen ; Yau, Shing Tung (1980). "On the existence of a complete Kähler metric on noncompact complex manifolds and the regularity of Fefferman's equation".

Communications on Pure and Applied Mathematics .

33 (4): 507– 544.

doi : 10.1002/cpa.3160330404 .

MR 0575736 .

Zbl 0506.53031 .

LY80.

Li, Peter ; Yau, Shing Tung (1980). "Estimates of eigenvalues of a compact Riemannian manifold". In Osserman, Robert ; Weinstein, Alan (eds.).

Geometry of the Laplace Operator . University of Hawaii, Honolulu (March 27–30, 1979). Proceedings of Symposia in Pure Mathematics. Vol. 36. Providence, RI: American Mathematical Society . pp.

205– 239.

doi : 10.1090/pspum/036 .

ISBN 978-0-8218-1439-0 .

MR 0573435 .

Zbl 0441.58014 .

SY80.

Siu, Yum Tong ; Yau, Shing Tung (1980).

"Compact Kähler manifolds of positive bisectional curvature" .

Inventiones Mathematicae .

59 (2): 189– 204.

Bibcode : 1980InMat..59..189S .

doi : 10.1007/BF01390043 .

MR 0577360 .

S2CID 120664058 .

Zbl 0442.53056 .

YY80.

Yang, Paul C.

; Yau, Shing Tung (1980).

"Eigenvalues of the Laplacian of compact Riemann surfaces and minimal submanifolds" .

Annali della Scuola Normale Superiore di Pisa. Classe di Scienze . Serie IV.

7 (1): 55– 63.

MR 0577325 .

Zbl 0446.58017 .

CY81.

Cheeger, Jeff ; Yau, Shing-Tung (1981). "A lower bound for the heat kernel".

Communications on Pure and Applied Mathematics .

34 (4): 465– 480.

doi : 10.1002/cpa.3160340404 .

MR 0615626 .

Zbl 0481.35003 .

CLY81.

Cheng, Siu Yuen ; Li, Peter ; Yau, Shing-Tung (1981). "On the upper estimate of the heat kernel of a complete Riemannian manifold".

American Journal of Mathematics .

103 (5): 1021– 1063.

doi : 10.2307/2374257 .

JSTOR 2374257 .

MR 0630777 .

Zbl 0484.53035 .

SY81.

Schoen, Richard ; Yau, Shing Tung (1981).

"Proof of the positive mass theorem. II" .

Communications in Mathematical Physics .

79 (2): 231– 260.

Bibcode : 1981CMaPh..79..231S .

doi : 10.1007/BF01942062 .

MR 0612249 .

S2CID 59473203 .

Zbl 0494.53028 .

LY82.

Li, Peter ; Yau, Shing Tung (1982).

"A new conformal invariant and its applications to the Willmore conjecture and the first eigenvalue of compact surfaces" .

Inventiones Mathematicae .

69 (2): 269– 291.

Bibcode : 1982InMat..69..269L .

doi : 10.1007/BF01399507 .

MR 0674407 .

S2CID 123019753 .

Zbl 0503.53042 .

MSY82.

Meeks, William III ; Simon, Leon ; Yau, Shing Tung (1982). "Embedded minimal surfaces, exotic spheres, and manifolds with positive Ricci curvature".

Annals of Mathematics . Second Series.

116 (3): 621– 659.

doi : 10.2307/2007026 .

JSTOR 2007026 .

MR 0678484 .

Zbl 0521.53007 .

MY82.

Meeks, William H. III ; Yau, Shing Tung (1982).

"The classical Plateau problem and the topology of three-dimensional manifolds. The embedding of the solution given by Douglas–Morrey and an analytic proof of Dehn's lemma" .

Topology .

21 (4): 409– 442.

doi : 10.1016/0040-9383(82)90021-0 .

MR 0670745 .

Zbl 0489.57002 .

LY83.

Li, Peter ; Yau, Shing Tung (1983).

"On the Schrödinger equation and the eigenvalue problem" .

Communications in Mathematical Physics .

88 (3): 309– 318.

Bibcode : 1983CMaPh..88..309L .

doi : 10.1007/BF01213210 .

MR 0701919 .

S2CID 120055958 .

Zbl 0554.35029 .

SY83.

Schoen, Richard ; Yau, S. T. (1983).

"The existence of a black hole due to condensation of matter" .

Communications in Mathematical Physics .

90 (4): 575– 579.

Bibcode : 1983CMaPh..90..575S .

doi : 10.1007/BF01216187 .

MR 0719436 .

S2CID 122331620 .

Zbl 0541.53054 .

S+85.

Singer, I. M.

; Wong, Bun; Yau, Shing-Tung; Yau, Stephen S.-T.

(1985).

"An estimate of the gap of the first two eigenvalues in the Schrödinger operator" .

Annali della Scuola Normale Superiore di Pisa. Classe di Scienze . Serie IV.

12 (2): 319– 333.

MR 0829055 .

Zbl 0603.35070 .

CY86.

Cheng, Shiu Yuen ; Yau, Shing-Tung (1986). "Complete affine hypersurfaces. I. The completeness of affine metrics".

Communications on Pure and Applied Mathematics .

39 (6): 839– 866.

doi : 10.1002/cpa.3160390606 .

MR 0859275 .

Zbl 0623.53002 .

LY86.

Li, Peter ; Yau, Shing-Tung (1986).

"On the parabolic kernel of the Schrödinger operator" .

Acta Mathematica .

156 ( 3– 4): 153– 201.

doi : 10.1007/bf02399203 .

MR 0834612 .

Zbl 0611.58045 .

UY86.

Uhlenbeck, K.

; Yau, S.-T. (1986). "On the existence of Hermitian–Yang–Mills connections in stable vector bundles".

Communications on Pure and Applied Mathematics .

39 (S): 257– 293.

doi : 10.1002/cpa.3160390714 .

MR 0861491 .

Zbl 0615.58045 .

(Erratum: doi : 10.1002/cpa.3160420505 ) SY88.

Schoen, R.

; Yau, S.-T. (1988).

"Conformally flat manifolds, Kleinian groups and scalar curvature" .

Inventiones Mathematicae .

92 (1): 47– 71.

Bibcode : 1988InMat..92...47S .

doi : 10.1007/BF01393992 .

MR 0931204 .

S2CID 59029712 .

Zbl 0658.53038 .

G+90.

Greene, Brian R.

; Shapere, Alfred; Vafa, Cumrun ; Yau, Shing-Tung (1990). "Stringy cosmic strings and noncompact Calabi–Yau manifolds".

Nuclear Physics B .

337 (1): 1– 36.

Bibcode : 1990NuPhB.337....1G .

doi : 10.1016/0550-3213(90)90248-C .

MR 1059826 .

Zbl 0744.53045 .

TY90.

Tian, G.

; Yau, Shing-Tung (1990).

"Complete Kähler manifolds with zero Ricci curvature. I" .

Journal of the American Mathematical Society .

3 (3): 579– 609.

doi : 10.1090/S0894-0347-1990-1040196-6 .

MR 1040196 .

Zbl 0719.53041 .

TY91.

Tian, Gang ; Yau, Shing-Tung (1991).

"Complete Kähler manifolds with zero Ricci curvature. II" .

Inventiones Mathematicae .

106 (1): 27– 60.

Bibcode : 1991InMat.106...27T .

doi : 10.1007/BF01243902 .

MR 1123371 .

S2CID 122638262 .

Zbl 0766.53053 .

HY96.

Huisken, Gerhard ; Yau, Shing-Tung (1996). "Definition of center of mass for isolated physical systems and unique foliations by stable spheres with constant mean curvature".

Inventiones Mathematicae .

124 ( 1– 3): 281– 311.

Bibcode : 1996InMat.124..281H .

doi : 10.1007/s002220050054 .

hdl : 11858/00-001M-0000-0013-5B63-3 .

MR 1369419 .

S2CID 122669931 .

Zbl 0858.53071 .

SYZ96.

Strominger, Andrew ; Yau, Shing-Tung; Zaslow, Eric (1996). "Mirror symmetry is T-duality".

Nuclear Physics B .

479 ( 1– 2): 243– 259.

arXiv : hep-th/9606040 .

Bibcode : 1996NuPhB.479..243S .

doi : 10.1016/0550-3213(96)00434-8 .

MR 1429831 .

S2CID 14586676 .

Zbl 0896.14024 .

LLY97.

Lian, Bong H.; Liu, Kefeng ; Yau, Shing-Tung (1997).

"Mirror principle. I" .

Asian Journal of Mathematics .

1 (4): 729– 763.

arXiv : alg-geom/9712011 .

Bibcode : 1997alg.geom.12011L .

doi : 10.4310/AJM.1997.v1.n4.a5 .

MR 1621573 .

Zbl 0953.14026 .

CY00.

Chung, Fan ; Yau, S.-T. (2000).

"Discrete Green's functions" .

Journal of Combinatorial Theory . Series A.

91 ( 1– 2): 191– 214.

doi : 10.1006/jcta.2000.3094 .

MR 1779780 .

Zbl 0963.65120 .

GY02.

Gu, Xianfeng; Yau, Shing-Tung (2002).

"Computing conformal structures of surfaces" .

Communications in Information and Systems .

2 (2): 121– 145.

arXiv : cs/0212043 .

Bibcode : 2002cs.......12043G .

doi : 10.4310/CIS.2002.v2.n2.a2 .

MR 1958012 .

Zbl 1092.14514 .

GY03.

Gu, Xianfeng; Yau, Shing Tung (2003). "Global conformal surface parameterization". In Kobbelt, Leif ; Schroeder, Peter ; Hoppe, Hugues (eds.).

Eurographics Symposium on Geometry Processing (Aachen, Germany, June 23–25, 2003) . Goslar, Germany: Eurographics Association . pp.

127– 137.

doi : 10.2312/SGP/SGP03/127-137 .

G+04.

Gu, Xianfeng; Wang, Yalin; Chan, Tony F.

; Thompson, Paul M.

; Yau, Shing-Tung (2004). "Genus zero surface conformal mapping and its application to brain surface mapping".

IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging .

28 (8): 949– 958.

doi : 10.1109/TMI.2004.831226 .

PMID 15338729 .

FY08.

Fu, Ji-Xiang; Yau, Shing-Tung (2008).

"The theory of superstring with flux on non-Kähler manifolds and the complex Monge–Ampère equation" .

Journal of Differential Geometry .

78 (3): 369– 428.

arXiv : hep-th/0604063 .

doi : 10.4310/jdg/1207834550 .

MR 2396248 .

Zbl 1141.53036 .

LY10.

Lin, Yong; Yau, Shing-Tung (2010).

"Ricci curvature and eigenvalue estimate on locally finite graphs" .

Mathematical Research Letters .

17 (2): 343– 356.

doi : 10.4310/MRL.2010.v17.n2.a13 .

MR 2644381 .

Zbl 1232.31003 .

LLY11.

Lin, Yong; Lu, Linyuan; Yau, Shing-Tung (2011).

"Ricci curvature of graphs" .

Tohoku Mathematical Journal . Second Series.

63 (4): 605– 627.

doi : 10.2748/tmj/1325886283 .

MR 2872958 .

Zbl 1237.05204 .

Survey articles and publications of collected works.

Y82a.

Yau, Shing Tung (1982). "Survey on partial differential equations in differential geometry". In Yau, Shing-Tung (ed.).

Seminar on Differential Geometry . Annals of Mathematics Studies. Vol. 102. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press . pp.

3– 71.

doi : 10.1515/9781400881918-002 .

ISBN 978-1-4008-8191-8 .

MR 0645729 .

Zbl 0478.53001 .

Y82b.

Yau, Shing Tung (1982). "Problem section". In Yau, Shing-Tung (ed.).

Seminar on Differential Geometry . Annals of Mathematics Studies. Vol. 102. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press . pp.

669– 706.

doi : 10.1515/9781400881918-035 .

ISBN 978-1-4008-8191-8 .

MR 0645762 .

Zbl 0479.53001 .

Y87.

Yau, Shing-Tung (1987).

"Nonlinear analysis in geometry" .

L'Enseignement Mathématique. Revue Internationale . 2e Série.

33 ( 1– 2): 109– 158.

doi : 10.5169/seals-87888 .

MR 0896385 .

Zbl 0631.53002 .

Y93.

Yau, Shing-Tung (1993). "Open problems in geometry". In Greene, Robert ; Yau, S. T. (eds.).

Differential Geometry: Partial Differential Equations on Manifolds . American Mathematical Society Summer Institute on Differential Geometry (University of California, Los Angeles, July 9–27, 1990). Proceedings of Symposia in Pure Mathematics. Vol. 54. Providence, RI: American Mathematical Society . pp.

1– 28.

doi : 10.1090/pspum/054.1 .

ISBN 978-0-8218-1494-9 .

MR 1216573 .

Zbl 0801.53001 .

Y00.

Yau, S.-T. (2000).

"Review of geometry and analysis" .

Asian Journal of Mathematics .

4 (1): 235– 278.

doi : 10.4310/AJM.2000.v4.n1.a16 .

MR 1803723 .

Zbl 1031.53004 .

Y06.

Yau, Shing-Tung (2006). "Perspectives on geometric analysis". In Yau, Shing-Tung (ed.).

Essays in geometry in memory of S.S. Chern . Surveys in Differential Geometry. Vol. 10. Somerville, MA: International Press. pp.

275– 379.

arXiv : math/0602363 .

doi : 10.4310/SDG.2005.v10.n1.a8 .

MR 2408227 .

Zbl 1138.53004 .

Y14a.

Ji, Lizhen ; Li, Peter ; Liu, Kefeng ; Schoen, Richard , eds. (2014a).

Selected expository works of Shing-Tung Yau with commentary. Vol. I . Advanced Lectures in Mathematics. Vol. 28. Somerville, MA: International Press.

ISBN 978-1-57146-293-0 .

MR 3307244 .

Zbl 1401.01045 .

Y14b.

Ji, Lizhen ; Li, Peter ; Liu, Kefeng ; Schoen, Richard , eds. (2014b).

Selected expository works of Shing-Tung Yau with commentary. Vol. II . Advanced Lectures in Mathematics. Vol. 29. Somerville, MA: International Press.

ISBN 978-1-57146-294-7 .

MR 3307245 .

Zbl 1401.01046 .

Y19a.

Cao, Huai-Dong ; Li, Jun ; Schoen, Richard , eds. (2019a).

Selected works of Shing-Tung Yau. Part I: 1971–1991. Volume 1: Metric geometry and minimal submanifolds . Somerville, MA: International Press.

ISBN 978-1-57146-376-0 .

Zbl 1412.01037 .

Y19b.

Cao, Huai-Dong ; Li, Jun ; Schoen, Richard , eds. (2019b).

Selected works of Shing-Tung Yau. Part I: 1971–1991. Volume 2: Metric geometry and harmonic functions . Somerville, MA: International Press.

ISBN 978-1-57146-377-7 .

Zbl 1412.01038 .

Y19c.

Cao, Huai-Dong ; Li, Jun ; Schoen, Richard , eds. (2019c).

Selected works of Shing-Tung Yau. Part I: 1971–1991. Volume 3: Eigenvalues and general relativity . Somerville, MA: International Press.

ISBN 978-1-57146-378-4 .

Zbl 1412.01039 .

Y19d.

Cao, Huai-Dong ; Li, Jun ; Schoen, Richard , eds. (2019d).

Selected works of Shing-Tung Yau. Part I: 1971–1991. Volume 4: Kähler geometry I . Somerville, MA: International Press.

ISBN 978-1-57146-379-1 .

Zbl 1412.01040 .

Y19e.

Cao, Huai-Dong ; Li, Jun ; Schoen, Richard , eds. (2019e).

Selected works of Shing-Tung Yau. Part I: 1971–1991. Volume 5: Kähler geometry II . Somerville, MA: International Press.

ISBN 978-1-57146-380-7 .

Zbl 1412.01041 .

Textbooks and technical monographs.

SY94.

Schoen, R.

; Yau, S.-T. (1994).

Lectures on differential geometry . Conference Proceedings and Lecture Notes in Geometry and Topology. Vol. 1. Lecture notes prepared by Wei Yue Ding, Kung Ching Chang, Jia Qing Zhong and Yi Chao Xu. Translated from the Chinese by Ding and S. Y. Cheng. Preface translated from the Chinese by Kaising Tso. Cambridge, MA: International Press.

ISBN 1-57146-012-8 .

MR 1333601 .

Zbl 0830.53001 .

SY97.

Schoen, R.

; Yau, S. T. (1997).

Lectures on harmonic maps . Conference Proceedings and Lecture Notes in Geometry and Topology. Vol. 2. Cambridge, MA: International Press.

ISBN 1-57146-002-0 .

MR 1474501 .

Zbl 0886.53004 .

SY98.

Salaff, Stephen; Yau, Shing-Tung (1998).

Ordinary differential equations (Second ed.). Cambridge, MA: International Press.

ISBN 1-57146-065-9 .

MR 1691427 .

Zbl 1089.34500 .

GY08.

Gu, Xianfeng David; Yau, Shing-Tung (2008).

Computational conformal geometry . Advanced Lectures in Mathematics. Vol. 3. Somerville, MA: International Press.

ISBN 978-1-57146-171-1 .

MR 2439718 .

Popular books.

YN10.

Yau, Shing-Tung; Nadis, Steve (2010).

The shape of inner space. String theory and the geometry of the universe's hidden dimensions . New York: Basic Books .

ISBN 978-0-465-02023-2 .

MR 2722198 .

Zbl 1235.00025 .

NY13.

Nadis, Steve; Yau, Shing-Tung (2013).

A history in sum. 150 years of mathematics at Harvard (1825–1975) . Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press .

ISBN 978-0-674-72500-3 .

MR 3100544 .

Zbl 1290.01005 .

NY15.

Nadis, Steve; Yau, Shing-Tung (2015).

From the Great Wall to the great collider: China and the quest to uncover the inner workings of the universe . Somerville, MA: International Press.

ISBN 978-1571463104 .

YN19.

Yau, Shing-Tung; Nadis, Steve (2019).

The shape of a life. One mathematician's search for the universe's hidden geometry . New Haven, CT: Yale University Press .

ISBN 978-0-300-23590-6 .

MR 3930611 .

Zbl 1435.32001 .

NY24.

Nadis, Steve; Yau, Shing-Tung (2024).

The gravity of math: how geometry rules the universe . New York: Basic Books .

ISBN 978-1541604292 .

References [ edit ] ^ "Questions and answers with Shing-Tung Yau" , Physics Today , 11 April 2016.

^ a b Ling, Xin (2022-04-21).

"Chinese-born maths genius leaves Harvard to help China become a powerhouse on subject" .

South China Morning Post . Retrieved 2022-04-22 .

^ Albers, Donald J.; Alexanderson, G. L.; Reid, Constance.

International Mathematical Congresses. An Illustrated History 1893-1986.

Rev. ed. including ICM 1986. Springer-Verlag, New York, 1986 ^ "丘成桐院士关注家乡蕉岭仓海诗廊文化建设项" [Yau visited his birthplace].

Eastday (in Chinese). 6 June 2018. Archived from the original on 17 August 2019 . Retrieved 2019-08-17 .

^ Shinobu Hosono. Interview with Shing-Tug Yau.

^ a b Page at Center of Mathematical Sciences at Zhejiang University ^ a b Shing-Tung Yau . Mathematics Genealogy.

^ a b c d e f O'Connor, J. J.; Robertson, E. F. (December 2023).

"Shing-Tung Yau (1949– )" .

MacTutor History of Mathematics Archive . Retrieved April 26, 2024 .

^ "University of California, San Diego: External Relations: News & Information: News Releases: Science" .

^ "Yau, Shing-Tung" .

^ a b "Stephen Hawking invited me to discuss [the proof] with him at Cambridge University in late August 1978. I gladly accepted.... Travel was difficult, however, because the British Consulate had recently taken my Hong Kong resident card, maintaining that I could not keep it now that I had a U.S. green card. In the process, I had become stateless. I was no longer a citizen of any country.... until I became a U.S. citizen in 1990." [YN19] : 125 ^ According to the Chinese nationality law , he was a Chinese national by descent and birth and remained so until his naturalization.

^ a b Nasar, Sylvia; Gruber, David (August 26, 2006).

"Manifold Destiny: A legendary problem and the battle over who solved it" .

New Yorker . Retrieved February 26, 2020 .

^ a b Overbye, Dennis (October 17, 2006).

"Scientist at Work: Shing-Tung Yau The Emperor of Math" .

The New York Times . Retrieved September 14, 2013 .

He became a United States citizen in 1990.

^ Ruane, P. N. (November 9, 2010).

"review of The shape of inner space: string theory and the geometry of the universe by Shing-Tung Yau and Steve Nadis" .

MAA Reviews, Mathematical Association of America .

^ Wang, Lifan (2016). "review of From the Great Wall to the Great Collider: China and the Quest to Uncover the Inner Workings of the Universe by Steve Nadis & Shing-Tung Yau".

Physics Today .

69 (4): 54.

doi : 10.1063/PT.3.3140 .

^ Ruane, P. N. (February 12, 2016).

"review of From the Great Wall to the Great Collider " .

MAA Reviews, Mathematical Association of America .

^ Goodstein, Judith (2019).

"A Mathematician's Odyssey (review of The shape of a life by Shing-Tung Yau & Steve Nadis)" .

American Scientist .

107 (4): 248– 250.

doi : 10.1511/2019.107.4.248 .

^ "Shing-Tung Yau, mathematician at UCSD awarded the Fields Medal." In "News Releases," Series Two of the University Communications Public Relations Materials. RSS 6020. Special Collections & Archives, UC San Diego ^ Centre Director. Center of Mathematical Sciences, Zhejiang University .

^ About. Yau Mathematical Sciences Center at Tsinghua University .

^ Directory. Institute of Applied Mathematical Sciences at National Taiwan University .

^ Tsinghua Sanya International Mathematics Forum .

^ "About – CMSA" .

^ Editorial Board of Journal of Differential Geometry .

^ Editorial Board of Asian Journal of Mathematics .

^ Editorial Board of Advances in Theoretical and Mathematical Physics .

^ Jackson, Allyn (September 2006).

"Conjectures no more? Consensus forming on the proof of the Poincaré and geometrization conjectures" (PDF) .

Notices of the American Mathematical Society .

53 (8): 897– 901.

^ "Russian Reports He Has Solved a Celebrated Math Problem." New York Times (April 15, 2003). Sara Robinson.

^ a b For both sides of the dispute, see: Lian, Bong; Liu, Kefeng (2006).

"On the mirror conjecture" (PDF) . Reprinted in Ji et al. (2014a) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2007-01-04.

and Footnote 17 in Givental, Alexander (1998). "Elliptic Gromov–Witten invariants and the generalized mirror conjecture". In Saito, M.-H.; Shimizu, Y.; Ueno, K.

(eds.).

Integrable systems and algebraic geometry . 41st Taniguchi Symposium held in Kobe (June 30–July 4, 1997) and at Research Institute for Mathematical Sciences, Kyoto University, Kyoto (July 7–11, 1997). River Edge, NJ: World Scientific . pp.

107– 155.

arXiv : math/9803053 .

MR 1672116 .

Zbl 0961.14036 .

^ Famous scientist slams academic corruption in China Archived 2008-09-17 at the Wayback Machine , China View (Xinhua) , 17 August 2006. Retrieved on 2008-08-05.

^ Xin, Hao (2006). "Frustrations Mount Over China's High-Priced Hunt for Trophy Professors".

Science .

313 (5794): 1721– 1723.

doi : 10.1126/science.313.5794.1721 .

PMID 16990526 .

S2CID 35979069 .

^ Solving an Old Math Problem Nets Award, Trouble . National Public Radio (2006).

^ Yau's website, with information on his legal action and letter to The New Yorker [ usurped ] ^ See the reprints of [Y82b] and [Y93] in Volume I of [Y14] .

^ a b c d e Aubin, Thierry (1998).

Some nonlinear problems in Riemannian geometry . Springer Monographs in Mathematics. Berlin: Springer-Verlag .

doi : 10.1007/978-3-662-13006-3 .

ISBN 3-540-60752-8 .

MR 1636569 .

Zbl 0896.53003 .

^ a b c Joyce, Dominic D.

(2007).

Riemannian holonomy groups and calibrated geometry . Oxford Graduate Texts in Mathematics. Vol. 12. Oxford: Oxford University Press .

ISBN 978-0-19-921559-1 .

MR 2292510 .

Zbl 1200.53003 .

^ a b Siu, Yum Tong (1987).

Lectures on Hermitian–Einstein metrics for stable bundles and Kähler–Einstein metrics . DMV Seminar. Vol. 8. Basel: Birkhäuser Verlag .

doi : 10.1007/978-3-0348-7486-1 .

ISBN 3-7643-1931-3 .

MR 0904673 .

Zbl 0631.53004 .

^ Tian, Gang (2000).

Canonical metrics in Kähler geometry . Lectures in Mathematics ETH Zürich. Notes taken by Meike Akveld . Basel: Birkhäuser Verlag .

doi : 10.1007/978-3-0348-8389-4 .

ISBN 3-7643-6194-8 .

MR 1787650 .

Zbl 0978.53002 .

^ a b c d e Besse, Arthur L.

(1987).

Einstein manifolds . Ergebnisse der Mathematik und ihrer Grenzgebiete (3). Vol. 10. Reprinted in 2008. Berlin: Springer-Verlag .

doi : 10.1007/978-3-540-74311-8 .

ISBN 3-540-15279-2 .

MR 0867684 .

Zbl 0613.53001 .

^ a b Becker, Katrin; Becker, Melanie; Schwarz, John H.

(2007).

String theory and M-theory. A modern introduction . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press .

doi : 10.1017/CBO9780511816086 .

ISBN 978-0-521-86069-7 .

MR 2285203 .

Zbl 1123.81001 .

^ a b Green, Michael B.

; Schwarz, John H.

; Witten, Edward (2012).

Superstring theory. Vol. 2. Loop amplitudes, anomalies and phenomenology (25th anniversary edition of 1987 original ed.). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press .

Bibcode : 2012stla.book.....G .

doi : 10.1017/CBO9781139248570 .

ISBN 978-1-107-02913-2 .

MR 3155202 .

Zbl 1245.53003 .

^ Hübsch, Tristan (1992).

Calabi–Yau manifolds. A bestiary for physicists . River Edge, NJ: World Scientific .

Bibcode : 1992cymb.book.....H .

doi : 10.1142/1410 .

ISBN 981-02-0662-3 .

MR 1177829 .

Zbl 0771.53002 .

^ a b Aspinwall, Paul S.

; Bridgeland, Tom ; Craw, Alastair; Douglas, Michael R.

; Gross, Mark ; Kapustin, Anton ; Moore, Gregory W.

; Segal, Graeme ; Szendrői, Balázs; Wilson, P. M. H. (2009).

Dirichlet branes and mirror symmetry .

Clay Mathematics Monographs . Vol. 4. Cambridge, MA: Clay Mathematics Institute .

ISBN 978-0-8218-3848-8 .

MR 2567952 .

Zbl 1188.14026 .

^ Gross, Mark ; Wilson, P. M. H. (2000).

"Large complex structure limits of K3 surfaces" .

Journal of Differential Geometry .

55 (3): 475– 546.

arXiv : math/0008018 .

Bibcode : 2000math......8018G .

doi : 10.4310/jdg/1090341262 .

MR 1863732 .

Zbl 1027.32021 .

^ a b c d Colding, Tobias Holck ; Minicozzi, William P. II (2011).

A course in minimal surfaces .

Graduate Studies in Mathematics . Vol. 121. Providence, RI: American Mathematical Society .

doi : 10.1090/gsm/121 .

ISBN 978-0-8218-5323-8 .

MR 2780140 .

Zbl 1242.53007 .

^ Gromov, Mikhael ; Lawson, H. Blaine Jr.

(1983).

"Positive scalar curvature and the Dirac operator on complete Riemannian manifolds" .

Publications Mathématiques de l'Institut des Hautes Études Scientifiques .

58 : 83– 196.

doi : 10.1007/BF02953774 .

MR 0720933 .

S2CID 123212001 .

Zbl 0538.53047 .

^ Jost, Jürgen (1991).

Two-dimensional geometric variational problems . Chichester: John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

ISBN 0-471-92839-9 .

MR 1100926 .

Zbl 0729.49001 .

(Erratum: [1] ) ^ Lin, Fanghua ; Wang, Changyou (2008).

The analysis of harmonic maps and their heat flows . Hackensack, NJ: World Scientific .

doi : 10.1142/9789812779533 .

ISBN 978-981-277-952-6 .

MR 2431658 .

Zbl 1203.58004 .

^ a b Choquet-Bruhat, Yvonne (2009).

General relativity and the Einstein equations . Oxford Mathematical Monographs. Oxford: Oxford University Press .

doi : 10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199230723.001.0001 .

ISBN 978-0-19-923072-3 .

MR 2473363 .

Zbl 1157.83002 .

^ Huisken, Gerhard (1987). "The volume preserving mean curvature flow".

Journal für die reine und angewandte Mathematik .

1987 (382): 35– 48.

doi : 10.1515/crll.1987.382.35 .

hdl : 11858/00-001M-0000-0013-5DAA-8 .

MR 0921165 .

S2CID 118368038 .

Zbl 0621.53007 .

^ a b c d e f g h Li, Peter (2012).

Geometric analysis . Cambridge Studies in Advanced Mathematics. Vol. 134. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press .

doi : 10.1017/CBO9781139105798 .

ISBN 978-1-107-02064-1 .

MR 2962229 .

Zbl 1246.53002 .

^ Pigola, Stefano; Rigoli, Marco; Setti, Alberto G. (2005). "Maximum principles on Riemannian manifolds and applications".

Memoirs of the American Mathematical Society .

174 (822).

doi : 10.1090/memo/0822 .

ISBN 978-0-8218-3639-2 .

MR 2116555 .

Zbl 1075.58017 .

^ a b Pigola, Stefano; Rigoli, Marco; Setti, Alberto G. (2008).

Vanishing and finiteness results in geometric analysis. A generalization of the Bochner technique . Progress in Mathematics. Vol. 266. Basel: Birkhäuser Verlag .

doi : 10.1007/978-3-7643-8642-9 .

ISBN 978-3-7643-8641-2 .

MR 2401291 .

Zbl 1150.53001 .

^ Graham, C. Robin ; Lee, John M.

(1991).

"Einstein metrics with prescribed conformal infinity on the ball" .

Advances in Mathematics .

87 (2): 186– 225.

doi : 10.1016/0001-8708(91)90071-E .

MR 1112625 .

Zbl 0765.53034 .

^ a b c d Chow, Bennett; Lu, Peng; Ni, Lei (2006).

Hamilton's Ricci flow .

Graduate Studies in Mathematics . Vol. 77. Providence, RI: American Mathematical Society .

doi : 10.1090/gsm/077 .

ISBN 978-0-8218-4231-7 .

MR 2274812 .

Zbl 1118.53001 .

^ Chow, Bennett; Chu, Sun-Chin; Glickenstein, David; Guenther, Christine ; Isenberg, James ; Ivey, Tom; Knopf, Dan; Lu, Peng; Luo, Feng; Ni, Lei (2010).

The Ricci flow: techniques and applications. Part III. Geometric-analytic aspects .

Mathematical Surveys and Monographs . Vol. 163. Providence, RI: American Mathematical Society .

doi : 10.1090/surv/163 .

ISBN 978-0-8218-4661-2 .

MR 2604955 .

Zbl 1216.53057 .

^ Lübke, Martin; Teleman, Andrei (1995).

The Kobayashi–Hitchin correspondence . River Edge, NJ: World Scientific .

doi : 10.1142/2660 .

ISBN 981-02-2168-1 .

MR 1370660 .

Zbl 0849.32020 .

^ "2019 Oswald Veblen Prize in Geometry" .

Notices of the American Mathematical Society .

66 (4): 610– 612. April 2019.

^ Marques, Fernando C.; Neves, André.

Min-max theory and the Willmore conjecture.

Ann. of Math. (2) 179 (2014), no. 2, 683–782.

^ Giusti, Enrico (1984).

Minimal surfaces and functions of bounded variation . Monographs in Mathematics. Vol. 80. Basel: Birkhäuser Verlag .

doi : 10.1007/978-1-4684-9486-0 .

ISBN 0-8176-3153-4 .

MR 0775682 .

Zbl 0545.49018 .

^ Colding, Tobias Holck ; Minicozzi, William P. II (2012).

"Generic mean curvature flow I: generic singularities" .

Annals of Mathematics . Second Series.

175 (2): 755– 833.

arXiv : 0908.3788 .

doi : 10.4007/annals.2012.175.2.7 .

MR 2993752 .

Zbl 1239.53084 .

^ Chen, Bang-yen (2019).

Geometry of submanifolds (Corrected reprint of 1973 original ed.). Mineola, NY: Dover Publications .

ISBN 978-0-486-83278-4 .

MR 0353212 .

Zbl 1458.53001 .

^ Hartman, Philip; Nirenberg, Louis.

On spherical image maps whose Jacobians do not change sign.

Amer. J. Math. 81 (1959), 901–920.

^ Chavel, Isaac (2001).

Isoperimetric inequalities. Differential geometric and analytic perspectives . Cambridge Tracts in Mathematics. Vol. 145. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press .

ISBN 0-521-80267-9 .

MR 1849187 .

Zbl 0988.51019 .

^ a b c d Trudinger, Neil S.

; Wang, Xu-Jia (2008). "The Monge–Ampère equation and its geometric applications". In Ji, Lizhen ; Li, Peter ; Schoen, Richard ; Simon, Leon (eds.).

Handbook of geometric analysis. No. 1 . Advanced Lectures in Mathematics. Vol. 7. Somerville, MA: International Press. pp.

467– 524.

ISBN 978-1-57146-130-8 .

MR 2483373 .

S2CID 37616041 .

Zbl 1156.35033 .

^ Caffarelli, L.

; Nirenberg, L.

; Spruck, J.

(1984). "The Dirichlet problem for nonlinear second-order elliptic equations. I. Monge–Ampère equation".

Communications on Pure and Applied Mathematics .

37 (3): 369– 402.

doi : 10.1002/cpa.3160370306 .

MR 0739925 .

Zbl 0598.35047 .

(Erratum: doi : 10.1002/cpa.3160400508 ) ^ a b Gilbarg, David ; Trudinger, Neil S.

(2001).

Elliptic partial differential equations of second order . Classics in Mathematics (Revised second edition of the 1977 original ed.). Berlin: Springer-Verlag .

doi : 10.1007/978-3-642-61798-0 .

ISBN 3-540-41160-7 .

MR 1814364 .

Zbl 1042.35002 .

^ Li, An-Min; Simon, Udo; Zhao, Guosong; Hu, Zejun (2015).

Global affine differential geometry of hypersurfaces . De Gruyter Expositions in Mathematics. Vol. 11 (Second revised and extended edition of 1993 original ed.). Berlin: De Gruyter .

doi : 10.1515/9783110268898 .

ISBN 978-3-11-026667-2 .

MR 3382197 .

Zbl 1330.53002 .

^ a b Cox, David A.

; Katz, Sheldon (1999).

Mirror symmetry and algebraic geometry .

Mathematical Surveys and Monographs . Vol. 68. Providence, RI: American Mathematical Society .

doi : 10.1090/surv/068 .

ISBN 0-8218-1059-6 .

MR 1677117 .

Zbl 0951.14026 .

^ a b Hori, Kentaro; Katz, Sheldon ; Klemm, Albrecht; Pandharipande, Rahul ; Thomas, Richard ; Vafa, Cumrun ; Vakil, Ravi ; Zaslow, Eric (2003).

Mirror symmetry .

Clay Mathematics Monographs . Vol. 1. Cambridge, MA: Clay Mathematics Institute .

ISBN 0-8218-2955-6 .

MR 2003030 .

Zbl 1044.14018 .

^ Cheeger, Jeff ; Ebin, David G.

(2008).

Comparison theorems in Riemannian geometry (Revised reprint of 1975 original ed.). Providence, RI: AMS Chelsea Publishing .

doi : 10.1090/chel/365 .

ISBN 978-0-8218-4417-5 .

MR 2394158 .

Zbl 1142.53003 .

^ Klingenberg, Wilhelm P. A.

(1995).

Riemannian geometry . De Gruyter Studies in Mathematics. Vol. 1 (Second edition of 1982 original ed.). Berlin: Walter de Gruyter & Co.

doi : 10.1515/9783110905120 .

ISBN 3-11-014593-6 .

MR 1330918 .

Zbl 0911.53022 .

^ Bridson, Martin R.

; Haefliger, André (1999).

Metric spaces of non-positive curvature . Grundlehren der mathematischen Wissenschaften. Vol. 319. Berlin: Springer-Verlag .

doi : 10.1007/978-3-662-12494-9 .

ISBN 3-540-64324-9 .

MR 1744486 .

Zbl 0988.53001 .

^ a b Chavel, Isaac (1984).

Eigenvalues in Riemannian geometry . Pure and Applied Mathematics. Vol. 115. Orlando, FL: Academic Press .

doi : 10.1016/s0079-8169(08)x6051-9 .

ISBN 0-12-170640-0 .

MR 0768584 .

Zbl 0551.53001 .

^ Chow, Bennett; Chu, Sun-Chin; Glickenstein, David; Guenther, Christine ; Isenberg, James ; Ivey, Tom; Knopf, Dan; Lu, Peng; Luo, Feng; Ni, Lei (2008).

The Ricci flow: techniques and applications. Part II. Analytic aspects .

Mathematical Surveys and Monographs . Vol. 144. Providence, RI: American Mathematical Society .

doi : 10.1090/surv/144 .

ISBN 978-0-8218-4429-8 .

MR 2365237 .

Zbl 1157.53035 .

^ Chavel, Isaac (2006).

Riemannian geometry. A modern introduction . Cambridge Studies in Advanced Mathematics. Vol. 98 (Second edition of 1993 original ed.). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press .

doi : 10.1017/CBO9780511616822 .

ISBN 978-0-521-61954-7 .

MR 2229062 .

Zbl 1099.53001 .

^ Lieb, Elliott H.

; Loss, Michael (2001).

Analysis .

Graduate Studies in Mathematics . Vol. 14 (Second edition of 1997 original ed.). Providence, RI: American Mathematical Society .

doi : 10.1090/gsm/014 .

hdl : 2027.42/149371 .

ISBN 0-8218-2783-9 .

MR 1817225 .

Zbl 0966.26002 .

^ Jost, Jürgen (2017).

Riemannian geometry and geometric analysis . Universitext (Seventh edition of 1995 original ed.).

Springer, Cham .

doi : 10.1007/978-3-319-61860-9 .

ISBN 978-3-319-61859-3 .

MR 3726907 .

Zbl 1380.53001 .

^ Chen, Mu-Fa (2005).

Eigenvalues, inequalities, and ergodic theory . Probability and its Applications. London: Springer-Verlag .

doi : 10.1007/b138904 .

ISBN 1-85233-868-7 .

MR 2105651 .

Zbl 1079.60005 .

^ Wang, Feng-Yu (2005).

Functional inequalities, Markov semigroups and spectral theory . Beijing/New York: Science Press .

doi : 10.1016/B978-0-08-044942-5.50022-7 .

ISBN 978-0-08-044942-5 .

^ "Mathematics People: Clay Research Awards Presented" (PDF) .

Notices of the American Mathematical Society .

64 (6): 595– 604. June 2017.

^ Floater, Michael S.; Hormann, Kai (2005). "Surface parameterization: a tutorial and survey". In Dodgson, Neil A.

; Floater, Michael S.; Sabin, Malcolm A. (eds.).

Advances in multiresolution for geometric modelling . Papers from the workshop (MINGLE 2003) held in Cambridge, September 9–11, 2003. Mathematics and Visualization. Berlin: Springer . pp.

157– 186.

doi : 10.1007/3-540-26808-1_9 .

ISBN 3-540-21462-3 .

MR 2112350 .

S2CID 9922896 .

Zbl 1065.65030 .

^ a b Chung, Fan R. K.

(1997).

Spectral graph theory . CBMS Regional Conference Series in Mathematics. Vol. 92. Providence, RI: American Mathematical Society .

doi : 10.1090/cbms/092 .

ISBN 0-8218-0315-8 .

MR 1421568 .

Zbl 0867.05046 .

^ Qiu, Huaijun; Hancock, Edwin R.

(2007). "Clustering and embedding using commute times".

IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence .

29 (11): 1873– 1890.

doi : 10.1109/TPAMI.2007.1103 .

PMID 17848771 .

S2CID 1043277 .

^ Smola, Alexander J.; Kondor, Risi (2003). "Kernels and regularization on graphs". In Schölkopf, Bernhard ; Warmuth, Manfred K.

(eds.).

Learning theory and kernel machines . 16th annual conference on learning theory and 7th kernel workshop, Washington, DC, USA, August 24–27, 2003.

Lecture Notes in Computer Science . Vol. 2777. pp.

144– 158.

doi : 10.1007/978-3-540-45167-9_12 .

ISBN 978-3-540-40720-1 .

S2CID 7326173 .

Zbl 1274.68351 .

^ Jost, Jürgen ; Liu, Shiping (2014).

"Ollivier's Ricci curvature, local clustering and curvature–dimension inequalities on graphs" .

Discrete & Computational Geometry .

51 (2): 300– 322.

arXiv : 1103.4037 .

doi : 10.1007/s00454-013-9558-1 .

MR 3164168 .

Zbl 1294.05061 .

^ "John J. Carty Award for the Advancement of Science" .

United States National Academy of Sciences . Archived from the original on 2010-12-29 . Retrieved Jan 1, 2009 .

^ "...for his development of non-linear techniques in differential geometry leading to the solution of several outstanding problems." ^ Malkah Fleisher, Winners of Prestigious Wolf Prize Announced ^ Marcel Grossmann, 15th Marcel Grossmann Meeting ^ Shaw Prize 2023 External links [ edit ] Center of Mathematical Sciences at Zhejiang University : commentary by various mathematicians on Yau Discover Magazine Interview, June 2010 issue Interview (11 pages long in Traditional Chinese ) Yau's autobiographical account (mostly English, some Chinese) O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F.

, "Shing-Tung Yau" , MacTutor History of Mathematics Archive , University of St Andrews Shing-Tung Yau at the Mathematics Genealogy Project Plugging A Math Gap UC Irvine courting Yau with a $2.5 million professorship International Conference Celebrating Shing Tung Yau's Birthday 8/27/2008-9/1/2008 Harvard University v t e Fields Medalists 1936 Ahlfors Douglas 1950 Schwartz Selberg 1954 Kodaira Serre 1958 Roth Thom 1962 Hörmander Milnor 1966 Atiyah Cohen Grothendieck Smale 1970 Baker Hironaka Novikov Thompson 1974 Bombieri Mumford 1978 Deligne Fefferman Margulis Quillen 1982 Connes Thurston Yau 1986 Donaldson Faltings Freedman 1990 Drinfeld Jones Mori Witten 1994 Bourgain Lions Yoccoz Zelmanov 1998 Borcherds Gowers Kontsevich McMullen 2002 Lafforgue Voevodsky 2006 Okounkov Perelman Tao Werner 2010 Lindenstrauss Ngô Smirnov Villani 2014 Avila Bhargava Hairer Mirzakhani 2018 Birkar Figalli Scholze Venkatesh 2022 Duminil-Copin Huh Maynard Viazovska Category Mathematics portal v t e Laureates of the Wolf Prize in Mathematics 1970s Israel Gelfand / Carl L. Siegel (1978) Jean Leray / André Weil (1979) 1980s Henri Cartan / Andrey Kolmogorov (1980) Lars Ahlfors / Oscar Zariski (1981) Hassler Whitney / Mark Krein (1982) Shiing-Shen Chern / Paul Erdős (1983/84) Kunihiko Kodaira / Hans Lewy (1984/85) Samuel Eilenberg / Atle Selberg (1986) Kiyosi Itô / Peter Lax (1987) Friedrich Hirzebruch / Lars Hörmander (1988) Alberto Calderón / John Milnor (1989) 1990s Ennio De Giorgi / Ilya Piatetski-Shapiro (1990) Lennart Carleson / John G. Thompson (1992) Mikhail Gromov / Jacques Tits (1993) Jürgen Moser (1994/95) Robert Langlands / Andrew Wiles (1995/96) Joseph Keller / Yakov G. Sinai (1996/97) László Lovász / Elias M. Stein (1999) 2000s Raoul Bott / Jean-Pierre Serre (2000) Vladimir Arnold / Saharon Shelah (2001) Mikio Sato / John Tate (2002/03) Grigory Margulis / Sergei Novikov (2005) Stephen Smale / Hillel Furstenberg (2006/07) Pierre Deligne / Phillip A. Griffiths / David B. Mumford (2008) 2010s Dennis Sullivan / Shing-Tung Yau (2010) Michael Aschbacher / Luis Caffarelli (2012) George Mostow / Michael Artin (2013) Peter Sarnak (2014) James G. Arthur (2015) Richard Schoen / Charles Fefferman (2017) Alexander Beilinson / Vladimir Drinfeld (2018) Jean-François Le Gall / Gregory Lawler (2019) 2020s Simon K. Donaldson / Yakov Eliashberg (2020) George Lusztig (2022) Ingrid Daubechies (2023) Noga Alon / Adi Shamir (2024) Mathematics portal v t e Shaw Prize laureates Astronomy Jim Peebles (2004) Geoffrey Marcy and Michel Mayor (2005) Saul Perlmutter , Adam Riess and Brian Schmidt (2006) Peter Goldreich (2007) Reinhard Genzel (2008) Frank Shu (2009) Charles Bennett , Lyman Page and David Spergel (2010) Enrico Costa and Gerald Fishman (2011) David C. Jewitt and Jane Luu (2012) Steven Balbus and John F. Hawley (2013) Daniel Eisenstein , Shaun Cole and John A. Peacock (2014) William J. Borucki (2015) Ronald Drever , Kip Thorne and Rainer Weiss (2016) Simon White (2017) Jean-Loup Puget (2018) Edward C. Stone (2019) Roger Blandford (2020) Victoria Kaspi and Chryssa Kouveliotou (2021) Lennart Lindegren and Michael Perryman (2022) Matthew Bailes , Duncan Lorimer and Maura McLaughlin (2023) Shrinivas R. Kulkarni (2024) John Richard Bond , George Efstathiou (2025) Life science and medicine Stanley Norman Cohen , Herbert Boyer , Yuet-Wai Kan and Richard Doll (2004) Michael Berridge (2005) Xiaodong Wang (2006) Robert Lefkowitz (2007) Ian Wilmut , Keith H. S. Campbell and Shinya Yamanaka (2008) Douglas Coleman and Jeffrey Friedman (2009) David Julius (2010) Jules Hoffmann , Ruslan Medzhitov and Bruce Beutler (2011) Franz-Ulrich Hartl and Arthur L. Horwich (2012) Jeffrey C. Hall , Michael Rosbash and Michael W. Young (2013) Kazutoshi Mori and Peter Walter (2014) Bonnie Bassler and Everett Peter Greenberg (2015) Adrian Bird and Huda Zoghbi (2016) Ian R. Gibbons and Ronald Vale (2017) Mary-Claire King (2018) Maria Jasin (2019) Gero Miesenböck , Peter Hegemann and Georg Nagel (2020) Scott D. Emr (2021) Paul A. Negulescu and Michael J. Welsh (2022) Patrick Cramer and Eva Nogales (2023) Stuart H. Orkin and Swee Lay Thein (2024) Wolfgang Baumeister (2025) Mathematical science Shiing-Shen Chern (2004) Andrew Wiles (2005) David Mumford and Wentsun Wu (2006) Robert Langlands and Richard Taylor (2007) Vladimir Arnold and Ludwig Faddeev (2008) Simon Donaldson and Clifford Taubes (2009) Jean Bourgain (2010) Demetrios Christodoulou and Richard S. Hamilton (2011) Maxim Kontsevich (2012) David Donoho (2013) George Lusztig (2014) Gerd Faltings and Henryk Iwaniec (2015) Nigel Hitchin (2016) János Kollár and Claire Voisin (2017) Luis Caffarelli (2018) Michel Talagrand (2019) Alexander Beilinson and David Kazhdan (2020) Jean-Michel Bismut and Jeff Cheeger (2021) Noga Alon and Ehud Hrushovski (2022) Vladimir Drinfeld and Shing-Tung Yau (2023) Peter Sarnak (2024) Kenji Fukaya (2025) v t e United States National Medal of Science laureates Behavioral and social science 1960s 1964 Neal Elgar Miller 1980s 1986 Herbert A. Simon 1987 Anne Anastasi George J. Stigler 1988 Milton Friedman 1990s 1990 Leonid Hurwicz Patrick Suppes 1991 George A. Miller 1992 Eleanor J. Gibson 1994 Robert K. Merton 1995 Roger N. Shepard 1996 Paul Samuelson 1997 William K. Estes 1998 William Julius Wilson 1999 Robert M. Solow 2000s 2000 Gary Becker 2003 R. Duncan Luce 2004 Kenneth Arrow 2005 Gordon H. Bower 2008 Michael I. Posner 2009 Mortimer Mishkin 2010s 2011 Anne Treisman 2014 Robert Axelrod 2015 Albert Bandura 2020s 2023 Huda Akil Shelley E. Taylor 2025 Larry Bartels Biological sciences 1960s 1963 C. B. van Niel 1964 Theodosius Dobzhansky Marshall W. Nirenberg 1965 Francis P. Rous George G. Simpson Donald D. Van Slyke 1966 Edward F. Knipling Fritz Albert Lipmann William C. Rose Sewall Wright 1967 Kenneth S. Cole Harry F. Harlow Michael Heidelberger Alfred H. Sturtevant 1968 Horace Barker Bernard B. Brodie Detlev W. Bronk Jay Lush Burrhus Frederic Skinner 1969 Robert Huebner Ernst Mayr 1970s 1970 Barbara McClintock Albert B. Sabin 1973 Daniel I. Arnon Earl W. Sutherland Jr.

1974 Britton Chance Erwin Chargaff James V. Neel James Augustine Shannon 1975 Hallowell Davis Paul Gyorgy Sterling B. Hendricks Orville Alvin Vogel 1976 Roger Guillemin Keith Roberts Porter Efraim Racker E. O. Wilson 1979 Robert H. Burris Elizabeth C. Crosby Arthur Kornberg Severo Ochoa Earl Reece Stadtman George Ledyard Stebbins Paul Alfred Weiss 1980s 1981 Philip Handler 1982 Seymour Benzer Glenn W. Burton Mildred Cohn 1983 Howard L. Bachrach Paul Berg Wendell L. Roelofs Berta Scharrer 1986 Stanley Cohen Donald A. Henderson Vernon B. Mountcastle George Emil Palade Joan A. Steitz 1987 Michael E. DeBakey Theodor O. Diener Harry Eagle Har Gobind Khorana Rita Levi-Montalcini 1988 Michael S. Brown Stanley Norman Cohen Joseph L. Goldstein Maurice R. Hilleman Eric R. Kandel Rosalyn Sussman Yalow 1989 Katherine Esau Viktor Hamburger Philip Leder Joshua Lederberg Roger W. Sperry Harland G. Wood 1990s 1990 Baruj Benacerraf Herbert W. Boyer Daniel E. Koshland Jr.

Edward B. Lewis David G. Nathan E. Donnall Thomas 1991 Mary Ellen Avery G. Evelyn Hutchinson Elvin A. Kabat Robert W. Kates Salvador Luria Paul A. Marks Folke K. Skoog Paul C. Zamecnik 1992 Maxine Singer Howard Martin Temin 1993 Daniel Nathans Salome G. Waelsch 1994 Thomas Eisner Elizabeth F. Neufeld 1995 Alexander Rich 1996 Ruth Patrick 1997 James Watson Robert A. Weinberg 1998 Bruce Ames Janet Rowley 1999 David Baltimore Jared Diamond Lynn Margulis 2000s 2000 Nancy C. Andreasen Peter H. Raven Carl Woese 2001 Francisco J. Ayala George F. Bass Mario R. Capecchi Ann Graybiel Gene E. Likens Victor A. McKusick Harold Varmus 2002 James E. Darnell Evelyn M. Witkin 2003 J. Michael Bishop Solomon H. Snyder Charles Yanofsky 2004 Norman E. Borlaug Phillip A. Sharp Thomas E. Starzl 2005 Anthony Fauci Torsten N. Wiesel 2006 Rita R. Colwell Nina Fedoroff Lubert Stryer 2007 Robert J. Lefkowitz Bert W. O'Malley 2008 Francis S. Collins Elaine Fuchs J. Craig Venter 2009 Susan L. Lindquist Stanley B. Prusiner 2010s 2010 Ralph L. Brinster Rudolf Jaenisch 2011 Lucy Shapiro Leroy Hood Sallie Chisholm 2012 May Berenbaum Bruce Alberts 2013 Rakesh K. Jain 2014 Stanley Falkow Mary-Claire King Simon Levin 2020s 2023 Gebisa Ejeta Eve Marder Gregory Petsko Sheldon Weinbaum 2025 Bonnie Bassler Angela Belcher Helen Blau Emery N. Brown G. David Tilman Teresa Woodruff Chemistry 1960s 1964 Roger Adams 1980s 1982 F. Albert Cotton Gilbert Stork 1983 Roald Hoffmann George C. Pimentel Richard N. Zare 1986 Harry B. Gray Yuan Tseh Lee Carl S. Marvel Frank H. Westheimer 1987 William S. Johnson Walter H. Stockmayer Max Tishler 1988 William O. Baker Konrad E. Bloch Elias J. Corey 1989 Richard B. Bernstein Melvin Calvin Rudolph A. Marcus Harden M. McConnell 1990s 1990 Elkan Blout Karl Folkers John D. Roberts 1991 Ronald Breslow Gertrude B. Elion Dudley R. Herschbach Glenn T. Seaborg 1992 Howard E. Simmons Jr.

1993 Donald J. Cram Norman Hackerman 1994 George S. Hammond 1995 Thomas Cech Isabella L. Karle 1996 Norman Davidson 1997 Darleane C. Hoffman Harold S. Johnston 1998 John W. Cahn George M. Whitesides 1999 Stuart A. Rice John Ross Susan Solomon 2000s 2000 John D. Baldeschwieler Ralph F. Hirschmann 2001 Ernest R. Davidson Gábor A. Somorjai 2002 John I. Brauman 2004 Stephen J. Lippard 2005 Tobin J. Marks 2006 Marvin H. Caruthers Peter B. Dervan 2007 Mostafa A. El-Sayed 2008 Joanna Fowler JoAnne Stubbe 2009 Stephen J. Benkovic Marye Anne Fox 2010s 2010 Jacqueline K. Barton Peter J. Stang 2011 Allen J. Bard M. Frederick Hawthorne 2012 Judith P. Klinman Jerrold Meinwald 2013 Geraldine L. Richmond 2014 A. Paul Alivisatos 2025 R. Lawrence Edwards Engineering sciences 1960s 1962 Theodore von Kármán 1963 Vannevar Bush John Robinson Pierce 1964 Charles S. Draper Othmar H. Ammann 1965 Hugh L. Dryden Clarence L. Johnson Warren K. Lewis 1966 Claude E. Shannon 1967 Edwin H. Land Igor I. Sikorsky 1968 J. Presper Eckert Nathan M. Newmark 1969 Jack St. Clair Kilby 1970s 1970 George E. Mueller 1973 Harold E. Edgerton Richard T. Whitcomb 1974 Rudolf Kompfner Ralph Brazelton Peck Abel Wolman 1975 Manson Benedict William Hayward Pickering Frederick E. Terman Wernher von Braun 1976 Morris Cohen Peter C. Goldmark Erwin Wilhelm Müller 1979 Emmett N. Leith Raymond D. Mindlin Robert N. Noyce Earl R. Parker Simon Ramo 1980s 1982 Edward H. Heinemann Donald L. Katz 1983 Bill Hewlett George Low John G. Trump 1986 Hans Wolfgang Liepmann Tung-Yen Lin Bernard M. Oliver 1987 Robert Byron Bird H. Bolton Seed Ernst Weber 1988 Daniel C. Drucker Willis M. Hawkins George W. Housner 1989 Harry George Drickamer Herbert E. Grier 1990s 1990 Mildred Dresselhaus Nick Holonyak Jr.

1991 George H. Heilmeier Luna B. Leopold H. Guyford Stever 1992 Calvin F. Quate John Roy Whinnery 1993 Alfred Y. Cho 1994 Ray W. Clough 1995 Hermann A. Haus 1996 James L. Flanagan C. Kumar N. Patel 1998 Eli Ruckenstein 1999 Kenneth N. Stevens 2000s 2000 Yuan-Cheng B. Fung 2001 Andreas Acrivos 2002 Leo Beranek 2003 John M. Prausnitz 2004 Edwin N. Lightfoot 2005 Jan D. Achenbach 2006 Robert S. Langer 2007 David J. Wineland 2008 Rudolf E. Kálmán 2009 Amnon Yariv 2010s 2010 Shu Chien 2011 John B. Goodenough 2012 Thomas Kailath 2020s 2023 Subra Suresh 2025 John Dabiri Mathematical, statistical, and computer sciences 1960s 1963 Norbert Wiener 1964 Solomon Lefschetz H. Marston Morse 1965 Oscar Zariski 1966 John Milnor 1967 Paul Cohen 1968 Jerzy Neyman 1969 William Feller 1970s 1970 Richard Brauer 1973 John Tukey 1974 Kurt Gödel 1975 John W. Backus Shiing-Shen Chern George Dantzig 1976 Kurt Otto Friedrichs Hassler Whitney 1979 Joseph L. Doob Donald E. Knuth 1980s 1982 Marshall H. Stone 1983 Herman Goldstine Isadore Singer 1986 Peter Lax Antoni Zygmund 1987 Raoul Bott Michael Freedman 1988 Ralph E. Gomory Joseph B. Keller 1989 Samuel Karlin Saunders Mac Lane Donald C. Spencer 1990s 1990 George F. Carrier Stephen Cole Kleene John McCarthy 1991 Alberto Calderón 1992 Allen Newell 1993 Martin David Kruskal 1994 John Cocke 1995 Louis Nirenberg 1996 Richard Karp Stephen Smale 1997 Shing-Tung Yau 1998 Cathleen Synge Morawetz 1999 Felix Browder Ronald R. Coifman 2000s 2000 John Griggs Thompson Karen Uhlenbeck 2001 Calyampudi R. Rao Elias M. Stein 2002 James G. Glimm 2003 Carl R. de Boor 2004 Dennis P. Sullivan 2005 Bradley Efron 2006 Hyman Bass 2007 Leonard Kleinrock Andrew J. Viterbi 2009 David B. Mumford 2010s 2010 Richard A. Tapia S. R. Srinivasa Varadhan 2011 Solomon W. Golomb Barry Mazur 2012 Alexandre Chorin David Blackwell 2013 Michael Artin 2020s 2025 Ingrid Daubechies Cynthia Dwork Physical sciences 1960s 1963 Luis W. Alvarez 1964 Julian Schwinger Harold Urey Robert Burns Woodward 1965 John Bardeen Peter Debye Leon M. Lederman William Rubey 1966 Jacob Bjerknes Subrahmanyan Chandrasekhar Henry Eyring John H. Van Vleck Vladimir K. Zworykin 1967 Jesse Beams Francis Birch Gregory Breit Louis Hammett George Kistiakowsky 1968 Paul Bartlett Herbert Friedman Lars Onsager Eugene Wigner 1969 Herbert C. Brown Wolfgang Panofsky 1970s 1970 Robert H. Dicke Allan R. Sandage John C. Slater John A. Wheeler Saul Winstein 1973 Carl Djerassi Maurice Ewing Arie Jan Haagen-Smit Vladimir Haensel Frederick Seitz Robert Rathbun Wilson 1974 Nicolaas Bloembergen Paul Flory William Alfred Fowler Linus Carl Pauling Kenneth Sanborn Pitzer 1975 Hans A. Bethe Joseph O. Hirschfelder Lewis Sarett Edgar Bright Wilson Chien-Shiung Wu 1976 Samuel Goudsmit Herbert S. Gutowsky Frederick Rossini Verner Suomi Henry Taube George Uhlenbeck 1979 Richard P. Feynman Herman Mark Edward M. Purcell John Sinfelt Lyman Spitzer Victor F. Weisskopf 1980s 1982 Philip W. Anderson Yoichiro Nambu Edward Teller Charles H. Townes 1983 E. Margaret Burbidge Maurice Goldhaber Helmut Landsberg Walter Munk Frederick Reines Bruno B. Rossi J. Robert Schrieffer 1986 Solomon J. Buchsbaum H. Richard Crane Herman Feshbach Robert Hofstadter Chen-Ning Yang 1987 Philip Abelson Walter Elsasser Paul C. Lauterbur George Pake James A. Van Allen 1988 D. Allan Bromley Paul Ching-Wu Chu Walter Kohn Norman Foster Ramsey Jr.

Jack Steinberger 1989 Arnold O. Beckman Eugene Parker Robert Sharp Henry Stommel 1990s 1990 Allan M. Cormack Edwin M. McMillan Robert Pound Roger Revelle 1991 Arthur L. Schawlow Ed Stone Steven Weinberg 1992 Eugene M. Shoemaker 1993 Val Fitch Vera Rubin 1994 Albert Overhauser Frank Press 1995 Hans Dehmelt Peter Goldreich 1996 Wallace S. Broecker 1997 Marshall Rosenbluth Martin Schwarzschild George Wetherill 1998 Don L. Anderson John N. Bahcall 1999 James Cronin Leo Kadanoff 2000s 2000 Willis E. Lamb Jeremiah P. Ostriker Gilbert F. White 2001 Marvin L. Cohen Raymond Davis Jr.

Charles Keeling 2002 Richard Garwin W. Jason Morgan Edward Witten 2003 G. Brent Dalrymple Riccardo Giacconi 2004 Robert N. Clayton 2005 Ralph A. Alpher Lonnie Thompson 2006 Daniel Kleppner 2007 Fay Ajzenberg-Selove Charles P. Slichter 2008 Berni Alder James E. Gunn 2009 Yakir Aharonov Esther M. Conwell Warren M. Washington 2010s 2011 Sidney Drell Sandra Faber Sylvester James Gates 2012 Burton Richter Sean C. Solomon 2014 Shirley Ann Jackson 2020s 2023 Barry Barish Myriam Sarachik 2025 Richard Alley Wendy Freedman Keivan Stassun v t e Recipients of the Oswald Veblen Prize in Geometry 1964 Christos Papakyriakopoulos 1964 Raoul Bott 1966 Stephen Smale 1966 Morton Brown and Barry Mazur 1971 Robion Kirby 1971 Dennis Sullivan 1976 William Thurston 1976 James Harris Simons 1981 Mikhail Gromov 1981 Shing-Tung Yau 1986 Michael Freedman 1991 Andrew Casson and Clifford Taubes 1996 Richard S. Hamilton and Gang Tian 2001 Jeff Cheeger , Yakov Eliashberg and Michael J. Hopkins 2004 David Gabai 2007 Peter Kronheimer and Tomasz Mrowka ; Peter Ozsváth and Zoltán Szabó 2010 Tobias Colding and William Minicozzi ; Paul Seidel 2013 Ian Agol and Daniel Wise 2016 Fernando Codá Marques and André Neves 2019 Xiuxiong Chen , Simon Donaldson and Song Sun 2022 Michael A. Hill , Michael J. Hopkins , and Douglas Ravenel 2025 Soheyla Feyzbakhsh and Richard Thomas v t e Relativity Special relativity Background Principle of relativity ( Galilean relativity Galilean transformation ) Special relativity Doubly special relativity Fundamental concepts Frame of reference Speed of light Hyperbolic orthogonality Rapidity Maxwell's equations Proper length Proper time Proper acceleration Relativistic mass Formulation Lorentz transformation Textbooks Phenomena Time dilation Mass–energy equivalence (E=mc 2 ) Length contraction Relativity of simultaneity Relativistic Doppler effect Thomas precession Ladder paradox Twin paradox Terrell rotation Spacetime Light cone World line Minkowski diagram Biquaternions Minkowski space General relativity Background Introduction Mathematical formulation Fundamental concepts Equivalence principle Riemannian geometry Penrose diagram Geodesics Mach's principle Formulation ADM formalism BSSN formalism Einstein field equations Linearized gravity Post-Newtonian formalism Raychaudhuri equation Hamilton–Jacobi–Einstein equation Ernst equation Phenomena Black hole Event horizon Singularity Two-body problem Gravitational waves : astronomy detectors ( LIGO and collaboration Virgo LISA Pathfinder GEO ) Hulse–Taylor binary Other tests : precession of Mercury lensing (together with Einstein cross and Einstein rings ) redshift Shapiro delay frame-dragging / geodetic effect ( Lense–Thirring precession ) pulsar timing arrays Advanced theories Brans–Dicke theory Kaluza–Klein Quantum gravity Solutions Cosmological: Friedmann–Lemaître–Robertson–Walker ( Friedmann equations ) Lemaître–Tolman Kasner BKL singularity Gödel Milne Spherical: Schwarzschild ( interior Tolman–Oppenheimer–Volkoff equation ) Reissner–Nordström Axisymmetric: Kerr ( Kerr–Newman ) Weyl−Lewis−Papapetrou Taub–NUT van Stockum dust discs Others: pp-wave Ozsváth–Schücking Alcubierre Ellis In computational physics: Numerical relativity Scientists Poincaré Lorentz Einstein Hilbert Schwarzschild de Sitter Weyl Eddington Friedmann Lemaître Milne Robertson Chandrasekhar Zwicky Wheeler Choquet-Bruhat Kerr Zel'dovich Novikov Ehlers Geroch Penrose Hawking Taylor Hulse Bondi Misner Yau Thorne Weiss others Category Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Netherlands Norway Korea Sweden Poland Israel Catalonia Academics CiNii ORCID Mathematics Genealogy Project Association for Computing Machinery Scopus zbMATH DBLP MathSciNet People Trove DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐zdlgq
Cached time: 20250817044053
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 2.235 seconds
Real time usage: 2.492 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 20543/1000000
Revision size: 119805/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 1028343/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 702981/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 19/100
Expensive parser function count: 10/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 585034/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.303/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 13320111/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1875.658      1 -total
 32.34%  606.667     82 Template:Longitem
 31.16%  584.469      1 Template:Reflist
 31.16%  584.425     70 Template:Rma
 26.67%  500.215     63 Template:Cite_journal
 14.14%  265.235     45 Template:Cite_book
  9.11%  170.804      1 Template:Infobox_scientist
  7.25%  136.037     11 Template:Cite_web
  6.00%  112.456     85 Template:Ran
  5.12%   96.071      1 Template:Fields_medalists Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:303137:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817044053 and revision id 1299942880. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Shing-Tung_Yau&oldid=1299942880 " Categories : 1949 births 20th-century American mathematicians 21st-century American mathematicians Academic staff of Zhejiang University Alumni of the Chinese University of Hong Kong American people of Chinese descent American relativity theorists Chinese emigrants to Hong Kong Differential geometers Educators from Guangdong Fellows of the American Mathematical Society Fields Medalists Foreign members of the Russian Academy of Sciences Foreign members of the Chinese Academy of Sciences Hakka scientists Harvard University faculty Hong Kong emigrants to the United States Hong Kong people of Hakka descent Institute for Advanced Study faculty Living people MacArthur Fellows Mathematicians from Guangdong Members of Academia Sinica Members of the Committee of 100 Members of the United States National Academy of Sciences National Medal of Science laureates People from Shantou Stanford University faculty Stateless people UC Berkeley College of Letters and Science alumni University of California, San Diego faculty Wolf Prize in Mathematics laureates Hidden categories: CS1 Chinese-language sources (zh) Webarchive template wayback links Articles intentionally citing publications with errata Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with hCards Articles containing Chinese-language text Articles containing traditional Chinese-language text This page was last edited on 11 July 2025, at 09:00 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Shing-Tung Yau 38 languages Add topic

