Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 Classical Greece 3 Roman Empire 4 Arabic 5 Persia 6 Africa 7 Modern revival 8 References Toggle the table of contents Panegyric 35 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Español Esperanto فارسی Français Հայերեն Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano ქართული Қазақша Кыргызча Latina Lietuvių Magyar Македонски Nederlands Polski Português Русский Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Svenska ไทย Türkçe Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Public speech in praise of a person Title page of the Panegyric of Leonardo Loredan (1503), created in honour of Leonardo Loredan , 75th Doge of Venice , now in the Walters Art Museum in Baltimore A panegyric ( US : / ˌ p æ n ɪ ˈ dʒ ɪ r ɪ k / or UK : / ˌ p æ n ɪ ˈ dʒ aɪ r ɪ k / ) is a formal public speech or written verse, delivered in high praise of a person or thing .

[ 1 ] The original panegyrics were speeches delivered at public events in ancient Athens.

Etymology [ edit ] The word originated as a compound of Ancient Greek : παν - 'all' (the form taken by the word πᾶν, neuter of πᾶς 'all', when that is used as a prefix) and the word Ancient Greek : ἄγυρις , romanized : ágyris 'assembly' (an Aeolic dialect form, corresponding to the Attic or Ionic form Ancient Greek : ἀγορά , romanized : agorá ). Compounded, these gave Ancient Greek : πανήγυρις , romanized : panḗgyris 'general or national assembly, especially a festival in honour of a god' and the derived adjective Ancient Greek : πανηγυρικός , romanized : panēgyrikós 'of or for a public assembly or festival'. In Hellenistic Greek the noun came also to mean 'a festal oration, laudatory speech', and the adjective 'of or relating to a eulogy, flattering'. The noun Ancient Greek : πανήγυρις , romanized : panḗgyris had been borrowed into Classical Latin by around the second century CE, as panēgyris 'festival' (in post-Classical usage also 'general assembly'). Correspondingly, Classical Latin also included the adjective panēgyricus , which appears meaning 'laudatory', but also came to function as a noun, meaning 'public eulogy'. These words inspired similar formations in European languages in the early modern period, such as French panégyrique , attested by 1512. The English noun and adjective panegyric seems to have been borrowed from the French word, but no doubt with cognisance of its Latin and Greek origins.

[ 2 ] Classical Greece [ edit ] In Athens such speeches were delivered at national festivals or games , with the object of rousing the citizens to emulate the glorious deeds of their ancestors . The most famous are the Olympiacus of Gorgias , the Olympiacus of Lysias , and the Panegyricus and Panathenaicus (neither of them, however, actually delivered) of Isocrates .

[ 1 ] Funeral orations, such as the famous speech of Pericles in Thucydides , also partook of the nature of panegyrics.

[ 1 ] Roman Empire [ edit ] Part of a series on Rhetoric History Ancient Greece Asianism Atticism Attic orators Calliope Sophists Ancient India Ancient Rome The age of Cicero Second Sophistic Middle Ages Byzantine rhetoric Trivium Renaissance Studia humanitatis Modern period Concepts Captatio benevolentiae Chironomia Decorum Delectare Docere Device Eloquence Eloquentia perfecta Eunoia Enthymeme Facilitas Fallacy Informal Figure of speech Scheme Trope Five canons Inventio Dispositio Elocutio Memoria Pronuntiatio Hypsos Imitatio Kairos Method of loci Modes Operations Persuasion Ethos Pathos Logos Situation Style Grand Sotto voce Topos Genres Apologetics Debate Declamation Controversia Deliberative Demagogy Dialectic Socratic method Dissoi logoi Elocution Epideictic Encomium Panegyric Eulogy Farewell speech Forensic Funeral oration Homiletics‎ Sermon Invitational Lecture Public Lightning talk Maiden speech Oratory Polemic Diatribe Eristic Philippic Progymnasmata Suasoria Propaganda Spin Resignation speech Stump speech War-mongering Criticism Cluster Dramatic Pentadic Frame Genre Ideological Metaphoric Mimesis Narrative Neo-Aristotelian Rhetoricians Aeschines Aelius Aristides Antiphon Aristotle Aspasia Augustine Bakhtin Booth Brueggemann Burke Cicero de Man Demosthenes Derrida Dio Chrysostom Erasmus Gorgias Hobbes Hypereides Isocrates Lucian Lysias McLuhan Ong Perelman Pizan Protagoras Quintilian Ramus Richards Seneca the Elder Smith Toulmin Vico Weaver Works Gorgias (380 BC) Phaedrus (c. 370 BC) Rhetoric (c. 350 BC) Rhetoric to Alexander (c. 350 BC) De Sophisticis Elenchis (c. 350 BC) Topics (c. 350 BC) De Inventione (84 BC) Rhetorica ad Herennium (80 BC) De Oratore (55 BC) A Dialogue Concerning Oratorical Partitions (c. 50 BC) De Optimo Genere Oratorum (46 BC) Orator (46 BC) On the Sublime (c. 50) Institutio Oratoria (95) Panegyrici Latini (100–400) Dialogus de oratoribus (102) De doctrina Christiana (426) De vulgari eloquentia (1305) Copia: Foundations of the Abundant Style (1521) Language as Symbolic Action (1966) A General Rhetoric (1970) Subfields Argumentation Cognitive Contrastive Constitutive Digital Feminist Native American New Health and medicine Pedagogy Procedural Science Technology Therapy Visual Composition Related Ars dictaminis Communication studies Composition studies Doxa Glossary of rhetorical terms Glossophobia List of feminist rhetoricians List of speeches Oral skills Orator Pistis Public rhetoric Rhetoric of social intervention model Rhetrickery Rogerian argument Seduction Speechwriting Talking point TED Terministic screen Toulmin model Wooden iron v t e Further information: Panegyrici Latini The Romans generally confined the panegyric to the living—with the deceased receiving funeral orations instead.

[ 1 ] The most celebrated example of a Latin panegyric, however, is that delivered by the younger Pliny (AD 100) in the Senate on the occasion of his assumption of the consulship , which contained a eulogy of Trajan considered fulsome by some scholars.

[ 1 ] Towards the end of the 3rd and during the 4th century, as a result of the orientalizing of the Imperial court by Diocletian , it became customary to celebrate as a matter of course the superhuman virtues and achievements of the reigning emperor , [ 1 ] in a formally staged literary event. In 336, Eusebius of Caesarea gave a panegyric of Constantine the Great on the 30th year of his reign, in which he broke from tradition by celebrating the piety of the emperor, rather than his secular achievements. 
A well-delivered, elegant and witty panegyric became a vehicle for an educated but inexperienced young man to attract desirable attention in a competitive sphere. The poet Claudian came to Rome from Alexandria before about 395 and made his first reputation with a panegyric; he became court poet to Stilicho .

Cassiodorus , magister officiorum of Theodoric the Great , left a book of panegyrics, the Laudes . One of his biographers, James O'Donnell, has described the genre thus: "It was to be expected that the praise contained in the speech would be excessive; the intellectual point of the exercise (and very likely an important criterion in judging it) was to see how excessive the praise could be made while remaining within boundaries of decorum and restraint, how much high praise could be made to seem the grudging testimony of simple honesty".

[ 3 ] In the Byzantine Empire , the basilikos logos was a formal panegyric for an emperor delivered on an important occasion.

[ 4 ] Arabic [ edit ] Panegyric poems were a major literary form among the Arabs. Writing in the Arabic language, Al-Mutanabbi wrote about Sayf al-Dawla 's celebrated campaign against the Byzantine Empire.

[ 5 ] Persia [ edit ] Persian language panegyric poems from the Middle Ages contain details on the life of court poets and their patrons, and shed light on contemporary attitudes and matters of political and military interest such as Farrukhi Sistani 's qasida on Ghaznavid ruler Mahmud of Ghazni 's incursion against the Somnath temple . Poems were composed for festivals like Eid al-Fitr , Nowruz and Mihragan . Some poems depicted the patron as a hero in a battle between Islam and infidels . Wars against Muslims required additional explanations and some poems by Farrukhi and Mu'izzi advocated in favor of Mahmud's capture of Rayy and Ahmad Sanjar 's attacks against the Ghaznavid ruler Arslan-Shah in 1117. These poems are important sources for the Great Seljuq period from which few records survive.

[ 5 ] In a panegyric poem address to Mahmud of Ghazna, Firdausi said: "Noble buildings are ruined by rain and by the heat of the sun./I have laid the foundations of a high palace of poetry which will not be damaged by wind and rain." This is similar to the grandiose claims of the Roman poet Horace who says, in an address to the Emperor Augustus , that his poetry was more lasting than bronze and grander than the pyramids .

[ 6 ] Africa [ edit ] African oral tradition includes panegyric customs such as praise names and praise poetry. Often these customs serve mnemonic and genealogical functions within the continent's numerous ethnic groups, and are usually also tied to tribal spirituality .

Examples include Oriki amongst the Yoruba people , [ 7 ] Isibongo amongst the Zulu people , [ 8 ] and Iziduko amongst the Xhosa people .

[ 9 ] Modern revival [ edit ] The custom of panegyrics addressed to monarchs was revived in the Baroque period , though there do exist Renaissance examples such as Bruni's Laudatio florentinae urbis to Florence of 1403, and Erasmus 's Panegyricus , first published in 1504. Thus, in 1660 , several panegyrics were published by English poets in honour of Charles II of England coming to power. Another significant work includes the "Panegyric for the Duke of Lerma ", written by the Spanish poet Luis de Góngora in 1617. Russian poets of the eighteenth century, most notably Mikhail Lomonosov , adopted the panegyric form to celebrate the achievements of Russian emperors and empresses.

[ citation needed ] References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e f Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911).

"Panegyric" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 20 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. pp.

676– 677.

^ "pan-, comb. form", "panegyris, n.", "panegyric, n. and adj.", OED Online . Oxford University Press, March 2017. Web. 19 March 2017.

^ O'Donnell, James J. (1979). "2".

Cassiodorus . Berkeley: University of California Press.

ISBN 0-520-03646-8 .

^ Kazhdan, Alexander; Jeffreys, Elizabeth M. (1991).

"Basilikos Logos" . In Kazhdan, Alexander (ed.).

The Oxford Dictionary of Byzantium . Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 0-19-504652-8 .

^ a b G.E. Tetley.

The Ghaznavid and Seljuk Turks: Poetry as a Source for Iranian History . Taylor & Francis. p. 2.

^ G. E. Tetley.

The Ghaznavid and Seljuk Turks: Poetry as a Source for Iranian History . Taylor & Francis. p. 1.

^ Johnson, Samuel (1921), The History of the Yorubas from the earliest times to the beginning of the British protectorate , p. 85 ^ Turner, Noleen (1994). "A brief overview of Zulu oral traditions" (PDF). Alternation. 1 (1): 58–67. Retrieved 19 February 2022.

^ "African Voices" . Archived from the original on 17 July 2012 . Retrieved 19 February 2022 .

Authority control databases National Germany United States Spain Latvia Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Panegyric&oldid=1301390561 " Categories : Speeches by type Panegyrics Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from October 2020 This page was last edited on 19 July 2025, at 15:07 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Panegyric 35 languages Add topic

