Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Terminology 2 Units and notation 3 Types 4 Correspondence with pronunciation Toggle Correspondence with pronunciation subsection 4.1 Developing literacy 4.2 Defective orthographies 5 See also 6 References Toggle References subsection 6.1 Works cited 7 Further reading 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Orthography 99 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch العربية Aragonés Asturianu Azərbaycanca বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) भोजपुरी Bikol Central Български Boarisch Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Чӑвашла Cebuano Čeština Cymraeg Dansk الدارجة Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Estremeñu Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa ქართული Қазақша Kiswahili Кыргызча Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Limburgs Luganda Lombard Magyar Македонски Malti مصرى Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Occitan Олык марий Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی پښتو Plattdüütsch Polski Português Qaraqalpaqsha Română Runa Simi Русский Shqip Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog Татарча / tatarça ไทย Türkçe Українська Vèneto Tiếng Việt Walon Winaray 吴语 粵語 中文 ꠍꠤꠟꠐꠤ Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Set of conventions for written language For the type of projection, see Orthographic projection .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Orthography" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( July 2016 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a series on Linguistics Outline History Index General linguistics Diachronic Lexicography Morphology Phonology Pragmatics Semantics Syntax Syntax–semantics interface Typology Applied linguistics Acquisition Anthropological Applied Mathematical Computational Conversation analysis Corpus linguistics Discourse analysis Determinism Distance Documentation Ethnography of communication Ethnomethodology Forensic History of linguistics Interlinguistics Neurolinguistics Philology Philosophy of language Phonetics Psycholinguistics Sociolinguistics Text Translating and interpreting Writing systems Theoretical frameworks Formalist Constituency Dependency Distributionalism Generative Glossematics Functional Cognitive Construction grammar Functional discourse grammar Grammaticalization Interactional linguistics Prague circle Systemic functional Usage-based Structuralism Topics Autonomy of syntax Compositionality Conservative and innovative language Descriptivism Etymology Iconicity Internet linguistics LGBTQ linguistics Origin of language Orismology Orthography Philosophy of linguistics Prescriptivism Second-language acquisition Theory of language Terminology Portal v t e An orthography is a set of conventions for writing a language , including norms of spelling , punctuation , word boundaries , capitalization , hyphenation , and emphasis .

Most national and international languages have an established writing system that has undergone substantial standardization, thus exhibiting less dialect variation than the spoken language.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] These processes can fossilize pronunciation patterns that are no longer routinely observed in speech (e.g.

would and should ); they can also reflect deliberate efforts to introduce variability for the sake of national identity, as seen in Noah Webster 's efforts to introduce easily noticeable differences between American and British spelling (e.g.

honor and honour ).

Orthographic norms develop through social and political influence at various levels, such as encounters with print in education, the workplace, and the state. Some nations have established language academies in an attempt to regulate aspects of the national language, including its orthography—such as the Académie Française in France and the Royal Spanish Academy in Spain. No such authority exists for most languages, including English. Some non-state organizations, such as newspapers of record and academic journals , choose greater orthographic homogeneity by enforcing a particular style guide or spelling standard such as Oxford spelling .

Terminology [ edit ] The English word orthography is first attested in the 15th century, ultimately from Ancient Greek : ὀρθός ( orthós 'correct') and γράφειν ( gráphein 'to write').

[ 3 ] Orthography in phonetic writing systems is often concerned with matters of spelling , i.e. the correspondence between written graphemes and the phonemes found in speech.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] Other elements that may be considered part of orthography include hyphenation , capitalization , word boundaries , emphasis , and punctuation .

[ 6 ] Thus, orthography describes or defines the symbols used in writing, and the conventions that regulate their use.

Most natural languages developed as oral languages and writing systems have usually been crafted or adapted as ways of representing the spoken language. The rules for doing this tend to become standardized for a given language, leading to the development of an orthography that is generally considered "correct". In linguistics , orthography often refers to any method of writing a language without judgement as to right and wrong, with a scientific understanding that orthographic standardization exists on a spectrum of strength of convention. The original sense of the word, though, implies a dichotomy of correct and incorrect, and the word is still most often used to refer specifically to a standardized prescriptive manner of writing. A distinction is made between emic and etic viewpoints, with the emic approach taking account of perceptions of correctness among language users, and the etic approach being purely descriptive, considering only the empirical qualities of any system as used.

Units and notation [ edit ] This page uses notation for orthographic or other linguistic analysis.

For the meaning of  how ⟨ ⟩ , | | , / / , and [ ] are used here, see this page .

Orthographic units, such as letters of an alphabet , are conceptualized as graphemes . These are a type of abstraction , analogous to the phonemes of spoken languages; different physical forms of written symbols are considered to represent the same grapheme if the differences between them are not significant for meaning. Thus, a grapheme can be regarded as an abstraction of a collection of glyphs that are all functionally equivalent. For example, in written English (or other languages using the Latin alphabet ), there are two different physical representations (glyphs) of the lowercase Latin letter a : ⟨a⟩ and ⟨ɑ⟩ . Since the substitution of either of them for the other cannot change the meaning of a word, they are considered to be allographs of the same grapheme, which can be written | a | . The italic and boldface forms are also allographic.

Graphemes or sequences of them are sometimes placed between angle brackets, as in | b | or | back | . This distinguishes them from phonemic transcription, which is placed between slashes ( /b/ , /bæk/ ), and from phonetic transcription , which is placed between square brackets ( [b] , [bæk] ).

Types [ edit ] The writing systems on which orthographies are based can be divided into a number of types, depending on what type of unit each symbol serves to represent. The principal types are logographic (with symbols representing words or morphemes), syllabic (with symbols representing syllables), and alphabetic (with symbols roughly representing phonemes). Many writing systems combine features of more than one of these types, and a number of detailed classifications have been proposed. Japanese is an example of a writing system that can be written using a combination of logographic kanji characters and syllabic hiragana and katakana characters; as with many non-alphabetic languages, alphabetic romaji characters may also be used as needed.

[ 7 ] Correspondence with pronunciation [ edit ] Orthographies that use alphabets and syllabaries are based on the principle that written graphemes correspond to units of sound of the spoken language: phonemes in the former case, and syllables in the latter. In virtually all cases, this correspondence is not exact. Different languages' orthographies offer different degrees of correspondence between spelling and pronunciation.  An orthography in which the correspondences between spelling and pronunciation are highly complex or inconsistent is called a deep orthography (or less formally, the language is said to have irregular spelling ). An orthography with relatively simple, consistent correspondences (i.e. more bijective , or one-to-one) between spelling and pronunciation is called shallow (and the language has regular spelling ).

[ citation needed ] The Navajo alphabet is a deep orthography.

[ 8 ] The Navajo language is a complex language system that relies on relatively subtle phonetics, including distinct tones and nasalization. The script likewise exhibits complexities representing the language, which presents challenges for people trying to acquire literacy.

Spanish is an alphabet with shallow orthography; there is clear one-to-one correspondence between phonemes and graphemes.

[ 9 ] Another is the Hawaiian alphabet , which only includes eight vowel letters and five consonant letters, for a total of thirteen. This allows literacy to be acquired quickly compared to deeper orthographies.

[ 10 ] Developing literacy [ edit ] According to studies, children learn to read and write more quickly in shallow orthographies, such as Spanish, compared to deeper orthographies, like English. Orthographic mapping is the process of associating phonemes with (graphemes. By establishing these strong connections, children can easily decode unfamiliar words with what they already know. Orthographic mapping also helps with vocabulary development and reading fluency. Although shallow orthography is easier to grasp, researchers have argued that deeper orthographies make it challenging for individuals with dyslexia to learn.

[ 11 ] Defective orthographies [ edit ] An orthography based on a correspondence to phonemes may sometimes lack characters to represent all the phonemic distinctions in the language. This is called a defective orthography . An example in English is the lack of any indication of stress .

[ citation needed ] Another is the digraph | th | , which represents two different phonemes (as in then and thin ) and replaced the old letters | ð | and | þ | . A more systematic example is that of abjads like the Arabic and Hebrew alphabets, in which the short vowels are normally left unwritten and must be inferred by the reader.

When an alphabet is borrowed from its original language for use with a new language—as has been done with the Latin alphabet for many languages, or Japanese katakana for non-Japanese words—it often proves defective in representing the new language's phonemes. Sometimes this problem is addressed by the use of such devices as digraphs (such as | sh | and | ch | in English, where pairs of letters represent single sounds), diacritics (like the caron on the letters | š | and | č | , which represent those same sounds in Czech ), or the addition of completely new symbols (as some languages have introduced the letter | w | to the Latin alphabet) or of symbols from another alphabet, such as the rune | þ | in Icelandic.

After the classical period, Greek developed a lowercase letter system with diacritics to enable foreigners to learn pronunciation and grammatical features. As pronunciation of letters changed over time, the diacritics were reduced to representing the stressed syllable. In Modern Greek typesetting, this system has been simplified to have only a single accent to indicate which syllable is stressed.

[ 12 ] See also [ edit ] Cursive Keyboard layout Lateral masking List of language disorders Palaeography Penmanship Prescription and description References [ edit ] ^ Ammon, Ulrich (2004). "Standard Variety".

Sociolinguistics . pp.

273– 283.

doi : 10.1515/9783110141894.1.2.273 .

ISBN 978-3-11-014189-4 .

^ Coulmas & Guerini (2012) , pp. 454ff.

^ "Orthography" , Online Etymology Dictionary ^ Seidenberg, Mark S. (1992). "Beyond Orthographic Depth in Reading: Equitable Division of Labor".

Orthography, Phonology, Morphology, and Meaning . Advances in Psychology. Vol. 94. pp.

85– 118.

doi : 10.1016/S0166-4115(08)62790-9 .

ISBN 978-0-444-89140-2 .

^ Donohue, Mark (2007), "Lexicography for Your Friends", in Siegel, Jeff; Lynch, John; Eades, Diana (eds.), Language Description, History and Development: Linguistic indulgence in memory of Terry Crowley , Creole Language Library, vol. 30, Amsterdam: John Benjamins, p. 396, doi : 10.1075/cll.30 , ISBN 978-90-272-5252-4 ^ Coulmas (1996) , p. 379.

^ Koda, Keiko; Zehler, Annette M., eds. (2008).

Learning to Read Across Languages . p. 17.

doi : 10.4324/9780203935668 .

ISBN 978-1-135-60034-1 .

^ McDonough, Joyce (2003).

The Navajo Sound System . Studies in Natural Language and Linguistic Theory. Vol. 55. Dordrecht: Springer Netherlands.

doi : 10.1007/978-94-010-0207-3 .

ISBN 978-1-4020-1351-5 .

^ Carrillo, María Soledad; Alegría, Jesús; Marín, Javier (July 2013). "On the acquisition of some basic word spelling mechanisms in a deep (French) and a shallow (Spanish) system".

Reading and Writing .

26 (6): 799– 819.

doi : 10.1007/s11145-012-9391-6 .

ISSN 0922-4777 .

^ Elbert, Samuel H.; Pukui, Mary Kawena (31 December 1979).

Hawaiian Grammar . University of Hawaii Press.

ISBN 978-0-8248-4079-2 .

^ Carioti, Desiré; Masia, Marta Franca; Travellini, Simona; Berlingeri, Manuela (1 October 2021).

"Orthographic depth and developmental dyslexia: a meta-analytic study" .

Annals of Dyslexia .

71 (3): 399– 438.

doi : 10.1007/s11881-021-00226-0 .

ISSN 1934-7243 .

PMC 8458191 .

PMID 33982221 .

^ Bulley, Michael (December 2011). "Spelling reform – a lesson from the Greeks: Learning from the Greeks about English spellings".

English Today .

27 (4): 71– 72.

doi : 10.1017/S0266078411000575 .

Works cited [ edit ] Borgwaldt, Susanne R.; Joyce, Terry (2013), Typology of Writing Systems , Amsterdam: John Benjamins, ISBN 978-90-272-0270-3 Condorelli, Marco; Rutkowska, Hanna, eds. (2023), The Cambridge Handbook of Historical Orthography , Cambridge handbooks in language and linguistics, Cambridge University Press, ISBN 978-1-108-48731-3 Coulmas, Florian (2002) [1996], The Blackwell Encyclopedia of Writing Systems (Repr. ed.), Malden, MA: Blackwell, ISBN 978-0-631-19446-0 Sebba, Mark (2007), Spelling and society: the culture and politics of orthography around the world , Cambridge University Press, ISBN 978-0-521-84845-9 Spolsky, Bernard, ed. (2012), "Literacy and Writing Reform", The Cambridge Handbook of Language Policy , Cambridge handbooks in language and linguistics, Cambridge University Press, doi : 10.1017/cbo9780511979026 , ISBN 978-0-511-97902-6 Coulmas, Florian; Guerini, Federica. "Literacy and Writing Reform". In Spolsky (2012) , pp. 437–460.

Further reading [ edit ] Cahill, Michael; Rice, Keren (2014), Developing Orthographies for Unwritten Languages , Dallas: SIL International, ISBN 978-1-55671-347-7 Smalley, William A. (1964), Orthography Studies: Articles on New Writing Systems , Helps for translators, London: United Bible Societies, OCLC 5522014 – via Google Books Venezky, Richard L.; Trabasso, Tom (2005), From orthography to pedagogy: essays in honor of Richard L. Venezky , Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum, ISBN 0-8058-5089-9 External links [ edit ] Look up orthography in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic Latvia Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Orthography&oldid=1300228848 " Categories : Orthography Applied linguistics Language Linguistics terminology Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use Oxford spelling from November 2024 Use dmy dates from November 2024 Articles needing additional references from July 2016 All articles needing additional references Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Pages with plain IPA All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from September 2022 Articles with unsourced statements from May 2024 This page was last edited on 13 July 2025, at 02:07 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Orthography 99 languages Add topic

