Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Historical comparisons 2 West Bank and Gaza Strip Toggle West Bank and Gaza Strip subsection 2.1 Hafrada–apartheid comparison 2.2 Under Israeli military occupation 2.3 Under Palestinian Authority 2.4 West Bank barrier 2.5 Land 2.6 Criminal law 2.7 Access to water 2.8 Travel and movement 3 Israel proper Toggle Israel proper subsection 3.1 Land 3.2 Community settlements legislation 3.3 Israeli citizenship law 3.4 Education 3.5 Population Registry Law 3.6 "Jewish State" bill 4 The legal standard Toggle The legal standard subsection 4.1 CERD 5 Opinions on applicability Toggle Opinions on applicability subsection 5.1 UN related reports 5.1.1 UN special rapporteur reports 5.1.2 2017 ESCWA Report 5.1.3 2022 special committee on Israeli practices 5.2 Reports by NGOs 5.2.1 2009 legal study of the South African Human Sciences Research Council 5.2.2 2020 Yesh Din 5.2.3 2021 B'Tselem report 5.2.4 2021 FIDH statement 5.2.5 2021 Human Rights Watch report 5.2.6 2022 Amnesty report 5.2.7 2022 jurists statement 5.2.8 2022 ICC submission by Dawn 5.3 Overview of reports 5.4 Additional views 5.4.1 Scholarly views 5.4.2 Palestinian views 5.4.3 Israeli views 5.4.4 American views 5.4.5 European views 5.4.6 African views 5.4.7 Other countries 5.4.8 Faith-based groups 5.4.9 Other views 6 Comments from South Africans 7 See also 8 Notes 9 References 10 Further reading 11 External links Toggle the table of contents Israeli apartheid 19 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Català Čeština Deitsch Español فارسی Français Bahasa Indonesia עברית മലയാളം Nederlands 日本語 Português Русский Shqip Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Israeli system of racial segregation and discrimination A Palestinian child sitting on a roadblock at Al-Shuhada Street within the Old City of Hebron in the Israeli-occupied West Bank . Palestinians have given the street the moniker "Apartheid Street" because it is closed to Palestinian traffic and open only to Israeli settlers and tourists.

[ 1 ] Part of a series on Discrimination Forms Institutional Reverse Structural Statistical Systemic Taste-based Attributes Age Caste Class Disability Economic Genetic Hair texture Height Language Dialect Looks Mental disorder Nationality or citizenship Race / Ethnicity Reverse Skin color Scientific racism Rank Sex Reverse Sexual orientation Species Size Viewpoint Social Arophobia Anti-albinism Acephobia Adultism Anti-altruistic Anti-autism Anti-homelessness Anti-drug addicts Anti-intellectualism Anti-intersex Anti-left handedness Anti-Masonry Aporophobia Audism Biphobia Clannism Elitism Endophobia Ephebiphobia Health mental in poverty Fatphobia Gayphobia Gerontophobia Heterosexism HIV/AIDS stigma Hypergamy Homophobia In-group Leprosy stigma Lesbophobia Against men Misandry Misogyny Misogynoir Nepotism Outgroup Perpetual foreigner Pregnancy Sectarianism Supremacism Aryanism Black Hutu Chauvinism Han Female Human Nordicism Male Ultranationalism White Transphobia Non-binary Transmisogyny Trans men Vegaphobia Xenophilia Xenophobia Religious Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Race or ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people Manifestations Algorithmic bias Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Blood libel Bullying Cancel culture Capital punishment for homosexuality Carnism Compulsory sterilization Corrective rape Counter-jihad Cultural genocide Defamation Democide Dog whistle Domicide Economic Education Academic In curricula Sexism Eliminationism Eliminationist antisemitism Employment Enemy of the people Environmental racism Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnocide Excellence Gender-based dress codes Cosmetics policy High heel policy Forced conversion Freak show Gay bashing Gendercide Transgender genocide Genital modification and mutilation Circumcision Female genital mutilation Intersex medical interventions Genocide examples Glass ceiling Hate crime Disability hate crime Violence against LGBTQ people Violence against transgender people Hate group Hate speech Institutional discrimination Institutional racism Homeless dumping Housing Hypergamy Age disparity Indian rolling International inequality Kill Haole Day Lavender scare LGBTQ+ grooming conspiracy theory Linguicide Lynching Media bias Minority stress Moral exclusion Mortgage Native American mascots Braves Blackhawks Chiefs Occupational Apartheid Inequality Injustice Segregation Opposition to immigration Paper genocide Persecution Pogrom Political Political repression Ideological repression Purge Racialization Religious persecution Religious terrorism Religious violence Religious war Scapegoating Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Sentencing disparity Sexual harassment Sex-selective abortion Slut-shaming Structural abuse Structural discrimination Structural evil Structural inequality Structural violence Untermensch Trans bashing Victimisation Violence against women White flight White genocide conspiracy theory Wife selling Witch hunt Policies Algorithmic wage discrimination Age of candidacy Apartheid in South Africa in Israel Blood purity Blood quantum Breadwinner model Conscription and sexism Disabilities Catholic Jewish Disparate impact Fagging Gender pay gap Gender roles Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Gerontocracy Gerrymandering Ghetto benches Internment Jewish quota Opposition to LGBTQ rights MSM blood donation restrictions No kid zone Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota) One-drop rule Racial quota Racial steering Redlining Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting) Segregation age racial Jim Crow laws Nuremberg Laws Segregation academy religious sexual in Islam Social exclusion Sodomy law State atheism State religion Ugly law Voter suppression White Australia policy Countermeasures Affirmative action Anti-discrimination law Anti-racism Audit study Autism rights movement Gender-blind Blind audition Constitutional colorblindness Cross-sex friendship Cultural assimilation Cultural pluralism Diversity, equity, and inclusion Diversity training Empowerment Fat acceptance movement Feminism Fighting Discrimination Golden Rule Hate speech laws by country Human rights Intersex human rights Korenizatsiia LGBTQ rights Mad pride Music in the movement against apartheid Racial integration Reappropriation Rock Against Sexism Self-determination Social integration Stop Murder Music Toleration Transgender rights movement Universal suffrage Women's rights Related topics Allophilia Amatonormativity Bias Capital punishment for homosexuality Cisnormativity Civil liberties Criminalization of homosexuality Dehumanization Diseases of despair Ethnic penalty Figleaf Heteronormativity Historical eugenics Internalized oppression Intersectionality Masculism Oikophobia Oppression Police brutality Polyculturalism Power distance Prejudice Prisoner abuse Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racism by country Racial color blindness Religious intolerance Second-generation gender bias Snobbery Social equity Social exclusion Social model of disability Social privilege Christian male white Social stigma Speciesism Stereotype The talk v t e Part of a series on Racial segregation Jim Crow sign, anti-Hispanic Overview Anti-miscegenation laws Crime of apartheid Allegations Caste Xenophobia Environmental / Institutional racism Ethnic nationalism Forced displacement Housing discrimination Exclusionary zoning Redlining Historical examples Australia Canada Pass system Separate schools Indian hospitals Fascist Italy French colonial empire Code Noir Indigénat Greek–Turkish population exchange Jewish ghettos in Europe Pale of Settlement Partition of India Portugal & Spain Nazi Germany Nuremberg Laws Rhodesia South Africa Bantustans Pass laws United Kingdom United States Black Codes Jim Crow laws Separate but equal Contemporary examples Anti-Romanyism Italy Romania Slovenia Roma walls Bosnia–Herzegovina Schools Cyprus Gulf states Saudi Arabia UAE South Asian labourers India Uthapuram Muslims Israel Palestinian enclaves Hafrada West Bank settlement law / barriers Malaysia Mauritania Morocco Myanmar Northern Ireland Sudan United States Academies Housing Schools Residential Xinjiang Yemen Related Citizenship Statelessness Forced assimilation Gender apartheid Income inequality One-drop rule Race Ethnicity Racial discrimination Category Commons v t e Israeli apartheid is a system of institutionalized segregation and discrimination in the Israeli-occupied Palestinian territories and to a lesser extent in Israel proper.

[ a ] This system is characterized by near-total physical separation between the Palestinian and the Israeli settler population of the West Bank , as well as the judicial separation that governs both communities, which discriminates against the Palestinians in a wide range of ways. Israel also discriminates against Palestinian refugees in the diaspora and against its own Palestinian citizens .

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] Since the 1948 Palestine war , Israel has been denying Palestinian refugees who were expelled or fled from what became its territory the right of return and right to their lost properties . Israel has been occupying the West Bank and the Gaza Strip since the 1967 Six-Day War , which is now the longest military occupation in modern history, and in contravention of international law has been constructing large settlements there that separate Palestinian communities from one another and prevent the establishment of a Palestinian state . The settlements are mostly encircled by the Israeli West Bank barrier , which intentionally separates the Israeli and Palestinian populations, a policy called Hafrada . Jewish Israeli settlers are subject to Israeli civil law, but the Palestinian population is subject to military law. Settlers also have access to separate roads and exploit the region's natural resources at its Palestinian inhabitants' expense.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] Academic comparisons between Israel–Palestine and South African apartheid were prevalent by the mid-1990s.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] Since the definition of apartheid as a crime in the 2002 Rome Statute , attention has shifted to the question of international law.

[ 11 ] In December 2019, the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination [ 12 ] announced it was reviewing the Palestinian complaint that Israel's policies in the West Bank amount to apartheid.

[ 13 ] Since then, several Israeli, Palestinian, and international human rights organizations have characterized the situation as apartheid, including Yesh Din , B'Tselem , [ 14 ] [ 15 ] [ 16 ] Human Rights Watch , [ 16 ] [ 17 ] and Amnesty International . This view has been supported by United Nations investigators, [ 18 ] the African National Congress (ANC), [ 19 ] human rights groups, [ 20 ] [ 21 ] and many prominent Israeli political and cultural figures.

[ 22 ] [ 23 ] [ 24 ] The International Court of Justice in its 2024 advisory opinion found that Israel's occupation of the Palestinian territories constitutes systemic discrimination and is in breach of Article 3 of the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination , which prohibits racial segregation and apartheid.

[ 25 ] [ 26 ] The ruling did not specify whether it was referring to racial segregation , apartheid, or both.

[ 27 ] [ 28 ] [ 29 ] Elements of Israeli apartheid include the Law of Return , the 2003 Citizenship and Entry into Israel Law , the 2018 Nation-State Law , and many laws regarding security, freedom of movement , land and planning, citizenship , political representation in the Knesset (legislature), education , and culture . Israel says its policies are driven by security considerations, [ 30 ] [ 31 ] [ 32 ] [ 33 ] and that the accusation of apartheid is factually and morally inaccurate and intended to delegitimize Israel.

[ 34 ] [ 32 ] [ 35 ] [ 36 ] It also often calls the charge antisemitic, which critics have called weaponization of antisemitism .

[ 37 ] [ 38 ] [ 39 ] [ 40 ] [ 41 ] Historical comparisons In 1961, the South African prime minister and architect of South Africa's apartheid policies, Hendrik Verwoerd , dismissed an Israeli vote against South African apartheid at the United Nations, saying, "Israel is not consistent in its new anti-apartheid attitude ... they took Israel away from the Arabs after the Arabs lived there for a thousand years. In that, I agree with them. Israel, like South Africa, is an apartheid state." [ 42 ] His successor John Vorster held the same view.

[ 43 ] Since then, a number of sources have used the apartheid analogy. In the early 1970s, Arabic language magazines of the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) and Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine (PFLP) compared the Israeli proposals for Palestinian autonomy to the Bantustan strategy of South Africa.

[ 42 ] In 1970, an anti-apartheid activist in the UK's Liberal Party , Louis Eaks, referred to the situation in Israel as "apartheid" and was threatened with expulsion as a result.

[ 44 ] In 1979, the Palestinian sociologist Elia Zureik said that while not de jure an apartheid state, Israeli society was characterized by a latent form of apartheid.

[ 45 ] The concept emerged with some frequency in both academic and activist writings in the 1980s–90s, [ 46 ] when Uri Davis , Meron Benvenisti , Richard Locke, and Anthony Stewart used the term apartheid to describe Israel's treatment of the Palestinians.

In the 1990s, the term "Israeli apartheid" gained prominence after Israel, as a result of the Oslo Accords , granted the Palestinians limited self-government in the form of the Palestinian Authority and established a system of permits and checkpoints in the Palestinian Territories . The apartheid analogy gained additional traction after Israel constructed the West Bank Barrier .

[ 42 ] In 2001, an NGO Forum ran separately from the World Conference against Racism in the nearby Kingsmead Stadium in Durban, from 28 August to 1 September. It consisted of 3,000 NGOs and was attended by 8,000 representatives. The declaration the NGO Forum adopted was not an official document of the conference.

[ 47 ] [ 48 ] The final NGO document called "for the reinstitution of the UN resolution equating Zionism with racism " and "the complete and total isolation of Israel as an apartheid state".

[ 49 ] Former US President Jimmy Carter wrote the 2006 book Palestine: Peace Not Apartheid . His use of the term "apartheid" was calibrated to avoid specific accusations of racism against the government of Israel, and carefully limited to the situation in Gaza and the West Bank. In a letter to the Board of Rabbis of Greater Phoenix, Carter made clear that he was not discussing the circumstances within Israel but exclusively within Gaza and the West Bank.

[ 50 ] In a 2007 interview, he said: "Apartheid is a word that is an accurate description of what has been going on in the West Bank, and it's based on the desire or avarice of a minority of Israelis for Palestinian land. It's not based on racism...This is a word that's a very accurate description of the forced separation within the West Bank of Israelis from Palestinians and the total domination and oppression of Palestinians by the dominant Israeli military." [ 51 ] By 2013, the analogy between the West Bank and Bantustans of apartheid-era South Africa was widely drawn in international circles.

[ 52 ] In the US, where the notion had previously been taboo, Israel's rule over the occupied territories was increasingly compared to apartheid.

[ 53 ] [ 54 ] West Bank and Gaza Strip Hafrada–apartheid comparison Main article: Hafrada Hafrada ( Hebrew : הפרדה literally 'separation') is the Israeli government's official term for the policy of separating the Palestinian population in Palestinian territories from the Israeli population.

[ 55 ] [ 56 ] [ 57 ] The term refers to the general policy of separation the Israeli government has adopted and implemented over the Palestinians in the West Bank and Gaza Strip .

[ 58 ] [ 59 ] [ 60 ] [ 61 ] Scholars and commentators have compared the word to apartheid , [ 59 ] [ 62 ] [ 63 ] [ 64 ] with some claiming the two words are equivalent.

[ 65 ] [ 7 ] The Israeli West Bank barrier ( Hebrew : גדר ההפרדה Geder Ha'hafrada , "separation fence"), [ 58 ] the associated controls on Palestinians' movements posed by West Bank Closures , [ 58 ] [ 60 ] [ 66 ] and Israel's unilateral disengagement from Gaza have been cited as examples of hafrada .

[ 58 ] [ 60 ] [ 66 ] [ 67 ] Aaron Klieman has distinguished between partition plans based on hafrada , which he translates as "detachment", and hipardut , translated as "disengagement".

[ 68 ] Since its first public introductions, the concept-turned-policy or paradigm of hafrada has dominated Israeli political and cultural discourse.

[ 55 ] [ 58 ] [ 69 ] In 2009, Israeli historian Benny Morris said those who equate Israeli efforts to separate the two populations with apartheid are effectively trying to undermine the legitimacy of any peace agreement based on a two-state solution .

[ 70 ] In 2023, former Human Rights Watch director Kenneth Roth said his organization had long refrained from interpreting the reality on the ground in terms of apartheid as long as there was a chance the peace process would succeed. Since, in his view, the process is going nowhere and the Israeli government is undermining a two-state solution, Roth has concluded Israel's policies in the West Bank have "all the elements of the oppressive discrimination that constitute apartheid".

[ 71 ] Former Foreign Policy editor David Rothkopf has called Israel an apartheid state.

[ 71 ] Under Israeli military occupation Leila Farsakh , associate professor of political science at University of Massachusetts Boston , has said that after 1977, "the military government in the West Bank and Gaza Strip (WBGS) expropriated and enclosed Palestinian land and allowed the transfer of Israeli settlers to the occupied territories." She notes that settlers continued to be governed by Israeli laws, and that a different system of military law was enacted "to regulate the civilian, economic and legal affairs of Palestinian inhabitants". She says, "[m]any view these Israeli policies of territorial integration and societal separation as apartheid, even if they were never given such a name." [ 72 ] Under Palestinian Authority Arabs living in the West Bank and Gaza Strip , areas occupied by Israel in the 1967 Six-Day War and deemed to be occupied territory under international law , are under the civil control of the Palestinian Authority and are not Israeli citizens. In some areas of the West Bank, they are under Israeli security control.

[ citation needed ] In 2007, in advance of a report from the United Nations Human Rights Council, Special Rapporteur John Dugard said that "Israel's laws and practices in the OPT [occupied Palestinian territories] certainly resemble aspects of apartheid." Dugard asked: "Can it seriously be denied that the purpose [...] is to establish and maintain domination by one racial group (Jews) over another racial group (Palestinians) and systematically oppressing them?" [ 73 ] [ 74 ] In October 2010, Richard A. Falk reported to the General Assembly Third Committee that "the nature of the occupation as of 2010 substantiates earlier allegations of colonialism and apartheid in evidence and law to a greater extent than was the case even three years ago." Falk called it a "cumulative process" and said "the longer it continues...the more serious is the abridgment of fundamental Palestinian rights." [ 75 ] Israeli Defense Minister and former prime minister Ehud Barak said in 2010: "As long as in this territory west of the Jordan River there is only one political entity called Israel it is going to be either non-Jewish, or non-democratic. If this bloc of millions of Palestinians cannot vote, that will be an apartheid state." [ 23 ] [ 76 ] In November 2014, former Attorney General of Israel Michael Ben-Yair urged the European Economic Union to endorse the creation of a Palestinian state, arguing that Israel had imposed an apartheid regime on the West Bank.

[ 77 ] In 2015, Meir Dagan , a former head of the Mossad , argued that continuing Prime Minister Netanyahu's policies would result in an Israel that is either a binational state or an apartheid state.

[ 78 ] West Bank barrier Main article: West Bank barrier The barrier, called an "apartheid wall" by pro-Palestinian groups, [ 79 ] "a security fence" by Israel [ 80 ] In 2003, a year after Operation Defensive Shield , the Israeli government announced a project of "fences and other physical obstacles" to keep Palestinians from crossing into Israel.

[ 81 ] Several figures, including Mohammad Sarwar , John Pilger , and Mustafa Barghouti , have called the resultant West Bank barrier an "apartheid wall".

[ 82 ] [ 83 ] [ 84 ] [ 85 ] Supporters of the barrier consider it largely responsible for reducing incidents of terrorism by 90% from 2002 to 2005.

[ 86 ] [ 87 ] Some Israelis have compared the separation plan to the South African apartheid regime. Political scientist Meron Benvenisti wrote that Israel's disengagement from Gaza created a bantustan model for Gaza. According to Benvenisti, Ariel Sharon 's intention to disengage from Gaza only after construction of the fence was completed, "along a route that will include all settlement blocs (in keeping with Binyamin Netanyahu ' s demand), underscores the continuity of the bantustan concept. The fence creates three bantustans on the West Bank: Jenin-Nablus, Bethlehem-Hebron, and Ramallah. He called this "the real link between the Gaza and West Bank plans".

[ 88 ] In 2004, the International Court of Justice ruled in an advisory opinion that the wall is illegal where it extends beyond the 1967 Green Line into the West Bank . Israel disagreed with the ruling, but its supreme court subsequently ordered the barrier to be moved in sections where its route was seen to cause more hardship to Palestinians than security concerns could justify.

[ 89 ] The Israeli Court ruled that the barrier is defensive and accepted the government's position that the route is based on security considerations.

[ 90 ] Land Henry Siegman , a former national director of the American Jewish Congress , has said that the network of settlements in the West Bank has created an "irreversible colonial project" aimed to foreclose the possibility of a viable Palestinian state . According to Siegman, in accomplishing this Israel has "crossed the threshold from 'the only democracy in the Middle East' to the only apartheid regime in the Western world". He argues that denying Palestinians both self-determination and Israeli citizenship amounts to a "double disenfranchisement", which when based on ethnicity amounts to racism, and that reserving democracy for privileged citizens and keeping others "behind checkpoints and barbed wire fences" is the opposite of democracy.

[ 91 ] John Dugard has compared Israel's confiscation of Palestinian farms and land, and destruction of Palestinian homes, to similar policies of apartheid-era South Africa.

[ 92 ] A major 2002 study of Israeli settlement practices by the Israeli human rights organization B'Tselem concluded: "Israel has created in the Occupied Territories a regime of separation based on discrimination, applying two separate systems of law in the same area and basing the rights of individuals on their nationality. This regime is the only one of its kind in the world, and is reminiscent of distasteful regimes from the past, such as the apartheid regime in South Africa .

[ 93 ] Criminal law Main article: Israeli law in the West Bank settlements In Illar, Tulkarm , occupation soldiers storm a taxi office to tear down the Palestinian flag .

In 2007, the UN Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination reported that Palestinians and Israeli settlers in the occupied territories are subject to different criminal laws, leading to longer detention and harsher punishments for Palestinians than Israelis for the same offenses.

[ 94 ] Amnesty International has reported that in the West Bank, Israeli settlers and soldiers who engage in abuses against Palestinians, including unlawful killings, enjoy "impunity" from punishment and are rarely prosecuted, but Palestinians detained by Israeli security forces may be imprisoned for prolonged periods of time, and reports of their torture and other ill-treatment are not credibly investigated.

[ 95 ] [ 96 ] [ 97 ] Dugard has compared Israeli imprisonment of Palestinians to policies of apartheid-era South Africa, saying, "Apartheid's security police practiced torture on a large scale. So do the Israeli security forces. There were many political prisoners on Robben Island but there are more Palestinian political prisoners in Israeli jails." [ 92 ] Access to water Main article: Water supply and sanitation in the State of Palestine The World Bank found in 2009 that Israeli settlements in the West Bank (which amount to 15% of its population) are given access to over 80% of its freshwater resources, despite the fact that the Oslo accords call for "joint" management of such resources. This has created, according to the Bank, "real water shortages" for the Palestinians.

[ 98 ] In January 2012, the Foreign Affairs Committee of the French parliament published a report calling Israel's water policies in the West Bank "a weapon serving the new apartheid". The report noted that the 450,000 Israeli settlers used more water than the 2.3 million Palestinians, "in contravention of international law", that Palestinians are not allowed to use the underground aquifers, and that Israel was deliberately destroying wells, reservoirs and water purification plants. Israeli Foreign Ministry spokesman Yigal Palmor said the report was "loaded with the language of vicious propaganda, far removed from any professional criticism with which one could argue intelligently".

[ 99 ] A Begin–Sadat Center for Strategic Studies report concludes that Israel has fulfilled the water agreements it has made with the Palestinians, and the author said the situation is "just the opposite of apartheid" as Israel has provided water infrastructure to more than 700 Palestinian villages.

[ 100 ] [ 101 ] In 2008, the Association for Civil Rights in Israel concluded that a segregated road network in the West Bank, expansion of Jewish settlements, restriction of the growth of Palestinian towns, and discriminatory granting of services, budgets, and access to natural resources are "a blatant violation of the principle of equality and in many ways reminiscent of the Apartheid regime in South Africa". The group reversed its previous reluctance to make a comparison to South Africa because "things are getting worse rather than better", according to spokeswoman Melanie Takefman.

[ 102 ] Travel and movement See also: Palestinian freedom of movement , Israeli permit regime in the West Bank , and Israeli permit regime in the Gaza Strip Huwwara Checkpoint , one of many Israeli checkpoints and closures (dismantled 2011 [ 103 ] ) that restricted the movement of Palestinians in the occupied West Bank and have been compared to the apartheid pass laws [ 104 ] [ 105 ] Palestinians living in non- annexed portions of the West Bank do not have Israeli citizenship or voting rights in Israel but are subject to movement restrictions by the Israeli government. Israel has created roads and checkpoints in the West Bank with the stated purpose of preventing the uninhibited movement of suicide bombers and militants in the region. The human rights NGO B'Tselem has indicated that such policies have isolated some Palestinian communities and that Israel's road regime "based on the principle of separation through discrimination, bears striking similarities to the racist apartheid regime that existed in South Africa until 1994".

[ 106 ] [ 107 ] The International Court of Justice stated that the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights guarantees the fundamental rights of the Palestinian population of the occupied territories, and that Israel cannot deny them on the grounds of security.

[ 108 ] Marwan Bishara , a teacher of international relations at the American University of Paris , has said that the restrictions on the movement of goods between Israel and the West Bank are "a de facto apartheid system".

[ 109 ] Michael Oren argues that none of this even remotely resembles apartheid, since "the vast majority of settlers and Palestinians choose to live apart because of cultural and historical differences, not segregation, though thousands of them do work side by side. The separate roads were created in response to terrorist attacks—not to segregate Palestinians but to save Jewish lives. And Israeli roads are used by Israeli Jews and Arabs alike." [ 110 ] A permit and closure system was introduced in 1990.

Leila Farsakh maintains that this system imposes "on Palestinians similar conditions to those faced by blacks under the pass laws . Like the pass laws, the permit system controlled population movement according to the settlers' unilaterally defined considerations." In response to the Al-Aqsa Intifada , Israel modified the permit system and fragmented the WBGS [West Bank and Gaza Strip] territorially. "In April 2002 Israel declared that the WBGS would be cut into eight main areas, outside which Palestinians could not live without a permit." [ 72 ] John Dugard has said these laws "resemble, but in severity go far beyond, apartheid's pass system".

[ 105 ] Jamal Zahalka , an Israeli-Arab member of the Knesset , has also said that this permit system is a feature of apartheid.

[ 111 ] Azmi Bishara , a former Knesset member, argued that the Palestinian situation had been caused by "colonialist apartheid".

[ 112 ] Palestinian children walk to their kindergarten, separated from the paved path reserved for Israeli settlers.

B'Tselem wrote in 2004, "Palestinians are barred from or have restricted access to 450 miles [720 km] of West Bank roads", and has said this system has "clear similarities" to South Africa's apartheid regime.

[ 113 ] In October 2005, the Israel Defense Forces stopped Palestinians from driving on Highway 60 as part of a plan for a separate road network for Palestinians and Israelis in the West Bank. The road had been sealed after the fatal shooting of three settlers near Bethlehem. As of 2005, no private Palestinian cars were permitted on the road although public transport was still allowed.

In 2011, Major General Nitzan Alon abolished separate public transportation systems on the West Bank, permitting Palestinians to ride alongside Israelis. Settlers have protested the measure. The IDF order was reportedly overturned by Moshe Ya'alon who, responding to pressure from settler groups, issued a directive that would deny Palestinians passage on buses running from Israel to the West Bank. In 2014, the decision was said to be made on security grounds, though according to Haaretz , military officials say that Palestinian use of such transport poses no security threat. Justice Minister Tzipi Livni asked Israeli Attorney General Yehuda Weinstein to examine the ban's legality and Weinstein immediately demanded that Ya'alon provide an explanation for his decision.

[ 114 ] Israeli security sources were quoted saying the decision had nothing to do with public buses and that the goal was to supervise entrance into and exit out of Israeli territory, thereby decreasing the chance of terrorist attacks inside Israel. Critics on the left called the policy tantamount to apartheid, and something that would render Israel a pariah state.

[ 115 ] On 29 December 2009, Israel's High Court of Justice accepted the Association for Civil Rights in Israel 's petition against an IDF order barring Palestinians from driving on Highway 443 . The ruling was to come into effect five months after being issued, allowing Palestinians to use the road.

[ 116 ] According to plans the IDF laid out to implement the court's ruling, Palestinian use of the road was to remain limited.

[ 117 ] In March 2013, the Israeli Afikim bus company announced that, as of 4 March 2013, it would operate separate bus lines for Jews and Arabs in the occupied territories.

[ 118 ] [ 119 ] [ 120 ] Israel proper Heribert Adam and Kogila Moodley wrote in 2006 that Israeli Palestinians are "restricted to second-class citizen status when another ethnic group monopolizes state power" because of legal prohibitions on access to land, as well as the unequal allocation of civil service positions and per capita expenditure on educations between "dominant and minority citizens".

[ 121 ] In 2008, 53 Stanford University faculty members signed a letter saying that "the State of Israel has nothing in common with apartheid" within its national territory. They argued that Israel is a liberal democracy in which Arab citizens enjoy civil, religious, social, and political equality. They said that likening Israel to apartheid South Africa was a "smear" and part of a campaign of "malicious propaganda".

[ 122 ] South African Judge Richard Goldstone , writing in The New York Times in October 2011, said that while there exists a degree of separation between Israeli Jews and Arabs, "in Israel, there is no apartheid. Nothing there comes close to the definition of apartheid under the 1998 Rome Statute". He wrote that the situation in the West Bank "is more complex. But here too there is no intent to maintain 'an institutionalized regime of systematic oppression and domination by one racial group'. This is a critical distinction, even if Israel acts oppressively toward Palestinians there." [ 123 ] [ 124 ] Goldstone also wrote, "the charge that Israel is an apartheid state is a false and malicious one that precludes, rather than promotes, peace and harmony." [ 125 ] Amnesty International condemned an Israeli court decision to forcibly evict 500 Palestinian Bedouins from Ras Jrabah in the Negev , saying the judgment showed the "deep discrimination that Palestinian citizens of Israel face under apartheid".

[ 126 ] [ 127 ] Land There has been a steady extension of Israeli Arab rights to lease or purchase land formerly restricted to Jewish applicants, such as that owned by the Jewish National Fund or the Jewish Agency. These groups, established by Jews during the Ottoman period to aid in building up a viable Jewish community in Ottoman Palestine, purchased land, including arid desert and swamps, that could be reclaimed, leased to and farmed by Jews, thus encouraging Jewish immigration. After the establishment of the state of Israel, the Israel Lands Authority oversaw the administration of these properties. On 8 March 2000, the Israeli Supreme Court ruled that Israeli Arabs had an equal right to purchase long-term leases of such land, even inside previously solely Jewish communities and villages. The court ruled that the government may not allocate land based on religion or ethnicity or prevent Arab citizens from living wherever they choose: "The principle of equality prohibits the state from distinguishing between its citizens on the basis of religion or nationality", Chief Justice Aharon Barak wrote. "The principle also applies to the allocation of state land.... The Jewish character of the state does not permit Israel to discriminate between its citizens." [ 128 ] In a book chapter about the "apartheid Israel" accusation, the British philosopher Bernard Harrison wrote: "No doubt much more needs to be done. But we are discussing, remember, the question of whether Israel is, or is not, an 'apartheid state'. It is not merely hard, but impossible, to imagine the South African Supreme Court, under the premiership of Hendrik Verwoerd, say, delivering an analogous decision, because to have done so would have struck at the root of the entire system of apartheid, which was nothing if not a system for separating the races by separating the areas they were permitted to occupy." [ 129 ] In 2006, Chris McGreal of The Guardian said that as a result of the government's control over most of the land in Israel, the vast majority of land in Israel is not available to non-Jews.

[ 130 ] In 2007, in response to a 2004 petition filed by Adalah, the Legal Center for Arab Minority Rights in Israel, Attorney General Menachem Mazuz ruled that the policy was discriminatory. It has been ruled that the JNF must sell land to non-Jews, and will be compensated with other land for any such land to ensure that the overall amount of Jewish-owned land in Israel remains unchanged.

[ 131 ] Community settlements legislation A community in the Negev established by the JNF under its Blueprint Negev program In the early 2000s, several community settlements in the Negev and the Galilee were accused of barring Arab applicants from moving in. In 2010, the Knesset passed legislation that allowed admissions committees to function in smaller communities in the Galilee and the Negev, while explicitly forbidding committees to bar applicants on the basis of race, religion, sex, ethnicity, disability, personal status, age, parenthood, sexual orientation, country of origin, political views, or political affiliation.

[ 132 ] [ 133 ] Critics say the law gives the privately run admissions committees wide latitude over public lands, and believe it will worsen discrimination against the Arab minority.

[ 134 ] Israeli citizenship law The Knesset passed the Citizenship and Entry into Israel Law in 2003 as an emergency measure after Israel had suffered its worst ever spate of suicide bombings [ 135 ] and after several Palestinians who had been granted permanent residency on the grounds of family reunification took part in terrorist attacks in Israel.

[ 136 ] The law makes inhabitants of Iran, Afghanistan, Lebanon, Libya, Sudan, Syria, Iraq, Pakistan, Yemen, and areas governed by the Palestinian Authority ineligible for the automatic granting of Israeli citizenship and residency permits that is usually available through marriage to an Israeli citizen. This applies equally to a spouse of any Israeli citizen, whether Arab or Jewish, but in practice the law mostly affects Palestinian Israelis living in the towns bordering the West Bank.

[ 135 ] The law was intended to be temporary but has since been extended annually.

[ 137 ] [ 138 ] In May 2006, the Supreme Court of Israel upheld the law by a six to five vote. Chief Justice Aharon Barak sided with the minority, declaring: "This violation of rights is directed against Arab citizens of Israel. As a result, therefore, the law is a violation of the right of Arab citizens in Israel to equality." [ 139 ] [ 140 ] Zehava Gal-On, one of the founders of B'Tselem and a Knesset member with the Meretz-Yachad party, said that with the ruling "The Supreme Court could have taken a braver decision and not relegated us to the level of an apartheid state." [ 141 ] The law was also criticized by Amnesty International [ 142 ] and Human Rights Watch .

[ 143 ] In 2007, the restriction was expanded to citizens of Iran, Iraq, Syria and Lebanon.

[ 138 ] Adam and Moodley cite the marriage law as an example of how Arab Israelis "resemble in many ways 'Colored' and Indian South Africans".

[ 144 ] They write: "Both Israeli Palestinians and Colored and Indian South Africans are restricted to second-class citizen status when another ethnic group monopolizes state power, treats the minorities as intrinsically suspect, and legally prohibits their access to land or allocates civil service positions or per capita expenditure on education differentially between dominant and minority citizens." In June 2008, after the law was extended for another year, Amos Schocken , the publisher of the Israeli daily Haaretz , wrote in an opinion article that the law severely discriminates when comparing the rights of young Israeli Jewish citizens and young Israeli Arab citizens who marry, and that its existence in the law books turns Israel into an apartheid state.

[ 145 ] Education See also: Education in Israel Separate and unequal education systems were a central part of apartheid in South Africa, as part of a deliberate strategy designed to limit black children to a life of manual labor. Some disparities between Jews and Arabs in Israel's education system exist, although according to The Guardian they are not as significant and the intent not as malign.

[ 130 ] The Israeli Pupils' Rights Law of 2000 prohibits educators from establishing different rights, obligations and disciplinary standards for students of different religions. Educational institutions may not discriminate against religious minorities in admissions or expulsion decisions or when developing curricula or assigning students to classes.

[ 146 ] Unlike in apartheid South Africa, in Israel, education is free and compulsory for all citizens, from elementary school to the end of high school, and university access is based on uniform tuition for all citizens.

[ 147 ] Israel has Hebrew-language and Arabic-language schools, while some schools are bilingual. Most Arabs study in Arabic, while a small number of Arab parents choose to enroll their children in Hebrew schools. All of Israel's eight universities use Hebrew.

[ 130 ] In 1992 a government report concluded that nearly twice as much money was allocated to each Jewish child as to each Arab pupil.

[ 130 ] Likewise, a 2004 Human Rights Watch report identified significant disparities in education spending and found that discrimination against Arab children affects every aspect of the education system. Exam pass-rate for Arab pupils were about one-third lower than their Jewish compatriots'.

[ 130 ] Population Registry Law Chris McGreal , The Guardian's former chief Israel correspondent, compared Israel's Population Registry Law of 1965, which requires all residents of Israel to register their nationality, to South Africa's apartheid-era Population Registration Act , which categorized South Africans according racially to determine who could live on what land. According to McGreal, the Israeli identification cards determine where people are permitted to live, affect access to some government welfare programs, and affect how people are likely to be treated by civil servants and policemen.

[ 130 ] "Jewish State" bill The "Jewish State" bill , which passed in July 2018, states that "the right of national self-determination in the state of Israel is unique to the Jewish people".

[ 148 ] [ 149 ] [ 150 ] The bill would also allow the establishment of segregated towns in which residency is restricted by religion or nationality—which has been compared to the 1950 Group Areas Act, which established apartheid in South Africa.

[ 151 ] [ 152 ] Opposition members and other commentators have warned that the bill would establish or consolidate an apartheid regime; [ 152 ] [ 153 ] a Haaretz editorial called it "a cornerstone of apartheid".

[ 154 ] The Ministerial Committee for Legislation unanimously approved the bill in May 2017.

[ 154 ] The legal standard See also: Crime of apartheid The United Nations General Assembly adopted the International Convention on the Suppression and Punishment of the Crime of Apartheid (ICSPCA) in 1973. The ICSPCA defines apartheid as "inhuman acts committed for the purpose of establishing and maintaining domination by one racial group ... over another racial group ... and systematically oppressing them".

[ 155 ] The crime of apartheid was further defined in 2002 by Article 7 of the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court as encompassing inhumane acts such as torture, murder, forcible transfer, imprisonment, or persecution of an identifiable group on political, racial, national, ethnic, cultural, religious, or other grounds, "committed in the context of an institutionalized regime of systematic oppression and domination by one racial group over any racial group or groups and committed with the intention of maintaining that regime".

[ 156 ] At Israel's five-yearly Universal Periodic Review in January 2018, Human Rights Watch and other rights groups criticized Israel. Human Rights Watch's Geneva Director John Fisher said, "Israel's professed commitment to human rights during its UN review is belied by its unwillingness to address human rights violations in the context of the occupation, the rights of Palestinians, or illegal settlement activity." Ahead of the review, eight Palestinian human rights organizations submitted a joint 60-page report [ 157 ] detailing "Israel's creation of an institutionalised regime of systematic racial domination and oppression over the Palestinian people as a whole, which amounts to the crime of apartheid, in violation of Article 3 of the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination (ICERD)".

[ 158 ] CERD Main article: Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination On 23 April 2018, Palestine filed an inter-state complaint against Israel for breaches of its obligations under the ICERD.

[ 159 ] On 12 December 2019, the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination decided that it has jurisdiction over the complaint [ 12 ] and would begin a review of the Palestinian complaint that Israel's policies in the West Bank amount to apartheid.

[ 13 ] The committee also expressed concern that Israel had not adopted a legal definition of racial discrimination and issued a number of recommendations.

[ 160 ] [ 161 ] On 30 April 2021, the Committee rejected the exceptions raised about the admissibility of inter-state communication and requested the creation of an ad hoc Conciliation Commission with a view "to an amicable solution of the matter on the basis of States parties' compliance with the convention." [ 162 ] The ad hoc Conciliation Commission will issue a report, to be distributed among all state parties to ICERD.

[ 163 ] [ 164 ] On 17 February 2022, CERD set up the commission, composed of five human rights experts from the Committee: Verene Shepherd , Gün Kut (chair), Pansy Tlakula , Chinsung Chung and Michał Balcerzak.

[ 165 ] [ 166 ] On 4–5 May 2022, the Commission held its first in-person meeting and published its Rules of Procedure.

[ 167 ] [ 168 ] During the public hearings pertaining to the UNGA request for an ICJ advisory opinion on Israeli practices in the OPT, 24 states and three international organizations claimed that "Israel's policies and practices amount to a system of institutionalized racial discrimination and domination breaching the prohibition of apartheid under international law and/or amount to prohibited acts of racial discrimination." [ 169 ] In its advisory opinion of 19 July 2024 , the ICJ found that "the régime of comprehensive restrictions imposed by Israel on Palestinians in the Occupied Palestinian Territory "constitutes systemic discrimination based on, inter alia, race, religion or ethnic origin, in violation of Articles 2, paragraph 1, and 26 of the ICCPR, Article 2, paragraph 2, of the ICESCR, and Article 2 of CERD", "that Israel's legislation and measures impose and serve to maintain a near-complete separation in the West Bank and East Jerusalem between the settler and Palestinian communities", and "that Israel's legislation and measures constitute a breach of Article 3 of [I]CERD".

[ 170 ] [ 171 ] The opinion did not say whether the discrimination amounts to apartheid. In separate opinions, Judge Nolte said that the Court did not have sufficient information to make that determination, while Judges Salam and Tladi thought the evidence supported such a finding.

[ 26 ] The opinion suggests that the definitions of apartheid in the apartheid convention and the Rome statute could be used to "inform the interpretation of Article 3".

[ 29 ] On 22 August 2024, CERD published the final report of the ad hoc conciliation commission, [ 172 ] drafted before the advisory opinion, that determined Israeli practices to be racial segregation. The accompanying annex [ 173 ] reads, "The commission is of the view that those acts [ b ] may amount to a situation of apartheid if no action is taken by Israel to effectively address the issues raised". The question returns to CERD.

[ 174 ] [ 175 ] Opinions on applicability UN related reports UN special rapporteur reports In a 2007 report, UN Special Rapporteur on Palestine John Dugard said, "elements of the Israeli occupation constitute forms of colonialism and of apartheid, which are contrary to international law" and suggested that the International Court of Justice should consider the "legal consequences" of these.

[ 176 ] In 2014, United Nations Special Rapporteur Richard A. Falk used the term in his "Report of the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in the Palestinian territories occupied since 1967".

[ 177 ] [ 178 ] [ 179 ] On 21 March 2022, Michael Lynk , the UN's Special Rapporteur for Human Rights in the Occupied Palestinian Territories, submitted a report [ 180 ] to the UN Human Rights Council stating that Israel's control over the West Bank and Gaza Strip amounts to apartheid, an "institutionalised regime of systematic racial oppression and discrimination." [ 181 ] The Israeli Foreign Ministry and other Israeli and Jewish organizations [ which?

] called Lynk hostile to Israel and the report baseless. In January, Foreign Minister Yair Lapid warned that 2022 would see intense efforts to call Israeli policy apartheid.

[ 182 ] On 18 October 2022, the United Nations Special Rapporteur on the occupied Palestinian territories recommended in a report [ 183 ] that UN member states develop "a plan to end the Israeli settler-colonial occupation and apartheid regime" and said these "violations" show that Israel's occupation is an "intentionally acquisitive, segregationist and repressive regime designed to prevent the realization of the Palestinian people's right to self-determination ".

[ 184 ] 2017 ESCWA Report A 2017 report was "commissioned and approved by the UN but has not obtained an official endorsement from the Secretary General of the UN. Hence, it does not represent the views of the UN." [ 185 ] [ 186 ] [ 187 ] Author Seada Hussein Adem discusses "the issue of apartheid on its own merits, in light of the Rome Statute and the Apartheid Convention" while acknowledging the analogy and taking "precaution to avoid using the discrete cases in apartheid South Africa as a yardstick to qualify conducts as amounting to the crime of apartheid", referring the reader to pages 14 to 17 of the 2017 report.

[ 185 ] At the time of publication, Rima Khalaf , then UN Under-Secretary General and ESCWA Executive Secretary, said the report "clearly and frankly concludes that Israel is a racist state that has established an apartheid system that persecutes the Palestinian people".

[ 188 ] The ESCWA comprises 18 Arab countries.

[ 189 ] 2022 special committee on Israeli practices The report of the Special Committee to Investigate Israeli Practices Affecting the Human Rights of the Palestinian People was published on 15 July 2022, following its annual mission to Amman, Jordan, from 4 to 7 July 2022.

[ 190 ] [ 191 ] The Special Committee stated, "By design, Israel's 55-year occupation of Palestine has been used as a vehicle to serve and protect the interest of a Jewish State and its Jewish people, while subjugating Palestinians", and "Many stakeholders consider that this practice amounts to apartheid." [ 192 ] Reports by NGOs 2009 legal study of the South African Human Sciences Research Council Following Dugard's report, the Human Sciences Research Council (HSRC) of South Africa commissioned a legal study, completed in 2009, of Israel's practices in the occupied Palestinian territories.

[ 193 ] The report said that one of South African apartheid's most "notorious" aspects was the "racial enclave policy" manifested in the Black Homelands called bantustans , and that Israel uses similar measures "aimed at preserving demographic superiority of one racial group over the other in certain areas", using security as a pretext.

[ 194 ] It said Israel's practices in the occupied Palestinian territories correlate almost entirely with the definition of apartheid as established in Article 2 of the International Convention on the Suppression and Punishment of the Crime of Apartheid. It also suggested Israeli practices can be compared to South African laws and practices, including violations of international standards for due process (such as illegal detention); discriminatory privileges based on ascribed ethnicity (legally, as Jewish or non-Jewish); draconian enforced ethnic segregation in all parts of life, including by confining groups to ethnic "reserves and ghettoes"; comprehensive restrictions on individual freedoms, such as movement and expression; a dual legal system based on ethno-national identity (Jewish or Palestinian); denationalization (denial of citizenship); and a special system of laws designed to punish any Palestinian resistance to the system. The study said Jewish Israeli domination over Palestinians "constitutes a breach of the prohibition of apartheid". The report was published in 2012.

[ 195 ] Whether Israelis and Palestinians are "racial groups" has been a point of contention in regard to the applicability of the ICSPCA and Article 7 of the Rome Statute. The HSRC's 2009 report states that in the Occupied Palestinian Territories, Jewish and Palestinian identities are "socially constructed as groups distinguished by ancestry or descent as well as nationality, ethnicity, and religion". On this basis, the study says that Israeli Jews and Palestinian Arabs can be considered "racial groups" for the purposes of the definition of apartheid in international law.

[ 193 ] 2020 Yesh Din In 2020, the Israeli human rights organization Yesh Din said that Israeli treatment of the West Bank's Palestinian population meets the definition of apartheid under both Article 7 of the 2002 Rome Statute, which established the International Criminal Court (ICC), and the International Convention on the Suppression and Punishment of the Crime of Apartheid (ICSPCA) adopted by the United Nations General Assembly, which went into force in 1976.

[ 196 ] 2021 B'Tselem report In January 2021, Israeli human rights organization B'Tselem issued a report outlining the considerations that led to the conclusion that "the bar for labeling the Israeli regime as apartheid has been met." [ 14 ] B'Tselem Executive Director Hagai El-Ad said, "Israel is not a democracy that has a temporary occupation attached to it: it is one regime between the Jordan River and the Mediterranean Sea, and we must look at the full picture and see it for what it is: apartheid." [ 197 ] 2021 FIDH statement In March 2021, the International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH) issued a statement saying, "The international community must hold Israel responsible for its crimes of apartheid", citing the work of its member organizations in Israel and Palestine.

[ 198 ] 2021 Human Rights Watch report In April 2021, Human Rights Watch released a report accusing Israeli officials of the crimes against humanity of apartheid and persecution and calling on the International Criminal Court to investigate "systematic discrimination" against Palestinians, becoming the first major international rights NGO to do so.

[ 199 ] Its report said that Israeli authorities "have dispossessed, confined, forcibly separated, and subjugated Palestinians by virtue of their identity to varying degrees of intensity".

[ 8 ] Israel rejected the report, with Strategic Affairs Minister Michael Biton saying it was part of "an ongoing attempt by HRW to undermine the State of Israel's right to exist as the nation state of the Jewish people".

[ 200 ] Palestinian Prime Minister Mohammad Shtayyeh welcomed HRW's report, urging the ICC to investigate the Israeli officials implicated.

[ 201 ] The US State Department rejected the report, saying, "It is not the view of this administration that Israel's actions constitute apartheid." [ 202 ] 2022 Amnesty report Amnesty secretary general Agnes Callamard dismissed the criticism of its report as shooting the messenger .

On 1 February 2022, Amnesty International published a report, Israel's Apartheid Against Palestinians: Cruel System of Domination and Crime Against Humanity , [ 203 ] which stated that Israeli practices in Israel and the occupied territories amount to apartheid and that territorial fragmentation of the Palestinians "serves as a foundational element of the regime of oppression and domination".

[ 204 ] The report states that, taken together, Israeli practices, including land expropriation, unlawful killings, forced displacement, restrictions on movement, and denial of citizenship rights amount to the crime of apartheid.

[ 205 ] The report suggested the International Criminal Court include the crime of apartheid as part of its investigations. Even before its release, Israeli officials condemned the report as "false and biased" and antisemitic, [ 206 ] [ 207 ] accusations that Amnesty secretary general Agnes Callamard dismissed as "baseless attacks, barefaced lies, fabrications on the messenger".

[ 208 ] [ 209 ] The U.S. State Department rejected the report's conclusions, calling them "absurd", and said "the Jewish people must not be denied their right to self-determination, and we must ensure there isn't a double standard being applied".

[ 210 ] [ 211 ] German Foreign Ministry spokesperson Christopher Burger said: "We reject expressions like 'apartheid' or a one-sided focusing of criticism on Israel. That is not helpful to solving the conflict in the Middle East".

[ 212 ] A spokesperson for the UK's Foreign and Commonwealth Development Office rejected the terminology used and said breaches of international law can be determined only by the courts.

[ 213 ] [ 214 ] The Dutch foreign minister said his government did not agree with Amnesty's conclusions.

[ 215 ] J Street , a nonprofit liberal organization, did not endorse the use of the term apartheid , while discouraging labeling those who use the term "antisemitic".

[ 216 ] [ 217 ] Thirteen Israeli human rights organizations issued a statement defending Amnesty and the report.

[ 218 ] [ 219 ] Omar Shakir , the Israel and Palestine director of Human Rights Watch, which produced a similar report in 2021, said, "There is certainly a consensus in the international human rights movement that Israel is committing apartheid." [ 220 ] The Arab League , the OIC , and the Palestinian Authority welcomed the report.

[ 221 ] [ c ] On 28 September 2022, Al-Haq hosted representatives of Amnesty International, the International Federation for Human Rights and Human Rights Watch in Ramallah . Referring to Israel's outlawing of Palestinian NGOs , Amnesty International's France director of campaigns Nathalie Godard described the "repression of Palestinian civic space" as part of the system of apartheid. She said, "Not only are Palestinians under Israeli military occupation, conducted with manifold violations of international humanitarian law and human rights law, but then also those organizations and human rights defenders who seek to assist people in need are shut down." [ 223 ] [ 224 ] In its March 2023 annual report, Amnesty condemned Western countries' "double standards" with respect to Israel. The report said "many Western governments chose instead to attack those denouncing Israel's apartheid system" rather than trying to end it.

[ 225 ] [ 226 ] [ 227 ] [ 228 ] [ 229 ] 2022 jurists statement In March 2022, the International Commission of Jurists said it "strongly condemns Israel's laws, policies and practices of racial segregation , persecution and apartheid against the indigenous Palestinian population in Israel and in the Occupied Palestinian Territories (OPT), comprising the Gaza Strip and the West Bank, including East Jerusalem, and against Palestinian refugees".

[ 230 ] 2022 ICC submission by Dawn The US-based NGO Democracy for the Arab World Now (DAWN) filed a complaint with the ICC against senior Israeli military lawyer Eyal Toledano for war crimes and crimes against humanity, including apartheid. The submission follows a months-long investigation by the NGO into incidents in the West Bank between 2016 and 2020 and falls within the scope of the current International Criminal Court investigation in Palestine . DAWN Executive Director Sarah Leah Whitson said, "The international legal community, democracies across the world, and in particular the signatories of the Apartheid Convention and Rome Statute have an obligation to reject Israeli apartheid by holding Toledano accountable for his culpability in the crime of apartheid". The Israeli military said it "thoroughly rejects" the claims, which it called "baseless".

[ 231 ] [ 232 ] [ 233 ] [ 234 ] Overview of reports Human rights lawyer and B'tselem director Smadar Ben-Natan analyzed the different reports in terms of temporal and spatial framing, whether they look at the situation from 1948 or from 1967, and whether they include Israel. ESCWA and the Palestinian NGOs take a very broad approach, "arguing that apartheid exists in the entire territory under Israeli control since 1948, being the constitutive logic of the State of Israel (raison d'état)", while Yesh Din focuses only on the occupied territories post-1967. B'tselem includes Israel but limits its scope to post-1967 while the HRW report differs from it in finding that while "the elements of systematic and widespread repression with the intention of maintaining the superiority of one group exist both within Israel and in the OPT, only in the OPT (including East Jerusalem) does the severity of inhumane acts make them criminal." The Amnesty report is "the only report explicitly arguing that crimes of apartheid have been perpetrated inside Israel since 1948, and accordingly considers many Israeli policies as falling under the category of inhumane acts". The UN Special Rapporteur report follows the mandate given and examines only the occupied territory, concluding "that Israel's occupation has turned into a system of apartheid, and that the crime of apartheid is being committed." [ 235 ] According to author Ran Greenstein, "Two features are shared by all the reports: they agree that apartheid is a relevant, indeed essential, concept for the analysis of Israeli rule, and they focus on legal analysis and political arrangements, paying scant attention to social and historical aspects of the evolution of Israeli, Palestinian, and South African societies." [ 236 ] Additional views Scholarly views In a 2005 book-length study, Heribert Adam of Simon Fraser University and Kogila Moodley of the University of British Columbia wrote that controversy over use of the term arises because Israel is perceived as a uniquely Western democracy in the region and is thus likely to be judged by the standards of such a state. Israel also claims to be a home for the worldwide Jewish diaspora .

[ 237 ] Adam and Moodley say that Jewish historical suffering has imbued Zionism with a "subjective sense of moral validity" that the ruling white South Africans never had.

[ 238 ] They also suggest that academic comparisons between Israel and apartheid South Africa leave unanswered the question of "when and how settlers become indigenous", as well as failing to take into account that Israel's Jewish immigrants view themselves as returning home.

[ 239 ] [ d ] In 2007, Gideon Shimoni, professor emeritus of Hebrew University, said the analogy is defamatory and reflects a double standard when applied to Israel and not to neighboring Arab countries, whose policies towards Palestinian minorities have also been described as discriminatory.

[ 241 ] Shimoni also says that while white people exploited Black Africans within a common South African society, Israel refuses to exploit Palestinians, instead seeking separation and "divorce" from Palestinians for reasons including self-defense. He says the Israel–Palestinian conflict reflects "separate nationalisms".

[ 241 ] [ self-published source?

] An August 2021 survey found that 65% of academic experts on the Middle East described Israel as a "one-state reality akin to apartheid". Seven months earlier, that percentage was 59%.

[ 242 ] [ 243 ] Attitudes may have shifted due to two key events during this time: the planned evictions of Palestinians in East Jerusalem , which may have highlighted the unequal treatment of Jews and Palestinians under Israeli control (and which led to the 2021 Israel-Palestine crisis ); and the reports published by the Israeli-based B'Tselem and the US-based Human Rights Watch , which suggested that there is an apartheid reality in Israel and the Palestinian territories, and that Israel's behavior fits the legal definition of apartheid, respectively.

[ 244 ] On 14 April 2023, Foreign Policy released a feature-length article, Israel's One-State Reality , co-authored by Michael Barnett , Nathan Brown , Marc Lynch , and Shibley Telhami . The authors wrote that the "illusion of a two-state solution" had been shattered by the return of Benjamin Netanyahu at the head of a far-right Israeli coalition, and called on the U.S. government to "stop shielding Israel in international organizations" when confronted by accusations of violations of international law. It concluded that "the one-state reality demands more. Looked at through that prism, Israel resembles an apartheid state." [ 245 ] In August 2023, more than 1,500 U.S., Israeli, Jewish, and Palestinian academics and public figures signed an open letter stating that Israel operates "a regime of apartheid" and calling on U.S. Jewish groups to speak out against the occupation in Palestine.

[ 246 ] [ 247 ] Palestinian views On 8 June 2021, the Palestine Liberation Organization released a report titled It is Apartheid: The Reality of Israel's Colonial Occupation of Palestine.

[ 248 ] [ 249 ] In a 6 June 2022 editorial, Israeli newspaper Haaretz wrote that Israeli settlements are made possible by a "mechanism that maintains apartheid in the West Bank"; the editorial mentions "the existence of two separate legal systems in the same territory, one for Israelis (that is, Jews) and one for Palestinians, as well as two separate justice systems. There's a military justice system for subjects without [Israeli] citizenship who live under a military dictatorship, and there's a second system for privileged Jews with Israeli citizenship, who live under Israeli law in a territory that's not under Israeli sovereignty".

[ 250 ] Israeli views A number of sitting Israeli premiers have warned that Israel could become like apartheid South Africa. In 1976, Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin warned that Israel risked becoming an apartheid state if it annexed and absorbed the West Bank's Arab population.

[ 23 ] [ 251 ] In 2007, Prime Minister Ehud Olmert warned that if the two-state solution collapsed, Israel would "face a South African-style struggle for equal voting rights, and as soon as that happens, the state of Israel is finished".

[ 252 ] On 8 June 2021, two former Israeli ambassadors to South Africa, Ilan Baruch and Alon Liel , wrote in an opinion piece for South African news website GroundUp , "It is time for the world to recognize that what we saw in South Africa decades ago is happening in the occupied Palestinian territories too." [ 253 ] United Arab List leader Mansour Abbas said he would not use the term apartheid to describe relations between Jews and Arabs inside Israel, pointing out that his Ra'am party is a member of the Israeli ruling coalition of the Thirty-sixth government of Israel .

[ 254 ] Hadash leader Ayman Odeh has said, "in [Israel’s] infrastructure and... law there is apartheid toward the Palestinian citizens [Israeli Arabs]".

[ 255 ] Former Attorney General of Israel Michael Ben-Yair said, "It is with great sadness that I must also conclude that my country has sunk to such political and moral depths that it is now an apartheid regime. It is time for the international community to recognise this reality as well." [ 256 ] As of 12 February 2023, 12 Israeli human rights groups had voiced their support for the Amnesty report and condemned the European Commission 's negative reaction to it. These groups were Adalah , B'Tselem , Breaking the Silence , Combatants for Peace , Gisha , HaMoked , Haqel: In Defense of Human Rights, Human Rights Defenders Fund, Ofek: The Israeli Center for Public Affairs, Physicians for Human Rights–Israel and Yesh Din .

[ 257 ] [ 258 ] A March 2023 position paper by the Israeli Law Professors' Forum for Democracy, a group of 120 Israeli law professors, stated that recent changes introduced by the Netanyahu government "validate the claim that Israel practices apartheid". Specifically, the group criticized the 23 February power-sharing agreement signed between the Likud parliamentary faction and the Religious Zionism faction granting the far-right leader of Religious Zionism, Bezalel Smotrich , special authority over the occupied West Bank. The professors argue that this transfer of responsibility to civilian hands violates international law, specifically the 1907 Hague Regulations .

[ 259 ] [ 260 ] The Biden administration criticized this aspect of the power-sharing agreement, calling it a step toward annexation; [ 261 ] a Haaretz editorial stated, "In light of the fact that there is no intention of granting civil rights to the millions of Palestinians living in the West Bank, the result of the agreement is a formal, full-fledged apartheid regime." [ 262 ] On 13 August 2023, former IDF Northern Command commander Amiram Levin said: "There are MKs in the government who came from the West Bank and do not know what democracy is. 57 years of absolute apartheid. The IDF is standing by and beginning to be complicit in war crimes. Walk around Hebron and you will see streets where Arabs cannot walk, just like what happened in Germany".

[ 263 ] [ 264 ] On 6 September 2023, former Mossad head Tamir Pardo said that Israel had imposed apartheid in the West Bank. He argued that "two people are judged under two legal systems" because Israel had imposed martial law on the Palestinians while Jewish settlers in West Bank are governed by civilian courts.

[ 265 ] [ 266 ] Israel and its supporters frequently call apartheid accusations antisemitic. Human rights specialists, [ 267 ] [ 268 ] scholars, [ 269 ] [ 270 ] and others argue that this criticism constitutes a weaponization of antisemitism accusations .

[ 271 ] American views In 1975, former US Ambassador to the United Nations Daniel Patrick Moynihan [ 272 ] voiced the United States' strong disagreement with the General Assembly's resolution that "Zionism is a form of racism and racial discrimination", saying that unlike apartheid, Zionism is not a racist ideology. He said that racist ideologies such as apartheid favor discrimination on the grounds of alleged biological differences, yet few people are as biologically heterogeneous as the Jews.

[ 273 ] Moynihan called the UN resolution "a great evil", adding, "the abomination of anti-Semitism has been given the appearance of international sanction by the UN".

[ 274 ] Vernon Jordan , executive director of the National Urban League , said the resolution smeared the 'racist' label on Zionism, adding that Black people could “easily smell out the fact that ‘anti-Zionism’ in this context is a code word for anti-Semitism”.

[ 275 ] The General Assembly's resolution equating Zionism with racism was revoked in 1991.

[ 276 ] In 2014, U.S. Secretary of State John Kerry warned that if Israel did not make peace soon with a two-state solution, it could become an apartheid state.

[ 277 ] Former South African state president F. W. de Klerk , who negotiated to end his country's apartheid regime, later said: "You have Palestinians living in Israel with full political rights. You don't have discriminatory laws against them, I mean not letting them swim on certain beaches or anything like that. I think it's unfair to call Israel an apartheid state. If John Kerry did so, I think he made a mistake." The interviewer clarified that Kerry had stressed that Israel was not at present an apartheid state.

[ 278 ] In an opinion survey commissioned by the Jewish Electorate Institute after the 2021 Israel–Palestine crisis , 34% agreed that "Israel's treatment of Palestinians is similar to racism in the United States", 25% agreed that "Israel is an apartheid state", and 22% agreed that "Israel is committing genocide against the Palestinians". The percentages were higher among younger voters, of whom more than a third agreed that Israel is an apartheid state.

[ 279 ] In a July 2022 interview, U.S. President Joe Biden was asked about "voices in the Democratic Party" who "say that Israel is an apartheid state, calling for an end of unconditional aid." He responded: "There are a few of them. I think they're wrong. I think they're making a mistake. Israel is a democracy. Israel is our ally." [ 280 ] A March 27 – April 5, 2023, Ipsos / University of Maryland poll found that when given choices for how they viewed Israel, 56% of the respondents said that they did not know. Of the remainder, 9% of respondents believed that Israel was a vibrant democracy, 13% said it was a flawed democracy, 7% said it was a state with restricted minority rights, and 13% said it was "a state with segregation similar to apartheid".

[ 281 ] [ 282 ] [ 283 ] In July 2023, the U.S. House of Representatives passed a resolution, 412–9, declaring that "The State of Israel is not a racist or apartheid state, Congress rejects all forms of antisemitism and xenophobia, and the United States will always be a staunch partner and supporter of Israel." [ 284 ] A 2023 Gallup survey found that Democrats' sympathies lie more with Palestinians than Israelis by a margin of 49% to 38%. In addition to the Ipsos poll, a June 2023 poll found that "in the absence of a two-state solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, three-quarters of Americans would choose a democratic Israel that is no longer Jewish over a Jewish Israel that denies full citizenship and equality to non-Jews." [ 285 ] European views In May 2021, then French foreign minister Jean-Yves Le Drian warned of "the risk of 'long-lasting apartheid' in Israel in the event that the Palestinians fail to obtain their own state" and that "Even the status quo produces that".

[ 286 ] Commenting on the clashes between Arabs and Jews in some Israeli towns , he concluded that this "clearly shows that if in the future we had a solution other than the two-state solution, we would have the ingredients of long-lasting apartheid." [ 287 ] In February 2022, Prime Minister Jean Castex of France read a speech on behalf of President Emmanuel Macron to the Representative Council of Jewish Institutions in France (CRIF) and said "How dare we talk about apartheid in a state where Arab citizens are represented in government and positions of leadership and responsibility?" [ 36 ] In June 2022 the Catalan Parliament passed a resolution that "Israel commits the crime of apartheid against the Palestinian people" and calling upon the Generalitat de Catalunya to avoid any support for the Israeli regime and to aid in implementing the recommendations of the Amnesty and Human Rights Watch reports.

[ 288 ] [ 289 ] [ 290 ] In a joint press conference with Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas in August 2022, German Chancellor Olaf Scholz rejected Abbas's comparison of Israel to apartheid and said "Regarding the Israeli politics we have a different assessment. I want to say clearly that I won't use the word 'apartheid' and I don't believe it is right to use the term to describe the situation".

[ 291 ] On 13 January 2023, in response to questions from the EU parliament, [ 292 ] EU high representative for foreign affairs and security policy Josep Borrell wrote, "The Commission is aware of the reports referred to by the Honourable Members and is giving them due attention. In any case, the Commission considers that it is not appropriate to use the term apartheid in connection with the State of Israel." [ 293 ] [ 294 ] In response, 12 Israeli human rights organizations, including B'tselem and Yesh Din, issued a statement condemning Borrell's remarks and calling on the EU Commission "to engage with the facts on which legal designations of apartheid regarding various aspects of Israel's treatment of Palestinians are based, and to reconsider its position in this regard." [ 295 ] [ 296 ] On 8 February 2023, the mayor of Barcelona cut ties with Israeli institutions "due to its 'apartheid policy' towards Palestinians" [ 297 ] and announced that the city is no longer twinned with Tel Aviv.

[ 298 ] In response, Madrid 's mayor offered to partner with Tel Aviv instead, denouncing Barcelona's move as having a "clear antisemitic overtone".

[ 299 ] In March 2023, the UK and Israel signed "The 2030 Roadmap for UK-Israeli Bilateral Relations", which said, "The UK and Israel will work together to tackle the singling out of Israel in the Human Rights Council as well as in other international bodies. In this context, the UK and Israel disagree with the use of the term 'apartheid' with regard to Israel." [ 300 ] In July 2023, departing EU Ambassador to the Palestinians Sven Kühn von Burgsdorff said: "I have my personal view on that matter, but I'm still a diplomat until the 31st of July and have to represent my headquarters on that matter. However, I would certainly be on the right side of history if I were to say that one should not suppress the discussion of whether actually what we're seeing on the ground constitutes or doesn't constitute the crime of apartheid", and insisted it was a question to be decided by international courts, not politicians.

[ 301 ] Responding to Felix Klein , Germany's commissioner for Jewish Life and the Fight Against Anti-Semitism, Jewish history professor Amos Goldberg wrote in the Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung on 23 August 2023 that the Israeli government fights against human rights, democracy, and equality, and promotes the opposite—"authoritarianism, discrimination, racism and apartheid"—and that "Accusing Israel of apartheid is not anti-Semitic. It describes reality". Klein gave an interview to Die Welt on 5 August 2023 during which, in response to Middle East scholar Muriel Assenburg, who had earlier said that Israel is "prima facie committing the crime of apartheid in the occupied territories", he said, "To accuse Israel of apartheid delegitimizes the Jewish state and is therefore an anti-Semitic narrative." [ 302 ] [ 303 ] [ 304 ] African views In February 2022, the Assembly of the African Union passed a resolution calling for the dismantlement of Israeli apartheid in the State of Palestine and recommended boycotting "the Israeli colonial system and illegal settlements" to end apartheid.

[ 305 ] The same declaration was renewed at the Union's Summit in 2023.

[ 306 ] On 26 July 2022, South African Foreign Minister Naledi Pandor said that Israel should be considered an apartheid state.

[ 307 ] [ 308 ] In her remarks to the 2022 UNGA on 22 September 2022, she said, "We cannot ignore the words of the former Israeli negotiator at the Oslo talks, Daniel Levy, who addressed the UN Security Council recently and referred to 'the increasingly weighty body of scholarly, legal and public opinion that has designated Israel to be perpetrating apartheid in the territories under its control'." [ 309 ] [ 310 ] Other countries Foreign governments who have used the word apartheid to describe the situation in Israel or in the Israeli-occupied territories include those of Bahrain , [ 311 ] Bangladesh , [ 312 ] Bolivia , [ 313 ] Cuba , [ 314 ] Iran , [ 315 ] Iraq , [ 315 ] Lebanon , [ 315 ] Nicaragua , [ 316 ] North Korea , [ 315 ] Pakistan , [ 316 ] Qatar , [ 316 ] Saudi Arabia , [ 317 ] and Venezuela .

[ 318 ] In April 2025, the 24th Congress of the Communist Party of India (Marxist) adopted a resolution declaring Israel an apartheid state.

[ 319 ] Faith-based groups On 18 July 2021, the General Synod of the United Church of Christ adopted a resolution, denounced by the American Jewish Committee 's director of media relations, that, among other criticism, refers to Israel's "apartheid system of laws and legal procedures".

[ 320 ] [ 321 ] On 28 June 2022, the U.S. Presbyterian Church passed a resolution stating that "Israel's laws, policies and practices regarding the Palestinian people fulfill the international legal definition of apartheid".

[ 322 ] [ 323 ] [ 324 ] On 8 September 2022, the World Council of Churches adopted a statement that included a call for "The WCC to study, discuss and discern the implications of the recent reports by B'tselem, Human Rights Watch and Amnesty International, and for its governing bodies to respond appropriately." After much debate, the statement also read, "Recently, numerous international, Israeli and Palestinian human rights organizations and legal bodies have published studies and reports describing the policies and actions of Israel as amounting to 'apartheid' under international law. Within this Assembly, some churches and delegates strongly support the utilization of this term as accurately describing the reality of the people in Palestine/Israel and the position under international law, while others find it inappropriate, unhelpful and painful. We are not of one mind on this matter".

[ 325 ] In June 2025, the Council concluded that Israel was practicing apartheid, and called for divestment and sanctions.

[ 326 ] On 6 June 2023, the Apartheid Free Communities Initiative launched, bringing together "over 100 congregations, faith groups, and organizations as an interdenominational campaign working to end the crime of apartheid committed against Palestinians." [ 327 ] On 29 July 2023, the Christian Church (Disciples of Christ) adopted a resolution stating "that many of the laws, policies and practices of the State of Israel meet the definition of apartheid as defined in international law." [ 328 ] [ 329 ] The Anglican Church of Southern Africa passed a resolution on 27 September 2023 declaring Israel an apartheid state and reviewing pilgrimages to the Holy Land.

[ 330 ] [ 331 ] Other views In 2017, Jacques De Maio, then Head of Delegation of the International Committee of the Red Cross , Israel and the Occupied Territories, denied there is apartheid, saying there is "no regime of superiority of race, of denial of basic human rights to a group of people because of their alleged racial inferiority. There is a bloody national conflict, whose most prominent and tragic characteristic is its continuation over the years, decades-long, and there is a state of occupation. Not apartheid." [ 332 ] In November 2020, Haaretz reported that Wikipedia 's "West Bank bantustans" article comparing Israel's control of the West Bank to the Black-only enclaves in apartheid -era South Africa indicated a possible shift for Wikipedia's consensus on likening Israel to an apartheid regime.

Wikipedia editors said that the article's having survived a deletion proposal indicated that events such as the Trump peace plan and Benjamin Netanyahu 's pledge to annex parts of the West Bank undermined Israel's talking point that it supported a two-state solution and strove to establish a Palestinian state .

[ 333 ] On 9 September 2022, hundreds of Google and Amazon workers protested cloud contracts made with the Israeli government known as Project Nimbus . Some protesters in San Francisco held signs reading, "Another Google Worker Against Apartheid" and "No Tech For Apartheid". Palestinian employees claim "institutionalized bias" within Google, with one saying it had become impossible to express disagreement with Israel's treatment of Palestinians without "being called into a HR [sic] meeting with the threat of retaliation".

[ 334 ] [ 335 ] [ 336 ] Former United Nations Secretary General Ban Ki-moon and Mary Robinson, chair of The Elders and former president of Ireland and UN human rights commissioner, visited Israel and the Palestinian territories on 22 June 2023. Ban said the situation had become worse since he was at the UN and there were signs that an apartheid system was taking root: "I'm just thinking that, as many people are saying, that this may constitute apartheid." [ e ] Robinson said that in every meeting they attended "we heard the word 'apartheid'".

[ 339 ] [ 340 ] An August 2023 open letter signed by more than 2,000 [ 266 ] U.S., Israeli, Jewish and Palestinian academics and public figures stated that Israel operates "a regime of apartheid". Signatories included Israeli historian Benny Morris , former Jewish Agency head Avraham Burg , [ 341 ] [ 246 ] [ 247 ] and Israeli American Holocaust expert Omer Bartov , who said Israel's 37th government had brought "a very radical shift".

[ 342 ] In October 2023, Craig Mokhiber, a director of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights , accused Israel of apartheid in his resignation letter.

[ 343 ] [ 344 ] In February 2024, Amnesty International chair Agnes Callamard said, "The occupation has enabled and entrenched Israel's system of apartheid imposed on all Palestinians".

[ 345 ] A November 2023 poll asked Canadians whether "Israel's policy towards Palestinians is a form of apartheid"; 43% agreed, 27% disagreed and 30% were unsure.

[ 346 ] Comments from South Africans Anglican Archbishop and Nobel Peace Prize winner Desmond Tutu commented on the similarities between South Africa and Palestine and the importance of international pressure in ending apartheid in South Africa. He drew a parallel between the movement "aiming to end Israeli occupation" and the international pressure that helped end apartheid in South Africa, saying: "If apartheid ended, so can the occupation, but the moral force and international pressure will have to be just as determined." [ 347 ] In 2014, Tutu urged the General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church in the United States to divest from companies that contributed to the occupation, [ 348 ] saying that Israel "has created an apartheid reality within its borders and through its occupation", and that the alternative to Israel being "an apartheid state in perpetuity" was to end the occupation through either a one-state solution or a two-state solution .

[ 349 ] Howard Friel writes that Tutu "views the conditions in the occupied Palestinian territories as resembling apartheid in South Africa." BBC News reported in 2012 that Tutu "accused Israel of practicing apartheid in its policies towards Palestinians." [ 350 ] Both Friel and Israeli author Uri Davis have quoted the following comment from Tutu, published in the Guardian in 2002, in their own work: "I was deeply distressed in my visit to the Holy Land; it reminded me so much of what has happened to us black people in South Africa." [ 350 ] [ 351 ] [ 352 ] Davis discusses Tutu's remark in his book Apartheid Israel: Possibilities for the Struggle Within , in which he argues that "fundamental apartheid structures of the Israeli polity" with respect to property inheritance rights, access to state land and water resources and access to state welfare resources "fully justify the classification of Israel as an apartheid State." [ 351 ] Other prominent South African anti-apartheid activists have used apartheid comparisons to criticize the occupation of the West Bank , and particularly the construction of the separation barrier. These include Farid Esack , a writer who was then a Visiting professor at Harvard Divinity School , [ 353 ] Ronnie Kasrils , [ 354 ] Winnie Madikizela-Mandela , [ 355 ] Denis Goldberg , [ 356 ] and Arun Gandhi .

[ 357 ] In 2008, a delegation of African National Congress (ANC) veterans visited Israel and the Occupied Territories, and said that in some respects it was worse than apartheid.

[ 358 ] [ 359 ] In May 2018, in the aftermath of the Gaza border protests , the ANC issued a statement comparing the actions of Palestinians to "our struggle against the apartheid regime". It also accused the Israeli military of "the same cruelty" as Hitler, and said that "all South Africans must rise up and treat Israel like the pariah that it is".

[ 360 ] Around the same time, the South African government withdrew indefinitely its ambassador to Israel, Sisa Ngombane [ de ] , to protest "the indiscriminate and grave manner of the latest Israeli attack".

[ 361 ] Human rights lawyer Fatima Hassan, a member of the 2008 ANC delegation, cited the separate roads, different registration of cars, the indignity of having to produce a permit, and long queues at checkpoints as worse than what black South Africans had experienced during apartheid. But she also thought the apartheid comparison was a potential "red herring": "the context is different and the debate on whether this is Apartheid or not deflects from the real issue of occupation, encroachment of more land, building of the wall and the indignity of the occupation and the conduct of the military and police. I saw the check point at Nablus, I met with Palestinians in Hebron, I met the villagers who are against the wall—I met Israelis and Palestinians who have lost family members, their land and homes. They have not lost hope though—and they believe in a joint struggle against the occupation and are willing in non-violent means to transform the daily direct and indirect forms of injustice and violence. To sum up, there is a transgression that is continuing unabated—call it what you want, apartheid/separation/closure/security—it remains a transgression".

[ 362 ] Poster for the 2009 Israeli Apartheid Week , designed by Carlos Latuff Sasha Polakow-Suransky notes that Israel's labour policies are very different from those of apartheid-era South Africa, that Israel has never enacted miscegenation laws, and that liberation movements in South Africa and Palestine have had different "aspirations and tactics".

[ 363 ] Still, he argues that the apartheid analogy is likely to gain further legitimacy in coming years unless Israel moves to dismantle West Bank settlements and create a viable Palestinian state.

[ 364 ] Polakow-Suransky also writes that the response of Israel's defenders to the analogy since 2007 has been "knee-jerk" and based on "vitriol and recycled propaganda" rather than an honest assessment of the situation.

[ 365 ] After the proposed Israeli annexation of the West Bank Benjamin Netanyahu announced in 2020, South-African born Israeli writer Benjamin Pogrund , a longtime critic of the analogy between Israeli occupational practices and apartheid, commented that if implemented, such a plan would alter his assessment: "[At] least it has been a military occupation. Now we are going to put other people under our control and not give them citizenship. That is apartheid. That is an exact mirror of what apartheid was [in South Africa]." [ 366 ] In an August 2023 opinion piece for Haaretz , Pogrund wrote, "In Israel, I am now witnessing the apartheid with which I grew up." [ 367 ] Incumbent South African president Cyril Ramaphosa has also compared Israel's treatment of Palestinians to apartheid.

[ 368 ] See also Crime of apartheid Absentees' Property Laws Allegations of apartheid by country Settler colonialism Zionism as settler colonialism Israeli-occupied territories Israeli Apartheid Week Ethnic profiling in Israel Racism in Israel Collective punishment New antisemitism Palestinian political violence Persecution of Muslims Human rights violations against Palestinians by Israel United Nations General Assembly Resolution 3379 Noel Ignatiev § Encyclopedia of Race and Racism Notes ^ "Israel proper" refers to the borders of Israel as recognized by the majority of the international community, which excludes East Jerusalem , the West Bank , the Golan Heights , and the Gaza Strip .

^ p4, 11.The commission notes the worrying assessment made by several United Nations bodies regarding segregation between Palestinians and Israelis as part of policies and practices imposed by Israel through two separate legal systems, road separation and movement restrictions, among other means.

^ The Palestinian Authority statement said: "The State of Palestine welcomes the report by Amnesty International on Israel's apartheid regime and racist policies and practices against the Palestinian people".

[ 222 ] ^ Adam and Moodley write, "because people give meaning to their lives and interpret their worlds through these diverse ideological prisms, the perceptions are real and have to be taken seriously".

[ 240 ] ^ On 29 June 2021, Ban Ki-moon , UN secretary general from 2007 to the end of 2016, in an opinion piece for the Financial Times , stated "This gives the dual legal regimes imposed in Palestinian territories by Israel—together with the inhumane and abusive acts that are carried out against Palestinians—new significance, resulting in a situation that arguably constitutes apartheid,".

[ 337 ] [ 338 ] References ^ "Hebron road renamed "Apartheid Street" " .

Ma'an News Agency . Hebron. Reuters. 2 November 2011. Archived from the original on 2 November 2011 . Retrieved 8 January 2023 .

^ Yiftachel, Oren (1 November 2009).

" "Creeping Apartheid" in Israel-Palestine. | EBSCOhost" .

openurl.ebsco.com .

Archived from the original on 10 March 2025 . Retrieved 25 February 2025 .

^ Brooks, Andrew; Griffiths, Mark (1 October 2024).

"Beyond Apartheid Israel" .

Political Geography .

114 103193.

doi : 10.1016/j.polgeo.2024.103193 .

ISSN 0962-6298 .

^ Greenstein, R. (2019). Colonialism, apartheid and the native question: The case of Israel/Palestine.

Democratic Marxism Series , 75 .

^ Peteet, J. (2016). The work of comparison: Israel/Palestine and apartheid.

Anthropological Quarterly , 89 (1), 247-281.

^ Davis, Uri (December 2003).

Apartheid Israel: Possibilities for the Struggle Within . Zed Books.

ISBN 978-1-84277-339-0 .

^ a b David J. Smith; Karl Cordell, eds. (18 October 2013).

Cultural Autonomy in Contemporary Europe . Routledge.

ISBN 978-1-317-96851-1 .

The Hebrew term Hafrada is the official descriptor of the policy of the Israeli Government to separate the Palestinian population in the territories occupied by Israel from the Israeli population, by means such as the West Bank barrier and the unilateral disengagement from those territories. The barrier is thus sometimes called gader ha'hafrada (separation fence) in Hebrew. The term Hafrada has striking similarities with the term apartheid , as this term mean 'apartness' in Afrikaans and Hafrada is the closest Hebrew equivalent.

^ a b "A Threshold Crossed: Israeli Authorities and the Crimes of Apartheid and Persecution" .

Human Rights Watch . 27 April 2021.

Archived from the original on 28 April 2021 . Retrieved 27 April 2021 .

^ Peteet, Julie (2016). "The work of comparison: Israel/Palestine and apartheid".

Anthropological Quarterly .

89 (1): 247– 281.

doi : 10.1353/anq.2016.0015 .

ISSN 0003-5491 .

JSTOR 43955521 .

S2CID 147128703 .

^ Peteet, Julie (2017).

Space and Mobility in Palestine .

Indiana University Press . p. 63.

ISBN 978-0-253-02511-1 .

Archived from the original on 20 January 2024 . Retrieved 20 January 2024 .

^ Baconi, Tareq (5 November 2021).

"What Apartheid Means for Israel" .

The New York Review of Books .

Archived from the original on 30 September 2022 . Retrieved 20 January 2024 .

^ a b Schuller, Kiera (13 December 2019).

"UN Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination publishes findings on Cambodia, Colombia, Ireland, Israel and Uzbekistan" (Press release). Geneva, Switzerland: United Nations Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights.

Archived from the original on 19 December 2019.

^ a b Times of Israel staff (24 December 2019).

"Report: UN anti-racism panel to probe claims of Israeli apartheid in West Bank" .

The Times of Israel .

Archived from the original on 29 May 2023 . Retrieved 20 January 2024 .

^ a b "A regime of Jewish supremacy from the Jordan River to the Mediterranean Sea: This is apartheid" . B'Tselem. 12 January 2021.

Archived from the original on 8 May 2021 . Retrieved 12 January 2021 .

A regime that uses laws, practices and organized violence to cement the supremacy of one group over another is an apartheid regime. Israeli apartheid, which promotes the supremacy of Jews over Palestinians, was not born in one day or of a single speech. It is a process that has gradually grown more institutionalized and explicit, with mechanisms introduced over time in law and practice to promote Jewish supremacy. These accumulated measures, their pervasiveness in legislation and political practice, and the public and judicial support they receive – all form the basis for our conclusion that the bar for labeling the Israeli regime as apartheid has been met.

^ Sfard, Michael (9 July 2020), "The Occupation of the West Bank and the Crime of Apartheid: Legal Opinion" (PDF) , Yesh Din , archived (PDF) from the original on 11 January 2024 ^ a b Sfard, Michael (3 June 2021).

"Why Israeli progressives have started to talk about 'apartheid' " .

The Guardian (Opinion).

Archived from the original on 4 January 2024 . Retrieved 20 January 2024 .

^ Holmes, Oliver (27 April 2021).

"Israel is committing the crime of apartheid, rights group says" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on 2 February 2022 . Retrieved 20 January 2024 .

^ White, Ben (18 March 2017).

"UN report: Israel has established an 'apartheid regime' " .

Al Jazeera .

Archived from the original on 24 March 2017.

^ Ahren, Raphael (15 May 2018).

"South African leaders tell country's Jews to reject 'Nazi-like' Israel" .

The Times of Israel .

Archived from the original on 23 December 2019 . Retrieved 23 May 2020 .

Tuesday's lengthy ANC statement accused Israel of 'crude viciousness,' comparing it to South Africa's past apartheid regime.

^ Davis, Uri (2003).

Apartheid Israel: possibilities for the struggle within .

Zed Books . pp.

86– 87.

ISBN 1-84277-339-9 .

^ Shimoni, Gideon (1980).

Jews and Zionism: The South African Experience 1910–1967 . Cape Town: Oxford University Press. pp.

310–336 .

ISBN 0-19-570179-8 .

^ Nichols, John (20 July 2023).

"Why do Americans get attacked for saying what Israelis say about Israel?" .

The Nation .

Archived from the original on 4 October 2023 . Retrieved 20 January 2024 .

^ a b c Hasan, Mehdi (22 March 2017).

"Top Israelis have warned of apartheid, so why the outrage at a UN report?" .

The Intercept .

Archived from the original on 2 September 2019 . Retrieved 20 January 2024 .

^ Quigley, John B. (1990).

Palestine and Israel: A Challenge to Justice .

Duke University Press . pp.

145– 150.

ISBN 978-0-8223-1011-2 .

Archived from the original on 20 January 2024 . Retrieved 20 January 2024 .

^ "Advisory Opinion of the International Court of Justice on the Legal Consequences of Israel's Policies and Practices in the "Occupied Palestinian Territory" " . January 2024.

^ a b Jeßberger, Florian; Mehta, Kalika (19 September 2024).

"The Inadvertent Protagonist" .

Verfassungsblog .

doi : 10.59704/27788635acf1f7b5 – via verfassungsblog.de.

^ Solomon, Solon (20 August 2024).

"The Limits of the ICJ Advisory Opinion on Israel's Occupation and the West Bank" .

Lawfare .

Archived from the original on 4 October 2024 . Retrieved 10 October 2024 .

^ "ICJ Delivers Advisory Opinion on the Legality of Israel's Occupation of Palestinian Territories" . 20 July 2024.

Archived from the original on 8 November 2024 . Retrieved 11 October 2024 .

The Court then moves to examining whether there is also a violation of Article 3 of CERD, which prohibits racial segregation and apartheid. This, of course, is a totemic issue in terms of the competing narratives of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. And here the Court, seeking internal consensus, opted for a more ambiguous approach …. but the bottom line of the Court's approach seems clear – at best Israel's actions amount 'only' to racial segregation, but they could also be apartheid. And the reason for this ambiguity is again the need to maintain consensus within the Court ^ a b Keane, David (31 July 2024).

" 'Racial Segregation and Apartheid' in the ICJ Palestine Advisory Opinion" .

Archived from the original on 3 August 2024 . Retrieved 6 August 2024 .

this is not the right reading. Article 3 refers to racial segregation and apartheid, and a breach of Article 3 could refer to racial segregation, apartheid, or both. This is seen in the Separate Opinions, some of which considered the finding of a breach of Article 3 as a finding of apartheid; others believing the Court had not made such a finding.

^ Peteet (2016 , p. 249) also argues that there is an Israeli narrative of exceptionalism which works to 'exempt' it from such comparisons.

^ Adam & Moodley 2005 , pp. 19ff., 59ff..

^ a b Sabel, Robbie (2009), The campaign to delegitimize Israel with the false charge of apartheid (PDF) , Jerusalem: Jerusalem Center for Public Affairs, ISBN 978-965-218-073-5 , archived (PDF) from the original on 24 February 2023 ^ Zilbershats, Yaffa (1 August 2013). "Apartheid, international law, and the occupied Palestinian territory: A reply to John Dugard and John Reynolds".

European Journal of International Law .

24 (3): 915– 928.

doi : 10.1093/ejil/cht043 .

ISSN 0938-5428 .

^ Dershowitz, Alan (29 September 2008).

The case against Israel's enemies: Exposing Jimmy Carter and others who stand in the way of peace .

John Wiley & Sons . pp.

20– 25, 28– 29, 36, 44– 48.

ISBN 978-0-470-37992-9 .

Archived from the original on 4 April 2023 . Retrieved 20 January 2024 .

^ Matas, David (2005).

Aftershock: Anti-Zionism & Anti-Semitism (in Italian). Toronto: Dundurn Press. pp.

53– 55.

ISBN 978-1-55002-894-2 . Retrieved 19 April 2024 .

^ a b Klein, Zvika (28 February 2022).

"France's Macron comes out against claims of Israeli apartheid" .

The Jerusalem Post .

Archived from the original on 11 January 2024 . Retrieved 20 January 2024 .

^ Geddie, Eve (20 March 2024).

"EU needs to acknowledge the reality of Israeli apartheid" . Amnesty International.

Archived from the original on 5 December 2023 . Retrieved 28 April 2023 .

12 Israeli human rights organizations have since expressed "grave concern" about attempts to associate Amnesty's report with antisemitism, and they have rejected the Commission's failure to recognize Israel's apartheid. These organizations argue that weaponizing antisemitism to silence legitimate criticism actually undermines attempts to address rising antisemitism.

Republished from Geddie, Eve (13 March 2023).

"EU needs to understand the realities in the West Bank" .

Politico . Retrieved 19 April 2024 .

Eve Geddie was writing as the director of Amnesty International’s European Institutions Office.

^ Roth, Kenneth [@KenRoth] (29 February 2024).

"This weaponizing of the charge of "antisemitism" to try to stop such perfectly legitimate and accurate criticism of Israel's apartheid in the Palestinian occupied territory is cheapening, and hence harming, the important fight against antisemitism" ( Tweet ) – via Twitter .

^ Jeff Handmaker (18 February 2022).

"Opinion – The Silencing of Amnesty International's Report on Israeli Apartheid" . E-International Relations.

Archived from the original on 18 May 2024 . Retrieved 18 May 2024 .

Amnesty's report is important and for many advocates it is affirming of what they have been stating all along is a racist regime of systemic discrimination. However, for many longstanding critics of Israel, accusations of Israeli apartheid are not new, nor is the predictable backlash against them whereby antisemitism has been weaponized by Israel and its supporters. This backlash is now been directed against Amnesty International ^ "How a Leading Definition of Antisemitism Has Been Weaponized Against Israel's Critics" . The Nation. 27 December 2023.

Archived from the original on 14 May 2024 . Retrieved 18 May 2024 .

As Human Rights Watch noted, the first example opens the door to reflexively labeling as antisemitic human rights organizations and lawyers who argue that current Israeli government policies constitute apartheid against Palestinians ^ "I Regret to Report There's a New Antisemitism Controversy at Harvard" . Slate. 26 January 2024.

There have been a few lines of attack on Penslar, and there are thus a few issues at hand. First, there is the notion that he called Israel a regime of apartheid.

& What makes the series of events at Harvard so disheartening is not that the attack on Penslar is unique but that it transparently gives the game away: There is no set of credentials that can prevent a person who is earnestly trying to do work in this space from getting sucked into the politicization and, yes, weaponization of antisemitism. This is the way that current public debates over antisemitism tend to go, in Congress and on debate stages, on social media and between friends, within families and within organizations. But when fact and understanding and nuance of the issue are all considered secondary, what gets sacrificed isn't just an individual's career or standing or time, but comprehension of the actual issue that is antisemitism.

^ a b c Clarno, Andrew James (2009).

The Empire's New Walls: Sovereignty, Neo-liberalism, and the Production of Space in Post-apartheid South Africa and Post-Oslo Palestine/Israel (PhD thesis). University of Michigan. pp.

66– 67.

hdl : 2027.42/127105 .

ISBN 978-1-244-00753-6 .

ProQuest 304940194 .

Archived from the original on 7 July 2024 . Retrieved 19 April 2024 .

^ Quigley 1990 , p. 149: 'Former South African prime minister John Vorster viewed Israel's government as confronting a situation similar to South Africa's. Israel was faced with an "apartheid problem" as concerned its Arab inhabitants, he said. "We view Israel's position and problems with understanding and sympathy'.' ^ Cook, Chris (1989).

A Short History of the Liberal Party . MacMillan Press. p. 148.

ISBN 0-333-44884-7 .

^ Zureik, Elia (1979).

The Palestinians in Israel: A Study in Internal Colonialism . London: Routledge & Kegan Paul. p. 16.

ISBN 978-0-7100-0016-3 .

While official de jure apartheid of the African variety does not exist in Israel, national apartheid on the latent and informal levels ... is a characteristic feature of Israeli society.

quoted in Lyon, David (2011) [2010].

"Identification, colonialism, and control: surveillant sorting in Israel/Palestine" . In Zureik, Elia; Lyon, David; Abu-Laban, Yasmeen (eds.).

Surveillance and Control in Israel/Palestine . London: Routledge. p. 58.

doi : 10.4324/9780203845967 .

ISBN 978-0-415-58861-4 .

^ Molavi, Shourideh C. (2013). "The Israeli incorporation regime: Colonizing the land of milk and honey".

Stateless citizenship: The Palestinian-Arab citizens of Israel (PDF) . Studies in Critical Social Sciences. Brill. p. 99.

doi : 10.1163/9789004254077_004 .

ISBN 978-90-04-25407-7 .

JSTOR 10.1163/j.ctv4cbhgd.9 .

^ "Daily Press Briefing" .

World Conference against Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance (Press release). Durban: United Nations . 5 September 2001.

Archived from the original on 18 January 2021 . Retrieved 20 January 2024 .

^ Report of the World Conference against Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance (PDF) (Report). United Nations. 8 September 2001. A/CONF.189/12 (Part III).

Archived (PDF) from the original on 20 January 2024 . Retrieved 20 January 2024 .

^ Bayefsky, Anne (13–16 March 2002). "The UN world conference against racism: a racist anti-racism conference".

American Society of International Law .

96 : 65– 74.

JSTOR 25659754 .

^ "Carter explains 'apartheid' reference in letter to U.S. Jews" .

International Herald Tribune . Atlanta. Associated Press. 15 December 2006. Archived from the original on 25 January 2007 . Retrieved 23 April 2007 .

The six rabbis... and I... discussed the word 'apartheid', which I defined as the forced segregation of two peoples living in the same land, with one of them dominating and persecuting the other. I made clear in the book's text and in my response to the rabbis that the system of apartheid in Palestine is not based on racism but the desire of a minority of Israelis for Palestinian land and the resulting suppression of protests that involve violence ... my use of 'apartheid' does not apply to circumstances within Israel.

^ Tharoor, Ishaan (24 February 2023).

"Jimmy Carter's warning: Without peace, Israel must face 'apartheid' " .

Washington Post .

Archived from the original on 25 February 2023 . Retrieved 20 January 2024 .

^ Stephens, Philip (21 February 2013).

"Settler policy imperils Israel's foundations" .

Financial Times .

Faced with widely drawn international parallels between the West Bank and the Bantustans of apartheid South Africa, senior figures in Mr Netanyahu's Likud party have begun to admit the danger.

^ McGreal, Chris (19 March 2013).

"Obama urged: Act tough on Israel or risk collapse of two-state solution" .

The Guardian . London.

Archived from the original on 6 March 2016.

^ Sherwood, Harriet (12 December 2013).  Written at Ramallah.

"Palestinians draw parallels with Mandela's anti-apartheid struggle" .

The Guardian . London.

Archived from the original on 4 March 2016.

Comparisons between the former regime in South Africa and the Israeli occupation of the Palestinian territories have become relatively commonplace—not just by Palestinians and their supporters, but also among Israelis and the international community.

^ a b Gideon Levy (4 November 2000).

"Republished as an excerpt of the original 28 October 2000 article in the Courrier International, under the title Au fil des jours, Périphéries explore quelques pistes – chroniques, critiques, citations, liens pointus: Israël-Palestine, revue de presse " . Périphéries.

Archived from the original on 24 July 2014.

^ According to the Milon and Masada dictionaries, hafrada translates into English as "separation", "segregation", "division", "severance", "disassociation" or "divorce".

הפרדה .

English–Hebrew Dictionary . Milon. Archived from the original on 2 September 2013 . Retrieved 26 September 2014 .

; Alcalai, Reuben (1981).

The Complete Hebrew–English Dictionary . Masada.

^ Michael G. Clyne (1997).

Undoing and Redoing Corpus Planning . Walter de Gruyter. p. 403.

ISBN 978-3-11-015509-9 .

In the Language of "us" and "them" we could have expected an undoing when an integrative policy of the two communities was introduced. Obviously the [Peace] Process moves in the opposite direction: separation. Actually, one of the most popular arguments use by the government to justify its policy is the "danger" ("the demographic bomb", "the Arab womb") of a "bi-national state" if no separation is made: the Process is thus a measure taken to secure the Jewish majority. The term 'separation' " hafrada " has become extremely popular during the Process referring to fences built around Palestinian autonomous enclaves, to roads pave in the Territories exclusively for Israelis to the decrease of the number of Palestinians employed in Israel or allowed to enter into it altogether. The stereotypes of the Palestinian society as "backward" have not changed either.

^ a b c d e Eric Rozenman (1 April 2001).

"Today's Arab Israelis, Tomorrow's Israel: Why "Separation" Can't Be the Answer for Peace" .

Policy Review .

Hoover Institution .

Archived from the original on 22 March 2017 . Retrieved 21 March 2017 .

^ a b Jeff Halper .

"Nishul (Displacement): Israel's form of Apartheid" .

Israeli Committee Against House Demolitions . Archived from the original on 6 February 2007 . Retrieved 21 March 2017 .

Hafrada ( Apartheid in Afrikaans) is the official Hebrew term for Israel's vision and policy towards the Palestinians of the Occupied Territories – and, it could be argued (with qualifications), within Israel itself ^ a b c Alain Epp Weaver (1 January 2007).

"Further footnotes on Zionism, Yoder, and Boyarin" . Cross Currents.

Archived from the original on 20 May 2011 . Retrieved 18 March 2007 .

^ Mazin B. Qumsiyeh (28 June 2006).

"Discussion on: Searching for Peace in the Palestinian–Israeli Conflict" (PDF) . Institute of Strategic and Development Studies, Andreas Papandreou , University of Athens . Archived from the original (PDF) on 28 September 2007 . Retrieved 18 March 2007 .

^ James Bowen (28 September 2006).

"Making Israel Take Responsibility" . Archived from the original on 1 December 2008 . Retrieved 22 March 2007 .

hafrada (separation) as the Zionist form of apartheid ^ David Pratt (28 May 2006).

"A Third Intifada?" .

Sunday Herald . Archived from the original on 5 October 2015 . Retrieved 26 September 2014 – via Miftah.

Even among Israelis, the term ' Hafrada ' — separation or apartheid in Hebrew — has entered the mainstream lexicon, despite strident denials by the Jewish state that it is engaged in any such process.

^ Jacobs, Sean; Soske, Jon (2015).

Apartheid Israel: The Politics of an Analogy . Chicago: Haymarket Books. pp.

1– 13.

ISBN 978-1-60846-518-7 .

^ Halevi, Ilan. "Apartheid is not socialist".

Revue d'études palestiniennes (22, Winter 2000): 116– 117.

It is significant that the Hebrew word used is hafrada [separation], which expresses the idea of an external action, of a coercive act, and not hipardouth , from the same root, which refers to the notion of self-separation, that is, secession. Thus it really is apartheid in the most classic sense ^ a b Neil Sandler (11 March 2002).

"Israel: A Saudi Peace Proposal Puts Sharon in a Bind" . Business Week Online. Archived from the original on 23 December 2011.

^ Reinhart, Tanya (21 March 2004).

"Sharon's New Plan" .

ZNet . ZCommunications.

Archived from the original on 30 August 2019 . Retrieved 30 August 2019 .

^ Aaron S. Klieman (15 January 2000).

Compromising Palestine: A Guide to Final Status Negotiations . Columbia University Press. p. 1.

ISBN 0-231-11789-2 .

^ Esther Zandberg (28 July 2005).

"Surroundings: Separation Seems to Have Spread Everywhere" .

Haaretz .

Archived from the original on 16 January 2016 . Retrieved 7 June 2017 .

^ Morris, Benny: One State, Two States (New Haven: Yale University Press, 2009), pp. 203–4, n. 1.

^ a b Weiss, Philip (25 January 2023).

" 'Israel is an apartheid state,' but keep the U.S. aid flowing — Rothkopf" .

Mondoweiss .

Archived from the original on 11 May 2023.

^ a b Leila Farsakh (November 2003).

"Israel an apartheid state?" .

Le Monde diplomatique .

Archived from the original on 10 June 2010.

^ John Dugard, "Report of the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in the Palestinian territories occupied since 1967" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 19 March 2009.

(243 KB) (Advance Edited Version), United Nations Human Rights Council, 29 January 2007.

^ McCarthy, Rory (23 February 2007).

"Occupied Gaza like apartheid South Africa, says UN report" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on 20 January 2024.

^ Falk, Richard (30 August 2010), Situation of human rights in the Palestinian territories occupied since 1967 , United Nations General Assembly, A/65/331, archived from the original on 7 March 2022 , retrieved 20 January 2024 ^ McCarthy, Rory (3 February 2010).

"Barak: make peace with Palestinians or face apartheid" .

The Guardian . Archived from the original on 12 February 2017.

^ 'Ex-attorney general urges EU to recognize Palestine,' Archived 25 November 2014 at the Wayback Machine The Times of Israel 23 November 2014.

^ Ex-Mossad chief pans Netanyahu's 'bulls---' speech to Congress (Jerusalem Post, March 3rd, 2015) Archived 10 March 2015 at the Wayback Machine "Israelis gather for mass anti-Netanyahu rally", Financial Times, 7 March 2015 ^ "Welcome – Stop the Wall" .

www.stopthewall.org . Archived from the original on 24 September 2004 . Retrieved 7 September 2020 .

^ Various aspects of the security fence project on Israel's Ministry of Foreign Affairs site Archived 21 July 2011 at the Wayback Machine ^ "United Jerusalem – Historical Perspectives – 4/13/2002" . Archived from the original on 15 March 2008.

^ "Israel: West Bank Barrier Endangers Basic Rights" Archived 27 December 2006 at the Wayback Machine , Human Rights Watch , 1 October 2003.

^ Alan Blenford, "Degree of separation", The Guardian , 30 September 2003, 14.

^ John Pilger , "John Pilger rejects the Law of Silence" Archived 26 April 2014 at the Wayback Machine , New Statesman , 11 April 2005 ^ "The Apartheid Wall" Archived 20 January 2024 at the Wayback Machine , Al Jazeera English, 8 December 2003 ^ Wall Street Journal , "After Sharon", 6 January 2006.

^ Boehlert, Eric.

"Fence? Security barrier? Apartheid wall?" Archived 8 February 2007 at the Wayback Machine , Salon.com , 1 August 2003. Retrieved 1 January 2007.

^ Meron Benvenisti , "Bantustan plan for an apartheid Israel" Archived 20 January 2024 at the Wayback Machine , The Guardian , 26 April 2005.

^ Erlanger, Steven (8 October 2005).

"At Israeli Barrier, More Sound Than Fury" .

The New York Times . Archived from the original on 3 March 2016 – via NYTimes.com.

^ The Supreme Court Sitting as the High Court of Justice Archived 21 November 2008 at the Wayback Machine Beit Sourik Village Council vs. The Government of Israel and Commander of the IDF Forces in the West Bank. (Articles 28–30) ^ "Imposing Middle East Peace" . The Nation). 7 January 2010.

Archived from the original on 25 March 2013 . Retrieved 20 January 2024 .

^ a b Dugard, John.

"Apartheid and the occupation of Palestine" .

english.aljazeera.net .

Archived from the original on 10 November 2011.

^ "Land Grab: Israel's Settlement Policy in the West Bank" .

B'tselem . May 2002.

Archived from the original on 19 January 2024 . Retrieved 20 January 2024 .

^ "Concluding observations of the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination, Israel" .

CERD/C/ISR/CO/13 . Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination. 14 June 2007. Archived from the original on 10 May 2011 . Retrieved 28 October 2010 .

^ "Israel and Occupied Palestinian Territories" . Amnesty International. 2008.

Archived from the original on 27 April 2010 . Retrieved 16 May 2010 .

^ "Israel and the Occupied Palestinian Territories | Amnesty International Report 2009" . Report2009.amnesty.org. Archived from the original on 2 July 2010 . Retrieved 16 May 2010 .

^ Felner, Eitan (November 1999).

"Creeping annexation of the West Bank" .

Le Monde diplomatique .

Archived from the original on 2 August 2009.

^ Assessment of restrictions on Palestinian water sector development, Sector Note April 2009, "Welcome to World Bank Intranet" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 April 2010 . Retrieved 28 June 2009 .

^ Ravid, Barak (17 January 2012).

"French parliament report accuses Israel of water 'apartheid' in West Bank" .

Haaretz .

Archived from the original on 17 January 2012 . Retrieved 17 January 2012 .

^ "Government slams French water 'apartheid' report" .

The Jerusalem Post . 25 December 2010.

Archived from the original on 19 January 2012 . Retrieved 19 January 2012 .

^ Gvirtzman, Haim.

"The Israeli–Palestinian Water Conflict: An Israeli Perspective" (PDF) .

Mideast Security and Policy Studies (94).

Archived (PDF) from the original on 31 January 2015.

^ "The United States of Anxiety: survey reveals a jittery nation overcome" .

Independent.co.uk . 9 September 2003. Archived from the original on 27 February 2010.

^ "Israeli forces begin the removal of infrastructure of the Huwwara".

Bahrain News Agency . 10 February 2011.

^ "West bank movement and access update" (PDF) .

UN Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs occupied Palestinian territory . November 2009. Archived from the original (PDF) on 6 July 2010 . Retrieved 30 December 2009 .

^ a b Dugard, John (29 November 2006).

"Israelis adopt what South Africa dropped" .

Archived from the original on 20 March 2017 . Retrieved 16 April 2017 .

^ Lein, Yehezkel (August 2004).

Forbidden Roads Israel's Discriminatory Road Regime in the West Bank (PDF) (Report). Jerusalem: B'tselem. p. 3.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 March 2013 . Retrieved 3 May 2013 .

^ Finkelstein, Norman G. (2008).

Beyond chutzpah: On the misuse of anti-semitism and the abuse of history (Updated ed.). University of California Press. p. xxviii.

ISBN 978-0-520-24989-9 .

^ see ICJ Legal Consequences of the Construction of a Wall in the Occupied Palestinian Territory (Advisory Opinion). paragraphs 127 and 128.

^ Bishara, Marwan (22 May 2002).

"Apartheid in the territories: Israel's pass laws will wreck peace hopes" .

The New York Times (Opinion). Paris.

Archived from the original on 4 November 2023 . Retrieved 19 April 2024 .

^ Oren, Michael (17 May 2014).

"Israel isn't, and will never be, an apartheid state" .

Los Angeles Times (Opinion). Tel Aviv.

Archived from the original on 6 October 2014.

^ New Laws Legalize Apartheid in Israel. Report from a Palestine Center briefing by Jamal Zahalka , archived from the original on 15 May 2010 Republished from "New Laws Legalize Apartheid in Israel. Report from a Palestine Center briefing by Jamal Zahalka", For the Record , vol. 116, 11 June 2002 ^ Bishara, Azmi (13 May 2004).

"Searching for meaning" .

Al-Ahram . Vol. 690. Archived from the original on 20 November 2006.

^ "Forbidden Roads: The Discriminatory West Bank Road Regime" . Jerusalem: B'Tselem. August 2004.

Archived from the original on 10 October 2006 . Retrieved 2 November 2006 .

^ Hovel, Revital [in Hebrew] ; Levinson, Chaim (27 October 2014).

"AG orders Ya'alon: Explain why Palestinians banned from Israeli-run buses in West Bank" .

Haaretz . Archived from the original on 28 October 2014.

^ Lazaroff, Tovah (26 October 2014).

"Left-wing screams apartheid over new security edict for Palestinian laborers" .

Jerusalem Post .

Archived from the original on 29 October 2014.

^ Route 443: West Bank road for Israelis only . Jerusalem: B'Tselem. 1 October 2008.

^ Harel, Amos (10 May 2010).

"Despite court ruling, Palestinian use of Route 443 likely to be limited" .

Haaretz . Archived from the original on 13 May 2010.

^ Levinson, Chaim (3 March 2013).

"Israel introduces 'Palestinian only' bus lines, following complaints from Jewish settlers" .

Haaretz .

Archived from the original on 4 March 2013 . Retrieved 3 March 2013 .

^ Dawber, Alistair (3 March 2013).

"Israel's Palestinian-only buses prompt apartheid comparisons" .

The Independent .

Archived from the original on 6 March 2013 . Retrieved 3 March 2013 .

^ Tait, Robert (3 March 2013).

"Israel launches Palestinian-only buses amid accusations of racial segregation" .

Daily Telegraph .

Archived from the original on 4 March 2013 . Retrieved 3 March 2013 .

^ Adam & Moodley 2005 , pp.

20f.

: Second-class citizenship: "Above all, both Israeli Palestinians and Coloured and Indian South Africans are restricted to second-class citizen status when another ethnic group monopolizes state power, treats the minorities as intrinsically suspect, and legally prohibits their access to land or allocates civil service positions or per capita expenditure on education differently between dominant and minority citizens." ^ "SPME: 53 Distinguished Stanford Faculty State Publicly, 'Israel is Not An Apartheid State!' " . Scholars for Peace in the Middle East. 12 February 2008.

Archived from the original on 29 July 2014 . Retrieved 20 April 2008 .

^ Goldstone, Richard J. (31 October 2011).

"Israel and the Apartheid Slander" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on 16 February 2017.

^ Goldstone Strikes Fatal Blow to False Apartheid Analogy Archived 16 January 2016 at the Wayback Machine . States News Service. 1 November 2011 ^ "Goldstone: There is no apartheid in Israel" .

Ynetnews . November 2011.

Archived from the original on 2 December 2012.

^ "Amnesty slams Israeli court decision to demolish Palestinian Bedouin village" .

The New Arab . 29 July 2023.

Archived from the original on 17 December 2023 . Retrieved 20 January 2024 .

^ "ISRAEL/OPT: 500 Palestinians facing forcible eviction, displacement, and segregation" . Amnesty International. 28 July 2023.

Archived from the original on 20 January 2024 . Retrieved 20 January 2024 .

^ Qadan v. Israel Lands Administration, HCJ (Israeli Supreme Court) 6698/95, 8 March 2000, as cited by Alan Dershowitz, The Case for Israel (Hoboken: John Wiley & Sons, 2003), p. 157, n. 7 (see p. 253).

^ Bernard Harrison, The Resurgence of Anti-Semitism: Jews, Israel, and Liberal Opinion (Lanham: Rowman & Littlefield, 2006), p. 133.

^ a b c d e f McGreal, Chris (6 February 2006).

"Worlds apart" .

The Guardian . London.

Archived from the original on 29 August 2013 . Retrieved 5 May 2010 .

^ Pfeffer, Anshel; Stern, Yoav (24 September 2007).

"High Court delays ruling on JNF land sales to non-Jews" .

Haaretz .

Archived from the original on 17 March 2014 . Retrieved 16 March 2014 .

^ "נבו - המאגר המשפטי" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 19 August 2012 . Retrieved 20 August 2012 .

^ Jack Khoury (14 September 2011).

"Israel's High Court orders Jewish Galilee town to accept Arab couple" .

Haaretz .

Archived from the original on 28 December 2013 . Retrieved 16 March 2014 .

^ New Israeli laws will increase discrimination against Arabs, critics say Archived 2 August 2018 at the Wayback Machine . 24 March 2011. Edmund Sanders, Los Angeles Times .

^ a b Who's a citizen? Israel.(Israel's citizenship laws) Archived 11 June 2014 at the Wayback Machine The Economist (US). 20 May 2006 ^ Right praises, Left slams High Court rejection of petitions against Citizenship Law Archived 10 June 2014 at the Wayback Machine .

The Jerusalem Post . 13 January 2011 ^ Ben Lynfield.

"Marriage law divides Israeli Arab families" .

Christian Science Monitor .

Archived from the original on 13 March 2006.

^ a b Families fight 'racist' Israeli citizenship law Archived 21 December 2010 at the Wayback Machine Heather Sharp BBC News Tuesday, 9 March 2010 ^ Macintyre, Donald (15 May 2006).

" 'Racist' marriage law upheld by Israel" .

The Independent . Jerusalem.

Archived from the original on 4 June 2010 . Retrieved 17 April 2010 .

^ Gideon Levy , Israeli Apartheid? Look No Further Than This Racist Law Archived 25 May 2022 at the Wayback Machine Haaretz 20 June 2021:' A young man from Kafr Qasem who falls in love with a woman from the West Bank city of Nablus cannot live with her in his country, Israel. A young man from neighboring Kfar Sava can live in his country with whomever he pleases. A woman from the settlement of Itamar , which overlooks Nablus, can in theory marry someone from the Kenyan Masai tribe or a Hindu from Nepal.' ^ Left appalled by citizenship ruling Archived 14 May 2014 at the Wayback Machine at The Jerusalem Post by Sheera Claire Frenkel ^ "Amnesty. Israel and the Occupied Territories: Torn Apart: Families split by discriminatory policies" . Archived from the original on 25 August 2014.

^ "Israel: Don't Outlaw Family Life" . 27 July 2003.

Archived from the original on 20 December 2013.

^ Adam & Moodley 2005 , p.

23 .

^ Amos Schocken (27 June 2008).

"Citizenship law makes Israel an apartheid state" .

Haaretz .

Archived from the original on 17 March 2014 . Retrieved 16 March 2014 .

^ "חוק זכויות התלמיד באנגלית – Pupils' Rights Law" . Cms.education.gov.il.

Archived from the original on 14 June 2012 . Retrieved 16 May 2010 .

^ Susser, Asher (2012).

Israel, Jordan, and Palestine: The Two-State Imperative . Brandeis University Press. p. 130.

doi : 10.2307/j.ctv102bfzn .

ISBN 978-1-61168-038-6 .

JSTOR j.ctv102bfzn .

^ Greenberg, Joel (10 May 2017).

"Israel takes first step towards 'Jewish nation-state' law" .

The Financial Times .

Archived from the original on 4 April 2023.

^ "Full text of MK Avi Dichter's 2017 'Jewish State' bill" .

The Times of Israel . 10 May 2017.

Archived from the original on 5 April 2023.

^ Harkov, Lahav (18 December 2017).

"Government Says It Will Push Jewish Nation-State Bill for First Vote Soon" .

The Jerusalem Post .

Archived from the original on 6 November 2023.

^ Harkov, Lahav (28 November 2017).

"Jewish Nation-State Bill Runs into Trouple with Exclusionary Towns Clause" .

Jerusalem Post .

Archived from the original on 25 December 2023.

^ a b Cook, Jonathan (12 May 2017).

"Knesset's new bill 'portrays racism as entirely normal' " .

Aljazeera .

Archived from the original on 19 March 2020.

^ Newman, Marissa (26 July 2017).

"Opposition warns of 'apartheid' as Knesset starts 'Jewish state bill' debates" .

The Times of Israel .

Archived from the original on 4 April 2023.

^ a b "A cornerstone of apartheid" .

Haaretz . 8 May 2017.

Archived from the original on 14 January 2018.

^ United Nations (30 November 2006).

"International Convention on the Suppression and Punishment of the Crime of Apartheid" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 21 November 2011 . Retrieved 25 April 2010 .

For the purpose of the present Convention, the term 'the crime of apartheid', which shall include similar policies and practices of racial segregation and discrimination as practised in southern Africa, shall apply to the following inhuman acts....

^ United Nations (2002).

"Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court, Part 2, Article 7" (PDF) . pp.

5– 6.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 14 January 2014 . Retrieved 26 April 2010 .

^ "Joint Parallel Report to the United Nations Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination on Israel's Seventeenth to Nineteenth Periodic Reports: 100th Session" (PDF) .

Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights . 2017. Archived from the original (PDF) on 29 April 2021 . Retrieved 20 April 2021 .

^ "Joint Statement: Human rights organisations welcome Concluding Observations of the UN Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination on racial segregation and apartheid on both sides of the Green Line" .

Al Mezan Center for Human Rights . 20 December 2019.

Archived from the original on 16 May 2022 . Retrieved 26 April 2021 .

^ Holmes, Oliver (23 April 2018).

"Palestine files complaint against Israel under anti-racism treaty" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on 9 June 2023 . Retrieved 20 January 2024 .

^ "UN: CERD adopted concluding observations on Cambodia, Colombia, Ireland, Israel and Uzbekistan" . Tokyo, Japan: International Movement Against All Forms of Discrimination and Racism. 17 December 2019.

Archived from the original on 29 April 2021 . Retrieved 26 April 2021 .

^ Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination (27 January 2020).

Concluding observations on the combined seventeenth to nineteenth reports of Israel (Report). Geneva: United Nations Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights.

Archived from the original on 19 January 2024.

^ "Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination closes one hundred and third session after adopting concluding observations on the report of Belgium and a Statement on the rise of racial discrimination against Asians and People of Asian Descent" (Press release). Geneva: United Nations Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights. 30 April 2021.

Archived from the original on 19 April 2024 . Retrieved 19 April 2024 .

^ Salem, Nora (19 November 2021).

"A Procedural Win in Palestine's Quest to Seek Justice for Israel's Apartheid Regime before the CERD" .

Opinio Juris .

Archived from the original on 10 October 2023 . Retrieved 20 January 2024 .

^ Tamada, Dai (9 August 2021).

"Inter-state communication under ICERD: From ad hoc conciliation to collective enforcement?" .

Journal of International Dispute Settlement .

12 (3): 405– 426.

doi : 10.1093/jnlids/idab018 .

hdl : 20.500.14094/90009065 .

ISSN 2040-3585 .

^ The New Arab staff (18 February 2022).

"UN creates expert body to settle Palestine's racism claim against Israel" .

english.alaraby.co.uk/ .

Archived from the original on 4 July 2022 . Retrieved 20 January 2024 .

^ Kwok, Vivian (17 February 2022).

"State of Palestine against Israel: UN Committee sets up ad hoc Conciliation Commission" (Press release). Geneva: United Nations Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights.

Archived from the original on 14 March 2022 . Retrieved 20 January 2024 .

^ Kwok, Vivian (6 May 2022).

"State of Palestine against Israel: Conciliation Commission holds first in-person meeting" (Press release). Geneva: United Nations Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights . Retrieved 19 April 2024 .

^ Eiken, Jan (23 May 2022).

"New Rules of Procedure of the Ad Hoc Conciliation Commission in Palestine v Israel" .

Archived from the original on 28 May 2023 . Retrieved 20 January 2024 .

^ Kattan, Victor (20 March 2024).

"The Implications of An ICJ Finding that Israel is Committing the Crime Against Humanity of Apartheid" .

Just Security .

Archived from the original on 25 April 2024 . Retrieved 25 April 2024 .

^ Imseis, Ardi (10 October 2024).

"A Seismic Change" .

Verfassungsblog .

doi : 10.59704/5d5cdd6931b65eb8 – via verfassungsblog.de.

^ Keane, David (31 July 2024).

" 'Racial Segregation and Apartheid' in the ICJ Palestine Advisory Opinion" .

Archived from the original on 3 August 2024 . Retrieved 6 August 2024 .

^ Findings and recommendations (PDF) (Report). Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination. 21 August 2024.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 10 September 2024 . Retrieved 12 October 2024 .

^ Assessment of the facts (PDF) (Report). Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination. 21 August 2024.

^ Keane, David (5 September 2024).

"A Missed Opportunity: The Decision in Palestine v Israel" .

^ "UN Committee calls for stronger global engagement to address racial discrimination in the Palestine-Israel dispute | OHCHR" .

^ Dugard, John (29 January 2007).

Report of the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in the Palestinian territories occupied since 1967 .

UN Special Rapporteur on Palestine (Report). p. 3. A/HRC/4/17.

Archived from the original on 22 March 2017 . Retrieved 21 March 2017 .

The international community has identified three regimes as inimical to human rights—colonialism, apartheid and foreign occupation. Israel is clearly in military occupation of the OPT. At the same time elements of the occupation constitute forms of colonialism and of apartheid, which are contrary to international law. What are the legal consequences of a regime of prolonged occupation with features of colonialism and apartheid for the occupied people, the occupying Power and third States? It is suggested that this question might appropriately be put to the International Court of Justice for a further advisory opinion.

^ Falk, Richard A.

(13 January 2014).

Report of the Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in the Palestinian territories occupied since 1967 (Report). A/HRC/25/67.

Archived from the original on 2 December 2024 . Retrieved 7 January 2025 .

^ Stoil, Rebecca Shimoni (19 February 2014).

"UN's Falk accuses Israel of 'ethnic cleansing' " .

The Times of Israel .

Archived from the original on 23 June 2014.

^ Nebehay, Stephanie (24 February 2014).

"U.N. rights envoy points to apartheid in Palestinian areas" .

Reuters . Archived from the original on 7 July 2014.

^ Lynk, Michael (21 March 2022).

Report of the special rapporteur on the situation of human rights in the Palestinian territories occupied since 1967 .

ReliefWeb (Report) (Advance Edited Version ed.). p. 17. A/HRC/49/87.

Archived from the original on 4 December 2023 . Retrieved 20 January 2024 .

an institutionalized regime of systematic racial oppression and discrimination has been established.

Final published version: Lynk, Michael (12 August 2022).

Report of the special rapporteur on the situation of human rights in the Palestinian territories occupied since 1967 (Report). p. 17. A/HRC/49/87.

Applying... the International Convention on the Suppression and Punishment of the Crime of Apartheid and the Rome Statute, the Special Rapporteur has concluded that the political system of entrenched rule in the Occupied Palestinian Territory that endows one racial-national-ethnic group with substantial rights, benefits and privileges while intentionally subjecting another group to live behind walls and checkpoints and under a permanent military rule sans droits, sans égalité, sans dignité et sans liberté (without rights, without equality, without dignity and without freedom) satisfies the prevailing evidentiary standard for the existence of apartheid. ... an institutionalized regime of systematic racial oppression and discrimination has been established.

^ The New Arab staff (23 March 2022).

"UN official: Israel imposing apartheid on Palestinians" .

Archived from the original on 15 October 2022 . Retrieved 20 January 2024 .

^ Berman, Lazar (23 March 2022).

"UN Human Rights Council report accuses Israel of apartheid" .

The Times of Israel .

Archived from the original on 23 May 2023 . Retrieved 20 January 2024 .

^ Albanese, Francesca (21 September 2022).

Situation of human rights in the Palestinian territories occupied since 1967 (PDF) (Report). United Nations. A/77/356.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 12 December 2023 . Retrieved 20 January 2024 .

^ The New Arab staff (19 October 2022).

"UN report urges plan to 'end Israeli settler-colonial occupation, apartheid regime' " .

The New Arab .

Archived from the original on 19 October 2022.

^ a b Adem, Seada Hussein (5 April 2019).

"Case selection and crimes under the Rome Statute" .

Palestine and the International Criminal Court . International Criminal Justice Series. Vol. 21. The Hague: T.M.C. Asser Press / Springer . p. 157.

doi : 10.1007/978-94-6265-291-0_5 .

ISBN 978-94-6265-291-0 .

^ Falk, Richard A.

; Tilley, Virginia (2017).

Israeli practices towards the Palestinian people and the question of apartheid (PDF) (Report).

United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 27 April 2021 . Retrieved 20 April 2021 .

^ Walberg, Eric (7 November 2017).

The Canada-Israel nexus . Atlanta: Clarity Press. p. 35.

ISBN 978-0-9986947-0-2 .

Archived from the original on 20 January 2024 . Retrieved 20 January 2024 .

^ Perry, Tom (16 March 2017).

"Israel is imposing 'apartheid regime' on Palestinians, UN agency says" .

The Independent . London.

Archived from the original on 10 December 2023 . Retrieved 25 April 2021 .

^ Perry, Tom; Rabinovitch, Ari; Nichols, Michelle (15 March 2017).

"Israel imposes 'apartheid regime' on Palestinians: U.N. report" .

Reuters .

Archived from the original on 4 December 2023 . Retrieved 20 January 2024 .

^ "End-of-Mission Statement of the UN Special Committee to Investigate Israeli Practices" .

OHCHR . 15 July 2022.

Archived from the original on 28 December 2023 . Retrieved 20 January 2024 .

^ Heaney, Christopher (15 July 2022).

"End-of-mission Statement by the UN Special Committee to Investigate Israeli Practices" .

Archived from the original on 12 December 2023 . Retrieved 20 January 2024 .

^ Decker, Adam (21 July 2022).

"UN claims Israel's West Bank presence subjugates Palestinians 'by design' " .

jewishnews.co.uk .

Archived from the original on 5 April 2023 . Retrieved 20 January 2024 .

^ a b du Plessis, Max ; El-Ajou, Fatmeh; Kattan, Victor; Reynolds, John; Rosenberg, Rina; Scobbie, Iain ; Tilley, Virginia (May 2009).

Tilley, Virginia (ed.).

"Occupation, Colonialism, Apartheid? A re-assessment of Israel's practices in the occupied Palestinian territories under international law" .

Human Sciences Research Council of South Africa. pp.

17– 22. Archived from the original on 22 June 2009 . Retrieved 4 July 2017 .

... practices in South Africa are not the test or benchmark for a finding of apartheid elsewhere, as the principal instrument which provides this test lies in the terms of the Apartheid Convention itself.

(pdf 3.0 MiB) The report does not represent an official position of the HSRC.

South African Academic Study Finds that Israel is Practicing Apartheid and Colonialism in the Occupied Palestinian Territories Archived 26 July 2010 at the Wayback Machine , May 2009.

^ du Plessis et al. 2009 , pp. 205–212.

^ Tilley, Virginia (ed).

Beyond Occupation: Apartheid, Colonialism and International Law in the Occupied Palestinian Territories . London, UK: Pluto Press, 2012.

^ Yesh Din, 9 Jul. 2020, The Occupation of the West Bank and the Crime of Apartheid: Legal Opinion Archived 10 February 2022 at the Wayback Machine The English version of the full legal opinion is here: [1] Archived 11 January 2024 at the Wayback Machine ^ "This is apartheid: The Israeli regime promotes and perpetuates Jewish supremacy between the Mediterranean Sea and the Jordan River" . B'Tselem. 12 January 2021.

Archived from the original on 12 January 2021 . Retrieved 12 January 2021 .

^ "The international community must hold Israel responsible for its crimes of apartheid" .

International Federation for Human Rights .

Archived from the original on 26 April 2022 . Retrieved 26 April 2022 .

^ Holmes, Oliver (27 April 2021).

"Israel is committing the crime of apartheid, rights watchdog says" .

the Guardian .

Archived from the original on 17 May 2023 . Retrieved 27 April 2021 .

^ "Human Rights Watch accuses Israel of 'apartheid' crimes against Palestinians" .

Reuters . 27 April 2021.

Archived from the original on 7 June 2023 . Retrieved 27 April 2021 .

^ "Government welcomes HRW report on Israeli "crimes of apartheid" against Palestinians" .

WAFA . 27 April 2021.

Archived from the original on 4 April 2023 . Retrieved 27 April 2021 .

^ staff, T. O. I. (29 April 2021).

"US rejects Human Rights Watch's accusation of Israeli 'apartheid' " .

www.timesofisrael.com .

Archived from the original on 31 May 2023 . Retrieved 20 January 2024 .

^ Amnesty International (January 2022).

Israel's Apartheid Against Palestinians: Cruel System of Domination and Crime Against Humanity (PDF) (Report). London: Author.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 1 February 2022 . Retrieved 20 January 2024 .

^ "Israeli policies against Palestinians amount to apartheid - Amnesty" .

BBC News . 1 February 2022.

Archived from the original on 20 January 2024 . Retrieved 20 January 2024 .

^ Shezaf, Hagar; Lis, Jonathan; Khoury, Jack (1 February 2022).

"Amnesty Report Accuses Israel of Apartheid Against Palestinians, Including Its Own Citizens" .

Haaretz .

Archived from the original on 25 May 2022 . Retrieved 20 January 2024 .

^ Carey, Andrew (February 2022).

"Amnesty accuses Israel of apartheid, is labeled anti-Semitic in return" .

CNN .

Archived from the original on 4 April 2023 . Retrieved 20 January 2024 .

^ Srivastava, Mehul (1 February 2022).

"Israel's treatment of Palestinians amounts to apartheid, says Amnesty" .

Financial Times .

Archived from the original on 11 December 2022 . Retrieved 1 February 2022 .

^ Krauss, Joseph (1 February 2022).

"Amnesty joins rights groups in accusing Israel of apartheid" .

Associated Press News .

Archived from the original on 20 April 2024 . Retrieved 20 April 2024 .

^ "Israel imposing 'apartheid' on Palestinians: Amnesty" .

Al Jazeera . 1 February 2022.

Archived from the original on 18 January 2024 . Retrieved 20 January 2024 .

^ Khader, Ismael (1 February 2022).

"Amnesty accuses Israel of enforcing 'apartheid' on Palestinians" .

Reuters .

Archived from the original on 8 December 2023 . Retrieved 2 February 2022 .

^ Lazaroff, Tovah (2 February 2022).

"US: Absurd to charge Israel with apartheid, we support a Jewish state" .

The Jerusalem Post .

Archived from the original on 18 June 2023 . Retrieved 20 January 2024 .

^ Escritt, Thomas; Rinke, Andreas; Murray, Miranda (2 February 2022).

"Germany rejects use of word 'apartheid' in connection with Israel" .

Reuters .

Archived from the original on 6 April 2023 . Retrieved 20 January 2024 .

^ Berman, Lazar (4 February 2022).

" 'We do not agree': UK rejects Amnesty report accusing Israel of apartheid" .

The Times of Israel .

Archived from the original on 12 December 2023 . Retrieved 4 February 2022 .

Any judgment on whether serious crimes under international law have occurred is a matter for judicial decision, rather than for governments or non-judicial bodies," they said. The spokesperson added: "As a friend of Israel, we have a regular dialogue on human rights. This includes encouraging the government of Israel to abide by its obligations under international law and do all it can to uphold the values of equality for all.

^ Lazaroff, Tovah (4 February 2022).

"Israel not apartheid state, but must uphold int'l law, UK says" .

The Jerusalem Post .

Archived from the original on 13 September 2023 . Retrieved 6 February 2022 .

^ Harkov, Lahav (2 May 2022).

"Netherlands rejects Amnesty report accusing Israel of apartheid" .

The Jerusalem Post .

Archived from the original on 9 September 2023 . Retrieved 2 May 2022 .

^ The Times of Israel staff (1 February 2022).

" 'Absurd': US rejects Amnesty accusation of Israeli apartheid against Palestinians" .

The Times of Israel .

Archived from the original on 5 April 2023 . Retrieved 20 January 2024 .

^ J Street (1 February 2022).

"Statement on Amnesty International report "Israel's apartheid against Palestinians" " (Press release). Washington, DC: Author.

Archived from the original on 19 January 2024 . Retrieved 20 January 2024 .

The release of Amnesty International's new report on human rights in Israel and the territory it occupies shines another bright spotlight on the injustice of Israel's occupation and the illegality of deepening de facto annexation of the territory it has occupied since 1967. The ongoing denial of fundamental rights and freedoms to millions of Palestinians in occupied territory runs counter to the values on which Israel was founded and undermines its security and international standing. J Street does not endorse the findings or the recommendations of the report, nor do we use the word "apartheid" to describe the situation on the ground. At the same time, we urge Israel and its friends around the world not to use issues with the report as an excuse to avoid grappling with the day-in and day-out realities of occupation and the moral and strategic catastrophe it represents for Israelis and for Palestinians. Supporters of Israel who pour time, energy and resources into attacking anti-occupation activists and human rights organizations are failing to address the very real threat to Israel's future posed by never-ending occupation. Those who level false charges of antisemitism against such activists and experts do a further disservice to the critical fight against the very real scourge of antisemitism.

^ "Human rights organizations in Israel condemn vicious attacks on Amnesty International" (Press release). Tel Aviv, Israel: Gisha – Legal Center for Freedom of Movement. 3 February 2022.

Archived from the original on 5 June 2023 . Retrieved 20 January 2024 .

^ F., K. (4 February 2022).

"Israeli human rights groups defend Amnesty International against scurrilous accusations" . Ramallah: Wafa .

Archived from the original on 21 September 2023 . Retrieved 20 January 2024 .

^ Rosenfeld, Arno (1 February 2022).

"Sweeping Amnesty 'apartheid' report solidifies human rights consensus on Israel" .

The Forward .

Archived from the original on 27 November 2023 . Retrieved 20 January 2024 .

^ Written at London.

"Arab League, OIC welcome Amnesty's report on Israel's 'apartheid' against Palestinians" .

Arab News . Jeddah, Saudi Arabia: Saudi Research & Publishing Company. 3 February 2022.

^ Toameh, Khaled Abu (1 February 2022).

" 'Amnesty paves way to Israeli prosecution:' Palestinians applaud report" .

The Jerusalem Post .

Archived from the original on 22 April 2023 . Retrieved 20 January 2024 .

^ R., T. (28 September 2022).

"Human rights groups: States should act to protect human rights in Palestine, and dismantle Israel's apartheid" . Ramallah: Wafa .

Archived from the original on 6 December 2022 . Retrieved 20 January 2024 .

^ Written at Ramallah.

"States should act to protect human rights in Palestine, and dismantle Israel's apartheid" (Press release). Paris: International Federation for Human Rights. 28 September 2022.

Archived from the original on 27 March 2023 . Retrieved 20 January 2024 .

^ Chehayeb, Kareem (28 March 2023).

"Amnesty: West's 'double standards' fuel Mideast repression" .

Associated Press News . Beirut.

Archived from the original on 1 August 2023 . Retrieved 20 January 2024 .

^ Agence France-Presse (28 March 2023).

"West's Ukraine response exposes 'double standards': Amnesty" .

France 24 . Paris.

Archived from the original on 30 October 2023 . Retrieved 20 January 2024 .

^ Siddiqui, Usaid (28 March 2023).

"Russia-Ukraine war exposed human rights 'double standards' " .

Al Jazeera .

Archived from the original on 28 December 2023 . Retrieved 20 January 2024 .

^ "Amnesty denounces the West's 'racist double standards' " .

Euronews . 28 March 2023.

Archived from the original on 24 August 2023 . Retrieved 20 January 2024 .

^ Iraqi, Amjad (31 July 2023).

"Amnesty is fighting to end Israeli apartheid. Why isn't its German branch?" .

+972 Magazine .

Archived from the original on 7 January 2024 . Retrieved 20 January 2024 .

^ "UN: ICJ denounces Israel's system of apartheid against Palestinians" .

International Commission of Jurists . 25 March 2022.

Archived from the original on 8 April 2022 . Retrieved 16 April 2022 .

^ "In Rare Move, NGO Asks ICC to Probe Israeli Military Prosecutor for Alleged War Crimes" .

Haaretz .

Archived from the original on 15 November 2022 . Retrieved 20 January 2024 .

^ "Human rights org. calls on ICC to probe 'engineer of Israeli apartheid' " .

The Jerusalem Post | JPost.com . 31 October 2022.

Archived from the original on 9 January 2024 . Retrieved 20 January 2024 .

^ The New Arab Staff (31 October 2022).

"DAWN call on ICC to investigate Israel 'apartheid architect' " .

The New Arab .

Archived from the original on 6 November 2022 . Retrieved 20 January 2024 .

^ "International Criminal Court: Investigate Senior Israeli Army Lawyer for War Crimes, Crimes Against Humanity" . 31 October 2022.

Archived from the original on 20 December 2023 . Retrieved 20 January 2024 .

^ "The Apartheid Reports: A Paradigm Shift on Israel/Palestine (Part I)" . 12 April 2022.

Archived from the original on 21 August 2023 . Retrieved 20 January 2024 .

^ Greenstein, Ran (2022).

Anti-Colonial Resistance in South Africa and Israel/Palestine .

doi : 10.4324/9780429020056 .

ISBN 978-0-429-02005-6 .

S2CID 249087245 .

[ page needed ] ^ Adam & Moodley 2005 , p.

xiii .

^ Adam & Moodley 2005 , p.

xv .

^ Adam & Moodley 2005 , p.

22 .

^ Adam & Moodley 2005 , p.

25 .

^ a b Gerstenfeld, Manfred (2 September 2007).

"Deconstructing Apartheid Accusations Against Israel" .

Jerusalem Center for Security and Foreign Affairs .

Jerusalem Center for Public Affairs .

Archived from the original on 20 July 2014 . Retrieved 16 March 2014 .

^ "Here's how experts on the Middle East see the region's key issues, our new survey finds" . 16 February 2021.

Archived from the original on 26 March 2023 . Retrieved 20 January 2024 .

^ Lynch, Marc; Telhami, Shibley (19 February 2021).

"Biden says he will listen to experts. Here is what scholars of the Middle East think" .

Brookings . Retrieved 9 November 2024 .

^ "Academic experts believe that Middle East politics are actually getting worse" . 17 September 2021.

Archived from the original on 5 April 2023 . Retrieved 20 January 2024 .

^ "Israel's One-State Reality" .

Foreign Policy .

Archived from the original on 18 January 2024 . Retrieved 20 January 2024 .

^ a b "Elephant in the room" .

sites.google.com .

Archived from the original on 1 December 2023 . Retrieved 20 January 2024 .

^ a b McGreal, Chris (15 August 2023).

"US Jews urged to condemn Israeli occupation amid Netanyahu censure" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on 4 December 2023 . Retrieved 20 January 2024 .

^ "PLO Negotiations Affairs Department issues a new publication on Israeli apartheid" . WAFA.

Archived from the original on 29 September 2022 . Retrieved 20 January 2024 .

^ It is Apartheid: The Reality of Israel's Colonial Occupation of Palestine (PDF) (Report). State of Palestine Palestine Liberation Organization Negotiation Affairs Department. 30 December 2020.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 1 October 2023 . Retrieved 20 January 2024 .

^ Editorial Board (7 June 2022).

"At Least the West Bank's Secret Is Out" .

Haaretz .

Archived from the original on 11 June 2022 . Retrieved 20 January 2024 .

^ "In 1976 interview, Rabin likens settler ideologues to 'cancer,' warns of 'apartheid'" Archived 7 December 2023 at the Wayback Machine , Toi Staff, The Times of Israel , 25 September 2015.

^ " Olmert to Haaretz: Two-state Solution, or Israel Is Done For Archived 14 January 2018 at the Wayback Machine ", Barak Ravid et al., Haaretz , 29 November 2007.

^ Liel, Ilan Baruch and Alon (8 June 2021).

"It's apartheid, say Israeli ambassadors to South Africa" .

GroundUp News .

Archived from the original on 8 December 2023 . Retrieved 20 January 2024 .

^ Wrobel, Sharon (10 February 2022).

"Israeli Arab Party Leader Abbas Dismisses Charge of 'Apartheid' State: 'Our Fate Here Is to Live Together' " .

Algemeiner .

Archived from the original on 5 April 2023 . Retrieved 20 January 2024 .

^ Ilanit, Chernick.

"Joint List leader: Apartheid exists in Israel's infrastructure and law" .

jpost.com . Jerusalem Post . Retrieved 3 March 2025 .

^ Benyair, Michael (10 February 2022).

"Former AG of Israel: With great sadness I conclude that my country is now an apartheid regime" .

TheJournal.ie .

Archived from the original on 19 January 2024 . Retrieved 20 January 2024 .

^ "EU needs to acknowledge the reality of Israeli apartheid" .

Amnesty . 20 March 2023.

Archived from the original on 5 December 2023 . Retrieved 20 January 2024 .

^ @HaMoked (7 February 2023).

"Twelve human rights organizations in Israel deplore recent statements by EU High Representative @JosepBorrellF regarding @amnesty 's report "Israel's Apartheid against Palestinians" " ( Tweet ) – via Twitter .

^ " 'Israel practices apartheid,' say Israeli law professors" .

Middle East Monitor . 30 March 2023.

Archived from the original on 4 April 2023 . Retrieved 20 January 2024 .

^ "Position Paper No 24: Implications of the Agreement Subordinating the Civil Administration to the Additional Minister in the Ministry of Defense" (PDF) .

The Israeli Law Professors' Forum for Democracy . 5 March 2023.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 4 April 2023 . Retrieved 20 January 2024 .

^ "U.S. Lawmakers Demand Action From Biden on Israel's Judicial Overhaul, Annexation Threat" .

Haaretz .

Archived from the original on 15 March 2023 . Retrieved 20 January 2024 .

^ "Israel's Cabinet Just Advanced Full-fledged Apartheid in the West Bank" .

Haaretz .

Archived from the original on 19 March 2023 . Retrieved 20 January 2024 .

^ "Former IDF commander: There is absolute apartheid in the West Bank" .

The Jerusalem Post . 13 August 2023.

Archived from the original on 13 August 2023 . Retrieved 13 August 2023 .

^ "Ex-Israeli General Says Army Partner in West Bank War Crimes, Invokes Nazi Germany" .

Haaretz .

Archived from the original on 13 August 2023 . Retrieved 20 January 2024 .

^ Azulay, Moran (13 August 2023).

"Ex-Mossad chief: in controversial statement, 'Israel enforcing apartheid' " .

Ynetnews .

Archived from the original on 6 September 2023 . Retrieved 6 September 2023 .

^ a b McGreal, Chris (6 September 2023).

"Israel imposing apartheid on Palestinians, says former Mossad chief" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on 19 January 2024 . Retrieved 20 January 2024 .

^ "EU needs to acknowledge the reality of Israeli apartheid" .

Amnesty International . 20 March 2023.

Archived from the original on 5 December 2023 . Retrieved 28 April 2023 .

^ "x.com" .

Archived from the original on 27 November 2024 . Retrieved 1 July 2024 .

^ Tamkin, Emily (26 January 2024).

"I Regret to Report There's a New Antisemitism Controversy at Harvard" .

Slate – via slate.com.

^ Handmaker, Jeff (18 February 2022).

"Opinion – The Silencing of Amnesty International's Report on Israeli Apartheid" .

^ Hafetz, Jonathan; Aziz, Sahar (27 December 2023).

"How a Leading Definition of Antisemitism Has Been Weaponized Against Israel's Critics" – via www.thenation.com.

^ 'History of USUN Ambassadors' Archived 10 November 2010 at the Wayback Machine . Ambassador Daniel P. Moynihan. Archive of the US Mission to the UN.

^ "United Nations: Zionism Vote: Rage & Discord" .

Time . 24 November 1975. Archived from the original on 16 March 2008 . Retrieved 5 May 2010 .

^ Kirk, Donald (11 November 1975). "Zionism is Racism, U.N. Votes; 'Terrible Evil Loose,' U.S. Says".

Chicago Tribune .

^ Jordan Jr., Vernon E. (18 November 1975). "Zionism, Racism-and Anti-Semitism Too".

Record (Hackensack, NJ) .

^ "General Assembly Repeals Resolution Equating Zionism with Racism" .

United Nations . No. UN7664614. 16 December 1991.

Archived from the original on 10 November 2024 . Retrieved 27 October 2024 .

^ " Kerry: Israel could become an 'apartheid state' Archived 3 November 2022 at the Wayback Machine ", Lazar Berman, The Times of Israel , 28 April 2014.

^ "South Africa's de Klerk: Israel not an apartheid state" Archived 4 April 2023 at the Wayback Machine (27 May 2014), The Times of Israel ^ "Israel 'is an apartheid state,' a quarter of U.S. Jews say in new poll" .

Haaretz .

Archived from the original on 16 October 2023 . Retrieved 20 January 2024 .

^ " 'They're Making a Mistake': Biden Rejects Progressive Democrats' Criticism of Israel" .

Haaretz .

Archived from the original on 20 October 2022 . Retrieved 22 September 2022 .

^ Berkowitz, Adam Eliyahu (27 April 2023).

"Nearly half of Democrats see Israel as apartheid, support BDS, new poll shows" .

Archived from the original on 31 May 2023 . Retrieved 20 January 2024 .

^ Telhami, Shibley (25 April 2023).

"Is Israel a democracy? Here's what Americans think" .

Brookings Institution .

Archived from the original on 3 May 2023 . Retrieved 26 April 2023 .

It is clear that public attitudes about Israel are shifting. The term "apartheid" appears to have become a common term among many Americans, especially Democrats ^ " 'Israel's a failed democracy': American attitudes towards US ally shifting, says poll" .

Middle East Eye .

Archived from the original on 25 September 2023 . Retrieved 20 January 2024 .

^ "US House overwhelmingly passes GOP resolution backing Israel, meant to rebuke Dems" .

Times of Israel . 19 July 2023.

Archived from the original on 11 October 2023 . Retrieved 20 January 2024 .

^ "Americans' Views on Israel Are Changing. Washington's Isn't" .

Time . 19 July 2023.

Archived from the original on 17 December 2023 . Retrieved 20 January 2024 .

^ "France: Jewish-Arab riots show Israel at risk of 'long-lasting apartheid' " .

The Times of Israel .

Archived from the original on 9 November 2023 . Retrieved 20 January 2024 .

^ Harkov, Lahav (24 May 2021).

"French FM warns Israel on its way to apartheid" . The Jerusalem Post.

Archived from the original on 30 April 2022 . Retrieved 30 April 2022 .

^ "El Parlament declara que "Israel comet el crim d'apartheid contra el poble palestí" " .

RacoCatalà (in Catalan).

Archived from the original on 16 June 2022 . Retrieved 17 June 2022 .

^ "El Parlament acusa Israel de "pràctiques equivalents a l'apartheid" contra els palestins" .

CCMA (in Catalan). 17 June 2022.

Archived from the original on 17 June 2022 . Retrieved 17 June 2022 .

^ "El Parlament equipara la gestió d'Israel amb l'apartheid" .

El Punt Avui (in Catalan).

Archived from the original on 16 June 2022 . Retrieved 17 June 2022 .

^ Welle (www.dw.com), Deutsche.

"Germany's Scholz rejects use of 'apartheid' to describe Israel | DW | 16.08.2022" .

DW.COM .

Archived from the original on 4 April 2023 . Retrieved 17 August 2022 .

^ Marc Botenga; Manu Pineda; João Pimenta Lopes; Marisa Matias; Chris MacManus.

"Parliamentary question | Amnesty International report on Israeli apartheid against the Palestinian people" .

European Parliament .

Archived from the original on 4 April 2023 . Retrieved 20 January 2024 .

^ Tucak, Ivana (13 January 2023).

"Amnesty International report on Israeli apartheid against the Palestinian people - EU Commission answer" .

INSIGHT EU MONITORING .

Archived from the original on 23 October 2023 . Retrieved 20 January 2024 .

^ "EU Foreign Minister Says the Term 'Apartheid' Is Inappropriate to Describe Israel" .

Haaretz .

Archived from the original on 15 March 2023 . Retrieved 20 January 2024 .

^ "Israeli human rights organizations deplore EU High Representative equating Amnesty with antisemitism" . WAFA.

Archived from the original on 22 March 2023 . Retrieved 20 January 2024 .

^ "Israeli Rights Groups Slam EU's Top Diplomat For Implying That Amnesty's Apartheid Report Is Antisemitic" .

Haaretz .

Archived from the original on 29 March 2023 . Retrieved 20 January 2024 .

^ Mahler, Maya (9 February 2023).

"Barcelona cuts ties with Israel over 'apartheid' treatment of Palestinians" .

Ynetnews . Ynet.

Archived from the original on 28 September 2023 . Retrieved 20 January 2024 .

^ "Barcelona mayor severs ties with twin city of Tel Aviv, citing Israeli 'apartheid' " .

The Jerusalem Post . 9 February 2023.

Archived from the original on 9 February 2023 . Retrieved 9 February 2023 .

^ "Madrid offers to partner with Tel Aviv after Barcelona severs 'twin city' ties" .

The Jerusalem Post . 11 February 2023.

Archived from the original on 11 February 2023 . Retrieved 11 February 2023 .

^ "UK rejects Israel 'apartheid' label in new trade and security pact" .

Middle East Eye .

Archived from the original on 11 October 2023 . Retrieved 20 January 2024 .

^ Magid, Jacob.

"Departing EU envoy: I won't accuse Israel of apartheid, but it's worthy of discussion" .

www.timesofisrael.com .

Archived from the original on 4 August 2023 . Retrieved 20 January 2024 .

^ " 'Accusing Israel of apartheid is not anti-Semitic': Holocaust historian" .

www.aljazeera.com .

Archived from the original on 20 December 2023 . Retrieved 20 January 2024 .

^ Goldberg, Amos (23 August 2023).

"Israel muss den Vorwurf aushalten, ein Apartheid-Regime zu sein" .

Faz.net .

Archived from the original on 29 August 2023 . Retrieved 20 January 2024 – via www.faz.net.

^ "German Antisemitism Czar Says Calling Israel 'Apartheid' Is Antisemitic" .

Haaretz .

Archived from the original on 10 January 2024 . Retrieved 20 January 2024 .

^ "African Union" . African Union.

Archived from the original on 28 September 2022 . Retrieved 20 January 2024 .

^ "Decisions, Declarations and Resolution of the Thirty-Six Ordinary Session of the Assembly of the Union" . African Union.

Archived from the original on 17 October 2023 . Retrieved 6 October 2023 .

^ Lazaroff, Tovah (26 July 2022).

"South African official calls for Israel to be declared 'apartheid state' " .

The Jerusalem Post .

Archived from the original on 17 January 2024 . Retrieved 20 January 2024 .

^ Myeni, Thabi (26 July 2022).

"South Africa calls for Israel to be declared an 'apartheid state' " .

Al Jazeera .

Archived from the original on 17 January 2024 . Retrieved 20 January 2024 .

^ The New Arab Staff (26 August 2022).

"Apartheid label is 'wake up call', Israeli ex-official says" .

The New Arab .

Archived from the original on 27 September 2022 . Retrieved 20 January 2024 .

^ Fang, Katherine; Apt, Clara (22 September 2022).

"Tracking UNGA 77: Notable Moments and Key Themes" .

Just Security . Reiss Center on Law and Security at New York University School of Law.

Archived from the original on 17 January 2024 . Retrieved 20 January 2024 .

^ Yahya (21 March 2017).

"Israel accused of apartheid at UN Human Rights Council" .

International Shia News Agency .

Archived from the original on 17 October 2023 . Retrieved 6 October 2023 .

^ "Ministry of Foreign Affairs" .

mofa.gov.bd .

Archived from the original on 12 October 2023 . Retrieved 6 October 2023 .

^ "La Paz, Estado Plurinacional de Bolivia - 4 de agosto de 2014 - EN DEFENSA DE PALESTINA" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 24 December 2023 . Retrieved 20 January 2024 .

^ "Cuba reiterates its support for the Palestinian cause and denounces Israel's apartheid practice in the occupied Palestinian territories" .

CUBADIPLOMATICA . 26 July 2022.

Archived from the original on 17 October 2023 . Retrieved 6 October 2023 .

^ a b c d Lew, Henry R. (29 November 2021).

Patterson of Israel . Hybrid Publishers.

ISBN 978-1-925736-92-2 .

Archived from the original on 30 October 2023 . Retrieved 20 January 2024 .

^ a b c Corder, Mike (29 December 2023).  Written at The Hague, Netherlands.

"South Africa launches case at top UN court accusing Israel of genocide in Gaza" .

Associated Press News . New York City . Retrieved 3 January 2024 .

^ "KSA calls on Security Council to restore people's confidence in international institutions" .

Archived from the original on 6 October 2023 . Retrieved 6 October 2023 .

^ "Venezuela condemns new military phase in Israel's long colonial war against Palestine - MPPRE" .

mppre.gob.ve .

Archived from the original on 17 October 2023 . Retrieved 6 October 2023 .

^ Kolappan, B. (4 April 2025).

"CPI(M) conference adopts resolution to declare Israel an 'apartheid State' " .

The Hindu .

ISSN 0971-751X . Retrieved 16 July 2025 .

^ Vail, Tiffany (19 July 2021).

"Synod delegates approve resolution decrying oppression of Palestinian people" . United Church of Christ.

Archived from the original on 21 November 2023 . Retrieved 21 November 2023 .

^ Bandler, Kenneth (16 August 2021).

"The United Church of Christ's obsession with Israel - opinion" .

Jerusalem Post .

Archived from the original on 21 September 2023 . Retrieved 21 November 2023 .

^ Staff, The New Arab (30 June 2022).

"US Presbyterian Church declares Israel 'apartheid state' " .

english.alaraby.co.uk .

Archived from the original on 21 October 2022 . Retrieved 20 January 2024 .

^ "US Presbyterian Church: Israel is apartheid state, creates Nakba Day" .

The Jerusalem Post - Christian World . 29 June 2022.

Archived from the original on 12 January 2024 . Retrieved 20 January 2024 .

^ "Presbyterian Church vote declaring Israel an apartheid state upsets Jewish groups" . WAPO.

^ "World Council of Churches General Assembly puts Israeli apartheid on the global church's table" .

Mondoweiss . 10 September 2022.

Archived from the original on 12 July 2023 . Retrieved 20 January 2024 .

^ "World Council of Churches denounces Israel's apartheid and occupation, calls for divestment and sanctions" .

Mondoweiss . 26 June 2025 . Retrieved 1 July 2025 .

^ "American Churches Launch Initiative to End Israel's Apartheid" . 7 June 2023.

Archived from the original on 14 December 2023 . Retrieved 20 January 2024 .

^ "Another North American church names Israeli apartheid" .

Mondoweiss . 30 July 2023.

Archived from the original on 4 December 2023 . Retrieved 20 January 2024 .

^ "US-based Christian mission accuses Israel of 'apartheid' in new letter" .

The Jerusalem Post - Christian World . 26 February 2022.

Archived from the original on 30 July 2023 . Retrieved 20 January 2024 .

^ "South Africa Anglican Church declares Israel apartheid state" .

The New Arab . 2 October 2023.

Archived from the original on 17 January 2024 . Retrieved 20 January 2024 .

^ "PSC Resolutions declaring Israel an apartheid state and on pilgrimages to the Holy Land – Anglican Church of Southern Africa" .

Archived from the original on 4 December 2023 . Retrieved 20 January 2024 .

^ "ICRC official: Israel is not an apartheid state, but there is occupation" . Ynet News. 26 April 2017.

Archived from the original on 15 May 2017.

^ Benjakob, Omer (29 November 2020).

"On Wikipedia, Israel is losing the battle against the word 'apartheid' " .

Haaretz .

Archived from the original on 15 September 2022 . Retrieved 7 March 2024 .

^ Nieva, Richard.

"Google And Amazon Workers Protest Their Companies' $1.2 Billion AI Contract With Israel" .

Forbes .

Archived from the original on 4 April 2023 . Retrieved 20 January 2024 .

^ Essa, Azad (9 September 2022).

" 'Google chooses apartheid over justice': Workers protest against Project Nimbus" .

Middle East Eye . New York City.

Archived from the original on 21 July 2023 . Retrieved 20 January 2024 .

^ "Google employee resigns saying company 'silences Palestinians' " .

www.aljazeera.com .

Archived from the original on 1 October 2023 . Retrieved 20 January 2024 .

^ "Former UN chief says Israeli oppression 'arguably constitutes apartheid' " .

Middle East Eye .

Archived from the original on 19 January 2024 . Retrieved 20 January 2024 .

^ Ki-moon, Ban (29 June 2021).

"Ban Ki-moon: US should back a new approach to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict" .

Financial Times .

Archived from the original on 11 December 2022 . Retrieved 25 September 2021 .

^ "Former UN chief says Israel's treatment of Palestinians may constitute apartheid" .

AP News . 22 June 2023.

Archived from the original on 4 January 2024 . Retrieved 20 January 2024 .

^ "Israel 'Drifting Into Apartheid' With 'Government Driving Jewish Supremacy': What ex-UN Chiefs Saw on Their Visit" .

Haaretz .

Archived from the original on 3 July 2023 . Retrieved 20 January 2024 .

^ "Hundreds of Israeli Academics and Public Figures: Judicial Coup and Occupation 'Directly Linked' " .

Haaretz .

Archived from the original on 19 October 2023 . Retrieved 20 January 2024 .

^ "In Israel and the U.S., 'apartheid' is the elephant in the room" . WAPO. 11 August 2023.

^ Pilkington, Ed (31 October 2023).

"Top UN official in New York steps down citing 'genocide' of Palestinian civilians" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on 31 October 2023 . Retrieved 1 November 2023 .

^ Houghtaling, Ellie Quinlan (31 October 2023).

"He Went There: Top U.N. Official Resigns Citing "Genocide" in Gaza" .

The New Republic .

Archived from the original on 13 November 2023 . Retrieved 20 January 2024 .

^ Amnesty International USA (18 February 2024).

"Israel Must End Its Occupation of Palestine to Stop Fueling Apartheid and Systematic Human Rights Violations" (Press release). Amnesty International USA . Retrieved 20 February 2024 .

^ Korzinski, David (7 November 2023).

"Israel-Gaza: Canadians share sympathies with both sides in warzone, two-thirds call for ceasefire" .

Angus Reid Institute .

Archived from the original on 19 January 2024 . Retrieved 3 December 2023 .

^ lim, Audrea, ed. (2 May 2012).

The Case for Sanctions Against Israel . Verso Books.

ISBN 978-1-84467-803-7 .

^ Tutu, Desmond (16 June 2014).

"Presbyterian General Assembly Biennial Meeting: My Message on Israel and Palestine" .

The Huffington Post .

^ "Desmond Tutu: U.S. Christians Must Recognize Israel as Apartheid State" .

Haaretz . 17 June 2014.

^ a b Friel, Howard (21 September 2013).

Chomsky and Dershowitz: On Endless War and the End of Civil Liberties . Interlink Publishing.

ISBN 978-1-62371-035-4 .

^ a b Davis, Uri (2003).

Apartheid Israel: Possibilities for the Struggle Within . Zed Books.

ISBN 978-1-84277-339-0 .

^ Tutu, Desmond (28 April 2002).

"Apartheid in the Holy Land" .

The Guardian (Opinion).

Archived from the original on 26 August 2013 . Retrieved 26 June 2017 .

^ Esack, Farid (6 September 2006), Learning from South Africa: Religion, Violence, Nonviolence, and International Engagement in the Israeli-Palestinian Struggle , Oak Park, Illinois, United States: Committee for a Just Peace in Israel and Palestine, archived from the original on 21 October 2007 , retrieved 24 October 2006 , The logic of Apartheid is akin to the logic of Zionism.... Life for the Palestinians is infinitely worse than what we ever had experienced under Apartheid.... The price they (Palestinians) have had to pay for resistance much more horrendous.

Speech presented at Oak Park Public Library.

Audio recording MP3 ^ Kasrils, Ronnie (2 September 2006).

"Rage of the elephant: Israel in Lebanon" .

The Mail & Guardian (Opinion). Johannesburg, South Africa.

Archived from the original on 28 October 2008 . Retrieved 19 April 2024 .

^ "Apartheid Israel can be defeated, says Winnie" , Independent Online , Cape Town, South Africa, 26 March 2004, archived from the original on 26 October 2007 , retrieved 3 November 2006 , Apartheid Israel can be defeated, just as apartheid in South Africa was defeated ^ Mahoney, John F. (March 1986), "About this issue: The Israeli-South African-U.S. Alliance" , The Link , vol. 19, no. 1, New York City: Americans for Middle East Understanding, p. 2, archived from the original on 27 September 2007 , retrieved 6 November 2006 ^ Ghandhi, Arun Manilal (29 August 2004).

Occupation "Ten Times Worse than Apartheid" (Speech). Palestine: Palestinian National Authority, State Information Service, International Press Center. Archived from the original on 27 August 2006 . Retrieved 17 September 2006 .

When I come here and see the situation [in the Palestinian territories], I find that what is happening here is ten times worse than what I had experienced in South Africa. This is Apartheid.

^ Macintyre, Donald (11 July 2008).

" 'This is like apartheid': ANC veterans visit West Bank" .

The Independent . London. Archived from the original on 29 July 2008.

^ Levy, Gideon (12 July 2008).

"Twilight Zone / 'Worse than apartheid' " .

Haaretz .

Archived from the original on 23 August 2013.

^ Ahren, Raphael (15 May 2018).

"South African leaders tell country's Jews to reject 'Nazi-like' Israel" .

Times of Israel . Retrieved 12 August 2018 .

^ Bachner, Michael (14 May 2018).

"South Africa recalls envoy to Israel over 'violent aggression' on Gaza border" .

Times of Israel .

Archived from the original on 14 May 2018 . Retrieved 12 August 2018 .

^ Ngugi, Mukoma Wa (23 July 2008).

"What Palestine is to me: An interview with Fatima Hassan" .

Pambazuka News . Nairobi, Kenya: Fahamu .

Archived from the original on 3 August 2008 . Retrieved 13 August 2008 .

^ Polakow-Suransky, Sasha (2010).

The Unspoken Alliance: Israel's Secret Relationship with Apartheid South Africa . New York City: Pantheon Books. pp.

236– 239.

ISBN 978-0-375-42546-2 .

^ Polakow-Suransky 2010 , pp. 239–242.

^ Polakow-Suransky 2010 , pp. 233–235.

^ Holmes, Oliver (9 June 2020).

"What would Israel annexing the West Bank mean" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on 9 June 2020.

^ Pogrund, Benjamin (10 August 2023).

"For decades, I defended Israel from claims of apartheid. I no longer can" .

Haaretz (Opinion).

Archived from the original on 14 August 2023.

^ Carl, Traci (29 December 2023).

"South Africa accuses Israel of genocide in a U.N. court" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 .

Archived from the original on 30 December 2023 . Retrieved 30 December 2023 .

Further reading Adam, Heribert ; Moodley, Kogila (2005).

Seeking Mandela: Peacemaking between Israelis and Palestinians . Philadelphia: Temple University Press.

ISBN 978-1-59213-396-3 .

OCLC 56955855 .

Excerpt .

Carter, Jimmy .

Palestine: Peace Not Apartheid . Simon & Schuster, 2006.

ISBN 0-7432-8502-6 Davis, Uri .

Apartheid Israel: Possibilities for the Struggle Within . Zed Books, 2004.

ISBN 1-84277-339-9 Fischer, Nina (2021).

"Palestinian Non-Violent Resistance and the Apartheid Analogy: Framing Israeli Policy in the 1960s and 1970s" .

Interventions .

23 (8): 1124– 1139.

doi : 10.1080/1369801X.2020.1816853 .

S2CID 234662442 .

Greenstein, Ran (2010).

"Israel/Palestine: Apartheid of a Special Type?" .

The Johannesburg Salon . Vol. 3. Johannesburg Workshop in Theory and Criticism. pp.

9– 18. Archived from the original on 25 February 2011.

PDF Hever, Shir (2021). "Toward a Political Economy of Apartheid and Inequality in Israel/Palestine".

Political Economy of Palestine: Critical, Interdisciplinary, and Decolonial Perspectives . Springer International Publishing. pp.

177– 194.

ISBN 978-3-030-68643-7 .

Lavie, Smadar (2003).

"Lilly white feminism and academic apartheid in Israel" (PDF) .

Anthropology News .

44 (7): 10– 11.

doi : 10.1111/an.2003.44.7.10 .

ISSN 1541-6151 .

White, Ben (2014).

Israeli Apartheid: A Beginner's Guide . Pluto Press.

doi : 10.2307/j.ctt183p6bk .

ISBN 978-0-7453-3463-9 .

JSTOR j.ctt183p6bk .

External links Wikimedia Commons has media related to Israeli apartheid .

Wikiquote has quotations related to Israeli apartheid .

International Human Rights Clinic at Harvard Law School and Adameer Apartheid in the Occupied West Bank: A Legal Analysis of Israel's Actions ( PDF ) Journeyman Pictures (2012, reposted in Oct. 2023) Shocking insight into Israel's Apartheid | Roadmap to Apartheid Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Israeli_apartheid&oldid=1306318980 " Categories : Israeli apartheid Israel–South Africa relations Political repression in Israel Gaza–Israel conflict Definition of racism controversy Discrimination in Israel Hidden categories: Articles containing Hebrew-language text Articles containing Afrikaans-language text CS1 Italian-language sources (it) CS1 location test CS1 uses Hebrew-language script (he) Webarchive template wayback links CS1 interwiki-linked names Articles containing French-language text Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from October 2022 CS1 Catalan-language sources (ca) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia extended-confirmed-protected pages Use dmy dates from May 2020 Articles with excerpts All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2017 All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from May 2022 All articles with self-published sources Articles with self-published sources from July 2023 CS1: unfit URL Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 17 August 2025, at 03:54 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Israeli apartheid 19 languages Add topic

