Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Psychology 2 Economics 3 Anthropology Toggle Anthropology subsection 3.1 Sociology 4 History 5 See also 6 References 7 Bibliography 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Cultural bias 9 languages العربية Español Euskara فارسی Français Hrvatski Italiano עברית 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Interpretation and judgement of phenomena by the standards of one's culture Cultural bias is the interpretation and judgment of phenomena by the standards of one's own culture. It is sometimes considered a problem central to social and human sciences, such as economics , psychology , anthropology , and sociology . Some practitioners of these fields have attempted to develop methods and theories to compensate for or eliminate cultural bias.

Cultural bias occurs when people of a culture make assumptions about conventions, including conventions of language, notation, proof and evidence. They are then accused of mistaking these assumptions for laws of logic or nature. Numerous such biases exist, concerning cultural norms for color, mate selection, concepts of justice, linguistic and logical validity, the acceptability of evidence, and taboos.

Psychology [ edit ] Cultural bias has no a priori definition.

[ clarification needed ] Instead, its presence is inferred from differential performance of socioracial (e.g., Blacks , Whites ), ethnic (e.g., Latinos /Latinas, Anglos ), or national groups (e.g., Americans , Japanese ) on measures of psychological constructs such as cognitive abilities, knowledge or skills (CAKS), or symptoms of psychopathology (e.g., depression). Historically, the term grew out of efforts to explain between group score differences on CAKS tests primarily of African American and Latino/Latina American test takers relative to their White American counterparts and concerns that test scores should not be interpreted in the same manner across those groups in the name of fairness and equality (see also Cognitive dissonance ). Although the concept of cultural bias in testing and assessment also pertains to score differences and potential misdiagnoses with respect to a broader range of psychological concepts, particularly in applied psychology and other social and behavioral sciences, this aspect of cultural bias has received less attention in the relevant literature.

[ 1 ] Cultural bias in psychological testing refers to the standardized psychological tests that are conducted to determine the level of intelligence among the test-takers. Limitations of such verbal or non-verbal intelligence tests have been observed since their introduction. Many tests have been objected to, as they produced poor results for the ethnic or racial minorities (students), as compared to the racial majorities. There is minimal evidence supporting claims of cultural bias and cross-cultural examination is both possible and done frequently.

[ 2 ] As discussed above, the learning environment, the questions posed or situations given in the test may be familiar and strange at the same time to students from different backgrounds [ 3 ] [ better source needed ] - the type of ambiguity in which intellectual differences become apparent in individual capacities to resolve the strange-yet-familiar entity.

Economics [ edit ] Cultural bias in economic exchange is often overlooked. A study done at the Northwestern University [ 4 ] suggests that the cultural perception that two countries have of each other plays a large factor in the economic activity between them. The study suggests that low bilateral trust between two countries results in less trade, less portfolio investment , and less direct investment . The effect is amplified for goods, as they are more trust-intensive.

Anthropology [ edit ] The concept of culture theory in anthropology explains that cultural bias is a critical piece of human group formation.

Sociology [ edit ] It is thought that societies with conflicting beliefs will more likely have cultural bias, as it is dependent on the group's standing in society in which the social constructions affect how a problem is produced. One example of cultural bias within the context of sociology can be seen in a study done at the University of California by Jane R. Mercer [ 5 ] of how test "validity", "bias", and "fairness" in different cultural belief systems affect one's future in a pluralistic society. A definition of the cultural bias was given as "the extent that the test contains cultural content that is generally peculiar to the members of one group but not to the members of another group", which leads to a belief that "the internal structure of the test will differ for different cultural groups".

[ 5 ] In addition, the different types of errors made on culture-biased tests are dependent on different cultural groups. The idea progressed to the conclusion that a non-cultural-test represents the ability of a population as intended and not the abilities of a group that is not represented.

History [ edit ] Cultural bias may also arise in historical scholarship when the standards, assumptions and conventions of the historian's own era are anachronistically used to report and to assess events of the past. The tendency is sometimes known as presentism , and is regarded by many historians as a fault to be avoided.

[ 6 ] Arthur Marwick has argued that "a grasp of the fact that past societies are very different from our own, and... very difficult to get to know" is an essential and fundamental skill of the professional historian; and that "anachronism is still one of the most obvious faults when the unqualified (those expert in other disciplines, perhaps) attempt to do history." [ 7 ] See also [ edit ] Cognitive bias Confirmation bias Cultural pluralism Determinism Embodied philosophy Environmental racism Ethnocentrism Framing (social sciences) Goodness and value theory Observer-expectancy effect Out-group homogeneity Social Darwinism Social learning theory Theory-ladenness Ultimate attribution error Xenocentrism References [ edit ] ^ Helms, Janet (January 30, 2010). "Cultural Bias in Psychological Testing". In Weiner, I. B.; Craighead, W. E. (eds.).

The Corsini Encyclopedia of Psychology . Wiley Online Library, American Cancer Society. pp.

1– 3.

doi : 10.1002/9780470479216.corpsy0244 .

ISBN 9780470479216 .

^ Reynolds, Cecil R.; Suzuki, Lisa A. (26 September 2012), "Bias in Psychological Assessment" , onlinelibrary.wiley.com , doi : 10.1002/9781118133880.hop210004 , ISBN 9780470619049 , retrieved 29 July 2021 – via Wiley Online Library ^ PsycholoGenie (2015-05-30).

"Understanding the Phenomena of Cultural Bias With Examples" .

psychologenie.com . Retrieved April 19, 2018 .

^ Guiso, Luigi; Sapienza, Paola; Zingales, Luigi (2009).

"Cultural Biases in Economic Exchange?" (PDF) .

Quarterly Journal of Economics .

124 (3): 1095– 1131.

doi : 10.1162/qjec.2009.124.3.1095 .

hdl : 1814/7496 .

^ a b Mercer, Jane R. (March 1978). "Test "validity", "bias", and "fairness": An analysis from the perspective of the sociology of knowledge".

Interchange .

9 (1): 1– 16.

doi : 10.1007/BF01807733 .

S2CID 145729742 .

^ Fischer, David H.

(1970).

Historians' Fallacies: toward a logic of historical thought . New York: Harper & Row. pp.

137–9 .

ISBN 978-0061315459 .

^ Marwick, Arthur (2001).

The New Nature of History: knowledge, evidence, language . Basingstoke: Palgrave. p. 63.

ISBN 978-0-333-96447-7 .

Bibliography [ edit ] Afolabi, Olusegun Emmanuel (2014).

Test and Measurement: bias and cultural diversity in psychological assessment . Grin Verlag.

ISBN 978-3656588085 .

Boholm, Åsa (1996). "Risk perception and social anthropology: Critique of cultural theory".

Ethnos .

61 ( 1– 2): 64– 84.

doi : 10.1080/00141844.1996.9981528 .

Douglas, Mary (1982).

"Cultural bias" .

In the Active Voice . London: Routledge.

ISBN 978-0710090652 .

OCLC 7948115 .

Flanagan, Cara (2004).

Psychology: the ultimate study guide . London: Letts Educational.

ISBN 9781843154785 .

Guiso, Luigi; Sapienza, Paola; Zingales, Luigi (2009).

"Cultural Biases in Economic Exchange?" (PDF) .

Quarterly Journal of Economics .

124 (3): 1095– 1131.

doi : 10.1162/qjec.2009.124.3.1095 .

hdl : 1814/7496 .

Helms, Janet E. (30 January 2010). "Cultural Bias in Psychological Testing". In Weiner, I. B.; Craighead, W. E. (eds.).

The Corsini Encyclopedia of Psychology . Wiley Online Library. pp.

1– 3.

doi : 10.1002/9780470479216.corpsy0244 .

ISBN 9780470479216 .

Seidner, Stanley S. (1982).

Ethnicity, Language, and Power from a Psycholinguistic Perspective . Brussels: Centre de Recherche sur le Plurilinguisme.

OCLC 51685367 . Archived from the original on 2016-12-08 . Retrieved 2016-05-11 .

Spielberger, Charles Donald, ed. (2004).

Encyclopedia of Applied Psychology . Elsevier Academic Press.

ISBN 978-0126574104 .

Stevenson, Andrew (2010).

Cultural Issues in Psychology: a student's handbook . London: Routledge.

ISBN 9780415429221 .

External links [ edit ] "Understanding the phenomena of cultural bias with examples" .

PsycholoGenie . 24 February 2018 . Retrieved 27 June 2018 .

v t e Biases Cognitive biases Acquiescence Ambiguity Affinity Anchoring Attentional Attribution Actor–observer Fundamental Group Ultimate Authority Automation Double standard Availability Mean world Belief Blind spot Choice-supportive Commitment Confirmation Selective perception Compassion fade Congruence Cultural Declinism Distinction Dunning–Kruger Egocentric Curse of knowledge Emotional Extrinsic incentives Fading affect Framing Frequency Frog pond effect Halo effect Hindsight Horn effect Hostile attribution Impact Implicit In-group Intentionality Illusion of transparency Mean world syndrome Mere-exposure effect Narrative Negativity Normalcy Omission Optimism Out-group homogeneity Outcome Overton window Precision Present Pro-innovation Proximity Response Restraint Self-serving Social comparison Social influence bias Spotlight Status quo Substitution Time-saving Trait ascription Turkey illusion von Restorff effect Zero-risk In animals Statistical biases Estimator Forecast Healthy user Information Psychological Lead time Length time Non-response Observer Omitted-variable Participation Recall Sampling Selection Self-selection Social desirability Spectrum Survivorship Systematic error Systemic Verification Wet Other biases Academic Basking in reflected glory Déformation professionnelle Funding FUTON Inductive Infrastructure Inherent In education Liking gap Media False balance Vietnam War South Asia United States Arab–Israeli conflict Ukraine Net Political bias Publication System justification Reporting White hat Ideological bias on Wikipedia Bias reduction Cognitive bias mitigation Debiasing Heuristics in judgment and decision-making Lists: General Memory v t e Culture Outline Sciences Cultural anthropology Cultural astronomy Cultural ecology Cultural geography Cultural neuroscience Cultural studies Culturology Culture theory Subfields Bioculture Cross-cultural studies Cross-cultural communication Cross-cultural leadership Cross-cultural psychiatry Cross-cultural psychology Cultural analytics Cultural economics Cultural entomology Cultural history Cultural mapping Cultural mediation Cultural psychology Cultural values Culturomics Intercultural learning Intercultural relations Philosophy of culture Popular culture studies Postcritique Semiotics of culture Sociology of culture Sound culture Theology of culture Transcultural nursing Types Constructed culture Dominant culture Folk culture High culture Individualistic culture Legal culture Microculture Official culture Political culture Civic Popular culture Low culture Media culture Recombinant culture Remix culture Trash culture Urban Primitive culture Resistance through culture Subculture Alternative culture Counterculture Fandom Far-right subcultures Underground culture Youth subculture list Super culture Vernacular culture Culture by location Aspects Acculturation Cultural appreciation Cultural appropriation Cultural area Cultural artifact Cultural baggage Cultural bias Cultural capital Cross-cultural Cultural communication Cultural conflict Cultural cringe Cultural dissonance Cultural emphasis Cultural framework Cultural heritage Destroyed Cultural icon Cultural identity Cultural industry Cultural invention Cultural landscape Cultural learning Cultural leveling Cultural memory Cultural pluralism Cultural practice Cultural property Cultural reproduction Cultural system Cultural technology Cultural universal Cultureme Enculturation High- and low-context cultures Interculturality Internet culture Manuscript culture Material culture Non-material culture Organizational culture Assessment culture Design culture Journalism culture Print culture Protoculture Relational mobility Safety culture Symbolic culture Technoculture Trans-cultural diffusion Transculturation Visual culture Politics Colonial mentality Consumer capitalism Cross cultural sensitivity Cultural assimilation Cultural attaché Cultural backwardness Cultural Bolshevism Cultural conservatism Cultural contracts Cultural deprivation Cultural diplomacy Cultural environmentalism Cultural exception Cultural feminism Cultural genocide Cultural globalization Cultural hegemony Cultural imperialism Cultural intelligence Cultural liberalism Cultural nationalism Cultural pessimism Cultural policy Cultural racism Cultural radicalism Cultural retention Cultural Revolution Cultural rights Cultural safety Cultural silence Cultural subsidy Cultural Zionism Culture change Culture minister Culture of fear Culture war Deculturalization Dominator culture Interculturalism Monoculturalism Multiculturalism Biculturalism Multiracial democracy Pluriculturalism Polyculturalism Transculturism Religions Buddhism Christianity Catholicism Cultural Christians Protestantism Role of Christianity in civilization Eastern Orthodoxy Mormonism Cultural Hindus Islam Cultural Muslims Judaism Sikhism Related Algorithmic culture Animal culture Archaeological culture Bennett scale Cannabis culture Circuit of culture Civilization Coffee culture Cringe culture Cross-cultural Cultural center Cultural competence Cultural critic Cultural determinism Cultural diversity Cultural evolutionism Cultural homogenization Cultural institution Cultural jet lag Cultural lag Cultural literacy Cultural mosaic Cultural movement Cultural mulatto Cultural probe Cultural relativism Cultural tourism Pop-culture Cultural translation Cultural turn Cultural sensibility Culture and menstruation Culture and positive psychology Culture and social cognition Culture gap Culture hero Culture industry Culture shock Culturgen Children's culture Culturalism Cyberculture Death and culture Disability culture Deaf culture Drinking culture Drug culture Eastern culture Emotions and culture Historical culture Intercultural communication Intercultural competence Languaculture Living things in culture Media culture Oppositional culture Participatory culture Permission culture Rape culture Remix culture Tea culture Transformation of culture Urban culture Welfare culture Western culture Youth culture Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Cultural_bias&oldid=1292022747 " Categories : Cognitive biases Cultural anthropology Value (ethics) Ethnocentrism Bias Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia articles needing clarification from December 2020 All articles lacking reliable references Articles lacking reliable references from December 2019 This page was last edited on 24 May 2025, at 19:33 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Cultural bias 9 languages Add topic

