Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 By country Toggle By country subsection 1.1 Kingdom of Hungary and the Habsburg Monarchy 1.2 Russia 1.2.1 Russian Empire 1.2.2 Soviet Union 1.2.3 Modern-day Russia 1.3 Post-Soviet Moldova 1.4 Ukraine 1.5 Yugoslavia and modern-day Serbia 1.6 Romania 1.7 Switzerland 1.8 European Union 1.8.1 United Kingdom 1.8.2 Netherlands 2 See also 3 Notes 4 References Toggle References subsection 4.1 Transnistria 4.2 USSR 4.3 Transylvania 4.4 Serbia Toggle the table of contents Anti-Romanian sentiment 4 languages Français Română Русский Српски / srpski Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Hostility toward or prejudice against Romanians Not to be confused with Anti-Romani sentiment .

This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Anti-Romanian sentiment" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( May 2014 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article's factual accuracy is disputed .

Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page . Please help to ensure that disputed statements are reliably sourced .

( May 2014 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a series on Discrimination Forms Institutional Reverse Structural Statistical Systemic Taste-based Attributes Age Caste Class Disability Economic Genetic Hair texture Height Language Dialect Looks Mental disorder Nationality or citizenship Race / Ethnicity Reverse Skin color Scientific racism Rank Sex Reverse Sexual orientation Species Size Viewpoint Social Arophobia Anti-albinism Acephobia Adultism Anti-altruistic Anti-autism Anti-homelessness Anti-drug addicts Anti-intellectualism Anti-intersex Anti-left handedness Anti-Masonry Aporophobia Audism Biphobia Clannism Elitism Endophobia Ephebiphobia Health mental in poverty Fatphobia Gayphobia Gerontophobia Heterosexism HIV/AIDS stigma Hypergamy Homophobia In-group Leprosy stigma Lesbophobia Against men Misandry Misogyny Misogynoir Nepotism Outgroup Perpetual foreigner Pregnancy Sectarianism Supremacism Aryanism Black Hutu Chauvinism Han Female Human Nordicism Male Ultranationalism White Transphobia Non-binary Transmisogyny Trans men Vegaphobia Xenophilia Xenophobia Religious Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Race or ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people Manifestations Algorithmic bias Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Blood libel Bullying Cancel culture Capital punishment for homosexuality Carnism Compulsory sterilization Corrective rape Counter-jihad Cultural genocide Defamation Democide Dog whistle Domicide Economic Education Academic In curricula Sexism Eliminationism Eliminationist antisemitism Employment Enemy of the people Environmental racism Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnocide Excellence Gender-based dress codes Cosmetics policy High heel policy Forced conversion Freak show Gay bashing Gendercide Transgender genocide Genital modification and mutilation Circumcision Female genital mutilation Intersex medical interventions Genocide examples Glass ceiling Hate crime Disability hate crime Violence against LGBTQ people Violence against transgender people Hate group Hate speech Institutional discrimination Institutional racism Homeless dumping Housing Hypergamy Age disparity Indian rolling International inequality Kill Haole Day Lavender scare LGBTQ+ grooming conspiracy theory Linguicide Lynching Media bias Minority stress Moral exclusion Mortgage Native American mascots Braves Blackhawks Chiefs Occupational Apartheid Inequality Injustice Segregation Opposition to immigration Paper genocide Persecution Pogrom Political Political repression Ideological repression Purge Racialization Religious persecution Religious terrorism Religious violence Religious war Scapegoating Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Sentencing disparity Sexual harassment Sex-selective abortion Slut-shaming Structural abuse Structural discrimination Structural evil Structural inequality Structural violence Untermensch Trans bashing Victimisation Violence against women White flight White genocide conspiracy theory Wife selling Witch hunt Policies Algorithmic wage discrimination Age of candidacy Apartheid in South Africa in Israel Blood purity Blood quantum Breadwinner model Conscription and sexism Disabilities Catholic Jewish Disparate impact Fagging Gender pay gap Gender roles Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Gerontocracy Gerrymandering Ghetto benches Internment Jewish quota Opposition to LGBTQ rights MSM blood donation restrictions No kid zone Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota) One-drop rule Racial quota Racial steering Redlining Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting) Segregation age racial Jim Crow laws Nuremberg Laws Segregation academy religious sexual in Islam Social exclusion Sodomy law State atheism State religion Ugly law Voter suppression White Australia policy Countermeasures Affirmative action Anti-discrimination law Anti-racism Audit study Autism rights movement Gender-blind Blind audition Constitutional colorblindness Cross-sex friendship Cultural assimilation Cultural pluralism Diversity, equity, and inclusion Diversity training Empowerment Fat acceptance movement Feminism Fighting Discrimination Golden Rule Hate speech laws by country Human rights Intersex human rights Korenizatsiia LGBTQ rights Mad pride Music in the movement against apartheid Racial integration Reappropriation Rock Against Sexism Self-determination Social integration Stop Murder Music Toleration Transgender rights movement Universal suffrage Women's rights Related topics Allophilia Amatonormativity Bias Capital punishment for homosexuality Cisnormativity Civil liberties Criminalization of homosexuality Dehumanization Diseases of despair Ethnic penalty Figleaf Heteronormativity Historical eugenics Internalized oppression Intersectionality Masculism Oikophobia Oppression Police brutality Polyculturalism Power distance Prejudice Prisoner abuse Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racism by country Racial color blindness Religious intolerance Second-generation gender bias Snobbery Social equity Social exclusion Social model of disability Social privilege Christian male white Social stigma Speciesism Stereotype The talk v t e Anti-Romanian sentiment , also known as Romanophobia [ 1 ] ( Romanian : antiromânism , [ 2 ] românofobie ) is hostility, hatred towards, or prejudice against Romanians as an ethnic, linguistic, religious, or perceived ethnic group, and it can range from personal feelings of hatred to institutionalized, violent persecution.

To varying degrees, anti-Romanian discrimination and sentiment have both been present among the populations and governments of nations which border Romania , either towards Romania itself or towards Romanian ethnic minorities which have resided in these countries. Similar patterns have also existed towards other ethnic groups, both in the region and elsewhere in the world, especially where political borders do not coincide with the patterns of ethnic populations.

By country [ edit ] Kingdom of Hungary and the Habsburg Monarchy [ edit ] Transylvania in the Middle Ages was organized according to the system of Estates , which were privileged groups ( universitates ) with power and influence in socio-economic and political life, being nonetheless organized according to certain ethnic criteria as well. The first Estate was the lay and ecclesiastic aristocracy, ethnically heterogeneous, but undergoing a process of homogenization  around its Hungarian nucleus.

[ 3 ] The other Estates were Saxons , Székelys , and Romanians (or Vlachs – Universitas Valachorum ), all with an ethnic and  ethno-linguistic basis ( Universis nobilibus, Saxonibus, Syculis et Olachis ). The general assembly ( congregatio generalis ) of the four Estates had mainly supra-legislative powers in Transylvania, but it sometimes took measures regarding order in the country, relationships between the privileged, military issues, etc.

[ 4 ] The turning point in the history of the Romanian population in Transylvania was in 1366, when through the Decree of Turda King Louis I Anjou of Hungary redefined nobility in terms of membership in the Roman Catholic Church , thus specifically excluding the Eastern Orthodox Romanians.

[ 5 ] Gradually, after 1366, Romanians lost their status as an Estate and were excluded from Transylvania's assemblies. This meant that the Romanian population of Transylvania was never directly represented in the Transylvanian Diet , which consisted of Hungarian nobles, German and Székely nobles (the Unio Trium Nationum ).

[ 6 ] In the 16th century, Transylvanian laws of justice separated the rights of Hungarians, Saxons, and Székelys from the rights of the Romanians, while Eastern Orthodox became a tolerated religion (opposed to the four privileged religions – Catholicism, Lutheranism, Calvinism, and Unitariasm).

[ 6 ] During the Habsburg rule of Transylvania, in order to escape their inferior status, and in correlation with the Austrian interest to strengthen Catholicism, the Romanian Orthodox accepted a proposal for a "church union" (accepting Catholic dogma and retaining Orthodox ritual and calendar), but the other privileged nations objected and the status of the Romanians remained eventually unchanged.

[ 7 ] As a consequence, Romanian peasants would sometimes revolt and demand better treatment. These revolts – even if the initial causes did not have ethnic grounds or shared the fate of the whole peasantry – were firmly suppressed such as the 1784 Romanian peasant uprising , in which Joseph II, Holy Roman Emperor , after learning of the escalated situation, ordered the army to intervene. The three leaders were caught by treason in their hiding places and handed over to General Paul Kray . Horea and Cloșca were executed by breaking on the wheel , while Crișan hanged himself in prison before the execution.

[ 8 ] In December 1918, after the First World War , the Union of Transylvania with Romania was declared at Alba Iulia by an assembly of the delegates of ethnic Romanians in Transylvania. Following the Hungarian–Romanian War of 1919 and the Treaty of Trianon of 1920, eventually Transylvania became part of Romania.

Russia [ edit ] Russian Empire [ edit ] Bessarabia became part of the Russian Empire under the 1812 Treaty of Bucharest .  A period of autonomy followed, but in 1828 all Romanian government institutions, schools and presses were closed and replaced by a Russian -style provincial administration. At the end of the 19th and the beginning of the 20th century, Bessarabia saw an intense process of Russification . Military service also became a new instrument of Russification. The process of Russification and colonization of this territory started to be carried out by representatives of other ethnic groups of the Russian Empire, including Jews , Germans , Bulgarians , Gagauz , and Ukrainians .

[ citation needed ] Russian census 1817: 86% Romanians Russian census 1856: 74% Romanians Russian census 1897: 56% Romanians Soviet Union [ edit ] When the Russian Empire collapsed after the Russian Revolution of 1917 , a local body called " Sfatul Țării " ("Council of the Country") was created in Bessarabia. Moldova became an independent republic on December 2, 1917. Given that Soviet raids already menaced the newly formed authority, the local body ("Sfatul Țării") called in support troops from the Kingdom of Romania . The troops entered Bessarabia on December 13. On March 27, 1918, Sfatul Țării voted to unite with Romania . Subsequently, the Soviet Union refused to recognize the union, and supported an intense propaganda campaign stating that the Kingdom of Romania was an imperialistic state.

[ citation needed ] Bessarabia was a part of Romania until June 1940, when the Soviet Union re-annexed the territory as well as Northern Bukovina , after delivering an ultimatum that threatened the use of force (see Soviet occupation of Bessarabia and Northern Bukovina ).

The convention of October 28, 1920, whereby the United Kingdom , France , Italy , and Japan recognized Romanian sovereignty in Bessarabia, was rejected as invalid by the USSR. The Soviet government even denied the validity of that part of the convention that stipulated that, upon Soviet request, the Council of the League of Nations could be empowered to arbitrate the Soviet-Romanian dispute over Bessarabia. In short, the Kremlin insisted that Romania was illegally occupying Bessarabia. Moscow also encouraged revolutionary activities by Bolshevik elements in Bessarabia.

[ citation needed ] The exact position of the USSR on these issues is unknown except for Moscow's unwillingness to make any concessions to the Romanian government on Bessarabian issues. Recent tracts by Romanian historians have emphasized the support given by Romanian Communists to the "democratic forces" opposed to alteration of the status quo in Transylvania in 1938 and subsequent years. True as this may be, there has been no evidence presented in support of any fundamental change in Moscow's positions with respect to Bessarabia in 1938 and subsequent years.

[ citation needed ] According to official NKVD documents, over 15,000 Romanians from Northern Bukovina were deported to Siberia in 1940 alone.

[ 9 ] The Soviet action culminated with the Fântâna Albă massacre , when 2,500 to 3,000 Romanian refugees who were attempting to leave Northern Bukovina for Romania were blocked by the Soviet Border Troops and about 200 of them were shot, at a place called "Fântâna Albă" ( White Fountain in Romanian). This policy resulted in a substantial shrinkage of the Romanian population in the province. By 1941, out of 250,000 Romanians in Northern Bukovina, only 192,000 were left.

[ citation needed ] On June 22, 1941, Romania joined Operation Barbarossa on the side of the Axis , in order to reclaim the lost territories of Bessarabia and Northern Bukovina; these territories were regained by the Soviet Union in 1944 (see Romania in World War II ).

The territory of the Moldavian Soviet Socialist Republic (MSSR) was composed of Bessarabia (except for Southern Bessarabia, assigned to Ukraine ) and a part of the territory of the former Moldavian Autonomous Soviet Socialist Republic ( Transnistria ), founded in 1924 within the territory of Ukraine. In the document confirming the establishment of the Moldavian Autonomous Soviet Socialist Republic (MASSR) of 12 October 1924 the West frontier of the republic was traced out not along the Dniester River but the Prut River . In the MASSR the ideology of a separate Moldovan identity was pursued, including the introduction of Moldovan language , distinct from Romanian. The Cyrillic alphabet and abundant Russisms were introduced.

[ citation needed ] In Bessarabia, the Soviet government pursued a policy of assimilation of the native Romanian population. First, the province was divided into a "Moldovan" Socialist Republic and a southern region known as Budjak , which was renamed Izmail Oblast and attached to the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic . Elite elements of the Romanian population were then deported to Siberia much like their Bukovinian counterparts. Russian and Ukrainian settlers were used to fill the vacant areas caused by the deportation of Romanians.

[ 10 ] In 1946–1947, as a result of the famine organised [ citation needed ] in the MSSR (according to some data of certain scientists; official data has not yet been published), around 300,000 Romanians died and many instances of cannibalism occurred [ citation needed ] . In addition, the population of the former MASSR, as a part of the Ukrainian SSR , also suffered from the artificial famine in the 1930s when several million people died in Ukraine ( see also Holodomor ).

The territory of Transnistria was more industrialised in comparison with the other part of Moldova and the industrialisation process of Transnistria was accompanied by a population flow from other areas of the USSR, especially from Russia. Although in the Republic of Moldova the level of population density was the highest one in the USSR, Moscow continued to stimulate the arrival of labour force from outside, including that with a poor qualification. Even Igor Smirnov , the former leader of the separatist Transnistria, was sent in 1987 from Russia to Bender to be the director of an enterprise. This process was also amplified by the excessive militarization of the area.

[ citation needed ] The 1989 adoption of the Law on state language (official language) and Law on functioning of languages on the territory of the MSSR generated an extremely negative reaction in the industrial centres of Transnistria, where the largely Russian -speaking population was not being consulted, and felt threatened by the prospects of Romanianization . These laws proclaimed the Moldovan (Romanian) language, written in the Latin alphabet, as the only state language. The fact that Moldovan and Romanian are identical was recognised. Although a majority of the Transnistrian population never read these laws which served as a reason for the conflict's outburst, they feared that by the application of the new linguistic legislation, Russian language speakers would become second-class citizens. At the industrial enterprises, including those of the military-industrial complex of the USSR, strikes occurred protesting against granting official language status to the Moldavian (Romanian) language.

[ citation needed ] Modern-day Russia [ edit ] Today, there is a strong opposition in Russia to Romania in the context of Moldova. A Russian newspaper, InfoRos, even accused Romanians of genocide against Moldovans.

[ 11 ] In 2022, during the Russian invasion of Ukraine and responding to a British declaration saying that Ukrainian attacks over military bases on Russian soil would be justified, the Russian news website Pravda.ru said that Romania could be the first candidate for an attack with 3M-54 Kalibr missiles, since "Romania may now invade Transnistria to save its Moldovan brothers there".

[ 12 ] An ethnic slur against Romanians as well as Moldovans used by Russians is мамалыжник ( mamalyzhnik ; in plural мамалыжники , mamalyzhniki ). It originates from mămăligă , a Romanian dish.

[ 13 ] Post-Soviet Moldova [ edit ] After the breakup of the USSR, various legislative reforms consolidated the position of ethnic Romanians/Moldovans, especially by establishing the Moldovan language as the official language. However, anti-Romanian sentiment and Moldovenism was promoted by Russophilic parties, especially the Edinstvo Movement and the Socialist Party of Moldova and, to a lesser manner, by the then-ruling Democratic Agrarian Party of Moldova .

Valeriu Senic , the leader of the Socialist Party of Moldova, proposed the banning of Romanian nationalism in Moldova, [ 14 ] as well as using the terms " Romanians " and " Romanian language ", when referring to the state language of Moldova.

[ 15 ] The Agrarians, while more moderate than the Socialists, still accused Romania of "imperialism" and promoted the terms "Moldovan people" and " Moldovan language ".

The 2001 parliamentary elections, won by the Party of Communists of the Republic of Moldova , initially brought a series of attempts to raise Russian to the status of a state language. However, the project was dropped by popular opposition.

[ citation needed ] Relations between the Moldovan and Romanian governments have initially included some tension as the Moldovan government led by President Vladimir Voronin accused Romania of committing imperialism , specifically declaring that "Romania has remained the only empire in Europe, consisting of Moldavia, Dobruja and Transylvania".

[ 16 ] [ 17 ] Nevertheless, in the recent past relations have improved and President Voronin as well as Romanian President Traian Băsescu have called for cooperation between the two sovereign states.

[ citation needed ] In 2006, the Gheorghe Asachi Romanian-French School was forced by the government to change its name to the Gheorghe Asachi Moldovan-French School. Critics argued that the government acted unilaterally and discriminated against Romanians, as other schools such as the Necui-Levitski Russian-Ukrainian School were allowed to continue using that name. In protest, four high school students from Asachi replaced the new high school sign with another with the old name. They were charged with "group-committed aggravated hooliganism".

[ 18 ] In Transnistria, the situation is considered to be far worse than the rest of Moldova. After the 1992 war , the Romanian population was substantially persecuted, causing at least 5,000 to 10,000 Romanians to flee the region. Although the number of Romanians in Transnistria is significant, Romanian is almost never used in public.

[ citation needed ] Romanian schools comprise about 11% of the total schools in Transnistria. Most of the schools are forced to teach in the Cyrillic script and use outdated, 40-year-old, communist-era books, and 6 schools are permitted to teach in Romanian using the Latin script ; however, pressure is often put on the institutions to close. The 2004 school crisis is a prime example of this, when the pro-Russian government in Tiraspol forcefully attempted to close down 2 of the schools. In the orphanage of Tighina , Romanian children returning from vacations found the orphanage locked by police. After spending a night outdoors, they forced their way into the building and had to stay there without water and electricity for a few months, until pressure from the Moldovan and Romanian governments and from the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE) made the conflict get resolved.

[ 19 ] Numerous Romanian parents were arrested or fired from their jobs for their political views and their determination to keep their children in Romanian-language schools.

[ citation needed ] Citizens who express pro-Romanian or pro-Moldovan attitudes are likewise persecuted in Transnistria. The Ilie Ilașcu group is the most commonly known and well-documented of organisation.

[ citation needed ] Ukraine [ edit ] Northern Bukovina , as well as the Tiachiv and Rakhiv raions (districts) of Zakarpattia Oblast (Transcarpathia), are the regions in Ukraine with considerable Romanian minorities, according to the 2001 Ukrainian Census .

[ citation needed ] The Ukrainian Census of 2001 was criticized by Dr. Ion Popescu, leader of the National Council of the Interregional Union of the Romanian Community in Ukraine and also one of the authors of the Constitution of Ukraine , who claims that the very existence of the classification of Moldovans as a separate ethnic group in census results is a "continuation of the Stalinist and Soviet policies of artificially dividing Romanians into Romanians and Moldovans " [1] . However, the response to the census question about the ethnicity had to be written in into the census form rather than picked from a pre-determined set of choices and the census respondents were free to claim their ethnicity as they wished [ 20 ] not to respond to this or any other particular census question or not answer any questions at all; besides, no allegation of counting fraud were ever brought up. It is therefore unclear if Dr. Popescu criticizes the way in which the census was conducted or the way in which data was processed.

[ citation needed ] The number of Romanian students at Chernivtsi University declined sharply in Soviet times. In 1991–92, the last year of Soviet rule, the number of Romanian students was only 4.44% (434 out of 9,769) [2] . Among teaching faculty, under-representation of Romanians is also evident. The breakdown by nationalities (in the same year) reveals: Ukrainian teachers 465 (77.1%), Russians 102 (16.9%), Moldovans 9 (1.4%), Romanians 7 (1.1%), Belarusians 6 (0.9%), etc. Even after Ukrainian independence, the number of Romanian students at the University continued to decline, to only 3.9% in 1992–93, which is much less than the overall percentage of Romanians in the region's general population. Since 1997, arrangements have been made for some students to study at universities in Romania. In 2001 the Christian-Democratic Alliance of the Romanians from Ukraine reported that Romanians in Chernivtsi lack an opportunity to study at the university level in their native language.

[3] However, according to the Ukrainian Constitution adopted after its 1991 independence, Ukrainian is the only state language in the country, and the state higher education system was switched to Ukrainian, according to the common practice in many countries worldwide and this practice was not directed specifically at the Romanian population. For example, the majority of Ukrainian universities do not provide education in Russian either, despite the fact that Russian is the native language of a much more considerable part of the population in Ukraine.

[ citation needed ] At the same time, there are schools teaching Romanian as a primary language, as well as newspapers, TV, and radio broadcasting in Romanian [4] , [5] , [6] . Future teachers for Romanian schools are trained in at the Chernivtsi University in the fields of Romanian philology, mathematics, and physics [7] . Romanian organizations still complain that despite this, 19 villages inhabited by Romanians have been deprived of schooling in their native language, therefore creating a worse situation than that which existed under the repressive Soviet regime [8] . However, the existence of the Romanian-language schools in Ukraine is a polarizing topic in the Ukrainian society, since many Ukrainians falsely claim that "a Romanianization of Chernivtsi Oblast " is taking place, while others claim that Romanians deserve these schools, since they are a native, but also loyal minority to the Ukrainian state.

[ 21 ] Yugoslavia and modern-day Serbia [ edit ] The Romanians living in the Serbian province of Vojvodina are very well represented at the provincial level despite their small presence (about 30,000 people, 1.5% of the province's population of around 2 million), and Romanian is one of the six official languages of the province. However, their counterparts in eastern Central Serbia (mostly in the Timok Valley and Branicevo ), known as "Vlachs" in Serbian and outnumbering the Serbian Romanians in Vojvodina, have not had any privileges. As example from Negotin in Vršac , the Romanian local television station door was vandalized with the inscription "Out Romanians, Serbia!!!" (Serbian: Napolje Rumuni, Srbija!!!

).

[ 22 ] The Timok Romanians speak the same language ( Daco-Romanian ) as is spoken to the north, in Romania .

[ 23 ] However, the Serbian authorities have pursued a policy of de-nationalization as they have slowly changed the term Romanian into "Vlach" through the years.

[ 24 ] [ 25 ] These people declare themselves on census forms as ethnic Vlachs and their number is about 40,000. Nevertheless, older Serbian censuses counted up to 200,000 Romanians in present-day Central Serbia (the 1895-census counted 159,510 Romanians, the 1921-census counted 150,098 Romanians, the 1953-census counted 198,793 "Vlach" (Romanian) speakers).

[ citation needed ] Since 2004 there are regular clashes between the Serbian authorities and the Romanian community in Timok when Bojan Aleksandrović , a Romanian Orthodox priest decided to build a small church where he would hold services in Romanian . Romanians in Serbia proper do not have the right to schooling and public worship in their native language.

[ 26 ] [ 27 ] In the town of Negotin , the Romanian Cultural Association was vandalized in 2004 when Serbian pro-fascist ultra-nationalists wrote "Out of Serbia" on the windows of the main doors.

[ 26 ] Some Serbian ultranationalists even treat Romanians as "Romanized Serbs ", even though no part of present-day Romania was ever under Serbian rule.

[ 28 ] Romania [ edit ] In 2013 accusations of discrimination in Covasna surfaced against Hungarian students and teachers. During a ceremony celebrating the Hungarian National Day , some Romanian students wearing the Romanian flag were physically assaulted by older students, and threatened by teachers with punishment for wearing the national symbol. As a result, the Romanian human rights organisation ActiveWatch [ 29 ] issued a statement condemning the actions of the school's administration, which it considers a blunt infringement of human rights and freedom of expression.

[ 30 ] [ 31 ] [ 32 ] Switzerland [ edit ] In 2009, the right-wing Swiss People's Party (SVP) ran an anti-immigration campaign against Romanians and Bulgarian emigrants, distributing and displaying banners depicting citizens of these countries as "crows".

[ 33 ] European Union [ edit ] Anti-Romanian sentiment in the European Union refers to the hatred, fear or discrimination of Romanian emigrants and citizens within the European Union.

[ citation needed ] Although Romania is a member of the EU, Romanian emigrants have faced ethnic profiling in various European countries and open discrimination in countries like Italy, France, Germany, Belgium, Greece or Austria.

[ citation needed ] United Kingdom [ edit ] In June 2009, having had their windows broken and death threats made against them, twenty Romanian-Roma families were forced from their homes in Lisburn Road , Belfast , in Northern Ireland . Up to [ vague ] 115 people, including women and children, were forced to seek refuge in a local church hall after being attacked. They were later moved by the authorities to a safer location.

[ 34 ] An anti-racist rally in the city on 15 June was attacked by local youths chanting neo-Nazi slogans.

[ citation needed ] Following the arrest of three local youths in relation to the attacks, the church where the Romanians had been given shelter was badly vandalised. Using 'emergency funds', Northern Irish government assisted most of the victims to return to Romania.

[ 35 ] [ 36 ] In 2013, Romanian ambassador to the United Kingdom Ion Jinga claimed that portions of the British media had written a series of unduly negative articles about Romanian immigrants. He claimed that these articles portrayed Romanian immigrants as being "invaders", criminals who abused social benefits and being involved in the 2013 horse meat scandal . Jinga responded to these alleged claims in a series of interviews and articles in British newspapers, radio and television, presenting his views on the professional value of Romanian immigrants and their, in his view, significant contribution to the British economy .

[ 37 ] [ 38 ] He also blamed UKIP for inciting anti-Romanian prejudice and violent attacks against Romanian immigrants.

[ 39 ] In 2013, the Daily Express launched a "crusade" against new EU migrants from Bulgaria and Romania . The article, published on the 31st of October, declared that "Britain is full and fed up. Today join your Daily Express Crusade to stop new flood of Romanian and Bulgarian migrants".

UKIP leader Nigel Farage declared that he had signed the petition, and urged others to do the same.

[ 40 ] Romanian politician Cătălin Ivan expressed "outrage" at the campaign.

[ 41 ] Netherlands [ edit ] A Dutch right-wing political party ( Party for Freedom (PVV)) launched a website aimed at gathering denunciations against Polish, Romanian, and Bulgarian nationals living in the Netherlands.

[ 42 ] See also [ edit ] Anti-Slavic sentiment Anti-Eastern Orthodox sentiment Second Vienna Award Ip massacre Nușfalău massacre Treznea massacre Vlach language Notes [ edit ] ^ Human Rights at the Turn of New Millenium in the Republic of Moldova . Moldovan Helsinki Committee for Human Rights. 2001.

ISBN 9789975964500 . Retrieved 25 January 2015 – via google.ro.

^ The word antiromânism is sometimes written without diacritics, and can be a cause of some confusion, because antiromanism can also mean antiţiganism (discrimination and prejudice against the Romani people ).

^ Georgescu 1991 , pp. 40–58.

^ Pop et al. 2003 , pp. 233-.

^ Georgescu 1991 , p. 63.

^ a b Georgescu 1991 , pp. 41–59.

^ Georgescu 1991 , pp. 43–61, 88–106.

^ Hegyes András - Marczali Henrik: Erdély története (Budapest, 2002) 141-147 o.

ISBN 9639452297 ^ (in Romanian) Gabriel Gherasim, Românii din Ucraina (2), p. 3 Archived 2007-10-06 at the Wayback Machine ("Romanians in Ukraine (2)", p. 3), Noi, NU! Revistă de atitudine și de cultură , August 7, 2005. Accessed December 20, 2006.

^ (in Romanian) Nina Negru, Nu-i lua cu fericirile - disciplinează-i cu decalogul Archived 2007-10-10 at the Wayback Machine ("Don't reach out to them with promises of happiness, discipline them with the Ten Commandments"), Jurnal de Chișinău , Edition 409, 30 August 2005. Accessed online 20 December 2006.

^ Novik, Alexander (4 April 2014).

"The Moldovan genocide, which can not be forgotten" .

InfoRos .

^ Baiaș, Ionuț (28 April 2022).

"Rușii de la Pravda scriu că România este prima candidată pentru lovituri cu rachete Kalibr: Bucureștiul ar putea invada Transnistria" .

HotNews (in Romanian).

^ "мамалыжники" .

Russki-mat.net (in Russian) . Retrieved 29 April 2023 .

^ https://adt.arcanum.com/ro/view/RenastereaBanateana_1994_05/?query=valeriu+senic&pg=320&layout=s ^ https://adt.arcanum.com/ro/view/RenastereaBanateana_1994_05/?query=valeriu+senic&pg=320&layout=s ^ "FOCUS: Relațiile România-R. Moldova - când calde, când reci, condimentate cu acuzații reciproce" .

Mediafax (in Romanian). 25 January 2010.

^ "Lideri antiromâni din Republica Moldova" .

Adevărul (in Romanian). 22 September 2015.

^ (in Romanian) 4 elevi moldoveni riscă inchisoarea, pentru că susțin că sunt români [ permanent dead link ] ("Four Moldovan students risk imprisonment for sustaining that they are Romanians"), Gândul , 8 June 2006.

^ OSCE report about Romanian language in Transnistria ^ The Census form Archived August 30, 2006, at the Wayback Machine at the State Statistics Committee of Ukraine web-site.

^ https://fact-news.com.ua/en/introduction-of-the-romanian-language-in-schools-in-bukovina-education-or-threat-to-cultural-identity/ ^ "Blic Online - Grafiti mržnje u Vršcu: "Napolje Rumuni!" " .

Blic Online . 12 September 2012 . Retrieved 25 January 2015 .

^ Thede Kahl , Ethnizität und räumliche Verteilung der Aromunen in Südosteuropa. Münster, 1999 ^ M. V. Fifor. Assimilation or Acculturalisation: Creating Identities in the New Europe. The case of Vlachs in Serbia. Published in Cultural Identity and Ethnicity in Central Europe, Jagellonian University , Cracow. M. Fifor Assimilation or Acculturalisation: Creating Identities in the New Europe. The case of Vlachs in Serbia.

^ Damian, George (March 1, 2008).

"Două "școli" de interpretare istorică și lingvistică vin să conteste unitatea poporului român" .

Ziua (in Romanian). Archived from the original on February 9, 2019 . Retrieved December 24, 2022 .

^ a b "Assemblée parlementaire du Conseil de l'Europe" .

coe.int . Retrieved 25 January 2015 .

^ "In Serbien lebende Rumänen sehen sich in ihren Rechten beschnitten" .

Deutsche Welle (in German). April 25, 2003 . Retrieved December 24, 2022 .

^ ПРЕЦИ РУМУНА СУ СРБИ ^ "About ActiveWatch" .

ActiveWatch . Archived from the original on 17 May 2015 . Retrieved 25 January 2015 .

^ "Dreptul la liberă exprimare reprimat abuziv de conducerea unui liceu din Covasna" .

ActiveWatch . Retrieved 25 January 2015 .

^ "UPDATE Sute de persoane protestează în mai multe oraşe din ţară pentru susţinerea Sabinei, fata cu bentiţa tricoloră" .

adevarul.ro . 22 March 2013 . Retrieved 25 January 2015 .

^ "Cazul "bentița tricoloră": Protest in costume naționale la liceul din Covasna. Elevii nu au intrat la ore" .

HotNews (in Romanian). March 22, 2013 . Retrieved December 26, 2022 .

^ "Posters and Election Propaganda" .

ithaca.edu . Retrieved 25 January 2015 .

^ "Racist attacks on Roma are latest low in North's intolerant history" .

The Irish Times . 18 June 2009. Archived from the original on 24 October 2010 . Retrieved 18 June 2009 .

^ McDonald, Henry (23 June 2009).

"Vandals attack Belfast church that sheltered Romanian victims of racism" .

The Guardian . London.

Archived from the original on 26 June 2009 . Retrieved 23 June 2009 .

^ "Romanians leave NI after attacks" .

BBC News . 23 June 2009.

Archived from the original on 24 June 2009 . Retrieved 23 June 2009 .

^ "ITV: Alarmist predictions' over immigrants can cause racism" .

ITV . February 22, 2013 . Retrieved December 26, 2022 .

^ "Ambassador's interview with Murnaghan On Sky News" .

londra.mae.ro . Embassy of Romania to the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland. February 3, 2013 . Retrieved December 26, 2022 .

; see also: Jinga, Ion; Hope, Christopher (February 21, 2013).

"Romanians' presence in the United Kingdom and the value of free movement of people" .

The Daily Telegraph . Retrieved December 26, 2022 .

^ "Romanian Ambassador Ion Jinga Blames Ukip For Racist Attacks" .

The Huffington Post UK . 2013-09-27 . Retrieved 17 June 2015 .

^ Nigel Farage MEP (November 2013).

"I've signed the Express petition – you should too! Remember, it'll be Albanians next..." Daily Express . Retrieved 17 June 2015 .

^ Max Evans (2013-11-04).

"Romanian MEP orders Daily Express to 'stop' our campaign to halt EU migration" .

Daily Express . Retrieved 17 June 2015 .

^ "Dutch website causes stir in Central Europe" .

Euractiv . 2012-02-10 . Retrieved 25 January 2015 .

References [ edit ] Georgescu, Vlad (1991).

The Romanians-A History . Ohio State University Press.

Pop, Ioan-Aurel; Nägler, Thomas; Bărbulescu, Mihai; Dörner, E. Anton; Glodariu, Ioan; Pop, P. Grigor; Rotea, Mihai; Vasiliev, Valentin (2003). Pop, Ioan-Aurel; Nägler, Thomas (eds.).

Istoria Transilvaniei, vol. I (până la 1541) . Cluj-Napoca: Centrul de Studii Transilvane - Institutul Cultural Român. Archived from the original on 2019-10-25 . Retrieved 2019-10-25 .

Transnistria [ edit ] "Lichidarea școlilor românești din Transnistria" (in Romanian). BBC. 2004.

USSR [ edit ] Grenoble, Lenore A (2003).

Language Policy in the Soviet Union . Springer.

ISBN 1-4020-1298-5 .

Transylvania [ edit ] Pop, Ioan-Aurel (1997).

Istoria Transilvaniei Medievale (in Romanian). Editura Presa Universitară Clujeană.

ISBN 973-9261-24-8 .

(in Hungarian) Romsics, Ignác. Magyarország története a huszadik században ("A History of Hungary in the 20th Century"), p. 85-86.

Serbia [ edit ] Crăciun, Gilia (December 23, 2004).

"Minoritatea românilor din Serbia este nemulțumită" (in Romanian).

BBC .

Djenovic, Drasko (June 20, 2005).

"Serbia: Police ban Romanian Orthodox commemoration" . Forum18.

Mihalcea, Florian (September 16, 2005).

"Biserica românească din Malainița amenințată din nou" (in Romanian).

BBC .

Petrovici, Georgeta.

"Românii nimănui" (in Romanian).

Evenimentul Zilei .

[ permanent dead link ] Ursulețu, Lucian.

"Slujbă clandestină pentru românii de pe Valea Timocului" (in Romanian).

Evenimentul Zilei . Archived from the original on 2020-09-29 . Retrieved 2005-10-14 .

v t e Anti-national sentiment Race or ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people State American Australian British Canadian Chilean Empire of Japan Inter-Korean North South Israeli Zionist People's Republic of China Qing Other Western Related topics Ethnic hatred v t e Discrimination Forms Institutional Reverse Structural Statistical Systemic Taste-based Attributes Age Caste Class Disability Economic Genetic Hair texture Height Language Dialect Looks Mental disorder Nationality or citizenship Race / Ethnicity Reverse Skin color Scientific racism Rank Sex Reverse Sexual orientation Species Size Viewpoint Social Arophobia Anti-albinism Acephobia Adultism Anti-altruistic Anti-autism Anti-homelessness Anti-drug addicts Anti-intellectualism Anti-intersex Anti-left handedness Anti-Masonry Aporophobia Audism Biphobia Clannism Elitism Endophobia Ephebiphobia Health mental in poverty Fatphobia Gayphobia Gerontophobia Heterosexism HIV/AIDS stigma Hypergamy Homophobia In-group Leprosy stigma Lesbophobia Against men Misandry Misogyny Misogynoir Nepotism Outgroup Perpetual foreigner Pregnancy Sectarianism Supremacism Aryanism Black Hutu Chauvinism Han Female Human Nordicism Male Ultranationalism White Transphobia Non-binary Transmisogyny Trans men Vegaphobia Xenophilia Xenophobia Religious Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Race / Ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people Manifestations Algorithmic bias Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Blood libel Bullying Cancel culture Capital punishment for homosexuality Carnism Compulsory sterilization Corrective rape Counter-jihad Cultural genocide Defamation Democide Dog whistle Domicide Economic Education Academic In curricula Sexism Eliminationism Eliminationist antisemitism Employment Enemy of the people Environmental racism Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnocide Excellence Gender-based dress codes Cosmetics policy High heel policy Forced conversion Freak show Gay bashing Gendercide Transgender genocide Genital modification and mutilation Circumcision Female genital mutilation Intersex medical interventions Genocide examples Glass ceiling Hate crime Disability hate crime Violence against LGBTQ people Violence against transgender people Hate group Hate speech Institutional discrimination Institutional racism Homeless dumping Housing Hypergamy Age disparity Indian rolling International inequality Kill Haole Day Lavender scare LGBTQ+ grooming conspiracy theory Linguicide Lynching Media bias Minority stress Moral exclusion Mortgage Native American mascots Braves Blackhawks Chiefs Occupational Apartheid Inequality Injustice Segregation Opposition to immigration Paper genocide Persecution Pogrom Political Political repression Ideological repression Purge Racialization Religious persecution Religious terrorism Religious violence Religious war Scapegoating Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Sentencing disparity Sexual harassment Sex-selective abortion Slut-shaming Structural abuse Structural discrimination Structural evil Structural inequality Structural violence Untermensch Trans bashing Victimisation Violence against women White flight White genocide conspiracy theory Wife selling Witch hunt Discriminatory policies Algorithmic wage discrimination Age of candidacy Apartheid in South Africa in Israel Blood purity Blood quantum Breadwinner model Conscription and sexism Disabilities Catholic Jewish Disparate impact Fagging Gender pay gap Gender roles Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Gerontocracy Gerrymandering Ghetto benches Internment Jewish quota Opposition to LGBTQ rights MSM blood donation restrictions No kid zone Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota) One-drop rule Racial quota Racial steering Redlining Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting) Segregation age racial Jim Crow laws Nuremberg Laws Segregation academy religious sexual in Islam Social exclusion Sodomy law State atheism State religion Ugly law Voter suppression White Australia policy Countermeasures Affirmative action Anti-discrimination law Anti-racism Audit study Autism rights movement Gender-blind Blind audition Constitutional colorblindness Cross-sex friendship Cultural assimilation Cultural pluralism Diversity, equity, and inclusion Diversity training Empowerment Fat acceptance movement Feminism Fighting Discrimination Golden Rule Hate speech laws by country Human rights Intersex human rights Korenizatsiia LGBTQ rights Mad pride Music in the movement against apartheid Racial integration Reappropriation Rock Against Sexism Self-determination Social integration Stop Murder Music Toleration Transgender rights movement Universal suffrage Women's rights Related topics Allophilia Amatonormativity Bias Capital punishment for homosexuality Cisnormativity Civil liberties Criminalization of homosexuality Dehumanization Diseases of despair Ethnic penalty Figleaf Heteronormativity Historical eugenics Internalized oppression Intersectionality Masculism Oikophobia Oppression Police brutality Polyculturalism Power distance Prejudice Prisoner abuse Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racism by country Racial color blindness Religious intolerance Second-generation gender bias Snobbery Social equity Social exclusion Social model of disability Social privilege Christian male white Social stigma Speciesism Stereotype The talk Category Commons Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Anti-Romanian_sentiment&oldid=1305042006 " Categories : Anti-Romanian sentiment Anti-national sentiment Transylvania in the Kingdom of Hungary Hidden categories: Articles with Romanian-language sources (ro) Webarchive template wayback links CS1 Romanian-language sources (ro) CS1 Russian-language sources (ru) All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from November 2019 Articles with permanently dead external links CS1 German-language sources (de) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from May 2014 All articles needing additional references Accuracy disputes from May 2014 All accuracy disputes Articles with multiple maintenance issues Articles with excerpts Articles containing Romanian-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2021 Articles with unsourced statements from November 2009 Articles containing Russian-language text Articles with unsourced statements from March 2008 Articles with unsourced statements from December 2012 All Wikipedia articles needing clarification Wikipedia articles needing clarification from March 2019 Articles with Hungarian-language sources (hu) Articles with dead external links from May 2019 This page was last edited on 9 August 2025, at 18:21 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Anti-Romanian sentiment 4 languages Add topic

