Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Summary 2 Publication 3 See also 4 Notes 5 References 6 Further reading 7 External links Toggle the table of contents The Commonwealth of Oceana 3 languages Français Italiano Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 1656 political book by James Harrington Title page of The Commonwealth of Oceana Part of the Politics series on Republicanism Concepts Anti-monarchism Anti-corruption Civic virtue Civil society Consent of the governed Democracy Democratization Liberty as non-domination Mixed government Political representation Popular sovereignty Public participation Republic Res publica Rule of law Self-governance Separation of powers Social contract Social equality Schools Classical Federal Kemalism Khomeinism Modern Nasserism Neo-republicanism Venizelism Types Autonomous Capitalist Christian Democratic Federal Imperial Islamic Maritime Parliamentary Peasant People's Revolutionary Secular Sister Soviet Philosophers Arendt Baggini Bello Bentham Bodin Cattaneo Chappell Cicero Condorcet Crick Franklin Harrington Honderich Jefferson Kant Locke Machiavelli Madison Mazzini Mill Montesquieu Paine Pettit Polybius Rousseau Sandel Sidney Sunstein Tocqueville Warburton Wollstonecraft Politicians Adams (Gerry) Adams (John) Atatürk Azaña Bartley Benn Bennett Bolívar Chapman Clark (Katy) Clarke (Tom) Connolly Cromwell Davidson Drakeford Etherington Fabiani Ferguson Flynn Gambetta Garibaldi de Gaulle Grévy Griffith Griffiths Harvie Hatton Hébert Hopkins Huppert Iorwerth Jackson Jay Jefferson Jones (Elin) Jones (Lynne) Juárez Kane Khomeini La Malfa Lenin Lewis Lincoln Lucas Mackay Mackenzie Madison Magid Mannin McDonnell McKechin Mullin Nandy Naysmith Nehru Pound Prescott Ritchie Robespierre Sayed Skates Skinner Slater Slaughter Smith Spadolini Sun Taverne Venizelos Wilson Wood Theoretical works Republic (c. 375 BC) De re publica (54–51 BC) Discourses on Livy (1531) The Tenure of Kings and Magistrates (1649) The Commonwealth of Oceana (1656) Discourses Concerning Government (1698) The Spirit of Law (1748) Discourse on Inequality (1755) The Social Contract (1762) The Federalist Papers (1787–1788) Rights of Man (1791) Perpetual Peace: A Philosophical Sketch (1794) Democracy in America (1835–1840) On Revolution (1963) History Roman Republic Gaṇasaṅgha Classical Athens Republic of Venice Republic of Genoa Republic of Florence Dutch Republic American Revolution French Revolution Spanish American wars of independence Trienio Liberal French Revolution of 1848 5 October 1910 revolution Chinese Revolution Russian Revolution German Revolution of 1918–1919 Turkish War of Independence Mongolian Revolution of 1921 11 September 1922 Revolution 1935 Greek coup d'état attempt Spanish Civil War 1946 Italian institutional referendum 1952 Egyptian revolution 14 July Revolution North Yemen civil war Zanzibar Revolution 1969 Libyan coup d'état 1970 Cambodian coup d'état Metapolitefsi Iranian revolution 1987 Fijian coups d'état Nepalese Civil War Barbadian Republic Proclamation National variants Antigua and Barbuda Australia Bahamas Barbados Canada Ireland Jamaica Japan Morocco Netherlands New Zealand Norway Spain Sweden United Kingdom Scotland Wales United States Republic days Armenia Azerbaijan China Iceland India Iran Italy Kazakhstan Malta Moldova Nepal Niger North Korea North Macedonia Pakistan Philippines Taiwan Turkey Related topics Classical radicalism Common good Communitarianism Criticism of monarchy Egalitarianism The Emperor's New Clothes Jacobinism Liberalism List of republics Monarchism Peasant republic Primus inter pares Republic without republicans Republican empire Republican Party Politics portal v t e The Commonwealth of Oceana ( / oʊ ˈ s iː ə n ə / oh- SEE -ə-nə ), published in 1656, is a seminal work of political philosophy by the English politician and essayist James Harrington (1611–1677). The initial publication of Oceana was met with official censorship from Lord Protector Oliver Cromwell (1599–1658). The publication was eventually made available to the public, and it was dedicated to Cromwell.

[ 1 ] The Oceana in the title is an allegorical version of the Commonwealth of England . Crownwell himself is depicted in the book under the alias of the lawgiver Olphaeus Megalator. Harrington presents his ideas about a utopian republic. These include limitations to the amount of land which a single individual can hold, land distribution methods, and term limits for politicians which would prevent them from seeking re-election for a few years following the end of their previous term.

The London printer John Streater published two first editions of the book between September and November 1656, known as the "Pakeman" and the "Chapman". The Chapman edition was advertised in the serial Mercurius Politicus , a "quasi-official" organ of the Commonwealth. In 1659, an abridged version of the book was published in three volumes, under the title The Art of Lawgiving . In 1700 the book was edited by John Toland and included in a collection of Harrington's works. Two 18th-century reprints of the book in Dublin included a version of Henry Neville 's Plato Redivivus and an appendix of miscellaneous Harrington works alongside the main work. Harrington's modern editor J. G. A. Pocock criticized the book for its " baroque " and confusing style.

Summary [ edit ] Harrington's magnum opus , Oceana is an exposition on an ideal constitution, designed to allow for the existence of a utopian republic.

Oceana was read contemporaneously as a metaphor for interregnum England , with its beneficent lawgiver Olphaeus Megalator representing Cromwell. The details of this ideal governing document are set out, from the rights of the state to the salaries of low officials. Its strategies were not implemented at the time.

The first constituent in Harrington's theoretical argument states that the determining element of power in a state is property, particularly property in land. The second is that the executive power ought not to be vested for any considerable time in the same man, men, or class of men. In accordance with the first of these, Harrington recommends an agrarian law, limiting holdings of land to the amount yielding a revenue of £2000, and consequently insisting on particular modes of distributing landed property. As a practical issue of the second he lays down the rule of rotation by ballot . A third part of the executive or senate are voted out by ballot every year, and may not be elected again for three years. Harrington explains very carefully how the state and its governing parts are to be constituted by his scheme.

Publication [ edit ] The Commonwealth of Oceana was published in two first editions, the "Pakeman" and the "Chapman" (first names Daniel and Livewell, respectively) by the London printer John Streater , [ 2 ] between September and November 1656. Their contents are nearly identical. The Chapman edition was listed in the Stationers' Register of 19 Sep, and was first advertised during the week of 6 Nov in the serial Mercurius Politicus , a "quasi-official" organ of the Commonwealth. The first edition of the book was seized while at the printer and taken to Whitehall . Harrington appealed to Elizabeth Claypole , Cromwell's favourite daughter; she agreed to intervene with the Lord Protector.

[ 3 ] The book went on to be published, was widely read and attacked by Henry Ferne , later Bishop of Chester , and by Matthew Wren . In 1659, an abridged version in three volumes, entitled The Art of Lawgiving , was published.

Harrington's first editor was John Toland (1670–1722), who in 1700 published The Oceana and other Works of James Harrington, with an Account of his Life . It was first reprinted in Dublin in 1737 and 1758 in a super-edition (as it were), containing a version of Henry Neville 's Plato Redivivus and an appendix of miscellaneous Harrington works compiled by the Rev.

Thomas Birch (1705–1766). This same appeared in London in 1747 and again in 1771.

[ 4 ] Oceana was reprinted in Morley 's Universal Library in 1883; S. B. Liljegren reissued a fastidiously prepared Pakeman edition in 1924. Much of the remaining Harrington canon consists of papers, pamphlets, aphorisms, even treatises, in steadfast defence of the controversial tract.

Modern readers might have difficulty understanding the prose. Harrington's modern editor J. G. A. Pocock considered the prose marred by what he described as an undisciplined work habit and a conspicuous "lack of sophistication." He "wrote hastily, in a baroque and periodic style in which he more than once lost his way," thereby becoming "...productive of confusion." According to Pocock, Harrington certainly never attained the level of "a great literary stylist." [ 5 ] See also [ edit ] Milton Malsor , where Oceana was written Notes [ edit ] ^ "...to his highnes[sic] the Lord Protector of the Comonwealth[sic] of England, Scotland, and Ireland"; Pocock, "Intro," p. 6, note 1. on Harrington as a classical republican , he was "England's premier civic humanist and Machiavellian. He was not the first to think about English politics in these terms..., but he was the first to achieve a paradigmatic restatement of English political understanding in the language and world-view inherited through Machiavelli." Pocock, "Intro," p. 15.

^ Streater was a former New Model Army officer stationed in Ireland who returned to England in 1653 to protest the dissolutions of the Rump and Little parliaments. He was subsequently arrested for seditious libel , apparently acquitted, and by April 1654 had set up his print shop. Pocock, "Intro," 9–10.

^ for an important qualification of the Lady Claypoole story, see note 2 in the Harrington article .

^ (London: T. Becket, Thomas Cadell, T. Evans, 1771). until Pocock's, more than two centuries later in 1977, the only complete edition of political Harringtoniana.

^ this and the preceding two paragraphs are adapted from Pocock, "Intro," p. xv.

References [ edit ] J.G.A. Pocock, "Editorial and Historical Introductions," The Political Works of James Harrington (Cambridge: 1977), xi–xviii; 1–152. cited as 'Pocock, "Intro"'.

Further reading [ edit ] Pocock, J.G.A., ed.

The Commonwealth of Oceana and A System of Politics (Cambridge: 1992). these two works only with a slimmed down introduction.

Sharp, R.A. "The Manuscript Versions of Harrington's Oceana ," Historical Journal 16,2(1973), 227–39.

Worden, Blair. "James Harrington and The Commonwealth of Oceana , 1656" and "Harrington's Oceana : origins and aftermath, 1651–1660," in David Wootton, ed.

Republicanism, liberty, and commercial society, 1649–1776 (Stanford: 1994).

James Harrington page : Further Reading .

The Work of J.G.A. Pocock : Harrington section .

External links [ edit ] Full text from Project Gutenberg Free full-text works of James Harrington online Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=The_Commonwealth_of_Oceana&oldid=1302072307 " Categories : 1656 non-fiction books 1656 in England 1656 in politics 1650s science fiction novels Books about political philosophy Books about England Utopian novels Republicanism in England Cultural depictions of Oliver Cromwell Interregnum (England) Censored books Baroque Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use British English from September 2013 Use dmy dates from December 2024 This page was last edited on 23 July 2025, at 05:54 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents The Commonwealth of Oceana 3 languages Add topic

