Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Education and research 3 Planetary Collegium 4 Art 5 Interactive computer art 6 International exhibitions 7 Books authored by Roy Ascott 8 Books edited by Roy Ascott 9 References 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Roy Ascott 5 languages Català Ελληνικά Español Français Русский Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia English cybernetic artist Roy Ascott Roy Ascott in 2012 Born Roy Ascott 26 October 1934 ( 1934-10-26 ) (age 90) Bath, Somerset , England Nationality English Education King's College London , University of Durham (now Newcastle University ) Known for art, technoetics, syncretism Notable work La Plissure du Texte , Electra , Paris; Planetary Network , XLII Venice Biennale ; Telematic Embrace: visionary theories of art, technology and consciousness , University of California Press ; 未来就是现在:艺术,技术和意识 [ The Future is Now: Art, Technology, and Consciousness ], Gold Wall Press, Beijing, 2012 Movement Technoetics , Digital Art Awards Doctor Honoris Causa, Ionian University , Corfu, Greece. Honorary Professor, Aalborg University . Fellow of the Royal Society of Arts London.

Prix Ars Electronica Golden Nica Award for Visionary Pioneers of Media Art 2014.

Roy Ascott FRSA (born 26 October 1934) is a British artist, who works with cybernetics and telematics on an art he calls technoetics by focusing on the impact of digital and telecommunications networks on consciousness . Since the 1960s, Ascott has been a practitioner of interactive computer art , electronic art , cybernetic art and telematic art .

Ascott exhibits internationally (including the Biennales of Venice and Shanghai), and is collected by Tate Britain and Arts Council England . He is recognised by Ars Electronica as the "visionary pioneer of media art", and widely seen as a radical innovator in arts education and research, having occupied leading academic roles in England, Europe, North America, and China, and is currently leading his Technoetic Arts studio in Shanghai, [ 1 ] and directing the Planetary Collegium . In 2018, he became the subject of Cybernetics & Human Knowing: A Journal of Second Order Cybernetics, Autopoiesis and Cybersemiotics entitled "A Tribute to the Messenger Shaman: Roy Ascott".

[ 2 ] Dr. Kate Sloan's comprehensive study of his early work "Art Cybernetics and Pedagogy in Post-War Britain: Roy Ascott's Groundcourse" was published by Routledge in 2019.

[ 3 ] In 2025 Ascott was the subject of a comprehensive interview at Artforum that was conducted by Hans-Ulrich Obrist .

[ 4 ] Ascott is the President of the Planetary Collegium , Professor of Technoetic Arts Plymouth University , and the De Tao Master of Technoetic Arts at the De Tao Masters Academy in Shanghai.

[ 1 ] He is also Chief Specialist of the Visual Art Innovation Institute at the Central Academy of Fine Arts in Beijing.

[ 1 ] He is the founding editor of the research journal Technoetic Arts , an honorary editor of Leonardo Journal , and author of the book Telematic Embrace: Visionary Theories of Art, Technology and Consciousness, University of California Press .

[ 1 ] Biography [ edit ] Roy Ascott was born in Bath , England. He was educated at the City of Bath Boys' School . His National Service was spent as a Pilot Officer in RAF Fighter Command working with radar defense systems.

[ 5 ] From 1955 to 1959, he studied Fine Art at King's College , University of Durham (now Newcastle University ) under Victor Pasmore and Richard Hamilton , and Art History under Lawrence Gowing and Quentin Bell .

[ 5 ] He was awarded the degree of B.A. Hons Fine Art, Dunelm in 1959.

[ 5 ] On graduation he was appointed Studio Demonstrator (1959–61). He then moved to London, where he established the radical Groundcourse at Ealing Art College , which he subsequently established at Ipswich Civic College, in Suffolk , working with artist tutors such as Anthony Benjamin , Bernard Cohen .

[ 5 ] R. B. Kitaj , Brian Wall, Harold Cohen , and Peter Startup. Important to the development of his understanding of cybernetics was his friendship with Gordon Pask . Notable alumni of the Groundcourse include Brian Eno , Pete Townshend , Stephen Willats , and Michael English .

[ 5 ] Ascott taught in London Ealing , [ 6 ] and was a visiting lecturer at other London art schools throughout the 1960s.

[ 6 ] He was then briefly was President of Ontario College of Art, now OCAD University , [ 7 ] Toronto and then Chair of Fine Art at Minneapolis College of Art and Design before moving to California as Vice-President and Dean of San Francisco Art Institute , during the 1970s. He was Professor for Communication Theory at the University of Applied Arts Vienna , [ 8 ] during the 1980s, and Professor of Technoetic Arts at the University of Wales, Newport in the 1990s, where he established the Centre for Advanced Inquiry in the Interactive Arts. He established the Planetary Collegium in 2003.

[ 8 ] Ascott is recipient of the Prix Ars Electronica Golden Nica award for Visionary Pioneer of Media Art 2014. The award is for "those men and women whose artistic, technological and social achievements have decisively influenced and advanced the development of new artistic directions." He is a Doctor Honoris Causa of Ionian University , Corfu , Greece; Honorary Professor at Aalborg University Copenhagen ; Honorary Professor at University of West London .

[ 6 ] Education and research [ edit ] He has advised new media arts organizations in Brazil, Japan, Korea, Europe and North America as well as UNESCO , and was Visiting Professor (VI), Design Media Arts, University of California Los Angeles (2003–07) [ 9 ] at the UCLA School of the Arts. Ascott was an International Commissioner for the XLII Venice Biennale of 1986 (Planetary Network and Laboratorio Ubiqua [ 10 ] ).

Planetary Collegium [ edit ] He is the founding president of the Planetary Collegium , an advanced art research center which he launched in 1994, with its Hub currently based in the University of Plymouth , UK, and nodes in China, Greece, Italy, and Switzerland. In March 2012 he was appointed De Tao Master of Technoetic Arts at (DTMA), [ 11 ] a high-level, multi-disciplined, creativity-oriented higher education institution in Shanghai, China. In 2014, he established the Ascott Technoetic Arts Studio at DTMA, [ 1 ] creating the Technoetic Arts advanced degree programme, taught jointly with the Shanghai Institute of Visual Art . The DeTao-Node of the Planetary Collegium was established in 2015. He is a Doctor Honoris Causa of Ionian University , Corfu, Greece.

[ 1 ] Art [ edit ] In his first show in 1964 at the Molton Gallery, London, [ 12 ] he exhibited Analogue Structures and Diagram Boxes , comprising aleatory chance operation paintings and other chance operation works in wood, perspex and glass.

In 1964, Ascott published "Behaviourist Art and the Cybernetic Vision" in Cybernetica: Journal of the International Association for Cybernetics (Namur). In 1968,  he was elected Associate Member of the Institution of Computer Science , London (proposed by Gordon Pask ) [ 12 ] and in 1972, he became a Fellow of the Royal Society of Arts .

[ 1 ] Interactive computer art [ edit ] Since the 1960s, Ascott has been working with interactive art , computer art , telematic art , [ 13 ] and systems art . Ascott built a theoretical framework for approaching interactive artworks , which brought together certain characteristics of Dada , Surrealism , Fluxus , Happenings , and Pop Art with the science of cybernetics .

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] He was also influenced by the writings of Gordon Pask , Stafford Beer , William Ross Ashby , and F.H. George .

[ 16 ] International exhibitions [ edit ] Ascott has shown at the Venice Biennale , Shanghai Biennale , Electra Paris, Ars Electronica , V2 Institute for the Unstable Media , Milan Triennale, Biennale do Mercosul, Brazil, European Media Festival, and gr2000az at Graz , Austria. His first telematic project was La Plissure du Texte (1983), [ 17 ] an online work of "distributed authorship" involving artists around the world. The second was his "gesamtdatenwerk" Aspects of Gaia: Digital Pathways across the Whole Earth (1989), an installation for the Ars Electronica Festival in Linz, discussed by (inter alia) Matthew Wilson Smith in The Total Work of Art: from Bayreuth to Cyberspace , New York: Routledge, 2007.

Retrospective exhibitions of his work were shown in May 2009 at Plymouth Arts Centre, England, then in the Incheon International Digital Arts Festival in Incheon , South Korea in September 2010, and at SPACE (studios) in Hackney, London in 2011.

Syncretic Cybernetics , a comprehensive exhibition of his work, was featured in the 9th Shanghai Biennale 2012.

Roy Ascott: The Analogues (featuring his work of the 1960s) was shown at the Plug-in Institute of Contemporary Arts, [ 18 ] Winnipeg, July–Sept 2013. In September 2014, a mini retrospective of his work was shown in Linz, at the time of his Ars Electronica Golden Nica award.

[ 19 ] He discussed his work on Geran TV.

[ 20 ] The seminal work of 1962, "Video-Roget" [ 21 ] was acquired in 2014, by the Tate Gallery, London for its permanent collection. Two key works were included in "Electronic Superhighway", at the Whitechapel Gallery, London in 2016.

[ 22 ] "Art in Europe 1945–68" shown in ZKM , Karlsruhe , Germany Oct 2016/ Jan 2017, included his "Change-painting 1966".

[ 23 ] His early work was the subject of the exhibition "Roy Ascott: Form has Behaviour", at the Henry Moore Institute, Leeds , Jan/Apr 2017.

[ 24 ] Books authored by Roy Ascott [ edit ] The Future is Now: Art, Technology, and Consciousness . 2012. Beijing: Gold Wall Press.2012 Telematic Embrace: Visionary Theories of Art, Technology, and Consciousness . Ed. and Intro. by Edward A. Shanken . Berkeley: University of California Press. 2003.

Technoetic Arts (trans: YI, Won-Kon), (Media & Art Series no. 6, Institute of Media Art, Yonsei University). Yonsei: Yonsei University Press. 2002.

Art & Telematics: toward the Construction of New Aesthetics . (trans: E. Fujihara). Tokyo: NTT Publishing Co. 1998.

Books edited by Roy Ascott [ edit ] Ascott, R., Girao, L. M. (eds).

Presence in the Mindfield: art, identity, and the technology of transformation.

Aveiro, Portugal: Universidade deAveiro. 2011.

Ascott, R., Gangvik, E., Jahrmann, M. (eds).

Making Reality Really Real.

Trondheim: TEKS. 2010.

Ascott, R., Bast, G., Fiel, W. (eds).

New Realities: Being Syncreti c. Vienna: Springer. 2009.

Ascott, R. (ed).

Engineered Nature: art and consciousness in the post-biological era . Bristol: Intellect Books. 2006.

Ascott, R. (ed).

Art Technology Consciousness . Exeter: Intellect Books. 2000 Ascott, R. (ed).

Reframing Consciousness . Exeter: Intellect Books. 1999 References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e f g "Roy Ascott Studio" .

royascottstudio.com . Retrieved 23 August 2023 .

^ "Cybernetics & Human Knowing A Journal of Second Order Cybernetics, Autopoiesis & Cybersemiotics - A Tribute to the Messenger Shaman: Roy Ascott, Volume 25" . 2018.

^ "Art, Cybernetics and Pedagogy in Post-War Britain: Roy Ascott's Groundcourse" .

CRC Press . 2019.

^ [1] GIVE AND TAKE : Roy Ascott reflects on his career by Hans-Ulrich Obrist Artforum, VOL. 63, NO. 6 ^ a b c d e "Technology and Intuition: Roy Ascott" .

leonardo.info . 10 March 1997.

^ a b c "Routes Toward British Computer Arts: Educational Institutions, Page 57, Summer 2004, Bulletin of the Computer Arts Society" (PDF) .

Computer Arts Society . 2004.

^ Wolfe, Morris (2002).

OCA 1967–1972: Five Turbulent Years ISBN 0-9689737-0-1 . Toronto: Grubstreet Books.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: publisher location ( link ) ^ a b "New Media M.A. Research Blog – Media Studies" .

University of Amsterdam . 2006.

^ "UCLA Design Media Arts / Calendar" .

dma.ucla.edu . 2007.

^ "Planetary Network - Venice Biennale 1986" .

alien.mur.at . 1986.

^ Index detaoma.net [ dead link ] ^ a b "telematic connections:: timeline" .

telematic.walkerart.org . 1964.

^ "Art Museum Timeline" .

artmuseum.net .

^ Randall, Randall; Jordan, Ken (2002).

"Roy Ascott: Behaviourist Art and the Cybernetic Vision" (PDF) .

Department of Computer Science at Colby . New York, London: W. W. Norton & Company. pp.

104– 120 . Retrieved 6 March 2024 .

^ "Plymouth Arts Cinema" .

Plymouth Arts Cinema | Independent Cinema for Everyone | located at Arts University Plymouth . Retrieved 25 August 2023 .

^ A critical survey of Ascott's work is provided by Edward A. Shanken in his introductory essay "From Cybernetics to Telematics: The Art, Pedagogy, and Theory of Roy Ascott" in Ascott, R. 2003.

Telematic Embrace: Visionary Theories of Art, Technology and Consciousness . (ed.

Edward A. Shanken ). Berkeley: University of California Press.

[2] ^ "telematic connections:: timeline" .

telematic.walkerart.org .

^ "Roy Ascott: The Analogues | Plug In ICA" .

www.plugin.org . Archived from the original on 3 May 2013.

^ "Roy Ascott (recording)" .

www.art-in-berlin.de .

^ "video play tv" .

www.art-in-tv.de .

^ " 'Video-Roget', Roy Ascott, 1962" .

Tate .

^ "Press Release - Electronic Superhighway" . Retrieved 25 August 2023 .

^ "Art in Europe 1945–1968 | 22.10.2016 (All day) to 29.01.2017 (All day) | ZKM" .

zkm.de .

^ Foundation, Henry Moore.

"Roy Ascott: Form has Behaviour" .

Henry Moore Foundation .

External links [ edit ] "Telematic Embrace: A Love Story? Roy Ascott's Theories of Telematic Art " by Edward A. Shanken, 2001.

Telematic Connections 2001 exhibition and online platform curated by Steve Dietz and inspired by Ascott's work.

Entry for Roy Ascott at the "Media Art Net" includes a biography and links to further sources, including articles by Söke Dinkla, Inke Arns, Rudolf Frieling, and Oliver Grau respectively La Plissure du Texte, in the online catalogue "Media Art Net" "Roy Ascott: Teaching Change", a Tate Blog article written by Elena Crippa, 15 June 2011 Webpage of the retrospective at Space London "Roy Ascott: The Syncretic Sense", May 20 – June 25, 2011 Time Out recommendation for the exhibition "Roy Ascott: The Syncretic Sense" "Degree Zero", article on Roy Ascott's Groundcourse, frieze magazine, web version of printed article, published on 02/09/06, written by Emily Pethick References for Roy Ascott with the German art magazine "Kunstforum International" Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Netherlands Latvia Poland Israel Artists ULAN RKD Artists People DDB Other IdRef ELMCIP Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Roy_Ascott&oldid=1304356889 " Categories : 1934 births Living people Artists from Bath, Somerset Cyberneticists Transdisciplinarity British postmodern artists English contemporary artists Postmodern theory Postmodernists Post-structuralists People educated at City of Bath Boys' School Academics of the University of Wolverhampton Academics of the University of Plymouth San Francisco Art Institute faculty Alumni of King's College, Newcastle UCLA School of the Arts and Architecture faculty Academic staff of OCAD University Canadian academic administrators OCAD University administrators Royal Air Force officers 20th-century Royal Air Force personnel Military personnel from Bath, Somerset Hidden categories: CS1 maint: publisher location All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from August 2023 Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from February 2020 Use British English from February 2020 Articles with hCards This page was last edited on 5 August 2025, at 14:58 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Roy Ascott 5 languages Add topic

