Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Origin 2 Aesthetic literature 3 Aesthetic fine art 4 Aesthetic decorative arts 5 Influence on advertising 6 See also 7 References 8 Sources 9 Further reading 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Aestheticism 33 languages العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Български Català Cymraeg Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 हिन्दी Italiano עברית Кыргызча Nederlands 日本語 ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Polski Português Română Русский Suomi Svenska ไทย Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 19th-century art movement Not to be confused with Asceticism .

"Aesthete" redirects here. For the visual system of chitons, see Aesthete (chiton) . For the group of poets, see Harvard Aesthetes .

The Peacock Room , designed in the Anglo-Japanese style by James Abbott McNeill Whistler and Edward Godwin , one of the most famous and comprehensive examples of Aesthetic interior design Aestheticism (also known as the aesthetic movement ) was an art movement in the late 19th century that valued the appearance of literature , music , fonts and the arts over their functions.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] According to Aestheticism, art should be produced to be beautiful, rather than to teach a lesson , create a parallel , or perform another didactic purpose, a sentiment expressed in the slogan " art for art's sake ." Aestheticism flourished in the 1870s and 1880s, gaining prominence and the support of notable writers such as Walter Pater and Oscar Wilde .

Aestheticism challenged the values of mainstream Victorian culture , as many Victorians believed that literature and art fulfilled important ethical roles.

[ 3 ] Writing in The Guardian , Fiona McCarthy states that "the aesthetic movement stood in stark and sometimes shocking contrast to the crass materialism of Britain in the 19th century." [ 4 ] Aestheticism was named by the critic Walter Hamilton in The Aesthetic Movement in England in 1882.

[ 5 ] By the 1890s, decadence , a term with origins in common with aestheticism, was in use across Europe .

[ 3 ] Origin [ edit ] Aestheticism has its roots in German Romanticism . Though the term "aesthetic" derives from Greek, Alexander Gottlieb Baumgarten 's Aesthetica (1750) made important use of it in German before Immanuel Kant incorporated it into his philosophy in the Critique of Judgment (1790). Kant, in turn, influenced Friedrich Schiller 's Aesthetic Letters (1794) and his concept of art as Spiel (Play): "Man is never so serious as when he plays; man is wholly man only when he plays". In the Letters , Schiller proclaimed salvation through art: Man has lost his dignity, but Art has saved it, and preserved it for him in expressive marbles. Truth still lives in fiction, and from the copy the original will be restored.

These ideas were imported to the English-speaking world largely through the efforts of Thomas Carlyle , whose Life of Friedrich Schiller (1825), Critical and Miscellaneous Essays and Sartor Resartus (1833–1834) introduced and advocated aestheticism while also, if not marking the earliest use of the word "aesthetic" in the English language, certainly popularising it.

Ruth apRoberts declared him the "apostle of aesthetics in England, 1825–1827", in recognition of his pioneering influence on the subsequent development of the aesthetic movement.

[ 6 ] Aesthetic literature [ edit ] The British decadent writers were much influenced by the Oxford professor Walter Pater and his essays published during 1867–1868, in which he stated that one had to live life intensely, and seek beauty. His text Studies in the History of the Renaissance (1873) was very popular among art-oriented young men of the late 19th century. Writers of the Decadent movement used the slogan " Art for Art's Sake " ( L'art pour l'art ), the origin of which is debated. Some claim that it was created by the philosopher Victor Cousin , although Angela Leighton notes that it was used by Benjamin Constant as early as 1804 in the work On Form: Poetry, Aestheticism and the Legacy of a Word (2007).

[ 7 ] It is generally accepted to have been popularised by Théophile Gautier in France , who used the phrase to suggest that art and morality were separate.

One of many Punch cartoons about aesthetes The artists and writers of Aesthetic style tended to profess that the Arts should provide refined sensuous pleasure, rather than convey moral or sentimental messages. As a consequence, they did not accept John Ruskin , Matthew Arnold , and George MacDonald 's conception of art as something moral or useful, "Art for truth's sake".

[ 8 ] Instead, they believed that Art did not have any didactic purpose; it only needed to be beautiful. The Aesthetes developed a cult of beauty, which they considered the basic factor of art. Life should copy Art, they asserted. They considered nature as crude and lacking in design when compared to art. The main characteristics of the style were: suggestion rather than statement, sensuality, great use of symbols, and synaesthetic / Ideasthetic effects—that is, correspondence between words, colours and music. Music was used to establish mood.

[ citation needed ] Predecessors of the Aesthetes included John Keats and Percy Bysshe Shelley , and some of the Pre-Raphaelites who themselves were a legacy of the Romantic spirit. There are a few significant continuities between the Pre-Raphaelite philosophy and that of the Aesthetes: Dedication to the idea of 'Art for Art's Sake'; admiration of, and constant striving for, beauty; escapism through visual and literary arts; craftsmanship that is both careful and self-conscious; mutual interest in merging the arts of various media. This final idea is promoted in the poem L'Art by Théophile Gautier , who compared the poet to the sculptor and painter.

[ 9 ] Dante Gabriel Rossetti and Edward Burne-Jones are most strongly associated with Aestheticism. However, their approach to Aestheticism did not share the creed of 'Art for Art's Sake' but rather "a spirited reassertion of those principles of colour, beauty, love, and cleanness that the drab, agitated, discouraging world of the mid-nineteenth century needed so much." [ 10 ] This reassertion of beauty in a drab world also connects to Pre-Raphaelite escapism in art and poetry.

In Britain the best representatives were Oscar Wilde , Algernon Charles Swinburne (both influenced by the French Symbolists), James McNeill Whistler and Dante Gabriel Rossetti . These writers and their style were satirised by Gilbert and Sullivan 's comic opera Patience and other works, such as F. C. Burnand 's drama The Colonel , and in comic magazines such as Punch , particularly in works by George Du Maurier .

[ 11 ] Compton Mackenzie 's novel Sinister Street makes use of the type as a phase through which the protagonist passes as he is influenced by older, decadent individuals. The novels of Evelyn Waugh , who was a young participant of aesthete society at Oxford University, describe the aesthetes mostly satirically, but also as a former participant. Some names associated with this assemblage are Robert Byron , Evelyn Waugh, Harold Acton , Nancy Mitford , A.E. Housman and Anthony Powell .

Aesthetic fine art [ edit ] Canaries by Albert Joseph Moore , ca. 1875–1880. Moore was among a group of artists whose work was exhibited at the Grosvenor Gallery in London.

[ 4 ] Artists associated with the Aesthetic style include Simeon Solomon , James McNeill Whistler , Dante Gabriel Rossetti , Albert Joseph Moore , GF Watts and Aubrey Beardsley .

[ 4 ] Although the work of Edward Burne-Jones was exhibited at the Grosvenor Gallery which promoted the movement, it is narrative and conveys moral or sentimental messages hence falling outside the movement's purported programme.

“Lady Lilith” by Dante Gabriel Rossetti Artists such as Rossetti focused more on simply painting beautiful women than aiming for a moral message, as is apparent in the famous “ Lady Lilith ” and “ Mona Vanna .” [ 12 ] [ 13 ] John Ruskin , a former friend of Rossetti's, said that Rossetti was “lost in the Inferno of London.” [ 14 ] Rossetti painted many more aestheticism paintings in his life, including “ Venus Verticordia ” and “ Proserpine .” Aesthetic decorative arts [ edit ] Aesthetic Brass Table by Bradley & Hubbard Company (see A Brass Menagerie, Metalwork of the Aesthetic Movement) Aesthetic Movement antiques at Florian Papp , New York City According to Christopher Dresser , the primary element of decorative art is utility. The maxim "art for art's sake," identifying art or beauty as the primary element in other branches of the Aesthetic Movement, especially fine art , cannot apply in this context. That is, decorative art must first have utility, but may also be beautiful.

[ 15 ] However, according to Michael Shindler, the decorative art branch of the Aesthetic Movement, was less the utilitarian cousin of Aestheticism's main 'pure' branch, and more the very means by which aesthetes exercised their fundamental design strategy. Like contemporary art , Shindler writes that aestheticism was born of "the conundrum of constituting one’s life in relation to an exterior work" and that it "attempted to overcome" this problem "by subsuming artists within their work in the hope of yielding—more than mere objects—lives which could be living artworks." Thus, "beautiful things became the sensuous set pieces of a drama in which artists were not like their forebears a sort of crew of anonymous stagehands, but stars. Consequently, aesthetes made idols of portraits , prayers of poems, altars of writing desks, chapels of dining rooms, and fallen angels of their fellow men." [ 16 ] Government Schools of Design were founded from 1837 onwards in order to improve the design of British goods. Following the Great Exhibition of 1851 efforts were intensified and oriental objects were purchased for the schools teaching collections.

Owen Jones , architect and orientalist , was requested to set out key principles of design and these became not only the basis of the schools teaching but also the propositions that preface The Grammar of Ornament (1856), which is still regarded as the finest systematic study or practical sourcebook of historic world ornament.

Jones identified the need for a new and modern style that would meet the requirements of the modern world, rather than the continual re-cycling of historic styles, but saw no reason to reject the lessons of the past.

Christopher Dresser , a student and later Professor at the school worked with Owen Jones on The Grammar of Ornament , as well as on the 1863 decoration of the oriental courts (Chinese, Japanese, and Indian) at the South Kensington Museum (now the Victoria and Albert Museum ), advanced the search for a new style with his two publications The Art of Decorative Design 1862, and Principles of Design 1873.

Production of Aesthetic style furniture was limited to approximately the late 19th century.

[ citation needed ] Aesthetic style furniture is characterized by several common themes: Ebonized wood with gilt highlights.

Far Eastern influence.

Prominent use of nature, especially flowers, birds, ginkgo leaves, and peacock feathers.

Blue and white on porcelain and other fine china.

Ebonized furniture means that the wood is painted or stained to a black ebony finish. The furniture is sometimes completely ebony-colored. More often however, there is gilding added to the carved surfaces of the feathers or stylized flowers that adorn the furniture.

[ citation needed ] As aesthetic movement decor was similar to the corresponding writing style in that it was about sensuality and nature, nature themes often appear on the furniture. A typical aesthetic feature is the gilded carved flower, or the stylized peacock feather. Colored paintings of birds or flowers are often seen. Non-ebonized aesthetic movement furniture may have realistic-looking three-dimensional-like renditions of birds or flowers carved into the wood.

Oscar Wilde lectured on the "English Renaissance in Art" during his North America tour in 1882 Contrasting with the ebonized-gilt furniture is use of blue and white for porcelain and china. Similar themes of peacock feathers and nature would be used in blue and white tones on dinnerware and other crockery. The blue and white design was also popular on square porcelain tiles. It is reported that Oscar Wilde used aesthetic decorations during his youth. This aspect of the movement was also satirised by Punch magazine and in Patience .

In 1882 Oscar Wilde visited Canada, where he toured the town of Woodstock, Ontario and gave a lecture on 29 May titled "The House Beautiful".

[ 17 ] In this lecture Wilde exposited the principles of the Aesthetic Movement in decorative and applied design, also known at the time as the "Ornamental Aesthetic" style, according to which local flora and fauna were celebrated as beautiful and textured, layered ceilings were popular. An example of this can be seen in Annandale National Historic Site , located in Tillsonburg, Ontario , Canada. The house was built in 1880 and decorated by Mary Ann Tillson, who happened to attend Oscar Wilde's lecture in Woodstock. Since the Aesthetic Movement was only prevalent in the decorative arts from about 1880 until about 1890, there are not many surviving examples of this particular style but one such example is 18 Stafford Terrace , London, England, which provides an insight into how the middle classes interpreted its principles.

Olana , the home of Frederic Edwin Church in upstate New York, is an important example of exoticism in the Aesthetic Movement decorative arts.

[ 18 ] Influence on advertising [ edit ] The aesthetic movement in England became directly involved in advertising , and Pears soap (under advertising pioneer Thomas J. Barratt ) recruited English actress and socialite Lillie Langtry —who had been painted by aesthete artists and was also a friend of Oscar Wilde—to promote their products in 1882, making her the first celebrity to endorse a commercial product.

[ 19 ] [ 20 ] [ 21 ] See also [ edit ] Aesthetics Arts and Crafts movement Aestheticization of politics Aestheticization of violence Ideasthesia References [ edit ] ^ Fargis, Paul (1998).

The New York Public Library Desk Reference – 3rd Edition . Macmillan General Reference. pp.

261 .

ISBN 0-02-862169-7 .

^ Denney, Colleen.

"At the Temple of Art: the Grosvenor Gallery, 1877–1890" , Issue 1165, p. 38, Fairleigh Dickinson University Press, 2000 ISBN 0-8386-3850-3 .

^ a b "Aestheticism and decadence" . British Library . Retrieved 2 August 2020 .

^ a b c "The Aesthetic Movement" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 1 September 2020 .

^ "Aesthetic Movement" .

Tate . Retrieved 1 September 2020 .

^ ap Roberts, Ruth (1991).

"Carlyle and the Aesthetic Movement" .

Carlyle Annual (12): 57– 64.

ISSN 1050-3099 .

JSTOR 44945538 .

^ Angela Leighton (2007), p. 32.

^ Raeper, William (1987) George MacDonald, p. 183. Tring, Herts., and Batavia, Illinois: Lion Publishing.

^ McMullen, Lorraine (1971).

An Introduction to the Aesthetic Movement in English Literature . Ottawa, Ontario: Bytown Press. pp.

22– 23.

^ Welland, Dennis S. R. (1953).

The Pre-Raphaelites in Literature and Art . London, UK: George G. Harrap & Co. Ltd. p. 22.

^ Mendelssohn, Michèle (2007).

Henry James, Oscar Wilde and Aesthetic Culture . Edinburgh University Press. pp.

22– 30.

ISBN 978-0748623853 .

^ "The Aesthetic Movement (article)" .

Khan Academy . Retrieved 22 September 2023 .

^ "Aestheticism | Oscar Wilde, Decadence & Symbolism | Britannica" .

www.britannica.com . Retrieved 22 September 2023 .

^ Duggan, Bob (6 November 2011).

"Dante Gabriel Rossetti: Painter, Poet, Sexual Revolutionary?" .

Big Think . Retrieved 22 September 2023 .

^ Christopher Dresser .

The Art of Decorative Design 1862.

^ Shindler, Michael (2 March 2020).

"The Art of Madness and Mystery" .

Church Life Journal . The McGrath Institute for Church Life, University of Notre Dame . Retrieved 10 March 2020 .

^ O'brien (1982), p. 114.

^ Burke, Doreen Bolger (1986).

In Pursuit of Beauty: Americans and the Aesthetic Movement . New York: Metropolitan Museum of Art. p. 20.

ISBN 9780870994685 .

^ Fortunato, Paul (2013).

Modernist Aesthetics and Consumer Culture in the Writings of Oscar Wilde . Routledge. p. 33.

^ Jones, Geoffrey (2010).

Beauty Imagined: A History of the Global Beauty Industry . Oxford University Press. p. 81.

^ "When Celebrity Endorsers Go Bad" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved 2 March 2022 .

British actress Lillie Langtry became the world's first celebrity endorser when her likeness appeared on packages of Pears Soap.

Sources [ edit ] Denisoff, Dennis. "Decadence and aestheticism." Cambridge Companion to the Fin de Siecle. Cambridge: Cambridge UP, 2007.

Gal, Michalle.

Aestheticism: Deep Formalism and the Emergence of Modernist Aesthetics.

Peter Lang AG International Academic Publishers, 2015.

Gaunt, William.

The Aesthetic Adventure . New York: Harcourt, 1945. ISBN None.

Halen, Widar.

Christopher Dresser, a Pioneer of Modern Design.

Phaidon: 1990.

ISBN 0-7148-2952-8 .

Lambourne, Lionel.

The Aesthetic Movement.

Phaidon Press: 1996.

ISBN 0-7148-3000-3 .

O'Brien, Kevin.

Oscar Wilde in Canada, an apostle for the arts . Personal Library, Publishers: 1982.

Snodin, Michael and John Styles.

Design & The Decorative Arts, Britain 1500–1900.

V&A Publications: 2001.

ISBN 1-85177-338-X .

Christopher Morley. "'Reform and Eastern Art' in Decorative Arts Society Journal", 2010.

Gal, Michalle. "Aestheticism, philosophical critique". in Oxford Encyclopedia of Aesthetics (Michael Kelly, ed.). Oxford University Press, 2014.

Further reading [ edit ] Fiell, Charlotte; Fiell, Peter (2005).

Design of the 20th Century (25th anniversary ed.). Köln: Taschen. pp.

24– 25.

ISBN 9783822840788 .

OCLC 809539744 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Aestheticism .

Gal, Michalle. "Aestheticism, philosophical critique". in Oxford Encyclopedia of Aesthetics (2nd edition, Michael Kelly, ed.).

Aesthetes & Decadents on Victorian Web Annandale National Historic Site Books, Research & Information "Aestheticism Style Guide" .

British Galleries .

Victoria and Albert Museum . Retrieved 31 January 2016 .

Edward Burne-Jones, Victorian artist-dreamer , a full text exhibition catalog from The Metropolitan Museum of Art v t e Aesthetics Areas Ancient Africa India Japanese Mathematics Medieval Music Nature Science Theology Schools Aestheticism Classicism Fascism Feminism Formalism Historicism Marxism Modernism Postmodernism Psychoanalysis Realism Romanticism Symbolism Theosophy more...

Philosophers Abhinavagupta Adorno Alberti Aristotle Aquinas Balázs Balthasar Baudelaire Baudrillard Baumgarten Bell Benjamin Burke Coleridge Collingwood Coomaraswamy Danto Deleuze Dewey Fry Goethe Goodman Greenberg Hanslick Hegel Heidegger Hume Hutcheson Kant Kierkegaard Klee Langer Lipps Liu Lukács Lyotard Man Marcuse Maritain Merleau-Ponty Nietzsche Ortega y Gasset Orwell Pater Plato Rancière Rand Richards Ruskin Santayana Schiller Schopenhauer Scruton Tagore Tanizaki Vasari Wilde Winckelmann more...

Concepts Appropriation Art for art's sake Art manifesto Artistic merit Avant-garde Beauty Feminine Masculine Camp Comedy Creativity Cuteness Depiction Disgust Ecstasy Elegance Emotions Entertainment Eroticism Fashion Gaze Harmony Humour Interpretation Judgment Kama Kitsch Life imitating art Magnificence Mimesis Perception Picturesque Quality Rasa Recreation Reverence Style Sublime Taste Tragedy Work of art Works Hippias Major (c. 390 BC) Poetics (c. 335 BC) The Literary Mind and the Carving of Dragons (c. 100) On the Sublime (c. 500) On the Sublime and Beautiful (1757) Lectures on Aesthetics (1835) " The Critic as Artist " (1891) In Praise of Shadows (1933) Art as Experience (1934) " The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction " (1935) " Avant-Garde and Kitsch " (1939) Critical Essays (1946) The Aesthetic Dimension (1977) Why Beauty Matters (2009) Related Aestheticization of politics Applied aesthetics Arts criticism Axiology Evolutionary aesthetics Mathematical beauty Neuroesthetics Patterns in nature Philosophy of design Philosophy of film Philosophy of music Psychology of art Theory of art Outline Category Philosophy portal v t e Premodern , Modern and Contemporary art movements List of art movements / periods Premodern (Western) Ancient Thracian Dacian Nuragic Aegean Cycladic Minoan Minyan ware Mycenaean Greek Sub-Mycenaean Protogeometric Geometric Orientalizing Archaic Black-figure Red-figure Severe style Classical Kerch style Hellenistic "Baroque" Indo-Greek Greco-Buddhist Neo-Attic Etruscan Scythian Iberian Gaulish Roman Republican Gallo-Roman Julio-Claudian Pompeian Styles Trajanic Severan Medieval Late antique Early Christian Coptic Ethiopian Migration Period Anglo-Saxon Hunnic Insular Lombard Visigothic Donor portrait Pictish Mozarabic Repoblación Viking Byzantine Iconoclast Macedonian Palaeologan Italo-Byzantine Frankish Merovingian Carolingian Pre-Romanesque Ottonian Romanesque Mosan Spanish Norman Norman-Sicilian Opus Anglicanum Gothic Gothic art in Milan International Gothic International Gothic art in Italy Lucchese school Crusades Moscow school Novgorod school Vladimir-Suzdal school Duecento Sienese school Mudéjar Medieval cartography Italian school Majorcan school Mappa mundi Renaissance Italian Renaissance Trecento Proto-Renaissance Florentine school Pittura infamante Quattrocento Ferrarese school Forlivese school Venetian school Cinquecento High Renaissance Bolognese school Mannerism Counter- Maniera Northern Renaissance Early Netherlandish World landscape Ghent–Bruges school Northern Mannerism German Renaissance Cologne school Danube school Dutch and Flemish Renaissance Antwerp Mannerism Romanism Still life English Renaissance Tudor court Cretan school Turquerie Fontainebleau school Art of the late 16th century in Milan 17th century Baroque Baroque in Milan Flemish Baroque Caravaggisti in Utrecht Tenebrism Louis XIII style Lutheran Baroque Stroganov school Animal painting Guild of Romanists Dutch Golden Age Delft school Capriccio Heptanese school Classicism Louis XIV style Poussinists and Rubenists 18th century Rococo Rocaille Louis XV style Frederician Chinoiserie Fête galante Neoclassicism Goût grec Louis XVI style Adam style Directoire style Neoclassical architecture in Milan Picturesque Colonial art Art of the African diaspora African-American Caribbean Haitian Colonial Asian art Arts in the Philippines Letras y figuras Tipos del País Colonial Asian Baroque Company style Latin American art Casta painting Indochristian art Chilote school Cuzco school Quito school Latin American Baroque Art borrowing Western elements Islamic Moorish Manichaean Mughal Qajar Qing handicrafts Western influence in Japan Akita ranga Uki-e Transition to modern (c. 1770 – 1862) Romanticism Fairy painting Danish Golden Age Troubadour style Nazarene movement Purismo Shoreham Ancients Düsseldorf school Pre-Raphaelites Hudson River School American luminism Orientalism Norwich school Empire style Historicism Revivalism Biedermeier Realism Barbizon school Costumbrismo Verismo Macchiaioli Academic art Munich school in Greece Neo-Grec Etching revival Modern (1863–1944) 1863–1899 Neo-romanticism National romanticism Yōga Nihonga Japonisme Anglo-Japanese style Beuron school Hague school Peredvizhniki Impressionism American Hoosier Group Boston school Amsterdam Canadian Heidelberg school Aestheticism Arts and Crafts Art pottery Tonalism Decadent movement Symbolism Romanian Russian Volcano school Incoherents Post-Impressionism Neo-Impressionism Luminism Divisionism Pointillism Pont-Aven School Cloisonnism Synthetism Les Nabis American Barbizon school California tonalism Costumbrismo 1900–1914 Art Nouveau Art Nouveau in Milan Primitivism California Impressionism Secessionism School of Paris Munich Secession Vienna Secession Berlin Secession Sonderbund Pennsylvania Impressionism Mir iskusstva Ten American Painters Fauvism Expressionism Die Brücke Der Blaue Reiter Noucentisme Deutscher Werkbund American Realism Ashcan school Cubism Proto-Cubism Orphism A Nyolcak Neue Künstlervereinigung München Futurism Cubo-Futurism Art Deco Metaphysical Rayonism Productivism Synchromism Vorticism 1915–1944 Sosaku-hanga Suprematism School of Paris Crystal Cubism Constructivism Latin American Universal Constructivism Dada Shin-hanga Neoplasticism De Stijl Purism Return to order Novecento Italiano Figurative Constructivism Stupid Cologne Progressives Arbeitsrat für Kunst November Group Australian tonalism Dresden Secession Social realism Functionalism Bauhaus Kinetic art Anthropophagy Mingei Group of Seven New Objectivity Grosvenor school Neues Sehen Surrealism Iranian Latin American Mexican muralism Neo-Fauvism Precisionism Aeropittura Asso Scuola Romana Cercle et Carré The Group Harlem Renaissance Kapists Regionalism California Scene Painting Heroic realism Socialist realism Nazi art Streamline Moderne Concrete art Abstraction-Création Tiki The Ten Dimensionism Boston Expressionism Leningrad school Contemporary and Postmodern (1945–present) 1945–1959 International Typographic Style Abstract expressionism Washington Color School Visionary art Vienna School of Fantastic Realism Spatialism Color field Lyrical abstraction Tachisme Arte Informale COBRA Nuagisme Generación de la Ruptura Jikken Kōbō Metcalf Chateau Mono-ha Nanyang Style Action painting American Figurative Expressionism in New York New media art New York school Hard-edge painting Bay Area Figurative Movement Les Plasticiens Gutai Art Association Gendai Bijutsu Kondankai Pop art Situationist International Soviet Nonconformist Ukrainian underground Lettrism Letterist International Ultra-Lettrist Florida Highwaymen Cybernetic art Antipodeans 1960–1969 Otra Figuración Afrofuturism Nueva Presencia ZERO Happening Neo-Dada Neo-Dada Organizers Op art Nouveau réalisme Nouvelle tendance Capitalist realism Art & Language Arte Povera Black Arts Movement The Caribbean Artists Movement Chicano art movement Conceptual art Land art Systems art Video art Minimalism Fluxus Generative art Post-painterly abstraction Intermedia Psychedelic art Nut Art Photorealism Environmental art Performance art Process art Institutional critique Light and Space Street art Feminist art movement in the US Saqqakhaneh movement The Stars Art Group Tropicália Yoru no Kai Artificial intelligence visual art 1970–1999 Post-conceptual art Installation art Artscene Postminimalism Endurance art Sots Art Moscow Conceptualists Pattern and Decoration Pliontanism Punk art Neo-expressionism Transavantgarde Saint Soleil school Guerrilla art Lowbrow art Telematic art Appropriation art Neo-conceptual art New European Painting Tunisian collaborative painting Memphis Group Cyberdelic Neue Slowenische Kunst Scratch video Transgressive Retrofuturism Young British Artists Superfiction Taring Padi Superflat New Leipzig school Artist-run initiative Artivism The Designers Republic Grunge design Verdadism Chinese Apartment Art 2000– present Amazonian pop art Altermodern Art for art Art game Art intervention Brandalism Classical Realism Contemporary African art Africanfuturism Contemporary Indigenous Australian art Crypto art Cyborg art Excessivism Fictive art Flat design Corporate Memphis Hypermodernism Hyperrealism Idea art Internet art Post-Internet iPhone art Kitsch movement Lightpainting Massurrealism Modern European ink painting Neo-futurism Neomodern Neosymbolism Passionism Post-YBAs Relational art Skeuomorphism Software art Sound art Stuckism Superflat SoFlo Superflat Superstroke Toyism Unilalianism Vaporwave Walking Artists Network Related topics History of art Abstract art Asemic writing Anti-art Avant-garde Ballets Russes Christian art Art in the Protestant Reformation and Counter-Reformation Catholic art Icon Lutheran art Digital art Fantastic art Folk art Hierarchy of genres Genre painting History painting Illuminated manuscript Illustration Interactive art Jewish art Kitsch Landscape painting Modernism Modern sculpture Late modernism Naïve art Outsider art Portrait Prehistoric European art Queer art Realism Shock art Trompe-l'œil Western painting Category Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Aestheticism&oldid=1287796226 " Categories : Art movements Movements in aesthetics Concepts in epistemology Culture in Oxford Human appearance Modern art Symbolism (arts) Victorian poetry Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from February 2024 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2011 Articles with unsourced statements from February 2024 Commons link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 28 April 2025, at 14:37 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Aestheticism 33 languages Add topic

