Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 The Twelve Keys of Basil Valentine 2 Selected publications 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Basil Valentine 15 languages العربية Català Deutsch Español فارسی Français Italiano مصرى Nederlands Occitan Português Русский Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Pseudonymous author " Frater Basilius Valentinus, monk  of the Benedictine order and Hermetic philosopher ": imaginary portrait in the frontispiece from Chymische Schrifften , 1717 [ 1 ] The Peterskirche , Erfurt, as it appeared in 2007 Basil Valentine is the Anglicised version of the name Basilius Valentinus , ostensibly a 15th-century alchemist , possibly Canon of the Benedictine Priory of Saint Peter in Erfurt, Germany but more likely a pseudonym used by one or several 16th-century German authors.

According to John Maxson Stillman , who wrote on the history of chemistry, there is no evidence of such a name on the rolls in Germany or Rome and no mention of this name before 1600.

[ 2 ] His putative history, like his imaginary portrait, appears to be of later creation than the writings themselves.

During the 18th century it was suggested that the author of the works attributed to Basil Valentine was Johann Thölde , a salt manufacturer in Germany who lived roughly 1565–1624.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Modern scholarship now suggests that one author was Thölde, but that others were involved. Thölde published the first five books under Valentine's name.

[ 4 ] : 138–140 Whoever he was, Basil Valentine had considerable knowledge of chemistry. He demonstrated that ammonia could be obtained by the action of alkali on sal-ammoniac ( ammonium chloride ), described the production of hydrochloric acid by acidifying brine of common salt ( sodium chloride ), and created ethyl chloride [ 5 ] and oil of vitriol ( sulfuric acid ), among other achievements.

[ 6 ] The Twelve Keys of Basil Valentine [ edit ] Illustration of the first key Main article: The Twelve Keys of Basil Valentine The Twelve Keys of Basil Valentine is a widely reproduced alchemical book attributed to Valentine, first published in 1599 by Johann Thölde.

[ 2 ] It contains two parts, the second of which houses the twelve keys. These were accompanied by woodcut engravings from later publications in the early seventeenth century.

Selected publications [ edit ] Library resources about Basil Valentine Resources in your library Resources in other libraries By Basil Valentine Online books Resources in your library Resources in other libraries Table of alchemical symbols , from an English translation of his Last Will and Testament , 1671 Numerous publications on alchemy in Latin and German were published under the name Basil Valentine. They have been translated into many European languages, including English , French , Russian and others. The following list is roughly organized in order of translation or publication date.

Ein kurtz summarischer Tractat, von dem grossen Stein der Uralten...

, (Of the great stone of the ancients), by Basilius Valentinus. Eisleben: 1599 (without illustrations) (German) Ein kurtz summarischer Tractat, von dem grossen Stein der Uralten...

, Leipzig: 1602 (with woodcuts) (German) Triumph Wagen Antimonii , (The Triumphant Chariot of Antimony) by Basil Valentine; Johannes Isaaci Hollandus; Joachim Tank; Georg Phaedro; Roger Bacon. Leipzig : In Verlegung Jacob Apels, 1604. (German) De microcosmo deque magno mundi mysterio, et medicina hominis , (Of the microcosm, of the great secrecy of the world, and the human medicine), by Basilius Valentinus; Wolfgang Ketzel; Raphael Eglinus. Marpurgi : typis Guolgangi Kezelii, 1609. (Latin) A Latin translation of the text of Ein kurtz summarischer Tractat as Tripus Aureus, hoc est, Tres Tractatus Chymici Selectissimi, nempe I. Basilii Valentini...Practica una cum 12 clavibus & appendice, ex Germanico , Michael Maier (editor), Frankfurt: Paul Jacob for Lucas Jennis, 1618. (with engravings of the 12 keys) (Latin) Azoth, ou le moyen de faire l'or caché des philosophes, de frère Basile Valentin by Basilius Valentinus; Christofle Perier; Jeremie Perier. (French) Paris: Chez Ieremie & Christofle Perier, au Palais, MDCXXIV 1624. (French) Les dovze clefs de philosophie de Frere Basile Valentin ... Traictant de la vraye medecine matalique. Plus l'Azoth, ou Le moyen de faire l'or chaché des philosophes. Tradvction francoise.

by Basilius Valentinus. Paris, Chez Ieremie et Christophle Perier, 1624. (French) Fratris Basilii Valentini,... letztes Testament und Offenbahrung der himmlischen und virdischen Geheimnüss, so in einem Altar gefunden, in fünff Bücher abgetheilet... zuvor nie in Druck aussgangen, jetzt aber... publiciret durch Georgium Claromontanum,...

by 	Basile Valentin; Georg Hellberger dit Georgius Claromontanus. Iena : H. Eyrings und J. Perferts Erben, 1626. (German) Revelation des mysteres des teintures essentieles des sept metaux et de leurs vertus médicinales...

by Basile Valentin; translated by Jean Israël. Paris : J. De Senlecque et J. Hénault, 1645. (French) Currus triumphalis antimonii : opus antiquioris medicinae et philosophiae hermeticae studiosis dicat , by Basilius Valentinus. Tolosae : Apud Petrum Bosc, 1646. (The triumphal chariot of antimony ) [ 7 ] (Latin) Le char triomphal de l'antimoine , translation by Sauvin, François, 17th century (1646),  introduction by Sylvain Matton; préface by Joachim Tancky. Editions Retz, 1977, 254 p.

[1] (French) Les livres secrets et le dernier testament de frere Basile Valentin Benedictin, de la grande pierre des anciens philosophes et autres mysteres cachés de la nature. Le tout tiré et transcrit de l'original trouvé dans le haut autel sous une petite table de marbre a Erfurt et mis en lumiere ou imprimé a línstante priere des enfans de la science ...

by Basilius Valentinus. (French)  Strasbourg: 1651. (French) Les douze clefs de philosophie de frere Basile Valentin ... : traictant de la vraye medecine metalique : plus l'Azoth, ou, Le moyen de faire l'or caché des philosophes : traduction francoise.

Basilius Valentinus.; Jean Gobille; Clovis Hesteau Nuisement, sieur de. Paris : Chez Pierre Moët ..., 1660. (French) Of natural and supernatural things : also, of the first tincture, root, and spirit of metals and minerals by Basilius Valentinus. London : Printed, and are to be sold by Moses Pitt, 1670.

[ 8 ] (English) The last will and testament of Basil Valentine, monke of the order of St. Bennet , by Basil Valentine; translated by John Worlidge . London : Printed by S.G. and B.G. for Edward Brewster, 1671. (English) [ 9 ] Chymische Schrifften by Basilius Valentinus. Hamburg: 1677. (German) Compendium veritatis philosophicum fratis Basilii Valentini Manuscript (Ms.180), 1780. (German) Les douze clefs de la philosophie .

Eugène Canseliet , translator. Paris, Éditions de Minuit, 1956, 264 p.

[2] Archived 2016-03-24 at the Wayback Machine (French) Révélations des mystères des teintures des sept métaux , Pierre Savoret , editor. Omnium littéraire, 1976. ( French ) [3] Archived 2016-07-03 at the Wayback Machine Le dernier testament de Basile Valentin : livres I, II, III, IV et V, dans lequel sont montrées les mines, l'origine d'icelles, leurs natures et propriétés...

by Basile Valentin; edited by Joseph Castelli. Montélimar : Castelli, 2008. (French) [ 10 ] Las doce llaves de la filosofía by Basilius Valentinus. Barcelona: Muñoz Moya y Montraveta, 1986. ( Spanish ) See also [ edit ] List of Catholic clergy scientists References [ edit ] ^ Valentinus, Basilius (1717).

Chymische Schrifften . Hamburg: Samuel Heyle.

^ a b c Stillman, John Maxson (December 1912).

"Basil Valentine, a Seventeenth Century Hoax" .

Popular Science Monthly . Retrieved 19 February 2011 .

^ Mellor, Joseph William (1922).

A Comprehensive Treatise on Inorganic and Theoretical Chemistry . London, New York: Longmans, Green and Co. p. 53.

ISBN 9780608186825 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ Principe, Lawrence M. (2013).

The Secrets of Alchemy . Chicago and London: The University of Chicago Press.

ISBN 9780226923789 .

^ Rossberg, M.; Lendle, W.; Pfleiderer, G.; Tögel, A.; Dreher, E. L.; Langer, E.; Rassaerts, H.; Kleinschmidt, P.; Strack, H.; Cook, R.; Beck, U.; Lipper, K.-A.; Torkelson, T.R.; Löser, E.; Beutel, K.K.; Mann, T. (2006). "Chlorinated Hydrocarbons".

Ullmann's Encyclopedia of Industrial Chemistry . Weinheim: Wiley-VCH.

doi : 10.1002/14356007.a06_233.pub2 .

ISBN 3527306730 .

^ Datta, N. C. (2005).

The Story of Chemistry . Hyderabad: Universities Press. p. 56.

ISBN 9788173715303 .

^ Valentinus, Basilius.

"Triumph-Wagen Antimonii" .

Othmer Library Catalog .

Science History Institute .

^ Valentinus, Basilius.

"Of natural and supernatural things" .

Othmer Library Catalog .

Science History Institute .

^ Valentinus, Basilius (1671) [original date unknown].

The last will and testament of Basil Valentine, monke of the order of St. Bennet . Translated by Worlidge, Johannes (1st ed.). London: S. G. and B. G. for Edward Brewster.

^ Valentinus, Basilius (2008) [original date unknown]. Castelli, Joseph (ed.).

Le dernier testament de Basile Valentin : livres I, II, III, IV et V, dans lequel sont montrées les mines, l'origine d'icelles, leurs natures et propriétés...

[ The last testament of Basil Valentin: books I, II, III, IV and V, in which are shown the mines, the origin of them, their natures and properties...

]. Alchemy (in French). Montélimar.

ISBN 9782353170449 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) External links [ edit ] Works by Basilius Valentinus at Project Gutenberg Works by or about Basil Valentine at the Internet Archive Transcription of Triumphal Chariot of Antimony Transcription of Azoth, ou le moyen de faire l'or caché des philosophes, de frère Basile Valentin Library Catalog entry for Last will and testament Musaeum Hermeticum Reformatum et Amplificatum (1678) from Science History Institute Digital Collections .

v t e Alchemy (general) Alchemists Greco-Egyptian Agathodaemon (legendary) Chymes pseudo-Cleopatra pseudo-Democritus Hermes Trismegistus (legendary) Mary the Jewess pseudo-Moses Ostanes (legendary) Paphnutia the Virgin Zosimos of Panopolis Ancient Chinese Fang (alchemist) Ge Hong Master Geng Wei Boyang Byzantine pseudo-Olympiodorus Stephanus of Alexandria Synesius Arabic-Islamic Abū Bakr al-Rāzī (Rhazes) Alphidius pseudo-Apollonius of Tyana (Balīnūs/Balīnās) Artephius pseudo-Avicenna Ibn Arfaʿ Raʾs Ibn Umayl (Senior Zadith) Ibn Waḥshiyya al-ʿIrāqī Jābir ibn Ḥayyān (Geber) pseudo-Khālid ibn Yazīd (Calid) al-Jildakī Maslama al-Qurṭubī al-Ṭughrāʾī al-Zahrāwī (Abulcasis) Late medieval pseudo-Albertus (pseudo-)Arnaldus de Villa Nova pseudo-Geber George Ripley Guido di Montanor Hugh of Evesham Johann of Laz John Dastin John of Rupescissa (Jean de Roquetaillade) Magister Salernus pseudo-Michael Scot Ortolanus Paul of Taranto Petrus Bonus pseudo-Ramon Llull (pseudo-)Roger Bacon Taddeo Alderotti Thomas Norton Early modern Andreas Libavius Basil Valentine pseudo-Bernard of Treviso George Starkey (Eirenaeus Philalethes) Gerhard Dorn Giovanni da Correggio Heinrich Khunrath Hennig Brand Isaac Newton Jakob Böhme Jan Baptist van Helmont Johann Rudolf Glauber John Dee Michael Maier Michael Sendivogius Paracelsus Pierre-Jean Fabre Robert Boyle Samuel Norton Thomas Vaughan (Eugenius Philalethes) Wilhelm Homberg Modern Carl Jung Eugène Canseliet Frater Albertus Fulcanelli Mary Anne Atwood Writings Major Works Atalanta fugiens Aurora consurgens Liber de compositione alchemiae ( Morienus ) Book of the Silvery Water and the Starry Earth Book of Mercy Books of the Balances Buch der heiligen Dreifaltigkeit Cantong Qi Chymical Wedding of Christian Rosenkreutz Clavis sapientiae ( Miftāḥ al-ḥikma ) De consideratione quintae essentiae Emerald Tablet ( Tabula Smaragdina ) Leyden papyrus X Liber Hermetis de alchemia ( Liber dabessi ) Liber ignium Liber lucis Mappae clavicula Mirror of Alchimy Mutus liber Nabataean Agriculture Ordinal of Alchemy Papyrus Graecus Holmiensis Physika kai mystika Rosary of the Philosophers Rutbat al-ḥakīm ( Step of the Sage ) Seventy Books Sirr al-khalīqa ( Secret of Creation ) Sirr al-Asrar (pseudo-Aristotle) Sirr al-Asrar (al-Rāzī) Splendor solis Summa perfectionis Suspicions about the Hidden Realities of the Air Turba philosophorum Twelve Keys of Basil Valentine Compilations Aureum vellus Bibliotheca chemica curiosa De alchemia Deutsches Theatrum Chemicum Fasciculus chemicus Musaeum Hermeticum Theatrum chemicum Theatrum chemicum Britannicum Tripus aureus Various Alembic Alkahest Athanor Azoth Chrysopoeia Element Digestion Elixir of life Homunculus Iatrochemistry In art/entertainment Magnum opus Ouroboros Pill of Immortality Philosophers' stone Prima materia Rebis Spagyric Takwin Yliaster Processes Substances Symbols ( Unicode , Suns in alchemy ) All articles Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Spain Netherlands Greece Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Belgium Academics CiNii People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Basil_Valentine&oldid=1305820758 " Categories : 15th-century alchemists Academic shared pseudonyms Canons (priests) German alchemists Hoaxes in Germany Hidden categories: CS1 errors: ISBN date CS1 maint: location missing publisher CS1 French-language sources (fr) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Webarchive template wayback links Articles with Project Gutenberg links Articles with Internet Archive links This page was last edited on 14 August 2025, at 08:06 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Basil Valentine 15 languages Add topic

