Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Background 2 History of the movement 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Rayonism 25 languages Català Čeština Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Hrvatski Italiano עברית Lietuvių Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Русский Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Russian art movement This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .

Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( May 2013 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Mikhail Larionov , Red Rayonism , 1913 Rayonism [ 1 ] (or Rayism [ 2 ] or Rayonnism [ 3 ] ) was a style of abstract art that developed in Russia in 1910–1914. Founded and named by Russian Cubo-Futurists Mikhail Larionov and Natalia Goncharova , it was one of Russia's first abstract art movements.

[ 4 ] Background [ edit ] In 1909, Italian poet F. T. Marinetti published the Founding Manifesto of Futurism.

The Futurists took speed, technology and modernity as their inspiration, depicting the dynamic character of early 20th century life; examples of Italian Futurists are Umberto Boccioni and Giacomo Balla . Shortly after the movement started, Russian Futurism , Ego-Futurism and Cubo-Futurism began; in Russia, the movement was developed by painter David Burliuk , poets Aleksei Kruchyonykh , Vasily Kamensky and Vladimir Mayakovsky , and many others. Larionov and Goncharova were early followers of Russian Futurism.

In 1910, the latter two people, together with many associates such as Aristarkh Lentulov and Ilya Mashkov , they founded the exhibiting society the Jack of Diamonds . However, in 1912, Goncharova and Larionov left, in protest at the group's reliance on French art, and organised their own rival exhibitions. It was then that Rayonism began, with a distinct vision of what abstract art was representative of. Larionov's approach to abstract painting was the idea that certain scientific principles, like radioactivity, ultraviolet light, and x-rays, were the foundation for the vision of what he wanted to create.

[ 5 ] History of the movement [ edit ] Goncharova began to paint in the Rayonist style as early as 1909, but the Rayonist Manifesto by her and Larionov was written in 1912, and published the subsequent year.

[ 6 ] In the manifesto, Larionov expresses the following, "Long live the style of Rayonist painting created by us, free from realistic forms, existing and developing itself only according to its own pictorial laws." [ 7 ] The Rayonists sought an art that floated beyond abstraction, outside time and space, and to break the barriers between the artist and the public. Rayonist paintings thus focused on the rays reflecting from the objects, and how the rays moved.

[ 8 ] They derived the name from the use of dynamic rays of contrasting color, representing lines of reflected light — "crossing of reflected rays from various objects".

[ This quote needs a citation ] At the famous 1913 Target exhibition, they introduced the style to the public.

[ 1 ] In their literature they described Rayonism as "naturally encompassing all existing styles and forms of the art of the past, as they, like life, are simply points of departure for a Rayonist perception and construction of a picture".

[ This quote needs a citation ] Larionov and Goncharova also wrote: The style of Rayonist painting that we advance signifies spatial forms which are obtained arising from the intersection of the reflected rays of various objects, and forms chosen by the artist's will. The ray is depicted provisionally on the surface by a colored line. That which is valuable for the lover of painting finds its maximum expression in a rayonist picture. The objects that we see in life play no role here, but that which is the essence of painting itself can be shown here best of all – the combination of color, its saturation, the relation of colored masses, depth, texture ... .

[ 9 ] We do not sense the object with our eye, as it is depicted conventionally in pictures and as a result of following this or that device; in fact, we do not sense the object as such. We perceive a sum of rays proceeding from a source of light; these are reflected from the object and enter our field of vision.

Consequently, if we wish to paint literally what we see, then we must paint the sum of rays reflected from the object. But in order to receive the total sum of rays from the desired object, we must select them deliberately – because together with the rays of the object being perceived, there also fall into our range of vision reflected reflex rays belonging to other nearby objects. Now, if we wish to depict an object exactly as we see it, then we must depict also these reflex rays belonging to other objects – and then we will depict literally what we see ...

Now, if we concern ourselves not with the objects themselves but with the sums of rays from them, we can build a picture in the following way: The sum of rays from object A intersects the sum of rays from object B, while a form emerges in the space between them driven by the artist's will.

[ 5 ] Perception, not of the object itself, but of the sum of rays from it, is, by its very nature, much closer to the symbolic surface of the picture than is the object itself. This is almost the same as the mirage which appears in the scorching air of the desert and depicts distant towns, lakes, and oases in the sky (in concrete instances). Rayonism erases the barriers that exist between the picture's surface and nature.

[ This quote needs a citation ] Later that same year, the Rayonists started painting their faces; in explanation, Larionov and fellow theoretician Ilia Zdanevich wrote the manifesto "Why We Paint Our Faces", which included suggested Rayonist face painting designs as illustrations.

Rayonism ended with the start of the Great War.

The movement received minimal acceptance for their influence on Russian abstract art until a few pieces were acquired by the Tate Gallery in 1952. There are few locations where works representative of this style can be viewed by the public outside of galleries, primarily in London, New York, or Paris. Many exist in private collections, especially due to the long history of abstract art being frowned upon by the Soviets.

[ 10 ] Although short-lived, Rayonism was a crucial step in the development of Russian abstract art. As Larionov said, it represented the "true freeing of art" from the former "realistic" conventions that had "oppressed" the artistic community.

Electro act "The Rayonists" took their name from the movement.

See also [ edit ] Ray tracing (graphics) References [ edit ] ^ a b "Rayism/Rayonism" .

National Galleries Scotland . Retrieved 21 January 2020 .

^ Harte, Tim (2009).

Fast forward the aesthetics and ideology of speed in Russian avant-garde culture, 1910-1930 . Madison, Wis.: University of Wisconsin Press. p. 259.

ISBN 978-0299233235 .

^ Drucker, Johanna (December 2020).

Iliazd: a Meta-Biography of a Modernist . Johns Hopkins University Press. p. 41.

^ "Rayonism" .

Tate Gallery . Retrieved 22 January 2021 .

^ a b Bobrinskaya, Ekaterina (2020).

"Mikhail Larionov's Rayonism and the Scientific Mythologies of the Late Nineteenth and Early Twentieth Century" .

Venezia Arti .

29 : 127– 136.

doi : 10.30687/VA/2385-2720/2020/01/007 .

^ Gerhardus, Mary; Gerhardus, Dietfried (1979).

Cubism and Futurism . Phaidon. p. 74.

^ Dabrowski, Magdalena (1975).

"The Formation and Development of Rayonism" .

Art Journal .

34 (3): 200– 207.

doi : 10.2307/775991 .

JSTOR 775991 . Retrieved 2 June 2022 .

^ Lodder, Christina.

"Natalia Goncharova: the Trailblazer" .

Tate Gallery . Retrieved 22 January 2021 .

^ "Introducing Natalia Goncharova" .

Tate Gallery . Retrieved 22 January 2021 .

^ Chamot, Mary (1955).

"The Early Work of Goncharova and Larionov" .

The Burlington Magazine .

97 (627): 170+172–174.

JSTOR 871635 .

"Larionov's "Rayonnist Composition" " .

Northwestern University . Retrieved 25 May 2018 .

Boguslawski, Alexander.

"Rayonism" .

University of Kansas . Retrieved 25 May 2018 .

West, Shearer (1996).

The Bullfinch Guide to Art . UK: Bloomsbury Publishing Plc.

ISBN 0-8212-2137-X .

External links [ edit ] Tate Museum - Rayonism Rayonists and Futurists: A Manifesto — Natalia Goncharova, 1913 v t e Futurism Italian Futurists Giacomo Balla ( list of works ) "Barbara" Umberto Boccioni Anton Bragaglia Benedetta Cappa Carlo Carrà Franco Casavola Nikolay Diulgheroff Luigi De Giudici F. T. Marinetti Marisa Mori Bruno Munari Aldo Palazzeschi Ugo Piatti Francesco Balilla Pratella Antonio Russolo Luigi Russolo Antonio Sant'Elia Gino Severini Ardengo Soffici Ego-Futurists Graal Arelsky Vasilisk Gnedov Boris Gusman Georgy Ivanov Igor Severyanin Dmitri Kryuchkov Konstantin Olimpov Rurik Ivnev Pavel Shirokov Russian Futurists and Cubo-Futurists Alexander Archipenko Nikolai Aseev Vladimir Baranoff-Rossine Lilya Brik Osip Brik Alexander Bogomazov Kseniya Boguslavskaya David Burliuk Vladimir Burliuk Joseph Chaikov Aleksandra Ekster Nina Genke-Meller Natalia Goncharova Elena Guro Vasily Kamensky Velimir Khlebnikov Ivan Kliun Aleksei Kruchyonykh Nikolai Kulbin Mikhail Larionov Aristarkh Lentulov El Lissitzky Benedikt Livshits Kazimir Malevich Mikhail Matyushin Vladimir Mayakovsky Boris Pasternak Victor Palmov Lyubov Popova Ivan Puni Olga Rozanova Vadim Shershenevich Nadezhda Udaltsova Ilia Zdanevich (Iliazd) Aeropittura Giacomo Balla "Barbara" Benedetta Cappa Giuseppe Caselli Tullio Crali Fortunato Depero Gerardo Dottori Fillìa Sante Monachesi Marisa Mori Enrico Prampolini Other Futurists Alice Bailly Mina Loy Almada Negreiros C. R. W. Nevinson Emilio Pettoruti Valentine de Saint-Point Jules Schmalzigaug Mykhaylo Semenko Amadeo de Souza-Cardoso Frances Simpson Stevens Mary Swanzy Růžena Zátková Techniques, sub-genres and inventions Anti-neutral suit Intonarumori Italian futurism in cinema Futurist architecture Futurist cooking Futurist literature Futurist music Noise music Zaum Selected output Abstract Speed + Sound Antigrazioso The Art of Noises BÏF§ZF+18 The City Rises Cyclist Development of a Bottle in Space Drama in the Futurists' Cabaret No. 13 Dyr bul shchyl Dynamism of a Car Dynamism of a Cyclist Dynamism of a Dog on a Leash Dynamism of a Human Body: Boxer Dynamism of a Soccer Player Dynamism of a Speeding Horse + Houses Futurist Painting: Technical Manifesto The Knifegrinder Girl Running on a Balcony The Hand of the Violinist Lacerba Man of Smoke Manifesto of Futurism Manifesto of Futurist Musicians Mercury Passing Before the Sun The Poem of the End Poesia The Street Enters the House The Street Light Thaïs Tango with Cows Unique Forms of Continuity in Space Universal War Victory over the Sun Vladimir Mayakovsky Zangezi Zang Tumb Tumb Associated people Luisa, Marchesa Casati Gabriele D'Annunzio Sergei Diaghilev Benito Mussolini Wyndham Lewis Léonide Massine Igor Stravinsky Groups influenced Agitprop Agit-train Constructivism Dadaism Donkey's Tail Grosvenor School Jack of Diamonds Neo-Primitivism Oberiu Panfuturism Precisionism Rayonism Soyuz Molodyozhi Suprematism Supremus Vorticism See also 0,10 Exhibition 5×5=25 Cubism Divisionism Estorick Collection of Modern Italian Art Le Chahut Pointillism Primitivism Robert René Meyer-Sée Russian avant-garde Russian Ballet Sackville Gallery Ukrainian avant-garde Verbovka Village Folk Centre Zveno (art) v t e Russian art and literary movements Abramtsevo Colony Acmeist poetry Russian avant-garde Second Russian avant-garde Conceptualism Constructivism The Five Russian Futurism Cubo-Futurism Ego-Futurism Zaum Imaginism Lieutenant prose Metarealism Mir iskusstva Natural school New peasant poets Oberiu Peredvizhniki Rayonism Russian postmodernism Russian symbolism Socialist realism Soviet nonconformism Stroganov school Suprematism Village prose v t e Avant-garde movements Visual art Abstract expressionism Art Nouveau Art & Language Conceptual art Constructivism Proto-Cubism Cubism Functionalism Bauhaus Grosvenor School Devětsil Divisionism Fauvism Impressionism Neo-Impressionism Post-Impressionism Color Field Incoherents Lyrical Abstraction Mail art Minimalism Mir iskusstva Multidimensional art Neoplasticism De Stijl Neue Slowenische Kunst Nonconformism Nouveau réalisme Orphism Performance art Pop art Process art Purism Rayonism Suprematism Temporary art Vorticism Literature and poetry Acmeism Angry Penguins Asemic writing Conceptual poetry Cyberpunk Ego-Futurism Experimental literature Flarf poetry Hungry generation Imaginism Imagism Language poets Neoavanguardia Neoteric Nouveau roman Oberiu Oulipo Slam poetry Ultraísmo Visual poetry Zaum Music By style Funk Jazz Free funk Yass Pop Rock Prog Punk Metal Others Aleatoric music Ars nova Ars subtilior Atonal music Electroacoustic music Electronic music Industrial music Experimental pop Free jazz Free improvisation Futurism Microtonal music Minimal music Drone music Music theatre Musique concrète New Complexity No wave Noise music Post-rock Rock in Opposition Second Viennese School Serialism Spectral music Stochastic music Textural music Totalism Twelve-tone technique Cinema and theatre Cinéma pur Dogme 95 Drop Art Epic theatre Experimental film Experimental theatre Modernist film Poetic realism Postdramatic theatre Remodernist film Structural film Theatre of the Absurd Theatre of Cruelty General Constructivism Dada Expressionism Fluxus Futurism Russian Futurism Cubo-Futurism Lettrism Modernism Minimalism Postminimalism Neo-minimalism Neo-Dada Neoism Postmodernism Postmodernist film Late modernism Primitivism Situationist International Social realism Socialist realism Surrealism Symbolism Russian symbolism v t e Premodern , Modern and Contemporary art movements List of art movements / periods Premodern (Western) Ancient Thracian Dacian Nuragic Aegean Cycladic Minoan Minyan ware Mycenaean Greek Sub-Mycenaean Protogeometric Geometric Orientalizing Archaic Black-figure Red-figure Severe style Classical Kerch style Hellenistic "Baroque" Indo-Greek Greco-Buddhist Neo-Attic Etruscan Scythian Iberian Gaulish Roman Republican Gallo-Roman Julio-Claudian Pompeian Styles Trajanic Severan Medieval Late antique Early Christian Coptic Ethiopian Migration Period Anglo-Saxon Hunnic Insular Lombard Visigothic Donor portrait Pictish Mozarabic Repoblación Viking Byzantine Iconoclast Macedonian Palaeologan Italo-Byzantine Frankish Merovingian Carolingian Pre-Romanesque Ottonian Romanesque Mosan Spanish Norman Norman-Sicilian Opus Anglicanum Gothic Gothic art in Milan International Gothic International Gothic art in Italy Lucchese school Crusades Moscow school Novgorod school Vladimir-Suzdal school Duecento Sienese school Mudéjar Medieval cartography Italian school Majorcan school Mappa mundi Renaissance Italian Renaissance Trecento Proto-Renaissance Florentine school Pittura infamante Quattrocento Ferrarese school Forlivese school Venetian school Cinquecento High Renaissance Bolognese school Mannerism Counter- Maniera Northern Renaissance Early Netherlandish World landscape Ghent–Bruges school Northern Mannerism German Renaissance Cologne school Danube school Dutch and Flemish Renaissance Antwerp Mannerism Romanism Still life English Renaissance Tudor court Cretan school Turquerie Fontainebleau school Art of the late 16th century in Milan 17th century Baroque Baroque in Milan Flemish Baroque Caravaggisti in Utrecht Tenebrism Louis XIII style Lutheran Baroque Stroganov school Animal painting Guild of Romanists Dutch Golden Age Delft school Capriccio Heptanese school Classicism Louis XIV style Poussinists and Rubenists 18th century Rococo Rocaille Louis XV style Frederician Chinoiserie Fête galante Neoclassicism Goût grec Louis XVI style Adam style Directoire style Neoclassical architecture in Milan Picturesque Colonial art Art of the African diaspora African-American Caribbean Haitian Colonial Asian art Arts in the Philippines Letras y figuras Tipos del País Colonial Asian Baroque Company style Latin American art Casta painting Indochristian art Chilote school Cuzco school Quito school Latin American Baroque Art borrowing Western elements Islamic Moorish Manichaean Mughal Qajar Qing handicrafts Western influence in Japan Akita ranga Uki-e Transition to modern (c. 1770 – 1862) Romanticism Fairy painting Danish Golden Age Troubadour style Nazarene movement Purismo Shoreham Ancients Düsseldorf school Pre-Raphaelites Hudson River School American luminism Orientalism Norwich school Empire style Historicism Revivalism Biedermeier Realism Barbizon school Costumbrismo Verismo Macchiaioli Academic art Munich school in Greece Neo-Grec Etching revival Modern (1863–1944) 1863–1899 Neo-romanticism National romanticism Yōga Nihonga Japonisme Anglo-Japanese style Beuron school Hague school Peredvizhniki Impressionism American Hoosier Group Boston school Amsterdam Canadian Heidelberg school Aestheticism Arts and Crafts Art pottery Tonalism Decadent movement Symbolism Romanian Russian Volcano school Incoherents Post-Impressionism Neo-Impressionism Luminism Divisionism Pointillism Pont-Aven School Cloisonnism Synthetism Les Nabis American Barbizon school California tonalism Costumbrismo 1900–1914 Art Nouveau Art Nouveau in Milan Primitivism California Impressionism Secessionism School of Paris Munich Secession Vienna Secession Berlin Secession Sonderbund Pennsylvania Impressionism Mir iskusstva Ten American Painters Fauvism Expressionism Die Brücke Der Blaue Reiter Noucentisme Deutscher Werkbund American Realism Ashcan school Cubism Proto-Cubism Orphism A Nyolcak Neue Künstlervereinigung München Futurism Cubo-Futurism Art Deco Metaphysical Rayonism Productivism Synchromism Vorticism 1915–1944 Sosaku-hanga Suprematism School of Paris Crystal Cubism Constructivism Latin American Universal Constructivism Dada Shin-hanga Neoplasticism De Stijl Purism Return to order Novecento Italiano Figurative Constructivism Stupid Cologne Progressives Arbeitsrat für Kunst November Group Australian tonalism Dresden Secession Social realism Functionalism Bauhaus Kinetic art Anthropophagy Mingei Group of Seven New Objectivity Grosvenor school Neues Sehen Surrealism Iranian Latin American Mexican muralism Neo-Fauvism Precisionism Aeropittura Asso Scuola Romana Cercle et Carré The Group Harlem Renaissance Kapists Regionalism California Scene Painting Heroic realism Socialist realism Nazi art Streamline Moderne Concrete art Abstraction-Création Tiki The Ten Dimensionism Boston Expressionism Leningrad school Contemporary and Postmodern (1945–present) 1945–1959 International Typographic Style Abstract expressionism Washington Color School Visionary art Vienna School of Fantastic Realism Spatialism Color field Lyrical abstraction Tachisme Arte Informale COBRA Nuagisme Generación de la Ruptura Jikken Kōbō Metcalf Chateau Mono-ha Nanyang Style Action painting American Figurative Expressionism in New York New media art New York school Hard-edge painting Bay Area Figurative Movement Les Plasticiens Gutai Art Association Gendai Bijutsu Kondankai Pop art Situationist International Soviet Nonconformist Ukrainian underground Lettrism Letterist International Ultra-Lettrist Florida Highwaymen Cybernetic art Antipodeans 1960–1969 Otra Figuración Afrofuturism Nueva Presencia ZERO Happening Neo-Dada Neo-Dada Organizers Op art Nouveau réalisme Nouvelle tendance Capitalist realism Art & Language Arte Povera Black Arts Movement The Caribbean Artists Movement Chicano art movement Conceptual art Land art Systems art Video art Minimalism Fluxus Generative art Post-painterly abstraction Intermedia Psychedelic art Nut Art Photorealism Environmental art Performance art Process art Institutional critique Light and Space Street art Feminist art movement in the US Saqqakhaneh movement The Stars Art Group Tropicália Yoru no Kai Artificial intelligence visual art 1970–1999 Post-conceptual art Installation art Artscene Postminimalism Endurance art Sots Art Moscow Conceptualists Pattern and Decoration Pliontanism Punk art Neo-expressionism Transavantgarde Saint Soleil school Guerrilla art Lowbrow art Telematic art Appropriation art Neo-conceptual art New European Painting Tunisian collaborative painting Memphis Group Cyberdelic Neue Slowenische Kunst Scratch video Transgressive Retrofuturism Young British Artists Superfiction Taring Padi Superflat New Leipzig school Artist-run initiative Artivism The Designers Republic Grunge design Verdadism Chinese Apartment Art 2000– present Amazonian pop art Altermodern Art for art Art game Art intervention Brandalism Classical Realism Contemporary African art Africanfuturism Contemporary Indigenous Australian art Crypto art Cyborg art Excessivism Fictive art Flat design Corporate Memphis Hypermodernism Hyperrealism Idea art Internet art Post-Internet iPhone art Kitsch movement Lightpainting Massurrealism Modern European ink painting Neo-futurism Neomodern Neosymbolism Passionism Post-YBAs Relational art Skeuomorphism Software art Sound art Stuckism Superflat SoFlo Superflat Superstroke Toyism Unilalianism Vaporwave Walking Artists Network Related topics History of art Abstract art Asemic writing Anti-art Avant-garde Ballets Russes Christian art Art in the Protestant Reformation and Counter-Reformation Catholic art Icon Lutheran art Digital art Fantastic art Folk art Hierarchy of genres Genre painting History painting Illuminated manuscript Illustration Interactive art Jewish art Kitsch Landscape painting Modernism Modern sculpture Late modernism Naïve art Outsider art Portrait Prehistoric European art Queer art Realism Shock art Trompe-l'œil Western painting Category NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐r99fl
Cached time: 20250812023512
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.440 seconds
Real time usage: 0.550 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2022/1000000
Revision size: 9990/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 185558/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 4167/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 2/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 77465/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.233/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 6054588/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  380.033      1 -total
 31.98%  121.523      1 Template:Reflist
 25.75%   97.851      8 Template:Navbox
 22.03%   83.738      6 Template:Cite_web
 17.62%   66.957      1 Template:Futurism
 14.52%   55.182      1 Template:More_footnotes_needed
 13.96%   53.055      1 Template:Short_description
 13.12%   49.867      1 Template:Ambox
  8.02%   30.477      2 Template:Pagetype
  6.12%   23.264      1 Template:Westernart Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:371510:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812023512 and revision id 1291990740. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Rayonism&oldid=1291990740 " Categories : Russian art movements Modern art Russian avant-garde Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles lacking in-text citations from May 2013 All articles lacking in-text citations Articles with unsourced quotes This page was last edited on 24 May 2025, at 15:55 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Rayonism 25 languages Add topic

