Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 General description Toggle General description subsection 1.1 Forms and concepts of technology assessment 2 Technology assessment institutions around the world 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Technology assessment 10 languages العربية Deutsch Français हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Русский Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Research area dealing with trends in science and technology and related social developments Futures studies Concepts Accelerating change Cashless society Global catastrophic risk Future Earth Mathematics Race Climate Space exploration Universe Historical materialism Kondratiev wave Kardashev scale Moore's law Peak oil Population cycle Resource depletion Singularity Swanson's law Techniques Backcasting Causal layered analysis Chain-linked model Consensus forecast Cross impact analysis Delphi Real-time Delphi Foresight Future-proof Futures wheel Future workshop Horizon scanning Reference class forecasting Scenario planning Systems analysis Threatcasting Trend analysis Technology assessment and forecasting Critical design Design fiction Exploratory engineering FTA Hype cycle Science fiction prototyping Speculative design TRL Technology scouting Related topics Futarchy Transhumanism v t e For the healthcare concept, see Health technology assessment .

Technology assessment ( TA , German : Technikfolgenabschätzung , French : Évaluation des choix scientifiques et technologiques ) is a practical process of determining the value of a new or emerging technology in and of itself or against existing technologies.

[ 1 ] This is a means of assessing and rating the new technology from the time when it was first developed to the time when it is potentially accepted by the public and authorities for further use. In essence, TA could be defined as "a form of policy research that examines short- and long term consequences (for example, societal, economic, ethical, legal) of the application of technology." [ 2 ] General description [ edit ] Example of assessment of ICT for educational assessment TA is the study and evaluation of new technologies. It is a way of trying to forecast and prepare for the upcoming technological advancements and their repercussions to the society, and then make decisions based on the judgments. It is based on the conviction that new developments within, and discoveries by, the scientific community are relevant for the world at large rather than just for the scientific experts themselves, and that technological progress can never be free of ethical implications. Technology assessment was initially practiced in the 1960s in the United States where it would focus on analyzing the significance of "supersonic transportation, pollution of the environment and ethics of genetic screening." [ 3 ] Also, technology assessment recognizes the fact that scientists normally are not trained ethicists themselves and accordingly ought to be very careful when passing ethical judgement on their own, or their colleagues, new findings, projects, or work in progress. TA is a very broad phenomenon which also includes aspects such as "diffusion of technology (and technology transfer), factors leading to rapid acceptance of new technology, and the role of technology and society." [ 3 ] Technology assessment assumes a global perspective and is future-oriented, not anti-technological. TA considers its task as an interdisciplinary approach to solving already existing problems and preventing potential damage caused by the uncritical application and the commercialization of new technologies.

Therefore, any results of technology assessment studies must be published, and particular consideration must be given to communication with political decision-makers.

An important problem concerning technology assessment is the so-called Collingridge dilemma : on the one hand, impacts of new technologies cannot be easily predicted until the technology is extensively developed and widely used; on the other hand, control or change of a technology is difficult as soon as it is widely used. It emphasizes on the fact that technologies, in their early stage, are unpredictable with regards to their implications and rather tough to regulate or control once it has been widely accepted by the society. Shaping or directing this technology is the desired direction becomes difficult for the authorities at this period of time. There have been several approaches put in place in order to tackle this dilemma, one of the common ones being "anticipation." In this approach, authorities and assessors "anticipate ethical impacts of a technology ("technomoral scenarios"), being too speculative to be reliable, or on ethically regulating technological developments ("sociotechnical experiments"), discarding anticipation of the future implications." [ 4 ] Comparing costs and benefit of each decision Seal of the United States Office of Technology Assessment Technology assessments, which are a form of cost–benefit analysis , are a medium for decision makers to evaluate and analyze solutions with regards to the particular technology assessment, and choose a best possible option which is cost effective and obeys the authoritative and budgetary requirements. However, they are difficult if not impossible to carry out in an objective manner since subjective decisions and value judgments have to be made regarding a number of complex issues such as (a) the boundaries of the analysis (i.e., what costs are internalized and externalized), (b) the selection of appropriate indicators of potential positive and negative consequences of the new technology, (c) the monetization of non-market values, and (d) a wide range of ethical perspectives.

[ 5 ] Consequently, most technology assessments are neither objective nor value-neutral exercises but instead are greatly influenced and biased by the values of the most powerful stakeholders, which are in many cases the developers and proponents (i.e., corporations and governments) of new technologies under consideration. In the most extreme view, as expressed by Ian Barbour in  '’Technology, Environment, and Human Values'’, technology assessment is "a one-sided apology for contemporary technology by people with a stake in its continuation." [ 6 ] Overall, technology assessment is a very broad field which reaches beyond just technology and industrial phenomenons. It handles the assessment of effects, consequences, and risks of a technology, but also is a forecasting function looking into the projection of opportunities and skill development as an input into strategic planning." [ 7 ] Some of the major fields of TA are: information technology, hydrogen technologies , nuclear technology , molecular nanotechnology , pharmacology , organ transplants , gene technology , artificial intelligence , the Internet and many more.

Forms and concepts of technology assessment [ edit ] The following types of concepts of TA are those that are most visible and practiced. There are, however, a number of further TA forms that are only proposed as concepts in the literature or are the label used by a particular TA institution.

[ 8 ] Logo of the European Parliamentary Technology Assessment Parliamentary TA ( PTA ): TA activities of various kinds whose addressee is a parliament. PTA may be performed directly by members of those parliaments (e.g. in France and Finland) or on their behalf of related TA institutions (such as in the UK, in Germany and Denmark) or by organisations not directly linked to a Parliament (such as in the Netherlands and Switzerland).

[ 9 ] Expert TA (often also referred to as the classical TA or traditional TA concept): TA activities carried out by (a team of) TA and technical experts. Input from stakeholders and other actors is included only via written statements, documents and interviews, but not as in participatory TA.

Participatory TA ( pTA ): TA activities which actively, systematically and methodologically involve various kinds of social actors as assessors and discussants, such as different kinds of civil society organisations, representatives of the state systems, but characteristically also individual stakeholders and citizens (lay persons), technical scientists and technical experts. Standard pTA methods include consensus conferences, focus groups, scenario workshops etc.

[ 10 ] Sometimes pTA is further divided into expert-stakeholder pTA and public pTA (including lay persons).

[ 11 ] The participatory assessment makes room for the inclusion of laypeople and establishes the value of varied point of views, interests and knowledge. It shows importance of the need for decision makers and actors to have a varied set of mindsets and perspective to make a combined, informed and rational decision.

Constructive TA ( CTA ): This concept of TA, developed in the Netherlands, but also applied [ 12 ] and discussed elsewhere [ 13 ] attempts to broaden the design of new technology through feedback of TA activities into the actual construction of technology. Contrary to other forms of TA, CTA is not directed toward influencing regulatory practices by assessing the impacts of technology. Instead, CTA wants to address social issues around technology by influencing design practices. It aims to "mobilize insights on co-evolutionary dynamics of science, technology and society for anticipating and assessing technologies, rather than being predominantly concerned with assessing societal impacts of a quasi-given technology." [ 14 ] This assessment established the value of involving users in the development and innovation process, encouraging the development and adaptation of new technology in their daily life.

Discursive TA or Argumentative TA : This type of TA wants to deepen the political and normative debate about science, technology and society. It is inspired by ethics, policy discourse analysis and the sociology of expectations in science and technology. This mode of TA aims to clarify and bring under public and political scrutiny the normative assumptions and visions that drive the actors who are socially shaping science and technology. This assessment can be used as a tool to analyse and evaluate the background of each and every reaction or perception that takes place for each technology; often some of the reactions these assessors receive are not related to science or technology. Some of the ways of analyzing actors and their reaction is by "studying prospective users' everyday-life practices in their own right, and in naturalistic settings." [ 15 ] Accordingly, argumentative TA not only addresses the side effects of technological change, but deals with both broader impacts of science and technology and the fundamental normative question of why developing a certain technology is legitimate and desirable.

[ 16 ] Technology assessment institutions around the world [ edit ] Many TA institutions are members of the European Parliamentary Technology Assessment (EPTA) network, some are working for the STOA panel of the European Parliament and formed the European Technology Assessment Group (ETAG).

Centre for Technology Assessment (TA-SWISS) , Bern , Switzerland.

Department of Science, Technology and Policy Studies, University of Twente Institute of Technology Assessment (ITA) of the Austrian Academy of Sciences, Vienna Institute for Technology Assessment and Systems Analysis , Karlsruhe Institute of Technology , Germany (former) Office of Technology Assessment (OTA) The Danish Board of Technology Foundation , Copenhagen Norwegian Board of Technology, Oslo Oficina de Ciencia y Tecnología del Congreso (OficinaC), Spain Parliamentary Office for the Evaluation of Scientific and Technological Choices (OPECST), Paris Parliamentary Office of Science and Technology (POST), London Rathenau Institute , The Hague Science and Technology Options Assessment (STOA) panel of the European Parliament, Brussels Science and Technology Policy Research (SPRU), Sussex Technology centre CAS (TC CAS) , Prague, Czech Republic See also [ edit ] History of science and technology Horizon scanning Scientific lacuna Technology Technology dynamics Technology forecasting Technology readiness level Technology transfer References [ edit ] ^ Bruley, Mark E.; Coates, Vivian H. (2004). "Medical Device Regulatory and Technology Assessment Agencies".

Clinical Engineering Handbook . pp.

559– 564.

doi : 10.1016/B978-012226570-9/50130-7 .

ISBN 978-0-12-226570-9 .

Technology assessment is the practical process of determining the value of a new or emerging technology in and of itself or against existing or competing technologies, using safety, efficacy, effectiveness, outcome, risk management, strategic, financial, and competitive criteria. Technology assessment also considers ethics and law as well as health priorities and cost-effectiveness compared to competing technologies.

^ Banta, David (July 25, 2009).

"What is technology assessment?" .

International Journal of Technology Assessment in Health Care . 25 Suppl 1: 7– 9.

doi : 10.1017/S0266462309090333 .

PMID 19519979 .

^ a b Banta, David (July 2009). "What is technology assessment?".

International Journal of Technology Assessment in Health Care .

25 (S1): 7– 9.

doi : 10.1017/S0266462309090333 .

PMID 19519979 .

^ Kudina and Verbeek, Olya and Peter-Paul (2019).

"Ethics from Within: Google Glass, the Collingridge Dilemma and the Mediated Value of Privacy" .

Science, Technology, & Human Values .

44 (2): 291– 314.

doi : 10.1177/0162243918793711 .

^ Huesemann, Michael; Huesemann, Joyce (2011).

"The Positive Biases of Technology Assessments and Cost Benefit Analyses" .

Techno-Fix: Why Technology Won't Save Us or the Environment . New Society Publishers. pp.

173– 206.

ISBN 978-1-55092-494-7 .

^ Barbour, I.A. (1980).

Technology, environment, and human values , Praeger, p. 202.

^ UN Branch for Science and Technology for Development. United Nations Workshop on Technology Assessment for Developing Countries. Hosted by the Office of Technology Assessment. Washington, DC: 1991 ^ Among those concepts one finds, for instance, Interactive TA ITAS.fzk.de , Rational TA EA-AW.com Archived September 18, 2010, at the Wayback Machine , Real-time TA (cp. Guston/Sarewitz (2002) Real-time technology assessment, in: Technology in Society 24, 93–109), Innovation-oriented TA Innovationsanalysen .

^ Those TA institutions that perform PTA are organised in the European Parliamentary Technology Assessment (EPTA) network; see EPTAnetwork.org .

^ Cp. the 2000 EUROpTA (European Participatory Technology Assessment – Participatory Methods in Technology Assessment and Technology Decision-Making) project report [1] .

^ Van Eijndhoven, Josée C.M. (February 1997). "Technology assessment: Product or process?".

Technological Forecasting and Social Change .

54 ( 2– 3): 269– 286.

doi : 10.1016/S0040-1625(96)00210-7 .

^ Baumann, Manuel Johann (2017).

Battery storage systems as balancing option in intermittent renewable energy systems - A transdisciplinary approach under the frame of Constructive Technology Assessment. PhD Thesis (Thesis). Lisbon: Universidade Nova de Lisboa. p. 187.

^ Schot/Rip (1997), The Past and Future of Constructive Technology Assessment in: Technological Forecasting & Social Change 54, 251–268.

^ Konrad, Kornelia; Rip, Arie; Greiving, Verena Schulze (November 2017).

"Constructive Technology Assessment - STS for and with Technology Actors" .

EASST Review .

36 (3).

^ M. Veen; B. Gremmen; H. te Molder; C. van Woerkum (April 13, 2010). "Emergent technologies against the background of everyday life: Discursive psychology as a technology assessment tool".

Public Understanding of Science .

20 (6): 810– 825.

doi : 10.1177/0963662510364202 .

PMID 22397087 .

S2CID 12306256 .

^ van Est/Brom (2010) Technology assessment as an analytic and democratic practice, in: Encyclopedia of Applied Ethics.

External links [ edit ] Scientific Technology Options Assessment (STOA), European Parliament European Technology Assessment Group for STOA [ permanent dead link ] Institute for Technology Assessment and Systems Analysis (ITAS), Karlsruhe Institute of Technology (KIT), Germany Office of Technology Assessment at the German Parliament (TAB) TA-SWISS Centre for Technology Assessment Institute of Technology Assessment (ITA), Austrian Academy of Sciences, Vienna, Austria The Danish Board of Technology Rathenau Institute The Norwegian Board of Technology v t e Science and technology studies Economics Economics of science Economics of scientific knowledge History History and philosophy of science History of science and technology History of technology Languages of science Scientific language Philosophy Anthropocene Antipositivism Empiricism Fuzzy logic Neo-Luddism Philosophy of science Philosophy of social science Philosophy of technology Positivism Postpositivism Religion and science Scientism Social constructivism Social epistemology Transhumanism Sociology Actor–network theory Social construction of technology shaping of technology Sociology of knowledge scientific Sociology of scientific ignorance Sociology of the history of science Sociotechnology Strong programme Science studies Academic bias Antiscience Bibliometrics Boundary-work Consilience Criticism of science Demarcation problem Double hermeneutic Logology Mapping controversies Metascience Paradigm shift black swan events Pseudoscience Psychology of science Science citizen communication education normal Neo-colonial post-normal rhetoric wars Scientific community consensus controversy dissent enterprise literacy method misconduct priority skepticism Scientocracy Scientometrics Team science Traditional knowledge ecological Unity of science Women in science STEM Technology studies Co-production Cyborg anthropology Design studies Dematerialization Digital anthropology Digital media use and mental health Early adopter Engineering studies Financial technology Hype cycle Innovation diffusion disruptive linear model system user Leapfrogging Normalization process theory Media studies Reverse salient Skunkworks project Sociotechnical system Technical change Technocracy Technoscience feminist Technological change convergence determinism revolution transitions Technology and society criticism of dynamics theories of transfer Women in engineering Policy Academic freedom Digital divide Evidence-based policy Factor 10 Funding of science Horizon scanning Politicization of science Regulation of science Research ethics Right to science Science policy history of science of Technology assessment Technology policy Transition management Portals Science History of science Technology Category Associations Journals Scholars Authority control databases National Germany United States Japan Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Technology_assessment&oldid=1305114162 " Categories : Technology assessment Technology forecasting Design for X Technology transfer Technology systems Hidden categories: CS1: long volume value Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use mdy dates from September 2015 Articles containing German-language text Articles containing French-language text All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from August 2025 Articles with permanently dead external links This page was last edited on 10 August 2025, at 04:05 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Technology assessment 10 languages Add topic

