Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Criteria for inclusion 2 List of states Toggle List of states subsection 2.1 UN member states and General Assembly observer states 2.2 Other states 3 See also 4 Notes 5 References 6 Bibliography Toggle the table of contents List of sovereign states 226 languages Адыгабзэ Afrikaans Alemannisch Алтай тил አማርኛ Anarâškielâ अंगिका Ænglisc Аԥсшәа العربية Aragonés ܐܪܡܝܐ Armãneashti Arpetan অসমীয়া Asturianu अवधी Avañe'ẽ Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه Basa Bali বাংলা Banjar 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Basa Banyumasan Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) भोजपुरी Bikol Central Bislama Български Boarisch བོད་ཡིག Bosanski Brezhoneg Буряад Català Чӑвашла Cebuano Čeština Chamoru Chavacano de Zamboanga Chi-Chewa Corsu Cymraeg Dansk Davvisámegiella Deitsch Deutsch ދިވެހިބަސް Dolnoserbski ཇོང་ཁ Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Føroyskt Français Frysk Fulfulde Furlan Gaeilge Gaelg Gagauz Gàidhlig Galego ГӀалгӀай Хальмг 한국어 Hausa Hawaiʻi Հայերեն हिन्दी Hornjoserbsce Hrvatski Ido Igbo Ilokano বিষ্ণুপ্রিয়া মণিপুরী Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Interlingue ᐃᓄᒃᑎᑐᑦ / inuktitut Ирон Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa ಕನ್ನಡ Kapampangan ქართული Қазақша Kernowek Ikinyarwanda Kiswahili Kongo Kotava Kreyòl ayisyen Kurdî Кыргызча Кырык мары Ladino ລາວ Latgaļu Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Ligure Limburgs Lingála Lingua Franca Nova Livvinkarjala La .lojban.

Magyar मैथिली Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം Malti Māori मराठी მარგალური مصرى ဘာသာမန် Bahasa Melayu ꯃꯤꯇꯩ ꯂꯣꯟ Minangkabau Mirandés Монгол မြန်မာဘာသာ Nāhuatl Naijá Na Vosa Vakaviti Nedersaksies नेपाली 日本語 Napulitano Нохчийн Nordfriisk Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Nouormand Occitan Олык марий ଓଡ଼ିଆ Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Pangasinan پنجابی ပအိုဝ်ႏဘာႏသာႏ Papiamentu پښتو Patois ភាសាខ្មែរ Tok Pisin Plattdüütsch Polski Português Qaraqalpaqsha Qırımtatarca Română Romani čhib Rumantsch Русиньскый Русский Саха тыла Gagana Samoa संस्कृतम् Sardu Scots Seeltersk Shqip Sicilianu සිංහල Simple English سنڌي SiSwati Slovenčina Slovenščina Soomaaliga کوردی Sranantongo Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Taclḥit Татарча / tatarça တႆး తెలుగు Tetun ไทย Тоҷикӣ ᏣᎳᎩ Türkçe Türkmençe Удмурт Basa Ugi Українська اردو ئۇيغۇرچە / Uyghurche Vèneto Vepsän kel’ Tiếng Việt Võro Winaray Wolof 吴语 Xitsonga ייִדיש Yorùbá 粵語 Zazaki Zeêuws Žemaitėška 中文 Batak Toba ᥖᥭᥰ ᥖᥬᥲ ᥑᥨᥒᥰ ⵜⴰⵎⴰⵣⵉⵖⵜ ⵜⴰⵏⴰⵡⴰⵢⵜ Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia "List of countries" and "List of nations" redirect here. For other lists of countries, see Lists of sovereign states and dependent territories . For non-sovereign dependencies, see Dependent territory .

Flags of the United Nations member and non-member GA observer states in front of the Palace of Nations in Geneva , Switzerland The following is a list providing an overview of sovereign states around the world with information on their status and recognition of their sovereignty .

The 205 listed states can be divided into three categories based on membership within the United Nations System : 193 UN member states , [ 1 ] two UN General Assembly non-member observer states , and ten other states. The sovereignty dispute column indicates states having undisputed sovereignty (188 states, of which there are 187 UN member states and one UN General Assembly non-member observer state), states having disputed sovereignty (15 states, of which there are six UN member states, one UN General Assembly non-member observer state, and eight de facto states), and states having a special political status (two states, both in free association with New Zealand).

Compiling a list such as this can be complicated and controversial, as there is no definition that is binding on all the members of the community of nations concerning the criteria for statehood . For more information on the criteria used to determine the contents of this list, please see the criteria for inclusion section below. The list is intended to include entities that have been recognised as having de facto status as sovereign states, and inclusion should not be seen as an endorsement of any specific claim to statehood in legal terms.

Criteria for inclusion The dominant customary international law standard of statehood is the declarative theory of statehood , which was codified by the Montevideo Convention of 1933. The Convention defines the state as a person of international law if it "possess[es] the following qualifications: (a) a permanent population; (b) a defined territory; (c) government; and (d) a capacity to enter into relations with the other states" so long as it was not "obtained by force whether this consists in the employment of arms, in threatening diplomatic representations, or in any other effective coercive measure".

[ 2 ] Debate exists on the degree to which recognition should be included as a criterion of statehood. The declarative theory of statehood argues that statehood is purely objective and recognition of a state by other states is irrelevant. On the other end of the spectrum, the constitutive theory of statehood defines a state as a person under international law only if it is recognised as sovereign by other states. For the purposes of this list, included are all polities that consider themselves sovereign states (through a declaration of independence or some other means) and either: are often regarded as satisfying the declarative theory of statehood, or are recognised as a sovereign state by at least one UN member state In some cases, there is a divergence of opinion over the interpretation of the first point, and whether an entity satisfies it is disputed. Unique political entities which fail to meet the classification of a sovereign state are considered proto-states .

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] On the basis of the above criteria, this list includes the following 205 entities: [ a ] [ b ] 203 states recognised by at least one UN member state One state that satisfies the declarative theory of statehood and is recognised only by non-UN member states One state that satisfies the declarative theory of statehood and is not recognised by any other state The table includes bullets in the right-hand column representing entities that are either not sovereign states or have a close association to another sovereign state. It also includes subnational areas where the sovereignty of the titular state is limited by an international agreement. Taken together, these include: Entities that are in a free association relationship with another state Two entities controlled by Pakistan which are neither sovereign states, dependent territories, nor part of another state: Azad Kashmir and Gilgit-Baltistan Dependent territories of another state, as well as areas that exhibit many characteristics of dependent territories according to the dependent territory page Subnational entities created by international agreements List of states UN member states and General Assembly observer states "Membership within the UN System " column legend UN member state UN General Assembly observer state " Sovereignty dispute " column legend Undisputed sovereignty Disputed sovereignty Common and formal names Membership within the UN System [ c ] Sovereignty dispute [ d ] Further information on status and recognition of sovereignty [ f ] Afghanistan – Islamic Emirate of Afghanistan A UN member state A None The ruling Islamic Emirate of Afghanistan, in power since 2021, has not been recognised by the United Nations or any other state except Russia.

[ 5 ] The defunct Islamic Republic of Afghanistan remains the recognised government.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] Albania – Republic of Albania A UN member state A None Algeria – People's Democratic Republic of Algeria A UN member state A None Andorra – Principality of Andorra A UN member state A None Andorra is a co-principality in which the office of head of state is jointly held ex officio by the French president and the bishop of the Roman Catholic diocese of Urgell , [ 8 ] who himself is appointed with approval from the Holy See .

Angola – Republic of Angola A UN member state A None Antigua and Barbuda A UN member state A None Antigua and Barbuda is a Commonwealth realm [ g ] with one autonomous region, Barbuda .

[ 9 ] [ h ] Argentina – Argentine Republic [ i ] A UN member state A None Argentina is a federation of 23 provinces and one autonomous city .

[ j ] Armenia – Republic of Armenia A UN member state Not recognised by Pakistan Armenia is not recognised by Pakistan due to the dispute over Artsakh .

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] [ 13 ] [ needs update ] Australia – Commonwealth of Australia A UN member state A None Australia is a Commonwealth realm [ g ] and a federation of both states and territories . There are six states, three internal territories, six external territories and one claimed Antarctic external territory. The external territories of Australia are: Ashmore and Cartier Islands Christmas Island Cocos (Keeling) Islands Coral Sea Islands Territory Heard Island and McDonald Islands Norfolk Island Australian Antarctic Territory Austria – Republic of Austria A UN member state A None Member of the European Union .

[ e ] Austria is a federation of nine states .

Azerbaijan – Republic of Azerbaijan [ k ] A UN member state A None Azerbaijan contains one autonomous region, Nakhchivan .

[ h ] Bahamas, The – Commonwealth of The Bahamas [ 15 ] A UN member state A None The Bahamas is a Commonwealth realm .

[ g ] Bahrain – Kingdom of Bahrain A UN member state A None Bangladesh – People's Republic of Bangladesh A UN member state A None Barbados A UN member state A None Belarus – Republic of Belarus A UN member state A None Many states rescinded their recognition of President Alexander Lukashenko following the disputed 2020 election .

Lithuania currently recognises Sviatlana Tsikhanouskaya 's Coordination Council as the legitimate government of Belarus.

[ 16 ] Belgium – Kingdom of Belgium A UN member state A None Member of the EU.

[ e ] Belgium is a federation of three linguistic communities and three regions .

Belize A UN member state A None Belize is a Commonwealth realm .

[ g ] Benin – Republic of Benin A UN member state A None Bhutan – Kingdom of Bhutan A UN member state A None Bolivia – Plurinational State of Bolivia A UN member state A None Bosnia and Herzegovina A UN member state A None Bosnia and Herzegovina has two constituent entities : Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina Republika Srpska and Brčko District , a self-governing administrative district .

[ 17 ] Botswana – Republic of Botswana A UN member state A None Brazil – Federative Republic of Brazil A UN member state A None Brazil is a federation of 26 states and one federal district .

Brunei – Brunei Darussalam A UN member state A None Bulgaria – Republic of Bulgaria A UN member state A None Member of the EU.

[ e ] Burkina Faso A UN member state A None Burundi – Republic of Burundi A UN member state A None Cambodia – Kingdom of Cambodia A UN member state A None Cameroon – Republic of Cameroon A UN member state A None Canada [ l ] A UN member state A None Canada is a Commonwealth realm [ g ] and a federation of 10 provinces and three territories .

Cape Verde – Republic of Cabo Verde [ m ] A UN member state A None Central African Republic A UN member state A None Chad – Republic of Chad A UN member state A None Chile – Republic of Chile A UN member state A None Chile has one special territory, Easter Island .

[ n ] China – People's Republic of China [ o ] A UN member state Partially unrecognised .

BClaimed by Afghanistan Claimed by Georgia Claimed by North Korea Claimed by Serbia Claimed by Somalia Claimed by the People's Republic of China Claimed by the Republic of China Claimed by South Korea Claimed by Azerbaijan Claimed by the Republic of Cyprus Disputed by Israel Claimed by Indonesia Claimed by the Marshall Islands Claimed by Mauritius Claimed by Morocco Claimed by Moldova Claimed by Mali Claimed by Spain Claimed by Argentina Claimed by Ukraine Claimed by Pakistan China contains five autonomous regions, Guangxi , Inner Mongolia , Ningxia , Tibet , and Xinjiang .

[ h ] Additionally, it has sovereignty over two Special Administrative Regions : Hong Kong Macao China claims, but does not control, Taiwan , which is governed by a rival administration (the Republic of China) that claims all of China as its territory.

[ p ] China is not recognised by 11 UN member states and Vatican City , which, with the exception of Bhutan , all recognise the Republic of China (Taiwan) instead.

[ q ] Colombia – Republic of Colombia A UN member state A None Comoros – Union of the Comoros A UN member state A None Comoros is a federation of three islands .

[ r ] Congo, Democratic Republic of the [ s ] A UN member state A None Congo, Republic of the [ t ] A UN member state A None Costa Rica – Republic of Costa Rica A UN member state A None Croatia – Republic of Croatia A UN member state A None Member of the EU.

[ e ] Cuba – Republic of Cuba A UN member state A None Cyprus – Republic of Cyprus A UN member state Not recognised by Turkey [ 20 ] Member of the EU.

[ e ] The northeastern part of the island is the de facto state of Northern Cyprus .

Cyprus is not recognised by Turkey due to the Cyprus problem , with Turkey recognising Northern Cyprus .

Czech Republic [ u ] A UN member state A None Member of the EU.

[ e ] Denmark – Kingdom of Denmark A UN member state A None Member of the EU.

[ e ] The Kingdom of Denmark includes two self-governing territories: Faroe Islands Greenland The metropolitan territory of Denmark , the Faroe Islands and Greenland form the three constituent countries of the Kingdom.

[ v ] The Kingdom of Denmark as a whole is a member of the EU, but EU law (in most cases) does not apply to the Faroe Islands and Greenland. See Greenland and the European Union , and Faroe Islands and the European Union .

[ 21 ] [ 22 ] Djibouti – Republic of Djibouti A UN member state A None Dominica – Commonwealth of Dominica A UN member state A None Dominican Republic A UN member state A None Ecuador – Republic of Ecuador A UN member state A None Egypt – Arab Republic of Egypt A UN member state A None El Salvador – Republic of El Salvador A UN member state A None Equatorial Guinea – Republic of Equatorial Guinea A UN member state A None Eritrea – State of Eritrea A UN member state A None Estonia – Republic of Estonia A UN member state A None Member of the EU.

[ e ] Eswatini – Kingdom of Eswatini [ w ] A UN member state A None Ethiopia – Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia A UN member state A None Ethiopia is a federation of 12 regions and two chartered cities .

Fiji – Republic of Fiji A UN member state A None Fiji contains one autonomous region, Rotuma .

[ h ] [ 23 ] [ 24 ] Finland – Republic of Finland A UN member state A None Member of the EU.

[ e ] Åland is a neutral and demilitarized autonomous region of Finland.

[ h ] [ x ] France – French Republic A UN member state A None Member of the EU.

[ e ] France contains five overseas regions/departments ; French Guiana , Guadeloupe , Martinique , Mayotte , and Réunion . France also includes eight overseas territories : Clipperton Island French Polynesia New Caledonia Saint Barthélemy Saint Martin Saint Pierre and Miquelon Wallis and Futuna French Southern and Antarctic Lands [ y ] Gabon – Gabonese Republic A UN member state A None Gambia, The – Republic of The Gambia [ 25 ] A UN member state A None Georgia A UN member state A None Georgia contains two autonomous republics, Adjara and Abkhazia .

[ h ] In Abkhazia and South Ossetia , de facto states have been formed.

Germany – Federal Republic of Germany A UN member state A None Member of the EU.

[ e ] Germany is a federation of 16 states .

Ghana – Republic of Ghana A UN member state A None Greece – Hellenic Republic A UN member state A None Member of the EU.

[ e ] Greece contains one autonomous area, Mount Athos .

[ 26 ] Grenada A UN member state A None Grenada is a Commonwealth realm .

[ g ] Guatemala – Republic of Guatemala A UN member state A None Guinea – Republic of Guinea [ z ] A UN member state A None Guinea-Bissau – Republic of Guinea-Bissau A UN member state A None Guyana – Co-operative Republic of Guyana A UN member state A None Haiti – Republic of Haiti A UN member state A None Honduras – Republic of Honduras A UN member state A None Hungary A UN member state A None Member of the EU.

[ e ] Iceland [ aa ] A UN member state A None India – Republic of India A UN member state A None India is a federation of 28 states and eight union territories .

Indonesia – Republic of Indonesia A UN member state A None Indonesia has nine autonomous provinces : Aceh , Jakarta , Central Papua , Highland Papua , Papua , South Papua , Southwest Papua , West Papua , and Yogyakarta .

[ h ] Iran – Islamic Republic of Iran A UN member state A None Iraq – Republic of Iraq A UN member state A None Iraq is a federation [ r ] [ 30 ] of 19 governorates , four of which make up the autonomous Kurdistan Region .

[ h ] Ireland [ ab ] A UN member state A None Member of the EU.

[ e ] Israel – State of Israel A UN member state Partially unrecognised Israel exerts strong control over the territory claimed by Palestine . It has annexed East Jerusalem , [ 32 ] an act not recognised by the international community.

[ 33 ] Israel has varying levels of control over the rest of the West Bank , and although it ended its permanent civilian or military presence in the Gaza Strip , it is still considered to be the occupying power under international law.

[ 34 ] [ 35 ] [ 36 ] [ 37 ] Israel is not recognised as a state by 28 UN members and the Sahrawi Republic . The Palestine Liberation Organization , recognised by a majority of UN member states as the representative of the Palestinian people, recognised Israel in 1993 .

Italy – Italian Republic A UN member state A None Member of the EU.

[ e ] Italy has five autonomous regions: Aosta Valley , Friuli-Venezia Giulia , Sardinia , Sicily and Trentino-Alto Adige/Südtirol .

[ h ] Ivory Coast – Republic of Côte d'Ivoire [ ac ] A UN member state A None Jamaica A UN member state A None Jamaica is a Commonwealth realm .

[ g ] Japan A UN member state A None Jordan – Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan A UN member state A None Kazakhstan – Republic of Kazakhstan A UN member state A None Kenya – Republic of Kenya A UN member state A None Kiribati – Republic of Kiribati A UN member state A None Kuwait – State of Kuwait A UN member state A None Kyrgyzstan – Kyrgyz Republic A UN member state A None Laos – Lao People's Democratic Republic A UN member state A None Latvia – Republic of Latvia A UN member state A None Member of the EU.

[ e ] Lebanon – Republic of Lebanon A UN member state A None Lesotho – Kingdom of Lesotho A UN member state A None Liberia – Republic of Liberia A UN member state A None Libya – State of Libya A UN member state A None Liechtenstein – Principality of Liechtenstein A UN member state A None Lithuania – Republic of Lithuania A UN member state A None Member of the EU.

[ e ] Luxembourg – Grand Duchy of Luxembourg A UN member state A None Member of the EU.

[ e ] Madagascar – Republic of Madagascar A UN member state A None Malawi – Republic of Malawi A UN member state A None Malaysia A UN member state A None Malaysia is a federation of 13 states and three federal territories .

Maldives – Republic of Maldives A UN member state A None Mali – Republic of Mali A UN member state A None Malta – Republic of Malta A UN member state A None Member of the EU.

[ e ] Marshall Islands – Republic of the Marshall Islands A UN member state A None Under Compact of Free Association with the United States .

Mauritania – Islamic Republic of Mauritania A UN member state A None Mauritius – Republic of Mauritius A UN member state A None Mauritius has an autonomous island, Rodrigues .

[ h ] Mexico – United Mexican States A UN member state A None Mexico is a federation of 31 states and one autonomous city .

Micronesia, Federated States of A UN member state A None Under Compact of Free Association with the United States . The Federated States of Micronesia is a federation of four states .

Moldova – Republic of Moldova A UN member state A None Moldova has two autonomous territorial units , Gagauzia and the Left Bank of the Dniester . The latter and a city, Bender (Tighina), are under the de facto control of Transnistria .

Monaco – Principality of Monaco A UN member state A None Mongolia A UN member state A None Montenegro A UN member state A None Morocco – Kingdom of Morocco A UN member state A None Part of the Moroccan-claimed Western Sahara is controlled by the partially recognised Sahrawi Republic .

Mozambique – Republic of Mozambique A UN member state A None Myanmar – Republic of the Union of Myanmar [ ad ] A UN member state A None Wa State is a de facto autonomous state within Myanmar. The United Nations has not recognised the de facto ruling government of Myanmar, the State Administration Council .

[ 7 ] Namibia – Republic of Namibia A UN member state A None Nauru – Republic of Nauru A UN member state A None Nepal – Federal Democratic Republic of Nepal A UN member state A None Nepal is a federation composed of seven provinces .

Netherlands – Kingdom of the Netherlands A UN member state A None Member of the EU.

[ e ] The Kingdom of the Netherlands includes four areas with substantial autonomy: Aruba Curaçao Netherlands Sint Maarten The Metropolitan Netherlands, Aruba, Curaçao and Sint Maarten form the four constituent countries of the Kingdom. Three overseas parts of the Netherlands ( Bonaire , Saba and Sint Eustatius ) are special municipalities of the metropolitan Netherlands.

[ ae ] The Kingdom of the Netherlands as a whole is a member of the EU, but EU law only wholly applies to parts within Europe.

New Zealand A UN member state A None New Zealand is a Commonwealth realm , [ g ] and has one dependent territory and one claimed Antarctic dependent territory: Tokelau Ross Dependency The New Zealand Government acts for the entire Realm of New Zealand in all international contexts, which has responsibilities for (but no rights of control over) two freely associated states : Cook Islands Niue The Cook Islands and Niue have diplomatic relations with 63 and 25 UN members respectively.

[ 38 ] [ 39 ] They have full treaty-making capacity in the UN, [ 40 ] and are members of some UN specialized agencies .

Nicaragua – Republic of Nicaragua A UN member state A None Nicaragua contains two autonomous regions, North Caribbean Coast and South Caribbean Coast .

[ h ] Niger – Republic of the Niger A UN member state A None Nigeria – Federal Republic of Nigeria A UN member state A None Nigeria is a federation of 36 states and one federal territory .

North Korea – Democratic People's Republic of Korea A UN member state BClaimed by Afghanistan Claimed by Georgia Claimed by North Korea Claimed by Serbia Claimed by Somalia Claimed by the People's Republic of China Claimed by the Republic of China Claimed by South Korea Claimed by Azerbaijan Claimed by the Republic of Cyprus Disputed by Israel Claimed by Indonesia Claimed by the Marshall Islands Claimed by Mauritius Claimed by Morocco Claimed by Moldova Claimed by Mali Claimed by Spain Claimed by Argentina Claimed by Ukraine Claimed by Pakistan North Korea is not recognised by one UN member, South Korea , which claims to be the sole legitimate government of Korea .

[ 41 ] North Macedonia – Republic of North Macedonia [ af ] A UN member state A None Norway – Kingdom of Norway A UN member state A None Norway has two unincorporated areas in Europe: Svalbard is an integral part of Norway, but has a special status due to the Svalbard Treaty .

Jan Mayen is an uninhabited island that is an integral part of Norway, although unincorporated.

Norway has one dependent territory and two claimed Antarctic dependent territories in the Southern Hemisphere : Bouvet Island Peter I Island Queen Maud Land Oman – Sultanate of Oman A UN member state A None Pakistan – Islamic Republic of Pakistan A UN member state A None Pakistan is a federation of four provinces and one capital territory . Pakistan exercises control over certain portions of Kashmir , but has not officially annexed any of it, [ 42 ] [ 43 ] instead regarding it as a disputed territory.

[ 44 ] [ 45 ] The portions that it controls are divided into two territories, administered separately from Pakistan proper: Azad Kashmir Gilgit-Baltistan Azad Kashmir describes itself as a "self-governing state under Pakistani control", while Gilgit-Baltistan is described in its governance order as a group of "areas" with self-government.

[ 46 ] [ 47 ] [ 48 ] These territories are not usually regarded as sovereign, as they do not fulfil the criteria set out by the declarative theory of statehood (for example, their current laws do not allow them to engage independently in relations with other states). Several state functions of these territories (such as foreign affairs and defense) are performed by Pakistan.

[ 47 ] [ 49 ] [ 50 ] Palau – Republic of Palau A UN member state A None Under Compact of Free Association with the United States .

Palestine – State of Palestine A UN General Assembly observer state ; member of two UN specialized agencies Partially unrecognised .

Occupied by Israel .

The State of Palestine, declared in 1988, is not recognised as a state by Israel but has received diplomatic recognition from 147 states.

[ 51 ] The proclaimed state has no agreed territorial borders, or effective control over much of the territory that it proclaimed.

[ 52 ] The Palestinian Authority is an interim administrative body formed as a result of the Oslo Accords that exercises limited autonomous jurisdiction within the occupied Palestinian territories . In foreign relations, Palestine is represented by the Palestine Liberation Organization .

[ 53 ] The State of Palestine is a member state of UNESCO , [ 54 ] UNIDO and other international organizations.

[ 55 ] Panama – Republic of Panama A UN member state A None Papua New Guinea – Independent State of Papua New Guinea A UN member state A None Papua New Guinea is a Commonwealth realm [ g ] with one autonomous region, Bougainville .

[ h ] Paraguay – Republic of Paraguay A UN member state A None Peru – Republic of Peru A UN member state A None Philippines – Republic of the Philippines A UN member state A None The Philippines contains one autonomous region, Bangsamoro .

[ h ] Poland – Republic of Poland A UN member state A None Member of the EU.

[ e ] Portugal – Portuguese Republic A UN member state A None Member of the EU.

[ e ] Portugal contains two autonomous regions, the Azores and Madeira .

[ h ] Qatar – State of Qatar A UN member state A None Romania A UN member state A None Member of the EU.

[ e ] Russia – Russian Federation A UN member state A None Russia is a federation of 83 internationally recognised federal subjects (republics, oblasts, krais, autonomous okrugs, federal cities, and an autonomous oblast). Several of the federal subjects are ethnic republics.

[ h ] Rwanda – Republic of Rwanda A UN member state A None Saint Kitts and Nevis – Federation of Saint Christopher and Nevis A UN member state A None Saint Kitts and Nevis is a Commonwealth realm [ g ] and is a federation [ r ] of two islands, Saint Kitts and Nevis .

Saint Lucia A UN member state A None Saint Lucia is a Commonwealth realm .

[ g ] Saint Vincent and the Grenadines A UN member state A None Saint Vincent and the Grenadines is a Commonwealth realm .

[ g ] Samoa – Independent State of Samoa A UN member state A None San Marino – Republic of San Marino A UN member state A None São Tomé and Príncipe – Democratic Republic of São Tomé and Príncipe A UN member state A None São Tomé and Príncipe contains one autonomous province, Príncipe .

[ h ] Saudi Arabia – Kingdom of Saudi Arabia A UN member state A None Senegal – Republic of Senegal A UN member state A None Serbia – Republic of Serbia A UN member state A None Serbia contains two autonomous provinces, Vojvodina and Kosovo and Metohija .

[ h ] The latter is under the de facto control of Kosovo .

Seychelles – Republic of Seychelles A UN member state A None Sierra Leone – Republic of Sierra Leone A UN member state A None Singapore – Republic of Singapore A UN member state A None Slovakia – Slovak Republic A UN member state A None Member of the EU.

[ e ] Slovenia – Republic of Slovenia A UN member state A None Member of the EU.

[ e ] Solomon Islands A UN member state A None Solomon Islands is a Commonwealth realm .

[ g ] Somalia – Federal Republic of Somalia A UN member state A None Somalia is a federation of six states . Two, Puntland and Galmudug , have self-declared autonomy, while one, Somaliland , is de facto independent.

South Africa – Republic of South Africa A UN member state A None South Korea – Republic of Korea A UN member state BClaimed by Afghanistan Claimed by Georgia Claimed by North Korea Claimed by Serbia Claimed by Somalia Claimed by the People's Republic of China Claimed by the Republic of China Claimed by South Korea Claimed by Azerbaijan Claimed by the Republic of Cyprus Disputed by Israel Claimed by Indonesia Claimed by the Marshall Islands Claimed by Mauritius Claimed by Morocco Claimed by Moldova Claimed by Mali Claimed by Spain Claimed by Argentina Claimed by Ukraine Claimed by Pakistan South Korea has one autonomous region, Jeju Province .

[ h ] [ 56 ] South Korea is not recognised by North Korea , which claims to be the sole legitimate government of Korea .

South Sudan – Republic of South Sudan A UN member state A None South Sudan is a federation of 10 states and three administrative areas .

The Abyei Area is a zone with "special administrative status" established by the Comprehensive Peace Agreement in 2005. It is de jure a condominium of South Sudan and Sudan , but de facto administered by two competing administrations and the United Nations.

[ 57 ] [ 58 ] Spain – Kingdom of Spain A UN member state A None Member of the EU.

[ e ] Spain is divided into 17 autonomous communities and two special autonomous cities .

[ h ] [ ag ] Sri Lanka – Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka [ ah ] A UN member state A None Sudan – Republic of the Sudan A UN member state A None Sudan is a federation of 18 states .

The Abyei Area is a zone with "special administrative status" established by the Comprehensive Peace Agreement in 2005. It is de jure a condominium of South Sudan and Sudan, but de facto administered by two competing administrations and the United Nations.

[ 57 ] [ 58 ] Suriname – Republic of Suriname A UN member state A None Sweden – Kingdom of Sweden A UN member state A None Member of the EU.

[ e ] Switzerland – Swiss Confederation A UN member state A None Switzerland is a federation of 26 cantons .

Syria – Syrian Arab Republic A UN member state A None During the Syrian civil war , the Syrian National Coalition (SNC) was recognised as the legitimate representative of the Syrian people by 20 UN members and established an interim government to rule rebel-controlled territory. After the fall of the Assad regime , the SNC declared its allegiance to the new government.

Syria has one self-declared autonomous region, Rojava .

Tajikistan – Republic of Tajikistan A UN member state A None Tajikistan contains one autonomous region, Gorno-Badakhshan .

[ h ] Tanzania – United Republic of Tanzania A UN member state A None Tanzania contains one autonomous region, Zanzibar .

[ h ] Thailand – Kingdom of Thailand A UN member state A None Timor-Leste – Democratic Republic of Timor-Leste [ ai ] A UN member state A None Togo – Togolese Republic A UN member state A None Tonga – Kingdom of Tonga A UN member state A None Trinidad and Tobago – Republic of Trinidad and Tobago A UN member state A None Trinidad and Tobago contains one autonomous region, Tobago .

[ h ] Tunisia – Republic of Tunisia A UN member state A None Turkey – Republic of Türkiye [ aj ] A UN member state A None Turkmenistan A UN member state A None Tuvalu A UN member state A None Tuvalu is a Commonwealth realm .

[ g ] Uganda – Republic of Uganda A UN member state A None Ukraine A UN member state A None Ukraine contains one autonomous region, the Autonomous Republic of Crimea , [ h ] which is under the control of Russia . Seven other areas of Ukraine are under full or partial Russian control, including Donetsk , Kharkiv , Kherson , Luhansk , Mykolaiv , Zaporizhzhia oblasts and Sevastopol .

United Arab Emirates A UN member state A None The United Arab Emirates is a federation of seven emirates .

United Kingdom – United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland A UN member state A None The United Kingdom is a Commonwealth realm [ g ] consisting of four constituent countries : England , Northern Ireland , Scotland , and Wales . The United Kingdom has the following 13 overseas territories and one claimed Antarctic dependent territory: Akrotiri and Dhekelia [ ak ] Anguilla Bermuda British Indian Ocean Territory British Virgin Islands Cayman Islands Falkland Islands Gibraltar Montserrat Pitcairn Islands Saint Helena, Ascension and Tristan da Cunha [ al ] South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands Turks and Caicos Islands British Antarctic Territory The British monarch also has direct sovereignty over three self-governing Crown Dependencies : Guernsey Isle of Man Jersey United States – United States of America A UN member state A None The United States is a federation of 50 states, one federal district, and one incorporated territory ( Palmyra Atoll ).

Additionally, the federal government of the United States has sovereignty over 13 unincorporated territories . Of these unincorporated territories, five are inhabited possessions: American Samoa Guam Northern Mariana Islands Puerto Rico U.S. Virgin Islands The United States also has sovereignty over eight uninhabited territories: Baker Island Howland Island Jarvis Island Johnston Atoll Kingman Reef Midway Atoll Navassa Island Wake Island The United States disputes sovereignty over two territories: Bajo Nuevo Bank Serranilla Bank Three sovereign states have become associated states of the United States under the Compact of Free Association : Marshall Islands Federated States of Micronesia Palau Uruguay – Oriental Republic of Uruguay A UN member state A None Uzbekistan – Republic of Uzbekistan A UN member state A None Uzbekistan contains one autonomous region, Karakalpakstan .

[ h ] Vanuatu – Republic of Vanuatu A UN member state A None Vatican City – Vatican City State A UN General Assembly observer state under the designation of " Holy See "; member of three UN specialized agencies A None Administered by the Holy See , a sovereign entity with diplomatic relations to 183 states (including 180 UN member states, the Cook Islands , the Republic of China (Taiwan) , and Palestine ).

[ 59 ] In addition, the European Union and the Sovereign Military Order of Malta maintain diplomatic relations with the Holy See. The Holy See is a member of three UN specialized agencies ( ITU , UPU , and WIPO ) and the IAEA , as well as being a permanent observer of the UN (in the category of "Non-member State") [ 53 ] and multiple other UN System organizations . The Vatican City is governed by officials appointed by the Pope , who is the Bishop of the Diocese of Rome and ex officio sovereign of Vatican City.

Venezuela – Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela A UN member state A None Venezuela is a federation of 23 states , one capital district, and federal dependencies .

Vietnam – Socialist Republic of Vietnam A UN member state A None Yemen – Republic of Yemen A UN member state A None Zambia – Republic of Zambia A UN member state A None Zimbabwe – Republic of Zimbabwe A UN member state A None Other states "Membership within the UN System" column legend Member state of a UN Specialized Agency No membership "Sovereignty dispute" column legend Undisputed sovereignty Disputed sovereignty Common and formal names Membership within the UN System [ c ] Sovereignty dispute [ d ] Further information on status and recognition of sovereignty [ f ] Abkhazia – Republic of Abkhazia D No membership Claimed by Georgia .

Occupied by Russia .

Recognised by Russia, Nicaragua, Nauru, Syria, Venezuela, South Ossetia, and Transnistria.

[ 60 ] Claimed in whole by Georgia as the Autonomous Republic of Abkhazia .

Cook Islands D Member of eight UN specialized agencies A None (See political status ) A state in free association with New Zealand , the Cook Islands maintains diplomatic relations with at least 63 other states and is recognized as a sovereign state by a number of them. The Cook Islands is a member of multiple UN agencies with full treaty-making capacity.

[ 40 ] It shares a head of state with New Zealand as well as having shared citizenship .

Kosovo – Republic of Kosovo D Member of two UN specialized agencies BClaimed by Afghanistan Claimed by Georgia Claimed by North Korea Claimed by Serbia Claimed by Somalia Claimed by the People's Republic of China Claimed by the Republic of China Claimed by South Korea Claimed by Azerbaijan Claimed by the Republic of Cyprus Disputed by Israel Claimed by Indonesia Claimed by the Marshall Islands Claimed by Mauritius Claimed by Morocco Claimed by Moldova Claimed by Mali Claimed by Spain Claimed by Argentina Claimed by Ukraine Claimed by Pakistan Pursuant to United Nations Security Council Resolution 1244 , Kosovo was placed under the administration of the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo in 1999.

[ 61 ] Kosovo declared independence in 2008 , and it has received diplomatic recognition from 116 UN member states and the Republic of China (Taiwan) , while 18 of those states have recognised Kosovo only to later withdraw their recognition.

[ 62 ] Serbia continues to maintain its sovereignty claim over Kosovo. Other UN member states and non UN member states continue to recognise Serbian sovereignty or have taken no position on the question. Kosovo is a member of the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank Group . The Republic of Kosovo has de facto control over most of the territory, with limited control in North Kosovo .

Niue D Member of five UN specialized agencies A None (See political status ) A state in free association with New Zealand , Niue maintains diplomatic relations with at least 28 other states and is recognized as a sovereign state by a number of them. Niue is a member of multiple UN agencies with full treaty-making capacity.

[ 40 ] It shares a head of state with New Zealand as well as having shared citizenship .

Northern Cyprus – Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus D No membership Claimed by Cyprus .

Occupied by Turkey .

Recognised only by Turkey . Under the name " Turkish Cypriot State ", it is an observer state of the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation and the Economic Cooperation Organization . Northern Cyprus is claimed in whole by the Republic of Cyprus .

[ 63 ] Sahrawi Republic – Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic D No membership Claimed and occupied by Morocco .

The Polisario Front , which administers the Sahrawi Republic, is recognized by the UN as the legitimate representative of the people of Western Sahara .

[ 64 ] [ 65 ] Recognised at some stage by 84 UN member states , 38 of which have since withdrawn or frozen their recognition. It is a founding member of the African Union , an international organization with permanent observer status at the UN General Assembly.

The territories under its control, the so-called Free Zone , are claimed in whole by Morocco as part of its Southern Provinces . In turn, the Sahrawi Republic claims the part of Western Sahara to the west of the Moroccan sand wall controlled by Morocco. Its government resides in exile in Tindouf , Algeria .

Somaliland – Republic of Somaliland D No membership BClaimed by Afghanistan Claimed by Georgia Claimed by North Korea Claimed by Serbia Claimed by Somalia Claimed by the People's Republic of China Claimed by the Republic of China Claimed by South Korea Claimed by Azerbaijan Claimed by the Republic of Cyprus Disputed by Israel Claimed by Indonesia Claimed by the Marshall Islands Claimed by Mauritius Claimed by Morocco Claimed by Moldova Claimed by Mali Claimed by Spain Claimed by Argentina Claimed by Ukraine Claimed by Pakistan A de facto independent state [ 66 ] [ 67 ] [ 68 ] not formally diplomatically recognised by any other state [ am ] and claimed in whole by the Federal Republic of Somalia .

[ 69 ] South Ossetia – Republic of South Ossetia–the State of Alania D No membership Claimed by Georgia .

Occupied by Russia .

A de facto independent state, [ 70 ] recognised by Russia, Nicaragua, Nauru, Syria, Venezuela, Abkhazia, and Transnistria. Claimed in whole by Georgia through the Administration of South Ossetia .

[ 71 ] Taiwan – Republic of China [ o ] D UN member state until 1971, now no membership Partially unrecognised .

BClaimed by Afghanistan Claimed by Georgia Claimed by North Korea Claimed by Serbia Claimed by Somalia Claimed by the People's Republic of China Claimed by the Republic of China Claimed by South Korea Claimed by Azerbaijan Claimed by the Republic of Cyprus Disputed by Israel Claimed by Indonesia Claimed by the Marshall Islands Claimed by Mauritius Claimed by Morocco Claimed by Moldova Claimed by Mali Claimed by Spain Claimed by Argentina Claimed by Ukraine Claimed by Pakistan .

A state competing (nominally) for recognition with the People's Republic of China (PRC) as the government of China since 1949. The Republic of China (ROC) controls the islands of Taiwan , Penghu , Kinmen , the Matsu Islands , and Pratas Island , as well as Taiping Island and Zhongzhou Reef of the Spratly Islands , and has not renounced claims over its annexed territories on the mainland .

[ 72 ] The ROC is recognised by 11 UN member states and Vatican City , none of which recognise the PRC. Additionally, one UN member ( Bhutan ) has refrained from recognising either the ROC or the PRC.

In addition to these relations, the ROC also maintains unofficial relations [ 73 ] with 58 UN member states, one self-declared state ( Somaliland ), three territories ( Guam , Hong Kong , and Macau ), and the European Union via its representative offices and consulates under the One China principle. Taiwan has the 31st-largest diplomatic network in the world with 110 offices.

[ 74 ] The territory of the ROC is claimed in whole by the PRC.

[ p ] The ROC participates in international organizations under a variety of pseudonyms, most commonly " Chinese Taipei ". In the WTO , the ROC has full membership under the designation of "Separate Customs Territory of Taiwan, Penghu, Kinmen and Matsu". The ROC was a founding member of the UN and enjoyed membership from 1945 to 1971, with veto power in the UN Security Council . See China and the United Nations .

Transnistria – Pridnestrovian Moldavian Republic D No membership Claimed by Moldova .

Occupied by Russia .

A de facto independent state, [ 66 ] recognised only by Abkhazia and South Ossetia .

[ 60 ] Claimed in whole by Moldova .

[ 75 ] See also Armorial of sovereign states Associated state Condominium Dependent territory ISO 3166-1 List of adjectival and demonymic forms for countries and nations List of administrative divisions by country List of countries and dependencies and their capitals in native languages List of countries and dependencies by area List of countries and dependencies by population List of countries and territories by the United Nations geoscheme List of country-name etymologies List of international rankings List of ISO 3166 country codes List of micronations List of national capitals List of national flags of sovereign states List of rebel groups that control territory List of states with limited recognition List of territorial disputes List of territories governed by the United Nations Lists of political entities by century Lists of state leaders by century Member states of the United Nations Sovereign state List of former sovereign states List of sovereign states and dependent territories by continent List of sovereign states by date of formation Template:Clickable world map Terra nullius United Nations list of non-self-governing territories Notes ^ The following bullets are grouped according to the availability of sources for the two criteria ((a) or (b)). This arrangement is not intended to reflect the relative importance of the two theories. Additional details are discussed in the state's individual entries.

^ The Sovereign Military Order of Malta is not included, as despite being a sovereign entity it lacks territory and does not claim statehood. Entities considered to be micronations are not included. It is often up to debate whether a micronation truly controls its claimed territory. Also omitted from this list are all uncontacted peoples , either who live in societies that cannot be defined as states or whose statuses as such are not definitively known.

^ a b This column indicates whether or not a state is a member of the United Nations .

[ 1 ] It also indicates which non-member states participate in the United Nations System through membership in the International Atomic Energy Agency or one of the specialized agencies of the United Nations . All United Nations members belong to at least one specialized agency and are parties to the statute of the International Court of Justice .

^ a b This column indicates whether or not a state is the subject of a major sovereignty dispute. Only states whose entire sovereignty is disputed by another state are listed.

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t u v w x y z aa ab The member states of the European Union have transferred part of their sovereignty in the form of legislative, executive, and judicial powers to the institutions of the EU, which is an example of supranational union . The EU has 27 member states.

[ 14 ] ^ a b Information is included on: The extent to which a state's sovereignty is recognised internationally. More information can be found at List of states with limited recognition , Membership in the European Union , [ e ] where applicable, Any dependencies , if applicable, which are generally not part of the territory of the sovereign state, federal structure of the state, where applicable. More information can be found at Federated state , Any autonomous areas inside the territory of the sovereign state, Any situations where one person is the Head of State of more than one state, Any governments-in-exile recognised by at least one state.

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o Commonwealth realm refers to any member state of the Commonwealth of Nations whose head of state is King Charles III . Each realm is separate, independent, and a sovereign state; see Commonwealth realm interrelationship .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t u v w x For more information on divisions with a high degree of autonomy, see List of autonomous areas by country .

^ The Argentine Constitution (Art. 35) recognises the following denominations for Argentina: "United Provinces of the Río de la Plata", "Argentine Republic" and "Argentine Confederation"; furthermore, it establishes the usage of "Argentine Nation" for purposes of legislation.

^ Argentina's claimed Antarctic territory of Argentine Antarctica ( Antártida Argentina ) is one of five constituent departments of the province Tierra del Fuego .

[ 10 ] ^ "Azerbaijan Republic" is sometimes used in an official capacity.

^ The legal name for Canada is the sole word; an officially sanctioned, though disused, name is Dominion of Canada (which includes its legal title); see: Use of Dominion , Dominion#Canada .

^ The government of Cape Verde declared "Cabo Verde" to be the official English name of the country in 2013.

[ 18 ] ^ Chile's claimed Antarctic territory of the Chilean Antarctic ( Antártica Chilena ) is a commune of the Antártica Chilena Province of the Magallanes Region .

^ a b The People's Republic of China (PRC) is commonly referred to as "China", while the Republic of China (ROC) is commonly referred to as "Taiwan". The ROC is also occasionally known diplomatically as Chinese Taipei , or by other alternative names .

^ a b In 1949, the Republic of China government led by the Kuomintang (KMT) lost the Chinese Civil War to the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) and set up a provisional capital in Taipei . The CCP established the PRC. As such, the political status of the ROC and legal status of Taiwan (alongside the territories under ROC jurisdiction) are in dispute. In 1971, the United Nations gave the China seat to the PRC. In the view of the United Nations, no member of the organization withdrew as a consequence of this, but the ROC representatives declared that they were withdrawing. Most states recognise the PRC to be the sole legitimate representative of all China, and the UN classifies Taiwan as " Taiwan, Province of China ". The ROC has de facto relations with most sovereign states. A significant political movement within Taiwan advocates Taiwan independence .

^ See also Dates of establishment of diplomatic relations with the People's Republic of China and Foreign relations of China .

^ a b c More information on more or less federal structures can be found at Federal governments .

[ 19 ] ^ Also known as Congo-Kinshasa. Formerly referred to as Zaire , its official name from 1971 to 1997.

^ Also known as Congo-Brazzaville.

^ An official short name in English has been adopted by the Czech government, " Czechia ". This variant remains uncommon, but has been adopted by several companies and organizations including the United Nations. See Name of the Czech Republic .

^ The designation "Denmark" can refer either to Metropolitan Denmark or to the entire Danish Realm (e.g. in international organisations).

^ Formerly referred to as the Kingdom of Swaziland, its official name until 2018.

^ Åland was demilitarized by the Treaty of Paris in 1856, which was later affirmed by the League of Nations in 1921, and in a somewhat different context reaffirmed in the treaty on Finland's admission to the European Union in 1995 .

^ France's claimed Antarctic territory of Adélie Land ( Terre Adélie ) is one of five constituent districts of the French Southern and Antarctic Lands.

^ Also known as Guinea-Conakry.

^ While sometimes referred to as the "Republic of Iceland" [ 27 ] [ 28 ] and sometimes its counterpart Lýðveldið Ísland in Icelandic, the official name of the country is simply "Iceland".

[ 29 ] One example of the former is the name of the Constitution of Iceland , which in Icelandic is Stjórnarskrá lýðveldisins Íslands and is translated to "the Constitution of the republic of Iceland". However, in this usage, "republic" is not capitalized.

^ "Ireland" is the official name of the country in English. "Republic of Ireland" (the official description in English) and "Éire" (the official name in Irish) have sometimes been used unofficially to distinguish the state from the larger island of Ireland , however, this is officially deprecated.

[ 31 ] See names of the Irish state .

^ The government of Ivory Coast uses "Côte d'Ivoire" as the official English name of the country.

^ The country's official name of Myanmar, adopted in 1989, has been mixed and controversial, with the former name Burma still being used in many cases. See Names of Myanmar .

^ The designation "the Netherlands" can refer either to the Metropolitan Netherlands or to the entire Kingdom (e.g. in international organisations).

^ Formerly known constitutionally as the "Republic of Macedonia" from 1991 to 2019 and under the international designation of "the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia" (FYROM) from 1993 to 2019 due to the Macedonia naming dispute with Greece . Following the Prespa Agreement going into effect in February 2019, the country was renamed "North Macedonia".

^ Spain holds several small overseas territories scattered along the Mediterranean coast bordering Morocco , known as the plazas de soberanía .

^ Formerly known as Ceylon until 1972.

^ Formerly also known as East Timor.

^ Formerly the "Republic of Turkey". In 2023, the United Nations recognized "Türkiye" as the official English name of the country after a request made by the Turkish government.

^ There is no official flag for Akrotiri and Dhekelia; it is represented by the flag of the United Kingdom , the Union Jack . See Flag of Akrotiri and Dhekelia ^ There is no official flag for Saint Helena, Ascension and Tristan da Cunha; it is represented by the flag of the United Kingdom , the Union Jack . However, the 3 islands that comprise it do have flags. See Flag of Saint Helena, Ascension and Tristan da Cunha ^ Though de facto recognized by the Republic of China (Taiwan) .

References ^ a b "Member States | United Nations" . United Nations.

Archived from the original on 1 March 2023 . Retrieved 7 March 2023 .

^ Hersch Lauterpacht (2012).

Recognition in International Law .

Cambridge University Press . p. xxxv.

ISBN 9781107609433 .

^ Hahn, Gordon (2002).

Russia's Revolution from Above, 1985–2000: Reform, Transition, and Revolution in the Fall of the Soviet Communist Regime . New Brunswick: Transaction Publishers. p. 527.

ISBN 978-0765800497 .

^ Griffiths, Ryan (2016).

Age of Secession: The International and Domestic Determinants of State Birth . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. pp. 85, 213– 242.

ISBN 978-1107161627 .

^ Trevelyan, Mark (3 July 2025).

"Russia becomes first country to recognise Taliban government of Afghanistan" .

Reuters . Retrieved 5 July 2025 .

^ "Taliban announce new government for Afghanistan" .

BBC News . 7 September 2021.

Archived from the original on 7 September 2021 . Retrieved 10 October 2021 .

^ a b "U.N. Seats Denied, for Now, to Afghanistan's Taliban and Myanmar's Junta" .

The New York Times . 1 December 2021.

Archived from the original on 28 December 2021 . Retrieved 10 January 2022 .

^ "Andorra country profile" .

BBC News .

Archived from the original on 15 February 2009 . Retrieved 8 November 2011 .

^ Government of Antigua and Barbuda.

"Chapter 44: The Barbuda Local Government Act" (PDF) .

Laws of Antigua and Barbuda . Archived from the original (PDF) on 6 July 2011 . Retrieved 10 November 2010 .

^ "Tierra del Fuego and Antarctica" .

Patagonia-Argentina .

Archived from the original on 29 March 2023 . Retrieved 12 September 2020 .

^ "Pakistan Worldview, Report 21, Visit to Azerbaijan" (PDF) . Senate of Pakistan Foreign Relations Committee. 2008. Archived from the original (PDF) on 19 February 2009.

^ "Nilufer Bakhtiyar: "For Azerbaijan Pakistan does not recognise Armenia as a country" " .

Today.az . 13 September 2006. Archived from the original on 13 August 2011 . Retrieved 11 June 2023 .

^ "Pakistan the only country not recognising Armenia – envoy" . News.Az. 5 February 2014. Archived from the original on 23 February 2014 . Retrieved 17 February 2014 .

We are the only country not recognising Armenia as a state.

^ "Country profiles" .

The European Union .

Archived from the original on 26 April 2023 . Retrieved 11 June 2023 .

^ "Bahamas, The | The Commonwealth" .

thecommonwealth.org . 15 August 2013.

Archived from the original on 9 March 2018 . Retrieved 12 March 2018 .

^ Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Lithuania (23 September 2020).

"Lithuanian Foreign Ministry's statement on the situation in Belarus" . Archived from the original on 3 July 2022 . Retrieved 14 March 2022 .

^ Stjepanović, Dejan (2015). "Dual Substate Citizenship as Institutional Innovation: The Case of Bosnia's Brčko District".

Nationalism and Ethnic Politics .

21 (4): 382– 383.

doi : 10.1080/13537113.2015.1095043 .

eISSN 1557-2986 .

ISSN 1353-7113 .

OCLC 5927465455 .

S2CID 146578107 .

^ Tanya Basu (14 December 2013).

"Cape Verde Gets New Name: 5 Things to Know About How Maps Change" .

National Geographic . Archived from the original on 20 October 2018 . Retrieved 8 October 2018 .

^ Constitution of Comoros, Art. 1.

^ Andreas S. Kakouris (9 July 2010).

"Cyprus is not at peace with Turkey" . CNN.

Archived from the original on 18 May 2014 . Retrieved 17 May 2014 .

Turkey stands alone in violation of the will of the international community. It is the only country to recognise the "TRNC" and is the only country that does not recognise the Republic of Cyprus and its government.

^ "Home Rule Act of the Faroe Islands : No. 137 of March 23, 1948" .

Statsministeriat . Copenhagen. Archived from the original on 10 September 2015 . Retrieved 20 May 2015 .

^ "The Greenland Home Rule Act : Act No. 577 of 29 November 1978" .

Statsministeriat . Copenhagen. Archived from the original on 14 February 2014 . Retrieved 20 May 2014 .

^ "Rotuma Act" .

Laws of Fiji (1978 ed.). Suva, Fiji: Government of Fiji. 1927. Archived from the original on 21 June 2010 . Retrieved 10 July 2010 .

^ Government of Fiji, Office of the Prime Minister (1978).

"Chapter 122: Rotuma Act" .

Laws of Fiji .

University of the South Pacific .

Archived from the original on 1 March 2011 . Retrieved 10 November 2010 .

^ "The Gambia profile" .

BBC News . 14 February 2018.

Archived from the original on 11 March 2018 . Retrieved 12 March 2018 .

^ Constitution of Greece, Art. 105.

^ "Iceland - Culture, History, & People" .

Archived from the original on 18 July 2011 . Retrieved 2 February 2016 .

^ "Working Paper No. 54 : UNGEGN list of country names (Prepared by the United Nations Group of Experts on Geographical Names)" (PDF) .

unstats.un.org . Vienna. May 2011.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 11 August 2011 . Retrieved 2 February 2016 .

^ "Hvert er formlegt heiti landsins okkar?" .

Archived from the original on 22 July 2011 . Retrieved 2 February 2016 .

^ "Iraqi constitution" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 18 May 2016.

^ Daly, Mary E. (January 2007).

"The Irish Free State/Éire/Republic of Ireland/Ireland: "A Country by Any Other Name"?" .

Journal of British Studies .

46 (1). Cambridge University Press on behalf of The North American Conference on British Studies: 72– 90.

doi : 10.1086/508399 .

ISSN 0021-9371 .

JSTOR 10.1086/508399 .

^ "Basic Law: Jerusalem, Capital of Israel" .

www.knesset.gov.il .

Archived from the original on 5 September 2014 . Retrieved 7 July 2014 .

^ "Disputes: International" . CIA World Factbook. Archived from the original on 14 May 2011 . Retrieved 8 November 2011 .

^ Bell, Abraham (28 January 2008).

"International Law and Gaza: The Assault on Israel's Right to Self-Defense" .

Jerusalem Issue Brief, Vol. 7, No. 29 . Jerusalem Center for Public Affairs.

Archived from the original on 21 June 2010 . Retrieved 16 July 2010 .

^ Salih, Zak M. (17 November 2005).

"Panelists Disagree Over Gaza's Occupation Status" .

University of Virginia School of Law . Archived from the original on 3 March 2016 . Retrieved 16 July 2010 .

^ "Israel: 'Disengagement' Will Not End Gaza Occupation" . Human Rights Watch. 29 October 2004.

Archived from the original on 1 November 2008 . Retrieved 16 July 2010 .

^ Sanger, Andrew (2011).

"The Contemporary Law of Blockade and the Gaza Freedom Flotilla" . In M.N. Schmitt; Louise Arimatsu; Tim McCormack (eds.).

Yearbook of International Humanitarian Law - 2010 . Vol. 13. Springer Science & Business Media. p. 429.

doi : 10.1007/978-90-6704-811-8_14 .

ISBN 978-90-6704-811-8 .

It is this direct external control over Gaza and indirect control over life within Gaza that has led the United Nations, the UN General Assembly, the UN Fact Finding Mission to Gaza, International human rights organisations, US Government websites, the UK Foreign and Commonwealth Office and a significant number of legal commentators, to reject the argument that Gaza is no longer occupied.

* Scobbie, Iain (2012). Elizabeth Wilmshurst (ed.).

International Law and the Classification of Conflicts . Oxford University Press. p. 295.

ISBN 978-0-19-965775-9 .

Even after the accession to power of Hamas, Israel's claim that it no longer occupies Gaza has not been accepted by UN bodies, most States, nor the majority of academic commentators because of its exclusive control of its border with Gaza and crossing points including the effective control it exerted over the Rafah crossing until at least May 2011, its control of Gaza's maritime zones and airspace which constitute what Aronson terms the 'security envelope' around Gaza, as well as its ability to intervene forcibly at will in Gaza.

* Gawerc, Michelle (2012).

Prefiguring Peace: Israeli-Palestinian Peacebuilding Partnerships . Lexington Books. p. 44.

ISBN 9780739166109 .

In other words, while Israel maintained that its occupation of Gaza ended with its unilateral disengagement Palestinians – as well as many human right organizations and international bodies – argued that Gaza was by all intents and purposes still occupied.

^ Federal Foreign Office of Germany (November 2009).

"Beziehungen zu Deutschland" . Government of Germany.

Archived from the original on 23 July 2010 . Retrieved 16 July 2010 .

For more information, see Foreign relations of the Cook Islands .

^ Republic of Nauru Permanent Mission to the United Nations.

"Foreign Affairs" . United Nations. Archived from the original on 4 October 2014 . Retrieved 16 July 2010 .

^ a b c "Article 102, Repertory of Practice of United Nations Organs, Supplement No. 8, Volume VI (1989–1994)" (PDF) .

untreaty.un.org . Archived from the original (PDF) on April 3, 2012 . Retrieved July 15, 2011 .

^ "Treaty on Basic Relations between Japan and the Republic of Korea" .

ioc.u-tokyo.ac.jp . 22 June 1965.

Archived from the original on 13 March 2009 . Retrieved 27 October 2008 .

^ Constitution of Pakistan, Art. 1.

^ Aslam, Tasnim (11 December 2006).

"Pakistan Does Not Claim Kashmir As An Integral Part..." Outlook India . The Outlook Group.

Archived from the original on 13 December 2011 . Retrieved 27 February 2011 .

^ Williams, Kristen P. (2001).

Despite nationalist conflicts: theory and practice of maintaining world peace . Greenwood Publishing Group. pp.

154– 155.

ISBN 978-0-275-96934-9 .

^ Pruthi, R.K. (2001).

An Encyclopaedic Survey Of Global Terrorism In 21st Century . Anmol Publications Pvt. Ltd. pp.

120– 121.

ISBN 978-81-261-1091-9 .

^ "Azad Kashmir Day" . Archived from the original on 12 August 2014 . Retrieved 28 July 2014 .

^ a b "To Be Published In The Next Issue Of The" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 5 September 2014 . Retrieved 28 July 2014 .

^ "AJ&K History" .

Archived from the original on 6 January 2018 . Retrieved 6 January 2018 .

^ Lansford, Tom (8 April 2014).

Political Handbook of the World 2014 . SAGE Publications.

ISBN 9781483333281 . Retrieved 5 October 2014 .

^ "The Azad Jammu And Kashmir Interim Constitution Act, 1974" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 13 October 2013 . Retrieved 28 July 2014 .

^ Palestine Liberation Organization.

"Road For Palestinian Statehood: Recognition and Admission" . Negotiations Affairs Department. Archived from the original on August 18, 2011 . Retrieved July 28, 2011 .

^ See the following on statehood criteria: Mendes, Errol (30 March 2010).

"Statehood and Palestine for the purposes of Article 12 (3) of the ICC Statute" (PDF) . pp. 28, 33.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 31 August 2011 . Retrieved 17 April 2011 : "...the Palestinian State also meets the traditional criteria under the Montevideo Convention..."; "...the fact that a majority of states have recognised Palestine as a State should easily fulfil the requisite state practice".

McKinney, Kathryn M. (1994).

"The Legal Effects of the Israeli-PLO Declaration ofPrinciples: Steps Toward Statehood for Palestine" .

Seattle University Law Review .

18 (93). Seattle University: 97. Archived from the original on 22 July 2011 . Retrieved 17 April 2011 : "It is possible, however, to argue for Palestinian statehood based on the constitutive theory".

McDonald, Avril (Spring 2009).

"Operation Cast Lead: Drawing the Battle Lines of the Legal Dispute" .

Human Rights Brief .

25 . Washington College of Law, Center for Human Rights and Humanitarian Law.

Archived from the original on 29 March 2012 . Retrieved 17 April 2011 : "Whether one applies the criteria of statehood set out in the Montevideo Convention or the more widely accepted constitutive theory of statehood, Palestine might be considered a state." ^ a b "Non-member States and Entities" . United Nations. 29 February 2008. Archived from the original on 9 May 2009 . Retrieved 30 August 2010 .

^ United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization.

"Arab States: Palestine" . United Nations.

Archived from the original on 4 January 2012 . Retrieved 3 December 2011 .

^ "The Palestinians: Background and U.S. Relations" (PDF) . 18 March 2021. pp.

40– 41.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 13 May 2021 . Retrieved 11 April 2021 .

^ Keun Min.

"Greetings" . Jeju Special Self-Governing Province.

Archived from the original on 2 May 2013 . Retrieved 10 November 2010 .

^ a b "Statement from UNISFA on the recent spate of attacks in Abyei" .

UNmissions.org . 18 October 2017.

Archived from the original on 13 February 2018 . Retrieved 12 February 2018 .

^ a b "Abyei Administration Area Changes Name" .

Gurtong.net . 29 July 2015.

Archived from the original on 13 February 2018 . Retrieved 12 February 2018 .

^ "Bilateral relations of the Holy See" . Holy See website.

Archived from the original on 9 July 2014 . Retrieved 5 June 2012 .

^ a b Абхазия, Южная Осетия и Приднестровье признали независимость друг друга и призвали всех к этому же (in Russian). newsru.com. 17 November 2006.

Archived from the original on 16 April 2009 . Retrieved 5 June 2011 .

^ "United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo" .

UN .

Archived from the original on 25 December 2014 . Retrieved 8 January 2015 .

^ " "Sijera Leone je 18. država koja je povukla priznanje tzv. Kosova" " .

Archived from the original on 30 January 2021 . Retrieved 27 July 2020 .

^ "Cyprus" , The World Factbook , Central Intelligence Agency, 7 June 2023, archived from the original on 9 January 2021 , retrieved 11 June 2023 ^ Question of Western Sahara A/RES/34/37 (1979) ^ Question of Western Sahara A/RES/35/19 (1980) ^ a b Ker-Lindsay, James (2012).

The Foreign Policy of Counter Secession: Preventing the Recognition of Contested States .

Oxford University Press . p. 53.

ISBN 9780199698394 .

Archived from the original on 9 October 2013 . Retrieved 24 September 2013 .

In addition to the four cases of contested statehood described above, there are three other territories that have unilaterally declared independence and are generally regarded as having met the Montevideo criteria for statehood but have not been recognised by any states: Transnistria, Nagorny Karabakh, and Somaliland.

^ Kreuter, Aaron (2010).

"Self-Determination, Sovereignty, and the Failure of States: Somaliland and the Case for Justified Secession" (PDF) .

Minnesota Journal of International Law .

19 (2).

University of Minnesota Law School : 380– 381. Archived from the original (PDF) on 27 September 2013 . Retrieved 24 September 2013 .

Considering each of these factors, Somaliland has a colorable argument that it meets the theoretical requirements of statehood. ... On these bases, Somaliland appears to have a strong claim to statehood.

^ Arieff, Alexis.

"de facto Statehood? The Strange Case of Somaliland" (PDF) .

Yale Journal of International Affairs (Spring/Summer 2008). International Affairs Council at Yale: 1– 79.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 13 December 2011 . Retrieved 17 April 2011 .

^ "Somaliland profile" .

BBC News . 14 December 2017.

Archived from the original on 23 April 2017 . Retrieved 27 January 2018 .

^ Jansen, Dinah (2009).

"The Conflict between Self-Determination and Territorial Integrity: the South Ossetian Paradigm" .

Geopolitics Vs. Global Governance: Reinterpreting International Security . Centre for Foreign Policy Studies, University of Dalhousie: 222– 242.

ISBN 978-1-896440-61-3 .

Archived from the original on 19 August 2018 . Retrieved 14 December 2017 .

^ "Russia condemned for recognising rebel regions" .

CNN.com . Cable News Network. 26 August 2008.

Archived from the original on 29 August 2008 . Retrieved 26 August 2008 .

^ "Ma refers to China as ROC territory in magazine interview" .

Taipei Times . 8 October 2008.

Archived from the original on 3 June 2009 . Retrieved 13 October 2008 .

^ 中華民國國情介紹 .

2.16.886.101.20003 . 22 March 2017.

Archived from the original on 2 July 2018 . Retrieved 20 April 2022 .

^ van der Wees, Gerrit.

"Is Taiwan's International Space Expanding or Contracting?" .

thediplomat.com . The Diplomat.

Archived from the original on 9 July 2023 . Retrieved 16 December 2021 .

^ "Transnistria profile – Overview" .

BBC News . 20 November 2022.

Archived from the original on 5 April 2023 . Retrieved 11 June 2023 .

Bibliography Bissio, Roberto Remo, ed. (1995).

The World: A Third World Guide: 1995/96 . Montevideo: Instituto del Tercer Mundo.

ISBN 978-0-85598-291-1 .

OCLC 476299738 .

"Countries or areas, codes and abbreviations" . Statistics Division, United Nations. 1 April 2010.

Archived from the original on 28 June 2014 . Retrieved 19 August 2007 .

Davis, Tim (19 February 2009).

"World Countries and States List" .

TimDavis.com.au .

"Geographic Names" (PDF) . Department of Public Information, Cartographic Section, United Nations. 7 September 2000.

"ISO 3166-1 Country names and code elements" . International Organization for Standardization. 2010.

Archived from the original on 23 December 2013 . Retrieved 10 September 2011 .

"List of countries, territories and currencies" . Publications Office of the European Union. 4 May 2010.

Archived from the original on 25 December 2018 . Retrieved 19 August 2007 .

"The World Factbook" . United States: Central Intelligence Agency. 2010. Archived from the original on 7 June 2007.

World of Information (Firm), and International Chamber of Commerce (2003).

Middle East Review 2003/04: The Economic and Business Report (27th ed.). London: Kogan Page. p. 161.

ISBN 978-0-7494-4066-4 .

OCLC 51992589 .

Slayden, Greg.

"The Countries of the World" .

PeakBagger.com .

Archived from the original on 24 July 2020 . Retrieved 24 July 2020 .

v t e Earth Outline History Atmosphere Atmosphere of Earth Prebiotic atmosphere Troposphere Stratosphere Mesosphere Thermosphere Exosphere Weather Climate Climate system Energy balance Climate change Climate variability and change Climatology Paleoclimatology Continents Africa Antarctica Asia Australia Europe North America South America Culture and society List of sovereign states dependent territories In culture Earth Day Flag Symbol World economy Etymology World history Time zones World Environment Biome Biosphere Biogeochemical cycles Ecology Ecosystem Human impact on the environment Evolutionary history of life Nature Geodesy Cartography Computer cartography Earth's orbit Geodetic astronomy Geomatics Gravity Navigation Remote Sensing Geopositioning Virtual globe Geophysics Earth structure Fluid dynamics Geomagnetism Magnetosphere Mineral physics Seismology Plate tectonics Signal processing Tomography Geology Age of Earth Earth science Extremes on Earth Future Geological history Geologic time scale Geologic record History of Earth Oceans Antarctic/Southern Ocean Arctic Ocean Atlantic Ocean Indian Ocean Pacific Ocean Oceanography Planetary science The Moon Evolution of the Solar System Geology of solar terrestrial planets Location in the Universe Solar System Category v t e List of sovereign states and dependent territories by continent Continents Africa Antarctica Asia Europe North America Oceania South America Landmasses Americas Eurasia Islands Island countries Transcontinental Transcontinental countries v t e Lists of political entities by century AD ( CE ) Current list of sovereign states Centuries 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th 6th 7th 8th 9th 10th 11th 19th Decades 1400s 1460s 1490s 1500s 1520s 1620s 1640s 1660s 1750s 1760s 1770s 1780s 1790s 1800s 1810s 1820s 1830s 1840s 1850s 1860s 1870s 1880s 1890s 1900s 1910s 1920s 1930s 1940s 1950s 1960s 1970s 1980s 1990s 2000s 2010s 2020s Ages Classical Late Antiquity Middle BC ( BCE ) Centuries 35th BC 21st BC 20th BC 19th BC 18th BC 17th BC 16th BC 15th BC 14th BC 13th BC 12th BC 11th BC 10th BC 9th BC 8th BC 7th BC 6th BC 5th BC 4th BC 3rd BC 2nd BC 1st BC Ages Copper Bronze Iron Classical v t e States with limited recognition Details concerning international recognition and foreign relations provided by the articles linked in parentheses UN member states Partially unrecognised Republic of Armenia relations People's Republic of China relations Republic of Cyprus relations State of Israel recognition relations Democratic People's Republic of Korea relations Republic of Korea relations UN specialized agency members or GA observer state Partially unrecognised Palestine recognition relations Republic of Kosovo recognition relations membership Cook Islands relations Niue relations Non-UN member states Recognised by at least one UN member Republic of Abkhazia recognition relations Republic of China relations Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus relations membership Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic recognition relations Republic of South Ossetia recognition relations Recognised only by non-UN members Pridnestrovian Moldavian Republic relations Republic of Somaliland relations Portals : Countries Geography Lists Politics World NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐qp56m
Cached time: 20250818020416
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.736 seconds
Real time usage: 2.088 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 31836/1000000
Revision size: 125001/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 392492/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 51446/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 15/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 377474/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.579/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 6635863/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1501.731      1 -total
 32.67%  490.574      2 Template:Reflist
 27.04%  406.091    249 Template:Flag
 19.62%  294.711     51 Template:Cite_web
  6.35%   95.422      9 Template:Navbox
  6.35%   95.405    249 Template:Flag/core
  4.92%   73.924      1 Template:Earth
  4.75%   71.279     13 Template:Cite_book
  4.57%   68.660      1 Template:Short_description
  4.38%   65.765    110 Template:Efn Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:68253:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818020416 and revision id 1305411528. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=List_of_sovereign_states&oldid=1305411528 " Category : Lists of countries Hidden categories: CS1 uses Russian-language script (ru) CS1 Russian-language sources (ru) CS1 uses Chinese-language script (zh) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pages Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages Use British English from July 2023 Use dmy dates from December 2017 Wikipedia articles in need of updating from December 2024 All Wikipedia articles in need of updating This page was last edited on 11 August 2025, at 22:38 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents List of sovereign states 226 languages Add topic

