Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Benefits 2 Software 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Open-access repository 7 languages বাংলা Čeština Español Français 日本語 Română Türkçe Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Open access repositories ) Open-access research database An open repository or open-access repository is a digital platform that holds research output and provides free, immediate and permanent access to research results for anyone to use, download and distribute. To facilitate open access such repositories must be interoperable according to the Open Archives Initiative Protocol for Metadata Harvesting (OAI-PMH).

Search engines harvest the content of open access repositories, constructing a database of worldwide, free of charge available research.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] Data repositories are the cornerstone for FAIR (findable, accessible, interoperable and reusable) data practices and are used expeditiously within the scientific community.

[ 4 ] Open-access repositories, such as an institutional repository or disciplinary repository , provide free access to research for users outside the institutional community and are one of the recommended ways to achieve the open access vision described in the Budapest Open Access Initiative definition of open access. This is sometimes referred to as the self-archiving or "green" route to open access.

Benefits [ edit ] The benefits of open-access repositories are: Opening up outputs of the institution to a worldwide audience; Maximizing the visibility and impact of these outputs as a result; Showcasing the institution to interested constituencies – prospective staff, prospective students and other stakeholders; Collecting and curating digital output; Managing and measuring research and teaching activities; Providing a workspace for work-in-progress, and for collaborative or large-scale projects; Enabling and encouraging interdisciplinary approaches to research; Facilitating the development and sharing of digital teaching materials and aids, and Supporting student endeavours, providing access to theses and dissertations and a location for the development of e-portfolios.

[ 5 ] Software [ edit ] The most frequently used repository software for open repositories according to OpenDOAR are Digital Commons , DSpace and EPrints .

[ 6 ] Other examples are arXiv , bioRxiv , Dryad , Figshare , Open Science Framework , Samvera , Ubiquity Repositories and invenio (solution used by Zenodo ).

See also [ edit ] Current research information system Digital library Digital asset management Library publishing Open-access archives Open access around the world List of academic databases and search engines ROARMAP References [ edit ] ^ Jacobs, Neil (2006).

Open Access: Key Strategic, Technical and Economic Aspects . Elsevier. p. 11.

ISBN 9781843342038 .

^ "Open Data, Software and Code Guidelines" .

open-research-europe.ec.europa.eu . Retrieved 5 April 2022 .

^ "About – Open Repositories" .

www.openrepositories.org . Retrieved 5 April 2022 .

^ Stracke, Konstantin; Evans, Jack (22 March 2024).

" "The rise of data repositories in materials chemistry" " .

Communications Chemistry .

7 (1): 63.

Bibcode : 2024CmChe...7...63S .

doi : 10.1038/s42004-024-01143-0 .

PMC 10959999 .

PMID 38519628 .

^ Swan, Alma.

"Open Access institutional repositories: A Briefing Paper (2009)" (PDF) .

Open Scholarship . Archived from the original on 19 July 2011 . Retrieved 24 September 2013 .

^ "OpenDOAR Chart - Usage%20of%20Open%20Access%20Repository%20Software%20-%20Worldwide" .

OpenDOAR . Archived from the original on 25 March 2016 . Retrieved 15 May 2016 .

External links [ edit ] Scholia has a topic profile for Open-access repository .

Peter Suber (ed.).

"(Repositories)" .

Open Access Tracking Project . Harvard University.

OCLC 1040261573 .

News and comment from the worldwide movement for open access to research Open repositories v t e Open access History Timeline Concepts Gratis versus libre Subscription business model Subscribe to Open Paywall Copyright transfer agreement Academic journal Scientific journal Manuscript Preprint Postprint Article processing charge Predatory publishing Statements Budapest Open Access Initiative Berlin Declaration Bethesda Statement DORA Durham Statement Geneva Declaration NIH Public Access Policy Research Works Act Strategies Self-archiving Open-access mandate Open-access repository Hybrid open-access journal Delayed open-access journal Projects and organizations The Cost of Knowledge Creative Commons Directory of Open Access Books [ ca ; es ] Directory of Open Access Journals Initiative for Open Citations Open Access Scholarly Publishing Association OpenAIRE Open Archives Initiative Open Knowledge Foundation Open Society Foundations Plan S Public Library of Science Public Knowledge Project Registry of Open Access Repositories Scholarly Publishing and Academic Resources Coalition SciELO Sci-Hub By country Australia Austria Belgium Canada Denmark France Germany Greece Hungary India Republic of Ireland Italy Netherlands New Zealand Norway Poland Portugal Russia South Africa Spain Sweden Ukraine Other Access to Knowledge movement Access2Research List of open-access journals Open content Open data Open education Open government Open hardware Open knowledge Open science Open source Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Open-access_repository&oldid=1299703940 " Categories : Online archives Open-access archives Open access (publishing) Communication Academic publishing Research Hidden categories: CS1: unfit URL Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from September 2023 This page was last edited on 9 July 2025, at 23:08 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Open-access repository 7 languages Add topic

