Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Aims and scope 2 Abstracting and indexing 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents The Quarterly Review of Biology 4 languages فارسی Italiano Nederlands Português Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Academic journal The Quarterly Review of Biology Discipline Biology Language English Edited by Liliana M. Dávalos Publication details History 1926–present Publisher University of Chicago Press for the Department of Ecology and Evolution at Stony Brook University (United States) Frequency Quarterly Open access Hybrid Impact factor 3.7 (2023) Standard abbreviations ISO 4 ( alt ) · Bluebook ( alt ) NLM ( alt ) · MathSciNet ( alt ) ISO 4 Q. Rev. Biol.

Indexing CODEN ( alt · alt2 ) · JSTOR ( alt ) · LCCN ( alt ) MIAR · NLM ( alt ) · Scopus · W&L CODEN QRBIAK ISSN 0033-5770 (print) 1539-7718 (web) JSTOR 00335770 OCLC no.

223702870 Links Journal homepage OnlineArchive The Quarterly Review of Biology is a peer-reviewed scientific journal covering all aspects of biology . It was established in 1926 by Raymond Pearl . In the 1960s it was purchased by the Stony Brook Foundation when the editor H. Bentley Glass became academic vice president of Stony Brook University . The editor-in-chief is Liliana M. Dávalos (Stony Brook University). It is currently published by the University of Chicago Press .

Aims and scope [ edit ] The QRB has presented insightful historical, philosophical, and technical treatments of important biological topics since 1926. As the premier review journal in biology, the QRB publishes outstanding review articles of generous length that are guided by an expansive, inclusive, and often humanistic understanding of biology. Beyond the core biological sciences, the QRB is also an important review journal for scholars in related areas, including policy studies and the history and philosophy of science. A comprehensive section of reviews of new biological books provides educators and researchers with information on the latest publications in the life sciences.

[ 1 ] Abstracting and indexing [ edit ] The journal is abstracted and indexed in Biological Abstracts , BIOSIS Previews , and the Science Citation Index .

References [ edit ] ^ About QRB External links [ edit ] Official website v t e Stony Brook University Based in Stony Brook , New York Academics College of Arts & Sciences College of Business College of Engineering & Applied Sciences The Graduate School School of Dental Medicine School of Health Technology & Management School of Journalism School of Marine & Atmospheric Sciences School of Medicine School of Nursing School of Professional Development School of Social Welfare Undergraduate Colleges Athletics Teams Stony Brook Seawolves Football Men's basketball Women's basketball Baseball Men's lacrosse Women's lacrosse Men's soccer Facilities Kenneth P. LaValle Stadium Island Federal Arena Joe Nathan Field Pritchard Gymnasium University Track Dubin Family Athletic Performance Center Stony Brook Indoor Sports Complex Other 2012 College World Series Battle for the Golden Apple Battle of Long Island Joe Nathan Dominick Reyes Will Tye Jameel Warney America East Conference CAA Football Campus Stony Brook University Hospital Jacob K. Javits Lecture Center Marine Sciences Research Center Frank Melville Jr. Memorial Library Ward Melville Social and Behavioral Sciences Mount Stony Brook Observatory Pollock-Krasner House and Study Center Simons Center for Geometry and Physics Southampton campus Staller Center for the Arts Student Housing Student Union Charles B. Wang Center Windmill Research Brookhaven National Laboratory (co-managed by SBU) Center of Excellence in Wireless and Information Technology Advanced Energy Research & Technology Center Long Island High Technology Incubator Stony Brook University Research and Development Park Student life People The Statesman WUSB Stony Brook Independent The Spirit of Stony Brook Marching Band Stony Brook Film Festival Wolfie the Seawolf Roth Pond Regatta Stony Brook Science Fiction Forum History Maurie D. McInnis (President) Alumni Presidents Ward Melville Coe Hall Association of American Universities State University of New York Founded: 1957 This article about a biology journal is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it .

See tips for writing articles about academic journals . Further suggestions might be found on the article's talk page .

v t e Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=The_Quarterly_Review_of_Biology&oldid=1248797362 " Categories : Biology journals University of Chicago Press academic journals Academic journals established in 1926 Quarterly journals English-language journals Review journals Biology journal stubs Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Quarterly journals (infobox) Hybrid open access journals (infobox) Official website different in Wikidata and Wikipedia All stub articles This page was last edited on 1 October 2024, at 14:42 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents The Quarterly Review of Biology 4 languages Add topic

