Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Founding and history 1.2 Season and playoff development 2 Teams 3 Organizational structure Toggle Organizational structure subsection 3.1 Finances 4 Season format Toggle Season format subsection 4.1 Preseason 4.2 Regular season 4.3 Postseason 5 Trophies and awards Toggle Trophies and awards subsection 5.1 Team trophies 5.2 Player and coach awards 6 Media coverage 7 Draft 8 Free agency 9 See also 10 References Toggle References subsection 10.1 Explanatory notes 10.2 Citations 10.3 Bibliography 11 External links Toggle the table of contents National Football League 74 languages Ænglisc العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Беларуская Български Bosanski Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Fiji Hindi Føroyskt Français Frysk Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Hawaiʻi Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית ಕನ್ನಡ ქართული Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar Македонски मराठी Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Occitan ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Polski Português Română Русский Scots Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Vèneto Tiếng Việt 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikinews Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Professional American football league "NFL" redirects here. For other leagues of the same name and other uses, see National Football League (disambiguation) and NFL (disambiguation) .

National Football League Upcoming season or competition: 2025 NFL season Formerly American Professional Football Conference (1920) American Professional Football Association (1920–1921) Sport American football Founded September 17, 1920 (104 years ago) ( 1920-09-17 ) Canton, Ohio , U.S.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] First season 1920 Commissioner Roger Goodell No. of teams 32 Country United States [ A ] Headquarters 345 Park Avenue ( New York City ) [ 3 ] Most recent champion(s) Philadelphia Eagles (5th title) Most titles Green Bay Packers (13 titles) Broadcaster(s) United States: [ 4 ] CBS Fox NBC ESPN / ABC / ESPN2 NFL Network TUDN Telemundo Deportes ESPN Deportes International: See list Streaming partner(s) United States: Paramount+ / Vix Tubi Peacock ESPN+ / Hulu / Disney+ Amazon Prime Video / Twitch Netflix International: DAZN Official website www .nfl .com The National Football League ( NFL ) is a professional American football league in the United States . Composed of 32 teams, it is divided equally between the American Football Conference (AFC) and the National Football Conference (NFC). The NFL is one of the major professional sports leagues in the United States and Canada and the highest professional level of American football in the world.

[ 5 ] Each NFL season begins annually with a three-week preseason in August, followed by the 18-week regular season , which runs from early September to early January, with each team playing 17 games and having one bye week . Following the conclusion of the regular season, seven teams from each conference, including the four division winners and three wild card teams, advance to the playoffs , a single-elimination tournament , which culminates in the Super Bowl , played in early February between the winners of the AFC and NFC championship games. The NFL is headquartered in Midtown Manhattan .

The NFL was formed in 1920 as the American Professional Football Association ( APFA ) before renaming itself the National Football League for the 1922 season . After initially determining champions through end-of-season standings, a playoff system was implemented in 1933 that culminated with the NFL Championship Game until 1966. Following an agreement to merge the NFL with the rival American Football League (AFL), the Super Bowl was first held in 1967 to determine a champion between the best teams from the two leagues and has remained as the final game of each NFL season since the merger was completed in 1970.

[ 6 ] The NFL is the wealthiest professional sports league in the world by revenue , [ 7 ] [ 8 ] and the sports league with the most valuable teams.

[ 9 ] The NFL also has the highest average attendance (67,591) of any professional sports league in the world [ 10 ] and is the most popular sports league in the United States.

[ 11 ] The Super Bowl is also among the most-watched sporting events in the world, [ 12 ] with the individual games accounting for many of the most watched television programs in American history and all occupying the top five of Nielsen 's all-time most-watched U.S. television broadcasts by 2015.

[ 13 ] The Green Bay Packers hold the most combined NFL championships with thirteen, winning nine titles before the Super Bowl era and four Super Bowls afterwards. Since the creation of the Super Bowl, the New England Patriots and Pittsburgh Steelers are tied for the most Super Bowl victories at six each. The reigning league champions are the Philadelphia Eagles .

History Main articles: Ohio League , History of the National Football League , and History of American football Founding and history "American Professional Football Association" redirects here. For the similarly-named minor professional league of the 1930s, see Midwest Football League (1935–1940) .

On August 20, 1920, a meeting was held by representatives of the Akron Pros , Canton Bulldogs , Cleveland Indians , and Dayton Triangles at the Jordan and Hupmobile auto showroom in Canton, Ohio .

[ 14 ] This meeting resulted in the formation of the American Professional Football Conference (APFC), a group who, according to the Canton Evening Repository , intended to "raise the standard of professional football in every way possible, to eliminate bidding for players between rival clubs and to secure cooperation in the formation of schedules".

[ 15 ] A second meeting was held on September 17, 1920, with representatives from teams within four states: Akron, Canton, Cleveland, and Dayton from Ohio; the Hammond Pros and Muncie Flyers from Indiana; the Rochester Jeffersons from New York; and the Rock Island Independents , Decatur Staleys , and Racine (Chicago) Cardinals from Illinois.

[ 16 ] [ 17 ] The league was renamed to the American Professional Football Association ( APFA ).

[ 15 ] The league elected Jim Thorpe as its first president, and consisted of 14 teams (the Buffalo All-Americans , Chicago Tigers , Columbus Panhandles and Detroit Heralds joined the league during the year). The Massillon Tigers from Massillon, Ohio was also at the September 17 meeting, but did not field a team in 1920. Only two of these teams, the Decatur Staleys (now the Chicago Bears) and the Chicago Cardinals (now the Arizona Cardinals), remain in the NFL.

[ 18 ] The Akron Pros won the first APFA (NFL) Championship in 1920.

Although the league did not maintain official standings for its 1920 inaugural season and teams played schedules that included non-league opponents, the APFA awarded the Akron Pros the championship by virtue of their 8–0–3 record.

[ 19 ] The first event occurred on September 26, 1920, when the Rock Island Independents defeated the non-league St. Paul Ideals 48–0 at Douglas Park .

[ 14 ] [ 20 ] On October 3, 1920, the first full week of league play occurred.

[ 21 ] [ 22 ] The following season resulted in the Chicago Staleys controversially winning the title over the Buffalo All-Americans.

[ 23 ] On June 24, 1922, the APFA changed its name to the National Football League (NFL).

[ 24 ] [ 25 ] In 1932 , the season ended with the Chicago Bears ( 6–1–6 ) and the Portsmouth Spartans ( 6–1–4 ) tied for first in the league standings.

[ 26 ] At the time, teams were ranked on a single table and the team with the highest winning percentage (not including ties, which were not counted towards the standings) at the end of the season was declared the champion; the only tiebreaker was that in the event of a tie if two teams played twice in a season, the result of the second game determined the title (the source of the 1921 controversy). This method had been used since the league's creation in 1920, but no situation had been encountered where two teams were tied for first. The league quickly determined that a playoff game between Chicago and Portsmouth was needed to decide the league's champion. The teams were originally scheduled to play the playoff game, officially a regular-season game that would count towards the regular season standings, at Wrigley Field in Chicago, but a combination of heavy snow and extreme cold forced the game to be moved indoors to Chicago Stadium , which did not have a regulation-size football field. Playing with altered rules to accommodate the smaller playing field, the Bears won the game 9–0 and thus won the championship. Fan interest in the de facto championship game led the NFL, beginning in 1933 , to split into two divisions with a championship game to be played between the division champions.

[ 27 ] The 1934 season also marked the first of twelve seasons in which African Americans were absent from the league . The de facto ban was rescinded in 1946 , following public pressure and coinciding with the removal of a similar ban in Major League Baseball .

[ 28 ] The NFL was always the largest professional football league in the United States; it nevertheless faced numerous rival professional leagues through the 1930s and 1940s. Rival leagues included at least three separate American Football Leagues and the All-America Football Conference (AAFC), on top of various regional leagues of varying caliber. Three NFL teams trace their histories to these rival leagues; the Los Angeles Rams who came from a 1936 iteration of the American Football League, and the Cleveland Browns and San Francisco 49ers , both from the AAFC. By the 1950s, the NFL had an effective monopoly on professional football in the United States; its only competition in North America was the professional Canadian football circuit, which formally became the Canadian Football League (CFL) in 1958. With Canadian football being a different football code than the American game, the CFL established a niche market in Canada and still survives as an independent league.

A new professional league, the fourth American Football League (AFL), began to play in 1960. The upstart AFL began to challenge the established NFL in popularity, gaining lucrative television contracts and engaging in a bidding war with the NFL for free agents and draft picks. The two leagues announced a merger on June 8, 1966, to take full effect in 1970. In the meantime, the leagues would hold a common draft and championship game. The game, the Super Bowl , was held four times before the merger, with the NFL winning Super Bowl I and Super Bowl II , and the AFL winning Super Bowl III and Super Bowl IV .

[ 29 ] After the league merged, it was reorganized into two conferences: the National Football Conference (NFC), consisting of most of the pre-merger NFL teams, and the American Football Conference (AFC), consisting of all of the AFL teams as well as three pre-merger NFL teams.

[ 30 ] Today, the NFL is the most popular sports league in North America [ 31 ] – with much of the league's growth and popularity attributable to former commissioner Pete Rozelle , who led the league from 1960 to 1989. Overall annual attendance increased from 3 million at the beginning of his tenure to 17 million by the end of his tenure, and 400 million global viewers watched 1989's Super Bowl XXIII .

[ 32 ] The NFL established NFL Properties in 1963. The league's licensing wing, NFL Properties, earns the league billions of dollars annually; Rozelle's tenure also marked the creation of NFL Charities and a national partnership with United Way .

[ 32 ] Paul Tagliabue was elected as commissioner to succeed Rozelle; his 17-year tenure, which ended in 2006, was marked by large increases in television contracts and the addition of four expansion teams, [ 33 ] as well as the introduction of league initiatives to increase the number of minorities in league and team management roles.

[ 34 ] The league's current commissioner, Roger Goodell , has focused on reducing the number of illegal hits and making the sport safer, mainly through fining or suspending players who break rules.

[ 35 ] These actions are among many the NFL is taking to reduce concussions and improve player safety.

[ 36 ] Prior to 2021, the NFL had utilized race-based adjustments of dementia claims in the $1 billion settlement of concussion claims, which had been criticized by critics before the NFL decided to end what was called "race-norming".

[ 37 ] [ 38 ] On May 21, 2024, the NFL announced the NFL Source initiative, aimed at increasing the number of minority- and women-owned businesses that work with the league throughout the year.

[ 39 ] NFL Source will be mandatory for teams that host major events, such as the Super Bowl and the NFL draft, and their organizing committees, but will be optional for other contracts at the team level.

[ 39 ] The NFL will partner with the U.S. Black Chambers, Inc to help local businesses across the country obtain the certifications necessary to do business with the league in furtherance of its efforts to increase partnerships with certified and underrepresented businesses that are 51% owned and operated or led by a veteran, woman, minority, person with disabilities or LGBTQ+.

[ 40 ] In 2015, a class-action lawsuit was filed on behalf of NFL Sunday Ticket subscribers, alleging that the NFL, its member teams, its broadcast partners, and DirecTV engaged in a conspiracy to violate antitrust law , by granting DirecTV exclusive rights to sell the Sunday Ticket product, thereby restricting competition and forcing viewers to pay super competitive prices to view out-of-market games.

[ 41 ] [ 42 ] On June 27, 2024, a jury in Los Angeles found that the NFL had violated antitrust law in setting the price of the Sunday ticket package and ordered a penalty totaling more than $4.7 billion. With triple damages allowed under federal antitrust laws, the NFL could ultimately be liable for $14.39 billion. The league said it would ask the judge to set the verdict aside then appeal the verdict if needed.

[ 43 ] Season and playoff development Main article: List of NFL seasons From 1920 to 1934, the NFL did not have a set number of games for teams to play, instead setting a minimum. The league mandated a twelve-game regular season for each team beginning in 1935 , later shortening this to eleven games in 1937 and ten games in 1943 , mainly due to World War II. After the war ended, the number of games returned to eleven games in 1946 , and later back to twelve in 1947. The NFL went to a 14-game schedule in 1961 , which it retained until switching to a 16-game schedule in 1978 .

[ 44 ] In March 2021, the NFL officially adopted a 17-game schedule after gaining the agreement of the National Football League Players Association (NFLPA).

[ 45 ] Having an odd number of games in the schedule will give half the teams nine games as the home team, while half the teams have only eight home games. To minimize the perceived benefit on competition of having more home games, the extra home game will be rotated between the two conferences each year. This is because playoff berths are allocated at the conference level, so all teams within the conference will have played the same number of home games.

The NFL operated in a two-conference system from 1933 to 1966 , where the champions of each conference would meet in the NFL Championship Game . If two teams tied for the conference lead, they would meet in a one-game playoff to determine the conference champion. In 1967 , the NFL expanded from 15 teams to 16 teams. Instead of just evening out the conferences by adding the expansion New Orleans Saints to the seven-member Western Conference, the NFL realigned the conferences and split each into two four-team divisions. The four division champions would meet in the NFL playoffs , a two-round playoff.

[ 46 ] The NFL also operated the Playoff Bowl (officially the Bert Bell Benefit Bowl) from 1960 to 1969. Effectively, a third-place game , pitting the two conference runners-up against each other, the league considers Playoff Bowls to have been exhibitions rather than playoff games. The league discontinued the Playoff Bowl in 1970 due to its perception as a game for losers.

[ 47 ] Following the addition of the former AFL teams into the NFL in 1970 , the NFL split into two conferences with three divisions each. The expanded league, now with twenty-six teams, [ 30 ] would also feature an expanded eight-team playoff, the participants being the three division champions from each conference as well as one 'wild card' team (the team with the best win percentage that did not win its division) from each conference. In 1978, the league added a second wild card team from each conference, bringing the total number of playoff teams to ten, and a further two wild card teams were added in 1990 to bring the total to twelve. When the NFL expanded to 32 teams in 2002 , the league realigned, changing the division structure from three divisions in each conference to four divisions in each conference. As each division champion gets a playoff bid, the number of wild card teams from each conference dropped from three to two.

[ 48 ] The playoffs expanded again in 2020, adding two more wild card teams to bring the total to 14 playoff teams.

[ 49 ] Teams See also: List of defunct NFL franchises , Timeline of the National Football League , and NFL franchise moves and mergers Bills Dolphins Patriots Jets Ravens Bengals Browns Steelers Texans Colts Jaguars Titans Broncos Chiefs Chargers Raiders Cowboys Giants Eagles Commanders Bears Lions Packers Vikings Falcons Panthers Saints Buccaneers Cardinals Rams 49ers Seahawks The NFL consists of 32 teams divided into two conferences of 16 teams each. Each conference is divided into four divisions of four teams each. During the regular season, each team is allowed a maximum of 55 players on its roster; only 48 of these may be active (eligible to play) on game days.

[ 50 ] Each team can also have a sixteen-player practice squad separate from its main roster.

[ 51 ] Each NFL club is granted a franchise, the league's authorization for the team to operate in its home city. This franchise covers "Home Territory" (the 75 miles surrounding the city limits, or, if the team is within 100 miles of another league city, half the distance between the two cities) and "Home Marketing Area" (Home Territory plus the rest of the state the club operates in, as well as the area the team operates its training camp in for the duration of the camp). Each NFL member has the exclusive right to host professional football games inside its Home Territory and the exclusive right to advertise, promote, and host events in its Home Marketing Area. There are a couple of exceptions to this rule, mostly relating to teams with close proximity to each other: teams that operate in the same city (e.g. New York City and Los Angeles) or the same state (e.g.

California , Florida , and Texas ) share the rights to the city's Home Territory and the state's Home Marketing Area, respectively.

[ 52 ] The Dallas Cowboys , valued at $12.8 billion, are the most valuable sport franchise in the world as of 2025 [update] according to Sportico .

[ 53 ] The average NFL team is worth $7.13 billion and collectively worth $228 billion.

[ 53 ] Key Symbol Meaning * Franchise has relocated at some point in its existence † Club was a founding member of the NFL National Football League teams Conference Division [ 54 ] Team [ 54 ] City Stadium [ 55 ] Capacity First season [ 56 ] Head coach AFC East Buffalo Bills Orchard Park, New York Highmark Stadium 71,608 1960 ( AFL ) 1970 (NFL) Sean McDermott Miami Dolphins Miami Gardens, Florida Hard Rock Stadium 64,767 1966 ( AFL ) 1970 (NFL) Mike McDaniel New England Patriots Foxborough, Massachusetts Gillette Stadium 65,878 1960 ( AFL ) 1970 (NFL) Mike Vrabel New York Jets East Rutherford, New Jersey MetLife Stadium [ B ] 82,500 1960 ( AFL ) 1970 (NFL) Aaron Glenn North Baltimore Ravens Baltimore, Maryland M&T Bank Stadium 71,008 1996 [ C ] John Harbaugh Cincinnati Bengals Cincinnati, Ohio Paycor Stadium 65,515 1968 ( AFL ) 1970 (NFL) Zac Taylor Cleveland Browns Cleveland, Ohio Huntington Bank Field 67,895 1946 ( AAFC ) 1950 (NFL) [ C ] Kevin Stefanski Pittsburgh Steelers Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania Acrisure Stadium 68,400 1933 Mike Tomlin South Houston Texans Houston, Texas NRG Stadium 71,995 2002 DeMeco Ryans Indianapolis Colts * Indianapolis, Indiana Lucas Oil Stadium 63,000 1953 Shane Steichen Jacksonville Jaguars Jacksonville, Florida EverBank Stadium [ D ] 67,814 1995 Liam Coen Tennessee Titans * Nashville, Tennessee Nissan Stadium 69,143 1960 ( AFL ) 1970 (NFL) Brian Callahan West Denver Broncos Denver, Colorado Empower Field at Mile High 76,125 1960 ( AFL ) 1970 (NFL) Sean Payton Kansas City Chiefs * Kansas City, Missouri GEHA Field at Arrowhead Stadium 76,416 1960 ( AFL ) 1970 (NFL) Andy Reid Las Vegas Raiders * Paradise, Nevada Allegiant Stadium 65,000 1960 ( AFL ) 1970 (NFL) Pete Carroll Los Angeles Chargers * Inglewood, California SoFi Stadium [ E ] 70,240 1960 ( AFL ) 1970 (NFL) Jim Harbaugh NFC East Dallas Cowboys Arlington, Texas AT&T Stadium 80,000 1960 Brian Schottenheimer New York Giants East Rutherford, New Jersey MetLife Stadium [ B ] 82,500 1925 Brian Daboll Philadelphia Eagles Philadelphia, Pennsylvania Lincoln Financial Field 69,176 1933 Nick Sirianni Washington Commanders * Landover, Maryland Northwest Stadium 62,000 1932 Dan Quinn North Chicago Bears *† Chicago, Illinois Soldier Field 61,500 1920 Ben Johnson Detroit Lions * Detroit, Michigan Ford Field 65,000 1930 Dan Campbell Green Bay Packers Green Bay, Wisconsin Lambeau Field 81,441 1921 Matt LaFleur Minnesota Vikings Minneapolis, Minnesota U.S. Bank Stadium 66,860 1961 Kevin O'Connell South Atlanta Falcons Atlanta, Georgia Mercedes-Benz Stadium 71,000 1966 Raheem Morris Carolina Panthers Charlotte, North Carolina Bank of America Stadium 75,523 1995 Dave Canales New Orleans Saints New Orleans, Louisiana Caesars Superdome 73,208 1967 Kellen Moore Tampa Bay Buccaneers Tampa, Florida Raymond James Stadium 65,618 1976 Todd Bowles West Arizona Cardinals *† Glendale, Arizona State Farm Stadium 63,400 1920 Jonathan Gannon Los Angeles Rams * Inglewood, California SoFi Stadium [ E ] 70,240 1936 ( AFL ) 1937 (NFL) Sean McVay San Francisco 49ers Santa Clara, California Levi's Stadium 68,500 1946 ( AAFC ) 1950 (NFL) Kyle Shanahan Seattle Seahawks Seattle, Washington Lumen Field 69,000 1976 Mike Macdonald Organizational structure See also: Commissioner of the NFL Roger Goodell , National Football League Commissioner since 2006 (pictured in 2012) At the corporate level, the National Football League considers itself a trade association made up of and financed by its 32 member teams.

[ 64 ] Up until 2015, the league was an unincorporated nonprofit 501(c)(6) association.

[ 65 ] Section 501(c)(6) of the Internal Revenue Code provides an exemption from federal income taxation for "Business leagues, chambers of commerce, real-estate boards, boards of trade, or professional football leagues (whether or not administering a pension fund for football players), not organized for profit and no part of the net earnings of which inures to the benefit of any private shareholder or individual." [ 66 ] In contrast, each individual team, with the exception of the non-profit Green Bay Packers , [ 67 ] is subject to tax because they make a profit.

[ 68 ] In 2015, the NFL gave up its tax-exempt status following public criticism; in a letter to the club owners, Commissioner Roger Goodell labeled it a "distraction", saying "the effects of the tax-exempt status of the league office have been mischaracterized repeatedly in recent years… Every dollar of income generated through television rights fees, licensing agreements, sponsorships, ticket sales, and other means is earned by the 32 clubs and is taxable there. This will remain the case even when the league office and Management Council file returns as taxable entities, and the change in filing status will make no material difference to our business." As a result, the league office might owe around US$10 million in income taxes, but it is no longer required to disclose the salaries of its executive officers.

[ 69 ] The league has three defined officers: the commissioner, secretary, and treasurer. Each conference has one defined officer, the president, which is essentially an honorary position with few powers and mostly ceremonial duties, including awarding the conference championship trophy.

The commissioner is elected by the affirmative vote of two-thirds or 18, whichever is greater, of the members of the league, while the president of each conference is elected by an affirmative vote of three-fourths or 10, whichever is greater, of the conference members.

[ 70 ] The commissioner appoints the secretary and treasurer and has broad authority in disputes between clubs, players, coaches, and employees. He is the "principal executive officer " [ 70 ] of the NFL and also has authority in hiring league employees, negotiating television contracts, disciplining individuals that own part or all of an NFL team, clubs, or employed individuals of an NFL club if they have violated league by-laws or committed "conduct detrimental to the welfare of the League or professional football".

[ 70 ] The commissioner can, in the event of misconduct by a party associated with the league, suspend individuals, hand down a fine of up to US$500,000, cancel contracts with the league, and award or strip teams of draft picks.

[ 70 ] In extreme cases, the commissioner can offer recommendations to the NFL's executive committee, up to and including the "cancellation or forfeiture" [ 70 ] of a club's franchise or any other action, he deems necessary. The commissioner can also issue sanctions up to and including a lifetime ban from the league if an individual connected to the NFL has bet on games or failed to notify the league of conspiracies or plans to bet on or fix games.

[ 70 ] The current Commissioner of the National Football League is Roger Goodell, who was elected in 2006 after Paul Tagliabue , the previous commissioner, retired.

[ 71 ] Finances NFL revenue is from three primary sources: NFL Ventures (merchandising), NFL Enterprises ( NFL Network and NFL Sunday Ticket , which the league controls), and the television contract. The league distributes such revenue equally among teams, regardless of performance. As of February 2019 [update] , each team receives $255 million annually from the league's television contract, up 150% from $99.9 million in 2010.

[ 72 ] Most NFL teams' financial statements are secret.

[ 73 ] The Kansas City Star obtained the Kansas City Chiefs' tax returns for 2008–2010. According to the Star , the team's revenue rose from $231 million in 2008 to $302 million in 2010. In 2010, two thirds of revenue came from the league: $99.8 million from NFL Ventures ($55.3 million) and NFL Enterprises ($44.6 million), and the $99.9 million share of the television contract. The remaining one third was from tickets ($42.4 million), corporate sponsorships ($6.6 million), food sales ($5 million), parking passes ($4.7 million), in-stadium advertising ($3.7 million), radio contract ($2.7 million), and miscellaneous sources.

[ 72 ] The largest Chiefs expense in 2010 was $148 million for players, coaches, and other employees. Of the $38 million in operating income, Clark , Lamar Jr.

, two other children, and widow of former team owner Lamar Hunt divided $17.6 million, and reinvested the remaining $20 million into the team.

[ 72 ] According to economist Richard D. Wolff , the NFL's revenue model is in contravention of the typical corporate structure. By redistributing profits to all teams the NFL is ensuring that one team will not dominate the league through excessive earnings.

[ 74 ] Roger Noll described the revenue sharing as the league's "most important structural weakness", however, as there is no disincentive against a team playing badly and the largest cost item, player salaries, is capped.

[ 72 ] Season format Main article: List of NFL seasons The NFL season format consists of a three-week preseason , an 18-week regular season (each team plays 17 games), and a 14-team single-elimination playoff culminating in the Super Bowl, the league's championship game.

Preseason Main article: NFL preseason The NFL preseason begins with the Pro Football Hall of Fame Game , played at Tom Benson Hall of Fame Stadium in Canton, Ohio .

[ 75 ] Each NFL team is required to schedule three preseason games. NFC teams must play at least two of these at home in odd numbered years and AFC teams must play at least two at home in even numbered years. However, the teams involved in the Hall of Fame game, as well as any team that played in an American Bowl game, play four preseason games.

[ 76 ] Preseason games are exhibition matches and do not count towards regular-season totals.

[ 77 ] Because the preseason does not count towards standings, teams generally do not focus on winning games; instead, they are used by coaches to evaluate their teams and by players to show their performance, both to their current team and to other teams if they get cut.

[ 78 ] The quality of preseason games has been criticized by some fans, who dislike having to pay full price for exhibition games, [ 79 ] as well as by some players and coaches, who dislike the risk of injury the games have, while others have felt the preseason is a necessary part of the NFL season.

[ 78 ] [ 79 ] Regular season Main article: NFL regular season 2024 AFC team standings POS AFC East AFC North AFC South AFC West 1st Bills Ravens Texans Chiefs 2nd Dolphins Steelers Colts Chargers 3rd Jets Bengals Jaguars Broncos 4th Patriots Browns Titans Raiders 2024 NFC team standings POS NFC East NFC North NFC South NFC West 1st Eagles Lions Buccaneers Rams 2nd Commanders Vikings Falcons Seahawks 3rd Cowboys Packers Panthers Cardinals 4th Giants Bears Saints 49ers This chart of the 2024 season standings displays an application of the NFL scheduling formula.

The 2024 Eagles (highlighted in green) finished in first place in the NFC East . Thus, in 2025 , the Eagles will play two games against each of their division rivals (highlighted in light blue), one game against each team in the NFC North and AFC West (highlighted in yellow), and one game each against the first-place finishers in the NFC South , NFC West (highlighted in orange), and AFC East (highlighted in pink).

Currently, the 14 opponents each team faces over the 17-game regular season schedule are set using a predetermined formula: [ 80 ] The league runs an 18-week, 272-game regular season.

[ 81 ] Since 2021, the season has begun the week after Labor Day (the first Monday in September) and concluded the week after New Year.

[ 82 ] The opening game of the season is normally a home game on a Thursday for the league's defending champion.

[ 83 ] Most NFL games are played on Sundays, with a Monday night game typically held at least once a week and Thursday night games occurring on most weeks as well.

[ 83 ] NFL games are not normally played on Fridays or Saturdays until late in the regular season, as federal law prohibits professional football leagues from competing with college or high school football. Because high school and college teams typically play games on Friday and Saturday, respectively, the NFL cannot hold games on those days until the Friday before the third Saturday in December. While Saturday games late in the season are common, the league rarely holds Friday games, the most recent one being on Christmas Day in 2020.

[ 84 ] NFL games are rarely scheduled for Tuesday or Wednesday, and those days have only been used three times since 1948: in 2010, when a Sunday game was rescheduled to Tuesday due to a blizzard; in 2012, when the Kickoff game was moved from Thursday to Wednesday to avoid conflict with the Democratic National Convention ; [ 85 ] [ 86 ] and in 2020, when a game was postponed from Sunday to Tuesday due to players testing positive for COVID-19 .

[ 87 ] NFL regular season match-ups are determined according to a scheduling formula. Within a division, all four teams play 14 out of their 17 games against common opponents or each other– two games (home and away) are played against the other three teams in the division, while one game is held against all the members of a division from the NFC and a division from the AFC as determined by a rotating cycle (three years for the conference the team is in, and four years in the conference they are not in). Two of the other games are intraconference games, determined by the standings of the previous year – for example, if a team finishes first in its division, it will play two other first-place teams in its conference, while a team that finishes last would play two other last-place teams in the conference. The final game is an inter-conference based on a rotating cycle (four years) and determined by previous season's standings.

[ 88 ] In total, each team plays 17 games and has one bye week, where it does not play a game.

[ 89 ] Although a team's home and away opponents are known by the end of the previous year's regular season, the exact dates and times for NFL games are not determined until much later because the league has to account for, among other things, the Major League Baseball postseason and local events that could pose a scheduling conflict with NFL games. During the 2010 season, over 500,000 potential schedules were created by computers, 5,000 of which were considered "playable schedules" and were reviewed by the NFL's scheduling team. After arriving at what they felt was the best schedule out of the group, nearly 50 more potential schedules were developed to try to ensure that the chosen schedule would be the best possible one.

[ 90 ] Postseason Main articles: NFL playoffs , Pro Bowl , and Super Bowl Following the conclusion of the regular season, the NFL Playoffs, a 14-team single-elimination tournament, is then held. Seven teams are selected from each conference: the winners of each of the four divisions as well as three wild card teams (the three remaining teams with the best overall record, with tiebreakers in the event of two or more teams having the same record). These teams are seeded according to overall record and tiebreakers, with the division champions always ranking higher than the wild card teams.

[ 91 ] The top team (seeded one) from each conference are awarded a bye week, while the remaining six teams (seeded 2–7) from each conference compete in the first round of the playoffs, the Wild Card round, with the 2-seed competing against the 7-seed, the 3-seed competing against the 6-seed and the 4-seed competing against the 5-seed. The winners of the Wild Card round advance to the Divisional Round, which matches the lower seeded team against the 1-seed and the two remaining teams against each other. The winners of those games then compete in the Conference Championships, with the higher remaining seed hosting the lower remaining seed. The AFC and NFC champions then compete in the Super Bowl to determine the league champion.

The only other postseason event hosted by the NFL is the Pro Bowl , the league's all-star game . Since 2009, the Pro Bowl has been held the week before the Super Bowl ; in previous years, the game was held the week following the Super Bowl, but in an effort to boost ratings, the game was moved to the week before.

[ 92 ] Because of this, players from the teams participating in the Super Bowl are exempt from participating in the game. The Pro Bowl is not considered as competitive as a regular-season game because the biggest concern of teams is to avoid injuries to the players.

[ 93 ] Trophies and awards Main article: List of NFL awards Team trophies Main articles: Vince Lombardi Trophy , Ed Thorp Memorial Trophy , and Brunswick-Balke-Collender Cup The National Football League has used three different trophies to honor its champion over its existence. The first trophy, the Brunswick-Balke-Collender Cup , was donated to the NFL (then APFA) in 1920 by the Brunswick-Balke-Collender Corporation . The trophy, the appearance of which is only known by its description as a "silver loving cup", was intended to be a traveling trophy and not to become permanent until a team had won at least three titles. The league awarded it to the Akron Pros, champions of the inaugural 1920 season; however, the trophy was discontinued and its current whereabouts are unknown.

[ 94 ] A second trophy, the Ed Thorp Memorial Trophy , was issued by the NFL from 1934 to 1967. The trophy's namesake, Ed Thorp, was a referee in the league and a friend to many early league owners; upon his death in 1934, the league created the trophy to honor him. In addition to the main trophy, which would be in the possession of the current league champion, the league issued a smaller replica trophy to each champion, who would maintain permanent control over it. The current location of the Ed Thorp Memorial Trophy, long thought to be lost, [ 95 ] is believed to be possessed by the Green Bay Packers Hall of Fame .

[ 96 ] The current trophy of the NFL is the Vince Lombardi Trophy . The Super Bowl trophy was officially renamed in 1970 after Vince Lombardi , who as head coach led the Green Bay Packers to victories in the first two Super Bowls.

[ 97 ] Unlike the previous trophies, a new Vince Lombardi Trophy is issued to each year's champion, who maintains permanent control of it. Lombardi Trophies are made by Tiffany & Co.

out of sterling silver and are worth anywhere from US$25,000 to US$300,000.

[ 98 ] Additionally, each player on the winning team as well as coaches and personnel are awarded Super Bowl rings to commemorate their victory. The winning team chooses the company that makes the rings; each ring design varies, with the NFL mandating certain ring specifications (which have a degree of room for deviation), in addition to requiring the Super Bowl logo be on at least one side of the ring.

[ 99 ] The losing team are also awarded rings, which must be no more than half as valuable as the winners' rings, but those are almost never worn.

[ 100 ] The conference champions receive trophies for their achievement. The champions of the NFC receive the George Halas Trophy , [ 101 ] named after Chicago Bears founder George Halas , who is also considered one of the co-founders of the NFL. The AFC champions receive the Lamar Hunt Trophy , [ 102 ] named after Lamar Hunt , the founder of the Kansas City Chiefs and the principal founder of the American Football League. Players on the winning team also receive a conference championship ring.

[ 103 ] [ 104 ] Player and coach awards See also: Category:NFL trophies and awards The NFL recognizes a number of awards for its players and coaches at its annual NFL Honors presentation. The most prestigious award is the AP Most Valuable Player (MVP) award.

[ 105 ] Other major awards include the AP Offensive Player of the Year , AP Defensive Player of the Year , AP Comeback Player of the Year , and the AP Offensive and Defensive Rookie of the Year awards.

[ 106 ] Another prestigious award is the Walter Payton Man of the Year award , which recognizes a player's off-field work in addition to his on-field performance.

[ 107 ] The NFL Coach of the Year award is the highest coaching award.

[ 108 ] The NFL also gives out weekly awards such as the FedEx Air & Ground NFL Players of the Week [ 109 ] and the Pepsi MAX NFL Rookie of the Week awards.

[ 110 ] Media coverage Main article: NFL on American television See also: List of current NFL broadcasters In the United States, the National Football League is televised on eight networks across seven media partners: ESPN / ABC , CBS , Fox , NBC , Prime Video , Netflix , and NFL Network . The league offers its media rights in packages of games to prospective media partners. The packages can vary depending on conference, broadcast time slot, or both. CBS televises afternoon games from the AFC package, and Fox carries afternoon games from the NFC package. These afternoon games are not carried on all affiliates, as multiple games are being played at once; each network affiliate is assigned one game per time slot, according to a complicated set of rules.

[ 111 ] Since 2011, the league has reserved the right to give Sunday games that, under the contract, would normally air on one network to the other network (known as "flexible scheduling").

[ 112 ] The only way to legally watch a regionally televised game not being carried on the local network affiliates is to purchase NFL Sunday Ticket, the league's out-of-market sports package , which is available through YouTube TV starting with the 2023 season.

[ 113 ] The league also provides NFL RedZone , an omnibus telecast that cuts to the most relevant plays in each game, live as they happen.

In addition to the regional games, the league also has packages of telecasts, mostly in prime time, that are carried nationwide. NBC broadcasts the primetime Sunday Night Football package, which includes the Thursday NFL Kickoff game that starts the regular season and a primetime Thanksgiving Day game . ESPN is the main broadcaster of the Monday Night Football package with ABC airing select games either exclusively or as a simulcast with ESPN.

Amazon , through their Prime Video streaming service, is the exclusive carrier of the Thursday Night Football package. NFL Network, a U.S. pay cable channel owned by the league itself, broadcasts select games under the NFL Network Exclusive Game Series banner. Games under this banner usually consist of NFL International Series games and select Saturday games. In 2023, the NFL occupied the top three rates for a 30-second advertisement: $882,079 for Sunday Night Football , $562,524 for Monday Night Football , and $440,523 for Thursday Night Football .

[ 114 ] The league, in recent years, has expanded their televised broadcasts to over-the-top streaming services. Since 2022, Amazon holds the exclusive rights to broadcast the Thursday Night Football package.

[ 115 ] Prior to then, Amazon streamed games from the same package as part of a tri-cast model that saw games aired on broadcast television (initially through CBS and NBC, then later with Fox), cable television (through NFL Network), and digital streaming (through Prime Video).

[ 116 ] [ 117 ] [ 118 ] Amazon has also streamed games for free on Twitch since 2018.

[ 118 ] CBS streams its AFC package games on Paramount+ as a simulcast with its CBS broadcasts.

[ 119 ] [ 120 ] NBC streams Sunday Night Football and select exclusive games on Peacock .

[ 119 ] [ 121 ] [ 122 ] ESPN streams its games on ESPN+ in simulcast with the broadcasts on ESPN or ABC.

[ 119 ] [ 123 ] ESPN also holds exclusive rights to stream one Sunday morning international game on ESPN+.

[ 123 ] Beginning in 2024, Netflix holds the global streaming rights for at least one Christmas Day game every season as part of a three-year deal.

[ 124 ] The Super Bowl television rights are rotated on a four-year basis between CBS, Fox, NBC, and ESPN/ABC. The NFL's most recent contract negotiation for the media rights deal was announced on March 18, 2021, to take effect beginning in the 2023 season. The deal renewed previous rights agreements made by the NFL and each of its network partners to air their respective game packages, while awarding Amazon the Thursday Night Football package. ESPN/ABC is set to return to the Super Bowl broadcast rotation and will broadcast the Super Bowl on U.S. television in 2027, 21 years after airing its last Super Bowl, Super Bowl XL . Digital and streaming distribution was expanded to allow CBS, NBC, and ESPN/ABC to stream games on their respective over-the-top streaming services. For each of the packages the respective network partners currently hold, ESPN/ABC is paying US$2.7 billion a year; CBS, Fox, and NBC are each paying more than US$2 billion a year; and Amazon is paying US$1 billion a year. The current deal runs through the 2033 season.

[ 119 ] [ 125 ] [ 126 ] The league also has deals with Spanish-language broadcasters NBC Universo , Fox Deportes , and ESPN Deportes , which air Spanish language dubs of their respective English-language sister networks' games.

[ 127 ] [ 128 ] The league's contracts do not cover preseason games, which individual teams are free to sell to local stations directly; a minority of preseason games are distributed among the league's national television partners.

Through the 2014 season, the NFL had a blackout policy in which games were 'blacked out' on local television in the home team's area if the home stadium was not sold out. Clubs could elect to set this requirement at only 85%, but they would have to give more ticket revenue to the visiting team; teams could also request a specific exemption from the NFL for the game. The vast majority of NFL games were not blacked out; only 6% of games were blacked out during the 2011 season , [ 129 ] and only two games were blacked out in 2013 and none in 2014 .

[ 130 ] The NFL announced in March 2015 that it would suspend its blackout policy for at least the 2015 season .

[ 130 ] According to Nielsen , the NFL regular season since 2012 was watched by at least 200 million individuals, accounting for 80% of all television households in the United States and 69% of all potential viewers in the United States. NFL regular season games accounted for 31 out of the top 32 most-watched programs in the fall season and an NFL game ranked as the most-watched television show in all 17 weeks of the regular season. At the local level, NFL games were the highest-ranked shows in NFL markets 92% of the time.

[ 131 ] Super Bowls account for the 22 most-watched programs (based on total audience) in US history, including a record 167 million people that watched Super Bowl XLVIII , the conclusion to the 2013 season.

[ 132 ] In addition to radio networks run by each NFL team, select NFL games are broadcast nationally by Westwood One (known as Dial Global for the 2012 season). These games are broadcast on over 500 networks, giving all NFL markets access to each primetime game. The NFL's deal with Westwood One was extended in 2012 and continued through 2017.

[ 133 ] Other NFL games are nationally distributed by Compass Media Networks and Sports USA Radio Network under contracts with individual teams.

Some broadcasting innovations have either been introduced or popularized during NFL telecasts. Among them, the Skycam camera system was used for the first time in a live telecast, at a 1984 preseason NFL game in San Diego between the Chargers and 49ers , and televised by CBS.

[ 134 ] Commentator John Madden famously used a telestrator during games between the early 1980s to the mid-2000s, boosting the device's popularity.

[ 135 ] The NFL has licensing agreements with X , Reddit and Meta Platforms to serve as authorized social media outlets for the league and its teams. The New England Patriots' attempt to launch a Bluesky account was met with a cease and desist order from the NFL headquarters.

[ 136 ] In 2025, the NFL began to take equity stakes in some of its media partners as part of business transactions. In August 2025, the NFL gained an equity stake in CBS parent company Paramount Skydance Corporation following the acquisition of Paramount Global by Skydance Media , by virtue of its existing investments and content partnerships with Skydance. The same month, the NFL announced that it would sell NFL Network, the NFL RedZone channel, and its fantasy football services to ESPN Inc.

for an undisclosed amount, pending regulatory approval; as part of the agreement, the NFL will take a 10% stake in ESPN.

[ 137 ] [ 138 ] [ 139 ] [ 140 ] Draft Main article: NFL draft Tennessee Titans quarterback Cam Ward , the first overall pick of the 2025 NFL draft Each April (excluding 2014 when it took place in May), the NFL holds a draft of college players. The draft consists of seven rounds, with each of the 32 clubs getting one pick in each round.

[ 141 ] The draft order for non-playoff teams is determined by regular-season record; among playoff teams, teams are first ranked by the furthest round of the playoffs they reached, and then are ranked by regular-season record. For example, any team that reached the divisional round will be given a higher pick than any team that reached the conference championships, but will be given a lower pick than any team that did not make the divisional round. The Super Bowl champion always drafts last, and the losing team from the Super Bowl always drafts next-to-last.

[ 142 ] All potential draftees must be at least three years removed from high school to be eligible for the draft.

[ 143 ] Underclassmen that have met that criterion to be eligible for the draft must write an application to the NFL by January 15 renouncing their remaining college eligibility.

[ 144 ] Clubs can trade away picks for future draft picks, but cannot trade the rights to players they have selected in previous drafts.

[ 145 ] Aside from the seven picks each club gets, compensatory draft picks are given to teams that have lost more compensatory free agents than they have gained. These are spread out from rounds 3 to 7, and a total of 32 are given.

[ 146 ] Clubs are required to make their selection within a certain period, the exact time depending on which round the pick is made in. If they fail to do so on time, the clubs behind them can begin to select their players in order, but they do not lose the pick outright. This happened in the 2003 draft , when the Minnesota Vikings failed to make their selection on time. The Jacksonville Jaguars and Carolina Panthers were able to make their picks before the Vikings were able to use theirs.

[ 147 ] Selected players are only allowed to negotiate contracts with the team that picked them, but if they choose not to sign they become eligible for the next year's draft.

[ 148 ] Under the current collective bargaining contract, all contracts to drafted players must be four-year deals with a club option for a fifth. Contracts themselves are limited to a certain amount of money, depending on the exact draft pick the player was selected with.

[ 149 ] Players who were draft eligible but not picked in the draft are free to sign with any club.

[ 141 ] The NFL operates several other drafts in addition to the NFL draft. The league holds a supplemental draft annually. Clubs submit emails to the league stating the player they wish to select and the round they will do so, and the team with the highest bid wins the rights to that player. The exact order is determined by a lottery held before the draft, and a successful bid for a player will result in the team forfeiting the rights to its pick in the equivalent round of the next NFL draft.

[ 150 ] Players are only eligible for the supplemental draft after being granted a petition for special eligibility.

[ 151 ] The league holds expansion drafts , the most recent happening in 2002 when the Houston Texans began to play as an expansion team .

[ 152 ] Other drafts held by the league include an allocation draft in 1950 to allocate players from several teams that played in the dissolved All-America Football Conference [ 153 ] and a supplemental draft in 1984 to give NFL teams the rights to players who had been eligible for the main draft but had not been drafted because they had signed contracts with the United States Football League or Canadian Football League .

[ 154 ] Like the other major sports leagues in the United States , the NFL maintains protocol for a disaster draft . In the event of a 'near disaster' (less than 15 players killed or disabled) that caused the club to lose a quarterback, they could draft one from a team with at least three quarterbacks. In the event of a 'disaster' (15 or more players killed or disabled) that results in a club's season being canceled, a restocking draft would be held. Neither of these protocols has ever had to be implemented.

[ 155 ] Free agency Free agents in the National Football League are divided into restricted free agents , who have three accrued seasons and whose current contract has expired, and unrestricted free agents , who have four or more accrued seasons and whose contract has expired. An accrued season is defined as "six or more regular-season games on a club's active/inactive, reserved/injured or reserve/physically unable to perform lists".

[ 156 ] Restricted free agents are allowed to negotiate with other clubs besides their former club, but the former club has the right to match any offer. If they choose not to, they are compensated with draft picks. Unrestricted free agents are free to sign with any club, and no compensation is owed if they sign with a different club.

[ 156 ] Clubs are given one franchise tag to offer to any unrestricted free agent. The franchise tag is a one-year deal that pays the player 120% of his previous contract or no less than the average of the five highest-paid players at his position, whichever is greater. There are two types of franchise tags: exclusive tags, which do not allow the player to negotiate with other clubs, and non-exclusive tags, which allow the player to negotiate with other clubs but gives his former club the right to match any offer and two first-round draft picks if they decline to match it.

[ 157 ] Clubs also have the option to use a transition tag , which is similar to the non-exclusive franchise tag but offers no compensation if the former club refuses to match the offer.

[ 158 ] Due to that stipulation, the transition tag is rarely used, [ 159 ] even with the removal of the "poison pill" strategy (offering a contract with stipulations that the former club would be unable to match) that essentially ended the usage of the tag league-wide.

[ 160 ] Each club is subject to a salary cap , which is set at US$188.2 million for the 2019 season, [ 161 ] US$11 million more than that of 2018.

[ 161 ] Members of clubs' practice squads , despite being paid by and working for their respective clubs, are also simultaneously a kind of free agent and are able to sign to any other club's active roster (provided their new club is not their previous club's next opponent within a set number of days) without compensation to their previous club; practice squad players cannot be signed to other clubs' practice squads, however, unless released by their original club first.

[ 162 ] See also American football in the United States List of NFL champions (1920–1969) List of Super Bowl champions (1966–present) National Football League (1902) National Football League All-Decade Teams National Football League Cheerleading National Football League controversies National Football League franchise moves and mergers National Football League records National Football League 75th Anniversary All-Time Team National Football League 100th Anniversary All-Time Team NFL Europe NFL Films Timeline of the National Football League List of current NFL franchise owners List of Pro Football Hall of Fame inductees List of NFL players with chronic traumatic encephalopathy (CTE) International Player Pathway (IPP) References Explanatory notes ^ All teams are based in the United States, but several preseason and regular season games have been held internationally.

^ a b The New York Jets and New York Giants share MetLife Stadium .

[ 57 ] ^ a b Due to an agreement with the city of Cleveland as part of the Cleveland Browns relocation controversy , the Browns name, colors, and team history/records were left in Cleveland, while the team, personnel, and staff were allowed to move to Baltimore what was considered a new franchise.

[ 58 ] As such, the Ravens are considered to have begun play in 1996 while the current Cleveland Browns are considered to have been founded in 1946, joined the NFL in 1950 , became inactive from 1996 to 1998, and resumed play in 1999.

[ 56 ] [ 59 ] ^ The Jacksonville Jaguars began playing one home game each season at Wembley Stadium in London, England in 2013, and will continue to do so through 2020. In 2020, the Jaguars were originally scheduled to play two home games at Wembley Stadium, but the plans were cancelled due to the COVID-19 pandemic .

[ 60 ] [ 61 ] [ 62 ] ^ a b The Los Angeles Chargers and Los Angeles Rams share SoFi Stadium .

[ 63 ] Citations ^ Battista, Judy (September 16, 2020).

"Remembering the NFL's humble origins on its 100th birthday" .

NFL.com . NFL Enterprises . Retrieved March 4, 2022 .

^ "NFL founded in Canton" .

ProFootballHOF.com . Pro Football Hall of Fame. January 1, 2005 . Retrieved March 4, 2022 .

^ "League Address" .

Support.NFL.com . NFL Enterprises, LLC. June 17, 2023. Archived from the original on May 2, 2023 . Retrieved May 6, 2024 .

^ Gordon, Grant (March 18, 2021).

"NFL announces new broadcast deals running through 2033 season" .

NFL.com . NFL Enterprises . Retrieved March 7, 2022 .

^ Jozsa, Frank P. (2004).

Sports Capitalism: The Foreign Business of American Professional Leagues .

Ashgate Publishing . p. 270.

ISBN 978-0-7546-4185-8 .

Since 1922, [the NFL] has been the top professional sports league in the world with respect to American football ^ Gulizia, Anthony; Willis, Jeremy (August 14, 2019).

"How the NFL took over America in 100 years" .

ESPN.com . Retrieved January 25, 2020 .

^ Garcia, Ahiza (April 29, 2018).

"Premier League revenues hit record high $6.4 billion" .

CNNMoney . Retrieved May 28, 2020 .

^ Fischer, Ben (April 10, 2025).

"Sources: NFL revenue passes $23B in latest FY" .

Sports Business Journal .

^ Badenhausen, Kurt (July 22, 2019).

"The World's 50 Most Valuable Sports Teams 2019" .

Forbes . Retrieved January 17, 2020 .

^ "NFL is world's best attended pro sports league" .

ABS-CBN News . Agence France-Presse. January 6, 2013.

Archived from the original on October 6, 2013 . Retrieved January 30, 2013 .

^ "Pro Football is Still America's Favorite Sport" .

Harris Interactive . January 26, 2016. Archived from the original on January 29, 2016 . Retrieved June 11, 2016 .

^ Harris, Nick (January 31, 2010).

"Elite clubs on Uefa gravy train as Super Bowl knocked off perch" .

The Independent . London.

Archived from the original on November 19, 2012 . Retrieved November 28, 2012 .

^ "Super Bowl XLV Most Viewed Telecast in U.S. Broadcast History" .

Nielsen Company . February 7, 2011. Archived from the original on February 8, 2011 . Retrieved February 17, 2013 .

^ a b "NFL founded in Canton – Pro Football Hall of Fame Official Site" .

profootballhof.com .

Archived from the original on March 6, 2016 . Retrieved February 28, 2016 .

^ a b "Happy Birthday NFL?" (PDF) .

The Coffin Corner .

2 (8).

Professional Football Researchers Association . 1980. Archived from the original (PDF) on February 6, 2009 . Retrieved February 7, 2013 .

^ "Timeline Detail | Pro Football Hall of Fame Official Site" .

Archived from the original on September 15, 2018 . Retrieved September 14, 2018 .

^ Battista, Judy (September 16, 2020).

"Remembering the NFL's humble origins on its 100th birthday" .

NFL.com . Retrieved September 17, 2020 .

^ "National Football League (NFL)" .

Encyclopædia Britannica .

Archived from the original on June 20, 2013 . Retrieved June 21, 2013 .

^ "Past Standings" (PDF) .

National Football League . p. 27.

Archived (PDF) from the original on September 4, 2012 . Retrieved February 21, 2019 .

^ "St. Paul Ideals at Rock Island Independents – September 26th, 1920 – Pro-Football-Reference.com" .

Pro-Football-Reference.com .

Archived from the original on August 6, 2018 . Retrieved March 31, 2018 .

^ "1920 APFA Standings & Team Stats – Pro-Football-Reference.com" .

Pro-Football-Reference.com .

Archived from the original on July 30, 2018 . Retrieved March 31, 2018 .

^ "1920 Rock Island Independents Schedule & Game Results – Pro-Football-Reference.com" .

Pro-Football-Reference.com .

Archived from the original on August 2, 2017 . Retrieved March 31, 2018 .

^ Snyder, Gib (January 6, 2012).

"Buffalo: A city cursed with bad sports luck" .

The Observer .

Ogden Newspapers . Archived from the original on July 29, 2013 . Retrieved January 16, 2013 .

^ "Sept. 17, 1920 – The Founding of the NFL" .

Pro Football Hall of Fame .

Archived from the original on July 9, 2012 . Retrieved July 9, 2012 .

^ "1922 American Professional Football Association changes name to National Football League" .

Pro Football Hall of Fame .

Archived from the original on August 6, 2018 . Retrieved June 29, 2017 .

^ "Past Standings" (PDF) . National Football League. p. 26.

Archived (PDF) from the original on September 4, 2012 . Retrieved February 21, 2019 .

^ Carroll, Bob.

"The 60-Yard Circus" (PDF) .

Professional Football Researchers Association . Archived from the original (PDF) on September 29, 2010 . Retrieved February 9, 2013 .

^ Finkelman, Paul, ed. (February 2, 2009).

Encyclopedia of African American History, 1896 to the Present: From the Age of Segregation to the Twenty-first Century . Vol. 1.

Oxford University Press . p. 235.

ISBN 978-0-19-516779-5 .

Archived from the original on September 30, 2013 . Retrieved June 21, 2013 .

^ Cross, B. Duane (January 22, 2001).

"Off-the-field competition yields game-changing merger" .

CNNSI . Archived from the original on February 15, 2001 . Retrieved February 15, 2013 .

^ a b "History: 1961–1970" .

NFL.com . NFL Enterprises.

Archived from the original on December 22, 2014 . Retrieved February 14, 2013 .

^ Richter, Felix (February 11, 2022).

"Americans Love the NFL, But Change Is Looming" .

Statista.com . Retrieved August 9, 2022 .

^ a b Bartlett, Roger; Gratton, Chris; Rolf, Christer, eds. (October 26, 2009).

Encyclopedia of International Sports Studies .

Routledge . pp.

932– 933.

ISBN 978-0-415-56147-1 .

Archived from the original on September 30, 2013 . Retrieved June 21, 2013 .

^ Evans, Thayer (February 2, 2008).

"The Legacy of Tagliabue?" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on December 4, 2013 . Retrieved June 27, 2013 .

^ Lapchick, Richard (August 17, 2006).

"Report Card: Tagliabue's legacy includes new model for racial hiring" .

ESPN.com .

Archived from the original on September 25, 2013 . Retrieved June 27, 2013 .

^ Taylor, Jean-Jacques (December 13, 2012).

"Roger Goodell's authority takes a hit" .

ESPN.com .

Archived from the original on December 16, 2012 . Retrieved December 13, 2012 .

^ Brady, Erik; Mihoces, Gary (September 16, 2013).

"Violent hits keep coming, so is NFL changing culture?" .

USA Today .

Archived from the original on September 21, 2013 . Retrieved September 22, 2013 .

^ Dale, Maryclaire (October 20, 2021).

"NFL agrees to end race-based brain testing in $1 billion settlement" .

The Washington Times . Retrieved November 15, 2021 .

^ "NFL, Players Agree to End 'Race-Norming' in $1 Billion Settlement" .

Claims Journal . Associated Press. October 22, 2021 . Retrieved November 15, 2021 .

^ a b Ellis, Athena Jones, Nicquel Terry (May 21, 2024).

"As DEI programs face backlash, NFL aims to help minority businesses get contracts" .

CNN . Retrieved May 24, 2024 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ "NFL announces league-wide expansion of procurement initiative with NFL Source" .

NFL.com . May 21, 2024 . Retrieved December 1, 2024 .

^ Schofield, Mark (June 6, 2024).

"NFL's billion-dollar antitrust case with 'Sunday Ticket,' explained" .

SB Nation .

Archived from the original on June 6, 2024 . Retrieved June 7, 2024 .

^ Reedy, Joe (June 6, 2024).

"Class-action lawsuit against NFL by 'Sunday Ticket' subscribers gets underway" .

Associated Press .

Pittsburgh Post-Gazette .

Archived from the original on June 7, 2024 . Retrieved June 7, 2024 .

^ "Jury rules NFL violated antitrust laws in 'Sunday Ticket' case" .

ESPN.com . June 27, 2024.

^ "NFL Regular Season Games Played per Season" .

Pro Football Hall of Fame .

Archived from the original on May 12, 2013 . Retrieved February 13, 2013 .

^ "NFL season to feature 17 regular-season games per team" .

NFL.com . NFL Enterprises. March 30, 2021 . Retrieved June 28, 2021 .

^ "Lady Luck and the Lombardi legend" . Cold Hard Football Facts. Football Nation. October 12, 2005. Archived from the original on May 13, 2013 . Retrieved February 14, 2013 .

^ King, Steve (January 7, 2013).

"This Day in Browns History – Jan. 7" .

ClevelandBrowns.com . Cleveland Browns. Archived from the original on January 11, 2013 . Retrieved December 31, 2018 .

^ "History of the Wild Card" .

Pro Football Hall of Fame .

Archived from the original on January 3, 2013 . Retrieved February 14, 2013 .

^ Patra, Kevin (March 31, 2020).

"Owners approve expanding postseason to 14 teams" .

NFL.com . Retrieved October 17, 2024 .

^ Battista, Judy (March 15, 2020).

"NFL players approve CBA: Impact on league in 2020 and beyond" .

NFL.com . Archived from the original on April 16, 2020 . Retrieved March 15, 2020 .

^ Volin, Ben (March 15, 2020).

"The NFL has a new CBA. Here are its biggest changes" .

BostonGlobe.com . Retrieved March 15, 2020 .

^ "Article IV–Territorial Rights" (PDF) .

Constitution and By-Laws of the National Football League (PDF) . NFL Enterprises. February 1, 1970. Archived from the original (PDF) on September 9, 2015 . Retrieved December 31, 2018 .

^ a b Badenhausen, Kurt (August 13, 2025).

"NFL Team Values 2025: Cowboys Rule as 3 Clubs Top $10 Billion" .

Sportico . Retrieved August 13, 2025 .

^ a b "Teams" .

Pro Football Hall of Fame .

Archived from the original on January 10, 2013 . Retrieved February 1, 2013 .

^ Breer, Albert (July 6, 2012).

"NFL stadiums go from boom to swoon in span of a decade" .

NFL.com . NFL Enterprises.

Archived from the original on January 31, 2013 . Retrieved February 1, 2013 .

^ a b "History of NFL franchises, 1920–present" .

Pro Football Hall of Fame .

Archived from the original on January 2, 2013 . Retrieved February 1, 2013 .

^ Borden, Sam; Shipigel, Ben (December 22, 2011).

"Preparations Different for a Home-and-Home Contest" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on May 12, 2013 . Retrieved February 2, 2013 .

^ Morgan, Jan (February 9, 1996).

"Deal clears NFL path to Baltimore" .

The Baltimore Sun .

Archived from the original on September 1, 2012 . Retrieved February 1, 2013 .

^ Grossi, Tony (September 12, 1999).

"Rival Pittsburgh gives Cleveland a brutal welcome in 43–0 drubbing" .

The Plain Dealer . Archived from the original on May 13, 2013 . Retrieved February 1, 2013 .

^ Pengelly, Martin (August 21, 2012).

"Jacksonville Jaguars to play four NFL 'home' games at Wembley" .

The Guardian . London.

Archived from the original on January 7, 2014 . Retrieved February 1, 2013 .

^ "NFL, Jaguars extend agreement to play at Wembley through 2020" .

NFL.com (Press release). NFL Enterprises. October 22, 2015.

Archived from the original on November 24, 2016 . Retrieved November 24, 2016 .

^ "Jacksonville Jaguars to host regular-season game in the United Kingdom in each of next four years" .

Jaguars.com . Jacksonville Jaguars. August 21, 2012. Archived from the original on September 19, 2015 . Retrieved December 31, 2018 .

^ Wharton, David (January 22, 2020).

"SoFi Stadium rises to a new level as Inglewood prepares for its impact" .

Los Angeles Times . Retrieved January 24, 2020 .

^ Wilson, Doug (August 11, 2008).

"N.F.L. Executives Hope to Keep Salaries Secret" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on February 26, 2013 . Retrieved February 2, 2013 .

^ Schrotenboer, Brent (May 30, 2013).

"To tax or not? The NFL's relationship with the IRS" .

USA Today .

Archived from the original on May 30, 2013 . Retrieved January 30, 2013 .

^ 26 U.S.C. § 501(c)(6) ^ "Community: Shareholders" . Green Bay Packers.

Archived from the original on July 23, 2018 . Retrieved December 31, 2018 .

Green Bay Packers Inc., has been a publicly owned, nonprofit corporation since Aug. 18, 1923, when original articles of incorporation were filed with Wisconsin's Secretary of State.

^ "NFL targeted by Oklahoma senator for 'not-for-profit' tax status" .

Sports Illustrated . March 5, 2012. Archived from the original on November 27, 2012 . Retrieved February 2, 2013 .

^ Myers, Gary (April 18, 2015).

"NFL no longer non-profit after giving up tax-exempt status" .

New York Daily News .

Archived from the original on June 18, 2015 . Retrieved June 25, 2015 .

^ a b c d e f "Constitution and Bylaws of the National Football League" (PDF) .

OnLabor . 2006. pp.

26– 35 . Retrieved August 3, 2025 .

^ Maske, Mark (August 9, 2006).

"Owners Pick Goodell as NFL Commissioner" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on November 12, 2012 . Retrieved February 2, 2013 .

^ a b c d Hendricks, Mike; Vockrodt, Steve (February 6, 2019).

"Kansas City Chiefs' tax returns provide rare look inside the business of pro football" .

The Kansas City Star .

Archived from the original on February 12, 2019 . Retrieved February 10, 2019 .

^ Murphy, Kevin M.; Topel, Robert H.

The Economics of NFL Team Ownership (PDF) (Report). Chicago Partners . Retrieved May 15, 2025 .

^ "Economic Update: Women's Movement Economics" .

Archived from the original on February 22, 2017 . Retrieved February 22, 2017 .

^ "NFL/Hall of Fame Game" .

Pro Football Hall of Fame .

Archived from the original on January 3, 2013 . Retrieved February 4, 2013 .

^ NFL Bylaws, p. 114.

^ Bowen, Matt (August 29, 2012).

"Exhibition finale biggest game of year for players on bubble" .

The Chicago Tribune .

Archived from the original on February 6, 2013 . Retrieved February 4, 2013 .

^ a b Maske, Mark (August 29, 2013).

"NFL preseason is long and often meaningless but a solution isn't apparent to league, players" .

The Washington Post . Archived from the original on September 1, 2013 . Retrieved August 28, 2013 .

^ a b Smith, Michael David Smith (August 14, 2013).

"Jim Irsay to fans: You don't really pay full price for preseason tickets" .

Pro Football Talk .

NBC Sports .

Archived from the original on September 17, 2013 . Retrieved September 18, 2013 .

^ "2012 Opponents Determined" (PDF) . NFL. January 2, 2012.

Archived (PDF) from the original on September 4, 2012 . Retrieved January 23, 2012 .

^ Molski, Max (May 15, 2024).

"Everything to know about the NFL schedule and how it works" .

NBC Los Angeles . Retrieved October 17, 2024 .

^ Issacson, Melissa (December 25, 2005).

"Ghost of Christmas past: Sports-free TV" .

The Chicago Tribune .

Archived from the original on May 13, 2013 . Retrieved February 6, 2013 .

^ a b "2012 NFL Schedule Announced" . NFL Communications. April 17, 2012. Archived from the original on November 1, 2012 . Retrieved February 4, 2013 .

^ Sensei, Andrew.

"Sports Law" .

Tulane University Law School . Archived from the original on September 25, 2013 . Retrieved February 23, 2019 .

^ "Blizzard forces postponement of Vikes-Eagles game to Tuesday" .

NFL.com . NFL Enterprises. December 26, 2010.

Archived from the original on January 29, 2013 . Retrieved February 4, 2013 .

^ "NFL season opener to be held Wednesday, Sept. 5" .

NFL.com . NFL Enterprises. February 28, 2012.

Archived from the original on October 17, 2012 . Retrieved February 4, 2013 .

^ "Slumping Ravens host last-place Cowboys in rare Tuesday game" .

San Diego Union-Tribune . Associated Press. December 7, 2020 . Retrieved October 15, 2024 .

^ "Realignment for 2002" .

NFL.com . NFL Enterprises.

Archived from the original on December 26, 2016 . Retrieved February 4, 2013 .

^ Florio, Mike (November 8, 2011).

"Unusual bye format traces to lockout" .

Pro Football Talk .

NBC Sports .

Archived from the original on January 28, 2013 . Retrieved February 4, 2013 .

^ Ourand, John (April 26, 2010).

"NFL schedule navigated World Series, other conflicts" .

Sports Business Daily . Archived from the original on September 26, 2012 . Retrieved February 4, 2013 .

^ "Tie-breaking procedures" .

NFL.com . NFL Enterprises.

Archived from the original on January 31, 2013 . Retrieved February 4, 2013 .

^ "Pro Bowl set for Jan. 27 in Honolulu, week before Super Bowl" .

NFL.com . NFL Enterprises. May 30, 2012.

Archived from the original on July 2, 2012 . Retrieved February 4, 2013 .

^ "NFC reels in five picks to throttle AFC in Pro Bowl" .

ESPN.com . ESPN Internet Ventures. January 30, 2011. Archived from the original on January 5, 2016 . Retrieved January 16, 2017 .

^ Price, Mark J. (April 25, 2011).

"Local history: Searching for lost trophy" .

Akron Beacon Journal .

Archived from the original on July 2, 2011 . Retrieved February 5, 2013 .

^ Terl, Matt (July 28, 2008).

"Inside Redskins Park: The Other Championship Trophy" . Official Redskins Blog.

Archived from the original on November 18, 2011 . Retrieved February 5, 2013 .

^ Christi, Cliff (January 28, 2017).

"The mystery of the Ed Thorp Memorial Trophy" . Green Bay Packers. Archived from the original on January 28, 2017 . Retrieved December 31, 2018 .

^ Gardner, Steve (February 11, 2024).

"Lombardi Trophy: History, facts about Super Bowl champion prize" .

USA TODAY . Retrieved October 15, 2024 .

^ Horovitz, Bruce (January 30, 2002).

"Football's super prize reaches icon status" .

USA Today .

Archived from the original on February 19, 2015 . Retrieved February 5, 2013 .

^ "45 Years of Super Bowl Rings" .

ESPN.com .

Archived from the original on February 6, 2013 . Retrieved February 5, 2013 .

^ Neel, Eric.

"Super Bowl from A to Z" .

ESPN.com .

Archived from the original on January 13, 2014 . Retrieved June 8, 2013 .

^ Jensen, Sean.

"NFC's Halas trophy has new look" .

Chicago Sun-Times .

Archived from the original on January 22, 2011 . Retrieved February 5, 2013 .

^ Tafur, Vic (January 26, 2013).

"O.J. Brigance inspires Ravens" .

San Francisco Chronicle .

Archived from the original on January 31, 2013 . Retrieved February 5, 2013 .

^ Pollak, Austin (June 14, 2012).

"Patriots Receive AFC Championship Rings From Owner Robert Kraft" .

New England Sports Network .

Archived from the original on May 12, 2013 . Retrieved February 5, 2013 .

^ "Seahawks receive NFC championship rings" .

ESPN.com . June 7, 2006.

Archived from the original on September 25, 2013 . Retrieved February 5, 2013 .

^ Klis, Mike (February 2, 2013).

"MVP in NFL: Peyton Manning or Adrian Peterson, it's a two-horse race" .

The Denver Post .

Archived from the original on February 5, 2013 . Retrieved February 16, 2013 .

^ "NFL Honors" .

NFL.com . NFL Enterprises.

Archived from the original on February 17, 2013 . Retrieved February 16, 2013 .

^ Watkins, Calvin (February 2, 2013).

"Jason Witten wins Walter Payton NFL Man of the Year award" .

ESPN.com . ESPN Internet Ventures.

Archived from the original on February 8, 2013 . Retrieved February 16, 2013 .

^ Brinson, Will (February 2, 2013).

"Bruce Arians wins 2012 Coach of the Year Award" .

CBS Sports .

Archived from the original on September 27, 2013 . Retrieved February 16, 2013 .

^ "Peyton Manning and Adrian Peterson named 2012 FedEx Air & Ground NFL Players of the Year at '2nd Annual NFL Honors' " .

NFL.com . NFL Enterprises.

Archived from the original on February 16, 2013 . Retrieved February 17, 2013 .

^ "Seattle Seahawks QB Russell Wilson named 2012 Pepsi MAX NFL Rookie of the Year" .

NFL.com . NFL Enterprises.

Archived from the original on February 17, 2013 . Retrieved February 17, 2013 .

^ "The tradition continues: NFL to remain on broadcast TV" .

NFL.com . NFL Enterprises. December 14, 2011.

Archived from the original on July 15, 2015 . Retrieved February 5, 2013 .

^ Florio, Mike (December 1, 2011).

"Flexible schedule flexes Broncos-Vikings from CBS to FOX" .

Pro Football Talk .

NBC Sports .

Archived from the original on January 26, 2013 . Retrieved February 5, 2013 .

^ "NFL, Google announce agreement to distribute NFL Sunday Ticket on YouTube TV, Primetime Channels" .

NFL.com . December 22, 2022 . Retrieved September 26, 2023 .

^ Parker Herren (October 31, 2023).

"What Primetime TV Ads Cost In Fall 2023" .

AdAge .

^ "NFL Announces Amazon Prime Video as Home of Thursday Night Football Beginning in 2022" .

NFL Football Operations . NFL. May 3, 2021. Archived from the original on December 29, 2023 . Retrieved December 29, 2023 .

^ "NATIONAL FOOTBALL LEAGUE AND AMAZON PRIME ANNOUNCE STREAMING PARTNERSHIP FOR THURSDAY NIGHT FOOTBALL" .

NFL Communications . NFL. April 9, 2017.

^ Nick Wingfield (April 4, 2017).

"Amazon Will Stream N.F.L.'s Thursday Night Games" .

The New York Times .

^ a b Spangler, Todd (April 26, 2018).

"NFL Renews Amazon Streaming Deal for 'Thursday Night Football' for 2018–19 Seasons" .

Variety . Retrieved April 27, 2018 .

^ a b c d "NFL completes long-term media distribution agreements through 2033 season" .

NFL . NFL Media. March 18, 2021.

^ Kerschbaumer, Ken (March 18, 2021).

"NFL Rights Deals: ViacomCBS Details New NFL Package; Paramount+ Streaming Rights Kick in Next Season" .

Sports Video Group .

Archived from the original on June 4, 2021 . Retrieved March 19, 2021 .

^ "NBCUniversal and NFL Reach 11-Year Extension & Expansion for Sunday Night Football, Primetime TV'S #1 Show" .

NBC Sports Pressbox . March 18, 2021.

Archived from the original on February 13, 2023 . Retrieved February 13, 2023 .

^ Toonkel, Joe Flint and Jessica (May 15, 2023).

"Peacock to Carry One NFL Playoff Game Exclusively Next Season" .

The Wall Street Journal .

Archived from the original on May 30, 2023 . Retrieved May 15, 2023 .

^ a b Volner, Derek (March 18, 2021).

"The Walt Disney Company, ESPN and National Football League Reach Landmark Long-Term Agreement" .

ESPN Press Room .

^ Goldblatt, Henry (September 5, 2024).

"Netflix Will Be the Home to Live NFL Games This Christmas Day" .

Netflix . Retrieved October 17, 2024 .

^ Strauss, Ben (March 18, 2021).

"What the NFL's new TV deal means for the league, fans and networks" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved March 19, 2021 .

^ Sherman, Alex; Young, Jabari (March 18, 2021).

"NFL finalizes new 11-year media rights deal, Amazon gets exclusive Thursday Night rights" .

CNBC .com . Retrieved March 19, 2021 .

^ Molloy, Tim (August 30, 2011).

"Telemundo Extends Deal With NFL Through 2013" .

Reuters .

Archived from the original on June 20, 2013 . Retrieved February 6, 2013 .

^ Kirkendall, Josh (September 8, 2011).

"NFL And ESPN Reach Major Media Rights Deal" .

Cincy Jungle . Cincy Jungle.

SB Nation .

Archived from the original on September 26, 2013 . Retrieved February 6, 2013 .

^ "NFL eases local TV blackout restrictions for upcoming season" .

NFL.com . NFL Enterprises. June 30, 2012.

Archived from the original on August 10, 2012 . Retrieved February 6, 2013 .

^ a b "NFL to suspend TV blackout policy" .

ESPN.com . March 24, 2015.

Archived from the original on March 24, 2015 . Retrieved March 24, 2015 .

^ "NFL 2012 TV Recap" . NFL Communications. January 3, 2003. Archived from the original on January 29, 2013 . Retrieved February 6, 2013 .

^ Bibel, Sara (February 4, 2014).

"Sunday Final Ratings: 'New Girl' & 'Brooklyn Nine Nine' Adjusted Up & Final Super Bowl Numbers (Updated)" .

Zap2it . Archived from the original on February 22, 2014 . Retrieved February 11, 2014 .

^ "NFL and Dial Global Agree on New Multi-Year Extension" .

Dial Global . September 19, 2012. Archived from the original on April 25, 2013 . Retrieved February 6, 2013 .

^ Cone, Lawrence L. (October 1985).

"Skycam: An Aerial Robotic Camera System" .

BYTE . p. 122.

Archived from the original on March 26, 2016 . Retrieved April 2, 2016 .

^ Oaks, Chris. WIRED magazine, "John Madden on Grid Iron Tech", January 22, 1999 ^ McCaskill, Steve (January 23, 2025).

"NFL teams 'not allowed' to launch on Bluesky" .

SportsPro . Retrieved February 9, 2025 .

^ Weprin, Alex (August 6, 2025).

"NFL to Acquire Stake in ESPN as Part of Blockbuster Deal With Disney" .

The Hollywood Reporter . Retrieved August 6, 2025 .

^ "Disney's ESPN to acquire NFL media assets in major deal" .

CNBC . August 6, 2025 . Retrieved August 6, 2025 .

^ Marchand, Andrew (August 1, 2025).

"NFL deals Red Zone, NFL Media assets to ESPN in blockbuster billion-dollar agreement: Sources" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved August 2, 2025 .

^ Simonetti, Joe Flint and Isabella.

"The NFL Is Taking a 10% Stake in Disney's ESPN" .

WSJ . Retrieved August 11, 2025 .

^ a b Love, Tim (April 23, 2009).

"What's the NFL draft all about?" .

BBC Sport .

Archived from the original on September 26, 2013 . Retrieved February 11, 2013 .

^ "Complete order of first round of 2011 NFL Draft determined" .

NFL.com . NFL Enterprises. March 27, 2012.

Archived from the original on November 25, 2011 . Retrieved February 11, 2013 .

^ Smith, Michael David (January 1, 2013).

"NFL draft rules a bad deal for Jadeveon Clowney" .

Pro Football Talk .

NBC Sports .

Archived from the original on January 29, 2013 . Retrieved February 11, 2013 .

^ "NFL officially grants draft eligibility to 65 underclassmen" .

NFL.com . NFL Enterprises. January 19, 2012.

Archived from the original on October 16, 2012 . Retrieved February 11, 2013 .

^ Schrager, Peter (March 31, 2011).

"Addressing NFL draft trade rules, times" .

Fox Sports .

Archived from the original on October 2, 2013 . Retrieved February 11, 2013 .

^ Aiello, Greg; McCarthy, Brian; Signora, Michael (March 26, 2012).

"NFL Announces 32 Compensatory Draft Choices to 15 Clubs" (PDF) . NFL Labor.

Archived (PDF) from the original on October 2, 2013 . Retrieved February 11, 2013 .

^ Black, James C. (May 29, 2003).

"Offseason overview: Minnesota Vikings" .

ESPN.com .

Archived from the original on December 19, 2012 . Retrieved February 11, 2013 .

^ Flatter, Ron (March 9, 2006).

"Bo knows stardom and disappointment" .

ESPN.com . Archived from the original on January 20, 2013 . Retrieved February 11, 2013 .

^ Badenhausen, Kurt (April 24, 2012).

"NFL Draft Picks More Valuable Than Ever Under New System" .

Forbes .

Archived from the original on March 4, 2013 . Retrieved February 11, 2013 .

^ Jeremiah, Daniel (July 11, 2012).

"Supplemental draft primer: Josh Gordon has NFL teams buzzing" .

NFL.com . NFL Enterprises.

Archived from the original on February 17, 2013 . Retrieved February 11, 2013 .

^ Schefter, Adam (August 15, 2011).

"Terrelle Pryor remains in draft limbo" .

ESPN.com .

Archived from the original on July 17, 2012 . Retrieved February 11, 2013 .

^ "Building Block" .

ESPN.com . February 12, 2002.

Archived from the original on August 31, 2012 . Retrieved February 11, 2013 .

^ "Allocation Draft" (PDF) .

Professional Football Researchers Association . Archived from the original (PDF) on May 5, 2012 . Retrieved February 11, 2013 .

^ "1984 Supplemental Draft" .

Pro Football Hall of Fame .

Archived from the original on May 12, 2013 . Retrieved February 11, 2013 .

^ Drehs, Wayne (April 10, 2001).

"God forbid it should ever be needed" .

ESPN.com .

Archived from the original on November 7, 2012 . Retrieved February 11, 2013 .

^ a b "Questions and answers for 2012 free agency" .

NFL.com . NFL Enterprises. March 11, 2012.

Archived from the original on July 13, 2012 . Retrieved February 16, 2013 .

^ Reynolds, Neil (February 16, 2012).

"NFL Explained: The Franchise Tag" . NFLUK. Archived from the original on February 18, 2012 . Retrieved February 16, 2013 .

^ Nogle, Kevin (December 28, 2012).

"NFL Franchise Tags and the Miami Dolphins" .

ThePhinsider.com .

SB Nation .

Archived from the original on January 31, 2013 . Retrieved February 16, 2013 .

^ Breer, Albert (February 23, 2012).

"New wrinkles to franchise tag, salary cap happened for reason" .

NFL.com . NFL Enterprises.

Archived from the original on February 12, 2013 . Retrieved February 16, 2013 .

^ Myers, Keith (February 16, 2008).

"The Poison Pill is dead" . 12th Man Rising.

SI.com .

Archived from the original on December 14, 2012 . Retrieved February 16, 2013 .

^ a b Gordon, Grant (March 1, 2019).

"NFL salary cap for 2019 season set at $188.2M" .

NFL.com .

Archived from the original on June 9, 2019 . Retrieved June 13, 2019 .

^ Chassen, Alexis (September 6, 2015).

"Everything you need to know about NFL practice squads" . SB Nation.

Archived from the original on November 16, 2016 . Retrieved January 16, 2017 .

Bibliography "Constitution and Bylaws of the National Football League" (PDF) . 2006. Archived from the original (PDF) on March 7, 2014 . Retrieved February 2, 2013 .

Zimmer, John; Marini, Matt, eds. (2013).

Official 2013 National Football League Record & Fact Book (PDF) . New York: National Football League.

ISBN 978-1-60320-980-9 . Archived from the original (PDF) on October 12, 2013 . Retrieved October 11, 2013 .

"2013 Official Playing Rules of the National Football League" (PDF) .

National Football League . 2013.

Archived (PDF) from the original on October 21, 2013 . Retrieved March 26, 2014 .

"2011–20 NFL/NFLPA Collective Bargaining Agreement" (PDF) .

National Football League . August 4, 2011.

Archived (PDF) from the original on March 19, 2014 . Retrieved March 26, 2014 .

External links Wikimedia Commons has media related to National Football League .

Wikivoyage has a travel guide for American Football .

Official website Pro Football Reference – historical stats of teams, players and coaches in the NFL Jared Dubin (April 28, 2015), "NFL ends tax exempt status after 73 years: 3 things to know" , CBS Sports v t e National Football League 2025 season American Football Conference East North South West Buffalo Bills Miami Dolphins New England Patriots New York Jets Baltimore Ravens Cincinnati Bengals Cleveland Browns Pittsburgh Steelers Houston Texans Indianapolis Colts Jacksonville Jaguars Tennessee Titans Denver Broncos Kansas City Chiefs Las Vegas Raiders Los Angeles Chargers National Football Conference East North South West Dallas Cowboys New York Giants Philadelphia Eagles Washington Commanders Chicago Bears Detroit Lions Green Bay Packers Minnesota Vikings Atlanta Falcons Carolina Panthers New Orleans Saints Tampa Bay Buccaneers Arizona Cardinals Los Angeles Rams San Francisco 49ers Seattle Seahawks Seasons Seasons by team Preseason Hall of Fame Game American Bowl Regular season Kickoff Thursday Night Football Monday Night Football Thanksgiving games Christmas games Playoffs list of games streaks droughts AFC Championship NFC Championship Super Bowl champions quarterbacks Pro Bowl History League history Commissioner championship history Timeline defunct franchises moves and mergers NFL in Los Angeles Eastern and Western Conferences (1933–1969) Century Division All-America Football Conference (1946–1949) American Football League (1960–1969) playoffs merger NFL Championship (1920–1969) Playoff Bowl NFL records individual quarterback team Super Bowl win–loss records last undefeated Tied games Canceled games Nicknamed games and plays Controversies League of Denial List of players with CTE List of proposed NFL teams International International Series London Toronto Bills Series NFL Europe Non-American players International Player Pathway Business Team owners Properties Management Council Competition committee NFLPA Collective bargaining agreement NFL Players Inc.

NFL Referees Association Lockouts Valuations Television NFL Network NFL RedZone NFL Films In Canada Antitrust cases Radovich v. National Football League Mid-South Grizzlies v. National Football League American Needle, Inc. v. National Football League Related Head coaches current wins leaders playoff record Starting quarterbacks Officials Stadiums chronology Awards All-Pro Hall of Fame members Player conduct suspensions Combine Draft Training camp NFL Foundation NFL Alumni Next Gen Stats Culture Mascots Nicknames Uniform numbers Color Rush Rivalries Cheerleading Conflicts Retired numbers v t e NFL seasons Early era (1920–1969) 1920 1921 1922 1923 1924 1925 1926 1927 1928 1929 1930 1931 1932 1933 1934 1935 1936 1937 1938 1939 1940 1941 1942 1943 1944 1945 1946 1947 1948 1949 1950 1951 1952 1953 1954 1955 1956 1957 1958 1959 1960 1961 1962 1963 1964 1965 1966 1967 1968 1969 AAFC seasons (1946–1949) 1946 1947 1948 1949 AFL seasons (1960–1969) 1960 1961 1962 1963 1964 1965 1966 1967 1968 1969 Modern era (1970–present) 1970 1971 1972 1973 1974 1975 1976 1977 1978 1979 1980 1981 1982 1983 1984 1985 1986 1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 Italics indicate future seasons v t e NFL awards and trophies Team Vince Lombardi Trophy Super Bowl Lamar Hunt Trophy AFC Championship George Halas Trophy NFC Championship Individual Most Valuable Player Coach of the Year Assistant Coach of the Year Offensive Player of the Year Defensive Player of the Year Rookie of the Year Comeback Player of the Year Walter Payton NFL Man of the Year The Sporting News NFL Player of the Year The Sporting News NFL Executive of the Year Alan Page Community Award Super Bowl MVP Pete Rozelle Trophy Super Bowl ring Art McNally Award Art Rooney Award Bart Starr Award Bert Bell Award Butkus Award Deacon Jones Award George Halas Award Polynesian Football Player of the Year Award One-time only 50th Anniversary All-Time Team (1969) 75th Anniversary All-Time Team (1994) 100th Anniversary All-Time Team (2019) All-Decade Teams Annual presentation NFL Honors NFL Top 100 Awards organizations Associated Press 101 Awards Maxwell Football Club NFL Alumni Touchdown Club of Columbus Washington D.C. Touchdown Club Former awards Brunswick-Balke Collender Cup Ed Thorp Memorial Trophy MVP NFL Player of the Year awards Joe F. Carr Trophy Jim Thorpe Trophy UPI American Football League Most Valuable Player award NEA defensive player of the year NEA Rookie of the Year Football Digest NFL Player of the Year UPI AFL-AFC Player of the Year UPI NFC Player of the Year UPI AFL-AFC Rookie of the Year UPI NFL-NFC Rookie of the Year Washington D.C. Touchdown Club NFL Player of the Year v t e NFL records and leaders General Team records Playoffs Win–loss Individual records Quarterback records Games played Consecutive games and starts All-purpose yards Super Bowl records 99-yard pass play Largest comebacks Dual-threat quarterback records Passing, rushing, and receiving touchdown in a single game Passing Career Touchdowns Regular season Playoffs Yards Completions Interceptions Passer rating Wins Playoff win–loss records Consecutive starts Consecutive games with a TD pass Teams beaten Annual Touchdowns Yards 5,000 passing yards Completion percentage Passer rating Game Touchdowns Yards Perfect passer rating Rushing Career Touchdowns Yards Attempts Annual Touchdowns Yards 2,000-yard club 1,000-yard duos Receiving Career Touchdowns Yards Receptions Annual Touchdowns Yards 1,000-yard trios Receptions Triple crown winners Defense Career Sacks Interceptions Tackles Annual Sacks Interceptions Tackles Forced fumbles Special teams Career Punts Yards Field goals Most Longest Most accurate Kickoff return yards Annual Punting yards Punt return yards Kickoff return yards Scoring Career Scoring Annual Scoring Game Highest scoring games Links to related articles v t e NFL drafts Early era (1936–1959) 1936 1937 1938 1939 1940 1941 1942 1943 1944 1945 1946 1947 1948 1949 1950 1951 1952 1953 1954 1955 1956 1957 1958 1959 AFL and NFL era (1960–1966) AFL 1960 1961 1962 1963 1964 1965 1966 NFL 1960 1961 1962 1963 1964 1965 1966 Common draft (1967–1969) 1967 1968 1969 Modern era (1970–present) 1970 1971 1972 1973 1974 1975 1976 1977 1978 1979 1980 1981 1982 1983 1984 1985 1986 1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 Expansion drafts 1960 1961 1966 1967 1976 1995 1999 2002 Others 1950 AAFC dispersal draft 1984 NFL supplemental draft of USFL and CFL players See also List of drafts first overall picks second overall picks Mr. Irrelevant supplemental picks List of broadcasters v t e National Football Foundation Gold Medal winners 1958: Dwight D. Eisenhower 1959: Douglas MacArthur 1960: Herbert Hoover & Amos Alonzo Stagg 1961: John F. Kennedy 1962: Byron "Whizzer" White 1963: Roger Blough 1964: Donold B. Lourie 1965: Juan T. Trippe 1966: Earl H. "Red" Blaik 1967: Frederick L. Hovde 1968: Chester J. LaRoche 1969: Richard Nixon 1970: Thomas J. Hamilton 1971: Ronald Reagan 1972: Gerald Ford 1973: John Wayne 1974: Gerald B. Zornow 1975: David Packard 1976: Edgar B. Speer 1977: Louis H. Wilson 1978: Vincent dePaul Draddy 1979: William P. Lawrence 1980: Walter J. Zable 1981: Justin W. Dart 1982: Silver Anniversary Awards (NCAA) - All Honored Jim Brown , Willie Davis , Jack Kemp , Ron Kramer , Jim Swink 1983: Jack Kemp 1984: John F. McGillicuddy 1985: William I. Spencer 1986: William H. Morton 1987: Charles R. Meyer 1988: Clinton E. Frank 1989: Paul Brown 1990: Thomas H. Moorer 1991: George H. W. Bush 1992: Donald R. Keough 1993: Norman Schwarzkopf 1994: Thomas S. Murphy 1995: Harold Alfond 1996: Gene Corrigan 1997: Jackie Robinson 1998: John H. McConnell 1999: Keith Jackson 2000: Fred M. Kirby II 2001: Billy Joe "Red" McCombs 2002: George Steinbrenner 2003: Tommy Franks 2004: William V. Campbell 2005: Jon F. Hanson 2006: Joe Paterno & Bobby Bowden 2007: Pete Dawkins & Roger Staubach 2008: John Glenn 2009: Phil Knight & Bill Bowerman 2010: Bill Cosby 2011: Robert Gates 2012: Roscoe Brown 2013: National Football League & Roger Goodell 2014: Tom Catena & George Weiss 2015: Condoleezza Rice 2016: Archie Manning 2017: None awarded 2018: Aaron Feis & Jason Seaman 2019: Mark Harmon v t e Professional gridiron football leagues in North America American football Major National Football League (1920–present) Other American 7s Football League (2015–present) Liga de Fútbol Americano Profesional (2016–present) United Football League (2024–present) Defunct national American Football League (1926) ² American Football League (1936–1937) ² American Football League (1940–1941) All-America Football Conference ² (1945–1949) American Football League (1960–1969)¹ Continental Football League (1965–1969) World Football League (1974–1975) United States Football League (1983–1985) World League of American Football/NFL Europe/NFL Europa ³ XFL (2001) United Football League (2009–2012) Alliance of American Football (2019) Fútbol Americano de México (2019–2022) XFL (2020, 2023)* United States Football League (2022–2023)* Defunct regional American Football Union (1886–1895) Western Pennsylvania Professional Football Circuit ** (1890–1905) Ohio League ² (1902–1919) New York Pro Football League ² (1908–1919) National Football League (1902) Anthracite League ² (1924) Eastern League of Professional Football (1926–1927) American Football League (1934) Midwest Football League (1935–1940) Dixie League ³ (1936–1947) American Association (American football) ³ American Football League (1938–1939) Eastern Pennsylvania Football League (1938) Pacific Coast Professional Football League ³ (1940–1948) American Football League (1944) American Football League (1946–1950) ³ American Football Conference (1959–1961) United Football League (1961–1964) Atlantic Coast Football League ³ (1962–1973) Midwest Football League (1962–1978) Professional Football League of America (1965–1967) Texas Football League (1966–1971) Seaboard Football League (1971–1974) American Football Association (1977–1983) Regional Football League (1999) Spring Football League (2000) World Football League (2008–2010) Stars Football League (2011–2013) Fall Experimental Football League (2014–2016) ¹ Merged into the NFL . All teams still active as members of the NFL's American Football Conference .

² Teams moved to NFL ³ Official NFL minor league; see also Association of Professional Football Leagues * Merged into the UFL, still active as conferences within Canadian football Major Canadian Football League Predecessors Direct Interprovincial Rugby Football Union Western Interprovincial Football Union Other Ontario Rugby Football Union Quebec Rugby Football Union Junior Atlantic Football League Canadian Junior Football League Quebec Junior Football League Arena football Current American Arena League 2 Arena Football One American Indoor Football Indoor Football League National Arena League The Arena League United Indoor Football Association Defunct American Indoor Football Alliance American Professional Football League American West Football Conference Arena Football Association Arena Football League (1987–2008, 2010–2019) Arena Football League (2024) arenafootball2 Arena Pro Football Can-Am Indoor Football League Champions Indoor Football Champions Professional Indoor Football League Continental Indoor Football League Great Lakes Arena Football Independent Indoor Football Alliance Indoor Football League (1999–2000) Indoor Professional Football League Intense Football League Lone Star Football League National Indoor Football League Professional Indoor Football League (1998) Professional Indoor Football League (2012) Southern Indoor Football League Supreme Indoor Football Ultimate Indoor Football League United Indoor Football X-League Indoor Football World Indoor Football League (2007) World Series of Football (1902–03) On hiatus Fan Controlled Football Women's football Outdoor Women's Football Alliance (2009–present) United States Women's Football League (2009–present) Women's National Football Conference (2018–present) Defunct Outdoor Women's Professional Football League (1965–1973) National Women's Football League (1974–1982) Women's Professional Football League (1999–2007) National Women's Football Association (2000–2008) Independent Women's Football League (2000–2018) Arena football X League (2009–present) v t e Top-level professional sports leagues in the United States and Canada Men's Majors Major League Baseball National Basketball Association National Football League National Hockey League Major League Soccer Canadian Football League Other top-flight leagues Canadian Premier League Major League Cricket Arena football AF1 IFL National Lacrosse League Premier Lacrosse League USA Rugby League Major League Rugby Premier Rugby Sevens Major Arena Soccer League Ultimate Frisbee Association National Volleyball Association Women's Majors Women's National Basketball Association National Women's Soccer League Professional Women's Hockey League Other top-flight leagues Women's Pro Baseball League Women's Football Alliance Women's Lacrosse League National Ringette League Women's Elite Rugby Premier Rugby Sevens Soccer USLS NSL Softball AUSL WPF Ultimate PUL WUL Volleyball LOVB Pro Major League Volleyball Others Individual Bowling PBA PWBA Bull riding PBR WPRA Golf PGA Tour LPGA Tennis ATP WTA Motorsports IndyCar Series NASCAR Cup Series Other Major League Eating USA Canada Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National Germany United States Israel Other SNAC Yale LUX Portals : American football United States Sports NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐api‐ext.codfw.main‐77f755c49c‐7tkv9
Cached time: 20250817230508
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.980 seconds
Real time usage: 2.498 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 16157/1000000
Revision size: 135333/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 696708/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 68570/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 23/100
Expensive parser function count: 37/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 683269/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.156/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 9490375/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 2045.484      1 -total
 49.60% 1014.564      2 Template:Reflist
 25.82%  528.086    102 Template:Cite_web
 16.91%  345.831     51 Template:Cite_news
  8.68%  177.594      1 Template:Navboxes
  5.71%  116.768      1 Template:Infobox_sports_league
  4.43%   90.663      3 Template:Navbox_with_columns
  4.35%   88.910      1 Template:National_Football_League
  4.07%   83.296      1 Template:Short_description
  3.79%   77.607      1 Template:National_Football_Foundation_Gold_Medal_Winners Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:21211:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817230508 and revision id 1306323636. Rendering was triggered because: unknown Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=National_Football_League&oldid=1306323636 " Categories : National Football League 1920 establishments in Ohio 501(c)(6) nonprofit organizations Cooperatives based in New York (state) Organizations based in New York City Sports leagues established in 1920 Hidden categories: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list CS1: unfit URL Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Good articles Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pages Use American English from October 2018 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use mdy dates from December 2024 Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2025 All articles containing potentially dated statements Articles containing potentially dated statements from February 2019 Commons link is on Wikidata Pages using navbox columns without the first column This page was last edited on 17 August 2025, at 04:31 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents National Football League 74 languages Add topic

