Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 Festivals and temples 3 Interpretatio graeca 4 In the classical tradition Toggle In the classical tradition subsection 4.1 Music 4.2 In painting 4.3 Sculpture 5 See also 6 References Toggle References subsection 6.1 Bibliography 6.2 Primary 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Flora (mythology) 49 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Башҡортса Беларуская Български Brezhoneg Català Чӑвашла Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Italiano עברית ქართული Latina Lietuvių Magyar Македонски مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk پنجابی Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Roman goddess of flowers and spring Flora Goddess of flowers and spring 1st-century fresco from the Villa di Arianna in Stabiae , depicting Flora or an allegory of spring Abode Elysium Symbols flower Festivals Floralia Genealogy Consort Favonius – Zephyrus Children Carpus Equivalents Greek Chloris Flora on a gold aureus of 43–39 BCE Flora ( Latin : Flōra ) is a Roman goddess of flowers and spring .

[ 1 ] She was one of the twelve deities of traditional Roman religion who had their own flamen , the Floralis , one of the flamines minores . Her association with spring gave her particular importance at the coming of springtime, as did her role as goddess of youth.

[ 2 ] She is  one of several fertility goddesses and a relatively minor figure in Roman mythology . Her Greek counterpart is Chloris .

Etymology [ edit ] The name Flōra descends from Proto-Italic *flōsā ('goddess of flowers'), itself a derivation from Proto-Italic *flōs ('flower'; cf.

Latin flōs , flōris 'blossom, flower').

[ 3 ] It is cognate with the Oscan goddess of flowers Fluusa , demonstrating that the cult was known more widely among Italic peoples . The name ultimately derives from Proto-Indo-European *bʰleh₃ōs ('blossoming').

[ 3 ] Festivals and temples [ edit ] Main article: Floralia Flora's festival, the Floralia , was held between April 28 and May 3 and was celebrated with drinking, flowers, and entertainments ( ludi ).

[ 4 ] The festival was first instituted in 240 BCE, and on the advice of the Sibylline books , she was also given a temple in 238 BCE.  At the festival, with the men decked in flowers, and the women wearing normally forbidden gay costumes, five days of farces and mimes were enacted – ithyphallic , [ 5 ] and including nudity when called for [ 6 ] – followed by a sixth day of the hunting of goats and hares.

[ 7 ] On May 23 another flower festival was held, the Rosalia .

[ 4 ] Interpretatio graeca [ edit ] Flora's Greek equivalent is the nymph Chloris , [ 8 ] whose myths were assimilated to Flora in mythological narratives ( interpretatio graeca ). The Hellenized Flora was married to Favonius , the wind god also known as Zephyr, and her companion was Hercules . According to the legend, Flora ran away from Favonius, but he caught her, married her and gave her dominion over the flowers.

[ 9 ] In the classical tradition [ edit ] Music [ edit ] Flora is the main character of the 1894 ballet The Awakening of Flora .

In painting [ edit ] Detail of Flora from Primavera by Botticelli , c. 1482 Flora by Titian , 1515 Idealized Portrait of a Courtesan as Flora by Bartolomeo Veneto , c. 1520 Flora by Francesco Melzi , c. 1520 Flora and Zephyr, by Jan Brueghel the Elder and Peter Paul Rubens , 1617 Flora by Claude Vignon , 1650 Flora by Rembrandt , 1654 Flora or Hebe by Alexander Roslin , 18th century Flora by Valentine Walter Bromley , 1874 Flora by Ferdinand Keller , 1883 Flora by Mosè Bianchi , 1890 Sculpture [ edit ] There are many monuments to Flora, for example in Rome (Italy), Valencia (Spain), and Szczecin (Poland).

statue of Flora at Orangerie Kassel , around 1703 Flora Farnese (Naples), mid-18th century AD Statue of Flora in Szczecin , Poland, 1730.

See also [ edit ] Abundantia Feronia Flora Fountain Fauna Nymph Pomona 8 Flora References [ edit ] ^ "Flora" . Myth Index. Archived from the original on 2016-05-03.

^ H. Nettleship ed., A Dictionary of Classical Antiquities (1891) p. 238 ^ a b de Vaan 2008 , pp. 227–228.

^ a b Guirand, Felix; Aldington, Richard; Ames, Delano; Graves, Robert (December 16, 1987).

New Larousse Encyclopedia of Mythology . Crescent Books. p.

201 .

ISBN 0517004046 .

^ P/ Green ed., Juvenal: The Sixteen Satires (1982) p. 156 ^ H. J. Rose, A Handbook of Latin Literature (1967) p. 151 ^ H. Nettleship ed., A Dictionary of Classical Antiquities (1891) p. 238 ^ Smith, s.v. Chloris (3) .

^ Grimal, Pierre (1987).

The Dictionary of Classical Mythology . Translated by A. R. Maxwell-Hyslop. New York, USA: Wiley-Blackwell. p.

165 .

ISBN 0-631-13209-0 .

Bibliography [ edit ] Smith, William , Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography and Mythology , London (1873).

Online version at the Perseus Digital Library .

de Vaan, Michiel (2008).

Etymological Dictionary of Latin and the other Italic Languages . Brill.

ISBN 9789004167971 .

Primary [ edit ] Ovid, Fasti V.193-212 Macrobius, Saturnalia I.10.11-14 Lactantius, Divinae institutions I.20.6-10 External links [ edit ] The Warburg Institute Iconographic Database (images of Flora) Media related to Flora (dea) at Wikimedia Commons "Flora" .

The New Student's Reference Work . 1914.

"Flora" .

Encyclopædia Britannica (11th ed.). 1911.

The Obscure Goddess Online Directory: Flora v t e Ancient Roman religion and mythology Deities ( Dii Consentes ) Agenoria Angerona Anna Perenna Apollo Aurora Bellona Bona Dea Carmenta Castor and Pollux Ceres Cloacina Cupid Dea Dia Diana Dies Dīs Pater Egeria Fauna Faunus Flora Genius Hercules Janus Juno Jupiter Lares Lares Familiares Liber Libertas Luna Mars Mercury Minerva Neptune Nox Ops Orcus Penates Pluto Pomona Priapus Proserpina Quirinus Salacia Saturn Silvanus Sol Summanus Venus Veritas Vesta Vertumnus Vulcan Abstract deities Abundantia Aequitas Aeternitas Africa Annona Averruncus Bonus Eventus Caelus Concordia Feronia Fides Fortuna Fontus Laverna Pax Pietas Roma Salus Securitas Spes Tranquillitas Terra Victoria Legendary figures Aeneas Rhea Silvia Romulus and Remus Numa Pompilius Tullus Hostilius Servius Tullius Ancus Marcius Lucius Tarquinius Priscus Lucius Tarquinius Superbus Kings of Alba Longa Hersilia Legendary beings She-wolf Barnacle goose Texts Virgil Aeneid Ovid Fasti Metamorphoses Propertius Varro Res divinae Sibylline Books Apuleius The Golden Ass Concepts and practices Festivals Interpretatio graeca Imperial cult Charity Palladium Theology of victory Pomerium Temples Capitolium Cella Celtic Philosophy Cynicism Epicureanism Neoplatonism Peripateticism Pythagoreanism Stoicism Events Golden Bough Founding of Rome Natale di Roma Rape of the Sabine Women Battle of Lacus Curtius Objects Gubernaculum Parabiago Plate Pignora imperii Variations Gallo-Roman Mysteries Cybele Isis Mithraism See also Classical mythology Decline Persecution Etruscan religion Glossary Greek mythology Myth and ritual Authority control databases International VIAF 2 3 FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data People DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Flora_(mythology)&oldid=1292463086 " Categories : Flora (mythology) Roman goddesses Fertility goddesses Spring deities Nature goddesses Youth Flowers in culture Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles having different image on Wikidata and Wikipedia Articles containing Latin-language text Commons category link is on Wikidata Wikipedia articles incorporating citation to the NSRW Wikipedia articles incorporating citation to the NSRW with an wstitle parameter Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference This page was last edited on 27 May 2025, at 02:34 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Flora (mythology) 49 languages Add topic

