Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview 2 Long- versus short-term class interests 3 Criticism 4 References Toggle the table of contents Structural Marxism 15 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Čeština Deutsch Ελληνικά Español فارسی 日本語 Polski Português Русский Svenska Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Marxist philosophy led by Louis Althusser This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Structural Marxism" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( May 2009 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a series on Marxism Outline Theoretical works Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844 The Condition of the Working Class in England The German Ideology Wage Labour and Capital The Communist Manifesto The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte Grundrisse Capital Critique of the Gotha Programme Dialectics of Nature The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State What Is to Be Done?

The Accumulation of Capital Philosophical Notebooks Terrorism and Communism The State and Revolution Essays on Marx's Theory of Value History and Class Consciousness Prison Notebooks The Black Jacobins On Practice Dialectic of Enlightenment A Critique of Soviet Economics The Long Revolution Guerrilla Warfare The Wretched of the Earth Reading Capital The Society of the Spectacle Pedagogy of the Oppressed Ideology and Ideological State Apparatuses Ways of Seeing How Europe Underdeveloped Africa Social Justice and the City Women, Race and Class Marxism and the Oppression of Women Imagined Communities Hegemony and Socialist Strategy The Sublime Object of Ideology Time, Labor and Social Domination The Age of Extremes The Origin of Capitalism Empire Late Victorian Holocausts Change the World Without Taking Power Caliban and the Witch An Introduction to the Three Volumes of Karl Marx's Capital Capitalist Realism Capital in the Anthropocene Philosophy Alienation Dialectical materialism Ideology Philosophy of nature Philosophy in the Soviet Union Reification Marxist ethics Critique of political economy Capital ( accumulation ) Crisis theory Commodity Concrete and abstract labor Factors of production Falling profit-rate tendency Means of production Mode of production Capitalist Socialist Productive forces Scientific socialism State monopoly capitalism Surplus product Socially necessary labour time Value-form Wage labour Sociology Base and superstructure Bourgeoisie Class Class consciousness Classless society Commodity fetishism Communist society Critical theory Cultural hegemony Democracy Dictatorship of the proletariat Soviet Radical Democratic centralism Exploitation False consciousness Human nature Immiseration Imperialism Lumpenproletariat Metabolic rift Proletariat Private property Relations of production State theory Working class History Class struggle Historical determinism Primitive accumulation Proletarian revolution World revolution Theory of historical trajectory Aspects Aesthetics Archaeology Criminology Cultural Marxism Cultural Studies Ethics Film theory Geography Historiography Literary criticism Marxism and religion Sociology Philosophy Common variants Structural Autonomist Marxism–Leninism Guevarism Maoism Neo-Gramscianism Regulation school Third-worldist Titoism Trotskyism Hegelian Budapest School Frankfurt School Humanist Neue Marx-Lektüre Open Praxis School Both Black Classical Communization Feminist Leninism Neo Post Western Other variants Analytical Austromarxism Hispanic marxism Centrist Eurocommunism Instrumental Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Nkrumaism Political Revisionist Situationist Socialism with Chinese characteristics Wertkritik People Marx Engels Morris Lafargue Rubin Kautsky Plekhanov Du Bois Connolly Lenin Luxemburg Liebknecht Kollontai Stalin Trotsky Grossman Zinoviev Bloch Lukács Korsch Bukharin Ho Serge Gramsci Pashukanis Bordiga Benjamin Mao Basu Mariátegui Horkheimer Dutt Brecht Marcuse Kalecki Fromm Cox Lefebvre James Adorno Padmore Sartre Deutscher Beauvoir Sombart Nkrumah Sweezy Emmanuel Hill Bettelheim Draper Jones Hobsbawm Althusser Hinton Williams Freire Cunhal Lara Mandel Sivanandan Miliband Cabral Thompson Bauman Fanon Berger Castro Guevara Liebman Heller Guattari Mészáros O'Connor Wallerstein Mies Tronti Debord Amin Hall Nairn Parenti Negri Jameson Dussel Harvey Laclau Bahro Poulantzas Vattimo Badiou Harnecker Altvater Ismail Anderson Löwy Vogel Sison Easthope Rancière Berman Przeworski Cohen Therborn Losurdo Postone Rodney Bannerji Spivak Newton Wood Federici Wolff Balibar Eagleton Kurz Rowbotham Mouffe Geras Brenner Davis Massey Cleaver Bishop Haraway Panitch Clarke Jessop Davis Wright Fraser Burawoy Holloway Rose Screpanti Tamás Hampton Cano Žižek Berardi Sankara Hennessy McDonnell Douzinas Roediger Foster West Ghandy Marcos Heinrich Prashad Kelley Dean Lordon Linera Fisher Li Prestes Coulthard Malm Seymour Toscano Bhattacharya Moufawad-Paul Srnicek Horvat Hamza Saito Journals Antipode Capital & Class Capitalism Nature Socialism Constellations Critique: Journal of Socialist Theory Historical Materialism Mediations Monthly Review New Left Review Race & Class Rethinking Marxism Science & Society Socialist Register Related topics 21st-century communist theorists Anarchism Creative destruction Conflict theory Criticism of Marxism Communism Communalism Economic determinism History of communism Left-wing politics Marxian economics New Left Old Left Municipalism Political ecology Socialism Authoritarian Democratic Market Reformist Revolutionary Social Utopian Left-wing populism Universal class Vulgar Marxism Economism Worker cooperative Workers' council Communism portal Economics portal Philosophy portal Politics portal Socialism portal v t e Structural Marxism (sometimes called Althusserian Marxism ) is an approach to Marxist philosophy based on structuralism , primarily associated with the work of the French philosopher Louis Althusser and his students. It was influential in France during the 1960s and 1970s, and also came to influence philosophers, political theorists and sociologists outside France during the 1970s. Other proponents of structural Marxism were the sociologist Nicos Poulantzas and the anthropologist Maurice Godelier . Many of Althusser's students broke with structural Marxism in the late 1960s and 1970s.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Overview [ edit ] Structural Marxism arose in opposition to the instrumental Marxism that dominated many western universities during the 1970s.

[ citation needed ] In contrast to other forms of Marxism, Althusser stressed that Marxism was a science that examined objective structures, [ 3 ] and he believed that historicist and phenomenological Marxism, which was based on Marx's early works, was caught in a "pre-scientific ideology".

[ 4 ] Toward the middle of the 1970s and throughout the 1980s, Marxist theorists began to develop structuralist Marxist accounts of the state, law, and crime. Structuralist Marxism disputes the instrumentalist view that the state can be viewed as the direct servant of the capitalist or ruling class. Whereas the instrumentalist position is that the institutions of the state [ 5 ] are under the direct control of those members of the capitalist class in positions of state power, the structuralist position is that state institutions must function so as to ensure the viability of capitalism more generally. In other words, state institutions must reproduce capitalist society as a whole. The debate between structural and instrumental Marxists was characterized by the Miliband–Poulantzas debate between instrumentalist Ralph Miliband and structuralist Nicos Poulantzas .

[ 6 ] Structuralists view the state in a capitalist mode of production as taking a specifically capitalist form, not because particular individuals are in powerful positions, but because the state reproduces the logic of capitalist structure in its economic, legal, and political institutions. Hence, from a structuralist perspective one would argue that state institutions (including legal ones) function in the long-term interests of capital and capitalism, rather than in the short-term interests of members of the capitalist class. Thus the state and its institutions have a certain degree of independence from specific elites in the ruling or capitalist class.

[ 7 ] Long- versus short-term class interests [ edit ] Structural Marxism posits that the state functions to serve the long-term interests of the bourgeoisie . Building upon the works of Engels , structural Marxists posit that the state is a mechanism for regulating class conflict , the irreconcilable tension between the proletariat and the bourgeoisie.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] By regulating these antagonisms —rather than eliminating them which is thought impossible without violent revolution [ 8 ] —the state serves to stabilize the capitalist system as a whole and preserve its existence.

[ 10 ] Structuralists differentiate between the long-term and short-term interests of the capitalist class in order to describe the necessity of the state to the capitalist system. Short-term interests of the bourgeoisie include policies that affect capital accumulation in the immediate future such as tax breaks, reduced minimum wages, government subsidies, etc. They maintain that when the state does not benefit the bourgeois class' short-term interests, it is acting on the behalf of its future interests. Accordingly, when the state seems to act on behalf of the proletariat rather than the bourgeoisie (raising minimum wage, increasing labor rights, etc.) it is serving capitalist interests by meeting the demands of workers only enough to prevent an uprising that could threaten the system as a whole. Because the interests of the proletariat and the capitalist classes are counter to one another, the state is seen as necessary to regulate the capitalist system and assure its preservation by forcing capitalists to agree to demands of workers to which they otherwise would not succumb.

[ 9 ] Criticism [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

( January 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Similar arguments have been made concerning structural theories of the capitalist nature of the state.

Claus Offe suggested that the class-character of the state could only be observed in an ex post perspective. In other words, the class character of the state can only be shown after policies are put in place and the outcome is observed. Because of this, he criticized structural theories which attempted to prove the capitalist character of the state, claiming they do so on an unfounded basis: because outcomes of the state's policies are empirically capitalist, it does not make the State a capitalist enterprise in its nature.

: 45–46 [ 11 ] [ failed verification ] References [ edit ] ^ Benton, Ted.

The Rise and Fall of Structural Marxism: Althusser and His Influence . Palgrave Macmillan.

^ Smith, Steven.

Reading Althusser: An Essay on Structural Marxism .

^ Althusser, L. (1971). Lenin and Philosophy. In Lenin and Philosophy and Other Essays . NY: Monthly Review Press.

^ Heine Andersen and L. B. Kaspersen (ed.).

Classical and Modern Social Theory , Blackwell publishers, Oxford, 2000.

^ Smith, Steven (1984).

Reading Althusser .

^ Poulantzas, N. & Miliband R. (1972). The Problem of the Capitalist State. In R. Blackburn (ed.) Ideology in Social Science: Readings in Critical Social Theory. NY: Pantheon Books, pp. 238–262.

^ Benton, Ted (1984).

The Rise and Fall of Structural Marxism: Althusser and His Influence . Palgrave Macmillan.

^ a b Lenin, V.I. (2004/1917).

The State and Revolution . Whitefish, MT: Kessinger Publishing.

^ a b Offe, Claus (1974).

Structural Problems of the Capitalist State: Class Rule and the Political System . In Klaus von Beyme (ed.) German Political Studies, vol. 1 . Beverly Hills, CA: Sage Publishing.

^ Van den Berg, Axel (1980). "Critical Theory: Is There Still Hope?" The American Journal of Sociology , Vol. 86 No. 3 (Nov 1980), pp. 449–478.

^ Kołakowski, Leszek (1971), " Althusser's Marx ".

Socialist Register 1971, pp. 111–28.

NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐5sjvr
Cached time: 20250812050539
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.339 seconds
Real time usage: 0.432 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1648/1000000
Revision size: 7216/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 88325/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 2112/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 16/100
Expensive parser function count: 11/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 41763/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.194/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 6079122/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  330.607      1 -total
 30.25%   99.995      1 Template:Marxism
 29.37%   97.095      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 24.95%   82.477      1 Template:Reflist
 21.73%   71.842      4 Template:Cite_book
 15.07%   49.829      1 Template:Sidebar
 14.12%   46.689      1 Template:Short_description
 13.18%   43.559      2 Template:Ambox
 13.00%   42.974      1 Template:Refimprove
  8.37%   27.685      2 Template:Pagetype Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:38780447:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812050539 and revision id 1294097481. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Structural_Marxism&oldid=1294097481 " Categories : Continental philosophy Eponymous political ideologies Marxist schools of thought Neo-Marxism Social theories Structuralism Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use Oxford spelling from December 2019 Articles needing additional references from May 2009 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2011 Articles needing additional references from January 2023 All articles with failed verification Articles with failed verification from January 2023 This page was last edited on 5 June 2025, at 15:25 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Structural Marxism 15 languages Add topic

