Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology and terminology 2 History 3 Equipment Toggle Equipment subsection 3.1 Weapons 3.2 Protection 3.3 Infantry-served weapons 4 Formations 5 Organization 6 Training 7 See also 8 References Toggle References subsection 8.1 Citations 8.2 Sources 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Infantry 82 languages Afrikaans العربية Aragonés Asturianu Azərbaycanca 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Boarisch Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Чӑвашла Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Furlan Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית ಕನ್ನಡ Қазақша Kiswahili Кыргызча Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Lombard Magyar Македонски മലയാളം मराठी Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Napulitano Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Română Русский Shqip Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Vèneto Tiếng Việt 吴语 ייִדיש 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Military personnel who engage in ground combat "Foot soldier" redirects here. For other uses of "foot soldier", see Foot soldier (disambiguation) .

For the professional journal of the United States Army, see Infantry (magazine) . For the 1999 video game, see Infantry (video game) .

This article may contain bundled citations with poor text–source integrity .

Please help improve this article this article by verifying its sources , moving citations closer to the claims they support, and removing original synthesis .

( August 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) French Army and British Army infantry during a military exercise in 2020 Part of a series on War ( outline ) History Prehistoric Ancient Thermal Gunpowder Timeline Post-classical Castles Early modern Military revolution Pike and shot Napoleonic warfare Late modern Industrial warfare Fourth-gen warfare AI warfare Military Organization Command and control Defense ministry Reserves Ranks Branches: Army Navy Air force Marines Coast guard Border guard Special forces Cyber force Space force Specialties: Staff Engineers Intel Recon Medical Police Diving Pilot Land units: Infantry Armor Cavalry Artillery Special forces Signal corps Naval units: Warships Submarines Aircraft carriers Landing craft Auxiliary ships Air units: Fighters Bombers Command Close air support Electronic-warfare Reconnaissance Combat systems: Fire-control system Fire-control radar Director (military) Combat information center Sonar Radar Historical: Ship gun fire-control Gun data computer Torpedo data computer Development: Basic training Military manoeuvrers Combat training Battlespace Aerospace Aerial Airborne Space Land Cold-region Desert Fortification Jungle Mountain Urban Subterranean Tunnel Sea Amphibious Blue Brown Green Surface Underwater Seabed Cyber Information Weapons Air defence Armor Artillery Barrage Biological Camouflage Cavalry Horses Air cavalry Chemical Combined arms Conventional Cyber Denial Disinformation Drone / Robot Electromagnetic Firearms Infantry Loitering Missile Music Nuclear Psychological Radiological Submarine Unconventional Tactics List of military tactics Aerial Airlift Air assault Airbridge Airdrop Anti-aircraft Anti-sub Anti-tank Battle Cavalry Charge CQC Counterattack Counterinsurgency Convoy Defeat in detail Foxhole Drone Envelopment Formation Guerrilla Naval Rapid dominance Encirclement Investment Siege Swarm Screen Tactical objective Target saturation Trench Withdrawal Operational Military operation Special Operations research Blitzkrieg Expeditionary Deep operation Maneuver Operational manoeuvre group Raid Covert Stay-behind Strategy List of military strategies and concepts Military campaign Anti-access Attrition Commerce raiding Counter-offensive Culminating Defence in depth Fabian Empty fort Mosaic Deception Defensive Depth Goal Nuclear Naval Offensive Scorched earth Grand strategy Asymmetric Blockade Broken-backed Class Cold war Colonial Conquest Containment Divide and conquer Economic Endemic Fleet in being Irregular Liberation Limited Network-centric New generation Perpetual Political Princely Proxy Religious Resource Strategic Succession Technology Theater Total war World war Administrative Branch Policy Staff Training Service Sociology Organization Area of responsibility Chain of command Command and control Doctrine Order of battle Principles of war Economy of force Medicine Engineers Intelligence Ranks Technology and equipment Personnel Recruitment Conscription Draft evasion Mobilization Training Specialism Soldier Morale Volunteer Women Children Transgender Harassment Conscientious objector Conscription and sexism Counter-recruitment Logistics History War economy Arms industry Materiel Supply-chain management Military–industrial complex Base MOB FOB Outpost Science Power projection Loss-of-strength gradient Lanchester's laws Force multiplication Morale Law Belligerent Occupation Armistice Ceasefire Court-martial Desertion Geneva Conventions Geneva Protocol Islamic rules Justice Lawful / Unlawful combatant Perfidy Regular / Irregular Jewish laws on war Right of conquest Right of self-defence Rules of engagement Self-determination Martial law War crime War and genocide War treason Theory Air supremacy Appeasement Command of the sea Deterrence theory Full-spectrum dominance Overmatch Just war theory Principles of war Philosophy of war Security dilemma Tripwire force Wargaming Simulation Exercises Combat effectiveness Center of gravity Non-warfare Arms control Counter-insurgency Deterrence Disaster response Grey-zone Gunboat diplomacy Humanitarian aid Law enforcement Low-intensity conflict Military engineering Peacekeeping Peacebuilding Peace through strength Show of force Culture Awards and decorations Battle cry Warrior War film Military science fiction War novel Anti-war movement Foot drill War song Uniform Wargame Militarization / Militarism Antimilitarism Camp follower Books Seven Military Classics The Art of War De re militari Strategemata Related Women in war War resister War studies Horses in warfare Wartime sexual violence Fifth column Mercenary Pacifism Privateer Private military company Soldiers are murderers Lists Battles Military occupations Military terms Operations Sieges War crimes Wars Weapons Writers v t e Infantry , or infantryman are a type of soldier who specialize in ground combat , typically fighting dismounted. Historically the term was used to describe foot soldiers, i.e. those who march and fight on foot. In modern usage, the term broadly encompasses a wide variety of subspecialties, including light infantry , irregular infantry , heavy infantry , mountain infantry , motorized infantry , mechanized infantry , airborne infantry , air assault infantry , and naval infantry . Other subtypes of infantry, such as line infantry and mounted infantry , were once commonplace but fell out of favor in the 19th century with the invention of more accurate and powerful weapons.

Etymology and terminology [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

( May 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Various infantry of the 17th through 18th century ( halberdier , arquebusier , pikeman , and mix of musketeers and grenadiers ) of Duchy of Württemberg In English, use of the term infantry began about the 1570s, describing soldiers who march and fight on foot.

[ 1 ] The word derives from Middle French infanterie , from older Italian (also Spanish) infanteria (foot soldiers too inexperienced for cavalry), from Latin īnfāns (without speech, newborn, foolish), from which English also gets infant .

[ 2 ] The individual-soldier term infantryman was not coined until 1837.

[ 3 ] In modern usage, foot soldiers of any era are now considered infantry and infantrymen.

[ 4 ] From the mid-18th century until 1881, the British Army named its infantry as numbered regiments "of Foot" to distinguish them from cavalry and dragoon regiments (see List of Regiments of Foot ).

[ citation needed ] Infantry equipped with special weapons were often named after that weapon, such as grenadiers for their grenades , or fusiliers for their fusils . These names can persist long after the weapon speciality; examples of infantry units that retained such names are the Royal Irish Fusiliers and the Grenadier Guards .

Dragoons were created as mounted infantry , with horses for travel between battles; they were still considered infantry since they dismounted before combat. However, if light cavalry was lacking in an army, any available dragoons might be assigned their duties; this practice increased over time, and dragoons eventually received all the weapons and training as both infantry and cavalry, and could be classified as both. Conversely, starting about the mid-19th century, regular cavalry have been forced to spend more of their time dismounted in combat due to the ever-increasing effectiveness of enemy infantry firearms. Thus most cavalry transitioned to mounted infantry. As with grenadiers, the dragoon and cavalry designations can be retained long after their horses, such as in the Royal Dragoon Guards , Royal Lancers , and King's Royal Hussars .

[ citation needed ] Infantry of the 3rd Armored Cavalry Regiment of the United States Army boarding an M2 Bradley IFV in Iraq in 2006 Similarly, motorised infantry have trucks and other unarmed vehicles for non-combat movement, but are still infantry since they leave their vehicles for any combat. Most modern infantry have vehicle transport, to the point where infantry being motorised is generally assumed, and the few exceptions might be identified as modern light infantry .

Mechanised infantry go beyond motorised, having transport vehicles with combat abilities, armoured personnel carriers (APCs), providing at least some options for combat without leaving their vehicles. In modern infantry, some APCs have evolved to be infantry fighting vehicles (IFVs), which are transport vehicles with more substantial combat abilities, approaching those of light tanks . Some well-equipped mechanised infantry can be designated as armoured infantry . Given that infantry forces typically also have some tanks, and given that most armoured forces have more mechanised infantry units than tank units in their organisation, the distinction between mechanised infantry and armour forces has blurred.

[ citation needed ] History [ edit ] Main article: History of infantry This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

( May 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Ancient Greek infantry of the Greco-Persian Wars (499–449 BC): light infantry (left, slinger ), and the heavy infantry (middle and right, hoplites ) The first military forces in history were infantry. In antiquity , infantry were armed with early melee weapons such as a spear , axe , or sword , or an early ranged weapon like a javelin , sling , or bow , with a few infantrymen being expected to use both a melee and a ranged weapon. With the development of gunpowder , infantry began converting to primarily firearms . By the time of Napoleonic warfare , infantry, cavalry and artillery formed a basic triad of ground forces, though infantry usually remained the most numerous. With armoured warfare , armoured fighting vehicles have replaced the horses of cavalry, and airpower has added a new dimension to ground combat, but infantry remains pivotal to all modern combined arms operations.

[ 5 ] The first warriors, adopting hunting weapons or improvised melee weapons, [ 6 ] before the existence of any organised military, likely started essentially as loose groups without any organisation or formation. But this changed sometime before recorded history ; the first ancient empires (2500–1500 BC) are shown to have some soldiers with standardised military equipment, and the training and discipline required for battlefield formations and manoeuvres: regular infantry .

[ 7 ] Though the main force of the army, these forces were usually kept small due to their cost of training and upkeep, and might be supplemented by local short-term mass-conscript forces using the older irregular infantry weapons and tactics; this remained a common practice almost up to modern times.

[ 8 ] Rocroi, el último tercio ("Roicroi, the last tercio") by Augusto Ferrer-Dalmau , portraying infantry of a battered Spanish tercio at the 1643 Battle of Rocroi Before the adoption of the chariot to create the first mobile fighting forces c.

2000 BC , [ 9 ] all armies were pure infantry. Even after, with a few exceptions like the Mongol Empire , infantry has been the largest component of most armies in history.

[ 10 ] In the Western world , from Classical Antiquity through the Middle Ages ( c.

8th century BC to 15th century AD), infantry are categorised as either heavy infantry or light infantry . After the fall of Rome, the quality of heavy infantry declined, and warfare was dominated by heavy cavalry , [ 11 ] such as knights , forming small elite units for decisive shock combat , supported by peasant infantry militias and assorted light infantry from the lower classes. Towards the end of Middle Ages, this began to change, where more professional and better trained light infantry could be effective against knights, such as the English longbowmen in the Hundred Years' War . By the start of the Renaissance , the infantry began to return to a larger role, with Swiss pikemen and German Landsknechts filling the role of heavy infantry again, using dense formations of pikes to drive off any cavalry.

[ 12 ] Dense formations are vulnerable to ranged weapons. Technological developments allowed the raising of large numbers of light infantry units armed with ranged weapons, without the years of training expected for traditional high-skilled archers and slingers. This started slowly, first with crossbowmen , then hand cannoneers and arquebusiers , each with increasing effectiveness, marking the beginning of early modern warfare , when firearms rendered the use of heavy infantry obsolete. The introduction of musketeers using bayonets in the mid 17th century began replacement of the pike with the infantry square replacing the pike square.

[ 13 ] French Army infantry in a line formation performing a bayonet charge in 1913 To maximise their firepower, musketeer infantry were trained to fight in wide lines facing the enemy, creating line infantry . These fulfilled the central battlefield role of earlier heavy infantry, using ranged weapons instead of melee weapons. To support these lines, smaller infantry formations using dispersed skirmish lines were created, called light infantry, fulfilling the same multiple roles as earlier light infantry. Their arms were no lighter than line infantry; they were distinguished by their skirmish formation and flexible tactics.

[ citation needed ] The modern rifleman infantry became the primary force for taking and holding ground on battlefields as an element of combined arms . As firepower continued to increase, use of infantry lines diminished, until all infantry became light infantry in practice. Modern classifications of infantry have since expanded to reflect modern equipment and tactics, such as motorised infantry , mechanised or armoured infantry , mountain infantry , marine infantry , and airborne infantry .

[ citation needed ] Equipment [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

( October 2017 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Swiss Army infantry kits arrayed in front of a field kitchen in Spitalacker, Bern during a workers' strike, c.

1918 Beyond main arms and armour, an infantryman's "military kit" generally includes combat boots , battledress or combat uniform , camping gear , heavy weather gear, survival gear , secondary weapons and ammunition , weapon service and repair kits, health and hygiene items, mess kit , rations , filled water canteen , and all other consumables each infantryman needs for the expected duration of time operating away from their unit's base, plus any special mission-specific equipment. One of the most valuable pieces of gear is the entrenching tool —basically a folding spade —which can be employed not only to dig important defences, but also in a variety of other daily tasks, and even sometimes as a weapon.

[ 14 ] Infantry typically have shared equipment on top of this, like tents or heavy weapons, where the carrying burden is spread across several infantrymen. In all, this can reach 25–45 kg (60–100 lb) for each soldier on the march.

[ 15 ] Such heavy infantry burdens have changed little over centuries of warfare; in the late Roman Republic, legionaries were nicknamed " Marius' mules " as their main activity seemed to be carrying the weight of their legion around on their backs, a practice that predates the eponymous Gaius Marius .

[ 16 ] Republic of Sierra Leone Armed Forces infantry "packing light" during a patrol in 2013 When combat is expected, infantry typically switch to "packing light", meaning reducing their equipment to weapons, ammunition, and other basic essentials, and leaving other items deemed unnecessary with their transport or baggage train , at camp or rally point, in temporary hidden caches, or even (in emergencies) simply discarding the items.

[ 17 ] Additional specialised equipment may be required, depending on the mission or to the particular terrain or environment, including satchel charges , demolition tools, mines , or barbed wire , carried by the infantry or attached specialists.

Historically, infantry have suffered high casualty rates from disease , exposure, exhaustion and privation—often in excess of the casualties suffered from enemy attacks.

[ 18 ] Better infantry equipment to support their health, energy, and protect from environmental factors greatly reduces these rates of loss, and increase their level of effective action. Health, energy, and morale are greatly influenced by how the soldier is fed, so militaries issue standardised field rations that provide palatable meals and enough calories to keep a soldier well-fed and combat-ready.

[ citation needed ] Communications gear has become a necessity, as it allows effective command of infantry units over greater distances, and communication with artillery and other support units. Modern infantry can have GPS , encrypted individual communications equipment, surveillance and night vision equipment, advanced intelligence and other high-tech mission-unique aids.

[ citation needed ] Armies have sought to improve and standardise infantry gear to reduce fatigue for extended carrying, increase freedom of movement, accessibility, and compatibility with other carried gear, such as the American all-purpose lightweight individual carrying equipment (ALICE).

[ citation needed ] Weapons [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

( October 2017 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Russian weapons from the 13th to 17th centuries Infantrymen are defined by their primary arms – the personal weapons and body armour for their own individual use. The available technology, resources, history, and society can produce quite different weapons for each military and era, but common infantry weapons can be distinguished in a few basic categories.

[ 19 ] [ 20 ] Ranged combat weapons : javelins , slings, blowguns , bows, crossbows , hand cannons, arquebuses , muskets , grenades , flamethrowers .

[ 20 ] Melee combat weapons : bludgeoning weapons like clubs , flails and maces ; bladed weapons like swords, daggers , and axes ; polearms like spears, halberds, naginata , and pikes.

[ 20 ] Both ranged and close weapons : the bayonet fixed to a firearm allows infantrymen to use the same weapon for both ranged combat and close combat. This started with muskets and its use still continues with modern assault rifles .

[ 20 ] Use of the bayonet has declined with the introduction of automatic firearms , but are still generally kept as a weapon of last resort.

[ 21 ] Infantrymen often carry secondary or back-up weapons, sometimes called a sidearm or ancillary weapons. Infantry with ranged or polearms often carried a sword or dagger for possible hand-to-hand combat.

[ 19 ] The pilum was a javelin the Roman legionaries threw just before drawing their primary weapon, the gladius (short sword), and closing with the enemy line.

[ 22 ] Modern infantrymen now treat the bayonet as a backup weapon, but may also have handguns as sidearms . They may also deploy anti-personnel mines, booby traps, incendiary, or explosive devices defensively before combat.

[ citation needed ] Protection [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( October 2017 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The Roman testudo performed during a siege , as shown on Trajan's Column Infantry have employed many different methods of protection from enemy attacks, including various kinds of armour and other gear, and tactical procedures.

The most basic is personal armour . This includes shields , helmets and many types of armour – padded linen , leather, lamellar , mail , plate , and kevlar . Initially, armour was used to defend both from ranged and close combat; even a fairly light shield could help defend against most slings and javelins, though high-strength bows and crossbows might penetrate common armour at very close range. Infantry armour had to compromise between protection and coverage, as a full suit of attack-proof armour would be too heavy to wear in combat.

[ citation needed ] Two U.S. Army soldiers presenting the Personnel Armor System for Ground Troops body armor, then regularly issued to American infantry, in 1996 As firearms improved, armour for ranged defence had to be made thicker and heavier, which hindered mobility. With the introduction of the heavy arquebus designed to pierce standard steel armour, it was proven easier to make heavier firearms than heavier armour; armour transitioned to be only for close combat purposes. Pikemen armour tended to be just steel helmets and breastplates, and gunners had very little or no armour at all. By the time of the musket, the dominance of firepower shifted militaries away from any close combat, and use of armour decreased, until infantry typically went without wearing any armour.

[ citation needed ] Helmets were added back during World War I as artillery began to dominate the battlefield, to protect against their fragmentation and other blast effects beyond a direct hit. Modern developments in bullet-proof composite materials like kevlar have started a return to body armour for infantry, though the extra weight is a notable burden.

[ citation needed ] In modern times, infantrymen must also often carry protective measures against chemical and biological attack, including military gas masks , counter-agents, and protective suits. All of these protective measures add to the weight an infantryman must carry, and may decrease combat efficiency.

Infantry-served weapons [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( October 2017 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Early crew-served weapons were siege weapons , like the ballista , trebuchet , and battering ram . Modern versions include machine guns , anti-tank missiles , and infantry mortars .

[ citation needed ] Formations [ edit ] Main article: Tactical formation This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

( October 2017 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Ancient depiction of infantry formations, from the Stele of the Vultures , Early Dynastic Period (Mesopotamia) , c.

2500 BC Beginning with the development the first regular military forces, close-combat regular infantry fought less as unorganised groups of individuals and more in coordinated units, maintaining a defined tactical formation during combat, for increased battlefield effectiveness; such infantry formations and the arms they used developed together, starting with the spear and the shield.

[ citation needed ] A spear has decent attack abilities with the additional advantage keeping opponents at distance; this advantage can be increased by using longer spears, but this could allow the opponent to side-step the point of the spear and close for hand-to-hand combat where the longer spear is near useless. This can be avoided when each spearman stays side by side with the others in close formation, each covering the ones next to him, presenting a solid wall of spears to the enemy that they cannot get around.

[ citation needed ] Similarly, a shield has decent defence abilities, but is literally hit-or-miss; an attack from an unexpected angle can bypass it completely. Larger shields can cover more, but are also heavier and less manoeuvrable, making unexpected attacks even more of a problem. This can be avoided by having shield-armed soldiers stand close together, side-by-side, each protecting both themselves and their immediate comrades, presenting a solid shield wall to the enemy.

The charge of the French Cuirassiers at the Battle of Waterloo against a British infantry square The opponents for these first formations, the close-combat infantry of more tribal societies , or any military without regular infantry (so called " barbarians ") used arms that focused on the individual – weapons using personal strength and force, such as larger swinging swords, axes, and clubs. These take more room and individual freedom to swing and wield, necessitating a more loose organisation. While this may allow for a fierce running attack (an initial shock advantage) the tighter formation of the heavy spear and shield infantry gave them a local manpower advantage where several might be able to fight each opponent.

[ citation needed ] Thus tight formations heightened advantages of heavy arms, and gave greater local numbers in melee. To also increase their staying power, multiple rows of heavy infantrymen were added. This also increased their shock combat effect; individual opponents saw themselves literally lined-up against several heavy infantryman each, with seemingly no chance of defeating all of them.

Heavy infantry developed into huge solid block formations, up to a hundred meters wide and a dozen rows deep.

[ citation needed ] Maintaining the advantages of heavy infantry meant maintaining formation; this became even more important when two forces with heavy infantry met in battle; the solidity of the formation became the deciding factor. Intense discipline and training became paramount. Empires formed around their military.

[ citation needed ] Organization [ edit ] Main article: Military organization This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

( October 2017 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Republic of Korea Army infantry of the 6th Infantry Division , Reconnaissance Battalion during an exercise in 2014 The organization of military forces into regular military units is first noted in Egyptian records of the Battle of Kadesh ( c.

1274 BC ). Soldiers were grouped into units of 50, which were in turn grouped into larger units of 250, then 1,000, and finally into units of up to 5,000 – the largest independent command. Several of these Egyptian "divisions" made up an army, but operated independently, both on the march and tactically, demonstrating sufficient military command and control organisation for basic battlefield manoeuvres. Similar hierarchical organizations have been noted in other ancient armies, typically with approximately 10 to 100 to 1,000 ratios (even where base 10 was not common), similar to modern sections (squads) , companies , and regiments .

[ 23 ] Training [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( October 2017 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Canadian Army Primary Reserve infantry during urban warfare training in 2004 The training of the infantry has differed drastically over time and from place to place. The cost of maintaining an army in fighting order and the seasonal nature of warfare precluded large permanent armies.

[ 24 ] The antiquity saw everything from the well-trained and motivated citizen armies of Greece and Rome, the tribal host assembled from farmers and hunters with only passing acquaintance with warfare and masses of lightly armed and ill-trained militia put up as a last ditch effort.

Kushite king Taharqa enjoyed military success in the Near East as a result of his efforts to strengthen the army through daily training in long-distance running.

[ 25 ] In medieval times the foot soldiers varied from peasant levies to semi-permanent companies of mercenaries, foremost among them the Swiss, English, Aragonese and German, to men-at-arms who went into battle as well-armoured as knights, the latter of which at times also fought on foot.

[ citation needed ] The creation of standing armies —permanently assembled for war or defence—saw increase in training and experience.

[ citation needed ] The introduction of national and mass armies saw an establishment of minimum requirements and the introduction of special troops (first of them the engineers going back to medieval times, but also different kinds of infantry adopted to specific terrain, bicycle, motorcycle, motorised and mechanised troops) culminating with the introduction of highly trained special forces during the first and second World War.

[ citation needed ] See also [ edit ] Air assault troops / Airborne forces Ashigaru Combined arms Foot guards Fusiliers Glider infantry / Paratrooper Grenadiers Indonesian Army infantry battalions Infantry Branch (United States) Infantry of the British Army Infantry tactics Line infantry Marines United States Army Rangers Riflemen Royal Canadian Infantry Corps School of Infantry Special forces / Commando Pathfinder (military) References [ edit ] Citations [ edit ] ^ "Infantry - Etymology, Origin & Meaning" .

etymonline . Retrieved 11 June 2025 .

^ "Infantry" .

Online Etymology Dictionary . Retrieved 17 October 2017 .

^ "Infantryman" .

Online Etymology Dictionary . Retrieved 17 October 2017 .

^ "Infantry" .

Dictionary.com . Retrieved 17 October 2017 .

^ Smith, Christopher.

"Contemporary Warfare, the Utility of Infantry, and Implications for the Project Land 400 Combined Arms Fighting System" .

Australian Army Journal . Directorate of Future Land Warfare . Retrieved 1 January 2010 .

^ Kelly, Raymond (October 2005).

"The evolution of lethal intergroup violence" .

PNAS .

102 (43): 24– 29.

doi : 10.1073/pnas.0505955102 .

PMC 1266108 .

PMID 16129826 .

^ Keeley, War Before Civilization , 1996, Oxford University Press, p. 45, Fig. 3.1 ^ Newman, Simon (29 May 2012).

"Military in the Middle Ages" .

thefinertimes.com . Retrieved 6 October 2015 .

^ Wilford, John Noble (22 February 1994).

"Remaking the Wheel: Evolution of the Chariot" .

The New York Times, Science . Retrieved 12 November 2017 .

^ "Infantry | Soldiers, Tactics, Combat | Britannica" .

www.britannica.com . 8 February 2025 . Retrieved 5 March 2025 .

^ Kagay, Donald J.; Villalon, L. J. Andrew (1999).

The Circle of War in the Middle Ages . Boydell Press. p. 53.

ISBN 978-0851156453 .

^ Carey, Brian Todd (2006).

Warfare in the Medieval World . London: Pen & Sword Military. p. chapter 6.

ISBN 978-1848847415 .

^ Archer, Christon I. (2002).

World History of Warfare . U of Nebraska Press. p.

291 .

ISBN 978-0803219410 .

^ "Military kit through the ages: from the Battle of Hastings to Helmand" .

The Telegraph . Archived from the original on 4 August 2014 . Retrieved 26 October 2017 .

^ Murphy, Patricia.

"Weight Of War: Soldiers' Heavy Gear Packs On Pain" .

NPR . Retrieved 26 October 2017 .

^ Taylor, Michael J (2019).

"Tactical reform in the late Roman republic: the view from Italy" .

Historia: Zeitschrift für Alte Geschichte .

68 (1): 76– 94.

doi : 10.25162/historia-2019-0004 .

ISSN 0018-2311 .

S2CID 165437350 .

^ Handy, Aaron Jr. (2010). "Part Two, chapter 3".

That Powerless Feeling . Trafford Publishing.

ISBN 978-1-4251-3155-5 .

^ McPherson, James M. (1989).

Battle cry of freedom : the Civil War era (1st Ballantine books ed.). Ballantine Books. p.

485 .

ISBN 0345359429 .

^ a b Zabecki, David T. (28 October 2014).

Germany at War: 400 Years of Military History . ABC-CLIO. p. 640.

ISBN 978-1598849806 .

^ a b c d Blumberg, Naomi.

"List of weapons" .

Encyclopedia Britannica . The Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc . Retrieved 13 November 2017 .

^ Kontis, George.

"Are We Forever Stuck with the Bayonet?" .

Small Arms Defense Journal . Retrieved 13 November 2017 .

^ Zhmodikov, Alexander (2000). "Roman Republican Heavy Infantrymen in Battle (IV-II Centuries B.C.)".

Historia: Zeitschrift für Alte Geschichte . Vol. 49. ABC-CLIO. p. 640.

ISBN 978-1598849806 .

^ Centeno, Miguel A.

; Enriquez, Elaine (31 March 2016). "Origins of Battle".

War and Society . John Wiley & Sons. pp.

81– 84.

ISBN 978-0-313-22348-8 .

^ "Training of Infantry in history" .

Bing . Retrieved 7 August 2024 .

^ Török, László (1998).

The Kingdom of Kush: Handbook of the Napatan-Meroitic Civilization . Leiden: Brill. pp.

132– 133, 153– 184.

ISBN 90-04-10448-8 .

Sources [ edit ] English, John A., Gudmundsson, Bruce I., On Infantry , (Revised edition), The Military Profession series, Praeger Publishers, London, 1994.

ISBN 0-275-94972-9 .

The Times , Earl Wavell, Thursday, 19 April 1945 In Praise of Infantry Archived 16 March 2021 at the Wayback Machine .

Tobin, James, Ernie Pyle's War: America's Eyewitness to World War II , Free Press, 1997.

Mauldin, Bill, Ambrose, Stephen E., Up Front , W. W. Norton, 2000.

Trogdon, Robert W., Ernest Hemingway: A Literary Reference , Da Capo Press, 2002.

The New York Times , Maj Gen C T Shortis, British Director of Infantry, 4 February 1985.

Heinl, Robert Debs, Dictionary of Military and Naval Quotations , Plautus in The Braggart Captain (3rd century AD), Naval Institute Press, Annapolis, 1978.

Nafziger, George, Napoleon's Invasion of Russia , Presidio Press, 1998.

McManus, John C.

Grunts: inside the American infantry combat experience, World War II through Iraq New York, NY: NAL Caliber. 2010 ISBN 978-0-451-22790-4 plus Webcast Author Lecture at the Pritzker Military Library on 29 September 2010.

Rottman, Gordon (2008).

World War II Infantry Assault Tactics . Osprey Publishing.

ISBN 978-1-84603-191-5 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Infantry .

Historic films and photos showing Infantries in World War I at europeanfilmgateway.eu In Praise of Infantry , by Field-Marshal Earl Wavell; First published in "The Times", Thursday, 19 April 1945.

The Lagunari "Serenissima" Regiment KFOR: KFOR Chronicle.

Web Version of U.S. Army Field Manual 3–21.8 – The Infantry Rifle Platoon and Squad.

"Infantry" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 14 (11th ed.). 1911. pp.

517– 533.

— includes several drawings v t e Military and war Concepts Military Service History Technology Occupational roles Recruitment National security Roles: Soldier Sailor Airman Enlisted rank Officer Commanding officer Executive officer Protocols and structure: Ranks List Uniforms Awards and decorations By country Highest Categories: Ranks Forces Command and control Defense ministry Armed Forces : Army Navy Air force Marines Space force Special forces Airborne forces Commando Frogman Militia Reserves Functional specialties: Communications Engineers Intelligence Reconnaissance List Medical Military police Gendarmerie Security forces Border guard Coast guard Logistics By country Categories: Combat occupations Development: Basic training Military maneuvers Combat training Branches Land units: Combat arms Infantry Armor Cavalry Artillery Special reconnaissance Signal corps Naval units: Warships Surface Littoral Patrol Submarines Aircraft carriers Landing craft Auxiliary ship Air units: Fighters Bombers Command Close air support Electronic-warfare Reconnaissance Structure Organization By country Armies by country Chain of command Unified combatant command General staff Land: Army group Field army Corps List Division List Brigade By type Regiment By country By type Battalion By country By type Platoon Squad Naval: Naval fleet Task force Carrier strike group Division Flotilla Squadron Air: Combat box Special units by nation: Battle Fleet; U.S. Navy Front; Russian land forces Vehicles Ground: Ground List Combat Tracked vehicles Wheeled vehicles Armor Tank Infantry fighting vehicle Lists By country Armored car Scout car Truck List Gun truck Self-propelled artillery List Anti-aircraft Rail Weapons Land Weapons List Artillery: Artillery List By country Battery Field gun List Howitzer List Rocket List Infantry guns : Pistols Machine guns List Service rifles : Battle rifles List Assault rifle List Sniper rifle Other infantry weapons: Bazooka Anti-tank gun List Grenade List Flamethrower Bayonet Combat knife List Missiles : Shoulder-fired Anti-tank List By country Mortar Lists: Infantry Heavy Other: Land mine Shells Sea/Air: Guided missiles List Naval : Naval artillery List Anti-ship missiles Torpedoes Depth charges Close-in weapons Aerial : Guns Missiles Bombs Equipment Military equipment Lists By country Helmet List Camouflage List Body armor Facilities: Military base Lists Field hospital Combat systems Fire-control system Fire-control radar Director (military) Combat information center Sonar Radar Historical: Ship gun fire-control Gun data computer Torpedo Data Computer Warfare War Battle Strategy Tactics Combat Military science Diplomacy International law By era: Prehistoric Ancient Post-classical Early modern Late modern industrial fourth-gen By type: Armoured warfare Artillery Barrage Biological Camouflage Cavalry Chemical Class Combined arms Conventional Cyber Denial Disinformation Drone Electronic Infantry Lawfare Loitering Music Nuclear Psychological Radiological Unconventional Battlespace Aerospace Air Airborne Space Land Cold-region Desert Jungle Mountain Urban Sea Amphibious Blue Brown Green Surface Underwater Subterranean Tunnel Cyber Information Tactics List of military tactics Aerial Airlift Airbridge Airdrop Battle Cavalry Charge Counterattack Counterinsurgency Defeat in detail Foxhole Envelopment Guerrilla Morale Rapid dominance Siege Swarming Tactical objective Target saturation Trench Withdrawal Operational Military operation Operations research Blitzkrieg Expeditionary Deep operation Maneuver Operational manoeuvre group Strategy List of military strategies and concepts Military campaign Attrition Counter-offensive Culminating Defence in depth Fabian Mosaic Deception Defensive Depth Goal Naval Offensive Scorched earth Policy Diplomacy : Alliances Peace treaty Cooperation Deterrence theory United Nations Mediation Public policy: Conscription Defense budget List Past Per capita Defense policy Related: Government Nation Lists Military lists Wars Weapons Military tactics History lists: Wars Battles Military occupations Operations Sieges Related lists: War crimes Writers Other namespace Templates {{ War }} {{ Weapons }} {{ Ranks }} Vehicles and weapons {{ Tanks }} {{ Weapons }} {{ Infantry fighting vehicles }} {{ Modern warships }} {{ Aircraft }} Specific modern wars {{ Napoleonic Wars }} {{ World War I }} {{ World War II }} {{ Cold War }} Categories Lists of wars by country Conflicts by time Related Peace Peace and conflict studies Peace movement Peace process Disarmament Pacifism Détente Global studies Conscientious objector Anti-war movement Idealism in international relations Humanitarianism International cooperation Crimes against humanity {{ International relations }} Categories: Peace organizations Category Commons Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic Israel Other Historical Dictionary of Switzerland NARA NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐bf252
Cached time: 20250814215810
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.918 seconds
Real time usage: 1.083 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 8188/1000000
Revision size: 35961/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 262386/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 14543/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 14/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 137275/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.540/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 17616893/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  838.405      1 -total
 24.56%  205.912      1 Template:Reflist
 15.00%  125.787     12 Template:Cite_web
 14.37%  120.485     21 Template:Citation_needed
 11.45%   96.001     21 Template:Fix
  9.05%   75.917      1 Template:War
  8.87%   74.388      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
  8.41%   70.515      1 Template:Lang
  7.31%   61.305      1 Template:Short_description
  6.53%   54.775      1 Template:Military_and_war Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:15068:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814215810 and revision id 1305659051. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Infantry&oldid=1305659051 " Categories : Infantry Combat occupations Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia articles needing factual verification from August 2022 Use dmy dates from February 2015 Use British English from November 2017 Articles needing additional references from May 2021 All articles needing additional references Articles containing Middle French (ca. 1400-1600)-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from May 2022 Articles needing additional references from October 2017 Webarchive template wayback links Commons link from Wikidata Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference This page was last edited on 13 August 2025, at 10:17 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Infantry 82 languages Add topic

