Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 In relation to the Higgs boson 2 Explanation 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Vector boson 12 languages বাংলা Català Español فارسی Français 한국어 Italiano Nederlands 日本語 Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Русский Türkçe Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Boson with Spin 1 This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Vector boson" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( December 2009 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) In particle physics , a vector boson is a boson whose spin equals one. Vector bosons that are also elementary particles are gauge bosons , the force carriers of fundamental interactions . Some composite particles are vector bosons, for instance any vector meson ( quark and antiquark ). During the 1970s and 1980s, intermediate vector bosons (the W and Z bosons, which mediate the weak interaction) drew much attention in particle physics .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] A pseudovector boson is a vector boson that has even parity , whereas "regular" vector bosons have odd parity. There are no fundamental pseudovector bosons, but there are pseudovector mesons .

[ 3 ] In relation to the Higgs boson [ edit ] Feynman diagram of the fusion of two electroweak vector bosons to the scalar Higgs boson , which is a prominent process of the generation of Higgs bosons at particle accelerators (q: quark particle, W and Z: vector bosons of the electroweak interaction , H 0 : Higgs boson) The W and Z particles interact with the Higgs boson as shown in the Feynman diagram .

[ 4 ] Explanation [ edit ] The name vector boson arises from quantum field theory . The component of such a particle's spin along any axis has the three eigenvalues − ħ , 0, and + ħ (where ħ is the reduced Planck constant ), meaning that any measurement of its spin can only yield one of these values. (This is true for massive vector bosons; the situation differs for massless particles such as the photon, for reasons beyond the scope of this article. See Wigner's classification .

[ 5 ] ) The space of spin states therefore is a discrete degree of freedom consisting of three states, the same as the number of components of a vector in three-dimensional space.

Quantum superpositions of these states can be taken such that they transform under rotations just like the spatial components of a rotating vector [ 6 ] (the so-called 3 representation of SU(2) ). If the vector boson is taken to be the quantum of a field, the field is a vector field , hence the name.

The boson part of the name arises from the spin-statistics relation , which requires that all integer spin particles be bosons.

[ 7 ] See also [ edit ] Scalar boson Maxwell's equations Proca action References [ edit ] ^ Barianti, G.; Gabathuler, E. (October 1983).

"Intermediate Vector Bosons: Production and Identification at the CERN Proton-Antiproton Collider" (PDF) . Europhysics News. pp. 6, 14 . Retrieved June 2, 2021 .

^ Ellis, John; Gaillard, Mary K.; Girardi, Georges; Sorba, Paul (1982).

"Physics of Intermediate Vector Boson" (PDF) .

Annual Review of Nuclear and Particle Science .

32 . Annual Reviews: 443– 497.

Bibcode : 1982ARNPS..32..443E .

doi : 10.1146/annurev.ns.32.120182.002303 .

^ "Intermediate vector boson | subatomic particle | Britannica" .

www.britannica.com . Retrieved 2024-10-10 .

^ "Confirmed! Newfound Particle Is a Higgs Boson" .

Live Science . 14 March 2013.

^ Weingard, Robert .

"Some Comments Regarding Spin and Relativity" (PDF) .

^ Franzosi, Diogo Buarque; Gallinaro, Michele; Ruiz, Richard; Aarrestad, Thea K.; Cetorelli, Flavia; Chiesa, Mauro; Costantini, Antonio; Denner, Ansgar; Dittmaier, Stefan (2022). "Vector boson scattering processes: Status and prospects".

Reviews in Physics .

8 .

arXiv : 2106.01393 .

doi : 10.1016/j.revip.2022.100071 .

^ Candemir, N.; Ahmed, F. (2023-03-24).

"Generalized Vector Boson Oscillator in (1+2)-Dimensional Gürses Space-Time" .

Few-Body Systems .

64 (2): 13.

doi : 10.1007/s00601-023-01795-z .

ISSN 1432-5411 .

v t e Particles in physics Elementary Fermions Quarks Up (quark antiquark) Down (quark antiquark) Charm (quark antiquark) Strange (quark antiquark) Top (quark antiquark) Bottom (quark antiquark) Leptons Electron Positron Muon Antimuon Tau Antitau Neutrino Electron neutrino Electron antineutrino Muon neutrino Muon antineutrino Tau neutrino Tau antineutrino Bosons Gauge Photon Gluon W and Z bosons Scalar Higgs boson Ghost fields Faddeev–Popov ghosts Hypothetical Superpartners Gauginos Gluino Gravitino Photino Others Axino Chargino Higgsino Neutralino Sfermion ( Stop squark ) Others Axion Curvaton Dilaton Dual graviton Graviphoton Graviton Inflaton Leptoquark Magnetic monopole Majoron Majorana fermion Dark photon Preon Sterile neutrino Tachyon W′ and Z′ bosons X and Y bosons Composite Hadrons Baryons Nucleon Proton Antiproton Neutron Antineutron Delta baryon Lambda baryon Sigma baryon Xi baryon Omega baryon Mesons Pion Rho meson Eta and eta prime mesons Bottom eta meson Phi meson J/psi meson Omega meson Upsilon meson Kaon B meson D meson Quarkonium Exotic hadrons Tetraquark ( Double-charm tetraquark ) Pentaquark Others Atomic nuclei Atoms Exotic atoms Positronium Muonium Tauonium Onia Pionium Protonium Antihydrogen Superatoms Molecules Hypothetical Baryons Hexaquark Heptaquark Skyrmion Mesons Glueball Theta meson T meson Others Mesonic molecule Pomeron Diquark R-hadron Quasiparticles Anyon Davydov soliton Dropleton Exciton Fracton Hole Magnon Phonon Plasmaron Plasmon Polariton Polaron Roton Trion Lists Baryons Mesons Particles Quasiparticles Timeline of particle discoveries Related History of subatomic physics timeline Standard Model mathematical formulation Subatomic particles Particles Antiparticles Nuclear physics Eightfold way Quark model Exotic matter Massless particle Relativistic particle Virtual particle Wave–particle duality Particle chauvinism Physics portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Vector_boson&oldid=1266665269 " Categories : Bosons Mesons Gauge theories Particle physics Subatomic particles with spin 1 Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from December 2009 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 1 January 2025, at 18:09 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Vector boson 12 languages Add topic

