Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Areas involved 2 Dating 3 By region Toggle By region subsection 3.1 Europe 3.1.1 Cultural responses 3.1.2 Depictions of winter in European painting 3.1.3 General Crisis of the seventeenth century 3.2 North America 3.3 Mesoamerica 3.4 Atlantic Ocean 3.5 Asia 3.6 Africa 3.7 Antarctica 3.8 Australia and New Zealand 3.9 Pacific islands 3.10 South America 3.11 Middle East 4 Central England temperature series 5 Possible causes Toggle Possible causes subsection 5.1 Orbital cycles 5.2 Solar activity 5.3 Volcanic activity 5.4 Ocean circulation 5.5 Decreased human populations 5.5.1 The Black Death in Europe 5.5.2 Mongol invasions 5.5.3 Destruction of native populations and biomass of the Americas 5.6 Population increases at mid- to high latitudes 5.7 Inherent variability of climate 6 See also 7 References 8 Further reading 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Little Ice Age 64 languages Alemannisch العربية Aragonés Asturianu تۆرکجه বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Беларуская Български Català Чӑвашла Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Hausa हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית ქართული Latviešu Lietuvių Limburgs Magyar Македонски Монгол Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் తెలుగు ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiversity Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Climatic cooling after the Medieval Warm Period (16th–19th centuries) For the most recent period that was much colder than present with significant glaciation, see Last Glacial Period .

Global average temperatures show that the Little Ice Age was not a distinct planet-wide period but a regional phenomenon occurring near the end of a long temperature decline that preceded recent global warming .

[ 1 ] The Little Ice Age ( LIA ) was a period of regional cooling, particularly pronounced in the North Atlantic region.

[ 2 ] It was not a true ice age of global extent.

[ 3 ] The term was introduced into scientific literature by François E. Matthes in 1939.

[ 4 ] The period has been conventionally defined as extending from the 16th to the 19th centuries, [ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] but some experts prefer an alternative time-span from about 1300 [ 8 ] to about 1850.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] [ 11 ] The NASA Earth Observatory notes three particularly cold intervals. One began about 1650, another about 1770, and the last in 1850, all of which were separated by intervals of slight warming.

[ 7 ] The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change Third Assessment Report considered that the timing and the areas affected by the LIA suggested largely independent regional climate changes, rather than a globally synchronous increased glaciation. At most, there was modest cooling of the Northern Hemisphere during the period.

[ 3 ] Several causes have been proposed: cyclical lows in solar radiation , heightened volcanic activity , changes in the ocean circulation , variations in Earth's orbit and axial tilt ( orbital forcing ), inherent variability in global climate, and decreases in the human population (such as from the massacres by Genghis Khan , the Black Death and the epidemics emerging in the Americas upon European contact [ 12 ] [ 13 ] ).

Areas involved [ edit ] The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change Third Assessment Report (TAR) of 2001 described the areas that were affected: Evidence from mountain glaciers does suggest increased glaciation in a number of widely spread regions outside Europe prior to the twentieth century, including Alaska, New Zealand and Patagonia . However, the timing of maximum glacial advances in these regions differs considerably, suggesting that they may represent largely independent regional climate changes , not a globally-synchronous increased glaciation. Thus current evidence does not support globally synchronous periods of anomalous cold or warmth over this interval, and the conventional terms of "Little Ice Age" and " Medieval Warm Period " appear to have limited utility in describing trends in hemispheric or global mean temperature changes in past centuries. ... [Viewed] hemispherically, the "Little Ice Age" can only be considered as a modest cooling of the Northern Hemisphere during this period of less than 1°C relative to late twentieth century levels.

[ 3 ] The IPCC Fourth Assessment Report (AR4) of 2007 discusses more recent research and gives particular attention to the Medieval Warm Period: ... when viewed together, the currently available reconstructions indicate generally greater variability in centennial time scale trends over the last 1 kyr than was apparent in the TAR. ... The result is a picture of relatively cool conditions in the seventeenth and early nineteenth centuries and warmth in the eleventh and early fifteenth centuries, but the warmest conditions are apparent in the twentieth century. Given that the confidence levels surrounding all of the reconstructions are wide, virtually all reconstructions are effectively encompassed within the uncertainty previously indicated in the TAR. The major differences between the various proxy reconstructions relate to the magnitude of past cool excursions, principally during the twelfth to fourteenth, seventeenth and nineteenth centuries.

[ 14 ] Dating [ edit ] The last written records of the Norse Greenlanders are from a 1408 marriage at Hvalsey Church , which is now the best-preserved Norse ruin.

There is no consensus on when the Little Ice Age began, [ 15 ] [ 16 ] but a series of events before the known climatic minima have often been referenced. In the 13th century, pack ice began advancing southwards in the North Atlantic, as did glaciers in Greenland . Anecdotal evidence suggests expanding glaciers almost worldwide. Based on radiocarbon dating of roughly 150 samples of dead plant material with roots intact that were collected from beneath ice caps on Baffin Island and Iceland , Miller et al.

(2012) [ 8 ] state that cold summers and ice growth began abruptly between 1275 and 1300, followed by "a substantial intensification" from 1430 to 1455.

[ 8 ] In contrast, a climate reconstruction based on glacial length [ 17 ] [ 18 ] shows no great variation from 1600 to 1850 but a strong retreat thereafter.

Therefore, any of several dates ranging over 400 years may indicate the beginning of the Little Ice Age: 1250 for when Atlantic pack ice began to grow, a cold period that was possibly triggered or enhanced by the massive eruption of the Samalas volcano in 1257 [ 19 ] and the associated volcanic winter .

1275 to 1300 for when the radiocarbon dating of plants shows that they were killed by glaciation 1300 for when warm summers stopped being dependable in Northern Europe 1315 for when rains and the Great Famine of 1315–1317 occurred 1560 to 1630 for when the worldwide glacial expansion, known as the Grindelwald Fluctuation , [ 20 ] began 1650, not the start of the Little Ice Age, but the start of the coldest years midway through, i.e., the First Climatic Minimum [ clarification needed ] The Little Ice Age ended in the latter half of the 19th century or in the early 20th century.

[ 21 ] [ 22 ] [ 23 ] The 6th report of the IPCC describes the coldest period in the last millennium as: [ 24 ] a multi-centennial period of relatively low temperature beginning around the 15th century, with GMST averaging –0.03 [–0.30 to 0.06] °C between 1450 and 1850 relative to 1850–1900.

By region [ edit ] Europe [ edit ] See also: Irish Famine (1740–1741) River Thames frost fair , 1684 Drangajökull , Iceland's northernmost glacier, reached its maximum extent during the LIA around 1665 or 1765.

[ 25 ] The Seine frozen, 3 January 1880. At the end of the 19th century, the climate was still colder than today.

The Baltic Sea froze over twice, in 1303 and 1306–1307, and years followed of "unseasonable cold, storms and rains, and a rise in the level of the Caspian Sea".

[ 26 ] The Little Ice Age brought colder winters to parts of Europe and North America. Farms and villages in the Swiss Alps were destroyed by encroaching glaciers during the mid-17th century.

[ 27 ] Canals and rivers in Great Britain and the Netherlands were frequently frozen deeply enough to support ice skating and winter festivals.

[ 27 ] As trade needed to continue during the prolonged winter often spanning 5 months, merchants equipped their boer style boats with planks and skates (runners), hence the iceboat was born. The first River Thames frost fair was in 1608 and the last in 1814. Changes to the bridges and the addition of the Thames Embankment have affected the river's flow and depth and greatly diminish the possibility of further freezes.

[ 28 ] [ 29 ] March Across the Belts , 1658 In 1658, a Swedish army marched through Denmark and across the Great Belt to attack Copenhagen from the west.

The winter of 1794–1795 was particularly harsh: the French invasion army under Pichegru marched on the frozen rivers of the Netherlands, and the Dutch fleet was locked in the ice in Den Helder harbour.

Sea ice surrounding Iceland extended for miles in every direction and closed harbors to shipping. The population of Iceland fell by half, but that may have been caused by skeletal fluorosis after the eruption of Laki in 1783.

[ 30 ] Iceland also suffered failures of cereal crops and people moved away from a grain-based diet.

[ 31 ] After Greenland 's climate became colder and stormier around 1250, the diet of the Norse Viking settlements there steadily shifted away from agricultural sources. By around 1300, seal hunting provided over three quarters of their food.  By 1350, there was reduced demand for their exports, and trade with Europe fell away. The last document from the settlements dates from 1412, and over the following decades, the remaining Europeans left in what seems to have been a gradual withdrawal, which was caused mainly by economic factors such as increased availability of farms in Scandinavian countries.

[ 32 ] Greenland was largely cut off by ice from 1410 to the 1720s.

[ 33 ] Between 1620 and 1740, the Yzeron Basin in the Massif Central of France witnessed a phase of decreased fluvial activity . This decline in fluvial activity is believed to be linked to a multidecennial phase of droughts in the western Mediterranean.

[ 34 ] In southwestern Europe, a negative North Atlantic oscillation (NAO) combined with increased aridity caused an increase in wind-driven sediment deposition during the LIA.

[ 35 ] Winter skating on the main canal of Pompenburg, Rotterdam in 1825, shortly before the minimum, by Bartholomeus Johannes van Hove In his 1995 book, the early climatologist Hubert Lamb said that in many years, "snowfall was much heavier than recorded before or since, and the snow lay on the ground for many months longer than it does today." [ 36 ] In Lisbon , Portugal, snowstorms were much more frequent than today, and one winter in the 17th century produced eight snowstorms.

[ citation needed ] Many springs and summers were cold and wet but with great variability between years and groups of years. That was particularly evident during the "Grindelwald Fluctuation" (1560–1630); the rapid cooling phase was associated with more erratic weather, including increased storminess, unseasonal snowstorms, and droughts.

[ 37 ] Crop practices throughout Europe had to be altered to adapt to the shortened and less reliable growing season, and there were many years of scarcity and famine . One was the Great Famine of 1315–1317 , but that may have been before the Little Ice Age.

[ 38 ] According to Elizabeth Ewan and Janay Nugent, "Famines in France 1693–94, Norway 1695–96 and Sweden 1696–97 claimed roughly 10 percent of the population of each country. In Estonia and Finland in 1696–97, losses have been estimated at a fifth and a third of the national populations, respectively." [ 39 ] Viticulture disappeared from some northern regions, and storms caused serious flooding and loss of life. Some of them resulted in the permanent loss of large areas of land from the Danish, German, and Dutch coasts .

[ 36 ] The violinmaker Antonio Stradivari produced his instruments during the Little Ice Age. The colder climate may have caused the wood that was used in his violins to be denser than in warmer periods and to contribute to the tone of his instruments.

[ 40 ] According to the science historian James Burke , the period inspired such novelties in everyday life as the widespread use of buttons and button-holes, as well as knitting of custom-made undergarments for the better covering and insulating of the body. Chimneys were invented to replace open fires in the centre of communal halls to allow houses with multiple rooms to have the separation of masters from servants.

[ 41 ] The Little Ice Age , by the anthropologist Brian Fagan of the University of California at Santa Barbara , describes the plight of European peasants from 1300 to 1850: famines, hypothermia , bread riots and the rise of despotic leaders brutalizing an increasingly dispirited peasantry. In the late 17th century, agriculture had dropped off dramatically: "Alpine villagers lived on bread made from ground nutshells mixed with barley and oat flour." [ 42 ] Historian Wolfgang Behringer has linked intensive witch-hunting episodes in Europe to agricultural failures during the Little Ice Age.

[ 43 ] David Vinckboons , Winter Landscape with Skaters and Ice-Sailing (c. 1615) The Frigid Golden Age , by the environmental historian Dagomar Degroot of Georgetown University , points out that some societies thrived, but others faltered during the Little Ice Age. In particular, the Little Ice Age transformed environments around the Dutch Republic and made them easier to exploit in commerce and conflict. The Dutch were resilient, even adaptive, in the face of weather that devastated neighboring countries. Merchants exploited harvest failures, military commanders took advantage of shifting wind patterns, and inventors developed technologies that helped them profit from the cold. The 17th-century Dutch Golden Age therefore owed much to its people's flexibility in coping with the changing climate.

[ 44 ] Cultural responses [ edit ] Historians have argued that cultural responses to the consequences of the Little Ice Age in Europe consisted of violent scapegoating .

[ 45 ] [ 46 ] [ 47 ] [ 43 ] [ 48 ] The prolonged cold, dry periods brought drought upon many European communities and resulted in poor crop growth, poor livestock survival, and increased activity of pathogens and disease vectors.

[ 49 ] Disease intensified under the same conditions that unemployment and economic difficulties arose: prolonged cold, dry seasons. Disease and unemployment generated a lethal positive feedback loop.

[ 49 ] Although the communities had some contingency plans, such as better crop mixes, emergency grain stocks, and international food trade, they did not always prove effective.

[ 45 ] Communities often lashed out via violent crimes, including robbery and murder. Accusations of sexual offenses also increased, such as adultery , bestiality , and rape .

[ 46 ] Europeans sought explanations for the famine, disease, and social unrest that they were experiencing, and they blamed the innocent. Evidence from several studies indicate that increases in violent actions against marginalized groups, which were held responsible for the Little Ice Age, overlap with the years of particularly cold, dry weather.

[ 47 ] [ 43 ] [ 45 ] One example of the violent scapegoating occurring during the Little Ice Age was the resurgence of witchcraft trials . Oster (2004) and Behringer (1999) argue that the resurgence was brought by the climatic decline. Prior to the Little Ice Age, witchcraft was considered an insignificant crime, and victims (the supposed witches) were rarely accused.

[ 43 ] But beginning in the 1380s, just as the Little Ice Age began, European populations began to link magic and weather-making.

[ 43 ] The first systematic witch hunts began in the 1430s, and by the 1480s, it was widely believed that witches should be held accountable for poor weather.

[ 43 ] Witches were blamed for direct and indirect consequences of the Little Ice Age: livestock epidemics, cows that gave too little milk, late frosts, and unknown diseases.

[ 46 ] In general, the number of witchcraft trials rose as the temperature dropped, and trials decreased when temperature increased.

[ 45 ] [ 43 ] The peaks of witchcraft persecutions overlap with the hunger crises that occurred in 1570 and 1580, the latter lasting a decade.

[ 43 ] The trials targeted primarily poor women, many of them widows. Not everybody agreed that witches should be persecuted for weather-making, but such arguments focused primarily not upon whether witches existed but upon whether witches had the capability to control the weather.

[ 43 ] [ 45 ] The Catholic Church in the Early Middle Ages argued that witches could not control the weather because they were mortals, not God, but by the mid-13th century, most people agreed with the idea that witches could control natural forces.

[ 45 ] Jewish populations were also blamed for climatic deterioration during the Little Ice Age.

[ 46 ] [ 48 ] The Western European states experienced waves of anti-Semitism , directed against the main religious minority in their otherwise Christian societies.

[ 46 ] There was no direct link made between Jews and the weather; they were blamed only for indirect consequences such as disease.

[ 46 ] Outbreaks of the Black Death were often blamed on Jews. In Western European cities during the 1300s, Jewish populations were murdered to stop the spread of the plague.

[ 46 ] Rumors spread that Jews were either poisoning wells themselves, or telling lepers to poison the wells.

[ 46 ] To escape persecution, some Jews converted to Christianity, while others migrated to the Ottoman Empire , Italy or the Holy Roman Empire , where they experienced greater toleration.

[ 46 ] Some populations blamed the cold periods and the resulting famine and disease during the Little Ice Age on a general divine displeasure.

[ 47 ] Particular groups took the brunt of the burden in attempts to cure it.

[ 47 ] In Germany, regulations were imposed upon activities such as gambling and drinking , which disproportionately affected the lower class and women were forbidden from showing their knees.

[ 47 ] Other regulations affected the wider population, such as prohibiting dancing, sexual activities and moderating food and drink intake.

[ 47 ] In Ireland, Catholics blamed the Reformation for the bad weather. The Annals of Loch Cé , in its entry for 1588, describes a midsummer snowstorm as "a wild apple was not larger than each stone of it" and blames it on the presence of a "wicked, heretical, bishop in Oilfinn", the Protestant Bishop of Elphin , John Lynch .

[ 50 ] [ 51 ] Depictions of winter in European painting [ edit ] The Reverend Robert Walker Skating on Duddingston Loch , attributed to Henry Raeburn , 1790s William James Burroughs analyzes the depiction of winter in paintings, as does Hans Neuberger .

[ 52 ] Burroughs asserts that it occurred almost entirely from 1565 to 1665 and was associated with the climatic decline from 1550 onwards. Burroughs claims that there had been almost no depictions of winter in art, and he "hypothesizes that the unusually harsh winter of 1565 inspired great artists to depict highly original images and that the decline in such paintings was a combination of the 'theme' having been fully explored and mild winters interrupting the flow of painting." [ 53 ] Wintry scenes, which entail technical difficulties in painting, have been regularly and well handled since at least the early 15th century by artists in illuminated manuscript cycles that show the Labours of the Months , typically placed on the calendar pages of books of hours . January and February are typically shown as snowy, as in February in the famous cycle in the Très Riches Heures du Duc de Berry , painted in 1412–1416 and illustrated below. Since landscape painting had not yet developed as an independent genre in art, the absence of other winter scenes is not remarkable. On the other hand, snowy winter landscapes, particularly stormy seascapes, became artistic genres in the Dutch Golden Age painting during the coldest and stormiest decades of the Little Ice Age.

[ 54 ] Most modern scholars believe them to be full of symbolic messages and metaphors, which would have been clear to contemporary viewers.

[ 54 ] The Hunters in the Snow by Pieter Bruegel the Elder , 1565 All of the famous winter landscape paintings by Pieter Bruegel the Elder , such as The Hunters in the Snow and the Massacre of the Innocents , are thought to have been painted around 1565. His son Pieter Brueghel the Younger (1564–1638) also painted many snowy landscapes, but according to Burroughs, he "slavishly copied his father's designs. The derivative nature of so much of this work makes it difficult to draw any definite conclusions about the influence of the winters between 1570 and 1600".

[ 53 ] [ 55 ] [ 29 ] Bruegel the Elder painted Hunters in the Snow in Antwerp, so the mountains in the picture probably mean it was based on drawings or memories from crossing of the Alps during his trip to Rome in 1551–1552. It is one of 5 known surviving paintings, probably from a series of 6 or 12, known as "the Twelve Months", that Breugel was commissioned to paint by a wealthy patron in Antwerp , Nicolaes Jonghelinck ( Hunters in the Snow being for January): none of the other four that survive show a snow-covered landscape and both The Hay Harvest (July) and The Harvesters (August) depict warm summer days. Even The Return of the Herd (thought to be the painting for November) and The Gloomy Day (known to be for February) show landscapes free of snow.

[ 29 ] Winter landscape with iceskaters , c.

1608 , Hendrick Avercamp Burroughs says that snowy subjects return to Dutch Golden Age painting with works by Hendrick Avercamp from 1609 onwards. There is a hiatus between 1627 and 1640, which is before the main period of such subjects from the 1640s to the 1660s. That relates well with climate records for the later period. The subjects are less popular after about 1660, but that does not match any recorded reduction in severity of winters and may reflect only changes in taste or fashion. In the later period between the 1780s and 1810s, snowy subjects again became popular.

[ 53 ] Neuberger analyzed 12,000 paintings, held in American and European museums and dated between 1400 and 1967, for cloudiness and darkness.

[ 52 ] His 1970 publication shows an increase in such depictions that corresponds to the Little Ice Age, [ 52 ] which peaks between 1600 and 1649.

[ 56 ] Winter ( Adriaen van de Venne ) 1614 Paintings and contemporary records in Scotland demonstrate that curling , ice skating and icesailing were popular outdoor winter sports, with curling dating to the 16th century and becoming widely popular in the mid-19th century.

[ 57 ] An outdoor curling pond constructed in Gourock in the 1860s remained in use for almost a century, but increasing use of indoor facilities, problems of vandalism, and milder winters led to the pond being abandoned in 1963.

[ 58 ] General Crisis of the seventeenth century [ edit ] See also: Great Famine of 1695–1697 and Seven Ill Years The General Crisis of the seventeenth century in Europe was a period of inclement weather, crop failure, economic hardship, extreme intergroup violence, and high mortality linked to the Little Ice Age. Episodes of social instability track the cooling with a time lapse of up to 15 years, and many developed into armed conflicts, such as the Thirty Years' War (1618–1648).

[ 59 ] The war started as a war of succession to the Bohemian throne. Animosity between Protestants and Catholics in the Holy Roman Empire (most of which is now in Germany, Austria, and the Czech Republic) added fuel to the fire. It soon escalated to a huge conflict that involved all the major European powers and devastated much of Germany. When the war ended, some regions of the Holy Roman Empire had seen their population drop by as much as 70%.

[ 60 ] North America [ edit ] "February" from the calendar of the Très Riches Heures du Duc de Berry , 1412–1416 Early European explorers and settlers of North America reported exceptionally severe winters. In southwestern Alaska, preexisting flexibility in foraging habits among the native people lent itself to high adaptability to the LIA.

[ 61 ] Both Europeans and indigenous peoples suffered excess mortality in Maine during the winter of 1607–1608, and extreme frost was meanwhile reported in the Jamestown, Virginia , settlement.

[ 36 ] Native Americans formed leagues in response to food shortages.

[ 33 ] The journal of Pierre de Troyes, Chevalier de Troyes , who led an expedition to James Bay in 1686, recorded that the bay was still littered with so much floating ice that he could hide behind it in his canoe on 1 July.

[ 62 ] In the winter of 1780, New York Harbor froze, which allowed people to walk from Manhattan Island to Staten Island .

The extent of mountain glaciers had been mapped by the late 19th century. In the north and the south temperate zones, Equilibrium Line Altitude (the boundaries separating zones of net accumulation from those of net ablation) were about 100 metres (330 ft) lower than they were in 1975.

[ 63 ] Southwestern Alaska experienced a temperature nadir around 135 BP, [ 64 ] and in south-central Alaska, mountain hemlock forests severely declined.

[ 65 ] In Glacier National Park , the last episode of glacier advance came in the late 18th and the early 19th centuries.

[ 66 ] In 1879, the famed naturalist John Muir found that Glacier Bay ice had retreated 48 miles (77 km). In Chesapeake Bay , Maryland , large temperature excursions were possibly related to changes in the strength of the North Atlantic thermohaline circulation .

[ 67 ] Because the Little Ice Age took place during the European colonization of the Americas , it discouraged many early colonists, who had expected the climate of North America to be similar to the climate of Europe at similar latitudes. They found that North America, at least in what would become Canada and the northern United States, had hotter summers and colder winters than Europe. That effect was aggravated by the Little Ice Age, and unpreparedness led to the collapse of many early European settlements in North America.

Historians agree that when colonists settled at Jamestown , it was one of the coldest periods in the last 1000 years. Drought was also a problem in North America during the Little Ice Age, and the settlers arrived in Roanoke during the largest drought of the past 800 years. Tree ring studies by the University of Arkansas discovered that many colonists arrived at the beginning of a seven-year drought. The droughts also decreased the Native American populations and led to conflict because of food scarcity. English colonists at Roanoke forced Native Americans of Ossomocomuck to share their depleted supplies with them. That led to warfare between the two groups, and Native American towns were destroyed. That cycle would repeat itself many times at Jamestown. The combination of fighting and cold weather also led to the spread of diseases. The colder weather helped the parasites brought by Europeans in mosquitoes to develop faster. That in turn led to many malaria deaths among Native Americans.

[ 68 ] Thomas Gorges wrote that between 1637 and 1645, colonists in Maine (then part of Massachusetts) experienced horrendous weather conditions. In June 1637, temperatures were so high that numerous European settlers died; travelers were forced to travel at night to stay cool. Gorges also wrote that the winter of 1641–1642 was "piercingly Intolerable" and that no Englishman or Native American had ever seen anything like it. He also stated that the Massachusetts Bay had frozen as far as one could see, and that horse carriages now roamed where ships used to be. He stated that the summers of 1638 and 1639 were very short, cold, and wet, which compounded food scarcity for a few years. To make matters worse, creatures like caterpillars and pigeons fed on crops and devastated harvests. Every year about which Gorges wrote featured unusual weather patterns, including high precipitation, drought, and extreme cold or heat.

[ 69 ] Many inhabitants of North America had their own theories about the extreme weather. The colonist Ferdinando Gorges blamed the cold weather on cold ocean winds.

Humphrey Gilbert tried to explain Newfoundland's icy and foggy weather by saying that the Earth drew cold vapors from the ocean and drew them west. Many others had their own theories for North America being so much colder than Europe; their observations and hypotheses offer insight on the Little Ice Age's effects in North America.

[ 70 ] Mesoamerica [ edit ] An analysis of several climate proxies undertaken in Mexico's Yucatán Peninsula , which was linked by its authors to Maya and Aztec chronicles relating periods of cold and drought, supports the existence of the Little Ice Age in the region. Cold and drought led to a terrible famine in the Aztec Empire in 1454 and the Chilam Balam Book of Mani mentions a decrease in temperature between 1441 and 1460 during the final years of Mayapan .

[ 71 ] Another study conducted in several sites in Mesoamerica like Los Tuxtlas and Lake Pompal in Veracruz, Mexico show a decrease in human activity in the area during the Little Ice Age. That was proven by studying charcoal fragments and the amount of maize pollen taken from sedimentary samples by using a nonrotatory piston corer. The samples also showed volcanic activity which caused forest regeneration between 650 and 800. The instances of volcanic activity near Lake Pompal indicate varying temperatures, not a continuous coldness, during the Little Ice Age in Mesoamerica.

[ 72 ] Atlantic Ocean [ edit ] In the North Atlantic, sediments accumulated since the end of the last ice age , which occurred nearly 12,000 years ago, show regular increases in the amount of coarse sediment grains deposited from icebergs melting in the now-open ocean, indicating a series of 1–2 °C (2–4 °F)  cooling events that recur every 1,500 years or so.

[ 73 ] The most recent cooling event was the Little Ice Age. The same cooling events are detected in sediments accumulating off Africa, but the cooling events appear to be larger: 3–8 °C (5–14 °F).

[ 74 ] δ 18 O values from chironomid remains in the Azores reflect the cooling of the LIA.

[ 75 ] Asia [ edit ] See also: Kyungshin Famine Although the original designation of a Little Ice Age referred to the reduced temperature of Europe and North America, there is some evidence of extended periods of cooling outside those regions although it is not clear whether they are related or independent events. Mann states: [ 5 ] While there is evidence that many other regions outside Europe exhibited periods of cooler conditions, expanded glaciation, and significantly altered climate conditions, the timing and nature of these variations are highly variable from region to region, and the notion of the Little Ice Age as a globally synchronous cold period has all but been dismissed.

In China, warm-weather crops such as oranges were abandoned in Jiangxi Province , where they had been grown for centuries.

[ 76 ] Also, the two periods of most frequent typhoon strikes in Guangdong coincide with two of the coldest and driest periods in northern and central China (1660–1680, 1850–1880).

[ 77 ] Scholars have argued that one of the reasons for the fall of the Ming dynasty may have been the droughts and famines that were caused by the Little Ice Age.

[ 78 ] There are debates on the start date and the periods of Little Ice Age's effects. Most scholars agree on categorizing the Little Ice Age period into three distinct cold periods: in 1458–1552, 1600–1720, and 1840–1880.

[ 79 ] According to data from the U.S.

National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration , the eastern monsoon area of China was the earliest to experience the effects of the Little Ice Age, from 1560 to 1709. In the western region of China surrounding the Tibetan Plateau , the effects of the Little Ice Age lagged behind the eastern region, with significant cold periods from 1620 to 1749.

[ 80 ] As the Medieval Warm Period transitioned into the Little Ice Age, the East Asian Summer Monsoon (EASM) became much weaker and the summer monsoon limit (SML) migrated southeastwards.

[ 81 ] Southwestern China became significantly colder and drier as a result of the weakening of the EASM caused by the decreased pressure gradient resulting from the cooling of the southern Eurasian landmass, while northwestern China, dominated by westerlies, saw an increase in precipitation.

[ 82 ] The temperature changes were unprecedented for the farming communities in China. According to Coching Chu 's 1972 study, the Little Ice Age from the end of the Ming dynasty to the start of the Qing dynasty (1650–1700) was one of the coldest periods in recorded Chinese history.

[ 83 ] Many major droughts during the summer months were recorded, and significant freezing events occurred during the winter months. That greatly worsened the food supply during the Ming dynasty.

This period of Little Ice Age corresponded to the period's major historical events. The Jurchen people lived in Northern China and formed a tributary state to the Ming dynasty and its Wanli Emperor . From 1573 to 1620, Manchuria experienced famine caused by extreme snowfall, which depleted agriculture production and devastated the livestock population. Scholars have argued that it had been caused by the temperature drops during the Little Ice Age. Despite the lack of food production, the Wanli Emperor ordered the Jurchens to pay the same amount of tribute each year. That led to anger and sowed seeds to the rebellion against the Ming dynasty. In 1616, Jurchens established the Later Jin dynasty . Led by Hong Taiji and Nurhaci , the Later Jin dynasty moved South and achieved decisive victories in battles against the Ming dynasty's military, such as during the 1618 Battle of Fushun .

[ 84 ] After the earlier defeats and the death of the Wanli Emperor, the Chongzhen Emperor took over China and continued the war effort. From 1632 to 1641, the Little Ice Age began to cause drastic climate changes in the Ming dynasty's territories. For example, rainfall in the Huabei region dropped by 11% to 47% from the historical average. Meanwhile, the Shaanbei region, along the Yellow River experienced six major floods, which ruined cities such as Yan'an . The climate factored heavily in weakening the government's control over China and accelerated the fall of the Ming dynasty. In 1644, Li Zicheng led the Later Jin's forces into Beijing, overthrew the Ming dynasty, and established the short-lived Shun dynasty which were soon overthrown by Qing dynasty .

[ 85 ] [ failed verification ] During the early years of the Qing dynasty, the Little Ice Age continued to have a significant impact on Chinese society. During the rule of the Kangxi Emperor (1661–1722), most Qing territories were still much colder than the historical average. However, the Kangxi Emperor pushed reforms and managed to increase the socio-economic recovery from the natural disasters. He benefited partly from the peacefulness of the early Qing dynasty. That essentially marked the end of the Little Ice Age in China and led to a more prosperous era of Chinese history that is known as the High Qing era .

[ 86 ] In the Himalayas , the general assumption is that the cooling events were synchronous with those in Europe during the Little Ice Age because of the characteristics of moraines. However, applications of Quaternary dating methods such as surface exposure dating have shown that glacial maxima occurred between 1300 and 1600, slightly earlier than the recorded coldest period in the Northern Hemisphere. Many large Himalayan glacial debris fields have remained close to their limits since the Little Ice Age. The Himalayas also experienced an increase in snowfall at higher altitudes, which results in a southward shift in the Indian summer monsoon and an increase in precipitation. Overall, the increase in winter precipitation may have caused some glacial movements.

[ 87 ] Since the end of the Little Ice Age, there has been an almost continuous retreat of glaciers to present.

[ 88 ] The region in Balochistan became colder, and its native Baloch people started a mass migration and began to settle along the Indus River in Sindh and Punjab .

[ 89 ] On Rebun Island , a rapid cooling event occurred around 390 BP (as measured from pollen samples in 2018) amidst a longer-term trend of cooling; this cooling event marked the onset of the Little Ice Age in the region.

[ 90 ] Africa [ edit ] The Little Ice Age influenced the African climate from the 14th to the 19th centuries.

[ 91 ] Despite variances throughout the continent, a general trend of declining temperatures in Africa led to an average cooling of 1 °C.

[ 92 ] In Ethiopia and North Africa, permanent snow was reported on mountain peaks at levels at which it does not occur today.

[ 76 ] Timbuktu , an important city on the trans- Saharan caravan route, was flooded at least 13 times by the Niger River , but there are no records of similar flooding before or since that time.

[ 76 ] Several paleoclimatic studies of Southern Africa have suggested significant changes in relative changes in climate and environmental conditions. In Southern Africa, sediment cores retrieved from Lake Malawi show colder conditions between 1570 and 1820, which "further support, and extend, the global expanse of the Little Ice Age".

[ 93 ] A novel 3,000-year temperature reconstruction method, based on the rate of stalagmite growth in a cold cave in South Africa, further suggests a cold period from 1500 to 1800 "characterizing the South African Little Ice Age".

[ 94 ] The δ18O stalagmite record temperature reconstruction over a 350-year period (1690–1740) suggests that South Africa may have been the coldest region in Africa and have cooled by as much as 1.4 °C in summer.

[ 95 ] Also, the solar magnetic and Niño-Southern Oscillation cycles may have been key drivers of climate variability in the subtropical region.

Periglacial features in the eastern Lesotho Highlands might have been reactivated by the Little Ice Age.

[ 96 ] Another archaeological reconstruction of Southern Africa reveals the rise of Great Zimbabwe because of ecological advantages from the increased rainfall over other competitor societies, such as the Mapungubwe .

[ 97 ] Pollen records derived from rock hyrax middens in the Cederberg Mountains of southwestern South Africa indicate an increase in humidity in the region at the start of the LIA.

[ 98 ] Other than temperature variability, data from equatorial East Africa suggest impacts to the hydrologic cycle in the late 1700s. Historical data reconstructions from ten major African lakes indicate that an episode of *drought and desiccation" occurred throughout East Africa.

[ 99 ] The period showed drastic reductions in the depths of lakes, which were transformed into desiccated puddles. It is very likely that locals could cross Lake Chad, among others, and that bouts of "intense droughts were ubiquitous". That indicates local societies were probably launched into long migrations and warfare with neighboring tribes, since agriculture was made virtually useless by the dry soil.

Antarctica [ edit ] CO 2 mixing ratios at Law Dome Kreutz et al. (1997) compared results from studies of West Antarctic ice cores with the Greenland Ice Sheet Project Two GISP2 ; they suggested a synchronous global cooling.

[ 100 ] An ocean sediment core from the eastern Bransfield Basin in the Antarctic Peninsula shows centennial events, which the authors link to the Little Ice Age and to the Medieval Warm Period.

[ 101 ] The authors note that "other unexplained climatic events comparable in duration and amplitude to the LIA and MWP events also appear".

The Siple Dome (SD) had a climate event with an onset time that is coincident with that of the Little Ice Age in the North Atlantic, based on a correlation with the GISP2 record. The Little Ice Age is the most dramatic climate event in the SD Holocene glaciochemical record.

[ 102 ] The Siple Dome ice core also contained its highest rate of melt layers (up to 8%) between 1550 and 1700, most likely because of warm summers.

[ 103 ] Law Dome ice cores show lower levels of CO 2 mixing ratios from 1550 to 1800, which Etheridge and Steele believe to be "probably as a result of colder global climate".

[ 104 ] Sediment cores in Bransfield Basin, Antarctic Peninsula, have neoglacial indicators by diatom and sea-ice taxa variations during the Little Ice Age.

[ 105 ] Stable isotope records from the Mount Erebus Saddle ice core site suggests that the Ross Sea region experienced average temperatures 1.6 ± 1.4 °C cooler during the Little Ice Age than the last 150 years.

[ 106 ] Australia and New Zealand [ edit ] Its location in the Southern Hemisphere made Australia not experience a regional cooling like that of Europe or North America. Instead, the Australian Little Ice Age was characterized by humid, rainy climates, which were followed by drying and aridification in the 19th century.

[ 107 ] As studied by Tibby et al. (2018), lake records from Victoria , New South Wales , and Queensland suggest that conditions in the east and the south-east of Australia were wet and unusually cool from the 16th to the early 19th centuries. That corresponds with the "peak" of the global Little Ice Age from 1594 to 1722. For example, North Stradbroke Island's Swallow Lagoon data reveals a period of persistent wetness from 1500 to 1850 CE (exceeding 300 mm above average), followed by a significant decrease in rainfall after 1891.

[ 107 ] The rainfalls significantly reduced after around 1890. Similarly, the hydrological records of Lake Surprise's salinity levels reveal high humidity levels around from 1440 to 1880, and an increase in salinity from 1860 to 1880 points to a negative change to the once-humid climate.

[ 108 ] The mid-19th century marked a notable change to eastern Australia's rainfall and humidity patterns.

Tibby et al. (2018) note that in eastern Australia, the paleoclimatic changes of the Little Ice Age in the late 1800s coincided with the agricultural changes resulting from European colonization. After the 1788 establishment of British colonies in the Australia, which were concentrated primarily in the eastern regions and cities like Sydney and later Melbourne and Brisbane, the British introduced new agricultural practices like pastoralism .

[ 107 ] Such practices required widespread deforestation and clearance of vegetation. Pastoralism and the clearing of land are captured in works of art such as the 1833 painting by the prominent landscape artist John Glover Patterdale Landscape with Cattle .

Patterdale Landscape with Cattle (1833) by John Glover depicts agricultural practices like pastoralism, which contributed to the aridification of Australia's late Little Ice Age.

Over the next century, the deforestation led to a loss of biodiversity , wind and water-based soil erosion, and soil salinity.

[ 109 ] Furthermore, as argued by Gordan et al. (2003), such land and vegetation clearance in Australia resulted in a 10% reduction in the transport of water vapor to the atmosphere. That occurred in Western Australia as well, where 19th-century land clearing resulted in reduced rainfall over the region.

[ 110 ] By 1850 to 1890, those human agricultural practices, which were concentrated in eastern Australia, had most likely amplified the drying and aridification that marked the end of the Little Ice Age.

In the north, evidence suggests fairly dry conditions, but coral cores from the Great Barrier Reef show rainfall similar to today but with less variability. A study that analyzed isotopes in Great Barrier Reef corals suggested that increased water vapor transport from the southern tropical oceans to the poles contributed to the Little Ice Age.

[ 111 ] Borehole reconstructions from Australia suggest that over the last 500 years, the 17th century was the coldest on the continent.

[ 112 ] The borehole temperature reconstruction method further indicates that the warming of Australia over the past five centuries is only around half that of the warming experienced by the Northern Hemisphere, which further proves that Australia did not reach the same depths of cooling as the continents in the north.

On the west coast of the Southern Alps of New Zealand, the Franz Josef Glacier advanced rapidly during the Little Ice Age and reached its maximum extent in the early 18th century. That was one of the few cases of a glacier thrusting into a rainforest .

[ 113 ] Evidence suggests, corroborated by tree ring proxy data, that the glacier contributed to a −0.56 °C (−1.01 °F) temperature anomaly over the course of the Little Ice Age in New Zealand.

[ 114 ] Based on dating of a yellow-green lichen of the Rhizocarpon subgenus, the Mueller Glacier , on the eastern flank of the Southern Alps within Aoraki / Mount Cook National Park , is considered to have been at its maximum extent between 1725 and 1730.

[ 115 ] Pacific islands [ edit ] Sea-level data for the Pacific islands suggest that sea level in the region fell, possibly in two stages, between 1270 and 1475. That was associated with a 1.5 °C fall in temperature, as determined from oxygen-isotope analysis, and an observed increase in the frequency of El Niño .

[ 116 ] Tropical Pacific coral records indicate the most frequent and intense El Niño–Southern Oscillation activity was in the mid-17th century.

[ 117 ] Foraminiferal 18 O records indicate that the Indo-Pacific Warm Pool was warm and saline between 1000 and 1400, with temperatures approximating current conditions, but that it cooled from 1400 onwards and reached its lowest temperatures in 1700. That is consistent with the transition from the mid- Holocene warming to the Little Ice Age.

[ 118 ] The nearby southwestern Pacific, however, experienced warmer-than-average conditions over the course of the Little Ice Age, which is thought to be from the increased trade winds, which increased the evaporation and the salinity in the region. The dramatic temperature differences between the higher latitudes and the equator are thought to have resulted in drier conditions in the subtropics.

[ 119 ] Independent multiproxy analyses of Raraku Lake (sedimentology, mineralology, organic and inorganic geochemistry, etc.) indicate that Easter Island was subject to two phases of arid climate that led to drought. The first occurred between 500 and 1200, and the second occurring during the Little Ice Age from 1570 to 1720.

[ 120 ] In between both arid phases, the island enjoyed a humid period from 1200 to 1570. That coincided with the peak of the Rapa Nui civilization .

[ 121 ] South America [ edit ] See also: White Earthquake Tree-ring data from Patagonia show cold episodes from 1270 and 1380 and from 1520 to 1670, during the events in the Northern Hemisphere.

[ 122 ] [ 123 ] Eight sediment cores taken from Puyehue Lake have been interpreted as showing a humid period from 1470 to 1700, which the authors describe as a regional marker of the onset of the Little Ice Age.

[ 124 ] A 2009 paper details cooler and wetter conditions in southeastern South America between 1550 and 1800 by citing evidence obtained via several proxies and models.

[ 125 ] 18 O records from three Andean ice cores show a cool period from 1600 to 1800.

[ 126 ] Although it is only anecdotal evidence, the Antonio de Vea expedition entered San Rafael Lake in 1675 through Río Témpanos (Spanish for "Ice Floe River"). The Spanish mentioned no ice floe but stated that the San Rafael Glacier did not reach far into the lagoon. In 1766, another expedition noticed that the glacier reached the lagoon and calved into large icebergs .

Hans Steffen visited the area in 1898 and noticed that the glacier penetrated far into the lagoon. Such historical records indicate a general cooling in the area between 1675 and 1898: "The recognition of the LIA in northern Patagonia, through the use of documentary sources, provides important, independent evidence for the occurrence of this phenomenon in the region." [ 127 ] As of 2001, the borders of the glacier had significantly retreated from those of 1675.

[ 127 ] It has been suggested that all glaciers of Gran Campo Nevado next to the Strait of Magellan reached their largest extent of the whole Holocene epoch during the Little Ice Age.

[ 128 ] It has been proposed that the Little Ice Age, locally lasting from the 17th to the 19th centuries, may have had a negative impact on the productivity of marine ecosystems and on the navigability of the Patagonian fjords and channels being thus detrimental to the sea-faring Kawésqar .

[ 129 ] Middle East [ edit ] The Ottoman LIA occurred from the early 14th century until the mid-19th century, with its most intense phase taking place between the 16th and 17th centuries.

From the 14th to 15th century, the Ottoman Empire transformed from a small group of soldiers to a major world power.

[ 130 ] By the end of the 16th century, the LIA began [ 130 ] and had a profound impact on the Ottoman economy, society, and culture. During February 1621, it is noted that the Bosphorus Strait in Istanbul had frozen over completely.

[ 131 ] In the years 1265, 1277 and 1297–1298 Byzantine sources describe extremely harsh cold. Also, around 1300, there were harsh winters in 1298/1299 in the Middle East.

[ 132 ] This is followed by a drought which takes place in Asia Minor in 1302-1304 while there is the flooding of the Sangarious River in the summer of 1302.

The Ottoman Empire, whose territories stretched across three continents, and its economy was based on agriculture and trade, had a diverse range of climates and ecosystems, and was greatly affected by this phenomenon.

[ 133 ] The Ottoman Empire was one of the largest and most powerful empires in the world during the Little Ice Age. The effects of the Little Ice Age on the Ottoman Empire were significant, leading to changes in agricultural practices, increased food prices, and social unrest. During the 1590s the beginning of a wave of extremely cold winters began and the middle eastern longest drought in six centuries marked the beginning of the Little Ice Age in the Middle East.

[ 134 ] Due to the expansion of the Ottoman Empire in the late 16th century, [ 135 ] the population of the empire reached around 30 million people which led to a shortage of land and an increase in tax.

[ 136 ] The second half of the 16th century included inflation and rising cost in both the Middle East and Europe. The effect of this large population and lack of supplies created a strain on the Ottoman government.

[ 137 ] The cooling climate disrupted agricultural production, leading to food shortages and famines. The Ottoman Empire did not often have a shortage of grain due to its location, close to the Danube, Nile and the Black Sea, however, once the Little Ice Age began that all changed, and grain was rare [ 138 ] due to the cooler temperatures which led to a shorter growing season, resulting in lower crop yields and decreased food production. The effects of the colder climate were exacerbated by extreme weather events, such as droughts, floods, and storms, which further reduced crop yields.

[ 138 ] Each ancient Middle Eastern empire had a significant supply of food: the Byzantines had Anatolia and Syria, the Abbasids had the lower Tigris-Euphrates region, as well as Khurasan and Bukhara, and the Ottomans had Egypt.

[ 139 ] However, there was an inherent political risk in such agricultural dependency, which finally materialised. Farmers who are unable or unwilling to relocate may be driven into revolt against the established authority if weather patterns shift. Nomads had the flexibility to move in response to climate shifts, unlike settled peasants who were unwilling to leave their traditional lands.

[ 139 ] The impact of the Little Ice Age on the Ottoman Empire was not limited to agriculture and trade. The cooling climate led to changes in migration patterns, as some regions became uninhabitable while others became more attractive. This in turn affected the demographics of the empire and contributed to the emergence of new political and social structures.

The lengthy drought as well as the cold winters led to the destruction of imperial systems which all led to a series of uprisings collectively known as the Celali Rebellion , c. 1596–1610. The rebellion became the longest-lasting internal challenge to state power in the Ottoman Empire's six centuries of existence.

[ 140 ] The goal of the Celali Rebellion was not to overthrow the Ottoman government; rather, it was an attempt to get newly appointed governorships.

[ 141 ] The Ottoman Empire did not fully recover from the Little Ice Age for around a hundred years, even then they were considered weakened with a large population loss.

[ 142 ] Central England temperature series [ edit ] Seasonal values of Central England temperatures. The top panel shows group sunspot numbers: the grey area shows the annual values from telescopic observations, the mauve line its 11-year running means, and the green line the values deduced from the abundance of the Carbon-14 cosmogenic isotope in tree trunks. The second panel shows the winter values of Central England temperature , being the mean for December, January and February. The third panel shows the summer values, being the mean for June, July and August. The bottom panel gives the aerosal optical depth , showing volcanic dust levels, from ice sheet cores. The vertical mauve lines are years in which frost fairs were held on the Thames in London and the vertical orange lines are the years when the ice there was reported as thick enough to walk on. The first cyan line is the date of the removal of the old London Bridge and wier and the second is the completion of the embankments: both riverine developments that increased the flow and ended Thames freezing events. All data sources are given in reference [ 29 ] The Central England temperature (CET) is the longest instrumental temperature record in existence anywhere in the world, and extends back continuously from the present day to 1659. Hence it starts in the middle of the Little Ice Age (LIA), however the LIA interval is defined. CET holds some very important implications for our understanding of the LIA. The CET data show that during the LIA there was an increased occurrence of exceptionally cold winters and these years coincided with years when frost fairs were held on the Thames and when exceptionally low temperatures were reported elsewhere in Europe.

[ 29 ] It also agrees well with paleoclimate estimates in average trends.

[ 143 ] However, winters were not unremittingly cold during the LIA in the CET record. For example, the coldest winter (defined by the average temperature for December, January and February) in the whole CET data series is 1684 (the year of one of the most famous frost fairs) yet the fifth warmest winter in the whole CET data series to date occurred just two years later, in 1686. Furthermore, summer temperatures are not greatly depressed during the LIA and when they are these lower temperatures correlate highly with volcanic eruptions.

[ 29 ] Hence the CET data strongly argue that the LIA, at least in Europe, should be regarded as a period of enhanced occurrence of exceptionally cold winters and hence lower average temperatures and not as an interval of unremitting cold.

Possible causes [ edit ] Scientists have tentatively identified seven possible causes of the Little Ice Age: orbital cycles , decreased solar activity , increased volcanic activity, altered ocean current flows , [ 144 ] fluctuations in the human population in different parts of the world causing reforestation or deforestation , and the inherent variability of global climate.

Orbital cycles [ edit ] Main article: Milankovich cycles Orbital forcing from cycles in the Earth's orbit around the Sun has for the past 2,000 years caused a long-term northern hemisphere cooling trend, which continued through the Middle Ages and the Little Ice Age. The rate of Arctic cooling is roughly 0.02 °C per century.

[ 145 ] That trend could be extrapolated to continue into the future and possibly lead to a full ice age, but the 20th-century instrumental temperature record shows a sudden reversal of that trend, with a rise in global temperatures attributed to greenhouse gas emissions .

[ 145 ] Solar activity [ edit ] Main articles: Solar activity and Solar activity and climate The Maunder Minimum in a 400-year history of sunspot numbers Sunspot number compared with Northern Hemisphere (NH) temperature anomaly. The upper panel shows 11-year smoothed group sunspot numbers from telescopic observations and the sunspot number derived from carbon-14 cosmogenic isotope abundances in tree trunks. The lower panel shows the Northern Hemisphere (NH) temperature anomaly (relative to the 1990 level) from a wide variety of paleoclimate proxies: the black line is the mean value, and the colors give the uncertainty probability distribution. The blue dots are the instrumental record. The dashed lines mark the start and end of the Little Ice Age (LIA) defined by the (NH) temperature anomaly level −0.16 degrees Celsius.

[ 143 ] [ 29 ] Solar activity includes any disturbances on the Sun such as sunspots and solar flares associated with the variable magnetic field of the solar surface and solar atmosphere (corona). Because Alfvén's theorem applies, the coronal magnetic field is dragged out into the heliosphere by the solar wind . Irregularities in this heliospheric magnetic field shield Earth from galactic cosmic rays by scattering them, which allows scientists to track solar activity in the past by analyzing both the carbon-14 or beryllium-10 isotopes generated by cosmic rays hitting the atmosphere and which are deposited in terrestrial reservoirs such as tree rings and ice sheets. In the intervals 1400–1550 (the Spörer Minimum ) and 1645–1715 (the Maunder Minimum ) there were very low recorded levels of solar activity and they are both within, or at least overlapped with, the LIA for most definitions. However, solar activity deduced from cosmogenic isotopes was as high between the Spörer Minimum and the Maunder Minimum as it was in about 1940, [ 146 ] yet this interval is also within the LIA. Hence any relationship between solar activity and the LIA is far from a simple one.

A drop in solar activity circa 1230 AD as measured by biogenic silica corrected ignition residue (IR- BSi ) has been suggested by one study as a forcing potentially responsible for initiating the LIA, with the authors noting that this drop in solar output preceded the onset of significant volcanism.

[ 147 ] A study by Dmitri Mauquoy et al. confirmed that at the beginning of the Spörer Minimum, the carbon-14 production rate rose rapidly.

[ 148 ] These authors argued this rise coincided with a sharp drop in temperatures deduced from European peat bogs. This temperature drop is also seen in mean northern hemisphere temperatures deduced from a wide variety of paleoclimate indicators but the timing of the onset of the Spörer Minimum is actually some 50 years earlier.

[ 143 ] A 50-year response lag is possible but is not consistent with subsequent variations in inferred solar activity and average northern hemisphere temperature.

[ 143 ] For example, the peak in solar activity between the Spörer Minimum and the Maunder Minimum is 50 years after the only peak in average northern hemisphere temperature that it could be associated with.

A study by Judith Lean in 1999 also pointed to a relationship between the Sun and the Little Ice Age. Her research found that there was a 0.13% total solar irradiance (TSI) increase (1.8 Wm −1 ) over 1650–1790 which could have raised the temperature of the Earth by 0.3 °C. In the calculated correlation coefficients of the global temperature response to their reconstruction of the solar forcing over three different periods, they found an average coefficient of 0.79 (i.e. 62% of the variation could be explained by the TSI) which indicates a possible relationship between the two components. Lean's team also formulated an equation in which the temperature change is 0.16 °C increase in temperature for every 0.1% increase in total solar irradiance.

[ 149 ] However, the main problem with quantifying the longer-term trends in TSI lies in the stability of the absolute radiometry measurements made from space, which has improved since the pioneering work of Judith Lean discussed above, but still remains a problem.

[ 150 ] [ 151 ] Analysis comparing trends in modern observations of TSI and cosmic ray fluxes shows that the uncertainties mean that it is possible that TSI was actually higher in the Maunder Minimum than present-day levels, but uncertainties are high with best estimates of the difference between the modern-day TSI and the Maunder-Minimum TSI in the range ±0.5 Wm −1 but with a 2 σ uncertainty range of ±1 Wm −1 .

[ 152 ] At the center of the LIA, during the Spörer Minimum and the Maunder Minimum , sunspots were minimal and cosmogenic isotope deposition (carbon-14 and beryllium-10) was increased in these minima as a result. However, detailed studies from multiple paleoclimate indicators show that the lower Northern Hemisphere temperatures in the Little Ice Age began before the start of the Maunder Minimum but after the start of the Spörer Minimum and persisted until after the Maunder Minimum (and even after the much weaker Dalton Minimum) had ceased. The return to more active solar conditions between these two grand solar minima had no obvious effect on either global or Northern Hemisphere temperatures. The Central England Temperature provide evidence that low solar activity may have contributed to the LIA through the increased occurrence of cold winters, at least in Europe, [ 153 ] but colder summers are more correlated with volcanic activity.

[ 29 ] Comparison of TSI records with Greenland ice core δ 18 O trends suggests that solar activity only accounted for 55% of the observed trend variance.

[ 154 ] Numerical climate modelling indicates that volcanic activity was the greater driver of the overall lower temperatures in the LIA, as seen in a variety of paleoclimate proxies.

[ 143 ] Volcanic activity [ edit ] Main article: Little Ice Age volcanism In a 2012 paper, Miller et al.

link the Little Ice Age to an "unusual 50-year-long episode with four large sulfur-rich explosive eruptions, each with global sulfate loading >60 Tg" and notes that "large changes in solar irradiance are not required." [ 8 ] Throughout the LIA, there was heightened volcanic activity.

[ 155 ] When a volcano erupts, its ash reaches high into the atmosphere and can spread to cover the whole earth. The ash cloud blocks out some of the incoming solar radiation, which leads to worldwide cooling for up to two years after an eruption. Also emitted by eruptions is sulfur in the form of sulfur dioxide . When sulfur dioxide reaches the stratosphere , the gas turns into sulfuric and sulfurous acid particles, which reflect the Sun's rays. That further reduces the amount of radiation reaching the Earth's surface.

A recent study found that an especially severe tropical volcanic eruption in 1257, possibly Mount Samalas (pre-caldera edifice of the active Rinjani) near Mount Rinjani , both in Lombok , Indonesia, followed by three smaller eruptions in 1268, 1275, and 1284, did not allow the climate to recover. That may have caused the initial cooling, and the 1452/1453 mystery eruption triggered a second pulse of cooling.

[ 8 ] The cold summers can be maintained by sea-ice/ocean feedbacks long after volcanic aerosols are removed.

Other volcanoes that erupted during the era and may have contributed to the cooling include Billy Mitchell (c. 1580), Huaynaputina (1600), Mount Parker (1641), Long Island (Papua New Guinea) (ca. 1660), and Laki (1783).

[ 27 ] The 1815 eruption of Tambora , also in Indonesia, blanketed the atmosphere with ash, and the following year came to be known as the Year Without a Summer , [ 156 ] when frost and snow were reported in June and July in both New England and Northern Europe.

Ocean circulation [ edit ] Thermohaline circulation or Oceanic conveyor belt illustrated In the early 2000s, a slowing of thermohaline circulation was proposed as an explanation for the LIA, [ 63 ] [ 144 ] [ 157 ] specifically, through the weakening of the North Atlantic Gyre .

[ 158 ] [ 159 ] The circulation could have been interrupted by the introduction of a large amount of fresh water into the North Atlantic and might have been caused by a period of warming before the LIA that is known as the Medieval Warm Period .

[ 42 ] [ 160 ] [ 161 ] Some researchers have thus classified the LIA as a Bond event .

[ 162 ] In 2005 there was some concern that a shutdown of thermohaline circulation could happen again as a result of the present warming.

[ 163 ] [ 164 ] More recent research indicates that the overall Atlantic Meridional Overturning Circulation may already be weaker now than it was during the LIA, [ 165 ] [ 166 ] or perhaps even over the past millennium.

[ 167 ] While there is still a robust debate about the present-day AMOC strength, [ 168 ] [ 169 ] [ 170 ] these findings make the link between AMOC and the LIA unlikely. However, some research instead suggests that a far more localized disruption of the North Subpolar Gyre convection was involved in the LIA.

[ 171 ] This is potentially relevant for the near future, as a minority of climate models project a permanent collapse of this convection under some scenarios of future climate change .

[ 172 ] [ 173 ] [ 174 ] Decreased human populations [ edit ] Some researchers have proposed that human influences on climate began earlier than is normally supposed (see Early anthropocene for more details) and that major population declines in Eurasia and the Americas reduced that impact and led to a cooling trend.

The Black Death in Europe [ edit ] The Black Death is estimated to have killed 30% to 60% of the European population .

[ 175 ] In total, the plague may have reduced the world population from an estimated 475 million to 350–375 million in the 14th century.

[ 176 ] It took 200 years for the world population to recover to its previous level.

[ 177 ] William Ruddiman et al.

proposed that those large population reductions in Europe, East Asia, and the Middle East caused a decrease in agricultural activity that allowed reforestation to cause additional carbon dioxide uptake from the atmosphere, leading to LIA cooling.

[ 178 ] Mongol invasions [ edit ] A 2011 study by the Carnegie Institution 's Department of Global Ecology asserts that the Mongol invasions and conquests , which lasted almost two centuries, contributed to global cooling by depopulating vast regions and replacing cultivated land by carbon-absorbing forest.

[ 179 ] [ 13 ] Destruction of native populations and biomass of the Americas [ edit ] William Ruddiman further hypothesized that a reduced population in the Americas after European contact started in the 16th century could have had a similar effect.

[ 180 ] [ 181 ] In a similar vein, Koch and others in 1990 suggested that as European conquest and disease brought by Europeans killed as many as 90% of Indigenous Americans, around 50 million hectares of land may have returned to a wilderness state, causing increased carbon dioxide uptake.

[ 182 ] Other researchers have supported depopulation in the Americas as a factor and have asserted that humans cleared considerable amounts of forest to support agriculture there before the arrival of Europeans brought on a population collapse.

[ 183 ] [ 184 ] Richard Nevle, Robert Dull and colleagues further suggested not only that anthropogenic forest clearance played a role in reducing the amount of carbon sequestered in Neotropical forests but also that human-set fires played a central role in reducing biomass in Amazonian and Central American forests before the arrival of the Europeans and the concomitant spread of diseases during the Columbian exchange .

[ 185 ] [ 186 ] [ 178 ] Dull and Nevle calculated that reforestation in the tropical biomes of the Americas alone from 1500 to 1650 accounted for net carbon sequestration of 2–5 Pg .

[ 186 ] Brierley conjectured that the European arrival in the Americas caused mass deaths from epidemic disease, which caused much abandonment of farmland. That caused much forest to return, which sequestered more CO 2 .

[ 12 ] A study of sediment cores and soil samples further suggests that CO 2 uptake via reforestation in the Americas could have contributed to the LIA.

[ 187 ] The depopulation is linked to a drop in CO 2 levels observed at Law Dome , Antarctica.

[ 183 ] However, the hypothesis is criticized on the grounds that the kind of agroforestry practiced by the pre-Columbian farmers in South America did not actually result in a large-scale deforestation typical for modern agriculture so the reforestation should not have had such a huge effect.

[ 188 ] Population increases at mid- to high latitudes [ edit ] It is suggested that during the Little Ice Age, increased deforestation had enough effect on the Earth's albedo (reflectiveness) to cause regional and global temperature decreases. Changes in albedo were caused by widespread deforestation at high latitudes, which exposed more snow cover and thus increased reflectiveness of the Earth's surface, as land was cleared for agricultural use. The theory implies that over the course of the Little Ice Age, enough land was cleared to make deforestation a possible cause of climate change.

[ 189 ] It has been proposed that the Land Use Intensification theory could explain this effect. The theory was originally proposed by Ester Boserup and suggests that agriculture advances only as the population demands it.

[ 190 ] Furthermore, there is evidence of rapid population and agricultural expansion , which could warrant some of the changes observed in the climate during this period.

This theory is still under speculation for multiple reasons: primarily, the difficulty of recreating climate simulations outside of a narrow set of land [ clarification needed ] in those regions; so that one cannot rely on data to explain sweeping changes or to account for the wide variety of other sources of climate change globally. As an extension of the first reason, climate models including this period have shown increases and decreases in temperature globally.

[ 191 ] That is, climate models have shown deforestation as neither a singular cause for climate change nor a reliable cause for the global temperature decrease.

Inherent variability of climate [ edit ] Spontaneous fluctuations in global climate might explain the past variability. It is very difficult to know what the true level of variability from internal causes might be given the existence of other forces, as noted above, whose magnitude may not be known. One approach to evaluating internal variability is the use of long integrations of coupled ocean-atmosphere global climate models . They have the advantage that the external forcing is known to be zero, but the disadvantage is that they may not fully reflect reality. The variations may result from chaos -driven changes in the oceans, the atmosphere, or interactions between the two.

[ 192 ] Two studies have concluded that the demonstrated inherent variability was not great enough to account for the Little Ice Age.

[ 192 ] [ 193 ] The severe winters of 1770 to 1772 in Europe, however, have been attributed to an anomaly in the North Atlantic oscillation .

[ 194 ] See also [ edit ] Medieval warm period – Period of warm climate in North Atlantic region lasting from about 950 CE to about 1250 Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets 8.2-kiloyear event – Rapid global cooling about 8,200 years ago Bond event – North Atlantic ice rafting events Great Frost of 1709 – Coldest recorded winter in Europe Historical climatology – Academic field of study Late Antique Little Ice Age – Northern Hemispheric cooling period Paleoclimatology – Study of changes in ancient climate Retreat of glaciers since 1850 – Recent shrinking of glaciers due to global warming Year Without a Summer – 1816 volcanic winter climate event Younger Dryas – Time period c. 12,900–11,700 years ago with Northern Hemisphere glacial cooling and SH warming References [ edit ] ^ Hawkins, Ed (30 January 2020).

"2019 years" .

climate-lab-book.ac.uk .

Archived from the original on 2 February 2020.

"The data show that the modern period is very different to what occurred in the past. The often quoted Medieval Warm Period and Little Ice Age are real phenomena, but small compared to the recent changes." ^ Ladurie, Emmanuel Le Roy (1971).

Times of Feast, Times of Famine: a History of Climate Since the Year 1000 . Barbara Bray. Garden City, New York: Doubleday.

ISBN 978-0-374-52122-6 .

OCLC 164590 .

^ a b c "Climate Change 2001: The Scientific Basis" . UNEP/GRID-Arendal. Archived from the original on 29 May 2006 . Retrieved 2 August 2007 .

^ Matthes, François E. (1939). "Report of Committee on Glaciers, April 1939".

Transactions, American Geophysical Union .

20 (4): 518– 523.

Bibcode : 1939TrAGU..20..518M .

doi : 10.1029/TR020i004p00518 .

Matthes described glaciers in the Sierra Nevada of California that he believed could not have survived the hypsithermal ; his usage of "Little Ice Age" has been superseded by " Neoglaciation ".

^ a b Mann, Michael (2003).

"Little Ice Age" (PDF) . In MacCracken, Michael C.; Perry, John S. (eds.).

Encyclopedia of Global Environmental Change, The Earth System: Physical and Chemical Dimensions of Global Environmental Change . Vol. 1. John Wiley & Sons.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022 . Retrieved 17 November 2012 .

^ Lamb, H. H. (1972). "The cold Little Ice Age climate of about 1550 to 1800".

Climate: present, past and future . London, England: Methuen. p. 107.

CiteSeerX 10.1.1.408.1689 .

ISBN 978-0-416-11530-7 .

(noted in Grove 2004: 4).

^ a b "Earth observatory Glossary L–N" . NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, Green Belt, Maryland: NASA . Retrieved 17 July 2015 .

^ a b c d e Miller, Gifford H.; Geirsdóttir, Áslaug; Zhong, Yafang; Larsen, Darren J.; Otto-Bliesner, Bette L.

; Holland, Marika M.

; Bailey, David A.; Refsnider, Kurt A.; Lehman, Scott J.; Southon, John R.; Anderson, Chance; Björnsson, Helgi; Thordarson, Thorvaldur (30 January 2012).

"Abrupt onset of the Little Ice Age triggered by volcanism and sustained by sea-ice/ocean feedbacks" .

Geophysical Research Letters .

39 (2): n/a.

Bibcode : 2012GeoRL..39.2708M .

CiteSeerX 10.1.1.639.9076 .

doi : 10.1029/2011GL050168 .

S2CID 15313398 .

^ Grove, J. M., Little Ice Ages: Ancient and Modern, Routledge, London, England (2 volumes) 2004.

^ Matthews, John A.; Briffa, Keith R. (2005). "The 'little ice age': Re-evaluation of an evolving concept".

Geografiska Annaler: Series A, Physical Geography .

87 (1): 17– 36.

Bibcode : 2005GeAnA..87...17M .

doi : 10.1111/j.0435-3676.2005.00242.x .

S2CID 4832081 .

^ "1.4.3 Solar Variability and the Total Solar Irradiance – AR4 WGI Chapter 1: Historical Overview of Climate Change Science" . Ipcc.ch . Retrieved 24 June 2013 .

^ a b Koch, Alexander; Brierley, Chris; Maslin, Mark M.; Lewis, Simon L. (1 March 2019).

"Earth system impacts of the European arrival and Great Dying in the Americas after 1492" .

Quaternary Science Reviews .

207 : 13– 36.

Bibcode : 2019QSRv..207...13K .

doi : 10.1016/j.quascirev.2018.12.004 .

^ a b Julia Pongratz; Ken Caldeira ; Christian H. Reick; Martin Claussen (20 January 2011). "Coupled climate–carbon simulations indicate minor global effects of wars and epidemics on atmospheric CO2 between ad 800 and 1850".

The Holocene .

21 (5): 843– 851.

doi : 10.1177/0959683610386981 .

ISSN 0959-6836 .

Wikidata Q106515792 .

^ "6.6 The Last 2,000 Years – AR4 WGI Chapter 6: Palaeoclimate" . Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. 2007 . Retrieved 17 December 2023 .

^ Jones, Philip D. (2001).

History and climate: memories of the future?

. Springer. p. 154.

[ ISBN missing ] ^ According to J. M. Lamb of Cambridge University, the Little Ice Age was already underway in Canada and Switzerland and in the wider North Atlantic region in the 13th and the 14th centuries.

^ "Worldwide glacier retreat" . RealClimate. 18 March 2005 . Retrieved 2 August 2007 .

^ Oerlemans, J. (2005).

"Extracting a Climate Signal from 169 Glacier Records" (PDF) .

Science .

308 (5722): 675– 677.

Bibcode : 2005Sci...308..675O .

doi : 10.1126/science.1107046 .

PMID 15746388 .

S2CID 26585604 .

^ Amos, Jonathan (30 September 2013).

"Mystery 13th Century eruption traced to Lombok, Indonesia" .

BBC News .

The mystery event in 1257 was so large its chemical signature is recorded in the ice of both the Arctic and the Antarctic. European medieval texts talk of a sudden cooling of the climate, and of failed harvests.

^ Degroot, Dagamar (2016).

"Did the Spanish Empire Change Earth's Climate?" .

HistoricalClimatology.com . Retrieved 17 December 2023 .

^ Hendy, Erica J.; Gagan, Michael K.; Alibert, Chantal A.; McCulloch, Malcolm T.; Lough, Janice M.

; Isdale, Peter J. (2002). "Abrupt Decrease in Tropical Pacific Sea Surface Salinity at End of Little Ice Age".

Science .

295 (5559): 1511– 1514.

Bibcode : 2002Sci...295.1511H .

doi : 10.1126/science.1067693 .

PMID 11859191 .

S2CID 25698190 .

^ Ogilvie, A. E. J.; Jónsson, T. (2001). " 'Little Ice Age' Research: A Perspective from Iceland".

Climatic Change .

48 : 9– 52.

doi : 10.1023/A:1005625729889 .

S2CID 189870320 .

^ Porter, S. C.

"Anout; Quaternary Science" . INQUA. Archived from the original on 15 April 2010 . Retrieved 6 May 2010 .

^ "AR6 Climate Change 2021: The Physical Science Basis – IPCC" . Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change.

^ Harning, David J.; Geirsdóttir, Áslaug; Miller, Gifford H.; Anderson, Leif (15 November 2016).

"Episodic expansion of Drangajökull, Vestfirðir, Iceland, over the last 3 ka culminating in its maximum dimension during the Little Ice Age" .

Quaternary Science Reviews .

152 : 118– 131.

Bibcode : 2016QSRv..152..118H .

doi : 10.1016/j.quascirev.2016.10.001 . Retrieved 5 June 2024 – via Elsevier Science Direct.

^ Tuchman, Barbara Wertheim (1912–1989) (1979).

A distant mirror: the calamitous 14th century . Ballantine. p. 24.

ISBN 978-0-241-97297-7 .

OCLC 1259448710 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list ( link ) ^ a b c Cowie, Jonathan (2007).

Climate change: biological and human aspects . Cambridge University Press. p. 164.

ISBN 978-0-521-69619-7 .

^ Davies, Caroline (12 February 2021).

"Part of River Thames freezes amid sub-zero temperatures" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 12 February 2021 .

^ a b c d e f g h Lockwood, M.; et al. (April 2017).

"Frost fairs, sunspots and the Little Ice Age" .

Astronomy & Geophysics .

58 (2): 2.17 – 2.23 .

doi : 10.1093/astrogeo/atx057 .

ISSN 2115-7251 .

^ Stone, R. (2004). "Volcanology: Iceland's Doomsday Scenario?".

Science .

306 (5700): 1278– 1281.

doi : 10.1126/science.306.5700.1278 .

PMID 15550636 .

S2CID 161557686 .

^ Rögnvaldardóttir, Nanna.

"What Did They Eat? – Icelandic food from the Settlement through the Middle Ages" .

Gestgjafinn . Archived from the original on 20 February 2012.

^ Stockinger, Günther (10 January 2012).

"Archaeologists Uncover Clues to Why Vikings Abandoned Greenland" .

Der Spiegel . Retrieved 12 January 2013 .

^ a b "SVS Science Story: Ice Age" . NASA Scientific Visualization Studio . Retrieved 2 August 2007 .

^ Delile, Hugo; Schmitt, Laurent; Jacob-Rousseau, Nicolas; Grosprêtre, Loïc; Privolt, Grégoire; Preusser, Frank (15 March 2016).

"Headwater valley response to climate and land use changes during the Little Ice Age in the Massif Central (Yzeron basin, France)" .

Geomorphology .

257 : 179– 197.

Bibcode : 2016Geomo.257..179D .

doi : 10.1016/j.geomorph.2016.01.010 . Retrieved 21 April 2023 .

^ Costas, Susana; Jerez, Sonia; Trigo, Ricardo M.; Goble, Ronald; Rebêlo, Luís (24 May 2012).

"Sand invasion along the Portuguese coast forced by westerly shifts during cold climate events" .

Quaternary Science Reviews .

42 : 15– 28.

Bibcode : 2012QSRv...42...15C .

doi : 10.1016/j.quascirev.2012.03.008 .

hdl : 10400.9/1848 . Retrieved 30 August 2023 .

^ a b c Lamb, Hubert H. (1995). "The little ice age".

Climate, history and the modern world . London, England: Routledge. pp.

211– 241.

ISBN 978-0-415-12734-9 .

^ Jones, Evan T.; Hewlett, Rose; Mackay, Anson W. (5 May 2021).

"Weird weather in Bristol during the Grindelwald Fluctuation (1560–1630)" .

Weather .

76 (4): 104– 110.

Bibcode : 2021Wthr...76..104J .

doi : 10.1002/wea.3846 .

hdl : 1983/28c52f89-91be-4ae4-80e9-918cd339da95 .

S2CID 225239334 .

^ Cullen, Karen J. (2010).

Famine in Scotland: The 'Ill Years' of The 1690s . Edinburgh University Press. p. 20.

ISBN 978-0-7486-3887-1 .

^ Ewanu, Elizabeth; Nugent, Janay (2008).

Finding the Family in Medieval and Early Modern Scotland . Ashgate. p. 153.

ISBN 978-0-7546-6049-1 .

^ Whitehouse, David (17 December 2003).

"Stradivarius' sound 'due to Sun' " . BBC.

^ Burke, James (21 September 1978). "Thunder in the Skies".

Connections . BBC.

^ a b Fagan 2001 .

^ a b c d e f g h i Behringer, Wolfgang (September 1999).

"Climatic change and witch-hunting: the impact of the Little Ice Age on mentalities" .

Climatic Change .

43 (1): 335– 351.

Bibcode : 1999ClCh...43..335B .

doi : 10.1023/A:1005554519604 .

S2CID 189869470 . Retrieved 11 November 2023 .

^ Dagomar Degroot, The Frigid Golden Age: Climate Change, the Little Ice Age, and the Dutch Republic, 1560–1720 (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2018) ISBN 978-1-108-41931-4 .

[ page needed ] ^ a b c d e f Oster, Emily (2004). "Witchcraft, weather and economic growth in Renaissance Europe".

Journal of Economic Perspectives .

18 (1): 215– 228.

CiteSeerX 10.1.1.526.7789 .

doi : 10.1257/089533004773563502 .

JSTOR 3216882 .

S2CID 22483025 .

SSRN 522403 .

^ a b c d e f g h i Behringer, Wolfgang (2009). "Cultural Consequences of the Little Ice Age".

A Cultural History of Climate . Wiley. pp.

121– 167.

ISBN 978-0-7456-4529-2 .

^ a b c d e f Parker, Geoffrey (2013). "The Little Ice Age".

Global Crisis: War, Climate Change, & Catastrophe in the Seventeenth Century . Yale University Press. pp.

3– 25.

ISBN 978-0-300-20863-4 .

^ a b Lehmann, Hartmut (1988). "The Persecution of Witches as Restoration of Order: The Case of Germany, 1590s–1650s".

Central European History .

21 (2): 107– 121.

doi : 10.1017/S000893890001270X .

S2CID 145501088 .

^ a b Post, John D. (1984). "Climatic Variability and the European Mortality Wave of the Early 1740s".

The Journal of Interdisciplinary History .

15 (1): 1– 30.

doi : 10.2307/203592 .

JSTOR 203592 .

PMID 11617361 .

^ "Part 12 of Annals of Loch Cé " .

Corpus of Electronic Texts . University College Cork.

^ Meigs, Samantha A. (1997).

Reformations in Ireland: Tradition and Confessionalism, 1400–1690 . Springer.

ISBN 978-1-349-25710-2 – via Google Books.

^ a b c Macdougall, Douglas (2004).

Frozen Earth: The Once and Future Story of Ice Ages . University of California Press. p. 225.

ISBN 978-0-520-24824-3 .

^ a b c Huddart, David; Stott, Tim (2010).

Earth Environments: Past, Present and Future . Wiley. p. 863.

ISBN 978-0-470-74960-9 .

^ a b Degroot, Dagomar (2018).

The Frigid Golden Age: Climate Change, the Little Ice Age, and the Dutch Republic, 1560–1720 . New York: Cambridge University Press. p. 254.

ISBN 978-1-108-41931-4 .

^ Burroughs, William (18–25 December 1980).

"The art of the weather" .

New Scientist . Vol. 88, no.

1232– 1233. pp.

768– 771.

ISSN 0262-4079 .

[ permanent dead link ] ^ Thornes, John E.; Constable, John (1999).

John Constable's skies: a fusion of art and science . Continuum International. p. 32.

ISBN 978-1-902459-02-8 .

^ "Kilsyth Curling" . Archived from the original on 5 February 2012 . Retrieved 11 September 2010 .

^ "The Story so Far!!!" . Gourock Curling Club. 2009. Archived from the original on 25 April 2012 . Retrieved 11 September 2010 .

^ Zhang, David D.; Lee, Harry F.; Wang, Cong; Li, Baosheng; Pei, Qing; Zhang, Jane; An, Yulun (18 October 2011).

"The causality analysis of climate change and large-scale human crisis" .

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America .

108 (42): 17296– 17301.

doi : 10.1073/pnas.1104268108 .

PMC 3198350 .

PMID 21969578 .

^ National Geographic (2007).

Essential Visual History of the World . National Geographic Society. pp.

190– 191.

ISBN 978-1-4262-0091-5 .

^ Masson-MacLean, Edouard; Houmard, Claire; Knecht, Rick; Sidéra, Isabelle; Dobney, Keith; Britton, Kate (30 May 2020).

"Pre-contact adaptations to the Little Ice Age in Southwest Alaska: New evidence from the Nunalleq site" .

Quaternary International .

549 : 130– 141.

Bibcode : 2020QuInt.549..130M .

doi : 10.1016/j.quaint.2019.05.003 .

hdl : 2164/15121 . Retrieved 18 August 2024 – via Elsevier Science Direct.

^ Kenyon, W. A.; Turnbull, J. R. (1971).

The Battle for James Bay . Toronto, Canada: Macmillan Company of Canada Limited.

^ a b Broecker, Wallace S. (2000).

"Was a change in thermohaline circulation responsible for the Little Ice Age?" .

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America .

97 (4): 1339– 1342.

Bibcode : 2000PNAS...97.1339B .

doi : 10.1073/pnas.97.4.1339 .

JSTOR 121471 .

PMC 34299 .

PMID 10677462 .

^ Forbes, Véronique; Ledger, Paul M.; Cretu, Denisa; Elias, Scott (30 May 2020).

"A sub-centennial, Little Ice Age climate reconstruction using beetle subfossil data from Nunalleq, southwestern Alaska" .

Quaternary International .

549 : 118– 129.

Bibcode : 2020QuInt.549..118F .

doi : 10.1016/j.quaint.2019.07.011 .

hdl : 2164/14668 . Retrieved 18 August 2024 – via Elsevier Science Direct.

^ Anderson, R. Scott; Kaufman, Darrell S.; Schiff, Caleb; Daigle, Tom; Berg, Edward (15 October 2013).

"The impact of Little Ice Age cooling on mountain hemlock (Tsuga mertensiana) distribution in southcentral, Alaska" .

Quaternary International .

310 : 228.

Bibcode : 2013QuInt.310..228A .

doi : 10.1016/j.quaint.2013.07.058 . Retrieved 18 August 2024 – via Elsevier Science Direct.

^ "Ice Ages" .

National Park Service . Archived from the original on 12 April 2005.

^ Cronin, T. M.; Dwyer, G. S.; Kamiya, T.; Schwede, S.; Willard, D. A. (2003).

"Medieval Warm Period, Little Ice Age and 20th century temperature variability from Chesapeake Bay" (PDF) .

Global and Planetary Change .

36 (1): 17.

Bibcode : 2003GPC....36...17C .

doi : 10.1016/S0921-8181(02)00161-3 .

hdl : 10161/6578 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022.

^ Wolfe, Brendan (7 December 2020).

"Little Ice Age and Colonial Virginia" .

The Encyclopedia Virginia . Retrieved 26 May 2021 .

^ "Climate and Mastery of the Wilderness in Seventeenth-Century New England" .

Colonial Society of Massachusetts . Retrieved 26 May 2021 .

^ White, Sam (2015).

"Unpuzzling American Climate: New World Experience and the Foundations of a New Science" .

Isis .

106 (3): 544– 566.

doi : 10.1086/683166 .

JSTOR 10.1086/683166 .

PMID 26685517 .

S2CID 37331690 . Retrieved 9 September 2023 .

^ Hodell, David A.; Brenner, Mark; Curtis, Jason H.; Medina-González, Roger; Ildefonso-Chan Can, Enrique; Albornaz-Pat, Alma; Guilderson, Thomas P. (2005). "Climate change on the Yucatan Peninsula during the Little Ice Age".

Quaternary Research .

63 (2): 109.

Bibcode : 2005QuRes..63..109H .

doi : 10.1016/j.yqres.2004.11.004 .

S2CID 129924750 .

.

^ del Socorro Lozano-García, Ma.; Caballero, Margarita; Ortega, Beatriz; Rodríguez, Alejandro; Sosa, Susana (9 October 2007).

"Tracing the effects of the Little Ice Age in the tropical lowlands of eastern Mesoamerica" .

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America .

104 (41): 16200– 16203.

Bibcode : 2007PNAS..10416200L .

doi : 10.1073/pnas.0707896104 .

PMC 2000453 .

PMID 17913875 .

^ Bond et al., 1997.

[ full citation needed ] ^ "Abrupt Climate Changes Revisited: How Serious and How Likely?" .

USGCRP Seminar . US Global Change Research Program. 23 February 1998. Archived from the original on 11 June 2007 . Retrieved 18 May 2005 .

^ Raposeiro, Pedro M.; Ritter, Catarina; Abbott, Mark; Hernandez, Armand; Pimentel, Adriano; Lasher, Everett; Płóciennik, Mateusz; Berlajolli, Violeta; Kotrys, Bartosz; Pombal, Xabier Pontevedra; Souto, Martin; Giralt, Santiago; Gonçalves, Vitor (1 May 2024).

"Late Holocene climate dynamics in the Azores archipelago" .

Quaternary Science Reviews .

331 : 108617.

Bibcode : 2024QSRv..33108617R .

doi : 10.1016/j.quascirev.2024.108617 .

^ a b c Reiter, Paul (2000).

"From Shakespeare to Defoe: Malaria in England in the Little Ice Age" .

Emerging Infectious Diseases .

6 (1): 1– 11.

doi : 10.3201/eid0601.000101 .

PMC 2627969 .

PMID 10653562 .

^ Liu, Kam-biu; Shen, Caiming; Louie, Kin-Sheun (2001). "A 1,000-Year History of Typhoon Landfalls in Guangdong, Southern China, Reconstructed from Chinese Historical Documentary Records".

Annals of the Association of American Geographers .

91 (3): 453– 464.

doi : 10.1111/0004-5608.00253 .

S2CID 53066209 .

^ Fan, Ka-wai (10 October 2009).

"Climatic change and dynastic cycles in Chinese history: A review essay" .

Climatic Change .

101 ( 3– 4): 565– 573.

Bibcode : 2010ClCh..101..565F .

doi : 10.1007/s10584-009-9702-3 .

S2CID 153997845 . Retrieved 5 July 2023 .

^ Cai, Wenjuan; Yn, Shuyan (March 2009). "The freeze disasters in the Little Ice Age of Ming and Qing Dynasties in the Guanzhong Region".

Journal of Arid Land Resources and Environment .

23 (3). College of Tourism and Environmental Sciences, Shaanxi Normal University: 119.

^ Zhang, Xian; Shao, Xiaohua; Wang, Tao (3 May 2013). "Regional Climate Characteristics in China during the Little Ice Age".

Journal of Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology: Natural Science Edition .

4 (1): 317– 325.

^ Lan, Jianghu; Xu, Hai; Lang, Yunchao; Yu, Keke; Zhou, Peng; Kang, Shugang; Zhou, Kangen; Wang, Xulong; Wang, Tianli; Cheng, Peng; Yan, Dongna; Yu, Shiyong; Che, Ping; Ye, Yuanda; Tan, Liangcheng (1 April 2020).

"Dramatic weakening of the East Asian summer monsoon in northern China during the transition from the Medieval Warm Period to the Little Ice Age" .

Geology .

48 (4): 307– 312.

Bibcode : 2020Geo....48..307L .

doi : 10.1130/G46811.1 .

S2CID 212826794 . Retrieved 5 July 2023 .

^ Li, Ting-Yong; Xiao, Si-Ya; Shen, Chuan-Chou; Zhang, Jian; Chen, Chao-Jun; Cheng, Hai; Spötl, Christoph; Huang, Ran; Wang, Tao; Li, Jun-Yun; Wu, Yao; Liu, Zi-Qi; Edwards, R. Lawrence; Yu, Tsai-Luen (15 January 2021).

"Little Ice Age climate changes in Southwest China from a stalagmite δ18O record" .

Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology .

562 : 110167.

Bibcode : 2021PPP...56210167L .

doi : 10.1016/j.palaeo.2020.110167 .

S2CID 230543250 . Retrieved 5 November 2022 .

^ KeZhen, Zhu (January 1972).

"中国近五千年来气候变迁的初步研究" .

Acta Archaeologica Sinica .

1 (1): 25.

^ Xiao, Jie; Zheng, Guozhang; Guo, Zhengsheng; Yan, Lisha (June 2018).

"Climate change and social response during the heyday of the little ice age in the Ming and Qing dynasty" .

Journal of Arid Land Resources and Environment, College of Geography Science, Shanxi Normal University .

32 (6): 80.

doi : 10.13448/j.cnki.jalre.2018.176 . Archived from the original on 9 October 2021 . Retrieved 5 May 2021 .

^ Yi, Shanming (May 2015).

"明朝灭亡与"小冰期" " .

Journal of Social Science of the North China University of Water Conservancy and Electric Power .

1 (5): 3 . Retrieved 5 May 2021 .

^ Xiao, Lingbo; Fang, Xiuqi; Zheng, Jingyun; Zhao, Wanyi (June 2015). "Famine, Migration and War: Comparison of Climate Change Impacts and Social Responses in North China between the Late Ming and Late Qing Dynasties".

The Holocene .

25 (6): 900– 910.

Bibcode : 2015Holoc..25..900X .

doi : 10.1177/0959683615572851 .

^ Rowan, Ann (1 February 2017).

"The 'Little Ice Age' in the Himalaya: A review of glacier advance driven by Northern Hemisphere temperature change" .

The Holocene .

27 (2): 292– 308.

Bibcode : 2017Holoc..27..292R .

doi : 10.1177/0959683616658530 .

S2CID 55253587 .

^ Lee, Ethan; Carrivick, Jonathan L.; Quincey, Duncan J.; Cook, Simon J.; James, William H. M.; Brown, Lee E. (20 December 2021).

"Accelerated mass loss of Himalayan glaciers since the Little Ice Age" .

Scientific Reports .

11 (1): 24284.

Bibcode : 2021NatSR..1124284L .

doi : 10.1038/s41598-021-03805-8 .

ISSN 2045-2322 .

PMC 8688493 .

PMID 34931039 .

^ "From Zardaris to Makranis: How the Baloch came to Sindh" .

The Express Tribune . 28 March 2014.

^ Leipe, Christian; Müller, Stefanie; Hille, Konrad; Kato, Hirofumi; Kobe, Franziska; Schmidt, Mareike; Seyffert, Konrad; Spengler III, Robert; Wagner, Mayke; Weber, Andrzej W.; Tarasov, Pavel E. (1 August 2018).

"Vegetation change and human impacts on Rebun Island (Northwest Pacific) over the last 6000 years" .

Quaternary Science Reviews .

193 : 129– 144.

Bibcode : 2018QSRv..193..129L .

doi : 10.1016/j.quascirev.2018.06.011 . Retrieved 14 April 2023 .

^ Johnson, Thomas C.; Barry, Sylvia L.; Chan, Yvonne; Wilkinson, Paul (2001).

<0083:drocvs>2.0.co;2 "Decadal record of climate variability spanning the past 700 yr in the Southern Tropics of East Africa" .

Geology .

29 (1): 83.

Bibcode : 2001Geo....29...83J .

doi : 10.1130/0091-7613(2001)029<0083:drocvs>2.0.co;2 .

ISSN 0091-7613 . Retrieved 11 November 2023 .

^ Klein, Richard G. (December 2000).

"The Earlier Stone Age of Southern Africa" .

The South African Archaeological Bulletin .

55 (172): 107– 122.

doi : 10.2307/3888960 .

ISSN 0038-1969 .

JSTOR 3888960 .

^ Johnson, Thomas C.; Barry, Sylvia L.; Chan, Yvonne; Wilkinson, Paul (2001). "Decadal record of climate variability spanning the past 700 yr in the Southern Tropics of East Africa".

Geology .

29 (1): 83.

Bibcode : 2001Geo....29...83J .

doi : 10.1130/0091-7613(2001)029<0083:DROCVS>2.0.CO;2 .

S2CID 20364249 .

^ Holmgren, K.; Tyson, P. D.; Moberg, A.; Svanered, O. (2001). "A preliminary 3000-year regional temperature reconstruction for South Africa".

South African Journal of Science .

97 : 49– 51.

hdl : 10520/EJC97278 .

^ Sundqvist, H. S.; Holmgren, K.; Fohlmeister, J.; Zhang, Q.; Matthews, M. Bar; Spötl, C.; Körnich, H. (December 2013).

"Evidence of a large cooling between 1690 and 1740 AD in southern Africa" .

Scientific Reports .

3 (1): 1767.

Bibcode : 2013NatSR...3.1767S .

doi : 10.1038/srep01767 .

ISSN 2045-2322 .

PMC 3642658 .

^ MacKay, Anson W.

; Bamford, Marion K.; Grab, Stefan W.; Fitchett, Jennifer M. (2016).

"A multi-disciplinary review of late Quaternary palaeoclimates and environments for Lesotho" .

South African Journal of Science .

112 (7/8): 9.

doi : 10.17159/sajs.2016/20160045 .

^ Huffman, Thomas N. (January 1996).

"Archaeological evidence for climatic change during the last 2000 years in southern Africa" .

Quaternary International .

33 : 55– 60.

Bibcode : 1996QuInt..33...55H .

doi : 10.1016/1040-6182(95)00095-x .

ISSN 1040-6182 .

^ Valsecchi, Verushka; Chase, Brian M.; Slingsby, Jasper A.; Carr, Andrew A.; Quick, Lynne J.; Meadows, Michael E.; Cheddadi, Rachid; Reimer, Paula J. (1 October 2013).

"A high resolution 15,600-year pollen and microcharcoal record from the Cederberg Mountains, South Africa" .

Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology .

387 : 6– 16.

Bibcode : 2013PPP...387....6V .

doi : 10.1016/j.palaeo.2013.07.009 . Retrieved 16 November 2022 .

^ Nicholson, Sharon E.; Yin, Xungang (2001).

"Rainfall Conditions in Equatorial East Africa during the Nineteenth Century as Inferred from the Record of Lake Victoria" .

Climatic Change .

48 (2/3): 387– 398.

Bibcode : 2001ClCh...48..387N .

doi : 10.1023/a:1010736008362 .

ISSN 0165-0009 .

S2CID 130327434 . Retrieved 9 September 2023 .

^ Kreutz, K. J. (1997). "Bipolar Changes in Atmospheric Circulation During the Little Ice Age".

Science .

277 (5330): 1294– 1296.

doi : 10.1126/science.277.5330.1294 .

S2CID 129868172 .

^ Khim, Boo-Keun; Yoon, Ho Il; Kang, Cheon Yun; Bahk, Jang Jun (2002). "Unstable Climate Oscillations during the Late Holocene in the Eastern Bransfield Basin, Antarctic Peninsula".

Quaternary Research .

58 (3): 234.

Bibcode : 2002QuRes..58..234K .

doi : 10.1006/qres.2002.2371 .

S2CID 129384061 .

^ "Siple Dome Glaciochemistry" . Archived from the original on 7 February 2020 . Retrieved 4 October 2017 .

^ Das, Sarah B.; Alley, Richard B.

"Clues to changing WAIS Holocene summer temperatures from variations in melt-layer frequency in the Siple Dome ice core" . Archived from the original on 7 October 2006.

^ Etheridge, D. M.; Steele, L. P.; Langenfelds, R. L.; Francey, R. J.; Barnola, J. -M.; Morgan, V. I.

"Historical CO 2 Records from the Law Dome DE08, DE08-2, and DSS Ice Cores" .

Carbon Dioxide Information Analysis Center . Oak Ridge, Tennessee: Oak Ridge National Laboratory, U.S. Department of Energy. Archived from the original on 13 August 2011 . Retrieved 15 May 2005 .

^ Bárcena, M. Angeles; Gersonde, Rainer; Ledesma, Santiago; Fabrés, Joan; Calafat, Antonio M.; Canals, Miquel; Sierro, F. Javier; Flores, Jose A. (1998). "Record of Holocene glacial oscillations in Bransfield Basin as revealed by siliceous microfossil assemblages".

Antarctic Science .

10 (3): 269.

Bibcode : 1998AntSc..10..269B .

doi : 10.1017/S0954102098000364 .

S2CID 128443058 .

^ Rhodes, R. H.; Bertler, N. A. N.; Baker, J. A.; Steen-Larsen, H. C.; Sneed, S. B.; Morgenstern, U.; Johnsen, S. J. (2012).

"Little Ice Age climate and oceanic conditions of the Ross Sea, Antarctica from a coastal ice core record" .

Climate of the Past .

8 (4): 1223.

Bibcode : 2012CliPa...8.1223R .

doi : 10.5194/cp-8-1223-2012 .

^ a b c Tibby, J.; Tyler, J. J.; Barr, C. (15 December 2018).

"Post little ice age drying of eastern Australia conflates understanding of early settlement impacts" .

Quaternary Science Reviews . Archives of Humans, Environments and their Interactions – papers in honour of Professor C. Neil Roberts and Professor Henry F. Lamb.

202 : 45– 54.

Bibcode : 2018QSRv..202...45T .

doi : 10.1016/j.quascirev.2018.10.033 .

ISSN 0277-3791 .

S2CID 134005721 .

^ Mercer, D.; Marden, P. (2006). "Ecologically sustainable development in a 'quarry' economy: one step forward, two steps back".

Geographical Research .

44 (2): 183– 202.

Bibcode : 2006GeoRs..44..183M .

doi : 10.1111/j.1745-5871.2006.00376.x .

^ Gordon, L.; Dunlop, M.; Foran, B. (2003).

"Land cover change and water vapour flows: learning from Australia" .

Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences .

358 (385): 1973– 1984.

doi : 10.1098/rstb.2003.1381 .

PMC 1693281 .

PMID 14728792 .

^ Nair, U. S.; Wu, Y.; Kala, J.; Lyons, T. J.; Peilke, R. A.; Hacker, J. M. (2011). "The role of land use change on the development and evolution of the west coast trough, convective clouds, and precipitation in southwest Australia".

Journal of Geophysical Research: Atmospheres .

116 (D7): D7.

Bibcode : 2011JGRD..116.7103N .

doi : 10.1029/2010JD014950 .

^ Hendy, Erica J.; Gagan, Michael K.; Alibert, Chantal A.; McCulloch, Malcolm T.; Lough, Janice M.; Isdale, Peter J. (2002). "Abrupt Decrease in Tropical Pacific Sea Surface Salinity at End of Little Ice Age".

Science .

295 (5559): 1511– 1514.

Bibcode : 2002Sci...295.1511H .

doi : 10.1126/science.1067693 .

PMID 11859191 .

S2CID 25698190 .

^ Pollack, Henry N.; Huang, Shaopeng; Smerdon, Jason E. (2006). "Five centuries of climate change in Australia: The view from underground".

Journal of Quaternary Science .

21 (7): 701.

Bibcode : 2006JQS....21..701P .

doi : 10.1002/jqs.1060 .

hdl : 2027.42/55832 .

^ Fagan, Brian M. (2001).

The Little Ice Age: How Climate Made History, 1300–1850 . Basic Books.

ISBN 978-0-465-02272-4 .

^ Lorrey, Andrew; Fauchereau, Nicholas; Stanton, Craig; Pearce, Petra (June 2013). "The Little Ice Age climate of New Zealand reconstructed from South Alps cirque glaciers: A synoptic type approach".

Climate Dynamics .

42 ( 11– 12): 11– 12.

doi : 10.1007/s00382-013-1876-8 .

^ Winkler, Stefan (2000). "The 'Little Ice Age' maximum in the Southern Alps, New Zealand: Preliminary results at Mueller Glacier".

The Holocene .

10 (5): 643– 647.

Bibcode : 2000Holoc..10..643W .

doi : 10.1191/095968300666087656 .

S2CID 131695554 .

^ Nunn, Patrick D. (2000). "Environmental catastrophe in the Pacific Islands around A.D. 1300".

Geoarchaeology .

15 (7): 715– 740.

Bibcode : 2000Gearc..15..715N .

doi : 10.1002/1520-6548(200010)15:7<715::AID-GEA4>3.0.CO;2-L .

^ Cobb, Kim M.; Charles, Chris; Cheng, Hai; Edwards, R. Lawrence.

"The Medieval Cool Period and the Little Warm Age in the Central Tropical Pacific? Fossil Coral Climate Records of the Last Millennium" . Archived from the original on 20 November 2003.

^ Field, Julie S.; Lape, Peter V. (March 2010). "Paleoclimates and the emergence of fortifications in the tropical Pacific islands".

Journal of Anthropological Archaeology .

29 (1). Elsevier Incorporated: 113– 124.

doi : 10.1016/j.jaa.2009.11.001 – via Elsevier Science Direct.

^ Hendy, E. J. (22 February 2002).

"Abrupt Decrease in Tropical Pacific Sea Surface Salinity at End of Little Ice Age" .

Science .

295 (5559): 1511– 1514.

Bibcode : 2002Sci...295.1511H .

doi : 10.1126/science.1067693 .

ISSN 0036-8075 .

PMID 11859191 .

S2CID 25698190 .

^ Rull, Valenti (5 January 2020).

"Drought, freshwater availability and cultural resilience on Easter Island (SE Pacific) during the Little Ice Age" .

The Holocene .

30 (5). Sage Publications: 774– 780.

Bibcode : 2020Holoc..30..774R .

doi : 10.1177/0959683619895587 .

hdl : 10261/198861 .

S2CID 214564573 – via GeoRef In Process.

^ Fischer, Steven Roger (2005).

Island at the End of the World: The Turbulent History of Easter Island . London, England: Reaktion Books.

ISBN 1-86189-282-9 .

^ Villalba, Ricardo (1990). "Climatic fluctuations in northern Patagonia during the last 1000 years as inferred from tree-ring records".

Quaternary Research .

34 (3): 346– 60.

Bibcode : 1990QuRes..34..346V .

doi : 10.1016/0033-5894(90)90046-N .

S2CID 129024705 .

^ Villalba, Ricardo (1994). "Tree-ring and glacial evidence for the medieval warm epoch and the little ice age in southern South America".

Climatic Change .

26 ( 2– 3): 183– 97.

Bibcode : 1994ClCh...26..183V .

doi : 10.1007/BF01092413 .

S2CID 189877440 .

^ Bertrand, Sébastien; Boës, Xavier; Castiaux, Julie; Charlet, François; Urrutia, Roberto; Espinoza, Cristian; Lepoint, Gilles; Charlier, Bernard; Fagel, Nathalie (2005).

"Temporal evolution of sediment supply in Lago Puyehue (Southern Chile) during the last 600 yr and its climatic significance" .

Quaternary Research .

64 (2): 163.

Bibcode : 2005QuRes..64..163B .

doi : 10.1016/j.yqres.2005.06.005 .

hdl : 2268/24732 .

S2CID 20090174 .

^ Meyer, Inka; Wagner, Sebastian (2009). "The Little Ice Age in Southern South America: Proxy and Model Based Evidence".

Past Climate Variability in South America and Surrounding Regions . Developments in Paleoenvironmental Research. Vol. 14. pp.

395– 412.

doi : 10.1007/978-90-481-2672-9_16 .

ISBN 978-90-481-2671-2 .

^ Thompson, L. G.; Mosley-Thompson, E.; Davis, M. E.; Lin, P. N.; Henderson, K.; Mashiotta, T. A. (2003). "Tropical Glacier and Ice Core Evidence of Climate Change on Annual to Millennial Time Scales".

Climate Variability and Change in High Elevation Regions: Past, Present & Future . Advances in Global Change Research. Vol. 15. pp.

137– 155.

doi : 10.1007/978-94-015-1252-7_8 .

ISBN 978-90-481-6322-9 .

S2CID 18990647 .

^ a b Araneda, Alberto; Torrejón, Fernando; Aguayo, Mauricio; Torres, Laura; Cruces, Fabiola; Cisternas, Marco; Urrutia, Roberto (2007).

"Historical records of San Rafael glacier advances (North Patagonian Icefield): Another clue to 'Little Ice Age' timing in southern Chile?" .

The Holocene .

17 (7): 987.

Bibcode : 2007Holoc..17..987A .

doi : 10.1177/0959683607082414 .

hdl : 10533/178477 .

S2CID 128826804 .

^ Koch, Johannes; Kilian, Rolf (2005).

" 'Little Ice Age' glacier fluctuations, Gran Campo Nevado, southernmost Chile" (PDF) .

The Holocene .

15 (1): 20– 28.

Bibcode : 2005Holoc..15...20K .

doi : 10.1191/0959683605hl780rp .

S2CID 129125563 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022.

^ Estay, Sergio A.; López, Daniela N.; Silva, Carmen P.; Gayo, Eugenia M.; McRostie, Virginia; Lima, Mauricio (2022). "A modeling approach to estimate the historical population size of the Patagonian Kawésqar people".

The Holocene .

32 (6): 578– 583.

Bibcode : 2022Holoc..32..578E .

doi : 10.1177/09596836221080761 .

S2CID 247151899 .

^ a b White, Sam (15 August 2011).

The Climate of Rebellion in the Early Modern Ottoman Empire . Cambridge University Press. p. 1.

doi : 10.1017/cbo9780511844058 .

ISBN 978-1-107-00831-1 .

^ White, Sam (15 August 2011).

The Climate of Rebellion in the Early Modern Ottoman Empire . Cambridge University Press. p. 123.

doi : 10.1017/cbo9780511844058 .

ISBN 978-1-107-00831-1 .

^ Raphael, Sarah Kate (15 January 2013).

Climate and Political Climate . Brill. p. 22.

doi : 10.1163/9789004244733 .

ISBN 978-90-04-24473-3 .

^ Ágoston, Gábor (13 November 2011).

"Ottoman conquests" .

The Encyclopedia of War . Oxford, UK: Blackwell Publishing Limited. p. 545.

doi : 10.1002/9781444338232.wbeow464 .

ISBN 978-1-4051-9037-4 . Retrieved 26 April 2023 .

^ White, S. (2012).

Water on Sand: Environmental histories of the Middle East and North Africa . Oxford University Press. p. 72.

^ Itzkowitz, Norman (1980).

Ottoman Empire and Islamic Tradition . University of Chicago Press. p. 67.

doi : 10.7208/chicago/9780226098012.001.0001 .

ISBN 978-0-226-38806-9 .

^ "The Changing Ottoman Empire" .

Greece, the Hidden Centuries . I.B. Tauris & Co. Ltd. 2010. p. 281.

doi : 10.5040/9780755621231.ch-014 .

ISBN 978-1-78076-238-8 . Retrieved 26 April 2023 .

^ Gerber, Haim (September 1996).

"An Economic and Social History of the Ottoman Empire, 1300–1914. Edited by Halil Inalcik. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1994. Pp. xxxix, 1026. $120.00" .

The Journal of Economic History (book review).

56 (3): 413– 414.

doi : 10.1017/s0022050700017216 .

ISSN 0022-0507 .

S2CID 154949743 .

^ a b White, Sam (15 August 2011).

The Climate of Rebellion in the Early Modern Ottoman Empire . Cambridge University Press. p. 32.

doi : 10.1017/cbo9780511844058 .

ISBN 978-1-107-00831-1 .

^ a b Griswold, William J. (September–October 1978).

"Saudi Aramco World: Whither the Weather" .

Saudi Aramco World . Vol. 29, no. 5. pp.

22– 27 . Retrieved 26 April 2023 .

^ Duffy, Andrea (9 June 2021).

"What the Ottoman Empire can teach us about the consequences of climate change – and how drought can uproot peoples and fuel warfare" .

The Conversation . Retrieved 26 April 2023 – via Colorado State University.

^ Robinson, Nova (May 2019).

"Betty Anderson, A History of the Modern Middle East: Rulers, Rebels, and Rouges (Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University Press, 2016). Pp. 540. $44.95 paper. ISBN: 9780804783248" .

International Journal of Middle East Studies (book review).

51 (2): 321– 323.

doi : 10.1017/s0020743819000114 .

ISSN 0020-7438 .

S2CID 167176658 .

^ White, Sam (15 August 2011).

The Climate of Rebellion in the Early Modern Ottoman Empire . Cambridge University Press. p. 2.

doi : 10.1017/cbo9780511844058 .

ISBN 978-1-107-00831-1 .

^ a b c d e Owens, M. J.; et al. (October 2017).

"The Maunder Minimum and the Little Ice Age: An update from recent reconstructions and climate simulations" .

Journal of Space Weather and Space Climate .

7 : A25.

arXiv : 1708.04904 .

doi : 10.1051/swsc/2017019 .

ISSN 2115-7251 .

S2CID 37433045 .

^ a b Wanamaker, Alan D.; Butler, Paul G.; Scourse, James D.; Heinemeier, Jan; Eiríksson, Jón; Knudsen, Karen Luise; Richardson, Christopher A. (2012).

"Surface changes in the North Atlantic meridional overturning circulation during the last millennium" .

Nature Communications .

3 (1): 899.

Bibcode : 2012NatCo...3..899W .

doi : 10.1038/ncomms1901 .

PMC 3621426 .

PMID 22692542 .

^ a b Kaufman, D. S.; Schneider, D. P.; McKay, N. P.; Ammann, C. M.; Bradley, R. S.; Briffa, K. R.; Miller, G. H.; Otto-Bliesner, B. L.

; Overpeck, J. T.; Vinther, B. M.; Abbott, M.; Axford, M.; Bird, Y.; Birks, B.; Bjune, H. J. B.; Briner, A. E.; Cook, J.; Chipman, T.; Francus, M.; Gajewski, P.; Geirsdottir, K.; Hu, A.; Kutchko, F. S.; Lamoureux, B.; Loso, S.; MacDonald, M.; Peros, G.; Porinchu, M.; Schiff, D.; Seppa, C.; Seppa, H.; Arctic Lakes 2k Project Members (2009).

"Recent Warming Reverses Long-Term Arctic Cooling" (PDF) .

Science .

325 (5945): 1236– 1239.

Bibcode : 2009Sci...325.1236K .

CiteSeerX 10.1.1.397.8778 .

doi : 10.1126/science.1173983 .

PMID 19729653 .

S2CID 23844037 .

{{ cite journal }} :  CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list ( link ) "Arctic Warming Overtakes 2,000 Years of Natural Cooling" . UCAR. 3 September 2009. Archived from the original on 27 April 2011 . Retrieved 19 May 2011 .

Bello, David (4 September 2009).

"Global Warming Reverses Long-Term Arctic Cooling" .

Scientific American . Retrieved 19 May 2011 .

^ Usoskin, I. G. (March 2017).

"A history of solar activity over millennia" .

Living Reviews in Solar Physics .

15 (3): 3.

arXiv : 0810.3972 .

Bibcode : 2017LRSP...14....3U .

doi : 10.1007/s41116-017-0006-9 .

S2CID 195340740 .

^ Kokfelt, U.; Muscheler, R. (March 2013).

"Solar forcing of climate during the last millennium recorded in lake sediments from northern Sweden" .

The Holocene .

23 (3): 447– 452.

Bibcode : 2013Holoc..23..447K .

doi : 10.1177/0959683612460781 .

ISSN 0959-6836 .

S2CID 128814633 . Retrieved 11 November 2023 .

^ Mauquoy, Dmitri; van Geel, Bas; Blaauw, Maarten; van der Plicht, Johannes (1 January 2002).

"Evidence from northwest European bogs shows 'Little Ice Age' climatic changes driven by variations in solar activity" .

The Holocene .

12 (1): 1– 6.

Bibcode : 2002Holoc..12....1M .

doi : 10.1191/0959683602hl514rr .

ISSN 0959-6836 .

S2CID 131513256 .

^ Lean, Judith ; Rind, David (1 January 1999).

"Evaluating sun–climate relationships since the Little Ice Age" .

Journal of Atmospheric and Solar-Terrestrial Physics .

61 ( 1– 2): 25– 36.

Bibcode : 1999JASTP..61...25L .

doi : 10.1016/S1364-6826(98)00113-8 .

ISSN 1364-6826 .

^ Kopp, G. (April 2014).

"An assessment of the solar irradiance record for climate studies" .

J. Space Weather and Space Climate .

4 : A14.

Bibcode : 2014JSWSC...4A..14K .

doi : 10.1051/swsc/2014012 .

^ Kopp, G. (July 2016). "Magnitudes and timescales of total solar irradiance variability".

Journal of Space Weather and Space Climate .

6 : A30.

arXiv : 1606.05258 .

Bibcode : 2016JSWSC...6A..30K .

doi : 10.1051/swsc/2016025 .

S2CID 55902879 .

^ Lockwood, M.; Ball, W. (May 2020).

"Placing limits on long-term variations in quiet-Sun irradiance and their contribution to total solar irradiance and solar radiative forcing of climate" .

Proceedings of the Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences .

476 (2238): 20200077.

Bibcode : 2020RSPSA.47600077L .

doi : 10.1098/rspa.2020.0077 .

ISSN 1364-5021 .

PMC 7428030 .

PMID 32831591 .

^ Lockwood, M.; Harrison, R. G.; Woollings, T.; Solanki, S. K. (2010).

"Are cold winters in Europe associated with low solar activity?" .

Environmental Research Letters .

5 (2): 024001.

Bibcode : 2010ERL.....5b4001L .

doi : 10.1088/1748-9326/5/2/024001 .

S2CID 10669151 .

^ Fischer, H.; Werner, M.; Wagenbach, D.; Schwager, M.; Thorsteinnson, T.; Wilhelms, F.; Kipfstuhl, J.; Sommer, S. (15 May 1998).

"Little Ice Age clearly recorded in northern Greenland ice cores" .

Geophysical Research Letters .

25 (10): 1749– 1752.

Bibcode : 1998GeoRL..25.1749F .

doi : 10.1029/98GL01177 .

S2CID 128608360 .

^ Robock, Alan (21 December 1979).

"The "Little Ice Age": Northern Hemisphere Average Observations and Model Calculations" .

Science .

206 (4425): 1402– 1404.

Bibcode : 1979Sci...206.1402R .

doi : 10.1126/science.206.4425.1402 .

PMID 17739301 .

S2CID 43754672 . Retrieved 11 September 2023 .

^ "Is the Meghalayan Event a Tipping Point in Geology?" .

The Wire .

^ "A Chilling Possibility – NASA Science" . Science.nasa.gov. Archived from the original on 17 March 2010 . Retrieved 24 June 2013 .

^ Lapointe, Francois; Bradley, Raymond S. (17 December 2021).

"Little Ice Age abruptly triggered by intrusion of Atlantic waters into the Nordic Seas" .

Science Advances .

7 (51): eabi8230.

Bibcode : 2021SciA....7.8230L .

doi : 10.1126/sciadv.abi8230 .

ISSN 2375-2548 .

PMC 8673760 .

PMID 34910526 .

^ Hopkin, Michael (29 November 2006).

"Gulf Stream weakened in 'Little Ice Age' " .

BioEd Online . Retrieved 1 February 2019 .

^ Villanueva, John Carl (19 October 2009).

"Little Ice Age" .

Universe Today . Retrieved 22 September 2010 .

^ Pittenger, Richard F.; Gagosian, Robert B. (October 2003).

"Global Warming Could Have a Chilling Effect on the Military" .

Defense Horizons .

33 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 31 May 2012 . Retrieved 22 September 2010 .

^ Banerji, Upasana S.; Padmalal, D. (2021).

"12 – Bond events and monsoon variability during Holocene—Evidence from marine and continental archives" . In Kumaran, Navnith; Damodara, Padmalal (eds.).

Holocene Climate Change and Environment . Elsevier. pp.

293– 339.

doi : 10.1016/B978-0-323-90085-0.00016-4 .

ISBN 978-0-323-90085-0 .

S2CID 244441781 . Retrieved 9 September 2023 .

^ Leake, Jonathan (8 May 2005).

"Britain faces big chill as ocean current slows" .

The Times . London. Archived from the original on 8 February 2007 . Retrieved 11 May 2010 .

^ "Little Ice Age, on season 15, episode  5" .

Scientific American Frontiers . Chedd-Angier Production Company. 2005.

PBS .

Archived from the original on 1 January 2006.

^ Rahmstorf, Stefan; Box, Jason E.; Feulner, Georg; Mann, Michael E.; Robinson, Alexander; Rutherford, Scott; Schaffernicht, Erik J. (2015).

"Exceptional twentieth-century slowdown in Atlantic Ocean overturning circulation" (PDF) .

Nature Climate Change .

5 (5): 475– 480.

Bibcode : 2015NatCC...5..475R .

doi : 10.1038/nclimate2554 .

ISSN 1758-678X .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 September 2016.

PDF in UNEP Document Repository Archived 12 July 2019 at the Wayback Machine ^ Thornalley, David JR; et al. (11 April 2018).

"Anomalously weak Labrador Sea convection and Atlantic overturning during the past 150 years" .

Nature .

556 (7700): 227– 230.

Bibcode : 2018Natur.556..227T .

doi : 10.1038/s41586-018-0007-4 .

PMID 29643484 .

S2CID 4771341 . Retrieved 3 October 2022 .

^ Caesar, L.; McCarthy, G.D.; Thornalley, D. J. R.; Cahill, N.; Rahmstorf, S. (25 February 2021).

"Current Atlantic Meridional Overturning Circulation weakest in last millennium" .

Nature Geoscience .

14 (3): 118– 120.

Bibcode : 2021NatGe..14..118C .

doi : 10.1038/s41561-021-00699-z .

S2CID 232052381 . Retrieved 3 October 2022 .

^ Kilbourne, Kelly Halimeda; et, al. (17 February 2022).

"Atlantic circulation change still uncertain" .

Nature Geoscience .

15 (3): 165– 167.

Bibcode : 2022NatGe..15..165K .

doi : 10.1038/s41561-022-00896-4 .

hdl : 2117/363518 .

S2CID 246901665 . Retrieved 3 October 2022 .

^ Caesar, L.; McCarthy, G. D.; Thornalley, D. J. R.; Cahill, N.; Rahmstorf, S. (17 February 2022).

"Reply to: Atlantic circulation change still uncertain" .

Nature Geoscience .

15 (3): 168– 170.

Bibcode : 2022NatGe..15..168C .

doi : 10.1038/s41561-022-00897-3 .

S2CID 246901654 . Retrieved 3 October 2022 .

^ Latif, Mojib; Sun, Jing; Visbeck, Martin; Bordbar (25 April 2022).

"Natural variability has dominated Atlantic Meridional Overturning Circulation since 1900" .

Nature Climate Change .

12 (5): 455– 460.

Bibcode : 2022NatCC..12..455L .

doi : 10.1038/s41558-022-01342-4 .

S2CID 248385988 .

^ Arellano-Nava, Beatriz; Halloran, Paul R.; Boulton, Chris A.; Scourse, James; Butler, Paul G.; Reynolds, David J.; Lenton, Timothy (25 August 2022).

"Destabilisation of the Subpolar North Atlantic prior to the Little Ice Age" .

Nature Communications .

13 (1): 5008.

Bibcode : 2022NatCo..13.5008A .

doi : 10.1038/s41467-022-32653-x .

PMC 9411610 .

PMID 36008418 .

S2CID 251842966 .

^ Swingedouw, Didier; Bily, Adrien; Esquerdo, Claire; Borchert, Leonard F.; Sgubin, Giovanni; Mignot, Juliette; Menary, Matthew (2021).

"On the risk of abrupt changes in the North Atlantic subpolar gyre in CMIP6 models" .

Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences .

1504 (1): 187– 201.

Bibcode : 2021NYASA1504..187S .

doi : 10.1111/nyas.14659 .

hdl : 10447/638022 .

PMID 34212391 .

S2CID 235712017 .

^ Armstrong McKay, David; Abrams, Jesse; Winkelmann, Ricarda; Sakschewski, Boris; Loriani, Sina; Fetzer, Ingo; Cornell, Sarah; Rockström, Johan; Staal, Arie; Lenton, Timothy (9 September 2022).

"Exceeding 1.5°C global warming could trigger multiple climate tipping points" .

Science .

377 (6611): eabn7950.

doi : 10.1126/science.abn7950 .

hdl : 10871/131584 .

ISSN 0036-8075 .

PMID 36074831 .

S2CID 252161375 .

^ Armstrong McKay, David (9 September 2022).

"Exceeding 1.5°C global warming could trigger multiple climate tipping points – paper explainer" .

climatetippingpoints.info . Retrieved 2 October 2022 .

^ Austin Alchon, Suzanne (2003).

A pest in the land: new world epidemics in a global perspective . University of New Mexico Press. p. 21.

ISBN 978-0-8263-2871-7 .

^ "Historical Estimates of World Population" . Census.gov . Retrieved 28 April 2019 .

^ Jay, Peter (17 July 2000).

"A Distant Mirror" .

TIME Europe .

156 (3). Archived from the original on 25 July 2008 . Retrieved 25 January 2018 .

^ a b Nevle, R. J.; Bird, D. K.; Ruddiman, W. F.; Dull, R. A. (1 August 2011). "Neotropical human–landscape interactions, fire, and atmospheric CO2 during European conquest".

The Holocene .

21 (5): 853– 864.

Bibcode : 2011Holoc..21..853N .

doi : 10.1177/0959683611404578 .

ISSN 0959-6836 .

S2CID 128896863 .

^ "War, Plague No Match For Deforestation In Driving CO2 Buildup" .

Carnegie Institution for Science . 20 January 2011 . Retrieved 8 December 2019 .

^ Ravilious, Kate (27 February 2006).

"Europe's chill linked to disease" . BBC.

^ Ruddiman, William F. (2003). "The Anthropogenic Greenhouse Era Began Thousands of Years Ago".

Climatic Change .

61 (3): 261– 293.

Bibcode : 2003ClCh...61..261R .

CiteSeerX 10.1.1.651.2119 .

doi : 10.1023/B:CLIM.0000004577.17928.fa .

S2CID 2501894 .

^ David Graeber and David Wendgrow, "The Dawn of Everything" (New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 2021) p. 258.

^ a b Faust, Franz X.; Gnecco, Cristóbal; Mannstein, Hermann; Stamm, Jörg (2006).

"Evidence for the Postconquest Demographic Collapse of the Americas in Historical CO2 Levels" (PDF) .

Earth Interactions .

10 (11): 1.

Bibcode : 2006EaInt..10k...1F .

doi : 10.1175/EI157.1 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022.

^ Richard J. Nevle et al ., "Ecological-hydrological effects of reduced biomass burning in the neotropics after A.D. 1500," Geological Society of America Meeting , Minneapolis MN, 11 October 2011.

abstract Archived 15 August 2019 at the Wayback Machine . Popular summary: " Columbus' arrival linked to carbon dioxide drop: Depopulation of Americas may have cooled climate Archived 13 July 2012 at the Wayback Machine ," Science News, 5 November 2011. (access date 2 January 2012).

^ Nevle, Richard J.; Bird, Dennis K. (7 July 2008). "Effects of syn-pandemic fire reduction and reforestation in the tropical Americas on atmospheric CO2 during European conquest".

Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology .

264 (1): 25– 38.

Bibcode : 2008PPP...264...25N .

doi : 10.1016/j.palaeo.2008.03.008 .

ISSN 0031-0182 .

^ a b Dull, Robert A.; Nevle, Richard J.; Woods, William I.; Bird, Dennis K.; Avnery, Shiri; Denevan, William M. (31 August 2010). "The Columbian Encounter and the Little Ice Age: Abrupt Land Use Change, Fire, and Greenhouse Forcing".

Annals of the Association of American Geographers .

100 (4): 755– 771.

doi : 10.1080/00045608.2010.502432 .

ISSN 0004-5608 .

S2CID 129862702 .

^ Bergeron, Louis (17 December 2008).

"Reforestation helped trigger Little Ice Age, researchers say" . Stanford News Service. Archived from the original on 2 December 2009 . Retrieved 1 January 2009 .

^ Watling, Jennifer; Iriarte, José; Mayle, Francis E.; Schaan, Denise; Pessenda, Luiz C. R.; Loader, Neil J.; Street-Perrott, F. Alayne ; Dickau, Ruth E.; Damasceno, Antonia; Ranzi, Alceu (21 February 2017).

"Impact of pre-Columbian "geoglyph" builders on Amazonian forests" .

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences .

114 (8): 1868– 1873.

Bibcode : 2017PNAS..114.1868W .

doi : 10.1073/pnas.1614359114 .

ISSN 0027-8424 .

PMC 5338430 .

PMID 28167791 .

^ Ellis, Erle C.; Kaplan, Jed O.; Fuller, Dorian Q.; Vavrus, Steve; Klein Goldewijk, Kees; Verburg, Peter H. (2013).

"Used planet: A global history" .

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America .

110 (20): 7978– 7985.

Bibcode : 2013PNAS..110.7978E .

doi : 10.1073/pnas.1217241110 .

PMC 3657770 .

PMID 23630271 .

^ Turner, B. L.; Fischer-Kowalski, Marina (2010).

"Ester Boserup: An interdisciplinary visionary relevant for sustainability" .

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America .

107 (51): 21963– 21965.

Bibcode : 2010PNAS..10721963T .

doi : 10.1073/pnas.1013972108 .

PMC 3009765 .

PMID 21135227 .

^ Pitman, A. J.; Noblet-Ducoudre, N.; Cruz, F. T.; Davin, E. L.; Bonan, G. B.; Brovkn, V.; Claussen, M.; Delire, C.; Ganzeveld, L.; Gayler, V.; Can den Hurk, B. J. J. M.; Lawrence, P. J.; van der Molen, M. K.; Muller, C.; Reick, C. H.; Seneviratne, S. I.; Strengers, B. J.; Voldoire, A. (2009).

"Uncertainties in climate responses to past land cover change: First results from the LUCID intercomparison study" .

Geophysical Research Letters .

36 (L14814): L14814.

Bibcode : 2009GeoRL..3614814P .

doi : 10.1029/2009GL039076 .

hdl : 11858/00-001M-0000-0011-F8CF-9 .

S2CID 15504757 .

^ a b Free, Melissa; Robock, Alan (1999).

"Global warming in the context of the Little Ice Age" .

Journal of Geophysical Research .

104 (D16): 19, 057.

Bibcode : 1999JGR...10419057F .

doi : 10.1029/1999JD900233 .

^ Hunt, B. G. (2006).

"The Medieval Warm Period, the Little Ice Age and simulated climatic variability" .

Climate Dynamics .

27 ( 7– 8): 677– 694.

Bibcode : 2006ClDy...27..677H .

doi : 10.1007/s00382-006-0153-5 .

S2CID 128890550 . Retrieved 11 September 2023 .

^ Collet, Dominik (2020). "Hungern und handeln".

Damals (in German). No. 6. pp.

72– 76.

Further reading [ edit ] Fagan, Brian M.

(2001).

The Little Ice Age: How Climate Made History, 1300–1850 . Basic Books.

ISBN 978-0-465-02272-4 .

[ permanent dead link ] Parker, Geoffrey (2013).

Global Crisis: War, Climate Change and Catastrophe in the Seventeenth Century . New Haven, Connecticut: Yale University Press.

ISBN 978-0-300-15323-1 .

Waldinger, Maria (2022). "The Economic Effects of Long-Term Climate Change: Evidence from the Little Ice Age".

Journal of Political Economy.

White, Sam (2017).

A Cold Welcome: The Little Ice Age and Europe's Encounter with North America . Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press.

ISBN 978-0-674-97192-9 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Little Ice Age .

Abrupt Climate Change Information from the Ocean & Climate Change Institute Archived 11 April 2009 at the Wayback Machine , links to Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution articles "The Next Ice Age" .

Discover . September 2002.

(discussion of Woods Hole research) "Huascaran (Peru) Ice Core Data" .

NOAA/NGDC Paleoclimatology Program . 1995. Archived from the original on 14 December 2012.

Dansgaard cycles and the Little Ice Age (LIA) Archived 17 April 2007 at the Wayback Machine (It is not easy to see an LIA in the graphs.) Tyson, P. D.; Karlen, W.; Holmgren, K.; Heiss, G. A. (2000).

"The Little Ice Age and Medieval Warming in South Africa" (PDF) .

South African Journal of Science .

96 (3): 121– 126.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022.

Was El Niño unaffected by the Little Ice Age?

Archived 30 January 2008 at the Wayback Machine (2002) Evidence for the Little Ice Age in Spain , c. 2003 The Little Ice Age in Europe , updated 2009 "The Little Ice Age, Ca. 1300–1870" .

Timeline of European Environmental History .

undated review article What's wrong with the sun? (Nothing) (2008) HistoricalClimatology.com , links, resources, and feature articles on the Little Ice Age and its present-day relevance Climate History Network , association of historical climatologists and climate historians, many of whom study the Little Ice Age and its social consequences v t e Climate change Overview Causes of climate change Effects of climate change Climate change mitigation Climate change adaptation By country and region Causes Overview Climate system Greenhouse effect ( Carbon dioxide in Earth's atmosphere ) Scientific consensus on climate change Sources Deforestation Fossil fuel Greenhouse gases Greenhouse gas emissions Carbon accounting Carbon footprint Carbon leakage from agriculture from wetlands World energy supply and consumption History History of climate change policy and politics History of climate change science Svante Arrhenius James Hansen Charles David Keeling United Nations Climate Change conferences Years in climate change 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 Effects and issues Physical Abrupt climate change Anoxic event Arctic methane emissions Arctic sea ice decline Atlantic meridional overturning circulation Drought Extreme weather Flood Coastal flooding Heat wave Marine Urban heat island Oceans acidification deoxygenation heat content sea surface temperature stratification temperature Ozone depletion Permafrost thaw Retreat of glaciers since 1850 Sea level rise Season creep Climate sensitivity Tipping points in the climate system Tropical cyclones Water cycle Wildfires Flora and fauna Biomes Mass mortality event Birds Extinction risk Forest dieback Invasive species Marine life Plant biodiversity Social and economic Agriculture Livestock Multi-breadbasket failure In the United States Children Cities Civilizational collapse Crime Depopulation of settlements Destruction of cultural heritage Disability Economic impacts U.S. insurance industry Fisheries Gender Health Mental health In the United Kingdom In the Philippines Human rights Indigenous peoples Infectious diseases Migration Poverty Psychological impacts Security and conflict Urban flooding Water scarcity Water security By country and region Africa Americas Antarctica Arctic Asia Australia Caribbean Europe Middle East and North Africa Small island countries by individual country Mitigation Economics and finance Carbon budget Carbon emission trading Carbon offsets and credits Gold Standard (carbon offset standard) Carbon price Carbon tax Climate debt Climate finance Climate risk insurance Co-benefits of climate change mitigation Economics of climate change mitigation Fossil fuel divestment Green Climate Fund Low-carbon economy Net zero emissions Energy Carbon capture and storage Energy transition Fossil fuel phase-out Nuclear power Renewable energy Sustainable energy Preserving and enhancing carbon sinks Blue carbon Carbon dioxide removal Carbon sequestration Direct air capture Carbon farming Climate-smart agriculture Forest management afforestation forestry for carbon sequestration REDD and REDD+ reforestation Land use, land-use change, and forestry (LULUCF and AFOLU) Nature-based solutions Other Individual action on climate change Geoengineering Society and adaptation Society Business action Climate action Climate emergency declaration Climate movement School Strike for Climate Denial Ecological grief Governance Justice Litigation Politics Public opinion Women Adaptation Adaptation strategies on the German coast Adaptive capacity Disaster risk reduction Ecosystem-based adaptation Flood control Loss and damage Managed retreat Nature-based solutions Resilience Risk Vulnerability The Adaptation Fund National Adaptation Programme of Action Communication Climate Change Performance Index Climate crisis (term) Climate spiral Education Media coverage Popular culture depictions art fiction video games Warming stripes International agreements Glasgow Climate Pact Kyoto Protocol Paris Agreement Cooperative Mechanisms under Article 6 of the Paris Agreement Nationally determined contributions Sustainable Development Goal 13 United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change Background and theory Measurements Global surface temperature Instrumental temperature record Proxy Satellite temperature measurement Theory Albedo Carbon cycle atmospheric biologic oceanic permafrost Carbon sink Climate sensitivity Climate variability and change Cloud feedback Cloud forcing Fixed anvil temperature hypothesis Cryosphere Earth's energy budget Extreme event attribution Feedbacks Global warming potential Illustrative model of greenhouse effect on climate change Orbital forcing Radiative forcing Research and modelling Climate change scenario Climate model Coupled Model Intercomparison Project Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) IPCC Sixth Assessment Report Paleoclimatology Representative Concentration Pathway Shared Socioeconomic Pathways Climate change portal Category Glossary Index v t e Continental glaciations General Post-glacial rebound Glacial lake outburst flood Time periods Glacial period Timeline of glaciation Quaternary glaciation Illinoian Stage Interglacial Interstadial Penultimate Glacial Period Last Glacial Period Last Glacial Maximum Mousterian Pluvial Holocene glacial retreat Oldest Dryas Older Dryas Pleistocene Pre-Illinoian Stage Quaternary glaciation Sangamonian Stage Wisconsin glaciation Bølling–Allerød warming Late Glacial Interstadial Huelmo–Mascardi Cold Reversal Younger Dryas 8.2 kiloyear event 4.2 kiloyear event Piora Oscillation Little Ice Age Landforms Erosional Fjord Glacial striae Roche moutonnée Tunnel valley U-shaped valley Glacial lake Proglacial lake Subglacial lake Supraglacial lake Ribbon lake List of prehistoric lakes Depositional Drumlin Erratic block Moraine Pulju moraine Rogen moraine Terminal moraine Till plain Veiki moraine Glacifluvial Diluvium Esker Giant current ripples Kame Kame delta Kettle hole Outwash fan Sandur North America Greenland ice sheet Canadian Shield Cordilleran ice sheet Laurentide ice sheet Lake Agassiz Lake Chicago Lake Tight Canada Arrowhead Provincial Park , Ontario Big Rock (glacial erratic) , Alberta Cypress Hills (Canada) , Saskatchewan Eramosa River , Ontario Eskers Provincial Park , British Columbia Foothills Erratics Train , Alberta Lion's Head Provincial Park , Ontario Origin of the Oak Ridges Moraine , Ontario Ovayok Territorial Park , Nunavut United States Lake Bonneville , Utah Lake Lahontan , Nevada Lake Missoula , Montana Glacial Lake Wisconsin , Wisconsin Chippewa Moraine State Recreation Area , Wisconsin Coteau des Prairies , South Dakota Devil's Lake State Park , Wisconsin Glacial Lakes State Park , Minnesota Glacial history of Minnesota Horicon Marsh State Wildlife Area , Wisconsin Ice Age Floods National Geologic Trail , Idaho, Oregon and Washington Ice Age National Scientific Reserve , Wisconsin Ice Age Trail , Wisconsin Interstate State Park , Minnesota and Wisconsin Kelleys Island , Ohio Teays River , Ohio Kettle Moraine State Forest , Wisconsin Mill Bluff State Park , Wisconsin Oneida Lake , New York Two Creeks Buried Forest State Natural Area , Wisconsin Withrow Moraine and Jameson Lake Drumlin Field , Washington Yosemite National Park , California Eurasia Hardangerfjord Killary Harbour Monte Rosa Svalbard Antarctica Antarctic Glaciation Antarctic ice sheet ( East , West ) Lambert Glacier Ross Ice Shelf Category v t e European Middle Ages Early Middle Ages Migration Period Decline of the Western Roman Empire Barbarian kingdoms Late antiquity Decline of Hellenistic religion Christianity in the Middle Ages Christianization Rise of Islam Papal States First Bulgarian Empire Frankish Empire Principality of Serbia Duchy of Croatia Kingdom of Croatia Anglo-Saxon England Viking Age Carolingian Empire Old Church Slavonic Rise of the Venetian Republic Civitas Schinesghe Kievan Rus' Growth of the Eastern Roman Empire Reconquista High Middle Ages Norman Conquest Holy Roman Empire Second Bulgarian Empire Georgian Empire Kingdom of Poland Croatia in personal union with Hungary Kingdom of Serbia Feudalism Rise of the Republic of Genoa Great Schism Investiture Controversy Crusades Republic of Florence Scholasticism Capet–Plantagenet feud Monasticism Communalism Manorialism Medieval Warm Period Mongol invasion of Europe Kingdom of Portugal Late Middle Ages Hundred Years' War Wars of the Roses Hussite Wars Burgundy Milan France England Serbian Empire Castile Western Schism Fall of Constantinople Rise of the Ottoman Empire Swiss mercenaries Chivalry Renaissance Humanism Universities Crisis of the late Middle Ages Great Famine Little Ice Age Culture Agriculture Architecture Art Church and State Cuisine Crusading movement Dance Demography Domes Hastilude Household Hunting In popular culture Itinerant court Literature Medicine Minstrel Music Instruments Philosophy Poetry Science Slavery Technology Theatre Warfare Women Related Medieval anthropology Dark Ages Disability in the Middle Ages Basic topics list Land terms Medievalism Medieval reenactment Medieval studies Misconceptions Neo-medievalism Peasant Wars Post-classical history Timeline Historiography in the Middle Ages Medieval archaeology Portal Category WikiProject Authority control databases National Germany Other Historical Dictionary of Switzerland NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐b5zfv
Cached time: 20250814232956
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 2.291 seconds
Real time usage: 2.573 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 16795/1000000
Revision size: 160734/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 619890/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 10183/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 19/100
Expensive parser function count: 22/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 821806/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.544/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 22682042/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 3/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 2203.859      1 -total
 69.57% 1533.273      1 Template:Reflist
 33.84%  745.860    111 Template:Cite_journal
 10.38%  228.759     36 Template:Cite_web
  8.65%  190.693     35 Template:Cite_book
  5.01%  110.466      1 Template:Harvnb
  4.46%   98.386      1 Template:Global_warming
  3.62%   79.861      2 Template:Lang
  3.26%   71.913     10 Template:Annotated_link
  3.06%   67.363      1 Template:Short_description Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:36786:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814232956 and revision id 1305016535. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Little_Ice_Age&oldid=1305016535 " Categories : 2nd millennium History of climate variability and change Holocene 1930s neologisms Historical eras Volcanic winters Hidden categories: Pages with missing ISBNs CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from July 2021 All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from November 2023 Articles with permanently dead external links All articles with incomplete citations Articles with incomplete citations from February 2019 Webarchive template wayback links CS1 German-language sources (de) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from May 2025 Use American English from October 2022 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Wikipedia articles needing clarification from May 2022 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2025 Articles containing French-language text All articles with failed verification Articles with failed verification from November 2023 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from April 2022 Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets via Module:Annotated link Commons link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 9 August 2025, at 15:04 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Little Ice Age 64 languages Add topic

