Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 See also 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Lustrum 24 languages Aragonés Asturianu Avañe'ẽ Català Čeština Deutsch Emiliàn e rumagnòl Español Euskara Français Galego Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Кыргызча Latina Magyar Nederlands Polski Português Русский Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Svenska Türkçe Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Unit of time, usually a five year period For other uses, see Lustrum (novel) , Lustrum (journal) , and Lustrum (disambiguation) .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Lustrum" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( January 2008 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) A lūstrum ( IPA: [ˈluːs̠t̪rʊ̃ˑ] , plural lūstra ) was a term for a five-year period in Ancient Rome .

It is distinct from the homograph lustrum ( / ˈ l ʊ s t r əm / LUSS -trəm ): a haunt of wild beasts (and figuratively, a den of vice), plural lustra ( / ˈ l ʊ s t r ɑː / LUUS -trah ).

[ 1 ] History [ edit ] The lustration was originally a sacrifice for expiation and purification offered by one of the censors in the name of the Roman people at the close of the taking of the census . The sacrifice was often in the form of an animal sacrifice, known as a suovetaurilia .

These censuses were taken at five-year intervals, thus a lūstrum came to refer to the five-year inter-census period.

Lustrum (from luo , Ancient Greek : λούω ) is a lustration or purification of the whole Roman people performed by one of the censors in the Campus Martius , after the taking of the census was over. As this purification took place only once in five years, the word lūstrum was also used to designate the time between two lustra.

The first lūstrum was performed in 566 BC by King Servius , after he had completed his census, and afterwards it is said to have taken place regularly every five years after the census was over. In the earliest period of the republic, the business of the census and the solemnities of the lūstrum were performed by the consuls. The first censors were appointed in 443 BC, and from this year down to 294 BC there had, according to Livy (X.47), only been 26 pairs of censors, and only 21 lustra, or general purifications, although if all had been regular, there would have been 30 pairs of censors and 30 lustra. Sometimes the census was not held at all, or at least not by the censors. The census might take place without the lūstrum , and indeed two cases of this kind are recorded, in 459 and 214 BC. In these cases, the lūstrum was not performed because of some great calamities that had befallen the republic.

The time when the lūstrum took place has been calculated. Six ancient Romulian years , of 304 days each, were, with the difference of two days, equal to five solar years of 365 days each, with one leap year of 366 days; or the six ancient years made 1824 days, while the five solar years contained 1826 days. The lūstrum , or the great year of the ancient Romans, was thus a cycle, at the end of which, the beginning of the ancient year nearly coincided with that of the solar year. As the coincidence, however, was not perfect, a month of 24 days was interposed in every eleventh lūstrum . It is highly probable that the recurrence of such a cycle or great year was, from the earliest times, solemnized with sacrifices and purifications, and that King Servius did not introduce them, but merely connected them with his census, and thus set the example for subsequent ages, which however, as we have seen, was not observed with regularity.

Census frieze from the so-called " Altar of Domitius Ahenobarbus ", with the taking of the census (at left) and the procession of the suovetaurilia. The tall warrior standing at the altar is sometimes identified as the god Mars himself [ 2 ] See also [ edit ] Lustratio Decade Century Millennium References [ edit ] ^ Oxford Latin Desk Dictionary (2005). Oxford: Oxford University Press. pp. vii, 109 ^ Katja Moede, "Reliefs, Public and Private," in A Companion to Roman Religion (Blackwell, 2007), p. 170.

External links [ edit ] Look up lustrum in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Livius.org Lustrum v t e Time measurement and standards Chronometry Orders of magnitude Metrology International standards Coordinated Universal Time offset UT ΔT DUT1 International Earth Rotation and Reference Systems Service ISO 31-1 ISO 8601 International Atomic Time 12-hour clock 24-hour clock Barycentric Coordinate Time Barycentric Dynamical Time Civil time Daylight saving time Geocentric Coordinate Time International Date Line IERS Reference Meridian Leap second Solar time Terrestrial Time Time zone 180th meridian Obsolete standards Ephemeris time Greenwich Mean Time Prime meridian Time in physics Absolute space and time Spacetime Chronon Continuous signal Coordinate time Cosmological decade Discrete time and continuous time Proper time Theory of relativity Time dilation Gravitational time dilation Time domain Time-translation symmetry T-symmetry Horology Clock Astrarium Atomic clock Complication History of timekeeping devices Hourglass Marine chronometer Marine sandglass Radio clock Watch stopwatch Water clock Sundial Dialing scales Equation of time History of sundials Sundial markup schema Calendar Gregorian Hebrew Hindu Holocene Islamic (lunar Hijri) Julian Solar Hijri Astronomical Dominical letter Epact Equinox Intercalation Julian day Leap year Lunar Lunisolar Solar Solstice Tropical year Weekday determination Weekday names Archaeology and geology Chronological dating Geologic time scale International Commission on Stratigraphy Astronomical chronology Galactic year Nuclear timescale Precession Sidereal time Other units of time Instant Flick Shake Jiffy Second Minute Moment Hour Day Week Fortnight Month Year Olympiad Lustrum Decade Century Saeculum Millennium Related topics Chronology Duration music Mental chronometry Decimal time Metric time System time Time metrology Time value of money Timekeeper Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Lustrum&oldid=1254094352 " Categories : Society of ancient Rome Population Units of time Quinquennial events Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from January 2008 All articles needing additional references Pages with Latin IPA Articles containing Latin-language text Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text This page was last edited on 29 October 2024, at 11:41 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Lustrum 24 languages Add topic

