Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Historical background 2 Methods and results Toggle Methods and results subsection 2.1 Experiment and conclusions 3 Discussion Toggle Discussion subsection 3.1 Confirmation 3.2 Other experiments 4 Legacy 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Hershey–Chase experiment 43 languages العربية Asturianu বাংলা Català Čeština Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara Français Gaelg Galego 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Jawa ქართული Latina Limburgs Magyar მარგალური Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Ripoarisch Română Русский Sicilianu Simple English Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Tarandíne ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 吴语 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia DNA experiment Overview of experiment and observations The Hershey–Chase experiments were a series of experiments conducted in 1952 [ 1 ] by Alfred Hershey and Martha Chase that helped to confirm that DNA is genetic material .

Scientists Martha Chase and Alfred Hershey While DNA had been known to biologists since 1869, [ 2 ] many scientists still assumed at the time that proteins carried the information for inheritance because DNA appeared to be an inert molecule, and, since it is located in the nucleus, its role was considered to be phosphorus storage. In their experiments, Hershey and Chase showed that when bacteriophages , which are composed of DNA and protein, infect bacteria, their DNA enters the host bacterial cell, but most of their protein does not. Hershey and Chase and subsequent discoveries all served to prove that DNA is the hereditary material.

Hershey shared the 1969 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine with Max Delbrück and Salvador Luria for their "discoveries concerning the genetic structure of viruses".

[ 3 ] Historical background [ edit ] In the early twentieth century, biologists thought that proteins carried genetic information. This was based on the belief that proteins were more complex than DNA.

Phoebus Levene's influential "tetranucleotide hypothesis", which incorrectly proposed that DNA was a repeating set of identical nucleotides , supported this conclusion. The results of the Avery–MacLeod–McCarty experiment , published in 1944, suggested that DNA was the genetic material, but there was still some hesitation within the general scientific community to accept this, which set the stage for the Hershey–Chase experiment.

[ 4 ] Hershey and Chase, along with others who had done related experiments, confirmed that DNA was the biomolecule that carried genetic information. Before that, Oswald Avery , Colin MacLeod , and Maclyn McCarty had shown that DNA led to the transformation of one strain of Streptococcus pneumoniae to another. The results of these experiments provided evidence that DNA was the biomolecule that carried genetic information.

[ 5 ] Methods and results [ edit ] Structural overview of T2 phage Hershey and Chase needed to be able to examine different parts of the phages they were studying separately, so they needed to distinguish the phage subsections.  Viruses were known to be composed of a protein shell and DNA, so they chose to uniquely label each with a different elemental isotope .  This allowed each to be observed and analyzed separately.  Since phosphorus is contained in DNA but not amino acids, radioactive phosphorus-32 was used to label the DNA contained in the T2 phage .  Radioactive sulfur-35 was used to label the protein sections of the T2 phage, because sulfur is contained in protein but not DNA.

[ 6 ] Hershey and Chase inserted the radioactive elements in the bacteriophages by adding the isotopes to separate media within which bacteria were allowed to grow for 4 hours before bacteriophage introduction. When the bacteriophages infected the bacteria, the progeny contained the radioactive isotopes in their structures. This procedure was performed once for the sulfur-labeled phages and once for phosphorus-labeled phages.
The labeled progeny were then allowed to infect unlabeled bacteria. The phage coats remained on the outside of the bacteria, while genetic material entered. Disruption of phage from the bacteria by agitation in a blender followed by centrifugation allowed for the separation of the phage coats from the bacteria. These bacteria were lysed to release phage progeny. The progeny of the phages that were labeled with radioactive phosphorus remained labeled, whereas the progeny of the phages labeled with radioactive sulfur were unlabeled. Thus, the Hershey–Chase experiment helped to confirm that DNA, not protein, is the genetic material.

[ 6 ] Hershey and Chase showed that the introduction of deoxyribonuclease (referred to as DNase ), an enzyme that breaks down DNA, into a solution containing the labeled bacteriophages did not introduce any 32 P into the solution.  This demonstrated that the phage is resistant to the enzyme while intact. Additionally, they were able to plasmolyze the bacteriophages so that they went into osmotic shock, which effectively created a solution containing most of the 32 P and a heavier solution containing structures called "ghosts" that contained the 35 S and the protein coat of the virus.  It was found that these "ghosts" could adsorb to bacteria that were susceptible to T2, although they contained no DNA and were simply the remains of the original viral capsule.  They concluded that the protein protected the DNA from DNase, but that once the two were separated and the phage was inactivated, the DNase could hydrolyze the phage DNA.

[ 1 ] Experiment and conclusions [ edit ] Hershey and Chase were also able to prove that the DNA from the phage is inserted into the bacteria shortly after the virus attaches to its host. Using a high-speed blender they were able to force the bacteriophages from the bacterial cells after adsorption . The lack of 32 P-labeled DNA remaining in the solution after the bacteriophages had been allowed to adsorb to the bacteria showed that the phage DNA was transferred into the bacterial cell.  The presence of almost all the radioactive 35 S in the solution showed that the protein coat that protects the DNA before adsorption stayed outside the cell.

[ 1 ] Hershey and Chase concluded that DNA, not protein, was the genetic material.  They determined that a protective protein coat was formed around the bacteriophage, but that the internal DNA is what conferred its ability to produce progeny inside a bacterium.  They showed that, in growth, protein has no function, while DNA has some function.  They determined this from the amount of radioactive material remaining outside of the cell.  Only 20% of the 32 P remained outside the cell, demonstrating that it was incorporated with DNA in the cell's genetic material.  All of the 35 S in the protein coats remained outside the cell, showing it was not incorporated into the cell, and that protein is not the genetic material.

[ 1 ] Hershey and Chase's experiment concluded that little sulfur-containing material entered the bacterial cell.  However no specific conclusions can be made regarding whether material that is sulfur-free enters the bacterial cell after phage adsorption. Further research was necessary to conclude that it was solely bacteriophages' DNA that entered the cell and not a combination of protein and DNA where the protein did not contain any sulfur.

[ 1 ] Discussion [ edit ] Confirmation [ edit ] Further information: DNA and DNA § History of DNA research Hershey and Chase concluded that protein was not likely to be the hereditary genetic material.  However, they did not make any conclusions regarding the specific function of DNA as hereditary material, and only said that it must have some undefined role.

[ 1 ] [ 7 ] Confirmation and clarity came a year later in 1953, when James D. Watson and Francis Crick correctly hypothesized, in their journal article " Molecular Structure of Nucleic Acids: A Structure for Deoxyribose Nucleic Acid ", the double helix structure of DNA, and suggested the copying mechanism by which DNA functions as hereditary material. Furthermore, Watson and Crick suggested that DNA, the genetic material, is responsible for the synthesis of the thousands of proteins found in cells. They had made this proposal based on the structural similarity that exists between the two macromolecules: both protein and DNA are linear sequences of monomers (amino acids and nucleotides, respectively).

[ 8 ] Other experiments [ edit ] Once the Hershey–Chase experiment was published, the scientific community generally acknowledged that DNA was the genetic code material. This discovery led to a more detailed investigation of DNA to determine its composition as well as its 3D structure. Using X-ray crystallography , the structure of DNA was discovered by James Watson and Francis Crick with the help of previously documented experimental evidence by Maurice Wilkins and Rosalind Franklin .

[ 9 ] Knowledge of the structure of DNA led scientists to examine the nature of genetic coding and, in turn, understand the process of protein synthesis.

George Gamow proposed that the genetic code was composed of sequences of three DNA base pairs known as triplets or codons which represent one of the twenty amino acids.

[ 10 ] Genetic coding helped researchers to understand the mechanism of gene expression , the process by which information from a gene is used in protein synthesis .  Since then, much research has been conducted to modulate steps in the gene expression process. These steps include transcription , RNA splicing , translation , and post-translational modification which are used to control the chemical and structural nature of proteins.

[ 11 ] Moreover, genetic engineering gives engineers the ability to directly manipulate the genetic materials of organisms using recombinant DNA techniques. The first recombinant DNA molecule was created by Paul Berg in 1972 when he combined DNA from the monkey virus SV40 with that of the lambda phage .

[ 12 ] Experiments on hereditary material during the time of the Hershey–Chase experiment often used bacteriophages as a model organism .  Bacteriophages lend themselves to experiments on hereditary material because they incorporate their genetic material into their host cell 's genetic material (making them useful tools), they multiply quickly, and they are easily collected by researchers.

[ 7 ] Legacy [ edit ] The Hershey–Chase experiment, its predecessors, such as the Avery–MacLeod–McCarty experiment , and successors served to unequivocally establish that hereditary information was carried by DNA. This finding has numerous applications in forensic science , crime investigation and genealogy .  It provided the background knowledge for further applications in DNA forensics, where DNA fingerprinting uses data originating from DNA, not protein sources, to deduce genetic variation .

[ 13 ] References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e f Hershey A, Chase M (1952).

"Independent functions of viral protein and nucleic acid in growth of bacteriophage" .

J Gen Physiol .

36 (1): 39– 56.

doi : 10.1085/jgp.36.1.39 .

PMC 2147348 .

PMID 12981234 .

^ Dahm R (January 2008). "Discovering DNA: Friedrich Miescher and the early years of nucleic acid research".

Hum. Genet .

122 (6): 565– 81.

doi : 10.1007/s00439-007-0433-0 .

PMID 17901982 .

S2CID 915930 .

^ "The Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine 1969" . Nobel Foundation . Retrieved 6 April 2011 .

^ "The Hershey-Chase Experiments (1952), by Alfred Hershey and Martha Chase | Embryo Project Encyclopedia" .

embryo.asu.edu . Retrieved 30 June 2024 .

^ "View | KEEP" .

keep.lib.asu.edu . Retrieved 14 November 2024 .

^ a b "Hershey-Chase Experiment" , Encyclopedia of Genetics, Genomics, Proteomics and Informatics , Dordrecht: Springer Netherlands, 2008, p. 865, doi : 10.1007/978-1-4020-6754-9_7525 , ISBN 978-1-4020-6753-2 , retrieved 19 December 2022 ^ a b O'Connor, Clare (2008).

"Isolating hereditary material: Frederick Griffith, Oswald Avery, Alfred Hershey, and Martha Chase" .

Scitable by Nature Education . Retrieved 20 March 2011 .

^ Pauling L, Corey RB (February 1953).

"A Proposed Structure for the Nucleic Acids" .

Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A .

39 (2): 84– 97.

Bibcode : 1953PNAS...39...84P .

doi : 10.1073/pnas.39.2.84 .

PMC 1063734 .

PMID 16578429 .

^ "L.O. Rosalind Franklin and the Double Helix. Physics Today, March 2003" . Physics Today . Retrieved 6 April 2011 .

^ Crick, Francis (1988).

"Chapter 8: The genetic code" .

What mad pursuit: a personal view of scientific discovery . New York: Basic Books. pp.

89–101 .

ISBN 978-0-465-09138-6 .

^ Berk V, Cate JH (June 2007). "Insights into protein biosynthesis from structures of bacterial ribosomes".

Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol .

17 (3): 302– 9.

doi : 10.1016/j.sbi.2007.05.009 .

PMID 17574829 .

^ Jackson DA, Symons RH, Berg P (October 1972).

"Biochemical method for inserting new genetic information into DNA of Simian Virus 40: circular SV40 DNA molecules containing lambda phage genes and the galactose operon of Escherichia coli" .

Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A .

69 (10): 2904– 9.

Bibcode : 1972PNAS...69.2904J .

doi : 10.1073/pnas.69.10.2904 .

PMC 389671 .

PMID 4342968 .

^ Jobling MA, Gill P (October 2004).

"Encoded evidence: DNA in forensic analysis" (PDF) .

Nat. Rev. Genet .

5 (10): 739– 51.

doi : 10.1038/nrg1455 .

PMID 15510165 .

S2CID 2236821 .

External links [ edit ] Hershey–Chase experiment animation Clear depiction and simple summary v t e History of biology ( timeline ) Fields, disciplines Agricultural science Anatomy Biochemistry Biotechnology Botany Ecology Evolutionary thought Genetics Geology Immunology Medicine Model organisms Molecular biology Molecular evolution Paleontology Phycology Plant systematics RNA biology Zoology (through 1859) Zoology (since 1859) Theories, concepts Germ theory of disease Central dogma of molecular biology Darwinism Great chain of being Hierarchy of life Lamarckism One gene–one enzyme hypothesis Protocell RNA world Sequence hypothesis Spontaneous generation Related History of science Philosophy of biology Teleology Ethnobotany Eugenics Dysgenics History of the creation-evolution controversy Human Genome Project Humboldtian science Natural history Natural philosophy Natural theology Relationship between religion and science Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Hershey–Chase_experiment&oldid=1304827977 " Categories : Genetics experiments Bacteriophages 1952 in biology Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from October 2020 This page was last edited on 8 August 2025, at 11:37 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Hershey–Chase experiment 43 languages Add topic

