Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early history 2 Naval Combat Demolition Units Toggle Naval Combat Demolition Units subsection 2.1 Normandy 3 Underwater Demolition Teams During WWII Toggle Underwater Demolition Teams During WWII subsection 3.1 Tarawa and the formation of UDTs 3.2 Kwajalein and the evolution of the UDT mission model 3.3 Roi-Namur, Saipan, Tinian, and Guam 3.4 Peleliu, Philippines, and Iwo Jima 3.5 Okinawa to the end of the war 4 After World War II Toggle After World War II subsection 4.1 Japan occupation 4.2 China 4.3 Operation Crossroads 4.4 Submersible Operations 5 Korean War 6 NASA 7 Vietnam War 8 Birth of Navy SEALs Toggle Birth of Navy SEALs subsection 8.1 Reorganization 9 Badge 10 Unit awards 11 Fiction 12 See also 13 References 14 Further reading 15 External links Toggle the table of contents Underwater Demolition Team 5 languages Dansk Español Français 한국어 Italiano Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia US Navy special operations group Underwater Demolition Teams Patch of the Underwater Demolition Teams.

Active 15 August 1942 –  1983 (re-designated as SEALs ) Country United States Branch United States Navy Type Amphibious warfare Role Direct action Underwater demolition Special reconnaissance Maritime infiltration and exfiltration Garrison/HQ Fort Pierce , Florida , U.S.

Maui , Hawaii , U.S.

Nickname(s) UDT, Frogmen Engagements Operation Overlord Operation Torch Battle of Kwajalein Battle of Roi Namur Battle of Saipan Battle of Tinian Battle of Guam Battle of Peleliu Battle of Iwo Jima Battle of Okinawa Borneo campaign Battle of Leyte Invasion of Lingayen Gulf Operation Beleaguer Korean War Vietnam War Military unit The Underwater Demolition Team ( UDT ), or frogmen , were amphibious units created by the United States Navy during World War II with specialized missions. They were predecessors of the Navy's current SEAL teams .

Their primary WWII function began with reconnaissance and underwater demolition of natural or man-made obstacles obstructing amphibious landings . Postwar they transitioned to scuba gear changing their capabilities.  With that they came to be considered more elite and tactical during the Korean and Vietnam Wars . UDTs were pioneers in underwater demolition , closed-circuit diving , combat swimming , riverine warfare and midget submarine (dry and wet submersible) operations. They later were tasked with ensuring recovery of space capsules and astronauts after splash down in the Mercury , Gemini and Apollo space flight programs.

[ 1 ] Commando training was added making them the forerunner to the United States Navy SEAL program that exists today.

[ 2 ] By 1983, the UDTs were re-designated as SEAL Teams or Swimmer Delivery Vehicle Teams (SDVTs); however, some UDTs, had already been re-designated into UCTs and special boat units prior. SDVTs have since been re-designated SEAL Delivery Vehicle Teams .

[ 3 ] Early history [ edit ] Underwater demolition swimmer checks his swim fins and face mask, during UDT operations at Balikpapan, 3 July 1945.

The United States Navy studied the problems encountered by the disastrous Allied amphibious landings during the Gallipoli Campaign of World War I . This contributed to the development and experimentation of new landing techniques in the mid-1930s. In August 1941, landing trials were performed and one hazardous operation led to Army Second Lieutenant Lloyd E. Peddicord being assigned the task of analyzing the need for a human intelligence (HUMINT) capability.

[ 2 ] When the U.S. entered World War II, the Navy realized that in order to strike at the Axis powers the U.S. forces would need to perform a large number of amphibious attacks. The Navy decided that men would have to go in to reconnoiter the landing beaches, locate obstacles and defenses, as well as guide the landing forces ashore. In August 1942, Peddicord set up a recon school for his new unit, Navy Scouts and Raiders , at the amphibious training base at Little Creek, Virginia .

[ 2 ] In 1942, the Army and Navy jointly established the Amphibious Scout and Raider School at Fort Pierce , Florida . Here Lieutenant Commander Phil H. Bucklew , the "Father of Naval Special Warfare", helped organize and train what became the Navy's 'first group' to specialize in amphibious raids and tactics.

The need for intelligence gathering prior to landings became paramount following the amphibious assault at the Battle of Tarawa in November 1943. Although Navy and Marine Corps planners had identified coral as an issue, they incorrectly assumed landing craft would be able to crawl over the coral. Marines were forced to exit their craft in chest deep water a thousand yards from shore, with many men drowning due to the irregularities of the reefs and Japanese gunners inflicting heavy U.S. casualties.

[ 2 ] After that experience, Rear Admiral Kelley Turner , Commander of the V Amphibious Corps (VAC), directed Seabee Lt. Crist (CEC) to come up with a means to deal with the coral and the men to do it.  Lt. Crist staged  30 officers and 150 enlisted men from the 7th Naval Construction Regiment [ 4 ] at Waipio Amphibious Operating Base on Oahu to form the nucleus of a reconnaissance and demolition training program. It is here that the UDTs of the Pacific were born.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] Later in war, the Army Engineers passed down demolition jobs to the U.S. Navy. It then became the Navy's responsibility to clear any obstacles and defenses in the near shore area.

[ citation needed ] A memorial to the founding of the UDT has been built at Bellows Air Force Station near the original Amphibious Training Base (ATB) in Oahu.

Naval Combat Demolition Units [ edit ] For the disk utility, see ncdu .

U.S. Naval Combat Demolition insignia – U.S. Navy Seal Museum In early May 1943, a two-phase "Naval Demolition Project" was ordered by the Chief of Naval Operations (CNO) "to meet a present and urgent requirement". The first phase began at Amphibious Training Base (ATB) Solomons, Maryland with the establishment of Operational Naval Demolition Unit No. 1. Six officers and eighteen enlisted men reported from the Seabees dynamiting and demolition school at Camp Peary for a four-week course.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] Those Seabees were immediately sent to participate in the invasion of Sicily, [ 9 ] where they were divided in three groups that landed on the beaches near Licata , Gela and Scoglitti .

[ 10 ] Also in May, the Navy created Naval Combat Demolition Units (NCDUs) tasked with eliminating beach obstructions in advance of amphibious assaults, going ashore in an LCRS inflatable boat .

[ 11 ] Each NCDU consisted of five enlisted men led by a single, junior (CEC) officer. In early May, Chief of Naval Operations Admiral Ernest J. King picked Lieutenant Commander Draper L. Kauffman to lead the training. The first six classes graduated from "Area E" at the Seabee's Camp Peary between May and mid-July.

[ 12 ] Training was moved to Fort Pierce, Florida, where the first class began mid-July 1943. Despite the move and having the Scouts Raiders base close by, Camp Peary was Kauffman's primary source of recruits. "He would go up to Camp Peary's Dynamite School and assemble the Seabees in the auditorium saying: I need volunteers for hazardous, prolonged and distant duty ." [ 13 ] Kauffman's other volunteers came from the U.S. Marines and U.S. Army combat engineers .

[ citation needed ] Training commenced with one grueling week designed to "separate the men from the boys". Some said that "the men had sense enough to quit, leaving Kauffman with the boys." [ 14 ] It was and is still considered the first " Hell Week ".

Normandy [ edit ] In early November 1943, NCDU-11 was assigned as the advance NCDU party for Operation Overlord . They would be joined in England by 33 more NCDUs. They trained with the 146th, 277th, and 299th Combat Engineers to prepare for the landing.

[ 15 ] Each Unit had five combat engineers attached to it. The first 10 NCDUs divided into three groups.

[ 15 ] The senior officer, by rank, was the commanding officer of Group III, Lieutenant Smith (CEC). He assumed command in an unofficial capacity.

[ 15 ] His Group III worked on experimental demolitions and developed the Hagensen Pack, [ 15 ] an innovation that used 2.5-pound (1.1 kg) of tetryl placed into rubber tubes that could be twisted around obstacles.

[ 16 ] As more teams arrived, a NCDU Command was created for NCDUs: 11, 22–30, 41–46, 127–8, and 130–42.

[ 15 ] "NCDU 45"; Ensign Karnowski, Chief Carpenters Mate Conrad C. Millis, MMCB2 Lester Meyers and three gunners mates. The unit received a Presidential Unit Citation with Ens. Karnowski earning the Navy Cross & French Croix de Guerre with Palm, while MM2 Meyers received a Silver Star . Two men were wounded and one was killed.

80-G-258013 At Morotai NCDU 21 with MacArthur's 7th Fleet makes a channel using 8 tons of explosives in a single blast. Debris was thrown 800 yards or nearly a half mile.

The Germans had constructed elaborate defenses on the French coast. These included steel posts driven into the beach and topped with explosive charges. Large 3-ton steel barricades, called Belgian Gates and hedgehogs , were placed throughout the tidal zone. Behind which was a network of reinforced coastal artillery , mortar and machine gun positions.

The Scouts and Raiders spent weeks gathering information during nightly surveillance missions up and down the French coast. Replicas of the Belgian Gates were constructed on the south coast of England for the NCDUs to practice demolitions on. It was possible to blow a gate to pieces, but that only created a mass of tangled iron, creating more of an obstacle. The NCDUs found that the best method was to blast the structural joints of a gate so that it fell down flat.

The NCDU teams (designated Demolitions Gap-Assault teams) would come in at low tide to clear the obstacles. Their mission was to open sixteen 50-foot (15 m) wide corridors for the landing at each of the U.S. landing zones ( Omaha Beach and Utah Beach ). 
Unfortunately, the plans were not executed as laid out. The preparatory air and naval bombardment was ineffective, leaving many German guns to fire on the assault. Also, tidal conditions caused difficulties for the NCDUs. Despite heavy German fire and casualties, the NCDUs charges opened gaps in the defenses.

As the infantry came ashore, some
used obstacles for cover that had demolition charges on them. The greatest difficulty was on Omaha Beach. By nightfall, thirteen of the planned sixteen gaps were open. Of the 175 NCDU men that landed, 31 were killed, and 60 were wounded. The attack on Utah Beach was better, four dead and eleven wounded.

[ 5 ] Overall, NCDUs suffered a 53 percent casualty rate. NCDUs were also assigned to Operation Dragoon , the invasion of southern France , with a few units from Normandy participating there too.

With Europe invaded, Admiral Turner requisitioned all available NCDUs from Fort Pierce for integration into the UDTs for the Pacific. However, the first NCDUs, 1–10, had been staged at Turner City, Florida Island in the Solomon Islands during January 1944.

[ 17 ] A few were temporarily attached to UDTs.

[ 17 ] Later, NCDUs 1–10 were combined to form Underwater Demolition Team Able.

[ 17 ] This team was disbanded with NCDUs 2 and 3, plus three others assigned to MacArthur's 7th Amphibious force, and were the only NCDUs remaining at war's end. The other men from Team Able were assigned to numbered UDTs.

Underwater Demolition Teams During WWII [ edit ] Underwater demolition team members pass an explosive charge preparing for Saipan Invasion, June 1944.

The first units designated as Underwater Demolition Teams were formed in the Pacific Theater .

Rear Admiral Turner , the Navy's amphibious expert, ordered the formation of Underwater Demolition Teams in response to the assault debacle experienced at Tarawa . Turner recognized that amphibious operations required intelligence of underwater obstacles.

[ 6 ] The personnel in teams 1-15 were primarily Seabees that had started out in the NCDUs.  UDT training was at the Waipio Amphibious Operating Base , under V Amphibious Corps operational and administrative control. Most of the instructors and trainees were graduates of the Fort Pierce NCDU or Scouts and Raiders schools, Seabees, Marines, and Army soldiers.

[ citation needed ] When Teams 1 and 2 were formed they were "provisional" and trained by a Marine Corps Amphibious Reconnaissance Battalion that had nothing to do with the Fort Pierce program.  After a successful mission at Kwajalein, where 2 UDT men stripped down to swim trunks and effectively gathered the intelligence Admiral Turner desired, the  UDT mission model evolved to daylight reconnaissance, wearing swim trunks, fins, and masks. The immediate success of the UDTs made them an indispensable part of all future amphibious landings.

A UDT was organized with approximately sixteen officers and eighty enlisted. One Marine and one Army officer were liaisons within each team.

[ 18 ] They were deployed in every major amphibious landing after Tarawa with 34 teams eventually being commissioned. Teams 1–21 were the teams that had deployed operationally, with slightly over half of the officers and enlisted coming from the Seabees in those teams.  The remaining teams were not deployed due to the war ending.

Tarawa and the formation of UDTs [ edit ] Prior to Tarawa , both Naval and Marine Corps planners had identified coral as an issue for amphibious operations .   At Tarawa the neap tide created draft issues for the Higgins boats (LCVPs) clearing the reef.  The Amtracs carrying the first wave crossed the reef successfully. The LCVPs carrying the second wave ran aground, disembarking their Marines several hundred yards to shore in full combat gear, under heavy fire.  Many drowned or were killed before making the beach, forced to wade across treacherously uneven coral. The first wave was left fighting without reinforcements and took heavy casualties on the beach.

This disaster made it clear to Admiral Turner that pre-assault intelligence was needed to avoid similar difficulties in future operations.  To that end, Turner ordered the formation of underwater demolition teams to do reconnaissance of beach conditions and do removal of submerged obstructions for Amphibious operations.

[ 6 ] After a thorough review, V Amphibious Corps found that the only people having any applicable experience with the coral were men in the Naval Construction Battalions . The Admiral tasked Lt. Thomas C. Crist (CEC) of CB 10 to develop a method for blasting coral under combat conditions and putting together a team for that purpose.

[ 19 ] Lt. Crist started by recruiting others he had blasted coral with in CB 10 and by the end November 1943 he had assembled close to 30 officers and 150 enlisted men from the 7th Naval Construction Regiment, [ 4 ] at Waipio Amphibious Operating Base on Maui .

[ 19 ] Kwajalein and the evolution of the UDT mission model [ edit ] Lt Luehrs was one of the 30 Officers from the 7th NCR that Lt. Crist staged for UDTs 1 & 2.  He and Chief Acheson were the first UDT swimmers His Corps insignia would have had a Seabee on it.

ChCarp. W. H. Achenson CEC at Silver Star award ceremony for UDT 1 action Seabees in both UDT 3 and UDT 4 made these welcome signs for the U.S. Marine Corps on Guam.

The first operation after Tarawa was Operation Flintlock in the Marshall Islands.  It began with the island of Kwajalein in January 1944.  Admiral Turner wanted the intelligence and to get it, the men that Lt. Crist had staged were used to form Underwater Demolition Teams: UDT 1 and UDT 2.  Initially, the team commanders were Cmdr. E. D. Brewster (CEC) and Lt. Crist (CEC).  However, Lt. Crist was made Ops officer of Team 2 and Lt. John T. Koehler was made the team Commander.

[ 6 ] As with all Seabee military training, the Marines provided it.  A Marine Corps Amphibious Reconnaissance Battalion oversaw five weeks further training of the Seabees in  UDTs 1 and 2 to prepare for the mission.

[ 20 ] UDT 1 was tasked with two daylight recons.

[ 21 ] The men were to follow Marine Corps Recon procedure with each two-man team getting close to the beach in an inflatable boat to make their observations wearing fatigues, boots, d helmets, and life-lined to their boats. Team 1 found that the reef kept them from ascertaining conditions both in the water and on the beach as had been anticipated.  In keeping with the Seabee traditions of: (1) doing whatever it takes to accomplish the job and (2) not always following military rules to get it done, UDT 1 did both: the fatigues and boots came off.

Ensign Lewis F. Luehrs and Seabee Chief Bill Acheson had anticipated that they would not be able to get the intel Admiral Turner wanted following USMC Recon protocol and had worn swim trunks beneath their fatigues.

[ 21 ] Stripping down, they swam 45 minutes undetected across the reef returning with sketches of gun emplacements and other intelligence.  Still in their trunks, they were taken directly to Rear Admiral Turner's flagship to report.

[ 21 ] Afterwards, Turner concluded that the only way to get this kind of information was to do what these men had done as individual swimmers, which is what he relayed to Admiral Nimitz . The planning and decisions of Rear Admiral Turner, Ensign Luehrs, and Chief Acheson made Kwajalein a developmental day in UDT history, changing both the mission model and training regimen.  Luehrs would make rank and be in UDT 3 until he was made XO of UDT 18.  Acheson and three other UDT officers were posted to the 301st CB as blasting officers.

[ 4 ] The 301st specialized in Harbor dredging. It saved UDT teams from blasting channels and harbor clearance, but it required its own blasters.

Admiral Turner ordered the formation of nine teams, six for V AC and three for III Amphibious Corps.  Seabees made up the majority of the men in teams 1–9, 13 and 15. The officers of those teams were primarily CEC [ 22 ] (Seabees).  UDT 2 was sent to Roi-Namur where Lt. Crist earned a Silver Star.   UDTs 1 and 2 were decommissioned upon return to Hawaii with most of the men transferred to UDTs 3, 4, 5, and 6.  Admiral Turner ordered the formation of nine teams, three for III Amphibious Corps and six for V Amphibious Corps (in all Teams 3–11). As more NCDUs arrived in the Pacific they were used to form even more teams. UDT 15 was an all-NCDU team. To implement these changes and grow the UDTs, Koehler was made the commanding officer of the Naval Combat Demolition Training and Experimental Base on Maui. Admiral Turner also brought on LCDR Draper Kaufmann as a combat officer.

[ 6 ] It became obvious more men were needed than the NCDUs would supply and Cmdr. Kauffman was no longer recruiting Seabees, so Admiral Nimitz put out a call to the Pacific Fleet for volunteers. They would form three teams; UDT 14 would be the first of them.  Recruiting was such an issue that three Lt. Cmdrs  who had no background in demolition were transferred from USN Beach Battalions to command UDTs 11, 12, and 13.

[ citation needed ] Admiral Turner requested the establishment of the Naval Combat Demolition Training and Experimental Base at Kihei independent of Fort Pierce, expanding upon what had been learned from UDT 1 at Kwajalein. Operations began in February 1944 with Lt. Crist the first head of training. Most of the procedures from Fort Pierce were changed, replaced with an emphasis on developing swimmers, daylight reconnaissance, and no lifelines. The uniform of the day changed to diving masks , swim trunks, and a Ka-Bar , creating the UDT image as "Naked Warriors" (swim-fins were added after UDT 10 introduced them).

Roi-Namur, Saipan, Tinian, and Guam [ edit ] At Saipan and Tinian UDTs 5, 6, and 7 were given the missions: day time for Saipan and night for Tinian .  At Saipan UDT 7 developed a method to recover swimmers on the move without making the recovery vessel a stationary target.

For Guam UDTs 3, 4, and 6 were the teams assigned.  When it was over the Seabee-dominated teams had made naval history .

[ 23 ] For the Marianas operations Admiral Turner recommended over sixty Silver Stars and over three hundred Bronze Stars with Vs for UDTs 3–7 [ 23 ] That was unprecedented in U.S. Naval/Marine Corps history.

[ 23 ] For UDTs 5 and 7, all officers received  silver stars and all the enlisted received bronze stars with Vs for Operation Forager (Tinian).

[ 24 ] For UDTs 3 and 4 all officers received a silver stars and all the enlisted received bronze stars with Vs for Operation Forager (Guam).

[ 24 ] Admiral Conolly felt the commanders of teams 3 and 4 (Lt. Crist and Lt. W.G. Carberry) should have received Navy Crosses.

[ 24 ] Teams 4 & 7 also received Naval Unit Commendations.

Peleliu, Philippines, and Iwo Jima [ edit ] UDTs 6, 7, and 10 drew the Peleliu [ 25 ] assignment while UDT 8 went to Angaur . The officers were almost all CEC and the enlisted were Seabees.

[ 26 ] At formation UDT 10 was assigned 5 officers and 24 enlisted that had trained as OSS Operational Swimmers (Maritime Unit: Operational Swimmer Group II). They were led by a Lt. A.O. Chote Jr., who became UDT 10's commanding officer. The men were multi-service: Army, Coast Guard, Marine Corps and Navy [ 27 ] [ 28 ] but the OSS was not allowed to operate in the Pacific Theater .  Admiral Nimitz needed swimmers and did approve their transfer from the OSS to his operational and administrative control.  Most of their OSS gear was stored as it was not applicable to UDT work however, their swimfins came with them.  The other UDTs quickly adopted them.

UDT 14 was the first all-Navy team (one of three from the Pacific fleet) even though its CO and XO were CEC and some of Team Able was incorporated.   In the Philippines Leyte Gulf UDTs 10 & 15 reconnoitered beaches at Luzon , teams 3, 4, 5, & 8 were sent to Dulag and teams 6, 9, & 10 went to Tacloban .

When UDT 3 returned to Maui the team was made the instructors of the school.

[ 29 ] Lt Crist was again made Training Officer.  Under his direction training was broken into four 2-week blocks with an emphasis on swimming and reconnaissance.

[ 29 ] There were classes in night operations, unit control, coral and lava blasting in addition to bivouacking, small unit tactics and small arms.

[ 29 ] Lt Crist would be promoted to Lt Cmdr and the team would remain in Hawaii until April 1945.

[ 29 ] At that time the Seabees of UDT 3 were transferred to Fort Pierce to be the instructors there.

[ 29 ] In all they would train teams 12 to 22.

[ 29 ] Lt. Cmdr. Crist would be sent back to Hawaii.

D-minus 2 at Iwo Jima UDTs 12, 13, 14, and 15 reconnoitered the beaches from twelve LCI (G) with just one man wounded.  They did come under intense heavy fire that sank three of their LCI(G) with the others seriously damaged or disabled.  The LCI(G) crews suffered more than the UDTs with the skipper of one boat earning a Medal of Honor .  The next day a Japanese bomb hit UDT 15's APD, USS Blessman killing fifteen and wounding 23. It was the largest loss suffered by the UDTs during the war.

On D-plus 2 the beachmaster requested help.  There were so many broached or damaged landing craft and the beach was so clogged with war debris that there was no place for landing craft to get ashore.  Lt Cmdr. E. Hochuli of UDT 12 volunteered his team to go deal with the problem and teams 13 and 14 were ordered to go with.

[ 30 ] Lt Cmdr. Vincent Moranz of UDT 13 was "reluctant, and radioed that his men ... were not salvage-men.

[ 30 ] It is reported that Capt. (Bull) Hanlon, Underwater Demolition Operations Commanding Officer radioed back that he did not want anything salvaged, he wanted that beach cleared." [ 30 ] The difference in attitude between Hochuli and Moranz would be remembered in the unit awards.

The three teams worked for five days clearing the waters edge.  While the teams all did the same job under the same conditions [ 30 ] the Navy gave them different unit awards: UDT 12 a PUC , UDT 14 a NUC and UDT 13 nothing.  The USMC ground commanders felt that every man that set foot on the island during the assault had an award coming. The Navy did not share this point of view, besides UDT 13 not a single USN beach party received a unit award either. On D-plus 2, when the UDTs set foot on beaches that were under a USMC assault, any unit award they received should have come under the USMC award protocol.  The USMC Iwo Jima PUC/NUC was a mass award with the PUC going to assault units and the NUC going to support units.

UDTs also served at Eniwetok , Ulithi , Leyte , Lingayen Gulf , Zambales , Labuan , and Brunei Bay. At Lingayen UDT 9 was aboard the USS Belknap when she was hit by a Kamikaze . It cost the team one officer, 7 enlisted, 3 MIA and 13 wounded.

Okinawa to the end of the war [ edit ] Beach reconnaissance map of Okinawa by Team 7 The largest UDT operation of WWII was the invasion of Okinawa , involving teams 7, 11, 12, 13, 14, 16, 17, and 18 (nearly 1,000 men). All prior missions had been in warm tropic waters but, the waters around Okinawa were cool enough that long immersion could cause hypothermia and severe cramps. Since thermal protection for swimmers was not available, UDTs were at risk to these hazards working around Okinawa.

Operations included both real reconnaissance and demolition at the landing beaches, and feints to create the illusion of landings in other locations. Pointed poles set into the coral reef protected the beaches on Okinawa. Teams 11 and 16 were sent in to blast the poles. The charges took out all of UDT 11's targets and half of UDT 16's. UDT 16 aborted the operation due to the death of one of their men; hence, their mission was considered a failure. UDT 11 went back the next day and took out the remaining poles after-which the team remained to guide landing-craft to the beach.

By war's end 34 teams had been formed with teams 1–21 having actually been deployed.  The Seabees provided half of the men in the teams that saw service.  The U.S. Navy did not publicize the existence of the UDTs until post war and when they did they gave credit to Lt. Commander Kauffman and the Seabees.

[ 31 ] During WWII the Navy did not have a rating for the UDTs nor did they have an insignia.  Those men with the CB rating on their uniforms considered themselves Seabees that were doing underwater demolition.  They did not call themselves "UDTs" or " Frogmen " but rather "Demolitioneers" which had carried over from the NCDUs [ 32 ] and LtCdr Kauffmans recruiting them from the Seabee dynamiting and demolition school.  UDTs had to meet the military's standard age guidelines, Seabees older could not volunteer.

In preparation for the invasion of Japan the UDTs created a cold water training center and mid-1945 UDTs had to meet a "new physical standard".  UDT 9 lost 70% of the team to this change.  The last UDT demolition operation of the war was on 4 July 1945 at Balikpapan , Borneo .  The UDTs continued to prepare for the invasion of Japan until VJ Day when the need for their services ceased.

With the draw-down from the war two half-strength UDTs were retained, one on each coast: UDT Baker and UDT Easy. However, the UDTs were the only special troops that avoided complete disbandment after the war, unlike the OSS Maritime Unit, the VAC Recon Battalion, and several Marine recon missions.

[ 6 ] In 1942 the Seabees became a completely new branch of the United States War Department.  The Marine Corps provided both training and an organizational model.  Something that either was not shared or the Seabees chose to ignore or considered not important was the keeping of logs, journals and records.  The Seabees brought this record keeping approach with to the NCDUs and UDTs.

After World War II [ edit ] Japan occupation [ edit ] LtCmdr. Edward P. Clayton, (back to camera) Commanding Officer UDT 21, receiving the first sword surrendered to an American force in the Japanese Home islands, from a Japanese Army Coastal Artillery Major (opposite Clayton), at Futtsu-misaki Point, across Tokyo Bay from Yokosuka Naval Base, 28 August 1945. When word of this circulated LtCmdr. Clayton was ordered to give up the sword. Protocol dictated that General MacArthur should receive the first surrendered sword.

On 20 August 1945 USS Begor embarked UDT 21 at Guam as a component of the U.S. occupation force heading for Japan.

[ 33 ] Nine days later UDT 21 became the first U.S military unit to set foot on Japanese home soil when it reconned the beaches at Futtsu-misaki Point in Tokyo Bay .

[ 33 ] Their assessment was that the area was well suited for landing U.S. amphibious forces.  UDT 21 made a large sign to greet the Marines on the beach.  Team 21 was all fleet and the sign said greetings from "USN" UDT 21.  The next day Begor took UDT 21 to Yokosuka Naval Base.

[ 33 ] There the team cleared the docks for the first U.S. warship to dock in Japan, USS San Diego .

[ 33 ] The team remained in Tokyo Bay until 8 Sept when it was tasked with locating remaining Kamikaze and two-man submarines at Katsura Wan, Uchiura Wan at Suruga Bay , Sendai , Onohama Shipyards and Choshi .

[ 33 ] Orders arrived for Begor to return the team to San Diego on 27 September.

[ 33 ] From 21 to 26 September UDT 11 was at Nagasaki and reported men getting sick from the stench.

[ 34 ] China [ edit ] With the war over thousands of Japanese troops remained in China .   The issue was given to the Marine's III Marine Amphibious Corps.  UDT 9 was assigned to Operation Beleaguer to recon the landings of the 1st Marine Division at Taku and Qingdao the first two weeks of October 1945.

[ 35 ] On their way to China the Navy had UDT 8 carry out a mission at Jinaen, Korea 8–27 September 1945.

[ 35 ] When UDT 9 arrived back in the States it was made one of the two post-War teams and redesignated UDT Baker.

[ 35 ] UDT 8 was also sent to China and was at Taku, Yantai , and Qingdao.

[ 36 ] Operation Crossroads [ edit ] Bikini atoll was chosen for the site of the nuclear tests of Operation Crossroads .

"In March 1946, Project Y scientists from Los Alamos decided that the analysis of a sample of water from the immediate vicinity of the nuclear detonation was essential if the tests were to be properly evaluated. After consideration of several proposals to accomplish this, it was finally decided to employ drone boats of the type used by Naval Combat Demolition Units in France during the war".

[ 37 ] UDT Easy, later named UDT 3, was given the designation TU 1.1.3 for the Operation and was assigned the control and maintenance of the drone boats. On 27 April, 7 officers and 51 enlisted men embarked the USS Begor at the Seabee base Port Hueneme, CA, [ 37 ] for transit to Bikini. At Bikini the drones were controlled from the Begor . Once a water sample was taken the drone would return to the Begor to be hosed down for decontamination . After a Radiation Safety Officer had taken a Geiger counter reading and the OK given, the UDTs would board with a radiation chemist to retrieve the sample.

[ 38 ] Begor came to have the reputation as the most contaminated boat in the fleet.

[ 38 ] A major issue afterwards was the treatment of the dislocated natives. In November 1948, the Bikinians were relocated to the uninhabited Island of Kili , however that island was located inside a coral reef that had no channel for access to the sea.

[ 39 ] In the spring of 1949, the governor of the Trust Territories , Marshall Group requested the U.S. Navy blast a channel to change this.

[ 39 ] That task was given to the Seabees on Kwajalin whose CO quickly determined this was actually a UDT project.

[ 39 ] He sent a request to CINCPACFLT who forwarded it to COMPHIBPAC .

[ 39 ] This ultimately resulted in the sending of UDT 3 on a Civic action program that turned out better than politicians could have hoped. The King of the Bikinians held a send off feast for the UDTs the night before they departed.

[ 39 ] Submersible Operations [ edit ] Post WWII the UDTs continued to research new techniques for underwater and shallow-water operations. One area was the use of SCUBA equipment. Dr.

Chris Lambertsen had developed the Lambertsen Amphibious Respiratory Unit (LARU), an oxygen rebreather , which was used by the Maritime Unit of the OSS. In October 1943, he demonstrated it to LtCmdr. Kauffman, but was told the device was not applicable to current UDT operations.

[ 40 ] [ 41 ] Dr. Lambertsen and the OSS continued to work on closed-circuit oxygen diving and combat swimming. When the OSS was dissolved in 1945, Lambertsen retained the LARU inventory. He later demonstrated the LARU to Army Engineers, the Coast Guard , and the UDTs. In 1947, he demonstrated the LARU to LtCmdr. Francis "Doug" Fane, then a senior UDT commander.

[ 40 ] [ 42 ] LtCmdr. Fane was enthusiastic for new diving techniques. He pushed for the adoption of rebreathers and SCUBA gear for future operations, but the Navy Experimental Diving Unit and the Navy Dive School, which used the old "hard-hat" diving apparatus, declared the new equipment be too dangerous. Nonetheless, LtCmdr. Fane invited Dr. Lambertsen to NAB Little Creek , Virginia in January 1948 to demonstrate and train UDT personnel in SCUBA operations. This was the first-ever SCUBA training for USN divers. Following this training, Lcdr. Fane and Dr. Lambertsen demonstrated new UDT capabilities with a successful lock-out and re-entry from USS Grouper , an underway submarine , to show the Navy's need for this capability. LtCmdr. Fane then started the classified "Submersible Operations" or SUBOPS platoon with men drawn from UDT 2 and 4 under the direction of Lieutenant (junior grade) Bruce Dunning.

[ 40 ] [ 43 ] LtCmdr. Fane also brought the conventional " Aqua-lung " open-circuit SCUBA system into use by the UDTs. Open-circuit SCUBA is less useful to combat divers, as the exhausted air produces a tell-tale trail of bubbles. However, in the early 1950s, the UDTs decided they preferred open-circuit SCUBA, and converted entirely to it. The remaining stock of LARUs was supposedly destroyed in a beach-party bonfire.

[ citation needed ] Later on, the UDT reverted to closed-circuit SCUBA, using improved rebreathers developed by Dr. Lambertsen.

It was at this time that the UDTs, led by LtCmdr. Fane, established training facilities at Saint Thomas in the Virgin Islands .

[ 44 ] The UDTs also began developing weapons skills and procedures for commando operations on land in coastal regions. The UDTs started experiments with insertion/extraction by helicopter, jumping from a moving helicopter into the water or rappelling like mountain climbers to the ground. Experimentation developed a system for emergency extraction by plane called "Skyhook" . Skyhook utilized a large helium balloon and cable rig with harness. A special grabbing device on the nose of a C-130 enabled a pilot to snatch the cable tethered to the balloon and lift a person off the ground. Once airborne, the crew would winch the cable in and retrieve the personnel though the back of the aircraft. Training this technique was discontinued following the death of a SEAL at NAB Coronado during a training exercise. Teams still utilize the Skyhook for equipment extraction and retain the combat capability for personnel if needed.

Korean War [ edit ] During the Korean War , the UDTs operated on the coasts of North Korea , with their efforts initially focused on demolitions and mine disposal. Additionally, the UDT accompanied South Korean commandos on raids in the North to demolish railroad tunnels and bridges. The higher-ranking officers of the UDT frowned upon this activity because it was a non-traditional use of the Naval forces, which took them too far from the water line. Due to the nature of the war, the UDT maintained a low operational profile. Some of the better-known missions include the transport of spies into North Korea, and the destruction of North Korean fishing nets.

A more traditional role for the UDT was in support of Operation CHROMITE , the amphibious landing at Inchon . UDT 1 and UDT 3 divers went in ahead of the landing craft, scouting mud flats, marking low points in the channel, clearing fouled propellers, and searching for mines. Four UDT personnel acted as wave-guides for the Marine landing.

[ 45 ] The UDT assisted in clearing mines in Wonsan harbor, under fire from enemy shore batteries. Two minesweepers were sunk in these operations. A UDT diver dove on the wreck of USS Pledge (AM-277) , the first U.S. combat operation using SCUBA gear.

The Korean War was a period of transition for the men of the UDT. They tested their previous limits and defined new parameters for their special style of warfare. These new techniques and expanded horizons positioned the UDT well to assume an even broader role as war began brewing to the south in Vietnam .

[ 46 ] Mercury space capsule recovery practice UDTs exiting SH-3A Sea King HS-6 Gemini 4 recover operations – S65-33491 NASA [ edit ] Apollo 8 capsule being recovered by UDT-12, 1968 Underwater Demolition Team 11 (UDT-11) for the recovery of the Apollo 17 mission, in December 1972 Initially, the splashdown of U.S. crewed space capsules were unassisted.

[ 47 ] That changed quickly after the second crewed flight; when Mercury 11 hit the water following reentry, the hatch blew and she sank, nearly drowning Gus Grissom .  All Mercury, Gemini, and Apollo space capsules were subsequently met by UDTs 11 or 12 upon splashdown.  Before the hatch was opened, the UDTs would attach a flotation collar to the capsule and liferaft for the astronauts to safely exit the craft.

[ 47 ] Vietnam War [ edit ] (USN 1109964F) UDT 12 maintaining UDT Seabee tradition 1965 at DaNang in 1965 The Navy entered the Vietnam War in 1958, when the UDTs delivered a small watercraft far up the Mekong River into Laos . In 1961, naval advisers started training South Vietnamese personnel in South Vietnam . The men were called the Liên Đoàn Người Nhái (LDNN) or Vietnamese Frogmen, which translates as "Frogmen Team".

UDT 11 awarded the Navy Unit Commendation in 1966.

Underwater Demolition Team from Task Force 116 returns to the Sea Float base on the Cua Long River after a patrol.

UDT 12 awarded the Navy Unit Commendation for service in Vietnam from August 1966 to March 1967.

UDT teams carried out hydrographic surveys in South Vietnam's coastal waters and reconnaissance missions of harbors, beaches and rivers often under hazardous conditions and enemy fire.

[ 48 ] Later, the UDTs supported the Amphibious Ready Groups operating on South Vietnam's rivers. UDTs manned riverine patrol craft and went ashore to demolish obstacles and enemy bunkers. They operated throughout South Vietnam, from the Mekong Delta ( Sea Float ), the Parrot's Beak and French canal AO's through I Corps and the Song Cui Dai estuary south of Da Nang .

Birth of Navy SEALs [ edit ] UDT-12 personnel place sensors along VC trail In the mid-1950s, the Navy saw how the UDT's mission had expanded to a broad range of " unconventional warfare ", but also that this clashed with the UDT's traditional focus on maritime operations swimming, boat, and diving operations. It was therefore decided to create a new type of unit that would build on the UDT's elite qualities and water-borne expertise, but would add land combat skills, including parachute training and guerrilla/counterinsurgency operations.

[ 49 ] These new teams would come to be known as the US Navy SEALs , an acronym for Sea, Air, and Land. Initially there was a lag in the unit's creation until President John F. Kennedy took office. Kennedy recognized the need for unconventional warfare, and supported the use of special operations forces against guerrilla activity. The Navy moved forward to establish its new special operations force and in January 1962 commissioned SEAL Team ONE in NAB Coronado and SEAL Team TWO at NAB Little Creek. In 1964, Boat Support Unit ONE was established, designed to directly support NSW operations, and was initially outfitted primarily by UDTs and newly established SEALs. UDT-11 & 12 were still active on the west coast and UDT-21 & 22 on the east coast. The SEALs quickly earned a reputation for valor and stealth in Vietnam, where they conducted clandestine raids in perilous territory.

Reorganization [ edit ] From 1974–1975, UDT 13 was redesignated; some personnel established Underwater Construction Teams , while others joined the special boat detachment . In May 1983, the remaining UDT teams were reorganized as SEAL teams. UDT 11 became SEAL Team Five and UDT 12 became Seal Delivery Vehicle Team One. UDT 21 became SEAL Team Four and UDT 22 became Seal Delivery Vehicle Team Two. A new team, SEAL Team Three was established in October 1983. Since then, teams of SEALs have taken on clandestine missions in war-torn regions around the world, tracking high-profile targets such as Panama's Manuel Noriega and Colombian drug lord Pablo Escobar , and playing integral roles in the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan.

[ 50 ] [ 51 ] Badge [ edit ] UDT Badges Officer Underwater Demolition Badge Enlisted Underwater Demolition Badge For those who served in an Underwater Demolition Team, the U.S. Navy authorized the Underwater Demolition operator badge in 1970. However, the UDT badge was phased out in 1971, a few months after it appeared, as was the silver badge for enlisted UDT/SEAL frogmen. After that, SEAL and UDT operators, both officer and enlisted, all wore the same gold Trident, as well as gold Navy jump wings.

Unit awards [ edit ] The UDTs have received several unit citations and commendations. Members who participated in actions that merited the award are authorized to wear the medal or ribbon associated with the award on their uniform.

Awards and decorations of the United States Armed Forces have different categories, (i.e. Service, Campaign, Unit, and Personal). Unit Citations are distinct from the other decorations.

[ 52 ] Naval Combat Demolition Force O (Omaha beach) Normandy Presidential Unit Citation Normandy Naval Combat Demolition Force U (Utah beach): Normandy Navy Unit Commendation : Normandy [ 53 ] UDT 1 Navy Unit Commendation : Korea [ 53 ] UDT 4 Navy Unit Commendation : Guam [ 53 ] Navy Unit Commendation : Leyte [ 53 ] Navy Unit Commendation : Okinawa [ 53 ] UDT 7 Navy Unit Commendation : Marianas [ 53 ] Navy Unit Commendation : Western Carolinas [ 53 ] Navy Unit Commendation : Okinawa [ 53 ] UDT 11 Presidential Unit Citation : Okinawa [ 54 ] Presidential Unit Citation : Bruni Bay, Borneo [ 54 ] Presidential Unit Citation : Balikpapan, Burneo [ 54 ] Navy Unit Commendation [ 54 ] 1966 Navy Meritorious Unit Commendation [ 54 ] 1968 Navy Unit Commendation [ 54 ] 1969 Presidential Unit Citation 1969 Navy Meritorious Unit Commendation [ 54 ] 1969 Navy Meritorious Unit Commendation [ 54 ] 1969 Navy Meritorious Unit Commendation [ 54 ] 1970 Republic of Vietnam Civil Actions Medal Unit Citation [ 54 ] Republic of Vietnam Gallantry Cross with Palm Unit Award [ 54 ] Coast Guard Meritorious Unit Commendation [ 54 ] UDT 12 Presidential Unit Citation : Iwo Jima [ 54 ] Presidential Unit Citation : Okinawa [ 54 ] Navy Unit Commendation [ 54 ] 1966 Navy Meritorious Unit Commendation : Vietnam [ 54 ] 1967 Navy Meritorious Unit Commendation : Vietnam [ 54 ] 1967 Navy Meritorious Unit Commendation : Vietnam [ 54 ] 1968 Navy Meritorious Unit Commendation : Vietnam [ 54 ] 1968 Navy Meritorious Unit Commendation : Vietnam [ 54 ] 1969 Republic of Vietnam Gallantry Cross with Palm Unit Award [ 54 ] Operation Eagle Pull Operation Frequent Wind Humanitarian Service Medal [ 54 ] 1979 Boat People UDT 13 Navy Meritorious Unit Commendation : Vietnam [ 55 ] 1969 Republic of Vietnam Gallantry Cross with Palm Unit Award [ 55 ] 1970 UDT 14 Navy Unit Commendation : Luzon [ 53 ] Navy Unit Commendation : Iwo Jima [ 53 ] Navy Unit Commendation : Okinawa [ 53 ] UDT 21 Navy Expeditionary Medal [ 56 ] Navy Meritorious Unit Commendation : Vietnam [ 56 ] Navy Meritorious Unit Commendation : Vietnam [ 56 ] Navy Meritorious Unit Commendation : Vietnam [ 56 ] Navy Meritorious Unit Commendation : Vietnam [ 56 ] UDT 22 Navy Meritorious Unit Commendation : Vietnam [ 57 ] 1969 OPNAV NOTICE 1650, MASTER LIST OF UNIT AWARDS AND CAMPAIGN MEDALS [ 58 ] Fiction [ edit ] The Frogmen (1951), starring Dana Andrews and Richard Widmark . World War II film based on the Underwater Demolition Teams. Contemporary UDT members appear in several sequences.

[ citation needed ] Underwater Warrior (1958) directed by Andrew Marton is based on the memoirs of Lieutenant-Commander Francis Douglas Fane, Naked Warriors .

See also [ edit ] United States Naval Special Warfare Command – Naval component of United States Special Operations Command List of former United States special operations units Underwater demolition – Deliberate destruction of underwater obstacles Seabee – Member of the US Naval Construction Forces Underwater Construction Teams – Navy construction battalion underwater construction units United States Navy SEALs – U.S. Navy special operations force United States special operations forces – Special Forces of the United States of America Republic of Korea Navy Special Warfare Flotilla – Special warfare unit of Republic of Korea Navy References [ edit ] ^ "SEAL History: Before the First Mercury Splashdown | National Navy UDT-SEAL Museum" . Navysealmuseum.com. Archived from the original on 21 January 2015 . Retrieved 12 May 2014 .

^ a b c d Cunningham, Chet (2004).

The Frogmen of World War II: An Oral History of the U.S. Navy's Underwater Demolition Teams . Pocket Star.

ISBN 978-0-7434-8216-5 .

^ "Navy SEAL History" . Retrieved 25 January 2008 .

^ a b c Submarine Blasting, 301 Naval Construction Battalion Cruisebook, Seabee Museum Archives website, Jan. 2020,  p.60,  Port Hueneme, CA.

[1] / ^ a b "SEAL History: Origins of Naval Special Warfare-WWII | National Navy UDT-SEAL Museum" . Navysealmuseum.com . Retrieved 12 May 2014 .

^ a b c d e f Milligan, Benjamin H (2021).

By Water Beneath the Walls . United States: Bantam Books. pp.

143– 186.

ISBN 978-0-553-39219-7 .

^ Blazich, Frank A. (12 May 2017).

"This Week in Seabee History (Week of May 14)" .

Seabee Online . Navy Facilities Engineering Command. Archived from the original on 5 August 2017 . Retrieved 18 October 2017 .

^ Blazich, Frank A. (6 June 2014).

"Opening Omaha Beach: Ensign Karnowski and NCDU-45" .

Seabee Online . Navy Facilities Engineering Command. Archived from the original on 3 September 2017 . Retrieved 18 October 2017 .

^ "Seal History: Origins of Naval Special Warfare – WWII" .

Navy Seal Museum Archives . Retrieved 18 October 2017 .

^ pp. 30–31 Dockery & Brutsman ^ p.34 Dockery, Kevin & Brutsman, Bud Navy SEALs A History of the Early Years Berkley Publishing 2001 ^ "Naval Combat Demolition Units" .

SpecWarNet.net . Retrieved 1 March 2018 .

^ Erickson, Mark St. John (3 December 2017).

"Training the Fighting Seabees of WWII at Camp Peary" .

Daily Press . Newport News, Virginia. Archived from the original on 5 August 2018 . Retrieved 29 December 2017 .

^ Hornfischer, James D. (2017).

The Fleet at Flood Tide: America at Total War in the Pacific, 1944–1945 . New York: Bantam Books. p. 44.

^ a b c d e Report on Naval Combat Demolition Units in Operation "Neptune" as part of Task Force 122, Submitted by: Lt.(jg) H. L. Blackwell, Jr. D-V(G), USNR, 5 July, 1944 ^ "World War II Era Beach Obstacles and Hedgehogs from Original NCDU School | National Navy UDT-SEAL Museum" . NavySealMuseum.com . Retrieved 12 May 2014 .

^ a b c Liptak, Eugene (2014).

World War II US Navy Special Warfare Units . New York: Osprey Publishing. p. 25.

^ Commander, V Amphibious Corps to CinCPac, report, Underwater Demolition Teams, Recommendations Concerning-Based on Experience in Flintlock (Kwajalein) , 2 June 1944, declassified from secret.

^ a b The Water Is Never Cold, James Douglas O'Dell, 2000, p. 132, Brassey's, 22841 Quicksilver Drive, Dulles, Va. 20166, ISBN 1-57488-275-9 ^ Meyers, Bruce F. (2004).

Swift, Silent, and Deadly: Marine Amphibious Reconnaissance in the Pacific, 1942–1945 . Naval Institute Press.

^ a b c Hoyt, Edwin P. (1993).

Seals at War . New York, New York: Dell Books.

ISBN 9780307570062 .

^ Blazich, Frank A. Jr. (12 September 2016).

"This Week in Seabee History" .

Seabee Online . Navy Facilities Engineering Command. Archived from the original on 13 October 2017 . Retrieved 16 October 2017 .

^ a b c Bush, E.K. (2012).

America's First Frogman: The Draper Kauffman Story . Naval Institute Press. p. 122.

ISBN 978-1-61251-298-3 . Retrieved 2 February 2021 .

^ a b c Naked Warriors, Cdr. Francis Douglas Fane USNR (Ret.), St. Martin's Press, 175 Fifth Ave, New York, NY 10010, 1996, pp. 122, 131, ISBN 0-312-95985-0 ^ Amphibious Assault: Key to the World War II Battle for Peleliu, Toni L. Carrell, PhD, Office of Ocean Exploration and Research, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, U.S. Department of Commerce web site [2] ^ "This Week in Seabee History, Sept 10–17, for Sept 12, Seabee Magazine online" . Archived from the original on 15 March 2018 . Retrieved 14 March 2018 .

^ OSS in Action The Pacific and the Far East, Series: OSS Training in the National Parks and Service Abroad in World War II, Catoctin Mountain Park, Prince William Forest Park webpage, 8 August 2017, National Park Service, 1100 Ohio Drive, SW, Washington, DC 20242 [3] ^ OPERATIONAL SWIMMER GROUP NAMES IS FROM A LIST WITH THE OSS HONOR ARTICLE PAGE, Military Memories webpage [4] ^ a b c d e f "The Teams in World War II" .

View of the Rockies . Retrieved 18 October 2017 .

^ a b c d UDT 13, The Men From Fort Pierce(excerpts), Marvin Cooper, U. S. Naval Special Warfare Archives web-site [5] ^ Underwater Demolition, "All Hands", The Bureau of Naval Personal Information Bulletin, October 1945, NAVPERS-0 NUMBER 343 pp. 12–15 [6] ^ NCDU 216 Photo , National Navy UDT–SEAL Museum, North Hutchinson Island, Fort Pierce, FL.

^ a b c d e f USS BEGOR (APD-127) veterans webpage [ permanent dead link ] ^ UDT 11, U. S. Naval Special Warfare Archives web site, "The Men From Fort Pierce" by Marvin Cooper [7] ^ a b c UNDERWATER DEMOLITION TEAM HISTORIES, WWII UDT TEAM NINE, compiled by Robert Allan King for the UDT-SEAL Museum from public records at the Operational Archives of the Naval Historical Center, U. S. Naval Special Warfare Archives web-site [8] ^ UNDERWATER DEMOLITION TEAM HISTORIES, WWII UDT TEAM EIGHT, compiled by Robert Allan King for the UDT-SEAL Museum from public records at the Operational Archives of the Naval Historical Center, U. S. Naval Special Warfare Archives web-site [9] ^ a b Operations Crossroads, DNA 6032F, prepared by the Defense Nuclear Agency, p.189-90 ^ a b "USS BEGOR (APD-127) Veterans webpage" . Archived from the original on 11 March 2018 . Retrieved 11 March 2018 .

^ a b c d e U.S. Naval Special Warfare Archives, After Operation Crossroads – Kili Island, Mack M. Boynton, December 21, 2013 ^ a b c Butler FK (2004).

"Closed-circuit oxygen diving in the U.S. Navy" .

Undersea and Hyperbaric Medicine .

31 (1): 3– 20.

PMID 15233156 . Archived from the original on 13 June 2008 . Retrieved 18 March 2009 .

^ Hawkins T (2000). "OSS Maritime".

The Blast .

32 (1).

^ Vann RD (2004).

"Lambertsen and O2: beginnings of operational physiology" .

Undersea Hyperb Med .

31 (1): 21– 31.

PMID 15233157 . Archived from the original on 13 June 2008 . Retrieved 18 March 2009 .

^ Vann RD (Spring 2000). "The evolution of diving in UDT from WW II through Korea".

Fire-in-the-Hole .

^ "CDR Doug Fane, Navy Udt leader" . bigislandforum.org . Retrieved 6 December 2009 .

^ "SEAL History: Underwater Demolition Teams in the Korean War | National Navy UDT-SEAL Museum" . Navysealmuseum.com . Retrieved 12 May 2014 .

^ "Navy UDT-SEAL Museum: History, Korea" . navysealmuseum.com. Archived from the original on 7 February 2008 . Retrieved 25 January 2008 .

^ a b UDTs and the Space Flight Programs, UDT Navy Seal Museum Archives website, Fort Pierce, FL [10] ^ "SEAL History: Vietnam-The Men With Green Faces | National Navy UDT-SEAL Museum" . Navysealmuseum.com. Archived from the original on 10 November 2014 . Retrieved 12 May 2014 .

^ Boynton, Mack (2010).

A Founding Father of the Navy SEALs (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 14 February 2012 . Retrieved 12 May 2013 .

^ Altman, Alex (27 April 2009).

"A Brief History of: The Navy SEALs" .

Time Magazine . Archived from the original on 18 April 2009 . Retrieved 12 May 2013 .

^ Mack Boynton (2007).

"SEAL Story of – SEAL Teams" .

The Blast . UDT-SEAL Association. Archived from the original on 24 July 2008 . Retrieved 6 December 2009 .

^ "List of Award Abbreviations, Chief of Naval Operations, 2000 Navy Pentagon, Washington, D.C. 20350" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 31 January 2017 . Retrieved 16 March 2018 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k Naval History and Heritage Command website, Part 2 – Unit Awards, Published:Mon Aug 31 14:01:11 EDT 2015, p. 22 ^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t u v US Navy Awards, Chief of Naval Operations, 2000 Navy Pentagon, Washington, D.C. 20350 ^ a b US Navy Awards, Chief of Naval Operations, 2000 Navy Pentagon, Washington, D.C. 20350 ^ a b c d e US Navy Awards, Chief of Naval Operations, 2000 Navy Pentagon, Washington, D.C. 20350 ^ US Navy Awards, Chief of Naval Operations, 2000 Navy Pentagon, Washington, D.C. 20350 ^ OPNAV NOTICE 1650, MASTER LIST OF UNIT AWARDS AND CAMPAIGN MEDALS, DEPARTMENT OF THE NAVY, OFFICE OF THE CHIEF OF NAVAL OPERATIONS, 2000 NAVY PENTAGON, WASHINGTON, DC 20350-2000, 18 September 2002 Further reading [ edit ] Best, Herbert.

The Webfoot Warriors; The Story of UDT, the U.S. Navy's Underwater Demolition Team . New York: John Day Co, 1962.

OCLC 1315014 Fane, Francis Douglas, and Don Moore.

The Naked Warriors: The Story of the U.S. Navy's Frogmen . Annapolis, MD: Naval Institute Press, 1995.

ISBN 1557502668 OCLC 33007811 Navy, U.S.

Handbook of Naval Combat Underwater Demolition Team Training(1944) . Paradise, CA: Loose Cannon Enterprises, 2019.

ISBN 9781944476854 O'Dell, James Douglas.

The Water Is Never Cold: The Origins of the U.S. Navy's Combat Demolition Units, UDTs, and SEALs . Washington, DC: Brassey's, 2000.

ISBN 1574882759 OCLC 44764036 Young, Darryl.

SEALs, UDT, Frogmen: Men Under Pressure . New York: Ivy Books, 1994.

ISBN 0804110646 OCLC 31815574 Milligan, Benjamin H.

By Water Beneath The Walls.

New York: Bantam Books, 2021. ISBN 978-0-553-39219-7 External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Underwater Demolition Team .

Navy UDT-SEAL Museum NavyFrogMen.com U. S. Naval Special Warfare Archives Pritzker Military Museum & Library "TNT Divers" Popular Mechanics , November 1945, pp. 72–73, one of earliest articles on WW2 UDT units.

v t e Underwater diving Diving activities Diving modes Atmospheric pressure diving Freediving Saturation diving Scuba diving Snorkeling Surface oriented diving Surface-supplied diving Unmanned diving Diving equipment Cleaning and disinfection of personal diving equipment Human factors in diving equipment design List of diving equipment manufacturers Basic equipment Diving mask Snorkel Swimfin Breathing gas Bailout gas Bottom gas Breathing air Decompression gas Emergency gas supply Heliox Hydreliox Hydrox Nitrox Oxygen Travel gas Trimix Buoyancy and trim equipment Avelo diving system Buoyancy compensator Power inflator Dump valve Variable buoyancy pressure vessel Diving weighting system Ankle weights Integrated weights Trim weights Weight belt Decompression equipment Decompression buoy Decompression chamber Decompression cylinder Decompression trapeze Dive computer Diving bell Diving shot Diving stage Jersey upline Jonline Diving suit Atmospheric diving suit JIM suit Newtsuit Dry suit Sladen suit Standard diving suit Rash vest Wetsuit Dive skins Hot-water suit Helmets and masks Anti-fog Diving helmet Free-flow helmet Lightweight demand helmet Orinasal mask Reclaim helmet Shallow water helmet Standard diving helmet Diving mask Band mask Full-face mask Half mask Instrumentation Bottom timer Depth gauge Dive computer Dive timer Diving watch Helium release valve Electro-galvanic oxygen sensor Pneumofathometer Submersible pressure gauge Mobility equipment Diver propulsion vehicle Human torpedo Wet sub Diving bell Closed bell Wet bell Diving stage Swimfin Monofin PowerSwim Towboard Safety equipment Alternative air source Octopus regulator Pony bottle Bolt snap Buddy line Dive light Diver's cutting tool Diver's knife Diver's telephone Through-water communications Underwater acoustic communication Diving bell Diving safety harness Emergency gas supply Bailout block Bailout bottle Lifeline Screw gate carabiner Emergency locator beacon Rescue tether Safety helmet Shark-proof cage Snoopy loop Navigation equipment Distance line Diving compass Dive reel Line marker Surface marker buoy Silt screw Underwater breathing apparatus Atmospheric diving suit Diving cylinder Burst disc Scuba cylinder valve Diving helmet Reclaim helmet Diving regulator Mechanism of diving regulators Regulator malfunction Regulator freeze Single-hose regulator Twin-hose regulator Full-face diving mask Open-circuit scuba Scuba set Bailout bottle Decompression cylinder Independent doubles Manifolded twin set Scuba manifold Pony bottle Scuba configuration Sidemount Sling cylinder Diving rebreathers Carbon dioxide scrubber Carleton CDBA Clearance Divers Life Support Equipment Cryogenic rebreather CUMA DSEA Dolphin Halcyon PVR-BASC Halcyon RB80 IDA71 Interspiro DCSC LAR-5 LAR-6 LAR-V LARU Mark IV Amphibian Porpoise Ray Siebe Gorman CDBA Salvus Siva Surface-supplied diving equipment Air line Diver's umbilical Diving air compressor Gas panel Hookah Scuba replacement Snuba Standard diving dress Diving equipment manufacturers AP Diving Apeks Aqua Lung America Aqua Lung/La Spirotechnique Beuchat René Cavalero Cis-Lunar Cressi-Sub Dacor DESCO Dive Xtras Divex Diving Unlimited International Drägerwerk Faber Fenzy Maurice Fernez Technisub Oscar Gugen Heinke HeinrichsWeikamp Johnson Outdoors Mares Morse Diving Nemrod Oceanic Worldwide Porpoise Shearwater Research Siebe Gorman Submarine Products Suunto Diving support equipment Access equipment Boarding stirrup Diver lift Diving bell Diving ladder Diving platform (scuba) Diving stage Downline Jackstay Launch and recovery system Messenger line Moon pool Breathing gas handling Air filtration Activated carbon Hopcalite Molecular sieve Silica gel Booster pump Carbon dioxide scrubber Cascade filling system Diver's pump Diving air compressor Diving air filter Water separator High pressure breathing air compressor Low pressure breathing air compressor Gas blending Gas blending for scuba diving Gas panel Gas reclaim system Gas storage bank Gas storage quad Gas storage tube Helium analyzer Nitrox production Membrane gas separation Pressure swing adsorption Oxygen analyser Electro-galvanic oxygen sensor Oxygen compatibility Decompression equipment Air-lock Built-in breathing system Decompression tables Diving bell Bell cursor Closed bell Clump weight Launch and recovery system Wet bell Diving chamber Diving stage Recreational Dive Planner Saturation system Platforms Dive boat Canoe and kayak diving Combat rubber raiding craft Liveaboard Subskimmer Diving support vessel HMS Challenger (K07) Underwater habitat Aquarius Reef Base Continental Shelf Station Two Helgoland Habitat Scott Carpenter Space Analog Station SEALAB Tektite habitat Remotely operated underwater vehicles 8A4-class ROUV ABISMO Atlantis ROV Team COTSBot CURV Deep Drone Épaulard Global Explorer ROV Goldfish-class ROUV Kaikō ROV Kaşif ROUV Long-Term Mine Reconnaissance System Mini Rover ROV OpenROV ROV KIEL 6000 ROV PHOCA Scorpio ROV Sea Dragon-class ROV Seabed tractor Seafox drone SeaPerch SJT-class ROUV T1200 Trenching Unit VideoRay UROVs Safety equipment Diver down flag Diving shot ENOS Rescue-System Hyperbaric lifeboat Hyperbaric stretcher Jackstay Jonline Reserve gas supply General Diving spread Air spread Saturation spread Hot water system Sonar Underwater acoustic positioning system Underwater acoustic communication Freediving Activities Aquathlon Apnoea finswimming Freediving Haenyeo Pearl hunting Ama Snorkeling Spearfishing Underwater football Underwater hockey Underwater rugby Underwater target shooting Competitions Nordic Deep Vertical Blue Disciplines Constant weight (CWT) Constant weight bi-fins (CWTB) Constant weight without fins (CNF) Dynamic apnea (DYN) Dynamic apnea without fins (DNF) Free immersion (FIM) No-limits apnea (NLT) Static apnea (STA) Skandalopetra diving Variable weight apnea (VWT) Variable weight apnea without fins Equipment Diving mask Diving suit Hawaiian sling Polespear Snorkel (swimming) Speargun Swimfins Monofin Water polo cap Freedivers Deborah Andollo Simone Arrigoni Peppo Biscarini Michael Board Sara Campbell Derya Can Göçen Goran Čolak Carlos Coste Robert Croft Mandy-Rae Cruickshank Yasemin Dalkılıç Leonardo D'Imporzano Flavia Eberhard Şahika Ercümen Emma Farrell Francisco Ferreras Pierre Frolla Flavia Eberhard Mehgan Heaney-Grier Elisabeth Kristoffersen Andriy Yevhenovych Khvetkevych Loïc Leferme Enzo Maiorca Jacques Mayol Audrey Mestre Karol Meyer Kate Middleton Stéphane Mifsud Alexey Molchanov Natalia Molchanova Dave Mullins Patrick Musimu Guillaume Néry Herbert Nitsch Umberto Pelizzari Liv Philip Annelie Pompe Stig Severinsen Tom Sietas Martin Štěpánek Walter Steyn Tanya Streeter William Trubridge Devrim Cenk Ulusoy Fatma Uruk Danai Varveri Alessia Zecchini Nataliia Zharkova Kateryna Sadurska Hazards Barotrauma Drowning Freediving blackout Deep-water blackout Shallow-water blackout Hypercapnia Hypothermia Historical Ama Octopus wrestling Swimming at the 1900 Summer Olympics – Men's underwater swimming Organisations AIDA International Scuba Schools International Australian Underwater Federation British Freediving Association Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins Performance Freediving International Professional diving Occupations Ama Commercial diver Commercial offshore diver Hazmat diver Divemaster Diving instructor Diving safety officer Diving superintendent Diving supervisor Haenyeo Media diver Police diver Public safety diver Scientific diver Underwater archaeologist Military diving Army engineer diver Canadian Armed Forces Divers Clearance diver Frogman Minentaucher Royal Navy ships diver United States military divers U.S. Navy diver U.S.Navy master diver Military diving units 7th Marine Brigade Clearance Diving Branch (RAN) Commando Hubert Combat Divers Service (Lithuania) Comando Raggruppamento Subacquei e Incursori Teseo Tesei Decima Flottiglia MAS Frogman Corps (Denmark) Fuerzas Especiales Fukuryu GRUMEC Grup Gerak Khas Jagdkommando JW Formoza JW GROM JW Komandosów Kommando Spezialkräfte Marine KOPASKA MARCOS Marine Commandos Marinejegerkommandoen Marine Raider Regiment Minedykkerkommandoen Namibian Marine Corps Operational Diving Unit Naval Diving Unit (Singapore) Naval Service Diving Section Naval Special Operations Command Operational Diving Division (SA Navy) Royal Engineers Russian commando frogmen Sappers Divers Group Shayetet 13 Special Air Service Special Air Service Regiment Special Actions Detachment Special Boat Service Special Boat Squadron (Sri Lanka) Special Forces Command (Turkey) Special Forces Group (Belgium) Special Operations Battalion (Croatia) Special Service Group (Navy) Special Warfare Diving and Salvage Tactical Divers Group US Marine Corps Force Reconnaissance US Marine Corps Reconnaissance Battalions US Navy SEALs Underwater Construction Teams Underwater Demolition Command Underwater Demolition Team Underwater Offence (Turkish Armed Forces) UNGERIN Underwater work Commercial offshore diving Dive leader Diver training Recreational diver training Hazmat diving Hyperbaric welding Marine construction Offshore construction Underwater construction Media diving Pearl hunting Police diving Potable water diving Public safety diving Scientific diving Ships husbandry Sponge diving Submarine pipeline Underwater archaeology Archaeology of shipwrecks Underwater cutting and welding Underwater demolition Underwater inspection Nondestructive testing Underwater logging Underwater photography Underwater search and recovery Underwater searches Underwater videography Underwater survey Salvage diving SS Egypt Kronan La Belle SS Laurentic RMS Lusitania Mars Mary Rose USS Monitor HMS Royal George Vasa Diving contractors COMEX Helix Energy Solutions Group International Marine Contractors Association Tools and equipment Abrasive waterjet Airlift Baited remote underwater video In-water surface cleaning Brush cart Cavitation cleaning Pressure washing Pigging Hot stab Lifting bag Remotely operated underwater vehicle Thermal lance Tremie Water jetting Underwater weapons Limpet mine Speargun Hawaiian sling Polespear Underwater firearm Gyrojet Mk 1 Underwater Defense Gun Powerhead Underwater pistols Heckler & Koch P11 SPP-1 underwater pistol Underwater revolvers AAI underwater revolver Underwater rifles ADS amphibious rifle APS underwater rifle ASM-DT amphibious rifle QBS-06 Recreational diving Recreational dive sites Index of recreational dive sites List of wreck diving sites Outline of recreational dive sites Specialties Altitude diving Cave diving Deep diving Ice diving Muck diving Open-water diving Rebreather diving Sidemount diving Solo diving Technical diving Underwater photography Wreck diving Diver organisations British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Cave Divers Association of Australia (CDAA) Cave Diving Group (CDG) Comhairle Fo-Thuinn (CFT) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas (FEDAS) Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins (FFESSM) International Association for Handicapped Divers (IAHD) Quintana Roo Speleological Survey (QRSS) Woodville Karst Plain Project (WKPP) Diving tourism industry Dive center Diving in Timor-Leste Diving in the Maldives Environmental impact of recreational diving Scuba diving tourism Scuba diving in the Cayman Islands Shark tourism Sinking ships for wreck diving sites Underwater diving in Guam Diving events and festivals Diversnight Underwater Bike Race Diving safety Human factors in diving equipment design Human factors in diving safety Life-support system Safety-critical system Scuba diving fatalities Underwater diving emergency Water safety Water surface searches Diving hazards List of diving hazards and precautions Environmental Current Delta-P Entanglement hazard Overhead Silt out Wave action Equipment Freeflow Use of breathing equipment in an underwater environment Failure of diving equipment other than breathing apparatus Single point of failure Physiological Cold shock response Decompression Nitrogen narcosis Oxygen toxicity Seasickness Uncontrolled decompression Diver behaviour and competence Incompetence Overconfidence effect Panic Task loading Trait anxiety Willful violation Consequences Barotrauma Decompression sickness Drowning Hypothermia Hypoxia Hypercapnia Hyperthermia Non-freezing cold injury Diving procedures Ascending and descending Emergency ascent Boat diving Canoe and kayak diving Buddy diving buddy check Decompression Decompression practice Pyle stop Ratio decompression Dive briefing Dive log Dive planning Rule of thirds Scuba gas planning Diver communications Diver rescue Diver training Doing It Right Drift diving Gas blending for scuba diving Night diving Rebreather diving Scuba gas management Solo diving Wall diving Risk management Checklist Hazard identification and risk assessment Hazard analysis Job safety analysis Risk assessment Hyperbaric evacuation and rescue Risk control Hierarchy of hazard controls Incident pit Lockout–tagout Permit To Work Redundancy Safety data sheet Situation awareness Diving team Bellman Chamber operator Diver medical technician Diver's attendant Diving supervisor Diving systems technician Gas man Life support technician Stand-by diver Equipment safety Breathing gas quality Testing and inspection of diving cylinders Hydrostatic test Sustained load cracking Diving regulator Breathing performance of regulators Occupational safety and health Association of Diving Contractors International International Marine Contractors Association Code of practice Contingency plan Diving regulations Emergency response plan Diving safety officer Diving superintendent Diving supervisor Operations manual Standard operating procedure Diving medicine Diving disorders List of signs and symptoms of diving disorders Cramp Motion sickness Surfer's ear Pressure related Alternobaric vertigo Barostriction Barotrauma Air embolism Aerosinusitis Barodontalgia Dental barotrauma Middle ear barotrauma Pulmonary barotrauma Compression arthralgia Decompression illness Dysbarism Oxygen Freediving blackout Hyperoxia Hypoxia Oxygen toxicity Inert gases Avascular necrosis Decompression sickness Dysbaric osteonecrosis Inner ear decompression sickness Isobaric counterdiffusion Taravana High-pressure nervous syndrome Hydrogen narcosis Nitrogen narcosis Carbon dioxide Hypercapnia Hypocapnia Breathing gas contaminants Carbon monoxide poisoning Immersion related Asphyxia Drowning Hypothermia Immersion diuresis Instinctive drowning response Laryngospasm Salt water aspiration syndrome Swimming-induced pulmonary edema Treatment Demand valve oxygen therapy First aid Hyperbaric medicine Hyperbaric treatment schedules In-water recompression Oxygen therapy Therapeutic recompression Personnel Diving Medical Examiner Diving Medical Practitioner Diving Medical Technician Hyperbaric nursing Screening Atrial septal defect Effects of drugs on fitness to dive Fitness to dive Psychological fitness to dive Research Researchers in diving physiology and medicine Arthur J. Bachrach Albert R. Behnke Peter B. Bennett Paul Bert George F. Bond Robert Boyle Alf O. Brubakk Albert A. Bühlmann John R. Clarke Guybon Chesney Castell Damant Kenneth William Donald William Paul Fife John Scott Haldane Robert William Hamilton Jr.

Henry Valence Hempleman Leonard Erskine Hill Brian Andrew Hills Felix Hoppe-Seyler Christian J. Lambertsen Simon Mitchell Charles Momsen Neal W. Pollock John Rawlins Charles Wesley Shilling Edward D. Thalmann Jacques Triger Diving medical research organisations Aerospace Medical Association Divers Alert Network (DAN) Diving Diseases Research Centre (DDRC) Diving Medical Advisory Council (DMAC) European Diving Technology Committee (EDTC) European Underwater and Baromedical Society (EUBS) National Board of Diving and Hyperbaric Medical Technology Naval Submarine Medical Research Laboratory Royal Australian Navy School of Underwater Medicine Rubicon Foundation South Pacific Underwater Medicine Society (SPUMS) Undersea and Hyperbaric Medical Society (UHMS) United States Navy Experimental Diving Unit (NEDU) Law Civil liability in recreational diving Diving regulations Duty of care List of legislation regulating underwater diving Investigation of diving accidents Convention on the Protection of the Underwater Cultural Heritage History of underwater diving History of decompression research and development History of dive computers History of Diving Museum History of scuba diving List of researchers in underwater diving Lyons Maritime Museum Man in the Sea Museum Timeline of atmospheric diving suits Timeline of diving technology Pearling in Western Australia US Navy decompression models and tables Archeological sites SS Commodore USS Monitor Queen Anne's Revenge Whydah Gally Underwater art and artists The Diver Jason deCaires Taylor Engineers and inventors Jerónimo de Ayanz y Beaumont William Beebe Georges Beuchat Giovanni Alfonso Borelli Joseph-Martin Cabirol John R. Clarke Jacques Cousteau Charles Anthony Deane John Deane Louis de Corlieu Auguste Denayrouze Ted Eldred Henry Fleuss Émile Gagnan Karl Heinrich Klingert Peter Kreeft Christian J. Lambertsen Yves Le Prieur John Lethbridge Ernest William Moir Joseph Salim Peress Auguste Piccard Joe Savoie Willard Franklyn Searle Gordon Smith Augustus Siebe Pierre-Marie Touboulic Jacques Triger Historical equipment Aqua-Lung RV Calypso SP-350 Denise Magnesium torch Nikonos Porpoise regulator Standard diving dress Sub Marine Explorer Vintage scuba Diver propulsion vehicles Advanced SEAL Delivery System Cosmos CE2F series Dry Combat Submersible Human torpedo Motorised Submersible Canoe Necker Nymph R-2 Mala-class swimmer delivery vehicle SEAL Delivery Vehicle Shallow Water Combat Submersible Siluro San Bartolomeo Welfreighter Wet Nellie Military and covert operations Raid on Alexandria (1941) Sinking of the Rainbow Warrior Scientific projects 1992 cageless shark-diving expedition Mission 31 Awards and events Hans Hass Award International Scuba Diving Hall of Fame London Diving Chamber Dive Lectures NOGI Awards Women Divers Hall of Fame Incidents Dive boat incidents Sinking of MV Conception Diver rescues Alpazat cave rescue Tham Luang cave rescue Early diving John Day (carpenter) Charles Spalding Ebenezer Watson Freediving fatalities Stephen Keenan Loïc Leferme Audrey Mestre Nicholas Mevoli Natalia Molchanova Offshore diving incidents Byford Dolphin diving bell accident Drill Master diving accident Star Canopus diving accident Stena Seaspread diving accident Venture One diving accident Waage Drill II diving accident Wildrake diving accident Professional diving fatalities Roger Baldwin John Bennett Victor F. Guiel Jr.

Francis P. Hammerberg Craig M. Hoffman Peter Henry Michael Holmes Johnson Sea Link accident Edwin Clayton Link Gerard Anthony Prangley Per Skipnes Robert John Smyth Albert D. Stover Richard A. Walker Lothar Michael Ward Joachim Wendler Bradley Westell Arne Zetterström Scuba diving fatalities 1973 Mount Gambier cave diving accident Ricardo Armbruster Allan Bridge David Bright Berry L. Cannon Cotton Coulson Cláudio Coutinho E. Yale Dawson Deon Dreyer Milan Dufek Sheck Exley Maurice Fargues Fernando Garfella Palmer Guy Garman Steve Irwin death Jim Jones Henry Way Kendall Artur Kozłowski Yuri Lipski Kirsty MacColl Linnea Mills Agnes Milowka François de Roubaix Chris and Chrissy Rouse Dave Shaw Wesley C. Skiles Dewey Smith Rob Stewart Esbjörn Svensson Josef Velek Publications Manuals NOAA Diving Manual U.S. Navy Diving Manual Basic Cave Diving: A Blueprint for Survival Underwater Handbook Bennett and Elliott's physiology and medicine of diving Encyclopedia of Recreational Diving The new science of skin and scuba diving Professional Diver's Handbook Basic Scuba Standards and Codes of Practice Code of Practice for Scientific Diving (UNESCO) DIN 7876 IMCA Code of Practice for Offshore Diving ISO 24801 Recreational diving services — Requirements for the training of recreational scuba divers General non-fiction The Darkness Beckons Goldfinder The Last Dive Shadow Divers The Silent World: A Story of Undersea Discovery and Adventure Research List of Divers Alert Network publications Dive guides Training and registration Diver training Competence and assessment Competency-based learning Refresher training Skill assessment Diver training standard Diving instructor Diving school Occupational diver training Commercial diver training Military diver training Public safety diver training Scientific diver training Recreational diver training Introductory diving ISO training standards Teaching method Muscle memory Overlearning Stress exposure training Skills Combat sidestroke Diver navigation Diver trim Ear clearing Frenzel maneuver Valsalva maneuver Finning techniques Scuba skills Buddy breathing Low impact diving Diamond Reef System Surface-supplied diving skills Underwater searches Recreational scuba certification levels Core diving skills Advanced Open Water Diver Autonomous diver CMAS* scuba diver CMAS** scuba diver Introductory diving Low Impact Diver Master Scuba Diver Open Water Diver Supervised diver Leadership skills Dive leader Divemaster Diving instructor Master Instructor Specialist skills Rescue Diver Solo diver Diver training certification and registration organisations European Underwater Federation (EUF) International Diving Regulators and Certifiers Forum (IDRCF) International Diving Schools Association (IDSA) International Marine Contractors Association (IMCA) List of diver certification organizations National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) Nautical Archaeology Society Recreational diver course referral World Recreational Scuba Training Council (WRSTC) Commercial diver certification authorities Australian Diver Accreditation Scheme (ADAS) Commercial diver registration in South Africa Divers Institute of Technology Health and Safety Executive (HSE) Department of Employment and Labour Commercial diving schools Divers Academy International Norwegian diver school Free-diving certification agencies AIDA International (AIDA) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Performance Freediving International (PI) Scuba Schools International (SSI) Recreational scuba certification agencies American Canadian Underwater Certifications (ACUC) American Nitrox Divers International (ANDI) Association nationale des moniteurs de plongée (ANMP) British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Comhairle Fo-Thuinn (CFT) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas (FEDAS) Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins (FFESSM) Federazione Italiana Attività Subacquee (FIAS) Global Underwater Explorers (GUE) International Association for Handicapped Divers (IAHD) International Association of Nitrox and Technical Divers (IANTD) International Life Saving Federation (ILS) Israeli Diving Federation (TIDF) National Academy of Scuba Educators (NASE) National Association of Underwater Instructors (NAUI) Nederlandse Onderwatersport Bond (NOB) Professional Association of Diving Instructors (PADI) Professional Diving Instructors Corporation (PDIC) Professional Technical and Recreational Diving (ProTec) Rebreather Association of International Divers (RAID) Sub-Aqua Association (SAA) Scuba Diving International (SDI) Scuba Educators International (SEI) Scuba Schools International (SSI) Türkiye Sualtı Sporları Federasyonu (TSSF) United Diving Instructors (UDI) YMCA SCUBA Program Scientific diver certification authorities American Academy of Underwater Sciences (AAUS) CMAS Scientific Committee Technical diver certification agencies American Nitrox Divers International (ANDI) British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Diving Science and Technology (DSAT) Federazione Italiana Attività Subacquee (FIAS) International Association of Nitrox and Technical Divers (IANTD) Professional Association of Diving Instructors (PADI) Professional Diving Instructors Corporation (PDIC) Professional Technical and Recreational Diving (ProTec) Rebreather Association of International Divers (RAID) Trimix Scuba Association (TSA) Technical Extended Range (TXR) Cave diving Cave Divers Association of Australia (CDAA) Cave Diving Group (CDG) Global Underwater Explorers (GUE) National Speleological Society#Cave Diving Group (CDG) National Association of Underwater Instructors (NAUI) Technical Diving International (TDI) Military diver training centres Defence Diving School Navy Diving Salvage and Training Center Underwater Escape Training Unit Military diver training courses United States Marine Corps Combatant Diver Course Underwater sports Surface snorkeling Finswimming Snorkeling/breath-hold Spearfishing Underwater football Underwater hockey Australia Turkey Underwater rugby Colombia United States Underwater target shooting Breath-hold Aquathlon Apnoea finswimming Freediving Open Circuit Scuba Immersion finswimming Sport diving Underwater cycling Underwater orienteering Underwater photography Rebreather Underwater photography Sports governing organisations and federations International AIDA International Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques ) National AIDA Hellas Australian Underwater Federation British Freediving Association British Octopush Association British Underwater Sports Association Comhairle Fo-Thuinn Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins South African Underwater Sports Federation Türkiye Sualtı Sporları Federasyonu Underwater Society of America ) Competitions 14th CMAS Underwater Photography World Championship Underwater Hockey World Championships Underwater Orienteering World Championships Underwater Rugby World Championships Underwater divers Pioneers of diving Eduard Admetlla i Lázaro Aquanaut Mary Bonnin Amelia Behrens-Furniss James F. Cahill Jacques Cousteau Billy Deans Dottie Frazier Trevor Hampton Hans Hass Hannes Keller Dick Rutkowski Teseo Tesei Arne Zetterström Underwater scientists archaeologists and environmentalists Michael Arbuthnot Robert Ballard George Bass Mensun Bound Louis Boutan Jeffrey Bozanic Hugh Bradner Cathy Church Eugenie Clark James P. Delgado Sylvia Earle John Christopher Fine George R. Fischer Anders Franzén Honor Frost Fernando Garfella Palmer David Gibbins Graham Jessop Swietenia Puspa Lestari Pilar Luna Robert F. Marx Anna Marguerite McCann Innes McCartney Charles T. Meide Mark M. Newell Lyuba Ognenova-Marinova John Peter Oleson Mendel L. Peterson Richard Pyle Andreas Rechnitzer William R. Royal Margaret Rule Gunter Schöbel Stephanie Schwabe Myriam Seco E. Lee Spence Robert Sténuit Peter Throckmorton Cristina Zenato Scuba record holders Pascal Bernabé Jim Bowden Mark Ellyatt Sheck Exley Nuno Gomes Claudia Serpieri Krzysztof Starnawski Underwater filmmakers and presenters Samir Alhafith David Attenborough Ramón Bravo Jean-Michel Cousteau Richie Kohler Paul Rose Andy Torbet Ivan Tors Andrew Wight James Cameron Underwater photographers Doug Allan Tamara Benitez Georges Beuchat Adrian Biddle Jonathan Bird Eric Cheng Neville Coleman Jacques Cousteau John D. Craig Ben Cropp Bernard Delemotte David Doubilet Candice Farmer John Christopher Fine Rodney Fox Ric Frazier Stephen Frink Peter Gimbel Monty Halls Hans Hass Henry Way Kendall Rudie Kuiter Joseph B. MacInnis Luis Marden Agnes Milowka Noel Monkman Pete Oxford Steve Parish Zale Parry Pierre Petit Leni Riefenstahl Peter Scoones Brian Skerry Wesley C. Skiles E. Lee Spence Philippe Tailliez Ron Taylor Valerie Taylor Albert Tillman John Veltri Stan Waterman Michele Westmorland John Ernest Williamson J. Lamar Worzel Underwater explorers Caves Graham Balcombe Sheck Exley Martyn Farr Jochen Hasenmayer Jill Heinerth Jarrod Jablonski Brian Kakuk William Hogarth Main Tom Mount Jack Sheppard Bill Stone Reefs Arthur C. Clarke Wrecks Leigh Bishop John Chatterton Clive Cussler Bill Nagle Valerie van Heest Aristotelis Zervoudis Aquanauts Andrew Abercromby Joseph M. Acaba Clayton Anderson Richard R. Arnold Serena Auñón-Chancellor Michael Barratt (astronaut) Robert A. Barth Robert L. Behnken Randolph Bresnik Timothy J. Broderick Justin Brown Berry L. Cannon Scott Carpenter Gregory Chamitoff Steve Chappell Catherine Coleman Robin Cook Craig B. Cooper Fabien Cousteau Philippe Cousteau Timothy Creamer Jonathan Dory Pedro Duque Sylvia Earle Jeanette Epps Sheck Exley Albert Falco Andrew J. Feustel Michael Fincke Satoshi Furukawa Ronald J. Garan Jr.

Michael L. Gernhardt Christopher E. Gerty David Gruber Chris Hadfield Jeremy Hansen José M. Hernández John Herrington Paul Hill Akihiko Hoshide Mark Hulsbeck Emma Hwang Norishige Kanai Les Kaufman Scott Kelly Karen Kohanowich Timothy Kopra Dominic Landucci Jon Lindbergh Kjell N. Lindgren Michael López-Alegría Joseph B. MacInnis Sandra Magnus Thomas Marshburn Matthias Maurer K. Megan McArthur Craig McKinley Jessica Meir Simone Melchior Dorothy Metcalf-Lindenburger Andreas Mogensen Karen Nyberg John D. Olivas Takuya Onishi Luca Parmitano Nicholas Patrick Tim Peake Thomas Pesquet Marc Reagan Garrett Reisman Kathleen Rubins Dick Rutkowski Tara Ruttley David Saint-Jacques Josef Schmid Robert Sheats Dewey Smith Steve Squyres Heidemarie Stefanyshyn-Piper Robert Sténuit Hervé Stevenin Nicole Stott James Talacek Daniel M. Tani Robert Thirsk Bill Todd Mark T. Vande Hei Koichi Wakata Rex J. Walheim Shannon Walker John Morgan Wells Joachim Wendler Douglas H. Wheelock Peggy Whitson Dafydd Williams Jeffrey Williams Sunita Williams Reid Wiseman Kimiya Yui Writers and journalists Michael C. Barnette Victor Berge Philippe Diolé Gary Gentile Bret Gilliam Bob Halstead Hillary Hauser Trevor Jackson Steve Lewis John Mattera Rescuers Craig Challen Richard Harris Rick Stanton John Volanthen Frogmen Lionel Crabb Ian Edward Fraser Sydney Knowles James Joseph Magennis Commercial salvors Keith Jessop Science of underwater diving List of researchers in underwater diving Diving physics Metre sea water Neutral buoyancy Underwater acoustics Modulated ultrasound Underwater vision Underwater computer vision Diving physiology Blood shift Cold shock response Diving reflex Equivalent narcotic depth Maximum operating depth Physiological response to water immersion Thermal balance of the underwater diver Underwater vision Work of breathing Decompression theory Decompression models: Bühlmann decompression algorithm Haldane's decompression model Reduced gradient bubble model Thalmann algorithm Thermodynamic model of decompression Varying Permeability Model Equivalent air depth Oxygen window Physiology of decompression Diving environments Underwater exploration Deep-sea exploration Classification List of diving environments by type Altitude diving Benign water diving Confined water diving Deep diving Inland diving Inshore diving Muck diving Night diving Open-water diving Black-water diving Blue-water diving Penetration diving Cave diving Torricellian chamber Ice diving Wreck diving Recreational dive sites Underwater environment Underwater diving environment Impact Environmental impact of recreational diving Low impact diving Other Bathysphere Defense against swimmer incursions Diver detection sonar Offshore survey Rugged compact camera Underwater domain awareness Underwater vehicle Deep-submergence vehicle Aluminaut DSV Alvin American submarine NR-1 Bathyscaphe Archimède FNRS-2 FNRS-3 Harmony class bathyscaphe Sea Pole -class bathyscaphe Trieste II Deepsea Challenger Ictineu 3 JAGO Jiaolong Konsul -class submersible Limiting Factor Russian submarine Losharik Mir Nautile Pisces -class deep submergence vehicle DSV Sea Cliff DSV Shinkai DSV Shinkai 2000 DSV Shinkai 6500 DSV Turtle DSV-5 Nemo Submarine rescue International Submarine Escape and Rescue Liaison Office Submarine Escape and Rescue system (Royal Swedish Navy) McCann Rescue Chamber Submarine rescue ship Deep-submergence rescue vehicle LR5 LR7 MSM-1 Mystic -class deep-submergence rescue vehicle DSRV-1 Mystic DSRV-2 Avalon NATO Submarine Rescue System Priz -class deep-submergence rescue vehicle Russian deep submergence rescue vehicle AS-28 Russian submarine AS-34 ASRV Remora SRV-300 Submarine Rescue Diving Recompression System Type 7103 DSRV URF (Swedish Navy) Submarine escape Escape trunk Submarine escape training facility Submarine Escape Training Facility (Australia) Escape set Davis Submerged Escape Apparatus Momsen lung Steinke hood Submarine Escape Immersion Equipment Special interest groups Artificial Reef Society of British Columbia CMAS Europe Coral Reef Alliance Divers Alert Network Green Fins Finger Lakes Underwater Preserve Association Karst Underwater Research Nautical Archaeology Program Nautical Archaeology Society Naval Air Command Sub Aqua Club PADI AWARE Reef Check Reef Life Survey Rubicon Foundation Save Ontario Shipwrecks SeaKeys Sea Research Society Society for Underwater Historical Research Society for Underwater Technology Underwater Archaeology Branch, Naval History & Heritage Command Neutral buoyancy facilities for Astronaut training Neutral Buoyancy Laboratory Neutral buoyancy pool Neutral buoyancy simulation as a training aid Neutral Buoyancy Simulator Space Systems Laboratory Yuri Gagarin Cosmonaut Training Center Other Nautilus Productions Helicopter Aircrew Breathing Device Scuba diving therapy Seabed mining Category Commons Glossary Indexes: Dive sites Divers Diving Outline Portal NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐lqpcc
Cached time: 20250817044334
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.120 seconds
Real time usage: 1.450 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 8305/1000000
Revision size: 73693/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 580982/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 7336/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 10/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 186506/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.550/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 22481136/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  981.462      1 -total
 25.59%  251.180      1 Template:Reflist
 16.46%  161.575      1 Template:Underwater_diving
 16.08%  157.840      1 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
 13.19%  129.445     17 Template:Cite_web
 12.72%  124.822      8 Template:Annotated_link
  9.36%   91.850     35 Template:Navbox
  8.91%   87.471      7 Template:USS
  8.28%   81.291      2 Template:Short_description
  6.90%   67.716      6 Template:Citation_needed Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:606406:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817044334 and revision id 1303166199. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Underwater_Demolition_Team&oldid=1303166199 " Categories : Military engineering Armed forces diving Special operations units and formations of the United States Navy Frogman operations Hidden categories: All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from February 2025 Articles with permanently dead external links CS1: unfit URL Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from September 2020 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from December 2010 Articles with unsourced statements from July 2025 Articles with unsourced statements from May 2022 Articles with unsourced statements from February 2021 Articles with unsourced statements from December 2018 Articles with unsourced statements from March 2017 Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 29 July 2025, at 12:28 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Underwater Demolition Team 5 languages Add topic

