Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Changes in regulation 2 Controversy 3 Examples of regulatory bodies 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Regulated market 8 languages العربية हिन्दी Italiano Македонски Polski Português Türkçe Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Market regulated and/or controlled by the government Part of a series on Capitalism Concepts Austerity Business Business cycle Businessperson Capital Capital accumulation Capital markets Company Corporation Competition Competition law Definitions Economic interventionism Economic liberalism Economic surplus Entrepreneurship Fictitious capital Financial market Free price system Free market Goods and services Investor Invisible hand Visible hand Liberalization Marginalism Money Private property Privatization Profit Rent seeking Supply and demand Surplus value Value Wage labour Economic systems Anglo-Saxon Authoritarian Corporate Dirigist Free-market Humanistic Laissez-faire Liberal Libertarian Market Mercantilist Mixed Monopoly National Neoliberal Nordic Private Raw Regulated market Regulatory Rhine Social Political State State-sponsored Welfare Economic theories American Austrian Chartalism MMT Chicago Classical Institutional Keynesian Neo- New Post- Market monetarism Critique of political economy Critique of work Marxist Monetarist Neoclassical New institutional Supply-side Ideologies Anarcho Authoritarian Classical liberalism Democratic Dirigisme Eco Gladstonian Humanistic Inclusive Liberal Liberalism Libertarian Neo Neoliberalism Objectivism Ordoliberalism Privatism Right-libertarianism Third Way Origins Age of Enlightenment Capitalism and Islam Commercial Revolution Feudalism Industrial Revolution Mercantilism Primitive accumulation Physiocracy Simple commodity production Development Advanced Consumer Community Corporate Crony Finance Global Illiberal Late Marxist Merchant Progressive Rentier State monopoly Technological Intellectuals Smith Bentham Malthus Say Ricardo Mill (James) Bastiat Mill (John Stuart) Marx Walras Marshall Pareto Veblen Weber von Mises Schumpeter Keynes Hayek Rand Weaver Coase Friedman Rothbard Sowell Becker Hoppe Related topics Anti-capitalism Capitalist propaganda Capitalist realism Capitalist state Consumerism Crisis theory Criticism of capitalism Critique of political economy Critique of work Cronyism Culture of capitalism Evergreening Exploitation of labour Globalization History History of theory Market economy Periodizations of capitalism Perspectives on capitalism Post-capitalism Speculation Spontaneous order Venture philanthropy Wage slavery Capitalism portal Business portal Economics portal v t e A regulated market ( RM ) or coordinated market is an idealized system where the government or other organizations oversee the market, control the forces of supply and demand , and to some extent regulate the market actions. This can include tasks such as determining who is allowed to enter the market and what prices may be charged.

[ 1 ] The majority of financial markets such as stock exchanges are regulated, whereas over-the-counter markets are usually not at all or only moderately regulated.

[ 2 ] One of the reasons for regulation can be the importance of the regulated activity – meaning the harm suffered should the industry fail would be so fatal that regulators ( governments , legislators ) cannot afford the risk. This includes fields like banking or financial services . Secondly, it is common for some markets to be regulated under the claim that they are natural monopolies , or that a monopoly would very likely appear should there be no regulation. It is crucial to prevent misuse of monopoly power , as this can lead to delivery of poor services with very high prices. This includes for example the telecommunications , water , gas , or electricity supply .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Often, regulated markets are established during the partial privatisation of government controlled utility assets.

A variety of forms of regulations exist in a regulated market. These include controls, oversights , anti-discrimination , environmental protection , taxation , and labor laws .

[ 1 ] In a regulated market, the government regulatory agency may legislate regulations that privilege special interests , known as regulatory capture .

[ 1 ] Changes in regulation [ edit ] Regulation is subject to changes over time, due to both technological advances as well as the change in attitude towards regulation in general. An example for industries that are no longer regulated is the rail service or airlines in the US. On the other hand, there are also industries that did not need regulation in the past, but are in need of it now. This includes for example the real estate market .

Another category are the markets that encountered major changes in regulatory approaches due to various crises . A prime example are stock exchanges following stock market crashes .

[ 2 ] The practice of regulating markets dates back centuries when ancient societies relied on standardised weights and measurements and practised punishment for theft and fraud. For the most part, market regulations have been imposed by the central governments and to a lesser extent by interest groups. One notable example of such interest groups is medieval guilds . They were associations of merchants and artisans that controlled the practise of their profession in their particular area. Guilds defined requirements for practising their profession, which usually meant that only guild members could practise their profession or sell their goods within their city. Since the beginning of the 20th century, labour groups at times have had regulatory roles in some markets.

Controversy [ edit ] Regulation is considered a polarising issue. Those in favour of regulating usually see it as beneficial to the wider society, for example regulations targeting ecological , racial , or religion related issues. Those against regulation see it as a tool for lobbying or as a source for creating unfair competition . Some advocates of free market generally see any regulation except for the most essential ones as costly and inefficient.

[ 3 ] Examples of regulatory bodies [ edit ] Food and Drug Administration (FDA) Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) See also [ edit ] Better Regulation Commission Bureaucracy Code of Federal Regulations Deregulation European Union directive European Union regulation Free market Mixed economy References [ edit ] ^ a b c d Encyclopedia of Management , Pennsylvania State University, Gale, 2009, p. 31.

^ a b c "Regulatory (Regulated, Controlled) Market" .

capital.com . Retrieved 2020-04-24 .

^ Kenton, Will.

"What is a Regulated Market?" .

Investopedia . Retrieved 2020-04-24 .

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Regulated_market&oldid=1304408270 " Categories : Free market Economic systems Market (economics) Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 5 August 2025, at 21:53 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Regulated market 8 languages Add topic

