Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Early developments 1.2 Cavity magnetron 1.3 Discovery 1.4 Commercial availability 1.5 Residential use 1.6 Categories 2 Principles Toggle Principles subsection 2.1 Defrosting 2.2 Fats and sugar 2.3 Cookware 2.4 Thermal runaway 2.5 Penetration 2.6 Energy consumption 3 Components Toggle Components subsection 3.1 Control panel 4 Variants and accessories 5 Heating characteristics Toggle Heating characteristics subsection 5.1 Effects on food and nutrients 5.2 Safety benefits and features 5.3 Use in cleaning kitchen sponges 6 Issues Toggle Issues subsection 6.1 High temperatures 6.1.1 Closed containers 6.1.2 Fires 6.1.3 Superheating 6.2 Metal objects 6.3 Direct microwave exposure 6.4 Chemical exposure 6.5 Uneven heating 6.6 Interference 7 See also 8 Notes 9 References 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Microwave oven 82 languages Afrikaans العربية Aragonés Asturianu Azərbaycanca বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Беларуская Български Bosanski Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deitsch Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Gaeilge Gaelg Galego 한국어 हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa ಕನ್ನಡ Қазақша Kiswahili Кыргызча Кырык мары Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Magyar Македонски മലയാളം مصرى Bahasa Melayu 閩東語 / Mìng-dĕ̤ng-ngṳ̄ Nederlands 日本語 Nordfriisk Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Română Runa Simi Русский Shqip Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் Татарча / tatarça ไทย Тоҷикӣ Tsetsêhestâhese Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt Winaray 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Kitchen cooking appliance Microwave oven A modern microwave oven (2022) Type Appliance Inventor Percy Spencer Inception 1947 ; 78 years ago ( 1947 ) Manufacturer Various Available Globally A microwave oven , or simply microwave , is an electric oven that heats and cooks food by exposing it to electromagnetic radiation in the microwave frequency range.

[ 1 ] This induces polar molecules in the food to rotate and produce thermal energy (heat) in a process known as dielectric heating . Microwave ovens heat food quickly and efficiently because the heating effect is fairly uniform in the outer 25–38 mm (1–1.5 inches) of a homogeneous , high-water-content food item.

The development of the cavity magnetron in the United Kingdom made possible the production of electromagnetic waves of a small enough wavelength ( microwaves ) to efficiently heat up water molecules. American electrical engineer Percy Spencer is generally credited with developing and patenting the world's first commercial microwave oven, the "Radarange", which was first sold in 1947. He based it on British radar technology which had been developed before and during World War II .

Raytheon later licensed its patents for a home-use microwave oven that was introduced by Tappan in 1955, but it was still too large and expensive for general home use.

Sharp Corporation introduced the first microwave oven with a turntable between 1964 and 1966. The countertop microwave oven was introduced in 1967 by the Amana Corporation . After microwave ovens became affordable for residential use in the late 1970s, their use spread into commercial and residential kitchens around the world, and prices fell rapidly during the 1980s. In addition to cooking food, microwave ovens are used for heating in many industrial processes.

Microwave ovens are a common kitchen appliance and are popular for reheating previously cooked foods and cooking a variety of foods. They rapidly heat foods which can easily burn or turn lumpy if cooked in conventional pans, such as hot butter, fats, chocolate, or porridge . Microwave ovens usually do not directly brown or caramelize food, since they rarely attain the necessary temperature to produce Maillard reactions . Exceptions occur in cases where the oven is used to heat frying-oil and other oily items (such as bacon), which attain far higher temperatures than that of boiling water.

Microwave ovens have a limited role in professional cooking, because the boiling-range temperatures of a microwave oven do not produce the flavorful chemical reactions that frying, browning, or baking at a higher temperature produces. However, such high-heat sources can be added to microwave ovens in the form of a convection microwave oven.

History Early developments Demonstration by Westinghouse of cooking sandwiches with a 60 MHz shortwave radio transmitter at the 1933 Chicago World's Fair The exploitation of high-frequency radio waves for heating substances was made possible by the development of vacuum tube radio transmitters around 1920. By 1930 the application of short waves to heat human tissue had developed into the medical therapy of diathermy .  At the 1933 Chicago World's Fair , Westinghouse demonstrated the cooking of foods between two metal plates attached to a 10 kW, 60 MHz shortwave transmitter .

[ 2 ] The Westinghouse team, led by I. F. Mouromtseff, found that foods like steaks and potatoes could be cooked in minutes.

[ 3 ] The 1937 United States patent application by Bell Laboratories states: [ 4 ] This invention relates to heating systems for dielectric materials and the object of the invention is to heat such materials uniformly and substantially simultaneously throughout their mass. ... It has been proposed therefore to heat such materials simultaneously throughout their mass by means of the dielectric loss produced in them when they are subjected to a high voltage, high frequency field.

However, lower-frequency dielectric heating , as described in the aforementioned patent, is (like induction heating ) an electromagnetic heating effect, the result of the so-called near-field effects that exist in an electromagnetic cavity that is small compared with the wavelength of the electromagnetic field. This patent proposed radio frequency heating, at 10 to 20 megahertz (wavelength 30 to 15 meters, respectively).

[ 5 ] Heating from microwaves that have a wavelength that is small relative to the cavity (as in a modern microwave oven) is due to "far-field" effects that are due to classical electromagnetic radiation that describes freely propagating light and microwaves suitably far from their source. Nevertheless, the primary heating effect of all types of electromagnetic fields at both radio and microwave frequencies occurs via the dielectric heating effect, as polarized molecules are affected by a rapidly alternating electric field.

Cavity magnetron Main article: Cavity magnetron The cavity magnetron developed by John Randall and Harry Boot in 1940 at the University of Birmingham , England The invention of the cavity magnetron made possible the production of electromagnetic waves of a small enough wavelength ( microwaves ). The cavity magnetron was a crucial component in the development of short wavelength radar during World War II .

[ 6 ] In 1937–1940, a multi-cavity magnetron was built by British physicist Sir John Turton Randall, FRSE and coworkers, for the British and American military radar installations in World War II.

[ 7 ] A higher-powered microwave generator that worked at shorter wavelengths was needed, and in 1940, at the University of Birmingham in England, Randall and Harry Boot produced a working prototype.

[ 8 ] They invented a valve that could produce pulses of microwave radio energy at a wavelength of 10 cm, an unprecedented discovery.

[ 7 ] Sir Henry Tizard traveled to the US in late September 1940 to offer Britain's most valuable technical secrets including the cavity magnetron in exchange for US financial and industrial support (see Tizard Mission ).

[ 7 ] An early 6 kW version, built in England by the General Electric Company Research Laboratories, Wembley , London, was given to the U.S. government in September 1940. The cavity magnetron was later described by American historian James Phinney Baxter III as "[t]he most valuable cargo ever brought to our shores".

[ 9 ] Contracts were awarded to Raytheon and other companies for the mass production of the cavity magnetron.

Discovery Microwave ovens, several from the 1980s In 1945, the heating effect of a high-power microwave beam was independently and accidentally discovered by Percy Spencer , an American self-taught engineer from Howland, Maine . Employed by Raytheon at the time, he noticed that microwaves from an active radar set he was working on started to melt a candy bar he had in his pocket. The first food deliberately cooked by Spencer was popcorn, and the second was an egg, which exploded in the face of one of the experimenters.

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] [ 12 ] To verify his finding, Spencer created a high-density electromagnetic field by feeding microwave power from a magnetron into a metal box from which it had no way to escape. When food was placed in the box with the microwave energy, the temperature of the food rose rapidly. On October 8, 1945, Raytheon filed a United States patent application for Spencer's microwave cooking process, and an oven that heated food using microwave energy from a magnetron was soon placed in a Boston restaurant for testing.

[ 13 ] Commercial availability Raytheon RadaRange aboard the NS Savannah nuclear-powered cargo ship, installed circa 1961 In 1947, Raytheon built the "Radarange", the first commercially available microwave oven.

[ 14 ] It was almost 1.8 metres (5 ft 11 in) tall, weighed 340 kilograms (750 lb) and cost about US$5,000 ($70,000 in 2024 dollars) each. It consumed 3 kilowatts, about three times as much as today's microwave ovens, and was water-cooled. The name was the winning entry in an employee contest.

[ 15 ] An early Radarange was installed (and remains) in the galley of the nuclear-powered passenger/cargo ship NS Savannah . An early commercial model introduced in 1954 consumed 1.6 kilowatts and sold for US$2,000 to US$3,000 ($23,000 to $35,000 in 2024 dollars). Raytheon licensed its technology to the Tappan Stove company of Mansfield, Ohio in 1952.

[ 16 ] Under contract to Whirlpool, Westinghouse, and other major appliance manufacturers looking to add matching microwave ovens to their conventional oven line, Tappan produced several variations of their built-in model from roughly 1955 to 1960. Due to maintenance (some units were water-cooled), in-built requirement, and cost—US$1,295 ($15,000 in 2024 dollars)—sales were limited.

[ 17 ] Japan's Sharp Corporation began manufacturing microwave ovens in 1961. Between 1964 and 1966, Sharp introduced the first microwave oven with a turntable, an alternative means to promote more even heating of food.

[ 18 ] In 1965, Raytheon, looking to expand their Radarange technology into the home market, acquired Amana to provide more manufacturing capability. In 1967, they introduced the first popular home model, the countertop Radarange, at a price of US$495 ($5,000 in 2024 dollars). Unlike the Sharp models, a motor driven mode stirrer in the top of the oven cavity rotated allowing the food to remain stationary.

Residential use Finnish Fiskars microwave from 1965 While uncommon today, combination microwave-ranges were offered by major appliance manufacturers through much of the 1970s as a natural progression of the technology. Both Tappan and General Electric offered units that appeared to be conventional stove top/oven ranges, but included microwave capability in the conventional oven cavity. Such ranges were attractive to consumers since both microwave energy and conventional heating elements could be used simultaneously to speed cooking, and there was no loss of countertop space. The proposition was also attractive to manufacturers as the additional component cost could better be absorbed compared with countertop units where pricing was increasingly market-sensitive.

[ citation needed ] By 1972, Litton (Litton Atherton Division, Minneapolis) introduced two new microwave ovens, priced at $349 and $399, to tap into the market estimated at $750 million by 1976, according to Robert I Bruder, president of the division.

[ 19 ] While prices remained high, new features continued to be added to home models. Amana introduced automatic defrost in 1974 on their RR-4D model, and was the first to offer a microprocessor controlled digital control panel in 1975 with their RR-6 model.

1974 Radarange RR-4 . By the late 1970s, technological advances led to rapidly falling prices. Often called "electronic ovens" in the 1960s, the name "microwave oven" later gained currency, and they are now informally called "microwaves".

The late 1970s saw an explosion of low-cost countertop models from many major manufacturers.

[ citation needed ] In addition to cooking food, microwave ovens are used for heating in many industrial processes.

[ 20 ] Formerly found only in large industrial applications, microwave ovens increasingly became a standard fixture of residential kitchens in developed countries . By 1986, roughly 25% of households in the U.S. owned a microwave oven, up from only about 1% in 1971; [ 21 ] the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics reported that over 90% of American households owned a microwave oven in 1997.

[ 21 ] [ 22 ] In Australia, a 2008 market research study found that 95% of kitchens contained a microwave oven and that 83% of them were used daily.

[ 23 ] In Canada, fewer than 5% of households had a microwave oven in 1979, but more than 88% of households owned one by 1998.

[ 24 ] In France, 40% of households owned a microwave oven in 1994, but that number had increased to 65% by 2004.

[ 25 ] Adoption has been slower in less-developed countries , as households with disposable income concentrate on more important household appliances like refrigerators and ovens. In India , for example, only about 5% of households owned a microwave oven in 2013, well behind refrigerators at 31% ownership.

[ 26 ] However, microwave ovens are gaining popularity. In Russia, for example, the number of households with a microwave oven grew from almost 24% in 2002 to almost 40% in 2008.

[ 27 ] Almost twice as many households in South Africa owned microwave ovens in 2008 (38.7%) as in 2002 (19.8%).

[ 27 ] Microwave oven ownership in Vietnam in 2008 was at 16% of households, versus 30% ownership of refrigerators; this rate was up significantly from 6.7% microwave oven ownership in 2002, with 14% ownership for refrigerators that year.

[ 27 ] Consumer household microwave ovens usually come with a cooking power of between 600 and 1200 watts. Microwave cooking power, also referred to as output wattage, is lower than its input wattage, which is the manufacturer's listed power rating .

[ citation needed ] The size of household microwave ovens can vary, but usually have an internal volume of around 20 liters (1,200 cu in; 0.71 cu ft), and external dimensions of approximately 45–60 cm (1 ft 6 in – 2 ft 0 in) wide, 35–40 cm (1 ft 2 in – 1 ft 4 in) deep and 25–35 cm (9.8 in – 1 ft 1.8 in) tall.

[ 28 ] Countertop microwaves vary in weight 23 – 45 lbs.

[ 29 ] Microwaves can be turntable or flatbed. Turntable ovens include a glass plate or tray. Flatbed ones do not include a plate, so they have a flat and wider cavity.

[ 30 ] [ 31 ] [ 32 ] By position and type, US DOE classifies them as (1) countertop or (2) over the range and built-in (wall oven for a cabinet or a drawer model).

[ 30 ] A traditional microwave only has two power output levels, fully on and fully off. Intermediate heat settings are achieved using duty-cycle modulation and switch between full power and off every few seconds, with more time on for higher settings.

[ citation needed ] An inverter type, however, can sustain lower temperatures for a lengthy duration without having to switch itself off and on repeatedly. Apart from offering superior cooking ability, these microwaves are generally more energy-efficient.

[ 33 ] [ 32 ] [ 34 ] As of 2020 [update] , the majority of countertop microwave ovens (regardless of brand) sold in the United States were manufactured by the Midea Group .

[ 35 ] Categories Microwave-safe symbol Domestic microwave ovens are typically marked with the microwave-safe symbol, next to the device's approximate IEC 60705 output power rating, in watts (typically either: 600W, 700W, 800W, 900W, 1000W), and a voluntary Heating Category (A-E).

[ 36 ] Principles Further information: Dielectric heating A microwave oven, c. 2005 Simulation of the electric field inside a microwave oven for the first 8 ns of operation A microwave oven heats food by passing microwave radiation through it. Microwaves are a form of non-ionizing electromagnetic radiation with a frequency in the so-called microwave region (300 MHz to 300 GHz). Microwave ovens use frequencies in one of the ISM (industrial, scientific, medical) bands , which are otherwise used for communication amongst devices that do not need a license to operate, so they do not interfere with other vital radio services.

It is a common misconception that microwave ovens heat food by operating at a special resonance of water molecules in the food.

[ 37 ] [ verification needed ] Instead, microwave ovens heat by causing molecules to spin under the influence of a constantly changing electric field ( dielectric heating ), usually in the microwave frequencies range, and a higher wattage power of the microwave oven results in faster cooking times. Typically, consumer ovens work around a nominal 2.45 gigahertz (GHz) – a wavelength of 12.2 centimetres (4.80 in) in the 2.4 GHz to 2.5 GHz ISM band – while large industrial / commercial ovens often use 915 megahertz (MHz) – 32.8 centimetres (12.9 in).

[ 38 ] Among other differences, the longer wavelength of a commercial microwave oven allows the initial heating effects to begin deeper within the food or liquid, and therefore become evenly spread within its bulk sooner, as well as raising the temperature deep within the food more quickly.

[ 39 ] A microwave oven takes advantage of the electric dipole structure of water molecules , fats, and many other substances in the food, using a process known as dielectric heating . These molecules have a partial positive charge at one end and a partial negative charge at the other. In an alternating electric field, they will constantly spin around as they continually try to align themselves with the electric field. This can happen over a wide range of frequencies.

[ 40 ] [ 41 ] [ 42 ] The electric field's energy is absorbed by the dipole molecules as rotational energy.  Then they hit non-dipole molecules, making them move faster as well. This energy is shared deeper into the substance as molecular rotation and translational movement occurs, signifying an increase in the temperature of the food. Once the electrical field's energy is initially absorbed, heat will gradually spread through the object similarly to any other heat transfer by contact with a hotter body.

[ 43 ] Defrosting Microwave heating is more efficient on liquid water than on frozen water, where the movement of molecules is more restricted.  Defrosting is done at a low power setting, allowing time for conduction to carry heat to still frozen parts of food. Dielectric heating of liquid water is also temperature-dependent: At 0 °C, dielectric loss is greatest at a field frequency of about 10 GHz, and for higher water temperatures at higher field frequencies.

[ 44 ] Fats and sugar Sugars and triglycerides (fats and oils) absorb microwaves due to the dipole moments of their hydroxyl groups or ester groups . Due to their molecular dipole moment , however, they are heated less efficiently.

[ a ] Although fats and sugar typically absorb energy less efficiently than water, paradoxically their temperatures rise faster and higher than water when cooking: Fats and oils require less energy delivered per gram of material to raise their temperature by 1 °C than does water (they have lower specific heat capacity ) and they begin cooling off by "boiling" only after reaching a higher temperature than water (the temperature they require to vaporize is higher), so inside microwave ovens they normally reach higher temperatures – sometimes much higher.

[ 44 ] This can induce temperatures in oil or fatty foods like bacon far above the boiling point of water, and high enough to induce some browning reactions, much in the manner of conventional broiling (UK: grilling) , braising, or deep fat frying.

[ citation needed ] The effect is most often noticed by consumers from unexpected damage to plastic containers when microwaving foods high in sugar, starch, or fat generates higher temperatures.

[ citation needed ] Foods high in water content and with little oil rarely exceed the boiling temperature of water and do not damage plastic.

[ citation needed ] Cookware Cookware must be transparent to microwaves. Conductive cookware, such as metal pots, reflects microwaves, and prevents the microwaves from reaching the food.

[ citation needed ] Cookware made of materials with high electrical permittivity will absorb microwaves, resulting in the cookware heating rather than the food. Cookware made of melamine resin is a common type of cookware that will heat in a microwave oven, reducing the effectiveness of the microwave oven and creating a hazard from burns or shattered cookware.

[ citation needed ] Thermal runaway Microwave heating can cause localized thermal runaways in some materials with low thermal conductivity which also have dielectric constants that increase with temperature. An example is glass, which can exhibit thermal runaway in a microwave oven to the point of melting if preheated. Additionally, microwaves can melt certain types of rocks, producing small quantities of molten rock. Some ceramics can also be melted, and may even become clear upon cooling. Thermal runaway is more typical of electrically conductive liquids such as salty water.

[ 45 ] Penetration Another misconception is that microwave ovens cook food "from the inside out", meaning from the center of the entire mass of food outwards.

[ citation needed ] This idea arises from heating behavior seen if an absorbent layer of water lies beneath a less absorbent drier layer at the surface of a food; in this case, the deposition of heat energy inside a food can exceed that on its surface.

[ citation needed ] This can also occur if the inner layer has a lower heat capacity than the outer layer causing it to reach a higher temperature, or even if the inner layer is more thermally conductive than the outer layer making it feel hotter despite having a lower temperature. In most cases, however, with uniformly structured or reasonably homogeneous food item, microwaves are absorbed in the outer layers of the item at a similar level to that of the inner layers.

[ citation needed ] Depending on water content, the depth of initial heat deposition may be several centimetres or more with microwave ovens, in contrast with broiling / grilling (infrared) or convection heating methods which thinly deposit heat at the food surface. Penetration depth of microwaves depends on food composition and the frequency, with lower microwave frequencies (longer wavelengths) penetrating deeper.

[ 39 ] Energy consumption In use, microwave ovens can be as low as 50% efficient at converting electricity into microwaves, [ 46 ] but energy-efficient models can exceed 64% efficiency.

[ 47 ] Stovetop cooking is 40–90% efficient, depending on the type of appliance used.

[ 48 ] Because they are used fairly infrequently, the average residential microwave oven consumes only 72 kWh per year.

[ 49 ] Globally, microwave ovens used an estimated 77 TWh per year in 2018, or 0.3% of global electricity generation.

[ 50 ] A 2000 study by Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory found that the average microwave drew almost 3 watts of standby power when not being used, [ 51 ] which would total approximately 26 kWh per year. New efficiency standards imposed in 2016 by the United States Department of Energy require less than 1 watt, or approximately 9 kWh per year, of standby power for most types of microwave ovens.

[ 52 ] Components A magnetron with section removed (magnet is not shown) Inner space of a microwave oven and its control panel A microwave oven generally consists of: a high-voltage DC power source, either: a large high voltage transformer with a voltage doubler (a high-voltage capacitor and a diode ) an electronic power converter usually based around an inverter.

a cavity magnetron , which converts the high-voltage DC electric energy to microwave radiation a magnetron control circuit (usually with a microcontroller ) a short waveguide (to couple microwave power from the magnetron into the cooking chamber) a turntable and/or metal wave guide stirring fan a control panel In most ovens, the magnetron is driven by a linear transformer which can only feasibly be switched completely on or off. (One variant of the GE Spacemaker had two taps on the transformer primary, for high and low power modes.) Usually choice of power level does not affect intensity of the microwave radiation; instead, the magnetron is cycled on and off every few seconds, thus altering the large scale duty cycle . Newer models use inverter power supplies that use pulse-width modulation to provide effectively continuous heating at reduced power settings, so that foods are heated more evenly at a given power level and can be heated more quickly without being damaged by uneven heating.

[ 53 ] [ 33 ] [ 32 ] [ 34 ] The microwave frequencies used in microwave ovens are chosen based on regulatory and cost constraints. The first is that they should be in one of the industrial, scientific, and medical (ISM) frequency bands set aside for unlicensed purposes. For household purposes, 2.45 GHz has the advantage over 915 MHz in that 915 MHz is only an ISM band in some countries ( ITU Region 2) while 2.45 GHz is available worldwide.

[ 54 ] Three additional ISM bands exist in the microwave frequencies, but are not used for microwave cooking. Two of them are centered on 5.8 GHz and 24.125 GHz, but are not used for microwave cooking because of the very high cost of power generation at these frequencies.

[ citation needed ] The third, centered on 433.92 MHz, is a narrow band that would require expensive equipment to generate sufficient power without creating interference outside the band, and is only available in some countries.

[ citation needed ] The cooking chamber is similar to a Faraday cage to prevent the waves from coming out of the oven. Even though there is no continuous metal-to-metal contact around the rim of the door, choke connections on the door edges act like metal-to-metal contact, at the frequency of the microwaves, to prevent leakage. The oven door usually has a window for easy viewing, with a layer of conductive mesh some distance from the outer panel to maintain the shielding. Because the size of the perforations in the mesh is much less than the microwaves' wavelength (12.2 cm for the usual 2.45 GHz), microwave radiation cannot pass through the door, while visible light (with its much shorter wavelength) can.

[ 55 ] Control panel Modern microwave ovens use either an analog dial-type timer or a digital control panel for operation. Control panels feature an LED , LCD or vacuum fluorescent display, buttons for entering the cook time and a power level selection feature.  A defrost option is typically offered, as either a power level or a separate function.  Some models include pre-programmed settings for different food types, typically taking weight as input.  In the 1990s, brands such as Panasonic and GE began offering models with a scrolling-text display showing cooking instructions.

Power settings are commonly implemented not by actually varying the power output, but by switching the emission of microwave energy off and on at intervals. The highest setting thus represents continuous power. Defrost might represent power for two seconds followed by no power for five seconds. To indicate cooking has completed, an audible warning such as a bell or a beeper is usually present, and/or "End" usually appears on the display of a digital microwave.

Microwave control panels are often considered awkward to use and are frequently employed as examples for user interface design.

[ 56 ] Variants and accessories A variant of the conventional microwave oven is the convection microwave oven. A convection microwave oven is a combination of a standard microwave oven and a convection oven . It allows food to be cooked quickly, yet come out browned or crisped, as from a convection oven. Convection microwave ovens are more expensive than conventional microwave ovens. Some convection microwave ovens—those with exposed heating elements—can produce smoke and burning odors as food spatter from earlier microwave-only use is burned off the heating elements. Some ovens use high speed air; these are known as impingement ovens and are designed to cook food quickly in restaurants, but cost more and consume more power.

In 2000, some manufacturers began offering high power quartz halogen bulbs to their convection microwave oven models, [ 57 ] marketing them under names such as "Speedcook", " Advantium ", "Lightwave" and "Optimawave" to emphasize their ability to cook food rapidly and with good browning. The bulbs heat the food's surface with infrared (IR) radiation, browning surfaces as in a conventional oven. The food browns while also being heated by the microwave radiation and heated through conduction through contact with heated air. The IR energy which is delivered to the outer surface of food by the lamps is sufficient to initiate browning caramelization in foods primarily made up of carbohydrates and Maillard reactions in foods primarily made up of protein. These reactions in food produce a texture and taste similar to that typically expected of conventional oven cooking rather than the bland boiled and steamed taste that microwave-only cooking tends to create.

In order to aid browning , sometimes an accessory browning tray is used, usually composed of glass or porcelain . It makes food crisp by oxidizing the top layer until it turns brown .

[ 58 ] Ordinary plastic cookware is unsuitable for this purpose because it could melt.

Frozen dinners , pies, and microwave popcorn bags often contain a susceptor made from thin aluminium film in the packaging or included on a small paper tray. The metal film absorbs microwave energy efficiently and consequently becomes extremely hot and radiates in the infrared, concentrating the heating of oil for popcorn or even browning surfaces of frozen foods. Heating packages or trays containing susceptors are designed for a single use and are then discarded as waste.

Heating characteristics In addition to their use in heating food, microwave ovens are widely used for heating in industrial processes, such as this microwave tunnel oven for softening plastic rods prior to extrusion.

Microwave ovens have a limited role in professional cooking, [ 59 ] because the boiling-range temperatures of a microwave oven do not produce the flavorful chemical reactions that frying, browning, or baking at a higher temperature produces. However, such high-heat sources can be added to microwave ovens in the form of a convection microwave oven.

[ 60 ] Microwave ovens produce heat directly within the food, but despite the common misconception that microwaved food cooks from the inside out, 2.45 GHz microwaves can only penetrate approximately 1 cm (0.4 in) into most foods. The inside portions of thicker foods are mainly heated by heat conducted from the outer 1 cm.

[ 61 ] [ 62 ] Uneven heating in microwaved food can be partly due to the uneven distribution of microwave energy inside the oven, and partly due to the different rates of energy absorption in different parts of the food. The first problem is reduced by a stirrer, a type of fan that reflects microwave energy to different parts of the oven as it rotates, or by a turntable or carousel that turns the food; turntables, however, may still leave spots, such as the center of the oven, which receive uneven energy distribution.

The location of dead spots and hot spots in a microwave oven can be mapped out by placing a damp piece of thermal paper in the oven: When the water-saturated paper is subjected to the microwave radiation it becomes hot enough to cause the dye to be darkened which can provide a visual representation of the microwaves. If multiple layers of paper are constructed in the oven with a sufficient distance between them a three-dimensional map can be created. Many store receipts are printed on thermal paper which allows this to be easily done at home.

[ 63 ] The second problem is due to food composition and geometry, and must be addressed by the cook, by arranging the food so that it absorbs energy evenly, and periodically testing and shielding any parts of the food that overheat. In some materials with low thermal conductivity , where dielectric constant increases with temperature, microwave heating can cause localized thermal runaway . Under certain conditions, glass can exhibit thermal runaway in a microwave oven to the point of melting.

[ 64 ] Due to this phenomenon, microwave ovens set at too-high power levels may even start to cook the edges of frozen food while the inside of the food remains frozen. Another case of uneven heating can be observed in baked goods containing berries. In these items, the berries absorb more energy than the drier surrounding bread and cannot dissipate the heat due to the low thermal conductivity of the bread. Often this results in overheating the berries relative to the rest of the food. "Defrost" oven settings either use low power levels or repeatedly turn the power off and on – intended to allow time for heat to be conducted within frozen foods from areas that absorb heat more readily to those which heat more slowly. In turntable-equipped ovens, more even heating can take place by placing food off-center on the turntable tray instead of exactly in the center, as this results in more even heating of the food throughout.

[ 65 ] There are microwave ovens on the market that allow full-power defrosting.  They do this by exploiting the properties of the electromagnetic radiation LSM modes . LSM full-power defrosting may actually achieve more even results than slow defrosting.

[ 66 ] Microwave heating can be deliberately uneven by design. Some microwavable packages (notably pies) may include materials that contain ceramic or aluminium flakes, which are designed to absorb microwaves and heat up, which aids in baking or crust preparation by depositing more energy shallowly in these areas. The technical term for such a microwave-absorbing patch is a susceptor . Such ceramic patches affixed to cardboard are positioned next to the food, and are typically smokey blue or gray in colour, usually making them easily identifiable; the cardboard sleeves included with Hot Pockets , which have a silver surface on the inside, are a good example of such packaging. Microwavable cardboard packaging may also contain overhead ceramic patches which function in the same way.

[ 67 ] Effects on food and nutrients Any form of cooking diminishes overall nutrient content in food, particularly water-soluble vitamins common in vegetables, but the key variables are how much water is used in the cooking, how long the food is cooked, and at what temperature.

[ 68 ] [ 69 ] Nutrients are primarily lost by leaching into cooking water, which tends to make microwave cooking effective, given the shorter cooking times it requires and that the water heated is in the food.

[ 70 ] Like other heating methods, microwaving converts vitamin B 12 from an active to inactive form; the amount of conversion depends on the temperature reached, as well as the cooking time. Boiled food reaches a maximum of 100 °C (212 °F) (the boiling point of water), whereas microwaved food can get internally hotter than this, leading to faster breakdown of vitamin B 12 . The higher rate of loss is partially offset by the shorter cooking times required.

[ 71 ] Spinach retains nearly all its folate when cooked in a microwave oven; when boiled, it loses about 77%, leaching nutrients into the cooking water.

[ 70 ] Bacon cooked by microwave oven has significantly lower levels of nitrosamines than conventionally cooked bacon.

[ 69 ] Steamed vegetables tend to maintain more nutrients when microwaved than when cooked on a stovetop.

[ 69 ] Microwave blanching is 3–4 times more effective than boiled-water blanching for retaining of the water-soluble vitamins, folate, thiamin and riboflavin , with the exception of vitamin C , of which 29% is lost (compared with a 16% loss with boiled-water blanching).

[ 72 ] Safety benefits and features All microwave ovens use a timer to switch off the oven at the end of the cooking time.

Microwave ovens heat food without getting hot themselves. Taking a pot off a stove, unless it is an induction cooktop , leaves a potentially dangerous heating element or trivet that remains hot for some time. Likewise, when taking a casserole out of a conventional oven, one's arms are exposed to the very hot walls of the oven.  A microwave oven does not pose this problem.

Food and cookware taken out of a microwave oven are rarely much hotter than 100 °C (212 °F). Cookware used in a microwave oven is often much cooler than the food because the cookware is transparent to microwaves; the microwaves heat the food directly and the cookware is indirectly heated by the food. Food and cookware from a conventional oven, on the other hand, are the same temperature as the rest of the oven; a typical cooking temperature is 180 °C (356 °F).  That means that conventional stoves and ovens can cause more serious burns.

The lower temperature of cooking (the boiling point of water) is a significant safety benefit compared with baking in the oven or frying, because it eliminates the formation of tars and char , which are carcinogenic .

[ 73 ] Microwave radiation also penetrates deeper than direct heat, so that the food is heated by its own internal water content. In contrast, direct heat can burn the surface while the inside is still cold. Pre-heating the food in a microwave oven before putting it into the grill or pan reduces the time needed to heat up the food and reduces the formation of carcinogenic char. Unlike frying and baking, microwaving does not produce acrylamide in potatoes, [ 74 ] however unlike deep-frying at high-temperatures, it is of only limited effectiveness in reducing glycoalkaloid (i.e., solanine ) levels.

[ 75 ] Acrylamide has been found in other microwaved products like popcorn.

Use in cleaning kitchen sponges Studies have investigated the use of the microwave oven to clean non-metallic domestic sponges which have been thoroughly wetted. A 2006 study found that microwaving wet sponges for 2 minutes (at 1000-watt power) removed 99% of coliforms , E. coli , and MS2 phages .

Bacillus cereus spores were killed at 4 minutes of microwaving.

[ 76 ] A 2017 study was less affirmative: About 60% of the germs were killed but the remaining ones quickly re-colonized the sponge.

[ 77 ] Issues High temperatures Closed containers Closed containers, such as eggs , can explode when heated in a microwave oven due to the increased pressure from steam . Intact fresh egg yolks outside the shell also explode as a result of superheating. Insulating plastic foams of all types generally contain closed air pockets, and are generally not recommended for use in a microwave oven, as the air pockets explode and the foam (which can be toxic if consumed) may melt. Not all plastics are microwave-safe, and some plastics absorb microwaves to the point that they may become dangerously hot.

[ 78 ] Fires Charred popcorn burnt by leaving the microwave oven on too long Products that are heated for too long  can catch fire. Though this is inherent to any form of cooking, the rapid cooking and unattended nature of the use of microwave ovens results in additional hazard.

Superheating In rare cases, water and other homogeneous liquids can superheat [ 79 ] [ 80 ] when heated in a microwave oven in a container with a smooth surface. That is, the liquid reaches a temperature slightly above its normal boiling point without bubbles of vapour forming inside the liquid. The boiling process can start explosively when the liquid is disturbed, such as when the user takes hold of the container to remove it from the oven or while adding solid ingredients such as powdered creamer or sugar. This can result in spontaneous boiling ( nucleation ) which may be violent enough to eject the boiling liquid from the container and cause severe scalding .

[ 81 ] Metal objects Contrary to popular assumptions, metal objects can be safely used in a microwave oven, but with some restrictions.

[ 82 ] [ 83 ] Any metal or conductive object placed into the microwave oven acts as an antenna to some degree, resulting in an electric current . This causes the object to act as a heating element. This effect varies with the object's shape and composition, and is sometimes utilized for cooking.

Any object containing pointed metal can create an electric arc (sparks) when microwaved. This includes cutlery , crumpled aluminium foil (though some foil used in microwave ovens is safe, see below), twist-ties containing metal wire, the metal wire carry-handles in oyster pails , or almost any metal formed into a poorly conductive foil or thin wire, or into a pointed shape.

[ 84 ] Forks are a good example: the tines of the fork respond to the electric field by producing high concentrations of electric charge at the tips. This has the effect of exceeding the dielectric breakdown of air, about 3 megavolts per meter. The air forms a conductive plasma , which is visible as a spark. The plasma and the tines may then form a conductive loop, which may be a more effective antenna, resulting in a longer lived spark. When dielectric breakdown occurs in air, some ozone and nitrogen oxides are formed, both of which are unhealthy in large quantities.

A microwave oven with a metal shelf Microwaving an individual smooth metal object without pointed ends, for example, a spoon or shallow metal pan, usually does not produce sparking. Thick metal wire racks can be part of the interior design in microwave ovens (see illustration). In a similar way, the interior wall plates with perforating holes which allow light and air into the oven, and allow interior-viewing through the oven door, are all made of conductive metal formed in a safe shape.

A microwaved DVD-R disc showing the effects of electrical discharge through its metal film The effect of microwaving thin metal films can be seen clearly on a Compact Disc or DVD (particularly the factory pressed type). The microwaves induce electric currents in the metal film, which heats up, melting the plastic in the disc and leaving a visible pattern of concentric and radial scars. Similarly, porcelain with thin metal films can also be destroyed or damaged by microwaving. Aluminium foil is thick enough to be used in microwave ovens as a shield against heating parts of food items, if the foil is not badly warped. When wrinkled, aluminium foil is generally unsafe in microwaves, as manipulation of the foil causes sharp bends and gaps that invite sparking. The USDA recommends that aluminium foil used as a partial food shield in microwave oven cooking cover no more than one quarter of a food object, and be carefully smoothed to eliminate sparking hazards.

[ 85 ] Another hazard is the resonance of the magnetron tube itself. If the microwave oven is run without an object to absorb the radiation, a standing wave forms. The energy is reflected back and forth between the tube and the cooking chamber. This may cause the tube to overload and burn out. High reflected power may also cause magnetron arcing, possibly resulting in primary power fuse failure, though such a causal relationship is not easily established. Thus, dehydrated food , or food wrapped in metal which does not arc, is problematic for overload reasons, without necessarily being a fire hazard.

Certain foods such as grapes, if properly arranged, can produce an electric arc .

[ 86 ] Prolonged arcing from food carries similar risks to arcing from other sources as noted above.

Some other objects that may conduct sparks are plastic/holographic print Thermos flasks and other heat-retaining containers (such as Starbucks novelty cups) or cups with metal lining. If any bit of the metal is exposed, all the outer shell can burst off the object or melt.

[ citation needed ] The high electrical fields generated inside a microwave oven often can be illustrated by placing a radiometer or neon glow-bulb inside the cooking chamber, creating glowing plasma inside the low-pressure bulb of the device.

Direct microwave exposure Further information: Microwave burn and Microwave § Effects on health Direct microwave exposure is not generally possible, as microwaves emitted by the source in a microwave oven are confined in the oven by the material out of which the oven is constructed. Furthermore, ovens are equipped with redundant safety interlocks, which remove power from the magnetron if the door is opened. This safety mechanism is required by United States federal regulations.

[ 87 ] Tests have shown confinement of the microwaves in commercially available ovens to be so nearly universal as to make routine testing unnecessary.

[ 88 ] According to the United States Food and Drug Administration 's Center for Devices and Radiological Health, a U.S. Federal Standard limits the amount of microwaves that can leak from an oven throughout its lifetime to 5 milliwatts of microwave radiation per square centimeter at approximately 5 cm (2 in) from the surface of the oven.

[ 89 ] This is far below the exposure level currently considered to be harmful to human health.

[ 90 ] The radiation produced by a microwave oven is non-ionizing. It therefore does not have the cancer risks associated with ionizing radiation such as X-rays and high-energy particles . Long-term rodent studies to assess cancer risk have so far failed to identify any carcinogenicity from 2.45 GHz microwave radiation even with chronic exposure levels (i.e. large fraction of life span) far larger than humans are likely to encounter from any leaking ovens.

[ 91 ] [ 92 ] However, with the oven door open, the radiation may cause damage by heating. Microwave ovens are sold with a protective interlock so that it cannot be run when the door is open or improperly latched.

Microwaves generated in microwave ovens cease to exist once the electrical power is turned off. They do not remain in the food when the power is turned off, any more than light from an electric lamp remains in the walls and furnishings of a room when the lamp is turned off. They do not make the food or the oven radioactive. In contrast with conventional cooking, the nutritional content of some foods may be altered differently, but generally in a positive way by preserving more micronutrients – see above . There is no indication of detrimental health issues associated with microwaved food.

[ 93 ] There are, however, a few cases where people have been exposed to direct microwave radiation, either from appliance malfunction or deliberate action.

[ 94 ] [ 95 ] This exposure generally results in physical burns to the body, as human tissue, particularly the outer fat and muscle layers, has a similar composition to some foods that are typically cooked in microwave ovens and so experiences similar dielectric heating effects when exposed to microwave electromagnetic radiation.

Chemical exposure Microwave-safe symbol The use of unmarked plastics for microwave cooking raises the issue of plasticizers leaching into the food.

[ 96 ] The plasticizers which received the most attention are bisphenol A (BPA) and phthalates , [ 96 ] [ 97 ] although it is unclear whether other plastic components present a toxicity risk.  Other issues include melting and flammability.  An alleged issue of release of dioxins into food has been dismissed [ 96 ] as an intentional red herring distraction from actual safety issues.

Some current plastic containers and food wraps are specifically designed to resist radiation from microwaves.  Products may use the term "microwave safe",  may carry a microwave symbol (three lines of waves, one above the other) or simply provide instructions for proper microwave oven use. Any of these is an indication that a product is suitable for microwaving when used in accordance with the directions provided.

[ 98 ] Plastic containers can release microplastics into food when heated in microwave ovens.

[ 99 ] Uneven heating Microwave ovens are frequently used for reheating leftover food , and bacterial contamination may not be repressed if the microwave oven is used improperly. If safe temperature is not reached, this can result in foodborne illness , as with other reheating methods. While microwave ovens can destroy bacteria as well as conventional ovens can, they cook rapidly and may not cook as evenly, similar to frying or grilling, leading to a risk of some food regions failing to reach recommended temperatures. Therefore, a standing period after cooking to allow temperatures in the food to equalize is recommended, as well as the use of a food thermometer to verify internal temperatures.

[ 100 ] Interference Microwave ovens, although shielded for safety purposes, still emit low levels of microwave radiation. This is not harmful to humans, but can sometimes cause interference to Wi-Fi and Bluetooth and other devices that communicate on the 2.45 GHz wavebands , particularly at close range.

[ 101 ] Conventional transformer ovens do not operate continuously over the mains cycle, but can cause significant slowdowns for many metres around the oven, whereas inverter-based ovens can stop nearby networking entirely while operating.

[ 102 ] See also Cooking portal Countertop Electromagnetic reverberation chamber Induction cooker List of cooking appliances List of home appliances Microwave chemistry Peryton (astronomy) Robert V. Decareau Thelma Pressman Wall oven Notes ^ Here "efficient" means that more energy is deposited and temperature rises faster, not necessarily that the temperature rises to a higher maximum. The maximum temperature is also a function of the material's specific heat capacity , which for most substances is lower than water. For a practical example, milk heats slightly faster than water in a microwave oven, but only because milk solids have less heat capacity than the water they replace.

[ citation needed ] References ^ "Microwave Oven" .

Encyclopedia Britannica . October 26, 2018 . Retrieved January 19, 2019 .

^ "Cooking with Short Waves" (PDF) .

Short Wave Craft .

4 (7): 394. November 1933 . Retrieved March 23, 2015 .

^ Lovelock JE, Smith AU (1956). "Studies on Golden Hamsters during Cooling to and Rewarming from Body Temperatures below 0 degrees C. III. Biophysical Aspects and General Discussion".

Proceedings of the Royal Society of London. Series B, Biological Sciences .

145 (920): 427– 442.

Bibcode : 1956RSPSB.145..427L .

doi : 10.1098/rspb.1956.0054 .

ISSN 0080-4649 .

JSTOR 83008 .

PMID 13359396 .

S2CID 6474737 .

^ U.S. patent 2,147,689 Chaffee, Joseph G., Method and apparatus for heating dielectric materials , filed August 11, 1937; granted February 21, 1939 ^ Chaffee, Joseph G. (February 21, 1939), 2,147,689: Method and Apparatus for Heating Dielectric Materials , United States Patent and Trademark Office, archived from the original on March 19, 2022 , retrieved February 5, 2015 ^ "The Magnetron" .

Radar Recollections - A Bournemouth University/CHiDE/HLF project . Defence Electronics History Society (formerly CHiDE).

^ a b c "Briefcase 'that changed the world' " . BBC. October 20, 2017.

^ Willshaw, W. E.; L. Rushforth; A. G. Stainsby; R. Latham; A. W. Balls; A. H. King (1946).

"The High-power Pulsed Magnetron: Development and Design for Radar Applications" .

Journal of the Institution of Electrical Engineers - Part IIIA: Radiolocation .

93 (5): 985– 1005.

doi : 10.1049/ji-3a-1.1946.0188 .

ISSN 2050-5485 . Archived from the original on May 5, 2018 . Retrieved June 22, 2012 .

^ Baxter, James Phinney III (1946).

Scientists Against Time . Boston: Little, Brown, and Co. p. 142.

^ Don Murray (August 1958).

"Percy Spencer and His Itch to Know" .

Reader's Digest . Archived from the original on March 6, 2005 . Retrieved January 14, 2025 .

{{ cite magazine }} :  CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown ( link ) ^ Gallawa, John Carlton (1998).

"The History of the Microwave Oven" . Archived from the original on July 9, 2011.

^ Radar — Father of the Microwave Oven on YouTube ^ US patent 2495429 , Spencer, Percy L., "Method of treating foodstuffs", issued January 2, 1950 ^ "Technology Leadership" . Raytheon. Archived from the original on March 22, 2013.

^ Gallawa, J Carlton (1989).

"A Brief History of the Microwave Oven" .

The complete microwave oven service handbook: operation, maintenance, troubleshooting, and repair . Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice Hall.

ISBN 9780131620179 .

OCLC 18559256 . Retrieved October 11, 2017 .

Chapter link is hosted at the Southwest Museum of Engineering, Communication and Computation; Glendale, Arizona .

^ "Do you remember your family's first microwave?" .

Ohio Historical Society . November 2, 2010. Archived from the original on April 22, 2016.

^ "A Brief History of the Microwave Oven" .

^ "History of Sharp" .

Sharp Corporation . Retrieved June 26, 2018 .

^ Litton Introduces Microwave Ovens .

New York Times , July 14, 1972, p. 38.

^ Metaxas, A. C.; Meredith, Roger (2008).

Industrial microwave heating . IEE power engineering series (Reprinted ed.). London: The Institution of Engineering and Technology.

ISBN 978-0-906048-89-4 .

^ a b Liegey, Paul R. (October 16, 2001), Hedonic Quality Adjustment Methods For Microwave Ovens In the U.S. CPI , Bureau of Labor Statistics, United States Department of Labor , retrieved October 5, 2013 ^ Cox, W. Michael; Alm, Richard (1997), "Time Well Spent: The Declining Real Cost of Living in America" (PDF) , 1997 Annual Report , Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, p. 22 (see Exhibit 8), archived from the original (PDF) on 19 October 2004 , retrieved 8 May 2016 ^ The Westinghouse How Australia Cooks Report (PDF) , Westinghouse, October 2008, archived from the original (PDF) on February 5, 2015 , retrieved February 5, 2015 ^ Williams, Cara (Winter 2000).

"Income and expenditures" (PDF) .

Canadian Social Trends — Catalogue No. 11-008 (59): 7– 12.

Microwaves have been adopted even more avidly: in 1979, less than 5% of households had one, but by 1998 over 88% did.

^ World Major Household Appliances: World Industry Study with Forecasts to 2009 & 2014 (Study #2015) (PDF) , Cleveland, Ohio: The Freedonia Group, January 2006, TABLE VI-5: FRANCE COOKING APPLIANCES SUPPLY & DEMAND (million dollars) ^ "Household penetration rate of home appliances in India in 2013" . Statistica . Retrieved February 5, 2015 .

^ a b c Ownership of household amenities among selected countries , Economic Research Service, United States Department of Agriculture, 2009, archived from the original (XLS) on June 26, 2013 , retrieved February 5, 2015 ^ Francis, Andrew (April 12, 2017).

"Microwave Sizes Comparison" .

reviewho.com . Retrieved March 10, 2021 .

^ "How Much Do Microwaves Weigh? Averages from 54 Models" .

ApplianceAnalysts . November 17, 2020 . Retrieved December 17, 2024 .

^ a b Williams, Alison (December 5, 2012).

Surveys of Microwave Ovens in U.S. Homes (PDF) . Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory. pp. 6, 18 and so on.

^ ANNIS, PATTY J. (August 1, 1980).

"Design and Use of Domestic Microwave Ovens" .

Journal of Food Protection .

43 (8): 629– 632.

doi : 10.4315/0362-028X-43.8.629 .

ISSN 0362-028X .

PMID 30822984 .

^ a b c Chen, Fangyuan; Warning, Alexander D.; Datta, Ashim K.; Chen, Xing (July 1, 2016).

"Thawing in a microwave cavity: Comprehensive understanding of inverter and cycled heating" .

Journal of Food Engineering .

180 : 87– 100.

doi : 10.1016/j.jfoodeng.2016.02.007 .

ISSN 0260-8774 .

^ a b Kako, H.; Nakagawa, T.; Narita, R. (August 1991). "Development of compact inverter power supply for microwave oven".

IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics .

37 (3): 611– 616.

doi : 10.1109/30.85575 .

ISSN 1558-4127 .

S2CID 108870083 .

^ a b Lee, Min-Ki; Koh, Kang-Hoon; Lee, Hyun--Woo (2004).

"A Study on Constant Power Control of Half Bridge Inverter for Microwave Oven" .

KIEE International Transaction on Electrical Machinery and Energy Conversion Systems .

4B (2): 73– 79.

ISSN 1598-2602 .

^ McCabe, Liam; Sullivan, Michael (May 20, 2020).

"The Best Microwave" .

Wirecutter . The New York Times . Retrieved May 21, 2020 .

^ "Microwave Fact Sheets" .

www.microwaveassociation.org.uk . Retrieved March 12, 2023 .

^ Schmitt, Ron (2002).

Electromagnetics Explained . Newnes. p. 343.

ISBN 9780750674034 .

Referring to the Figure 15.2, you can see that there is no resonance of water at this frequency. The first resonant peak occurs above 1THz, and the highest loss occurs well into the infrared. There is no special significance of 2.45 GHz, except that it is allocated by the FCC as being allowable for microwave oven usage.

^ "For heat, tune to 915 or 2450 Megacycles" .

Litton Industries . 2007 [1965] . Retrieved December 12, 2006 – via Southwest Museum of Engineering, Communications, and Computation.

^ a b "Cooking with Microwave Ovens" .

Food Safety and Inspection Service .

U.S. Department of Agriculture . Archived from the original on May 2, 2025 . Retrieved June 22, 2022 .

^ Soltysiak, Michal; Celuch, Malgorzata; Erle, Ulrich (June 2011).

Measured and simulated frequency spectra of the household microwave oven . 2011 IEEE MTT-S International Microwave Symposium. pp.

1– 4.

doi : 10.1109/MWSYM.2011.5972844 .

ISBN 978-1-61284-754-2 .

S2CID 41526758 .

^ Bloomfield, Louis.

"Question 1456" .

How Everything Works . Archived from the original on October 17, 2013 . Retrieved February 9, 2012 .

^ Baird, Christopher S. (October 15, 2014).

"Why are the microwaves in a microwave oven tuned to water" .

Science Questions with Surprising Answers . Canyon, TX: West Texas A&M University .

^ Zitzewitz, Paul W. (February 2011).

The Handy Physics Answer Book . Visible Ink Press.

ISBN 9781578593576 – via Google Books.

^ a b Chaplin, Martin (May 28, 2012).

"Water and microwaves" . Water Structure and Science.

London South Bank University . Retrieved December 4, 2012 .

^ Jerby, Eli; Meir, Yehuda; Faran, Mubarak (September 2013).

Basalt melting by localized-microwave thermal-runaway instability (PDF) . 14th International Conference on Microwave and High Frequency Heating, AMPERE-2013. Nottingham, UK.

doi : 10.13140/2.1.4346.1126 .

^ Wirfs-Brock, Jordan; Jacobson, Rebecca (February 23, 2016).

"A watched pot: What is the most energy-efficient way to boil water?" .

Inside Energy .

^ "Energy Label- Criteria" .

www.energylabel.org.tw (in Chinese). Bureau of Energy, Ministry of Economic Affairs, Taiwan . Retrieved March 7, 2022 .

^ "Level-up your cooking game with an energy-efficient stovetop" . August 24, 2020. Archived from the original on December 23, 2022 . Retrieved December 23, 2022 .

^ Gallego-Schmid, Alejandro; Mendoza, Joan Manuel F.; Azapagic, Adisa (March 2018).

"Environmental assessment of microwaves and the effect of European energy efficiency and waste management legislation" .

Science of the Total Environment .

618 : 487– 499.

Bibcode : 2018ScTEn.618..487G .

doi : 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2017.11.064 .

PMID 29145100 .

^ Detz, Remko J.; van der Zwaan, Bob (October 20, 2020).

"Surfing the microwave oven learning curve" .

Journal of Cleaner Production .

271 122278.

Bibcode : 2020JCPro.27122278D .

doi : 10.1016/j.jclepro.2020.122278 .

S2CID 225872878 .

^ Ross, J.P.; Meier, Alan (2001).

"Whole-House Measurements of Standby Power Consumption" .

Energy Efficiency in Household Appliances and Lighting . pp.

278– 285.

doi : 10.1007/978-3-642-56531-1_33 .

ISBN 978-3-540-41482-7 .

OSTI 793739 .

^ de Laski, Andrew (June 3, 2013).

"New standards cut "vampire" energy waste" .

Appliance Standards Awareness Project (ASAP) . Retrieved October 4, 2021 .

^ "A notable advance in microwave technology" .

The Telegram . September 22, 2013. Archived from the original on May 2, 2018 . Retrieved May 10, 2018 .

^ "Low-Power RF Devices and the ISM Bands" .

All About Circuits .

^ Staff, Straight Dope (November 4, 2003).

"What keeps microwave radiation from leaking out the oven door?" .

The Straight Dope . Retrieved March 1, 2021 .

^ "User Interfaces: Why are Microwave Ovens All So Difficult to Use?" .

The Guardian . July 13, 2015 . Retrieved January 4, 2019 .

^ Fabricant, Florence (September 27, 2000).

"Son of Microwave: Fast and Crisp" .

The New York Times . Retrieved January 6, 2015 .

^ Fredericks, Jonae (May 3, 2017).

"How to Use a Browning Dish for Microwave Cooking" .

LEAFtv . Retrieved January 1, 2025 .

^ This, Hervé (1995).

Révélations gastronomiques (in French). Éditions Belin.

ISBN 978-2-7011-1756-0 .

^ Datta, A. K.; Rakesh, V. (2013). "Principles of Microwave Combination Heating".

Comprehensive Reviews in Food Science and Food Safety .

12 (1): 24– 39.

doi : 10.1111/j.1541-4337.2012.00211.x .

ISSN 1541-4337 .

^ "Microwave penetration depths" .

pueschner.com . Püschner GMBH + CO KG MicrowavePowerSystems . Retrieved June 1, 2018 .

^ "Microwave oven radiation" . Radiation-emitting products / Resources for you.

fda.gov . Center for Devices and Radiological Health. U.S.

Food and Drug Administration . December 12, 2017. Archived from the original on May 1, 2011 . Retrieved June 1, 2018 .

^ Rutgers, Maarten (1999).

"Finding the hot spots in your microwave with fax paper" . Physics inside a microwave oven.

maartenrutgers.org . Archived from the original on July 20, 2003.

^ Video of microwave effects on YouTube ^ Pitchai, K. (2011).

Electromagnetic and Heat Transfer Modeling of Microwave Heating in Domestic Ovens (Masters thesis).

Lincoln, Nebraska : University of Nebraska–Lincoln . Retrieved August 28, 2020 .

^ Risman, P. (2009). "Advanced topics in microwave heating uniformity". In Lorence, M.W.; Pesheck, P.S. (eds.).

Development of Packaging and Products for Use in Microwave Ovens . Elsevier. pp.

76– 77.

ISBN 978-1845696573 .

^ Labuza, T.; Meister, J. (1992).

"An alternate method for measuring the heating potential of microwave susceptor films" (PDF) .

Journal of Microwave Power and Electromagnetic Energy .

27 (4): 205– 208.

Bibcode : 1992JMPEE..27..205L .

doi : 10.1080/08327823.1992.11688192 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 November 2011 . Retrieved 23 September 2011 .

^ "Microwave cooking and nutrition" .

health.harvard.edu . Family Health Guide.

Harvard Medical School . February 6, 2019. Archived from the original on July 17, 2011 . Retrieved April 13, 2021 .

^ a b c O'Connor, Anahad (October 17, 2006).

"The claim: Microwave ovens kill nutrients in food" .

The New York Times . Retrieved April 13, 2021 .

^ a b "Microwave cooking and nutrition" .

Family Health Guide . Harvard Medical School. February 6, 2019. Archived from the original on July 17, 2011 . Retrieved April 13, 2021 .

^ Watanabe, Fumio; Abe, Katsuo; Fujita, Tomoyuki; Goto, Mashahiro; Hiemori, Miki; Nakano, Yoshihisa (January 1998). "Effects of microwave heating on the loss of vitamin B(12) in foods".

Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry .

46 (1): 206– 210.

Bibcode : 1998JAFC...46..206W .

doi : 10.1021/jf970670x .

PMID 10554220 .

S2CID 23096987 .

^ Osinboyejo, M.A.; Walker, L.T.; Ogutu, S.; Verghese, M. (July 15, 2003).

"Effects of microwave blanching vs. boiling water blanching on retention of selected water-soluble vitamins in turnips, foods, and greens using HPLC" . National Center for Home Food Preservation.

University of Georgia . Retrieved July 23, 2011 .

^ "The five worst foods to grill" . Physicians Committee for Responsible Medicine. 2005. Archived from the original on December 30, 2010.

^ "Acrylamide: Information on diet, food storage, and food preparation" .

fda.gov . U.S.

Food and Drug Administration . May 22, 2008. Archived from the original on July 10, 2013.

Boiling potatoes and microwaving whole potatoes with skin on, to make "microwaved baked potatoes", does not produce acrylamide.⁽¹⁾ (Footnote (1): Based on FDA studies.) ^ Tice, Raymond; Brevard, Brigette (February 1999).

3-Picoline [108-99-6]: Review of toxicological literature (PDF) (Report). Research Triangle Park, NC: Integrated Laboratory Systems. Archived from the original (PDF) on February 5, 2015.

^ Taché, J.; Carpentier, B. (January 2014). "Hygiene in the home kitchen: Changes in behaviour and impact of key microbiological hazard control measures".

Food Control .

35 (1): 392– 400.

doi : 10.1016/j.foodcont.2013.07.026 .

^ Egert, Markus; Schnell, Sylvia; Lueders, Tillmann; Kaiser, Dominik; Cardinale, Massimiliano (19 July 2017).

"Microbiome analysis and confocal microscopy of used kitchen sponges reveal massive colonization by Acinetobacter , Moraxella , and Chryseobacterium species" .

Scientific Reports .

7 (1): 5791.

Bibcode : 2017NatSR...7.5791C .

doi : 10.1038/s41598-017-06055-9 .

PMC 5517580 .

PMID 28725026 .

^ "Microwave safe plastics - How safe are they? | CAG" .

www.cag.org.in . January 17, 2024 . Retrieved May 29, 2024 .

^ Mike P.; Alcir Grohmann; Darin Wagner; Richard E. Barrans Jr; Vince Calder (2001–2002).

"Superheated Water" .

NEWTON Ask-A-Scientist .

Argonne National Laboratory . Archived from the original on March 22, 2009 . Retrieved March 28, 2009 .

(from the U.S. Dept. of Energy "Ask A Scientist" series's "Chemistry Archive" 2001315) ^ "Superheating and microwave ovens" .

School of Physics .

University of New South Wales . Retrieved October 25, 2010 .

^ Beaty, William J.

"High Voltage in your Kitchen: Unwise Microwave Oven Experiments" . Amasci.com . Retrieved January 21, 2006 .

^ "Yes, You Can Microwave Metal" . January 31, 2014.

^ "Cooking with Microwave Ovens: What containers and wraps are safe to use in the microwave oven?" .

Food Safety and Inspection Service . Archived from the original on May 2, 2025 . Retrieved October 17, 2021 .

^ "Microwave cooking" .

ConagraFoods.com . sec. "Q: What is a microwave-safe plate or container?". Archived from the original on March 30, 2012 . Retrieved October 25, 2009 .

^ "Microwave Ovens and Food Safety" (PDF) .

Food Safety and Inspection Service .

United States Department of Agriculture . October 2011. Archived from the original (PDF) on January 8, 2011 . Retrieved August 10, 2011 .

^ Popa, Adrian (December 23, 1997).

"Re: Why do grapes spark in the microwave?" .

MadSci Network . Archived from the original on March 5, 2001 . Retrieved February 23, 2006 .

^ 21 C.F.R. 1030.10 Retrieved August 12, 2014.

^ "Radiation Emissions from Microwave ovens: How safe are Microwave Ovens?" .

ARPANSA . Archived from the original on March 6, 2009 . Retrieved March 5, 2009 .

^ "Microwave Oven Radiation: Microwave Oven Safety Standard" . U.S.

Food and Drug Administration . January 13, 2010. Archived from the original on May 29, 2011 . Retrieved February 16, 2009 .

^ "Advanced Measurements of Microwave Oven Leakage" (PDF) .

ARPANSA . 2004. Archived from the original (PDF) on January 24, 2011 . Retrieved January 8, 2011 .

^ Frei, MR; Jauchem, JR; Dusch, SJ; Merritt, JH; Berger, RE; Stedham, MA (1998). "Chronic, low-level (1.0 W/kg) exposure of mice prone to mammary cancer to 2450 MHz microwaves".

Radiation Research .

150 (5): 568– 76.

Bibcode : 1998RadR..150..568F .

doi : 10.2307/3579874 .

JSTOR 3579874 .

PMID 9806599 .

^ Frei, MR; Berger, RE; Dusch, SJ; Guel, V; Jauchem, JR; Merritt, JH; Stedham, MA (1998). "Chronic exposure of cancer-prone mice to low-level 2450 MHz radiofrequency radiation".

Bioelectromagnetics .

19 (1): 20– 31.

doi : 10.1002/(SICI)1521-186X(1998)19:1<20::AID-BEM2>3.0.CO;2-6 .

PMID 9453703 .

^ "ARPANSA - Microwave Ovens and Health" . Archived from the original on March 6, 2009 . Retrieved March 26, 2015 .

^ Frost, Joe L. (September 30, 2001).

Children and Injuries . Lawyers & Judges Publishing. p. 593.

ISBN 978-0-913875-96-4 . Retrieved January 29, 2011 .

^ Geddesm, Leslie Alexander; Roeder, Rebecca A. (2006).

Handbook of electrical hazards and accidents . Lawyers & Judges Publishing. pp. 369ff.

ISBN 978-0-913875-44-5 .

^ a b c "Microwaving food in plastic: Dangerous or not?" . Harvard Health Publishing (Harvard U.). December 2019.

^ Trasande, Leonardo; Liu, Buyun; Bao, Wei (January 1, 2022).

"Phthalates and attributable mortality: A population-based longitudinal cohort study and cost analysis" .

Environmental Pollution .

292 (Pt A): 118021.

Bibcode : 2022EPoll.29218021T .

doi : 10.1016/j.envpol.2021.118021 .

PMC 8616787 .

PMID 34654571 .

^ "FAQs: Using Plastics in the Microwave" . American Chemistry Council. Archived from the original on September 26, 2010 . Retrieved May 12, 2010 .

^ "Nebraska study finds billions of nanoplastics released when microwaving containers" .

University of Nebraska–Lincoln . July 21, 2023 . Retrieved September 4, 2023 .

^ "Microwave Ovens and Food Safety" .

Food Safety and Inspection Service . United States Department of Agriculture. August 8, 2013 . Retrieved June 1, 2018 .

^ Kruszelnicki, Karl S. (September 25, 2012).

"WiFi frozen? Blame the microwave oven" .

ABC News and Current Affairs .

Australian Broadcasting Corporation . Retrieved January 19, 2019 .

^ "Part 1" . Interference from non-WiFi sources.

cwnp.com . WiSE Article.

External links Wikimedia Commons has media related to Microwave ovens .

U.S. patent 2,495,429 : Percy Spencer's original patent Ask a Scientist Chemistry Archives Archived February 26, 2015, at the Wayback Machine , Argonne National Laboratory Further Reading On The History Of Microwaves and Microwave Ovens Microwave oven history from American Heritage magazine Superheating and Microwave Ovens, University of New South Wales (includes video) "The Microwave Oven" : Short explanation of microwave oven in terms of microwave cavities and waveguides , intended for use in a class in electrical engineering How Things Work: Microwave Ovens ,  David Ruzic, University of Illinois v t e Home appliances Types Air conditioner Air fryer Air ioniser Air purifier Barbecue grill Blender Immersion blender Bread machine Bug zapper Coffee percolator Clothes dryer combo Clothes iron Coffeemaker Dehumidifier Dishwasher drying cabinet Domestic robot Deep fryer Electric blanket Electric drill Electric kettle Electric knife Electric water boiler Electric heater Electric shaver Electric toothbrush Epilator Espresso machine Evaporative cooler Food processor Fan attic bladeless ceiling Fan heater window Freezer Garbage disposer Hair dryer Hair iron Humidifier Icemaker Ice cream maker Induction cooker Instant hot water dispenser Juicer Kitchen hood Kitchen stove Laundry-folding machine Lawn mower Riding mower Robotic lawn mower Leaf blower Lighter Mixer Oven Convection oven Microwave oven Pie iron Pressure cooker Refrigerator Crisper drawer smart Rice cooker Sewing machine Slow cooker Television set Toaster Vacuum cleaner central manual robotic Waffle iron Water dispenser Washing machine Washer-dryer See also Appliance plug Appliance recycling Authority control databases National United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐5b4gd
Cached time: 20250817043947
Cache expiry: 1279216
Reduced expiry: true
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.274 seconds
Real time usage: 1.449 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 17232/1000000
Revision size: 91238/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 263556/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 15928/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 22/100
Expensive parser function count: 17/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 375777/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.763/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 10609027/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1251.793      1 -total
 51.01%  638.515      2 Template:Reflist
 21.47%  268.771     51 Template:Cite_web
  9.93%  124.347     18 Template:Cite_journal
  9.38%  117.471     16 Template:Citation_needed
  8.14%  101.956     17 Template:Fix
  5.09%   63.681      1 Template:Home_appliances
  5.05%   63.188      1 Template:Short_description
  4.95%   61.942      1 Template:Navbox
  4.63%   58.015      5 Template:Inflation Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:58017:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817043947 and revision id 1304972489. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Microwave_oven&oldid=1304972489 " Categories : Ovens Microwave technology American inventions Radiation effects Products introduced in 1947 20th-century inventions Home appliances Hidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2009 CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown CS1 Chinese-language sources (zh) CS1 French-language sources (fr) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Wikipedia pages semi-protected against vandalism Use mdy dates from April 2025 Articles with unsourced statements from February 2025 Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2020 All articles containing potentially dated statements All pages needing factual verification Wikipedia articles needing factual verification from July 2025 Articles with unsourced statements from July 2020 Articles with unsourced statements from May 2019 Articles with unsourced statements from March 2013 Commons category link is on Wikidata Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 9 August 2025, at 07:52 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Microwave oven 82 languages Add topic

