Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Development as a literary critique 3 Achievements and limitations 4 See also 5 References 6 Further reading 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Gynocriticism 4 languages Català Eesti Galego Português Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Literary project expanding the study of women writers Gynocriticism or gynocritics is the term coined in the seventies by Elaine Showalter to describe a new literary project intended to construct "a female framework for the analysis of women's literature".

By expanding the historical study of women writers as a distinct literary tradition, gynocritics sought to develop new models based on the study of female experience to replace male models of literary creation, and so "map the territory" [ 1 ] left unexplored in earlier literary criticisms.

History [ edit ] While previous figures like Virginia Woolf and Simone de Beauvoir had already begun to review and evaluate the female image in literature, [ 2 ] and second-wave feminism had explored phallocentrism and sexism through a female reading of male authors, gynocriticism was designed as a "second phase" in feminist criticism – turning to a focus on, and interrogation of female authorship, images, the feminine experience and ideology, and the history and development of the female literary tradition.

[ 3 ] [ 2 ] Development as a literary critique [ edit ] Gynocriticism also examines the female struggle for identity and the social construct of gender.

[ 2 ] According to Elaine Showalter, [ 2 ] gynocritics is the study of not only the female as a gender status but also the 'internalized consciousness' of the female. The uncovering of the female subculture and exposition of a female model is the intention of gynocriticism, [ 3 ] comprising recognition of a distinct female canon where a female identity is sought free from the masculine definitions and oppositions.

[ 3 ] Gynocriticism accordingly challenged a Freudian psychoanalytic perspective whereby the female inherently suffers envy of men and feelings of inadequacy and injustice, [ 3 ] combined with feelings of intellectual inferiority.

[ 4 ] Arguing that male 'phallic prejudice' [ 3 ] itself creates a female consciousness that demands a critique, [ 3 ] and that prejudice against the female incites a specific noesis that gets attributed to the female, [ 4 ] Gynocriticism stressed that this prejudice has concealed the female literary tradition to the point of imitating the masculine.

[ 5 ] Achievements and limitations [ edit ] Gynocriticism helped reclaim from obscurity a vast body of early female writings, often published in Virago , [ 6 ] as well as producing such feminist classics as The Madwoman in the Attic .

[ 7 ] However its very successes left it open to new challenges from within feminism. Poststructuralists complained that it fetishized the role of the author , at the expense of the reader and the text, and that its grand narrative, setting up a female canon in opposition to the male, was essentialist , and omitted differences and divisions among women, leaving out lesbians and women of color , for example.

[ 8 ] Race, class, social interest, political inclination, religion and sexuality [ 3 ] [ 5 ] all arguably come into play in the construction of identity.

[ 5 ] Separating out such properties would create a one-dimensional view of the female, yet if gender and identity are merely constructs then it becomes difficult to assign any inherent qualities of nature or language to found a critique.

[ 2 ] Despite such limitations, gynocriticism offers a valuable interrogation of 'female' literature, through the study of sameness and difference in gender.

[ 5 ] While the term is rarely used in third-wave feminism , the practices and canon establishment of gynocriticism continues to underpin feminist literary criticism .

[ 9 ] See also [ edit ] Ellen Moers Ecriture feminine Feminist studies References [ edit ] ^ Quoted in J. Childers ed., The Columbia Dictionary of Modern Literary and Cultural Criticism (1995) p. 129 ^ a b c d e Barry, P 2009, Beginning theory; An introduction to literary and cultural theory, Manchester University Press, Manchester.

^ a b c d e f g Xu, Y 2007, 'Contribution of gynocriticism to feminist criticism', US – China Foreign Language, vol. 5, no. 5, pp. 1 – 5.

^ a b Frager, R & Fadiman, J 2005, Personality and personal growth 6th ed, Pearson Prentice Hall, New Jersey.

^ a b c d Friedman, Susan Stanford. Mappings : Feminism and the Cultural Geographies of Encounter. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1998 ^ Patricia Waugh, Literary Theory and Criticism (2006) p. 328 ^ J. Childers ed., The Columbia Dictionary of Modern Literary and Cultural Criticism (1995) p. 129 ^ Literary Terms." Fall 2002. Montclair State University (students of ENGL 605: Literary Research). 05 Jun. 2005 < http://english.montclair.edu/isaacs/605LitResearch/litermFA02.htm >.

^ I. Buchanan, A Dictionary of Critical Theory (2010) p. 215 Further reading [ edit ] Groden, Michael and Martin Kreiswurth, eds. The Johns Hopkins Guide to Literary Theory and Criticism. Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University Press, 1997.

External links [ edit ] virtuaLit Fiction page on Feminist Criticism v t e Literary criticism Literary theory Archetypal criticism Biographical criticism Chicago school Cultural materialism Darwinian criticism Deconstruction Descriptive poetics Ecocriticism Feminist criticism Formalism Geneva school Geocriticism Marxist criticism New Criticism New historicism Postcolonial criticism Postcritique Psychoanalytic criticism Reader-response criticism Russian formalism Semiotic criticism Sociological criticism Source criticism Thing theory Theorists and critics Plato Aristotle Horace Longinus Plotinus St. Augustine Boethius Aquinas Dante Boccaccio de Pizan Valmiki Lu Ji Sidney Tasso Bacon Hobbes Corneille Dryden Boileau-Despréaux Locke Pope Addison Vico Burke (Edmund) Hume Johnson Young Lessing Reynolds Diderot Kant Wollstonecraft Blake Schiller Schlegel Wordsworth de Staël Schelling Coleridge von Humboldt Keats Schopenhauer Peacock Shelley von Goethe Hegel Leopardi De Sanctis Carlyle Mill Emerson Sainte-Beuve Lowell Poe Arnold Taine Baudelaire Marx Kierkegaard Nietzsche Pater Zola France Wilde Mallarmé Tolstoy Croce Gramsci Eco Freud de Saussure Lévi-Strauss Hulme Benjamin Shklovsky Eliot Jung Trotsky Woolf Richards Bakhtin Bataille Ransom Lacan Lukács Valéry Burke (Kenneth) Cassirer Brooks Mukařovský Sartre de Beauvoir Adorno Jakobson Frye Bachelard Gombrich Heidegger Chomsky Derrida Barthes Foucault Poulet Williams Trilling Kristeva de Man Bloom Achebe Said Deleuze Guattari Girard Cixous Iser White Gadamer Ricoeur Abrams Geertz Marinetti Tzara Breton Loy de Andrade Hu Paz Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Gynocriticism&oldid=1224703866 " Categories : Feminist terminology Feminist theory Literary criticism Postmodern feminism Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 19 May 2024, at 23:45 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Gynocriticism 4 languages Add topic

