Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Chancellor Toggle Chancellor subsection 1.1 Australia and New Zealand 1.2 Bangladesh 1.3 Canada 1.4 Finland 1.5 France 1.6 Germany and Poland 1.7 Hong Kong 1.8 India 1.9 Ireland 1.10 Malaysia 1.11 Nepal 1.12 Pakistan 1.13 Philippines 1.14 United Kingdom 1.15 United States 2 President Toggle President subsection 2.1 France 2.2 Post-Soviet states 2.3 United Kingdom 2.4 United States 3 Vice-chancellor 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Chancellor (education) 33 languages العربية বাংলা Cymraeg Deutsch Español Français हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia עברית ಕನ್ನಡ کٲشُر Kiswahili Latina Magyar മലയാളം मराठी Bahasa Melayu नेपाली ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی Polski Русский Shqip Simple English Suomi Svenska தமிழ் తెలుగు Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt Yorùbá 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from University president ) Leader of a university or college This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Chancellor" education – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( June 2012 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) A chancellor is a leader of a college or university, usually either the executive or ceremonial head of the university or of a university campus within a university system .

In most Commonwealth and former Commonwealth nations, the chancellor is usually a ceremonial non-resident head of the university. In such institutions, the chief executive of a university is the vice-chancellor, who may carry an additional title such as " president " (e.g., "president and vice-chancellor"). The chancellor may serve as chairperson of the governing body ; if not, this duty is often held by a chairperson who may be known as a pro-chancellor .

In many countries, the administrative and educational head of the university is known as the president, principal or rector . In the United States, the head of a university is sometimes referred to as the university president. In US university systems that have more than one affiliated university or campus, the executive head of a specific campus may have the title of chancellor and report to the overall system's president, or vice versa.

Chancellor [ edit ] Australia and New Zealand [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( August 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) In both Australia and New Zealand, a chancellor is the chairperson of a university's governing body; thus, as well as having ceremonial duties, the chancellor participates in the governance of the university (but not its active management). The chancellor is assisted by a deputy chancellor (known as the pro-chancellor in some universities). The chancellor and deputy chancellor are frequently drawn from the senior ranks of business or the judiciary (it is one of the few jobs considered compatible with judicial service). Some universities have a visitor who is senior to the chancellor. University disputes can be appealed from the governing board to the visitor (as is still the case in the UK), but nowadays, such appeals are generally prohibited by legislation, and the position has only ceremonial functions (unlike the chancellor and deputy chancellor, who frequently preside at functions such as graduations, the visitor rarely attends university functions). The vice-chancellor usually serves as the chief executive of the university.

Macquarie University in Sydney is an anomaly as it once had the unique position of Emeritus Deputy Chancellor, a post created for John Lincoln upon his retirement from his long-held post of deputy chancellor in 2000. The position was not merely an honorary title, as it also retained for Lincoln a place in the University Council until his death in 2011.

Bangladesh [ edit ] Chancellor is a titular position in Bangladesh always held by the incumbent President of Bangladesh under the Private Universities Act 1992.

[ 1 ] The position in public universities is not fixed for the president under any acts or laws (since the erection of a state university in Bangladesh requires an act to be passed in itself), [ 2 ] but it has been the custom so far to name the incumbent president of the country as chancellor of all state universities thus established. The day-to-day business of the university is run by the vice chancellor. The vice chancellor has a deputy called the pro-vice-chancellor.

[ citation needed ] Canada [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( August 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) See also: Category:Chancellors by university and college in Canada Canadian universities have a titular chancellor similar to those in England and Wales , with day-to-day operations typically handled by a vice-chancellor. The vice-chancellor usually carries the joint title of "president and vice-chancellor" or "rector and vice-chancellor".

Finland [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( August 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) In Finland, if the university has a chancellor ( Finnish : Kansleri , Swedish : Kansler ), they are the leading official in the university. The duties of the chancellor are mainly to promote sciences and to look after the best interests of the university. As the rector of the university (Finnish: rehtori , Swedish: rektor ) remains the de facto administrative leader and chief executive official, the role of the chancellor is more of a social, political and even historical nature. However some administrative duties still belong to the chancellor's jurisdiction despite their often arguably ceremonial nature. Examples of these include the appointment of new professors and docents .

The chancellor of University of Helsinki (the oldest and largest in Finland) has also the right to be present and to speak in the plenary meetings of the Council of State when matters regarding the university are discussed. Despite their role as the chancellor of only one university, they are often regarded as the political representative of Finland's entire university institution when they exercise their rights in the Council of State.

In the history of Finland the office of the chancellor dates all the way back to the Swedish Empire , and later the Russian Empire . Historically the chancellor's duty was to function as the official representative of the monarch in the autonomous university.

The number of chancellors in Finnish universities has declined over the years, and in the vast majority of Finnish universities the highest official is the rector. The remaining universities with chancellors are University of Helsinki and Åbo Akademi University .

France [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( August 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) In France, chancellor ( chancelier ) is one of the titles of the rector ( recteur ), a senior civil servant of the Ministry of Education serving as manager of a regional educational district ( académie ). In his capacity as chancellor, the rector awards academic degrees to the university's graduates, oversees the legality of the universities' executive acts and channels funding from the ministry. The rector has no executive function in any university but remains a member ex officio of the board of every public university in his district.

Germany and Poland [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( August 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) In Poland, the chancellor (kanclerz) is the head of many universities' administration and the leader of the non-academic staff while the rector is the academic head. The main academic bodies of the university consists of: rektor (the head of the university), prorektor (deputy rector), dziekan (the head of the faculty), prodziekan (deputy head of the faculty), senat (senate: the main council of the university). In universities with presidential constitution, the university's president holds both the functions of chancellor and rector.

Similarly, in Germany the chancellor (Kanzler) is the head of the administration, and regularly is recruited not from a scholarly but from an administrative background. The chancellor is a member of the governing body of the university Hochschulleitung , which is directed by either a rector Rektor or a president Präsident , whose precise role may vary among universities. Traditionally, the chancellor had the role to represent the local king or later the government in the university and to make sure that the university is compliant with government laws and policies. After universities gained more autonomy in the 20th century, they also got more freedom in choosing the chancellor by themselves. However, still today the chancellor is not an administrator who is entirely subordinate to the president but an office holder who oversees a host of responsibilities assigned to him or her directly by higher education law. This can give the chancellor a considerable veto power in the university leadership.

Hong Kong [ edit ] In Hong Kong, the Chief Executive of Hong Kong (before 1997 the Governor of Hong Kong ) acts as the chancellor of all chartered universities, which includes all eight public universities and Hong Kong Metropolitan University .

[ 3 ] Day-to-day operation is in the hands of either a vice-chancellor (older and established institutions) or a president (in newer institutions), depending on the institution.

[ citation needed ] India [ edit ] In India, almost all universities have a chancellor as their titular head, whose function is largely ceremonial. The governor of the state appointed as the union's representative of state by the president , is the honorary chancellor of all state-owned universities. The de facto head of any government university is the vice-chancellor.

[ citation needed ] A private university or deemed university is headed by a president rather than a chancellor.

[ 4 ] Ireland [ edit ] In Ireland, four universities have a chancellor. The chancellor of the National University of Ireland is also chair of the senate of the university, [ 5 ] while the chancellors of Dublin City University and the University of Limerick are also the chairs of those universities' governing authorities.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] The chancellor of the University of Dublin presides at meetings of the university's senate and is one of the two visitors of Trinity College Dublin .

[ 8 ] Malaysia [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( August 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) In Malaysia, the chancellor position is given to dignitaries such as royalty or prominent politicians by universities to represent the universities in the political arena. For example, the chancellor of University of Malaya , the oldest university in Malaysia is Sultan Nazrin Shah , the Sultan of Perak .

All public universities except the International Islamic University of Malaysia used the term chancellor. While for IIUM, the Constitutional Head which has same degree as the chancellor is used.

Nepal [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( August 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) In Nepal, universities have a chancellor as ceremonial head. The de facto head of the university is the vice-chancellor. The chancellor is primarily responsible for attending the convocation programmes and accepting the resignation and appointment letter of a new vice-chancellor. Generally, the prime minister is considered the chancellor, and in his absence, the minister of education acts as the chancellor.

Pakistan [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( August 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) In Pakistan, chancellor is normally the figurehead of the university, who is normally the provincial governor where that university exists.
Day-to-day business of the university is run by the vice chancellor.

Philippines [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( August 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) In the Philippines, the De La Salle University designates the head of its university as the chancellor. For the University of the Philippines, the entire system is headed by a president, while the eight constituent universities under the system is each headed by a chancellor. The chancellor designates the different vice-chancellors for different areas of concern of the university: academic affairs, finance, and community affairs, among others. Some more universities like University of Santo Tomas and other colleges institutions have chancellors. Its chancellor is the incumbent Master of the Order of Preachers (Dominicans); meanwhile, the vice chancellor is the prior provincial of the Dominican Province of the Philippines. Their roles are largely ceremonial. The University of Santo Tomas is governed mainly by [[Rector Magnificus of the University of Santo Tomas|its rector magnificus ]] in overseeing its academic, financial and other affairs. The Central Seminary under the University of Santo Tomas also has an appointed Chancellor who acts as the executive secretary of the rector and the guardian of the archives of the seminary.

Other universities in the Philippines (such as state universities like Mindanao State University where each constituent campus is headed by chancellor) are mostly headed by their respective university presidents.

United Kingdom [ edit ] The Chancellor of the University of Oxford, Lord Patten , in procession at encaenia , 2009 See also: List of chancellors and vice-chancellors of British universities and Ancient university governance in Scotland § The Chancellor In the United Kingdom, a university chancellor is a ceremonial position held by a prominent person. In England, Wales and Northern Ireland, the executive head of the university is usually the vice-chancellor , [ 9 ] while in Scotland, the executive head is titled the " principal and vice-chancellor".

[ citation needed ] United States [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

( August 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) See also: List of longest serving higher education presidents In the United States, heads of colleges and universities are typically called " president ." A multi-campus university system may be headed by a chancellor who serves as systemwide chief, with presidents governing individual institutions. This is more commonly seen in university systems which were belatedly formed by grouping together already-extant colleges or universities in the 20th century, such as the State University of New York , the City University of New York , and the California State University . In many state university systems which began with a single flagship campus in the 18th or 19th century and gradually delegated operational authority to satellite campuses during the 20th century, the titles are reversed. This is the case in Arkansas , California , North Carolina , Illinois , Massachusetts , Missouri , and Wisconsin .

[ citation needed ] Outside of university systems, presidents are the functional chief executive officers of most standalone U.S. universities. However, a few universities, such as Syracuse University and the University of Pittsburgh , have a chancellor as their chief executive officer. There are occasional other uses of the title "chancellor." The College of William & Mary uses the term "chancellor" in the British sense, as a figurehead leader, but the actual executive of the school is the "president", not a "vice-chancellor". Some schools, such as Lubbock Christian University , give the ceremonial title of "chancellor" to a retiring university president.

The Catholic University of America is headed by their president (formerly "rector"), with the Archbishop of Washington serving as chancellor, a ceremonial position but one which does require the archbishop to represent the university before the Holy See . This scenario, while not always exactly duplicated, is typical in other Catholic universities due to the Catholic hierarchy. In some schools run by Catholic religious orders, the rector of the community supersedes the president when the latter is a member of that religious order.

[ citation needed ] In some universities, such as Massachusetts Institute of Technology , the chancellor is a high-ranking officer below the president and equal to or below the provost, who might have vice-chancellors reporting to her or him.

[ 10 ] The title "chancellor" is sometimes used in K-12 education in a sense similar to superintendent of schools , particularly in urban school districts. The New York City Schools Chancellor is the chief executive officer of the New York City Department of Education , which manages the city's public school system (the largest in the United States). The leader of the District of Columbia Public Schools system is also referred to as the chancellor.

[ citation needed ] President [ edit ] "College president" and "President (education)" redirect here. For the head of a residential college sometimes titled "president", see Head of college .

President or university president is the title of the highest-ranking officer within the academic administration of a university, within university systems that prefer that appellation over other variations such as chancellor or rector . The relative seniority varies between institutions.

France [ edit ] In France, the president is the elected chair of the board and chief executive officer in universities. The president is always elected by the board among the professors of the university. The president serves a four-year term which is renewable once.

[ 11 ] The chancellor is a servant of the Ministry of Education .

Post-Soviet states [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( August 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Some universities in Russia and Ukraine also have figurehead presidents with the head of the university being the rector.

United Kingdom [ edit ] In a number of British universities, the title of president is used alongside that of vice-chancellor for the chief executive officer, as either "president and vice-chancellor" or "vice-chancellor and president".

[ 12 ] [ 13 ] [ 14 ] In a few institutions the title of president is used alone (rather than with vice-chancellor) for the chief executive, e.g., Imperial College London [ 15 ] and City St George's, University of London .

[ 16 ] Historically, the title of president was used for the ceremonial heads of constituent institutions of the University of Wales , thus the politician Neil Kinnock was President of Cardiff University from 1998 until succeeded in 2009 by the Nobel prize winner Sir Martin Evans .

[ 17 ] Some member institution of the University of London, such as Birkbeck, University of London , also use the title of president for their ceremonial head.

[ 18 ] United States [ edit ] E. Gordon Gee , former president of Brown University , Ohio State University , Vanderbilt University , and West Virginia University In most stand-alone universities and colleges in the United States, the chief executive officer is called the president, while the second-most senior officer is called the provost , vice president of academic affairs, dean of faculties, or some other similar title.

[ 19 ] In the United States, the executive and ceremonial roles are not split, which means that a university president assumes an enormous burden in terms of the sheer breadth of their duties and responsibilities.

[ 20 ] The president is expected to preside over all major ceremonies, including graduations and presentations of awards and honors, [ 21 ] while also reporting to the board of trustees and personally handling certain high-level executive functions: external relations (especially public relations and fundraising) and long-range planning and strategy (especially the creation and termination of university degrees, programs, and policies).

[ 19 ] [ 20 ] Most other decisions are delegated to their second in command, especially operational day-to-day decisions.

[ 19 ] The provost often has the final say on resource allocation decisions, difficult tenure decisions, whether to initiate recruiting of star faculty from other institutions, and whether to initiate defensive measures against such recruiting of the institution's own star faculty.

[ 19 ] University presidents typically ascend to the position from academic careers (i.e., after earning tenure and becoming professors and then deans), and it is highly unusual for a university to recruit a president who lacks a strong track record in academic research or university administration.

[ 22 ] [ 23 ] The average salary for college presidents in private, non-profit institutions in 2015 was $569,932, 9 percent higher than in 2014.

[ 24 ] There are two well-known problems with the American tradition of concentrating so much power and responsibility in a single person. First, American universities are notoriously bad at training faculty members and administrators to assume such a heavy burden.

[ 20 ] [ 25 ] Second, university presidents are increasingly vulnerable to occupational burnout and either return to the faculty or flee academia for nonprofits or consulting.

[ 26 ] The average length of an American university president's term of office dropped from 8.5 years in 2006 to 5.9 years in 2023.

[ 26 ] Vice-chancellor [ edit ] Main article: Vice-chancellor The vice-chancellor is normally the chief executive of a university.

[ 27 ] In some countries, the title is used by the chief executive as a deputy for the chancellor in a ceremonial role, with a different title such as president or principal for their executive role.

[ 28 ] See also [ edit ] Lists of university leaders References [ edit ] ^ "The Private University Act, 1992" . Südasien-Institut. Archived from the original on 17 December 2007 . Retrieved 6 April 2011 .

^ "Ministry of Education – Law/Act" . Ministry of Education, Government of the People's Republic of Bangladesh . Retrieved 6 April 2011 .

^ "Chief executive's HKU role should only be honorary, says panel" .

South China Morning Post . 23 February 2017 . Retrieved 15 September 2017 .

^ "Two more private universities approved for Pune" .

The Times of India . Retrieved 3 July 2014 .

^ "NUI Convocation Election 2024: Information for Candidates" .

National University of Ireland . Retrieved 11 August 2025 .

^ "Role of the Chancellor" .

Dublin City University . Retrieved 11 August 2025 .

^ "Professor Brigid Laffan - Chancellor" .

University of Limerick . Retrieved 11 August 2025 .

^ "Role of the Chancellor" .

Trinity College Dublin . Retrieved 11 August 2025 .

^ Gill Evans (17 September 2024).

"What is a Chancellor for?" .

HEPI . Retrieved 3 February 2025 .

^ "Chancellor MIT Organization Chart" . orgchart.mit.edu . Retrieved 28 July 2022 .

^ Code de l'éducation , art. L 712-2 (in French) ^ "University statutes" .

University of Manchester . Retrieved 11 April 2023 .

^ "President and Vice-Chancellor" .

Queen's University Belfast . 19 April 2016 . Retrieved 11 April 2023 .

^ "President and Vice-Chancellor" .

Cardiff University . Retrieved 11 April 2023 .

^ "President" .

Imperial College London . Retrieved 15 July 2025 .

^ "Executive leadership" .

City St George's . Retrieved 15 July 2025 .

^ "Annual Review" (PDF) . Cardiff University. 2009. pp. 7, 34 . Retrieved 11 April 2023 .

^ "Officers of the College" .

Birkbeck, University of London . Retrieved 15 July 2025 .

^ a b c d Goldsmith, John A.; Komlos, John; Gold, Penny Schine (2001).

The Chicago Guide to Your Academic Career: A Portable Mentor for Scholars from Graduate School Through Tenure . Chicago: University of Chicago Press. pp.

257– 258.

ISBN 9780226301495 .

^ a b c Kirwan, William (2018).

"Becoming a President" . In Trachtenberg, Stephen Joel ; Kauvar, Gerald B.; Gee, E. Gordon (eds.).

Leading Colleges and Universities: Lessons from Higher Education Leaders . Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press. pp.

3– 9.

ISBN 9781421424934 . Retrieved 19 March 2023 .

^ Kerr, Clark (2001).

The Gold and the Blue: A Personal Memoir of the University of California, 1949–1967, Volume 1 . Berkeley: University of California Press. p. 214.

ISBN 9780520223677 . Retrieved 24 January 2021 .

^ Gordon, Larry (12 July 2013).

"Janet Napolitano, Homeland Security chief, to head UC" .

Los Angeles Times . Retrieved 25 January 2021 .

^ Loftin, R. Bowen (2018).

"Leading a Public Flagship within a State System" . In Trachtenberg, Stephen Joel ; Kauvar, Gerald B.; Gee, E. Gordon (eds.).

Leading Colleges and Universities: Lessons from Higher Education Leaders . Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press. pp.

245– 252.

ISBN 9781421424934 . Retrieved 2 December 2020 .

^ Smith, Kate (11 December 2017).

"College Presidents Making $1 Million Rise With Tuition and Student Debt" .

Bloomberg News . Retrieved 13 December 2017 .

^ June, Audrey Williams (14 April 2023).

"Here Are the Parts of Their Job for Which Presidents Want More Training" .

The Chronicle of Higher Education . Retrieved 5 January 2024 .

^ a b Jesse, David (14 April 2023).

"Portrait of the Presidency" .

The Chronicle of Higher Education . Retrieved 5 January 2024 .

^ "vice chancellor" .

Cambridge Dictionary . Retrieved 11 August 2025 .

^ "Principal and Vice-Chancellor" .

University of Edinburgh . Retrieved 11 August 2025 .

v t e Common academic faculty titles Academic administration Chancellor (education) Vice-chancellor Pro-vice-chancellor Dean (education) Dean of women Provost (education) Principal (academia) Head teacher Master (college) Warden (college) Rector (academia) trustee Authority control databases National United States Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐api‐ext.codfw.main‐b666f4b‐zxz85
Cached time: 20250815151419
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.628 seconds
Real time usage: 0.740 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 4548/1000000
Revision size: 29612/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 157617/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 5713/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 13/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 129395/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.430/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 15747501/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  656.812      1 -total
 32.32%  212.307      1 Template:Reflist
 19.78%  129.913     18 Template:Cite_web
 13.91%   91.379      2 Template:Langx
  9.76%   64.109      1 Template:Academic_titles
  9.48%   62.270      1 Template:Navbox
  9.47%   62.232     12 Template:Ambox
  8.67%   56.941      7 Template:Citation_needed
  7.81%   51.326      1 Template:Short_description
  7.68%   50.429      2 Template:More_citations_needed Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:2681197:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250815151419 and revision id 1306038257. Rendering was triggered because: unknown Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Chancellor_(education)&oldid=1306038257#University_president " Categories : Academic honours Academic administrators Education and training occupations University governance Heads of universities and colleges Academic administration Hidden categories: Articles with French-language sources (fr) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from June 2012 All articles needing additional references Use dmy dates from January 2022 Articles needing additional references from August 2025 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2025 Articles containing Finnish-language text Articles containing Swedish-language text Articles containing French-language text Articles containing Polish-language text Articles containing German-language text Articles with unsourced statements from July 2025 Articles containing Latin-language text This page was last edited on 15 August 2025, at 15:13 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Chancellor (education) 33 languages Add topic

