Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Works 2 References Toggle References subsection 2.1 Sources 3 Further reading 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Aetius (philosopher) 13 languages Català Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Français Italiano עברית Кыргызча Latina مصرى Русский Suomi Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 1st- or 2nd-century AD Greek doxographer and philosopher This article is about Aetius, the 1st–2nd-century AD philosopher. For the 4th-century AD theologian, see Aëtius of Antioch .

Aetius ( / eɪ ˈ iː ʃ i ə s / ; Greek : Ἀέτιος ) was a 1st- [ 1 ] or 2nd-century AD [ 2 ] doxographer and Eclectic philosopher .

Works [ edit ] None of Aetius' works survives today, but he solves a mystery about two major compilations of philosophical quotes. There are two extant books named De Placita Philosophorum (Περὶ τῶν ἀρεσκόντων φιλοσόφοις φυσικῶν δογμάτων, "Opinions of the Philosophers") and Eclogae Physicae (Ἐκλογαὶ φυσικαὶ καὶ ἠθικαί, "Physical and Moral Extracts"). The first of these is by Pseudo-Plutarch and the second is by Stobaeus . They are clearly both abridgements of a larger work.

Hermann Diels , in his great Doxographi Graeci (1879), discovered that the 5th-century CE theologian Theodoret had full versions of the quotes which were shortened in the abridgements. This means that Theodoret had managed to procure the original book which Pseudo-Plutarch and Stobaeus had shortened. He calls this book " Aetiou tên peri areskontôn sunagôgên (Ἀετίου περὶ τῶν Ἀρεσκόντων Συναγωγήν)" [ 3 ] [ 4 ] and therefore we ascribe the original Placita to Aetius.

Diels claimed that Aetius himself was merely abridging a work which Diels (1879) called Oldest Tenets or, in Latin, Vetusta Placita . Unlike Aetius, whose existence is attested by Theodoret, the Vetusta Placita is Diels' invention and is generally disregarded by modern classicists [ 5 ] Quotes which are ascribed to Aetius in scholarly essays were actually discovered in either the abridgements of Pseudo-Plutarch or Stobaeus, or Theodoret's full quotes in rare cases, or finally one of several ancient authors who provided corrections to misquotes in one of these works.

References [ edit ] ^ Dorothea Frede, André Laks, Traditions of Theology , Brill, 2002, p. 15.

^ W. K. C. Guthrie , A History of Greek Philosophy, Volume I: The Earlier Presocratics and the Pythagoreans , Cambridge University Press, 1962, p. xiv.

^ Astronomical and Astrophysical Transactions , Vol. 25, No. 4, August 2006, 357–358 .

^ John Burnet , Early Greek Philosophy : Section B: Note on the Sources Archived 2009-02-16 at the Wayback Machine .

^ Algra 1999 .

Sources [ edit ] Algra, Keimpe ; Barnes, Jonathan ; Mansfeld, Jaap ; Schofield, Malcolm , eds. (9 December 1999).

The Cambridge History of Hellenistic Philosophy . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0-521-25028-3 .

Further reading [ edit ] Mansfeld, Jaap, & Runia, David T.

Aëtiana: The Method and Intellectual Context of a Doxographer, I: The Sources (Leiden: E. J. Brill, 1997) ( Philosophia Antiqua , 73); Idem, Aëtiana: The Method and Intellectual Context of a Doxographer, II/1-2; The compendium (Leiden: E. J. Brill, 2009) ( Philosophia Antiqua , 114); Idem, Aëtiana: The Method and Intellectual Context of a Doxographer. Vol. 3, Studies in the Doxographical Traditions of Ancient Philosophy (Leiden/Boston:  Brill, 2009) ( Philosophia antiqua , 118).

Mansfield, Jaap; Runia, David T. (2023).

Placita (Loeb Classical Library) .

Harvard University Press .

ISBN 9780674997592 Bottler, Heike: Pseudo-Plutarch und Stobaios: Eine synoptische Untersuchung (Hypomnemata 198) , Göttingen 2014, ISBN 978-3-525-25305-2 External links [ edit ] John Burnet's Early Greek Philosophy: Section B: Note on the Sources Mansfeld, Jaap.

"Doxography of Ancient Philosophy" . In Zalta, Edward N.

(ed.).

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Complete text of the Placita : Greek , and French Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST National Germany United States Czech Republic Sweden Vatican Israel Academics CiNii People Deutsche Biographie Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Aetius_(philosopher)&oldid=1273406538 " Categories : 2nd-century Greek philosophers 1st-century Greek philosophers Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Greek-language text Year of birth unknown Year of death unknown This page was last edited on 2 February 2025, at 04:05 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Aetius (philosopher) 13 languages Add topic

