Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Chinese Toggle Chinese subsection 1.1 Native characters 1.2 Characters based on European pronunciations 1.3 Meaning-based characters 1.4 Usage in the nomenclature for simple inorganic compounds 1.5 Recently discovered elements 1.6 In the periodic table 1.7 Notes 1.8 History 2 Japanese Toggle Japanese subsection 2.1 Names based on European pronunciations 2.2 Native names 2.3 Meaning-based names 3 Korean 4 Vietnamese 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle External links subsection 7.1 Periodic tables 7.2 Articles Toggle the table of contents Chemical elements in East Asian languages 4 languages 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia 日本語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Part of a series on the Periodic table Periodic table forms 18-column 32-column Alternative and extended forms Periodic table history D. Mendeleev 1871 table 1869 predictions Discovery of elements Naming and etymology for people for places controversies ( in East Asia ) Systematic element names Sets of elements By periodic table structure Groups (1–18) 1 ( alkali metals ) 2 (alkaline earth metals) 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 (pnictogens) 16 (chalcogens) 17 (halogens) 18 (noble gases) Periods (1–7, ...) 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8+ Blocks (s, p, d, f, ...) Atomic orbitals Aufbau principle By metallic classification Metals alkali alkaline earth transition post-transition lanthanide actinide Metalloids dividing metals and nonmetals Nonmetals nonmetal halogen noble gas By other characteristics Coinage metals Platinum-group metals Precious metals Refractory metals Heavy metals Light metals Native metals Noble metals Main-group elements Rare-earth elements Transuranium elements Major , minor and trans- actinides Elements List of chemical elements by abundance ( in human body ) by atomic properties by isotope stability by symbol Properties of elements Relative atomic mass Crystal structure Electron affinity configuration Electronegativity ( Allen , Pauling ) Goldschmidt classification Nutrition Valence Data pages for elements Abundance Atomic radius Boiling point Critical point Density Elasticity Electrical resistivity Electron affinity / configuration Electronegativity Hardness Heat capacity / of fusion / of vaporization Ionization energy Melting point Oxidation state Speed of sound Thermal conductivity / expansion coefficient Vapor pressure Category Chemistry Portal v t e The names for chemical elements in East Asian languages , along with those for some chemical compounds (mostly organic ), are among the newest words to enter the local vocabularies. Except for those metals well-known since antiquity, the names of most elements were created after modern chemistry was introduced to East Asia in the 18th and 19th centuries, with more translations being coined for those elements discovered later.

While most East Asian languages use—or have used—the Chinese script , only the Chinese language uses logograms as the predominant way of naming elements. Native phonetic writing systems are primarily used for element names in Japanese ( Katakana ), Korean ( Hangul ) and Vietnamese ( chữ Quốc ngữ ).

Chinese [ edit ] In Chinese , characters for the elements are the last officially created and recognized characters in the Chinese writing system . Unlike characters for unofficial varieties of Chinese (e.g., written Cantonese ) or other now-defunct ad hoc characters (e.g., those by the Empress Wu ), the names for the elements are official, consistent, and taught (with Mandarin pronunciation) to every Chinese and Taiwanese student who has attended public schools (usually by the first year of middle school ). New names and symbols are decided upon by the China National Committee for Terminology in Science and Technology.

[ 1 ] Native characters [ edit ] Some metallic elements were already familiar to the Chinese, as their ores were already excavated and used extensively in China for construction, alchemy , and medicine. These include the long-established group of "Five Metals" (五金) — gold (金), silver (銀/银), copper (銅/铜), iron (鐵/铁), and tin (錫/锡) — as well as lead (鉛/铅) and mercury (汞).

Some non-metals were already named in Chinese as well, because their minerals were in widespread use.

[ 2 ] For example, boron (硼) as part of borax carbon (碳) in the form of charcoal sulfur (硫) had been used to make gunpowder since at least the 10th century in China.

Characters based on European pronunciations [ edit ] However, the Chinese did not know about most of the elements until they were isolated during the Industrial Age . These new elements therefore required new characters, which were invented using the phono-semantic principle . Each character consists of two parts, one to signify the meaning and the other to hint at the sound: The semantic (meaning) part is also the radical of the character. It refers to the element's usual state at room temperature and standard pressure . Only four radicals are used for elements: 釒 / 钅 ( jīn "gold; metal") for solid metals, 石 ( shí "stone, rock") for solid non-metals, 水 / 氵 ( shuǐ "water") for liquids, and 气 ( qì "air, steam") for gases.

The phonetic (sound) part represents the character's pronunciation and is a partial transliteration of the element's name. For each element character, this is a unique phonetic component. Since 118 elements have been discovered, over 100 phonetic components are used in naming the elements.  Because many characters in modern Chinese are homophones, including for tone, two different phonetic components can be pronounced the same.  Current practice dictates that new names should avoid being homophonous with previous element names or with organic functional groups .  However, this rule was not rigorously followed in the past, and confusingly, the names of tin (锡) and selenium (硒) both have the pronunciation xī with the same tone. The alternative pronunciation xí for tin is recommended by the National Committee for Approval of Terms in Science and Technology (全国科学技术名词审定委员会).

锡 (tin) and 硒 (selenium) are not homophones in Nanjing Mandarin , which was the prestige dialect of Chinese when most elements were named, which was until the late 19th century. The phonetic component of 锡, 易 ( yì ), was accurate when the character was invented around 3000 years ago, but not now because of sound change. In Middle Chinese 锡 was an entering tone character, a closed syllable ending in -p/-t/-k (or -ʔ in some modern dialects). But 硒 was constructed in the late 19th century using the (still accurate) phonetic 西 ( xī ), which in Middle Chinese was a level tone character, an open syllable with a vowel ending.  In Beijing Mandarin, the variety on which Standard Modern Chinese is based, stop consonant endings of syllables were dropped, and the entering tone was merged into the other tones in a complex and irregular manner by the 16th–17th centuries, and 锡 and 西 both became Tone 1 (high tone) characters.  In dialects that preserve the entering tone, like Nanjing Mandarin and Shanghainese and Cantonese, 锡 retains a -k or -ʔ ending and 锡 and 西 (硒) are pronounced differently.

This sometimes causes difficulty in verbal communication, as Sn and Se can both be divalent and tetravalent.  Thus, SnO 2 二氧化锡 and SeO 2 二氧化硒 would be pronounced identically, as èryǎnghuàxī , if not for the variant xí for 锡. To avoid further confusion, P.R.C.

authorities avoided using the name 矽 xī (or any tonal variants) for silicon. (In Taiwan 矽 is pronounced xì .) Examples of characters derived from European pronunciations Semantic Phonetic Element Source 釒 / 钅 + 里 lǐ = 鋰 / 锂 ( lǐ ) li thium 釒 / 钅 + 甲 jiǎ = 鉀 / 钾 ( jiǎ ) ka lium, Latin name for potassium 釒 / 钅 + 內 / 内 nèi or nà † = 鈉 / 钠 ( nà ) na trium, Latin name for sodium 釒 / 钅 + 弟 dì or tì † = 銻 / 锑 ( Taiwan tì / Mainland t ī *) s ti bium, Latin name for antimony 釒 / 钅 + 臬 niè = 鎳 / 镍 ( niè ) ni ckel 釒 / 钅 + 鬲 gé = 鎘 / 镉 ( gé ) ca dmium 釒 / 钅 + 烏 / 乌 wū = 鎢 / 钨 ( wū ) wo lframium, Latin name for tungsten 釒 / 钅 + 必 bì = 鉍 / 铋 ( bì ) bi smuth 釒 / 钅 + 由 yóu = 鈾 / 铀 ( Taiwan y ò u * / Mainland yóu ) u ranium 釒 / 钅 + 呂 / 吕 lǚ = 鋁 / 铝 ( lǚ ) a lu minium 石 + 典 diǎn = 碘 ( diǎn ) io dine 气 + 亥 hài = 氦 ( hài ) he lium 气 + 弗 fú = 氟 ( fú ) fluo rine 气 + 乃 nǎi = 氖 ( nǎi ) ne on 石 + 夕 xī = 矽 ( Taiwan x ì * / Mainland xī ) si licon . Mainly used in R.O.C. (Taiwan), Hong Kong, and Macau 圭 guī = 硅 ( guī ) silicon . Derived from Japanese transliteration '珪' ( kei , けい) of archaic Dutch kei aarde . Mostly used in P.R.C.

† 內 / 内 is primarily pronounced as nèi , but less commonly as nà , the source of 納 / 纳 . Likewise, the primary pronunciation of 弟 is dì , but the alternate reading of tì gave rise to 銻 / 锑 .

* The derived pronunciation differs (in tone or in sound) from the pronunciation of the element.

The "water" radical ( 水 ) is not used much here, as only two elements (bromine and mercury) are truly liquid at standard room temperature and pressure. Their characters are not based on the European pronunciation of the elements' names. Bromine ( 溴 ), the only liquid nonmetal at room temperature, is explained in the following section. Mercury ( 汞 ), now grouped with the heavy metals , was long classified as a kind of fluid in ancient China.

Meaning-based characters [ edit ] A few characters, though, are not created using the above "phono-semantic" design, but are "semantic-semantic", that is, both of its parts indicate meanings. One part refers to the element's usual state (like the semanto-phonetic characters), while the other part indicates some additional property or function of the element. In addition, the second part also indicates the pronunciation of the element. Such elements are: Semantic Semantic Element English Note 釒 / 钅 + 白 bái (white) = 鉑 / 铂 bó [ note 1 ] platinum The character is repurposed.

[ note 2 ] 氵 + 臭 chòu (stinky) = 溴 xiù [ note 1 ] bromine odorous (Greek βρῶμος brómos also means "stench") 气 + 羊 yáng , short for 養 / 养 yǎng (to nourish/foster) = 氧 yǎng [ note 3 ] oxygen A continuous supply of oxygenated air nourishes almost all animals 气 + 巠 / 𢀖 jīng , short for 輕 / 轻 qīng (light-weight) = 氫 / 氢 qīng [ note 3 ] hydrogen the lightest of all elements 气 + 彔 / 录 lù , short for 綠 / 绿 lǜ (green) = 氯 / 氯 lǜ [ note 3 ] chlorine greenish yellow in color 气 + 炎 yán , short for 淡 dàn (diluted) = 氮 dàn [ note 3 ] nitrogen dilutes breathable air 石 + 粦 lín , short for 燐 lín (glow) = 磷 lín phosphorus emits a faint glow in the dark ^ a b The pronunciation of these characters come from the second semantic characters' nearly obsolete pronunciations. Nowadays 白 (white) is normally pronounced b ái in the standard Mandarin dialect, although traditionally b ó was preferred. Similarly, 臭 (stinky) is almost always pronounced ch òu , as opposed to x iù , now an archaic reading.

^ The original meaning of 鉑 / 铂 is "thin sheet of gold" (now obsolete). The character was not associated with platinum until modern time, since platinum was known in the Old World only after the Age of Discovery .

^ a b c d The apparent mismatch in pronunciation with the phonetic component is because the pronunciation is inherited from another character that provides the meaning. For example, the ultimate source of the pronunciation of 氧 yǎng (oxygen) is not 羊 yáng (sheep),  but 養 / 养 yǎng (to nourish/foster).

Usage in the nomenclature for simple inorganic compounds [ edit ] Simple covalent binary inorganic compounds E m X n are named as n X 化 ( huà ) m E   (with n and m written as Chinese numerals), where X is more electronegative than E, using the IUPAC formal electronegativity order .  化 as a full noun or verb means 'change; transform(ation)'.  As a noun suffix, it is equivalent to the English suffixes -ized/-ated/-ified. It is the root of the word 化学 (huàxué) 'chemistry'.

For example, P 4 S 10 is called 十硫化四磷 (shíliúhuàsìlín) (literally: 'ten sulfur of four phosphorus', 'decasulfide of tetraphosphorus').  As in English nomenclature, if m = 1, the numerical prefix of E is usually dropped in covalent compounds.  For example, CO is called 一氧化碳 (yīyǎnghuàtàn) (literally: 'one oxygen of carbon', 'monoxide of carbon').

However, for compounds named as salts, numerical prefixes are dropped altogether, as in English. Thus, calcium chloride, CaCl 2 , is named 氯化钙 (literally: 'chloride of calcium'). The Chinese name for FeCl 3 , 氯化铁, literally means 'chlorinated iron' and is akin to the archaic English names 'muriated iron' or 'muriate of iron'. In this example, 氯 is 'chlorine' and 铁 is 'iron'.

There is a Chinese analog of the -ic /- ous nomenclature for higher/lower oxidation states: -ous is translated as 亚 ( yà , 'minor; secondary'): for example, FeCl 2 is 氯化亚铁 and FeCl 3 is 氯化铁.  In a four-way contrast, hypo- is translated as 次 ( cì , 'inferior; following') and per- is translated as 高 ( gāo , 'high, upper').  For example, the acid HClO is 次氯酸 "inferior chlorine acid", HClO 2 is 亚氯酸, HClO 3 is 氯酸, and HClO 4 is 高氯酸.  In this example, the character 酸 (suān, 'sour') means (organic or inorganic) acid.  The more modern Stock nomenclature in which oxidation state is explicitly specified can also be used: thus, tin(IV) oxide (SnO 2 ) is simply 氧化锡(IV).

Recently discovered elements [ edit ] This article contains uncommon Unicode characters.

Without proper rendering support , you may see question marks, boxes, or other symbols instead of the intended characters.

In 2015, IUPAC recognised the discovery of four new elements. In November 2016, IUPAC published their formal names and symbols: nihonium ( 113 Nh), moscovium ( 115 Mc), tennessine ( 117 Ts), and oganesson ( 118 Og).

Subsequently, in January 2017, the China National Committee for Terms in Sciences and Technologies published four naming characters for these elements.

[ 1 ] The National Academy for Educational Research under the Ministry of Education of the Republic of China on Taiwan published an almost identical list (the only differences being the use of the traditional Chinese metal radical '釒' in place of the simplified Chinese form '钅' for nihonium and moscovium) in April 2017.

[ 3 ] For traditional Chinese, nihonium and moscovium were then existing characters; while in simplified Chinese, only moscovium already existed in the Unicode Standard . The missing characters were added to Unicode version 11.0 as urgently needed characters in June 2018.

[ 4 ] The Chinese characters for these symbols are: Nihonium: Traditional: U+9268 鉨 CJK UNIFIED IDEOGRAPH-9268 Simplified: U+9FED 鿭 CJK UNIFIED IDEOGRAPH-9FED ( nǐ ) Moscovium: Traditional: U+93CC 鏌 CJK UNIFIED IDEOGRAPH-93CC Simplified: U+9546 镆 CJK UNIFIED IDEOGRAPH-9546 ( mò ) Tennessine: Both Traditional and Simplified: U+9FEC 鿬 CJK UNIFIED IDEOGRAPH-9FEC ( tián ) Oganesson: Both Traditional and Simplified: U+9FEB 鿫 CJK UNIFIED IDEOGRAPH-9FEB ( ào ) In the periodic table [ edit ] v t e Names of the chemical elements in Simplified Chinese 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 1 氢 qīng hydro­gen H [ 5 ] 氦 hài he­lium He 2 锂 lǐ lith­ium Li 铍 pí beryl­lium Be 硼 péng boron B 碳 tàn carbon C 氮 dàn nitro­gen N 氧 yǎng oxy­gen O 氟 fú fluor­ine F 氖 nǎi neon Ne 3 钠 nà so­dium Na 镁 měi magne­sium Mg 铝 lǚ alumin­ium Al 硅 guī sili­con Si 磷 lín phos­phorus P 硫 liú sulfur S 氯 lǜ chlor­ine Cl 氩 yà argon Ar 4 钾 jiǎ potas­sium K 钙 gài cal­cium Ca 钪 kàng scan­dium Sc 钛 tài tita­nium Ti 钒 fán vana­dium V 铬 gè chrom­ium Cr 锰 měng manga­nese Mn 铁 tiě iron Fe 钴 gǔ cobalt Co 镍 niè nickel Ni 铜 tóng copper Cu 锌 xīn zinc Zn 镓 jiā gallium Ga 锗 zhě germa­nium Ge 砷 shēn arsenic As 硒 xī sele­nium Se 溴 xiù bromine Br 氪 kè kryp­ton Kr 5 铷 rú rubid­ium Rb 锶 sī stront­ium Sr 钇 yǐ yttrium Y 锆 gào zirco­nium Zr 铌 ní nio­bium Nb 钼 mù molyb­denum Mo 锝 dé tech­netium Tc 钌 liǎo ruthe­nium Ru 铑 lǎo rho­dium Rh 钯 bǎ pallad­ium Pd 银 yín silver Ag 镉 gé cad­mium Cd 铟 yīn indium In 锡 xī tin Sn 锑 tī anti­mony Sb 碲 dì tellur­ium Te 碘 diǎn iodine I 氙 xiān xenon Xe 6 铯 sè cae­sium Cs 钡 bèi ba­rium Ba 镥 lǔ lute­tium Lu 铪 hā haf­nium Hf 钽 tǎn tanta­lum Ta 钨 wū tung­sten W 铼 lái rhe­nium Re 锇 é os­mium Os 铱 yī iridium Ir 铂 bó plat­inum Pt 金 jīn gold Au 汞 gǒng mer­cury Hg 铊 tā thallium Tl 铅 qiān lead Pb 铋 bì bis­muth Bi 钋 pō polo­nium Po 砹 ài asta­tine At 氡 dōng radon Rn 7 钫 fāng fran­cium Fr 镭 léi ra­dium Ra 铹 láo lawren­cium Lr 𬬻 lú ruther­fordium Rf 𬭊 dù dub­nium Db 𬭳 xǐ sea­borgium Sg 𬭛 bō bohr­ium Bh 𬭶 hēi has­sium Hs 鿏 mài meit­nerium Mt 𫟼 dá darm­stadtium Ds 𬬭 lún roent­genium Rg 鿔 gē coper­nicium Cn 鿭 nǐ nihon­ium Nh 𫓧 fū flerov­ium Fl 镆 mò moscov­ium Mc 𫟷 lì liver­morium Lv 鿬 tián tenness­ine Ts 鿫 ào oga­nesson Og 镧 lán lan­thanum La 铈 shì cerium Ce 镨 pǔ praseo­dymium Pr 钕 nǚ neo­dymium Nd 钷 pǒ prome­thium Pm 钐 shān sama­rium Sm 铕 yǒu europ­ium Eu 钆 gá gadolin­ium Gd 铽 tè ter­bium Tb 镝 dī dyspro­sium Dy 钬 huǒ hol­mium Ho 铒 ěr erbium Er 铥 diū thulium Tm 镱 yì ytter­bium Yb 锕 ā actin­ium Ac 钍 tǔ thor­ium Th 镤 pú protac­tinium Pa 铀 yóu ura­nium U 镎 ná neptu­nium Np 钚 bù pluto­nium Pu 镅 méi ameri­cium Am 锔 jú curium Cm 锫 péi berkel­ium Bk 锎 kāi califor­nium Cf 锿 āi einstei­nium Es 镄 fèi fer­mium Fm 钔 mén mende­levium Md 锘 nuò nobel­ium No Primordial From decay Synthetic Border shows natural occurrence of the element Pronunciations for some elements differ between mainland China and Taiwan, as described in the article. Simplified characters and mainland Chinese pronunciations are shown above.

[ 6 ] Some of the characters for the superheavy elements may not be visible depending on fonts.

Notes [ edit ] Comparison of mainland China, Taiwan and SAR names English Z Mainland China Taiwan Hong Kong/Macau silicon 14 硅 guī 矽 xì 硅 gwai 1 , 矽 zik 6 technetium 43 锝 dé 鎝 tǎ 鎝 daap 1 , 鍀 dak 1 lutetium 71 镥 lǔ 鎦 liú 鑥 lou 5 , 鎦 lau 4 astatine 85 砹 ài 砈 è 砹 ngaai 6 , 砈 ngo 5 francium 87 钫 fāng 鍅 fǎ 鈁 fong 1 , 鍅 faat 3 neptunium 93 镎 ná 錼 nài 錼 noi 6 , 鎿 naa 4 plutonium 94 钚 bù 鈽 bù 鈈 bat 1 americium 95 镅 méi 鋂 méi 鎇 mei 4 , 鋂 mui 4 berkelium 97 锫 péi 鉳 běi 錇 pui 4 , 鉳 bak 1 californium 98 锎 kāi 鉲 kǎ 鐦 hoi 1 , 鉲 kaa 1 einsteinium 99 锿 āi 鑀 ài 鎄 oi 1 , 鑀 oi 3 A minority of the "new characters" are not completely new inventions, as they coincide with archaic characters, whose original meanings have long been lost to most people. For example, 鈹 ( beryllium ), 鉻 ( chromium ), 鑭 ( lanthanum ), and 鏷 ( protactinium ), are obscure characters meaning " needle ", " hook ", " harrow ", and "raw iron", respectively.

Some elements' names were already present as characters used in the names of members of the House of Zhu . In the early Ming dynasty , the Hongwu Emperor established a rule that his descendants' given names must follow the order of the Five Phases per generation, and should have a character including the radical for one of the Five Phases. Some later descendants had to adopt rarely used characters, and even created new characters to fit this rule, which were later readopted for chemical elements. For example, radium (鐳/镭) from Zhu Shenlei [ zh ] (朱慎鐳, 1572–1598), Prince Yonghe Gongyi polonium (釙/钋) from Zhu Zhengpo [ zh ] (朱徵釙, 1440–1469), Prince Hanhui cerium (鈰/铈) from Zhu Enshi [ zh ] (朱恩鈰, 1460–1497), Prince Yuanling Xuanmu.

Most element names are the same in Simplified and Traditional Chinese , merely being variants of each other, since most of the names were translated by a single body of standardization before the PRC - ROC split. However, elements discovered close to, during, or after the split sometimes have different names in Taiwan and in mainland China. In Hong Kong, both Taiwanese and mainland Chinese names are used.

[ 7 ] A few pronunciations also differ even when the characters are analogous: cobalt gǔ (PRC) / gū (ROC); palladium bǎ (PRC) / bā (ROC); tin xī (PRC) / xí (ROC); antimony tī (PRC) / tì (ROC); polonium pō (PRC) / pò (ROC); uranium yóu (PRC) / yòu (ROC); bohrium bō (PRC) / pō (ROC).

[ 6 ] The isotopes of hydrogen – protium ( 1 H), deuterium (D) and tritium (T) – are written 氕 piē , 氘 dāo and 氚 chuān , respectively, in both simplified and traditional writing.
鑀 is used in Taiwan for both einsteinium (mainland China: 锿) and ionium , a previous name for the isotope thorium -230.

[ citation needed ] History [ edit ] In 1871, John Fryer and Shou Xu proposed the modern convention of exclusively using single characters for element names.

[ 8 ] Japanese [ edit ] Like other words in the language, elements' names in Japanese can be native ( yamatokotoba ), from China ( Sino-Japanese ) or from Europe ( gairaigo ).

Names based on European pronunciations [ edit ] Even though the Japanese language also uses Chinese characters ( kanji ), it primarily employs katakana to transliterate names of the elements from European languages (often German / Dutch or Latin [via German] or English ). Elements not listed in any of the tables below have their names follow English, like tungsten.

English Japanese Note tungsten tangusuten ( タングステン ) from English; other major European languages refer to this element as wolfram or tungsten with some additional syllable ( -o , -e , etc.).

nihonium nihoniumu ( ニホニウム ) The first element discovered in Japan. Named after Japan ( Nihon ).

sodium natoriumu ( ナトリウム ) natrium in Latin potassium kariumu ( カリウム ) kalium in Latin titanium chitan ( チタン ) Titan in German chromium kuromu ( クロム ) Chrom in German manganese mangan ( マンガン ) Mangan in German. Formerly written with ateji as 満俺 .

selenium seren ( セレン ) Selen in German niobium niobu ( ニオブ ) Niob in German molybdenum moribuden ( モリブデン ) Molybdän in German antimony anchimon ( アンチモン ) From either Dutch antimoon or German Antimon tellurium teruru ( テルル ) Tellur in German lanthanum rantan ( ランタン ) Lanthan in German praseodymium puraseojimu ( プラセオジム ) Praseodym in German neodymium neojimu ( ネオジム ) Neodym in German tantalum tantaru ( タンタル ) Tantal in German uranium uran ( ウラン ) Uran in German fluorine fusso ( 弗素 ) fu tsu ( 弗 ) approximates flu- . Similar to the Chinese: 氟 , plus the "air" radical (气). As 弗 is not a commonly used kanji , it is often written フッ素 , using katakana .

iodine yōso ( ヨウ素 / 沃素 ) -yō ( ヨウ ; "io-" [joː] , like Dutch jood [joːt] ) or German Jod + -so ( 素 ; "element/component") .  Chinese uses 碘 ( diǎn ), the second syllable of io dine .

Native names [ edit ] On the other hand, elements known since antiquity are Chinese loanwords, which are mostly identical to their Chinese counterparts, albeit in the Shinjitai , for example, iron ( 鉄 ) is tetsu ( Tang-dynasty loan ) and lead ( 鉛 ) is namari ( native reading ). While all elements in Chinese are single-character in the official system, some Japanese elements have two characters. Often this parallels colloquial or everyday names for such elements in Chinese, such as 水銀/水银 ( pinyin : shuǐyín ) for mercury and 硫黃/硫黄 ( pinyin : liúhuáng ) for sulfur. A special case is tin ( 錫 , suzu ), which is more often written in katakana ( スズ ).

English Japanese Chinese Note mercury suigin ( 水銀 ) 汞 (gǒng) lit.

"watery silver" aka.

quicksilver , like the element's symbol, Hg (Latin/Greek hydro-argyrum , "water-silver"). In the Greater China Region , 水銀/水银 is more generally used than 汞, because 汞 is not taught until the chemistry class (or physics class as in "汞液柱" while teaching atmospheric pressure ) but 水銀/水银 is the word used in daily life; for example, when people talk about the mercury liquid in the thermometer , most people would say "水銀/水银" but not 汞. This kind of thermometer is called "水銀溫度計/水银温度计" ( lit.

"watery silver thermometer") in Chinese instead of "汞溫度計/汞温度计" ( lit.

"mercury thermometer"), which is not used at all.

In Japanese too, 汞 kō exists but is very rare and literary, having an alternative obsolete reading mizugane . It is used in 昇汞 shōkō " mercuric chloride " (which also exists in Chinese as shēnggǒng ).

sulfur iō , formerly iwō ( 硫黄 ) 硫 (liú) 黄 (ō) means "yellow", to distinguish 硫 from other characters pronounced the same.

zinc aen ( 亜鉛 ) 鋅/锌 (xīn) meaning "light lead"; 鉛 is "lead" in Japanese and Chinese.

platinum hakkin ( 白金 ) 鉑 (bó) lit.

"white gold". Like 水銀/水银 and 汞 in Chinese, 白金 is the "daily"/colloquial word, and 鉑/铂 is the formal name and usually won't be taught until the chemistry class. In mainland China, jewelry stores usually use the word "白金" or "铂金".

arsenic hiso ( 砒素 ) 砷 (shēn) hi ( ヒ ) < ( 砒霜 ) hi-shimo , the Chinese name for arsenic trioxide ( pīshuāng ). In modern Chinese, arsenic is instead shēn (砷), an approximation of the second syllable of ar sen ic .

The kanji 砒 is quite rare. Often written ヒ素 using katakana .

boron hōso ( 硼素 ; " borax element") 硼 (péng) Hō ( ホウ ) < hōsa ( 硼砂 ) , the Chinese name for borax ( péngshā ). Boron is still called péng in modern Chinese.

The kanji 硼 is extremely rare. Mostly written ホウ素 using katakana .

Meaning-based names [ edit ] Some names were later invented to describe properties or characteristics of the element. 
They were mostly introduced around the 18th century to Japan, and they sometimes differ drastically from their Chinese counterparts. The following comparison shows that Japanese does not use the radical system for naming elements like Chinese .

English Japanese Chinese Note hydrogen suiso ( 水素 ; "water's element") 氫/氢 (qīng) translation of the hydro- prefix, or translation of the Dutch word for hydrogen, waterstof ("Water substance"), or the German word Wasserstoff carbon tanso ( 炭素 ; "coal element") 碳 (tàn) translation of the Dutch word for carbon, koolstof ("coal substance").

nitrogen chisso ( 窒素 ; "the suffocating element") 氮 (dàn) translation of the Dutch word for nitrogen, stikstof (" suffocating substance"). While nitrogen is not toxic per se and in fact constitutes the majority of air , air-breathing animals cannot survive breathing it alone (without sufficient oxygen mixed in).

oxygen sanso ( 酸素 ; "acid's element") 氧 (yǎng) similar to the Dutch word for oxygen, zuurstof ("sour substance"), the German word Sauerstoff or the Greek-based oxygen ("acid maker").

Many 19th-century European chemists erroneously believed that all acids contain oxygen. (Many common ones do—called oxyacid , but not all—the ones that are called hydracid .) silicon keiso ( 硅素 / 珪素 ) 硅 (guī) same as Chinese; the kanji 硅 is extremely rare. Often written ケイ素 using katakana . Its origin lies in the Dutch word keiaarde ; kei is a partial calque . The Chinese word is an orthographic borrowing from Japanese.

phosphorus rin ( 燐 ) 磷 (lín) similar to Chinese, except the "fire" radical replacing the "stone" radical. The kanji 燐 is rare. Usually written リン using katakana .

chlorine enso ( 塩素 ; "salt's element") 氯 (lǜ) together with sodium make up common table salt (NaCl); 塩 is the Shinjitai version of 鹽 .

bromine shūso ( 臭素 ; "the stinky element") 溴 (xiù) similar to Chinese, except the lack of the "water" radical.

Korean [ edit ] As Hanja (Sino-Korean characters) are now rarely used in Korea , all of the elements are written in Hangul .
Since many Korean scientific terms were translated from Japanese sources, the pattern of naming is mostly similar to that of Japanese. Namely, the classical elements are loanwords from China , with new elements from European languages . But recently, some elements' names were changed. For example: English Korean (before 2014) Source (South) Korean (after 2014) gold geum (금) from Chinese jin (金) geum (금) silver eun (은) from Chinese yin (銀) eun (은) antimony antimon (안티몬) from German antimoni (안티모니) tungsten teongseuten (텅스텐) from English teongseuten (텅스텐) sodium nateuryum (나트륨) from Latin or German (Na for natrium ) sodyum (소듐) potassium kalyum (칼륨) from Latin or German kalium potasyum (포타슘) manganese manggan (망간) from German Mangan mangganijeu (망가니즈) Pre-modern (18th-century) elements often are the Korean pronunciation of their Japanese equivalents, e.g., English Korean (Hangul, hanja) hydrogen suso (수소, 水素) carbon tanso (탄소, 炭素) nitrogen jilso (질소, 窒素) oxygen sanso (산소, 酸素) chlorine yeomso (염소, 鹽素) zinc ayeon (아연, 亞鉛) mercury sueun (수은, 水銀) Vietnamese [ edit ] In Vietnamese , some of the elements known since antiquity and medieval times are loanwords from Chinese , such as copper ( đồng from 銅 ), tin ( thiếc from 錫 ), mercury ( thuỷ ngân from 水銀 ), sulfur ( lưu huỳnh from 硫黃 ), oxygen ( dưỡng khí from 氧氣 ; oxi or oxy is the more common name) and platinum ( bạch kim from 白金 ; platin is another common name). 
Others have native or old Sino-Vietnamese names, such as sắt for iron, bạc for silver, chì for lead, vàng for gold, kền for nickel ( niken or nickel are the more common names) and kẽm for zinc. 
In either case, now they are written in the Vietnamese alphabet . Before the Latin alphabet was introduced, sắt was rendered as 𨫊 , bạc as 鉑 , chì as 𨨲 , vàng as 鐄 , kền as 𨪝 and kẽm as 𨯘 in Chữ Nôm .

The majority of elements are shortened and localized pronunciations of the European names (usually from French). For example: Phosphorus becomes phốtpho and phosphor .

The - ine suffix is absent, e.g., chlorine , iodine and fluorine become clo , iốt (or iod ) and flo , respectively; compare French chlore , iode , fluor .

The - um suffix is lost, e.g., caesium becomes xêzi (or caesi ), pronounced /sezi/ ; compare the French césium , pronounced /s e zjɔm/ (whereas the English is /s i zi-/ ).

Similarly, beryllium , tellurium , lithium , natrium (sodium), and lanthanum become berili , telua , liti , natri , and lantan respectively The - gen suffix is lost, e.g., nitrogen , oxygen and hydrogen become nitơ , ôxy and hiđrô , respectively A minority of elements, mostly those not suffixed with - ium , retain their full name, e.g., Tungsten (aka wolfram) becomes volfram .

Bismuth becomes bitmut .

Aluminium becomes nhôm ( 銋 ), because the ending -nium has a similar pronunciation. It was the first element to be known in English in Vietnam.

Elements with the - on suffix (e.g.

noble gases )  seem to be inconsistent.

Boron and silicon are respectively shortened to bo and silic . On the other hand, neon , argon , krypton , xenon and radon do not have common shorter forms.

Unlike the other halogens , astatine retains its suffix ( astatin in Vietnamese).

Antimony is shortened to antimon , and arsenic to asen ; these names are similar to the German ones ( Antimon and Arsen , respectively).

Some elements have multiple names, for instance, potassium is known as pô-tát and kali (from kalium , the element's Latin name).

Update in 2018 General Education Program, chemistry section: [ 9 ] (At page 50) Integration principles: Chemical nomenclature is used according to recommendations of the International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry (IUPAC) with reference to Vietnamese Standards (TCVN 5529:2010 and 5530:2010 of the Directorate for Standards, Metrology and Quality, Decision No. 2950-QD/BKHCN of the Ministry of Science and Technology), consistent with Vietnamese practice, gradually meeting the requirements of unification and integration.

Practical principles: Use the names of 13 elements commonly used in Vietnamese: gold, silver, copper, lead, iron, aluminum, zinc, sulfur, tin, nitrogen, sodium, potassium and mercury; At the same time, there are English terms for easy reference. Compounds of these elements are named according to IUPAC recommendations See also [ edit ] Discoveries of the chemical elements Organic nomenclature in Chinese References [ edit ] ^ a b "新元素113号、115号、117号、118号的中文定名征集" (in Chinese). 2017-01-15.

^ Chang, Hao (2018).

"What's in a name: A comparison of Chinese and Japanese approaches to the translation of chemical elements" .

Chemtexts .

4 (3): 12.

Bibcode : 2018ChTxt...4...12C .

doi : 10.1007/s40828-018-0065-0 .

S2CID 186517051 .

^ "Chemical nouns -- overview of the names of chemical elements" . Archived from the original on 18 April 2017 . Retrieved 17 July 2017 .

^ "Unicode® 11.0.0" .

Unicode.org . Retrieved 7 June 2018 .

^ There are Chinese names for the isotopes of hydrogen .

Protium is called 氕, deuterium is called 氘, and tritium is called 氚.

^ a b "Language Log » Names of the chemical elements in Chinese" .

^ Wong, Kin-on James; Cheuk, Kwok-hung; Lei, Keng-lon; Leung, Ho-ming; Leung, Man-wai; Pang, Hei-tung; Pau, Chiu-wah; Tang, Kin-hung; Wai, Pui-wah; Fong, Wai-hung Raymond (1999).

"English-Chinese Glossary of Terms Commonly Used in the Teaching of Chemistry in Secondary Schools" (PDF) .

Education Bureau . Hong Kong Education City Limited . Retrieved 29 January 2015 .

^ Wright, David (1997).

"The Great Desideratum: Chinese Chemical Nomenclature and the Transmission of Western Chemical Concepts" .

Chinese Science (14): 35– 70.

JSTOR 43290407 .

^ "Ministry of Education and Training(Vietnam) - General Education Program _ Chemistry" (in Vietnamese) . Retrieved 2024-02-18 .

Wright, David (2000).

Translating Science: The Transmission of Western Chemistry into Late Imperial China, 1840–1900 . Leiden; Boston: Brill. See especially Chapter Seven, "On Translation".

External links [ edit ] Periodic tables [ edit ] Interactive table in Traditional Chinese Interactive table in Simplified Chinese Interactive table in Japanese Interactive table in Korean Interactive table in Vietnamese English-Chinese periodic table of elements Articles [ edit ] The Chinese Periodic Table: A Rosetta Stone for Understanding the Language of Chemistry in the Context of the Introduction of Modern Chemistry into China Archived 2016-03-10 at the Wayback Machine A New Inquiry into the Translation of Chemical Terms Archived 2016-03-10 at the Wayback Machine by John Fryer and Xu Shou Chinese Terms for Chemical Elements Chemistry International -- Newsmagazine for IUPAC v t e Periodic table Periodic table forms Alternatives Extended periodic table Sets of elements By periodic table structure Groups 1 ( Hydrogen and alkali metals ) 2 (Alkaline earth metals) 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 (Triels) 14 (Tetrels) 15 (Pnictogens) 16 (Chalcogens) 17 (Halogens) 18 (Noble gases) Periods 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8+ Aufbau Fricke Pyykkö Blocks Aufbau principle By metallicity Metals Lanthanides Actinides Transition metals Post-transition metals Metalloids Lists of metalloids by source Dividing line Nonmetals Noble gases Other sets Platinum-group metals (PGM) Rare-earth elements Refractory metals Precious metals Coinage metals Noble metals Heavy metals Native metals Transuranium elements Superheavy elements Major actinides Minor actinides Elements Lists By: Abundance ( in humans ) Atomic properties Nuclear stability Symbol Properties Aqueous chemistry Crystal structure Electron configuration Electronegativity Goldschmidt classification Term symbol Data pages Abundance Atomic radius Boiling point Critical point Density Elasticity Electrical resistivity Electron affinity Electron configuration Electronegativity Hardness Heat capacity Heat of fusion Heat of vaporization Ionization energy Melting point Oxidation state Speed of sound Thermal conductivity Thermal expansion coefficient Vapor pressure History Element discoveries Dmitri Mendeleev 1871 table 1869 predictions Naming etymology controversies for places for people in East Asian languages See also IUPAC nomenclature systematic element name Trivial name Dmitri Mendeleev Category WikiProject Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Chemical_elements_in_East_Asian_languages&oldid=1296548748 " Categories : Naming of chemical elements Languages of East Asia Periodic table Science and technology in East Asia Chinese characters Hidden categories: Articles containing Chinese-language text CS1 Chinese-language sources (zh) CS1 Vietnamese-language sources (vi) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Greek-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from October 2013 Articles containing Japanese-language text Articles containing Latin-language text Articles containing German-language text Articles containing Dutch-language text Pages with plain IPA Articles containing uncoded-language text Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 20 June 2025, at 17:12 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Chemical elements in East Asian languages 4 languages Add topic

