Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Homer 2 Personification 3 Examples of usage Toggle Examples of usage subsection 3.1 Athletics 3.2 Paideia 4 See also 5 References Toggle References subsection 5.1 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Arete 21 languages Brezhoneg Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español فارسی Français Galego 한국어 עברית Lietuvių پښتو Polski Português Română Русский Suomi Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Aretē ) Greek philosophical concept This article is about the philosophical concept. For the thin ridge of rock formed by glaciers, see Arête . For the mythological figure, see Arete (mythology) . For other uses, see Arete (disambiguation) .

Arete Goddess of excellence and virtue Member of The Praxidicae Statue of Arete in Celsus' Library in Ephesus , 2nd century AD Gender Female Genealogy Parents Praxidice and Soter Siblings Homonoia Equivalents Roman Virtus Arete ( Ancient Greek : ἀρετή , romanized : aretḗ ) is a concept in ancient Greek thought that refers to "excellence" of any kind [ 1 ] —especially a person or thing's "full realization of potential or inherent function." [ 2 ] The term may also refer to excellence in " moral virtue ." [ 1 ] The concept was also occasionally personified as a minor goddess, Arete (not to be confused with the mythological Queen Arete ), who, together with sister Homonoia , formed the Praxidikai ("Exacters of Justice").

In its earliest appearance in Greek , this notion of excellence was bound up with the notion of the fulfillment of purpose or function: living up to one's potential. A person of arete is of the highest effectiveness; such a person uses all of their faculties— strength , bravery , and wit —to achieve real results. In the Homeric world, arete involves all of the abilities and potentialities available to humans. Though particularly associated with "manly" qualities, [ 1 ] the Homeric usage of the term was not necessarily gender-specific, as Homer applied the term to both the Greek and Trojan heroes as well as major female figures, such as Penelope , the wife of Greek hero Odysseus . In the Homeric poems , arete is frequently associated with bravery, but more often with effectiveness.

In some contexts, arete is explicitly linked with human knowledge, where the expressions " virtue is knowledge " and " arete is knowledge" are used interchangeably. In this sense, the highest human potential is knowledge, and all other human abilities derive from this central capacity. If arete is knowledge, the highest human knowledge is knowledge about knowledge itself . In this light, the theoretical study of human knowledge, which Aristotle called "contemplation", is the highest human ability and happiness.

[ 3 ] History [ edit ] The ancient Greeks applied the term arete ( ἀρετή ) to anything: for example, the excellence of a chimney, the excellence of a bull for breeding, and the excellence of a man. The meaning of the word changes depending on what it describes since everything has its own excellence; the arete of a man is different from the arete of a horse. This way of thinking originates from Plato , where it can be seen in the Allegory of the Cave .

[ 4 ] In particular, the aristocratic class was presumed, essentially by definition, to be exemplary of arete : The root of the word is the same as aristos , the word which shows superlative ability and superiority, and aristos was constantly used in the plural to denote the nobility .

[ 5 ] By the 5th and 4th centuries BCE , arete as applied to men had developed to include quieter virtues, such as dikaiosyne ( justice ) and sophrosyne ( self-restraint ). Though Plato tried to produce a moral philosophy that incorporated this new usage, it was in the Nicomachean Ethics of Aristotle that the doctrine of arete found its fullest flowering. Aristotle's Doctrine of the Mean is a paradigm example of his thinking.

[ 6 ] Aristotle deliberated on the various goals of education: including practical skills, arete , and theory.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] : 149 –152 Educating towards arete means boys would be educated towards things that are useful in life. However, there is no agreement about what constitutes arete , which leads to disagreement about how to train students for arete .

[ 8 ] : 150 To say that arete has a common definition of excellence or fulfillment may be an overstatement simply because it was very difficult to pinpoint arete , much less the proper ways to go about obtaining it.

Homer [ edit ] In Homer 's Iliad and Odyssey , arete mainly describes heroes and nobles and their mobile dexterity, with special reference to strength and courage , though it is not limited to this.

[ 1 ] For instance, the excellence of the gods generally included their power, but, in the Odyssey (13.42), Odysseus asked the gods to grant the Phaeacians arete , which here is generally translated as prosperity.

[ 9 ] Penelope 's arete , as another example, relates to co-operation , for which she is praised by Agamemnon . Though associated with "manly" qualities, [ 1 ] the Homeric usage of the term was not necessarily gender-specific, as Homer applied the term to major female figures as well as the Greek and Trojan heroes.

The Odyssey states that "far-sounding Zeus takes away half the arete of a man, when the day of slavery takes hold of him." [ 10 ] In the Iliad , the way Homer describes Achilles is an example of arete .

Arete is associated with the goodness and prowess of a warrior. Debra Hawhee points out that the norms and practices of Athenian virtuosity "operate within the politics of reputation, whose normative poles are honor and shame." [ 11 ] Dying in battle or securing a victory in the Olympic Games were considered agathos ("good") and, hence, deserving of timê ("honor"). So, not only is Achilles a brave and brilliant warrior but also, from the outset, he is destined to die in battle at Troy with the utmost glory—a guarantor of arete .

[ 11 ] According to Bernard Knox 's notes in the Robert Fagles ' translation of The Odyssey , " arete " is also associated with araomai , the Greek word for "pray".

[ 12 ] Personification [ edit ] For the Roman equivalent deity, see Virtus Greek deities series Primordial deities Titans and Olympians Water deities Chthonic deities Personifications List Achlys Adephagia Adikia Agon Aidos Alala Alastor Algos Alke Amechania Amphillogiai Anaideia Ananke Androktasiai Angelia Apate Arae Arete Atë Bia Caerus Charites Deimos Dike Dyssebeia Dysnomia Eirene Ekecheiria Eleos Elpis Epiales Epidotes Epiphron Eris Eros Eunomia Eupraxia Gelos Geras Harmonia Hebe Hedone Hedylogos Homados Homonoia Horae Horkos Horme Hybris Hygeia Hypnos Hysminai Ioke Kakia Keres Koalemos Koros Kratos Kydoimos Lampetia Lethe Limos Litae Lyssa Machai Maniae Methe Metis Mnemosyne Moirai Momus Moros Neikea Nemesis Nike Nomos Oizys Olethros Oneiroi Palioxis Peitharchia Phaethusa Peitho Penia Penthus Pheme Philotes Phobos Phonoi Phthonus Pistis Plutus Polemos Ponos Porus Praxidice Proioxis Prophasis Ptocheia Soteria Telete Thanatos Themis Thrasos Tyche Zelus v t e The Choice of Hercules by Carracci, 1596. Depicts Hercules deciding between Vice (right) and Virtue, or Arete (left) Arete was occasionally personified as a goddess, the sister of Homonoia (goddess of concord, unanimity, and oneness of mind), and the daughter of Praxidike (goddess of justice). Arete and Homonoia were known jointly as the Praxidikai ("Exacters of Justice"). As with many minor Greek deities, there is little or no real mythical background to Arete, who is used at most as a personification of virtue .

The only surviving story involving Arete was told in the 5th century BCE by the sophist Prodicus . Known as " Hercules at the crossroads ", it concerns the early life of the hero Heracles . At a crossroads, Arete appeared to Heracles as a young maiden and offered him glory and a life of struggle against evil; her counterpart Kakia ( κακία , 'badness') offered him wealth and pleasure. Heracles chose to follow the path of Arete.

[ 13 ] This story was later used by Christian writers, such as Methodius of Olympus , Justin Martyr , Clement of Alexandria , and Basil of Caesarea .

Examples of usage [ edit ] In Aristotle's Nicomachean Ethics , Book 2, chapter 6: "Virtue ( arete ), then, is a habit or trained faculty of choice, the characteristic of which lies in moderation or observance of the mean relatively to the persons concerned, as determined by reason, i.e., by the reason by which the prudent man would determine it." [ 14 ] In the Admonition of Paul in Philippians 4:8 : "Finally, brothers and sisters, whatever is true, whatever is honorable, whatever is just, whatever is pure, whatever is pleasing, whatever is commendable, if there is any excellence ( arete ) and if there is anything worthy of praise, think about these things." Robert Pirsig uses " arete " as a synonym for "quality" in his book Zen and the Art of Motorcycle Maintenance , which includes an extensive discussion of Plato's Phaedrus and the historical contrast between Dialectic and Rhetoric : "And what is good, Phaedrus, And what is not good—Need we ask anyone to tell us these things?" [ 15 ] Pirsig's line plays off a line in the Platonic dialogue The Phaedrus which reads: "And what is well and what is badly—need we ask Lysias, or any other poet or orator, who ever wrote or will write either a political or any other work, in metre or out of metre, poet or prose writer, to teach us this?" [ 16 ] In a Pindarian ode inscribed on the base of an Olympian victor's statue for the boxer Diagoras of Rhodes : "O father Zeus, give honor to this hymn for a victor at Olympia, and to his now famous arete in boxing." [ 8 ] Arete is the name of a key protagonist in The Philosopher Kings , the second book of Jo Walton 's Thessaly trilogy in which a group of people gathered by the time-traveling goddess Athena work to achieve the ideal society as described in Plato's Republic . She is a precocious teenager who also appears in the sequel. Arete's name and its meaning ("excellence") is a small but important plot point in the book—as well as a general theme of the series as a whole.

Athletics [ edit ] Arete was also used by Plato in his discussion of athletic training and the education of young boys.

[ 8 ] It was commonly believed that the mind, body, and soul each had to be developed for a man to live a life of arete . This led to the thought that athletics had to be present in order to obtain arete . Athletics did not need to occupy one's life, but could be used to exercise the body into the right condition for arete , just as the mind and soul would be exercised by other means.

[ 8 ] Paideia [ edit ] Arete is a significant part of the paideia of ancient Greeks: the training of the boy to manhood. This training in arete included physical training , for which the Greeks developed the gymnasion ; mental training, which included oratory , rhetoric , and basic sciences ; and spiritual training, which included music and what is called virtue .

See also [ edit ] Aretaic turn – Normative ethical theories Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Aretology – Narrative about a divine figure Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Maturity (psychological) – Learned ability to respond to the environment in a socially appropriate manner Mens sana in corpore sano – Latin phrase regarding health ("a healthy mind in a healthy body") Pirsig's metaphysics of Quality – Theory of reality Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Virtue ethics – Normative ethical theories Virtus – Masculine virtue in Ancient Rome References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e Liddell, H. G.

; Scott, R.

, eds. (1940).

"ἀρετή" .

A Greek–English Lexicon (9th ed.). Oxford: Oxford University Press.

^ "Arete: definition and meaning" .

Collins English Dictionary . 5 July 2023 . Retrieved 5 July 2023 .

^ Aristotle .

"X: Conclusion" .

Nicomachean Ethics .

^ "Plato, Republic, Book 6" .

Perseus Digital Library . Retrieved 2021-11-30 .

^ Jaeger, Werner (1945).

Paideia; the Ideals of Greek Culture . Vol. I. New York: Oxford University Press. p. 5.

^ "Aristotle, Nicomachean Ethics, Bekker page 1094a" .

Perseus Digital Library . Retrieved 2021-11-30 .

^ Aristotle .

Politics . VIII.

^ a b c d e Miller, Stephen G.

(2004).

Ancient Greek Athletics (3rd ed.). University of California Press.

ISBN 978-0300115291 .

^ "Homer, Odyssey" .

Perseus Digital Library . Book 13, line 1 . Retrieved 2021-11-30 .

^ Powell, Anton (11 September 2002).

The Greek World . Routledge. p. 53.

ISBN 978-1-134-69864-6 .

^ a b Hawhee, Debra (2002). "Agonism and Arete".

Philosophy and Rhetoric .

35 (3). The Pennsylvania State University Press: 185– 207.

doi : 10.1353/par.2003.0004 .

ISSN 1527-2079 .

S2CID 143802236 .

^ Knox, Bernard (1996). "Introduction and notes".

The Odyssey . Translated by Fagles, Robert. London: Penguin Classics Deluxe Ed.

^ Xenophon (1897), "The Memorabilia Recollections of Socrates" , Book II , translated by Dakyns, Macmillan and Co.

, retrieved 2021-06-11 ^ Aristotle (1906).

"II. Moral Virtue" .

Nicomachean Ethics . Translated by Peters, F.H.

^ Pirsig, Robert M.

(1974).

Zen and the Art of Motorcycle Maintenance .

^ Plato .

Phaedrus . Translated by Jowett, Benjamin .

Further reading [ edit ] Kerferd, G.B. (1967). "Arete/Agathon/Kakon". In Edwards, P. (ed.).

The Encyclopedia of Philosophy . New York: Macmillan & The Free Press.

Areté: Activate Your Heroic Potential by Brian Johnson | Goodreads v t e Ancient Greek philosophical concepts Adiaphora (indifferent) Aletheia (truth) Apeiron (infinite) Aporia (problem) Arche (first principle) Arete (excellence) Ataraxia (tranquility) Cosmos (order) Diairesis (division) Doxa (opinion) Episteme (knowledge) Ethos (character) Eudaimonia (flourishing) Hesychia (stillness) Logos (reason) Mimesis (imitation) Monad (unit) Nous (intellect) Ousia (substance) Pathos (passion) Phronesis (prudence) Physis (nature) Sophia (wisdom) Sophrosyne (temperance) Sophós (sage) Techne (craft) Telos (goal) Thumos (temper) v t e Virtues About virtues Endowment Moral character Nicomachean Ethics Positive psychology Trait theory Virtue ethics Virtue families Bodhipakkhiyā dhammā Brahmavihārās Bushidō Catalogue of Vices and Virtues Emi Omo Eso Epistemic virtues Five virtues Four Cardinal Principles and Eight Virtues Intellectual virtues Moral virtues Nine Noble Virtues Omoluwabi Pāramīs Prussian virtues Scout Law Seven virtues Cardinal Theological Teachings of the Seven Grandfathers Three Treasures Values in Action Inventory of Strengths Yamas Individual virtues Accountability Alertness Altruism Authenticity Calmness Charisma Charity Chastity Chivalry Cleanliness Compassion Conscientiousness Courage Civil Moral Courtesy Diligence Discernment Discipline Duty Empathy Endurance Equanimity Etiquette Faith Faithfulness Fidelity Foresight Forgiveness Frugality Generosity Glory Good faith Gratitude Heroism Honesty Honour Hope Hospitality Humanity Humility Impartiality Innocence Insight Integrity Intelligence Emotional Social Judgement Justice Kindness Love Loyalty Magnanimity Magnificence Meekness Mercy Moderation Modesty Nonattachment Patience Patriotism Perspicacity Philanthropy Piety Filial Pity Politeness Prudence Punctuality Religion Renunciation Resilience Respect Reverence Righteous indignation Righteousness Self-control Self-cultivation Self-transcendence Simplicity Sincerity Solidarity Sportsmanship Sympathy Taste Temperance Tranquillity Trust Wisdom Wit Workmanship Chinese De Jing Li Ren Yi Greek Agape Arete Ataraxia Eutrapelia Philotimo Phronesis Sophia Sophrosyne Indian Adhiṭṭhāna Ahimsa Akrodha Aparigraha Ārjava Asteya Brahmacharya Dāna Dhṛti Hrī Karuṇā Kshama Kshanti Mettā Muditā Nishkama Karma Prajñā Samatva Satya Shaucha Sevā Śraddhā / Saddhā Upekṣā Vīrya Latin Auctoritas Caritas Decorum Dignitas Fides Gravitas Humanitas Pietas Virtus Other Ganbaru Giri Sadaqah Seny Sisu Virtù Authority control databases International FAST National Germany United States France BnF data Israel NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐dfczw
Cached time: 20250817043925
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.810 seconds
Real time usage: 1.014 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 6063/1000000
Revision size: 17200/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 117203/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 6256/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 16/100
Expensive parser function count: 5/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 90872/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.517/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 16938443/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  881.166      1 -total
 20.99%  184.931      1 Template:Reflist
 18.27%  161.015     52 Template:Transliteration
 14.38%  126.742     11 Template:Cite_book
 11.88%  104.675      3 Template:Navbox
 11.32%   99.720      1 Template:Greek_myth_(personified)
 10.92%   96.250      1 Template:Sidebar
  8.86%   78.060      1 Template:Infobox_deity
  8.01%   70.588      1 Template:Short_description
  6.61%   58.207      1 Template:Infobox Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:581086:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817043925 and revision id 1269442852. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Arete&oldid=1269442852 " Categories : Concepts in ancient Greek ethics Hellenistic deities Virtue Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Articles containing Greek-language text Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets via Module:Annotated link Articles containing Latin-language text Articles containing Catalan-language text Articles containing Italian-language text This page was last edited on 14 January 2025, at 18:21 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Arete 21 languages Add topic

