Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Nature of Roman myth Toggle Nature of Roman myth subsection 1.1 Founding myths 1.2 Other myths 2 Religion and myth Toggle Religion and myth subsection 2.1 Foreign gods 3 Astronomy 4 See also 5 References 6 Sources 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Roman mythology 82 languages Afrikaans العربية Aragonés Արեւմտահայերէն অসমীয়া Asturianu Azərbaycanca বাংলা Беларуская Български Bosanski Català Чӑвашла Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa ქართული Kiswahili Kreyòl ayisyen Kurdî Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Lingua Franca Nova Magyar Македонски مصرى Bahasa Melayu မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Polski Português Română Русский Sakizaya Shqip Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt Walon West-Vlams Winaray 吴语 粵語 Zazaki 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Romulus and Remus , the Lupercal , Father Tiber , and the Palatine on a relief from a pedestal dating to the reign of Trajan (AD 98–117) Mythology Mythologies Indeterminate Proto-Indo-European Africa Berber Bantu Efik Guanche Kongo Lugbara Maasai Malagasy Mbuti Somali West African Yoruba Mediterranean Egyptian French Greek Iberian Basque Catalan Cantabrian Lusitanian Italian Etruscan Roman Romanian Turkic Europe Albanian Baltic Latvian Lithuanian Prussian Celtic Breton Cornish Irish Scottish Welsh English Estonian Georgian Germanic Nazi mythology Frankish Continental Germanic Norse Anglo-Saxon Gothic Slavic Uralic Finnish Hungarian Proto-Uralic Sámi Middle East Arabian Armenian Christian Hittite Jewish Mesopotamian Ossetian Persian Talysh Asia Buddhist Chinese Hindu Japanese Korean Meitei Mongol Philippine Tai Thai Tibetan Vietnamese Oceania Aboriginal Australian Indonesian Māori Melanesian Micronesian Papuan Polynesian North America Algonquian Abenaki Blackfoot Lenape Aztec Californian Miwok Ohlone Choctaw Muscogee/Creek Haida Inuit Iroquois Maya Kwakwakaʼwakw Plains Indians Ho-Chunk Lakota Pawnee Puebloan Hopi Zuni Talamancan South America Brazilian Chaná Chilote Guarani Inca Muisca Selk'nam Types Creation Flood National Origin Lists Creations Creatures Deities Feral children Floods Heroes Culture Folk Objects Pairs Places Sources Related concepts Deity Legendary creature Type Legendary progenitor Twins Culture hero Folk hero See also Comparative mythology Comparative religion Euhemerism Folklore Epics Lower mythology Pseudo-mythology Religion and mythology Symbolism Theology v t e Part of a series on the Culture of Italy History Citizenship Currency and coinage Economy Fashion Flags Genetic Historic states Judaism LGBT Military Music Name Postage Railway People Languages Italian Arbëresh Algherese Slavomolisano Aostan French Friulian Gallo-Italic of Sicily Italian Germanic Griko Ladin Occitan Romani Sardinian Slovene Wenzhounese Traditions Mythology and folklore Roman Mythology Mythology of Italy Cuisine Abruzzese Apulian Arbëreshë Corsican Emilian Ligurian Lombard Mantuan Lucanian Neapolitan Piedmontese Roman Sardinian Sicilian Tuscan Venetian Festivals Tricolour Day (7 January) National Memorial Day of the Exiles and Foibe (10 February) Anniversary of the Unification of Italy (17 March) Liberation Day (25 April) Republic Day (2 June) National Unity and Armed Forces Day (4 November) Natale di Roma (21 April) Religion Roman Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Oriental Orthodoxy Protestantism Islam Judaism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Hinduism Sikhism Reconstructionist Roman religion Neopaganism in Italy Irreligiosity Art Architecture Sculpture Literature Comics Music and performing arts Theatre Folk dance Folk music Media Television Cinema Books Internet Magazines Newspapers Radio Sport Calcio storico Association football Athletics Baseball Rugby union Tennis Football in Italy Monuments World Heritage Sites More Symbols Flag Coat of arms National anthem National day National monument National personification Organisations Italian Cultural Institute Dante Alighieri Society Libraries Museums Italy portal v t e Roman mythology is the body of myths of ancient Rome as represented in the literature and visual arts of the Romans , and is a form of Roman folklore . "Roman mythology"  may also refer to the modern study of these representations, and to the subject matter as represented in the literature and art of other cultures in any period. Roman mythology draws from the mythology of the Italic peoples and shares mythemes with Proto-Indo-European mythology .

The Romans usually treated their traditional narratives as historical, even when these have miraculous or supernatural elements. The stories are often concerned with politics and morality, and how an individual's personal integrity relates to their responsibility to the community or Roman state. Heroism is an important theme. When the stories illuminate Roman religious practices, they are more concerned with ritual, augury , and institutions than with theology or cosmogony .

[ 1 ] Roman mythology also draws on Greek mythology , primarily during the Hellenistic period of Greek influence and through the Roman conquest of Greece , via the artistic imitation of Greek literary models by Roman authors.

[ 2 ] The Romans identified their own gods with those of the ancient Greeks and reinterpreted myths about Greek deities under the names of their Roman counterparts. The influence of Greek mythology likely began as early as Rome's protohistory .

Classical mythology is the amalgamated tradition of Greek and Roman mythologies, as disseminated especially by Latin literature in Europe throughout the Middle Ages , into the Renaissance , and up to present-day uses of myths in fiction and movies. The interpretations of Greek myths by the Romans often had a greater influence on narrative and pictorial representations of myths than Greek sources. In particular, the versions of Greek myths in Ovid 's Metamorphoses , written during the reign of Augustus , came to be regarded as canonical .

Nature of Roman myth In this wall painting from Pompeii , Venus looks on while the physician Iapyx tends to the wound of her son, Aeneas ; the tearful boy is her grandson Ascanius, also known as Iulus , legendary ancestor of Julius Caesar and the Julio-Claudian dynasty Because ritual played the central role in Roman religion that myth did for the Greeks, it is sometimes doubted that the Romans had much of a native mythology. This perception is a product of Romanticism and the classical scholarship of the 19th century, which valued Greek civilization as more "authentically creative." [ 3 ] From the Renaissance to the 18th century, however, Roman myths were an inspiration particularly for European painting .

[ 4 ] The Roman tradition is rich in historical myths, or legends , concerning the foundation and rise of the city. These narratives focus on human actors, with only occasional intervention from deities but a pervasive sense of divinely ordered destiny. In Rome's earliest period, history and myth have a mutual and complementary relationship.

[ 5 ] As T. P. Wiseman notes: The Roman stories still matter , as they mattered to Dante in 1300 and Shakespeare in 1600 and the founding fathers of the United States in 1776. What does it take to be a free citizen ? Can a superpower still be a republic ? How does well-meaning authority turn into murderous tyranny ?

[ 4 ] Major sources for Roman myth include the Aeneid of Virgil and the first few books of Livy 's history as well as Dionysius's Roman Antiquities . Other important sources are the Fasti of Ovid , a six-book poem structured by the Roman religious calendar , and the fourth book of elegies by Propertius . Scenes from Roman myth also appear in Roman wall painting , coins , and sculpture , particularly reliefs .

Founding myths Main article: Founding of Rome The Aeneid and Livy's early history are the best extant sources for Rome's founding myths . Material from Greek heroic legend was grafted onto this native stock at an early date.  The Trojan prince Aeneas was cast as husband of Lavinia , daughter of King Latinus , patronymical ancestor of the Latini , and therefore through a convoluted revisionist genealogy as forebear of Romulus and Remus .  By extension, the Trojans were adopted as the mythical ancestors of the Roman people.

[ 6 ] Other myths Mucius Scaevola in the Presence of Lars Porsenna (early 1640s) by Matthias Stom Polyphemus hears of the arrival of Galatea ; ancient Roman fresco painted in the "Fourth Style" of Pompeii (45–79 AD) The characteristic myths of Rome are often political or moral, that is, they deal with the development of Roman government in accordance with divine law, as expressed by Roman religion , and with demonstrations of the individual's adherence to moral expectations ( mos maiorum ) or failures to do so.

Rape of the Sabine women , explaining the importance of the Sabines in the formation of Roman culture, and the growth of Rome through conflict and alliance.

Numa Pompilius , the Sabine second king of Rome who consorted with the nymph Egeria and established many of Rome's legal and religious institutions.

Servius Tullius , the sixth king of Rome, whose mysterious origins were freely mythologized and who was said to have been the lover of the goddess Fortuna .

The Tarpeian Rock , and why it was used for the execution of traitors.

Lucretia , whose self-sacrifice prompted the overthrow of the early Roman monarchy and led to the establishment of the Republic.

Cloelia , a Roman woman taken hostage by Lars Porsena , who escaped but after negotiations returned voluntarily to save others and preserve the peace treaty.

Horatius at the bridge , on the importance of individual valor .

Mucius Scaevola , who thrust his right hand into the fire to prove his loyalty to Rome.

Caeculus and the founding of Praeneste .

[ 7 ] Manlius and the geese , about divine intervention at the Gallic siege of Rome .

[ 8 ] Stories pertaining to the Nonae Caprotinae and Poplifugia festivals.

[ 9 ] Coriolanus , a story of politics and morality.

The Etruscan city of Corythus as the "cradle" of Trojan and Italian civilization.

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] The arrival of the Great Mother (Cybele) in Rome.

[ 12 ] Religion and myth Main article: Religion in ancient Rome Narratives of divine activity played a more important role in the system of Greek religious belief than among the Romans, for whom ritual and cultus were primary. Although Roman religion was not based on scriptures and their exegesis , priestly literature was one of the earliest written forms of Latin prose .

[ 13 ] The books (libri) and commentaries (commentarii) of the College of Pontiffs and of the augurs contained religious procedures, prayers, and rulings and opinions on points of religious law.

[ 14 ] Although at least some of this archived material was available for consultation by the Roman senate , it was often occultum genus litterarum , [ 15 ] an arcane form of literature to which by definition only priests had access.

[ 16 ] Prophecies pertaining to world history and to Rome's destiny turn up fortuitously at critical junctures in history, discovered suddenly in the nebulous Sibylline books , which Tarquin the Proud (according to legend) purchased in the late 6th century BC from the Cumaean Sibyl . Some aspects of archaic Roman religion survived in the lost theological works of the 1st-century BC scholar Varro , known through other classical and Christian authors.

Capitoline Triad Although traditional Roman religion was conservative in ritual rather than dogmatic in doctrine, the meaning of the rituals they perpetuated could be adapted, expanded, and reinterpreted by accretions of myths, etiologies , commentary, and the influences of other cultures in response to social change.

[ 17 ] The earliest pantheon included Janus, Vesta , and the so-called Archaic Triad of Jupiter, Mars, and Quirinus, whose three patrician flamens were of the highest order . According to tradition, Numa Pompilius , the Sabine second king of Rome , founded Roman religion; Numa was believed to have had as his consort and adviser a Roman goddess or nymph of fountains and of prophecy, Egeria . The Etruscan-influenced Capitoline Triad of Jupiter, Juno and Minerva later became central to official religion, replacing the Archaic Triad – an unusual example within Indo-European religion of a supreme triad formed of two female deities and only one male. The cult of Diana became established on the Aventine Hill , but the most famous Roman manifestation of this goddess may be Diana Nemorensis , owing to the attention paid to her cult by J.G. Frazer in the mythographic classic The Golden Bough . What modern scholars call the Aventine Triad – Ceres , Liber , and Libera – developed in association with the rise of plebeians to positions of wealth and influence.

Punishment of Ixion : in the center stands Mercury holding the caduceus , and on the right Juno sits on her throne. Behind her Iris stands and gestures. On the left Vulcan (the blond figure) stands behind the wheel, manning it, with Ixion already tied to it.

Nephele sits at Mercury's feet. – Roman fresco from the eastern wall of the triclinium in the House of the Vettii , Pompeii , Fourth Style (60–79 AD).

The gods represented distinctly the practical needs of daily life, and the Romans scrupulously accorded them the appropriate rites and offerings. Early Roman divinities included a host of "specialist gods" whose names were invoked in the carrying out of various specific activities. Fragments of old ritual accompanying such acts as plowing or sowing reveal that at every stage of the operation a separate deity was invoked, the name of each deity being regularly derived from the verb for the operation.

Tutelary deities were particularly important in ancient Rome. Saturn was known as the father of Jupiter, Ceres, Pluto, Neptune, Juno, and Vesta.

Thus, Janus and Vesta guarded the door and hearth, the Lares protected the field and house, Pales the pasture, Saturn the sowing, Ceres the growth of the grain, Pomona the fruit, and Consus and Ops the harvest.

Jupiter , the ruler of the gods, was honored for the aid his rains might give to the farms and vineyards. In his more encompassing character he was considered, through his weapon of lightning, the director of human activity. Owing to his widespread domain, the Romans regarded him as their protector in their military activities beyond the borders of their own community. Prominent in early times were the gods Mars and Quirinus , who were often identified with each other. Mars was a god of both war and agriculture; he was honored in March and October. Quirinus was the patron of the armed community in time of peace.

The 19th-century scholar Georg Wissowa [ 18 ] thought that the Romans distinguished two classes of gods, the di indigetes and the di novensides or novensiles :  the indigetes were the original gods of the Roman state, their names and nature indicated by the titles of the earliest priests and by the fixed festivals of the calendar, with 30 such gods honored by special festivals; the novensides were later divinities whose cults were introduced to the city in the historical period, usually at a known date and in response to a specific crisis or felt need.

Arnaldo Momigliano and others, however, have argued that this distinction cannot be maintained.

[ 19 ] During the war with Hannibal , any distinction between "indigenous" and "immigrant" gods begins to fade, and the Romans embraced diverse gods from various cultures as a sign of strength and universal divine favor.

[ 20 ] Foreign gods Mithras in a Roman wall painting The absorption of neighboring local gods took place as the Roman state conquered neighboring territories. The Romans commonly granted the local gods of a conquered territory the same honors as the earlier gods of the Roman state religion . In addition to Castor and Pollux , the conquered settlements in Italy seem to have contributed to the Roman pantheon Diana , Minerva , Hercules , Venus , and deities of lesser rank, some of whom were Italic divinities, others originally derived from the Greek culture of Magna Graecia . In 203 BC, Rome imported the cult object embodying Cybele from Pessinus in Phrygia and welcomed its arrival with due ceremony . Both Lucretius and Catullus , poets contemporary in the mid-1st century BC, offer disapproving glimpses of Cybele's wildly ecstatic cult.

In some instances, deities of an enemy power were formally invited through the ritual of evocatio to take up their abode in new sanctuaries at Rome.

Communities of foreigners ( peregrini ) and former slaves (libertini) continued their own religious practices within the city. In this way Mithras came to Rome and his popularity within the Roman army spread his cult as far afield as Roman Britain . The important Roman deities were eventually identified with the more anthropomorphic Greek gods and goddesses, and assumed many of their attributes and myths.

Astronomy Main article: Milky Way (mythology) The Origin of the Milky Way ( c.

1575–1580) by Tintoretto Many astronomical objects are named after Roman deities, like the planets Mercury , Venus , Mars , Jupiter , Saturn , and Neptune .

In Roman and Greek mythology, Jupiter places his son born by a mortal woman, the infant Hercules , on Juno 's breast while she is asleep so the baby will drink her divine milk and thus become immortal, an act which would endow the baby with godlike qualities. When Juno woke and realized that she was breastfeeding an unknown infant, she pushed him away, some of her milk spills, and the spurting milk became the Milky Way . In another version of the myth, the abandoned Hercules is given by Minerva to Juno for feeding, but Hercules' forcefulness causes Minerva to rip him from her breast in pain. The milk that squirts out forms the Milky Way.

[ 21 ] [ 22 ] [ 23 ] This section needs expansion . You can help by making an edit request adding to it .

( August 2022 ) See also Ancient Rome portal Mythology portal History portal Wikimedia Commons has media related to Roman mythology .

List of Ovid's Metamorphoses characters List of Roman deities Mythology of Italy Roman Polytheistic Reconstructionism Pillar of Yzeures-sur-Creuse References ^ John North, Roman Religion (Cambridge University Press, 2000) pp. 4ff.

^ Rengel, Marian; Daly, Kathleen N. (2009).

Greek and Roman Mythology, A to Z . United States: Facts On File, Incorporated. p. 66.

^ T. P. Wiseman, The Myths of Rome (University of Exeter Press, 2004), preface (n.p.).

^ a b Wiseman, The Myths of Rome , preface.

^ Alexandre Grandazzi , The Foundation of Rome: Myth and History (Cornell University Press, 1997), pp. 45–46.

^ See also Lusus Troiae .

^ J.N. Bremmer and N.M. Horsfall, Roman Myth and Mythography (University of London Institute of Classical Studies, 1987), pp. 49–62.

^ Bremmer and Horsfall, pp. 63–75.

^ Bremmer and Horsfall, pp. 76–88.

^ Bremmer and Horsfall, pp. 89–104 ^ Larissa Bonfante , Etruscan Life and Afterlife: A Handbook of Etruscan Studies (Wayne State University Press, 1986), p. 25.

^ Bremmer and Horsfall, pp. 105–111.

^ Moses Hadas (1952).

A History of Latin Literature . Columbia University Press. p. 15.

ISBN 978-0-231-51487-3 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ C. O. Brink (1963).

Horace on Poetry: Epistles Book II: The Letters to Augustus and Florus . CUP Archive. p. 64.

ISBN 978-0-521-20069-1 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ Cicero, De domo sua 138.

^ Jerzy Linderski , "The libri reconditi ", Harvard Studies in Classical Philology 89 (1985) 207–234.

^ Molly Pasco-Pranger, "With the Veil Removed: Women’s Public Nudity in the Early Roman Empire," Classical Antiquity 38:2 (2019), p. 218.

^ Georg Wissowa , De dis Romanorum indigetibus et novensidibus disputatio (1892), full text (in Latin) online.

^ Arnaldo Momigliano , "From Bachofen to Cumont", in A.D. Momigliano: Studies on Modern Scholarship (University of California Press, 1994), p. 319; Franz Altheim, A History of Roman Religion , as translated by Harold Mattingly (London, 1938), pp. 110–112; Mary Beard , J.A. North and S.R.F. Price.

Religions of Rome: A History (Cambridge University Press, 1998), vol. 1, p. 158, note 7.

^ William Warde Fowler , The Religious Experience of the Roman People (London, 1922) pp. 157 and 319; J.S. Wacher, The Roman World (Routledge, 1987, 2002), p. 751.

^ "Myths about the Milky Way" .

judy-volker.com . Retrieved 21 March 2022 .

^ Leeming, David Adams (1998).

Mythology: The Voyage of the Hero (Third ed.). Oxford, England: Oxford University Press. p. 44.

ISBN 978-0-19-511957-2 .

^ Pache, Corinne Ondine (2010). "Hercules". In Gargarin, Michael; Fantham, Elaine (eds.).

Ancient Greece and Rome . Vol. 1: Academy-Bible. Oxford, England: Oxford University Press. p. 400.

ISBN 978-0-19-538839-8 .

Sources Beard, Mary. 1993. "Looking (Harder) for Roman Myth: Dumézil, Declamation, and the Problems of Definition." In Mythos in Mythenloser Gesellschaft: Das Paradigma Roms.

Edited by Fritz Graf, 44–64. Stuttgart, Germany: Teubner.

Braund, David, and Christopher Gill, eds. 2003.

Myth, History, and Culture in Republican Rome: Studies in Honour of T. P. Wiseman.

Exeter, UK: Univ. of Exeter Press.

Cameron, Alan. 2004.

Greek Mythography in the Roman World.

Oxford: Oxford Univ. Press.

Dumézil, Georges. 1996.

Archaic Roman Religion . Rev. ed. Translated by Philip Krapp. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Univ. Press.

Fox, Matthew. 2011. "The Myth of Rome" In A Companion to Greek Mythology. Blackwell Companions to the Ancient World. Literature and Culture.

Edited by Ken Dowden and Niall Livingstone.   Chichester; Malden, MA:  Wiley-Blackwell.

Gardner, Jane F. 1993.

Roman Myths: The Legendary Past . Austin: Univ. of Texas Press.

Grandazzi, Alexandre. 1997.

The Foundation of Rome: Myth and History.

Translated by Jane Marie Todd. Ithaca, NY: Cornell Univ. Press.

Hall, Edith 2013. "Pantomime: Visualising Myth in the Roman Empire." In Performance in Greek and Roman Theatre.

Edited by George Harrison and George William Mallory, 451–743. Leiden; Boston: Brill.

Miller, Paul Allen. 2013. "Mythology and the Abject in Imperial Satire." In Classical Myth and Psychoanalysis: Ancient and Modern Stories of the Self.

Edited by Vanda Zajko and Ellen O'Gorman, 213–230. Oxford; New York: Oxford University Press.

Newby, Zahra . 2012. "The Aesthetics of Violence: Myth and Danger in Roman Domestic Landscapes." Classical Antiquity 31.2: 349–389.

Wiseman, T. P. 2004.

The Myths of Rome.

Exeter: Univ. of Exeter Press.

Woodard, Roger D. 2013.

Myth, Ritual, and the Warrior in Roman and Indo-European Antiquity.

Cambridge; New York:  Cambridge University Press.

External links Library resources about Roman mythology Online books Resources in your library Resources in other libraries Lexicon Iconographicum Mythologiae Classicae (LIMC) (1981–1999, Artemis-Verlag, 9 volumes), Supplementum (2009, Artemis_Verlag).

LIMC-France (LIMC): Databases Dedicated to Graeco-Roman Mythology and its Iconography.

v t e Religion in ancient Rome Practices and beliefs Libation Sacrifice Vota Temples Festivals Ludi Funerals Imperial cult Greco-Roman mysteries Priesthoods Pontifices Augures Vestal Virgins Flamines Fetiales Epulones Fratres Arvales Salii Deities List of Roman deities Twelve major gods Capitoline Triad Aventine Triad Underworld gods Indigitamenta Deified leaders Divus Julius Divus Augustus Related topics Glossary of ancient Roman religion Roman mythology Ancient Greek religion Etruscan mythology Gallo-Roman religion Interpretatio graeca Decline of Greco-Roman polytheism v t e Ancient Roman religion and mythology Deities ( Dii Consentes ) Agenoria Angerona Anna Perenna Apollo Aurora Bellona Bona Dea Carmenta Castor and Pollux Ceres Cloacina Cupid Dea Dia Diana Dies Dīs Pater Egeria Fauna Faunus Flora Genius Hercules Janus Juno Jupiter Lares Lares Familiares Liber Libertas Luna Mars Mercury Minerva Neptune Nox Ops Orcus Penates Pluto Pomona Priapus Proserpina Quirinus Salacia Saturn Silvanus Sol Summanus Venus Veritas Vesta Vertumnus Vulcan Abstract deities Abundantia Aequitas Aeternitas Africa Annona Averruncus Bonus Eventus Caelus Concordia Feronia Fides Fortuna Fontus Laverna Pax Pietas Roma Salus Securitas Spes Tranquillitas Terra Victoria Legendary figures Aeneas Rhea Silvia Romulus and Remus Numa Pompilius Tullus Hostilius Servius Tullius Ancus Marcius Lucius Tarquinius Priscus Lucius Tarquinius Superbus Kings of Alba Longa Hersilia Legendary beings She-wolf Barnacle goose Texts Virgil Aeneid Ovid Fasti Metamorphoses Propertius Varro Res divinae Sibylline Books Apuleius The Golden Ass Concepts and practices Festivals Interpretatio graeca Imperial cult Charity Palladium Theology of victory Pomerium Temples Capitolium Cella Celtic Philosophy Cynicism Epicureanism Neoplatonism Peripateticism Pythagoreanism Stoicism Events Golden Bough Founding of Rome Natale di Roma Rape of the Sabine Women Battle of Lacus Curtius Objects Gubernaculum Parabiago Plate Pignora imperii Variations Gallo-Roman Mysteries Cybele Isis Mithraism See also Classical mythology Decline Persecution Etruscan religion Glossary Greek mythology Myth and ritual v t e Ancient Rome topics Outline Timeline Index History Foundation Kingdom overthrow Republic Empire History Pax Romana Principate Dominate Western Empire fall historiography of the fall Byzantine Empire decline fall Later Roman Empire History Constitution History Kingdom Republic Empire Late Empire Senate Legislative assemblies Curiate Centuriate Tribal Plebeian Executive magistrates SPQR Law Twelve Tables Mos maiorum Citizenship Auctoritas Imperium Status Litigation Government Curia Forum Cursus honorum Collegiality Emperor Legatus Dux Officium Praefectus Vicarius Vigintisexviri Lictor Magister militum Imperator Princeps senatus Pontifex maximus Augustus Caesar Tetrarch Optimates and populares Province Magistrates Ordinary Consul Censor Praetor Tribune Tribune of the plebs Military tribune Quaestor Aedile Promagistrate Governor Extraordinary Rex Interrex Dictator Magister equitum Decemviri Consular tribune Triumvir Military History Borders Establishment Structure Campaigns Political control Strategy Engineering Frontiers and fortifications castra Technology Army Legion Infantry tactics Personal equipment Siege engines Siege in Ancient Rome Navy Auxiliaries Decorations and punishments Hippika gymnasia Economy Agriculture Deforestation Commerce Finance Currency Republican currency Imperial currency Culture Architecture Art Bathing Calendar Clothing Cosmetics Cuisine Education Family Pater familias Folklore Hairstyles Literature Music Mythology Religion Deities Romanization Romans Sexuality Spectacles Theatre Toys and games Wine Society Patricians Plebs Conflict of the Orders Secessio plebis Equites Gens Tribes Assembly Patronage Naming conventions Demography Women Marriage Adoption Slavery Bagaudae Technology Amphitheatres Aqueducts Bridges Circuses Civil engineering Concrete Domes Metallurgy Numerals Roads Sanitation Ships Temples Theatres Thermae Latin History Alphabet Versions Old Classical Vulgar Late Medieval Renaissance Neo-Latin Contemporary Ecclesiastical Romance languages Writers Latin Aelius Donatus Ammianus Marcellinus Appuleius Asconius Pedianus Augustine Aurelius Victor Ausonius Boëthius Caesar Catullus Cassiodorus Censorinus Cicero Claudian Columella Cornelius Nepos Ennius Eutropius Fabius Pictor Sextus Pompeius Festus Rufus Festus Florus Frontinus Fronto Fulgentius Gellius Horace Hydatius Hyginus Jerome Jordanes Julius Paulus Justin Juvenal Lactantius Livy Lucan Lucretius Macrobius Marcellus Empiricus Marcus Aurelius Manilius Martial Nicolaus Damascenus Nonius Marcellus Obsequens Orosius Ovid Petronius Phaedrus Plautus Pliny the Elder Pliny the Younger Pomponius Mela Priscian Propertius Quadrigarius Quintilian Quintus Curtius Rufus Sallust Seneca the Elder Seneca the Younger Servius Sidonius Apollinaris Silius Italicus Statius Suetonius Symmachus Tacitus Terence Tertullian Tibullus Valerius Antias Valerius Maximus Varro Velleius Paterculus Verrius Flaccus Vergil Vitruvius Greek Aelian Aëtius of Amida Appian Arrian Cassius Dio Diodorus Siculus Diogenes Laërtius Dionysius of Halicarnassus Dioscorides Eusebius of Caesaria Galen Herodian Josephus Julian Libanius Lucian Pausanias Philostratus Phlegon of Tralles Photius Plutarch Polyaenus Polybius Porphyrius Priscus Procopius Simplicius of Cilicia Sozomen Stephanus Byzantinus Strabo Themistius Theodoret Zonaras Zosimus Major cities Alexandria Antioch Aquileia Berytus Bononia Carthage Constantinopolis Eboracum Leptis Magna Londinium Lugdunum Lutetia Mediolanum Pompeii Ravenna Roma Smyrna Vindobona Volubilis Lists and other topics Cities and towns Climate Consuls Dictators Distinguished women Dynasties Emperors Empresses Fiction Film Generals Gentes Geographers Institutions Laws Legacy Legions Magistri equitum Nomina Pontifices maximi Praetors Quaestors Tribunes Roman–Iranian relations External wars and battles Civil wars and revolts Authority control databases National United States Japan Czech Republic Latvia Poland Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Roman_mythology&oldid=1303519393 " Category : Roman mythology Hidden categories: CS1 errors: ISBN date CS1: long volume value Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pages Use dmy dates from February 2020 Articles with excerpts Articles to be expanded from August 2022 All articles to be expanded Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 31 July 2025, at 13:16 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Roman mythology 82 languages Add topic

