Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Publications 2 Notable members 3 Sources 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Connecticut Academy of Arts and Sciences Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikispecies Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American learned society This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) The topic of this article may not meet Wikipedia's notability guidelines for companies and organizations .

Please help to demonstrate the notability of the topic by citing reliable secondary sources that are independent of the topic and provide significant coverage of it beyond a mere trivial mention. If notability cannot be shown, the article is likely to be merged , redirected , or deleted .

Find sources: "Connecticut Academy of Arts and Sciences" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( October 2020 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .

Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( October 2020 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The Connecticut Academy of Arts and Sciences is a learned society founded in 1799 in New Haven, Connecticut "to cultivate every art and science which may tend to advance the interest and happiness of a free and virtuous people." Its purpose is the dissemination of scholarly information.

In the 2021–2022 academic year, the CAAS had 266 members .

Publications [ edit ] Transactions of the Connecticut Academy of Arts and Sciences Memoirs of the Connecticut Academy of Arts and Sciences Catalogue of publications Notable members [ edit ] Asger Aaboe , historian and mathematician Hezekiah Augur , sculptor and inventor Simeon E. Baldwin , jurist, law professor and governor Charles Emerson Beecher , paleontologist Bertram Boltwood , radiochemist Sheila Levrant de Bretteville , graphic designer, artist and educator William Henry Brewer , botanist George Jarvis Brush , mineralogist and academic administrator Henry A. Bumstead , electromagnetist Russell Henry Chittenden , biochemist Edward Salisbury Dana , mineralogist and physicist Arnold Dashefsky , sociologist Franklin Bowditch Dexter , librarian and university administrator Timothy Dwight , educator and theologian Edson Fessenden Gallaudet , aviator Josiah Willard Gibbs , physicist, chemist, and mathematician Frank Austin Gooch , chemist and engineer Henry Solon Graves , forester and educator Charles Sheldon Hastings , physicist Yandell Henderson , physiologist James Mason Hoppin , educator and writer George Trumbull Ladd , philosopher, educator, and psychologist Joseph LaPalombara , political scientist Charles Lemert , sociologist Linda Lorimer , university administrator Chester Lyman , president George Grant MacCurdy , anthropologist Ronald Mallett , theoretical physicist Lafayette Mendel , nutritionist Hubert Anson Newton , astronomer and mathematician Alexander Petrunkevitch , arachnologist Charles Brinckerhoff Richards , engineer William North Rice , geologist, educator, Methodist theologian John Rose , organist Edward Elbridge Salisbury , Sanskritist Benjamin Silliman , chemist and geologist Joseph Siry , architectural historian Gaddis Smith , historian Percey F. Smith , mathematician Jennifer Tucker , historian and biologist Addison Van Name , librarian and linguist John Monroe Van Vleck , mathematician and astronomer Addison Emery Verrill , president Noah Webster , lexicographer, author, editor, prolific author Eli Whitney , inventor of cotton gin William Kurtz Wimsatt Jr.

, literary theorist and critic Sources [ edit ] Rollin Gustav Osterweis, The Sesquicentennial History of the Connecticut Academy of Arts and Sciences (New Haven, 1949) Mary Ellen Ellsworth, A History of the Connecticut Academy of Arts and Sciences 1799-1999 (Transactions, vol. 55) ISBN 9781878500816 External links [ edit ] Official website Yale University entry Scholarly Societies entry Connecticut portal Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National Germany United States France BnF data Australia Norway Vatican Israel Catalonia Academics CiNii People Trove Other IdRef Yale LUX This Connecticut -related article is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it .

v t e Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Connecticut_Academy_of_Arts_and_Sciences&oldid=1255405996 " Categories : Learned societies of the United States Organizations established in 1799 Culture of Yale University Organizations based in New Haven, Connecticut 1799 establishments in the United States Connecticut stubs Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with topics of unclear notability from October 2020 All articles with topics of unclear notability Organization articles with topics of unclear notability Articles lacking in-text citations from October 2020 All articles lacking in-text citations Articles with multiple maintenance issues Official website different in Wikidata and Wikipedia All stub articles This page was last edited on 4 November 2024, at 20:09 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Connecticut Academy of Arts and Sciences Add languages Add topic

