Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Structure 2 Constitutional theory Toggle Constitutional theory subsection 2.1 Principles that motivate citizen behavior according to Montesquieu 3 Liberty and the separation of powers 4 Political sociology 5 See also 6 Notes 7 References 8 Further reading in English 9 External links Toggle the table of contents The Spirit of Law 32 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Български Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Latina Nederlands नेपाली 日本語 Norsk bokmål Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Русский Simple English Suomi Svenska ไทย Українська Tiếng Việt 文言 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Book by Montesquieu This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "The Spirit of Law" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( February 2012 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The Spirit of Law De l'esprit des loix , 1st edn 1748, 2 vols.

Author Montesquieu Language French Subject law Genre non-fiction Publication date 1748 Publication place France Published in English 1750 Media type paper Original text The Spirit of Law at French Wikisource Translation The Spirit of Law at Wikisource Part of the Politics series on Republicanism Concepts Anti-monarchism Anti-corruption Civic virtue Civil society Consent of the governed Democracy Democratization Liberty as non-domination Mixed government Political representation Popular sovereignty Public participation Republic Res publica Rule of law Self-governance Separation of powers Social contract Social equality Schools Classical Federal Kemalism Khomeinism Modern Nasserism Neo-republicanism Venizelism Types Autonomous Capitalist Christian Democratic Federal Imperial Islamic Maritime Parliamentary Peasant People's Revolutionary Secular Sister Soviet Philosophers Arendt Baggini Bello Bentham Bodin Cattaneo Chappell Cicero Condorcet Crick Franklin Harrington Honderich Jefferson Kant Locke Machiavelli Madison Mazzini Mill Montesquieu Paine Pettit Polybius Rousseau Sandel Sidney Sunstein Tocqueville Warburton Wollstonecraft Politicians Adams (Gerry) Adams (John) Atatürk Azaña Bartley Benn Bennett Bolívar Chapman Clark (Katy) Clarke (Tom) Connolly Cromwell Davidson Drakeford Etherington Fabiani Ferguson Flynn Gambetta Garibaldi de Gaulle Grévy Griffith Griffiths Harvie Hatton Hébert Hopkins Huppert Iorwerth Jackson Jay Jefferson Jones (Elin) Jones (Lynne) Juárez Kane Khomeini La Malfa Lenin Lewis Lincoln Lucas Mackay Mackenzie Madison Magid Mannin McDonnell McKechin Mullin Nandy Naysmith Nehru Pound Prescott Ritchie Robespierre Sayed Skates Skinner Slater Slaughter Smith Spadolini Sun Taverne Venizelos Wilson Wood Theoretical works Republic (c. 375 BC) De re publica (54–51 BC) Discourses on Livy (1531) The Tenure of Kings and Magistrates (1649) The Commonwealth of Oceana (1656) Discourses Concerning Government (1698) The Spirit of Law (1748) Discourse on Inequality (1755) The Social Contract (1762) The Federalist Papers (1787–1788) Rights of Man (1791) Perpetual Peace: A Philosophical Sketch (1794) Democracy in America (1835–1840) On Revolution (1963) History Roman Republic Gaṇasaṅgha Classical Athens Republic of Venice Republic of Genoa Republic of Florence Dutch Republic American Revolution French Revolution Spanish American wars of independence Trienio Liberal French Revolution of 1848 5 October 1910 revolution Chinese Revolution Russian Revolution German Revolution of 1918–1919 Turkish War of Independence Mongolian Revolution of 1921 11 September 1922 Revolution 1935 Greek coup d'état attempt Spanish Civil War 1946 Italian institutional referendum 1952 Egyptian revolution 14 July Revolution North Yemen civil war Zanzibar Revolution 1969 Libyan coup d'état 1970 Cambodian coup d'état Metapolitefsi Iranian revolution 1987 Fijian coups d'état Nepalese Civil War Barbadian Republic Proclamation National variants Antigua and Barbuda Australia Bahamas Barbados Canada Ireland Jamaica Japan Morocco Netherlands New Zealand Norway Spain Sweden United Kingdom Scotland Wales United States Republic days Armenia Azerbaijan China Iceland India Iran Italy Kazakhstan Malta Moldova Nepal Niger North Korea North Macedonia Pakistan Philippines Taiwan Turkey Related topics Classical radicalism Common good Communitarianism Criticism of monarchy Egalitarianism The Emperor's New Clothes Jacobinism Liberalism List of republics Monarchism Peasant republic Primus inter pares Republic without republicans Republican empire Republican Party Politics portal v t e The Spirit of Law (French: De l'esprit des lois , originally spelled De l'esprit des loix [ 1 ] ), also known in English as The Spirit of [the] Laws , is a treatise on political theory , as well as a pioneering work in comparative law by Montesquieu , published in 1748.

[ 2 ] Originally published anonymously, as was the norm, its influence outside France was aided by its rapid translation into other languages. In 1750 Thomas Nugent published an English translation, many times revised and reprinted in countless editions. In 1751 the Roman Catholic Church added De l'esprit des lois to its Index Librorum Prohibitorum ("List of Prohibited Books").

Montesquieu's treatise, already widely disseminated, had an enormous influence on the work of many others, most notably: Catherine the Great , who produced Nakaz ( Instruction ); the Founding Fathers of the United States Constitution ; and Alexis de Tocqueville , who applied Montesquieu's methods to a study of American society, in Democracy in America . British historian and politician Macaulay referenced Montesquieu's continuing importance when he wrote in his 1827 essay entitled "Machiavelli" that "Montesquieu enjoys, perhaps, a wider celebrity than any political writer of modern Europe" [1] .

Montesquieu spent about ten years and a lifetime of thought researching and writing De l'esprit des lois , [ 3 ] covering a wide range of topics including law, social life, and anthropology. In this treatise Montesquieu argues that political institutions need, for their success, to reflect the social and geographical aspects of the particular community.  He pleads for a constitutional system of government with separation of powers , the preservation of legality and civil liberties .

[ 4 ] Structure [ edit ] This section needs expansion with: summaries of chapters (perhaps in groups). You can help by adding to it .

( May 2021 ) Preface Part I Book I: On law in general: Book II: On laws which derive directly from the nature of the government -This book contained a great deal of information about popular sovereignty.

Book III: On the principles of the three governments Book IV: That laws on education must relate to the principles of the government Book V: That the laws made by the legislator must be relative to the principle of the government Book VI: Consequences of the principles of the various governments with respect to the simplicity of the civil and criminal laws , the form of judgments, and the establishment of punishments Book VII: Consequences of the different principles of the three governments with respect to sumptuary laws, to luxury, and to the condition of women Book VIII: On the corruption of the principles of the three governments Part II Book IX: On the laws in their relations to the defensive force Book X: On the laws in their relation to offensive strength Book XI: On the laws that constitute political freedom in their relation to the constitution Book XII: On laws that constitute political liberty in its relation to the citizen Book XIII: On the relations which the levying of tributes and the magnitude of public revenues have with liberty Part III Book XIV: On the laws in their relation to the nature of the climate Book XV: How the laws of civil slavery relate to the nature of the climate Book XVI: How the laws of domestic slavery relate to the nature of the climate Book XVII: How the laws of political servitude are related to the nature of the climate Book XVIII: On laws in their relationship to the nature of the terrain Book XIX: On the laws in the relation they have to the principles that constitute the general spirit, the ways, and the manners of a nation Part IV Book XX: On laws in their relationship with commerce, considered in its nature and its distinctions Book XXI: On laws in the relation they have to commerce, considered in the transformations it has seen in the world Book XXII: On the laws in their relation to the use of money Book XXIII: On laws in their relation to the number of inhabitants Part V Book XXIV: On laws in their relation with religion, considered in its doctrines and in itself Book XXV: On laws in their relation with the establishment of religion and its external policy Book XXVI: On laws in the relation they must have with the order of things on which they bear Part VI Book XXVII: On the origin and transformations of the Roman laws on successions Book XXVIII: On the origin and transformations of the civil laws among the French Book XXIX: On the manner of composing laws Book XXX: Theory of feudal laws among the Franks, in the relation they have to the establishment of the monarchy Book XXXI: Theory of feudal laws among the Franks, in their relation to the transformations in their monarchy Constitutional theory [ edit ] In his classification of political systems, Montesquieu defines three main kinds: republican , monarchical , and despotic . As he defines them, Republican political systems vary depending on how broadly they extend citizenship rights—those that extend citizenship relatively broadly are termed democratic republics, while those that restrict citizenship more narrowly are termed aristocratic republics. The distinction between monarchy and despotism hinges on whether or not a fixed set of laws exists that can restrain the authority of the ruler: if so, the regime counts as a monarchy; if not, it counts as despotism.

Principles that motivate citizen behavior according to Montesquieu [ edit ] Driving each classification of political system, according to Montesquieu, must be what he calls a "principle". This principle acts as a spring or motor to motivate behavior on the part of the citizens in ways that will tend to support that regime and make it function smoothly.

For democratic republics (and to a somewhat lesser extent for aristocratic republics), this spring is the love of virtue —the willingness to put the interests of the community ahead of private interests.

For monarchies, the spring is the love of honor —the desire to attain greater rank and privilege.

Finally, for despotisms, the spring is the fear of the ruler —the fear of consequences to authority.

A political system cannot last long if its appropriate principle is lacking. Montesquieu claims, for example, that the English failed to establish a republic after the Civil War (1642–1651) because the society lacked the requisite love of virtue.

Liberty and the separation of powers [ edit ] A second major theme in The Spirit of Law concerns political liberty and the best means of preserving it. "Political liberty" is Montesquieu's concept of what we might call today personal security, especially in so far as this is provided for through a system of dependable and moderate laws. He distinguishes this view of liberty from two other views of political liberty. The first is the view that liberty consists in collective self-government—i.e. that liberty and democracy are the same. The second is the view that liberty consists in being able to do whatever one wants without constraint. Not only are these latter two not genuine political liberty, he maintains, but they can both be hostile to it.

Political liberty is not possible in a despotic political system, but it is possible, though not guaranteed, in republics and monarchies. Generally speaking, establishing political liberty on a sound footing requires two things: The separation of the powers of government .

Building on and revising a discussion in John Locke 's Second Treatise of Government , Montesquieu argues that the executive, legislative, and judicial functions of government should be assigned to different bodies, so that attempts by one branch of government to infringe on political liberty might be restrained by the other branches. ( Habeas corpus is an example of a check that the judicial branch has on the executive branch of government.) In a lengthy discussion of the English political system, he tries to show how this might be achieved and liberty secured, even in a monarchy. He also notes that liberty cannot be secure where there is no separation of powers, even in a republic.

The appropriate framing of civil and criminal laws so as to ensure personal security.

Montesquieu intends what modern legal scholars might call the rights to "robust procedural due process", including the right to a fair trial , the presumption of innocence and the proportionality in the severity of punishment . Pursuant to this requirement to frame civil and criminal laws appropriately to ensure political liberty (i.e., personal security), Montesquieu also argues against slavery and for the freedom of thought , speech and assembly .

This book mainly concerns explicit laws, but also pays considerable attention to cultural norms that may support the same goals. "Montesquieu believed the hard architecture of political institutions might be enough to constrain overreaching power — that constitutional design was not unlike an engineering problem," as Levitsky and Ziblatt put it.

[ 5 ] Political sociology [ edit ] The third major contribution of The Spirit of Law was to the field of political sociology , which Montesquieu is often credited with more or less inventing. The bulk of the treatise, in fact, concerns how geography and climate interact with particular cultures to produce the spirit of a people. This spirit, in turn, inclines that people toward certain sorts of political and social institutions, and away from others. Later writers often caricatured Montesquieu's theory by suggesting that he claimed to explain legal variation simply by the distance of a community from the equator.

[ original research?

] While the analysis in The Spirit of Law is much more subtle than these later writers perceive, many of his specific claims lack rigour to modern readers. Nevertheless, his approach to politics from a naturalistic or scientific point of view proved very influential, directly or indirectly inspiring modern fields of political science, sociology, and anthropology.

[ original research?

] See also [ edit ] Comparative law Democracy Doux commerce Letter and spirit of the law Rule of law Mutual liberty Notes [ edit ] ^ Montesquieu (1977). David Wallace Carrithers (ed.).

The Spirit of the Laws: A Compendium of the First English Edition . Berkeley: U California P.

^ De l'Esprit des loix ou du Rapport que les loix doivent avoir avec la constitution de chaque gouvernement, les moeurs, le climat, la religion, le commerce, &c . à quoi l'auteur a ajouté des recherches nouvelles sur les loix romaines touchant les successions, sur les loix françoises, & sur les loix féodales . Vol. I (1 ed.). A Genève, chez Barrillot & fils . Retrieved September 7, 2016 – via Gallica.

^ Mes pensées, nos. 1872 and 1920 .

^ Cohler, et al., "Introduction" to the 1989 Cambridge UP ed.

^ Levitsky, Steven ; Ziblatt, Daniel (16 January 2018).

How Democracies Die (Nook e-book, first ed.). Crown Publishing. p.

166 .

ISBN 9781524762957 .

Cohler, A. M., Miller, B. C., & Stone, H. S. (1989). Montesquieu: The spirit of the laws. Cambridge University Press.

References [ edit ] Montesquieu, L'esprit des loix . Texte établi et présenté par Jean Brethe de La Gressaye (Paris: Societe Les Belles Lettres, 1950–1961. Takes account of variants in all editions issued between 1748 and 1757.

Montesquieu: The Spirit of the Laws , trans. Anne M. Cohler, Basia Carolyn Miller, and Harold Samuel Stone.  Cambridge Texts in the History of Political Thought. Cambridge: Cambridge UP , 1989.

Montesquieu: The Spirit of Law , trans. Philip Stewart, 2018.

http://montesquieu.ens-lyon.fr/spip.php?rubrique186 Bok, Hilary,  " Baron de Montesquieu, Charles-Louis de Secondat ", Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.

Volpilhac-Auger, Catherine, Montesquieu , Paris: Gallimard, "Folio Biographies", 2017.

Further reading in English [ edit ] Sheila Mason, Montesquieu’s Idea of Justice , The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1975.

Mark Hulliung, Montesquieu and the Old Regime , Berkeley: University of California Press, 1976.

Stephen J. Rosow, "Commerce, Power and Justice: Montesquieu on international politics," Review of Politics 46, no. 3 (July 1984): 346–366.

Anne M. Cohler, Montesquieu’s Comparative Politics and the Spirit of American Constitutionalism , Lawrence KS: University Press of Kansas, 1988.

Thomas L. Pangle, Montesquieu’s Philosophy of Liberalism: a commentary on "The Spirit of the Laws" , Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1989.

David W. Carrithers, "Montesquieu’s philosophy of punishment," History of Political Thought 19 (1998), p. 213-240.

David W. Carrithers, Michael A. Mosher, and Paul A. Rahe, eds., Montesquieu’s Science of Politics: essays on "The Spirit of Laws", Lanham, Maryland: Rowman & Littlefield, 2001.

Robert Howse, "Montesquieu on Commerce, War, and Peace," Brookings Journal of International Law 31, no. 3 (2006): 693–708.

http://www.law.nyu.edu/sites/default/files/ECM_PRO_060042.pdf Paul A. Rahe, Montesquieu and the Logic of Liberty, New Haven: Yale University Press, 2009.

Andrea Radasanu, "Montesquieu on Moderation, Monarchy and Reform," History of Political Thought 31, no. 2 (2010), p. 283–307.

Rolando Minuti, Studies on Montesquieu: mapping political diversity , Cham (Switzerland): Springer, 2018. (Translation by Julia Weiss of Una geografia politica della diversità: studi su Montesquieu , Naples, Liguori, 2015.) Andrew Scott Bibby, Montesquieu’s Political Economy , New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2016.

Joshua Bandoch, The Politics of Place: Montesquieu, particularism, and the pursuit of liberty , Rochester: University of Rochester Press, 2017.

Vickie B. Sullivan, Montesquieu and the Despotic Ideas of Europe: an interpretation of "The Spirit of the laws" , University of Chicago Press, 2017.

Keegan Callanan, Montesquieu’s Liberalism and the Problem of Universal Politics , New York: Cambridge University Press, 2018.

Sharon R. Krause , The Rule of Law in Montesquieu , Cambridge University Press, 2021.

Vickie V. Sullivan, "Montesquieu on Slavery," in K. Callanan, The Cambridge Companion to Montesquieu , New York, 2023, p. 182-197.

External links [ edit ] English Wikisource has original text related to this article: The Spirit of Laws Wikiquote has quotations related to The Spirit of the Laws .

Wikimedia Commons has media related to The Spirit of the Laws by Montesquieu .

de Secondat, Charles, Baron de Montesquieu , " The Spirit of Laws " (Free – The Internet Archive, High Resolution) de Secondat, Charles, Baron de Montesquieu , " The Spirit of Laws: Volume 1 ", 1793 (Free – Librivox, Audiobook) de Secondat, Charles, Baron de Montesquieu ,  " The Spirit of Laws "  2 vols.  Originally published anonymously.  1748; Crowder, Wark, and Payne, 1777.  Trans.  Thomas Nugent (1750).  Rev.  J. V. Prichard.  ("Based on a public domain edition published in 1914 by G. Bell & Sons, Ltd., London.  Rendered into HTML and text by Jon Roland of The Constitution Society.")  Accessed May 16, 2007.

A Montesquieu Dictionary , Société Montesquieu, open access: " [2] Archived 2022-02-27 at the Wayback Machine " Montesquieu: The Spirit of Law . Trans. Philip Stewart, 2018. Open access: " [3] ".

v t e Jurisprudence Legal theory Constitutionalism Critical legal studies Comparative law Economic analysis Legal norms International legal theory Legal history Philosophy of law Sociology of law Philosophers Alexy Aquinas Aristotle Austin Bastiat Beccaria Bentham Blackstone Bobbio Bork Brożek Cardozo Durkheim Dworkin Ehrlich Finnis Fuller Grotius Gurvitch Habermas Haller Han Hart Hegel Hobbes Hägerström Jellinek Jhering Kant Kelsen Leoni Llewellyn Luhmann Maistre Marx Montesquieu Müller Nussbaum Olivecrona Pashukanis Perelman Petrażycki Plato Posner Pound Pufendorf Radbruch Rawls Raz Reinach Renner Ross Rumi Savigny Scaevola Schmitt Shang Suárez Stahl Unger Voegelin Waldron Walzer Weber Works Laws (c. 355 BC) Treatise on Law (c. 1270) The Spirit of Law (1748) Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1820) Pure Theory of Law (1934) The Concept of Law (1961) Natural Law and Natural Rights (1980) Law's Empire (1986) Theories Analytical jurisprudence Deontological ethics Fundamental theory of Catholic canon law German historical school Interpretivism Legal moralism Legal positivism Legal realism Legalism Libertarian theories of law Natural law Paternalism Utilitarianism Virtue jurisprudence Concepts Constitutional amendment Dharma Fa Judicial interpretation Judicial reform Justice Law without the state Legal system Li Question of law Rational-legal authority Usul al-Fiqh Category Law portal Philosophy portal WikiProject Law WikiProject Philosophy changes v t e Political philosophy Terms Authority Citizenship‎ Duty Elite Emancipation Freedom Government Hegemony Hierarchy Justice Law Legitimacy Liberty Monopoly Nation Obedience Peace People Pluralism Power Progress Propaganda Property Regime Revolution Rights Ruling class Society Sovereignty‎ State Utopia War Government Aristocracy Oligarchy Autocracy Bureaucracy Dictatorship Democracy Ochlocracy Gerontocracy Meritocracy Monarchy Tyranny Plutocracy Technocracy Theocracy Ideologies Agrarianism Anarchism Capitalism Christian democracy Colonialism Communism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Corporatism Distributism Environmentalism Fascism Feminism Feudalism Imperialism Islamism Liberalism Libertarianism Localism Marxism Monarchism Multiculturalism Nationalism Nazism Populism Republicanism Social Darwinism Social democracy Socialism Third Way Concepts Balance of power Bellum omnium contra omnes Body politic Clash of civilizations Common good Consent of the governed Divine right of kings Family as a model for the state Monopoly on violence Natural law Negative and positive rights Night-watchman state Noble lie Noblesse oblige Open society Ordered liberty Original position Overton window Separation of powers Social contract State of nature Statolatry Supermajority Tyranny of the majority Philosophers Antiquity Aristotle Chanakya Cicero Confucius Han Fei Lactantius Mencius Mozi Plato political philosophy Polybius Shang Sun Tzu Thucydides Xenophon Middle Ages Al-Farabi Aquinas Averroes Bruni Dante Gelasius al-Ghazali Ibn Khaldun Marsilius Muhammad Nizam al-Mulk Ockham Plethon Wang Early modern period Boétie Bodin Bossuet Calvin Campanella Filmer Grotius Guicciardini Hobbes political philosophy James Leibniz Locke Luther Machiavelli Milton More Müntzer Pufendorf Spinoza Suárez 18th and 19th centuries Bakunin Bastiat Beccaria Bentham Bolingbroke Bonald Burke Carlyle Comte Condorcet Constant Cortés Engels Fichte Fourier Franklin Godwin Haller Hegel Herder Hume Iqbal Jefferson Kant political philosophy Le Bon Le Play Madison Maistre Marx Mazzini Mill Montesquieu Nietzsche Owen Paine Renan Rousseau Sade Saint-Simon Smith Spencer de Staël Stirner Taine Thoreau Tocqueville Tucker Voltaire 20th and 21st centuries Agamben Ambedkar Arendt Aron Badiou Bauman Benoist Berlin Bernstein Burnham Chomsky Dmowski Du Bois Dugin Dworkin Evola Foucault Fromm Fukuyama Gandhi Gentile Gramsci Guénon Habermas Hayek Hoppe Huntington Kautsky Khomeini Kirk Kropotkin Laclau Lenin Luxemburg Mansfield Mao Marcuse Maurras Michels Mises Mosca Mouffe Negri Nozick Nussbaum Oakeshott Ortega Pareto Popper Qutb Rand Rawls Röpke Rothbard Russell Sartre Schmitt Scruton Shariati Sorel Spann Spengler Strauss Sun Taylor Voegelin Walzer Weber Works Republic (c. 375 BC) Politics (c. 350 BC) On the Republic (51 BC) Treatise on Law (c. 1274) Monarchy (1313) The Prince (1532) Leviathan (1651) Two Treatises of Government (1689) The Spirit of Law (1748) The Social Contract (1762) Reflections on the Revolution in France (1790) Rights of Man (1791) Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1820) Democracy in America (1835–1840) The Communist Manifesto (1848) On Liberty (1859) The Revolt of the Masses (1929) The Road to Serfdom (1944) The Open Society and Its Enemies (1945) The Origins of Totalitarianism (1951) A Theory of Justice (1971) The End of History and the Last Man (1992) Related Authoritarianism Collectivism and individualism Conflict theories Contractualism Critique of political economy Egalitarianism Elite theory Elitism History of political thought Institutional discrimination Jurisprudence Justification for the state Political ethics Political spectrum Left-wing politics Centrism Right-wing politics Political theology Political violence Separation of church and state Separatism Social justice Statism Totalitarianism Category:Political philosophy Authority control databases International VIAF National Israel NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐2rhtf
Cached time: 20250817044909
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.796 seconds
Real time usage: 1.022 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 4115/1000000
Revision size: 18464/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 149002/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 16115/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 18/100
Expensive parser function count: 5/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 56261/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.498/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 16374599/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  856.439      1 -total
 21.71%  185.893      1 Template:Infobox_book
 19.46%  166.704      1 Template:Infobox
 14.52%  124.341      3 Template:Sister_project
 14.35%  122.919      1 Template:Reflist
 14.31%  122.539      3 Template:Side_box
 13.92%  119.204      1 Template:Republicanism_sidebar
 13.65%  116.885      1 Template:Politics_series_sidebar
 13.40%  114.771      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 12.90%  110.518      4 Template:Cite_book Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:2449747:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817044909 and revision id 1302073206. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=The_Spirit_of_Law&oldid=1302073206 " Categories : 1748 non-fiction books Books about political philosophy Modern philosophical literature Works by Montesquieu Books about sovereignty Treatises Comparative law Works published anonymously Censored books Separation of powers Abolitionism Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from February 2012 All articles needing additional references Articles containing French-language text Articles that link to foreign-language Wikisources Articles that link to Wikisource Articles to be expanded from May 2021 All articles to be expanded All articles that may contain original research Articles that may contain original research from December 2020 Commons category link is locally defined Webarchive template wayback links Articles containing Latin-language text This page was last edited on 23 July 2025, at 05:59 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents The Spirit of Law 32 languages Add topic

