Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Ancient philosophy 1.2 Medieval philosophy 1.3 Modern philosophy 1.4 Contemporary philosophy 2 Major topics and subfields Toggle Major topics and subfields subsection 2.1 Meaning 2.2 Reference 2.3 Composition and parts 2.4 Mind and language 2.4.1 Innateness and learning 2.5 Communication 2.5.1 Language and thought 2.6 Social interaction and language 2.7 Truth 3 Problems in the philosophy of language Toggle Problems in the philosophy of language subsection 3.1 Nature of language 3.2 Problem of universals and composition 3.3 Formal versus informal approaches 3.4 Game theoretical approach 3.5 Translation and interpretation 3.6 Vagueness 4 Further reading 5 See also 6 External links 7 References Toggle the table of contents Philosophy of language 66 languages Afrikaans Anarâškielâ العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca বাংলা Башҡортса Български བོད་ཡིག Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית Қазақша Kreyòl ayisyen Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Magyar Македонски Malagasy Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Slovenčina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Index of philosophy of language articles ) Not to be confused with Linguistic philosophy or philosophy of linguistics .

Part of a series on Philosophy Philosophy portal Contents Outline Glossary History Categories Philosophies By period Ancient Egyptian Greek Roman Chinese Medieval Buddhism Neo-Confucianism Scholasticism Renaissance Modern Enlightenment Idealism Contemporary Analytic Continental By region African Egyptian Ethiopian South African Eastern Chinese Indian Indonesian Japanese Korean Vietnamese Indigenous American Aztec Middle Eastern Iranian Western United States British French German Italian Russian By religion Buddhist Confucian Christian Hindu Islamic Jain Jewish Taoist Branches Epistemology Ethics Logic Metaphysics Aesthetics Education History Language Law Metaphilosophy Mind Ontology Phenomenology Political Religion Science Philosophers Aesthetic philosophers Epistemologists Ethicists Logicians Metaphysicians Philosophers of mind Social and political philosophers Women in philosophy v t e Part of a series on Linguistics Outline History Index General linguistics Diachronic Lexicography Morphology Phonology Pragmatics Semantics Syntax Syntax–semantics interface Typology Applied linguistics Acquisition Anthropological Applied Mathematical Computational Conversation analysis Corpus linguistics Discourse analysis Determinism Distance Documentation Ethnography of communication Ethnomethodology Forensic History of linguistics Interlinguistics Neurolinguistics Philology Philosophy of language Phonetics Psycholinguistics Sociolinguistics Text Translating and interpreting Writing systems Theoretical frameworks Formalist Constituency Dependency Distributionalism Generative Glossematics Functional Cognitive Construction grammar Functional discourse grammar Grammaticalization Interactional linguistics Prague circle Systemic functional Usage-based Structuralism Topics Autonomy of syntax Compositionality Conservative and innovative language Descriptivism Etymology Iconicity Internet linguistics LGBTQ linguistics Origin of language Orismology Orthography Philosophy of linguistics Prescriptivism Second-language acquisition Theory of language Terminology Portal v t e Philosophy of language refers to the philosophical study of the nature of language . It investigates the relationship between language, language users, and the world.

[ 1 ] Investigations may include inquiry into the nature of meaning , intentionality , reference , the constitution of sentences, concepts, learning , and thought .

Gottlob Frege and Bertrand Russell were pivotal figures in analytic philosophy's " linguistic turn ". These writers were followed by Ludwig Wittgenstein ( Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus ), the Vienna Circle , logical positivists , and Willard Van Orman Quine .

[ 2 ] History [ edit ] Further information: History of linguistics Ancient philosophy [ edit ] In the West, inquiry into language stretches back to the 5th century BC with philosophers such as Socrates , Plato , Aristotle , and the Stoics .

[ 3 ] Linguistic speculation predated systematic descriptions of grammar which emerged c.

the 5th century BC in India and c.

the 3rd century BC in Greece.

In the dialogue Cratylus , Plato considered the question of whether the names of things were determined by convention or by nature. He criticized conventionalism because it led to the bizarre consequence that anything can be conventionally denominated by any name. Hence, it cannot account for the correct or incorrect application of a name. He claimed that there was a natural correctness to names. To do this, he pointed out that compound words and phrases have a range of correctness. He also argued that primitive names had a natural correctness, because each phoneme represented basic ideas or sentiments. For example, for Plato the letter l and its sound represented the idea of softness. However, by the end of Cratylus , he had admitted that some social conventions were also involved, and that there were faults in the idea that phonemes had individual meanings.

[ 4 ] Plato is often considered a proponent of extreme realism .

Aristotle interested himself with issues of logic , categories, and the creation of meaning. He separated all things into categories of species and genus . He thought that the meaning of a predicate was established through an abstraction of the similarities between various individual things. This theory later came to be called nominalism .

[ 5 ] However, since Aristotle took these similarities to be constituted by a real commonality of form, he is more often considered a proponent of moderate realism .

The Stoics made important contributions to the analysis of grammar, distinguishing five parts of speech: nouns, verbs, appellatives (names or epithets ), conjunctions and articles . They also developed a sophisticated doctrine of the lektón associated with each sign of a language, but distinct from both the sign itself and the thing to which it refers. This lektón was the meaning or sense of every term. The complete lektón of a sentence is what we would now call its proposition .

[ 6 ] Only propositions were considered truth-bearing —meaning they could be considered true or false—while sentences were simply their vehicles of expression. Different lektá could also express things besides propositions, such as commands, questions and exclamations.

[ 7 ] Medieval philosophy [ edit ] Medieval philosophers were greatly interested in the subtleties of language and its usage. For many scholastics , this interest was provoked by the necessity of translating Greek texts into Latin . There were several noteworthy philosophers of language in the medieval period. According to Peter J. King (though this has been disputed), Peter Abelard anticipated the modern theories of reference .

[ 8 ] Also, William of Ockham 's Summa Logicae brought forward one of the first serious proposals for codifying a mental language.

[ 9 ] The scholastics of the high medieval period, such as Ockham and John Duns Scotus , considered logic to be a scientia sermocinalis (science of language). The result of their studies was the elaboration of linguistic-philosophical notions whose complexity and subtlety has only recently come to be appreciated. Many of the most interesting problems of modern philosophy of language were anticipated by medieval thinkers. The phenomena of vagueness and ambiguity were analyzed intensely, and this led to an increasing interest in problems related to the use of syncategorematic words , such as and , or , not , if , and every . The study of categorematic words (or terms ) and their properties was also developed greatly.

[ 10 ] One of the major developments of the scholastics in this area was the doctrine of the suppositio .

[ 11 ] The suppositio of a term is the interpretation that is given of it in a specific context. It can be proper or improper (as when it is used in metaphor , metonym , and other figures of speech). A proper suppositio , in turn, can be either formal or material according to whether it refers to its usual non-linguistic referent (as in "Charles is a man"), or to itself as a linguistic entity (as in "'Charles' has seven letters"). Such a classification scheme is the precursor of modern distinctions between use and mention , and between language and metalanguage.

[ 11 ] There is a tradition called speculative grammar which existed from the 11th to the 13th century. Leading scholars included Martin of Dacia and Thomas of Erfurt (see Modistae ).

Modern philosophy [ edit ] Linguists of the Renaissance and Baroque periods such as Johannes Goropius Becanus , Athanasius Kircher and John Wilkins were infatuated with the idea of a philosophical language reversing the confusion of tongues , influenced by the gradual discovery of Chinese characters and Egyptian hieroglyphs ( Hieroglyphica ). This thought parallels the idea that there might be a universal language of music.

European scholarship began to absorb the Indian linguistic tradition only from the mid-18th century, pioneered by Jean François Pons and Henry Thomas Colebrooke (the editio princeps of Varadarāja , a 17th-century Sanskrit grammarian, dating to 1849).

In the early 19th century, the Danish philosopher Søren Kierkegaard insisted that language should play a larger role in Western philosophy . He argued that philosophy has not sufficiently focused on the role language plays in cognition and that future philosophy ought to proceed with a conscious focus on language: If the claim of philosophers to be unbiased were all it pretends to be, it would also have to take account of language and its whole significance in relation to speculative philosophy ... Language is partly something originally given, partly that which develops freely. And just as the individual can never reach the point at which he becomes absolutely independent ... so too with language.

[ 12 ] Contemporary philosophy [ edit ] See also: Ordinary language philosophy Language began to play a central role in Western philosophy in the early 20th century. The phrase " linguistic turn " describes the noteworthy emphasis that contemporary philosophers put upon language during this time.

One of the central figures involved in this development was the German philosopher Gottlob Frege , whose work on philosophical logic and the philosophy of language in the late 19th century influenced the work of 20th-century analytic philosophers Bertrand Russell and Ludwig Wittgenstein . In continental philosophy , the foundational work in the field was Ferdinand de Saussure 's Cours de linguistique générale , [ 13 ] published posthumously in 1916. The philosophy of language became so pervasive that for a time, in analytic philosophy circles, philosophy as a whole was understood to be a matter of philosophy of language.

Searching to disrupt the philosophy of language embroiled in these postmodernist and post-structuralist deadlocks, American academic Jason Ānanda Josephson Storm has introduced hylosemiotics .

[ 14 ] Influenced by theory including pragmatism in the mode of William James combined with insight into plant and animal communication , hylosemiotics seeks to establish a panspecies approach to signs, their intention, and meaning.

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] In other words, hylosemiotics is a movement to strip the philosophy of language of its anthropocentrism .

Major topics and subfields [ edit ] Meaning [ edit ] Main articles: Meaning (linguistic) and Meaning (philosophy of language) The topic that has received the most attention in the philosophy of language has been the nature of meaning, to explain what "meaning" is, and what we mean when we talk about meaning. Within this area, issues include: the nature of synonymy , the origins of meaning itself, our apprehension of meaning, and the nature of composition (the question of how meaningful units of language are composed of smaller meaningful parts, and how the meaning of the whole is derived from the meaning of its parts).

There have been several distinctive explanations of what a linguistic "meaning" is. Each has been associated with its own body of literature.

The ideational theory of meaning , most commonly associated with the British empiricist John Locke , claims that meanings are mental representations provoked by signs.

[ 17 ] Although this view of meaning has been beset by a number of problems from the beginning (see the main article for details), interest in it has been renewed by some contemporary theorists under the guise of semantic internalism .

[ 18 ] The truth-conditional theory of meaning holds meaning to be the conditions under which an expression may be true or false. This tradition goes back at least to Frege and is associated with a rich body of modern work, spearheaded by philosophers like Alfred Tarski and Donald Davidson .

[ 19 ] [ 20 ] (See also Wittgenstein's picture theory of language .) The use theory of meaning , most commonly associated with the later Wittgenstein , helped inaugurate the idea of "meaning as use", and a communitarian view of language. Wittgenstein was interested in the way in which the communities use language, and how far it can be taken.

[ 21 ] It is also associated with P. F. Strawson , John Searle , Robert Brandom , and others.

[ 22 ] The inferentialist theory of meaning, the view that the meaning of an expression is derived from the inferential relations that it has with other expressions. This view is thought to be descended from the use theory of meaning, and has been most notably defended by Wilfrid Sellars and Robert Brandom .

The direct reference theory of meaning, the view that the meaning of a word or expression is what it points out in the world. While views of this kind have been widely criticized regarding the use of language in general, John Stuart Mill defended a form of this view, and Saul Kripke and Ruth Barcan Marcus have both defended the application of direct reference theory to proper names .

The semantic externalist theory of meaning, according to which meaning is not a purely psychological phenomenon, because it is determined, at least in part, by features of one's environment. There are two broad subspecies of externalism: social and environmental. The first is most closely associated with Tyler Burge and the second with Hilary Putnam , Saul Kripke and others.

[ 23 ] [ 24 ] [ 25 ] The verificationist theory of meaning is generally associated with the early 20th century movement of logical positivism . The traditional formulation of such a theory is that the meaning of a sentence is its method of verification or falsification. In this form, the thesis was abandoned after the acceptance by most philosophers of the Duhem–Quine thesis of confirmation holism after the publication of Quine 's " Two Dogmas of Empiricism ".

[ 26 ] However, Michael Dummett has advocated a modified form of verificationism since the 1970s. In this version, the comprehension (and hence meaning) of a sentence consists in the hearer's ability to recognize the demonstration (mathematical, empirical or other) of the truth of the sentence.

[ 27 ] Pragmatic theories of meaning include any theory in which the meaning (or understanding) of a sentence is determined by the consequences of its application. Dummett attributes such a theory of meaning to Charles Sanders Peirce and other early 20th century American pragmatists.

[ 27 ] Psychological theories of meaning , which focus on the intentions of a speaker in determining the meaning of an utterance. One notable proponent of such a view was Paul Grice , whose views also account for non-linguistic meaning (i.e., meaning as conveyed by body language, meanings as consequences, etc.).

[ 28 ] Reference [ edit ] Investigations into how language interacts with the world are called theories of reference .

Gottlob Frege was an advocate of a mediated reference theory . Frege divided the semantic content of every expression, including sentences, into two components: sense and reference . The sense of a sentence is the thought that it expresses. Such a thought is abstract, universal and objective. The sense of any sub-sentential expression consists in its contribution to the thought that its embedding sentence expresses. Senses determine reference and are also the modes of presentation of the objects to which expressions refer.

Referents are the objects in the world that words pick out. The senses of sentences are thoughts, while their referents are truth values (true or false). The referents of sentences embedded in propositional attitude ascriptions and other opaque contexts are their usual senses.

[ 29 ] Bertrand Russell , in his later writings and for reasons related to his theory of acquaintance in epistemology , held that the only directly referential expressions are what he called "logically proper names". Logically proper names are such terms as I , now , here and other indexicals .

[ 30 ] [ 31 ] He viewed proper names of the sort described above as "abbreviated definite descriptions " (see Theory of descriptions ). Hence Joseph R. Biden may be an abbreviation for "a past President of the United States and husband of Jill Biden". Definite descriptions are denoting phrases (see " On Denoting ") which are analyzed by Russell into existentially quantified logical constructions. Such phrases denote in the sense that there is an object that satisfies the description. However, such objects are not to be considered meaningful on their own, but have meaning only in the proposition expressed by the sentences of which they are a part. Hence, they are not directly referential in the same way as logically proper names, for Russell.

[ 32 ] [ 33 ] On Frege's account, any referring expression has a sense as well as a referent. Such a "mediated reference" view has certain theoretical advantages over Mill's view. For example, co-referential names, such as Samuel Clemens and Mark Twain , cause problems for a directly referential view because it is possible for someone to hear "Mark Twain is Samuel Clemens" and be surprised – thus, their cognitive content seems different.

Despite the differences between the views of Frege and Russell, they are generally lumped together as descriptivists about proper names. Such descriptivism was criticized in Saul Kripke 's Naming and Necessity .

Kripke put forth what has come to be known as "the modal argument" (or "argument from rigidity"). Consider the name Aristotle and the descriptions "the greatest student of Plato", "the founder of logic" and "the teacher of Alexander".

Aristotle obviously satisfies all of the descriptions (and many of the others we commonly associate with him), but it is not necessarily true that if Aristotle existed then Aristotle was any one, or all, of these descriptions. Aristotle may well have existed without doing any single one of the things for which he is known to posterity. He may have existed and not have become known to posterity at all or he may have died in infancy. Suppose that Aristotle is associated by Mary with the description "the last great philosopher of antiquity" and (the actual) Aristotle died in infancy. Then Mary's description would seem to refer to Plato. But this is deeply counterintuitive. Hence, names are rigid designators , according to Kripke. That is, they refer to the same individual in every possible world in which that individual exists. In the same work, Kripke articulated several other arguments against " Frege–Russell " descriptivism [ 25 ] (see also Kripke's causal theory of reference ).

The whole philosophical enterprise of studying reference has been critiqued by linguist Noam Chomsky in various works.

[ 34 ] [ 35 ] Composition and parts [ edit ] It has long been known that there are different parts of speech . One part of the common sentence is the lexical word , which is composed of nouns , verbs, and adjectives. A major question in the field – perhaps the single most important question for formalist and structuralist thinkers – is how the meaning of a sentence emerges from its parts.

Example of a syntactic tree Many aspects of the problem of the composition of sentences are addressed in the field of linguistics of syntax . Philosophical semantics tends to focus on the principle of compositionality to explain the relationship between meaningful parts and whole sentences. The principle of compositionality asserts that a sentence can be understood on the basis of the meaning of the parts of the sentence (i.e., words, morphemes) along with an understanding of its structure (i.e., syntax, logic).

[ 36 ] Further, syntactic propositions are arranged into discourse or narrative structures, which also encode meanings through pragmatics like temporal relations and pronominals.

[ 37 ] It is possible to use the concept of functions to describe more than just how lexical meanings work: they can also be used to describe the meaning of a sentence. In the sentence "The horse is red", "the horse" can be considered to be the product of a propositional function . A propositional function is an operation of language that takes an entity (in this case, the horse) as an input and outputs a semantic fact (i.e., the proposition that is represented by "The horse is red"). In other words, a propositional function is like an algorithm. The meaning of "red" in this case is whatever takes the entity "the horse" and turns it into the statement, "The horse is red." [ 38 ] Linguists have developed at least two general methods of understanding the relationship between the parts of a linguistic string and how it is put together: syntactic and semantic trees.

Syntactic trees draw upon the words of a sentence with the grammar of the sentence in mind; semantic trees focus upon the role of the meaning of the words and how those meanings combine to provide insight onto the genesis of semantic facts.

Mind and language [ edit ] Innateness and learning [ edit ] Some of the major issues at the intersection of philosophy of language and philosophy of mind are also dealt with in modern psycholinguistics . Some important questions regard the amount of innate language, if language acquisition is a special faculty in the mind, and what the connection is between thought and language.

There are three general perspectives on the issue of language learning. The first is the behaviorist perspective, which dictates that not only is the solid bulk of language learned, but it is learned via conditioning. The second is the hypothesis testing perspective , which understands the child's learning of syntactic rules and meanings to involve the postulation and testing of hypotheses, through the use of the general faculty of intelligence. The final candidate for explanation is the innatist perspective, which states that at least some of the syntactic settings are innate and hardwired, based on certain modules of the mind.

[ 39 ] [ 40 ] There are varying notions of the structure of the brain when it comes to language.

Connectionist models emphasize the idea that a person's lexicon and their thoughts operate in a kind of distributed, associative network.

[ 41 ] Nativist models assert that there are specialized devices in the brain that are dedicated to language acquisition.

[ 40 ] Computation models emphasize the notion of a representational language of thought and the logic-like, computational processing that the mind performs over them.

[ 42 ] Emergentist models focus on the notion that natural faculties are a complex system that emerge from simpler biological parts.

Reductionist models attempt to explain higher-level mental processes in terms of the basic low-level neurophysiological activity.

[ 43 ] Communication [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( February 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Firstly, this field of study seeks to better understand what speakers and listeners do with language in communication , and how it is used socially. Specific interests include the topics of language learning , language creation, and speech acts .

Secondly, the question of how language relates to the minds of both the speaker and the interpreter is investigated. Of specific interest is the grounds for successful translation of words and concepts into their equivalents in another language.

Language and thought [ edit ] An important problem which touches both philosophy of language and philosophy of mind is to what extent language influences thought and vice versa. There have been a number of different perspectives on this issue, each offering a number of insights and suggestions.

Linguists Sapir and Whorf suggested that language limited the extent to which members of a "linguistic community" can think about certain subjects (a hypothesis paralleled in George Orwell 's novel Nineteen Eighty-Four ).

[ 44 ] In other words, language was analytically prior to thought. Philosopher Michael Dummett is also a proponent of the "language-first" viewpoint.

[ 45 ] The stark opposite to the Sapir–Whorf position is the notion that thought (or, more broadly, mental content) has priority over language. The "knowledge-first" position can be found, for instance, in the work of Paul Grice .

[ 45 ] Further, this view is closely associated with Jerry Fodor and his language of thought hypothesis. According to his argument, spoken and written language derive their intentionality and meaning from an internal language encoded in the mind.

[ 46 ] The main argument in favor of such a view is that the structure of thoughts and the structure of language seem to share a compositional, systematic character. Another argument is that it is difficult to explain how signs and symbols on paper can represent anything meaningful unless some sort of meaning is infused into them by the contents of the mind. One of the main arguments against is that such levels of language can lead to an infinite regress.

[ 46 ] In any case, many philosophers of mind and language, such as Ruth Millikan , Fred Dretske and Fodor, have recently turned their attention to explaining the meanings of mental contents and states directly.

Another tradition of philosophers has attempted to show that language and thought are coextensive – that there is no way of explaining one without the other. Donald Davidson, in his essay "Thought and Talk", argued that the notion of belief could only arise as a product of public linguistic interaction.

Daniel Dennett holds a similar interpretationist view of propositional attitudes .

[ 47 ] To an extent, the theoretical underpinnings to cognitive semantics (including the notion of semantic framing ) suggest the influence of language upon thought.

[ 48 ] However, the same tradition views meaning and grammar as a function of conceptualization, making it difficult to assess in any straightforward way.

Some thinkers, like the ancient sophist Gorgias , have questioned whether or not language was capable of capturing thought at all.

...speech can never exactly represent perceptibles, since it is different from them, and perceptibles are apprehended each by the one kind of organ, speech by another. Hence, since the objects of sight cannot be presented to any other organ but sight, and the different sense-organs cannot give their information to one another, similarly speech cannot give any information about perceptibles. Therefore, if anything exists and is comprehended, it is incommunicable.

[ 49 ] There are studies that prove that languages shape how people understand causality. Some of them were performed by Lera Boroditsky . For example, English speakers tend to say things like "John broke the vase" even for accidents. However, Spanish or Japanese speakers would be more likely to say "the vase broke itself". In studies conducted by Caitlin Fausey at Stanford University speakers of English, Spanish and Japanese watched videos of two people popping balloons, breaking eggs and spilling drinks either intentionally or accidentally. Later everyone was asked whether they could remember who did what. Spanish and Japanese speakers did not remember the agents of accidental events as well as did English speakers.

[ 50 ] Russian speakers, who make an extra distinction between light and dark blue in their language, are better able to visually discriminate shades of blue. The Piraha , a tribe in Brazil , whose language has only terms like few and many instead of numerals, are not able to keep track of exact quantities.

[ 51 ] In one study German and Spanish speakers were asked to describe objects having opposite gender assignment in those two languages. The descriptions they gave differed in a way predicted by grammatical gender . For example, when asked to describe a "key"—a word that is masculine in German and feminine in Spanish—the German speakers were more likely to use words like "hard", "heavy", "jagged", "metal", "serrated" and "useful" whereas Spanish speakers were more likely to say "golden", "intricate", "little", "lovely", "shiny" and "tiny". To describe a "bridge", which is feminine in German and masculine in Spanish, the German speakers said "beautiful", "elegant", "fragile", "peaceful", "pretty" and "slender", and the Spanish speakers said "big", "dangerous", "long", "strong", "sturdy" and "towering". This was the case even though all testing was done in English, a language without grammatical gender.

[ 52 ] In a series of studies conducted by Gary Lupyan, people were asked to look at a series of images of imaginary aliens.

[ 53 ] Whether each alien was friendly or hostile was determined by certain subtle features but participants were not told what these were. They had to guess whether each alien was friendly or hostile, and after each response they were told if they were correct or not, helping them learn the subtle cues that distinguished friend from foe. A quarter of the participants were told in advance that the friendly aliens were called "leebish" and the hostile ones "grecious", while another quarter were told the opposite. For the rest, the aliens remained nameless. It was found that participants who were given names for the aliens learned to categorize the aliens far more quickly, reaching 80 per cent accuracy in less than half the time taken by those not told the names. By the end of the test, those told the names could correctly categorize 88 per cent of aliens, compared to just 80 per cent for the rest. It was concluded that naming objects helps us categorize and memorize them.

In another series of experiments, [ 54 ] a group of people was asked to view furniture from an IKEA catalog. Half the time they were asked to label the object – whether it was a chair or lamp, for example – while the rest of the time they had to say whether or not they liked it. It was found that when asked to label items, people were later less likely to recall the specific details of products, such as whether a chair had arms or not. It was concluded that labeling objects helps our minds build a prototype of the typical object in the group at the expense of individual features.

[ 55 ] Social interaction and language [ edit ] A common claim is that language is governed by social conventions. Questions inevitably arise on surrounding topics. One question regards what a convention exactly is, and how it is studied, and second regards the extent that conventions even matter in the study of language.

David Kellogg Lewis proposed a worthy reply to the first question by expounding the view that a convention is a "rationally self-perpetuating regularity in behavior". However, this view seems to compete to some extent with the Gricean view of speaker's meaning, requiring either one (or both) to be weakened if both are to be taken as true.

[ 45 ] Some have questioned whether or not conventions are relevant to the study of meaning at all.

Noam Chomsky proposed that the study of language could be done in terms of the I-Language, or internal language of persons. If this is so, then it undermines the pursuit of explanations in terms of conventions, and relegates such explanations to the domain of metasemantics .

Metasemantics is a term used by philosopher of language Robert Stainton to describe all those fields that attempt to explain how semantic facts arise.

[ 38 ] One fruitful source of research involves investigation into the social conditions that give rise to, or are associated with, meanings and languages.

Etymology (the study of the origins of words) and stylistics (philosophical argumentation over what makes "good grammar", relative to a particular language) are two other examples of fields that are taken to be metasemantic.

Many separate (but related) fields have investigated the topic of linguistic convention within their own research paradigms. The presumptions that prop up each theoretical view are of interest to the philosopher of language. For instance, one of the major fields of sociology, symbolic interactionism , is based on the insight that human social organization is based almost entirely on the use of meanings.

[ 56 ] In consequence, any explanation of a social structure (like an institution ) would need to account for the shared meanings which create and sustain the structure.

Rhetoric is the study of the particular words that people use to achieve the proper emotional and rational effect in the listener, be it to persuade, provoke, endear, or teach. Some relevant applications of the field include the examination of propaganda and didacticism , the examination of the purposes of swearing and pejoratives (especially how it influences the behaviors of others, and defines relationships), or the effects of gendered language. It can also be used to study linguistic transparency (or speaking in an accessible manner), as well as performative utterances and the various tasks that language can perform (called "speech acts"). It also has applications to the study and interpretation of law, and helps give insight to the logical concept of the domain of discourse .

Literary theory is a discipline that some literary theorists claim overlaps with the philosophy of language. It emphasizes the methods that readers and critics use in understanding a text. This field, an outgrowth of the study of how to properly interpret messages, is
closely tied to the ancient discipline of hermeneutics .

Truth [ edit ] Finally, philosophers of language investigate how language and meaning relate to truth and the reality being referred to . They tend to be less interested in which sentences are actually true , and more in what kinds of meanings can be true or false . A truth-oriented philosopher of language might wonder whether or not a meaningless sentence can be true or false, or whether or not sentences can express propositions about things that do not exist, rather than the way sentences are used.

[ citation needed ] Problems in the philosophy of language [ edit ] Nature of language [ edit ] Main article: Theory of language In the philosophical tradition stemming from the Ancient Greeks, such as Plato and Aristotle, language is seen as a tool for making statements about the reality by means of predication ; e.g. "Man is a rational animal", where Man is the subject and is a rational animal is the predicate , which expresses a property of the subject. Such structures also constitute the syntactic basis of syllogism , which remained the standard model of formal logic until the early 20th century, when it was replaced with predicate logic . In linguistics and philosophy of language, the classical model survived in the Middle Ages, and the link between Aristotelian philosophy of science and linguistics was elaborated by Thomas of Erfurt's Modistae grammar ( c.

1305 ), which gives an example of the analysis of the transitive sentence: "Plato strikes Socrates", where Socrates is the object and part of the predicate.

[ 57 ] [ 58 ] The social and evolutionary aspects of language were discussed during the classical and mediaeval periods. Plato's dialogue Cratylus investigates the iconicity of words, arguing that words are made by "wordsmiths" and selected by those who need the words, and that the study of language is external to the philosophical objective of studying ideas .

[ 59 ] Age-of-Enlightenment thinkers accommodated the classical model with a Christian worldview, arguing that God created Man social and rational, and, out of these properties, Man created his own cultural habits including language.

[ 60 ] In this tradition, the logic of the subject-predicate structure forms a general, or 'universal' grammar, which governs thinking and underpins all languages. Variation between languages was investigated in the Port-Royal Grammar of Arnauld and Lancelot, among others, who described it as accidental and separate from the logical requirements of thought and language.

[ 61 ] The classical view was overturned in the early 19th century by the advocates of German romanticism .

Humboldt and his contemporaries questioned the existence of a universal inner form of thought . They argued that, since thinking is verbal, language must be the prerequisite for thought. Therefore, every nation has its own unique way of thinking, a worldview , which has evolved with the linguistic history of the nation.

[ 62 ] Diversity became emphasized with a focus on the uncontrollable sociohistorical construction of language. Influential romantic accounts include Grimm 's sound laws of linguistic evolution, Schleicher 's "Darwinian" species-language analogy, the Völkerpsychologie accounts of language by Steinthal and Wundt , and Saussure 's semiology , a dyadic model of semiotics , i.e., language as a sign system with its own inner logic, separated from physical reality.

[ 63 ] In the early 20th century, logical grammar was defended by Frege and Husserl . Husserl's 'pure logical grammar' draws from 17th-century rational universal grammar, proposing a formal semantics that links the structures of physical reality (e.g., "This paper is white") with the structures of the mind, meaning, and the surface form of natural languages. Husserl's treatise was, however, rejected in general linguistics.

[ 64 ] Instead, linguists opted for Chomsky 's theory of universal grammar as an innate biological structure that generates syntax in a formalistic fashion, i.e., irrespective of meaning.

[ 57 ] Many philosophers continue to hold the view that language is a logically based tool of expressing the structures of reality by means of predicate-argument structure. Proponents include, with different nuances, Russell , Wittgenstein , Sellars , Davidson , Putnam , and Searle . Attempts to revive logical formal semantics as a basis of linguistics followed, e.g., the Montague grammar . Despite resistance from linguists including Chomsky and Lakoff , formal semantics was established in the late twentieth century. However, its influence has been mostly limited to computational linguistics , with little impact on general linguistics.

[ 65 ] The incompatibility with genetics and neuropsychology of Chomsky's innate grammar gave rise to new psychologically and biologically oriented theories of language in the 1980s, and these have gained influence in linguistics and cognitive science in the 21st century. Examples include Lakoff's conceptual metaphor , which argues that language arises automatically from visual and other sensory input, and different models inspired by Dawkins 's memetics , [ 66 ] a neo-Darwinian model of linguistic units as the units of natural selection . These include cognitive grammar , construction grammar , and usage-based linguistics .

[ 67 ] Problem of universals and composition [ edit ] Further information: Problem of universals One debate that has captured the interest of many philosophers is the debate over the meaning of universals . It might be asked, for example, why when people say the word rocks , what it is that the word represents. Two different answers have emerged to this question. Some have said that the expression stands for some real, abstract universal out in the world called "rocks". Others have said that the word stands for some collection of particular, individual rocks that are associated with merely a nomenclature. The former position has been called philosophical realism , and the latter nominalism .

[ 68 ] The issue here can be explicated in examination of the proposition "Socrates is a man".

From the realist's perspective, the connection between S and M is a connection between two abstract entities. There is an entity, "man", and an entity, "Socrates". These two things connect in some way or overlap.

From a nominalist's perspective, the connection between S and M is the connection between a particular entity (Socrates) and a vast collection of particular things (men). To say that Socrates is a man is to say that Socrates is a part of the class of "men". Another perspective is to consider "man" to be a property of the entity, "Socrates".

There is a third way, between nominalism and (extreme) realism , usually called " moderate realism " and attributed to Aristotle and Thomas Aquinas. Moderate realists hold that "man" refers to a real essence or form that is really present and identical in Socrates and all other men, but "man" does not exist as a separate and distinct entity. This is a realist position, because "man" is real, insofar as it really exists in all men; but it is a moderate realism, because "man" is not an entity separate from the men it informs.

Formal versus informal approaches [ edit ] Another of the questions that has divided philosophers of language is the extent to which formal logic can be used as an effective tool in the analysis and understanding of natural languages. While most philosophers, including Gottlob Frege , Alfred Tarski and Rudolf Carnap , have been more or less skeptical about formalizing natural languages, many of them developed formal languages for use in the sciences or formalized parts of natural language for investigation. Some of the most prominent members of this tradition of formal semantics include Tarski, Carnap, Richard Montague and Donald Davidson .

[ 69 ] On the other side of the divide, and especially prominent in the 1950s and '60s, were the so-called " ordinary language philosophers ". Philosophers such as P. F. Strawson , John Langshaw Austin and Gilbert Ryle stressed the importance of studying natural language without regard to the truth-conditions of sentences and the references of terms. They did not believe that the social and practical dimensions of linguistic meaning could be captured by any attempts at formalization using the tools of logic. Logic is one thing and language is something entirely different. What is important is not expressions themselves but what people use them to do in communication.

[ 70 ] Hence, Austin developed a theory of speech acts , which described the kinds of things which can be done with a sentence (assertion, command, inquiry, exclamation) in different contexts of use on different occasions.

[ 71 ] Strawson argued that the truth-table semantics of the logical connectives (e.g., ∧ ∧ {\displaystyle \land } , ∨ ∨ {\displaystyle \lor } and → → {\displaystyle \rightarrow } ) do not capture the meanings of their natural language counterparts ("and", "or" and "if-then").

[ 72 ] While the "ordinary language" movement basically died out in the 1970s, its influence was crucial to the development of the fields of speech-act theory and the study of pragmatics . Many of its ideas have been absorbed by theorists such as Kent Bach , Robert Brandom , Paul Horwich and Stephen Neale .

[ 22 ] In recent work, the division between semantics and pragmatics has become a lively topic of discussion at the interface of philosophy and linguistics, for instance in work by Sperber and Wilson, Carston and Levinson.

[ 73 ] [ 74 ] [ 75 ] While keeping these traditions in mind, the question of whether or not there is any grounds for conflict between the formal and informal approaches is far from being decided. Some theorists, like Paul Grice , have been skeptical of any claims that there is a substantial conflict between logic and natural language.

[ 76 ] Game theoretical approach [ edit ] Game theory has been suggested as a tool to study the evolution of language. Some researchers that have developed game theoretical approaches to philosophy of language are David K. Lewis , Schuhmacher, and Rubinstein.

[ 77 ] Translation and interpretation [ edit ] Translation and interpretation are two other problems that philosophers of language have attempted to confront. In the 1950s, W.V. Quine argued for the indeterminacy of meaning and reference based on the principle of radical translation . In Word and Object , Quine asks readers to imagine a situation in which they are confronted with a previously undocumented, group of indigenous people where they must attempt to make sense of the utterances and gestures that its members make. This is the situation of radical translation.

[ 78 ] He claimed that, in such a situation, it is impossible in principle to be absolutely certain of the meaning or reference that a speaker of the indigenous peoples language attaches to an utterance. For example, if a speaker sees a rabbit and says "gavagai", is she referring to the whole rabbit, to the rabbit's tail, or to a temporal part of the rabbit?  All that can be done is to examine the utterance as a part of the overall linguistic behaviour of the individual, and then use these observations to interpret the meaning of all other utterances. From this basis, one can form a manual of translation. But, since reference is indeterminate, there will be many such manuals, no one of which is more correct than the others. For Quine, as for Wittgenstein and Austin, meaning is not something that is associated with a single word or sentence, but is rather something that, if it can be attributed at all, can only be attributed to a whole language.

[ 78 ] The resulting view is called semantic holism .

Inspired by Quine's discussion, Donald Davidson extended the idea of radical translation to the interpretation of utterances and behavior within a single linguistic community. He dubbed this notion radical interpretation . He suggested that the meaning that any individual ascribed to a sentence could only be determined by attributing meanings to many, perhaps all, of the individual's assertions, as well as their mental states and attitudes.

[ 20 ] Vagueness [ edit ] One issue that has troubled philosophers of language and logic is the problem of the vagueness of words. The specific instances of vagueness that most interest philosophers of language are those where the existence of "borderline cases" makes it seemingly impossible to say whether a predicate is true or false. Classic examples are "is tall" or "is bald", where it cannot be said that some borderline case (some given person) is tall or not-tall. In consequence, vagueness gives rise to the paradox of the heap . Many theorists have attempted to solve the paradox by way of n -valued logics, such as fuzzy logic , which have radically departed from classical two-valued logics.

[ 79 ] Further reading [ edit ] Atherton, Catherine. 1993.

The Stoics on Ambiguity.

Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.

Denyer, Nicholas. 1991.

Language, Thought and Falsehood in Ancient Greek Philosophy.

London: Routledge.

Kneale, W., and M. Kneale. 1962.

The Development of Logic.

Oxford: Clarendon.

Modrak, Deborah K. W.

2001.

Aristotle's Theory of Language and Meaning.

Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.

Sedley, David. 2003.

Plato's Cratylus.

Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.

See also [ edit ] Analytic philosophy Discourse Interpersonal communication Linguistics Semiotics Theory of language External links [ edit ] Philosophy of language at the Indiana Philosophy Ontology Project Philosophy of language at PhilPapers "Philosophy of Language" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Magee, Bryan (March 14, 2008).

"John Searle on the Philosophy of Language, Part 1" . Searle John (interviewee). flame0430's channel.

Archived from the original on 2021-11-11.

One of five parts, the others found here, 2 here. 3 here, 4 here, 5 There are also 16 lectures by Searle, beginning with "Searle: Philosophy of Language, lecture 1" . SocioPhilosophy's channel. October 25, 2011.

Archived from the original on 2021-11-11.

Sprachlogik short articles in the philosophies of logic and language.

Glossary of Linguistic terms .

What is I-language?

Archived 2011-07-06 at the Wayback Machine – Chapter 1 of I-language: An Introduction to Linguistics as Cognitive Science.

The London Philosophy Study Guide Archived 2009-09-23 at the Wayback Machine offers many suggestions on what to read, depending on the student's familiarity with the subject: Philosophy of Language .

Carnap, R., (1956).

Meaning and Necessity: a Study in Semantics and Modal Logic . University of Chicago Press.

Collins, John. (2001). Truth Conditions Without Interpretation.

[1] .

Devitt, Michael and Hanley, Richard, eds. (2006) The Blackwell Guide to the Philosophy of Language. Oxford: Blackwell.

Eco, Umberto .

Semiotics and the Philosophy of Language . Indiana University Press, 1986, ISBN 0253203988 , ISBN 9780253203984 .

Greenberg, Mark and Harman, Gilbert. (2005). Conceptual Role Semantics.

[2] .

Hale, B. and Crispin Wright, Ed. (1999). Blackwell Companions To Philosophy. Malden, Massachusetts, Blackwell Publishers.

Isac, Daniela; Charles Reiss (2013).

I-language: An Introduction to Linguistics as Cognitive Science, 2nd edition . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-953420-3 .

Lepore, Ernest and Barry C. Smith (eds). (2006).

The Oxford Handbook of Philosophy of Language . Oxford University Press.

Lycan, W. G. (2008).

Philosophy of Language: A Contemporary Introduction . New York, Routledge.

Miller, James. (1999).

PEN-L message, Bad writing .

Searle, John (2007).

Philosophy of Language : an interview with John Searle.

Stainton, Robert J. (1996).

Philosophical Perspectives on Language . Peterborough, Ont., Broadview Press.

Tarski, Alfred. (1944). " The Semantical Conception of Truth ".

Turri, John. (2016).

Knowledge and the Norm of Assertion: An Essay in Philosophical Science . Open Book Publishers.

doi : 10.11647/OBP.0083 .

ISBN 978-1-78374-183-0 .

Watson, Gerard (1982).

"St. Augustine's Theory of Language" .

The Maynooth Review / Revieú Mhá Nuad .

6 (2).

Maynooth : Faculty of Arts, Celtic Studies & Philosophy NUIM : 4– 20.

ISSN 0332-4869 .

JSTOR 20556950 . Retrieved 3 March 2025 .

.

References [ edit ] ^ "Philosophy of language" .

Encyclopedia Britannica . Retrieved 2018-11-14 .

^ "Philosophy of Language" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Retrieved 2019-09-22 .

^ Blackburn, S.

(1995). "History of the Philosophy of Language". In Honderich, Ted (ed.).

The Oxford companion to philosophy . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-198-66132-0 .

^ Plato (2007) [c. 360 BC].

Cratylus . Translated by Sedley, David N.

Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0-521-58492-0 .

Also available via Project Gutenberg .

^ Porphyry (1992) [c. 270].

On Aristotle's categories . Translated by Strange, Steven K. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.

ISBN 978-0-801-42816-6 .

^ Eco, Umberto (1986).

Semiotics and the Philosophy of Language . Indiana University Press. p.

30 .

ISBN 978-0-253-20398-4 .

^ Mates, Benson (1973) [1953].

Stoic Logic (Repr. ed.). Berkeley: University of California Press.

ISBN 978-0-520-02368-0 .

^ King, Peter.

Peter Abelard.

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.

http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/abelard/#4 ^ Chalmers, D. (1999) "Is there Synonymy in Occam's Mental Language?". Published in The Cambridge Companion to Ockham , edited by Paul Vincent Spade. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0-521-58244-5 ^ Marconi, D. "Storia della Filosofia del Linguaggio". In L'Enciclopedia Garzantina della Filosofia . ed. Gianni Vattimo. Milan: Garzanti Editori. 1981.

ISBN 88-11-50515-1 ^ a b Kretzmann, N.

, Anthony Kenny & Jan Pinborg . (1982) Cambridge History of Later Medieval Philosophy . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 0-521-22605-8 ^ Søren Kierkegaard (1813–1855). In Cloeren, H.

Language and Thought . Berlin: Walter de Gruyter, 1988.

^ David Kreps, Bergson, Complexity and Creative Emergence , Springer, 2015, p. 92.

^ Josephson Storm, Jason (2021).

Metamodernism: The Future of Theory . University of Chicago Press.

ISBN 9780226786797 .

^ Nencini, Andrea Maria (2023-12-04).

"Metamodernism: A Multispecies Approach to Hermeneutics" .

Method & Theory in the Study of Religion .

37 (1): 47– 56.

doi : 10.1163/15700682-bja10123 .

ISSN 0943-3058 .

^ Josephson Storm, Jason (2021).

Metamodernism: The Future of Theory . University of Chicago Press.

ISBN 9780226786797 .

^ Grigoris Antoniou, John Slaney (eds.), Advanced Topics in Artificial Intelligence , Springer, 1998, p. 9.

^ Block, Ned. "Conceptual Role Semantics" (online) .

^ Tarski, Alfred. (1944). "The Semantical Conception of Truth".

PDF .

^ a b Davidson, D. (2001) Inquiries into Truth and Interpretation . Oxford: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 0-19-924629-7 ^ Wittgenstein, L.

(1958) Philosophical Investigations . Third edition. trans.

G. E. M. Anscombe . New York: Macmillan Publishing Co.

^ a b Brandom, R. (1994) Making it Explicit . Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press.

ISBN 0-674-54330-0 ^ Burge, Tyler. 1979. Individualism and the Mental.

Midwest Studies in Philosophy 4: 73–121.

^ Putnam, H. (1975) "The Meaning of 'Meaning'" Archived 2013-06-18 at the Wayback Machine . In Language, Mind and Knowledge . ed. K. Gunderson. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.

ISBN 88-459-0257-9 ^ a b Kripke, S. (1980) Naming and Necessity . Oxford: Basil Blackwell.

ISBN 88-339-1135-7 ^ Voltolini, A. (2002) "Olismi Irriducibilmente Indipendenti?". In Olismo ed. Massimo Dell'Utri. Macerata: Quodlibet.

ISBN 88-86570-85-6 ^ a b Dummett, M. (1991) The Logical Basis of Metaphysics . Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press.

ISBN 88-15-05669-6 ^ Grice, Paul. "Meaning".

Perspectives in the Philosophy of Language.

(2000), ed. Robert Stainton.

^ Frege, G. (1892). " On Sense and Reference ". In Frege: Senso, Funzione e Concetto . eds.

Eva Picardi and Carlo Penco . Bari: Editori Laterza. 2001.

ISBN 88-420-6347-9 ^ Stanley, Jason. (2006).

Philosophy of Language in the Twentieth Century Archived 2006-04-24 at the Wayback Machine . Forthcoming in the Routledge Guide to Twentieth Century Philosophy.

^ Gaynesford, M. de I: The Meaning of the First Person Term , Oxford, Oxford University Press, 2006.

^ Russell, B. (1905) "On Denoting". Published in Mind .

online text , Neale, Stephen (1990) Descriptions, Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press.

^ Russell, B. (1903) I Principi della Matematica . Original title: The Principles of Mathematics . Italian trans. by Enrico Carone and Maurizio Destro. Rome: Newton Compton editori. 1971.

ISBN 88-8183-730-7 ^ Chomsky, Noam.

New horizons in the study of language and mind . Cambridge University Press, 2000.

^ Piattelli-Palmarini, Massimo, Juan Uriagereka, and Pello Salaburu, eds.

Of Minds and Language: A Dialogue with Noam Chomsky in the Basque Country . Oxford University Press, 2009, p. 27.

^ Pagin, P. "Are Holism and Compositionality Compatible?" In Olismo . ed. Massimo dell'Utri. Macerata: Quodlibet. 2002.

ISBN 88-86570-85-6 ^ Syntax: An Introduction, Volume 1 by Talmy Givón, John Benjamins Publishing, 2001 ^ a b Stainton, Robert J. (1996).

Philosophical perspectives on language . Peterborough, Ont., Broadview Press.

^ Fodor, Jerry A. (1983).

The Modularity of Mind: An Essay in Faculty Psychology . The MIT Press.

ISBN 0-262-56025-9 .

^ a b Pinker, S. (1994) L'Istinto del Linguaggio . Original title: The Language Instinct . 1997. Milan: Arnaldo Mondadori Editori.

ISBN 88-04-45350-8 ^ Churchland, P. (1995) Engine of Reason, Seat of the Soul: A Philosophical Journey Into the Brain. Cambridge, Massachusetts: The MIT Press.

^ Fodor, J and E. Lepore. (1999) "All at Sea in Semantic Space: Churchland on Meaning Similarity". Journal of Philosophy 96, 381–403.

^ Hofstadter, D.R. (1979) Gödel, Escher, Bach: An Eternal Golden Braid . New York: Random House.

ISBN 0-394-74502-7 ^ Kay, P. and W. Kempton. 1984. "What is the Sapir-Whorf Hypothesis?" American Anthropologist 86(1): 65–79.

^ a b c Bunnin, Nicholas; Tsui-James, E. P. (1999).

The Blackwell Companion to Philosophy . Oxford: Blackwell. p.

97 , 120–121.

^ a b Fodor, J.

The Language of Thought , Harvard University Press, 1975, ISBN 0-674-51030-5 .

^ Gozzano, S. "Olismo, Razionalità e Interpretazione". In Olismo ed. Massimo dell'Utri. 2002. Macerata: Quodlibet.

ISBN 88-86570-85-6 ^ Lakoff, G. (1987) Women, Fire, and Dangerous Things: What Categories Reveal About the Mind . Chicago:University of Chicago Press.

ISBN 0-226-46804-6 .

^ Giorgias (c. 375 BCE) translated by Kathleen Freeman. In Kaufmann, W.

Philosophic Classics: Thales to Ockham . New Jersey: Prentice Hall, Inc. 1961, 1968.

^ "csjarchive.cogsci.rpi.edu/Proceedings/2009/papers/559/paper559.pdf" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2012-04-26 . Retrieved 2011-12-23 .

^ Boroditsky, Lera (2010-07-23).

"Lost in Translation. New cognitive research suggests that language profoundly influences the way people see the world; a different sense of blame in Japanese and Spanish by Lera Boroditsky" . Online.wsj.com . Retrieved 2011-12-10 .

^ "How Does Our Language Shape The Way We Think?" . Edge.org . Retrieved 2011-12-10 .

^ Lupyan, Gary; Rakison, David H.; McClelland, James L. (December 2007).

"Language is not Just for Talking: Redundant Labels Facilitate Learning of Novel Categories" (PDF) .

Psychological Science .

18 (12): 1077– 1083.

doi : 10.1111/j.1467-9280.2007.02028.x .

PMID 18031415 .

S2CID 13455410 . Retrieved 15 February 2023 .

^ "Archived copy" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2013-11-02 . Retrieved 2013-07-24 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: archived copy as title ( link ) ^ "What's in a name? The words behind thought by David Robson" . Newscientist.com. 2010-09-06 . Retrieved 2011-12-10 .

^ Teevan, James J. and W.E. Hewitt. (2001) Introduction to Sociology: A Canadian Focus. Prentice Hall: Toronto. p.10 ^ a b Seuren, Pieter A. M. (1998).

Western linguistics: An historical introduction . Wiley-Blackwell. pp.

250– 251.

ISBN 0-631-20891-7 .

^ Itkonen, Esa (2013). "Philosophy of linguistics". In Allen, Keith (ed.).

The Oxford Handbook of the History of Linguistics . Oxford University Press. pp.

747– 775.

ISBN 9780199585847 .

^ Cooper, John M.; Hutchinson, Douglas S. (1997).

Plato: Complete Works . Hackett.

ISBN 978-0872203495 .

^ Jermołowicz, Renata (2003). "On the project of a universal language in the framework of the XVII century philosophy".

Studies in Logic, Grammar and Rhetoric .

6 (19): 51– 61.

^ Arnauld, Antoine ; Lancelot, Claude (1975) [First published 1660].

General and Rational Grammar : The Port-Royal Grammar . The Hague: Mouton.

ISBN 902793004X .

^ Beak, Wouter (2004).

Linguistic Relativism: Variants and Misconceptions (PDF) (thesis). University of Amsterdam. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2023-03-26.

^ Nöth, Winfried (1990).

Handbook of Semiotics . Indiana University Press.

ISBN 978-0-253-20959-7 .

^ Mays, Wolfe (2002). "Edmund Husserl's Grammar: 100 Years On".

JBSP – Journal of the British Society for Phenomenology .

33 (3): 317– 340.

doi : 10.1080/00071773.2002.11007389 .

S2CID 170924210 .

^ Partee, Barbara (2011). "Formal Semantics: Origins, Issues, Early Impact".

The Baltic International Yearbook of Cognition, Logic and Communication . Vol. 6. BIYCLC. pp.

1– 52.

doi : 10.4148/biyclc.v6i0.1580 .

^ Blackmore, Susan (2008).

"Memes shape brains shape memes" .

Behavioral and Brain Sciences .

31 (5): 513.

doi : 10.1017/S0140525X08005037 . Retrieved 2020-12-22 .

^ Christiansen, Morten H.; Chater, Nick (2008).

"Language as shaped by the brain" (PDF) .

Behavioral and Brain Sciences .

31 (5): 489– 558.

doi : 10.1017/S0140525X08004998 .

PMID 18826669 . Retrieved 2020-12-22 .

^ Herbermann, Charles, ed. (1913).

"Nominalism, Realism, Conceptualism" .

Catholic Encyclopedia . New York: Robert Appleton Company.

^ Partee, B.

Richard Montague (1930–1971) . In Encyclopedia of Language and Linguistics, 2nd Ed., ed. Keith Brown. Oxford: Elsevier. V. 8, pp. 255–57, 2006.

^ Lycan, W. G. (2008).

Philosophy of Language: A Contemporary Introduction . New York: Routledge.

^ Austin, J.L. (1962). J.O. Urmson. (ed.).

How to Do Things With Words: The William James Lectures delivered at Harvard University in 1955 . Oxford: Clarendon Press.

ISBN 0-674-41152-8 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ P. F. Strawson, "On Referring".

Mind , New Series, Vol. 59, No. 235 (Jul., 1950), pp. 320–344 ^ Sperber, Dan; Wilson, Deirdre (2001).

Relevance : communication and cognition (2nd ed.). Oxford: Blackwell Publishers.

ISBN 9780631198789 .

OCLC 32589501 .

^ Robyn., Carston (2002).

Thoughts and utterances : the pragmatics of explicit communication . Oxford, U.K.: Blackwell Pub.

ISBN 9780631178910 .

OCLC 49525903 .

^ C., Levinson, Stephen (2000).

Presumptive meanings : the theory of generalized conversational implicature . Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press.

ISBN 9780262621304 .

OCLC 45733473 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ Grice, Paul. "Logic and Conversation".

Perspectives in the Philosophy of Language.

(2000) ed. Robert Stainton.

^ Bruin, Boudewijn de (September 2005).

"Game Theory in Philosophy" .

Topoi .

24 (2): 197– 208.

doi : 10.1007/s11245-005-5055-3 .

ISSN 0167-7411 .

^ a b Quine, W.V. (1960) Word and Object . MIT Press; ISBN 0-262-67001-1 .

^ Sorensen, Roy. (2006) "Vagueness". Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.

http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/vagueness/#3 v t e Philosophy Branches Branches Applied philosophy Logic Metaphilosophy Philosophy of education Philosophy of information Philosophy of language Philosophy of mathematics Philosophy of religion Philosophy of science Political philosophy Practical philosophy Social philosophy Theoretical philosophy Aesthetics Aesthetic response Formalism Institutionalism Epistemology Empiricism Fideism Naturalism Particularism Rationalism Skepticism Solipsism Ethics Consequentialism Deontology Virtue Free will Compatibilism Determinism Hard Incompatibilism Hard Libertarianism Metaphysics Atomism Dualism Idealism Monism Naturalism Realism Mind Behaviorism Eliminativism Emergentism Epiphenomenalism Functionalism Objectivism Subjectivism Normativity Absolutism Particularism Relativism Nihilism Skepticism Universalism Ontology Action Event Process Reality Anti-realism Conceptualism Idealism Materialism Naturalism Nominalism Physicalism Realism By era By era Ancient Western Medieval Renaissance Early modern Modern Contemporary Ancient Chinese Agriculturalism Confucianism Legalism Logicians Mohism Chinese naturalism Taoism Yangism Greco- Roman Presocratic Ionians Pythagoreans Eleatics Atomists Sophists Cyrenaics Cynicism Eretrian school Megarian school Academy Peripatetic school Hellenistic philosophy Pyrrhonism Stoicism Epicureanism Academic Skepticism Middle Platonism School of the Sextii Neopythagoreanism Second Sophistic Neoplatonism Church Fathers Dispositio Indian Hindu Samkhya Nyaya Vaisheshika Yoga Mīmāṃsā Ājīvika Ajñana Cārvāka Jain Anekantavada Syādvāda Buddhist Abhidharma Sarvāstivadā Pudgalavada Sautrāntika Madhyamaka Svatantrika and Prasangika Śūnyatā Yogacara Tibetan Persian Mazdakism Mithraism Zoroastrianism Zurvanism Medieval East Asian Neotaoism Tiantai Huayan Chan Zen Neo-Confucianism Korean Confucianism European Christian Augustinianism Scholasticism Thomism Scotism Occamism Renaissance humanism Indian Vedanta Acintya bheda abheda Advaita Bhedabheda Dvaita Nimbarka Sampradaya Shuddhadvaita Vishishtadvaita Navya-Nyāya Islamic Aristotelianism Averroism Avicennism Illuminationism ʿIlm al-Kalām Sufi Jewish Judeo-Islamic Modern Anarchism Classical Realism Collectivism Conservatism Determinism Dualism Edo neo-Confucianism Empiricism Existentialism Foundationalism Historicism Holism Humanism Anti- Idealism Absolute British German Objective Subjective Transcendental Individualism Kokugaku Liberalism Materialism Modernism Monism Naturalism Natural law Nihilism New Confucianism Neo-scholasticism Pessimism Pragmatism Phenomenology Positivism Reductionism Rationalism Social contract Socialism Transcendentalism Utilitarianism People Cartesianism Kantianism Neo Kierkegaardianism Krausism Hegelianism Marxism Newtonianism Nietzscheanism Spinozism Contemporary Analytic Applied ethics Analytic feminism Analytical Marxism Communitarianism Consequentialism Critical rationalism Experimental philosophy Falsificationism Foundationalism / Coherentism Internalism and externalism Logical positivism Legal positivism Meta-ethics Moral realism Quinean naturalism Normative ethics Ordinary language philosophy Postanalytic philosophy Quietism Rawlsian Reformed epistemology Systemics Scientism Scientific realism Scientific skepticism Transactionalism Contemporary utilitarianism Vienna Circle Wittgensteinian Continental Critical theory Deconstruction Existentialism Feminist Frankfurt School Hermeneutics Neo-Marxism New Historicism Phenomenology Posthumanism Postmodernism Post-structuralism Social constructionism Structuralism Western Marxism Miscellaneous Kyoto School Objectivism Postcritique Russian cosmism By region By region African Bantu Egyptian Ethiopian Africana Eastern Buddhist Chinese Indian Indonesian Japanese Korean Taiwanese Vietnamese Middle Eastern Iranian Islamic Jewish Pakistani Turkish Western ( Analytic / Continental ) American Australian British Scottish Canada Czech Danish Dutch Finland French German Greek Italian Maltese Polish Slovene Spanish Miscellaneous Amerindian Aztec Romanian Russian Yugoslav Philosophy portal Category v t e Philosophy of language Philosophers Confucius Gorgias Cratylus Plato Aristotle Eubulides Diodorus Chrysippus Zhuangzi Xunzi Averroes Ibn Khaldun Hobbes Wilkins Arnauld Lancelot Leibniz Berkeley Herder von Humboldt Mauthner Ricœur de Saussure Frege Boas Tillich Sapir Bloomfield Bergson Vygotsky Wittgenstein Russell Carnap Derrida Whorf Austin Chomsky Gadamer Kripke Ayer Anscombe Hintikka Dummett Davidson Grice Ryle Strawson Quine Putnam Lewis Searle Watzlawick Theories Causal theory of reference Contrast theory of meaning Contrastivism Conventionalism Cratylism Deconstruction Descriptivism Direct reference theory Dramatism Dynamic semantics Expressivism Inquisitive semantics Linguistic determinism Mediated reference theory Nominalism Non-cognitivism Phallogocentrism Relevance theory Semantic externalism Semantic holism Situation semantics Structuralism Supposition theory Symbiosism Theological noncognitivism Theory of descriptions ( Definite description ) Theory of language Unilalianism Verification theory Concepts Ambiguity Cant Class Concept Categories Family resemblance Intension Language Linguistic relativity Logical form Mental representation Metalanguage Modality (natural language) Presupposition Principle of compositionality Property Proposition Sense and reference Sentence Set Sign Speech act Statement Symbol Truth-bearer Use–mention distinction more...

Works Cratylus (n.d.) Port-Royal Grammar (1660) De Arte Combinatoria (1666) An Essay Towards a Real Character, and a Philosophical Language (1668) Alciphron (1732) " On Denoting " (1905) Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus (1921) Language, Truth, and Logic (1936) Two Dogmas of Empiricism (1951) Philosophical Investigations (1953) Of Grammatology (1967) Naming and Necessity (1980) Wittgenstein on Rules and Private Language (1982) Limited Inc (1988) Related articles Analytic philosophy Philosophy of information Philosophical logic Linguistics Pragmatics Rhetoric Scholasticism School of Names Semantics Formal semantics Semiotics Category Task Force Discussion v t e Analytic philosophy Related articles Areas of focus Metaphysics Epistemology Language Mathematics Science Turns Aretaic Historical Linguistic Performative Logic Classical Deviant Mathematical Non-classical Paraconsistent Philosophical Predicate Theories Anti-realism Causal theory of reference Descriptivism Emotivism Feminism Functionalism Logical atomism Logical positivism Marxism Neurophilosophy Ordinary language Pragmatism Quietism Scientific structuralism Sense data Analytic theology Analytical Thomism Concepts Analysis ( paradox of analysis ) Analytic–synthetic distinction Counterfactual Natural kind Reflective equilibrium Supervenience Modality Actualism Necessity Possibility Possible world Realism Rigid designator Philosophers Noam Chomsky Keith Donnellan Gottlob Frege Edmund Gettier Jaakko Hintikka Giuseppe Peano Russ Shafer-Landau Ernest Sosa Barry Stroud Australian realism David Malet Armstrong David Chalmers J. L. Mackie Peter Singer J. J. C. Smart Cambridge Arif Ahmed Charlie Broad Casimir Lewy Norman Malcolm G. E. Moore Graham Priest Bertrand Russell Frank P. Ramsey Ludwig Wittgenstein Oxford G. E. M. Anscombe J. L. Austin Michael Dummett Antony Flew Philippa Foot Peter Geach Paul Grice R. M. Hare Alasdair MacIntyre Derek Parfit Gilbert Ryle John Searle P. F. Strawson Richard Swinburne Charles Taylor Bernard Williams Timothy Williamson Logical positivists A. J. Ayer Ernest Nagel Berlin Circle Carl Gustav Hempel Hans Reichenbach Vienna Circle Rudolf Carnap Hans Hahn Otto Neurath Moritz Schlick Friedrich Waismann Harvard Roderick Chisholm Donald Davidson Daniel Dennett Nelson Goodman Christine Korsgaard Thomas Nagel Robert Nozick Hilary Putnam W. V. O. Quine John Rawls Notre Dame Robert Audi Peter van Inwagen Pittsburgh School Robert Brandom Patricia Churchland Paul Churchland Adolf Grünbaum John McDowell Ruth Millikan Alexander Pruss Nicholas Rescher Wilfrid Sellars Bas van Fraassen Pragmatism Susan Haack Nicholas Rescher Morton White Princeton Alonzo Church Jerry Fodor Kurt Gödel David Lewis Jaegwon Kim Saul Kripke Richard Rorty Nathan Salmon Michael Walzer Quietism James F. Conant Alice Crary Cora Diamond Reformed Alvin Plantinga William Lane Craig Nicholas Wolterstorff Science Paul Feyerabend Thomas Kuhn Imre Lakatos Karl Popper Stanford School Nancy Cartwright John Dupré Peter Galison Ian Hacking Patrick Suppes Lwow–Warsaw Jan Łukasiewicz Alfred Tarski Category v t e Formal semantics (natural language) Central concepts Compositionality Denotation Entailment Extension Generalized quantifier Intension Logical form Presupposition Proposition Reference Scope Speech act Syntax–semantics interface Truth conditions Topics Areas Anaphora Ambiguity Binding Conditionals Definiteness Disjunction Evidentiality Focus Indexicality Lexical semantics Modality Negation Propositional attitudes Tense–aspect–mood Quantification Vagueness Phenomena Antecedent-contained deletion Cataphora Coercion Conservativity Counterfactuals Crossover effects Cumulativity De dicto and de re De se Deontic modality Discourse relations Donkey anaphora Epistemic modality Exhaustivity Faultless disagreement Free choice inferences Givenness Homogeneity (linguistics) Hurford disjunction Inalienable possession Intersective modification Logophoricity Mirativity Modal subordination Opaque contexts Performatives Polarity items Privative adjectives Quantificational variability effect Responsive predicate Rising declaratives Scalar implicature Sloppy identity Subsective modification Subtrigging Telicity Temperature paradox Veridicality Formalism Formal systems Alternative semantics Categorial grammar Combinatory categorial grammar Discourse representation theory (DRT) Dynamic semantics Generative grammar Glue semantics Inquisitive semantics Intensional logic Lambda calculus Mereology Montague grammar Segmented discourse representation theory (SDRT) Situation semantics Supervaluationism Type theory TTR Concepts Autonomy of syntax Context set Continuation Conversational scoreboard Downward entailing Existential closure Function application Meaning postulate Monads Plural quantification Possible world Quantifier raising Quantization Question under discussion Semantic parsing Squiggle operator Strawson entailment Strict conditional Type shifter Universal grinder See also Cognitive semantics Computational semantics Distributional semantics Formal grammar Inferentialism Logic translation Linguistics wars Philosophy of language Pragmatics Semantics of logic Authority control databases National Germany Japan Czech Republic Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐4pjhf
Cached time: 20250816100926
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.022 seconds
Real time usage: 1.306 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 6106/1000000
Revision size: 70385/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 346492/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 5535/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 12/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 280540/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.564/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 17396375/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  944.150      1 -total
 26.70%  252.098      1 Template:Reflist
 12.15%  114.698      1 Template:Philosophy_sidebar
 11.44%  108.034     21 Template:Cite_book
  8.84%   83.491      1 Template:Short_description
  8.73%   82.440      4 Template:Lang
  8.11%   76.593      2 Template:Cite_encyclopedia
  7.88%   74.433      1 Template:Cite_IEP
  6.60%   62.289     17 Template:Navbox
  5.28%   49.808      2 Template:Pagetype Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:6880370:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250816100926 and revision id 1304225164. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Philosophy_of_language&oldid=1304225164 " Categories : Philosophy of language Analytic philosophy Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1 maint: archived copy as title Articles incorporating a citation from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference CS1 errors: ISBN date CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Pages using sidebar with the child parameter Articles containing Latin-language text Articles needing additional references from February 2022 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from September 2017 Articles with Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy links This page was last edited on 4 August 2025, at 19:25 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Philosophy of language 66 languages Add topic

