Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Classical aristocracy 2 Modern aristocracy 3 Concept 4 Differentiation 5 History Toggle History subsection 5.1 18th and 19th centuries 5.2 20th century 6 See also 7 References 8 Further reading 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Aristocracy 86 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch العربية Aragonés Asturianu Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه বাংলা Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Bosanski Буряад Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית Къарачай-малкъар ქართული Қазақша Kurdî Кыргызча Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം მარგალური مصرى Bahasa Melayu Nederlands नेपाली 日本語 Нохчийн Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پښتو Polski Português Română Runa Simi Русский Shqip Sicilianu Simple English Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Form of government This article is about the form of government. For the social class, see Aristocracy (class) . For other uses, see Aristocrat (disambiguation) .

Part of the Politics series Basic forms of government List of forms · List of countries Source of power Democracy ( rule by many ) Demarchy Direct Economic Liberal Representative Social Socialist Others Oligarchy (rule by few) Anocracy Aristocracy Broligarchy Gerontocracy Kleptocracy Kritarchy Meritocracy Noocracy Particracy Plutocracy Stratocracy Technocracy Theocracy Autocracy ( rule by one ) Despotism Dictatorship Military dictatorship Tyranny Anarchy (rule by none) Anarchism Free association Stateless Power ideology Monarchy Republic (socio-political ideologies) Absolute Communist Constitutional Directorial Legalist Parliamentary Presidential Semi-presidential Authoritarian Libertarian (socio-economic ideologies) Anarchism Colonialism Communism Despotism Distributism Fascism Feudalism Islamism Socialism Totalitarianism Tribalism Religious Secular State religion Secular state Separation of church and state State atheism Global Local (geo-cultural ideologies) City-state Intergovernmental organisation National government World government Nationalism Internationalism Globalism Power structure Unitarism Unitary state Empire Principality Client state Associated state Dependent territory Dominion Protectorate Puppet state Puppet monarch Satellite state Self-governing colony Tributary state Buffer state Vassal state Viceroyalty Federalism Confederation Devolution Federation Superstate Supranational union International relations Small power Middle power Regional power Emerging power Great power Superpower Related Administrative division Democracy indices Democratic transition Autocratization Democratisation Hybrid regimes Politics portal v t e Part of a series on Conservatism Variants Authoritarian Corporatist Cultural Fiscal Green Liberal Libertarian Moderate National Paternalistic Populist Pragmatic Progressive Reactionary Religious Social Traditionalist Ultra Principles Ancestral worship Authority Traditional Balance of power Class collaboration Collective identity Cultural heritage Cultural values Culture of life Pro-Life Discipline Duty Elitism Aristocracy Meritocracy Noblesse oblige Ethical order Familialism Family as a state model Family values Fundamentalism Gender roles Complementarianism Essentialism Historism Honour Imperialism Law and order Loyalty Maternalism Monarchism Royalism Moral absolutism Natalism Nationalism Nativism Natural law Norms Customs Mores Ordered liberty Organicism Organised religion State Orthodoxy Patriarchy Patriarchalism Patriotism Peace through strength Property rights Public morality Rule of law Social hierarchy Social institutions Social order Sovereignty Stewardship Subsidiarity Tradition Intellectuals Johnson Hume Burke More Maistre Bonald Chateaubriand Czartoryski Coleridge Karamzin Savigny Carlyle Ranke Newman Tocqueville Dostoevsky Taine Le Bon Nordau Belloc Iorga Chesterton Spengler Jabotinsky Ilyin Savarkar Schmitt Eliot Mannheim Jünger Evola Strauss Röpke Gadamer Freyre Voegelin Oakeshott Burnham Lefebvre Qutb Kuehnelt-Leddihn Gómez Dávila Kirk Solzhenitsyn Koselleck Mishima Buckley Sowell Mansfield Scruton Hoppe Dugin Peterson Politicians Adams Pitt Canning Metternich Disraeli Bismarck Salisbury Dmowski Mannerheim Baldwin Maurras Horthy Metaxas Churchill Adenauer De Gasperi Chiang Salazar De Gaulle Dollfuss Franco Khomeini Reagan Powell Pinochet Marcos Park Smith Reza Shah Suharto Lee Zia Vajpayee Thatcher Kohl Fujimori Trump Bush Kaczyński Netanyahu Modi Putin Erdoğan Abe Sarkozy Bolsonaro Yoon Orbán Milei Meloni Bukele Religion Christian democracy Christian right Confucianism Clericalism Hindutva Islamism Jewish conservatism Religious Zionism Theravada Buddhism Traditionalist Catholicism Integralism Ultramontanism Traditionalist School Personal variants Berlusconism Bukelism Cameronism Chiangism Erdoğanism Francoism Fujimorism Gaullism Janismo Kaczyzm Maurrassisme Mellismo Metaxism Powellism Pinochetism Putinism Qutbism Khomeinism Reaganism Sarkozysm Thatcherism Trumpism Ziaism National variants Australia Austria Bangladesh Belgium Belize Brazil Canada Chile China Hong Kong Colombia Cuba Denmark Finland France Germany Greece Guatemala Hungary Iceland India Iran Israel Italy Japan Luxembourg Malaysia Mexico Netherlands New Zealand Norway Pakistan Panama Peru Poland Russia Serbia Singapore Sweden Switzerland South Korea Taiwan Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom Toryism United States Related ideologies Agrarianism Black conservatism In US Conservative feminism Clerical fascism Communitarianism Conservative liberalism Conservative socialism Corporatism Hispanic conservatism In US LGBTQ conservatism Ordoliberalism Para-fascism Related topics Anti-communism White Terror Anti-gender movement Anti-immigration Catholic social teaching Conservative wave NatCon Radical right Europe US Right realism Right-wing politics Alt Authoritarianism Centre Dictatorship Far New Small-c conservative Conservatism portal Politics portal v t e Aristocracy (from Ancient Greek ἀριστοκρατίᾱ ( aristokratíā ) ' rule of the best ' ; from ἄριστος ( áristos ) ' best ' and κράτος ( krátos ) ' power, strength ' ) is a form of government that places power in the hands of a small, privileged ruling class , the aristocrats .

[ 1 ] The 6th Duke of Norfolk , a 17th-century English aristocrat and politician who held the hereditary office of Earl Marshal of England .

Across Europe , the aristocracy exercised immense economic , political , and social influence.

[ 2 ] In Western Christian countries, the aristocracy was mostly equal with magnates , also known as the titled or higher nobility , however the members of the more numerous social class, the untitled lower nobility ( petty nobility or gentry ) were not part of the aristocracy.

Classical aristocracy [ edit ] In ancient Greece , the Greeks conceived aristocracy as rule by the best-qualified citizens—and often contrasted it favorably with monarchy , rule by an individual. The term was first used by such ancient Greeks as Aristotle and Plato , who used it to describe a system where only the best of the citizens, chosen through a careful process of selection, would become rulers, and hereditary rule would actually have been forbidden, unless the rulers' children performed best and were better endowed with the attributes that make a person fit to rule compared with every other citizen in the polity.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] Hereditary rule in this understanding is more related to oligarchy , a corrupted form of aristocracy where there is rule by a few, but not by the best.

Plato , Socrates , Aristotle , Xenophon , and the Spartans considered aristocracy (the ideal form of rule by the few) to be inherently better than the ideal form of rule by the many ( politeia ), but they also considered the corrupted form of aristocracy (oligarchy) to be worse than the corrupted form of democracy ( mob rule ).

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] This belief was rooted in the assumption that the masses could only produce average policy, while the best of men could produce the best policy, if they were indeed the best of men.

[ 5 ] Later Polybius in his analysis of the Roman Constitution used the concept of aristocracy to describe his conception of a republic as a mixed form of government, along with democracy and monarchy in their conception from then, as a system of checks and balances , where each element checks the excesses of the other.

[ 8 ] Modern aristocracy [ edit ] In modern times , aristocracy was usually seen as rule by a privileged group, the aristocratic class , and has since been contrasted with democracy .

[ 1 ] Concept [ edit ] The concept evolved in ancient Greece in which a council of leading citizens was commonly empowered. That was contrasted with representative democracy in which a council of citizens was appointed as the "senate" of a city state or other political unit. The Greeks did not like the concept of monarchy, and as their democratic system fell, aristocracy was upheld.

[ 1 ] According to Tomás Fernández de Medrano , a just and virtuous form of republic is known as aristocracy , meaning the rule of the most virtuous, referred to in Latin as Optimates because they are regarded as good and honorable .

[ 9 ] In his 1602 political treatise República Mista , Medrano explains how this system arises when a select group of men, distinguished by their virtue, morality , and wisdom , hold authority over the rest, whether broadly or in specific matters, governing solely for the benefit and welfare of the public. A prime example of this was seen in Sparta , whose exceptional governance allowed it to rule Greece for nearly five centuries.

[ 9 ] Plato's concept of aristocracy envisions an ideal state governed by a philosopher-king —a ruler who possesses wisdom and a love for truth . He defines these "philosopher-kings" as individuals who "love the sight of truth." [ 10 ] To illustrate this idea, Plato uses analogies such as a captain steering a ship and a doctor administering medicine, emphasizing that just as not everyone is naturally suited to navigation or medicine, not everyone is fit to govern. A significant portion of the Republic is then dedicated to outlining the educational system necessary to cultivate philosopher-kings.

[ 11 ] In contrast, the 1651 book Leviathan by Thomas Hobbes describes an aristocracy as a commonwealth in which the representative of the citizens is an assembly by part only. It is a system in which only a small part of the population represents the government; "certain men distinguished from the rest." [ 12 ] Modern depictions of aristocracy tend to regard it not as the ancient Greek concept of rule by the best, but more as an oligarchy or plutocracy —rule by the few or the wealthy.

[ citation needed ] Differentiation [ edit ] Aristocracy's corrupt counterpart is oligarchy .

[ 13 ] Socrates describes oligarchy as a system rife with corruption and instability. As the ruling elite prioritize their own wealth, they enact laws that further concentrate power and resources in their hands. This deepens economic divisions between the rich and the poor, leading to class conflict and internal strife.

[ 14 ] According to Tomás Fernández de Medrano in his 1602 República Mista , oligarchy occurs when a small group of noble or wealthy individuals control public administration but neglect the needs of the poor , prioritizing personal gain over the common good . Such governance inevitably turns into tyranny , as historically seen in Sicily and other ancient oligarchies.

[ 9 ] Medrano also warns against the dangers of aristocratic rule when consumed by internal strife, stating that when the Optimates (the aristocracy) become driven by anger, hatred, envy , and rivalry , they inevitably destroy themselves and bring ruin to the republic through factionalism and division.

[ 9 ] Medrano illustrates the dangers of internal discord through historical examples, citing Babylon’s fall to Cyrus , Carthage’s destruction, and Greek disunity under Alexander the Great . He notes that Rome’s decline, from Jugurtha’s downfall to later internal strife, mirrors the fate of Sparta, the Numidians , and other divided civilizations—including Rome itself, as Cato had foreseen.

[ 9 ] History [ edit ] Aristocracies dominated political and economic power for most of the medieval and modern periods almost everywhere in Europe, using their wealth and land ownership to form a powerful political force. The English Civil War involved the first sustained organised effort to reduce aristocratic power in Europe.

18th and 19th centuries [ edit ] In the 18th century, the rising merchant class attempted to use money to buy into the aristocracy, with some success. However, the French Revolution in the 1790s forced many French aristocrats into exile and caused consternation and shock in the aristocratic families of neighbouring countries. After the defeat of Napoleon in 1814, some of the surviving exiles returned, but their position within French society was not recovered.

The planter class , owners of large-scale plantations where enslaved Africans produced crops to create wealth for a white elite, dominated political and economic affairs in America for over a century. The London School of Economics : "The dominant elite in the South before the Civil War were the wealthy landowners who held people in slavery, the so-called "planter class". Their influence in politics before the war can best be illustrated by highlighting that of the 15 presidents before Abraham Lincoln, eight held people as slaves while in office." [ 15 ] While many former slaveowners kept control of their land and remained politically influential, according to C. Vann Woodward , the Civil War weakened and in some cases destroyed the planter aristocracy.

[ 16 ] Beginning in Britain, industrialization in the 19th century brought urbanization, with wealth increasingly concentrated in the cities, which absorbed political power. However, as late as 1900, aristocrats maintained political dominance in Britain, Germany , Denmark , Sweden , Austria and Russia , but it was an increasingly-precarious dominion.

20th century [ edit ] The First World War had the effect of dramatically reducing the power of aristocrats in all major countries. In Russia, aristocrats were imprisoned and murdered by the communists. After 1900, liberal and socialist governments levied heavy taxes on landowners, spelling their loss of economic power.

[ 17 ] [ 18 ] See also [ edit ] Elitism Gentry Meritocracy Nobility Old money Timocracy References [ edit ] ^ a b c "Aristocracy" .

Oxford English Dictionary . December 1989. Archived from the original on June 29, 2011 . Retrieved December 22, 2009 .

^ "The Aristocracy and Gentry | Encyclopedia.com" .

www.encyclopedia.com . Retrieved 2025-03-17 .

^ a b Aristotle.

Politics .

^ a b Plato.

The Republic .

^ a b c Plato.

The Statesman .

^ Xenophon.

The Polity of the Athenians and the Lacedaemonians .

^ Plutarch.

"The Life of Lycurgus" .

The Parallel Lives of the Noble Greeks and Romans .

^ Polybius.

"The Roman Republic Compared with Others, Book VI, Section 43" .

The Histories .

^ a b c d e Medrano, Juan Fernandez de (1602).

República Mista (in Spanish). Impr. Real.

^ Plato, Republic 475c, Vol. 5 ^ "Plato: The Republic | Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy" . Retrieved 2025-03-16 .

^ Hobbes, Thomas (1 January 2010).

Leviathan . Digireads.com Publishing. p. 81.

ISBN 978-1-4209-3699-5 – via Google Books .

^ "Oligarchy | Definition & Facts | Britannica" .

www.britannica.com . 2025-02-06 . Retrieved 2025-03-18 .

^ Kanefield, Teri (2025-01-19).

"Part 3: Democracy, Oligarchy, and Tyranny" .

Teri Kanefield . Retrieved 2025-03-18 .

^ "Enslavers dominated Southern politics long after the Civil War ended" .

LSE . Retrieved August 11, 2025 .

^ Billings, Dwight B. (2017).

Planters and the Making of a "New South" . University of North Carolina Press. p. 39.

^ Moore, Barrington (1966).

The social origins of dictatorship and democracy .

^ Cannadine, David (1990).

The decline and fall of the British aristocracy . Anchor Books.

ISBN 9780385421034 .

Further reading [ edit ] Bengtsson, Erik, et al. "Aristocratic wealth and inequality in a changing society: Sweden, 1750–1900." Scandinavian Journal of History 44.1 (2019): 27–52.

Online Cannon, John.

History , Oxford University Press, 1997, ISBN 978-0-19-866176-4 Liu, Jia. "Study on the Decline of the British Aristocracy from the Perspective of Modernization." 2018 4th International Conference on Economics, Management and Humanities Science (2018).

Online Schutte, Kimberly.

Women, Rank, and Marriage in the British Aristocracy, 1485–2000: An Open Elite?

(Springer, 2014).

Wasson,  Ellis.

Aristocracy in the Modern World , Palgrave Macmillan, 2006.

External links [ edit ] Quotations related to Aristocracy at Wikiquote Aristocracy at Encyclopædia Britannica v t e Social class Status Stratum Economic classes Theories Elite theory Gilbert model Marxian Mudsill theory New class Spoon class theory Weberian (three-component) Related topics Caste Chattering classes Class conflict Class discrimination Class society Class traitor Classicide Classless society Euthenics High society Nouveau riche / Parvenu Poverty Ranked society Snobbery Social cleansing Social exclusion Social mobility Social orphan Social position Social stigma Subaltern Status Anxiety By demographic By status Administrative detainee Alien illegal immigrant refugee Citizen dual or multiple native-born naturalized second-class Clique adolescent Convicted Migrant worker Political prisoner Socioeconomic Stateless By " collar " Blue Green Grey New Pink White By type Ruling Aristocracy Aristoi Hanseaten Magnate Oligarchy Russian Patrician Ancient Rome Post-Roman Political Family List Hereditary Royal family Intellectual Clergy Priest Knowledge worker Professor Scholar Warrior Chhetri Cossacks Cuāuh Harii Hashashin Knight Kshatriya Nair Ocēlōtl Pendekar Samurai Spartiate Vanniyar / Vanniar (Chieftain) Upper Business magnate Elite Gabellotto Gentry Lord Nobility Landed Petty Old money Overclass Robber baron Seigneur Superclass Creative Bohemians Middle Bourgeoisie Petite Burgher Lower middle class Upper middle class Working Commoner Lazzaroni Lumpenproletariat Pea-pickers Peasant Precariat Proletariat Working poor Under Ant tribe Outcast Outlaw / Prisoner Serf Plebeian Rat tribe Slave / Freedman Untouchable By country or region United States Affluence American Dream History Mobility Classes Upper Black Donor Gentry Middle Black Mexican-American Upper Middle Underprivileged Lower Under Income Household Inequality Personal Poverty Standard of living Education Homelessness Home-ownership Other regions or countries Africa Belize Cambodia China Colombia France Haiti India Iran Italy Luxembourg Nepal New Zealand Nigeria Romania Sri Lanka Tibet United Kingdom United States Historic 18th-century Spain Ancient Greece Ancient Rome Aztec Ottoman Empire Pre-industrial East Asia Pre-industrial Europe Soviet Union Category v t e Nobility of Europe Present monarchies Belgium ( Brussels ) Denmark Netherlands Norway Spain Sweden United Kingdom Vatican City ( Black ) Former monarchies Albania Armenia Austria and Slovenia Bohemia Bosnia Croatia Estonia and Latvia Finland France Empire Georgia Germany Greece Ancient Attica Medieval Early Modern Hungary and Slovakia Iceland Ireland Italy Sicily Lithuania Malta Montenegro Poland Magnates Ruthenian Galicia Portugal Romania Russia Serbia Switzerland Associated Organisations Permanent Deputation and Council of Grandees of Spain and Titles of the Kingdom Order of Santiago Order of Alcántara Order of Calatrava Order of Montesa Order of Malta Most Venerable Order of St John CILANE v t e Political philosophy Terms Authority Citizenship‎ Duty Elite Emancipation Freedom Government Hegemony Hierarchy Justice Law Legitimacy Liberty Monopoly Nation Obedience Peace People Pluralism Power Progress Propaganda Property Regime Revolution Rights Ruling class Society Sovereignty‎ State Utopia War Government Aristocracy Oligarchy Autocracy Bureaucracy Dictatorship Democracy Ochlocracy Gerontocracy Meritocracy Monarchy Tyranny Plutocracy Technocracy Theocracy Ideologies Agrarianism Anarchism Capitalism Christian democracy Colonialism Communism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Corporatism Distributism Environmentalism Fascism Feminism Feudalism Imperialism Islamism Liberalism Libertarianism Localism Marxism Monarchism Multiculturalism Nationalism Nazism Populism Republicanism Social Darwinism Social democracy Socialism Third Way Concepts Balance of power Bellum omnium contra omnes Body politic Clash of civilizations Common good Consent of the governed Divine right of kings Family as a model for the state Monopoly on violence Natural law Negative and positive rights Night-watchman state Noble lie Noblesse oblige Open society Ordered liberty Original position Overton window Separation of powers Social contract State of nature Statolatry Supermajority Tyranny of the majority Philosophers Antiquity Aristotle Chanakya Cicero Confucius Han Fei Lactantius Mencius Mozi Plato political philosophy Polybius Shang Sun Tzu Thucydides Xenophon Middle Ages Al-Farabi Aquinas Averroes Bruni Dante Gelasius al-Ghazali Ibn Khaldun Marsilius Muhammad Nizam al-Mulk Ockham Plethon Wang Early modern period Boétie Bodin Bossuet Calvin Campanella Filmer Grotius Guicciardini Hobbes political philosophy James Leibniz Locke Luther Machiavelli Milton More Müntzer Pufendorf Spinoza Suárez 18th and 19th centuries Bakunin Bastiat Beccaria Bentham Bolingbroke Bonald Burke Carlyle Comte Condorcet Constant Cortés Engels Fichte Fourier Franklin Godwin Haller Hegel Herder Hume Iqbal Jefferson Kant political philosophy Le Bon Le Play Madison Maistre Marx Mazzini Mill Montesquieu Nietzsche Owen Paine Renan Rousseau Sade Saint-Simon Smith Spencer de Staël Stirner Taine Thoreau Tocqueville Tucker Voltaire 20th and 21st centuries Agamben Ambedkar Arendt Aron Badiou Bauman Benoist Berlin Bernstein Burnham Chomsky Dmowski Du Bois Dugin Dworkin Evola Foucault Fromm Fukuyama Gandhi Gentile Gramsci Guénon Habermas Hayek Hoppe Huntington Kautsky Khomeini Kirk Kropotkin Laclau Lenin Luxemburg Mansfield Mao Marcuse Maurras Michels Mises Mosca Mouffe Negri Nozick Nussbaum Oakeshott Ortega Pareto Popper Qutb Rand Rawls Röpke Rothbard Russell Sartre Schmitt Scruton Shariati Sorel Spann Spengler Strauss Sun Taylor Voegelin Walzer Weber Works Republic (c. 375 BC) Politics (c. 350 BC) On the Republic (51 BC) Treatise on Law (c. 1274) Monarchy (1313) The Prince (1532) Leviathan (1651) Two Treatises of Government (1689) The Spirit of Law (1748) The Social Contract (1762) Reflections on the Revolution in France (1790) Rights of Man (1791) Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1820) Democracy in America (1835–1840) The Communist Manifesto (1848) On Liberty (1859) The Revolt of the Masses (1929) The Road to Serfdom (1944) The Open Society and Its Enemies (1945) The Origins of Totalitarianism (1951) A Theory of Justice (1971) The End of History and the Last Man (1992) Related Authoritarianism Collectivism and individualism Conflict theories Contractualism Critique of political economy Egalitarianism Elite theory Elitism History of political thought Institutional discrimination Jurisprudence Justification for the state Political ethics Political spectrum Left-wing politics Centrism Right-wing politics Political theology Political violence Separation of church and state Separatism Social justice Statism Totalitarianism Category:Political philosophy Authority control databases International FAST 2 National Germany United States 2 Czech Republic Spain Israel 2 Other Encyclopedia of Modern Ukraine Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Aristocracy&oldid=1305424811 " Categories : Aristocracy Ancient Greek government Oligarchy Social classes Social groups Hidden categories: CS1 Spanish-language sources (es) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Pages using sidebar with the child parameter Articles containing French-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2015 Articles containing Latin-language text This page was last edited on 12 August 2025, at 00:32 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Aristocracy 86 languages Add topic

