Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Measures of economic liberalization 2 Potential benefits Toggle Potential benefits subsection 2.1 Poverty reduction 3 Potential risks 4 By region 5 Historical examples 6 See also 7 References 8 Sources Toggle the table of contents Economic liberalization 25 languages العربية Català Čeština Cymraeg Ελληνικά Español فارسی Français 한국어 हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Latina Magyar മലയാളം मराठी 日本語 Português Română Русский Simple English Svenska ไทย Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Policy advocating for fewer government regulations Part of a series on Capitalism Concepts Austerity Business Business cycle Businessperson Capital Capital accumulation Capital markets Company Corporation Competition Competition law Definitions Economic interventionism Economic liberalism Economic surplus Entrepreneurship Fictitious capital Financial market Free price system Free market Goods and services Investor Invisible hand Visible hand Liberalization Marginalism Money Private property Privatization Profit Rent seeking Supply and demand Surplus value Value Wage labour Economic systems Anglo-Saxon Authoritarian Corporate Dirigist Free-market Humanistic Laissez-faire Liberal Libertarian Market Mercantilist Mixed Monopoly National Neoliberal Nordic Private Raw Regulated market Regulatory Rhine Social Political State State-sponsored Welfare Economic theories American Austrian Chartalism MMT Chicago Classical Institutional Keynesian Neo- New Post- Market monetarism Critique of political economy Critique of work Marxist Monetarist Neoclassical New institutional Supply-side Ideologies Anarcho Authoritarian Classical liberalism Democratic Dirigisme Eco Gladstonian Humanistic Inclusive Liberal Liberalism Libertarian Neo Neoliberalism Objectivism Ordoliberalism Privatism Right-libertarianism Third Way Origins Age of Enlightenment Capitalism and Islam Commercial Revolution Feudalism Industrial Revolution Mercantilism Primitive accumulation Physiocracy Simple commodity production Development Advanced Consumer Community Corporate Crony Finance Global Illiberal Late Marxist Merchant Progressive Rentier State monopoly Technological Intellectuals Smith Bentham Malthus Say Ricardo Mill (James) Bastiat Mill (John Stuart) Marx Walras Marshall Pareto Veblen Weber von Mises Schumpeter Keynes Hayek Rand Weaver Coase Friedman Rothbard Sowell Becker Hoppe Related topics Anti-capitalism Capitalist propaganda Capitalist realism Capitalist state Consumerism Crisis theory Criticism of capitalism Critique of political economy Critique of work Cronyism Culture of capitalism Evergreening Exploitation of labour Globalization History History of theory Market economy Periodizations of capitalism Perspectives on capitalism Post-capitalism Speculation Spontaneous order Venture philanthropy Wage slavery Capitalism portal Business portal Economics portal v t e Economic liberalization , or economic liberalisation , is the lessening of government regulations and restrictions in an economy in exchange for greater participation by private entities. In politics, the doctrine is associated with classical liberalism and neoliberalism . Liberalization in short is "the removal of controls" to encourage economic development .

[ 1 ] Many countries have pursued and followed the path of economic liberalization in the 1980s, 1990s and in the 21st century, with the stated goal of maintaining or increasing their competitiveness as business environments. Liberalization policies may or often include the partial or complete privatization of government institutions and state-owned assets , greater labour market flexibility , lower tax rates for businesses, less restrictions on both domestic and foreign capital, open markets , etc. In support of liberalization, former British prime minister Tony Blair wrote: "Success will go to those companies and countries which are swift to adapt, slow to complain, open and willing to change. The task of modern governments is to ensure that our countries can rise to this challenge." [ 2 ] In developing countries, economic liberalization refers more to liberalization or further "opening up" of their respective economies to foreign capital and investments. Three of the fastest growing developing economies today; Brazil, China, and India, have achieved rapid economic growth in the past several years or decades, in part, from having liberalized their economies to foreign capital.

[ 3 ] Many countries nowadays, particularly those in the third world, arguably were given no choice but to "liberalize" their economies to remain competitive in attracting and retaining both their domestic and foreign investments. This is referred to as the TINA factor, standing for " there is no alternative ". For example, in China after Cultural Revolution , reforms were introduced.

[ 4 ] Similarly, in the Philippines , the contentious proposals for Charter Change include amending the economically restrictive provisions of their 1987 constitution .

[ 5 ] By this measure, an opposite of a liberalized economy are economies such as North Korea's economy with their "self-sufficient" economic system that is closed to foreign trade and investment (see autarky ). However, North Korea is not completely separate from the global economy, since it actively trades with China, through Dandong , a large border port and receives aid from other countries in exchange for peace and restrictions in their nuclear programme.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] Another example would be oil-rich countries such as Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates [ citation needed ] , which see no need to further open up their economies to foreign capital and investments since their oil reserves already provide them with huge export earnings.

Economic liberalization applies to domestic deregulation and trade liberalization such as free trade .

Measures of economic liberalization [ edit ] Fraser Institute constarcted index of economic freedom based on size of government, Legal system and property rights, sound money, freedom to trade internationally, and regulation.

[ 8 ] The Heritage Foundation constructed a similar index with 4 main pillars and 12 subcategories: Rule of Law (property rights, judicial effectiveness, government integrity), Government Size (government spending, tax burden, fiscal health), Regulatory Efficiency (business freedom, labor freedom, monetary freedom), Open Markets (trade freedom, investment freedom, financial freedom).

Potential benefits [ edit ] Liberalization offers the opportunity for the service sector to compete internationally, contributing to GDP growth and generating foreign exchange. As such, service exports are an important part of many developing countries' growth strategies. India's IT services have become globally competitive as many companies have outsourced certain administrative functions to countries where costs (esp. wages) are lower. Furthermore, if service providers in some developing economies are not competitive enough to succeed on world markets, overseas companies will be attracted to invest, bringing with them international "best practices" and better skills and technologies.

[ 9 ] The entry of foreign service providers can be a positive as well as negative development. For example, it can lead to better services for domestic consumers, improve the performance and competitiveness of domestic service providers, as well as simply attract FDI /foreign capital into the country. In fact, some research suggest a 50% cut in service trade barriers over a five- to ten-year period would create global gains in economic welfare of around $250 billion per annum.

[ 9 ] Preferential trading areas can increase democratization when trading between with other democracies.

[ 10 ] Poverty reduction [ edit ] These paragraphs are an excerpt from Poverty reduction § Economic liberalization .

[ edit ] Proponents of economic liberalization have argued that it reduces poverty.

[ 11 ] Other commentators have claimed that, due to economic liberalization, poverty in the world is rising rather than declining, [ 12 ] and the data provided by the World Bank, echoing that poverty is decreasing, is flawed.

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] [ 15 ] They also argue that extending property rights protection to the poor is one of the most important poverty reduction strategies a nation can implement.

[ 16 ] Securing property rights to land, the largest asset for most societies, is vital to their economic freedom.

[ 16 ] [ 17 ] The World Bank concludes that increasing land rights is 'the key to reducing poverty' citing that land rights greatly increase poor people's wealth, in some cases doubling it.

[ 18 ] It is estimated that state recognition of the property of the poor would give them assets worth 40 times all the foreign aid since 1945.

[ 16 ] Although approaches varied, the World Bank said the key issues were security of tenure and ensuring land transactions were low cost.

[ 18 ] In China and India, noted reductions in poverty in recent decades have occurred mostly as a result of the abandonment of collective farming in China and the cutting of government red tape in India.

[ 19 ] Potential risks [ edit ] Trade liberalisation carries substantial risks that necessitate careful economic management through appropriate regulation by governments. Some argue foreign providers crowd out domestic providers and instead of leading to investment and the transfer of skills, it allows foreign providers and shareholders "to capture the profits for themselves, taking the money out of the country".

[ 9 ] Thus, it is often argued that protection is needed to allow domestic companies the chance to develop before they are exposed to international competition. This is also supported by the anthropologist Trouillot who argues that the current market system is not a free market at all, but instead a privatized market (IE, markets can be 'bought'). Other potential risks resulting from liberalisation, include: Risks of financial sector instability resulting from global contagion [ 9 ] Risk of brain drain [ 9 ] Risk of environmental degradation [ 9 ] Risk of a debt spiral due to decreased tax revenue among other economic problems (oftentimes linked to IMF restructuring though the state government in Kansas is currently encountering this issue).

[ 20 ] Risk of increased inequality across race, ethnicity, or gender lines. For example, according to the anthropologist Lilu Abu-Lughod we see increased gender inequality in new markets as women lose labor opportunities that existed prior to market liberalization.

However, researchers at thinks tanks such as the Overseas Development Institute argue the risks are outweighed by the benefits and that what is needed is careful regulation.

[ 9 ] For instance, there is a risk that private providers will 'skim off' the most profitable clients and cease to serve certain unprofitable groups of consumers or geographical areas. Yet such concerns could be addressed through regulation and by a universal service obligations in contracts, or in the licensing, to prevent such a situation from occurring. Of course, this bears the risk that this barrier to entry will dissuade international competitors from entering the market. Examples of such an approach include South Africa's Financial Sector Charter or Indian nurses who promoted the nursing profession within India itself, which has resulted in a rapid growth in demand for nursing education and a related supply response.

[ 9 ] Trade between autocracies and democracies can increase democratic backsliding .

[ 21 ] Wandel durch Handel or "Change through trade" has been criticized for indirectly financing autocratic regimes.

[ 22 ] By region [ edit ] Economic liberalisation in India Economic liberalisation in Myanmar Economic liberalisation in Pakistan Effects of Economic Liberalisation on Education in Tajikistan Baltic Tiger (Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, c.

2000 –present) Economy of Cuba , starting in 1994 and accelerating under Raúl Castro Indonesian economic boom , Starting after the Secession of East Timor in 1999 with the beginnings of the 21st century.

Historical examples [ edit ] Doux commerce Economic liberalization in the post–World War II era Chinese economic reform Perestroika (Soviet Union) Economic history of Brazil in the 1980s and 1990s Miracle of Chile Đổi Mới (Vietnam) See also [ edit ] Multilateral development bank International Monetary Fund (IMF) World Bank (WB) Asian Development Bank (ADB) New Development Bank Capitalism Economic liberalism Democracy and economic growth Globalization International trade theory Liberalization References [ edit ] ^ Chaudhary, C. M. (2008).

India's economic policies . sublime publications. p. 131.

ISBN 978-81-8192-121-5 .

^ Tony Blair (2005).

"Europe is Falling Behind" .

Newsweek . Retrieved 4 December 2007 .

^ Zuliu Hu, Mohsin S. Khan.

"Why Is China Growing So Fast?" .

International Monetary Fund .

^ Gorbachev, Deng to meet on rough roads to reform ^ "Philippines : Gov.Ph : About the Philippines" . Archived from the original ( ASP ) on 3 October 2006.

^ "A photo journey through China's lesser known cities" .

www.nationalgeographic.com . National Geographic. 24 May 2018. Archived from the original on 24 May 2018 . Retrieved 26 March 2019 .

^ "China: Tyranny Tourism Thrives at North Korea's Border" . Time . Retrieved 26 March 2019 .

^ "Econmic Freedom" . Retrieved 7 April 2025 .

^ a b c d e f g h Massimiliano Cali, Karen Ellis and Dirk Willem te Velde (2008) The contribution of services to development: The role of regulation and trade liberalisation Archived 30 April 2010 at the Wayback Machine London: Overseas Development Institute ^ Manger, Mark S.; Pickup, Mark A. (1 February 2016). "The Coevolution of Trade Agreement Networks and Democracy".

Journal of Conflict Resolution .

60 (1): 164– 191.

doi : 10.1177/0022002714535431 .

ISSN 0022-0027 .

S2CID 154493227 .

^ Nations, United (1 November 2010).

"Economic liberalization and poverty reduction" .

Report on the World Social Situation 2010 . pp.

97– 113.

doi : 10.18356/0875e84f-en .

ISBN 9789210545693 . Retrieved 25 September 2022 – via www.un-ilibrary.org.

^ "Global inequality may be much worse than we think" , The Guardian , 8 April 2016 ^ Edward, Peter (2006).

"The Ethical Poverty Line: a moral quantification of absolute poverty" (PDF) .

Third World Quarterly .

27 (2): 377– 393.

doi : 10.1080/01436590500432739 .

S2CID 154522588 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 5 April 2016.

^ "World bank poverty figures: what do they mean?" . Share The World's Resources (STWR).

^ Shaikh, Anwar.

"Globalization and the Myth of free Trade" (PDF) . Retrieved 1 November 2019 .

^ a b c "Ending Mass Poverty" by Ian Vásquez, Cato Institute , 4 September 2001 ^ EDT, Fareed Zakaria (19 September 2008).

"Zakaria: How to Spread Democracy" .

Newsweek . Retrieved 1 November 2019 .

^ a b "Business – Land rights 'help fight poverty' " . BBC News. 20 June 2003.

^ "Can aid bring an end to poverty?" .

BBC News: Africa . 4 October 2006.

^ https://news.yahoo.com/kansas-tax-collections-short-expectations-january-222746060.html [ dead link ] ^ Pronin, Pavel (2020).

"International Trade And Democracy: How Trade Partners Affect Regime Change And Persistence" (PDF) .

SSRN Electronic Journal . Elsevier BV.

doi : 10.2139/ssrn.3717614 .

ISSN 1556-5068 .

^ Strupczewski, Jan (21 April 2022).

"Ukraine war shows 'end of globalisation as we know it' - EU's Gentiloni" . Reuters . Retrieved 6 May 2022 .

Sources [ edit ] Haymes, Stephen; Vidal de Haymes, Maria; Miller, Reuben, eds. (2015).

The Routledge Handbook of Poverty in the United States . London: Routledge .

ISBN 978-0415673440 .

Jones, Campbell; Parker, Martin; Bos, Rene Ten (2005).

For Business Ethics .

Routledge .

ISBN 978-0415311359 .

v t e Revolutions of 1989 Internal background Era of Stagnation Communism Anti-communism Criticism of communist party rule Eastern Bloc Eastern Bloc politics Eastern Bloc media and propaganda Emigration from the Eastern Bloc KGB Nomenklatura Shortage economy Totalitarianism Anti-communist insurgencies in Central and Eastern Europe International background Active measures Cold War List of socialist states People Power Revolution Predictions of the collapse of the Soviet Union Reagan Doctrine Soviet Empire Terrorism and the Soviet Union Vatican Opposition Warsaw Pact invasion of Czechoslovakia Reforms Uskorenie Perestroika Demokratizatsiya Khozraschyot 500 Days Program New political thinking Sinatra Doctrine Glasnost Reform and opening up Socialism with Chinese characteristics Đổi Mới Government leaders Ramiz Alia Nicolae Ceaușescu Mikhail Gorbachev Károly Grósz Erich Honecker Miloš Jakeš Egon Krenz Wojciech Jaruzelski Slobodan Milošević Mathieu Kérékou Mengistu Haile Mariam Ne Win Denis Sassou Nguesso Heng Samrin Deng Xiaoping Zhao Ziyang Todor Zhivkov Siad Barre Opposition methods Civil resistance Human chains Magnitizdat Polish underground press Political demonstration Protests Samizdat Strike action Opposition leaders Lech Wałęsa Václav Havel Alexander Dubček Ion Iliescu Liu Gang Wu'erkaixi Chai Ling Wang Dan Feng Congde Tank Man Joachim Gauck Sali Berisha Sanjaasürengiin Zorig Vladimir Bukovsky Boris Yeltsin Viacheslav Chornovil Vytautas Landsbergis Zianon Pazniak Zhelyu Zhelev Aung San Suu Kyi Meles Zenawi Isaias Afwerki Ronald Reagan George H. W. Bush Pope John Paul II Opposition movements Beijing Students' Autonomous Federation Charter 77 New Forum Civic Forum Democratic Party of Albania Democratic Russia Initiative for Peace and Human Rights Sąjūdis People's Movement of Ukraine Solidarity Popular Front of Latvia Popular Front of Estonia Public Against Violence Belarusian Popular Front Rastokhez National League for Democracy National Salvation Front Union of Democratic Forces Inter-regional Deputies Group Alliance of Free Democrats Hungarian Democratic Forum Events by location Central and Eastern Europe Albania Bulgaria Czechoslovakia East Germany Hungary Poland Romania Soviet Union Yugoslavia Soviet Union Armenia Azerbaijan Belarus Chechnya Estonia Georgia Latvia Lithuania Kazakhstan Kyrgyzstan Moldova Russia Tajikistan Turkmenistan Ukraine Uzbekistan Elsewhere Afghanistan Angola Benin Burma Cambodia China Congo-Brazzaville Ethiopia Mongolia Mozambique Somalia South Yemen Individual events Jeltoqsan 1987–1989 Tibetan unrest Wars in the Caucasus 1988 Polish strikes Polish Round Table Agreement April 9 tragedy Removal of Hungary's border fence with Austria Hungarian Round Table Talks Pan-European Picnic Baltic Way Monday Demonstrations Alexanderplatz demonstration Fall of the Berlin Wall Fall of the inner German border Malta Summit Black January 1990s post-Soviet aliyah Helsinki Summit Revolution on Granite Reunification of Germany January Events in Lithuania January Events in Latvia Transnistria War 1991 protests in Belgrade 1991 Belarusian strikes Dissolution of the Warsaw Pact August Coup Dissolution of the Soviet Union Tajikistani Civil War Dissolution of Czechoslovakia Later events Colour revolution Decommunization Lustration Democratization Economic liberalization Post-Soviet conflicts Neo-Sovietism Neo-Stalinism Post-communism Yugoslav Wars Pink tide Related Human rights in the Soviet Union Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Economic_liberalization&oldid=1299714500 " Categories : Economic liberalization Economic reforms Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from February 2022 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from August 2021 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from October 2019 Articles with excerpts Articles containing Vietnamese-language text This page was last edited on 10 July 2025, at 00:27 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Economic liberalization 25 languages Add topic

