Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life 2 Career 3 Works 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Tommaso Maria Zigliara 13 languages Català Deutsch Español Français Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Kiswahili مصرى Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Svenska Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia French cardinal, philosopher and theologian This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Tommaso Maria Zigliara" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( May 2014 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) His Eminence Tommaso Maria Zigliara O.P.

Cardinal-Bishop-Elect of Frascati See Frascati Appointed 16 January 1893 Predecessor Edward Henry Howard Successor Serafino Vannutelli Other post(s) Prefect of the Congregation for Studies Previous post(s) Cardinal-Deacon of Santi Cosma e Damiano (1879–1891) Prefect of the Congregation for Indulgences and Relics (1886–1887) Cardinal-Priest of Santa Prassede (1891–1893) Orders Ordination 17 May 1856 by Vincenzo Gioacchino Raffaele Luigi Pecci Created cardinal 12 May 1879 by Pope Leo XIII Rank Cardinal Bishop Personal details Born Francesco Zigliara ( 1833-10-29 ) 29 October 1833 Bonifacio , Corsica, France Died 10 May 1893 (1893-05-10) (aged 59) Rome Denomination Roman Catholic Tommaso Maria Zigliara , OP (29 October 1833 – 11 May 1893) was a Corsican priest of the Catholic Church , a member of the Dominicans , a theologian , philosopher and a cardinal .

Early life [ edit ] Zigliara was born on 29 October 1833 at Bonifacio a seaport of Corsica .

[ 1 ] He was baptized "Francesco".

[ 2 ] His early classical studies were made in his native town under the Jesuit teacher, Father Aloysius Piras. At the age of eighteen he was received into the Order of Preachers at Rome, and made his religious profession in 1852 and studied philosophy at the College of Saint Thomas, the future Pontifical University of Saint Thomas Aquinas, Angelicum .  From the beginning Zigliara was a student of uncommon brilliancy. He completed his theology studies at Perugia where, on 17 May 1856, he was ordained by Gioacchino Pecci, Archbishop of Perugia and the future Pope Leo XIII .

Career [ edit ] Soon after ordination the young priest was appointed to teach philosophy, first in Rome, then at Corbara in his native Corsica, and later in the diocesan seminary at Viterbo while master of novices in the neighbouring convent at Gradi.

When his work at Viterbo was finished, he was called to Rome, again made master of novices.  Zigliara taught at the Collegium Divi Thomae , the future Pontifical University of Saint Thomas Aquinas, Angelicum , from 1870 to 1879, becoming a master in sacred theology and serving as regent of the college after 1873. Before assuming this latter duty, he was raised to the dignity of master in sacred theology. When his community was forced by the Italian Government in 1873 to give up the convent of the Minerva, Zigliara with other professors and students took refuge with the Fathers of the Holy Ghost , who had charge of the French College in Rome. Here the lectures were continued until a house near the Minerva was secured. Zigliara's fame was now widespread in Rome and elsewhere. French, Italian, German, English, and American bishops were eager to put some of their most promising students and young professors under his tuition.

Zigliara had a role in composing papal encyclicals that supported the revival of Thomism and responded to the modernist crisis: Aeterni Patris and Rerum novarum .

[ 3 ] Pope Leo XIII, long a friend of Zigliari, included him among the first group of prelates he made cardinals, creating him a cardinal deacon on 12 May 1879.

[ 4 ] He confirmed him as a cardinal priest assigned the titular church of Santa Prassede on 1 June 1891.

[ 5 ] In a consistory held on 16 January 1893, Zigliari exercised his option to join the highest order of cardinals, cardinal bishop, choosing to become Bishop of Frascati , one of the seven suburbicarian sees .

[ 6 ] His health prevented him from being consecrated a bishop before his death in Rome on 11 May 1893.

Works [ edit ] He was a member of seven Roman congregations , besides being prefect of the Congregation of Studies and co-president of the Pontifical Academy of St. Thomas Aquinas . He was a man of deep piety and devotion, and a tireless student to the end of his life. In addition to his many duties as cardinal, he was entrusted with the superintendence of the Leonine edition of the works of St. Thomas, the first volume of which contains his own commentary. He also found time to publish his "Propaedeutica ad Sacram Theologiam" and to write an extensive work on the sacraments, of which only the tracts on baptism and penance received final revision before his death. The most important, however, of Zigliara's works is his "Summa Philosophica", which enjoys a worldwide circulation. For many years this has been the textbook in a great number of the seminaries and colleges of Europe, Canada , and the United States ; and around the turn of the 20th century it was adopted as the textbook for the philosophical examination in the National University of Ireland . His other works are: Osservazioni su alcune interpretazioni di G.C. Ubaghs sull' ideologia di San Tommaso d'Aquino (Viterbo, 1870) Della luce intellettuale e dell'ontologismo secondo la dottrina di S. Bonaventura e Tommaso d'Aquino (2 vols., Rome, 1874) De mente Concilii Viennensis in definiendo dogmate unionis animae humanae cum corpore (1878) Commentaria S. Thomae in Aristotelis libros Peri Hermeneias et Posteriorum analyticorum , in fol. vol. I new edit. "Opp. S. Thomae": (Rome, 1882) Saggio sui principi del tradizionalismo Dimittatur e la spiegazione datane dalla S. Congregazione dell' Indice .

By his teaching and through his writings, he was one of the chief instruments, under Leo XIII, of reviving and propagating Thomistic philosophy throughout the entire Church. In his own order and in some universities and seminaries, the teaching of St. Thomas had never been interrupted, but it was reserved for Zigliara to give a special impetus to the movement which has made Thomistic philosophy and theology dominant in the Catholic world.

References [ edit ] ^ Kelly, William J. (2000). "Zigliara, Tommaso Maria". In: Biographical Dictionary of Christian Theologians.

Westport, Conn: Greenwood Press, p. 549.

^ Herbermann, Charles, ed. (1913). " Tommaso Maria Zigliara ".

Catholic Encyclopedia . New York: Robert Appleton Company.

^ Benedict Ashley, The Dominicans , 9 "The Age of Compromise", "The Dominican Friars of the Province of St. Albert the Great » the Age of Compromise (1800s)" . Archived from the original on 13 December 2013 . Retrieved 20 August 2013 .

^ Acta Sanctae Sedis (PDF) . Vol. XI. 1878. pp.

587– 8 . Retrieved 30 January 2021 .

^ Acta Sanctae Sedis (PDF) . Vol. XXIII. 1890–1891. p. 705 . Retrieved 15 February 2021 .

^ Acta Sanctae Sedis (PDF) . Vol. XXV. 1892–1893. p. 388 . Retrieved 4 March 2021 .

This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Herbermann, Charles, ed. (1913). " Tommaso Maria Zigliara ".

Catholic Encyclopedia . New York: Robert Appleton Company.

External links [ edit ] Grossi, I. P. (2003).

"Zigliara, Tommaso" .

New Catholic Encyclopedia . Vol. 14: Thi–Zwi (2 ed.). Detroit: Thomson Gale . p. 925.

Zanardi, Stefania (2020).

"ZIGLIARA, Francesco" .

Dizionario Biografico degli Italiani , Volume 100: Vittorio Emanuele I–Zurlo (in Italian). Rome: Istituto dell'Enciclopedia Italiana .

ISBN 978-88-12-00032-6 .

Works by or about Tommaso Maria Zigliara at the Internet Archive Grasso, Giacomo (1988). "Il Card. Tommaso Maria Zigliara, o. p., l'uomo, il domenicano, il cardinale".

Angelicum .

65 (2): 224– 239.

JSTOR 44616134 .

Translated excerpt from Zigliara's Summa philosophica Catholic Church titles Preceded by Joseph Hergenröther Cardinal Protodeacon 1890–1891 Succeeded by Isidoro Verga v t e History of Catholic theology Key figures General History of the Catholic Church Timeline History of the papacy Papal primacy Ecumenical councils Catholic Bible Vulgate Biblical canon History of Christian theology Early Church Paul Clement of Rome First Epistle of Clement Didache Ignatius of Antioch Polycarp Epistle of Barnabas The Shepherd of Hermas Aristides of Athens Justin Martyr Epistle to Diognetus Irenaeus Montanism Tertullian Origen Antipope Novatian Cyprian Constantine to Pope Gregory I Eusebius Athanasius of Alexandria Arianism Pelagianism Nestorianism Monophysitism Ephrem the Syrian Hilary of Poitiers Cyril of Jerusalem Basil of Caesarea Gregory of Nazianzus Gregory of Nyssa Ambrose John Chrysostom Jerome Augustine of Hippo John Cassian Orosius Cyril of Alexandria Peter Chrysologus Pope Leo I Boethius Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite Pope Gregory I Early Middle Ages Isidore of Seville John Climacus Maximus the Confessor Monothelitism Ecthesis Bede John of Damascus Iconoclasm Transubstantiation dispute Predestination disputes Paulinus II of Aquileia Alcuin Benedict of Aniane Rabanus Maurus Paschasius Radbertus John Scotus Eriugena High Middle Ages Roscellinus Gregory of Narek Berengar of Tours Peter Damian Anselm of Canterbury Joachim of Fiore Peter Abelard Decretum Gratiani Bernard of Clairvaux Peter Lombard Anselm of Laon Hildegard of Bingen Hugh of Saint Victor Dominic de Guzmán Robert Grosseteste Francis of Assisi Anthony of Padua Beatrice of Nazareth Bonaventure Albertus Magnus Boetius of Dacia Henry of Ghent Thomas Aquinas Siger of Brabant Thomism Roger Bacon Mysticism and reforms Ramon Llull Duns Scotus Dante Alighieri William of Ockham Richard Rolle John of Ruusbroec Catherine of Siena Bridget of Sweden Meister Eckhart Johannes Tauler Walter Hilton The Cloud of Unknowing Heinrich Seuse Geert Groote Devotio Moderna Julian of Norwich Thomas à Kempis Nicholas of Cusa Marsilio Ficino Girolamo Savonarola Giovanni Pico della Mirandola Reformation Counter-Reformation Erasmus Thomas Cajetan Thomas More John Fisher Johann Eck Francisco de Vitoria Thomas of Villanova Ignatius of Loyola Francisco de Osuna John of Ávila Francis Xavier Teresa of Ávila Luis de León John of the Cross Peter Canisius Luis de Molina ( Molinism ) Robert Bellarmine Francisco Suárez Lawrence of Brindisi Francis de Sales Baroque period to French Revolution Tommaso Campanella Pierre de Bérulle Pierre Gassendi René Descartes Mary of Jesus of Ágreda António Vieira Jean-Jacques Olier Louis Thomassin Jacques-Bénigne Bossuet François Fénelon Cornelius Jansen ( Jansenism ) Blaise Pascal Nicolas Malebranche Giambattista Vico Alphonsus Liguori Louis de Montfort Maria Gaetana Agnesi Alfonso Muzzarelli Johann Michael Sailer Clement Mary Hofbauer Bruno Lanteri 19th century Joseph Görres Félicité de La Mennais Luigi Taparelli Antonio Rosmini Ignaz von Döllinger John Henry Newman Henri Lacordaire Jaime Balmes Gaetano Sanseverino Giovanni Maria Cornoldi Wilhelm Emmanuel Freiherr von Ketteler Giuseppe Pecci Joseph Hergenröther Tommaso Maria Zigliara Matthias Joseph Scheeben Émile Boutroux Modernism Neo-scholasticism Léon Bloy Désiré-Joseph Mercier Friedrich von Hügel Vladimir Solovyov Marie-Joseph Lagrange George Tyrrell Maurice Blondel Thérèse of Lisieux 20th century G. K. Chesterton Reginald Garrigou-Lagrange Joseph Maréchal Pierre Teilhard de Chardin Jacques Maritain Étienne Gilson Ronald Knox Georges Bernanos Dietrich von Hildebrand Gabriel Marcel Marie-Dominique Chenu Romano Guardini Edith Stein Fulton Sheen Henri de Lubac Dorothy Day Henri Daniel-Rops Jean Guitton Josemaría Escrivá Nouvelle théologie Karl Rahner Yves Congar Bernard Lonergan Emmanuel Mounier Jean Daniélou Hans Urs von Balthasar Marcel Lefebvre Frederick Copleston Alfred Delp Edward Schillebeeckx Thomas Merton René Girard Hans Küng Johann Baptist Metz Jean Vanier Henri Nouwen 21st century Pope John Paul II Alice von Hildebrand Carlo Maria Martini Pope Benedict XVI Gustavo Gutiérrez Alasdair MacIntyre Walter Kasper Raniero Cantalamessa Michał Heller Peter Kreeft Jean-Luc Marion Tomáš Halík Aidan Nichols Scott Hahn Catholicism portal Portals : Biography Catholicism Italy Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Australia Netherlands Sweden Vatican Catalonia People Trove Italian People Other IdRef Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Tommaso_Maria_Zigliara&oldid=1252887714 " Categories : 1833 births 1893 deaths 19th-century Italian cardinals 19th-century Italian male writers 19th-century Italian non-fiction writers 19th-century Italian Roman Catholic theologians Cardinals created by Pope Leo XIII Cardinal-bishops of Frascati Dominican cardinals Italian Dominicans Italian male non-fiction writers Italian religious writers Italian Roman Catholic writers People from Corse-du-Sud Thomists University of Perugia alumni Hidden categories: Articles incorporating a citation from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference Articles incorporating text from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from February 2021 Articles needing additional references from May 2014 All articles needing additional references CS1: long volume value CS1 Italian-language sources (it) Articles with Internet Archive links Pages using S-rel template with ca parameter This page was last edited on 23 October 2024, at 10:55 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Tommaso Maria Zigliara 13 languages Add topic

