Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Definition and categorization 3 Importance 4 Terrestrial 5 Marine 6 Freshwater 7 See also 8 References 9 Bibliography 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Ecoregion 43 languages Afrikaans العربية Беларуская Български Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית ქართული Lietuvių Magyar Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Slovenščina Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska ไทย Türkçe Українська West-Vlams 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Ecological and geographic area A map of the Amazon rainforest ecoregions. The yellow line encloses the ecoregions per the World Wide Fund for Nature.

Ecoregions ( ecological regions ) are ecological and geographic areas that exist on multiple different levels, [ 1 ] defined by type, quality, and quantity of environmental resources.

[ 2 ] Ecoregions cover relatively large areas of land or water, and contain characteristic, geographically distinct assemblages of natural communities and species . The biodiversity of flora , fauna and ecosystems that characterise an ecoregion tends to be distinct from that of other ecoregions. In theory, biodiversity or conservation ecoregions are relatively large areas of land or water where the probability of encountering different species and communities at any given point remains relatively constant, within an acceptable range of variation (largely undefined at this point).
Ecoregions are also known as "ecozones" ("ecological zones"), although that term may also refer to biogeographic realms .

Three caveats are appropriate for all bio-geographic mapping approaches. Firstly, no single bio-geographic framework is optimal for all taxa. Ecoregions reflect the best compromise for as many taxa as possible. Secondly, ecoregion boundaries rarely form abrupt edges; rather, ecotones and mosaic habitats bound them. Thirdly, most ecoregions contain habitats that differ from their assigned biome . Biogeographic provinces may originate due to various barriers, including physical (plate tectonics, topographic highs), climatic (latitudinal variation, seasonal range) and ocean chemical related (salinity, oxygen levels).

History [ edit ] The history of the term is somewhat vague. It has been used in many contexts: forest classifications (Loucks, 1962), biome classifications (Bailey, 1976, 2014), biogeographic classifications ( WWF / Global 200 scheme of Olson & Dinerstein, 1998), etc.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] The phrase "ecological region" was widely used throughout the 20th century by biologists and zoologists to define specific geographic areas in research. In the early 1970s, the term 'ecoregion' was introduced (short for ecological region), and R.G. Bailey published the first comprehensive map of U.S. ecoregions in 1976.

[ 4 ] The term was used widely in scholarly literature in the 1980s and 1990s, and in 2001 scientists at the U.S. conservation organization World Wildlife Fund (WWF) codified and published the first global-scale map of Terrestrial Ecoregions of the World (TEOW), led by D. Olsen, E. Dinerstein, E. Wikramanayake, and N. Burgess.

[ 8 ] While the two approaches are related, the Bailey ecoregions (nested in four levels) give more importance to ecological criteria and climate zones, while the WWF ecoregions give more importance to biogeography, that is, the distribution of distinct species assemblages.

[ 6 ] The TEOW framework originally delineated 867 terrestrial ecoregions nested into 14 major biomes, contained with the world's 8 major biogeographical realms. Subsequent regional papers by the co-authors covering Africa, Indo-Pacific, and Latin America differentiate between ecoregions and bioregions, referring to the latter as "geographic clusters of ecoregions that may span several habitat types, but have strong biogeographic affinities, particularly at taxonomic levels higher than the species level (genus, family)", [ 9 ] [ 10 ] [ 11 ] though the Assessment by Graham defines a bioregion exclusively in the sense of biogeographic history.

[ 12 ] The specific goal of the authors was to support global biodiversity conservation by providing a "fourfold increase in resolution over that of the 198 biotic provinces of Dasmann (1974) and the 193 units of Udvardy (1975)." In 2007, a comparable set of Marine Ecoregions of the World (MEOW) was published, led by M. Spalding, [ 13 ] and in 2008 a set of Freshwater Ecoregions of the World (FEOW) was published, led by R. Abell.

[ 14 ] Bailey's ecoregion concept prioritizes ecological criteria and climate, while the WWF concept prioritizes biogeography, that is, the distribution of distinct species assemblages.

[ 6 ] In 2017, an updated terrestrial ecoregions dataset was released in the paper "An Ecoregion-Based Approach to Protecting Half the Terrestrial Realm" led by E. Dinerstein with 48 co-authors.

[ 15 ] Using recent advances in satellite imagery the ecoregion perimeters were refined and the total number reduced to 846 (and later 844), which can be explored on a web application developed by Resolve and Google Earth Engine.

[ 16 ] Definition and categorization [ edit ] The Ötztal Alps , a mountain range in the central Alps of Europe , are part of the Central Eastern Alps , and can both be termed as ecoregions.

A conifer forest in the Swiss Alps ( National Park ).

An ecoregion is a "recurring pattern of ecosystems associated with characteristic combinations of soil and landform that characterise that region".

[ 17 ] Omernik (2004) elaborates on this by defining ecoregions as: "areas within which there is spatial coincidence in characteristics of geographical phenomena associated with differences in the quality, health, and integrity of ecosystems ".

[ 18 ] "Characteristics of geographical phenomena" may include geology , physiography , vegetation, climate, hydrology , terrestrial and aquatic fauna , and soils, and may or may not include the impacts of human activity (e.g. land use patterns, vegetation changes). There is significant, but not absolute, spatial correlation among these characteristics, making the delineation of ecoregions an imperfect science. Another complication is that environmental conditions across an ecoregion boundary may change very gradually, e.g. the prairie-forest transition in the midwestern United States, making it difficult to identify an exact dividing boundary. Such transition zones are called ecotones .

Ecoregions can be categorized using an algorithmic approach or a holistic, "weight-of-evidence" approach where the importance of various factors may vary. An example of the algorithmic approach is Robert Bailey 's work for the U.S. Forest Service, which uses a hierarchical classification that first divides land areas into very large regions based on climatic factors, and subdivides these regions, based first on dominant potential vegetation, and then by geomorphology and soil characteristics. The weight-of-evidence approach is exemplified by James Omernik's work for the United States Environmental Protection Agency , subsequently adopted (with modification) for North America by the Commission for Environmental Cooperation .

The intended purpose of ecoregion delineation may affect the method used. For example, the WWF ecoregions were developed to aid in biodiversity conservation planning, and place a greater emphasis than the Omernik or Bailey systems on floral and faunal differences between regions. The WWF classification defines an ecoregion as: A large area of land or water that contains a geographically distinct assemblage of natural communities that: (a) Share a large majority of their species and ecological dynamics; (b) Share similar environmental conditions, and; (c) Interact ecologically in ways that are critical for their long-term persistence.

According to WWF, the boundaries of an ecoregion approximate the original extent of the natural communities prior to any major recent disruptions or changes. WWF has identified 867 terrestrial ecoregions, and approximately 450 freshwater ecoregions across the Earth.

Terrestrial Ecoregions of the World (Olson et al. 2001, BioScience) Importance [ edit ] The use of the term ecoregion is an outgrowth of a surge of interest in ecosystems and their functioning. In particular, there is awareness of issues relating to spatial scale in the study and management of landscapes . It is widely recognized that interlinked ecosystems combine to form a whole that is "greater than the sum of its parts". There are many attempts to respond to ecosystems in an integrated way to achieve "multi-functional" landscapes, and various interest groups from agricultural researchers to conservationists are using the "ecoregion" as a unit of analysis.

The " Global 200 " is the list of ecoregions identified by WWF as priorities for conservation .

Terrestrial [ edit ] WWF terrestrial ecoregions Terrestrial ecoregions are land ecoregions, as distinct from freshwater and marine ecoregions. In this context, terrestrial is used to mean "of land" (soil and rock), rather than the more general sense "of Earth " (which includes land and oceans).

WWF (World Wildlife Fund) ecologists currently divide the land surface of the Earth into eight biogeographical realms containing 867 smaller terrestrial ecoregions (see list ). The WWF effort is a synthesis of many previous efforts to define and classify ecoregions.

[ 19 ] The eight realms follow the major floral and faunal boundaries, identified by botanists and zoologists, that separate the world's major plant and animal communities. Realm boundaries generally follow continental boundaries, or major barriers to plant and animal distribution, like the Himalayas and the Sahara . The boundaries of ecoregions are often not as decisive or well recognized, and are subject to greater disagreement.

Proportion of forest area by forest area density class and global ecological zone, 2015, from Food and Agriculture Organization publication The State of the World's Forests 2020. Forests, biodiversity and people – In brief [ 20 ] Ecoregions are classified by biome type, which are the major global plant communities determined by rainfall and climate. Forests, grasslands (including savanna and shrubland), and deserts (including xeric shrublands ) are distinguished by climate ( tropical and subtropical vs.

temperate and boreal climates) and, for forests, by whether the trees are predominantly conifers ( gymnosperms ), or whether they are predominantly broadleaf ( Angiosperms ) and mixed (broadleaf and conifer). Biome types like Mediterranean forests, woodlands, and scrub ; tundra ; and mangroves host very distinct ecological communities, and are recognised as distinct biome types [ clarification needed ] as well.

Marine [ edit ] Main article: Marine ecoregion See also: Large marine ecosystem View of Earth, taken in 1972 by the Apollo 17 crew. Approximately 71% of Earth's surface (an area of some 361 million square kilometers) consists of ocean Marine ecoregions are: "Areas of relatively homogeneous species composition , clearly distinct from adjacent systems….In ecological terms, these are strongly cohesive units, sufficiently large to encompass ecological or life history processes for most sedentary species." [ 21 ] They have been defined by The Nature Conservancy (TNC) and World Wildlife Fund (WWF) to aid in conservation activities for marine ecosystems . Forty-three priority marine ecoregions were delineated as part of WWF's Global 200 efforts.

[ 22 ] The scheme used to designate and classify marine ecoregions is analogous to that used for terrestrial ecoregions. Major habitat types are identified: polar, temperate shelves and seas, temperate upwelling, tropical upwelling, tropical coral, pelagic (trades and westerlies), abyssal, and hadal (ocean trench). These correspond to the terrestrial biomes .

The Global 200 classification of marine ecoregions is not developed to the same level of detail and comprehensiveness as that of the terrestrial ecoregions; only the priority conservation areas are listed.

See Global 200 Marine ecoregions for a full list of marine ecoregions.

[ 23 ] In 2007, TNC and WWF refined and expanded this scheme to provide a system of comprehensive near shore (to 200 meters depth) Marine Ecoregions of the World (MEOW).

[ 23 ] The 232 individual marine ecoregions are grouped into 62 marine provinces , which in turn group into 12 marine realms , which represent the broad latitudinal divisions of polar, temperate, and tropical seas, with subdivisions based on ocean basins (except for the southern hemisphere temperate oceans, which are based on continents).

Major marine biogeographic realms, analogous to the eight terrestrial biogeographic realms , represent large regions of the ocean basins: Arctic , Temperate Northern Atlantic , Temperate Northern Pacific , Tropical Atlantic , Western Indo-Pacific , Central Indo-Pacific , Eastern Indo-Pacific , Tropical Eastern Pacific , Temperate South America , Temperate Southern Africa , Temperate Australasia , and Southern Ocean .

[ 21 ] A similar system of identifying areas of the oceans for conservation purposes is the system of large marine ecosystems (LMEs), developed by the US National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA).

Freshwater [ edit ] See also: List of freshwater ecoregions The Amazon River in Brazil .

A freshwater ecoregion is a large area encompassing one or more freshwater systems that contains a distinct assemblage of natural freshwater communities and species. The freshwater species, dynamics, and environmental conditions within a given ecoregion are more similar to each other than to those of surrounding ecoregions and together form a conservation unit. Freshwater systems include rivers , streams , lakes , and wetlands . Freshwater ecoregions are distinct from terrestrial ecoregions, which identify biotic communities of the land, and marine ecoregions, which are biotic communities of the oceans.

[ 24 ] A map of Freshwater Ecoregions of the World, released in 2008, has 426 ecoregions covering virtually the entire non-marine surface of the earth.

[ 25 ] World Wildlife Fund (WWF) identifies twelve major habitat types of freshwater ecoregions: Large lakes, large river deltas, polar freshwaters, montane freshwaters, temperate coastal rivers, temperate floodplain rivers and wetlands, temperate upland rivers, tropical and subtropical coastal rivers, tropical and subtropical floodplain rivers and wetlands, tropical and subtropical upland rivers, xeric freshwaters and endorheic basins, and oceanic islands. The freshwater major habitat types reflect groupings of ecoregions with similar biological, chemical, and physical characteristics and are roughly equivalent to biomes for terrestrial systems.

The Global 200 , a set of ecoregions identified by WWF whose conservation would achieve the goal of saving a broad diversity of the Earth's ecosystems, includes a number of areas highlighted for their freshwater biodiversity values. The Global 200 preceded Freshwater Ecoregions of the World and incorporated information from regional freshwater ecoregional assessments that had been completed at that time.

See also [ edit ] Environment portal Ecology portal Wetlands portal Crisis ecoregion Lists of ecoregions References [ edit ] ^ "Ecoregions of North America" .

U.S. Environmental Protection Agency . U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.

North America has been divided into:  15 broad, level I ecological regions; 50 level II ecological regions intended to provide a more detailed description of the large ecological areas nested within the level I regions; and 182 Level III ecoregions, which are smaller ecological areas nested within level II regions.

^ "Ecoregions" .

U.S. Environmental Protection Agency . U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.

Ecoregions are areas where ecosystems (and the type, quality, and quantity of environmental resources) are generally similar.

^ Loucks, O. L. (1962). A forest classification for the Maritime Provinces.

Proceedings of the Nova Scotian Institute of Science , 25(Part 2), 85–167.

^ a b Bailey, R. G. 1976.

Ecoregions of the United States (map). Ogden, Utah: USDA Forest Service, Intermountain Region. 1:7,500,000.

^ Bailey, R. G. 2002.

Ecoregion-based design for sustainability . New York: Springer, [1] .

^ a b c Bailey, R. G. 2014.

Ecoregions: The Ecosystem Geography of the. Oceans and Continents . 2nd ed., Springer, 180 pp., [2] .

^ Olson, D. M. & E. Dinerstein (1998). The Global 200: A representation approach to conserving the Earth's most biologically valuable ecoregions.

Conservation Biol.

12:502–515.

^ David M. Olson, Eric Dinerstein, Eric D. Wikramanayake, Neil D. Burgess, George V. N. Powell, Emma C. Underwood, Jennifer A. D'amico, Illanga Itoua, Holly E. Strand, John C. Morrison, Colby J. Loucks, Thomas F. Allnutt, Taylor H. Ricketts, Yumiko Kura, John F. Lamoreux, Wesley W. Wettengel, Prashant Hedao, Kenneth R. Kassem (November 1, 2001).

"Terrestrial Ecoregions of the World: A New Map of Life on Earth" .

BioScience .

51 (11) – via Oxford Academic.

{{ cite journal }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ Burgess, N.D.; D'Amico Hales, J.; Dinerstein, E.; et al. (2004).

Terrestrial eco-regions of Africa and Madagascar: A conservation assessment . Washington DC.: Island Press [3] ^ Wikramanayake, Eric; Eric Dinerstein; Colby J. Loucks; et al. (2002).

Terrestrial Ecoregions of the Indo-Pacific: a Conservation Assessment.

Washington, DC: Island Press ^ Dinerstein, E., Olson, D. Graham, D.J. et al. (1995).

A Conservation Assessment of the Terrestrial Ecoregions of Latin America and the Caribbean.

World Bank, Washington DC., [4] .

^ name=":4">Dinerstein, E., Olson, D. Graham, D.J. et al. (1995).

A Conservation Assessment of the Terrestrial Ecoregions of Latin America and the Caribbean.

World Bank, Washington DC., [5] . |quote= A bioregion is a geographically related assemblage of ecoregions that share a similar biogeographic history… ^ Mark D. Spalding, Helen E. Fox, Gerald R. Allen, Nick Davidson, Zach A. Ferdaña, Max Finlayson, Benjamin S. Halpern, Miguel A. Jorge, Al Lombana, Sara A. Lourie, Kirsten D. Martin, Edmund McManus, Jennifer Molnar, Cheri A. Recchia, James Robertson (July 1, 2007).

"Marine Ecoregions of the World: A Bioregionalization of Coastal and Shelf Areas" .

BioScience .

57 (7) – via Oxford Academic.

{{ cite journal }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ Robin Abell, Michele L. Thieme, Carmen Revenga, Mark Bryer, Maurice Kottelat, Nina Bogutskaya, Brian Coad, Nick Mandrak, Salvador Contreras Balderas, William Bussing, Melanie L. J. Stiassny, Paul Skelton, Gerald R. Allen, Peter Unmack, Alexander Naseka, Rebecca Ng, Nikolai Sindorf, James Robertson, Eric Armijo, Jonathan V. Higgins, Thomas J. Heibel, Eric Wikramanayake, David Olson, Hugo L. López, Roberto E. Reis, John G. Lundberg, Mark H. Sabaj Pérez, Paulo Petry (May 1, 2008).

"Freshwater Ecoregions of the World: A New Map of Biogeographic Units for Freshwater Biodiversity Conservation" .

BioScience .

58 (5): 403– 414.

doi : 10.1641/B580507 – via Oxford Academic.

{{ cite journal }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ Dinerstein, Eric (5 April 2017).

"An Ecoregion-Based Approach to Protecting Half the Terrestrial Realm" .

BioScience .

67 (6): 534– 545.

doi : 10.1093/biosci/bix014 .

PMC 5451287 .

PMID 28608869 – via Oxford Academic.

^ Dinerstein (Ed.), Eric (2017).

"Ecoregions 2017" .

Ecoregions 2017 .

^ Brunckhorst, D. (2000).

Bioregional planning: resource management beyond the new millennium.

Harwood Academic Publishers: Sydney, Australia.

^ Omernik, J. M. (2004). "Perspectives on the Nature and Definition of Ecological Regions".

Environmental Management . 34 Suppl 1 (1): 34 – Supplement 1, pp.27–38.

Bibcode : 2004EnMan..34S..27O .

doi : 10.1007/s00267-003-5197-2 .

PMID 16044553 .

S2CID 11191859 .

^ "Biomes - Conserving Biomes - WWF" .

^ The State of the World's Forests 2020. Forests, biodiversity and people – In brief . Rome: FAO & UNEP. 2020.

doi : 10.4060/ca8985en .

ISBN 978-92-5-132707-4 .

S2CID 241416114 .

^ a b Spalding, Mark D.; Fox, Helen E.; Allen, Gerald R.; Davidson, Nick; et al. (2007).

"Marine Ecoregions of the World: A Bioregionalization of Coastal and Shelf Areas" .

BioScience .

57 (7): 573– 583.

doi : 10.1641/B570707 .

S2CID 29150840 .

^ Olson and Dinerstein 1998 and 2002 ^ a b "Marine Ecoregions of the World" . World Wide Fund for Nature.

^ Hermoso, Virgilio; Abell, Robin; Linke, Simon; Boon, Philip (2016). "The role of protected areas for freshwater biodiversity conservation: challenges and opportunities in a rapidly changing world".

Aquatic Conservation: Marine and Freshwater Ecosystems .

26 (s1): 3– 10.

Bibcode : 2016ACMFE..26S...3H .

doi : 10.1002/aqc.2681 .

S2CID 88786689 .

^ "Freshwater Ecoregions of the World" .

WWF .

Bibliography [ edit ] Sources related to the WWC scheme: Main papers: Abell, R., M. Thieme, C. Revenga, M. Bryer, M. Kottelat, N. Bogutskaya, B. Coad, N. Mandrak, S. Contreras-Balderas, W. Bussing, M. L. J. Stiassny, P. Skelton, G. R. Allen, P. Unmack, A. Naseka, R. Ng, N. Sindorf, J. Robertson, E. Armijo, J. Higgins, T. J. Heibel, E. Wikramanayake, D. Olson, H. L. Lopez, R. E. d. Reis, J. G. Lundberg, M. H. Sabaj Perez, and P. Petry. (2008). Freshwater ecoregions of the world: A new map of biogeographic units for freshwater biodiversity conservation.

BioScience 58:403–414, [6] .

Olson, D. M., Dinerstein, E., Wikramanayake, E. D., Burgess, N. D., Powell, G. V. N., Underwood, E. C., D'Amico, J. A., Itoua, I., Strand, H. E., Morrison, J. C., Loucks, C. J., Allnutt, T. F., Ricketts, T. H., Kura, Y., Lamoreux, J. F., Wettengel, W. W., Hedao, P., Kassem, K. R. (2001). Terrestrial ecoregions of the world: a new map of life on Earth.

BioScience 51(11):933–938, [7] .

Spalding, M. D. et al. (2007). Marine ecoregions of the world: a bioregionalization of coastal and shelf areas.

BioScience 57: 573–583, [8] .

Africa: Burgess, N., J.D. Hales, E. Underwood, and E. Dinerstein (2004).

Terrestrial Ecoregions of Africa and Madagascar: A Conservation Assessment.

Island Press, Washington, D.C., [9] .

Thieme, M.L., R. Abell, M.L.J. Stiassny, P. Skelton, B. Lehner, G.G. Teugels, E. Dinerstein, A.K. Toham, N. Burgess & D. Olson. 2005.

Freshwater ecoregions of Africa and Madagascar: A conservation assessment.

Washington DC: WWF, [10] .

Latin America Dinerstein, E., Olson, D. Graham, D.J. et al. (1995).

A Conservation Assessment of the Terrestrial Ecoregions of Latin America and the Caribbean.

World Bank, Washington DC., [11] .

Olson, D. M., E. Dinerstein, G. Cintron, and P. Iolster. 1996.

A conservation assessment of mangrove ecosystems of Latin America and the Caribbean . Final report for The Ford Foundation. World Wildlife Fund, Washington, D.C.

Olson, D. M., B. Chernoff, G. Burgess, I. Davidson, P. Canevari, E. Dinerstein, G. Castro, V. Morisset, R. Abell, and E. Toledo. 1997.

Freshwater biodiversity of Latin America and the Caribbean: a conservation assessment . Draft report. World Wildlife Fund-U.S., Wetlands International, Biodiversity Support Program, and United States Agency for International Development, Washington, D.C., [12] .

North America Abell, R.A. et al. (2000).

Freshwater Ecoregions of North America: A Conservation Assessment Washington, DC: Island Press, [13] .

Ricketts, T.H. et al. 1999.

Terrestrial Ecoregions of North America: A Conservation Assessment . Washington (DC): Island Press, [14] .

Russia and Indo-Pacific Krever, V., Dinerstein, E., Olson, D. and Williams, L. 1994.

Conserving Russia's Biological Diversity: an analytical framework and initial investment portfolio . WWF, Switzerland.

Wikramanayake, E., E. Dinerstein, C. J. Loucks, D. M. Olson, J. Morrison, J. L. Lamoreux, M. McKnight, and P. Hedao. 2002.

Terrestrial ecoregions of the Indo-Pacific: a conservation assessment . Island Press, Washington, DC, USA, [15] .

Others: Brunckhorst, D. 2000.

Bioregional planning: resource management beyond the new millennium.

Harwood Academic Publishers: Sydney, Australia.

Busch, D.E. and J.C. Trexler. eds. 2003. Monitoring Ecosystems: Interdisciplinary approaches for evaluating ecoregional initiatives. Island Press. 447 pages.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Ecoregions .

WWF WildFinder (interactive on-line map of ecoregions with additional information about animal species) WWF Map of the ecozones at the Wayback Machine (archived April 10, 2010), Original web page Activist network cultivating Ecoregions/Bioregions Sierra Club – ecoregions at the Wayback Machine (archived November 14, 2008), Original web page World Map of Ecoregions v t e Biogeographic regions Biomes Terrestrial biomes Polar/montane Tundra Taiga Montane grasslands and shrublands Alpine tundra Temperate Coniferous forests Broadleaf and mixed forests Deciduous forests Grasslands, savannas, and shrublands Tropical and subtropical Coniferous forests Cloud forest Moist broadleaf forests list Dry broadleaf forests Grasslands, savannas, and shrublands Dry Mediterranean forests, woodlands, and scrub Deserts and xeric shrublands Steppe Wet Flooded grasslands and savannas Riparian Wetland Mangroves Aquatic biomes Pond Littoral Intertidal Kelp forests Coral reefs Neritic zone Pelagic zone Benthic zone Hydrothermal vents Cold seeps Demersal zone Other biomes Endolithic zone Biogeographic realms Terrestrial Afrotropical Antarctic Australasian Holarctic Nearctic Palearctic Indomalayan Neotropical Oceanian Marine Antarctic/Southern Ocean Arctic Central Indo-Pacific Eastern Indo-Pacific Temperate Australasia Temperate Northern Atlantic Temperate Northern Pacific Temperate South America Temperate Southern Africa Tropical Atlantic Tropical Eastern Pacific Western Indo-Pacific Subdivisions Biogeographic provinces Bioregions Ecoregions Lists of ecoregions Global 200 ecoregions See also Altitudinal zonation Ecological classification Floristic kingdoms Vegetation classifications Wallace Line Zoogeography Authority control databases National United States Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐46fs6
Cached time: 20250811235508
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.415 seconds
Real time usage: 0.511 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1668/1000000
Revision size: 29813/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 80679/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 1257/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 8/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 77939/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.258/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 6441784/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  429.819      1 -total
 33.67%  144.713      1 Template:Reflist
 18.76%   80.650      6 Template:Cite_web
 16.95%   72.839      4 Template:Navbox
 16.23%   69.781      1 Template:Biome
 14.51%   62.347      1 Template:Short_description
 10.08%   43.342      1 Template:Commons_category
  9.71%   41.735      1 Template:Sister_project
  9.42%   40.499      1 Template:Side_box
  9.35%   40.186      7 Template:Cite_journal Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:45383:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250811235508 and revision id 1304072235. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ecoregion&oldid=1304072235 " Categories : Ecoregions Biogeography Hidden categories: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list CS1: long volume value Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia articles needing clarification from October 2021 Commons category link is on Wikidata Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 3 August 2025, at 20:13 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Ecoregion 43 languages Add topic

