Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Definition Toggle Definition subsection 1.1 Debate on privatization 2 Origins 3 Funding Toggle Funding subsection 3.1 Special purpose vehicle 3.2 Financial partners 3.3 Government 3.4 Risks 3.5 Profits 4 P3 justifications Toggle P3 justifications subsection 4.1 Off-balance-sheet accounting 4.2 Project costs 4.3 Value for money 4.4 Transfer of risk 5 Accountability and transparency 6 Sectors Toggle Sectors subsection 6.1 Water services 6.2 Transportation 6.3 Health services 6.4 Forestry sector 7 Institutional support Toggle Institutional support subsection 7.1 PPP units 7.2 Accounting firms 7.3 International institutions 7.4 United States foreign policy 8 Delivery models 9 Other types Toggle Other types subsection 9.1 Asset monetization 9.2 Global public–private partnership 9.3 Institutionalised public–private partnership 9.4 Market-led proposal 9.5 Public–private–community partnerships 9.6 Social impact bond 10 See also 11 References 12 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Public–private partnership 40 languages العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা Български Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español فارسی Français Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית Lietuvių Magyar Nederlands Norsk bokmål پښتو Polski Português Română Русский Shqip Simple English Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska ไทย Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Private-public partnership ) Government/private company partnership "PPPs" redirects here. For other uses, see PPPS and PPP (disambiguation) .

Public–private partnerships are often represented by a handshake, symbolizing the private and public partners coming to an agreement.

Part of a series on Neoliberalism Ideas Austerity Balanced budget Denationalization Deregulation Economic integration Economic interdependence Economic liberalization Foreign direct investment Free markets Free trade ( area ) Globalization Intellectual property Laffer curve Marketization Market economy Mundell–Fleming model Privatization Public–private partnership Shock therapy Single market Structural Adjustment Programme Supranationalism Tax cuts Economics Monetarism Neoclassical Supply-side Trickle-down Movements Economic liberalism Fiscal conservatism Fujimorism Thatcherism Reaganomics Rogernomics Third Way Governance Association of Southeast Asian Nations Bank for International Settlements European Central Bank European Union Federal Reserve Greater Arab Free Trade Area International Monetary Fund MERCOSUR North American Free Trade Agreement Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership World Bank World Trade Organization Organizations World Economic Forum Third Way People Clinton Fujimori Douglas Greenspan Lippmann Nakasone Pinochet Reagan Rougier Thatcher Related topics Anti-capitalism Anti-globalization Alter-globalization Authoritarian capitalism Blatcherism Criticism of capitalism Criticism of intellectual property Market fundamentalism Capitalism portal Economics portal Liberalism portal Politics portal v t e A public–private partnership ( PPP , 3P , or P3 ) is a long-term arrangement between a government and private sector institutions.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Typically, it involves private capital financing government projects and services up-front, and then drawing revenues from taxpayers and/or users for profit over the course of the PPP contract.

[ 3 ] Public–private partnerships have been implemented in multiple countries and are primarily used for infrastructure projects. Although they are not compulsory, PPPs have been employed for building, equipping, operating and maintaining schools, hospitals, transport systems, and water and sewerage systems.

[ 4 ] Cooperation between private actors, corporations and governments has existed since the inception of sovereign states , notably for the purpose of tax collection and colonization .

[ 5 ] Contemporary "public–private partnerships" came into being around the end of the 20th century. They were aimed at increasing the private sector's involvement in public administration . They were seen by governments around the world as a method of financing new or refurbished public sector assets outside their balance sheet .

[ 6 ] While PPP financing comes from the private sector, these projects are always paid for either through taxes or by users of the service, or a mix of both. PPPs are structurally more expensive than publicly financed projects because of the private sector's higher cost of borrowing, resulting in users or taxpayers footing the bill for disproportionately high interest costs. PPPs also have high transaction costs .

[ 6 ] PPPs are controversial as funding tools, largely over concerns that public return on investment is lower than returns for the private funder. PPPs are closely related to concepts such as privatization and the contracting out of government services.

[ 1 ] [ 7 ] The secrecy surrounding their financial details complexifies the process of evaluating whether PPPs have been successful.

[ 8 ] PPP advocates highlight the sharing of risk and the development of innovation , [ 8 ] while critics decry their higher costs and issues of accountability .

[ 6 ] Evidence of PPP performance in terms of value for money and efficiency, for example, is mixed and often unavailable.

[ 9 ] Definition [ edit ] Gavin Newsom hosts a meeting for employers about public-private partnerships. (13 November 2019) There is no consensus about how to define a PPP.

[ 7 ] The term can cover hundreds of different types of long-term contracts with a wide range of risk allocations, funding arrangements, and transparency requirements.

[ 1 ] The advancement of PPPs, as a concept and a practice, is a product of the new public management of the late 20th century, the rise of neoliberalism, and globalization pressures. Despite there being no formal consensus regarding a definition, the term has been defined by major entities.

For example, The OECD formally defines public–private partnerships as "long term contractual arrangements between the government and a private partner whereby the latter delivers and funds public services using a capital asset, sharing the associated risks".

[ 10 ] According to David L. Weimer and Aidan R. Vining, "A P3 typically involves a private entity financing, constructing, or managing a project in return for a promised stream of payments directly from government or indirectly from users over the projected life of the project or some other specified period of time".

[ 11 ] A 2013 study published in State and Local Government Review found that definitions of public-private partnerships vary widely between municipalities: "Many public and private officials tout public–private partnerships for any number of activities, when in truth the relationship is contractual, a franchise, or the load shedding of some previously public service to a private or nonprofit entity." A more general term for such agreements is "shared service delivery", in which public-sector entities join with private firms or non-profit organizations to provide services to citizens.

[ 12 ] [ 13 ] Debate on privatization [ edit ] Protest in France against encroaching privatization and the introduction of profit-seeking practices in the public sector. (22 March 2018) There is a semantic debate pertaining to whether public–private partnerships constitute privatization or not. Some argue that it isn't "privatization" because the government retains ownership of the facility and/or remains responsible for public service delivery. Others argue that they exist on a continuum of privatization, P3s being a more limited form of privatization than the outright sale of public assets, but more extensive than simply contracting out government services.

Because "privatization" has a negative connotation in some circles, supporters of P3s generally take the position that P3s do not constitute privatization, while P3 opponents argue that they do. The Canadian Union of Public Employees describes P3s as "privatization by stealth".

[ 6 ] : chapter 1 Origins [ edit ] Second Toll Gate on Yonge Street in 1886 Governments have used such a mix of public and private endeavors throughout history.

[ 5 ] [ 14 ] Muhammad Ali of Egypt utilized " concessions " in the early 1800s to obtain public works for minimal cost while the concessionaires' companies made most of the profits from projects such as railroads and dams.

[ 15 ] Much of the early infrastructure of the United States was built by what can be considered public–private partnerships. This includes the Philadelphia and Lancaster Turnpike road in Pennsylvania, which was initiated in 1792, [ 16 ] an early steamboat line between New York and New Jersey in 1808; many of the railroads, including the nation's first railroad , chartered in New Jersey in 1815; and most of the modern electric grid .

[ citation needed ] In Newfoundland, Robert Gillespie Reid contracted to operate the railways for fifty years from 1898, though originally they were to become his property at the end of the period.

[ citation needed ] The late 20th and early 21st century saw a clear trend toward governments across the globe making greater use of various PPP arrangements.

[ 2 ] Pressure to change the model of public procurement was associated with the neoliberal turn. Instigators of the policy portrayed PPPs as a solution to concerns about the growing level of public debt during the 1970s and 1980s. They sought to encourage private investment in infrastructure , initially on the basis of ideology and accounting fallacies arising from the fact that public accounts did not distinguish between recurrent and capital expenditures.

[ 6 ] : chapter 1 In 1992, the Conservative government of John Major in the United Kingdom introduced the Private finance initiative (PFI), [ 17 ] the first systematic program aimed at encouraging public–private partnerships. The 1992 program focused on reducing the public-sector borrowing requirement , although, as already noted, the effect on public accounts was largely illusory. Initially, the private sector was unenthusiastic about PFI, and the public sector was opposed to its implementation. In 1993, the Chancellor of the Exchequer described its progress as "disappointingly slow". To help promote and implement the policy, Major created institutions staffed with people linked with the City of London , accountancy and consultancy firms who had a vested interest in the success of PFI.

During his first term in office, Tony Blair made public-private partnerships the norm for government procurement projects in the United Kingdom.

Around the same time, PPPs were being initiated haphazardly in various OECD countries. The first governments to implement them were ideologically neoliberal and short on revenues : they were thus politically and fiscally inclined to try out alternative forms of public procurement. These early PPP projects were usually pitched by wealthy and politically connected business magnates . This explains why each countries experimenting with PPPs started in different sectors .

[ 6 ] At that time, PPPs were seen as a radical reform of government service provision.

[ 18 ] In 1997, the new British government of Tony Blair 's Labour Party expanded the PFI but sought to shift the emphasis to the achievement of "value for money", mainly through an appropriate allocation of risk. Blair created Partnerships UK (PUK), a new semi-independent organization to replace the previous pro-PPP government institutions. Its mandate was to promote and implement PFI. PUK was central in making PPPs the "new normal" for public infrastructure procurements in the country.

[ 19 ] Multiple countries subsequently created similar PPP units based on PUK's model.

[ 20 ] While initiated in first world countries , PPPs immediately received significant attention in developing countries . This is because the PPP model promised to bring new sources of funding for infrastructure projects in transition economies , which could translate into jobs and economic growth . However, the lack of investor rights guarantees, commercial confidentiality laws, and dedicated state spending on public infrastructure in these countries made the implementation of public–private partnership in transition economies difficult. PPPs in the countries usually can't rely on stable revenues from user fees either. The World Bank 's Public-Private Infrastructure Advisory Forum attempts to mitigate these challenges.

[ 6 ] [ 21 ] Funding [ edit ] A defining aspect of many infrastructure P3s is that most of the up-front financing is made through the private sector. The way this financing is done differs significantly by country. For P3s in the UK, bonds are used rather than bank loans . In Canada, P3 projects usually use loans that must be repaid within five years, and the projects are refinanced at a later date.

[ 6 ] In some types of public–private partnership, the cost of using the service is borne exclusively by the users of the service, [ 2 ] for example, by toll road users such as in the case of Toronto 's Yonge Street at the dawn of the 19th century, [ 22 ] and the more recent Highway 407 in Ontario . In other types (notably the PFI), capital investment is made by the private sector on the basis of a contract with the government to provide agreed-on services, and the cost of providing the services is borne wholly or in part by the government.

[ 23 ] Special purpose vehicle [ edit ] One year after the completion of the Mario Cuomo Bridge PPP, dozens of bolts holding its steel girders together had already failed. A whistleblower claims that the SPV responsible for its construction had knowingly delivered many defective high-strength bolts, and taken measures to hide evidence of the defects.

[ 24 ] Typically, a private-sector consortium forms a special company called a special-purpose vehicle (SPV) to develop, build, maintain, and operate the asset for the contracted period.

[ 25 ] [ 26 ] In cases where the government has invested in the project, it is typically (but not always) allotted an equity share in the SPV.

[ 27 ] The consortium is usually made up of a building contractor, a maintenance company, and one or more equity investors. The two former are typically equity holders in the project, who make decisions but are only repaid when the debts are paid, while the latter is the project's creditor (debt holder).

[ 6 ] It is the SPV that signs the contract with the government and with subcontractors to build the facility and then maintain it. A typical PPP example would be a hospital building financed and constructed by a private developer and then leased to the hospital authority. The private developer then acts as landlord, providing housekeeping and other non-medical services, while the hospital itself provides medical services.

[ 25 ] The SPV links the firms responsible of the building phase and the operating phase together. Hence there is a strong incentives in the building stage to make investments with regard to the operating stage. These investments can be desirable but may also be undesirable (e.g., when the investments not only reduce operating costs but also reduce service quality).

[ 28 ] Financial partners [ edit ] Public infrastructure is a relatively low-risk, high-reward investment, and combining it with complex arrangements and contracts that guarantee and secure the cash flows make PPP projects prime candidates for project financing . The equity investors in SPVs are usually institutional investors such as pension funds, life insurance companies, sovereign wealth and superannuation funds, and banks. Major P3 investors include AustralianSuper , OMERS and Dutch state-owned bank ABN AMRO , which funded the majority of P3 projects in Australia.

Wall Street firms have increased their interest in PPP since the 2008 financial crisis.

[ 6 ] Government [ edit ] Government sometimes make in kind contributions to a PPP, notably with the transfer of existing assets. In projects that are aimed at creating public goods , like in the infrastructure sector, the government may provide a capital subsidy in the form of a one-time grant so as to make the project economically viable. In other cases, the government may support the project by providing revenue subsidies, including tax breaks or by guaranteed annual revenues for a fixed period.

[ 29 ] [ 30 ] Risks [ edit ] Within public-private partnerships (PPPs), there are various risks associated. One risk common within PPPs is the lack of proper or accurate cost evaluation. Oftentimes the estimated costs of a project will not properly account for delays or unexpected events, leading to the costs to be larger than what was projected.

[ 31 ] Another risk within this area is with change of governance from differing political representatives could lead to projects being diminished or reduction of the allocated budget. This is common within PPPs as different political actors are likely to scrutinise their opponents based on their ideological positions.

Profits [ edit ] Private monopolies created by PPPs can generate a rent-seeking behavior, which leads to spiraling costs for users and/or taxpayers in the operation phase of the project.

[ 11 ] [ 6 ] Some public–private partnerships, when the development of new technologies is involved, include profit-sharing agreements. This generally involves splitting revenues between the inventor and the public once a technology is commercialized. Profit-sharing agreements may stand over a fixed period of time or in perpetuity.

[ 32 ] P3 justifications [ edit ] Using PPPs have been justified in various ways over time.

[ 2 ] [ 33 ] Advocates generally argue that PPPs enable the public sector to harness the expertise and efficiencies that the private sector can bring to the delivery of certain facilities and services traditionally procured and delivered by the public sector.

[ 34 ] On the other hand, critics suggest that PPPs are part of an ideological program that seeks to privatize public services for the profits of private entities.

[ 6 ] Off-balance-sheet accounting [ edit ] PPPs are often structured so that borrowing for the project does not appear on the balance sheet of the public-sector body seeking to make a capital investment. Rather, the borrowing is incurred by the private-sector vehicle implementing the project, with or without an explicit backup guarantee of the loan by the public body. On PPP projects where the cost of using the service is intended to be borne exclusively by the end-user, or through a lease billed to the government every year during the operation phase of the project, the PPP is, from the public sector's perspective, an " off-balance sheet " method of financing the delivery of new or refurbished public-sector assets.

This justification was particularly important during the 1990s, but has been exposed as an accounting trick designed to make the government of the day appear more fiscally responsible , while offloading the costs of their projects to service users or future governments. In Canada, many auditors general have condemned this practice, and forced governments to include PPP projects "on-balance sheet".

[ 6 ] On PPP projects where the public sector intends to compensate the private sector through availability payments once the facility is established or renewed, the financing is, from the public sector's perspective, "on-balance sheet". According to PPP advocates, the public sector will regularly benefit from significantly deferred cash flows. This viewpoint has been contested through research that shows that a majority of PPP projects ultimately cost significantly more than traditional public ones.

[ 35 ] [ 36 ] In the European Union, the fact that PPP debt is not recorded as debt and remains largely "off-balance-sheet" has become a major concern. Indeed, keeping the PPP project and its contingent liabilities "off balance sheet" means that the true cost of the project is hidden.

[ 37 ] According to the International Monetary Fund , economic ownership of the asset should determine whether to record PPP-related assets and liabilities in the government's or the private corporation's balance sheet is not straightforward.

[ 38 ] Project costs [ edit ] A discredited 2001 report by PricewaterhouseCoopers predicted that building the Abbotsford Regional Hospital & Cancer Centre (pictured) through a PPP would lead to cost savings of 1% at best. This option was selected, and then the projected construction costs increased by 68% over the course of PPP contract negotiations that lasted two years.

[ 6 ] The effectiveness of PPPs as cost-saving venture has been refuted by numerous studies.

[ 39 ] Research has showed that on average, governments pay more for PPPs projects than for traditional publicly financed projects.

[ 35 ] [ 36 ] The higher cost of P3s is attributed to these systemic factors: The private sector's higher cost of capital: governments can typically borrow capital at an interest rate lower than any private company ever could. This is because governments have the power of taxation , which guarantees that they will be able to repay their debts. Since lending to governments almost always come at a lower risk than lending to private entities, governments get better credit and cheaper financing costs for building large infrastructure projects than private finance.

[ 40 ] [ 41 ] [ 42 ] Transaction costs : P3 contracts are much more complex and extensive than contracts made in traditional publicly financed projects. The negotiation of these contracts require the presence of lawyers on all sides of the table and can take months or even years to finalize.

[ 43 ] Barrie Mckenna reports that "transaction costs for lawyers and consultants [in P3s] add about 3 percent to the final bill." [ 44 ] Operating profits :  Private companies that engage in P3s expect a return on investment after the completion of the project. By financing PPPs, they partner engages in low-risk speculation. Over the course of the contract, the private partner can charge the end-users and/or the government for more money than the cost of the initial investment.

[ 6 ] : chapter 4 Sometimes, private partners manage to overcome these costs and provide a project cheaper for taxpayers. This can be done by cutting corners, designing the project so as to be more profitable in the operational phase, charging user fees, and/or monetizing aspects of the projects not covered by the contract. For P3 schools in Nova Scotia , this latter aspect has included restricting the use of schools' fields and interior walls, and charging after-hours facility access to community groups at 10 times the rate of non-P3 schools.

[ 6 ] : chapter 4 In Ontario, a 2012 review of 28 projects showed that the costs were on average 16% lower for traditional publicly procured projects than for PPPs.

[ 35 ] A 2014 report by the Auditor General of Ontario said that the province overpaid by $8 billion through PPPs.

[ 45 ] Value for money [ edit ] The Deputy Chairman, Planning Commission, Shri Montek Singh Ahluwalia delivering the Keynote Address at the inauguration of the conference on Public Private Partnership in transmission of electricity, in New Delhi. (2010) In response to these negative findings about the costs and quality of P3 projects, proponents developed formal procedures for the assessment of PPPs which focused heavily on value for money . Heather Whiteside defines P3 "Value for money" as: Not to be confused with lower overall project costs, value for money is a concept used to evaluate P3 private-partner bids against a hypothetical public sector comparator designed to approximate the costs of a fully public option (in terms of design, construction, financing, and operations). P3 value for money calculations consider a range of costs, the exact nature of which has changed over time and varies by jurisdiction. One thing that does remain consistent, however, is the favoring of "risk transfer" to the private partner, to the detriment of the public sector comparator.

[ 6 ] : chapter 1 Value for money assessment procedures were incorporated into the PFI and its Australian and Canadian counterparts beginning in the late 1990s and early 2000s. A 2012 study showed that value-for-money frameworks were still inadequate as an effective method of evaluating PPP proposals.

[ 35 ] The problem is that it is unclear what the catchy term "value-for-money" means in the technical details relating to their practical implementation. A Scottish auditor once qualified this use of the term as "technocratic mumbo-jumbo".

[ 6 ] : chapter 4 Project promoters often contract a PPP unit or one of the Big Four accounting firms to conduct the value for money assessments.  Because these firms also offer PPP consultancy services, they have a vested interest in recommending the PPP option over the traditional public procurement method.

[ 6 ] [ 19 ] The lack of transparency surrounding individual PPP projects makes it difficult to draft independent value-for-money assessments.

[ 46 ] A number of Australian studies of early initiatives to promote private investment in infrastructure concluded that in most cases, the schemes being proposed were inferior to the standard model of public procurement based on competitively tendered construction of publicly owned assets.

[ 47 ] In 2009, the New Zealand Treasury , in response to inquiries by the new National Party government, released a report on PPP schemes that concluded that "there is little reliable empirical evidence about the costs and benefits of PPPs" and that there "are other ways of obtaining private sector finance", as well as that "the advantages of PPPs must be weighed against the contractual complexities and rigidities they entail".

[ 48 ] In the United Kingdom, many private finance initiative programs ran dramatically over budget and have not provided value for money for the taxpayer, with some projects costing more to cancel than to complete. An in-depth study conducted by the National Audit Office of the United Kingdom concluded that the private finance initiative model had proved to be more expensive and less efficient in supporting hospitals, schools, and other public infrastructure than public financing.

[ 49 ] A treasury select committee stated that 'PFI was no more efficient than other forms of borrowing and it was "illusory" that it shielded the taxpayer from risk'.

[ 50 ] Transfer of risk [ edit ] One of the main rationales for P3s is that they provide for a transfer of risk : the Private partner assumes the risks in case of cost overruns or project failures. Methods for assessing value-for-money rely heavily on risk transfers to show the superiority of P3s. However, P3s do not inherently reduce risk, they simply reassign who is responsible, and the Private sector assumes that risk at a cost for the taxpayer. If the value of the risk transfer is appraised too high, then the government is overpaying for P3 projects.

[ 6 ] : chapter 4 Incidentally, a 2018 UK Parliament report [ 51 ] underlines that some private investors have made large returns from PPP deals, suggesting that departments are overpaying for transferring the risks of projects to the private sector, one of the Treasury's stated benefits of PPP.

The maintenance of the new National Physical Laboratory building was transferred back to the British Department of Trade and Industry in 2004 after the private sector partners involved in the PFI contract made losses of over £100m.

[ 52 ] Supporters of P3s claim that risk is successfully transferred from public to private sectors as a result of P3, and that the private sector is better at risk management . As an example of successful risk transfer, they cite the case of the National Physical Laboratory . This deal ultimately caused the collapse of the building contractor Laser (a joint venture between Serco and John Laing ) when the cost of the complex scientific laboratory, which was ultimately built, was very much larger than estimated.

[ 53 ] On the other hand, Allyson Pollock argues that in many PFI projects risks are not in fact transferred to the private sector [ 54 ] and, based on the research findings of Pollock and others, George Monbiot argues [ 55 ] that the calculation of risk in PFI projects is highly subjective, and is skewed to favor the private sector: When private companies take on a PFI project, they are deemed to acquire risks the state would otherwise have carried. These risks carry a price, which proves to be remarkably responsive to the outcome you want. A paper in the British Medical Journal shows that before risk was costed, the hospital schemes it studied would have been built much more cheaply with public funds. After the risk was costed, they all tipped the other way; in several cases by less than 0.1%.

[ 56 ] Following an incident in the Royal Infirmary of Edinburgh where surgeons were forced to continue a heart operation in the dark following a power cut caused by PFI operating company Consort, Dave Watson from Unison criticized the way the PFI contract operates: It's a costly and inefficient way of delivering services. It's meant to mean a transfer of risk, but when things go wrong the risk stays with the public sector and, at the end of the day, the public because the companies expect to get paid. The health board should now be seeking an exit from this failed arrangement with Consort and at the very least be looking to bring facilities management back in-house.

[ 57 ] Furthermore, assessments ignore the practices of risk transfers to contractors under traditional procurement methods. As for the idea that the private sector is inherently better at managing risk, there has been no comprehensive study comparing risk management by the public sector and by P3s. Auditor Generals of Quebec , Ontario and New Brunswick have publicly questioned P3 rationales based on a transfer of risk, the latter stating he was "unable to develop any substantive evidence supporting risk transfer decisions".

[ 6 ] : chapter 4 Furthermore, many PPP concessions proved to be unstable and required to be renegotiated to favor the contractor.

[ 58 ] Accountability and transparency [ edit ] One of the main criticisms of public–private partnerships is the lack of accountability and transparency associated with these projects. Part of the reason why evidence of PPP performance is often unavailable is that most financial details of P3s are under the veil of commercial confidentiality provisions, and unavailable to researchers and the public. Around the world, opponents of P3s have launched judicial procedures to access greater P3 project documentation than the limited "bottom line" sheets available on the project's websites. When they are successful, the documents they receive are often heavily redacted.

[ 6 ] A 2007 survey of U.S.

city managers revealed that communities often fail to sufficiently monitor PPPs: "For instance, in 2002, only 47.3% of managers involved with private firms as delivery partners reported that they evaluate that service delivery. By 2007, that was down to 45.4%. Performance monitoring is a general concern from these surveys and in the scholarly criticisms of these arrangements." [ 12 ] [ 13 ] Sectors [ edit ] Water services [ edit ] Sign at the entrance of the Regina Wastewater Treatment Plant After a wave of privatization of many water services in the 1990s, mostly in developing countries, experiences show that global water corporations have not brought the promised improvements in public water utilities.

[ 18 ] Instead of lower prices, large volumes of investment, and improvements in the connection of the poor to water and sanitation, water tariffs have increased out of reach of poor households. Water multinationals are withdrawing from developing countries, and the World Bank is reluctant to provide support.

[ 59 ] The privatization of the water services of the city of Paris proved to be unwanted, and at the end of 2009 the city did not renew its contract with two of the French water corporations, Suez and Veolia .

[ 60 ] [ 61 ] After a year of being controlled by the public, it is projected that the water tariff will be cut by between 5% and 10%.

[ 62 ] In the 2010s, as wastewater treatment plants across North America came of age and needed to be replaced, multiple cities decided to fund the renewal of their water infrastructure through a public–private partnership.

[ 6 ] Among those cities were Brandenburg, Kentucky , which was the "first local government in Kentucky to execute a public–private partnership under legislation passed in 2016", [ 63 ] and Regina, Saskatchewan , which held a referendum on the plant's funding model . The P3 option won out." [ 64 ] Transportation [ edit ] The main toll plaza of the Dulles Toll Road concession in Virginia , whose price is periodically increasing.

Another major sector for P3s is transportation. The P3 Transportation sector can be broadly split into five sectors: airports, ports, roads, railways and urban passenger transport (which includes bus, light rail and heavy rail systems).

Many P3s in the United States have been toll road concessions.

[ 6 ] Transportation projects have accounted for 1/5 of all P3 projects in Canada. Major transportation P3 projects have included the Confederation Bridge linking Prince Edward Island and New Brunswick , the Pocahontas Parkway in Virginia , and the London Underground PPP .

Health services [ edit ] Indian Minister of Health and Family Welfare Anbumani Ramadoss addressing the inauguration of the Associate Chamber of Commerce & Industry National Summit on Public Health Initiatives and the PPP model, in New Delhi. (2006) For more than two decades, public–private partnerships have been used to finance health infrastructure. In Canada , they comprise 1/3 of all P3 projects nationwide.

[ 6 ] Governments have looked to the PPP model in an attempt to solve larger problems in health care delivery. However, some health-care-related PPPs have been shown to cost significantly more money to develop and maintain than those developed through traditional public procurement.

[ 65 ] A health services PPP can be described as a long-term contract (typically 15–30 years) between a public-sector authority and one or more private-sector companies operating as a legal entity. In theory, the agreements entails that the government provides purchasing power and outlines goals for an optimal health system. It then contracts a private enterprise to design, build, maintain, and/or manage the delivery of agreed-upon services over the term of the contract. Finally, the private sector receives payment for its services and assumes additional risk while benefitting from returns on its investments during the operational phase.

[ 39 ] A criticism of P3s for Hospitals in Canada is that they result in an "internal bifurcation of authority". This occurs when the facility is operated and maintained by the private sector while the care services are delivered by the public sector. In those cases, the nursing staff cannot request their colleagues from the maintenance staff to clean something (urine, blood, etc.) or to hang workplace safety signs, even if they are standing next to each other, without the approval of the private managers.

[ 6 ] : chapter 4 In the UK, P3s were used to build hospitals for the National Health Service . In 2017 there were 127 PFI schemes in the English NHS . The contracts vary greatly in size. Most include the cost of running services such as facilities management, hospital portering and patient food, and these amount to around 40% of the cost. Total repayments will cost around £2.1 billion in 2017 and will reach a peak in 2029.  This is around 2% of the NHS budget.

[ 66 ] [ 67 ] Forestry sector [ edit ] PPP options in the forest sector can include joint forest management projects between government agencies, various investors and NGOs.

USAID promotes the use of P3s to assist the exploitation of certified timber and non-timber products in Third World countries by foreign companies. They claim forestry PPPs are an agent of nature conservation and the sustainable harvesting of commercialized forest products, [ 68 ] notwithstanding the fact that it was competition from foreign companies that forced local producers to engage in unsustainable harvesting practices in the first place.

[ 69 ] Many forestry sector partnerships with NGOs are nothing more than greenwashing operations.

[ 70 ] Institutional support [ edit ] Aside from the support of national governments and financial firms, PPPs are promoted by the following institutions: PPP units [ edit ] Public–private partnership units are organizations responsible for promoting, facilitating, and assessing P3s in their territory. They can be government agencies, or semi-independent organizations created with full or part government support. Governments tend to create these units as a response to criticisms of the implementation of P3 projects in their country prior to the creation of the P3 unit.

[ 71 ] In 2009, 50% of OECD countries had created a centralized PPP unit, and many more of these institutions exist in other countries.

[ 20 ] Accounting firms [ edit ] The " big four " accounting firms of PricewaterhouseCoopers , Deloitte , Ernst & Young , and KPMG have been involved in the public–private partnership model from its inception. Advisors from these companies have been tapped to develop PPP policies and procedures in multiple countries. These companies then went on to evaluate those procedures, appraise individual projects, and act as a consultants for private and public partners in PPP contract negotiations. Accounting firms sometimes even have an equity stake in projects that they appraise the value for money.

[ 19 ] Due to these conflict of interests, multiple authors have argues that the "big four"'s public project appraisals are biased towards the PPP funding option against the traditional procurement model.

[ 6 ] International institutions [ edit ] Participants of People-First Public-Private Partnerships during the World Investment Forum 2018 The World Bank works to promote public–private partnerships in countries where it operates. The United Nations ' Sustainable Development Goal 17 target 17.17 is formulated as: "Encourage effective partnerships: Encourage and promote effective public, public–private and civil society partnerships, building on the experience and resourcing strategies of partnerships." [ 72 ] The success of this target is measured by the amount in United States dollars committed to public–private partnerships for infrastructure worldwide.

[ 73 ] United States foreign policy [ edit ] The American government seeks to promote public–private partnerships around the globe to meet its various foreign policy goals.

USAID promoted PPPs with Global Development Alliances and through the Development Credit Authority , which was merged into the Overseas Private Investment Corporation in 2019. The State department also promotes PPPs through its Office of Global Partnerships .

[ 74 ] Delivery models [ edit ] Further information: Project delivery method There are many types and delivery models of PPPs, the following is a non-exhaustive list of some of the designs: Operation and maintenance contract (O & M) A private economic agent, under a government contract, operates a publicly-owned asset for a specific period of time. Formal, ownership of the asset remains with the public entity. In terms of private-sector risk and involvement, this model is on the lower end of the spectrum for both involvement and risk.

[ 75 ] Build – finance (BF) The private actor builds the asset and finances the cost during the construction period, afterwards the responsibility is handed over to the public entity. In terms of private-sector risk and involvement, this model is again on the lower end of the spectrum for both measures.

[ 75 ] Build – operate – transfer (BOT) Build–operate–transfer represents a complete integration of the project delivery: the same contract governs the design, construction, operations, maintenance, and financing of the project.  After some concessionary period, the facility is transferred back to the owner.

Build–own–operate–transfer (BOOT) A BOOT structure differs from BOT in that the private entity owns the works. During the concession period, the private company owns and operates the facility with the prime goal to recover the costs of investment and maintenance while trying to achieve a higher margin on the project. BOOT has been used in projects like highways, roads mass transit, railway transport and power generation.

[ 76 ] Build–own–operate (BOO) In a BOO project ownership of the project remains usually with the project company, such as a mobile phone network . Therefore, the private company gets the benefits of any residual value of the project. This framework is used when the physical life of the project coincides with the concession period. A BOO scheme involves large amounts of finance and long payback period . Some examples of BOO projects come from the water treatment plants.

[ 77 ] Build–lease–transfer (BLT) Under BLT, a private entity builds a complete project and leases it to the government. In this way the control over the project is transferred from the project owner to a lessee. In other words, the ownership remains by the shareholders but operation purposes are leased. After the expiry of the leasing the ownership of the asset and the operational responsibility is transferred to the government at a previously agreed price.

Design – build – finance – maintain (DBFM) "The private sector designs, builds and finances an asset and provides hard facility management or maintenance services under a long-term agreement." The owner (usually the public sector) operates the facility. This model is in the middle of the spectrum for private sector risk and involvement.

[ 75 ] Design–build–finance–maintain – operate (DBFMO) Design–build–finance–operate is a project delivery method very similar to BOOT except that there is no actual ownership transfer. Moreover, the contractor assumes the risk of financing until the end of the contract period. The owner then assumes the responsibility for maintenance and operation. This model is extensively used in specific infrastructure projects such as toll roads . The private construction company is responsible for the design and construction of a piece of infrastructure for the government, which is the true owner. Moreover, the private entity has the responsibility to raise finance during the construction and the exploitation period.

[ 78 ] Usually, the public sector begins payments to the private sector for use of the asset post-construction. This is the most commonly used model in the EU according to the European Court of Auditors.

[ 79 ] Design–build–operate–transfer (DBOT) This funding option is common when the client has no knowledge of what the project entails. Hence they contracts the project to a company to design, build, operate, and then transfer it. Examples of such projects are refinery constructions.

[ 80 ] Design–construct–manage–finance (DCMF) A private entity is entrusted to design, construct, manage, and finance a facility, based on the specifications of the government. Project cash flows result from the government's payment for the rent of the facility. Some examples of the DCMF model are prisons or public hospitals.

Concession A concession is a grant of rights, land or property by a government, local authority, corporation, individual or other legal entity.

[ 81 ] Public services such as water supply may be operated as a concession. In the case of a public service concession, a private company enters into an agreement with the government to have the exclusive right to operate, maintain and carry out investment in a public utility (such as a water privatization ) for a given number of years.

[ 75 ] Different Levels of Private sector engagement in PPP contracts Model Identify Infrastructure Need Propose solution Project design Project financing Construction Operation Maintenance Ownership Concession?

Bid–build Public sector Private sector Public sector No Design–bid–build Public sector Private sector Public sector Private sector Public sector No Design–build Public sector Private sector Public sector Private sector Public sector No Design–build–finance Public sector Private sector Public sector No Design–build–finance–maintain Public sector Private sector Public sector Private sector Public sector No Design–build–finance–operate Public sector Private sector Public sector No Design–build–finance–maintain–operate Public sector Private sector Public sector No Build–finance Public sector Private sector Public sector No Operation & maintenance contract ?

Private sector Public sector No Build-operate-transfer Public sector Private sector Public sector Temporary Build–lease–transfer Public sector Private sector Public sector Private sector Temporary Build–own–operate–transfer Public sector Private sector Temporary Build–own–operate Public sector Private sector Yes Market-led proposals Private sector Public sector No Other types [ edit ] While long-term infrastructure projects compose the bulk of P3s worldwide, other types of Public–private partnerships exist to suit different purposes and actors.

Asset monetization [ edit ] A form of P3 that became prevalent in American cities during the 21st century are asset monetization arrangements. They concerns a city's revenue-generating assets (parking lots, garage and meters, public lights, toll roads, etc.) and transforms them into financial assets that the city can lease to a private corporation in exchange for covering operation and maintenance. These deals are usually done during periods of financial distress for the city, and the immediate revenues municipalities receive is used to pay down the debt or to fill budget holes. The 2014 Detroit bankruptcy deal included many asset monetization arrangements.

[ 82 ] Global public–private partnership [ edit ] Global public–private partnership (GPPP) is a governance mechanism to foster public–private partnership (PPP) cooperation between an international intergovernmental organisation like the United Nations and private companies . Existing GPPPs strive, among other things, to increase affordable access to non-generic essential drugs and vaccines in developing countries, [ 83 ] and to [ 84 ] promote handwashing with soap to reduce diarrhoea .

[ 85 ] Institutionalised public–private partnership [ edit ] The European Commission issued an "interpretative communication" in 2008 regarding the establishment of institutionalised public–private partnerships (IPPP), whose formation generally involves simultaneously creating a new jointly owned public–private entity and the award of a public sector contract or concession whereby the new entity supplies goods or services to the public body or the general public. The Commission acknowledged that separating these two procedures, such that the selection of the private partner and the decision on whether to contract with the new entity were distinct processes, would not be practical, and therefore a "transparent and competitive procedure" through which the private partner was identified and the terms of their involvement in the institutionalised entity could be compliant with treaty obligations and public procurement law. The guidance also noted that, following the establishment of the IPPP entity, it would be free to bid for future public contracts in the same way as other businesses, but particular care would be needed to ensure that the award process remained transparent.

[ 86 ] Market-led proposal [ edit ] Market-led proposals (MLP) are P3s proposed by the private sector. MLP policies encourage private sector firms to make unsolicited P3 infrastructure project proposals to the government, instead of putting the onus on the state to propose each projects. During the 2010s, MLP policies were implemented in most Australian states and territories .

[ 6 ] : chapter 5 Amy Sarcevic from Informa Australia notes that "to date, market-led proposals have had a relatively high failure rate".

[ 87 ] Public–private–community partnerships [ edit ] Public–private partnerships with non-profits and private partners, sometimes called Public–private–community partnerships (PPCPs), are a modified version of the PPP model designed for the needs of Third world countries .

[ 18 ] They were notably proposed by the Asian Development Bank as early as 1991 as an "institutional reform ... to facilitate the participation of individuals, CBOs [community based organizations], other NGOs and the private sector" so that they become "actively involved in planning and management".

[ 88 ] Social impact bond [ edit ] Social impact bonds (also called pay for success bonds) are "a public–private partnership which funds effective social services through a performance-based contract", according to Social Finance 's definition.

[ 89 ] They operate over a fixed period of time, but they do not offer a fixed rate of return. Generally, repayment to investors is contingent upon a specified social outcome being achieved.

[ 90 ] A similar system, development impact bonds , is being implemented in developing countries .

See also [ edit ] Privatization Public–private partnerships by country Industry funding of academic research Government procurement Top 100 Contractors of the U.S. federal government Sustainable procurement Build–operate–transfer Economic conversion Volume risk References [ edit ] ^ a b c Hodge, G. A and Greve, C. (2007), Public–Private Partnerships: An International Performance Review, Public Administration Review, 2007, Vol. 67(3), pp. 545–558 ^ a b c d Roehrich, Jens K.; Lewis, Michael A.; George, Gerard (2014).

"Are public–private partnerships a healthy option? A systematic literature review" .

Social Science & Medicine .

113 : 110– 119.

doi : 10.1016/j.socscimed.2014.03.037 .

hdl : 10044/1/13799 .

PMID 24861412 .

^ Caves, R. W. (2004).

Encyclopedia of the City . Routledge. pp.

551 .

ISBN 9780415252256 .

^ Bovaird, Tony (25 September 2015). Bovaird, Tony; Loeffler, Elke (eds.).

Public Management and Governance .

doi : 10.4324/9781315693279 .

ISBN 9781315693279 .

^ a b Wettenhall, R. (2019), The Public/Private Interface: Surveying the History, in G. Hodge and C. Greve (eds.), The Challenge of Public–Private Partnerships: Learning from International Experience, Cheltenham UK: Edward Elgar ^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t u v w x y z aa ab Whiteside, Heather (2016).

Public-private partnerships in Canada . Halifax: Fernwood Publishing.

ISBN 978-1-55266-896-2 .

OCLC 952801311 .

^ a b Marta Marsilio, M., Cappellaro, G and Cuccurullo, C. (2011), The Intellectual Structure Of Research Into PPPs, Public Management Review , Vol 13 (6), pp.763–782 ^ a b Hodge, G.A. and Greve, C. (2016), On Public-Private Partnership Performance: A Contemporary Review, Public Works Management & Policy, pp. 1–24 ^ Mols, F. (2010) Harnessing Market Competition in PPP Procurement: The Importance of Periodically Taking a Strategic View. Australian Journal of Public Administration, 69(2), 229-244.

^ OECD (2012), Recommendation of the Council on Principles for
Public Governance of Public-Private Partnerships, https://www.oecd.org/governance/budgeting/PPP-Recommendation.pdf ^ a b Vining, Aidan R.; Weimer, David L. (2011).

Policy Analysis Edition No.05 . Pearson, Inc. p. 309.

ISBN 978-0-205-78130-0 .

^ a b Hilvert, Cheryl; Swindell, David (2014).

"Collaborative Service Delivery: What Every Local Government Manager Should Know" .

State and Local Government Review .

45 .

^ a b "Local government services and contracts: Best practices and key issues to watch" .

JournalistsResource.org, retrieved February 14, 2014 ^ Wettenhall, R. (2000), Mixes and partnerships through time, in G.A. Hodge, C. Greve and A. Boardman (eds.), International Handbook in Public–Private Partnerships , Cheltenham UK: Edward Elgar ^ Karabell, Zachary (2003).

Parting the desert: the creation of the Suez Canal . Alfred A. Knopf. p.

34 .

ISBN 978-0-375-40883-0 .

^ Buxbaum, Jeffrey N (2009).

Public Sector Decision Making for Public-private Partnerships . Washington, DC: Transportation Research Board. p. 9.

ISBN 978-0-309-09829-8 .

^ Allen, Grahame.

"The Private Finance Initiative (PFI) Commons Briefing papers RP01-117" (PDF) .

UK Parliament: House of Commons Library . UK Government . Retrieved 20 January 2018 .

^ a b c Franceys, Richard; Weitz, Almud (November 2003).

"Public-private community partnerships in infrastructure for the poor" .

Journal of International Development .

15 (8): 1083– 1098.

doi : 10.1002/jid.1052 .

ISSN 0954-1748 .

^ a b c Shaoul, Jean; Stafford, Anne; Stapleton, Pamela (2007). "Partnerships and the role of financial advisors: private control over public policy?".

Policy & Politics .

35 (3): 479– 495.

doi : 10.1332/030557307781571678 .

^ a b Alberto Lemma.

"Literature Review: Evaluating the Costs and Benefits of Centralised PPP Units" . EPS PEAKS.

^ Vaillancourt, François; Bird, Richard M., eds. (2008).

Fiscal Decentralization in Developing Countries . Cambridge University Press.

^ Mayers, Adam (24 March 2008).

"When Yonge was a toll road" .

thestar.com . Retrieved 4 April 2023 .

^ "House of Commons - Private Finance Initiative - Treasury" .

publications.parliament.uk . Retrieved 18 May 2020 .

^ "Unsealed records allege a cover up of safety concerns on Gov. Mario M. Cuomo Bridge" .

WRGB . 28 March 2021 . Retrieved 16 August 2021 .

^ a b Barlow, J.; Roehrich, J.K.; Wright, S. (2013).

"Europe Sees Mixed Results From Public-Private Partnerships For Building And Managing Health Care Facilities And Services" (PDF) .

Health Affairs .

32 (1): 146– 154.

doi : 10.1377/hlthaff.2011.1223 .

hdl : 10044/1/15645 .

PMID 23297282 .

S2CID 36377771 .

^ Zheng, J.; Roehrich, J.K.; Lewis, M.A. (2008).

"The dynamics of contractual and relational governance: Evidence from long-term public–private procurement arrangements" .

Journal of Purchasing and Supply Management .

14 (1): 43– 54.

doi : 10.1016/j.pursup.2008.01.004 .

S2CID 207472262 .

^ Moszoro M., Gasiorowski P. (2008), 'Optimal Capital Structure of Public–Private Partnerships', IMF Working Paper 1/2008 . Papers.ssrn.com (2008-01-25). Retrieved on 2011-11-20.

^ Hart, Oliver (2003).

"Incomplete Contracts and Public Ownership: Remarks, and an Application to Public–Private Partnerships*" (PDF) .

The Economic Journal .

113 (486): C69 – C76 .

doi : 10.1111/1468-0297.00119 .

ISSN 1468-0297 .

^ Cardenas, I.; Voordijk, H; Geert, D. (2017).

"Beyond theory: Towards a probabilistic causation model to support project governance in infrastructure projects" .

International Journal of Project Management .

35 (3): 432– 450.

doi : 10.1016/j.ijproman.2017.01.002 .

^ Cardenas, I.; Voordijk, H; Geert, D. (2018).

"Beyond project governance. Enhancing funding and enabling financing for infrastructure in transport. Findings from the importance analysis approach" .

European Journal of Transport and Infrastructure Research .

18 (4).

doi : 10.18757/ejtir.2018.18.4.3261 .

^ Hodge, Grame A. (2004). "The risky business of public-private partnerships".

Australian Journal of Public Administration .

63 (4): 39.

doi : 10.1111/j.1467-8500.2004.00400.x .

^ Vincent, Donovan (1 July 2019).

"Who should share in the risks and rewards of Sidewalk Labs' smart city on Toronto's waterfront? | The Star" .

thestar.com . Toronto Star . Retrieved 1 July 2019 .

^ "Archived copy" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 15 August 2018 . Retrieved 14 November 2018 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: archived copy as title ( link ) ^ Caldwell, Nigel D.; Roehrich, Jens K.; George, Gerard (September 2017).

"Social Value Creation and Relational Coordination in Public-Private Collaborations" .

Journal of Management Studies .

54 (6): 906– 928.

doi : 10.1111/joms.12268 .

^ a b c d Siemiatycki, Matti; Farooqi, Naeem (July 2012). "Value for Money and Risk in Public-Private Partnerships".

Journal of the American Planning Association .

78 (3): 286– 299.

doi : 10.1080/01944363.2012.715525 .

S2CID 153603588 .

^ a b [1] Extreme poverty and human rights*, Report of the Special Rapporteur on extreme poverty and human rights, Philip Alston, submitted in accordance with Human Rights Council resolution 35/19 , NYC, 26 September 2019 ^ Romero, Maria Jose (2015).

What lies beneath? A critical assessment of PPPs and their impact on sustainable development (PDF) . Eurodad. p. 5.

^ GOVERNMENT FINANCE STATISTICS MANUAL 2014 . Washington: IMF. 2014. pp.

324– 327.

ISBN 978-1-49834-376-3 .

^ a b Whiteside, Heather (1 September 2011). "Unhealthy policy: The political economy of Canadian public-private partnership hospitals".

Health Sociology Review .

20 (3): 258– 268.

doi : 10.5172/hesr.2011.20.3.258 .

ISSN 1446-1242 .

S2CID 143156657 .

^ Mols, F. (2010). Harnessing market competition in PPP procurement: The importance of periodically taking a strategic view. Australian Journal of Public Administration, 69(2), 229-244 ^ Germà Bel and Xavier Fageda, "What have we learned from the last three decades of empirical studies on factors driving local privatization? ", Local Government Studies, vol. 43, No. 4 (2017), pp. 503–511 ^ Languille, "Public-private partnerships in education and health in the global South", p. 156 ^ European Court of Auditors, Public-Private Partnerships in the EU, p. 9 ^ McKenna, Barrie (14 October 2012).

"The hidden price of public-private partnerships" .

The Globe and Mail . Retrieved 18 May 2020 .

^ "Ontario AG reveals Public-Private Partnerships aren't a savings bonanza after all" .

CBC News . 10 December 2014 . Retrieved 10 August 2020 .

^ "Comment: PFI is dead, long live PFI" . Politics.co.uk. 23 May 2012 . Retrieved 30 September 2012 .

^ Economic Planning Advisory Commission (EPAC) 1995a,b; House of Representatives Standing Committee on Communications Transport and Microeconomic Reform 1997; Harris 1996; Industry Commission 1996; Quiggin 1996 ^ "Brian Rudman: Promised electric trains derailed by misguided enthusiasm" .

The New Zealand Herald . 1 June 2009 . Retrieved 21 February 2010 .

^ United Kingdom, National Audit Office, PF1 and PF2, a report by the Comptroller and
Auditor General (London, 2018) ^ Tyrie, Andrew (19 August 2011), "PFI poor value for money, says MPs" , BBC News ^ "Treasury must set out clear position on PFI - News from Parliament" .

UK Parliament . Retrieved 27 June 2018 .

^ "The Termination of the PFI Contract for the National Physical Laboratory |National Audit Office" .

nao.org.uk . 2013.

Archived from the original on 24 December 2013 . Retrieved 23 December 2013 .

^ The Termination of the PFI Contract for the National Physical Laboratory (PDF) , National Audit Office , 2006, archived from the original (PDF) on 29 November 2007 ^ Pollock, Allyson (2005), NHS Plc: The Privatisation of Our Health Care , Verso , p. 3, ISBN 1-84467-539-4 ^ Monbiot, George (7 April 2009), "The Biggest Weirdest Rip-Off Yet" , The Guardian , London ^ Pollock, Allyson M; Shaoul, Jean; Vickers, Neil (18 May 2002), "Private finance and "value for money" in NHS hospitals: a policy in search of a rationale?", British Medical Journal , 342 (7347): 1205– 1209, doi : 10.1136/bmj.324.7347.1205 , PMC 1123165 , PMID 12016191 .

^ Carrell, Severin (21 April 2012), "Power cut leaves surgeons operating by torchlight at PFI hospital", The Guardian ^ Cruz, Carlos Oliveira; Marques, Rui Cunha (2013). "Endogenous Determinants for Renegotiating Concessions: Evidence from Local Infrastructure".

Local Government Studies .

39 (3): 352– 374.

doi : 10.1080/03003930.2013.783476 .

ISSN 0300-3930 .

S2CID 153619884 .

^ the Water Justice Project on Transnational Institute ^ Reversal of privatization of Paris' water . Cupe.ca (2010-02-25). Retrieved on 2011-11-20.

^ Deputy Mayor of Paris Anne Le Strat tells how Paris put water services back into public hands . Canadians.org (2011-02-18). Retrieved on 2011-11-20.

^ Water tariff cut . Globalwaterintel.com (2011-01-13). Retrieved on 2011-11-20.

^ "Brandenburg's wastewater P3 could be Kentucky's first" .

Building Kentucky . 25 February 2020 . Retrieved 19 May 2020 .

^ "Referendum results in: P3 model to fund Regina sewage plant" .

CBC News . 25 September 2013.

^ Reynolds, Keith (3 August 2017).

"The enormous cost of public-private partnerships" .

Policy Note . Retrieved 28 June 2019 .

^ Appleby, John (6 October 2017).

"Making sense of PFI" . Nuffield Trust . Retrieved 6 October 2017 .

^ Barlow, J. Roehrich; Wright, S. (2010).

"De facto privatisation or a renewed role for the EU? Paying for Europe's healthcare infrastructure in a recession" .

Journal of the Royal Society of Medicine .

103 (2): 51– 55.

doi : 10.1258/jrsm.2009.090296 .

PMC 2813788 .

PMID 20118334 .

^ "Public-Private Partnerships in Forestry" (PDF) .

USAID Forest Program . 2003. Archived from the original (PDF) on 28 August 2006.

^ Center for International Forestry Research (CIFOR) (1 September 2015).

"Public private partnership in forestry management" .

CIFOR .

^ International, Survival.

"WWF wins Survival's "Greenwashing of the Year" award" .

www.survivalinternational.org . Retrieved 14 December 2022 .

^ Siemiatycki, Matti (1 September 2015). "Public-Private Partnerships in Canada: Reflections on twenty years of practice".

Canadian Public Administration .

58 (3): 343– 362.

doi : 10.1111/capa.12119 .

ISSN 1754-7121 .

^ United, Nations (10 July 2017).

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 6 July 2017: Work of the statistical commission pertaining to the 2030 Agenda for sustainable development (PDF) . United Nations General Assembly. pp.

1– 25.

^ Ritchie, Roser, Mispy, Ortiz-Ospina.

"Measuring progress towards the Sustainable Development Goals." (SDG 17) SDG-Tracker.org, website (2018) ^ "Public-Private Partnerships in Foreign Aid: Leveraging U.S. Assistance for Greater Impact and Sustainability | United States Senate Committee on Foreign Relations" .

www.foreign.senate.gov . 12 July 2016 . Retrieved 25 March 2021 .

^ a b c d The Canadian Council for Public-Private Partnerships, "Definitions & Models", https://www.pppcouncil.ca/web/P3_Knowledge_Centre/About_P3s/Definitions_Models.aspx Archived 28 October 2020 at the Wayback Machine ^ Gatti, Stafano (2007).

Project Finance in theory and practice . Academic Press. p. 414.

ISBN 978-0-12-373699-4 .

^ Lewis/ Grimsey, Mervyn/Darrin (2007).

Public Private Partnerships: the worldwide revolution in infrastructure provision and project finance . Edward Elgar Publishing. p. 268.

ISBN 978-1-84720-226-0 .

^ Pekka, Pakkala (2002).

Innovative Project Delivery Methods for Infrastructure (PDF) . Finnish Road Enterprise. p. 120.

ISBN 978-952-5408-05-8 .

^ The European Court of Auditors (2018), " Special Report: Public-Private Partnerships in the EU: Widespread shortcomings and limited benefits ".

^ Siddhaye, Ninad (29 June 2010).

"Worli-Haji Ali sea link will be ready in 4 years" .

DNA . Diligent Media Corporation.

Archived from the original on 1 October 2012.

^ What is a concession agreement?

, wisegeek.com ^ Whiteside, Heather (2016). "Why are P3s?".

Public-private partnerships . Halifax: Fernwood Publishing.

ISBN 978-1-55266-896-2 .

OCLC 952801311 .

^ Klock, Kevin A. (1 October 2016).

"International Public Private Partnerships as Part of the Solution to Infectious Disease Threats: Operational, Legal, and Governance Considerations" .

doi : 10.2139/ssrn.3971005 .

SSRN 3971005 .

{{ cite journal }} : Cite journal requires |journal= ( help ) ^ "Access to affordable essential medicines" (PDF) . World Health Organization. Archived from the original (PDF) on 19 January 2022.

^ "The Global Handwashing Partnership" .

globalhandwashing.org . Retrieved 19 May 2020 .

^ European Commission, Commission interpretative communication on the application of Community law on Public Procurement and Concessions to institutionalised PPP (IPPP) , 2008/C 91/02, published 12 April 2008, accessed 8 August 2023 ^ Sarcevic, Amy (5 June 2018).

"Do market-led proposals have their place? | News & Insights" .

Informa Australia . Retrieved 7 June 2020 .

^ Asian Development Bank (ADB). 1991.

The Urban Poor and Basic Infrastructure Services in Asia and the Pacific , Vol. I. Asian Development Bank: Manila.

^ Social Impact Bonds: The Early Years (PDF) .

Social Finance . July 2016.

^ "Social Impact Bonds: Rethinking finance for social outcomes" (PDF) .

London : Social Finance Ltd . August 2009.

Further reading [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Public–private partnership .

Abou-bakr, A (2013), Managing Disasters Through Public–Private Partnerships, Georgetown University Press.

Burnett, M. "PPP – A decision maker's guide", European Institute of Public Administration, 2007 Chinchilla, C. "El nuevo contrato de colaboración entre el setor público y el sector privado", Revista Española de Derecho Administrativo nº 132 (2006) Delmon, Jeff "Private Sector Investment in Infrastructure: Project finance, PPP projects and risk," Kluwer, 2009.

Delmon, Jeff "Public Private Partnership Programs: Creating a framework for private sector investment in infrastructure, Kluwer, 2014.

Gonzalez Garcia, Julio V. (May–August 2006).

"El contrato de colaboración público privada" [The public-private collaboration contract].

Revista de Administración Pública (in Spanish) (170). Madrid: 7– 39.

ISSN 0034-7639 .

Koh, Jae Myong (2018).

Green Infrastructure Financing: Institutional Investors, PPPs and Bankable Projects . Palgrave Macmillan.

ISBN 978-3-319-71769-2 .

Linotte, Didier (10 January 2005). "Un cadre juridique désormais sécurisé pour les contrats de partenariat" [A secure legal framework for partnership contracts].

AJDA (in French).

2005 (1).

Monera Frédéric, Les financements innovants de services et de projets publics , Revue de la Recherche Juridique – Droit prospectif, PUAM, 2005–1, p. 337 & s.

Moszoro M.

, Gasiorowski P. (2008), 'Optimal Capital Structure of Public–Private Partnerships', IMF Working Paper 1/2008.

[2] Colman, J. (2002), 'Mumbo jumbo...and other pitfalls:Evaluating PFI/PPP projects', National Audit Office PFI / PPP Conference "Bringing about beneficial change, London, May.

Economic Planning Advisory Commission (EPAC) (1995), 'Final Report of the Private Infrastructure Task Force', Australian Government Publishing Service, Canberra.

Economic Planning Advisory Commission (EPAC) (1995), 'Interim Report of the Private Infrastructure Task Force', Australian Government Publishing Service, Canberra.

Harris, A. C. (1996), 'Financing infrastructure: private profits from public losses', Audit Office of NSW, Public Accounts Committee, Parliament of NSW, Conference, Public/Private infrastructure financing: Still feasible?, Sydney, September.

Hart, Oliver (2003). "Incomplete contracts and public ownership: Remarks, and an application to public‐private partnerships".

Economic Journal 113: C69-C76.

Hoppe, Eva I.; Schmitz, Patrick W. (2013).

"Public-private partnerships versus traditional procurement: Innovation incentives and information gathering" (PDF) .

The RAND Journal of Economics .

44 : 56– 74.

doi : 10.1111/1756-2171.12010 .

House of Representatives Standing Committee on Communications Transport and Microeconomic Reform (1997), 'Planning not Patching: An Inquiry Into Federal Road Funding', The Parliament of the Commonwealth of Australia, Australian Government Publishing Service, Canberra.

Industry Commission (1996), 'Competitive Tendering and Contracting by Public Sector Agencies', Australian Government Publishing Service, Canberra.

Iossa, Elisabetta; Martimort, David (2012).

"Risk allocation and the costs and benefits of public-private partnerships" (PDF) .

The RAND Journal of Economics .

43 (3): 442– 474.

doi : 10.1111/j.1756-2171.2012.00181.x .

hdl : 2108/90910 .

Loxley, J. (2010). Public service, private profits: the political economy of public/private partnerships in Canada. Fernwood Publishing. 224 p.

Minnow, Martha and Jody Freeman (2009), Government By Contract: Outsourcing and American Democracy, Harvard U.P.

MSI Integrity. (2020).

"Not Fit-for-Purpose The Grand Experiment of Multi-Stakeholder Initiatives in Corporate Accountability, Human Rights and Global Governance." San Francisco: Institute for Multi-Stakeholder Initiative Integrity Monbiot, George (2000).

Captive State, The Corporate Takeover of Britain .

Macmillan .

ISBN 978-0-333-90164-9 .

Möric, K. (2009), 'Les partenariats public-privé – le choix du partenaire privé au regard du droit communautaire, Editions Larcier, 264 p.

Onses, Richard (2003).

The Public Private Partnership of Cartagena de Indias – Colombia: Agbar's Experience . Barcelona.

ISBN 978-84-607-8089-2 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) Quiggin, J. (1996), 'Private sector involvement in infrastructure projects', Australian Economic Review, 1st quarter, 51–64.

Schaeffer, Peter V.; Loveridge, Scott (2002).

"Toward an Understanding of Types of Public-Private Cooperation" .

Public Performance & Management Review .

26 (2). Taylor & Francis: 169– 189.

doi : 10.1177/1530957602238261 .

JSTOR 3381276 .

S2CID 143932122 .

Spackman, M. (2002), 'Public–private partnerships: lessons from the British approach', Economic Systems, 26(3), 283–301.

Strauch, L. (2009), 'Public Private Partnership in European Road Infrastructure: PPP as Investment Asset Following the M6 Road Project in Hungary', VDM.

Talibdjanov, N. and Koshnazarov, S. UNDP & Chamber of Commerce and Industry of Uzbekistan, Public-Private Partnership in Uzbekistan: Problems, Opportunities and Ways of Introduction (2008–2009) Venkat Raman, A. and J. W. Bjorkman (2009), 'Public-Private Partnerships in Health Care in India: Lessons for Developing Countries'. London. Routledge.

Whiteside, H. (2015). Purchase for profit: public-private partnerships and Canada's public health-care system. University of Toronto Press.

Authority control databases International VIAF National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic 2 Israel Other Yale LUX v t e Public–private partnership Ideas Crowdfunding Public–private partnership Outsourcing Multistakeholder governance Private equity Privatization Social Finance Sponsorships Venture capital Off-balance sheet Public debt Risk transfer Neoliberalism Models Concession Build–operate–transfer Social impact bonds Global Public-private partnership By country Canada India United Kingdom United States Transition economies PPP units Infrastructure Investment Facilitation Company (Bangladesh) Local Partnerships (England and Wales) Partnerships BC Partnerships UK PPP Canada Infrastructure Ontario Public-Private Partnership Authority (Bangladesh) Scottish Futures Trust International institutional support Office of Global Partnerships Global Development Alliances USAID Concordia Summit World Bank SDG 17 European Investment Bank European PPP Expertise Centre NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐8487bf5649‐6sm27
Cached time: 20250814033155
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.275 seconds
Real time usage: 1.513 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 8608/1000000
Revision size: 88078/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 198769/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 6126/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 16/100
Expensive parser function count: 12/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 303315/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.804/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 9584937/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1295.907      1 -total
 44.99%  583.032      1 Template:Reflist
 18.65%  241.714     23 Template:Cite_journal
 13.62%  176.460      1 Template:Neoliberalism_sidebar
 13.45%  174.334      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 10.78%  139.697     18 Template:Cite_book
  8.09%  104.860     18 Template:Cite_web
  6.59%   85.433     10 Template:Rp
  6.02%   78.036     10 Template:R/superscript
  5.94%   76.948      1 Template:Short_description Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:438151:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814033155 and revision id 1303175221. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Public–private_partnership&oldid=1303175221 " Categories : Public–private partnership Government finances Public economics Government procurement Privatization Construction management Securities (finance) Hidden categories: CS1 maint: archived copy as title Webarchive template wayback links CS1 errors: missing periodical Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from June 2021 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2019 Commons category link is on Wikidata CS1 Spanish-language sources (es) CS1 French-language sources (fr) CS1 maint: location missing publisher Articles prone to spam from November 2014 This page was last edited on 29 July 2025, at 13:35 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Public–private partnership 40 languages Add topic

