Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Gallery 3 Books from the Corvina Library 4 References 5 Further reading 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Bibliotheca Corviniana 29 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Башҡортса Беларуская Català Čeština Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Français Հայերեն Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano ქართული Latina Magyar Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Română Русский Slovenščina Српски / srpski Suomi Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Matthias Corvinus , King of Hungary Bibliotheca Corviniana or Corvina Library was one of the most renowned libraries of the Renaissance world in Buda Castle , established by Matthias Corvinus , King of the Kingdom of Hungary (1458–1490). The books were taken to Istanbul after the Hungarian defeat by the Ottomans at the Battle of Mohács in 1526.

History [ edit ] Matthias, one of the most powerful rulers of the age, started to collect the books from about 1460. At the king's death in 1490, the library consisted of about 3,000 codices or "Corvinae" which included about four to five thousand various works, many of classical Greek and Latin authors. It represented the literary production and reflected the state of knowledge and arts of the Renaissance and included works of philosophy, theology, history, law, literature, geography, natural sciences, medicine, architecture , and many others.

[ 1 ] The codices moved to Istanbul after the Turkish conquest of Hungary in the 16th century.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Only about 216 Corvinae survived, today preserved in several libraries in Hungary and Europe.

North of the Alps , Matthias's library was the largest in Europe, and its vast contents was only second to the Vatican Library in the whole of Europe, according to contemporary accounts. It was the greatest collection of science writings in its time. In 1489, Bartolomeo della Fonte of Florence wrote that Lorenzo de Medici founded his own Greek-Latin library encouraged by the example of the Hungarian king.

Nearly two-thirds of the surviving volumes had not been printed before the king's death. Some of them contained the sole copy of the works in them, like the book of Constantine Porphyrogennetos on the habits in the court of the Byzantine emperor, or the church history of Nikephoros Kallistos . Some lost Corvinae works are also known, with which the only copy of ancient books perished, including the full works of Hypereides , and writings by Flavius Cresconius Corippus , Procopius , as well as by Matthias's contemporary Cuspinianus .

Hungary's National Széchényi Library is working on projects to restore the Corvina library in digital form.

Items from the Bibliotheca Corviniana were inscribed on UNESCO ’s Memory of the World Register in 2005 in recognition of their historical significance.

[ 4 ] Gallery [ edit ] The editor's preface was adorned with gilded letters in one version of the Augsburg edition of the Chronica Hungarorum by Johannes Thuróczy from 1488. For the first time in history, gold paint was used for this print.

The first page of one version of the Augsburg edition of the Chronica Hungarorum by Johannes Thuróczy from 1488, also known as the Thuróczy Chronicle.

Epitome rerum Hungarorum by Pietro Ranzano from 1490.

Italian humanist, Pietro Ranzano before King Matthias Corvinus and Queen Beatrice in the Epitome rerum Hungarorum .

Philostratus codex Books from the Corvina Library [ edit ] Libellus de virtutibus Matthiae Corvino dedicatus (Latin for "A Little Book of Virtues dedicated to Matthias Corvinus", 1467) Chronica Hungarorum - Buda Chronicle (Latin for "Chronicle of the Hungarians", 1473) Chronica Hungarorum - Thuróczy Chronicle (Latin for "Chronicle of the Hungarians", 1488) Epitome rerum Hungarorum (Latin for "A Brief Summary of the History of the Hungarians", 1490) Rerum Hungaricarum decades (Latin for "Decades of Hungarian History" 1497) References [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Bibliotheca Corviniana .

^ Tanner, Marcus.

The Raven King : Matthias Corvinus and the Fate of His Lost Library.

New Haven (Conn.) [etc.]: Yale University Press, 2009.

^ Matthew Landrus, Leonardo Da Vinci's Giant Crossbow , (Springer Verlag, 2010), 49.

^ Alfred Burns, The Power of the Written Word: The Role of Literacy in the History of Western Civilization , (Peter Lang, 1989), 228.

^ "The Bibliotheca Corviniana Collection" . UNESCO Memory of the World Programme. 2009-08-12. Archived from the original on 2015-11-17 . Retrieved 2009-12-15 .

Further reading [ edit ] Csapodi, Csaba & Csapodiné Gárdonyi, Klára: Bibliotheca Corviniana (Budapest, 1976.) External links [ edit ] The Carbo codex from the collection of the Library and Information Centre, Hungarian Academy of Sciences Bibliotheca Corvina Virtualis in the Hungarian National Library v t e Hungarian literature The list is by chronological order.

Early sources Old Hungarian script Establishing charter of the abbey of Tihany Urgesta Funeral Sermon and Prayer Anonymus (notary of Béla III) Gesta Hungarorum Ákos (chronicler) Simon of Kéza Gesta Hunnorum et Hungarorum Lamentations of Mary 14th century Minorite Chronicle of Buda John of Küküllő Mark of Kalt Chronicon Pictum 15th century John Vitéz Hussite Bible Andreas Pannonius Janus Pannonius Johannes Thuróczy Codex of Bécs Codex of Munich Zirc Bestiary Buda Chronicle Chronica Hungarorum Epitome rerum Hungarorum Antonio Bonfini Rerum Hungaricarum decades Corvina Library 15th – 16th century Gáspár Heltai Nicolaus Olahus 16th century Sebestyén Tinódi Lantos Tripartitum Érdy Codex Péter Bornemisza Bálint Balassi 16th – 17th century Péter Pázmány 17th century Miklós Zrínyi István Gyöngyösi Nádasdy Mausoleum 17th – 18th century Kelemen Mikes 18th century József Kármán 18th – 19th century Ferenc Kazinczy János Batsányi Mihály Fazekas Sándor Kisfaludy Mihály Csokonai Vitéz Dániel Berzsenyi Károly Kisfaludy Ferenc Kölcsey István Széchenyi József Katona 19th century Mihály Vörösmarty József Bajza János Garay József Eötvös Ede Szigligeti Zsigmond Kemény János Arany Mihály Tompa Sándor Petőfi Imre Madách János Vajda Gergely Csiky 19th – 20th century Mór Jókai Kálmán Mikszáth Elek Benedek Zoltán Ambrus Sándor Bródy Géza Gárdonyi Ferenc Herczeg Ignotus Miklós Bánffy Endre Ady Miksa Fenyő Ferenc Molnár Gyula Krúdy Dezső Szabó Zsigmond Móricz Ferenc Móra Menyhért Lengyel Margit Kaffka Lajos Nagy Gyula Juhász Mihály Babits Károly Kós Géza Gyóni Béla Balázs Árpád Tóth Géza Csáth Dezső Kosztolányi Lajos Kassák Frigyes Karinthy Lajos Áprily Milán Füst József Nyírő Sándor Reményik Lajos Zilahy Tibor Déry Béla Hamvas Sándor Szathmári Áron Tamási János Kodolányi 20th century István Fekete Lőrinc Szabó Sándor Márai László Németh Antal Szerb Gyula Illyés Jolán Földes Sándor Török Jenő Rejtő Attila József Albert Wass Miklós Szentkuthy Mária Szepes Géza Képes Miklós Radnóti István Örkény Géza Ottlik László Kálnoky Sándor Weöres Iván Mándy Ferenc Karinthy János Pilinszky Ágnes Nemes Nagy László Nagy Éva Janikovszky Péter Zsoldos Ervin Lázár Gáspár Nagy 20th – 21st century György Faludy Magda Szabó András Sütő Ferenc Juhász Sándor Kányádi Imre Kertész Gábor Görgey Sándor Csoóri Anna Jókai György Konrád György Moldova István Csukás Tamás Cseh Péter Esterházy György Károly Erno Polgar Contemporary Ágnes Gergely László L. Lőrincz Endre Kukorelly Péter Nádas György Spiró Ádám Nádasdy Miklós Vámos Zsuzsa Rakovszky Béla Markó Lajos Parti Nagy László Krasznahorkai Attila Bartis György Dragomán Category:Hungarian writers Authority control databases International VIAF National Germany United States Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Bibliotheca_Corviniana&oldid=1298932613 " Categories : Libraries in Hungary 15th-century establishments in Europe Memory of the World Register Libraries established in the 15th century Cultural depictions of Matthias Corvinus Hidden categories: Commons category link is on Wikidata Hungary articles missing geocoordinate data All articles needing coordinates Articles missing coordinates without coordinates on Wikidata This page was last edited on 5 July 2025, at 16:52 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Bibliotheca Corviniana 29 languages Add topic

