Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Foundation 1.2 Early works 1.3 Expansion of the order 1.3.1 Britain 1.3.2 China 1.3.3 Ireland 1.3.4 Canada 1.3.5 United States 1.3.6 Ecuador 1.3.7 Mexico 1.3.8 Northern Spanish America 1.3.9 Paraguay 1.3.10 Philippines 1.3.11 Colonial Brazil 1.4 Suppression and restoration 1.5 Early 20th century 1.6 Post-Vatican II 2 Ignatian spirituality 3 Formation 4 Governance of the society 5 Statistics 6 Habit and dress 7 Controversies Toggle Controversies subsection 7.1 Slavery 7.2 Power-seeking 7.3 Political intrigue 7.4 Casuistic justification 7.5 Exclusion of those of Jewish or Muslim ancestry 7.6 Theological debates 8 Nazi persecution Toggle Nazi persecution subsection 8.1 Rescue efforts during the Holocaust 9 In science 10 Notable members 11 Gallery of Jesuit churches 12 Institutions Toggle Institutions subsection 12.1 Educational institutions 12.2 Social and development institutions 13 Publications 14 See also 15 Notes 16 References Toggle References subsection 16.1 Citations 16.2 Sources 17 Further reading Toggle Further reading subsection 17.1 Surveys 17.2 Specialized studies 17.3 United States 17.4 Primary sources 17.5 In German 18 External links Toggle External links subsection 18.1 Catholic Church documents 18.2 Jesuit documents 18.3 Other links Toggle the table of contents Jesuits 107 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch العربية Aragonés Arpetan Asturianu Avañe'ẽ Azərbaycanca বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Bikol Central Български Boarisch Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Чӑвашла Cebuano Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Gaeilge Gàidhlig Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Ido বিষ্ণুপ্রিয়া মণিপুরী Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa Kabɩyɛ ಕನ್ನಡ ქართული Қазақша Kiswahili Kreyòl ayisyen Kurdî Latgaļu Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Limburgs Magyar Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം مصرى مازِرونی Bahasa Melayu 閩東語 / Mìng-dĕ̤ng-ngṳ̄ Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Piemontèis Polski Português Română Русиньскый Русский Sardu Scots Shqip Sicilianu සිංහල Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Словѣньскъ / ⰔⰎⰑⰂⰡⰐⰠⰔⰍⰟ کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Vèneto Tiếng Việt Walon Winaray 吴语 粵語 中文 Jaku Iban Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 41°54′5″N 12°27′38″E ﻿ / ﻿ 41.90139°N 12.46056°E ﻿ / 41.90139; 12.46056 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Society of Jesus ) Male religious congregation of the Catholic Church This article is about the Society of Jesus, also known as Jesuit Order. For philosophy concerning the teachings of Jesus, see Jesuism . For the band, see Jesuit (band) . For the pastry, see Jésuite . For the sandwich, see Jesuita (sandwich) .

Society of Jesus Latin : Societas Jesu Christogram Abbreviation S.J. or SJ Nickname Jesuits Formation 27 September 1540 ; 484 years ago ( 1540-09-27 ) [ 1 ] Founders Saint Ignatius of Loyola Saint Francis Xavier Saint Peter Faber Nicholas Bobadilla Diego Laínez Simão Rodrigues Alfonso Salmeron Founded at Paris , France formalised in Rome Type Order of clerics regular of pontifical right (for men) [ 1 ] Headquarters Generalate : Borgo S. Spirito 4, 00195 Prati , Rome, Italy Coordinates 41°54′5″N 12°27′38″E ﻿ / ﻿ 41.90139°N 12.46056°E ﻿ / 41.90139; 12.46056 Region served Worldwide Members 13,768 (2025) [ 1 ] Motto Latin : Ad Maiorem Dei Gloriam English: For the Greater Glory of God Superior General Fr.

Arturo Sosa , SJ Patron saints Saint Joseph Blessed Virgin Mary (under the title Madonna della Strada ) Ministry Missionary, educational, literary works Main organ La Civiltà Cattolica Parent organization Catholic Church Website www .jesuits .global Part of a series on the Society of Jesus History Regimini militantis Congregatio de Auxiliis Suppression Ratio Studiorum Hierarchy General Congregation Superior General Spirituality Spiritual Exercises Ad maiorem Dei gloriam Training Magis Works Educational institutions List of sites Jesuit Refugee Service Bollandists Notable Jesuits Ignatius of Loyola Francis Xavier Peter Faber Pedro Arrupe John Berchmans Francisco Suárez Robert Bellarmine Peter Canisius Edmund Campion Pierre-Jean De Smet Augustin Barruel Aloysius Gonzaga Frederick Copleston Karl Rahner Pope Francis Jesuit saints Jesuit theologians Jesuit philosophers v t e The Society of Jesus ( Latin : Societas Iesu ; abbreviation: S.J.

or SJ ), also known as the Jesuit Order or the Jesuits ( / ˈ dʒ ɛ ʒ u ɪ t s , ˈ dʒ ɛ zj u -/ JEZH -oo-its, JEZ -ew- ; [ 2 ] Latin: Iesuitae ), [ 3 ] is a religious order of clerics regular of pontifical right for men in the Catholic Church headquartered in Rome . It was founded in 1540 by Ignatius of Loyola and six companions, with the approval of Pope Paul III . The Society of Jesus is the largest religious order in the Catholic Church and has played a significant role in education, charity, humanitarian acts and global policies.  The Society of Jesus is engaged in evangelization and apostolic ministry in 112 countries. Jesuits work in education, research, and cultural pursuits. They also conduct retreats, minister in hospitals and parishes, sponsor direct social and humanitarian works, and promote ecumenical dialogue .

The Society of Jesus is consecrated under the patronage of Madonna della Strada, a title of the Blessed Virgin Mary , and it is led by a superior general .

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] The headquarters of the society, its general curia , is in Rome.

[ 6 ] The historic curia of Ignatius is now part of the Collegio del Gesù attached to the Church of the Gesù , the Jesuit mother church .

Members of the Society of Jesus make profession of "perpetual poverty, chastity, and obedience" and "promise a special obedience to the sovereign pontiff in regard to the missions." A Jesuit is expected to be totally available and obedient to his superiors, accepting orders to go anywhere in the world, even if required to live in extreme conditions. Ignatius, its leading founder, was a nobleman who had a military background. The opening lines of the founding document of the Society of Jesus accordingly declare that it was founded for "whoever desires to serve as a soldier of God, [ a ] to strive especially for the defense and propagation of the faith, and for the progress of souls in Christian life and doctrine".

[ 7 ] Jesuits are thus sometimes referred to colloquially as "God's soldiers", [ 8 ] "God's marines", [ 9 ] or "the Company".

[ 10 ] The Society of Jesus participated in the Counter-Reformation and, later, in the implementation of the Second Vatican Council .

Jesuit missionaries established missions around the world from the 16th to the 18th century and had both successes and failures in Christianizing the native peoples. The Jesuits have always been controversial within the Catholic Church and have frequently clashed with secular governments and institutions. Beginning in 1759, the Catholic Church expelled Jesuits from most countries in Europe and from European colonies.

Pope Clement XIV officially suppressed the order in 1773. In 1814, the Church lifted the suppression.

History [ edit ] Foundation [ edit ] Ignatius of Loyola , the founder of the Jesuits Ignatius of Loyola , a Basque nobleman from the Pyrenees area of northern Spain, founded the society after discerning his spiritual vocation while recovering from a wound sustained in the Battle of Pamplona .

On 15 August 1534, Ignatius of Loyola (born Íñigo López de Loyola), a Spaniard from the Basque city of Loyola , and six others mostly of Castilian origin, all students at the University of Paris , [ 11 ] met in Montmartre outside Paris, in a crypt beneath the church of Saint Denis , now Saint Pierre de Montmartre , to pronounce promises of poverty, chastity, and obedience.

[ 12 ] Ignatius' six companions were: Francisco Xavier from Navarre ( modern Spain ), Alfonso Salmeron , Diego Laínez , Nicolás Bobadilla from Castile ( modern Spain ), Peter Faber from Savoy , and Simão Rodrigues from Portugal .

[ 13 ] The meeting is commemorated in the Martyrium of Saint Denis, Montmartre . They called themselves the Compañía de Jesús , and also Amigos en El Señor or "Friends in the Lord", because they felt "they were placed together by Christ." The name "company" had echoes of the military (reflecting perhaps Ignatius' background as captain in the Spanish army) as well as of discipleship (the "companions" of Jesus). The Spanish "company" would be translated into Latin as societas like in socius , a partner or comrade. From this came "Society of Jesus" (SJ) by which they would be known more widely.

[ 14 ] Religious orders established in the medieval era were named after particular men: Francis of Assisi (Franciscans); Domingo de Guzmán , later canonized as Saint Dominic (Dominicans); and Augustine of Hippo (Augustinians). Ignatius of Loyola and his followers appropriated the name of Jesus for their new order, provoking resentment by other orders who considered it presumptuous. The resentment was recorded by Jesuit José de Acosta of a conversation with the Archbishop of Santo Domingo.

[ 15 ] In the words of one historian: "The use of the name Jesus gave great offense. Both on the Continent and in England, it was denounced as blasphemous; petitions were sent to kings and to civil and ecclesiastical tribunals to have it changed; and even Pope Sixtus V had signed a Brief to do away with it." But nothing came of all the opposition; there were already congregations named after the Trinity and as "God's daughters".

[ 16 ] In 1537, the seven travelled to Italy to seek papal approval for their order . Pope Paul III gave them a commendation, and permitted them to be ordained priests. These initial steps led to the official founding in 1540.

They were ordained in Venice by the bishop of Arbe on 24 June. They devoted themselves to preaching and charitable work in Italy . The Italian War of 1536–1538 renewed between Charles V, Holy Roman Emperor , Venice, the Pope, and the Ottoman Empire , had rendered any journey to Jerusalem impossible.

Again in 1540, they presented the project to Paul III. After months of dispute, a congregation of cardinals reported favourably upon the Constitution presented, and Paul III confirmed the order through the bull Regimini militantis ecclesiae ("To the Government of the Church Militant"), on 27 September 1540. This is the founding document of the Society of Jesus as an official Catholic religious order. Ignatius was chosen as the first Superior General . Paul III's bull had limited the number of its members to sixty. This limitation was removed through the bull Exposcit debitum of Julius III in 1550.

[ 17 ] In 1543, Peter Canisius entered the company. Ignatius sent him to Messina, where he founded the first Jesuit college in Sicily .

Ignatius laid out his original vision for the new order in the "Formula of the Institute of the Society of Jesus", [ 18 ] which is "the fundamental charter of the order, of which all subsequent official documents were elaborations and to which they had to conform".

[ 19 ] He ensured that his formula was contained in two papal bulls signed by Pope Paul III in 1540 and by Pope Julius III in 1550.

[ 18 ] The formula expressed the nature, spirituality, community life, and apostolate of the new religious order. Its famous opening statement echoed Ignatius' military background: A fresco depicting Ignatius receiving the papal bull from Pope Paul III was created after 1743 by Johann Christoph Handke in the Church of Our Lady Of the Snow in Olomouc .

Whoever desires to serve as a soldier of God beneath the banner of the Cross in our Society, which we desire to be designated by the Name of Jesus, and to serve the Lord alone and the Church, his spouse, under the Roman Pontiff, the Vicar of Christ on earth, should, after a solemn vow of perpetual chastity, poverty and obedience, keep what follows in mind. He is a member of a Society founded chiefly for this purpose: to strive especially for the defence and propagation of the faith and for the progress of souls in Christian life and doctrine, by means of public preaching, lectures and any other ministration whatsoever of the Word of God, and further by means of retreats, the education of children and unlettered persons in Christianity, and the spiritual consolation of Christ's faithful through hearing confessions and administering the other sacraments. Moreover, he should show himself ready to reconcile the estranged, compassionately assist and serve those who are in prisons or hospitals, and indeed, to perform any other works of charity, according to what will seem expedient for the glory of God and the common good.

[ 20 ] Jesuits at Akbar 's court in India, c.

1605 In fulfilling the mission of the "Formula of the Institute of the Society", the first Jesuits concentrated on a few key activities. First, they founded schools throughout Europe. Jesuit teachers were trained in both classical studies and theology , and their schools reflected this. These schools taught with a balance of Aristotelian methods with mathematics.

[ 21 ] Second, they sent out missionaries across the globe to evangelize those peoples who had not yet heard the Gospel , founding missions in widely diverse regions such as modern-day Paraguay , Japan, Ontario , and Ethiopia . One of the original seven arrived in India already in 1541.

[ 22 ] Finally, though not initially formed for the purpose, they aimed to stop Protestantism from spreading and to preserve communion with Rome and the pope . The zeal of the Jesuits overcame the movement toward Protestantism in the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth and southern Germany .

Ignatius wrote the Jesuit Constitutions , adopted in 1553, which created a centralised organization and stressed acceptance of any mission to which the pope might call them.

[ 23 ] [ 24 ] [ 25 ] His main principle became the unofficial Jesuit motto: Ad Maiorem Dei Gloriam ("For the greater glory of God"). This phrase is designed to reflect the idea that any work that is not evil can be meritorious for the spiritual life if it is performed with this intention, even things normally considered of little importance.

[ 17 ] The Society of Jesus is classified among institutes as an order of clerks regular , that is, a body of priests organized for apostolic work, and following a religious rule.

The term Jesuit (of 15th-century origin, meaning "one who used too frequently or appropriated the name of Jesus") was first applied to the society in reproach (1544–1552).

[ 26 ] The term was never used by Ignatius of Loyola, but over time, members and friends of the society adopted the name with a positive meaning.

[ 16 ] While the order is limited to men, Joanna of Austria, Princess of Portugal , favored the order and she is reputed to have been admitted surreptitiously under a male pseudonym.

[ 27 ] Early works [ edit ] Ratio Studiorum , 1598 This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

( August 2020 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The Jesuits were founded just before the Council of Trent (1545–1563) and ensuing Counter-Reformation that would introduce reforms within the Catholic Church, and so counter the Protestant Reformation throughout Catholic Europe.

Ignatius and the early Jesuits did recognize, though, that the hierarchical church was in dire need of reform. Some of their greatest struggles were against corruption, venality , and spiritual lassitude within the Catholic Church. Ignatius insisted on a high level of academic preparation for the clergy in contrast to the relatively poor education of much of the clergy of his time. The Jesuit vow against "ambitioning prelacies" can be seen as an effort to counteract another problem evidenced in the preceding century.

Ignatius and the Jesuits who followed him believed that the reform of the church had to begin with the conversion of an individual's heart. One of the main tools the Jesuits have used to bring about this conversion is the Ignatian retreat, called the Spiritual Exercises . During a four-week period of silence, individuals undergo a series of directed meditations on the purpose of life and contemplations on the life of Christ. They meet regularly with a spiritual director who guides their choice of exercises and helps them to develop a more discerning love for Christ.

The retreat follows a "Purgative-Illuminative-Unitive" pattern in the tradition of the spirituality of John Cassian and the Desert Fathers . Ignatius' innovation was to make this style of contemplative mysticism available to all people in active life. He used it as a means of rebuilding the spiritual life of the church. The Exercises became both the basis for the training of Jesuits and one of the essential ministries of the order: giving the exercises to others in what became known as "retreats".

The Jesuits' contributions to the late Renaissance were significant in their roles both as a missionary order and as the first religious order to operate colleges and universities as a principal and distinct ministry.

[ 21 ] By the time of Ignatius' death in 1556, the Jesuits were already operating a network of 74 colleges on three continents. A precursor to liberal education , the Jesuit plan of studies incorporated the Classical teachings of Renaissance humanism into the Scholastic structure of Catholic thought.

[ 21 ] This method of teaching was important in the context of the Scientific Revolution, as these universities were open to teaching new scientific and mathematical methodology. Further, many important thinkers of the Scientific Revolution were educated by Jesuit universities.

[ 21 ] In addition to the teachings of faith , the Jesuit Ratio Studiorum (1599) would standardize the study of Latin , Greek , classical literature, poetry, and philosophy as well as non-European languages, sciences, and the arts. Jesuit schools encouraged the study of vernacular literature and rhetoric , and thereby became important centres for the training of lawyers and public officials.

The Jesuit schools played an important part in winning back to Catholicism a number of European countries which had for a time been predominantly Protestant, notably Poland and Lithuania . Today, Jesuit colleges and universities are located in over one hundred nations around the world. Under the notion that God can be encountered through created things and especially art, they encouraged the use of ceremony and decoration in Catholic ritual and devotion. Perhaps as a result of this appreciation for art, coupled with their spiritual practice of "finding God in all things", many early Jesuits distinguished themselves in the visual and performing arts as well as in music. The theater was a form of expression especially prominent in Jesuit schools.

[ 28 ] Jesuit priests often acted as confessors to kings during the early modern period . They were an important force in the Counter-Reformation and in the Catholic missions, in part because their relatively loose structure (without the requirements of living and celebration of the Liturgy of Hours in common) allowed them to be flexible and meet diverse needs arising at the time.

[ 29 ] Expansion of the order [ edit ] This section may be confusing or unclear to readers .

Please help clarify the section . There might be a discussion about this on the talk page .

( December 2019 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) A jesuit missionary , painting from 1779 After much training and experience in theology, Jesuits went across the globe in search of converts to Christianity. Despite their dedication, they had little success in Asia, except in the Philippines . For instance, early missions in Japan resulted in the government granting the Jesuits the feudal fiefdom of Nagasaki in 1580. This was removed in 1587 due to fears over their growing influence.

[ 30 ] Jesuits did, however, have much success in Latin America. Their ascendancy in societies in the Americas accelerated during the seventeenth century, wherein Jesuits created new missions in Peru , Colombia , and Bolivia . As early as 1603, there were 345 Jesuit priests in Mexico alone.

[ 31 ] Francis Xavier led the first Christian mission to Japan In 1541, Francis Xavier , one of the original companions of Loyola , arrived in Goa , Portuguese India , to carry out evangelical service in the Indies. In a 1545 letter to John III of Portugal, he requested an Inquisition to be installed in Goa to combat heresies like crypto-Judaism and crypto-Islam. Under Portuguese royal patronage , Jesuits thrived in Goa and until 1759 successfully expanded their activities to education and healthcare.

[ 32 ] In 1594, they founded the first Roman-style academic institution in the East, St. Paul Jesuit College in Macau , China. Founded by Alessandro Valignano , it had a great influence on the learning of Eastern languages (Chinese and Japanese) and culture by missionary Jesuits, becoming home to the first western sinologists such as Matteo Ricci . Jesuit efforts in Goa were interrupted by the expulsion of the Jesuits from Portuguese territories in 1759 by the powerful Marquis of Pombal , the Secretary of State in Portugal.

[ 32 ] In 1624, the Portuguese Jesuit António de Andrade founded a mission in Western Tibet . In 1661, two Jesuit missionaries, Johann Grueber and Albert Dorville , reached Lhasa , in Tibet. The Italian Jesuit Ippolito Desideri established a new Jesuit mission in Lhasa and Central Tibet (1716–21) and gained an exceptional mastery of Tibetan language and culture, writing a long and very detailed account of the country and its religion as well as treatises in Tibetan that attempted to refute key Buddhist ideas and establish the truth of Catholic Christianity.

The Spanish missionary José de Anchieta was, together with Manuel da Nóbrega , the first Jesuit that Ignacio de Loyola sent to America.

Jesuit missions in the Americas became controversial in Europe, especially in Spain and Portugal, where they were seen as interfering with the proper colonial enterprises of the royal governments. The Jesuits were often the only force standing between the Indigenous and slavery . Together throughout South America but especially in present-day Brazil and Paraguay , they formed Indigenous Christian city-states, called " reductions ". These were societies set up according to an idealized theocratic model.

[ 31 ] The efforts of Jesuits like Antonio Ruiz de Montoya to protect the natives from enslavement by Spanish and Portuguese colonizers contributed to the call for the society's suppression. Jesuit priests such as Manuel da Nóbrega and José de Anchieta founded several towns in Brazil in the 16th century, including São Paulo and Rio de Janeiro , and were very influential in the pacification, religious conversion , and education of indigenous nations. They built schools, organized people into villages, and created a writing system for the local languages of Brazil.

[ 31 ] José de Anchieta and Manuel da Nóbrega were the first Jesuits that Ignacio de Loyola sent to the Americas.

[ 33 ] Jesuit scholars working in foreign missions were very dedicated in studying the local languages and strove to produce Latinized grammars and dictionaries . This included: Japanese (see Nippo jisho , also known as Vocabvlario da Lingoa de Iapam , "Vocabulary of the Japanese Language", a Japanese–Portuguese dictionary written 1603); Vietnamese (Portuguese missionaries created the Vietnamese alphabet , [ 34 ] [ 35 ] which was later formalized by Avignon missionary Alexandre de Rhodes with his 1651 trilingual dictionary ); Tupi , the main language of Brazil, and the pioneering study of Sanskrit in the West by Jean François Pons in the 1740s.

Jesuit missionaries were active among indigenous peoples in New France in North America, many of them compiling dictionaries or glossaries of the First Nations and Native American languages they had learned. For instance, before his death in 1708, Jacques Gravier , vicar general of the Illinois Mission in the Mississippi River valley, compiled a Miami–Illinois –French dictionary , considered the most extensive among works of the missionaries.

[ 36 ] Extensive documentation was left in the form of The Jesuit Relations , published annually from 1632 until 1673.

A shunkō-in bell made in Portugal for the Nanbanji Church , run by Jesuits in Japan, 1576–1587 Britain [ edit ] Whereas Jesuits were active in Britain in the 1500s, due to the persecution of Catholics in the Elizabethan times, an English province was only established in 1623.

[ 37 ] The first pressing issue for early Jesuits in what today is the United Kingdom , was to establish places for training priests. In 1579, an English College was opened in Rome . In 1589, a Jesuit seminary was opened at Valladolid .

In 1592, an English College was opened in Seville . In 1614, an English college opened in Louvain. This was the earliest foundation of what was later Heythrop College .

Campion Hall , founded in 1896, has been a presence within Oxford University since then.

16th and 17th-century Jesuit institutions intended to train priests were hotbeds for the persecution of Catholics in Britain, where men suspected of being Catholic priests were routinely imprisoned, tortured, and executed. Jesuits were among those killed, including the namesake of Campion Hall , as well as Brian Cansfield, Ralph Corbington , and many others. A number of them were canonized among the Forty Martyrs of England and Wales .

In 2022, four Jesuit churches existed in London , with three other places of worship in England and two in Scotland .

[ 38 ] China [ edit ] Main article: Jesuit missions in China Matteo Ricci (left) and Xu Guangqi in the 1607 Chinese publication of Euclid 's Elements Confucius, Philosopher of the Chinese, or, Chinese Knowledge Explained in Latin , published by Philippe Couplet , Prospero Intorcetta , Christian Herdtrich , and François de Rougemont at Paris in 1687 A map of the 200-odd Jesuit churches and missions established across China c.

1687 The Jesuits first entered China through the Portuguese settlement on Macau , where they settled on Green Island and founded St. Paul's College .

The Jesuit China missions of the 16th and 17th centuries introduced Western science and astronomy, [ 39 ] then undergoing its own revolution , to China. The scientific revolution brought by the Jesuits coincided with a time when scientific innovation had declined in China: [The Jesuits] made efforts to translate western mathematical and astronomical works into Chinese and aroused the interest of Chinese scholars in these sciences. They made very extensive astronomical observation and carried out the first modern cartographic work in China. They also learned to appreciate the scientific achievements of this ancient culture and made them known in Europe. Through their correspondence, European scientists first learned about the Chinese science and culture.

[ 40 ] For over a century, Jesuits such as Michele Ruggieri , Matteo Ricci , [ 41 ] Diego de Pantoja , Philippe Couplet , Michal Boym , and François Noël refined translations and disseminated Chinese knowledge , culture , history , and philosophy to Europe. Their Latin works popularized the name " Confucius " and had considerable influence on the Deists and other Enlightenment thinkers, some of whom were intrigued by the Jesuits' attempts to reconcile Confucian morality with Catholicism .

[ 42 ] Upon the arrival of the Franciscans and other monastic orders, Jesuit accommodation of Chinese culture and rituals led to the long-running Chinese Rites controversy . Despite the personal testimony of the Kangxi Emperor and many Jesuit converts that Chinese veneration of ancestors and Confucius was a nonreligious token of respect, Pope Clement XI 's papal decree Cum Deus Optimus ruled that such behavior constituted impermissible forms of idolatry and superstition in 1704.

[ 43 ] His legate Tournon and Bishop Charles Maigrot of Fujian, tasked with presenting this finding to the Kangxi Emperor , displayed such extreme ignorance that the emperor mandated the expulsion of Christian missionaries unable to abide by the terms of Ricci's Chinese catechism.

[ 44 ] [ 45 ] [ 46 ] [ 47 ] Tournon's summary and automatic excommunication for any violators of Clement's decree [ 48 ] – upheld by the 1715 bull Ex Illa Die – led to the swift collapse of all the missions in China.

[ 45 ] The last Jesuits were expelled after 1721.

[ 49 ] Ireland [ edit ] See also: List of Jesuit schools in Ireland The first Jesuit school in Ireland was established at Limerick by the apostolic visitor of the Holy See , David Wolfe . Wolfe was sent to Ireland by Pope Pius IV with the concurrence of the third Jesuit superior general, Diego Laynez .

[ 50 ] He was charged with setting up grammar schools "as a remedy against the profound ignorance of the people".

[ 51 ] Wolfe's mission in Ireland initially concentrated on setting the sclerotic Irish Church on a sound footing, introducing the Tridentine Reforms and finding suitable men to fill vacant sees. He established a house of religious women in Limerick known as the Menabochta ("poor women" ) and in 1565 preparations began for establishing a school at Limerick.

[ 52 ] At his instigation, Richard Creagh , a priest of the Diocese of Limerick, was persuaded to accept the vacant Archdiocese of Armagh , and was consecrated in Rome in 1564.

This early Limerick school, Crescent College , operated in difficult circumstances. In April 1566, William Good sent a detailed report to Rome of his activities via the Portuguese Jesuits. He informed the Jesuit superior general that he and Edmund Daniel had arrived at Limerick city two years beforehand and their situation there had been perilous. Both had arrived in the city in very bad health, but had recovered due to the kindness of the people.

They established contact with Wolfe, but were only able to meet with him at night, as the English authorities were attempting to arrest the legate. Wolfe charged them initially with teaching to the boys of Limerick, with an emphasis on religious instruction, and Good translated the catechism from Latin into English for this purpose. They remained in Limerick for eight months.

[ 53 ] In December 1565, they moved to Kilmallock under the protection of the Earl of Desmond, where they lived in more comfort than the primitive conditions they experienced in Limerick. They were unable to support themselves at Kilmallock and three months later they returned to Limerick in Easter 1566, and strangely set up their house in accommodation owned by the Lord Deputy of Ireland, which was conveyed to them by certain influential friends.

[ 53 ] They recommenced teaching at Castle Lane, and imparting the sacraments, though their activities were restricted by the arrival of Royal Commissioners. Good reported that as he was an Englishman, English officials in the city cultivated him and he was invited to dine with them on a number of occasions, though he was warned to exercise prudence and avoid promoting the Petrine primacy and the priority of the Mass amongst the sacraments with his students and congregation, and that his sermons should emphasize obedience to secular princes if he wished to avoid arrest.

[ 53 ] The number of scholars in their care was very small. An early example of a school play in Ireland is sent in one of Good's reports, which was performed on the Feast of St. John in 1566. The school was conducted in one large aula, with the students were divided into distinct classes. Good gives a highly detailed report of the curriculum taught. The top class studied the first and second parts of Johannes Despauterius 's Commentarli grammatici, and read a few letters of Cicero or the dialogues of Frusius (André des Freux, SJ). The second class committed Donatus' texts in Latin to memory and read dialogues and works by Ēvaldus Gallus. Students in the third class learned Donatus by heart, translated into English rather than Latin. Young boys in the fourth class were taught to read. Progress was slow because there were too few teachers to conduct classes simultaneously.

[ 53 ] In the spirit of Ignatius' Roman College founded 14 years before, no fee was requested from pupils. As a result, the two Jesuits lived in very poor conditions and were very overworked with teaching and administering the sacraments to the public. In late 1568, the Castle Lane School, in the presence of Daniel and Good, was attacked and looted by government agents sent by Sir Thomas Cusack during the pacification of Munster.

[ 54 ] The political and religious climate had become more uncertain in the lead up to Pope Pius V 's formal excommunication of Queen Elizabeth I , which resulted in a new wave of repression of Catholicism in England and Ireland. At the end of 1568, the Anglican Bishop of Meath, Hugh Brady , was sent to Limerick charged with a Royal Commission to seek out and expel the Jesuits. Daniel was immediately ordered to quit the city and went to Lisbon, where he resumed his studies with the Portuguese Jesuits.

[ 54 ] Good moved on to Clonmel , before establishing himself at Youghal until 1577.

[ 55 ] In 1571, after Wolfe had been captured and imprisoned at Dublin Castle , Daniel persuaded the Portuguese Province to agree a surety for the ransom of Wolfe, who was quickly banished on release. In 1572, Daniel returned to Ireland, but was immediately captured. Incriminating documents were found on his person, which were taken as proof of his involvement with the rebellious cousin of the Earl of Desmond , James Fitzmaurice and a Spanish plot.

[ 56 ] He was removed from Limerick, and taken to Cork, "just as if he were a thief or noted evildoer". After being court-martialled by the Lord President of Munster, Sir John Perrot , he was sentenced to be hanged, drawn, and quartered for treason, and refused pardon in return for swearing the Act of Supremacy . His execution was carried out on 25 October 1572. A report of it was sent by Fitzmaurice to the Jesuit Superior General in 1576, where he said that Daniel was "cruelly killed because of me".

[ 57 ] With Daniel dead and Wolfe dismissed, the Irish Jesuit foundation suffered a severe setback. Good is recorded as resident at Rome in 1577. In 1586, the seizure of Earl of Desmond's estates resulted in a new permanent Protestant plantation in Munster, making the continuation of the Limerick school impossible for a time. It was not until the early 1600s that the Jesuit mission could again re-establish itself in the city, though the Jesuits kept a low profile existence in lodgings here and there. For instance, a mission led by Fr. Nicholas Leinagh re-established itself at Limerick in 1601, [ 58 ] though the Jesuit presence in the city numbered no more than 1 or 2 at a time in the years immediately following.

In 1604, the Lord President of Munster, Sir Henry Brouncker - at Limerick, ordered all Jesuits from the city and Province, and offered £7 to anyone willing to betray a Jesuit priest to the authorities, and £5 for a seminarian.

[ 59 ] Jesuit houses and schools throughout the province, in the years after, were subject to periodic crackdown and the occasional destruction of schools, imprisonment of teachers and the levying of heavy money penalties on parents are recorded in publications of the time. In 1615–17, the Royal Visitation Books, written up by Thomas Jones , the Anglican Archbishop of Dublin , records the suppression of Jesuit schools at Waterford , Limerick and Galway .

[ 60 ] In spite of this occasional persecution, the Jesuits were able to exert a degree of discreet influence within the province and in Limerick. For instance in 1606, largely through their efforts, a Catholic named Christopher Holywood was elected Mayor of the city.

[ 61 ] In 1602, the resident Jesuit had raised a sum of "200 cruzados" for the purpose of founding a hospital in Limerick, though the project was disrupted by a severe outbreak of plague and repression by the Lord President.

[ 62 ] The principal activities of the order within Limerick at this time were devoted to preaching, administration of the sacraments and teaching. The school opened and closed intermittently in or around the area of Castle Lane, near Lahiffy's lane. During demolition work stones marked I.H.S., 1642 and 1609 were, in the 19th century, found inserted in a wall behind a tan yard near St Mary's Chapel which, according to Lenihan, were thought to mark the site of an early Jesuit school and oratory. This building, at other times, had also functioned as a dance house and candle factory.

[ 63 ] For much of the 1600s, the Limerick Jesuit foundation established a more permanent and stable presence and the Jesuit Annals record a 'flourishing' school at Limerick in the 1640s.

[ 64 ] During the Confederacy the Jesuits had been able to go about their business unhindered and were invited to preach publicly from the pulpit of St. Mary's Cathedral on 4 occasions. Cardinal Giovanni Rinuccini wrote to the Jesuit general in Rome, praising the work of the Rector of the Limerick College, Fr. William O'Hurley, who was aided by Fr. Thomas Burke.

[ 65 ] A few years later, during the Protectorate era, only 18 of the Jesuits resident in Ireland managed to avoid capture by the authorities. Lenihan records that the Limerick Crescent College in 1656 moved to a hut in the middle of a bog, which was difficult for the authorities to find. This foundation was headed up by Fr. Nicholas Punch, who was aided by Frs. Maurice Patrick, Piers Creagh and James Forde. The school attracted a large number of students from around the locality.

[ 66 ] At the Restoration of Charles II , the school moved back to Castle Lane, and remained largely undisturbed for the next 40 years, until the surrender of the city to Williamite forces in 1692. In 1671, Dr. James Douley was appointed Vicar Apostolic of Limerick. During his visitation to the diocese, he reported to the Holy See that the Jesuits had a house and "taught schools with great fruit, instructing the youth in the articles of faith and good morals." [ 67 ] Douley also noted that this and other Catholic schools operating in the Diocese were also attended by local Protestants.

[ 68 ] The Jesuit presence in Ireland, in the so-called Penal era after the Battle of the Boyne, ebbed and flowed. In 1700 they were only 6 or 7, recovering to 25 in 1750. Small Jesuit houses and schools existed at Athlone, Carrick-on-Suir, Cashel, Clonmel, Kilkenny, Waterford, New Ross, Wexford, and Drogheda, as well as Dublin and Galway. At Limerick there appears to have been a long hiatus following the defeat of the Jacobite forces. Fr. Thomas O'Gorman was the first Jesuit to return to Limerick after the siege, arriving in 1728. He took up residence in Jail Lane, near the Castle in the Englishtown. There he opened a school to "impart the rudiments of the classics to the better class youth of the city." [ 69 ] O'Gorman left in 1737 and was succeeded by Fr. John McGrath.

[ 70 ] Next came Fr. James McMahon, who was a nephew of the Primate of Armagh, Hugh MacMahon . McMahon lived at Limerick for thirteen years until his death in 1751. In 1746, Fr Joseph Morony was sent from Bordeaux to join McMahon and the others.

[ 71 ] Morony remained at the Jail Lane site teaching at  a "high class school" until 1773, when he was ordered to close the school and oratory following the papal suppression of the Society of Jesus , [ 72 ] 208 years after its foundation by Wolfe. Morony then went to live in Dublin and worked as a secular priest.

Despite the efforts of the Castle authorities and English government, the Limerick school managed to survive the Protestant Reformation , the Cromwellian invasion and Williamite Wars , and subsequent Penal Laws . It was forced to close, not for religious or confessional reasons, but due to the political difficulties of the Jesuit Order elsewhere.

Following the restoration of the Society of Jesus in 1814, the Jesuits gradually re-established a number of their schools throughout the country, starting with foundations at Kildare and Dublin. In 1859, they returned to Limerick at the invitation of the Bishop of Limerick, John Ryan , and re-established a school in Galway the same year.

Canada [ edit ] See also: Jesuit missions in North America The Bressani map of 1657 depicting the martyrdom of Jean de Brébeuf The first Jesuit mission to Canada was on 25 October 1604, when the Jesuit Father Pierre Coton requested his General Superior Claudio Acquaviva to send two missionaries to Terre-Neuve .

[ 73 ] : 43 During the French colonisation of New France in the 17th century, Jesuits played an active role in North America.

Samuel de Champlain established the foundations of the French colony at Québec in 1608. The native tribes that inhabited modern day Ontario, Québec, and the areas around Lake Simcoe and Georgian Bay were the Montagnais, the Algonquins, and the Huron .

[ 74 ] Champlain believed that these had souls to be saved, so in 1614 he obtained the Recollects , a reform branch of the Franciscans in France, to convert the native inhabitants.

[ 75 ] In 1624, the French Recollects realized the magnitude of their task [ 76 ] and sent a delegate to France to invite the Society of Jesus to help with this mission. The invitation was accepted, and Jesuits Jean de Brébeuf , Énemond Massé , and Charles Lalemant arrived in Quebec in 1625.

[ 77 ] Lalemant is considered to have been the first author of one of the Jesuit Relations of New France , which chronicled their evangelization during the 17th century.

The Jesuits became involved in the Huron mission in 1626 and lived among the Huron peoples. Brébeuf learned the native language and created the first Huron language dictionary. Outside conflict forced the Jesuits to leave New France in 1629 when Quebec was surrendered to the English . In 1632, Quebec was returned to the French under the Treaty of Saint Germain-en-Laye and the Jesuits returned to the Huron territory .

[ 78 ] After a series of epidemics of European-introduced diseases beginning in 1634, some Huron began to mistrust the Jesuits and accused them of being sorcerers casting spells from their books.

[ 79 ] In 1639, Jesuit Jerome Lalemant decided that the missionaries among the Hurons needed a local residence and established Sainte-Marie near present-day Midland, Ontario , which was meant to be a replica of European society.

[ 80 ] It became the Jesuit headquarters and an important part of Canadian history. Throughout most of the 1640s the Jesuits had modest success, establishing five chapels in Huronia and baptising more than one thousand Huron out of a population, which may have exceeded 20,000 before the epidemics of the 1630s.

[ 81 ] However, the Iroquois of New York , rivals of the Hurons, grew jealous of the Hurons' wealth and control of the fur trade system and attacked Huron villages in 1648. They killed missionaries and burned villages, and the Hurons scattered. Both de Brébeuf and Gabriel Lalemant were tortured and killed in the Iroquois raids. For this, they have been canonized as martyrs in the Catholic Church.

[ 82 ] The Jesuit Paul Ragueneau burned down Sainte-Marie , instead of allowing the Iroquois the satisfaction of destroying it. By late June 1649, the French and some Christian Hurons built Sainte-Marie II on Christian Island (Isle de Saint-Joseph). Facing starvation, lack of supplies, and constant threats of Iroquois attack, the small Sainte-Marie II was abandoned in June 1650. The remaining Christian Hurons and Jesuits departed for Quebec and Ottawa .

[ 82 ] As a result of the Iroquois raids and outbreak of disease, many missionaries, traders, and soldiers died.

[ 83 ] Today, the Huron tribe, also known as the Wyandot , have a First Nations reserve in Quebec, Canada, and three major settlements in the United States.

[ 84 ] After the collapse of the Huron nation , the Jesuits undertook the task of converting the Iroquois, something they had attempted in 1642 with little success. In 1653, the Iroquois nation had a fallout with the Dutch. They then signed a peace treaty with the French and a mission was established. The Iroquois soon turned on the French again. In 1658, the Jesuits were having little success and were under constant threat of being tortured or killed.

[ 83 ] They continued their effort until 1687, when they abandoned their permanent posts in the Iroquois homeland.

[ 85 ] In 1700, Jesuits turned to maintaining Quebec, Montreal , and Ottawa without establishing new posts.

[ 86 ] During the Seven Years' War , Quebec was captured by the British in 1759 and New France came under British control. The British barred the immigration of more Jesuits to New France. In 1763, only 21 Jesuits were stationed in New France. In 1773, only 11 Jesuits remained. In 1773, the British crown declared that the Society of Jesus in New France was dissolved.

[ 87 ] The dissolution of the order left in place substantial estates and investments, amounting to an income of approximately £5,000 a year. The Council for the Affairs of the Province of Quebec , later succeeded by the Legislative Assembly of Quebec , assumed the task of allocating the funds to suitable recipients, chiefly schools.

[ 88 ] In 1842, the Jesuit mission in Quebec was re-established. A number of Jesuit colleges were founded in the decades following. One of these colleges evolved into present-day Laval University .

[ 89 ] United States [ edit ] Main article: Jesuits in the United States In the United States, the order is best known for its missions to the Native Americans in the early 17th century, its network of colleges and universities , and in Europe before 1773, its politically conservative role in the Catholic Counter Reformation .

The Society of Jesus, in the United States, is organized into geographic provinces, each of which being headed by a provincial superior . Today, there are four Jesuit provinces operating in the United States: the USA East , USA Central and Southern , USA Midwest , and USA West Provinces. At their height, there were ten provinces. Though there had been mergers in the past, a major reorganization of the provinces began in early 21st century, with the aim of consolidating into four provinces by 2020.

[ 90 ] Ecuador [ edit ] The Church of the Society of Jesus (Spanish: La Iglesia de la Compañía de Jesús ), known colloquially as la Compañía , is a Jesuit church in Quito, Ecuador . It is among the best-known churches in Quito because of its large central nave , which is profusely decorated with gold leaf , gilded plaster and wood carvings. Inspired by two Roman Jesuit churches – the Chiesa del Gesù (1580) and the Chiesa di Sant'Ignazio di Loyola (1650) – la Compañía is one of the most significant works of Spanish Baroque architecture in South America and Quito's most ornate church.

Over the 160 years of its construction, the architects of la Compañía incorporated elements of four architectural styles.

Baroque is the most prominent.

Mudéjar ( Moorish ) influence is seen in the geometrical figures on the pillars.

Churrigueresque characterizes much of the ornate decoration, especially in the interior walls. The Neoclassical style adorns the Chapel of Saint Mariana de Jesús, which was a winery in its early years.

Mexico [ edit ] The Misión de Nuestra Señora de Loreto Conchó in the 18th century, the first permanent Jesuit mission in Baja California, established by Juan María de Salvatierra in 1697 Mexican-born Jesuit Francisco Clavijero (1731–1787) wrote an important history of Mexico.

The Jesuits in New Spain distinguished themselves in several ways. They had high standards for acceptance to the order and many years of training. They attracted the patronage of elite families whose sons they educated in rigorous newly founded Jesuit colegios ("colleges"), including Colegio de San Pedro y San Pablo , Colegio de San Ildefonso , and the Colegio de San Francisco Javier, Tepozotlan . Those same elite families hoped that a son with a vocation to the priesthood would be accepted as a Jesuit. Jesuits were also zealous in evangelization of the indigenous, particularly on the northern frontiers.

To support their colegios and members of the Society of Jesus, the Jesuits acquired landed estates that were run with the best-practices for generating income in that era. A number of these haciendas were donated by wealthy elites. The donation of a hacienda to the Jesuits was the spark igniting a conflict between 17th-century Bishop Don Juan de Palafox of Puebla and the Jesuit colegio in that city. Since the Jesuits resisted paying the tithe on their estates, this donation effectively took revenue out of the church hierarchy's pockets by removing it from the tithe rolls.

[ 91 ] Many of Jesuit haciendas were huge, with Palafox asserting that just two colleges owned 300,000 head of sheep, whose wool was transformed locally in Puebla to cloth; six sugar plantations worth a million pesos and generating an income of 100,000 pesos.

[ 91 ] The immense Jesuit hacienda of Santa Lucía produced pulque , the alcoholic drink made from fermented agave sap whose main consumers were the lower classes and Indigenous peoples in Spanish cities. Although most haciendas had a free work force of permanent or seasonal labourers, the Jesuit haciendas in Mexico had a significant number of enslaved people of African descent.

[ 92 ] The Jesuits operated their properties as an integrated unit with the larger Jesuit order; thus revenues from haciendas funded their colegios . Jesuits did significantly expand missions to the Indigenous in the northern frontier area and a number were martyred, but the crown supported those missions.

[ 91 ] Mendicant orders that had real estate were less economically integrated, so that some individual houses were wealthy while others struggled economically. The Franciscans , who were founded as an order embracing poverty, did not accumulate real estate, unlike the Augustinians and Dominicans in Mexico.

The Jesuits engaged in conflict with the episcopal hierarchy over the question of payment of tithes, the ten percent tax on agriculture levied on landed estates for support of the church hierarchy from bishops and cathedral chapters to parish priests. Since the Jesuits were the largest religious order holding real estate, surpassing the Dominicans and Augustinians who had accumulated significant property, this was no small matter.

[ 91 ] They argued that they were exempt, due to special pontifical privileges.

[ 93 ] Bishop De Palafox took on the Jesuits over this matter and was so soundly defeated that he was recalled to Spain, where he became the bishop of the minor Diocese of Osma .

As elsewhere in the Spanish empire, the Jesuits were expelled from Mexico in 1767. Their haciendas were sold off and their colegios and missions in Baja California were taken over by other orders.

[ 94 ] Exiled Mexican-born Jesuit Francisco Javier Clavijero wrote an important history of Mexico while in Italy, a basis for creole patriotism.

Andrés Cavo also wrote an important text on Mexican history that Carlos María de Bustamante published in the early 19th century.

[ 95 ] An earlier Jesuit who wrote about the history of Mexico was Diego Luis de Motezuma (1619–99), a descendant of the Aztec monarchs of Tenochtitlan . Motezuma's Corona mexicana, o Historia de los nueve Motezumas was completed in 1696. He "aimed to show that Mexican emperors were a legitimate dynasty in the 17th-century in the European sense".

[ 96 ] [ 97 ] The Jesuits were allowed to return to Mexico in 1840 when General Antonio López de Santa Anna was once more president of Mexico. Their re-introduction to Mexico was "to assist in the education of the poorer classes and much of their property was restored to them".

[ 98 ] The main altar of the Jesuit colegio in Tepozotlan, now the Museo Nacional del Virreinato Northern Spanish America [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

( August 2020 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Acosta's Historia natural y moral de las Indias (1590) text on the Americas In 1571, the Jesuits arrived in the Viceroyalty of Peru . It was a key area of the Spanish Empire , with a large indigenous populations and huge deposits of silver at Potosí . A major figure in the first wave of Jesuits was José de Acosta (1540–1600), whose 1590 book Historia natural y moral de las Indias introduced Europeans to Spain's American empire, via fluid prose and keen observation and explanation, based on 15 years in Peru and some time in New Spain (Mexico).

[ 99 ] The Viceroy of Peru Don Francisco de Toledo urged the Jesuits to evangelize the Indigenous peoples of Peru , wanting to put them in charge of parishes, but Acosta adhered to the Jesuit position that they were not subject to the jurisdiction of bishops and to catechize in Indigenous parishes would bring them into conflict with the bishops. For that reason, the Jesuits in Peru focused on education of elite men rather than the indigenous populations.

[ 99 ] Peter Claver ministering to African slaves at Cartagena To minister to newly arrived African slaves, Alonso de Sandoval (1576–1651) worked at the port of Cartagena de Indias . Sandoval wrote about this ministry in De instauranda Aethiopum salute (1627), [ 100 ] describing how he and his assistant Peter Claver , later canonized, met slave transport ships in the harbour, went below decks where 300–600 slaves were chained, and gave physical aid with water, while introducing the Africans to Christianity. In his treatise, he did not condemn slavery or the ill-treatment of slaves, but sought to instruct fellow Jesuits to this ministry and describe how he catechized the slaves.

[ 101 ] Rafael Ferrer was the first Jesuit of Quito to explore and found missions in the upper Amazon regions of South America from 1602 to 1610, which belonged to the Audiencia (high court) of Quito that was a part of the Viceroyalty of Peru until it was transferred to the newly created Viceroyalty of New Granada in 1717. In 1602, Ferrer began to explore the Aguarico, Napo, and Marañon rivers in the Sucumbios region, in what is today Ecuador and Peru. Between 1604 and 1605, he set up missions among the Cofane natives. In 1610, he was martyred by an apostate native.

In 1639, the Audiencia of Quito organized an expedition to renew its exploration of the Amazon river and the Quito Jesuit (Jesuita Quiteño) Cristóbal de Acuña was a part of this expedition. In February 1639, the expedition disembarked from the Napo river. In December 1639, they arrived in what is today Pará , Brazil, on the banks of the Amazon river. In 1641, Acuña published in Madrid a memoir of his expedition to the Amazon river entitled Nuevo Descubrimiento del gran rio de las Amazonas , which for academics became a fundamental reference on the Amazon region.

In 1637, the Jesuits Gaspar Cugia and Lucas de la Cueva from Quito began establishing the Mainas missions in territories on the banks of the Marañón River , around the Pongo de Manseriche region, close to the Spanish settlement of Borja . Between 1637 and 1652 there were 14 missions established along the Marañón River and its southern tributaries, the Huallaga and the Ucayali rivers. Jesuit de la Cueva and Raimundo de Santacruz opened up two new routes of communication with Quito, through the Pastaza and Napo rivers.

Samuel Fritz 's 1707 map showing the Amazon and the Orinoco Between 1637 and 1715, Samuel Fritz founded 38 missions along the length of the Amazon river, between the Napo and Negro rivers, that were called the Omagua Missions. Beginning in 1705, these missions were continually attacked by the Brazilian Bandeirantes . In 1768, the only Omagua mission that was left was San Joaquin de Omaguas, since it had been moved to a new location on the Napo river away from the Bandeirantes.

In the immense territory of Maynas, the Jesuits of Quito made contact with a number of indigenous tribes which spoke 40 different languages, and founded 173 Jesuit missions, encompassing 150,000 inhabitants. Because of the constant epidemics of smallpox and measles and warfare with other tribes and the Bandeirantes , the number of Jesuit Missions were reduced to 40 by 1744. The Jesuit missions offered the Indigenous people Christianity, iron tools, and a small degree of protection from the slavers and the colonists.

[ 102 ] In exchange, the Indigenous had to submit to Jesuit discipline and adopt, at least superficially, a lifestyle foreign to their experience. The population of the missions was sustained by frequent expeditions into the jungle by Jesuits, soldiers, and Christian Indians to capture Indigenous people and force them to return or to settle in the missions.

[ 102 ] At the time when the Jesuits were expelled from Spanish America in 1767, the Jesuits registered 36 missions run by 25 Jesuits in the Audiencia of Quito – 6 in the Napo and Aguarico Missions and 19 in the Pastaza and Iquitos Missions, with a population at 20,000 inhabitants.

[ 103 ] Paraguay [ edit ] Main article: Jesuit missions among the Guaraní The Guaraní people of eastern Paraguay and neighboring Brazil and Argentina were in crisis in the early 17th century. Recurrent epidemics of European diseases had reduced their population by up 50 percent and the forced labor of the encomiendas by the Spanish and mestizo colonists had made virtual slaves of many. Franciscan missionaries began establishing missions called reductions in the 1580s.

[ 104 ] The first Jesuits arrived in Asunción in 1588 and founded their first mission (or reduction) of San Ignacio Guazú in 1609. The objectives of the Jesuits were to make Christians of the Guaraní, impose European values and customs (which were regarded as essential to a Christian life), and isolate and protect the Guaraní from European colonists and slavers.

[ 104 ] [ 105 ] Ruins of La Santisima Trinidad de Parana mission in Paraguay, founded by Jesuits in 1706 In addition to recurrent epidemics, the Guaraní were threatened by the slave-raiding Bandeirantes from Brazil, who captured natives and sold them as slaves to work in sugar plantations or as concubines and household servants. Having depleted native populations near São Paulo , they discovered the richly populated Jesuit missions. Initially, the missions had few defenses against the slavers and thousands of Guaraní were captured and enslaved.

Beginning in 1631, the Jesuits moved their missions from the Guayrá province (present day Brazil and Paraguay), about 500 km (310 miles) southwest to the three borders region of Paraguay, Argentina, and Brazil. About 10,000 of 30,000 Guaraní in the missions chose to accompany the Jesuits. In 1641 and 1642, armed by the Jesuits, Guaraní armies defeated the Bandeirantes and ended the worst of the slave trade in their region. From this point on the Jesuit missions enjoyed growth and prosperity, punctuated by epidemics. At the peak of their importance in 1732, the Jesuits presided over 141,000 Guaraní (including a sprinkling of other peoples) who lived in about 30 missions.

[ 106 ] The opinions of historians differ with regard to the Jesuit missions. The missions are much-romanticized with the Guaraní portrayed as innocent children of nature and the Jesuits as their wise and benevolent guides to an earthly utopia. "Proponents...highlight that the Jesuits protected the Indians from exploitation and preserved the Guaraní language and other aspects of indigenous culture." [ 107 ] "By means of religion," wrote the 18th century philosopher Jean d'Alembert , "the Jesuits established a monarchical authority in Paraguay, founded solely on their powers of persuasion and on their lenient methods of government. Masters of the country, they rendered happy the people under their sway." Voltaire called the Jesuit missions "a triumph of humanity".

[ 108 ] Detractors say that "the Jesuits took away the Indians' freedom, forced them to radically change their lifestyle, physically abused them, and subjected them to disease." Moreover, the missions were inefficient and their economic success "depended on subsidies from the Jesuit order, special protection and privileges from the Crown, and the lack of competition" [ 107 ] The Jesuits are portrayed as "exploiters" who "sought to create a kingdom independent of the Spanish and Portuguese Crowns." [ 109 ] The Comunero Revolt (1721 to 1735) was a serious protest by Spanish and mestizo Paraguayans against the Jesuit missions. The residents of Paraguay violently protested the pro-Jesuit government of Paraguay, Jesuit control of Guaraní labor, and what they regarded as unfair competition for the market for products such as yerba mate . Although the revolt ultimately failed and the missions remained intact, the Jesuits were expelled from institutions they had created in Asunción .

[ 110 ] In 1756, the Guaraní protested the relocation of seven missions, fighting (and losing) a brief war with both the Spanish and Portuguese. The Jesuits were accused of inciting the Guaraní to rebel.

[ 111 ] In 1767, Charles III of Spain (1759–88) expelled the Jesuits from the Americas. The expulsion was part of an effort in the Bourbon Reforms to assert more Spanish control over its American colonies.

[ 112 ] In total, 78 Jesuits departed from the missions leaving behind 89,000 Guaraní in 30 missions.

[ 113 ] Philippines [ edit ] The Jesuits were among the original five Catholic religious orders, alongside the Augustinians , Franciscans , Dominicans and Augustinian Recollects , who evangelized the Philippines in support of Spanish colonization.

[ 114 ] The Jesuits worked particularly hard in converting the Muslims of Mindanao and Luzon from Islam to Christianity, in which case, they were successful among the cities of Zamboanga and Manila .

[ 115 ] Zamboanga in particular was run like the Jesuit reductions in Paraguay and housed a large population of Peruvian and Latin American immigrants whereas Manila eventually became the capital of the Spanish colony.

[ 116 ] [ 117 ] The papal brief, Dominus ac Redemptor , of Pope Clement XIV suppressing Jesuits and closing the Universidad de San Ignacio at Manila.

In addition to missionary work, the Jesuits compiled artifacts and chronicled the precolonial history and culture of the Philippines. Jesuit chronicler Pedro Chirino chronicled the history of the Kedatuan of Madja-as in Panay and its war against Rajah Makatunao of Sarawak as well as the histories of other Visayan kingdoms .

[ 118 ] Meanwhile, another Jesuit, Francisco Combés , chronicled the history of the Venice of the Visayas, the Kedatuan of Dapitan , its temporary conquest by the Sultanate of Ternate , its re-establishment in Mindanao and its alliance against the Sultanates of Ternate and Lanao as vassals under Christian Spain.

The Jesuits also established the first missions in Hindu -dominated Butuan , to convert it to Christianity.

[ 119 ] The Jesuits also founded many towns, farms, haciendas, educational institutes, libraries, and an observatory in the Philippines.

[ 120 ] The Jesuits were instrumental in the sciences of medicine, botany, zoology, astronomy and seismology. They trained the Philippines' second saint, Pedro Calungsod , who was martyred in Guam alongside the Jesuit priest Diego Luis de San Vitores .

[ 121 ] The eventual temporary suppression of the Jesuits due their role in anti-colonial and anti-slavery revolts among the Paraguay reductions, [ 105 ] alongside cooperation with the Recollects , allowed their vacated parishes to be put under control by the local nationalistic diocesan clergy; the martyrdom of three of them, the diocesan priests known as Gomburza , [ 122 ] inspired José Rizal (also Jesuit-educated upon the restoration of the order), who became the Philippines' national hero. He successfully started the Philippine Revolution against Spain.

The Jesuits largely discredited the Freemasons , who claimed responsibility for the American and French Revolutions , by reverting Jose Rizal from Freemasonry back to Catholicism.

[ 123 ] They argued that since the Philippine Revolution was inspired by the allegedly Masonic ideals behind the French and American revolutions, the French and American Freemasons themselves betrayed their own founding ideals when the American Freemasons annexed the Philippines and killed Filipinos in the Philippine-American War and the French Freemasons assented to the Treaty of Paris (1898) , [ 124 ] [ 125 ] [ 126 ] this is compounded by the fact that American Freemason lodges dismissed the Philippine Revolutionary Freemason lodges as "irregular" and illegitimate.

[ 127 ] For the remainder of this period, Philippine Freemasonry was subservient to the Grand Lodge of California.

[ 128 ] In 1953, after being expelled from China by the Communists , the Jesuits relocated their organization's nexus in Asia from China to the Philippines and brought along a sizeable Chinese diaspora .

[ 129 ] The Jesuits play a pivotal role in the nation-building of the Philippines with its various Ateneos and educational institutes training the country's intellectual elites.

[ 130 ] [ 131 ] Colonial Brazil [ edit ] Manuel da Nóbrega on a commemorative Portuguese stamp of the 400th anniversary of the foundation of São Paulo , Brazil A Jesuit in 18th century, Brazil Tomé de Sousa , first Governor General of Brazil , brought the first group of Jesuits to the colony. The Jesuits were officially supported by the King , who instructed Tomé de Sousa to give them all the support needed to Christianize the indigenous peoples.

The first Jesuits, guided by Manuel da Nóbrega , Juan de Azpilcueta Navarro, Leonardo Nunes, and later José de Anchieta , established the first Jesuit missions in Salvador and in São Paulo dos Campos de Piratininga , the settlement that gave rise to the city of São Paulo . Nóbrega and Anchieta were instrumental in the defeat of the French colonists of France Antarctique by managing to pacify the Tamoio natives, who had previously fought the Portuguese. The Jesuits took part in the foundation of the city of Rio de Janeiro in 1565.

The success of the Jesuits in converting the Indigenous peoples is linked to their efforts to understand the native cultures, especially their languages. The first grammar of the Tupi language was compiled by José de Anchieta and printed in Coimbra in 1595. The Jesuits often gathered the natives in communities (the Jesuit reductions ), where the natives worked for the community and were evangelised.

The Jesuits had frequent disputes with other colonists who wanted to enslave the natives. The action of the Jesuits saved many natives from being enslaved by Europeans, but also disturbed their ancestral way of life and inadvertently helped spread infectious diseases against which the natives had no natural defenses. Slave labor and trade were essential for the economy of Brazil and other American colonies, and the Jesuits usually did object to the enslavement of African peoples, criticized the conditions of slavery.

[ 132 ] In cases where individual Jesuit priests criticized the institution of African slavery, they were censored and sent back to Europe.

[ 133 ] Suppression and restoration [ edit ] Main article: Suppression of the Society of Jesus The suppression of the Jesuits alienated the colonial empires from the natives they governed in the Americas and Asia, as the Jesuits were active protectors of native rights against the colonial empires. With the suppression of the Order, the profitable Jesuit reductions which gave wealth and protection to natives were sequestered by royal authorities and the natives enslaved. Faced with this suppression; the natives, mestizos, and creoles were galvanized into starting the Latin American Wars of Independence .

[ 134 ] The suppression of the Jesuits in Portugal, France, the Two Sicilies , Parma , and the Spanish Empire by 1767 was deeply troubling to Pope Clement XIII , the society's defender.

[ 135 ] On 21 July 1773 his successor, Pope Clement XIV , issued the papal brief Dominus ac Redemptor , decreeing: Having further considered that the said Company of Jesus can no longer produce those abundant fruits, ... in the present case, we are determining upon the fate of a society classed among the mendicant orders, both by its institute and by its privileges; after a mature deliberation, we do, out of our certain knowledge, and the fulness of our apostolical power, suppress and abolish the said company: we deprive it of all activity whatever. ...And to this end a member of the regular clergy, recommendable for his prudence and sound morals, shall be chosen to preside over and govern the said houses; so that the name of the Company shall be, and is, for ever extinguished and suppressed.

— Dominus ac Redemptor [ 136 ] The suppression was carried out on political grounds in all countries except Prussia for a time, and Russia , where Catherine the Great had forbidden its promulgation. Because millions of Catholics (including many Jesuits) lived in the Polish provinces recently part-annexed by the Kingdom of Prussia , the Society was able to maintain its continuity and carry on its work all through the stormy period of suppression. Subsequently, Pope Pius VI granted formal permission for the continuation of the society in Russia and Poland, with Stanisław Czerniewicz elected superior of the province in 1782. He was followed by Gabriel Lenkiewicz , Franciszek Kareu and Gabriel Gruber until 1805, all elected locally as Temporary Vicars General.

Pope Pius VII had resolved during his captivity in France to restore the Jesuits universally, and on his return to Rome he did so without much delay. On 7 August 1814, with the bull Sollicitudo omnium ecclesiarum , he reversed the suppression of the society, and therewith another Polish Jesuit, Tadeusz Brzozowski , who had been elected as superior in Russia in 1805, acquired universal jurisdiction. On his death in 1820 the Jesuits were expelled from Russia by tsar Alexander I .

The period following the Restoration of the Jesuits in 1814 was marked by tremendous growth, as evidenced by the large number of Jesuit colleges and universities established during the 19th century. During this time in the United States, 22 of the society's 28 universities were founded or taken over by the Jesuits. It has been suggested that the experience of suppression had served to heighten orthodoxy among the Jesuits. While this claim is debatable, Jesuits were generally supportive of papal authority within the church, and some members became associated with the Ultramontanist movement and the declaration of papal infallibility in 1870.

[ 137 ] In Switzerland , the constitution was modified and Jesuits were banished in 1848, following the defeat of the Sonderbund Catholic defence alliance. The ban was lifted on 20 May 1973, when 54.9 per cent of voters accepted a referendum modifying the constitution.

[ 138 ] Early 20th century [ edit ] In the Constitution of Norway from 1814, a relic from the earlier anti-Catholic laws of Denmark–Norway , Paragraph 2, known as the Jesuit clause , originally read: "The Evangelical-Lutheran religion remains the public religion of the State. Those inhabitants, who confess thereto, are bound to raise their children to the same. Jesuits and monastic orders are not permitted. Jews are still prohibited from entry to the Realm." Jews were first allowed into the realm in 1851 after the famous Norwegian poet Henrik Wergeland had campaigned for this permission. Monastic orders were permitted in 1897, but the ban on Jesuits was only lifted in 1956.

[ 139 ] Republican Spain in the 1930s passed laws banning the Jesuits on grounds that they were obedient to a power different from the state. Pope Pius XI wrote about this: "It was an expression of a soul deeply hostile to God and the Catholic religion, to have disbanded the Religious Orders that had taken a vow of obedience to an authority different from the legitimate authority of the State. In this way it was sought to do away with the Society of Jesus – which can well glory in being one of the soundest auxiliaries of the Chair of Saint Peter – with the hope, perhaps, of then being able with less difficulty to overthrow in the near future, the Christian faith and morale in the heart of the Spanish nation, which gave to the Church of God the grand and glorious figure of Ignatius Loyola." [ 140 ] Post-Vatican II [ edit ] The 20th century witnessed both growth and decline of the order. Following a trend within the Catholic priesthood at large, Jesuit numbers peaked in the 1950s and have declined steadily since. Meanwhile, the number of Jesuit institutions has grown considerably, due in large part to a post– Vatican II focus on the establishment of Jesuit secondary schools in inner-city areas and an increase in voluntary lay groups inspired in part by the Spiritual Exercises . Among the notable Jesuits of the 20th century, John Courtney Murray was called one of the "architects of the Second Vatican Council " and drafted what eventually became the council's endorsement of religious freedom, Dignitatis humanae .

In Latin America, the Jesuits had significant influence in the development of liberation theology , a movement that was controversial in the Catholic community after the negative assessment of it by Pope John Paul II in 1984.

[ 141 ] Under Superior General Pedro Arrupe , social justice and the preferential option for the poor emerged as dominant themes of the work of the Jesuits. When Arrupe was paralyzed by a stroke in 1981, Pope John Paul II, not entirely pleased with the progressive turn of the Jesuits, took the unusual step of appointing the venerable and aged Paolo Dezza for an interim to oversee "the authentic renewal of the Church", [ 142 ] instead of the progressive American priest Vincent O'Keefe whom Arrupe had preferred.

[ 143 ] In 1983, John Paul gave leave for the Jesuits to appoint Peter Hans Kolvenbach as a successor to Arrupe.

On 16 November 1989, six Jesuit priests ( Ignacio Ellacuría , Segundo Montes , Ignacio Martín-Baró , Joaquin López y López, Juan Ramon Moreno, and Amado López), Elba Ramos their housekeeper, and Celia Marisela Ramos her daughter, were murdered by the Salvadoran military on the campus of the University of Central America in San Salvador , El Salvador, because they had been labeled as subversives by the government.

[ 144 ] The assassinations galvanized the society's peace and justice movements, including annual protests at the Western Hemisphere Institute for Security Cooperation at Fort Benning , Georgia, United States, where several of the assassins had been trained under US government sponsorship.

[ 145 ] In February 2001, the Jesuit priest Avery Dulles , an internationally known author, lecturer, and theologian, was created a cardinal of the Catholic Church by Pope John Paul II. The son of former Secretary of State John Foster Dulles , Avery Dulles was long known for his carefully reasoned argumentation and fidelity to the teaching office of the church. An author of 22 books and over 700 theological articles, Dulles died in December 2008 at Fordham University , where he had taught for twenty years as the Laurence J. McGinley Professor of Religion and Society. He was, at his passing, one of ten Jesuit cardinals in the Catholic Church.

In 2002, Boston College president and Jesuit priest William P. Leahy initiated the Church in the 21st Century program as a means of moving the church "from crisis to renewal". The initiative has provided the society with a platform for examining issues brought about by the worldwide Catholic sex abuse cases , including the priesthood , celibacy, sexuality , women's roles, and the role of the laity .

[ 146 ] The visit of Pope Benedict XVI to the Jesuit-run Pontifical Gregorian University In April 2005, Thomas J. Reese , editor of the American Jesuit weekly magazine America , resigned at the request of the society. The move was widely published in the media as the result of pressure from the Vatican, following years of criticism by the Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith on articles touching subjects such as HIV/AIDS , religious pluralism , homosexuality , and the right of life for the unborn. Following his resignation, Reese spent a year-long sabbatical at Santa Clara University before being named a fellow at the Woodstock Theological Center in Washington, D.C., and later senior analyst for the National Catholic Reporter . President Barack Obama appointed him to the United States Commission on International Religious Freedom in 2014 and again in 2016.

[ 147 ] In February 2006, Peter Hans Kolvenbach informed members of the Society of Jesus that, with the consent of Pope Benedict XVI , he intended to step down as superior general in 2008, the year he would turn 80.

On 22 April 2006, during the Feast of Our Lady, Mother of the Society of Jesus, Pope Benedict XVI greeted thousands of Jesuits on pilgrimage to Rome, and took the opportunity to thank God "for having granted to your Company the gift of men of extraordinary sanctity and of exceptional apostolic zeal such as St Ignatius of Loyola, St Francis Xavier, and Blessed Peter Faber ". He said "St Ignatius of Loyola was above all a man of God, who gave the first place of his life to God, to his greater glory and his greater service. He was a man of profound prayer, which found its center and its culmination in the daily Eucharistic Celebration." [ 148 ] In May 2006, Benedict XVI wrote a letter to Kolvenbach on the occasion of the 50th anniversary of Pope Pius XII's encyclical Haurietis aquas , on devotion to the Sacred Heart , because the Jesuits have always been "extremely active in the promotion of this essential devotion".

[ 149 ] In his 3 November 2006 visit to the Pontifical Gregorian University , Benedict XVI cited the university as "one of the greatest services that the Society of Jesus carries out for the universal Church".

[ 150 ] In January 2008, the 35th General Congregation of the Society of Jesus convened and elected Adolfo Nicolás as the new superior general on 19 January 2008. In a letter to the order, Benedict XVI wrote: [ 151 ] As my Predecessors have said to you on various occasions, the Church needs you, relies on you and continues to turn to you with trust, particularly to reach those physical and spiritual places which others do not reach or have difficulty in reaching. Paul VI's words remain engraved on your hearts: "Wherever in the Church, even in the most difficult and extreme fields, at the crossroads of ideologies, in the social trenches, there has been and there is confrontation between the burning exigencies of man and the perennial message of the Gospel, here also there have been, and there are, Jesuits".

— Address to the 32nd General Congregation of the Jesuits , 3 December 1974; ORE, 12 December, n. 2, p. 4.

Pope Francis, the first Jesuit pope In 2013, the Jesuit cardinal Jorge Bergoglio became Pope Francis . Before he became pope, he had been appointed a bishop when he was in "virtual estrangement from the Jesuits" since he was seen as "an enemy of liberation theology" and viewed by others as "still far too orthodox". He was criticised for colluding with the Argentine junta , while biographers characterised him as working to save the lives of other Jesuits.

[ 152 ] [ 153 ] [ 154 ] As a Jesuit pope, he has stressed discernment over following rules, changing the culture of the clergy to steer away from clericalism and to move toward an ethic of service, i.e. to have the "smell of sheep", staying close to the people.

[ 155 ] After his papal election, Superior General Adolfo Nicolás praised Pope Francis as a "brother among brothers".

[ 152 ] In October 2016, the 36th General Congregation convened in Rome, convoked by Nicolás, who had announced his intention to resign at age 80.

[ 156 ] [ 157 ] [ 158 ] On 14 October, the 36th General Congregation of the Society of Jesus elected Arturo Sosa , a Venezuelan , as its thirty-first superior general.

[ 159 ] In 2016, the General Congregation that elected Arturo Sosa, asked him to complete the process of discerning Jesuit priorities for the time ahead. Sosa devised a plan that enlisted all Jesuits and their lay collaborators in the process of discernment over a 16-month period. In February 2019, he presented the results of the discernment, a list of four priorities for Jesuit ministries for the next ten years.

[ 160 ] To show the way to God through discernment and the Spiritual Exercises of Ignatius of Loyola ; To walk with the poor, the outcasts of the world, those whose dignity has been violated, in a mission of reconciliation and justice; To accompany young people in the creation of a hope-filled future; To collaborate in the care of our Common Home.

Pope Francis gave his approval to these priorities, saying that they were in harmony with the church's present priorities and with the programmatic letter of his pontificate, Evangelii gaudium .

[ 161 ] Ignatian spirituality [ edit ] Main article: Ignatian spirituality The spirituality practiced by the Jesuits, called Ignatian spirituality, ultimately based on the Catholic faith and the gospels, is drawn from the Constitutions , The Letters , and Autobiography , and most specially from Ignatius' Spiritual Exercises , whose purpose is "to conquer oneself and to regulate one's life in such a way that no decision is made under the influence of any inordinate attachment". The Exercises culminate in a contemplation whereby one develops a facility to "find God in all things".

Formation [ edit ] Main article: Jesuit formation The formation (training) of Jesuits seeks to prepare men spiritually, academically, and practically for the ministries they will be called to offer the church and world. Ignatius was strongly influenced by the Renaissance , and he wanted Jesuits to be able to offer whatever ministries were most needed at any given moment and, especially, to be ready to respond to missions (assignments) from the pope. Formation for priesthood normally takes between eight and fourteen years, depending on the man's background and previous education. Final vows are taken several years after that, making Jesuit formation among the longest of any of the religious orders.

Governance of the society [ edit ] The society is headed by a Superior General , with the formal title Praepositus Generalis , Latin for "provost-general", more commonly called Father General. He is elected by the General Congregation for life or until he resigns. He is confirmed by the pope and has absolute authority in running the Society. The Superior General of the Jesuits is the Venezuelan Arturo Sosa , who was elected in October 2016.

[ 162 ] The Father General is assisted by "assistants". Four are "assistants for provident care" and serve as general advisors and a sort of inner council. Regional assistants head an "assistancy", which is either a geographic area, for instance the North American Assistancy, or an area of ministry, such as higher education. The assistants normally reside with the Father General in Rome and along with others form an advisory council to the General. A vicar general and secretary of the society run day-to-day administration. The General is required to have an admonitor , a confidential advisor whose task is to warn the General honestly and confidentially when he might be acting imprudently or contrary to the church's magisterium . The central staff of the General is known as the Curia.

[ 162 ] The society is divided into geographic areas called provinces. Each is headed by a Provincial Superior, formally called Father Provincial, chosen by the Superior General. He has authority over all Jesuits and ministries in his area, and is assisted by a socius who acts as a sort of secretary and chief of staff. With the approval of the Superior General, the Provincial Superior appoints a novice master and a master of tertians to oversee formation, and rectors of local communities of Jesuits.

[ 163 ] For better cooperation and apostolic efficacy on each continent, the Jesuit provinces are grouped into six Jesuit Conferences worldwide.

Each Jesuit community within a province is normally headed by a rector. He is assisted by a "minister", from the Latin word for "servant", a priest who helps oversee the community's day-to-day needs.

[ 164 ] The General Congregation is a meeting of all of the assistants, provincials, and additional representatives who are elected by the professed Jesuits of each province. It meets irregularly and rarely, normally to elect a new superior general or to take up some major policy issues for the order. The Superior General meets more regularly with smaller councils composed of just the provincials.

[ 165 ] Statistics [ edit ] Jesuits in the World – January 2022 [ 166 ] Region Jesuits Percentage Africa 1,712 12% Latin America [ 167 ] 1,859 13% South Asia 3,955 27% Asia-Pacific 1,481 10% Europe 3,386 23% North America [ 168 ] 2,046 14% Total 14,439 As of 2012 [update] , the Jesuits formed the largest single religious order of priests and brothers in the Catholic Church.

[ 169 ] The Jesuits have experienced a decline in numbers in recent decades. In 2022, the society had 14,439 members - 10,432 priests, 837 brothers, 2,587 scholastics, and 583 novices.

[ 166 ] This represents a 59% percent decline since the Second Vatican Council of 1965, when the society had a total membership of 36,038, of which 20,301 were priests.

[ 170 ] This decline is most pronounced in Europe and the Americas, with relatively modest membership gains occurring in Asia and Africa.

[ 171 ] [ 172 ] In 2016, according to Patrick Reilly of the National Catholic Register , there seems to be no " Pope Francis effect " in counteracting the fall of vocations among the Jesuits.

[ 173 ] In 2019, twenty-eight novices took first vows in the Jesuits in the United States and Haiti.

[ 174 ] In September 2019, the superior general of the Jesuits, Arturo Sosa , estimated that by 2034 the number would decrease to about 10,000 Jesuits, with a much younger average age than in 2019, and with a shift away from Europe and into Latin America, Africa, and India.

[ 175 ] In 2008, their average age was 57.3 years: 63.4 years for priests, 29.9 years for scholastics, and 65.5 years for brothers.

[ 20 ] The Superior General of the Jesuits is Arturo Sosa . The society is characterized by its ministries in the fields of missionary work, human rights, social justice and, most notably, higher education. It operates colleges and universities in countries around the world and is particularly active in the Philippines and India . In the United States, the Jesuits have historical ties to 27 colleges and universities and 61 high schools . The degree to which the Jesuits are involved in the administration of each institution varies. In September 2018, 15 of the 27 Jesuit universities in the US had non-Jesuit lay presidents.

[ 176 ] According to a 2014 article in The Atlantic , "the number of Jesuit priests who are active in everyday operations at the schools isn't nearly as high as it once was".

[ 177 ] Worldwide it runs 322 secondary schools and 172 colleges and universities . A typical conception of the mission of a Jesuit school will often contain such concepts as proposing Christ as the model of human life, the pursuit of excellence in teaching and learning, lifelong spiritual and intellectual growth, [ 178 ] and training men and women for others.

[ 179 ] Habit and dress [ edit ] Jesuits do not have an official habit. The society's Constitutions gives the following instructions: "The clothing too should have three characteristics: first, it should be proper; second, conformed to the usage of the country of residence; and third, not contradictory to the poverty we profess." (Const. 577) The traditional Jesuit-style cassock , called a "soutane" is similar to a robe which is wrapped around the body and was tied with a cincture , rather than the customary buttoned front cassock worn by diocesan priests.

[ 180 ] A tuftless biretta (only diocesan clergy wore tufts) and a ferraiolo (cape) completed the look.

[ 181 ] Today, most Jesuits in the United States wear the clerical collar and black clothing of diocesan priests [ 182 ] while most Jesuits in Europe are dressed in civilian clothes.

[ citation needed ] Controversies [ edit ] Slavery [ edit ] Jesuit scholar Andrew Dial has calculated that the Jesuits owned more than 20,000 slaves worldwide in 1760, the great majority of them in the Americas.

[ 183 ] The Jesuits in some places protected the indigenous people of the Americas from slavers, notably the Guaraní in South America, but in other places they enslaved indigenous people after "just wars" in which indigenous people who resisted European colonization were defeated.

The Jesuits also participated in the Atlantic slave trade , working thousands of African slaves on their large plantations scattered throughout the Americas.

Antoine Lavalette , a slave-owning French Jesuit in Martinique , accumulated large debts which he was unable to pay, which led to the banning of the Jesuits in France in 1764.

In the United States, tobacco plantations utilizing African-American slave labor in Maryland and other states supported Jesuit institutions such as Georgetown University , from which were infamously sold 272 slaves in 1838.

In the 16th century, Jesuits were also complicit in the Portuguese trade in enslaved East Asians . In other parts of Europe, slaves were probably employed in Jesuit schools and institutions.

The Jesuits justified their ownership of slaves and participation in the slave trade as a means of converting slaves to Catholicism . "Enslaved people...were a captive audience for evangelization." [ 184 ] [ 185 ] Power-seeking [ edit ] The Monita Secreta (Secret Instructions of the Jesuits), published in 1612 and in 1614 in Kraków , is alleged to have been written by Claudio Acquaviva , the fifth general of the society, but was probably written by former Jesuit Jerome Zahorowski. It purports to describe the methods to be adopted by Jesuits for the acquisition of greater power and influence for the society and for the Catholic Church. The Catholic Encyclopedia states the book is a forgery, fabricated to ascribe a sinister reputation to the Society of Jesus.

[ 186 ] Separation of church and state in the history of the Catholic Church Overview Two kingdoms doctrine in Roman Catholicism Relations between the Catholic Church and the State Catholic integralism Politics of Vatican City Sovereignty and loyalty Papal deposing power Sovereign immunity § Holy See Dual loyalty § Historical examples Fourth vow § In the Society of Jesus Documents Donation of Constantine Dictatus papae Unam sanctam To the Christian Nobility of the German Nation Papal Jurisdiction Act 1560 (Scotland) Disputationes de Controversiis Mirari vos Quanta cura Syllabus of Errors Dignitatis humanae Church–state relations in Argentina § 2005 Episcopal Conference document Historical controversies Constantinian shift / Constantinianism Investiture Controversy Society of Jesus § Political intrigue Cisalpinism vs.

Ultramontanism Americanism (heresy) § American response 20th-century topics History of Christian thought on persecution and tolerance § The mid-20th-century Spanish model Letitia Dunbar-Harrison Christian anarchism § Catholic Worker Movement Current topics Evo Morales and the Roman Catholic Church Radio Maryja § Involvement in politics Laudato si' § Impact on the United States political system Catholic social teaching Conscience clause in medicine in the United States § Catholic doctrine Canon 915 § Politicians consistently promoting permissive abortion or euthanasia laws Bp. W. Francis Malooly on Canon 915 Bp. Edward J. Slattery § Illegal immigrants v t e Political intrigue [ edit ] The Jesuits were temporarily banished from France in 1594 after a man named Jean Châtel tried to assassinate the king of France, Henri IV . Under questioning, Châtel revealed that he had been educated by the Jesuits of the Collège de Clermont . The Jesuits were accused of inspiring Châtel's attack. Two of his former teachers were exiled and a third was hanged.

[ 187 ] The Collège de Clermont was closed, and the building was confiscated. The Jesuits were banned from France, although this ban was quickly lifted and the school eventually reopened.

[ 188 ] In England, Henry Garnet , one of the leading English Jesuits, was hanged for misprision of treason because of his knowledge of the 1605 Gunpowder Plot . The Plot was the attempted assassination of James VI and I , his family, and most of the Protestant aristocracy in a single attack, by blowing up the Houses of Parliament . Another Jesuit, Oswald Tesimond , managed to escape arrest for his involvement in this plot.

[ 189 ] Casuistic justification [ edit ] Jesuits have been accused of using casuistry to obtain justifications for unjustifiable actions (cf.

formulary controversy and Lettres Provinciales , by Blaise Pascal ).

[ 190 ] Hence, the Concise Oxford Dictionary of the English language lists "equivocating" as a secondary denotation of the word "Jesuit". Modern critics of the Society of Jesus include Avro Manhattan , Alberto Rivera , and Malachi Martin , the latter being the author of The Jesuits: The Society of Jesus and the Betrayal of the Roman Catholic Church (1987).

[ 191 ] Exclusion of those of Jewish or Muslim ancestry [ edit ] Although in the first 30 years of the existence of the Society of Jesus there were many Jesuits who were conversos (Catholic-convert Jews and Muslims and their descendants), an anti- converso faction led to the Decree de genere (1593) which proclaimed that either Jewish or Muslim ancestry, no matter how distant, was an insurmountable impediment for admission to the Society of Jesus.

[ 192 ] This new rule was contrary to the original wishes of Ignatius who "said that he would take it as a special grace from our Lord to come from Jewish lineage".

[ 193 ] The 16th-century Decree de genere was repealed in 1946.

[ b ] Bylaws requiring " blood purity " became common across Early Modern Spain and Portugal.

Theological debates [ edit ] Within the Catholic Church, there has existed a sometimes tense relationship between Jesuits and the Holy See , due to questioning of official church teaching and papal directives, such as those on abortion , [ irrelevant citation ] [ 196 ] [ 197 ] birth control , [ 198 ] [ 199 ] [ 200 ] [ 201 ] women deacons , [ 202 ] homosexuality, and liberation theology .

[ 203 ] [ 204 ] At the same time, Jesuits have been appointed to prominent doctrinal and theological positions in the church; under Pope Benedict XVI, Archbishop Luis Ladaria Ferrer was Secretary and later, under Pope Francis, Prefect of the Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith .

[ 205 ] [ 206 ] Nazi persecution [ edit ] Main article: Jesuits and Nazi Germany The Catholic Church faced persecution in Nazi Germany .

Adolf Hitler , though baptized and confirmed in the Catholic faith and raised in a Catholic household, was anticlerical and had particular disdain for the Jesuits. According to John Pollard, the Jesuits' "ethos represented the most intransigent opposition to the philosophy of Nazism", [ 207 ] and so the Nazis considered them as one of their most dangerous enemies. A Jesuit college in the city of Innsbruck served as a center for anti-Nazi resistance and was closed down by the Nazis in 1938.

[ 208 ] Jesuits were a target for Gestapo persecution, and many Jesuit priests were deported to death camps.

[ 209 ] Jesuits made up the largest contingent of clergy imprisoned in the Priest Barracks of Dachau Concentration Camp .

[ 210 ] Vincent Lapomarda lists some 30 Jesuits as having died at Dachau.

[ 211 ] Of the 152 Jesuits murdered by the Nazis across Europe, 43 died in the death camps and an additional 27 died from captivity or its results.

[ 212 ] The Superior General of Jesuits at the outbreak of war was Włodzimierz Ledóchowski , a Pole. The Nazi persecution of the Catholic Church in Poland was particularly severe. Lapomarda wrote that Ledóchowski helped "stiffen the general attitude of the Jesuits against the Nazis" and that he permitted Vatican Radio to carry on its campaign against the Nazis in Poland. Vatican Radio was run by the Jesuit Filippo Soccorsi and spoke out against Nazi oppression, particularly with regard to Poland and to Vichy-French antisemitism.

[ 213 ] Jesuit Alfred Delp , member of the Kreisau Circle that operated within Nazi Germany was executed in February 1945 [ 214 ] Several Jesuits were prominent in the small German Resistance .

[ 215 ] Among the central membership of the Kreisau Circle of the Resistance were the Jesuit priests Augustin Rösch , Alfred Delp , and Lothar König .

[ 216 ] The Bavarian Jesuit Provincial, Augustin Rösch , ended the war on death row for his role in the July Plot to overthrow Hitler. Another non-military German Resistance group, dubbed the "Frau Solf Tea Party" by the Gestapo, included the Jesuit priest Friedrich Erxleben .

[ 217 ] The German Jesuit Robert Leiber acted as intermediary between Pius XII and the German Resistance .

[ 218 ] [ 219 ] Among the Jesuit victims of the Nazis, Germany's Rupert Mayer has been beatified. Mayer was a Bavarian Jesuit who clashed with the Nazis as early as 1923. Continuing his critique following Hitler's rise to power, Mayer was imprisoned in 1939 and sent to Sachsenhausen death camp . As his health declined, the Nazis feared the creation of a martyr and sent him to the Abbey of Ettal in 1940. There he continued to give sermons and lectures against the evils of the Nazi régime, until his death in 1945.

[ 220 ] [ 221 ] Rescue efforts during the Holocaust [ edit ] Further information: Rescue of Jews by Catholics during the Holocaust In his history of the heroes of the Holocaust, the Jewish historian Martin Gilbert notes that in every country under German occupation, priests played a major part in rescuing Jews, and that the Jesuits were one of the Catholic Orders that hid Jewish children in monasteries and schools to protect them from the Nazis.

[ 222 ] [ 223 ] Fourteen Jesuit priests have been formally recognized by Yad Vashem , the Holocaust Martyrs' and Heroes' Remembrance Authority in Jerusalem, for risking their lives to save Jews during the Holocaust of World War II: Roger Braun (1910–1981) of France, [ 224 ] Pierre Chaillet (1900–1972) of France, [ 225 ] Jean-Baptist De Coster (1896–1968) of Belgium, [ 226 ] Jean Fleury (1905–1982) of France, [ 227 ] Emile Gessler (1891–1958) of Belgium, Jean-Baptiste Janssens (1889–1964) of Belgium, Alphonse Lambrette (1884–1970) of Belgium, Emile Planckaert (1906–2006) of France, Jacob Raile (1894–1949) of Hungary, Henri Revol (1904–1992) of France, Adam Sztark (1907–1942) of Poland, Henri Van Oostayen (1906–1945) of Belgium, Ioannes Marangas (1901–1989) of Greece, and Raffaele de Chantuz Cubbe (1904–1983) of Italy.

[ 228 ] Several other Jesuits are known to have rescued or given refuge to Jews during that period.

[ 229 ] A plaque commemorating the 152 Jesuit priests who gave their lives during the Holocaust was installed in April 2007 at the Jesuits' Rockhurst University in Kansas City, Missouri , United States.

In science [ edit ] See also: List of Jesuit scientists Jesuit scholars in China . Top: Matteo Ricci , Adam Schall and Ferdinand Verbiest (1623–88). Bottom: Paul Siu (Xu Guangqi) , as Colao or Prime Minister of State, and his granddaughter Candide Hiu.

Between the sixteenth and eighteenth centuries, the teaching of science in Jesuit schools, as laid down in the Ratio atque Institutio Studiorum Societatis Iesu ("The Official Plan of studies for the Society of Jesus") of 1599, [ 230 ] was almost entirely based on the works of Aristotle .

The Jesuits, nevertheless, have made numerous significant contributions to the development of science.

[ 21 ] For example, the Jesuits have dedicated significant study to fields from cosmology to seismology , the latter of which has been described as "the Jesuit science".

[ 231 ] The Jesuits have been described as "the single most important contributor to experimental physics in the seventeenth century".

[ 232 ] According to Jonathan Wright in his book God's Soldiers , by the eighteenth century the Jesuits had "contributed to the development of pendulum clocks , pantographs , barometers , reflecting telescopes and microscopes – to scientific fields as various as magnetism , optics , and electricity . They observed, in some cases before anyone else, the colored bands on Jupiter 's surface, the Andromeda nebula , and Saturn 's rings. They theorized about the circulation of the blood (independently of Harvey ), the theoretical possibility of flight, the way the moon affected the tides, and the wave-like nature of light." [ 233 ] The Jesuit China missions of the 16th and 17th centuries introduced Western science and astronomy . One modern historian writes that in late Ming courts, the Jesuits were "regarded as impressive especially for their knowledge of astronomy, calendar-making, mathematics, hydraulics , and geography".

[ 234 ] The Society of Jesus introduced, according to Thomas Woods , "a substantial body of scientific knowledge and a vast array of mental tools for understanding the physical universe, including the Euclidean geometry that made planetary motion comprehensible".

[ 235 ] Notable members [ edit ] Main article: List of Jesuits See also: List of Jesuit theologians and List of Jesuit scientists Jesuits include missionaries , educators, scientists, artists, philosophers, and a pope. Among many distinguished early Jesuits was Francis Xavier , a missionary to Asia who converted more people to Catholicism than anyone before, and Robert Bellarmine , a Doctor of the Church .

José de Anchieta and Manuel da Nóbrega , founders of the city of São Paulo , Brazil, were Jesuit priests. Another famous Jesuit was Jean de Brébeuf , a French missionary who was martyred during the 17th century in New France , the part that became Ontario, in Canada.

In Spanish America, José de Acosta wrote a major work on early Peru and New Spain with important material on indigenous peoples. In South America, Peter Claver was notable for his mission to African slaves, building on the work of Alonso de Sandoval.

Francisco Javier Clavijero was expelled from New Spain during the Suppression of the Society of Jesus in 1767 and wrote an important history of Mexico during his exile in Italy.

Eusebio Kino is renowned in the southwestern United States and northern Mexico, then called the Pimería Alta . He founded numerous missions and served as the peace-bringer between the tribes and the government of New Spain.

Antonio Ruiz de Montoya was an important missionary in the Jesuit reductions of Paraguay.

Baltasar Gracián was a 17th-century Spanish Jesuit and baroque prose writer and philosopher. He was born in Belmonte , near Calatayud ( Aragon ). His writings, particularly El Criticón (1651–57) and Oráculo Manual y Arte de Prudencia ("The Art of Prudence", 1647) were lauded by Schopenhauer and Nietzsche .

In Scotland, John Ogilvie , a Jesuit, is the nation's only post-Reformation saint.

Gerard Manley Hopkins was one of the first English poets to use sprung verse .

Anthony de Mello was a Jesuit priest and psychotherapist who became recognized for his books which introduced Westerners to the East Indian traditions of spirituality.

Dorothy Lawson was a recusant and patroness of the Society of Jesus, [ 236 ] who met yearly at her home to discuss the mission in England after the English Reformation.

[ 237 ] Cardinal Jorge Bergoglio of Argentina was elected by conclave as Pope Francis on 13 March 2013, the first Jesuit to be elected pope. He served until his death in April 2025.

[ 238 ] The Feast of All Jesuit Saints and Blesseds is celebrated on 5 November.

[ 239 ] Gallery of Jesuit churches [ edit ] See also: List of Jesuit sites The Church of the Gesù in Rome , is the mother church of the Jesuits.

Iglesia de La Compañía , Quito , Ecuador , interior with gold leaf Church of Saint-Pierre de Montmartre , Paris, France Jesuit church , Cuzco, Peru Colegio de Belén, Havana , "The Palace of Education" Christ the King Church in the Ateneo de Naga University campus, Naga City, Philippines Fordham University Church at Rose Hill, Bronx, New York, US Loyola University Chicago Art Deco Chapel at Lakeshore Campus, Chicago, Illinois, US St. John's Church in Creighton University campus, Omaha, Nebraska, US Holy Name of Jesus Church in the Loyola University New Orleans campus, New Orleans Louisiana US The Church of the Gesu in Milwaukee, Wisconsin, US, is the school church of Marquette University.

St. Francis Xavier Church, a Jesuit parish church across the street from the Rockhurst University campus, Kansas City, Missouri, US St. Francis Xavier College Church in the Saint Louis University campus, St. Louis, Missouri, US The Santa Clara University's Mission Church is at the heart of Santa Clara University's historic campus Santa Clara, California, US.

St. Ignatius Church , parish church of the University of San Francisco , San Francisco, California , US the Church of the Gesu, Philadelphia is the school church of St. Joseph's Preparatory School , Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, US.

The Church of the Gesu in Frascati, province of Rome , Italy The Église du Gesù in Montreal, Quebec, Canada, church and cultural venue Jakarta Cathedral , Indonesia Sacred Heart Church, Wimbledon , London Institutions [ edit ] Educational institutions [ edit ] See also: List of Jesuit educational institutions Although the work of the Jesuits today embraces a wide variety of apostolates, ministries, and civil occupations, they are probably most well known for their educational work, on all continents. Since the inception of the order, Jesuits have been teachers. Besides serving on the faculty of Catholic and secular schools, the Jesuits are the Catholic religious order with the second highest number of schools which they run: 168 tertiary institutions in 40 countries and 324 secondary schools in 55 countries. The Brothers of the Christian Schools have over 560 Lasallian educational institutions . They also run elementary schools, at which they are less likely to teach. Many of the schools are named after Francis Xavier and other prominent Jesuits.

After the Second Vatican Council , Jesuit schools had become a very controversial place of instruction as they abandoned teaching traditional Catholic education with things such as the mastery of Latin and the Baltimore Catechism . Jesuit schools replaced classic theological instruction from people like Thomas Aquinas and Bonaventure to people like Karl Rahner and Pierre Teilhard de Chardin , which was a very controversial move at the time.

[ 240 ] [ 241 ] Jesuit educational institutions aim to promote the values of Eloquentia Perfecta . This is a Jesuit tradition that focuses on cultivating a person as a whole, as one learns to speak and write for the common good.

Social and development institutions [ edit ] Jesuits have become increasingly involved in works directed primarily toward social and economic development for the poor and marginalized.

[ 242 ] Included in this would be research, training, advocacy, and action for human development, as well as direct services. Most Jesuit schools have an office that fosters social awareness and social service in the classroom and through extracurricular programs, usually detailed on their websites. The Jesuits also run over 500 notable or stand-alone social or economic development centres in 56 countries around the world.

Publications [ edit ] The Sanctuary of Loyola in Azpeitia , Basque Country , Spain , the main Jesuit shrine in the birthplace of Ignatius of Loyola Jesuits are also known for their involvement in publications. Most Jesuit colleges and universities have their own presses which produce a variety of books, book series, textbooks, and academic publications.

La Civiltà Cattolica , a periodical produced in Rome by the Jesuits, has often been used as a semi-official platform for popes and officials of the Roman Curia to float ideas for discussion or hint at future statements or positions, though authorship is limited to Jesuits.

[ 243 ] The Way is an international journal of contemporary Christian spirituality published by the British Jesuits.

[ 244 ] In the United States of America, America magazine has long had a prominent place in Catholic intellectual circles.

[ 245 ] Ignatius Press , founded by a Jesuit, is an independent publisher of Catholic books, most of which are of the popular academic or lay-intellectual variety.

[ 246 ] Manresa is a review of Ignatian spirituality published in Madrid, Spain.

[ 247 ] In Australia, the Jesuits produce a number of magazines, including Eureka Street , Madonna , Australian Catholics , and Province Express .

In Germany, the Jesuits publish the journal Geist und Leben and the related publication Weltweit [ 248 ] that describes their international work, the Jesuitenmission .

In Sweden the Catholic cultural magazine Signum , edited by the Newman Institute, covers a broad spectrum of issues concerning faith, culture, research, and society. The printed version of Signum is published eight times per year.

[ 249 ] Jesuit publishing is not limited to journals and books; they also produce digital content and podcasts to engage modern audiences. Many Jesuit provinces operate media ministries aimed at evangelization, education, and social dialogue. For instance, Jesuit Communications in India runs online platforms and short film projects that address contemporary moral and spiritual issues.

[ citation needed ] Jesuits in Canada and the U.S. have embraced video storytelling and podcasting, such as the popular "Jesuitical" podcast by America Media. These platforms reflect the Society's ongoing commitment to intellectual engagement and cultural dialogue in an increasingly digital and interconnected world.

[ citation needed ] See also [ edit ] Catholicism portal Ad maiorem Dei gloriam Apostleship of Prayer Blas Valera Bollandist Canadian Indian residential school system Church of the Mission of France Jesuit conspiracy theories Jesuit Ivy Jesuit missions among the Guaraní Jesuit Missions of Chiquitos Jesuit Refugee Service List of Jesuit sites List of saints of the Society of Jesus Misiones Province Monumenta Historica Societatis Iesu Igreja de São Roque Sexual abuse scandal in the Society of Jesus Thomas Weld (of Lulworth) Notes [ edit ] ^ Spanish : " todo el que quiera militar para Dios " [ citation needed ] ^ Jesuit scholar John Padberg states that the restriction on Jewish/Muslim converts was limited only to the degree of parentage. Fourteen years later this was extended back to the fifth degree. Over time the restriction relating to Muslim ancestry was dropped.

[ 194 ] In 1923, the 27th Jesuit General Congregation specified that "The impediment of origin extends to all who are descended from the Jewish race, unless it is clear that their father, grandfather, and great grandfather have belonged to the Catholic Church." In 1946, the 29th General Congregation dropped the requirement but still called for "cautions to be exercised before admitting a candidate about whom there is some doubt as to the character of his hereditary background". Robert Aleksander Maryks interprets the 1593 "Decree de genere" as preventing, despite Ignatius' desires, any Jewish or Muslim conversos and, by extension, any person with Jewish or Muslim ancestry, no matter how distant , from admission to the Society of Jesus.

[ 195 ] References [ edit ] Citations [ edit ] ^ a b c "Society of Jesus (Institute of Consecrated Life – Men) [Catholic-Hierarchy]" .

www.catholic-hierarchy.org .

Archived from the original on 23 January 2003 . Retrieved 15 October 2018 .

^ "Jesuit" .

Dictionary.com Unabridged (Online). n.d.

^ "Jesuit" .

Cambridge Dictionary of English .

Cambridge University Press .

Archived from the original on 3 May 2022 . Retrieved 22 May 2021 .

^ "News on the elections of the new Superior General" . Sjweb.info.

Archived from the original on 25 April 2023 . Retrieved 4 December 2011 .

^ Brown, Stephen (9 February 2009).

"Spaniard becomes Jesuits' new 'black pope' " . Reuters. Archived from the original on 3 January 2009 . Retrieved 4 December 2011 .

^ "The General Curia" .

Archived from the original on 6 October 2022 . Retrieved 7 October 2022 .

^ O'Malley 2006 , p. xxxv.

^ "Poverty and Chastity for Every Occasion" .

Weekend Edition Saturday .

National Public Radio . 5 March 2010.

Archived from the original on 20 June 2013 . Retrieved 15 May 2013 .

^ "The Jesuits: 'God's marines' " .

The Week . New York. 23 March 2013.

Archived from the original on 11 June 2017 . Retrieved 19 June 2017 .

^ "About Our Jesuits" . Atlanta, Georgia: Ignatius House Retreat Center. Archived from the original on 11 April 2013 . Retrieved 15 May 2013 .

^ Francisco Javier Benjamín González Echeverría.

"Documents of the Jesuits and of Michael de Villanueva (Servetus) in the register of the University of Paris" .

Michael Servetus Research . Archived from the original on 11 October 2014 . Retrieved 16 January 2023 .

^ Campbell 1921 , p. 24.

^ Coyle 1908 , p. 142.

^ "Chapter 2" .

www.reformation.org . Archived from the original on 2 January 2018 . Retrieved 30 May 2017 .

^ Brading 1991 , p. 166.

^ a b Campbell 1921 , p. 7.

^ a b Höpfl 2004 , p. 426.

^ a b Text of the Formula of the Institute (1540) Archived 26 July 2022 at the Wayback Machine , Boston College , Institute for Advanced Jesuit Studies, accessed 31 May 2021 ^ O'Malley 1993 , p. 5.

^ a b Puca, Pasquale (30 January 2008).

"St. Ignatius of Loyola and the Development of the Society of Jesus" .

L'Osservatore Romano Weekly Edition in English . The Cathedral Foundation. p. 12. Archived from the original on 5 May 2022 . Retrieved 23 February 2010 .

^ a b c d e Principe, Lawrence M. (2011).

The Scientific Revolution: A Very Short Introduction . Oxford University Press.

doi : 10.1093/actrade/9780199567416.003.0002 .

ISBN 978-0-19-956741-6 . Retrieved 17 September 2023 .

^ Campbell 1921 , p. 72.

^ Jesuitas (1583).

" SEXTA PARS – CAP. 1 " .

Constitutiones Societatis Iesu: cum earum declarationibus (in Latin).

^ Ignatius of Loyola (1970).

The constitutions of the society of Jesus . Translated by Ganss, George E. Institute of Jesuit Sources. p.

249 .

ISBN 9780912422206 .

Carried and directed by Divine Providence through the agency of the superior as if he were a lifeless body which allows itself to be carried to any place and to be treated in any manner desired.

^ Painter 1903 , p. 167.

^ Pollen 1912 .

^ "Female Jesuits" .

www.gc36.org . Archived from the original on 10 July 2016 . Retrieved 5 July 2016 .

^ Campbell 1921 , p. 857.

^ Gonzalez 1985 , p. 144.

^ Mullins, Mark R., ed. (2003).

Handbook of Christianity in Japan . Leiden: Brill. pp.

9– 10.

ISBN 9004131566 .

OCLC 191931641 .

^ a b c Dussel, Enrique (1981).

The History of the Church in Latin America . New York: NYU Press. p. 60.

^ a b "The American Catholic quarterly review" .

archive.org . Philadelphia : Hardy and Mahony. p. 244 . Retrieved 31 May 2017 .

^ "24 de abril de 2014: Santa Misa de acción de gracias por la canonización de San José de Anchieta | Francisco" .

www.vatican.va .

Archived from the original on 29 June 2021 . Retrieved 29 June 2021 .

^ Jacques, Roland (2002).

Portuguese Pioneers of Vietnamese Linguistics Prior to 1650 – Pionniers Portugais de la Linguistique Vietnamienne Jusqu'en 1650 (in English and French). Bangkok, Thailand: Orchid Press.

ISBN 974-8304-77-9 .

^ Jacques, Roland (2004).

"Bồ Đào Nha và công trình sáng chế chữ quốc ngữ: Phải chăng cần viết lại lịch sử?" .

Centre Culturel Nguyen-Truong-To (in Vietnamese). Archived from the original on 26 October 2017 . Retrieved 16 January 2023 .

Translated by Nguyễn Đăng Trúc. In Các nhà truyền giáo Bồ Đào Nha và thời kỳ đầu của Giáo hội Công giáo Việt Nam (Quyển 1) – Les missionnaires portugais et les débuts de l'Eglise catholique au Viêt-nam (Tome 1) 2004 (in Vietnamese & French). Reichstett, France: Định Hướng Tùng Thư.

ISBN 2-912554-26-8 .

^ Adelaar 2004 .

^ "Jesuits in Britain Timeline – Our history" .

jesuit.org.uk .

Archived from the original on 28 May 2022 . Retrieved 22 August 2022 .

^ "Parishes & Outreach – Our work" .

jesuit.org.uk .

Archived from the original on 22 August 2022 . Retrieved 22 August 2022 .

^ Elman, Benjamin (2007).

"Global Science and Comparative History: Jesuits, Science, and Philology in China and Europe, 1550–1850" .

East Asian Science, Technology, and Medicine .

26 (26): 9– 16.

doi : 10.1163/26669323-02601003 .

ISSN 1562-918X .

JSTOR 43150703 .

Archived from the original on 8 November 2023 . Retrieved 10 September 2023 .

^ Udías 2003 .

^ Parker 1978 , p. 26.

^ Hobson 2004 , pp. 194–195; Parker 1978 , p. 26.

^ Rule, Paul (2003), "François Noël, SJ, and the Chinese Rites Controversy" , The History of the Relations between the Low Countries and China in the Qing Era , Leuven Chinese Studies , Vol. XIV, Leuven: Leuven University Press, pp.

152 , ISBN 9789058673152 .

^ Ricci, Matteo (1603), 《天主實義》 [ Tiānzhŭ Shíyì, The True Meaning of the Lord of Heaven ] , archived from the original on 26 December 2017 , retrieved 1 January 2018 .

(in Chinese) ^ a b Charbonnier, Jean-Pierre (2007), Couve de Murville, Maurice Noël Léon (ed.), Christians in China: AD 600 to 2000 , San Francisco: Ignatius Press, pp.

256– 262, ISBN 9780898709162 .

^ Von Collani, Claudia (2009), "Biography of Charles Maigrot MEP", Stochastikon Encyclopedia , Würzburg: Stochastikon, archived from the original on 7 February 2020 , retrieved 19 April 2021 .

^ Seah, Audrey (2017), "The 1670 Chinese Missal: A Struggle for Indigenization amidst the Chinese Rites Controversy", China's Christianity: From Missionary to Indigenous Church , Studies in Christian Mission, Leiden: Koninklijke Brill, p. 115, ISBN 9789004345607 .

^ Ott, Michael (1913), " Charles-Thomas Maillard de Tournon ", Catholic Encyclopedia , vol.

Vol. XV , New York: Encyclopedia Press .

^ Mungello 1994 .

^ "From Limerick City.ie" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 20 February 2023 . Retrieved 8 February 2023 .

^ Morrissey, Thomas J. (2004).

"Entry for David Wolfe SJ by Thomas Morrissey SJ" .

Oxford Dictionary of National Biography (online ed.). Oxford University Press.

doi : 10.1093/ref:odnb/29832 .

(Subscription, Wikipedia Library access or UK public library membership required.) ^ "Entry for David Wolfe SJ by Judy Barry" . Dictionary of Irish Biography.

Archived from the original on 28 July 2020 . Retrieved 8 February 2023 .

^ a b c d "Life in Tudor Limerick: William Good's 'Annual Letter' of 1566". By Thomas M. McCoog SJ & Victor Houliston. From Archivium Hibernicum , 2016, Vol. 69 (2016), pp. 7–36 ^ a b Catholic Encyclopedia (1913), Vol. 11 Edmund O'Donnell by Charles McNeill ^ "Entry for William Good SJ by Thomas McCoog SJ" .

Oxford Dictionary of National Biography (online ed.). Oxford University Press. 2004.

doi : 10.1093/ref:odnb/10946 .

(Subscription, Wikipedia Library access or UK public library membership required.) ^ "Entry for Edmund Daniel SJ by Stephen Redmond" .

Oxford Dictionary of National Biography (online ed.). Oxford University Press. 2004.

doi : 10.1093/ref:odnb/69033 .

(Subscription, Wikipedia Library access or UK public library membership required.) ^ "Entry from Irish Jesuit Archives website by Vera Orschel (archivist & editor) entitled 4 / 2015 Irish Jesuit Documents in Rome: Part 17 (1 April 2015) 'Not giving the Jesuit martyr Edmund Daniel (O'Donnell) a bad name'. This document contains some scanned copies of Good's original correspondence" . SJArchives.

Archived from the original on 26 March 2023 . Retrieved 8 February 2023 .

^ Vera Moynes, Irish Jesuit Annual Letters 1604–1674 Vol. II, p. 551 ^ Vera Moynes, Irish Jesuit Annual Letters 1604–1674 Vol. I, p. 32.

^ T. Corcoron, "Early Jesuit Educators", in Studies: An Irish Quarterly Review , Vol. 29, No. 116 (Dec. 1940), pp. 545–560 ^ Vera Moynes, Irish Jesuit Annual Letters 1604–167 4 Vol. I, p. 88 ^ Vera Moynes, Irish Jesuit Annual Letters 1604–1674 Vol. I, p. 40 ^ Maurice Lenihan Limerick; Its History and Antiquities p. 671 [ ISBN missing ] ^ John Canon Begley, The Diocese of Limerick in the 16th and 17th Centuries p. 440 [ ISBN missing ] ^ Lenihan p. 666 ^ Lenihan p. 667 ^ Begley p. 479 ^ Begley p. 480 ^ Begley The Diocese of Limerick from 1691 to the Present Time p. 307 [ ISBN missing ] ^ Begley p. 307 ^ Lenihan p. 671 ^ Begley p. 308 ^ Li, Shenwen (2001).

Stratégies missionnaires des Jésuites Français en Nouvelle-France et en Chine au XVIIieme siècle (Print). Sainte-Foy, Québec Paris: Les Presses de l'Université Laval L'Harmattan.

ISBN 2-7475-1123-5 .

^ Devine 1925 , p. 1.

^ Devine 1925 , p. 3.

^ Paquin 1932 , p. 29.

^ Devine 1925 , p. 5.

^ Delaney & Nicholls 1989 , p. 1.

^ Carpenter 2004 , p. 61.

^ Delaney & Nicholls 1989 , p. 2.

^ Kennedy 1950 , p. 42.

^ a b Delaney & Nicholls 1989 , p. 3.

^ a b Kennedy 1950 , p. 43.

^ "First Nations Culture Areas Index" .

the Canadian Museum of Civilization .

Archived from the original on 11 August 2011 . Retrieved 10 June 2016 .

^ Kennedy 1950 , p. 46.

^ Kennedy 1950 , p. 49.

^ Kennedy 1950 , p. 53.

^ "Cap. 44" .

The provincial statutes of Canada: anno undecimo et duodecimo Victoriae Reginae . Montreal: Stewart Derbishire & George Desbarats. 1847. pp.

1483– 1484.

^ Meehan, Peter; Thériault, Michel; Cooper, Celine (26 April 2019).

"Jesuits" .

The Canadian Encyclopedia .

Archived from the original on 8 June 2019 . Retrieved 16 January 2023 .

^ Langlois, Ed (27 December 2012).

"West Coast Jesuits forming new province - gradually" .

Catholic Sentinel .

Archived from the original on 13 November 2019 . Retrieved 13 November 2019 .

^ a b c d Brading 1991 , p. 242.

^ Konrad 1980 .

^ Cline 1997 , p. 250.

^ Van Handel 1991 .

^ Carlos María de Bustamante, Los tres siglos de México durante el gobierno español, hasta la entrada del ejército trigarante. Obra escrita en Roma por el P. Andrés Cavo, de la Compañía de Jesús; publicada con notas y suplemento . 4 vols. Mexico 1836–38.

^ Warren 1973 , p. 84.

^ Diego Luis de Motezuma, Corona mexicana, o historia de los Motezumas, por el Padre Diego Luis de Motezuma de la Compañía de Jesús . Madrid 1914.

^ Mecham 1966 , pp. 358–359.

^ a b Brading 1991 , p. 185.

^ Sandoval 2008 .

^ Brading 1991 , pp. 167–169.

^ a b Taylor, Anne Christine (1999).

"The Western Margins of Amazonia from the Early Sixteenth to the Early Nineteenth Century" .

The Cambridge History of the Native Peoples of the Americas . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. pp.

225– 226.

doi : 10.1017/CHOL9780521630764.005 .

ISBN 978-0521630757 .

^ Cipolletti, Maria Susana; Magnin, Juan (2008).

" 'Nostalgia del monte'. Indigenas del Oriente peruano segun un manuscripto del jesuita Juan Magnin (Borja 1743)" .

Anthropos .

103 (2): 509.

doi : 10.5771/0257-9774-2008-2-507 .

ISSN 0257-9774 .

JSTOR 40467427 .

^ a b Hebblethwaite, Margaret (2010).

Paraguay . Bradt Travel Guides. p. 103.

^ a b Sarreal, Julia J.S. (2014).

The Guarani and their Missions . Stanford: Stanford University Press. pp.

6– 7, 20– 28.

ISBN 9780804791229 .

^ Ganson, Barbara (2003).

The Guarani Under Spanish Rule in the Rio de la Plata . Stanford: Stanford University Press. pp.

44– 53.

ISBN 0804736022 .

^ a b Sarreal 2014 , pp. 6–7.

^ Durant, Will; Durant, Ariel (1961).

The Age of Reason Begins . The Story of Civilization. Simon & Schuster. pp.

250 .

ISBN 978-0671013202 . Retrieved 22 April 2006 .

Paraguay founded solely on their powers.

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) the preceding paragraph is based on pp. 249–250 ^ Wilde, Guillermo (2015).

"Imagining Guarinis and Jesuits" .

ReVista .

XIV (3): 4– 5 . Retrieved 24 March 2022 .

[ permanent dead link ] ^ Saeger, James Schofield (1972).

"Origins of the Rebellion of Paraguay" .

The Hispanic American Historical Review .

52 (2): 227– 229.

doi : 10.1215/00182168-52.2.215 . Retrieved 30 March 2022 .

^ Ganson 2003 , pp. 107–111.

^ Guedea, Virginia (2000).

The Oxford History of Mexico . Oxford: Oxford University Press. p. 278.

ISBN 9780199731985 .

Edited by Michael Meyer and William Beezley.

^ Sarreal 2014 , p. 115.

^ Ooi, Keat Gin (2004).

Southeast Asia: A Historical Encyclopedia, from Angkor Wat to East Timor . ABC-CLIO. p.

524 .

ISBN 978-1-57607-770-2 . Retrieved 23 April 2022 .

^ Crailsheim, Eberhard (18 January 2022).

"Missionaries and Commanders: The Jesuits in Mindanao, 1718–68" .

Journal of Jesuit Studies .

9 (2): 207– 228.

doi : 10.1163/22141332-09020003 .

hdl : 10261/273146 .

Archived from the original on 5 January 2024 . Retrieved 5 January 2024 – via brill.com.

^ Image–Object–Performance: Mediality and Communication in Cultural Contact Zones of Colonial Latin America and the Philippines, ed. Astrid Windus and Eberhard Crailsheim (Munster: Waxmann Verlag, 2013) ^ "Moro Pirates' attacks worsen, 1634" .

www.zamboanga.com .

Archived from the original on 8 May 2021 . Retrieved 15 April 2024 .

^ "Today in Philippine history: 16 September 1635, Father Pedro Chirino died in Manila" .

The Kahimyang Project .

Archived from the original on 31 August 2017 . Retrieved 30 August 2017 .

^ Mission, Jesuit Bukidnon.

"Jesuit Bukidnon Mission" .

Jesuit Bukidnon Mission .

Archived from the original on 21 February 2024 . Retrieved 5 October 2023 .

^ 2007 Institutional Brochure, Ateneo de Manila University. Published by the Office of International Programs, Ateneo de Manila University.

^ Carlomagno Bacaltos.

"A Catechetical Primer on the Life, Martyrdom and Glorification of Blessed Pedro Calungsod – Part 1" . Archived from the original on 21 October 2014 . Retrieved 31 October 2014 .

^ Escalante, Rene (12 May 2020).

"Watch: Gomburza an NHCP Documentary" (video) .

youtube.com .

National Historical Commission of the Philippines .

Archived from the original on 27 February 2024 . Retrieved 5 January 2024 .

^ Garcia, Ricardo P. (1964). " The Great Debate: The Rizal Retraction – Preface". R.P. Garcia Publishing Co., Quezon City.

^ Spencer C. Tucker (2009).

The Encyclopedia of the Spanish–American and Philippine–American Wars: A Political, Social, and Military History . Abc-Clio. p. 477.

ISBN 978-1851099528 .

^ Bullock, Steven C. Revolutionary brotherhood: Freemasonry and the transformation of the American social order, 1730–1840 (UNC Press Books, 2011) ^ Daniel Ligou, ed. (2000) [1981].

Histoire des Francs-Maçons en France: De 1815 à nos jours . Vol. 2. Privately published. p. 200.

ISBN 2-7089-6839-4 .

^ [1] Archived 24 February 2025 at the Wayback Machine "The Filipino Lodges felt that the American Lodges had not acted with true Masonic spirit in not inviting to the Convention Lodges working under the Grand Oriente Español. The reason such an invitation was not extended was because most members of Lodges holding Charters from California agreed that it would be considered irregular by many of the Grand Lodges of the United States, which would neither take the time nor show interest enough to investigate the reasons for such action. They would simply have refused to grant recognition to the new Grand Lodge for allowing irregular Lodges to participate in its deliberations." ^ "History of Masonry in the Philippines. Chronology, 1901-1918 - Philippine Center for Masonic Studies" . Retrieved 28 September 2016 .

^ "Ateneo de Iloilo Website" .

www.adi.edu.ph .

Archived from the original on 5 January 2024 . Retrieved 8 August 2017 .

^ "Ateneo overtakes UP as top Philippine university in global ranking" .

The Philippine Star . 12 October 2022.

Archived from the original on 30 October 2023 . Retrieved 12 October 2022 .

^ "Ateneo overtakes UP in World University Rankings" .

The Manila Times . 12 October 2022.

Archived from the original on 27 January 2024 . Retrieved 12 October 2022 .

^ Campbell 1921 , pp. 87ff.

^ Chamberlin, William (4 June 2018).

"Silencing Genocide: The Jesuit Ministry in Colonial Cartagena de Indias and its Legacy" .

Journal of Black Studies .

49 (7): 672– 693.

doi : 10.1177/0021934718778718 .

S2CID 149464521 .

Archived from the original on 23 April 2022 . Retrieved 23 April 2022 .

^ D.A. Brading , The First America: The Spanish Monarchy, Creole Patriots, and the Liberal State, 1492–1867 . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press 1991, pp. 453–458.

^ Maryks, Robert; Wright, Jonathan, eds. (2015).

Jesuit Survival and Restoration, A Global History (1773–1900) . Brill.

ISBN 9789004283879 .

^ "Dominus ac Redemptor Noster" .

www.reformation.org . Archived from the original on 3 March 2016 . Retrieved 31 May 2017 .

^ Hasler, A.B., (1981) How the Pope Became Infallible: Pius IX and the Politics of Persuasion (Doubleday; Garden City, NY), p. 58 ^ "Votation No 236 Tableau récapitulatif: Arrêté fédéral abrogeant les articles de la constitution fédérale sur les jésuites et les couvents (art. 51 et 52)" .

Chancellerie fédérale ChF (in French). 20 May 1973.

Archived from the original on 17 November 2015 . Retrieved 23 October 2007 .

^ "Chronology of Jesuit History" (PDF) .

Jesuits in Europe .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 February 2019 . Retrieved 8 February 2019 .

^ Pius XI, dilectissima Nobis, 1933 ^ Novak, Michael (21 October 1984).

"The Case Against Liberation Theology" .

The New York Times Magazine .

Archived from the original on 20 June 2017 . Retrieved 31 May 2017 .

^ John Paul II (20 December 1999).

"Eulogy for His Eminence Cardinal Paolo Dezza" .

The Holy See .

Archived from the original on 1 February 2020 . Retrieved 31 May 2017 .

^ "Religion: John Paul Takes On the Jesuits" .

Time . 9 November 1981.

ISSN 0040-781X .

Archived from the original on 20 July 2017 . Retrieved 31 May 2017 .

^ Müller et al. 2000 .

^ Krickl, Tony (3 February 2007).

"CGU Student Josh Harris to Spend Two Months in Federal Prison for Protesting" .

Claremont Courier . Archived from the original on 5 February 2007 . Retrieved 19 September 2015 .

^ Lehigh, Scot (19 June 2002).

"BC is leading the way on church reform" .

The Boston Globe . Archived from the original on 26 September 2018 . Retrieved 16 June 2017 .

^ "Rev. Thomas J. Reese, S.J., Chair" .

United States Commission on International Religious Freedom . Archived from the original on 2 June 2017 . Retrieved 1 June 2017 .

^ Benedict XVI (22 April 2006).

"Address of his Holiness Benedict XVI to the Fathers and Brothers of the Society of Jesus" .

The Holy See .

Archived from the original on 30 September 2007 . Retrieved 23 October 2007 .

^ Benedict XVI (15 May 2006).

"Letter to the Superior General of the Society of Jesus on the 50th anniversary of the Encyclical Haurietis Aquas" .

The Holy See .

Archived from the original on 30 September 2007 . Retrieved 23 October 2007 .

^ Benedict XVI (3 November 2006).

"Visit of the Holy Father to the Pontifical Gregorian University" .

The Holy See .

Archived from the original on 30 September 2007 . Retrieved 23 October 2007 .

^ Benedict XVI (21 February 2008).

"To the Fathers of the General Congregation of the Society of Jesus" .

The Holy See .

Archived from the original on 14 May 2016 . Retrieved 31 May 2017 .

^ a b Gibson, David (12 March 2014).

"To understand Pope Francis, look to the Jesuits" .

National Catholic Reporter .

Archived from the original on 28 August 2016 . Retrieved 30 May 2017 .

^ Anderson, Jon Lee (14 March 2013).

"Pope Francis and the Dirty War" .

The New Yorker .

Archived from the original on 19 December 2018 . Retrieved 1 June 2017 .

^ "Vatican, Argentine church to open 'dirty war' archives" .

Crux . Associated Press. 25 October 2016. Archived from the original on 30 June 2017 . Retrieved 1 June 2017 .

^ Bole, William (5 March 2018).

"Five Years Later Changes under Pope Francis are Revealing his Jesuit DNA" .

jesuits.org .

Archived from the original on 11 August 2023.

^ "General Congregation 36" .

jesuits.org . Archived from the original on 31 October 2017 . Retrieved 30 May 2017 .

^ Curti, Elena.

"Dominican Master urges Jesuits to adopt 'audacity and humility' in electing Superior General" .

www.thetablet.co.uk .

Archived from the original on 23 August 2017 . Retrieved 30 May 2017 .

^ "The first session in the aula and Father Nicolás' resignation – General Congregation 36" .

General Congregation 36 . 3 October 2016. Archived from the original on 10 July 2017 . Retrieved 30 May 2017 .

^ "Jesuits elect first Latin-American general" .

Crux . 14 October 2016. Archived from the original on 30 June 2017 . Retrieved 30 May 2017 .

^ "How the Jesuits' four new universal apostolic priorities support social enterprise" .

America Magazine . 28 March 2019.

Archived from the original on 2 January 2020 . Retrieved 1 October 2019 .

^ "Pope Francis approves four priorities for the Jesuits' next decade" .

America Magazine . 19 February 2019.

Archived from the original on 19 February 2019 . Retrieved 20 February 2019 .

^ a b "Father General's House" .

www.sjweb.info . Archived from the original on 19 May 2017 . Retrieved 30 May 2017 .

^ "USA Assistancy" .

SJWeb.info . Archived from the original on 16 May 2008 . Retrieved 30 May 2017 .

^ "The Jesuit Community at JST – Jesuit School of Theology – Santa Clara University" .

www.scu.edu . Archived from the original on 1 October 2019 . Retrieved 1 October 2019 .

^ "General Congregation: purpose, delegates, ..." jesuits.org . Archived from the original on 1 October 2019 . Retrieved 1 October 2019 .

^ a b "The Society of Jesus in Numbers, 2022 Edition" . Jesuits. 23 March 2022.

Archived from the original on 4 June 2023 . Retrieved 4 June 2023 .

^ Including Mexico and the Caribbean.

^ Canada and the United States only; not including Mexico and the Caribbean.

^ Lapitan, Giselle (22 May 2012).

"The changing face of the Jesuits" . Province Express. Archived from the original on 28 March 2016 . Retrieved 27 June 2013 .

^ Becker, Joseph M. (January–March 1977).

"The Statistics and a Tentative Analysis" (PDF) .

Studies in the Spirituality of Jesuits .

IX (1/2). p. 104, table A-7.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 16 May 2021 . Retrieved 23 November 2020 .

^ Gray, Mark M. (9 January 2015).

"Nineteen Sixty-four: By the Numbers: Jesuit Demography" .

nineteensixty-four.blogspot.com .

CARA .

Archived from the original on 15 April 2017 . Retrieved 14 April 2017 .

^ Raper, Mark (23 May 2012).

"Changing to best serve the universal mission" . Jesuit Asia Pacific Conference. Archived from the original on 26 February 2014 . Retrieved 27 June 2013 .

^ Reilly, Patrick (28 July 2016).

"American Jesuits Are in a Free Fall, and the Crisis is Getting Worse" .

National Catholic Register . Retrieved 16 June 2017 .

^ "Twenty-Eight Jesuit Novices Profess First Vows" .

jesuits.org .

Archived from the original on 3 January 2020 . Retrieved 29 September 2019 .

^ O'Connell, Gerard (16 September 2019).

"Father Sosa: Attacks against Pope Francis are aimed at influencing the next conclave" .

America Magazine .

Archived from the original on 20 September 2019 . Retrieved 25 September 2019 .

^ "Jesuit universities slowly losing Jesuit presidents" . 7 September 2018.

Archived from the original on 16 October 2018 . Retrieved 15 October 2018 .

^ Jones, Autumn (30 December 2014).

"The New Brand of Jesuit Universities" .

The Atlantic .

Archived from the original on 12 February 2018 . Retrieved 22 March 2018 .

^ "St. Aloysius College mission statement" .

StAloysius.NSW.edu.au . Archived from the original on 15 March 2018 . Retrieved 21 March 2018 .

^ Martin, James (10 November 2009).

"Time Magazine on 'Men for Others' " .

America Magazine .

Archived from the original on 12 February 2018 . Retrieved 30 May 2017 .

^ Edwards, Nina (2011).

On The Button . I.B. Tauris. p. 178.

ISBN 9781848855847 .

^ "Habit and dress::Society of Jesus - ::concepts" .

concepts.org . Archived from the original on 21 June 2021 . Retrieved 12 February 2021 .

^ "The Society of Jesus in the United States: Frequently Asked Questions" . Jesuit.org. 19 January 2008. Archived from the original on 25 March 2013 . Retrieved 18 March 2013 .

^ Dial, Andrew (2021).

"Antoine Lavalette, Slave Murderer: A Forgotten Scandal of the French West Indies" .

Journal of Jesuit Studies .

8 : 40 . Retrieved 30 August 2023 .

^ Rothman, Adam (2021).

"The Jesuits and Slavery" .

Journal of Jesuit Studies .

8 : 1– 9.

doi : 10.1163/22141332-0801P001 .

S2CID 230540515 .

^ Whitehead, Maurice (Winter 2014–2015).

"From Expulsion to Restoration: The Jesuits in Crisis, 1759–1814" .

Studies: An Irish Quarterly Review .

103 (412): 454.

JSTOR 24347842 .

Archived from the original on 3 September 2023 . Retrieved 3 September 2023 .

^ Gerard 1911 .

^ Voltaire (1769), "XXXI" , Histoire du Parlement de Paris , archived from the original on 5 February 2012 , retrieved 30 November 2014 , Châtel fut écartelé, le jésuite Guignard fut pendu; et ce qui est bien étrange, Jouvency, dans son Histoire des Jésuites, le regarde comme un martyr et le compare à Jésus-Christ. Le régent de Châtel, nommé Guéret, et un autre jésuite, nommé Hay, ne furent condamnés qu'à un bannissement perpétuel.

^ Voltaire (1769), "XXXI", Histoire du Parlement de Paris , archived from the original on 5 February 2012, ^ Fraser 2005 , p. 448.

^ Nelson 1981 , p. 190.

^ see Malachi Martin (1987) The Jesuits: The Society of Jesus and the Betrayal of the Roman Catholic Church , Simon & Schuster , Linden Press, New York, 1987, ISBN 0-671-54505-1 ^ Rosa, De La; Coello, Alexandre (1932).

"El Estatuto de Limpieza de Sangre de la Compañía de Jesús (1593) y su influencia en el Perú Colonial" .

Archivum Historicum Societatis Iesu . Institutum Societatis Iesu: 45– 93.

ISSN 0037-8887 . Archived from the original on 26 October 2014 . Retrieved 7 December 2012 .

^ Reites 1981 , p. 17.

^ Padberg 1994 , p. 204.

^ Maryks 2010 , p. xxviii.

^ Kavanaugh, John F. (15 December 2008).

"Abortion Absolutists" .

America . Archived from the original on 3 July 2011 . Retrieved 2 August 2011 .

^ O'Brien, Dennis (30 May 2005).

"No to Abortion: Posture, Not Policy" .

America . Archived from the original on 12 June 2011 . Retrieved 2 August 2011 .

^ Rigali, Norbert J. (23 September 2000).

"Words and Contraception" .

America . Archived from the original on 12 June 2011 . Retrieved 2 August 2011 .

^ McCormick, Richard A.

(17 July 1993).

" 'Humanae Vitae' 25 Years Later" .

America . Archived from the original on 15 July 2011 . Retrieved 2 August 2011 .

^ Dulles, Avery (28 September 1968).

"Karl Rahner on 'Humanae Vitae' " .

America . Archived from the original on 11 May 2011 . Retrieved 2 August 2011 .

^ Reese, Thomas J.

(31 March 2009).

"Pope, Condoms and AIDS" . On Faith.

The Washington Post . Archived from the original on 3 April 2009 . Retrieved 2 August 2011 .

^ Zagano, Phyllis (17 February 2003).

"Catholic Women Deacons" .

America . Archived from the original on 28 July 2011 . Retrieved 2 August 2011 .

^ Martin, James (21 November 2008).

"Jesuit General: Liberation Theology 'Courageous' " .

America . Archived from the original on 11 August 2011 . Retrieved 2 August 2011 .

^ Martin, James (29 August 2010).

"Glenn Beck and Liberation Theology" .

America . Archived from the original on 20 September 2011 . Retrieved 2 August 2011 .

^ Thavis, John (8 September 2006).

" 'Sala Stampa' style change: From toreador to low-key mathematician" .

Catholic News Service . Archived from the original on 5 October 2009 . Retrieved 12 June 2009 .

^ "Pope Francis names Luis Ladaria as new prefect of Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith" .

www.romereports.com . July 2017.

Archived from the original on 4 July 2017 . Retrieved 11 April 2020 .

^ Pollard 2006 , p. 357.

^ Pollard 2006 , p. 356.

^ Pollard 2006 , p. 356–357.

^ Lapomarda 2005 , pp. 140–141.

^ Lapomarda 2005 , appx. A.

^ Lapomarda 2005 , p. 33, appx. A.

^ Lapomarda 2005 , pp. 266–267.

^ Anton Gill; An Honourable Defeat; A History of the German Resistance to Hitler; Heinemann; London; 1994; p. 264.

^ Lapomarda 2005 , p. 33.

^ Peter Hoffmann; The History of the German Resistance 1933–1945 ; 3rd ed. (1st English ed.); McDonald & Jane's; London; 1977; p. 33.

^ Shirer 1960 , pp. 1025–1026.

^ Peter Hoffmann ; The History of the German Resistance 1933–1945 ; 3rd ed. (1st English ed.); McDonald & Jane's; London; 1977; p. 160 ^ Shirer 1960 , pp. 648–649.

^ "Pontiff Praises a Bavarian Foe of Nazism" .

Zenit News Agency .

Archived from the original on 14 October 2013 . Retrieved 6 November 2013 .

^ "Library: The Gentile Holocaust" . Catholic Culture.

Archived from the original on 24 October 2013 . Retrieved 6 November 2013 .

^ Martin Gilbert.

The Righteous – The Unsung Heroes of the Holocaust ; Doubleday; 2002; ISBN 0-385-60100-X ; p. 299 ^ Martin Gilbert; The Righteous: the Unsung Heroes of the Holocaust ; Holt Paperback; New York; 2004; Preface ^ Braun Roger (1910–1981) Archived 4 December 2022 at the Wayback Machine , Yad Vashem ^ "Chaillet Pierre" .

The Righteous Among the Nations Database . Yad Vashem.

Archived from the original on 17 May 2021 . Retrieved 16 January 2023 .

^ De Coster, Father Jean-Baptiste Archived 31 May 2020 at the Wayback Machine , Yad Vashem ^ yadvashem.org/righteous/family.html?language=en&itemId=4042826 Fleury Jean (1905–1982) Archived 8 December 2015 at the Wayback Machine , Yad Vashem ^ Vincent A. Lapomarda, The Jesuits and the Third Reich ( Lewiston, New York : Edwin Mellen Press , 1989).

^ "Hiatt Holocaust Collection" . Holycross. edu. Archived from the original on 28 May 2010 . Retrieved 4 December 2011 .

^ "The Jesuit Ratio Studiorum of 1599" (PDF) . Translated by Allan P. Farrell. Conference of Major Supporters of Jesuits. 1970 [1599]. Archived from the original (PDF) on 27 December 2017 . Retrieved 16 January 2023 .

^ Hough 2007 , p. 68.

^ Ashworth 1986 , p. 154.

^ Wright 2004 , p. 200.

^ Ebrey 2010 , p. 212.

^ Woods 2005 , p. 101.

^ Lux-Sterritt, Laurence (2011).

" 'Virgo Becomes Virago': Women in the Accounts of Seventeenth-Century English Catholic Missionaries" .

British Catholic History .

30 (4): 537– 553.

doi : 10.1017/S0034193200013170 .

ISSN 0034-1932 .

Archived from the original on 2 December 2024 . Retrieved 28 March 2025 .

^ Palmes, William (1855).

The Life of Mrs. Dorothy Lawson: Of St. Antony's Near Newcastle-on-Tyne . C. Dolman.

^ Ivereigh 2014 , pp. 1–2.

^ "November 5: Feast of all Jesuit Saints and Blessed" .

tertianship.eu . Archived from the original on 3 July 2017 . Retrieved 30 May 2017 .

^ "How Vatican II Helped the Jesuits Do Their Job" .

Conversations . Archived from the original on 14 February 2021 . Retrieved 7 February 2021 .

^ Howell, Patrick (1 September 2012).

"The 'New' Jesuits: The Response to the Society of Jesus to Vatican II, 1962–2012: Some Alacrity, Some Resistance" .

Conversations on Jesuit Higher Education .

42 (1).

Archived from the original on 16 February 2021 . Retrieved 7 February 2021 .

^ "4th Decree" .

onlineministries.creighton.edu .

Archived from the original on 29 May 2017 . Retrieved 30 May 2017 .

^ "La Civiltà Cattolica" .

La Civiltà Cattolica .

Archived from the original on 29 September 2019 . Retrieved 1 October 2019 .

^ "The Way" .

www.theway.org.uk .

Archived from the original on 1 October 2019 . Retrieved 1 October 2019 .

^ "About America Media" .

America Magazine .

Archived from the original on 9 August 2019 . Retrieved 1 October 2019 .

^ "About Us" .

www.ignatius.com .

Archived from the original on 17 July 2019 . Retrieved 1 October 2019 .

^ "Revista Manresa" .

manresarev.com .

Archived from the original on 1 October 2019 . Retrieved 1 October 2019 .

^ "Weltweit" .

Archived from the original on 23 March 2024 . Retrieved 23 March 2024 .

^ "Signum" .

Signum .

Archived from the original on 29 June 2021 . Retrieved 29 June 2021 .

Sources [ edit ] Adelaar, Willem F.H.

(2004). "Review of Kaskaskia Illinois-to-French Dictionary edited by Carl Masthay".

International Journal of Lexicography .

17 (3): 325– 327.

doi : 10.1093/ijl/17.3.325 .

ISSN 1477-4577 .

Ashworth, William B. (1986). "Catholicism and Early Modern Science". In Lindberg, David C.

; Numbers, Ronald L.

(eds.).

God and Nature: Historical Essays on the Encounter between Christianity and Science . Berkeley: University of California Press.

ISBN 978-0-520-05538-4 .

Bailey, Gauvin Alexander (1999).

Art on the Jesuit Missions in Asia and Latin America, 1542–1773 . Toronto: University of Toronto Press.

ISBN 0-8020-4688-6 .

Bailey, Gauvin Alexander (2003).

Between Renaissance and Baroque: Jesuit Art in Rome, 1565–1610 . Toronto: University of Toronto Press.

ISBN 0-8020-3721-6 .

Brading, D. A.

(1991).

The First America: Spanish Monarchs, Creole Patriots, and the Liberal State, 1492–1867 . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0-521-39130-6 .

Campbell, Thomas J. (1921).

The Jesuits, 1534–1921: A History of the Society of Jesus from Its Foundation to the Present Time . New York: The Encyclopedia Press.

ISBN 978-0878210183 . Retrieved 19 June 2017 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) Carpenter, Roger M. (2004).

The Renewed, The Destroyed, and the Remade: The Three Thought Worlds of the Iroquois and the Huron, 1609–1650 . East Lansing: Michigan State University Press.

ISBN 978-0-87013-728-0 .

Cline, Sarah L. (1997). "Church and State: Habsburg New Spain". In Werner, Michael S. (ed.).

Encyclopedia of Mexico: History, Society & Culture . Vol. 1. Chicago: Fitzroy Dearborn Publishers.

ISBN 978-1-884964-31-2 .

Coyle, Henry (1908).

Our church, her Children and Institutions . Vol. 2. Boston: Angel Guardian Press.

Curran, Robert Emmett (1993).

The Bicentennial History of Georgetown University . Washington, D.C.: Georgetown University Press.

ISBN 978-0-87840-485-8 .

Delaney, Paul J.; Nicholls, Andrew D. (1989).

After The Fire: Sainte-Marie Among the Hurons Since 1649 . Elmvale, Ontario: East Georgian Bay Company.

Devine, E. J. (1925).

The Jesuit Martyrs of Canada . Toronto: The Canadian Messenger.

Durant, Will ; Durant, Ariel (1961).

The Age of Reason Begins: A History of European Civilization in the Period of Shakespeare, Bacon, Montaigne, Rembrandt, Galileo, and Descartes, 1558–1648 . The Story of Civilization. Vol. 7. New York: Simon & Schuster.

ISBN 978-0-671-01320-2 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) Ebrey, Patricia Buckley (2010).

The Cambridge Illustrated History of China . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0-521-12433-1 .

Fraser, Antonia (2005) [1996].

The Gunpowder Plot: Terror and Faith in 1605 . London: Phoenix.

ISBN 978-0-7538-1401-7 .

Gerard, John (1911). " Monita Secreta ". In Herbermann, Charles (ed.).

Catholic Encyclopedia . Vol. 10. New York: Robert Appleton Company.

Gonzalez, Justo L.

(1985).

The Story of Christianity: The Early Church to the Present Day .

Hobson, John M.

(2004).

The Eastern Origins of Western Civilisation . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Höpfl, Harro (2004).

Jesuit Political Thought: The Society of Jesus and the State, c. 1540–1630 . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0-521-83779-8 .

Hough, Susan Elizabeth (2007).

Richter's Scale: Measure of an Earthquake, Measure of a Man . Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press.

ISBN 978-0-691-12807-8 .

Ivereigh, Austen (2014).

The Great Reformer: Francis and the Making of a Radical Pope . New York: Henry Holt and Co.

ISBN 978-1-62779-157-1 .

Kennedy, J. H. (1950).

Jesuit and Savage in New France . New Haven, CN: Yale University Press.

Konrad, Herman W. (1980).

A Jesuit Hacienda in Colonial Mexico: Santa Lucía, 1576–1767 . Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-8047-1050-3 .

Lapomarda, Vincent A. (2005).

The Jesuits and the Third Reich (2nd ed.).

Lewiston, New York : Edwin Mellen Press .

ISBN 978-0-7734-6265-6 .

Mahoney, Kathleen A. (2003).

Catholic Higher Education in Protestant America: The Jesuits and Harvard in the Age of the University . Baltimore, Maryland: Johns Hopkins University Press.

ISBN 978-0-8018-7340-9 .

Maryks, Robert Aleksander (2010).

The Jesuit Order As a Synagogue of Jews: Jesuits of Jewish Ancestry and Purity-of-Blood Laws in the Early Society of Jesus . Studies in Medieval and Reformation Traditions. Vol. 146. Leiden, Netherlands: Brill.

ISBN 978-90-04-17981-3 .

Mecham, J. Lloyd (1966).

Church and State in Latin America: A History of Politico-Ecclesiastical Relations (2nd ed.). Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press.

Müller, Andreas; Tausch, Arno ; Zulehner, Paul M.; Wickens, Henry, eds. (2000).

Global Capitalism, Liberation Theology, and the Social Sciences: An Analysis of the Contradictions of Modernity at the Turn of the Millennium . Hauppauge, New York: Nova Science Publishers.

ISBN 978-1-56072-679-1 .

Mungello, David E.

, ed. (1994).

The Chinese Rites Controversy: Its History and Meaning . Monumenta Serica Monograph Series. Vol. 33. Nettetal, Germany: Steyler Verlag.

ISBN 978-3-8050-0348-3 .

Nelson, Robert J. (1981).

Pascal: Adversary and Advocate . Cambridge, Massachusetts.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) O'Malley, John W. (1993).

The First Jesuits . Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press.

ISBN 978-06-7430-313-3 .

——— (2006). "Introduction". In O'Malley, John W.; Bailey, Gauvin Alexander ; Harris, Steven J.; Kennedy, T. Frank (eds.).

The Jesuits II: Cultures, Sciences, and the Arts, 1540–1773 . University of Toronto Press.

ISBN 978-0-8020-3861-6 .

Padberg, John W. (1994).

For Matters of Greater Moment:The First Thirty Jesuit General Congregations . St. Louis, Missouri: Institute of Jesuit Sources.

ISBN 978-1-880810-06-4 .

Painter, F. V. N. (1903).

A History of Education . International Education Series. Vol. 2. New York: D. Appleton and Co.

Paquin, Julien (1932).

The Tragedy of Old Huron . Sault Ste. Marie, Ontario: The Martyrs' Shrine.

Parker, John (1978).

Windows into China: The Jesuits and their Books, 1580–1730 . Maury A. Bromsen Lecture in Humanistic Bibliography. Vol. 5. Boston: Trustees of the Public Library of the City of Boston.

ISBN 978-0-89073-050-8 . Retrieved 18 June 2017 .

Perrin, Pat (1970).

Crime and Punishment: The Colonial Period to the New Frontier . Discovery Enterprises.

Pollard, John (2006). "Jesuits, The". In Blamires, Cyprian P. (ed.).

World Fascism: A Historical Encyclopedia . Vol. 1. Santa Barbara, California: ABC-CLIO. pp.

356– 357.

ISBN 978-1-57607-940-9 .

Pollen, John Hungerford (1912). " Society of Jesus ". In Herbermann, Charles (ed.).

Catholic Encyclopedia . Vol. 14. New York: Robert Appleton Company.

Reites, James W. (1981).

"St. Ignatius of Loyola and the Jews" .

Studies in the Spirituality of Jesuits .

13 (4). St. Louis, Missouri: American Assistancy Seminar on Jesuit Spirituality.

ISSN 2328-5575 .

Archived from the original on 6 May 2017 . Retrieved 18 June 2017 .

Sacks, Richard S. (1990).

"Historical Setting" (PDF) . In Hanratty, Dennis M.; Meditz, Sandra (eds.).

Paraguay: A Country Study . Area Handbook Series (2nd ed.). Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office. pp.

1– 49.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 26 September 2020 . Retrieved 18 June 2017 .

Sandoval, Alonso de (2008). Von Germeten, Nicole (ed.).

Treatise on Slavery: Selections from De Instauranda Aethiopum Salute . Translated by von Germeten, Nicole. Indianapolis, Indiana: Hackett Publishing Co.

ISBN 978-0-87220-929-9 .

Shirer, William L.

(1960).

The Rise and Fall of the Third Reich . London: Secker & Warburg.

Udías, Agustín (2003).

Searching the Heavens and the Earth: The History of Jesuit Observatories . Astrophysics and Space Science Library. Berlin: Springer.

ISBN 978-1-4020-1189-4 .

Vacalebre, Natale (2016).

Come Le Armadure e L'Armi. Per una storia delle antiche biblioteche della Compagnia di Gesù. Con il caso di Perugia . Biblioteca di bibliografia – Documents and Studies in Book and Library History, vol. 205. Florence: Olschki.

ISBN 978-8822-26480-0 .

Warren, J. Benedict (1973). "An Introductory Survey of Secular Writings in the European Tradition on Colonial Middle America, 1503–1818". In Cline, Howard F. (ed.).

Handbook of Middle American Indians . Vol. 13: Guide to Ethnohistorical Sources, Part Two. Austin: University of Texas Press (published 2015). pp.

42– 137.

ISBN 978-1-4773-0683-3 .

Van Handel, Robert Michael (1991).

The Jesuit and Franciscan Missions in Baja California (MA thesis). University of California, Santa Barbara.

Woods, Thomas E.

(2005).

How The Catholic Church Built Western Civilization . Washington, D.C.: Regnery Publishing (published 2012).

ISBN 978-1-59698-328-1 .

Wright, Jonathan (2004).

God's Soldiers: Adventure, Politics, Intrigue, and Power: A History of the Jesuits . New York: Doubleday Religious Publishing Group (published 2005).

ISBN 978-0-385-50080-7 .

Further reading [ edit ] Surveys [ edit ] History of the Jesuit missions in India, China and Japan (Luis de Guzmán, 1601).

Bangert, William V.

A History of the Society of Jesus (2nd ed. 1958) 552 pp.

Barthel, Manfred.

Jesuits: History & Legend of the Society of Jesus (1984) 347 pp.

online free Chapple, Christopher.

Jesuit Tradition in Education & Missions: A 450-Year Perspective (1993), 290 pp.

Mitchell, David.

Jesuits: A History (1981) 320 pp.

Molina, J. Michelle.

To Overcome Oneself: The Jesuit Ethic and Spirit of Global Expansion, 1520–1767 (2013) online Archived 18 May 2018 at the Wayback Machine O'Malley, John W.

The Jesuits: A History from Ignatius to the Present (2014), 138 pp Worcester, Thomas. ed.

The Cambridge Companion to the Jesuits (2008), to 1773 Wright, Jonathan.

God's Soldiers: Adventure, Politics, Intrigue & Power: A History of the Jesuits (2004) 368 pp online free Specialized studies [ edit ] Alden, Dauril.

Making of an Enterprise: The Society of Jesus in Portugal, Its Empire & Beyond, 1540–1750 (1996).

Brockey, Liam Matthew.

Journey to the East: The Jesuit Mission to China, 1579–1724 (2007).

Brodrick James (1940).

The Origin of the Jesuits . Originally Published Longmans Green.

ISBN 9780829409307 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) , Special Edition Published 1997 by Loyola University Press, US.

ISBN 0829409300 .

Brodrick, James .

Saint Francis Xavier (1506–1552) (1952).

Brodrick, James .

Saint Ignatius Loyola: The Pilgrim Years 1491–1538 (1998).

Burson, Jeffrey D. and Jonathan Wright, eds.

The Jesuit Suppression in Global Context: Causes, Events, and Consequences (Cambridge UP, 2015).

Bygott, Ursula M. L.

With Pen & Tongue: The Jesuits in Australia, 1865–1939 (1980).

Comerford, Kathleen M.

Jesuit Libraries . Brill, 2023.

[ ISBN missing ] Dalmases, Cándido de.

Ignatius of Loyola, Founder of the Jesuits: His Life & Work (1985).

[ ISBN missing ] Caraman, Philip.

Ignatius Loyola: A Biography of the Founder of the Jesuits (1990).

Edwards, Francis.

Jesuits in England from 1580 to the Present Day (1985).

Grendler, Paul F. "Jesuit Schools and Universities in Europe 1548–1773." Brill Research Perspectives in Jesuit Studies 1.1 (2019): 1–118.

online Archived 23 January 2022 at the Wayback Machine Healy, Róisin.

Jesuit Specter in Imperial Germany (2003).

[ ISBN missing ] Höpfl, Harro.

Jesuit Political Thought: The Society of Jesus & the State, c. 1540–1640 (2004).

Hsia, Ronnie Po-chia. "Jesuit Foreign Missions. A Historiographical Essay." Journal of Jesuit Studies (2014) 1#1, pp. 47–65.

Kaiser, Robert Blair.

Inside the Jesuits: How Pope Francis is Changing the Church and the World (Rowman & Littlefield, 2014) Klaiber, Jeffrey.

The Jesuits in Latin America: 1549–2000:: 450 Years of Inculturation, Defense of Human Rights, and Prophetic Witness . St Louis, MO: Institute of Jesuit Sources 2009.

Lapomarda, Vincent A., The Catholic Bishops of Europe and the Nazi Persecutions of Catholics and Jews , Lewiston, New York : Edwin Mellen Press (2012) McCoog, Thomas M., ed.

Mercurian Project: Forming Jesuit Culture: 1573–1580 (2004) (30 advanced essays by scholars).

Martin, A. Lynn.

Jesuit Mind. The Mentality of an Elite in Early Modern France (1988).

O'Malley, John. "The Society of Jesus." in R. Po-chia Hsia, ed., A Companion to the Reformation World (2004), pp. 223–236.

O'Malley, John W. ed.

Saints or Devils Incarnate? Studies in Jesuit History (2013).

Parkman, Francis (1867).

The Jesuits in North America in the Seventeenth Century (PDF) . p. 637. Archived from the original (PDF) on 9 May 2012 . Retrieved 25 April 2012 .

Pomplun, Trent.

Jesuit on the Roof of the World: Ippolito Desideri's Mission to Tibet . Oxford University Press (2010).

Roberts, Ian D.

Harvest of Hope: Jesuit Collegiate Education in England, 1794–1914 (1996).

Ronan, Charles E. and Bonnie B. C. Oh, eds.

East Meets West: The Jesuits in China, 1582–1773 (1988).

Ross, Andrew C.

Vision Betrayed: The Jesuits in Japan & China, 1542–1742 (1994).

Santich, Jan Joseph.

Missio Moscovitica: The Role of the Jesuits in the Westernization of Russia, 1582–1689 (1995).

Schmiedl, Joachim (2011).

Religious Orders as Transnational Networks of the Catholic Church Archived 24 September 2021 at the Wayback Machine , EGO – European History Online Archived 8 February 2013 at the Wayback Machine , Mainz: Institute of European History Archived 19 February 2016 at the Wayback Machine , retrieved: 25 March 2021 ( pdf Archived 17 January 2022 at the Wayback Machine ).

Wright, Jonathan. "From Immolation to Restoration: The Jesuits, 1773–1814." Theological Studies (2014) 75#4 pp. 729–745.

Zhang, Qiong.

Making the New World their own: Chinese encounters with Jesuit science in the age of discovery (Brill, 2015).

United States [ edit ] Cushner, Nicholas P.

Soldiers of God: The Jesuits in Colonial America, 1565–1767 (2002) 402 pp.

Garraghan, Gilbert J.

The Jesuits Of The Middle United States (3 vol 1938) covers Midwest from 1800 to 1919 vol 1 online ; vol 2 ; vol 3 McDonough, Peter.

Men astutely trained : a history of the Jesuits in the American century (1994), covers 1900 to 1960s; online free Schroth, Raymond A.

The American Jesuits: A History (2009) Primary sources [ edit ] Desideri, Ippolito. "Mission to Tibet: The Extraordinary Eighteenth-Century Account of Father Ippolito Desideri." Translated by Michael J. Sweet. Edited by Leonard Zwilling. Boston: Wisdom Publications, 2010.

Donnelly, John Patrick, ed.

Jesuit Writings of the Early Modern Period: 1540–1640 (2006) In German [ edit ] Klaus Schatz.

Geschichte der deutschen Jesuiten: Bd. 1: 1814–1872 Münster: Aschendorff Verlag, 2013. XXX, 274 S.

ISBN 978-3-402-12964-7 .

online review Schatz.

Geschichte der deutschen Jesuiten: Bd. 2: 1872–1917 Schatz.

Geschichte der deutschen Jesuiten: Bd. 3: 1917–1945 Schatz.

Geschichte der deutschen Jesuiten: Bd. 4: 1945–1983 Schatz.

Geschichte der deutschen Jesuiten: Bd. 5: Quellen, Glossar, Biogramme, Gesamtregister External links [ edit ] Library resources about Jesuits Resources in your library Resources in other libraries Media related to Society of Jesus at Wikimedia Commons " Society of Jesus " section of Wikisource 's Catholicism portal .

Catholic Church documents [ edit ] Benedict XVI's Address to the Members of the Society of Jesus, 22 April 2006 Archived 22 August 2013 at the Wayback Machine Benedict XVI's Visit to the Pontifical Gregorian University, 3 November 2006 Archived 21 October 2012 at the Wayback Machine Jesuit documents [ edit ] The Jesuit Ratio Studiorum of 1599 The Jesuit Mission Press in Japan, 1591–1610 Letter of the Jesuit Social Justice Secretariat to the leaders of the G8, July 2005 Archived 30 June 2017 at the Wayback Machine The Spiritual Exercises of St. Ignatius of Loyola Archived 2 December 2010 at the Wayback Machine Other links [ edit ] The Jesuits Archived 22 March 2018 at the Wayback Machine , BBC Radio 4 discussion with Nigel Aston, Simon Ditchfield & Olwen Hutton ( In Our Time , 18 January 2007) "The Jesuit Curia in Rome" .

Archived from the original on 26 February 2011 . Retrieved 2 April 2012 .

"Archivum Romanum Societatis Iesu – Jesuit Archive in Rome" .

Archived from the original on 2 July 2013 . Retrieved 2 July 2013 .

Archives of Jezuïeten – Belgische (1832–1935) En Vlaamse (1935–) Provincie. 16de Eeuw–2012 in ODIS – Online Database for Intermediary Structures Archived 28 April 2016 at the Wayback Machine Journal of Jesuit Studies.

Archived 4 September 2021 at the Wayback Machine Institute for Advanced Jesuit Studies. Boston College.

v t e Jesuits History Protestant Reformation Counter-Reformation Spiritual Exercises of Ignatius of Loyola Ad maiorem Dei gloriam Magis Regimini militantis Ecclesiae Exposcit debitum Ratio Studiorum Suppression of the Society of Jesus List of Jesuits Saints José de Anchieta Modeste Andlauer Edmund Arrowsmith Inácio de Azevedo Robert Bellarmine John Berchmans Jacques Berthieu Andrew Bobola Francis Borgia Jean de Brébeuf Alexander Briant John de Britto Edmund Campion Peter Canisius Juan del Castillo Noël Chabanel Peter Claver Claude de la Colombière Antoine Daniel Paul Denn Philip Evans Peter Faber Thomas Garnet Charles Garnier Aloysius Gonzaga Roque González de Santa Cruz John Soan de Goto René Goupil Melchior Grodziecki Alberto Hurtado Rémy Isoré Ignatius of Loyola Francis de Geronimo Isaac Jogues James Kisai Stanislaus Kostka Jean de Lalande Gabriel Lalemant David Lewis Lèon-Ignance Mangin Paul Miki Henry Morse John Ogilvie Nicholas Owen Joseph Pignatelli Stephen Pongracz Bernardino Realino John Francis Regis Alphonsus Rodriguez José María Rubio Robert Southwell André de Soveral Henry Walpole Francis Xavier Alfonso Rodríguez Olmedo Popes Francis Theology Diego Laynez Luis de Molina Francisco Suárez Jean Daniélou Karl Rahner Pierre Teilhard de Chardin Henri de Lubac John Courtney Murray Joseph Fitzmyer Alonso Rodriguez List of Jesuit theologians General Bollandist La Civiltà Cattolica General Congregation Superior General of the Society of Jesus Pontifical Gregorian University Pontifical Biblical Institute Pontifical Oriental Institute Jesuit China missions Jesuit missions in North America List of Jesuit educational institutions International Association of Jesuit Universities Ignatian Pedagogical Paradigm Related Church of the Gesù Madonna Della Strada Saint-Pierre de Montmartre Claudio Acquaviva Category Catholicism portal v t e Catholic religious institutes Male and female Alexians Assumptionists (AA) Augustinian Recollects (OAR) Basilian Aleppians (BA) Basilian Chouerites (BC) Benedictines (OSB) Bridgettines (OSsS) Canossians (FDCC) Carmelites (OCarm) Carthusians (OCart) Cistercians (OCist) Congregation of Our Lady of Sion (NDS) Congregation of the Sacred Hearts of Jesus and Mary (SSCC) Discalced Carmelites (OCD) Dominicans (OP) Franciscans (OFM) Institute of the Incarnate Word (IVE) Mercedarians (O de M) Missionaries of Charity (MC) Missionaries of St. Charles Borromeo (CS) Monastic Family of Bethlehem, of the Assumption of the Virgin and of Saint Bruno Premonstratensians (OPraem) Servants of Charity (SC) Servite Order (OSM) Society of the Atonement (SA) TOR Franciscans Trappists (OCSO) Trinitarian Order (OSST) Coat of arms of Vatican City Male Adorno Fathers (CRM) Albertine Brothers Augustinians (OSA) Barnabites (B) Basilians (CSB) Brothers of Our Lady of Mercy (FDM) Camillians (MI) Canons Regular of St. John Cantius (SJC) Capuchins (OFM Cap) Christian Brothers (Irish) (CFC) Congregatio Discipulorum Domini (CDD) Immaculate Heart of Mary (CICM) Congregation of the Blessed Sacrament (SSS) Claretians (CMF) Congregation of Saint Thérèse of Lisieux (CST) Conventual Franciscans (OFM Conv) Crosiers (OSC) De La Salle Brothers (FSC) Discalced Augustinians (OAD) Franciscan Friars of the Renewal (CFR) Franciscan Missionaries of the Eternal Word (MFVA) Gabrielites Heralds of Good News (HGN) Holy Cross (CSC) Holy Ghost Fathers (CSSp) Josephites (SSJ) Legionaries of Christ (LC) Little Brothers of Jesus Marians of the Immaculate Conception (MIC) Society of Jesus (Jesuits) (SJ) Society of Mary (Marianists) (SM) Society of Mary (Marists) (SM) Society of the Divine Word (SVD) Society of Saint Edmund (SSE) Marist Brothers (FMS) Mechitarists (CAM) Comboni Missionaries of the Heart of Jesus (MCCI) Missionaries of La Salette (MS) Missionaries of St. Francis de Sales (MSFS) Missionaries of the Poor (MOP) Missionaries of the Sacred Heart (MSC) Missionaries of the Sacred Hearts of Jesus and Mary Oblates of Mary Immaculate (OMI) Oblates of the Virgin Mary (OMV) Oblates of St. Francis de Sales (OSFS) Order of Friars Minor (OFM) Passionists (CP) Pauline Fathers (OSPPE) Redemptorists (CSsR) Rogationists of the Heart of Jesus (RCJ) Sacred Heart Brothers Salesians (SDB) Servants of Jesus and Mary (SJM) Sons of the Most Holy Redeemer (FSSR) Stigmatines (CSS) Xaverian Brothers (CFX) Female Adorers of the Blood of Christ (ASC) Apostolic Carmel (AC) Basilian Aleppian Sisters Basilian Chouerite Sisters Brigidines Congregation of the Sisters of the Immaculate Conception of the Blessed Virgin Mary (CSIC) Carmelite Sisters of Saint Teresa (CSST) Congregation of the Franciscan Hospitaller Sisters of the Immaculate Conception (FHIC) Daughters of Divine Love Daughters of Mary of the Immaculate Conception (DM) Daughters of the Holy Heart of Mary Faithful Companions of Jesus Felicians (CSSF) Filippini Sisters (MPF) Handmaids of the Heart of Jesus Handmaids of the Sacred Heart of Jesus Hijas de Jesús Holy Spirit Adoration Sisters Institute of the Blessed Virgin Mary Little Sisters Disciples of the Lamb Little Sisters of Jesus Little Sisters of the Poor Living the Gospel Community (LGC) Lovers of the Holy Cross Marianites of Holy Cross (MSC) Maryknoll Sisters (MM) Missionary Sisters of the Immaculate Conception of the Mother of God (SMIC) Missionary Sisters of the Immaculate Heart of Mary (ICM) Missionary Sisters of the Sacred Heart Missionary Sisters of the Sacred Heart of Jesus (MSC) Oblate Sisters of Providence (OSP) Oblates of Jesus the Priest Oblate Sisters of the Virgin Mary of Fatima (OMVF) Order of Our Lady of Charity (ODNC) Order of the Annunciation of the Blessed Virgin Mary Poor Clares (OSC) Poor Clare Missionaries of the Blessed Sacrament (MC) Religious of the Sacred Heart of Jesus (RSCJ) Religious of the Virgin Mary (RVM) Servants of St. Joseph (SSJ) Sisters of the Blessed Sacrament Sisters of Charity Sisters of Maria Bambina (SCCG) Sisters of Christian Doctrine of Nancy (DC) Sisters of the Cross and Passion Sisters of the Destitute (SD) Sisters of the Good Shepherd (RGS) Sisters of Holy Cross Sisters of the Holy Cross Sisters of the Holy Family-Louisiana Sisters of the Holy Names of Jesus and Mary Sisters of the Immaculate Conception Sisters of the Immaculate Conception of the Blessed Virgin Mary Sisters of the Immaculate Heart of Mary Sisters, Servants of the Immaculate Heart of Mary Sisters of Life (SV) Sisters of Mercy (RSM) Sisters of Notre Dame de Namur (SNDdeN) Sisters of Providence of Saint Mary-of-the-Woods Sisters of the Sacred Heart Sisters of Saint Francis Sisters of Saint Joseph The Sisters of St. Joseph of Peace Sisters of St Joseph of the Sacred Heart (RSJ) Sisters of St. Paul of Chartres (SPC) Society of the Helpers of the Holy Souls Sisters of Social Service (sss) Servants of the Blessed Sacrament (SSS) Ursulines (OSU) White Sisters See also: Third orders of Catholic laity Catholicism portal v t e History of the Catholic Church General History of the Catholic Church By country or region Ecclesiastical history Timeline Papacy Papal primacy Catholic ecumenical councils First seven Catholic Bible Biblical canon Vulgate Crusading movement History of the Roman Curia Religious institutes Christian monasticism Catholic culture Art Role in civilization Vatican City Papal States Latin Church Eastern Catholic Churches Early Church (30–325/476) Origins and Apostolic Age (30–100) Jesus Ministry Crucifixion Resurrection Great Commission Holy Spirit Mary John the Baptist Apostles in the New Testament Commissioning Peter John Paul Stephen Council of Jerusalem Split with Judaism New Testament Background Gospels Acts Pauline epistles General epistles Revelation Ante-Nicene period (100–325) Persecution Church Fathers Apostolic Fathers Pope Clement I Polycarp Ignatius Irenaeus Justin Martyr Canon Tertullian Origen Late antiquity (313–476) Great Church (180–451) Roman state church (380–451) Constantine the Great Christianity Arian controversy Archbasilica of Saint John Lateran Old St. Peter's Basilica First Council of Nicaea Pope Sylvester I First Council of Constantinople Biblical canon Jerome Vulgate Council of Ephesus Council of Chalcedon Early Middle Ages Benedict of Nursia Monasticism Second Council of Constantinople Pope Gregory I Gregorian chant Third Council of Constantinople Saint Boniface Byzantine Iconoclasm Second Council of Nicaea Charlemagne Pope Leo III Fourth Council of Constantinople East–West Schism High Middle Ages Pope Urban II Investiture Controversy Clash against the empire Crusades Universities Scholasticism First Council of the Lateran Second Council of the Lateran Third Council of the Lateran Pope Innocent III Latin Empire Francis of Assisi Fourth Council of the Lateran Inquisition First Council of Lyon Second Council of Lyon Bernard of Clairvaux Late Middle Ages Thomas Aquinas Pope Boniface VIII Western Schism Avignon Papacy Pope Clement V Council of Vienne Knights Templar Catherine of Siena Pope Alexander VI Age of Discovery Protestant Reformation Counter-Reformation Protestant Reformation Catholic Counter-Reformation Exsurge Domine Dissolution of the monasteries Council of Trent Thomas More Pope Leo X Society of Jesus Ignatius of Loyola Francis Xavier Pope Pius V Tridentine Mass Teresa of Ávila John of the Cross Peter Canisius Philip Neri Robert Bellarmine European wars of religion Thirty Years' War Baroque period to the French Revolution Pope Innocent XI Pope Benedict XIV Suppression of the Society of Jesus Age of Enlightenment Anti-clericalism Pope Pius VI Shimabara Rebellion Edict of Nantes Dechristianization of France during the French Revolution 19th century Pope Pius VII Pope Pius IX United States Dogma of the Immaculate Conception of the Virgin Mary Our Lady of La Salette Our Lady of Lourdes First Vatican Council Papal infallibility Pope Leo XIII Mary of the Divine Heart Prayer of Consecration to the Sacred Heart Rerum novarum 20th century Pope Pius X Our Lady of Fátima Persecutions of the Catholic Church and Pius XII Pope Pius XII Pope Pius XII 1942 consecration to the Immaculate Heart of Mary Dogma of the Assumption of the Virgin Mary Lateran Treaty Nazi Germany Mit brennender Sorge Pope John XXIII Pacem in terris Second Vatican Council Ecumenism Judaism Pope Paul VI ( coronation ) Pope John Paul I Mother Teresa USSR Pope John Paul II HIV/AIDS World Youth Day 1995 21st century Sexual abuse scandal Islam World Youth Day 2000 2002 2005 2008 2011 2013 2016 2019 2023 Pope Benedict XVI Pope Francis Laudato si' Patriarch Kirill COVID-19 pandemic Pope Leo XIV Vatican City portal Catholicism portal Jesuit Bishops v t e Catholic Church in Russia Province of Moscow Archdiocese of Moscow Diocese of Novosibirsk Diocese of Saratov Diocese of Irkutsk Exempt jurisdiction Apostolic Prefecture of Yuzhno Sakhalinsk Furthermore List of Catholic dioceses in Russia Bishops Episcopal Conference Paolo Pezzi Nicolai Dubinin Joseph Werth Clemens Pickel Cyryl Klimowicz Apostolic Nuncio Giovanni d'Aniello Education St. Thomas Institute [ de ] (Moscow) "Mary, Queen of Apostles" Seminary [ ru ] (St. Petersburg) Catholic Preseminary (Novosibirsk) Order of the Holy Sepulchre Magistral Delegation of Russia Igor Kovalevsky (Chaplain) Eastern Catholic Churches Byzantine Rite Russian Greek Catholic Church : Russian Catholic Apostolic Exarchate of Russia ( Joseph Werth : Ordinary) Armenian Rite Armenian Catholic Church : Ordinariate for Catholics of Armenian Rite in Eastern Europe ( Mikael Bassalé : Apostolic Administrator) Former Dioceses Archdiocese of Mohilev Diocese of Tiraspol Diocese of Vladivostok Apostolic Administration of Minsk-Mohilev Apostolic Administration of Moscow [ ru ] Apostolic Administration of Leningrad [ ru ] Apostolic Administration of Odesa Apostolic Vicariate of Siberia [ ru ] Cathedrals Cathedral of the Assumption of the Blessed Virgin Mary (Saint Petersburg) Cathedral of the Immaculate Conception (Moscow) Immaculate Heart of Mary Cathedral, Irkutsk Mother of God Church, Vladivostok St. Peter and St. Paul Cathedral, Saratov Transfiguration Cathedral, Novosibirsk Catholicism portal Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National Germany United States France BnF data Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal 2 Norway Latvia Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Catalonia Academics CiNii People Trove Other IdRef Historical Dictionary of Switzerland İslâm Ansiklopedisi Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐wms7n
Cached time: 20250817142552
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 3.202 seconds
Real time usage: 3.588 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 23190/1000000
Revision size: 210230/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 641003/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 39977/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 19/100
Expensive parser function count: 37/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 795799/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 2.027/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 23025996/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 2994.942      1 -total
 37.42% 1120.843      2 Template:Reflist
 15.73%  471.141     68 Template:Cite_web
 13.62%  408.001     63 Template:Cite_book
  9.78%  292.804     74 Template:Sfn
  9.17%  274.708      1 Template:Infobox_organization
  8.90%  266.407      1 Template:Infobox
  4.19%  125.411      5 Template:Langx
  3.59%  107.636     20 Template:Cite_news
  3.46%  103.636     15 Template:Cite_journal Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:16083:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817142552 and revision id 1306396998. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Jesuits&oldid=1306396998 " Categories : Society of Jesus Ignatius of Loyola 1540 establishments in Europe Counter-Reformation Religious organizations established in the 1540s Catholic religious orders established in the 16th century Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles containing Spanish-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2024 CS1: unfit URL Webarchive template wayback links CS1 Latin-language sources (la) CS1 French-language sources (fr) CS1 Vietnamese-language sources (vi) Articles with Chinese-language sources (zh) CS1: long volume value Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the ODNB Pages with missing ISBNs CS1 errors: ISBN date All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from March 2023 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from November 2021 Articles containing Latin-language text Coordinates not on Wikidata Articles needing additional references from August 2020 All articles needing additional references Wikipedia articles needing clarification from December 2019 All Wikipedia articles needing clarification Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2012 All articles containing potentially dated statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2025 Articles containing French-language text All articles lacking reliable references Articles lacking reliable references from June 2023 Articles containing German-language text Articles with unsourced statements from May 2025 Articles incorporating a citation from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference CS1 maint: location missing publisher Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 17 August 2025, at 14:24 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Jesuits 107 languages Add topic

