Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Works 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Agon Hamza 2 languages Polski Shqip Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This biography of a living person needs additional citations for verification .

Please help by adding reliable sources .

Contentious material about living persons that is unsourced or poorly sourced must be removed immediately from the article and its talk page, especially if potentially libelous .

Find sources: "Agon Hamza" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( August 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This biography of a living person relies too much on references to primary sources .

Please help by adding secondary or tertiary sources . Contentious material about living persons that is unsourced or poorly sourced must be removed immediately , especially if potentially libelous or harmful.

Find sources: "Agon Hamza" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( August 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Reading Marx (2018), cover page Agon Hamza (born 1984) is a philosopher and a political theorist from Kosovo .

[ 1 ] Influenced by Žižek and his readings of German Idealism , Marx and Marxist tradition in general; his work develops further the Hegelian-Marxist concepts of state , religion and politics . He is the author of Althusser and Pasolini: Philosophy, Marxism and Film (2016) and the co-author of Reading Marx (2018) and Reading Hegel (2021) alongside Slavoj Žižek and Frank Ruda , as well as From Myth to Symptom: The Case of Kosovo (2013) with Slavoj Žižek .

He is the founder and co-editor-in-chief of the international journal of political thought and philosophy Crisis and Critique .

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Life [ edit ] Hamza is an Assistant professor of political philosophy at Institute of Social Sciences and Humanities, in Skopje , North Macedonia .

[ 4 ] He briefly served as political advisor to the Prime Minister of the Republic of Kosovo, Albin Kurti , in 2020.

[ 5 ] He received his Ph.D. in 2017 from The Research Center of the Slovenian Academy of Sciences and Arts (ZRC SAZU), under the supervision of Jelica Šumič Riha on the work of the French Marxist philosopher Louis Althusser . He is a regular contributor to a daily newspaper in Kosovo, [ 6 ] and contributed from 2020 to 2021 to the Philosophical Salon in a monthly feature, "The R-Files” (short for “The Review Files”), with Frank Ruda.

[ 7 ] He has written for Al-Jazeera , [ 8 ] Los Angeles Review of Books (LARB).

[ 9 ] Works [ edit ] Repeating Žižek . Durham: Duke University Press. 2015 Slavoj Žižek and Dialectical Materialism . Basingstoke, Palgrave Macmillan. 2016 (with Frank Ruda) Althusser and Theology: Religion, Politics and Philosophy . Leiden, Brill, 2016 Althusser and Pasolini: Philosophy, Marxism, and Film.

Basingstoke, Palgrave Macmillan. 2016/2018 Reading Marx . (with Slavoj Žižek and Frank Ruda) London, Polity Press, 2018.

Reading Hegel . (with Slavoj Žižek and Frank Ruda) London, Polity Press, 2021.

See also [ edit ] Hegelian Marxism References [ edit ] ^ Alfie Bown (2016).

HKRB Interviews: Agon Hamza , Hong Kong Review of Books, July 2016 ^ "Los Angeles Review of Books" .

^ "Home" .

^ "» Agon Hamza" .

^ "Prime Minister Kurti has appointed Mr. Agon Hamza, political adviser" . 10 March 2020.

^ "Autori" .

^ "You searched for R-files" .

^ "Agon Hamza | al Jazeera News | Today's latest from al Jazeera" .

^ "Los Angeles Review of Books" .

Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National Germany United States Netherlands Israel Academics CiNii People DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Agon_Hamza&oldid=1291767865 " Categories : 1984 births Living people Kosovan writers 21st-century philosophers Political philosophers Hidden categories: BLP articles lacking sources from August 2021 All BLP articles lacking sources Articles lacking reliable references from August 2021 All articles lacking reliable references Articles with multiple maintenance issues This page was last edited on 23 May 2025, at 08:12 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Agon Hamza 2 languages Add topic

