Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Goryeo dynasty Toggle Goryeo dynasty subsection 1.1 Historical outlook 2 Joseon dynasty Toggle Joseon dynasty subsection 2.1 Historical outlook of the early period 2.2 Historical outlook of the late period 3 Modern era Toggle Modern era subsection 3.1 Historical outlook of the early period 3.2 Historical outlook of later period 4 See also 5 References 6 Further reading 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Historiography of Korea 3 languages Français 한국어 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia The historiography of Korea refers to the study and methods of compiling the history of Korea . This field has evolved over time, reflecting different periods and cultural contexts. During the Joseon period, historical narratives were influenced by the royal court, emphasizing a state-centric view. However, during the Korean independence movement and the Japanese colonial period , Korean historiography shifted towards a more realistic analysis and critical thinking. Modern Korean historiography seeks to provide a multi-dimensional understanding through independent perspectives, diverse theories, and methodologies, highlighting the distinctive characteristics and significance of Korean history.

Goryeo dynasty [ edit ] The historical and literary activities of the Goryeo Dynasty were diverse and active, primarily focused on the use of Chinese characters. These activities gradually shifted from a China-centric perspective to a more Korea-centric approach, conscious of the nation's independence. In history, Kim Bu-sik's Samguk sagi and Ilyeon's Samguk yusa are representative works, reflecting the changing times and growing national consciousness. During this period, most activities were still predominantly based on Chinese characters.

[ 1 ] Historical outlook [ edit ] First of all, it is noteworthy that the activities in the fields of history and literature during this era were much more diverse and active than in the previous era. These activities were made possible through a deeper understanding of Chinese characters. During this time, neither Idu (吏讀), which was found in Silla's Hyangga literature, nor Hangeul, introduced after the Joseon Dynasty, was commonly used as a means of expression. Almost all activities were dominated by the use of Chinese characters, which were the primary medium of the era. The overall characteristic of historical and literary thought in this period lies in the gradual shift from a Chinese-centered perspective to a Korean-centered one, as people became increasingly aware of national independence. This change inevitably occurred due to the development of Korean society and shifts in domestic circumstances.

[ 2 ] In terms of historical writings, Goryeo began compiling the Sillok (實錄) from the early stages of the dynasty. In addition to this project, other historical books (史書) were frequently compiled and published. Among them, Kim Bu-sik's Samguk sagi (三國史記) (comprising 50 volumes), compiled in the 23rd year of King Injong (1145), is the longest of the Korean history books still in existence. However, Samguk sagi has been criticized for largely reflecting Kim Bu-sik's Sadaejuui (事大主義), a pro-Chinese ideology.

[ 3 ] Through many passages in the Samguk sagi , Korea's historical narrative remains China-centered, leading to criticism that it lacks sufficient national independence. However, rather than placing the blame entirely on Kim Bu-sik, it is important to understand the spirit of the times. Ideologically, the deep influence of Chinese culture and its way of thinking was prevalent throughout Korean society until then. The historical thought (史學思想) seen in Samguk sagi is a product of these circumstances.

[ 4 ] As the times changed, so too did historical thought. A significant example of this can be seen in Ilyeon (一然) 's Samguk yusa (三國遺事), compiled during the reign of King Chungnyeol (1274–1308). By this time, the conditions had changed drastically. The Song (宋) Dynasty, founded by the Han (漢) people, had collapsed, and the Mongols, a northern people, had emerged as the dominant power, exerting considerable influence on the political and ideological landscape of the Goryeo Dynasty. At this point, a Korean-centered historical narrative began to emerge. The national consciousness to protect the Korean people in the face of Mongol military and political oppression was reflected in historical descriptions. For example, the Dangun myth [ ko ] (檀君神話), which appears at the beginning of Samguk yusa , represents efforts to reclaim national independence.

[ 5 ] This ideological trend can be generally observed in the history and literature of the late Goryeo Dynasty. For instance, the changing spirit of the times is reflected in Lee Seung-Hyu [ ko ] 's (李承休) Jewang ungi (帝王韻紀) and Lee Gyu-bo [ ko ] 's (李奎報) Dongmyeong Wangpyeon (東明王篇). Many other historical books, such as Pyeonnyeon Tongrok [ ko ] (編年通錄), Gogeumrok [ ko ] (古今錄), and Bonjo Pyeonnyeon Gangmok (本朝編年綱目), were also published during this period. However, it is unfortunate that these works are no longer extant, making it difficult to examine their specific historical thought.

[ 6 ] Joseon dynasty [ edit ] The historical ideas of the early Joseon Dynasty are particularly evident in the approach to compiling history. In the national history books of this period, Chinese-centered thinking, inherited from the Goryeo Dynasty, was predominant. However, due to the growing recognition that "the people of Joseon are well-versed in Chinese history but lack knowledge of Korean history," there was a shift toward emphasizing national history. This led to the compilation of numerous national history books and an increase in history education during this time.

[ 7 ] In contrast, during the late Joseon Dynasty, the focus on Korean historical consciousness became much more pronounced. However, this consciousness was still heavily influenced by Confucian ideas. The desire to break away from Confucian ideals led to the compilation of numerous historical works that aimed to represent Korea's autonomous and independent historical identity. This process resulted in a more systematic understanding of Korean history, and the historical ideas of the late Joseon Dynasty came to play a significant role in shaping Korean historical thought.

[ 8 ] Historical outlook of the early period [ edit ] The historical ideas of the early Joseon Dynasty are notably reflected in the approach to history editing. During this period, the focus of national history books remained largely Chinese-centered, following the precedent set by the Goryeo Dynasty. However, as awareness grew that "the people of Joseon are well-versed in Chinese history but lack knowledge of Korean history," there was a push towards emphasizing national history. This led to the compilation of many national historical texts and an increased focus on history education.

[ 7 ] In contrast, by the late Joseon Dynasty, there was a much stronger emphasis on Korean historical consciousness. Despite this, most of this consciousness was still rooted in Confucian ideas. Efforts were made to move away from Confucian idealism, leading to the compilation of numerous historical works aimed at representing Korea's independent historical identity. This period saw a reorganization of Korean history and its system, resulting in a significant development of historical thought.

[ 9 ] The influence of Chinese historical texts on the compilation of Korean national history was substantial. This is evident in the preface of Dongguk Tonggam , which reflects a strong interest in Chinese historiography. After the founding of the Joseon Dynasty, the compilation of historical records such as the Annals of the Dynasty and various historical texts, including Gwanchan and Sachan works like Goryeosa and Goreyosa Jeolyo [ ko ] , became prominent. King Sejo's efforts to highlight Korean history and correct historical narratives are well-documented, including Seo Geo-Jeong's references to Chinese texts like Jachi Tonggam and Tonggam Gangmok by Zhu Xi (朱憙). Seo Geo-Jeong's critiques emphasized that despite the long history of Joseon, there was a lack of a comprehensive history book, which motivated the creation of works like the Dongguk Tonggam to enlighten people about Korean history.

[ 10 ] During the early Joseon Dynasty, the historical editing consciousness was strong, with an emphasis on moral instruction and the promotion of national ethos. This is reflected in the efforts to compile various historical texts and to enhance history education. For instance, Yang Seong-Ji's selection of important historical texts during King Sejo's reign underscored the commitment to both Korean and Chinese history. The focus on Korean history became even more pronounced after events like the Imjin War and the Qing invasion of Joseon , driven by the need to assert Korean identity in the face of external pressures.

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] Historical outlook of the late period [ edit ] A series of advanced scholars in the late Joseon Dynasty grappled with various contradictions in political and social systems. While there were notable thinkers in earlier periods, their motivations were not as pronounced as those in the late Joseon era. Some of these scholars sought solutions while in government, while others pursued their ideas in rural settings. Nonetheless, any proposed ideas were constrained by Confucian ideology (儒敎理念), which remained the standard for resolving contradictions. From the 18th century onwards, as Western studies and new perceptions of Qing dynasty culture emerged, ideas began to deviate from Confucianism. However, most remained influenced by Confucian thought.

[ 13 ] Consequently, the pursuit of a new ideal state and society often began with a critique of reality based on Confucian ideals. This critique frequently sought rationality from a historical perspective.

[ 14 ] Pre-modern history was autonomous, and its significance was apparent. This autonomy also characterized the historical consciousness of the late Joseon Dynasty.

[ 15 ] Reality often proved unsatisfactory, particularly for those aiming to achieve Gwangjeong (匡正) by confronting contradictions. Historical research, always critical of contemporary scientific methodology, begins with a critique of inherent facts. This critical approach was also evident in the late Joseon Dynasty. Scholars of this period were independent thinkers who attempted to resolve issues from an independent perspective, diverging from traditional attitudes. This approach led to a renewed perception of Joseon's history and geography.

[ 16 ] In Korea, historical consciousness emerged prominently during the period of national awakening. Whether or not the concept of a nation was established, it arose during a time of strong self-recognition. This phenomenon can be observed in various historical periods, such as the mid-Goryeo period during northern invasions, the early Joseon period with the establishment of new systems, and the mid-Joseon period facing invasions from the north and south. Intellectuals before and after the 18th century, who struggled with realistic contradictions before and after the Enlightenment, also exhibited this consciousness. Historical consciousness thus characterizes the times, and historical books reflecting this consciousness emerged during the late Joseon Dynasty.

[ 17 ] Notable historians who compiled significant historical works include Ahn Jung-bok (安鼎福), author of Dongsa Gangmok (東史綱目); Lee Geung-ik (李肯翊), author of Yeongnyeosil Gisul [ ko ] (燃藜室記述); and Han Chi-yoon (韓致奫), author of Haedong Yeoksa [ ko ] (海東繹史).

[ 18 ] Influential scholars who impacted their work included Lee Ik (李瀷), Lim Sang-Deok (林象德), Yoon Seong-sang (尹衡聖), Lee Deok-mu (李德懋), Cho Gyeong-nam (趙慶男), Yoo Deuk-gong (柳得恭), Hong Yang-ho (洪良浩), Hong Seok-ju (洪奭周), and Jeong Yak-yong (丁若鏞). Most of the so-called Positive School (實學派) of the late Joseon Dynasty were historical thinkers. They studied history not merely from autonomous perspectives but engaged actively with and critiqued reality. This active historicism aimed for an objective examination of history. For instance, Han Chi-yoon's Haedong Yeoksa , which aimed to project Korean history using Chinese or Japanese sources, was comparable to Ahn Jung-bok's Dongsa Gangmok , which established an independent Korean history system, and Lee Geung-ik's Yeongnyeosil Gisul . The value of history as a science was a common goal.

[ 19 ] History is more than just a description of facts. Each historical work of the late Joseon Dynasty had unique characteristics. For example, Dongsa Gangmok was a comprehensive history of Gangmok (綱目), Yeongnyeosil Gisul was a concise history of the end of the article, and Haedong Yeoksa was a comprehensive history of Gijeon (紀傳).

[ 20 ] Additionally, Lim Sang-Deok's Dongsa Hoegang (東史會綱) and Yoon Seong-sang's Joya Cheomjae (朝野僉載) are considered Yasa (野史), and Yoo Deuk-gong established a personal view on the history of Balhae (渤海), founded by migrants from Goguryeo.

[ 21 ] Their approach to studying and compiling history sought to uncover true historical facts rather than merely acknowledging existing ones. This pursuit of due diligence or Gujin (求眞) is evident in the Goi-pyeon (考異篇) and Haedong Yeoksa in Dongsa Gangmok , as well as in the geographical evidence in Balhaego by Yoo Deuk-gong. Their spirit aimed to systematically understand and properly reorganize Korean history, laying the foundation for the longitudinal study of history and analysis of historical facts.

[ 22 ] The innovative perspective on Korean history pioneered by these scholars is still relevant today. They approached historical research with a scientific and objective mindset. Their methods and attitudes were further developed by scholars such as Lee Geon-chang (李建昌), Park Eun-sik (朴殷植), Shin Chae-ho (申采浩), and Jang Ji-yeon (張志淵).

[ 23 ] Additionally, scholars such as Choi Nam-seon (崔南善), Lee Neung-hwa (李能和), and Jeong In-bo (鄭寅普) also belong to this group. Thus, historical thought in the late Joseon Dynasty remains significant both in its time and as a major component of Korean historical science.

[ 24 ] Modern era [ edit ] From 1890 to 1920, there was a need for historical consciousness focused on the dismantling of the feudal social system and national independence. As a result, many Koreans made significant efforts to move away from traditional historical views. For example, Kim Taek-young [ ko ] (金澤榮), Hyunchae [ ko ] (玄采), and Jang Ji-yeon [ ko ] (張志淵) sought to reform historical thought through Silhak (practical learning).

Park Eun-sik (朴殷植) and Sin Chae-ho addressed issues that Silhak could not resolve, thereby completing modern Korean history.

[ 23 ] This process established modern Korean history on ethnic principles. Additionally, from 1930 to 1940, Jeong In-bo, Choi Nam-sun , and Paek Nam-un sought to systematize Korean history by writing various historical works based on socioeconomic history.

[ 25 ] Historical outlook of the early period [ edit ] In the 19th century, the history of Korea had two basic characteristics. One was to break down the feudal social system that had already been dismantled in the internal development of Korean history and form a new modern society. The other was the question of how to maintain national independence in response to the imperialist and colonial advancement of Western capitalist powers or the Japanese colonial era.

[ 26 ] Therefore, historical studies of this period needed a historical consciousness to provide insight into such historical reality and cope with it. Moreover, in the period from the 1890s to the 1910s, Korean history was studied and described by Japanese scholars as modern history, in that it was carried out by the Japanese invasion of the continent. In Japan, when research on Korean history was being conducted with such aggression, history in Korea had to seek a new dimension in terms of historical consciousness and methodology of historical research. In other words, modern Korean history also needed to break away from traditional historical views and objectively grasp the development of history.

[ 27 ] This request showed a tendency to take into account new methodologies only through the Gwangmu(光武) reform period, and the history of this period was based on Silhak(實學) and emphasized traditional ideas and culture that should inherit and develop Silhak. In this way, in the 5th year of Gwangmu (1901), Kim Taek-young(金澤榮), Hyunchae(玄采), and Jang Ji-yeon(張志淵) published or expanded practical books. In 1905, Kim Taek-young compiled Yeoksa-Jipryak(歷史輯略), and Jang Ji-yeon [ ko ] was also preparing the history of Korean manners and customs.

[ 28 ] As such, historians of the reform period conducted their research on a practical basis, and the results were shown in two trends: Tongsa(通史) and special research. As Tongsa, Hwang Hyun [ ko ] (黃玹)'s Maecheon Yarok [ ko ] (梅泉野錄), Jeong Gyeo [ ko ] (鄭喬)'s Daehan Gyenyeonsa (大韓季年史), and Kim Taek-young's biography Yeoksa-Jipryak are representative. These authors' historical consciousness was strong, so they agreed to the reform projects of this period and showed a national consciousness that strongly resisted imperialist aggression. However, their historical descriptions were still following tradition, and their historical consciousness did not reach modernity. This point was a limitation and a task that the historical studies of this period had to overcome.

[ 29 ] These tasks gradually found clues to solutions through translation studies of history. From the standpoint of historical history, translation can be found in a series of translation activities. He performed Manguksagi (萬國史記) and published Dongguksarak(東國史略). These translation activities were based on the common view of the literate stratum at the time that they should know how to resist imperialism, and interest in methodologies for historical descriptions also developed.

[ 30 ] It was a series of scholars called ethnic historians who succeeded in the history of the reform period and solved the problems that could not be solved at that time.

[ 31 ] Ethnic history was developed by Park Eun-sik(朴殷植) and Sin Chae-ho . Park Eun-sik developed Korean history into modern history by inheriting the history of the Gwangmu Reform period and introducing the methodology of modern history, which was in the 1910s, and Hanguk Tongsa(韓國痛史) and " Korean Independence Movement Jihyeolsa [ ko ] (韓國獨立運動之血史)" [ 32 ] are his representative works. In these books, he analyzed, criticized, and synthesized the development process of historical facts in terms of causal relations, and revealed the Japanese invasion process in detail through the methodology of modern history. He considered the soul, or spirit, as the key to maintaining the state, and called it the history of the country where the soul of the nation or state is contained. He also said that a country with a strong soul could eventually become independent even if it was temporarily merged into the powers. He believed that the Korean people were strong-spirited and was confident that Korea would also be liberated in the future. It cannot be overlooked that Park Eun-sik's historical thought and history were consistent with national consciousness and national spirit, and it was also incorporated into the enterprising reform idea that the world's culture should be opened and consumed from an independent standpoint. At the same time, his historical ideas were deeply imbued with Confucian values. Therefore, his reform ideas contained limitations that were bound to be critiqued within the historical consciousness of modern Korean history in that regard.

[ 33 ] Shin Chae-ho , theoretically completed modern Korean history. And also started Korean historiographic Nationalism It was Shin Chae-ho who inherited Park Eun-sik's history, overcame the limitations of his historical consciousness, and theoretically completed modern Korean history. His historical consciousness was thorough in the struggle against imperialism, and his ethnic consciousness was strong. His historical research was a struggle for independence in itself. It is a fact that, in the 1920s, Shin Chae-ho paid attention to history and completed modern Korean history, which is well illustrated in Joseon Sanggosa (朝鮮上古史) and other fragmentary research activities. He recognized the nature of history as a "struggle between Ah (我) and Via (非我)." Here, Ah or Via should have continuity in time, and its influence should spread socially.

[ 34 ] In addition, the struggle was such that if the spiritual sense of subjectivity for "Ah" was not established or if the environment of "Via" was not adapted to, it would result in defeat. In particular, the contradiction between "Ah" and "Via" within society is regarded as an opportunity for social development.

[ 35 ] His essential understanding of history was that he sought to develop history by grasping the causal relationship of historical facts in social phenomena, and he understood that such struggles and new cultures were created by identifying various egos of subjectivity and internally comprehending the various historical realities of each era through mutual contradictions. Shin Chae-ho's attitude toward recognizing history was in line with modern European historical thought.

[ 36 ] Thus, from the standpoint of this historical awareness, Shin Chae-ho sought to reorganize Korean history. As part of these efforts, he criticized conventional historical books (史書) and emphasized the importance of the three major elements of history composition: time (時), earth (地), and human (人), which were often lacking in these historical texts. He also criticized these books for neglecting to thoroughly examine historical materials and failing to properly evaluate historical facts because they were based on the historical description methods of Confucius ' Chunchu (春秋) or Gangmok (綱目) by Zhu Xi (朱子) . Since the achievements of Korean history at that time were in such a condition, he argued that Korean history should be reorganized by critically assessing historical materials and improving the methods and perspectives of historical research and narratives.

[ 35 ] A particularly important aspect of Shin Chae-ho's historical consciousness was his strong pride in the history and tradition of the Korean people, along with a civic modern consciousness that believed in and sought to achieve human freedom and social progress. He also emphasized the nation as the subject of history and placed the people at the forefront of historical events, which reflected his vivid modern consciousness. His perspective on Japan focused on the idea of overthrowing invaders by force and achieving the independence of the people. He described this as a revolution through violence. He also harshly criticized the two methods that had been employed thus far to build the Japanese Empire: the independence movement through diplomatic strategy and the theory of preparation. However, for him, independence did not simply mean the establishment of the Japanese Empire. His concept of independence also included the social goal of reforming the class contradictions and outdated social systems that had existed in Korean society until that time. Korea's modern history emerged from the contradictory relationships of internal social conflicts and struggles against Japan, and through this, civic awareness and solid nationalist ideals were formed.

[ 37 ] Historical outlook of later period [ edit ] Korean history was evolving into modern history through the works of Park Eun-sik (朴殷植) and Shin Chae-ho (申采浩). Their historical descriptions and consciousness during this period were significant achievements for Korean history, serving as a spiritual foundation for establishing modern Korean history. However, in the 1930s and 1940s, modern Korean history diversified. At this time, professionally trained historians emerged, displaying distinct historical perspectives in response to rapidly changing social ideologies. Alongside ethnic history, which had now developed into a new form of history rooted in orthodox traditions, socioeconomic history also emerged, attempting to systematize the entirety of history through a specific historical lens.

[ 38 ] In the realm of ethnic history, Choi Nam-sun, who held a different position from Shin Chae-ho, lost a consistent historical spirit and reverted to encyclopedic knowledge reminiscent of the Silhak era. Choi Nam-sun's most notable contributions to Korean literary history are best represented in his thesis, Bulham Munhwaron [ ko ] (不咸文化論). Many historians contributed to the field of ethnic history, but Jeong In-bo (鄭寅普) played a pivotal role. His serious engagement with historical research began in the 1930s.

Ahn Chai-hong (安在鴻), who authored Joseon SanggosaGam [ ko ] (朝鮮上古史鑑), and Mun Il-pyeong (文一平) also emerged around the same time as Jeong In-bo. Mun's Hoamjeonjip [ ko ] (湖岩全集) presents a new form of historical description, focusing on popularizing history and enlightening the public.

[ 39 ] Son Jin-tae [ ko ] (孫晋泰) and Lee In-young (李仁榮) were active in the 1940s, carrying forward this academic tradition while attempting to challenge Japanese colonial historiography. Despite their academic achievements, few scholars subscribed to the school of national history.

[ 40 ] Nevertheless, their contributions in a short period were far from insignificant. They made significant strides in protecting the nation and promoting national spirit, establishing a historiographical framework opposed to Japanese colonial history, and laying a solid foundation for Korean history. Furthermore, their historical consciousness represented the highest level attainable during the Japanese occupation, and their historical narratives also displayed the scientific rigor of modern historiography. The level of historical narrative and consciousness reached by these ethnic historians by the 1940s was profound, and their approach to historical research remains a benchmark. They connected Korean history to world history, making efforts to study various stages of world historical development and applying those findings to Korean history.

[ 41 ] Among their achievements was the application of the theory of social development to the systematization of Korean history. In essence, they sought to establish the subjecthood of Korean history, conscious of the balance between universality and individuality in relation to world history. Ethnic history is sometimes criticized as unscientific or simplistic, but this evaluation overlooks its core contributions, focusing instead on certain limitations. It is true that Japanese colonial historiography failed to scientifically overcome the political theories used to justify colonial policies, as well as the positivist historical evidence surrounding the Korean War and colonial history.

[ 37 ] When discussing positivism during the Japanese colonial period, the Jin-dan Academy [ ko ] (震檀學會) often comes to mind, and for good reason. The Jin-dan Academy, established in 1934, represents the nature of positivism in its relationship with socioeconomic and national history. Socioeconomic historians viewed the Jin-dan Academy as an organization conducting academic activities in the manner of pure history. They criticized positivism for being a research group without a historical perspective. Although the Jin-dan Academy did not actively engage with socioeconomic historians, it tolerated such criticism. Despite this, tensions remained high between the two groups.

[ 42 ] Next is the relationship with ethnic history. Jeong In-bo was dissatisfied with Japanese scholars, as he sought to uncover national historical truths omitted from the existing literature. Positivist historians, however, were equally unsatisfied with national historians and did not value their academic contributions. As seen in the relationship between positivism and national or socioeconomic history, positivism was not entrenched in older generations but deliberately distanced itself. Positivists attempted to understand general historical trends through specific studies, but they were criticized for lacking a cohesive view of history. Their work remained at the level of documenting individual facts without developing into a comprehensive understanding of Korean or world history.

[ 43 ] Positivism rejected the idea that applying predetermined formulas or laws constituted a scientific method for historical research. Positivists argued that general laws of history could not be derived solely from examining all ethnic histories globally, but rather that general principles could be distilled from individual or ethnic histories. However, it is mistaken to believe that empirical research is unique to positivism or that it alone defines the foundation of historical generalization. Positivism is not history itself, but empirical historians showed little inclination to reflect on the general significance of individual facts. As a result, the unresolved issues within positivism led to confusion in modern Korean historiography.

[ 44 ] Socioeconomic history also advanced during this period. Though called socioeconomic history, not all historians within the field shared the same approach. From the late 1920s to the 1930s, the rise of socialism and labor movements, in response to heightened colonial exploitation and economic depression, influenced the field. A defining feature of socioeconomic history was its systematic approach to studying the entire socioeconomic system, distinct from research focused on individual historical facts. Paek Nam-un (白南雲), a leading historian of this school, laid the foundation for historical materialism in Korea. He introduced the concept of historical materialism and analyzed the feudalistic aspects of the Korean peninsula.

[ 45 ] Paek Nam-un's representative works are The History of Joseon Socio-Economy (1933) and The History of Joseon Feudal Socio-Economy·Volume I (1937). He had originally planned to complete a comprehensive history of Korean socio-economy. In his criticism of modern history, [ 46 ] Paek rejected both nationalist views and those of Japanese historians. He viewed history as distinct from external specificity and the monistic law of history, and believed that the basis of historical development lay in the monistic law.

[ 45 ] He argued that only from this perspective could a proactive solution be found that avoided despair, despite the difficult circumstances under Japanese colonial rule. The monistic law of historical development, which he accepted as an alternative to colonial and nationalist views—what he termed the "special view"—was based on the principles of materialism .

[ 47 ] Although he was criticized for applying this formula directly to Korean history, Paek was praised for attempting to systematize Korean history in the context of world historical development. However, questions arose regarding his interpretation of the law of development in world history. Paek argued that the development of world history was based on the European historical trajectory, as evidenced in his treatment of the "Asiatic mode of production." This issue emerged in his analysis of Asian empires, which he viewed as following a different path from Western societies. He applied this interpretation to Korean history, suggesting that Korea's feudal society had its own specificities—what he referred to as "Asian specificity." This approach was seen as a direct contradiction of his earlier adherence to a unitary law of development. It became evident that his historical framework was not inductively derived from specific research but was rather a one-sided application of this law.

[ 48 ] Thus, the law of world history should be reconsidered from a different perspective. It is important to recognize that history is not governed by a single rule, but rather by pluralistic laws that must be interpreted with both universality and specificity in mind. Furthermore, specificity should be understood through the lens of a people's particular historical experiences. A nuanced understanding of these experiences forms the comprehensive foundation of a people's historical consciousness, leading to a more complete and diverse understanding of history.

[ 49 ] See also [ edit ] History portal History of Korea Historiography Korean nationalist historiography References [ edit ] ^ Bong-Jun, Choi (2021).

"고대~고려시대 다원적 사상지형과 유학의 전개과정" [Structure of Pluralistic Thought and Development of Confucianism from Ancient Times to the Goryeo Dynasty].

한국사상사학 (in Korean) (67): 1– 40.

^ Joo-Jin, Kang (2022-06-17).

고려시대의 정치, 사회·경제, 유학, 불교, 도교, 도참, 사학·문예, 과학사상 고려시대의 사상 [ Politics, Social and Economic Studies, Confucianism, Buddhism, Taoism, History and Literature, and Scientific History of the Goryeo Dynasty ] (in Korean). Kyobobook MCP. p. 5.

ISBN 979-11-6173-182-7 .

^ Ho-Gi, Kim (2011-01-21).

"중국식 유교질서 추구한 사대주의자 김부식…한민족의 역사적 정체성 구현한 민족주의자 일연" ["Kim Bu-sik, a flunky who pursued a Chinese-style Confucian order... "Nationalist Il-yeon who embodied the historical identity of the Korean people""].

신동아 (in Korean) . Retrieved 2023-05-08 .

^ Jin-Seok, Yoon (2021-11-11).

"15. 김부식과 『삼국사기』에 대한 몇 가지 오해" ["15. Some misunderstandings about Kim Bu-sik and 『Samguk Sagi』"].

인문360° (in Korean) . Retrieved 2023-05-15 .

^ "몽고와 당당히 맞서다(외세를 물리친 고려) - 학습마당 이야기" ["Confidently Confronting Mongo (Defeating foreign powers) - Learning Madang Story"].

i815.or.kr . Retrieved 2023-05-15 .

^ "우리역사넷" ["Woori history.net"].

우리역사넷 . Retrieved 2023-05-15 .

^ a b Jae-Hoon, Jung (2005).

"[태학사] 조선전기 유교 정치사상 연구" ["[Taehaksa] A Study on the Political Thought of Confucianism in the Early Joseon Period"].

국립중앙도서관 연계자료 (in Korean) (2): 0– 439.

^ Jae-Hoon, Jung (2004).

"조선후기 史書에 나타난 中華主義와 民族主義" ["Sinocentrism and Nationalism by considering a history book in late Choson"].

한국실학연구 (in Korean) (8): 299– 324.

^ Gloomy (2022-09-24).

"조선전기의 역사인식- 관찬사서, 사찬사서, 고려사, 고려사절요" ["Awareness of History in the Early Joseon Period - Gwanchan history book, Sachan history book, Goryeosa, Goryeosajeolyo"].

Gloomy's Story (in Korean) . Retrieved 2023-05-15 .

^ "동국통감 서문 < 사료로 본 한국사" ["Dongguk Tongam preface <Korean history from historical sources>"].

contents.history.go.kr . Retrieved 2023-05-15 .

^ Man-Gill, Kang (1976).

한국의 역사인식: 한국사학사론선 [ "Awareness of Korean History : Korean History Book Compilation" ] (in Korean) (1 ed.). 창비. p. 240.

ISBN 978-89-364-1015-5 .

^ Hub-Chang, Lee (2019).

"조선왕조의 정책사와 근세 실학, 그리고 金堉(1580~1658)" ["Kim Yuk(金堉), the Early Modern Silhak(實學), and Policies of the Joseon Dynasty"].

한국실학연구 (in Korean) (37): 7– 104.

ISSN 1598-0928 .

^ Byung-seol, Jung (2018).

"조선 후기 소설 유통의 정치경제적 배경 재론: 류준경, 김영민 교수 비평에 대한 반론" ["Political and economic background of the distribution of novels in the late Joseon Dynasty: Objections to Professor Ryu Joon-kyung and Professor Kim Young-min's criticism"] (PDF) .

관악어문연구 : 125pp.

^ Young-Jin, Ko (2020).

"유교국가 조선과 비판적 지식인" ["Confucian State Joseon and the Critical Intellectual"].

동방학지 (in Korean) (193): 59– 85.

ISSN 1226-6728 .

^ Seong-Su, Kim (2015).

"조선시대 儒醫의 형성과 변화" ["A Study about the Emergence and Changes of Confucian doctors in Choseon Dynasty"].

한국의사학회지 (in Korean).

28 (2): 105– 120.

^ Hyung-Yeol, Cho (2018).

"1930년대 조선 역사과학의 연구방법론" ["Research methodology of the historical science of Joseon in the 1930s"].

사림 (in Korean) (64): 125– 153.

ISSN 1229-9545 .

^ Kyeong-Jin, Yoon (2020).

"고려 숙종대 南京 설치와 역사계승의식" ["Establishment of 南京 at the Goryeo Dynasty in King Suk-Jong period and the Consciousness of the Succession of History"].

[TCHCCOS] 서울과 역사 (in Korean).

105 .

^ Ruh-Hwa, Kim (2020).

"한치윤(韓致奫)의 교유관계와 『해동역사』(海東繹史)의 편찬배경" ["The Relationship of Han Chi-yun (韓致奫) and the Compilation of HaeDong yoksa (海東繹史)"].

한국학논집 (in Korean).

81 : 285– 320.

ISSN 1738-8902 .

^ Bong-Hee, Kim; Bo-Ram, Choi (2004).

"조선조 역사서의 평가를 위한 비교 연구 :『東國通鑑』, 『東史綱目』, 『海東繹史』를 중심으로" ["A Comparative Study on the Evaluation of Historical Books of the Joseon Dynasty, at the center of 『東國通鑑』, 『東史綱目』, 『海東繹史』"].

사회과학연구논총 (in Korean).

12 : 209– 248.

ISSN 1975-8987 .

^ Nam-Il, Kim (2012).

"안정복의 『자치통감강목』 書法 이해와 『동사강목』 마한정통론의 강목체 필법" ["A Study on An Jeongbok’s Comprehension of the Historiographical Method of “Zizhi Tongjian Gangmu” and the Gangmok Style of the Mahan Legitimate Theory in “Dongsa Gangmu”"].

韓國史學史學報 (in Korean) (26): 227– 278.

^ In-Ho, Park (2002).

"『발해고』에 나타난 유득공의 역사지리인식" ["A Study on Yu Deuk-gong's Territorial Conscience through the Analysis of Balhaego"].

韓國史學史學報 (in Korean) (6): 35– 61.

^ Jong-Bok, Kim (2021).

"수정본 『발해고』와 『해동역사』 발해 기사의 비교 연구" ["A comparative study on Revised Version of the Balhae-go and the Segment of Balhae in Haedong Yeoksa"].

사림 (in Korean) (75): 93– 121.

ISSN 1229-9545 .

^ a b Hyun-Geun, Jang (2004).

"유교근대화와 계몽주의적 한민족국가 구상 :박은식ㆍ장지연의 국가건설 사상" ["The Modernization of Confucianism and an Idea of Korean Nation State: Park Eun-Sik and Chang Ji-Yon"].

한국동양정치사상사연구 (in Korean).

3 (2): 139– 168.

ISSN 1598-5954 .

^ Nan-Soo, Lee (2021).

"전통과 저항의 담론으로서 '풍류'의 소환 - 최남선ㆍ이능화ㆍ권상로를 중심으로 -" ["Summoning ‘Pungryu’ as a Discourse for Tradition and Resistance - Focusing on Choi Nam seonㆍLee Neung hwaㆍKwon Sang ro -"].

양명학 (in Korean) (62): 237– 271.

ISSN 1229-5957 .

^ Mi-Ill, Oh (2006).

"식민지시대 사회경제사학자들의 역사인식" ["The Historical Perception of Socio-Economic Historians in the Colonial Period"].

내일을 여는 역사 (in Korean) (25): 90– 102.

ISSN 1228-8802 .

^ Li-Fei, Zheng (2017).

"개항기 '支那' 명칭의 등장과 문화적 함의" ["The Appearance and Cultural Meaning of Word Gina(支那) in Late 19th Century Korea"].

한국사학보 (in Korean) (69): 359– 394.

doi : 10.21490/jskh.2017.11.69.359 .

ISSN 1229-6252 .

^ Dae-Sung, Jung (2022).

"사회주의자 신남철의 역사의식과 관념론적 유산 - 신체인식론을 중심으로 -" ["The Historical Consciousness and Idealistic Legacy of Socialist Shin Nam-cheol"].

인간연구 (in Korean) (46): 175– 204.

doi : 10.21738/JHS.2022.04.46.175 .

ISSN 1229-6740 .

S2CID 248709184 .

^ Hye-Joo, Choi (2017).

"중국 이주 역사가 김택영의 저술활동" ["Writing Activities of Kim Taek-young, a Historian Specializing in Chinese Migration"].

반교어문연구 (in Korean) (47): 89– 120.

^ Jang-Hee, Lee (1983).

" '매천야록' 초" ["'Maecheon Yarok' Cho"].

나라사랑 (in Korean).

46 : 125– 160.

ISSN 1739-7855 .

^ Shin-Cheol, Lee (2013).

"대한제국기 역사교과서 편찬과 근대역사학 :『동국사략』(현채)의 당대사 서술을 통한 '국민 만들기'를 중심으로" ["History Textbook Publishing of Great Han Empire and Modern History - Focusing on ‘Nation-Building’ by Describing Contemporary History 『Dongguksaryak』"].

역사교육 (in Korean).

126 : 115– 151.

doi : 10.18622/kher.2013.06.126.115 .

ISSN 1225-0570 .

^ "[2021/12] 독립운동의 정신적 구심점, 민족사학자 > 순국 Focus | 월간순국" ["National Historian, the Spiritual Center of the Independence Movement"].

월간순국 . Retrieved 2023-05-08 .

^ "교과서 용어해설 | 우리역사넷" ["Korean Independence Movement Jihyeolsa"].

우리역사넷 . Retrieved 2023-05-08 .

^ Jung-Sim, Park (2021).

"박은식 『王陽明先生實記』의 사상적 특징에 관한 연구" ["A Study on the Ideological Characteristics of Park Eun-sik'"].

한국철학논집 (in Korean) (69): 163– 191.

ISSN 1598-5024 .

^ You-Shim, Lee (2019-08-19).

"[고전이야기] '역사란 나와 상대가 투쟁한 기록'… 신채호가 감옥서 쓴 역사서" ["[Classical story] History is a record of me and my opponent's struggles"... "A history book written by Shin Chae-ho in prison."].

premium.chosun.com (in Korean) . Retrieved 2023-05-08 .

^ a b Jung-Sim, Park (2014).

"신채호의 我와 非我의 관계에 관한 연구" ["A Study on Ah(Self 我) and Biah(Others 非我) of Shin Chaeho(申采浩)"].

동양철학연구 (in Korean) (77): 375– 402.

^ Ji-Hyun, Lee (2019).

"단재 신채호와 상담 : 단재 신채호의 주체성에 관한 상담학적 연구" ["A counseling study on the 'jucheseong' of Danjea Shin Cheaho"].

DBpia (in Korean) . Retrieved 2023-06-09 .

^ a b Ki-Bong, Kim (2005).

"한국 근대 역사개념의 성립 ―'국사'의 탄생과 신채호의 민족사학―" ["The Korean Conception of History ―The Birth of National History and Shin Ch'aeho's Nationalistic Historiography―"].

한국사국사학보 (12): 218pp – 240pp .

^ "민족주의사학(民族主義史學)" ["Nationalist History(民族主義史學)"].

Encyclopedia of Korean Culture (in Korean) . Retrieved 2023-05-08 .

^ Si-Hyun, Ryu (2015).

"1930년대 문일평의 조선학 연구와 실학의 재조명" ["Moon Il-Pyong’s Korean Studies and the Refocusing on Practical Studies during the 1930s"].

한국인물사연구 (in Korean) (23): 217– 242.

ISSN 1738-3307 .

^ Soo-Tae, Kim (2020).

"손진태의 한국 근대사 서술" ["Son Jin-tae’s Description of Korean Modern History"].

한국민족운동사연구 (in Korean) (103): 307– 348.

^ Kyung-Mi, Kim (2010).

"1940년대 이광수의 역사 내러티브와 민족주의 담론의 양상 :역사소설 『세조대왕』을 중심으로" ["Aspect of Lee Guang-su’s Historical Narration and Nationalism Discourse in the 1940s – Focus on the Historical Novel 'King Sejo'"].

어문학 (in Korean).

109 : 281– 308.

ISSN 1225-3774 .

^ Byong-Joon, Lee (2016).

"식민지 관제 역사학과근대 학문으로서의 한국역사학의 태동 - 진단학회를 중심으로" ["The Colonial Government Controlled History and the Rebirth of Korean History as Modern Studies: Focused on the Jin-dan Academy"].

사회와역사 (in Korean) (110): 105– 162.

^ Tae-Ok, Park (2021).

"근대 유교지식인의 주체 인식과 사회적 구현의 문제-정인보의 '감통(感通)'론을 중심으로" ["The Problem of Identity and Social Implementation of Modern Confucian Intellectuals – Focusing on Jeong In-bo's 'Emotional Interaction' Theory"].

동서철학연구 (in Korean) (99): 165– 190.

^ Jong-Wook, Hong (2019).

"실증사학의 '이념' — 식민지 조선에 온 역사주의" ["Ideology of Positivist Historiography: Historicism in Colonial Korea"].

인문논총 (in Korean).

76 (3): 287– 323.

^ a b Hyeong-Rul, Cho (2020).

"식민지 조선 역사학의 방향 전환, 백남운의 『조선사회경제사』(1933)" ["A Change in the Direction of Colonial Joseon History, Baek Nam-un's "The History of Joseon Socio-Economy" (1933)"].

내일을 여는 역사 (in Korean).

78 : 156– 165.

ISSN 1228-8802 .

^ Sung-Hee, Jung (2021-01-04).

"[독립운동가 열전 90] 독립과 통일에 헌신한 마르크스주의 경제사학자 백남운" ["[Biography of independence activist <Life and Soul> 90] Baek Nam-woon, a Marxist economic historian who devoted himself to independence and unification"].

매일노동뉴스 (in Korean) . Retrieved 2023-05-08 .

^ 노사과연 (2021-09-23).

"[번역] 일원론적 역사관의 발전(1) | 노동사회과학연구소" ["[Translation]The Development of the Monist View of History(1) | Labor and Social Sciences Research Institute"].

노사과연 (in Korean) . Retrieved 2023-05-08 .

^ Jong-Sun, Kim (1995).

"마르크스의 아시아적 생산양식과 한국 고대사회" ["Marx's Asiatic Mode of Production and Ancient Korean Society"].

아시아문화 (in Korean) (11): 123– 190.

ISSN 1225-2034 .

^ In-Young, Lee (1991).

"鶴山 李仁榮의歷史意識" [歷史意識 of 鶴山 李仁榮] (PDF) . Ihwa University. p. 173.

Further reading [ edit ] Yŏng-ho Ch'oe, « An outline history of Korean historiography », Korean Studies, vol. 4, 1980, p. 1-27 Remco Breuker , Grace Koh et James B. Lewis, « The Tradition of Historical Writing in Korea », in Sarah Foot, Chase F. Robinson, The Oxford History of Historical Writing : Volume 2: 400–1400, Oxford University Press, 2015, 672 p. ( ISBN 9780198737995 ), p. 119-137 Don Baker, « Writing History in Pre-Modern Korea », in José Rabasa, Masayuki Sato, Edoardo Tortarolo, Daniel Woolf, The Oxford History of Historical Writing : Volume 3: 1400–1800, Oxford University Press, 2015, 752 p. ( ISBN 9780198738008 ), p. 103-118 Henry Em, « Historians and Historical Writing in Modern Korea », in Axel Schneider, Daniel Woolf, The Oxford History of Historical Writing : Volume 5: Historical Writing Since 1945, Oxford University Press, 2015, 752 p. ( ISBN 9780198737971 ), p. 659-677.

External links [ edit ] Media related to Historiography of Korea at Wikimedia Commons v t e Historiography Historians list / by area of study History historians historicity history theories of history Historical sources Types Primary sources Secondary sources Tertiary sources Sources Annals Archives Artifacts Archaeological site Chronicles Codices Deeds Facsimiles Features Hieroglyphs Historical documents Logbooks Manuscripts Illuminated Oral tradition Papyri Religious texts Scrolls War diaries Service records Fields of study By scale Big History World history Human history Local history Microhistory By source Archival science / Library and information science ( template ) Books / Writing systems Chorography Chronology dating Diplomatics Encyclopaedistics Epigraphy Genealogy Heraldry Numismatics (Money) Onomastics Oral history preservation Phaleristics Philology Postage stamps Prosopography Sigillography Toponymy Vexillology By topic Anthropology / Paleoanthropology Cultural Ecology / Environment / Geography Economic Business Capitalism Perspectives on capitalism by school of thought Thought Intellectual Geistesgeschichte Linguistics Maritime Medieval churches Military Political Constitutional Diplomatic Social Feminism Gender Indigenous Labour LGBTQ Rural Quantitative Urban Women Methodology Case study Periodization Historical eras Tarikh Three-age system Approaches, schools Annales school History of mentalities Nouvelle histoire Historiometry / Cliometrics Comparative historical research Critical Decoloniality Feminist Historical anthropology Historical determinism Historism Historical-critical method Humanistic Indiscipline of history [ pt ] Leninist Marxist Historical materialism Nationalist Ancestral civilisation Nationalization of history People's history Subaltern Studies Pop history Quantitative history Revisionist Transnational Whig Great Man theory Concepts General Change and continuity Historic preservation Historic recurrence Historical significance Historicity Historiology [ es ] Theory of history [ de ] Philosophy Specific Black legend Coloniality and decolonization of knowledge Dark Ages Historical negationism Historian's fallacy / Presentism Invented tradition Modernisation theory Narratives Paradigm shift Pax list Thirty-year rule Transhistoricity Translatio imperii / Translatio studii Vaticinium ex eventu Periodization of modern history Age of Discovery Age of Enlightenment European Civil War / Second Thirty Years' War Long 18th / 19th century Renaissance Continuity thesis By country or region Africa African historiography Egypt Pyramid construction techniques Black Egypt Thesis [ es ] Ethiopia Morocco Greater Morocco Rwanda Double genocide theory Maafa Americas Canada Metropolitan-hinterland thesis Residential schools Staples thesis Indigenous population history Latin America Argentina May Revolution / Causes Revisionist [ es ] Peru Iquicha Royalism Colonial Spanish America Casta United States African-American history Nadir of American race relations Neoabolitionism Reconstruction era Consensus history Cyclical theory Frontier thesis Political history Eras Progressive-era historians Eurasia Albania Dealbanisation Austria Habsburg myth Balhae Belarus Litvinism Bulgaria Byzantine Empire [ de ] Early [ ru ] Croatia Europe Ancient [ ru ] Medieval [ ru ] New Age [ ru ] Georgia Aryan Kartli Greek Ages of Man Iran 2,500-year celebration Japan Korea Nationalist Goguryeo controversies North Macedonia Philippines Early settlements Portugal [ pt ] Lusotropicalism Romania Great Union Serbia Kosovo Myth Sweden Götaland theory Switzerland Taiwan Ukraine Executed Renaissance Vietnam Nam tiến Trưng sisters Ancient Rome Catilinarian conspiracy Christianization Constantinian shift Expansion Fall of Western Rome Prosopography Succession Byzantine succession Moscow, third Rome Ottoman claim Problem of two emperors China 5000-year civilization assertion Archaeology Wunu School [ zh ] Century of humiliation Conquest dynasty "Chineseness" debate New Qing History Golden ages Hua–Yi distinction Four Barbarians Sinocentrism Self-Strengthening Movement Sprouts of capitalism Tibetan sovereignty debate France Cordon sanitaire Frankish Interregnum [ fr ] Grand Siècle Legendary Saracen [ fr ] Location of Alésia [ fr ] Lyon [ fr ] Historiography of Vichy France Germany Alltagsgeschichte Borussian myth Historikerstreit Sonderweg Strukturgeschichte [ de ] Sybel-Ficker controversy Vergangenheitsbewältigung India Greater Magadha Indocentrism Indigenous Aryanism Ireland Great Famine " More Irish than the Irish themselves " Revisionism Revolutionary period Italy Fascist Italy Fourth Italian War of Independence Historiae Patriae Monumenta Historical Series of the Bank of Italy Italians, the good people Rerum italicarum scriptores Revisionism of Risorgimento Southern question Neo-Bourbonism Poland Golden Liberty Sarmatism Deluge Partitions Polish People's Republic [ pl ] Russia Anti-Normanism Pre-Revolutionary Russia [ ru ] Skeptic School [ ru ] Soviet Union October Revolution Soviet famine of 1930–1933 Causes of the Holodomor Holodomor genocide question Holodomor in modern politics Spain Black legend / White legend Hispanism Carlism in the Francoist era Convivencia Inquisition Limpieza de sangre controversy [ es ] Reconquista Islamic revolution of Spain [ es ] Revisionist Colonies or Provinces Spanish decline [ es ] Ser de España [ es ] Turkey Kemalist Ottoman Empire Ghaza thesis Decline thesis United Kingdom Poor Laws Scotland Kingdom of Alba Westminster Stone Storm over the gentry Suffragette Campaign Tudor myth Ricardians Winter of Discontent British Empire Cambridge School Porter–MacKenzie debate Second colonial occupation Oceania Colonial Australia By war, conflict v t e Military historiography Military history List of military museums Pre-18th century conflicts Albigensian Crusade Catharism debate Crusades Islamic views Eighty Years' War Origins Fall of Babylon Gallic Wars Late Bronze Age collapse Dorian invasion Sea Peoples Peloponnesian War 18th and 19th century conflicts Coalition Wars (1792–1815) French Revolution Causes War in the Vendée Napoleonic era Invasion of Russia Waterloo American Civil War Origins Turning point Franco-Prussian War Causes Paris Commune Great Game Indian Rebellion of 1857 Causes Paraguayan War War of 1812 Origins War of the Pacific Causes World War I Causes ( Color books / Fischer thesis ) Late Ottoman genocides ( Causes of the Armenian genocide ) Patriotic consent Persian famine of 1917–1919 Powder keg of Europe Schlieffen Plan Spirit of 1914 / 1917 Treaty of Brest-Litovsk , Germany imposed this on Russia in 1918 Treaty of Versailles Reparations War guilt question Article 231 Reichstag inquiry Interwar period Burning of Smyrna Polish–Soviet War Causes Spanish Civil War Background World War II Causes "Blitzkrieg" concept Broad vs. narrow front German resistance to Nazism Nazi foreign policy debate Eastern Front Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact Soviet offensive plans Soviets and the Warsaw Uprising Massacres of Poles in Volhynia and Eastern Galicia Winter War Background Spirit The Holocaust Auschwitz bombing debate Awareness in Nazi Germany and German-occupied Europe Functionalism–intentionalism debate In relation to the Armenian genocide / Nakba Pope Pius XII and the Holocaust Pius Wars "Polish death camp" Responsibility Slovakia Uniqueness Pacific War Atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki "Battle for Australia" Bengal famine Second Sino-Japanese War Nanjing Massacre Western Front Battle of France Guilty Men Résistancialisme Vichy France Cold War Origins 1948 Palestine war Palestinian expulsion and flight / Ongoing Nakba Zionism as settler colonialism New Historians Malayan Emergency Causes Algerian War Six-Day War Origins Iranian revolution Causes Iran–Iraq War Falklands War Sovereignty dispute Sri Lankan civil war Origins Post-Cold War Russo-Georgian War Background Responsibility Syrian revolution Causes Related Conflict thesis Gunpowder and gun transmission War and genocide Category By person Political leaders Adolf Hitler Alexander the Great Amin al-Husseini Aurangzeb Cato the Younger Che Guevara Chiang Ching-kuo [ zh ] Chiang Kai Shek [ zh ] Constantine the Great Gregory Palamas Horatio Nelson Hypatia Jiang Zemin [ zh ] Joseph Stalin [ ru ] José de San Martín Juan Manuel de Rosas Klemens von Metternich Leonid Brezhnev Louis Riel Mao Zedong [ zh ] Muammar Gaddafi Napoleon Neville Chamberlain Pedro II of Brazil Simon Bolivar Cult of personality [ es ] Bolivarianism Saladin Sun Yat-sen [ zh ] Thomas Aquinas Thomas Jefferson Ulysses S. Grant Warren G. Harding Yuan Shikai [ zh ] Zhou Enlai [ zh ] Zhuge Liang [ zh ] Historical rankings Australia Canada Modern Germany Netherlands United Kingdom United States Others The Beatles Charles Darwin Friedrich Nietzsche H. P. Lovecraft Jane Austen Muhammed Historicity Judaism Medieval Christian Jesus Historicity Resurrection Religious perspectives Christianity Judaism Islam J. R. R. Tolkien The Lord of the Rings Madonna Robert Falcon Scott Socrates Søren Kierkegaard William Shakespeare Other topics Bears in antiquity Crisis of historiography [ pt ] Feudalism Library of Alexandria Nationalism in the Middle Ages Professionalization and institutionalization of history Salons Western European colonialism and colonization Desacralization of knowledge Economics Industrial Revolution Great Recession Great Depression School of Thoughts Historical school of economics English historical school of economics Religion Avestan geography Early Christianity Background Historical reliability of the Gospels Primacy of Peter Opposition to Papal supremacy Proto-orthodox Christianity Early Islam Criticism of the Quran Succession to Muhammad Islamic golden age Kharijites Ecclesiastical history of the Catholic Church Second Vatican Council Hermeneutics of Vatican Council II [ it ] Hesychast controversy Protestant Reformation Proto-Protestantism Criticism of Protestantism Protestant work ethic Jesuit historiography Modern Jewish history Wissenschaft des Judentums Schools of thought Biblical criticism Catholic theology Panbabylonism Urreligion Perennial Religionsgeschichtliche Schule Roman Revisionist school of Islamic studies Science / Technology Merton thesis Protestant Ethic and Capitalism Heroic theory of invention and scientific development Gunpowder and gun transmission Torsion mangonel myth Organizations, publications Heritage registers Historical society ( list ) History institutes History journals template Related Commemorative plaque Documentary film Hagiography Historical fiction Historical realism Historiographic metafiction Historical geographic information system Category Multimedia Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Historiography_of_Korea&oldid=1294683373 " Category : Historiography of Korea Hidden categories: CS1 Korean-language sources (ko) Interlanguage link template existing link Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 9 June 2025, at 05:54 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Historiography of Korea 3 languages Add topic

