Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History and Background 2 References 3 Further reading 4 External links Toggle External links subsection 4.1 Regional FLUXNET websites Toggle the table of contents FLUXNET Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from FluxNet ) Global network of micrometeorological towers The Fluxnet Logo FLUXNET is a global network of micrometeorological tower sites that use eddy covariance methods to measure the exchanges of carbon dioxide , water vapor , and energy between the biosphere and atmosphere .  FLUXNET is a global 'network of regional networks' that serves to provide an infrastructure to compile, archive and distribute data for the scientific community.  The most recent FLUXNET data product, FLUXNET2015 , is hosted by the Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory (USA) and is publicly available for download.  Currently there are over 1000 active and historic flux measurement sites.

FLUXNET works to ensure that different flux networks are calibrated to facilitate comparison between sites, and it provides a forum for the distribution of knowledge and data between scientists.

[ 1 ] Researchers also collect data on site vegetation , soil , trace gas fluxes, hydrology, and meteorological characteristics at the tower sites.

History and Background [ edit ] FLUXNET started in 1997 and has grown from a handful of sites in North America and Europe to a current population exceeding 260 registered sites world-wide.  Today, FLUXNET consists of regional networks in North America (AmeriFlux, Fluxnet-Canada, NEON), South America (LBA), Europe (CarboEuroFlux, ICOS), Australasia (OzFlux), Asia (China Flux, and Asia Flux) and Africa (AfriFlux).   At each tower site, the eddy covariance flux measurements are made every 30 minutes and are integrated on daily, monthly and annual time scales.  The spatial scale of the footprint at each tower site reaches between 200 m and a kilometer.

An overarching intent of FLUXNET, and its regional partners, is to provide data that can be used to validate terrestrial carbon fluxes derived from sensors on NASA satellites, such as TERRA and AQUA, and from biogeochemical models.   To achieve this overarching goal, the objectives and priorities of FLUXNET have evolved as the network has grown and matured.  During the initial stages of FLUXNET, the priority of our research was to develop value-added products, such as gap-filled data sets of net ecosystem productivity, NEP, evaporation, energy exchange and meteorology.  The rationales for this undertaking were: 1) to compute daily, monthly and annual sums of net carbon, water and energy exchange; and 2) to produce continuous datasets for the execution and testing of a variety of biogeochemical/biophysical/ecosystem dynamic models and satellite-based remote sensing algorithms.

During the second stage of FLUXNET the research priority involved the decomposition of NEE measurements into component fluxes such as GPP and ecosystem respiration, R eco .  This step is required for FLUXNET to be a successful tool for validating MODIS-based estimate of terrestrial carbon exchange; algorithms driven by satellite-based remote sensing instruments are unable to assess NEE directly, and instead compute GPP or NPP . In the intervening years, FLUXNET scientists have used the flux-component datasets ( GPP, R eco ) to assess how canopy photosynthesis and ecosystem respiration vary as a function of: 1) season; 2) plant functional type; and 3) environmental drivers.

While these initial studies have contributed significantly towards understanding the physiology of whole ecosystems, they only represent an initial step towards the future evolution and productivity of FLUXNET.   For example, the majority of the early work was produced with a subset of field sites, which was heavily biased towards coniferous and deciduous forests.   With the continued growth and extended duration of the network, many new opportunities, relating to the spatial/temporal aspects of carbon dioxide exchange, remain to be explored.  First, FLUXNET has expanded to include broader representation of vegetation types and climates.  The network now includes numerous tower sites over tropical and alpine forests, savanna, chaparral, tundra, grasslands, wetlands and an assortment of agricultural crops. Second, the scope of many studies over deciduous and conifer forests has expanded. Several contributing research groups are conducting chronosequence studies associated with disturbance by fire and logging.   From this work, scientists are learning that information on disturbance needs to be incorporated into model schemes that rely on climate drivers and plant functional type to upscale of tower fluxes to landscapes and regions—adding another level of complexity. Third, FLUXNET is partnering with other groups that are measuring the changes in phenology with networks of digital cameras, soil moisture and methane fluxes.

Today, with many datasets extending beyond two decades, FLUXNET has the opportunity to provide data that is necessary to assess the impacts of climate and ecosystem factors on inter-annual variations and trends of carbon dioxide and water vapor fluxes.

The sharing of data has also been instrumental in developing techniques that use machine learning methods and combine data streams from FLUXNET, remote sensing and gridded data products to produce maps of carbon and water fluxes.

References [ edit ] ^ Baldocchi, Dennis; Falge, Eva; Gu, Lianhong; Olson, Richard; Hollinger, David; Running, Steve; Anthoni, Peter; Bernhofer, Ch; Davis, Kenneth; Evans, Robert; Fuentes, Jose; Goldstein, Allen; Katul, Gabriel; Law, Beverly; Lee, Xuhui; Malhi, Yadvinder ; Meyers, Tilden; Munger, William; Oechel, Walt; Paw, K. T.; Pilegaard, Kim; Schmid, H. P.; Valentini, Riccardo; Verma, Shashi; Vesala, Timo; Wilson, Kell; Wofsy, Steve (2001).

"FLUXNET: A New Tool to Study the Temporal and Spatial Variability of Ecosystem–Scale Carbon Dioxide, Water Vapor, and Energy Flux Densities" .

Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society .

82 (11): 2415– 2434.

Bibcode : 2001BAMS...82.2415B .

doi : 10.1175/1520-0477(2001)082<2415:FANTTS>2.3.CO;2 .

ISSN 0003-0007 .

Further reading [ edit ] Baldocchi, D.D. (2008). " 'Breathing' of the Terrestrial Biosphere: Lessons Learned from a Global Network of Carbon Dioxide Flux Measurement Systems".

Australian Journal of Botany .

56 : 1– 26.

doi : 10.1071/bt07151 .

Pastorello, G., D. Papale, H. Chu, C. Trotta, D. Agarwal, E. C. Canfora, D. Baldocchi, and M. Torn (2016), The FLUXNET2015 Dataset: The longest record of global carbon, water, and energy fluxes is updated, Eos Trans. AGU.

Pastorello, G., et al. (2020), The FLUXNET2015 dataset and the ONEFlux processing pipeline for eddy covariance data, Scientific Data, 7(1), 225, doi:10.1038/s41597-020-0534-3.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to FluxNet .

FLUXNET FLUXNET2015 Dataset (2015) FLUXNET LaThuile Dataset (2007) FLUXNET Marconi Dataset (2000) Historical Interactive Map of Fluxnet Sites Historical FLUXNET at ORNL Historical Fluxdata.org Fluxnet on NOSA [ dead link ] Regional FLUXNET websites [ edit ] AmeriFlux AsiaFlux CarboEurope Chinaflux European Fluxes Database Fluxnet-Canada KoFlux Archived 2009-02-10 at the Wayback Machine OzFlux Urban Flux Network v t e Earth science Outline Index Atmospheric science Environmental science Geodesy Geology Geophysics Glaciology Hydrology Meteorology Oceanography Paleogeoscience Physical geography Soil science Volcanology Category Portal Commons v t e Environmental science Main fields Atmospheric science Biogeochemistry Ecology Environmental chemistry Geosciences Hydrology Limnology Oceanography Soil science Related fields Biology Chemistry green Ecological economics Environmental design Environmental economics Environmental engineering Environmental health epidemiology Environmental studies Environmental humanities Environmental statistics Environmental toxicology Geodesy Physics Radioecology Sustainability science Systems ecology Urban ecology Applications Energy conservation Environmental technology Natural resource management Pollution control Public transport encouragement Recycling Remediation Renewable energy Road ecology Sewage treatment Urban metabolism Water purification Waste management Lists Degrees Journals Research institutes Glossary Environment by year See also Human impact on the environment Sustainability Technogaianism Category scientists Commons Environment portal WikiProject v t e Earth-based meteorological observation systems and weather stations General Aircraft report (AIREP) Automated airport weather station Automatic weather station (AWS) Binary Universal Form for the Representation of meteorological data (BUFR) Dropsonde Hurricane Hunters Mesonet Meteorological Aerodrome Report (METAR) Pilot report (PIREP) Weather ship By region Worldwide Aircraft Communication Addressing and Reporting System (ACARS) Aircraft Meteorological Data Relay (AMDAR) Argo Automated Meteorological Data Acquisition System (AMeDAS) Deep-ocean Assessment and Reporting of Tsunamis (DART) FluxNet Project (FluxNet) Global Atmosphere Watch (GAW) Global Sea Level Observing System (GLOSS) Prediction and Research Moored Array in the Atlantic (PIRATA) Research Moored Array for African-Asian-Australian Monsoon Analysis and Prediction (RAMA) Tropical Atmosphere Ocean project (TAO/TRITON) Voluntary observing ship program United States Citizen Weather Observer Program (CWOP) Coastal-Marine Automated Network (C-MAN) NEXRAD radar Snow Telemetry (SNOTEL) Remote Automated Weather Station (RAWS) Road Weather Information System (RWIS) Tropospheric Airborne Meteorological Data Reporting (TAMDAR) Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=FLUXNET&oldid=1287418202 " Categories : Applied and interdisciplinary physics Meteorological data and networks Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Commons category link is on Wikidata All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from April 2025 Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 26 April 2025, at 03:30 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents FLUXNET Add languages Add topic

