Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Plot summary 2 Interpretation 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Fiasco (novel) 10 languages Български Deutsch Español Esperanto Italiano Polski Română Русский Svenska Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 1986 novel by Stanislaw Lem This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .

Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( August 2009 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Fiasco First published edition (Germany) Author Stanisław Lem Original title Fiasko Translator Michael Kandel Language German (First published) Genre Science fiction Publisher Fischer Verlag (Germany) Harcourt Brace Jovanovich (Eng. trans.) Publication date 1986 Publication place Germany (first published) Published in English May 1987 Media type Print ( Hardback & Paperback ) Pages 336 ISBN 0-15-630630-1 OCLC 17896549 Fiasco ( Polish : Fiasko ) is a science fiction novel by Polish author Stanisław Lem , first published in a German translation in 1986. The book, published in Poland the following year and translated into English by Michael Kandel in the same year, is a further elaboration of Lem's skepticism: in Lem's opinion, the difficulty in communication with extraterrestrial intelligence (the main theme of the novel) is more likely cultural disparity rather than spatial distance. It was nominated for the Arthur C. Clarke Award .

The novel was written on order from publisher S. Fischer Verlag around the time Lem was emigrating from Poland due to the introduction of martial law . Lem stated that this was the only occasion he wrote something upon publisher's request, accepting an advance for a nonexistent novel.

[ 1 ] Plot summary [ edit ] At a base on Saturn 's moon Titan , a young spaceship pilot Parvis sets out in a strider (a mecha -like machine) to find several missing people, among them Pirx (the spaceman appearing in Lem's Tales of Pirx the Pilot ). Parvis ventures to the dangerous geyser region, where the others were lost. Unfortunately, he suffers an accident. Seeing no way to get out of the machine and return to safety, he triggers a built-in cryogenic device.

An expedition is sent to a distant star in order to make first contact with a civilization that may have been detected. It is set more than a century after the prologue, when a starship is built in Titan's orbit. This future society is described as globally unified and peaceful with high regard for success. During starship preparations, the geyser region is cleared, and the frozen bodies are discovered. They are exhumed and taken aboard, to be awakened, if possible, during the voyage. However, only one of them can be revived (or more precisely, pieced together from the organs of several of them) with a high likelihood of success. The identity of the man is unclear; it has been narrowed to two men (whose last names begin with 'P'). It is never revealed whether he is in fact Pirx or Parvis (and he seems to have amnesia ). In his new life, he adopts the name Tempe.

The explorer spaceship Eurydika ( Eurydice ) first travels to a black hole near the Beta Harpiae to perform maneuvers to minimize the effects of time dilation . Before closing on the event horizon , the Eurydice launches the Hermes , a smaller explorer ship, which continues to Beta Harpiae.

Approaching the planet Quinta, which exhibits signs of harboring intelligent life, the crew of the Hermes attempts to establish contact with the denizens of the planet, who, contrary to the expectations of the mission's crewmen, are strangely unwilling to communicate. The crew reaches the conclusion that there is a Cold War -like state on the planet's surface and throughout the planetary system, halting the locals' industrial development.

The crew of the Hermes assumes that the Quintan civilisation is inevitably doomed to collapse in mutual assured destruction . They try to force the aliens to engage contact by means of an event impossible to hide by the aliens' governments: staging the implosion of their moon. Surprisingly, just before impact, several of the deployed rockets are destroyed by missiles of the Quintans, undermining the symmetry of the implosion which causes fragments of the moon to be thrown clear, some impacting the planet's surface.

However, even this cataclysm does not drive the locals to engage with their alien visitors, so the crewmen deploy a device working as a giant lens or laser , capable of displaying images (but also concentrating beams to the point of being a powerful weapon). Following a suggestion by Tempe, they show the Quintans a " fairy tale " by projecting a cartoon onto Quinta's clouds. At last, the Quintans contact the Hermes and make arrangements for a meeting. The humans do not trust the Quintans, so to gauge the Quintans' intentions, they send a smaller replica of the Hermes which is destroyed shortly before landing. The humans retaliate by firing their laser on the ice ring around the planet, shattering it and sending chunks falling on the planet.

Finally, the Quintans are forced to receive an 'ambassador', who is Tempe; the Quintans are warned that the projecting device will be used to destroy the planet if the man should fail to report back his continued safety. After landing, Tempe discovers that there is no trace of anyone at the landing site. After investigating a peculiar structure nearby, he finds a strange-looking mound, which he opens with a small shovel. To his horror, he notices that in his distracted state he has allowed the allotted time to expire without signaling his crewmates. As the planet is engulfed by fiery destruction at the hands of those who were sent to establish contact with its denizens, Tempe finally realizes what the Quintans are. However, he has no time to share his discovery with the others.

Interpretation [ edit ] The book is the fifth in Lem's series of pessimistic first contact scenarios, after Eden , Solaris , The Invincible , and His Master's Voice .

According to critic Paul Delany: Fiasco will come to be regarded as one of the great SF novels... It is a remarkable achievement, even for Lem; for us, it is a most moving experience.

[ 2 ] References [ edit ] ^ "Fiasco" .

official Lem Website . lem.pl. Archived from the original on 2011-10-06 . Retrieved 2011-12-02 .

^ Delany, Paul.

"Review for Fiasco " .

The New York Times Review of Books . Retrieved April 5, 2017 – via Official website of Stanislaw Lem.

External links [ edit ] Fiasco title listing at the Internet Speculative Fiction Database v t e Works by Stanisław Lem Novels The Man from Mars (1946) Time Not Lost Hospital of the Transfiguration (1948) The Astronauts (1951) The Magellanic Cloud (1955) The Investigation (1959) Eden (1959) Return from the Stars (1961) Solaris (1961) Memoirs Found in a Bathtub (1961) The Invincible (1964) Highcastle (1966) His Master's Voice (1968) The Futurological Congress (1971) Professor A. Dońda (1973) The Chain of Chance (1975) Golem XIV (1981) Observation on the Spot (1982) Fiasco (1986) Peace on Earth (1987) Short stories " End of the World at Eight O'Clock " (1947) The Star Diaries (1957) " The Hunt " (1950s) " Terminus " (1961) " Lymphater's Formula " (1961) Fables for Robots (1964) The Cyberiad (1965) Tales of Pirx the Pilot (1966) " The Mask " (1974) Major essays Dialogs (1957) Summa Technologiae (1964) The Philosophy of Chance (1968) Science Fiction and Futurology (1970) Microworlds (1984) Pseudepigraphy A Perfect Vacuum (1971) Imaginary Magnitude (1973) One Human Minute (1986) Plays Korzenie (1940s) Do You Exist, Mr. Jones?

(1955) Faithful Robot (1961) Adaptations Films The Silent Star (1960) Ikarie XB-1 (1963) Solaris (1968) Roly Poly (1968) Solaris (1972) Hospital of the Transfiguration (1978) Inquest of Pilot Pirx (1979) Victim of the Brain (1988) Solaris (2002) 1 (2009) Maska (2010) The Congress (2013) His Master's Voice (2018) TV The Adventures of Pirx (1973) Ijon Tichy: Space Pilot (2007) Fear of a Bot Planet (1999) End of the World at Eight O'Clock (2015) Other Cyberiada (opera) Solaris (2019 play) The Invincible (video game) (2023) Characters Ijon Tichy Pilot Pirx Professor Tarantoga Mad scientists A. Dońda , A. Lymphater Lem's robots Trurl and Klapaucius , Terminus Lemology People Stanisław Bereś Konstantin Dushenko Michael Kandel Daniel Mróz Wojciech Orliński Franz Rottensteiner Peter Swirski Works A Stanislaw Lem Reader Correspondence of Lem Rozmowy ze Stanisławem Lemem Other Honors bestowed on Lem Neologisms of Stanisław Lem Sepulka Lem's Law Works about Lem Year of Lem Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Fiasco_(novel)&oldid=1256431483 " Categories : 1986 novels Novels by Stanisław Lem Novels set on Titan (moon) 1986 science fiction novels Fiction about black holes Novels about extraterrestrial life Polish novels Polish science fiction novels S. Fischer Verlag books Pirx Science fiction about first contact Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles lacking in-text citations from August 2009 All articles lacking in-text citations Articles containing Polish-language text This page was last edited on 9 November 2024, at 22:41 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Fiasco (novel) 10 languages Add topic

