Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Extent 2 See also 3 References 4 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Sunda plate 27 languages Azərbaycanca Bikol Central Čeština Deutsch Español Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Македонски Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Русский Slovenčina Sunda Svenska ไทย Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Tectonic plate including Southeast Asia Sunda plate Type Minor Movement 1 east Speed 1 11–14 mm/year Features Mainland Southeast Asia , Borneo , Java , Sumatra , Bali , South China Sea 1 Relative to the African plate The Sunda plate is a minor tectonic plate straddling the equator in the Eastern Hemisphere on which the majority of Southeast Asia is located.

[ 1 ] The Sunda plate was formerly considered a part of the Eurasian plate , but the GPS measurements have confirmed its independent movement at 10 mm/yr eastward relative to Eurasia.

[ 2 ] Extent [ edit ] The Sunda plate includes the South China Sea , the Andaman Sea , southern parts of Vietnam , Myanmar , Laos and Thailand along with Malaysia , Singapore , Cambodia , southern Philippines , and the islands of Bali , Lombok , West Nusa Tenggara , Borneo , Sumatra , Java , and part of Sulawesi in Indonesia .

The Sunda is bounded in the east by the Philippine Mobile Belt , Molucca Sea Collision Zone , Molucca Sea plate , Banda Sea plate and Timor plate ; to the south and west by the Australian plate ; and to the north by the Burma plate , Eurasian plate ; and Yangtze plate . The Indo-Australian plate dips beneath the Sunda plate along the Sunda Trench also known as Java Trench , which generates frequent earthquakes and tsunamis.

[ 1 ] The plate margin between the lower Indo-Australian plate and the upper Sunda plate, features a unique form of subduction near the island of Timor. The subduction that occurred between the upper plate and lower plate started as oceanic plate subducting under oceanic. However, it then transitioned to continental passive margin subducting under oceanic plate. This rare phenomenon continues due to the previously subducted oceanic plate continuing to drag the continental plate under the oceanic upper plate. GPS data provides insights into the consequences of speed and direction of the colliding Indo-Australian plate and the Sunda plate. This data shows that lower Indo-Australian plate is the main driver for deformation seen in the nearby Sunda-Banda Arc system. The strain that is created within this system results in shortening, with the greatest concentration in the forearc and backarc. Active shortening is occurring within the Banda Orogen.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] The eastern, southern, and western boundaries of the Sunda plate are tectonically complex and seismically active. Only the northern boundary is relatively quiescent.

See also [ edit ] Kutai Basin List of earthquakes in Indonesia Sunda Arc Sunda Shelf References [ edit ] ^ a b Whitten, T; Soeriaatmadja, R. E.; Suraya A. A. (1996).

The Ecology of Java and Bali . Hong Kong: Periplus Editions Ltd. p. 87.

ISBN 978-9625938882 .

^ Socquet, Anne; Wim Simons; Christophe Vigny; Robert McCaffrey; Cecep Subarya; Dina Sarsito; Boudewijn Ambrosius; Wim Spakman (2006).

"Microblock rotations and fault coupling in SE Asia triple junction (Sulawesi, Indonesia) from GPS and earthquake slip vector data" .

Journal of Geophysical Research .

111 (B8).

Bibcode : 2006JGRB..111.8409S .

doi : 10.1029/2005JB003963 .

ISSN 0148-0227 .

^ Nugroho, Hendro; Harris, Ron; Lestariya, Amin W.; Maruf, Bilal (December 2009).

"Plate boundary reorganization in the active Banda Arc–continent collision: Insights from new GPS measurements" .

Tectonophysics .

479 ( 1– 2): 52– 65.

doi : 10.1016/j.tecto.2009.01.026 .

ISSN 0040-1951 .

^ Harris, Ron (2009-06-01).

"Transition from subduction to arc-continent collision: Geologic and neotectonic evolution of Savu Island, Indonesia" .

Geosphere .

5 (3).

doi : 10.1130/ges00209.s1 .

ISSN 1553-040X .

Further reading [ edit ] Bird, P. (2003) An updated digital model of plate boundaries, Geochemistry, Geophysics, Geosystems , 4(3), 1027, doi : 10.1029/2001GC000252 .

[1] also available as a PDF file (13 mb) [2] v t e Tectonic plates Major plates African Antarctic Eurasian Indo-Australian Australian Indian North American Pacific South American Minor plates Amurian Arabian Burma Caribbean Caroline Cocos Indian Nazca New Hebrides Okhotsk Philippine Scotia Somali Sunda Yangtze Microplates Adriatic Aegean Sea Anatolian Balmoral Reef Banda Sea Bird's Head Capricorn Coiba Conway Reef Explorer Futuna Galápagos Gonâve Gorda Greenland Halmahera Iberian Iranian Juan de Fuca Juan Fernández Kerguelen Kermadec Lwandle Madagascar Malpelo Manus Maoke Mariana Molucca Sea Niuafo’ou North Andes North Bismarck North Galápagos Okinawa Panama Pelso Philippine Mobile Belt Rivera Rovuma Sangihe Seychelles Shetland Solomon Sea South Bismarck South Sandwich Timor Tisza Tonga Trobriand Victoria Woodlark Ancient plates Baltic Bellingshausen Charcot Cimmeria Farallon Insular Intermontane Izanagi Kula Lhasa Malvinas Moa Phoenix Kshiroda Oceanic ridges Aden Ridge Carlsberg Ridge Central Indian Ridge Chile Ridge Cocos Ridge East Pacific Rise Explorer Ridge Gakkel Ridge Galápagos Spreading Center Gorda Ridge Juan de Fuca Ridge Mid-Atlantic Ridge Knipovich Ridge Kolbeinsey Ridge Mohns Ridge Reykjanes Ridge Pacific–Antarctic Ridge South American–Antarctic Ridge Southeast Indian Ridge Southwest Indian Ridge Ancient oceanic ridges Aegir Ridge Alpha Ridge Antarctic–Phoenix Ridge Kula–Farallon Ridge Mid-Labrador Ridge Pacific–Farallon Ridge Pacific–Kula Ridge Geology portal List Category Commons v t e Tectonic plates of Southeast Asia – New Guinea ( Australian plate – Pacific plate convergence zone) Large Caroline plate Philippine Sea plate Sunda plate Small West Burma plate Philippines Philippine Mobile Belt Indonesia Banda Sea plate Bird's Head plate Halmahera plate Molucca Sea Collision Zone Molucca Sea plate Sangihe plate Timor plate New Guinea Maoke plate North Bismarck plate Manus plate Solomon Sea plate South Bismarck plate Trobriand plate Woodlark plate Faults Flores back-arc thrust fault Great Sumatran Fault Marikina Valley fault system New Britain subduction zone Palu-Koro Fault Philippine fault system Ramu-Markham Fault Sorong Fault Trenches and troughs Java Trench (Sunda) with Mentawai Trough Sunda Trough Timor Trough Philippines Cotabato Trench Manila Trench North Luzon Trough Negros Trench Palawan Trench Philippine Trench East Luzon Trench Sulu Trench Sulawesi and Moluccas Aru Trough Banda Trench Ceram Trough Salajar Trough Sangihe Trough Talaud Trough Ternate Trough Timor Aur Trough Tanimbar Trough New Guinea Ayu Trough Kilinailau Trench Manokwari Trough Lyra Trough Mussau Trough New Guinea Trench Pocklington Trough New Britain Trench (Bougainville) West Caroline Trough West Melanesian Trench Subsea plateaus and basins Arafura Basin Aru-Tanimbar Basin Bengkulu Basin Benham Plateau Bula Basin East Natuna Basin Geelvinck (Cendrawasih) Basin Manus Basin Minahasa Basin North Australian Basin North Biak Basin North Flores Basin Northern East Java Basin Northern Makassar Basin Ontong Java Plateau Sawu Basin Southern Makassar Basin Talaud Basin Weber Deep West Halmahera Basin West Natuna Basin Woodlark Basin Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Sunda_plate&oldid=1292063045 " Categories : Tectonic plates South China Sea Geology of Cambodia Geology of Thailand Geology of the Pacific Ocean Geology of the Indian Ocean Geology of Indonesia Geology of Malaysia Geology of Vietnam Natural history of Asia Natural history of the Philippines Natural history of Singapore Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 25 May 2025, at 00:38 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Sunda plate 27 languages Add topic

