Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Notes and references 3 Further reading 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Nikolaus von Schönberg 11 languages Català Deutsch Español Français Italiano Kiswahili مصرى Norsk bokmål Polski Português Slovenščina Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia German Catholic prelate (1472–1537) This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .

Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( April 2014 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) His Eminence Nikolaus von Schönberg Archbishop of Capua Archdiocese Capua Appointed 12 September 1520 Term ended 28 April 1536 Predecessor Ippolito d'Este Successor Tommaso Caracciolo Other post(s) Cardinal-Priest of San Sisto (1537) Archbishop Emeritus of Capua (1536–1537) Orders Created cardinal 21 May 1535 by Pope Paul III Rank Cardinal-priest Personal details Born 11 August 1472 ( 1472-08-11 ) Rothschönberg , Electorate of Saxony Died 7 September 1537 ( 1537-09-08 ) (aged 65) Rome , Papal States Nikolaus von Schönberg (11 August 1472 – 7 September 1537) was a German Catholic cardinal and Archbishop of Capua .

Biography [ edit ] Born in Rothschönberg (now part of Klipphausen ) near Meissen to a noble family which already had several Bishops of Meissen , Nikolaus became Canon at the Cathedral of Naumburg (as would later his brothers Hans and Dietrich) and became a doctor of law (Dr. jur.) when studying in Italy.

Impressed by the speeches held by Savonarola in Pisa in 1495, Schönberg became a priest in 1497 and a member of the Ordo Praedicatorum (Dominican Order) on 31 October 1498. In Florence he promoted to Dr. theol., but also studied mathematics, astronomy, medicine and geography. Speaking several languages, and serving his order, he travelled around Europe, to Jerusalem and the Ottoman Empire before settling in Rome in 1508 to serve Pope Julius II . As professor at the Sapienza in Rome, he held speeches that were published in 1512.

George, Duke of Saxony , made Schönberg his procurator for the Fifth Council of the Lateran (1512–1517).

Pope Leo X sent him as papal legate around Europe to find support for a crusade against the Ottoman Turks .

Other missions sent him to Maximilian I, Holy Roman Emperor , at Innsbruck , to the courts of Hungary , Poland , Muscovy , and to the Grand Master of the Teutonic Knights , Albert of Brandenburg . In 1891 this mission was the subject of a doctoral thesis in Greifswald .

On 12 September 1520, Schönberg was appointed Archbishop of Capua by Pope Leo X , and on 21 May 1535 elevated to Cardinal by Pope Paul III . On 28 April 1536 he resigned from his office at age 63.

On 1 November 1536, Schönberg wrote a "Letter to Copernicus" from Rome, [ 1 ] which Copernicus made famous by including it in De revolutionibus orbium coelestium : Nicholas Schönberg, Cardinal of Capua, to Nicolaus Copernicus , Greetings.

Some years ago word reached me concerning your proficiency, of which everybody constantly spoke. At that time I began to have a very high regard for you, and also to congratulate our contemporaries among whom you enjoyed such great prestige. For I had learned that you had not merely mastered the discoveries of the ancient astronomers uncommonly well but had also formulated a new cosmology. In it you maintain that the earth moves; that the sun occupies the lowest, and thus the central, place in the universe; that the eighth heaven remain perpetually motionless and fixed; and that, together with the elements included in its sphere, the moon, situated between the heavens of Mars and Venus, revolves around the sun in the period of a year. I have also learned that you have written an exposition of this whole system of astronomy, and have computed the planetary motions and set them down in tables, to the greatest admiration of all. Therefore with the utmost earnestness I entreat you, most learned sir, unless I inconvenience you, to communicate this discovery of yours to scholars, and at the earliest possible moment to send me your writings on the sphere of the universe together with the tables and whatever else you have that is relevant to this subject. Moreover, I have instructed Theodoric of Reden to have everything copied in your quarters at my expense and dispatched to me. If you gratify my desire in this matter, you will see that you are dealing with a man who is zealous for your reputation and eager to do justice to so fine a talent. Farewell.

Rome, 1 November 1536 Schönberg died in Rome on 7 September 1537.

[ 2 ] Notes and references [ edit ] ^ "Nicholas Copernicus" .

Calendars Through The Ages – via WebExhibits .

^ Stephan Ehses (1910), "Der Todestag des Kardinals Nikolaus von Schömberg (9.-10. September 1537)", Römische Quartalschrift für christliche Altertumskunde und Kirchengeschichte 24 (Rome: 1910), p. 106.

Further reading [ edit ] "Pagina:Nicolai Copernici torinensis De revolutionibus orbium coelestium.djvu/3" [Page : Nicolaus Copernicus of Turin On the Revolutions of the Celestial Orbs.djvu/3].

Wikisource (in Latin).

"Kardinal Nikolaus v. Schönberg/Rothschönberg" [Cardinal Nicholas of Schoenberg/Rothschoenberg].

Familie von Schönberg (in German).

"Nikolaus Cardinal von Schönberg, O.P." Catholic-Hierarchy.org . David M. Cheney.

External links [ edit ] Diocese of Capua (in Italian) Ordo Praedicatorum (Order of Preachers) (in English) Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National Germany Italy Czech Republic Vatican Belgium People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Nikolaus_von_Schönberg&oldid=1291866756 " Categories : 1472 births 1537 deaths People from Klipphausen 16th-century German cardinals Diplomats for the Holy See German Dominicans Archbishops of Capua Dominican cardinals Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles lacking in-text citations from April 2014 All articles lacking in-text citations CS1 Latin-language sources (la) CS1 German-language sources (de) Articles with Italian-language sources (it) This page was last edited on 23 May 2025, at 21:26 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Nikolaus von Schönberg 11 languages Add topic

