Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Childhood and adolescence Toggle Childhood and adolescence subsection 1.1 Children 1.2 Adolescence 2 Peer pressure and adolescent behaviors Toggle Peer pressure and adolescent behaviors subsection 2.1 Substance use 2.1.1 Nicotine use 2.1.2 Alcohol use 2.1.3 Prevention 2.2 Peer pressure and sexual intercourse 3 Psychological explanations Toggle Psychological explanations subsection 3.1 Neurology and physiological psychology 3.2 Social psychology 4 Social media Toggle Social media subsection 4.1 Peer pressure on social media across cultures 5 Historical examples Toggle Historical examples subsection 5.1 Holocaust 5.1.1 Browning's Ordinary Men 5.1.2 Goldhagen's Hitler's Willing Executioners 5.2 Rwandan genocide 6 Applications Toggle Applications subsection 6.1 Leadership tool 6.1.1 Education 6.2 Voting 6.3 Charitable donations 6.4 Criminal justice 7 See also 8 References 9 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Peer pressure 30 languages Afrikaans العربية বাংলা Català Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia עברית Kiswahili Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Português Русский Simple English Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Influencing peers to conform For other uses, see Peer pressure (disambiguation) .

Peer pressure is a direct or indirect influence on peers, i.e., members of social groups with similar interests and experiences, or social statuses. Members of a peer group are more likely to influence a person's beliefs, values, religion and behavior. A group or individual may be encouraged and want to follow their peers by changing their attitudes , values or behaviors to conform to those of the influencing group or individual. For the individual affected by peer pressure, this can have both a positive or negative effect on them.

[ 1 ] Social groups include both membership groups in which individuals hold "formal" membership (e.g.

political parties , trade unions , schools) and cliques in which membership is less clearly defined. However, a person does not need to be a member or be seeking membership of a group to be affected by peer pressure. An individual may be in a crowd, a group of many cliques, and still be affected by peer pressure. Research suggests that organizations as well as individuals are susceptible to peer pressure. For example, an organization may base a decision off of the current trends to receive more affection or grow a following group.

[ 2 ] Peer pressure can affect individuals of all ethnic groups, genders and ages. Researchers have frequently studied the effects of peer pressure on children and on adolescents , and in popular discourse the term "peer pressure" is used most often with reference to those age-groups. It's important to understand that for children of adolescent age, they are faced with finding their identity. Erikson, a sociopsychologist, explains that identity is faced with role confusion, in other words, these children are trying to find a sense of belonging and are the most susceptible to peer pressure as a form of acceptance.

[ 3 ] For children, the themes most commonly studied are their abilities for independent decision-making. For adolescents, peer pressure's relationships to sexual intercourse and substance abuse have been significantly researched. Peer pressure can be experienced through both face-to-face interaction and through digital interaction.

Social media offers opportunities for adolescents and adults alike to instill and/or experience pressure every day.

[ 4 ] Studies of social networks examine connections between members of social groups, including their use of social media, to better understand mechanisms such as information sharing and peer sanctioning. Sanctions can range from subtle glances that suggest disapproval, to threats and physical violence. Peer sanctioning may enhance either positive or negative behaviors. Whether peer sanctioning will have an effect depends strongly on members' expectations and the possible sanctions actually being applied. It can also depend on a person's position in a social network. Those who are more central in a social network seem more likely to be cooperative, perhaps as a result of how networks form. However, this goes both ways and so they are also more likely to participate in negative behaviors. This may be caused by the repeated social pressures they experience in their networks.

[ 5 ] Childhood and adolescence [ edit ] Children [ edit ] Imitation plays a large role in children's lives; in order to pick up skills and techniques that they use in their own life, children are always searching for behaviors and attitudes around them that they can co-opt. In other words, children are influenced by people that are important in their lives, such as friends, parents, celebrities (including YouTubers), singers, dancers, etc. This may explain why children with parents who eat unhealthy or don't live active lifestyles can conform to creating habits just like their parents as young adults, and why children try to walk when very young. Children are aware of their position in the social hierarchy from a young age: their instinct is to defer to adults' judgements and majority opinions.

[ 6 ] Similar to the Asch conformity experiments , a study done on groups of preschool children showed that they were influenced by groups of their peers to change their opinion to a demonstrably wrong one.

[ 7 ] Each child was handed a book with two sets of images on each page, with a groups of differently sized animals on the left hand page and one animal on the right hand, and each child was asked to indicate the size of the lone animal. All the books appeared the same, but the last child would sometimes get a book that was different. The children reported their size judgements in turn, and the child being tested was asked last. Before the child was to be tested, however, there was a group of children working in conjunction with the researchers. Sometimes, the children who answered before the test subject all gave an incorrect answer. When asked in the presence of the other children, the last child's response was often the same as his or her peers. However, when allowed to privately share their responses with a researcher, the children proved much more resistant to their peers' pressure, illustrating the importance of the physical presence of their peers in shaping their opinions.

[ 7 ] An observation is that children can monitor and intervene in their peers' behavior through pressure. A study conducted in a remedial kindergarten class, in the Edna A. Hill Child Development Laboratory at the University of Kansas, was designed to measure how children could ease disruptive behavior in their peers through a two-part system. After describing a series of tasks to their classroom that included going to the bathroom, cleaning up, and general classroom behavior, teachers and researchers would observe children's performance on the tasks. The study focused on three children who were clearly identified as being more disruptive than their peers. They looked at their responses to potential techniques. They utilized the two-part system: first, each student would be given points by their teachers for correctly completing tasks with little disruption (e.g. sitting down on a mat for reading time), and if a student reached three points by the end of the day they would receive a prize. The second part brought in peer interaction, where students who reached three points were appointed "peer monitors" whose role was to lead their small groups and assign points at the end of the day. The results were clear-cut, showing that the monitored students' disruption level dropped when teachers started the points system and monitored them, but when peer monitors were introduced the target students' disruption dropped to average rates of 1% for student C1, 8% for student C2, and 11% for student C3 (down from 36%, 62%, and 59%, respectively). Even small children, then, are susceptible to pressure from their peers, and that pressure can be used to effect positive change in academic and social environments.

[ 8 ] Adolescence [ edit ] Adolescence is the time when a person is most susceptible to peer pressure because peers become an important influence on behavior during adolescence, and peer pressure has been called a hallmark of adolescent experience.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] Children entering this period in life become aware for the first time of the other people around them and realize the importance of perception in their interactions. Peer conformity in young people is most pronounced with respect to style, taste, appearance, ideology, and values.

[ 11 ] According to a recent private opinion research study, the Social Pressure Index , college students feel the least comfortable sharing their private views in public.

[ 12 ] Peer pressure is commonly associated with episodes of adolescent risk-taking because these activities commonly occur in the company of peers .

[ 10 ] Affiliation with friends who engage in risky behaviors has been shown to be a strong predictor of an adolescent's own behavior.

[ 13 ] Peer pressure can also have positive effects when youth are pressured by their peers toward positive behavior, such as volunteering for charity, [ 14 ] excelling in academics, or participating in a service project.

[ 15 ] The importance of peer approval declines upon entering adulthood.

[ 16 ] Even though socially accepted children are more prone to experience higher, more frequent, positive fulfillments and participate in more opportunities, research shows that social acceptance (being in the popular crowd) may increase the likelihood of engaging in risky behavior, depending on the norms in the group. Groups of popular children showed an increased propensity to engage in risky, drug-related and delinquent behavior when this behavior was likely to receive approval in their groups. Peer pressure was greatest among more popular children because they were the children most attuned to the judgments of their peers, making them more susceptible to group pressures.

[ 17 ] Gender also has a clear effect on the amount of peer pressure an adolescent experiences: girls report significantly higher pressures to conform to their groups [ 18 ] in the form of clothing choices or speech patterns.

[ 19 ] Additionally, girls and boys reported facing differing amounts of pressures in different areas of their lives, perhaps reflecting a different set of values and priorities for each gender.

[ 18 ] Both boys and girls are susceptible to peer pressure, but what it revolves around is defining the values, beliefs, or attitudes that their peer groups have or deeply desire. For girls, it typically revolves around their physical appearance, including their fashion choices, such as wearing thong underwear .

[ 20 ] For boys, it's more likely to revolve around typical masculine ideals, such as athleticism or intellect. Either way, peer pressure tends to follow the trends with the current world.

Peer pressure is widely recognized as a major contributor to the initiation of drug use, particularly in adolescents.

[ 21 ] This has been shown for a variety of substances, including nicotine [ 22 ] [ 23 ] and alcohol.

[ 24 ] While this link is well established, moderating factors do exist. For example, parental monitoring is negatively associated with substance use; yet when there is little monitoring, adolescents are more likely to succumb to peer coercion during initiation to substance use, but not during the transition from experimental to regular use.

[ 25 ] Caldwell and colleagues extended this work by finding that peer pressure was a factor leading to heightened risk in the context of social gatherings with little parental monitoring, and if the individual reported themselves as vulnerable to peer pressure.

[ 26 ] Conversely, some research has observed that peer pressure can be a protective factor against substance use.

[ 27 ] Peer pressure produces a wide array of negative outcomes. Allen and colleagues showed that susceptibility to peer pressure in 13- and 14-year-olds was predictive of not only future response to peer pressure, but also a wider array of functioning.

[ 28 ] For example, greater depression symptomatology, decreasing popularity, more sexual behavior, and externalizing behavior were greater for more susceptible teens. Of note, substance use was also predicted by peer pressure susceptibility such that greater susceptibility was predictive of greater alcohol and drug use.

Peer pressure and adolescent behaviors [ edit ] Substance use [ edit ] Nicotine use [ edit ] Substance use is likely not attributed to peer pressure alone. Evidence of genetic predispositions for substance use exists [ 29 ] and some have begun to examine gene x environment interactions for peer influence. In a nationally representative sample, adolescents who had a genetic predisposition were more likely to have close friends who were heavy substance users and were furthermore, more likely to be vulnerable to the adverse influence of these friends.

[ 30 ] Results from specific candidate gene studies have been mixed. For instance, in a study of nicotine use Johnson and colleagues found that peer smoking had a lower effect on nicotine dependence for those with the high risk allele (CHRNA5).

[ 31 ] This suggests that social contexts do not play a significant role in substance use initiation and maintenance and that interventions for these individuals should be developed with genetics in mind as well While tobacco is one of the most widespread forms of nicotine, it is not the only form of nicotine adolescents use. E-cigarette use is on the rise, and over the course of four years, vaporizer use increased ninefold among adolescents.

[ 32 ] In the United States, youths are commonly introduced to e-cigarettes and vaporizers in their middle and high-school years; almost 6% of students in this age group reported use of some form of e-cigarettes.

[ 33 ] The mechanisms behind why adolescents adhere to vaping largely relate to social psychology topics such as conformity and acceptance within social groups. Conformity and acceptance can be associated with several factors which are personality and habit-based. Some of the most often cited criteria include a need to belong, alleviation of emotional or physical pain, and curiosity.

[ 34 ] The onset and continued use of electronic cigarette products are considered normative behaviors within certain social groups, [ 35 ] and through behavioral modifications to fit the norms, adolescents and adults gain acceptance and approval from their peers. Additionally, nicotine abuse through social contexts can be traced to individuals and locations where people feel most comfortable. The sites of initiation, or the first location a substance is taken, are most often locations such as schools and homes [ 34 ] These locations are familiar spaces for individuals and tend to have low risk of consequences.

Alcohol use [ edit ] Though the impact of peer influence in adolescence has been well established, it was unclear at what age this effect begins to diminish. It is accepted that such peer pressure to use alcohol or illicit substances is less likely to exist in elementary school and very young adolescents given the limited access and exposure. Using the Resistance to Peer Influence Scale, Sumter and colleagues found that resistance to peer pressure grew as age increased in a large study of 10- to 18-year-olds.

[ 36 ] This study also found that girls were generally more resistant to peer influence than boys, particularly at mid-adolescence (i.e. ages 13–15). The higher vulnerability to peer pressure for teenage boys makes sense given the higher rates of substance use in male teens.

[ 37 ] For girls, increased and positive parental behaviors (e.g. parental social support, consistent discipline) have been shown to be an important contributor to the ability to resist peer pressure to use substances.

[ 38 ] It is believed that peer pressure relating to alcohol use in college is caused by a variety of factors including: Modeling, social norms, and being offered alcohol. Offering alcohol can be seen as a kind gesture, but in some cases a forceful one. Students may feel like their social position could become compromised if they don't follow the actions of their fellow peers. This correlates to modeling, a term used to describe the action of copying/imitating the actions of your peers to fit in. This usually occurs when students give into peer pressure to seem more attractive to the perceived majority. Lastly, you have common, socially acceptable norms that frequently occur in college settings such as substance abuse and drinking. One of the most commonly used excuses among students to which why they drink is because "everyone does it". Upon entering college, it's common to see students begin to increase their alcohol intake, especially for those who do not live at home. Because they have shifted from being influenced by their parents to being influenced by their college peers, it's common to see students reflect their peers, most likely due to an increase of modeling to fit in to social settings.

[ 39 ] Other substances Besides the impacts of peer pressure on adolescent alcohol and tobacco use, peer pressure plays a role in the use of other substances, such as marijuana and hard drugs. One contributor to peer pressure with marijuana is legalization efforts; the legalization of recreational marijuana may increase adolescent access and decrease stigma, increasing the likelihood of peer exposure and peer pressure.

[ 32 ] With legalization comes other challenges, such as deregulation and a lack of control of substances like marijuana and non-medical opioids when it comes to safety concerns. On an international scale, contaminants such as fentanyl are seeping into deregulated opioid markets, which dramatically decreases safety and increases risks for opioid toxicity and death.

[ 40 ] Peer pressure and social group selection can create a positive feedback loop with marijuana abuse as well as other substances. Through homophily, the sociological concept in which people connect more with others they are similar to, pro-substance use adolescents and adults self-select with others who share their habits.

[ 41 ] [ 42 ] Similar to nicotine, comfort and familiarity with people and places of first initiation are predictors for whether individuals will use substances.

[ 34 ] Opioid use is closely linked to peer pressure and comfort, as well as a number of other risk factors which connect with other substance use trends. Opioid use is strongly correlated with tobacco use, and "experimentation," or trying several different substances during adolescence, is closely tied to long-term abuse.

[ 43 ] Additionally, delinquent behaviors and peer selection connect closely with opioid use. Opioid use and distribution outside of prescriptions is commonly associated with crime, and if peer groups contain individuals who commit these crimes, the risk of group abuse increases.

[ 43 ] Prevention [ edit ] Substance use prevention and intervention programs have utilized multiple techniques in order to combat the impact of peer pressure. One major technique is peer influence resistance skills.

[ 44 ] [ 45 ] The known correlational relationship between substance use and relationships with others that use makes resistance skills a natural treatment target. This type of training is meant to help individuals refuse participation with substance use while maintaining their membership in the peer group. Other interventions include normative education approaches (interventions designed to teach students about the true prevalence rates and acceptability of substance use), [ 45 ] education interventions that raise awareness of potential dangers of substance use, alcohol awareness training and classroom behavior management. The literature regarding the efficacy of these approaches, however, is mixed.

[ 45 ] [ 46 ] [ 47 ] A study in Los Angeles and Orange Counties that established conservative norms and attempted to correct children's beliefs about substance abuse among their peers showed a statistically significant decrease in alcohol, tobacco, and marijuana use, [ 45 ] but other studies that systematically reviewed school-based attempts to prevent alcohol misuse in children found "no easily discernible pattern" in both successful and failed programs.

[ 46 ] A systematic review of intervention programs in schools conducted by Onrust et al. found that programs in elementary school were successful in slightly reducing a student's likelihood to abuse drugs or alcohol. However, this effect started to wear off with programs that targeted older students. Programs that targeted students in grades 8–9 reduced smoking, but not alcohol and other drug abuse, and programs that targeted older children reported no effect at all.

[ 48 ] In a non-substance use context, however, research has shown that decision-making training [ 49 ] can produce concrete gains in risk perception and decision-making ability among autistic children. When administered the training in several short sessions that taught the children how to recognize risk from peers and react accordingly, the children demonstrated, through post-training assessments, that they were able to identify potential threats and sources of pressure from peers and deflect them far better than non-autistic adolescents in a control group.

[ 49 ] Peer pressure and sexual intercourse [ edit ] There is evidence supporting the conclusion that parental attitudes disapproving sex tends to lead toward lower levels of adolescent unplanned pregnancy.

[ 50 ] These disparities are not due solely to parental disposition but also to communication.

[ citation needed ] A study completed in Cape Town, South Africa, looked at students at four secondary schools in the region. They found a number of unhealthy practices derived from peer pressure: condoms are derided, threats of ridicule for abstinence, and engaging in sexual activity with multiple partners as part of a status symbol (especially for males). The students colloquially call others who choose abstinence as "umqwayito", which means dried fruit/meat. An important solution for these problems is communication with adults, which the study found to be extremely lacking within adolescent social groups.

[ 51 ] Another investigation, completed in 2011, looked at the effect of peer pressure surrounding sexual activities in the youth surrounding US born Mexicans and Mexico born Mexicans. It summarized that US born Mexican youths are more susceptive of peer pressure, specifically towards sexual relations, than Mexico born youths.

[ 52 ] It has been found that Mexican born youths grow up with stronger familial households than US born Mexico born youths, which leads to why Mexico born youths are more apt to talk with family than with peers.

[ 52 ] Less interaction with peers means less influence with peers and more trust in family.

Literature reviews in this field have attempted to analyse the norms present in the interactions and decision making behind these behaviors. A review conducted by Bongardt et al. defined three types of peer norms that led to a person's participation in sexual intercourse: descriptive norms, injunctive norms, and outright peer pressure. Descriptive norms and injunctive norms are both observed behaviors and are thus more indirect forms of pressure, but differ in one key aspect: descriptive norms describe peers' sexual behaviors, but injunctive norms describe peers' attitudes toward those behaviors (e.g. approval or disapproval). The last norm defined by the study is called "peer pressure" by the authors, and is used to describe direct encouragement or pressure by a person's peers to engage in sexual behavior.

The review found that indirect norms (descriptive and injunctive) had a stronger effect on a person's decision to engage in sexual behavior than direct peer pressure. Between the two indirect norms, descriptive norms had a stronger effect: people were likely to try what they thought their peers were engaging in rather than what they thought had approval in their peer group.

[ 53 ] Additionally, studies have found a link between self-regulation and likeliness to engage in sexual behavior. The more trouble an individual had with self-regulation and self-control growing up, the more they were likely to fall prey to peer pressure that would lead them to engage in risky sexual acts. Based on these findings, it may be a good idea to prevent these through either a decision-making program or by targeting adolescents' ability to self-regulate against possible risks.

[ 54 ] Psychological explanations [ edit ] Neurology and physiological psychology [ edit ] From a neurological perspective, the medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC) and the striatum play an important role in figuring out the value of specific actions. The mPFC is active when determining "socially tagged" objects, which are objects that peers have expressed an opinion about; the striatum is significant for determining the value of these "socially tagged" objects and rewards in general. An experiment performed by Mason et al. utilizing fMRI scans analyzed individuals who were assigned to indicate if a chosen symbol appeared consecutively. The researchers did not tell the subjects the real purpose of the experiment, which was to collect data regarding mPFC and striatum stimulation. Before the actual experiment began, the subjects were subject to a phase of "social" influence, where they learned which symbols were preferred by other subjects who had completed the experiment (while in actuality these other subjects did not exist). Mason et al. found that determining an object's social value/significance is dependent on combined information from the mPFC and the striatum [along the lines denoted in the beginning of the paragraph]. Without both present and functional, it would be difficult to determine the value of action based upon social circumstances.

[ 55 ] A similar experiment was conducted by Stallen, Smidts, and Sanfrey. Twenty-four subjects were manipulated using a minimal group paradigm approach. Unbeknownst to them, they were all selected as part of the "in-group", although there was an established "out-group". Following this socialization, the subjects estimated the number of dots seen on the screen while given information about what an in-group or out-group member chose. Participants were more likely to conform to in-group decisions as compared to out-group ones. The experiment confirmed the importance of the striatum in social influence, suggesting that conformity with the in-group is mediated with a fundamental value signal—rewards. In other words, the brain associates social inclusion with positive reward. The posterior superior temporal sulcus (pSTS), which is associated with perspective taking, appeared to be active as well, which correlated with patients' self-reports of in-group trustworthiness.

[ 56 ] In adolescence, risk-taking appears to increase dramatically. Researchers conducted an experiment with adolescent males who were of driving age and measured their risk-taking depending on whether a passenger (a peer of the same age) was in the car. A driving simulation was created, and certain risky scenarios, such as a decaying yellow light as the car was approaching, were modeled and presented to the subjects. Those who were most likely to take risks in the presence of peers (but took fewer risks when there were no passengers) had greater brain activity in the social-cognitive and social-affective brain systems during solo activity (no passengers.) The social-cognitive aspect refers to the ability to gauge what others are thinking and is primarily controlled by the mPFC, right temporal parietal junction , and the posterior cingulate cortex . The social-affective aspect relates to the reward system for committing actions that are accepted or rejected by other people. One side of the reward system is "social pain", [ 57 ] which refers to the emotional pain felt by individual due to group repudiation and is associated with heightened activity in the anterior insula and the subgenual anterior cingulate cortex .

[ 58 ] Social psychology [ edit ] An explanation of how the peer pressure process works, called "the identity shift effect," was introduced by social psychologist Wendy Treynor, who weaves together Festinger's two seminal social-psychological theories (on dissonance, which addresses internal conflict, and social comparison, which addresses external conflict) into a unified whole. According to Treynor's original "identity shift effect" hypothesis, the peer pressure process works in the following way: One's state of harmony is disrupted when faced with the threat of external conflict ( social rejection ) for failing to conform to a group standard. Thus, one conforms to the group standard, but as soon as one does, eliminating this external conflict, internal conflict is introduced (because one has violated one's own standards). To rid oneself of this internal conflict (self-rejection), an "identity shift" is undertaken, where one adopts the group's standards as one's own, thereby eliminating internal conflict (in addition to the formerly eliminated external conflict), returning one to a state of harmony. Although the peer pressure process begins and ends with one in a (conflict-less) state of harmony, as a result of conflict and the conflict resolution process, one leaves with a new identity—a new set of internalized standards.

[ 59 ] Social media [ edit ] Social media provides a massive new digital arena for peer pressure and influence. Research suggests there are a variety of benefits from social media use, such as increased socialization, exposure to ideas, and greater self-confidence .

[ 60 ] However, there is also evidence of negative influences such as advertising pressure, exposure to inappropriate behavior and/or dialogue, and fake news .

[ 61 ] These versions of digital peer pressure exist between youth, adults and businesses. In some cases, people can feel pressure to make themselves available 24/7 or to be perfect.

[ 62 ] Within this digital conversation there can be pressure to conform, especially as people are impacted by the frequency of times others hit the like button .

[ 63 ] In 2014, 39% of the 789 respondents, in ages 13–17, felt pressured to post content for likes and comments.

[ 64 ] The way others portray themselves on social media might lead to young people trying to mimic those qualities or actions in an attempt to conform . In 2014, 40% of 789 respondents, in ages 13–17, felt the need to only post content to look good to others on social media.

[ 64 ] It may also lead to a fear of missing out , which can pressure youth into irresponsible actions or decisions. Actions and influence on social media may lead to changes in identity , confidence , or habits in real life for children, adolescents, and adults.

[ 65 ] [ better source needed ] Another area in which social media and social network groups influence people is in the purchasing of products.

[ 66 ] When a person is a part of an online social networking group, they are more likely to purchase a product if it was recommended by another member of that group than if it were recommended by a random person online.

[ 66 ] Knowledge about brands, opinions of brands, and purchasing behavior are directly influenced by peers and the media; people's purchase decisions largely stem from what their friends are purchasing.

[ 67 ] The effects of social networking groups on purchasing products even translates to subscriptions. If a subscription-based product was given to a member of an online social networking group as a gift by another member of the same group, the person receiving the gift is more likely to adopt the cost of the subscription and keep paying for the service.

[ 66 ] Peer pressure on social media across cultures [ edit ] Over 3 billion social media users across the world are using a variety of platforms, in turn, the type, frequency, and scope of the resulting peer pressure fluctuates.

[ 68 ] Some research suggests social media has a greater influence on purchasing decisions for consumers in China than in other countries in the world. In addition, Chinese consumers say that they are more likely to consider buying a product if they see it discussed positively by friends on a social media site.

[ 69 ] Some countries have a very low usage rate of social media platforms, or have cultures that do not value it as highly. As a result, the power and impact of digital peer pressure may vary throughout the world. Overall, there is limited research on this topic and its global scope.

Historical examples [ edit ] Holocaust [ edit ] The Holocaust is one of the most well-known of genocides. In the 1940s, Nazi Germany , led by Adolf Hitler, began a systematic purge against the Jewish people living in Europe, killing around six million Jews by the end of World War II . It is clear that some Germans are culpable for the Holocaust; SS officers and soldiers clearly bought into the Jewish genocide and participated as executioners, jailers, and hunters (for hiding Jews).

[ 70 ] However, not all Germans wanted to kill the Jews. When bringing the concept of peer pressure into the Holocaust , German culpability is even harder to decide.

The primary issue revolves around collective responsibility and beliefs. As such, there are two positions, most notably held by Christopher Browning and David Goldhagen.

Browning's Ordinary Men [ edit ] Christopher Browning , most known for his book Ordinary Men: Reserve Police Battalion 101 , relies on an analysis of the men in Reserve Police Battalion 101. The men of the 101st were not ardent Nazis but ordinary middle-aged men of working-class backgrounds from Hamburg. They were drafted but found ineligible for regular military duty. Their test as an Order Police battalion first came in the form of Jozefow, a Jewish ghetto in Poland. The Battalion was ordered to round up the men in the ghetto and kill all women, children, and elderly on sight. During the executions, a few dozen men were granted release of their execution tasks and were reassigned to guard or truck duty. Others tried to stall as long as possible, trying not to be assigned to a firing squad. After the executions were completed, the men drank heavily, shaken by their ordeal.

[ 71 ] At the end of his book, Browning supplies his theory on 101's actions: a combination of authoritative and peer pressure was a powerful coercive tool. First, the Nazi leadership wanted to keep the country's soldiers psychologically healthy, so soldiers were not forced to commit these murders. Throughout the German ranks, nothing negative happened to the soldiers and policemen who refused to join in on a firing squad or Jewish search party. They would simply be assigned other or additional duties, and perhaps subject to a little verbal abuse deriding their "cowardice". For the officers, no official sanction was given, but it was well known that being unable to carry out executions was a sign of a "weak" leader, and the officer would be passed for promotions.

[ 70 ] Second, Major Trapp, the head of Battalion 101, consistently offered protection from committing these actions, even so far as supporting one man who was blatantly and vocally against these practices. He established "ground" rules in which only volunteers were taking on 'Jewish Hunts" and raids.

Browning relies on Milgram's experiments on authority to expand his point. Admitting that Trapp was not a particularly strong authority figure, Browning instead points to the Nazi leadership and the orders of the "highest order" that were handed down. Furthermore, according to Browning's analysis, one reason so few men separated themselves from their task was peer pressure—individual policemen did not want to "lose face" in front of their comrades. Some argued that it was better to shoot one and quit than to be a coward immediately. Some superior officers treated those who did not want to execute Jews with disdain; on the other hand, those selected for the executions or Jewish hunts were regarded as real "men" and were verbally praised accordingly. For some, refusing their tasks meant that their compatriots would need to carry the burden and the guilt of abandoning their comrades (as well as fear of ostracization) compelled them to kill.

[ 71 ] Goldhagen's Hitler's Willing Executioners [ edit ] Daniel Goldhagen , disagreeing with Browning's conclusion, decided to write his own book, Hitler's Willing Executioners . Its release was highly controversial. He argues that the Germans were always anti-Semitic, engaging in a form of " eliminationism ". Taking photos of the deceased, going on "Jew-Hunts", death marches near the end of the war, and a general focus on hate (rather than ignorance) are points Goldhagen utilizes in his book.

[ 72 ] He does not believe that peer pressure or authoritative pressure can explain why ordinary Germans engaged in these actions. He believes that in order for the policemen in Battalion 101 (and those in similar situations) to kill, they must all be fully committed to the action—no half-heartedness. As he notes, "For that matter, for someone to be pressured into doing something, by peer pressure, everyone else has to want to do it. Peer pressure can, of course, operate on isolated individuals, or small groups, but it depends upon the majority wanting to do it. So the peer pressure argument contradicts itself. If the majority of the people hadn't wanted to kill Jews, then there would have been peer pressure not to do it" (37).

[ 72 ] Instead, he places a significant emphasis on the German people's anti-Semitism, to the extent of drawing ire from other historians. Browning notes Goldhagen's "uniform portrayal" of Germans, dehumanizing all of the perpetrators without looking at the whole picture.

[ 73 ] For example, in the town of Niezdow, the Police Battalion executed over a dozen elderly Poles in retaliation for the murder of a German policeman. It is less clear, then, if the Germans in the Police Battalion are antagonistic only towards Jews. The German-Canadian historian Ruth Bettina Birn has—in collaboration with Volker Rieß— checked Goldhagen's archival sources from Ludwigsburg. Their findings confirm the arbitrary nature of his selection and evaluation of existing records as opposed to a more holistic combination of primary sources. Furthermore, Konrad Kwiet , a Holocaust historian, argues that Goldhagen's narrow focus on German anti-Semitism has blinded him to other considerations. He points to the massacres of non-Jews as an example: "[Goldhagen does not shine light] on the motives of "Hitler's willing executioners" in murdering disabled people within the so-called "Euthanasia Program", in liquidating 2.7 million Soviet prisoners of war, in exterminating Romas or in killing hundreds of thousands of other people classified as enemies of the "German People and Nation". The emphasis on German responsibility allows Goldhagen to push aside the willingness of genocidal killers of other nationalities [such as Latvians] who, recruited from the vast army of indigenous collaborators, were often commissioned with the task of carrying out the 'dirty work', such as the murder of women and children, and who, in many cases, surpassed their German masters in their cruelty and spontaneous brutality".

[ 74 ] Rwandan genocide [ edit ] The Rwandan genocide occurred in 1994, with ethnic violence between the Hutu and Tutsi ethnicities. The primary belligerents were the Hutu; however, as with most ethnic conflicts, not all Hutu wanted to kill Tutsi. A survivor, Mectilde, described the Hutu breakdown as follows: 10% helped, 30% forced, 20% reluctant, and 40% willing.

[ 75 ] For the willing, a rewards structure was put in place. For the unwilling, a punishment system was in effect. The combination, Professor Bhavnani argues, is a behavioral norm enforced by in-group policing. Instead of the typical peer pressure associated with western high school students, the peer pressure within the Rwandan genocide, where Tutsi and Hutu have inter-married, worked under coercion. Property destruction, rape, incarceration, and death faced the Hutu who were unwilling to commit to the genocide or protected the Tutsi from violence.

[ 75 ] When observing a sample community of 3426 in the village of Tare during the genocide, McDoom found that neighborhoods and familial structures are important micro-spaces that helped determine if an individual would participate in violence. Physical proximity increases the likelihood of social interaction and influence. For example, starting at a set point such as the home of a "mobilizing" agent for the Hutu (any individual who planned or led an attack in the village), the proportion of convicts living in a 100m radius of a resident is almost twice as many for convicts (individuals convicted of genocide by the gacaca , a local institution of transitional justice that allows villagers to adjudicate on many of the perpetrators' crimes by themselves) as for non-convicts. As the radius increases, so does the proportion decrease. This data implies that "social influence" was a major factor. Looking at neighborhoods, an individual is 4% more likely to join the genocide for every single percentage point increase in the proportion of convicted perpetrators living within a 100m radius of them. Looking at familial structures, for any individual, each percentage point increase in the proportion of genocide participants in the individual's household increased their chances of joining the violence by 21 to 25%.

[ 76 ] However, the complete situation is a little more nuanced. The extreme control of citizens' daily lives by the government in social affairs facilitated the rapidity of the genocide's spread and broke down the resolve of some who initially wanted to have no part in the genocide. First, prior to the genocide, Rwandans' sense of discipline was introduced and reinforced through weekly umuganda (collective work) sessions, involving praise for the regime and its leaders and a host of collective activities for the community. Respect for authority and the fear of stepping out of line were strong cultural values of pre-genocide Rwanda and so were included in these activities.

[ 77 ] Second, their value of social conformity only increased in the decades leading up to the genocide in both social and political manners. Peasants were told exactly when and what to farm and could be fined given any lack of compliance. These factors helped to drive the killing's fast pace.

Most importantly, there were already ethnic tensions among the groups for a variety of reasons: conflicts over land allocation (farming versus pasture) and declining prices of Rwanda's main export: coffee. These problems combined with a history of previously existing conflict. With the introduction of the Second Republic under Habyarimana, former Tutsis in power were immediately purged, and racism served as an explanation as keeping the majority Hutu in legitimate government power.

[ 78 ] As a result, when the war came, the Hutu were already introduced to the concept of racism against their very own peers.

The division in Rwanda was reinforced for hundreds of years. King Kigeli IV, a Tutsi, centralized Rwandan power in the 1800s, just as Belgian colonization was taking place. The Belgian furthered the message of distinct races, allowing Tutsi men to remain the leaders in the society.

[ 78 ] Applications [ edit ] Leadership tool [ edit ] Education [ edit ] Principals who served as strong "instructional" leaders and introduced new curricula and academic programs were able to create a system of peer pressure at the teaching level, where the teachers placed accountability pressure on themselves.

[ 79 ] Voting [ edit ] Peer pressure can be especially effective (more so than door-to-door visits and telephone calls) in getting people to vote. Gerber, Green, and Larimer conducted a large-scale field experiment involving over 180,000 Michigan households in 2006 and four treatments: one was a reminder to vote, one was a reminder to vote and a note informing them that they were being studied, one that listed the voting records for all potential household individuals, and finally one that listed the voting records for the household individuals and their neighbors. The final treatment emphasized peer pressure within a neighborhood; neighbors could view each other's voting habits with the lists, and so the social norm of "voting is best for the community" is combined with the fear that individuals' peers would judge their lack of voting. Compared to a baseline rate of 29.7% (only the voting reminder), the treatment that utilized peer pressure increased the percentage of household voters by 8.1 percentage points (to 37.8%), which exceeds the value of in-person canvassing and personalized phone calls.

[ 80 ] A similar large-scale field experiment conducted by Todd Rogers, Donald P. Green, Carolina Ferrerosa Young, and John Ternovski (2017) [ 81 ] studied the impact of a social pressure mailing in the context of a high-salience election, the 2012 Wisconsin gubernatorial election. Social pressure mailers included the line, "We're sending this mailing to you and your neighbors to publicize who does and does not vote." [ 81 ] This study found a treatment effect of 1.0 percentage point, a statistically significant but far weaker effect than the 8.1 percentage point effect reported by Gerber, Green, and Larimer.

[ 81 ] The 2017 study's effects were particularly sizable for low-propensity voters.

[ 81 ] Charitable donations [ edit ] An experiment conducted by Diane Reyniers and Richa Bhalla measured the amount donated by a group of London School of Economics students. The group was split into individual donators and pair donators. The donation amounts were revealed within each pair; then, the pair was given time to discuss their amounts and then revise them as necessary. In general, pair subjects donated an average of 3.64 pounds (Sterling) while individuals donated an average of 2.55 pounds. Furthermore, in pairs where one subject donated significantly more than the other, the latter would on average increase the donation amount by 0.55 pounds. This suggests that peer pressure "shames" individuals for making smaller donations. But when controlling for donation amount, paired subjects were significantly less happy with their donation amount than individual subjects—suggesting that paired subjects felt coerced to donate more than they would have otherwise. This leads to a dilemma: charities will do better by approaching groups of people (such as friends); however, this could result in increased donor discomfort, which would impact their future donations.

[ 82 ] Organizational researchers have found a generally similar phenomenon among large corporations: executives and managers of large companies look to similar organizations in their industry or headquarters city to figure out the appropriate level of corporate charitable donations, and those that make smaller donations might be seen as stingy and suffer damage to their reputations.

[ 2 ] Criminal justice [ edit ] There are a number of applications for peer pressure related to adolescent exposure to the criminal justice and juvenile justice system, which relate to disproportionate minority contact, differential involvement, and topics like codes of the street. Tens of thousands of juveniles offend and make contact with the criminal justice system per day, which has significant impacts within communities and neighborhoods.

[ 83 ] Neighborhoods and social contexts contribute largely to crime outcomes through social disorganization and connections with communities. There is a significant correlation between a lack of social connection between the individual and their neighborhoods and likelihood of offending / recidivism.

[ 83 ] Literature is mixed regarding the causality of neighborhood conditions and substance use, but it is more strongly correlated with peer pressure and differential social environments. This can be examined as a partial correlation, where peer pressure is the confound which strongly influences the relationships between social disorganization and negative outcomes like substance use and crime.

[ 84 ] Risky behaviors and lifestyles are closely related with all types of substance use, seen in the connections between crime and drug possession. Delinquent behaviors and tendencies for crime are most commonly associated with "hard drugs" like opioids and prescription drugs.

[ 43 ] See also [ edit ] Psychology portal Society portal Abilene paradox – False consensus due to communication failure Conformity – Matching opinions and behaviors to group norms Collective narcissism – Psychological tendency to exaggerate the positive image of one's social group Groupshift Groupthink – Psychological phenomenon that occurs within a group of people Guilty pleasure – Type of pleasure that one holds for something despite it not being held in high regard Hazing – Rituals of humiliation used to initiate someone into a group Ingratiation – Attempt to influence someone else by increasing their attractiveness Milieu control – Sociological tactic Opinion corridor – Theory of legitimate public discourse Peer contagion Personal distress – Type of emotional reaction Pluralistic ignorance – Incorrect perception of others' beliefs Productivism – Primacy of productivity and growth Self-deprecation – Act of devaluating one's self-worth Social exclusion – Form of social disadvantage and relegation to the fringe of society Social norms marketing – Strategy in health behavioral science Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Social stress – Type of psychological stress Suggestibility – Inclination to accept the suggestions of others Toxic positivity – Construct in psychology References [ edit ] ^ "Peer pressure or influence: pre-teens and teenagers" .

Raising Children Network . Retrieved June 19, 2025 .

^ a b Marquis, Christopher ; Tilcsik, András (October 1, 2016).

"Institutional Equivalence: How Industry and Community Peers Influence Corporate Philanthropy" (PDF) .

Organization Science .

27 (5): 1325– 1341.

doi : 10.1287/orsc.2016.1083 .

hdl : 1813/44734 .

ISSN 1047-7039 .

^ Berk, Laura E. (2018).

Development through the lifespan (7th ed.). Hoboken, NJ.

ISBN 978-0-13-441969-5 .

OCLC 946161390 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ Jang, Kyungeun; Park, Namkee; Song, Hayeon (September 1, 2016). "Social comparison on Facebook: Its antecedents and psychological outcomes".

Computers in Human Behavior .

62 (Supplement C): 147– 154.

doi : 10.1016/j.chb.2016.03.082 .

^ Larson, Jennifer M. (May 11, 2021).

"Networks of Conflict and Cooperation" .

Annual Review of Political Science .

24 (1): 89– 107.

doi : 10.1146/annurev-polisci-041719-102523 .

^ Corriveau, Kathleen H.; Harris, Paul L. (March 1, 2010). "Preschoolers (sometimes) defer to the majority in making simple perceptual judgments".

Developmental Psychology .

46 (2): 437– 445.

doi : 10.1037/a0017553 .

ISSN 1939-0599 .

PMID 20210502 .

^ a b Haun, Daniel B. M.; Tomasello, Michael (2011).

"Conformity to Peer Pressure in Preschool Children" (PDF) .

Child Development .

82 (6): 1759– 1767.

doi : 10.1111/j.1467-8624.2011.01666.x .

hdl : 11858/00-001M-0000-0012-C434-2 .

ISSN 0009-3920 .

PMID 22023172 .

S2CID 3218812 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on August 9, 2017 . Retrieved September 1, 2019 .

^ Carden Smith, L. K.; Fowler, S. A. (1984).

"Positive peer pressure: the effects of peer monitoring on children's disruptive behavior" .

Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis .

17 (2): 213– 227.

doi : 10.1901/jaba.1984.17-213 .

ISSN 0021-8855 .

PMC 1307935 .

PMID 6735953 .

^ Brown, B. Bradford (2004). "Adolescents' Relationships with Peers". In Lerner, R. M.; Steinburg, L. (eds.).

Handbook of Adolescent Psychology (2nd ed.). Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, Inc. pp.

363– 394.

doi : 10.1002/9780471726746.ch12 .

ISBN 978-0-471-72674-6 .

^ a b Steinberg, Laurence ; Monahan, Kathryn C. (2007).

"Age differences in resistance to peer influence" .

Developmental Psychology .

43 (6): 1531– 1543.

doi : 10.1037/0012-1649.43.6.1531 .

PMC 2779518 .

PMID 18020830 .

^ Durkin, Kevin. "Peer Pressure", In:  Anthony S. R. Manstead and Miles Hewstone (Eds.), The Blackwell Encyclopedia of Social Psychology, 1996.

^ "Social Pressure Index - Private Opinion in America" . Populace.org. May 16 – June 24, 2024.

^ Spear, Hila J.; Kulbok, Pamela A (2001). "Adolescent Health Behaviors and Related Factors: A Review".

Public Health Nursing .

18 (2): 82– 93.

doi : 10.1046/j.1525-1446.2001.00082.x .

PMID 11285102 .

^ Hanes, Stephanie (October 25, 2012).

"Teens and volunteering: Altruism or just peer pressure?" .

Christian Science Monitor .

ISSN 0882-7729 .

Archived from the original on December 14, 2019 . Retrieved December 14, 2019 .

^ Gormly, Kellie B. (March 18, 2013).

"Peer pressure — for students and adults — can be positive" .

Pittsburgh Tribune-Review .

Archived from the original on December 14, 2019 . Retrieved December 14, 2019 .

^ Brown, B. Bradford; Eicher, Sue Ann; Petrie, Sandra (1986). "The importance of peer group ("crowd") affiliation in adolescence".

Journal of Adolescence .

9 (1): 73– 96.

doi : 10.1016/S0140-1971(86)80029-X .

PMID 3700780 .

^ Allen, Joseph P.

; Porter, Maryfrances R.; McFarland, F. Christy; Marsh, Penny; McElhaney, Kathleen Boykin (2005).

"The Two Faces of Adolescents' Success With Peers: Adolescent Popularity, Social Adaptation, and Deviant Behavior" .

Child Development .

76 (3): 747– 760.

doi : 10.1111/j.1467-8624.2005.00875.x .

PMC 1551978 .

PMID 15892790 .

^ a b Brown, B. Bradford (1982). "The extent and effects of peer pressure among high school students: A retrospective analysis".

Journal of Youth and Adolescence .

11 (2): 121– 133.

doi : 10.1007/BF01834708 .

ISSN 0047-2891 .

PMID 24310728 .

S2CID 40116993 .

^ Clasen, Donna Rae; Brown, B. Bradford (1985). "The multidimensionality of peer pressure in adolescence".

Journal of Youth and Adolescence .

14 (6): 451– 468.

doi : 10.1007/BF02139520 .

ISSN 0047-2891 .

PMID 24301413 .

S2CID 6465967 .

^ Wallis, Claudia (October 6, 2003).

"The Thing About Thongs" .

Time Magazine . US: Time Magazine . Retrieved October 11, 2024 .

^ Bahr, Stephen J.; Hoffmann, John P.

; Yang, Xiaoyan (October 15, 2005). "Parental and Peer Influences on the Risk of Adolescent Drug Use".

The Journal of Primary Prevention .

26 (6): 529– 551.

doi : 10.1007/s10935-005-0014-8 .

PMID 16228115 .

S2CID 24670181 .

^ Urberg, Kathryn A.; Shiang-Jeou, Shyu; Liang, Jersey (1990). "Peer influence in adolescent cigarette smoking".

Addictive Behaviors .

15 (3): 247– 255.

doi : 10.1016/0306-4603(90)90067-8 .

PMID 2378284 .

^ Farrell, Albert D.; White, Kamila S. (April 1998). "Peer influences and drug use among urban adolescents: Family structure and parent-adolescent relationship as protective factors".

Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology .

66 (2): 248– 258.

doi : 10.1037/0022-006X.66.2.248 .

PMID 9583328 .

^ Dielman, T. E.; Butchart, A. T.; Shope, J. T. (1993). "Structural Equation Model Tests of Patterns of Family Interaction, Peer Alcohol Use, and Intrapersonal Predictors of Adolescent Alcohol Use and Misuse".

Journal of Drug Education .

23 (3): 273– 316.

doi : 10.2190/8YXM-K9GB-B8FD-82NQ .

PMID 8263671 .

S2CID 27589804 .

^ Steinberg, L.; Fletcher, A.; Darling, N. (1994). "Parental monitoring and peer influences on adolescent substance use".

Pediatrics .

93 (6 Pt 2): 1060– 4.

doi : 10.1542/peds.93.6.1060 .

PMID 8197008 .

S2CID 245182006 .

Also available as: Fletcher, Anne C.; Darling, Nancy; Steinberg, Laurence (1995). "Parental monitoring and peer influences on adolescent substance use".

Coercion and Punishment in Long-Term Perspectives . pp.

259– 271.

doi : 10.1017/CBO9780511527906.016 .

ISBN 9780521450690 .

^ Caldwell, Linda; Darling, Nancy (1999). "Leisure Context, Parental Control, and Resistance to Peer Pressure as Predictors of Adolescent Partying and Substance Use: An Ecological Perspective".

Journal of Leisure Research .

31 (1): 57– 77.

Bibcode : 1999JLeiR..31...57C .

doi : 10.1080/00222216.1999.11949851 .

S2CID 142326608 .

^ Maxwell, Kimberly A. (August 2002). "Friends: The Role of Peer Influence Across Adolescent Risk Behaviors".

Journal of Youth and Adolescence .

31 (4): 267– 277.

doi : 10.1023/A:1015493316865 .

S2CID 46914786 .

^ Allen, Joseph P.

; Porter, Maryfrances R.; McFarland, F. Christy (2006).

"Leaders and followers in adolescent close friendships: Susceptibility to peer influence as a predictor of risky behavior, friendship instability, and depression" .

Development and Psychopathology .

18 (1): 155– 72.

doi : 10.1017/S0954579406060093 .

PMC 1557636 .

PMID 16478557 .

^ Kendler, Kenneth S.

; Prescott, Carol A.

; Myers, John; Neale, Michael C.

(September 2003).

"The Structure of Genetic and Environmental Risk Factors for Common Psychiatric and Substance Use Disorders in Men and Women" .

Archives of General Psychiatry .

60 (9): 929– 937.

doi : 10.1001/archpsyc.60.9.929 .

PMID 12963675 .

^ Harden, K. Paige ; Hill, Jennifer E.; Turkheimer, Eric ; Emery, Robert E.

(March 27, 2008).

"Gene-Environment Correlation and Interaction in Peer Effects on Adolescent Alcohol and Tobacco Use" .

Behavior Genetics .

38 (4): 339– 347.

doi : 10.1007/s10519-008-9202-7 .

PMC 2898558 .

PMID 18368474 .

^ Johnson, Eric O.; Chen, Li-Shiun; Breslau, Naomi ; Hatsukami, Dorothy; Robbins, Tania; Saccone, Nancy L.; Grucza, Richard A.

; Bierut, Laura J. (November 2010).

"Peer smoking and the nicotinic receptor genes: an examination of genetic and environmental risks for nicotine dependence" .

Addiction .

105 (11): 2014– 2022.

doi : 10.1111/j.1360-0443.2010.03074.x .

PMC 2970633 .

PMID 20840187 .

^ a b Henneberger, Angela K.; Mushonga, Dawnsha R.; Preston, Alison M. (March 1, 2021).

"Peer Influence and Adolescent Substance Use: A Systematic Review of Dynamic Social Network Research" .

Adolescent Research Review .

6 (1): 57– 73.

doi : 10.1007/s40894-019-00130-0 .

ISSN 2363-8354 .

^ CDC (October 17, 2024).

"E-Cigarette Use Among Youth" .

Smoking and Tobacco Use . Retrieved December 1, 2024 .

^ a b c Guerra Castillo, Claudia; Hoeft, Kristin S.; Couch, Elizabeth T.; Halpern-Felsher, Bonnie; Chaffee, Benjamin W. (August 27, 2024).

"Adolescent Perspectives on Their E-Cigarette Initiation Experiences" .

American Journal of Health Promotion .

39 (2): 283– 290.

doi : 10.1177/08901171241277669 .

ISSN 2168-6602 .

PMC 11662507 .

PMID 39189439 .

^ Skinner, Ann T.; Golonka, Megan; Godwin, Jennifer; Kwiatek, Sarah; Sweitzer, Maggie; Hoyle, Rick H. (December 1, 2024).

"My friends made me do it: Peer influences and different types of vaping in adolescence" .

Addictive Behaviors .

159 108128.

doi : 10.1016/j.addbeh.2024.108128 .

ISSN 0306-4603 .

PMC 11480947.

PMID 39173423 .

Archived from the original on September 9, 2024 . Retrieved December 1, 2024 .

^ Sumter, Sindy R.; Bokhorst, Caroline L.; Steinberg, Laurence ; Westenberg, P. Michiel (August 2009). "The developmental pattern of resistance to peer influence in adolescence: Will the teenager ever be able to resist?".

Journal of Adolescence .

32 (4): 1009– 1021.

doi : 10.1016/j.adolescence.2008.08.010 .

PMID 18992936 .

^ Merikangas, Kathleen Ries ; He, Jian-ping; Burstein, Marcy; Swanson, Sonja A.; Avenevoli, Shelli ; Cui, Lihong; Benjet, Corina; Georgiades, Katholiki; Swendsen, Joel (October 2010).

"Lifetime Prevalence of Mental Disorders in U.S. Adolescents: Results from the National Comorbidity Survey Replication–Adolescent Supplement (NCS-A)" .

Journal of the American Academy of Child & Adolescent Psychiatry .

49 (10): 980– 989.

doi : 10.1016/j.jaac.2010.05.017 .

PMC 2946114 .

PMID 20855043 .

^ Marshal, Michael P.; Chassin, Laurie (March 2000). "Peer Influence on Adolescent Alcohol Use: The Moderating Role of Parental Support and Discipline".

Applied Developmental Science .

4 (2): 80– 88.

doi : 10.1207/S1532480XADS0402_3 .

S2CID 143466975 .

^ Borsari, Brian; Carey, Kate (December 2001). "Peer influences on college drinking: A review of the research".

Journal of Substance Abuse .

13 (4): 391– 424.

CiteSeerX 10.1.1.602.7429 .

doi : 10.1016/s0899-3289(01)00098-0 .

PMID 11775073 .

^ Akbar, Sadia; Iacono, Anita; Yang, Joanna; Antoniou, Tony; Juurlink, David; Sheikh, Hasan; Kurdyak, Paul; Wu, Fangyun; Cheng, Clare; Leece, Pamela; Kolla, Gillian; Emblem, Jennifer; Shearer, Dana; Gomes, Tara (July 1, 2024).

"Characteristics of Opioid Toxicity Deaths Among Adolescents and Young Adults in Ontario Prior To and During the COVID-19 Pandemic" .

Journal of Adolescent Health .

75 (1): 35– 42.

doi : 10.1016/j.jadohealth.2024.02.024 .

ISSN 1054-139X .

PMID 38597841 .

^ McPherson, Miller; Smith-Lovin, Lynn; Cook, James M. (2001).

"Birds of a Feather: Homophily in Social Networks" .

Annual Review of Sociology .

27 : 415– 444.

doi : 10.1146/annurev.soc.27.1.415 .

ISSN 0360-0572 .

JSTOR 2678628 .

Archived from the original on December 4, 2024 . Retrieved December 1, 2024 .

^ Barnett, Nancy P.; DiGuiseppi, Graham T.; Tesdahl, Eric A.; Meisel, Matthew K. (January 2022).

"Peer selection and influence for marijuana use in a complete network of first-year college students" .

Addictive Behaviors .

124 107087.

doi : 10.1016/j.addbeh.2021.107087 .

PMC 8785655 .

PMID 34464915 .

^ a b c Kelley-Quon, Lorraine I.; Cho, Junhan; Barrington-Trimis, Jessica; Kipke, Michele D.; Clapp, John D.; Krueger, Evan A.; Leventhal, Adam M. (July 1, 2022).

"Longitudinal trajectories of prescription opioid misuse in adolescents" .

Drug and Alcohol Dependence .

236 109470.

doi : 10.1016/j.drugalcdep.2022.109470 .

ISSN 1879-0046 .

PMC 10027390 .

PMID 35504242 .

^ Tobler, Nancy (1986).

"Meta-analysis of 143 adolescent drug prevention programs: Quantitative outcome results of program participants compared to a control or comparison group" .

Journal of Drug Issues .

16 (4): 537– 567.

doi : 10.1177/002204268601600405 .

S2CID 76433088 .

Archived from the original on August 6, 2020 . Retrieved November 30, 2014 .

^ a b c d Hansen, William B.; Graham, John W. (May 1991). "Preventing alcohol, marijuana, and cigarette use among adolescents: Peer pressure resistance training versus establishing conservative norms".

Preventive Medicine .

20 (3): 414– 430.

doi : 10.1016/0091-7435(91)90039-7 .

PMID 1862062 .

^ a b Foxcroft, David R; Tsertsvadze, Alexander (March 2012). "Cochrane Review: Universal school-based prevention programs for alcohol misuse in young people".

Evidence-Based Child Health .

7 (2): 450– 575.

doi : 10.1002/ebch.1829 .

^ Shope, Jean T.; Copeland, Laurel A.; Maharg, Ruth; Dielman, T.E. (August 1996). "Effectiveness of a High School Alcohol Misuse Prevention Program".

Alcoholism: Clinical and Experimental Research .

20 (5): 791– 798.

doi : 10.1111/j.1530-0277.1996.tb05253.x .

hdl : 2027.42/65153 .

PMID 8865950 .

^ Onrust, Simone A.; Otten, Roy; Lammers, Jeroen; Smit, Filip (March 1, 2016).

"School-based programmes to reduce and prevent substance use in different age groups: What works for whom? Systematic review and meta-regression analysis" .

Clinical Psychology Review .

44 : 45– 59.

doi : 10.1016/j.cpr.2015.11.002 .

hdl : 2066/157223 .

PMID 26722708 .

^ a b Khemka, Ishita; Hickson, Linda; Mallory, Sarah B. (March 18, 2016). "Evaluation of a Decision-Making Curriculum for Teaching Adolescents with Disabilities to Resist Negative Peer Pressure".

Journal of Autism and Developmental Disorders .

46 (7): 2372– 2384.

doi : 10.1007/s10803-016-2770-0 .

ISSN 0162-3257 .

PMID 26993636 .

S2CID 23515180 .

^ Hampton, Mary Rucklos; McWatters, Barb; Jeffery, Bonnie; Smith, Pamela (2005).

"Influence of Teens' Perceptions of Parental Disapproval and Peer Behaviour on Their Initiation of Sexual Intercourse" .

The Canadian Journal of Human Sexuality .

14 ( 3– 4): 105– 121.

ISSN 1188-4517 .

^ Selikow TA, Ahmed N, Flisher AJ, Mathews C, Mukoma W (June 2009).

"I am not "umqwayito": a qualitative study of peer pressure and sexual risk behaviour among young adolescents in Cape Town, South Africa" .

Scand J Public Health .

37 (Suppl 2): 107– 12.

doi : 10.1177/1403494809103903 .

PMID 19493988 .

^ a b Killoren, Sarah E.; Updegraff, Kimberly A.; Scott, Christopher F.; Umaña-Taylor, Adriana J. (February 1, 2012).

"Mothers, Fathers, Peers, and Mexican-Origin Adolescents' Sexual Intentions" .

Journal of Marriage and the Family .

73 (1): 209– 220.

doi : 10.1111/j.1741-3737.2010.00799.x .

PMC 3026176 .

PMID 21278903 .

^ Bongardt, Daphne van de; Reitz, Ellen; Sandfort, Theo; Deković, Maja (August 1, 2015).

"A Meta-Analysis of the Relations Between Three Types of Peer Norms and Adolescent Sexual Behavior" .

Personality and Social Psychology Review .

19 (3): 203– 234.

doi : 10.1177/1088868314544223 .

ISSN 1088-8683 .

PMC 5871927 .

PMID 25217363 .

^ Crockett, Lisa J.; Raffaelli, Marcela; Shen, Yuh-Ling (2006).

"Linking Self-Regulation and Risk Proneness to Risky Sexual Behavior: Pathways through Peer Pressure and Early Substance Use" .

Journal of Research on Adolescence .

16 (4): 503– 525.

doi : 10.1111/j.1532-7795.2006.00505.x .

Archived from the original on October 19, 2017 . Retrieved November 1, 2016 .

^ Mason, Malia; Dyer, Rebecca; Norton, Michael (2009). "Neural Mechanisms of Social Influence".

Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes .

110 (2): 152– 159.

doi : 10.1016/j.obhdp.2009.04.001 .

S2CID 16783698 .

^ Stallen, Mirre; Smidts, Ale; Sanfey, Alan (2013).

"Peer influence: neural mechanisms underlying in-group conformity" .

Frontiers in Human Neuroscience .

7 (50): 50.

doi : 10.3389/fnhum.2013.00050 .

PMC 3591747 .

PMID 23482688 .

^ Eisenberger, Naomi I.

; Lieberman, Matthew D.

; Williams, Kipling D.

(October 10, 2003). "Does Rejection Hurt? An fMRI Study of Social Exclusion".

Science .

302 (5643): 290– 292.

Bibcode : 2003Sci...302..290E .

doi : 10.1126/science.1089134 .

ISSN 0036-8075 .

PMID 14551436 .

S2CID 21253445 .

^ Falk, Emily B.

; Cascio, Christopher N.; O'Donnell, Matthew Brook; Carp, Joshua; Tinney, Francis J.; Bingham, C. Raymond; Shope, Jean T.; Ouimet, Marie Claude; Pradhan, Anuj K. (May 2014).

"Neural Responses to Exclusion Predict Susceptibility to Social Influence" .

Journal of Adolescent Health .

54 (5): S22 – S31 .

doi : 10.1016/j.jadohealth.2013.12.035 .

PMC 4144831 .

PMID 24759437 .

^ Treynor, Wendy (2009).

Towards a General Theory of Social Psychology: Understanding Human Cruelty, Human Misery, and, Perhaps, a Remedy (A Theory of the Socialization Process) (1st ed.). Redondo Beach, CA: Euphoria Press. pp.

67– 69.

ISBN 978-0205037438 .

^ O'Keeffe, Gwenn Schurgin; Clarke-Pearson, Kathleen; Council on Communications and Media (2011).

"The Impact of Social Media on Children, Adolescents, and Families" .

Pediatrics .

127 (4): 800– 804.

doi : 10.1542/peds.2011-0054 .

PMID 21444588 .

^ Ramasubbu, Suren (May 26, 2015).

"Influence of Social Media on Teenagers" .

Huffington Post .

Archived from the original on September 26, 2017 . Retrieved December 7, 2017 .

^ Udorie, June Eric (September 16, 2015).

"Social media is harming the mental health of teenagers. The state has to act" .

The Guardian .

ISSN 0261-3077 .

Archived from the original on December 1, 2017 . Retrieved December 7, 2017 .

^ Wolpert, Stuart.

"The teenage brain on social media" .

UCLA Newsroom .

Archived from the original on July 20, 2019 . Retrieved December 7, 2017 .

^ a b "U.S. teen social media peer pressure 2015" .

Statista .

Archived from the original on April 27, 2023 . Retrieved April 27, 2023 .

^ "The Power of Prime" .

Psychology Today . Retrieved December 7, 2017 .

^ a b c Bapna, Ravi ; Umyarov, Akhmed (August 2015). "Do Your Online Friends Make You Pay? A Randomized Field Experiment on Peer Influence in Online Social Networks".

Management Science .

61 (8): 1902– 1920.

doi : 10.1287/mnsc.2014.2081 .

ISSN 0025-1909 .

S2CID 18907499 .

^ Mishra, Anubhav; Maity, Moutusy (November 2021).

"Influence of parents, peers, and media on adolescents' consumer knowledge, attitudes, and purchase behavior: A meta-analysis" .

Journal of Consumer Behaviour .

20 (6): 1675– 1689.

doi : 10.1002/cb.1946 .

ISSN 1472-0817 .

^ Williams, Brett.

"There are now over 3 billion social media users in the world — about 40 percent of the global population" .

Mashable .

Archived from the original on December 1, 2017 . Retrieved November 30, 2017 .

^ "China's social-media boom" .

McKinsey & Company .

Archived from the original on February 15, 2020 . Retrieved November 30, 2017 .

^ a b Klee, Ernst ; Dressen, Willi; Reiss, Volker (1996).

The Good Old Days: The Holocaust as Seen by Its Perpetrators and Bystanders . New York: The Free Press.

ISBN 978-1568521336 .

^ a b Browning, Christopher (1998).

Ordinary Men: Reserve Police Battalion 101 and the Final Solution in Poland . London: Penguin.

ISBN 978-0060995065 .

^ a b Goldhagen, Daniel Jonah ; Wohlgelernter, Maurice (1997). "Hitler's willing executioners".

Society .

34 (2): 32– 37.

doi : 10.1007/BF02823096 .

ISSN 0147-2011 .

S2CID 189886623 .

^ Browning, Christopher (1996). "Daniel Goldhagen's Willing Executioners".

History and Memory .

8 (1): 88– 108.

JSTOR 25618699 .

^ Kwiet, Konrad (1997). "Goldhagen, the Germans, and the Holocaust".

Gesher. Journal of Jewish Affairs .

133 : 7– 39.

^ a b Bhavnani, Ravi (November 1, 2006). "Ethnic Norms and Interethnic Violence: Accounting for Mass Participation in the Rwandan Genocide".

Journal of Peace Research .

43 (6): 651– 669.

doi : 10.1177/0022343306069290 .

ISSN 0022-3433 .

S2CID 146217602 .

^ McDoom, Omar Shahabudin (July 1, 2013).

"Who killed in Rwanda's genocide? Micro-space, social influence and individual participation in intergroup violence" (PDF) .

Journal of Peace Research .

50 (4): 453– 467.

doi : 10.1177/0022343313478958 .

ISSN 0022-3433 .

S2CID 53132227 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on March 3, 2021 . Retrieved June 3, 2020 .

^ Hintjens, Helen (1999).

"Explaining the 1994 Genocide in Rwanda" .

The Journal of Modern African Studies .

37 (2): 241– 286.

doi : 10.1017/s0022278x99003018 .

hdl : 1765/21553 .

PMID 21991623 .

S2CID 24370574 .

Archived from the original on February 15, 2020 . Retrieved July 10, 2019 .

^ a b Uvin, Peter (January 1, 1997). "Prejudice, Crisis, and Genocide in Rwanda".

African Studies Review .

40 (2): 91– 115.

doi : 10.2307/525158 .

JSTOR 525158 .

S2CID 145591352 .

^ Jacobson, Stephen; Johnson, Lauri; Ylimaki, Rose; Giles, Corrie (2005). "Successful leadership in challenging US schools: enabling principles, enabling schools".

Journal of Educational Administration .

43 (6): 607– 618.

doi : 10.1108/09578230510625700 .

^ Gerber, Alan S.; Green, Donald P.; Larimer, Christopher W. (February 1, 2008).

"Social Pressure and Voter Turnout: Evidence from a Large-Scale Field Experiment" .

American Political Science Review .

102 (1): 33– 48.

doi : 10.1017/S000305540808009X .

ISSN 1537-5943 .

S2CID 17451965 .

Archived from the original on September 6, 2019 . Retrieved November 1, 2016 .

^ a b c d Rogers, Todd; Green, Donald P.; Ternovski, John; Ferrerosa Young, Carolina (2017). "Social pressure and voting: A field experiment conducted in a high-salience election".

Electoral Studies .

46 : 87– 100.

doi : 10.1016/j.electstud.2017.02.004 .

^ Reyniers, Diane; Bhalla, Richa (2013).

"Reluctant altruism and peer pressure in charitable giving" (PDF) .

Judgment and Decision Making .

8 (1): 7– 15.

doi : 10.1017/S1930297500004447 .

S2CID 6350831 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on February 22, 2020 . Retrieved November 21, 2019 .

^ a b Pyle, Nicole; Flower, Andrea; Williams, Jacob; Fall, Anna Mari (June 1, 2020).

"Social Risk Factors of Institutionalized Juvenile Offenders: A Systematic Review" .

Adolescent Research Review .

5 (2): 173– 186.

doi : 10.1007/s40894-019-00120-2 .

ISSN 2363-8354 .

^ Brenner, Allison B.; Bauermeister, José A.; Zimmerman, Marc A. (July 2011).

"Neighborhood Variation in Adolescent Alcohol Use: Examination of Socioecological and Social Disorganization Theories" .

Journal of Studies on Alcohol and Drugs .

72 (4): 651– 659.

doi : 10.15288/jsad.2011.72.651 .

ISSN 1937-1888 .

PMC 3125888 .

PMID 21683047 .

Further reading [ edit ] Browning, Christopher R.

(1998).

Ordinary Men: Reserve Police Battalion 101 and the Final Solution in Poland (reprint ed.). Harper Perennial.

ISBN 978-0-060-99506-5 .

Goldhagen, Daniel (1996).

Hitler's Willing Executioners: Ordinary Germans and The Holocaust . New York: Alfred A. Knopf.

ISBN 978-0-679-44695-8 .

Lowe, M. L., & Haws, K. L. (2014). (Im)moral Support: The Social Outcomes of Parallel Self-Control Decisions.

Journal of Consumer Research , 41 (2), 489–505.

JSTOR 10.1086/676688 v t e Conformity Enforcement Proscription Damnatio memoriae Dissident / Dissenter Exile Émigré Homo sacer Ostracism Blacklisting Cancel culture Censorship Deplatforming Outcast Outlaw Civil death Vogelfrei Persona non grata Public enemy Enemy of the people Enemy of the state Scapegoating Shunning Governmental pressure Authoritarianism Harmonisation of law Nationalism Left-wing nationalism National conservatism Totalitarianism Tyranny of the majority Group pressure Bandwagon effect Brainwashing Closure (sociology) Collectivism Consensus reality Culture shock Dogma Echo chamber False consensus effect Fear of missing out Groupthink Hazing Herd mentality Identification (psychology) Indoctrination Invented tradition Memory conformity Mere-exposure effect Milieu control Mobbing Normalization Normative social influence Passing (sociology) Patriotism Peer pressure Pluralistic ignorance Propaganda Psychosocial issue Purity spiral Operant conditioning Rally 'round the flag effect Social construction of gender Social contagion Addiction Behavioral Crime Hysterical Suicide Emotional Social influence Social integration Socialization Spiral of silence Teasing Toxic positivity Untouchability Individual pressure Authoritarian personality Authoritarian leadership style Right-wing authoritarianism Control freak Obsessive–compulsive personality disorder Conformity Compliance Communal reinforcement Countersignaling Creeping normality Herd behavior Internalization Normalization of deviance Obedience Preference falsification Social proof Social reality Experiments Asch conformity experiments Breaching experiment Milgram experiment Stanford prison experiment Anticonformity Alternative media Anti-authoritarianism Anti-social behaviour Self-segregation Civil disobedience Cosmopolitanism Counterculture Culture jamming Deviance Devil's advocate Dissent / Defection Political Eccentricity Eclecticism Hermit Idiosyncrasy Individualism Insubordination Pueblo clown Rebellion Red team Satire Shock value v t e Digital media use and mental health Proposed or recognised diagnostic categories Computer addiction Internet addiction disorder Internet sex addiction Online gambling Problematic smartphone use Nomophobia Problematic social media use Television addiction Video game addiction Disciplines involved Digital anthropology Digital sociology Ergonomics Cognitive ergonomics Computer-mediated communication Cyberpsychology Engineering psychology Human–computer interaction Media naturalness theory Neuroergonomics Neuroscience Psychiatry Evolutionary Psychology Clinical Cognitive Evolutionary Social Associated psychiatric conditions Anxiety disorder Generalized anxiety disorder Obsessive–compulsive disorder Social anxiety disorder Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder Autism Bipolar disorder Depression Eating disorder Anorexia nervosa Body image disturbance Insomnia Narcissistic personality disorder Related topics Behavioral addiction Behavioral modernity Body image Criticism of Facebook 2021 Facebook company files leak Cyberbullying Cyberpathology Digital detox Digital zombie Evolution of cognition Evolutionary mismatch Fear of missing out Mobile phones and driving safety Promotion of anorexia Psychological effects of Internet use Screen time Binge-watching Social aspects of television Television consumption Smartphones and pedestrian safety Social media and suicide Social media restrictions on children in Australia Spaving Suicide and the Internet Technophilia Technophobia Technostress Texting while driving v t e Censorship Media regulation Books books banned Films banned films Internet circumvention Music Postal Press Radio Speech and expression Student media Televisions banned televisions Thought Video games banned video games Methods Bleeping Book burning Broadcast delay By copyright Cancel culture Censor bars Chilling effect Collateral censorship Concision Conspiracy of silence Content-control software Damnatio memoriae De-banking Deplatforming Euphemism Minced oath Expurgation Fogging Gag order Gatekeeping Hallin's spheres Heckling Heckler's veto Hush money Internet police Malinformation Media blackout Memory hole National intranet News embargo Newspaper theft Non-disclosure agreement Opinion corridor Overton window Pixelization Political correctness Prior restraint Propaganda Purge Redaction Revisionism Sanitization Self-censorship Shadow banning Social rejection Speech code Spiral of silence Strategic lawsuit Super-injunction Surveillance computer and network mass Taboo Whitewashing Word filtering Contexts AI Algorithmic Chinese censorship abroad Criminal Corporate Apple Facebook Google Hate speech Online Ideological Academic LGBT issues Media bias Moral police Moralistic fallacy Naturalistic fallacy Political censorship Banned parties Political prisoner Propaganda model Religious Blasphemy law Islamic Police Suppression of dissent Systemic bias Wikipedia By location Censorship by country Blasphemy law Freedom of speech Internet censorship In the Middle East In South Asia Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Israel Other IdRef 2 Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Peer_pressure&oldid=1305869480 " Categories : Group processes Youth Conformity Popular psychology Social influence Majority–minority relations Hidden categories: CS1 maint: location missing publisher Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use mdy dates from October 2023 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2022 All articles lacking reliable references Articles lacking reliable references from December 2019 Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets via Module:Annotated link This page was last edited on 14 August 2025, at 15:09 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Peer pressure 30 languages Add topic

