Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Background 2 Historical context 3 Use of the term Viet Cong 4 Incidents by country Toggle Incidents by country subsection 4.1 Thailand 4.2 Cambodia 4.3 People's Republic of China 4.4 Japan 4.5 Myanmar 4.6 Hong Kong 4.7 South Korea 4.8 Russia 4.8.1 North Caucasus 4.9 United States 5 Derogatory terms 6 See also 7 References Toggle the table of contents Anti-Vietnamese sentiment 4 languages Bahasa Indonesia Русский Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Aspect of culture Part of a series on Discrimination Forms Institutional Reverse Structural Statistical Systemic Taste-based Attributes Age Caste Class Disability Economic Genetic Hair texture Height Language Dialect Looks Mental disorder Nationality or citizenship Race / Ethnicity Reverse Skin color Scientific racism Rank Sex Reverse Sexual orientation Species Size Viewpoint Social Arophobia Anti-albinism Acephobia Adultism Anti-altruistic Anti-autism Anti-homelessness Anti-drug addicts Anti-intellectualism Anti-intersex Anti-left handedness Anti-Masonry Aporophobia Audism Biphobia Clannism Elitism Endophobia Ephebiphobia Health mental in poverty Fatphobia Gayphobia Gerontophobia Heterosexism HIV/AIDS stigma Hypergamy Homophobia In-group Leprosy stigma Lesbophobia Against men Misandry Misogyny Misogynoir Nepotism Outgroup Perpetual foreigner Pregnancy Sectarianism Supremacism Aryanism Black Hutu Chauvinism Han Female Human Nordicism Male Ultranationalism White Transphobia Non-binary Transmisogyny Trans men Vegaphobia Xenophilia Xenophobia Religious Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Race or ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people Manifestations Algorithmic bias Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Blood libel Bullying Cancel culture Capital punishment for homosexuality Carnism Compulsory sterilization Corrective rape Counter-jihad Cultural genocide Defamation Democide Dog whistle Domicide Economic Education Academic In curricula Sexism Eliminationism Eliminationist antisemitism Employment Enemy of the people Environmental racism Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnocide Excellence Gender-based dress codes Cosmetics policy High heel policy Forced conversion Freak show Gay bashing Gendercide Transgender genocide Genital modification and mutilation Circumcision Female genital mutilation Intersex medical interventions Genocide examples Glass ceiling Hate crime Disability hate crime Violence against LGBTQ people Violence against transgender people Hate group Hate speech Institutional discrimination Institutional racism Homeless dumping Housing Hypergamy Age disparity Indian rolling International inequality Kill Haole Day Lavender scare LGBTQ+ grooming conspiracy theory Linguicide Lynching Media bias Minority stress Moral exclusion Mortgage Native American mascots Braves Blackhawks Chiefs Occupational Apartheid Inequality Injustice Segregation Opposition to immigration Paper genocide Persecution Pogrom Political Political repression Ideological repression Purge Racialization Religious persecution Religious terrorism Religious violence Religious war Scapegoating Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Sentencing disparity Sexual harassment Sex-selective abortion Slut-shaming Structural abuse Structural discrimination Structural evil Structural inequality Structural violence Untermensch Trans bashing Victimisation Violence against women White flight White genocide conspiracy theory Wife selling Witch hunt Policies Algorithmic wage discrimination Age of candidacy Apartheid in South Africa in Israel Blood purity Blood quantum Breadwinner model Conscription and sexism Disabilities Catholic Jewish Disparate impact Fagging Gender pay gap Gender roles Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Gerontocracy Gerrymandering Ghetto benches Internment Jewish quota Opposition to LGBTQ rights MSM blood donation restrictions No kid zone Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota) One-drop rule Racial quota Racial steering Redlining Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting) Segregation age racial Jim Crow laws Nuremberg Laws Segregation academy religious sexual in Islam Social exclusion Sodomy law State atheism State religion Ugly law Voter suppression White Australia policy Countermeasures Affirmative action Anti-discrimination law Anti-racism Audit study Autism rights movement Gender-blind Blind audition Constitutional colorblindness Cross-sex friendship Cultural assimilation Cultural pluralism Diversity, equity, and inclusion Diversity training Empowerment Fat acceptance movement Feminism Fighting Discrimination Golden Rule Hate speech laws by country Human rights Intersex human rights Korenizatsiia LGBTQ rights Mad pride Music in the movement against apartheid Racial integration Reappropriation Rock Against Sexism Self-determination Social integration Stop Murder Music Toleration Transgender rights movement Universal suffrage Women's rights Related topics Allophilia Amatonormativity Bias Capital punishment for homosexuality Cisnormativity Civil liberties Criminalization of homosexuality Dehumanization Diseases of despair Ethnic penalty Figleaf Heteronormativity Historical eugenics Internalized oppression Intersectionality Masculism Oikophobia Oppression Police brutality Polyculturalism Power distance Prejudice Prisoner abuse Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racism by country Racial color blindness Religious intolerance Second-generation gender bias Snobbery Social equity Social exclusion Social model of disability Social privilege Christian male white Social stigma Speciesism Stereotype The talk v t e The neutrality of this article is disputed .

Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page . Please do not remove this message until conditions to do so are met .

( July 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Anti-Vietnamese sentiment ( Vietnamese : Chủ nghĩa bài Việt Nam ) involves hostility or hatred that is directed towards Vietnamese people , or the state of Vietnam . This may be due to negative perceptions created by historical tensions, ethnic negative perceptions, wars, or xenophobic sentiments that emerged from the event of refugee Vietnamese (Indochinese ' boat people '). National or regional discrimination can also occur.

Anti-Vietnam propaganda from the KPNLF .

Additionally xenophobia towards the Vietnamese may extend from cultural, political or economic divisions, such as Vietnam being situated within the affected Global South (mostly developing countries) or anti-communists being hostile against Vietnamese communist rule.

Vietnam is mostly Kinh majority, but is also a multiethnic country .

Background Anti-Vietnamese sentiment, known on the lesser version as Vietnamophobia and Anti-Vietnamism , has a strong and deep historical root for more than thousand years since the establishment of Đại Việt . There are several features behind this anti-Vietnamese hatred below: Organized persecution of the Vietnamese as a nation or as an ethnic group, often based on the belief that Vietnamese interests are a threat to one's own national aspirations; Racist anti-Vietnamese sentiment, a variety of xenophobia ; Cultural anti-Vietnamese sentiment: a prejudice against the Vietnamese and Vietnamese-speaking persons – their customs, language and education; and Stereotypes about Vietnam and Vietnamese people in the media and popular culture. Examples include: Impersonations or playing up the "Vietnamese accent" Stereotyping Vietnamese as " Nguyen " Being seen as poor boat people , refugees, or illegal migrants doing illegal activity abroad.

Anti-Vietnamese acts had been long organized by various countries and ethnicities opposing the existence of Vietnam as a country and the fear over Vietnamese takeover, in both direct and indirect forms.

Chinese dynasties used to extend their level of anti-Vietnamese persecutions from imprisoning, hanging to even massacres in large scales, notably under the Ming dynasty which the Chinese organized massacring methods from burning to beheading with no mercy; [ 1 ] or the famine of 1944–1945 in which the Empire of Japan was believed to have attempted a brutal extermination of possible Vietnamese resistance against Japanese rule.

[ 2 ] Smaller states like Cambodia also organized massacres on Vietnamese, notably under Lon Nol and the Khmer Rouge , justifying that Vietnam wanted to take over Cambodia and make it a province.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] Historic actions inspired by anti-Vietnamism ranged from felonious acts motivated by hatred, to the physical extermination of the Vietnamese nation, the goal of which was to eradicate the Vietnamese state.

Historical context The Siamese, and later, the Thais, following the Vietnamese expansions and occupation in the 15th century, [ citation needed ] became extremely frightened and hostile towards Vietnam.

[ 5 ] The Siamese had waged a number of wars against Vietnam since the 18th century, but they had not won another war after the successful first ransack in 1712. This facilitated Vietnamophobia among the Siamese. Similar to the Cambodians, Thais also referred to the Vietnamese as "Youn", a derogatory term similar in meaning to "barbarian", which is a corruption of "Yona", a Pali and Sanskrit term for "Greek"(Due to the invasion and subsequent establishment of the "foreign" Indo-Greek Kingdom ).

Despite that, the real meanings of yuon, youn and yona/yavana had been altered or misunderstood by early French and colonial era orientalists.

Michael Vickery wrote: "There was once a consensus among historians of Southeast Asia that yuon in the sense of Vietnamese derived from Sanskrit yavana, defined in the most authoritative Sanskrit-English dictionary (Monier Monier-Williams, p 848), as " Ionian , Greek [barbarians?], later also Mohammedan , European, and any foreigner or barbarian". This, remember, was usage in India from ancient times, and in itself has no significance for yavana or yuon in Southeast Asia." He continues, "As for the Buddhist Institute Dictionary, popularly called the dictionary of the Venerable Chuon Nath , it defines yuon simply as inhabitants of Vietnam, says nothing about yavana, but includes yona, or yonaka, in the classical Indian sense, as a name for "Western Laos", which is what the French called northern Thailand, and also notes that the original yonaka country was Greece. No connection is made in that context between yonaka and yuon as a name for Vietnamese, nor is "barbarian" given as the meaning of any of these terms. This dictionary also correctly distinguishes the Kamboja of ancient India from Kambuja ." In conclusion, Vickery argues that the term yuon had been intendedly misinterpreted by some colonial era orientalists, and some later agencies willfully weaponized that misinterpretation, such as the Khmer Rouge , to legalize xenophobia and ethnic hatred.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] However, Thai "Yuon" actually derived from Jiāozhǐ (交趾, Old Chinese : kraw ), an ancient Chinese toponym for Northern Vietnam , which ultimately would have emerged from the Austroasiatic *k(ə)ra:w "human being". In Lao , the Vietnamese are referred by colloquial name of keo, derived from Kæw.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] With the subsequent French military occupation of Vietnam as a consequence of Vietnam's persecution of the Catholic population by the Nguyễn dynasty after Gia Long , French colonial rulers considered the Vietnamese an inferior race, calling them "Annamites", even towards Vietnamese elites. Originally referring to northern Vietnamese, it became a symbol of widespread discrimination and anti-Vietnamism.

[ 10 ] Mass uprisings against French colonial overlords increased, and the French tightened their grip on the Vietnamese with more brutal and infamous punishments, including deportations to New Caledonia .

[ 11 ] French colonial rule would be soon disrupted by the Japanese, but the attitude remained the same, even after World War II , until the Battle of Điện Biên Phủ .

Severely malnourished children in Hải Hậu Village, Nam Định province , August 1945. Extremely impoverished villagers suffered the most from the famine, with various sources estimating the number of people starving to death at approximately one to two million.

The Japanese occupation of Vietnam in 1940 placed it under the control of two empires.

[ 12 ] Japanese and French mismanagement caused the famine of 1945 , which Japanese soldiers refused to give rice to the Vietnamese peasantry to help their war effort, that killed between 1 and 2 million Vietnamese, an act that contributed to the distrust of Japanese administration in Vietnamese.

[ 13 ] Following the French Indochina War was the Vietnam War and American involvement therein. Although the American intervention on behalf of their South Vietnamese ally received a mixed reception. American soldiers committed massacres during the war, with the most infamous being the My Lai massacre , and also controversially used Agent Orange .

The end of the Vietnam War, as an unwanted consequence, made Vietnamophobia grow rapidly among both Asian communists and non-communists alike, such as in China, Thailand, Singapore, North Korea, Malaysia and Cambodia, as the fear of a Vietnamese Intermarium , based on the idea of Poland's Józef Piłsudski , that sought to turn Southeast Asia into a communist/anti-Chinese base increased. The previous Lon Nol government and even the Khmer Rouge encouraged anti-Vietnamese massacres, blaming them for trying to colonize Cambodia, such as the Ba Chúc massacre .

[ 14 ] In Thailand, the possibility of Vietnamese invasions prompted hostility against anything Vietnamese in Thailand, leading to wide range support for the Khmer Rouge.

[ 15 ] Singapore and Malaysia also called for sanctions against Vietnam with the accusation of Vietnamese imperialism in Cambodia.

[ 16 ] North Korea, meanwhile, accused Vietnam for the same reason and supported the anti-Vietnamese movement, hosting Norodom Sihanouk and broadcast anti-Vietnamese propaganda in North Korea.

[ 17 ] Pirates also attacked and raided Vietnamese boat people fleeing from Vietnam, although whether this was inspired by anti-Vietnamese sentiment is not known to be true.

[ 18 ] This trend of anti-Vietnamese sentiment only started to dwindle down after Đổi mới , when Vietnam started economic liberalization and reforms, opening Vietnam to the world which gave them a rising profile of political and economic successes with the normalization of the U.S. and China's relations; [ 19 ] however due to historical conflicts, there remains historical animosities towards Vietnam amongst some of its neighbours, particularly Cambodia.

[ 20 ] Use of the term Viet Cong See also: Viet Cong Western media regarding the Vietnam War can be a negative for Vietnam's image. The most notable is the use of the term Viet Cong , which has different interpretations depending on the context. The term may be used to invoke memories of North Vietnamese war crimes against South Vietnamese.

[ 21 ] It may be used to insult Vietnamese people in Vietnam, mostly from former South Vietnamese refugees, and Vietnamese in Western Europe and the U.S.

.

[ 22 ] On the other hand, the use of term Việt Cộng can also provoke anger among Vietnamese as it can evoke memories of American war crimes during the war.

[ 23 ] Additionally, decades of Vietnam War movies or fictional narratives of the events of the Vietnam War often dehumanise the Vietnamese and centre the story around the Americans or around Western perspectives.

[ 24 ] Incidents by country Thailand See also: Siamese–Vietnamese wars and Vietnamese border raids in Thailand Anti-Vietnamese sentiment in Thailand has been the direct result of historical conflicts with the Vietnamese.

[ 5 ] Since the series of conflict between the two nations, which began in 18th century, Siam had only won one conflict, with the others being indecisive or Siamese defeats against Vietnam. Thailand also later participated in the Vietnam War , and took pride in its participation.

[ 25 ] When the Khmer Rouge was overthrown in Cambodia, Thailand was one of the main countries that harbored Khmer Rouge's leader and provided them ammunition against Vietnamese forces, owned by the old historical fear of Vietnamese invasion, [ 26 ] and accusation over Vietnamese plan to invade Thailand inflamed anti-Vietnamese sentiment in Thailand.

[ 27 ] Cambodia See also: Cambodian genocide , Cambodian–Vietnamese War , and Cambodia-Vietnam relations Anti-Vietnamese sentiment in Cambodia dates back to the Khmer Empire , because the Khmer Empire, as a Chinese vassal, was constantly raiding and conspiring with China's dynasties to attack the Vietnamese in pincer attacks. The Khmers who sparsely inhabited the Mekong Delta started to become inundated by Vietnamese settlers that were allowed to settle by the Cambodian king at the time and in response the Vietnamese were subjected to Cambodian retaliation.

[ 28 ] After the Vietnamese successfully annexed Champa , they then moved to conquer the Khmers on the Mekong Delta. Following the beginning of French Cochinchina with the arrival of European troops and missionaries, the Cambodians told Catholic European envoys that the Vietnamese government's persecution of Catholics justified the launching of retaliatory attacks against the Vietnamese colonists in Cambodia.

[ 28 ] Antipathy against the Vietnamese peaked under the Khmer rouge .

[ 29 ] In 1978, under the administration of Democratic Kampuchea , especially when Cambodian socialists began to rebel in the eastern zone of Cambodia, Pol Pot ordered his armies to exterminate 1.5 million eastern Cambodians which he branded as "Cambodian with Vietnamese minds" along with the 50 million Vietnamese in the area.

[ 30 ] This led to a war with the Vietnamese when they began to retaliate for the inhumane genocide and subsequently overthrew the Khmer Rouge .

[ 31 ] In the 21st century, anti-Vietnamese sentiment occasionally flares up in Cambodia due to the Cambodian people's fear that Vietnam will take over their land one day and some Cambodian opposition politicians continue to exploit this issue in order to justify their hatred of the Vietnamese.

[ 32 ] That fear was illustrated by attacks against Vietnamese which resulted in the rape and murder of several Vietnamese in the country.

[ 32 ] People's Republic of China See also: Chinese domination of Vietnam ; Territorial disputes in the South China Sea ; Haiyang Shiyou 981 standoff ; 2014 Vietnam anti-China protests ; Sino-Vietnamese War ; and Sino-Vietnamese conflicts, 1979–1991 As China had occupied the Vietnamese people for 1000 years, there has been a long uneasy sentiment towards China by the Vietnamese and vice versa.

[ 33 ] Nonetheless, anti-Vietnamese expressions have been dated back longer in Chinese history, especially following the Lý–Song War , during which the Vietnamese army under Lý Thường Kiệt invaded southern Guangxi and parts of southwestern Guangdong in response to attacks from the Song dynasty .

[ 34 ] More than 250,000–400,000 troops and civilians died (including massacre of Yongzhou ) and more than half of Song troops died during the counteroffensive against Đại Việt.

[ 35 ] Chinese historical sources exaggeratedly stated seven million Vietnamese casualties inflicted by Chinese forces during the retaliatory campaign.

[ 36 ] Brutality against the Vietnamese continued during the Fourth Chinese domination of Vietnam .

[ citation needed ] After its independence, the newly founded Lê dynasty waged several wars against Champa , a Chinese-aligned polity to the east of the Khmer Empire .

[ 37 ] During the Sino-Vietnamese War , when China had invaded Vietnam, the Chinese claimed that Vietnamese had invaded them instead and saw the war as self-defense despite being the one who launched the attack. The war is still taught in China as a "war of resistance against Vietnamese invasion".

[ 38 ] Recent tensions in the South China Sea have caused more disdain towards the Vietnamese by the Chinese community. In retaliation to territorial disputes, a Chinese restaurant in Beijing refused to serve food to Vietnamese tourists, alongside Filipinos and Japanese.

[ 39 ] [ 40 ] The feelings are also reciprocated from the latter, not just from disputes but also because of COVID-19 .

[ 41 ] [ 42 ] [ 43 ] [ 44 ] Japan Vietnamese people in Japan , among one of Japan's largest foreign communities, have expressed concerns about stereotyping and discrimination. Japan's Ministry of Public Security says that Vietnamese nationals are the foreign group with the highest rate of crime, and Vietnamese nationals in the country say they have been treated with suspicion and hostility.

[ 45 ] Myanmar The people of Myanmar began to express hatred towards Vietnam as well as China and ASEAN countries after the protests , because of suspicions of expressing support for the military government .

Mytel , a Viettel 's subsidiary, along with Vietnamese companies have been targeted by protesters.

Hong Kong Anti-Vietnamese sentiments occurred during the Vietnam War refugee crisis where handling Vietnamese refugees were an issue and were discriminated against in Hong Kong. Hong Kong may also express some anti-Southeast Asian sentiments, look down on countries seen as poor, or having anti-communist sentiments may also target the Vietnamese.

South Korea In a similar vein as to how the South Koreans have not be satisfied with Japan's apologies of 'comfort women', the Vietnamese have not found South Korean apologies for actions committed in the Vietnam War acceptable either.

[ 46 ] South Korean military were in disagreement towards the compensation of Vietnamese victims of the Vietnam War.

[ 47 ] Russia See also: Racism in Russia Hatred towards foreigners especially to non- white people began to rise in Russia as they were blamed for the country's 10 years of failed reforms in which living standards plummeted.

[ 48 ] Prior to the Chechen–Russian conflict , especially when Russian authorities blamed the Chechen Muslims Jihadist as responsible in the Russian apartment bombings , this has fuelled more hatred towards immigrants in the country.

[ 48 ] Prior to this, Russian skinheads began to be formed with some of the group members joining to take revenge for their family members that had been killed during the bomb attacks, though some other Russians joined the group because they are just "bored" and want to bully people.

[ 49 ] Following the attack against Vietnamese in Russia, protests were held by the Vietnamese community in the country, especially after the murder of 20-year-old Vietnamese student, Vu Anh Tuan on 13 October 2004. The protesters state: We came to study in this country, which we thought was a friend of Vietnam. We do not have drunken fights, we do not steal, we do not sell drugs and we have the right to protection from bandits.

[ 50 ] Despite the protest for protection from Russian authorities, Vietnamese people continue to be attacked. On 25 December 2004, two Vietnamese students at the Moscow Energy Institute , Nguyễn Tuấn Anh and Nguyen Hoàng Anh suffered severe injuries and were subsequently hospitalised after they had been assaulted by a group of strangers with knives and clubs on the way back to their dormitory.

[ 51 ] On 13 March 2005, three Russians stabbed a 45-year-old Vietnamese man named Quân to death in front of his home in Moscow.

[ 52 ] On 22 March 2008, a 35-year-old Vietnamese woman who worked at a Moscow market stabbed to death in an apparent race-hate killing.

[ citation needed ] On 9 January 2009, a group of strangers in Moscow stabbed a 21-year-old Vietnamese student named Tăng Quốc Bình resulting in his death the next day.

[ 53 ] Amid continuous attacks against Vietnamese students and workers, around 600 Vietnamese were rounded up in August 2013 in the city of Moscow and placed in poor condition tents while waiting to be deported from Russia.

[ 54 ] North Caucasus Reports about the growing Vietnamese population in North Caucasus have resulted in several ethnic violence between ethnic Vietnamese and North Caucasian peoples, notably occurring in Chechnya and Ingushetia . Following a rumor about Chechens being killed by Vietnamese employers, it had sparked uproar and anti-Vietnamese sentiment in social media.

[ 55 ] In 2013, violence broke out in Malgobek between Vietnamese and Ingush workers, with the Chechens supporting the Ingush, resulting with deaths of several Vietnamese.

[ 56 ] A year before, ethnic violence between Vietnamese and Ingush also broke out, with the Ingush accused the authorities of Vietnamization of Ingushetia.

[ 57 ] United States See also: Vietnam War , Indochina refugee crisis , and Vietnamese Americans This section needs expansion . You can help by making an edit request adding to it .

( June 2018 ) Tension and hatred between Vietnamese immigrants and white fishermen rose up in Galveston Bay, Texas in 1981, and was intensified by the Ku Klux Klan following an invitation from the American fishermen to threatening and intimidating the Vietnamese to leave, which resulted in attacks on Vietnamese boats.

[ 58 ] In April 1988, Mark Wahlberg attacked a Vietnamese-American veteran from the Vietnam war with a wooden stick and blinded his eye, calling him "Vietnam fucking shits".

[ 59 ] Wahlberg attacked a second Vietnamese-American man later the same day, punching him in the eye. When Wahlberg was arrested and returned to the scene of the first assault, he told police officers: "I'll tell you now that's the mother-fucker whose head I split open." [ 60 ] Vietnamese business owners, along with Korean Americans were disproportionately targeted during the Rodney King riots , a result of misdirected anger and hatred.

[ citation needed ] In June 2020, Matthew Hubbard, a mathematics professor at Laney College , allegedly asked Vietnamese student Phúc Bùi Diễm Nguyễn to " anglicize " her name because he believed it sounded like an offensive phrase in English.

[ 61 ] Ironically it is the anglicisation that caused offence, and not her true name with diacritics.

Derogatory terms Gook – A derogatory slur for Vietnamese and East Asians . It was originally used by the United States Armed Forces during wartime, especially during the Vietnam War .

[ 62 ] [ 63 ] [ 64 ] Annamite or mites ( French ) – Originally generalised as a colonialist synonym for all Vietnamese.

[ 65 ] [ 66 ] [ 67 ] Fidschi, also written as Vitschi ( German ) – East German slur, originally used for Vietnamese guest workers.

[ 68 ] [ 69 ] Gaew ( แกว ) – A Thai and Lao slang word for people who is of Vietnamese descent in Thailand .

[ 70 ] Uzkoglázy ( узкоглазый ) – East Asian Russian slur meaning "small eyes" or in Russian referring to the prevalence of epicanthic folds in Asian ethnic groups.

[ 71 ] Yuon ( យួន ) – Originally neutral and only Khmer word for Vietnam that has gradually evolved into becoming a slur.

Niakoué – French derogatory term for Vietnamese people, derived from the Vietnamese word "nhà quê", itself a derogatory term for people of rural origin.

Yuènán hóuzi ( 越南猴子 ) – Derogatory slur from Chinese towards Vietnamese people meaning "monkey" due to historical sentiments regarding Vietnamese people as barbaric, uncivilized, and animal-like.

Bat lau dung laai ( 不漏洞拉 ) – A phrase now considered derogatory from Cantonese, it is a corruption of the Vietnamese phrase bắt đầu từ nay (扒頭自𫢩; "from now on") used at the beginning of a Vietnamese-language public service announcement in Hong Kong notifying Vietnamese boat people that they would not be granted asylum and would be deported back to Vietnam.

See also Vietnam portal Racism Racism in Vietnam References ^ Lovell, Julia (19 September 2014).

"Beauty and bloodbaths in the Ming dynasty" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 2 March 2019 – via www.theguardian.com.

^ "The great Vietnam famine" .

endofempire.asia . 17 August 2015. Archived from the original on 17 June 2022 . Retrieved 22 July 2025 .

^ "Lon Nol – Sciences Po Mass Violence and Resistance – Research Network" .

www.sciencespo.fr . 4 February 2016 . Retrieved 2 March 2019 .

^ Pringle, James (7 January 2004).

"MEANWHILE : When the Khmer Rouge came to kill in Vietnam" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 2 March 2019 .

^ a b Brian A. Zottoli.

"Reconceptualizing Southern Vietnamese History from the 15th to 18th Centuries: Competition along the Coasts from Guangdong to Cambodia – from page 80 ff" (PDF) . University of Michigan . Retrieved 23 February 2019 .

^ Staff, Post.

"From Ionia to Vietnam" .

The Phnom Penh Post . Archived from the original on 29 November 2020 . Retrieved 19 November 2020 .

^ Ben Kiernan (2001).

"Myth, nationalism and genocide" (PDF) .

Yale University Genocide Studies Program .

^ Ferlus, Michel (2009).

"Formation of Ethnonyms in Southeast Asia" .

42nd International Conference on Sino-Tibetan Languages and Linguistics .

31 : 1– 6 – via HAL .

^ Pain, Frédéric (2008).

"An Introduction to Thai Ethnonymy: Examples from Shan and Northern Thai" .

Journal of the American Oriental Society .

128 (4): 641– 662.

JSTOR 25608449 .

^ Vann, Michael G. (2009).

"Caricaturing "The Colonial Good Life" in French Indochina" .

European Comic Art .

2 (1): 83– 108.

doi : 10.3828/eca.2.1.6 . Retrieved 2 March 2019 – via www.academia.edu.

^ Walsh, Liz (25 November 2015).

"The Crimes of French Imperialism" .

Truthout . Retrieved 2 March 2019 .

^ "Japanese occupation of Vietnam" .

alphahistory.com . 25 June 2012 . Retrieved 2 March 2019 .

^ "Vietnamese Famine of 1945" .

Japanese Occupation of Vietnam . Retrieved 2 March 2019 .

^ Hutt, David.

"The Truth About Anti-Vietnam Sentiment in Cambodia" .

The Diplomat . Retrieved 2 March 2019 .

^ Rungswasdisab, Puangthong.

"Thailand's Response to the Cambodian Genocide" (PDF) .

ETH Zurich .

^ Robert Hoppens, University of Texas Pan American (29 July 2014).

"The 1979 Sino-Vietnamese War and the Transformation of Japan's Relations with China in Diplomacy and Discourse" .

japanesestudies.org.uk . Retrieved 2 March 2019 .

^ "The curious case of North Korea in Cambodia" .

Channel NewsAsia . Archived from the original on 25 February 2019 . Retrieved 2 March 2019 .

^ "Pirates Plaguing Vietnamese Refugees – The Washington Post" .

The Washington Post .

^ "Vietnam's Political Economy in Transition (1986–2016)" . Archived from the original on 3 March 2019 . Retrieved 25 February 2019 .

^ "How the 'Politics of Gratitude' Inflames Cambodia-Vietnam Relations – the Diplomat" . Archived from the original on 7 June 2024.

^ Stur, Heather (19 December 2017).

"Opinion | The Viet Cong Committed Atrocities, Too" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 18 August 2020 .

^ "Anti-Viet Cong Atrocity PSYOP" .

^ "Vietnam War: 'Kill anything that moves' " .

BBC News . 28 August 2013 . Retrieved 18 August 2020 .

^ Mooney, Darren (29 September 2023).

"The Creator is a Sci-Fi Vietnam Movie About Vietnam Movies" .

The Escapist . Retrieved 30 September 2023 .

^ Ruth, Richard A. (7 November 2017).

"Opinion – Why Thailand Takes Pride in the Vietnam War" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 2 March 2019 .

^ "POL POT'S BEST PAL: THAILAND – The Washington Post" .

The Washington Post .

^ "Thailand Says Vietnamese Plan a February Invasion" .

The New York Times . 9 December 1976 . Retrieved 2 March 2019 .

^ a b Ben Kiernan (2008).

Blood and Soil: Modern Genocide 1500–2000 . Melbourne Univ. Publishing. pp. 158–.

ISBN 978-0-522-85477-0 .

^ McHale, Shawn (2013).

"Ethnicity, Violence, and Khmer-Vietnamese Relations: The Significance of the Lower Mekong Delta, 1757–1954" .

The Journal of Asian Studies .

72 (2): 367– 390.

doi : 10.1017/S0021911813000016 .

ISSN 0021-9118 .

JSTOR 43553182 .

S2CID 162830836 .

^ Encyclopedia of Genocide: Vol. 1- . ABC-CLIO. 1999. pp. 132–.

ISBN 978-0-87436-928-1 .

^ International Commission on Intervention and State Sovereignty; International Development Research Centre (Canada) (January 2001).

The Responsibility to Protect: Report of the International Commission on Intervention and State Sovereignty . IDRC. pp. 58–.

ISBN 978-0-88936-963-4 .

^ a b Prak Chan Thul (28 April 2014).

"Investors wary as anti-Vietnamese feeling grows in Cambodia" . Reuters . Retrieved 1 November 2016 .

^ Jung-Ho Bae; Jae H. Ku; Korea Institute for National Unification (South Korea) (31 December 2013).

China's Internal and External Relations and Lessons for Korea and Asia . 길잡이미디어. pp. 182–.

ISBN 978-89-8479-742-0 .

^ Anderson, James (2 March 2019).

The Rebel Den of Nùng Trí Cao: Loyalty and Identity Along the Sino-Vietnamese Frontier . NUS Press.

ISBN 9789971693671 . Retrieved 2 March 2019 – via Google Books.

^ Trần, Trọng Kim (1954).

Việt nam sử lược [ Vietnam History ]. Tan Viet. p. 107.

ISBN 978-5879825893 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ Friedman, Edward; McCormick, Barrett L. (11 June 2015).

What if China Doesn't Democratize?: Implications for War and Peace . Routledge.

ISBN 9781317452218 .

^ Baldanza, Kathlene (29 March 2016).

Ming China and Vietnam . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 9781107124240 . Retrieved 2 March 2019 – via Google Books.

^ "越南人看中越战争: 越南的贫穷与落后是中国造成_中华网" .

3g.china.com . Retrieved 2 March 2019 .

^ "China restaurant bans Asian maritime dispute citizens" .

BBC News . 27 February 2013 . Retrieved 1 November 2016 .

^ "Racist Beijing Restaurant Sign Bars Japanese, Vietnamese, Filipinos And Dogs (PHOTO)" .

Agence France-Presse . 29 April 2013 . Retrieved 1 November 2016 .

^ " 'No Chinese allowed': Japanese shop criticised for coronavirus sign" .

South China Morning Post . 22 January 2020 . Retrieved 12 January 2022 .

^ "Coronavirus, South China Sea politics fuel anti-Chinese sentiment in the Philippines" .

South China Morning Post . 7 February 2020 . Retrieved 12 January 2022 .

^ "A bar in Ho Chi Minh City bans Chinese customers, as coronavirus concerns spark anti-Chinese racism" .

Business Insider . 25 February 2020 . Retrieved 12 January 2022 .

^ "Philippine foreign secretary directs unusually aggressive tweet at Beijing over South China Sea" .

CNBC . 3 May 2021 . Retrieved 12 January 2022 .

^ Duc, Trung (9 September 2022).

"Vietnamese in Japan concerned about compatriots' crimes" .

VNExpress . Retrieved 11 November 2022 .

^ Luong, Dien (30 December 2022).

"It's Time for South Korea to Acknowledge Its Atrocities in Vietnam" .

Foreign Policy . Retrieved 9 October 2023 .

^ "S Korea appeals ruling to compensate Vietnam War massacre victim" .

www.aljazeera.com . Retrieved 9 October 2023 .

^ a b Guy Chazan (16 July 2000).

"Neo-Nazis terrorise Russia's black diplomats" .

The Telegraph . Retrieved 1 November 2016 .

^ "Violence and hatred in Russia's new skinhead playground" .

The Independent . 25 January 2005.

Archived from the original on 7 May 2022 . Retrieved 1 November 2016 .

^ "Racists kill Vietnamese student in Russia" . ~ Le Viêt Nam, aujourd'hui. ~ (The Vietnam News). Reuters. 14 October 2004 . Retrieved 1 November 2016 .

^ The Vinh (27 December 2004).

"Two Vietnamese students attacked in Moscow" .

Tuổi Trẻ/Vietnam News Agency . Talk Vietnam . Retrieved 1 November 2016 .

^ Hieu Trung (13 March 2005).

"Vietnamese man stabbed to death in Moscow" . Talk Vietnam. Archived from the original on 31 October 2018 . Retrieved 1 November 2016 .

^ "Another Vietnamese student killed in Russia" . Voice of Vietnam. 11 January 2009 . Retrieved 1 November 2016 .

^ Alexandra Odynova (21 October 2013).

"Migrants on high-alert following Moscow riot" .

Equal Times . Retrieved 1 November 2016 .

^ "Chechnya to punish "spreading rumours" about food quality" .

OC Media . 11 July 2018 . Retrieved 2 December 2020 .

^ "Кавполит: Драка в Ингушетии неожиданно выявила остроту проблемы гастарбайтеров на Кавказе" .

Эхо Москвы .

^ "Вьетнамцы в Ингушетии – нечто похожее на рабство" . 4 October 2012.

^ William K. Stevens (25 April 1981).

"Klan inflames Gulf fishing fight between Whites and Vietnamese" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 1 November 2016 .

^ "Back In The Day: Marky Mark's Rap Sheet" .

The Smoking Gun . p. 2. Archived from the original on 24 June 2018 . Retrieved 23 June 2018 .

^ "Back In The Day: Marky Mark's Rap Sheet" .

The Smoking Gun . p. 6. Archived from the original on 29 December 2014 . Retrieved 7 December 2014 .

^ Palmer On 6/19/20 at 9:23 AM, Ewan (19 June 2020).

"Professor placed on leave for telling student to "Anglicize" her name" .

Newsweek .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list ( link ) ^ Stephen M. Sonnenberg; Arthur S. Blank (1985).

The Trauma of War: Stress and Recovery in Viet Nam Veterans . American Psychiatric Pub. pp. 366–.

ISBN 978-0-88048-048-2 .

^ Kathleen L. Barry (1 July 1996).

The Prostitution of Sexuality . NYU Press. pp. 130–.

ISBN 978-0-8147-2336-4 .

^ Tom Dalzell (25 July 2014).

Vietnam War Slang: A Dictionary on Historical Principles . Routledge. pp. 69–.

ISBN 978-1-317-66187-0 .

^ Sue Peabody (30 June 2003).

The Color of Liberty: Histories of Race in France . Duke University Press. pp. 188–.

ISBN 0-8223-3117-9 .

In the colonial lexicon, an Annamite was a Vietnamese.

^ Katie Baker (24 September 2013).

"Searching for Madame Nhu" . The Daily Beast . Retrieved 1 November 2016 .

In Annamite circles, the police added, using the derogatory term for native inhabitants.

^ "1905: Two murderers beheaded in French Indochina" . Executed Today. 7 March 2012 . Retrieved 1 November 2016 .

A term that will not get you a warm welcome in Southeast Asia today – were residents of the French protectorate of Annam. It, along with Tonkin to its north and Cochinchina to its south, comprise present-day Vietnam: It is also sometimes generalised as a colonialist synonym for all Vietnamese.

^ LEE, FELIX (3 August 2004).

"Fidschi? "Ein ganz normales Wort" " .

Die Tageszeitung: taz (in German). p. 21.

ISSN 0931-9085 . Retrieved 1 October 2024 .

^ "Warum ich das nicht mehr hören will: "Fidschi" " .

Belltower.News (in German). 13 November 2008 . Retrieved 1 October 2024 .

^ Thailand, Sanook Online Ltd.

"แกว คืออะไร แปลภาษา แปลว่า หมายถึง (พจนานุกรมไทย-ไทย ราชบัณฑิตยสถาน)" .

dictionary.sanook.com .

^ Сергей Павлович Кашин.

Самые вкусные рецепты. Сверхпростые кулинарные рецепты (in Russian). Рипол Классик. pp. 114–.

ISBN 978-5-386-07960-4 .

v t e Racism Types of racism Aversive Colorism Covert Cultural Cyber Environmental Formal Gendered Institutional Internalized Patent Laissez-faire Linguistic Neocolonial Romantic Scientific Societal Substantive Symbolic Manifestations of racism Anti-miscegenation laws Apartheid Biological determinism Discrimination based on nationality Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic jokes Ethnic slurs Ethnic stereotype Hate crime Hate speech Hate group Hypodescent / Hyperdescent Racial capitalism Racialization Racial hierarchy Racial nationalism Racial profiling Racial segregation Racism by region Global apartheid Africa South Africa Zimbabwe Asia China Japan North Korea South Korea Thailand Vietnam Arab world Libya Saudi Arabia Sudan Australia Europe Denmark France Germany Italy Poland Portugal Russia Soviet Union Spain Ukraine United Kingdom Middle East Iran Israel Palestine Turkey North America Canada United States Mexico South America Argentina Brazil Chile Racism by target Arab Asians Chinese Chinese Americans Zainichi Chinese Japanese Japanese Americans Japanese Koreans Korean Zainichi Koreans Vietnamese Black African Americans Arab Women Mexican Native Americans Jewish Anti-racism Jewish Americans In Jewish communities LGBT Middle Eastern Muslim Romani Slavic Wine industry Racial supremacy Black supremacy White supremacy White Related topics Ableism Alt-right Anti-racism Casteism Ethnic plastic surgery Go back to where you came from Herrenvolk democracy Interminority racism in the United States Hispanics/Latinos Lynching Passing Perpetual foreigner Psychometrics of racism Race and sexuality Race card Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racial misrepresentation Racial figleaf Racial integration Racial quota Racism in sport in Australia Reverse racism Sociology of race and ethnic relations Xenophobia Category Commons Index v t e Anti-national sentiment Race or ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people State American Australian British Canadian Chilean Empire of Japan Inter-Korean North South Israeli Zionist People's Republic of China Qing Other Western Related topics Ethnic hatred v t e Discrimination Forms Institutional Reverse Structural Statistical Systemic Taste-based Attributes Age Caste Class Disability Economic Genetic Hair texture Height Language Dialect Looks Mental disorder Nationality or citizenship Race / Ethnicity Reverse Skin color Scientific racism Rank Sex Reverse Sexual orientation Species Size Viewpoint Social Arophobia Anti-albinism Acephobia Adultism Anti-altruistic Anti-autism Anti-homelessness Anti-drug addicts Anti-intellectualism Anti-intersex Anti-left handedness Anti-Masonry Aporophobia Audism Biphobia Clannism Elitism Endophobia Ephebiphobia Health mental in poverty Fatphobia Gayphobia Gerontophobia Heterosexism HIV/AIDS stigma Hypergamy Homophobia In-group Leprosy stigma Lesbophobia Against men Misandry Misogyny Misogynoir Nepotism Outgroup Perpetual foreigner Pregnancy Sectarianism Supremacism Aryanism Black Hutu Chauvinism Han Female Human Nordicism Male Ultranationalism White Transphobia Non-binary Transmisogyny Trans men Vegaphobia Xenophilia Xenophobia Religious Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Race / Ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people Manifestations Algorithmic bias Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Blood libel Bullying Cancel culture Capital punishment for homosexuality Carnism Compulsory sterilization Corrective rape Counter-jihad Cultural genocide Defamation Democide Dog whistle Domicide Economic Education Academic In curricula Sexism Eliminationism Eliminationist antisemitism Employment Enemy of the people Environmental racism Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnocide Excellence Gender-based dress codes Cosmetics policy High heel policy Forced conversion Freak show Gay bashing Gendercide Transgender genocide Genital modification and mutilation Circumcision Female genital mutilation Intersex medical interventions Genocide examples Glass ceiling Hate crime Disability hate crime Violence against LGBTQ people Violence against transgender people Hate group Hate speech Institutional discrimination Institutional racism Homeless dumping Housing Hypergamy Age disparity Indian rolling International inequality Kill Haole Day Lavender scare LGBTQ+ grooming conspiracy theory Linguicide Lynching Media bias Minority stress Moral exclusion Mortgage Native American mascots Braves Blackhawks Chiefs Occupational Apartheid Inequality Injustice Segregation Opposition to immigration Paper genocide Persecution Pogrom Political Political repression Ideological repression Purge Racialization Religious persecution Religious terrorism Religious violence Religious war Scapegoating Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Sentencing disparity Sexual harassment Sex-selective abortion Slut-shaming Structural abuse Structural discrimination Structural evil Structural inequality Structural violence Untermensch Trans bashing Victimisation Violence against women White flight White genocide conspiracy theory Wife selling Witch hunt Discriminatory policies Algorithmic wage discrimination Age of candidacy Apartheid in South Africa in Israel Blood purity Blood quantum Breadwinner model Conscription and sexism Disabilities Catholic Jewish Disparate impact Fagging Gender pay gap Gender roles Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Gerontocracy Gerrymandering Ghetto benches Internment Jewish quota Opposition to LGBTQ rights MSM blood donation restrictions No kid zone Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota) One-drop rule Racial quota Racial steering Redlining Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting) Segregation age racial Jim Crow laws Nuremberg Laws Segregation academy religious sexual in Islam Social exclusion Sodomy law State atheism State religion Ugly law Voter suppression White Australia policy Countermeasures Affirmative action Anti-discrimination law Anti-racism Audit study Autism rights movement Gender-blind Blind audition Constitutional colorblindness Cross-sex friendship Cultural assimilation Cultural pluralism Diversity, equity, and inclusion Diversity training Empowerment Fat acceptance movement Feminism Fighting Discrimination Golden Rule Hate speech laws by country Human rights Intersex human rights Korenizatsiia LGBTQ rights Mad pride Music in the movement against apartheid Racial integration Reappropriation Rock Against Sexism Self-determination Social integration Stop Murder Music Toleration Transgender rights movement Universal suffrage Women's rights Related topics Allophilia Amatonormativity Bias Capital punishment for homosexuality Cisnormativity Civil liberties Criminalization of homosexuality Dehumanization Diseases of despair Ethnic penalty Figleaf Heteronormativity Historical eugenics Internalized oppression Intersectionality Masculism Oikophobia Oppression Police brutality Polyculturalism Power distance Prejudice Prisoner abuse Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racism by country Racial color blindness Religious intolerance Second-generation gender bias Snobbery Social equity Social exclusion Social model of disability Social privilege Christian male white Social stigma Speciesism Stereotype The talk Category Commons Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Anti-Vietnamese_sentiment&oldid=1304558131 " Categories : Anti-Vietnamese sentiment Anti-national sentiment Anti–Southeast Asian sentiment Hidden categories: CS1 errors: ISBN date CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list CS1 German-language sources (de) CS1 Russian-language sources (ru) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Wikipedia pages semi-protected from banned users Use dmy dates from October 2020 Articles with excerpts Wikipedia neutral point of view disputes from July 2022 All Wikipedia neutral point of view disputes Articles containing Vietnamese-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2021 Articles with unsourced statements from October 2020 Articles with unsourced statements from November 2020 Articles to be expanded from June 2018 All articles to be expanded Articles with unsourced statements from April 2023 Articles containing Thai-language text Articles containing Russian-language text Articles containing Khmer-language text Articles containing Chinese-language text This page was last edited on 6 August 2025, at 19:28 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Anti-Vietnamese sentiment 4 languages Add topic

