Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Modernism and postmodernism 2 The post-postmodern era Toggle The post-postmodern era subsection 2.1 Brooklyn's Immersionism 2.2 Turner's post-postmodernism 2.3 Epstein's trans-postmodernism 2.4 Pseudo-modernism 3 Discussion 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Post-postmodernism 11 languages Afrikaans العربية Čeština Español עברית Português Русский Simple English Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Artistic and philosophical movement This article is written like a personal reflection, personal essay, or argumentative essay that states a Wikipedia editor's personal feelings or presents an original argument about a topic.

Please help improve it by rewriting it in an encyclopedic style .

( March 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Postmodernism Preceded by Modernism Postmodernity Deconstruction Hypermodernity Hyperreality Posthumanism Post-structuralism Fields Anthropology Archaeology Architecture Art Criminology Dance Feminism Film Television Literature ( Picture books ) Music International relations Philosophy Anarchism Marxism Postpositivism Psychology Political science Theatre Theology and Religion Reactions Criticism Metamodernism Post-postmodernism Remodernism v t e Post-postmodernism is a wide-ranging set of developments in critical theory , philosophy , architecture , art , literature , and culture which are emerging from and reacting to postmodernism .

Modernism and postmodernism [ edit ] Most scholars would agree that modernism was an outgrowth of the European Renaissance and began to mature in the industrial age of the 19th century. Around 1900 it became the dominant cultural force in the intellectual circles of Western culture well into the mid-twentieth century.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Like all eras, modernism encompasses many competing individual directions and is impossible to define as a discrete unity or totality. However, its chief general characteristics are often thought to include an emphasis on "radical aesthetics, technical experimentation, spatial or rhythmic, rather than chronological form, [and] self-conscious reflexiveness" [ 3 ] as well as the search for authenticity in human relations, abstraction in art, and utopian striving. These characteristics are normally lacking in postmodernism or are treated as objects of irony.

Postmodernism arose after World War II as a reaction to the perceived failings of modernism, whose radical artistic projects had come to be associated with totalitarianism [ 4 ] or had been assimilated into mainstream culture. The basic features of what is now called postmodernism can be found as early as the 1940s, most notably in the work of Jorge Luis Borges .

[ 5 ] However, most scholars today would agree that postmodernism began to compete with modernism in the late 1950s and gained ascendancy over it in the 1960s.

[ 6 ] Since then, postmodernism has been a dominant, though not undisputed, force in art, literature, film, music, drama, architecture, history, and continental philosophy. Salient features of postmodernism are normally thought to include the ironic play with styles, citations and narrative levels, [ 7 ] a metaphysical skepticism or nihilism towards a " grand narrative " of Western culture, [ 8 ] a preference for the virtual at the expense of the real (or more accurately, a fundamental questioning of what "the real" constitutes) [ 9 ] and a "waning of affect" [ 10 ] on the part of the subject, who is caught up in the free interplay of virtual, endlessly reproducible signs inducing a state of consciousness similar to schizophrenia.

[ 11 ] Since the late 1990s, there has been a small but growing feeling both in popular culture and in academia that postmodernism "has gone out of fashion." [ 12 ] There have been attempts to formulate alternatives to postmodernism, and one of them, Immersionism has entered a number of art history books, but none of the proposed designations has yet become part of mainstream usage.

The post-postmodern era [ edit ] Consensus on what constitutes an era can not be easily achieved while that era is still in its early stages. However, a common theme of current attempts to define post-postmodernism is emerging as one where dialogue, environmental engagement, sincerity, trust and faith can work to transcend postmodern irony . The following definitions, which vary widely in depth, focus, and scope, are listed in the chronological order of their appearance.

Brooklyn's Immersionism [ edit ] In a shift away from the postmodern distancing aesthetics of Manhattan in the 1980s, creative communities in Fort Greene, Greenpoint and Williamsburg, Brooklyn began to cultivate a post-postmodern culture distinguished by social and environmental engagement.

[ 13 ] According to art historian Jonathan Fineberg, the international community of artists, musicians and writers that gathered near Williamsburg’s abandoned industrial waterfront in the late 1980s innovated a new cultural “paradigm" [ 14 ] that involved "a richer, more dynamically interacting whole." [ 14 ] One of the movement’s earliest manifestoes, You Sub Mod suggests in 1988 that the loss of modernism’s certainty doesn’t require being stuck in a perpetual state of postmodern doubt. As the information ritual pioneer, Ebon Fisher stated in You Sub Mod: “You never believed in modernism and you aren't fooled by its vain reflection, postmodernism... You found that to immerse yourself was the thing, sensing that objectivity was only another dream.” [ 15 ] Now referred to as the Brooklyn Immersionists , the Williamsburg scene gave birth to many other terms and prescriptions for environmental immersion and enchantment, including "inject vitality," [ 16 ] "omnisensorialism," [ 17 ] "close-to-the-pulse,” [ 18 ] "web jam,” [ 17 ] and “mutual world construction." [ 19 ] In his book, The Williamsburg Avant-Garde: Experimental Music and Sound on the Brooklyn Waterfront, Cisco Bradley states: "In many ways, Immersionism was the next stage of evolution of the New York art scene, which had evolved from the rationalist works of figures like conceptual artist Joseph Kosuth (b. 1945) or minimalist Donald Judd (1928–94) to the postmodern rebellion of the 1980s... As some of the early theorists of Immersionism stated ‘[Immersionists] helped to shift cultural protocols away from cold, postmodern cynicism, towards something a whole lot warmer: immersive, mutual world construction.' [ 20 ] " [ 19 ] Turner's post-postmodernism [ edit ] In 1995, the landscape architect and urban planner Tom Turner issued a book-length call for a post-postmodern turn in urban planning.

[ 21 ] Turner criticizes the postmodern credo of "anything goes" and suggests that "the built environment professions are witnessing the gradual dawn of a post-Postmodernism that seeks to temper reason with faith." [ 22 ] In particular, Turner argues for the use of timeless organic and geometrical patterns in urban planning. As sources of such patterns he cites, among others, the Taoist-influenced work of the American architect Christopher Alexander , gestalt psychology and the psychoanalyst Carl Jung 's concept of archetypes . Regarding terminology, Turner urges people to "embrace post-Postmodernism – and pray for a better name." [ 23 ] Epstein's trans-postmodernism [ edit ] In his 1999 book on Russian postmodernism , the Russian-American Slavist Mikhail Epstein suggested that postmodernism "is ... part of a much larger historical formation," which he calls " postmodernity ".

[ 24 ] Epstein believes that postmodernist aesthetics will eventually become entirely conventional and provide the foundation for a new, non-ironic kind of poetry, which he describes using the prefix " trans- ": In considering the names that might possibly be used to designate the new era following "postmodernism," one finds that the prefix "trans" stands out in a special way. The last third of the 20th century developed under the sign of "post," which signalled the demise of such concepts of modernity as "truth" and "objectivity," "soul" and "subjectivity," "utopia" and "ideality," "primary origin" and "originality," "sincerity" and "sentimentality." All of these concepts are now being reborn in the form of "trans-subjectivity," "trans-idealism," "trans-utopianism," "trans-originality," "trans-lyricism," "trans-sentimentality" etc.

[ 25 ] As an example Epstein cites the work of the contemporary Russian poet Timur Kibirov .

[ 26 ] Pseudo-modernism [ edit ] In his 2006 paper The Death of Postmodernism and Beyond , the British scholar Alan Kirby formulated a socio-cultural assessment of post-postmodernism that he calls "pseudo-modernism".

[ 27 ] Kirby associates pseudo-modernism with the triteness and shallowness resulting from the instantaneous, direct, and superficial participation in culture made possible by the internet, mobile phones, interactive television and similar means: "In pseudo-modernism one phones, clicks, presses, surfs, chooses, moves, downloads." [ 27 ] Pseudo-modernism's "typical intellectual states" are furthermore described as being "ignorance, fanaticism and anxiety" and it is said to produce a "trance-like state" in those participating in it. The net result of this media-induced shallowness and instantaneous participation in trivial events is a "silent autism" superseding "the neurosis of modernism and the narcissism of postmodernism." Kirby sees no aesthetically valuable works coming out of "pseudo-modernism". As examples of its triteness he cites reality TV, interactive news programs, "the drivel found ... on some Wikipedia pages", docu-soaps, and the essayistic cinema of Michael Moore or Morgan Spurlock .

[ 27 ] In a book published in September 2009 titled Digimodernism: How New Technologies Dismantle the Postmodern and Reconfigure our Culture , Kirby developed further and nuanced his views on culture and textuality in the aftermath of postmodernism .

Discussion [ edit ] The shallow digital interactivity of which Kirby speaks is in many ways a reconstitution of postmodernism, albeit with greater international participation. A culture predicated on interaction with a machine, especially one tied to algorithms that alienate users from their assumed audience, is an echo of Warhol’s ironic statement, “I want to be a machine.” [ 28 ] In contrast, a more profound rejection of corporate machine culture appears in the rich array of organic interactions embodied by the Brooklyn Immersionists, Turner's post-postmodernism and even Epstein’s trans-postmodernism. Fisher’s submodernism, introduced in 1988, encourages a reconnection with an organic substrate or “burrow” [ 29 ] that pre-existed modernism, but also anticipates these last three post-postmodern movements. Both Brooklyn submodernism and Immersionism have been discussed as recently as 2023 in Cisco Bradley’s book, The Williamsburg Avant-Garde: Experimental Music and Sound on the Brooklyn Waterfront.

[ 29 ] The climactic Immersionist event, Organism was discussed in Newsweek in 1993, [ 30 ] in Domus in 1998, [ 31 ] and more recently cited in Bradley’s book in 2023 [ 29 ] and by The New York Times in 2024.

[ 32 ] See also [ edit ] Altermodern Cold War Dogme 95 Excessivism Integral theory (Ken Wilber) Brooklyn Immersionists Kitsch movement Maximalism Metamodernism Neo-minimalism New Puritans New Sincerity New Urbanism Post-irony Post-truth Pseudorealism Radical orthodoxy Remodernism Stuckism Transmodernism References [ edit ] ^ Childs, Peter (2008).

Modernism . New York: Routledge . p. 18.

ISBN 978-0-415-41544-6 .

[modernism] is [...] primarily located in the years 1890-1930 [...] ^ Armstrong, Tim (2005).

Modernism: A Cultural History . Cambridge: Polity Press . p.

24 .

ISBN 978-0-7456-2983-4 .

[modernism] can be defined as a series of international artistic movements in the period 1900–40 [...].

^ Childs, Peter (2008).

Modernism . New York: Routledge . p. 18.

ISBN 978-0-415-41544-6 .

^ Cf. Groys, Boris: The Total Art of Stalinism , Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1992.

^ Barth, John (August 1967). " The Literature of Exhaustion ".

The Atlantic Monthly . pp.

29– 34.

^ Cf., for example, Huyssen, Andreas: After the Great Divide. Modernism, Mass Culture, Postmodernism . Bloomington: Indiana University Press , 1986, p. 188.

^ See Hutcheon, Linda: A Poetics of Postmodernism. History, Theory, Fiction . New York: Routledge, 1988, pp. 3–21; McHale, Brian: Postmodern Fiction , London: Methuen, 1987.

^ See Lyotard, Jean-François, The Postmodern Condition: A Report on Knowledge , Minneapolis: University of Minneapolis Press 1984 ^ Baudrillard, Jean (1988). " Simulacra and Simulations ".

Jean Baudrillard. Selected Writings . Stanford: Stanford University Press . pp.

166– 184.

^ Jameson, Fredric: Postmodernism or, The Cultural Logic of Late Capitalism . Durham: Duke University Press 1991, p. 16 ^ Jameson, Fredric (1991).

Postmodernism or, The Cultural Logic of Late Capitalism . Durham: Duke University Press . pp.

26– 27.

^ Potter, Garry; Lopez, Jose, eds. (2001).

After Postmodernism: An Introduction to Critical Realism . London: The Athlone Press. p. 4.

^ Introduction by Jonathan Fineberg to the catalogue for the exhibition, Out of Town: The Williamsburg Paradigm, curated by Fineberg for the Krannert Art Museum (University of Illinois, 1992).

^ a b Introduction by Jonathan Fineberg to the catalogue for the exhibition, Out of Town: The Williamsburg Paradigm, curated by Fineberg for the Krannert Art Museum (University of Illinois, 1992).

^ You Sub Mod by Ebon Fisher, 1988, quoted in The Williamsburg Avant-Garde: Experimental Music and Sound on the Brooklyn Waterfront by Cisco Bradley, Duke University Press, 2023, p. 27 ^ Czernek, Ladislav (January 1990). "Invitation to Epoché".

Word of Mouth .

^ a b Ebon Fisher quoted in "Where Do We Go After the Rave?" by Melissa Rossi, Newsweek, July 26, 1993, p. 58 ^ Gould, Genia (January 1992). "Welcome to Breukelen".

Breukelen Magazine .

1 : 1.

^ a b The Williamsburg Avant-Garde: Experimental Music and Sound on the Brooklyn Waterfront by Cisco Bradley, Duke University Press, 2023, p. 27 ^ Susie Kahlich, Ethan Pettit, Ebon Fisher, "Immersionism, a Brief Introduction," Facebook, February 13, 2011, https://www.facebook.com/notes/ethan-pettit/immersionism/501003277687 ^ City as Landscape: A Post Post-modern View of Design and Planning , (Taylor & Francis: London 1995).

^ City as Landscape: A Post Post-modern View of Design and Planning , ( Taylor & Francis : London 1995), p. 9.

^ City as Landscape: A Post Post-modern View of Design and Planning , ( Taylor & Francis : London 1995), p. 10; see also a summary of the book at [1] ^ Epstein, Mikhail; Genis, Alexander; Vladiv-Glover, Slobodanka.

Russian Postmodernism. New Perspectives on Post-Soviet Culture . Berghahn Books: New York, 1999, p. 467.

^ "Epstein (specific) – the Place of Postmodernism in Postmodernity" . Archived from the original on 2012-10-28 . Retrieved 2006-05-19 .

^ Epstein, Mikhail; Genis, Alexander; Vladiv-Glover, Slobodanka.

Russian Postmodernism. New Perspectives on Post-Soviet Culture .

Berghahn Books : New York, 1999, pp. 457–460 ^ a b c Kirby, Alan (November–December 2006).

"The Death of Postmodernism And Beyond" .

Philosophy Now (58) . Retrieved June 17, 2011 .

^ Hughes, Robert (May 17, 1971).

"Art: Man for the Machine" .

Time .

^ a b c The Williamsburg Avant-Garde: Experimental Music and Sound on the Brooklyn Waterfront by Cisco Bradley, Duke University Press, 2023, p. 27 ^ "Where Do We Go After the Rave?" by Melissa Rossi, Newsweek, July 26, 1993, p. 58 ^ Wines, Suzan (February 1998). "Go With the Flow: Eight New York Artists and Architects in the Digital Era".

Domus Magazine .

^ Kurutz, Steven (January 29, 2024).

"Williamsburg. What Happened?" .

The New York Times . Retrieved April 12, 2024 .

External links [ edit ] Essay by Alan Kirby on theories of post-postmodernism Essay by Mikhail Epstein on The Place of Postmodernism in Postmodernity Introduction to "Digimodernism: How New Technologies Dismantle the Postmodern and Reconfigure Our Culture" by Alan Kirby Notes on metamodernism Performatism.de (Resource site for performatism and theories of post-postmodernism) Post-post-modernism known as Authenticism Post-postmodern novel by Patrick J. F. Quere Post-postmodernism known as Hyperhybridism v t e Criticism of postmodernism Concepts Altermodern Anti-anti-art Hypermodernity Metamodernism Neomodern Neomodernism New sincerity Post-irony Post-postmodernism Remodernism Remodernist film Stuckism International Transmodernism Critics Anderson Benson Berman Bricmont Bunge Chomsky Crews Dawkins Dennett Dussel Eagleton Fukuyama Hicks Jameson Kramer Lindsay Paglia Peterson Pluckrose Scruton Sokal Windschuttle Works Postmodernism, or, the Cultural Logic of Late Capitalism (1991) Higher Superstition (1994) Dead White Males (1995) Fashionable Nonsense (1997) Explaining Postmodernism (2004) The Dictionary of Fashionable Nonsense (2006) Cynical Theories (2020) Related Grievance studies affair Postmodernism Generator Science wars Sokal affair Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Post-postmodernism&oldid=1291697847 " Categories : Metamodernism Theories of aesthetics Architectural theory Visual arts genres Contemporary art Postmodern theory Critical theory Criticism of postmodernism Modernism Modernist architecture New Urbanism Postmodernism Postmodern architecture 21st century in the arts Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Wikipedia articles with style issues from March 2025 All articles with style issues This page was last edited on 22 May 2025, at 21:03 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Post-postmodernism 11 languages Add topic

