Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Writings Toggle Writings subsection 2.1 Other works 3 Notes 4 External links 5 References Toggle the table of contents Ibn Sa'id al-Maghribi 16 languages العربية Català Español فارسی Français Galego Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Kurdî 日本語 Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча پنجابی Português Русский Türkçe اردو Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Ibn Said al-Maghribi ) Arab geographer, historian and poet (1213–1286) Not to be confused with Said al-Andalusi .

Ibn Sa'id al-Maghribi Native name ابن سعيد المغربي Born 1213 Alcalá la Real , Granada , Al-Andalus Died 1286 Tunis Occupation Geographer, Historian, Poet Notable works Al-Mughrib fī ḥulā al-Maghrib (The Extraordinary Book on the Adornments of the West) Excerpt from the chapter about Villena in Al-Mugrib fī ḥulā al-Magrib , in which the poet Abū l-Hasan Rāshid ibn Sulaymān is mentioned.

Abū al-Ḥasan ʿAlī ibn Mūsā ibn Saʿīd al-Maghribī ( Arabic : علي بن موسى المغربي بن سعيد ) (1213–1286), [ 1 ] also known as Ibn Saʿīd al-Andalusī , [ 2 ] was an Arab [ 3 ] geographer, historian, poet, and the most important collector of poetry from al-Andalus in the 12th and 13th centuries.

Biography [ edit ] Ibn Said was born at Qal'a Benī Sa'īd (modern day Alcalá la Real) near Granada to a prominent family which was descended from the Companion of the Prophet Ammar ibn Yasir .

[ 4 ] Many of his family members were literary figures, [ 5 ] and grew up in Marrakesh . He subsequently studied in Seville and stayed in Tunis , Alexandria , Cairo , Jerusalem and Aleppo . At the age of 30, he undertook a pilgrimage to Mecca .

[ 6 ] He was also a close friend of the Muwallad poet Ibn Muqana al-Ushbuni [ es ] . His last years were spent in Tunis, and he died there in 1286.

[ 7 ] Writings [ edit ] Ibn Said al-Maghribi wrote or compiled 'at least forty works on various branches of knowledge'.

[ 8 ] Ibn Said's best known achievement was the completion of the fifteen-volume al-Mughrib fī ḥulā l-Maghrib ('The Extraordinary Book on the Adornments of the West'), which had been started over a century before by Abū Muḥammad al-Ḥijārī (1106–55) at the behest of Ibn Said's great-grandfather ‘Abd al-Malik. Abū Muḥammad al-Ḥijārī completed 6 volumes, ‘Abd al-Malik added to them; two of ‘Abd al-Malik's sons (Ibn Said's grandfather and great uncle) added more; Ibn Said's father worked on it further; and Ibn Said completed it.

[ 9 ] The work is also known as the Kitāb al-Mughrib ('book of the Maghrib'), and is midway between an anthology of poetry and a geography, collecting information on the poets of Maghreb organized by geographical origin.

[ 10 ] Part of the Mughrib circulated separately as Rāyāt al-mubarrizīn wa-ghāyāt al-mumayyazīn ( Banners of the Champions and the Standards of the Distinguished ), which Ibn Said compiled in Cairo, completing it on 21 June 1243 (641 by Islamic dating).

[ 11 ] It is, in the words of Louis Crompton , 'perhaps the most important' of the various medieval Andalucian poetry anthologies.

[ 12 ] 'His aim in compiling the collection seems to have been to show that poetry produced in the West was as good as anything the East had to offer (and that stuff by Ibn Sa'id and his family was especially good)'.

[ 13 ] Ibn Said's works that are probably preserved only fragmentarily, in quotation by others, include Al-Ṭāli‘ al-Sa‘ı̄d fı̄ Tārı̄kh Banı̄ Sa‘ı̄d , a history of the Banū Sa‘ı̄d.

[ 14 ] An example of Ibn Said's own poems, which he included in the Rāyāt al-mubarrizīn wa-ghāyāt al-mumayyazīn , is "Black horse with a white chest", with a recent translation being Cola Franzen 's translation into English of Gómez 's 1930 Spanish translation: [ 15 ] Other works [ edit ] المقتطف من أزاهر الطرف Notes [ edit ] ^ Fernandes, Maria Alice; Abdallah Khawli; Luís Fraga da Silva (2006-12-12).

"A viagem de Ibn Ammâr de São Brás a Silves" (PDF) (in Portuguese). Associação Campo Arqueológico de Tavira. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2008-11-20 . Retrieved 2007-12-16 .

^ Arberry, [transl. by] A.J. (2001).

Moorish poetry : a translation of the pennants, an anthology compiled in 1243 by the andalusian ibn sa'id (Repr. ed.). Surrey: Curzon.

ISBN 978-0-7007-1428-5 .

^ Hill, Richard Leslie (1967).

A Biographical Dictionary of the Sudan . Psychology Press.

ISBN 9780714610375 .

^ Ch., Pellat (24 April 2012).

"Ibn Saʿīd al-Mag̲h̲ribī" .

^ Rāyāt al-mubarrizīn wa-ghāyāt al-mumayyazīn/The Banners of the Champions: An Anthology of Medieval Arabic Poetry from Andalusia and Beyond , selected and translated by James A. Bellamy and Patricia Owen Steiner (Madison: Hispanic Seminary of Medieval Studies, 1989), p. xxii.

^ Rāyāt al-mubarrizīn wa-ghāyāt al-mumayyazīn/The Banners of the Champions: An Anthology of Medieval Arabic Poetry from Andalusia and Beyond , selected and translated by James A. Bellamy and Patricia Owen Steiner (Madison: Hispanic Seminary of Medieval Studies, 1989), p. xxii.

^ Rāyāt al-mubarrizīn wa-ghāyāt al-mumayyazīn/The Banners of the Champions: An Anthology of Medieval Arabic Poetry from Andalusia and Beyond , selected and translated by James A. Bellamy and Patricia Owen Steiner (Madison: Hispanic Seminary of Medieval Studies, 1989), p. xxii.

^ Rāyāt al-mubarrizīn wa-ghāyāt al-mumayyazīn/The Banners of the Champions: An Anthology of Medieval Arabic Poetry from Andalusia and Beyond , selected and translated by James A. Bellamy and Patricia Owen Steiner (Madison: Hispanic Seminary of Medieval Studies, 1989), p. xxi.

^ Rāyāt al-mubarrizīn wa-ghāyāt al-mumayyazīn/The Banners of the Champions: An Anthology of Medieval Arabic Poetry from Andalusia and Beyond , selected and translated by James A. Bellamy and Patricia Owen Steiner (Madison: Hispanic Seminary of Medieval Studies, 1989), p. xxi.

^ "Ibn Said: Book of the Maghrib, 13th Century" .

Internet Medieval Source Book . Fordham University Center for Medieval Studies . Retrieved 2007-12-16 .

^ Rāyāt al-mubarrizīn wa-ghāyāt al-mumayyazīn/The Banners of the Champions: An Anthology of Medieval Arabic Poetry from Andalusia and Beyond , selected and translated by James A. Bellamy and Patricia Owen Steiner (Madison: Hispanic Seminary of Medieval Studies, 1989), p. xxi.

^ Louis Crompton, 'Male Love and Islamic Law in Arab Spain', in Islamic Homosexualities: Culture, History, and Literature , ed. by Stephen O. Murray and Will Roscoe (New York: New York University Press, 1997), pp. 142-58 (at p. 154).

^ Robert Irwin, The Penguin Anthology of Classical Arabic Literature (Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1999), p. 301.

^ Marlé Hammond, 'He said "She said": Narrations of Women's Verse in Classical Arabic Literature. A Case Study: Nazhuūn's Hijā’ of Abū Bakr al-Makhzūmī', Middle Eastern Literatures , 6:1 (2003), 3-18 (p. 7).

doi : 10.1080/14752620306884 .

^ Gómez, translated by Cola Franzen from the Spanish versions of Emilio García (1989).

Poems of Arab Andalusia . San Francisco: City Lights Books. p. 69.

ISBN 978-0-87286-242-5 .

External links [ edit ] Geographia, in Arabic Excerpt from the Book of the Maghrib , in English Excerpt from Kitab al-Bast , in French. [ Relations de voyages et textes géographiques arabes, persans et turks relatifs à l’Extrême-Orient du VIIIe au XVIIIe siècles: traduits, revus, et annotés , tr. Gabriel Ferrand (Paris: E. Leroux, 1913), i, 316ff.] References [ edit ] Ali Ibn Musa Ibn Said al-Magribi und sein Werk al-Gusun al-yaniafi mahasin su ara al-miça as-sabia by M. Kropp, in: Islam (Der) Berlin, 1980, vol. 57, no. 1, pp. 68–96 (2p.) His history of the world and Islamic literature: ms. Escorial 1728. edition by Ibrahim al-Ibyari (2 vol.), Cairo 1968 Arberry, [transl. by] A.J. (2001).

Moorish poetry : a translation of the pennants, an anthology compiled in 1243 by the andalusian ibn sa'id (Repr. ed.). Surrey: Curzon.

ISBN 978-0-7007-1428-5 .

The Banners of the Champions of Ibn Said al-Maghribi , translated by James Bellamy and Patricia Steiner (Madison: Hispanic Seminary of Medieval Studies, 1988) v t e Geography and cartography in the medieval Islamic world Geographers 9th century Al-Khwarizmi Abu Hanifa Dinawari Ya'qubi Sulaiman al-Tajir 10th century Ibn Khordadbeh Ahmad ibn Rustah Ahmad ibn Fadlan Abu Zayd al-Balkhi Abu Muhammad al-Hasan al-Hamdani Al-Masudi Istakhri Khashkhash Ibn Saeed Ibn Aswad Ibn Hawqal Ibn al-Faqih Al-Muqaddasi Buzurg ibn Shahriyar Qudama ibn Ja'far 11th century Al-Biruni Abu Saʿīd Gardēzī Al-Bakri Mahmud al-Kashgari Domiyat 12th century al-Zuhri Muhammad al-Idrisi Abu'l Abbas al-Hijazi 13th century Ibn Jubayr Saadi Shirazi Yaqut al-Hamawi Ibn Said al-Maghribi Ibn al-Nafis Ibn al-Mujawir 14th century Al-Dimashqi Abu'l-Fida Ibn al-Wardi Hamdallah Mustawfi Ibn Battuta Lin Nu 15th century Abd-al-Razzāq Samarqandī Ghiyāth al-dīn Naqqāsh Ahmad ibn Mājid Zheng He Ma Huan Fei Xin 16th century Sulaiman Al Mahri Piri Reis Mir Ahmed Nasrallah Thattvi Amīn Rāzī 17th century Evliya Çelebi Works Book of Roads and Kingdoms (al-Bakrī) Book of Roads and Kingdoms (ibn Khordadbeh) Tabula Rogeriana Kitab al-Rawd al-Mitar Mu'jam Al-Buldan Rihla The Meadows of Gold Piri Reis map Kitab al-Kharaj Influences Geography (Ptolemy) Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Spain Netherlands Norway Sweden Vatican Israel Belgium People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ibn_Sa%27id_al-Maghribi&oldid=1274796369 " Categories : 1213 births 1286 deaths 13th-century Arab people Poets from al-Andalus 13th-century writers from al-Andalus Geographers from Al-Andalus 13th-century geographers Explorers of West Asia Hidden categories: CS1 Portuguese-language sources (pt) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Arabic-language text This page was last edited on 9 February 2025, at 08:52 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Ibn Sa'id al-Maghribi 16 languages Add topic

