Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Flows and temperature 2 Gyre contribution 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents North Pacific Current 27 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Беларуская Català Deutsch Eesti Español Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Italiano Қазақша मराठी Nederlands 日本語 Нохчийн Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ភាសាខ្មែរ Русский Svenska ไทย Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Ocean current, Japan to British Columbia The North Pacific Current.

The North Pacific Current (sometimes referred to as the North Pacific Drift) is an ocean current that flows west-to-east between 30 and 50 degrees north in the Pacific Ocean . The current forms the southern part of the North Pacific Subpolar Gyre and the northern part of the North Pacific Subtropical Gyre. The North Pacific Current is formed by the collision of the Kuroshio Current , running northward off the coast of Japan, and the Oyashio Current , which is a cold subarctic current that flows south and circulates counterclockwise along the western North Pacific Ocean. In the eastern North Pacific off southern British Columbia , it splits into the southward flowing cold water California Current and the northward flowing Alaska Current .

Flows and temperature [ edit ] Originating from the eastward directed flow occurring east of the island of Honshu, Japan, the North Pacific Current extends over 40° of longitude. According to the Great Soviet Encyclopedia, the NPC may be considered to be a part or an extension of the Kuroshio current. The current covers a large area and brings warmer water from the subtropics to the sub-polar latitudes. Average sea surface temperature along the NPC can range in the winter from 45 to 61 °F (7 to 16 °C) and in the summer months 64–74 °F (18–23 °C).

As it flows from west to east, the latitudinal extent of the NPC increases so much that it spans some 20 degrees of latitude east of the dateline. This is associated with a decrease in the speed of current; eastward directed speeds at the surface are typically less than 0.05 m/s (5 cm/s) in the central Pacific. As the NPC approaches the west coast of North America, it divides into two broad currents: the northward flowing Alaska Current and the southward flowing California Current. The splitting of flow is referred to as the bifurcation of the NPC.

The Gulf of Alaska and the California Current receive different volumes and flows of warm water from the North Pacific Current. The Gulf of Alaska receives about 60% of the flow of the NPC while the California Current receives the remaining 40%.

[ 1 ] These values may fluctuate, resulting in changes in the volume and the speed of the NPC water entering into the Alaska and California Currents.

Gyre contribution [ edit ] The NPC forms the northward portion of the North Pacific Subtropical Gyre . As the eastward flow of the Kuroshio, the flow of the NPC can lead to the transport of material from the western Pacific to the coast of North America. For example, some of the marine debris from the Japanese earthquake and tsunami of 2011 was transported by the NPC across the Pacific, leading to deposition of tsunami debris along the shores of Alaska, British Columbia, Washington and Oregon.

[ 2 ] References [ edit ] ^ Freeland, Howard J. (2006-12-01).

"What proportion of the north pacific current finds its way into the Gulf of Alaska?" .

Atmosphere-Ocean .

44 (4): 321– 330.

doi : 10.3137/ao.440401 .

ISSN 0705-5900 .

^ "Seventy-foot dock from Japan washes up in Oregon - CBS News" .

www.cbsnews.com . 2012-06-06 . Retrieved 2023-10-03 .

External links [ edit ] Quick Bulletin of Ocean Conditions around Japan [1] [2] [3] v t e Ocean currents and gyres Currents Arctic Ocean East Greenland North Icelandic Norwegian Transpolar Drift Stream Atlantic Ocean Angola Antilles Azores Baffin Island Benguela Brazil Canary Cape Horn Caribbean East Greenland East Iceland Falkland Florida Guinea Gulf Stream Irminger Labrador Lomonosov Loop North Atlantic North Brazil North Equatorial Norwegian Portugal South Atlantic South Equatorial West Greenland West Spitsbergen Indian Ocean Agulhas Agulhas Return East Madagascar Equatorial Counter Indian Monsoon Indonesian Throughflow Leeuwin Madagascar Mozambique North Madagascar Somali South Equatorial West Australian Pacific Ocean Alaska Aleutian California Cromwell Davidson East Australian East Korea Warm Equatorial Counter Humboldt Indonesian Throughflow Kamchatka Kuroshio Mindanao North Equatorial North Korea Cold North Pacific Oyashio South Equatorial Tasman Front Southern Ocean Antarctic Circumpolar Tasman Outflow Gyres Major gyres Indian Ocean Gyre North Atlantic Gyre South Atlantic Gyre North Pacific Gyre South Pacific Gyre Other gyres Beaufort Gyre Ross Gyre Weddell Gyre Related Atmospheric circulation Boundary current Coriolis force Ekman transport Marine debris Marine garbage patches Great Pacific Indian Ocean North Atlantic South Pacific Thermohaline circulation Environment portal Oceans portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=North_Pacific_Current&oldid=1292100577 " Category : Currents of the Pacific Ocean Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 25 May 2025, at 06:01 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents North Pacific Current 27 languages Add topic

