Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 History Toggle History subsection 2.1 Early history 2.2 Spanish colonization 2.3 Independence and nation building 2.4 20th century 2.4.1 Pinochet era (1973–1990) 2.5 21st century 3 Geography Toggle Geography subsection 3.1 Topography 3.2 Climate and hydrography 3.3 Biodiversity 4 Government and politics Toggle Government and politics subsection 4.1 Foreign relations 4.2 Military 4.3 Administrative divisions 4.4 National symbols 5 Economy Toggle Economy subsection 5.1 Mineral resources 5.2 Agriculture 5.3 Tourism 5.4 Transport 5.5 Internet and telecommunications 5.6 Energy 6 Demographics Toggle Demographics subsection 6.1 Ancestry and ethnicity 6.2 Urbanization 6.3 Religion 6.4 Languages 6.5 Health 6.6 Education 7 Culture Toggle Culture subsection 7.1 Music and dance 7.2 Literature 7.3 Cuisine 7.4 Folklore 7.5 Sports 7.6 Cultural heritage 8 See also 9 References Toggle References subsection 9.1 Notes 9.2 Citations 10 Further reading 11 External links Toggle the table of contents Chile 305 languages Acèh Адыгэбзэ Адыгабзэ Afrikaans Alemannisch አማርኛ Anarâškielâ अंगिका Ænglisc Аԥсшәа العربية Aragonés ܐܪܡܝܐ Արեւմտահայերէն Armãneashti Arpetan অসমীয়া Asturianu अवधी Avañe'ẽ Авар Aymar aru Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه Basa Bali Bamanankan বাংলা Banjar 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Basa Banyumasan Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) भोजपुरी Bikol Central Bislama Български Boarisch བོད་ཡིག Bosanski Brezhoneg Буряад Català Чӑвашла Cebuano Čeština Chamoru Chavacano de Zamboanga Chi-Chewa ChiShona ChiTumbuka Corsu Cymraeg Dansk الدارجة Davvisámegiella Deitsch Deutsch ދިވެހިބަސް Diné bizaad Dolnoserbski डोटेली ཇོང་ཁ Eesti Ελληνικά Emiliàn e rumagnòl Эрзянь Español Esperanto Estremeñu Euskara Eʋegbe فارسی Fiji Hindi Føroyskt Français Frysk Fulfulde Furlan Gaeilge Gaelg Gagauz Gàidhlig Galego 贛語 Gĩkũyũ گیلکی ગુજરાતી 𐌲𐌿𐍄𐌹𐍃𐌺 गोंयची कोंकणी / Gõychi Konknni 客家語 / Hak-kâ-ngî 한국어 Hausa Hawaiʻi Հայերեն हिन्दी Hornjoserbsce Hrvatski Ido Igbo Ilokano বিষ্ণুপ্রিয়া মণিপুরী Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Interlingue ᐃᓄᒃᑎᑐᑦ / inuktitut Iñupiatun Ирон IsiXhosa IsiZulu Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa Kabɩyɛ ಕನ್ನಡ Kapampangan Къарачай-малкъар ქართული Kaszëbsczi Қазақша Kernowek Ikinyarwanda Ikirundi Kiswahili Коми Kongo Kotava Kreyòl ayisyen Kriyòl gwiyannen Kurdî Кыргызча Кырык мары Ladin Ladino Лакку ລາວ Latgaļu Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Лезги Lietuvių Ligure Limburgs Lingála Lingua Franca Nova Livvinkarjala La .lojban.

Luganda Lombard Magyar Madhurâ मैथिली Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം Malti Māori मराठी მარგალური مصرى مازِرونی Bahasa Melayu ꯃꯤꯇꯩ ꯂꯣꯟ Minangkabau 閩東語 / Mìng-dĕ̤ng-ngṳ̄ Mirandés Мокшень Монгол မြန်မာဘာသာ Na Vosa Vakaviti Nederlands Nedersaksies नेपाली नेपाल भाषा 日本語 Napulitano Нохчийн Nordfriisk Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Nouormand Novial Occitan Олык марий Oromoo Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ पालि Pälzisch Pangasinan Pangcah پنجابی ပအိုဝ်ႏဘာႏသာႏ Papiamentu پښتو Patois Перем коми ភាសាខ្មែរ Picard Piemontèis Tok Pisin Plattdüütsch Polski Ποντιακά Português Qaraqalpaqsha Qırımtatarca Reo tahiti Ripoarisch Română Romani čhib Rumantsch Runa Simi Русиньскый Русский Саха тыла Sakizaya Gagana Samoa संस्कृतम् Sängö ᱥᱟᱱᱛᱟᱲᱤ Sardu Scots Seediq Seeltersk Sesotho Sesotho sa Leboa Setswana Shqip Sicilianu සිංහල Simple English سنڌي SiSwati Slovenčina Slovenščina Словѣньскъ / ⰔⰎⰑⰂⰡⰐⰠⰔⰍⰟ Ślůnski Soomaaliga کوردی Sranantongo Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Taclḥit Taqbaylit Tarandíne Татарча / tatarça တႆး Tayal తెలుగు Tetun ไทย ትግርኛ Тоҷикӣ Lea faka-Tonga ᏣᎳᎩ Tsetsêhestâhese Tshivenda ತುಳು Türkçe Türkmençe Twi Тыва дыл Удмурт Basa Ugi Українська اردو ئۇيغۇرچە / Uyghurche Vahcuengh Vèneto Vepsän kel’ Tiếng Việt Volapük Võro Walon Wayuunaiki 文言 West-Vlams Winaray Wolof 吴语 Xitsonga ייִדיש Yorùbá 粵語 Zazaki Zeêuws Žemaitėška 中文 Batak Toba Betawi Kadazandusun Ghanaian Pidgin Jaku Iban Yerwa Kanuri ꠍꠤꠟꠐꠤ Tolışi ⵜⴰⵎⴰⵣⵉⵖⵜ ⵜⴰⵏⴰⵡⴰⵢⵜ Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikinews Wikiquote Wikivoyage Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 34°S 71°W ﻿ / ﻿ 34°S 71°W ﻿ / -34; -71 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Country in South America This article is about the country. For other uses, see Chile (disambiguation) .

Republic of Chile República de Chile ( Spanish ) Flag Coat of arms Motto: Por la razón o la fuerza ("By reason or by force") Anthem: Himno Nacional de Chile ("National Anthem of Chile") Chilean territory in dark green; claimed but uncontrolled territory in light green Capital and largest city Santiago a 33°26′S 70°40′W ﻿ / ﻿ 33.433°S 70.667°W ﻿ / -33.433; -70.667 National language Spanish Religion (2024) [ 1 ] 70% Christianity 54% Catholicism 16% Protestantism 26% no religion 4% other Demonym(s) Chilean Government Unitary presidential republic • President Gabriel Boric • President of the Senate Manuel José Ossandón • President of the Chamber of Deputies José Miguel Castro • President of Supreme Court Juan Fuentes Belmar Legislature National Congress • Upper house Senate • Lower house Chamber of Deputies Independence from Spain • Government Junta 18 September 1810 • Declared 12 February 1818 • Recognized 25 April 1844 • Current constitution 11 March 1981 Area • Total 756,101.96 [ 2 ] [ 3 ] km 2 (291,932.60 sq mi) b ( 37th ) • Water (%) 2.1 (as of 2015) [ 4 ] Population • 2023 estimate 19,629,588 [ 5 ] ( 63rd ) • Density 24/km 2 (62.2/sq mi) ( 198th ) GDP ( PPP ) 2024 estimate • Total $674.388 billion [ 6 ] ( 45th ) • Per capita $33,574 [ 6 ] ( 64th ) GDP (nominal) 2024 estimate • Total $362.24 billion [ 7 ] ( 45th ) • Per capita $17,936 [ 7 ] ( 63rd ) Gini (2022) 44.8 [ 8 ] medium inequality HDI (2023) 0.878 [ 9 ] very high ( 45th ) Currency Chilean peso ( CLP ) Time zone UTC −3, −4, −6 ( CLST, CLT, EAST ) • Summer ( DST ) UTC −3, −5 ( CLST, EASST ) Magallanes and the Chilean Antarctica, and Aysén Region observes UTC−3 year-round.

Date format dd/mm/yyyy Calling code +56 ISO 3166 code CL Internet TLD .cl Legislature is based in Valparaíso .

Includes Easter Island and Isla Salas y Gómez ; does not include 1,250,000 square kilometres (480,000 sq mi) of territory claimed in Antarctica.

Chile , [ a ] officially the Republic of Chile , [ b ] is a country in western South America . It is the southernmost country in the world and the closest to Antarctica , stretching along a narrow strip of land between the Andes Mountains and the Pacific Ocean . Chile had a population of 17.5 million as of the latest census in 2017 and has a territorial area of 756,102 square kilometers (291,933 sq mi), [ 11 ] [ 3 ] sharing borders with Peru to the north, Bolivia to the northeast, Argentina to the east, and the Drake Passage to the south. The country also controls several Pacific islands, including Juan Fernández , Isla Salas y Gómez , Desventuradas , and Easter Island , and claims about 1,250,000 square kilometers (480,000 sq mi) of Antarctica as the Chilean Antarctic Territory .

[ nb 2 ] The capital and largest city of Chile is Santiago , and the national language is Spanish .

Spain conquered and colonized the region in the mid-16th century, replacing Inca rule ; however, they failed to conquer the autonomous tribal Mapuche people who inhabited what is now south-central Chile. Chile emerged as a relatively stable authoritarian republic in the 1830s after their 1818 declaration of independence from Spain . During the 19th century, Chile experienced significant economic and territorial growth, putting an end to Mapuche resistance in the 1880s and gaining its current northern territory in the War of the Pacific (1879–83) by defeating Peru and Bolivia. In the 20th century, up until the 1970s, Chile underwent a process of democratization [ 12 ] [ 13 ] and experienced rapid population growth and urbanization , [ 14 ] while relying increasingly on exports from copper mining to support its economy .

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] During the 1960s and 1970s, the country was marked by severe left-right political polarization and turmoil, which culminated in the 1973 Chilean coup d'état that overthrew Salvador Allende 's democratically elected left-wing government , with support from the United States . This was followed by a 16-year right-wing military dictatorship under Augusto Pinochet , in which the 1980 Chilean Constitution was made with the consultancy of the Ortúzar Commission [ 17 ] [ 18 ] as well as several political and economic reforms, [ 19 ] and resulted in more than 3,000 deaths or disappearances .

[ 20 ] The regime ended in 1990, following a referendum in 1988 , and was succeeded by a center-left coalition , which ruled until 2010.

Chile is a high-income economy and is one of the most economically and socially stable nations in South America.

[ 21 ] Chile also performs well in the region in terms of sustainability of the state and democratic development.

[ 22 ] Chile is a founding member of the United Nations , the Community of Latin American and Caribbean States (CELAC), and the Pacific Alliance , and joined the OECD in 2010.

Etymology There are various theories about the origin of the word Chile . According to 17th-century Spanish chronicler Diego de Rosales , [ 23 ] the Incas called the valley of the Aconcagua Chili by corruption of the name of a Picunche tribal chief ( cacique ) called Tili , who ruled the area at the time of the Incan conquest in the 15th century.

[ 24 ] [ 25 ] Another theory points to the similarity of the valley of the Aconcagua with that of the Casma Valley in Peru, where there was a town and valley named Chili .

[ 25 ] Other theories say Chile may derive its name from a Native American word meaning either 'ends of the earth' or 'sea gulls'; [ 26 ] from the Mapuche word chilli , which may mean 'where the land ends'" [ 27 ] or from the Quechua chiri , [ 28 ] 'cold', [ 29 ] or tchili , meaning either 'snow' [ 29 ] [ 30 ] or "the deepest point of the Earth".

[ 31 ] Another origin attributed to chilli is the onomatopoeic cheele-cheele —the Mapuche imitation of the warble of a bird locally known as trile .

[ 27 ] [ 32 ] The Spanish conquistadors heard about this name from the Incas, and the few survivors of Diego de Almagro 's first Spanish expedition south from Peru in 1535–36 called themselves the "men of Chilli".

[ 27 ] Ultimately, Almagro is credited with the universalization of the name Chile , after naming the Mapocho valley as such.

[ 25 ] The older spelling "Chili" was in use in English until the early 20th century before switching to "Chile".

[ 33 ] History Main article: History of Chile Early history See also: Prehispanic history of Chile and Origin of the Mapuche The Chinchorro mummies , the oldest of which are from around 5050 BCE Stone tool evidence indicates humans sporadically frequented the Monte Verde valley area as long as 18,500 years ago. About 10,000 years ago, migrating Indigenous peoples settled in fertile valleys and coastal areas of what is present-day Chile. Settlement sites from very early human habitation include Monte Verde, Cueva del Milodón and the Pali-Aike Crater 's lava tube .

[ 34 ] The Incas briefly extended their empire into what is now northern Chile, but the Mapuche (or Araucanians as they were known by the Spaniards) successfully resisted many attempts by the Inca Empire to subjugate them, despite their lack of state organization.

[ 35 ] They fought against the Sapa Inca Tupac Yupanqui and his army. The result of the bloody three-day confrontation known as the Battle of the Maule was that the Inca conquest of the territories of Chile ended at the Maule river .

[ 36 ] Spanish colonization Main articles: Conquest of Chile and Colonial Chile Kingdom of Chile in 1775 according to Chilean historiography. The next year the Viceroyalty of the Río de la Plata was created and the territories of the cities of Mendoza and San Juan got transferred from Chile to the new entity.

[ 37 ] [ 38 ] [ 39 ] [ 40 ] In 1520, while attempting to circumnavigate the globe, Ferdinand Magellan discovered the southern passage now named after him (the Strait of Magellan ) thus becoming the first European to set foot on what is now Chile. The next Europeans to reach Chile were Diego de Almagro and his band of Spanish conquistadors , who came from Peru in 1535 seeking gold. The Spanish encountered various cultures that supported themselves principally through slash-and-burn agriculture and hunting.

[ 36 ] The conquest of Chile began in earnest in 1540 and was carried out by Pedro de Valdivia , one of Francisco Pizarro 's lieutenants, who founded the city of Santiago on 12 February 1541. Although the Spanish did not find the extensive gold and silver they sought, they recognized the agricultural potential of Chile's central valley, and Chile became part of the Spanish Empire .

[ 36 ] Conquest took place gradually, and the Europeans suffered repeated setbacks. A massive Mapuche insurrection that began in 1553 resulted in Valdivia's death and the destruction of many of the colony's principal settlements. Subsequent major insurrections took place in 1598 and in 1655. Each time the Mapuche and other native groups revolted, the southern border of the colony was driven northward. The abolition of slavery by the Spanish crown in 1683 was done in recognition that enslaving the Mapuche intensified resistance rather than cowing them into submission. Despite royal prohibitions, relations remained strained from continual colonialist interference.

[ 41 ] [ verification needed ] Cut off to the north by desert, to the south by the Mapuche, to the east by the Andes Mountains, and to the west by the ocean, Chile became one of the most centralized, homogeneous territories in Spanish America. Serving as a sort of frontier garrison , the colony found itself with the mission of forestalling encroachment by both the Mapuche and Spain's European enemies, especially the English and the Dutch .

Buccaneers and pirates menaced the colony in addition to the Mapuche, as was shown by Sir Francis Drake 's 1578 raid on Valparaíso, the colony's principal port. Chile hosted one of the largest standing armies in the Americas, making it one of the most militarized of the Spanish possessions, as well as a drain on the treasury of the Viceroyalty of Peru .

[ 27 ] Pedro Lira 's 1888 painting of the founding of Santiago by Pedro de Valdivia at Huelén Hill The first general census was conducted by the government of Agustín de Jáuregui between 1777 and 1778; it indicated that the population consisted of 259,646 inhabitants: 73.5% of European descent , 7.9% mestizos , 8.6% indigenous peoples and 9.8% blacks. Francisco Hurtado, Governor of the province of Chiloé , conducted a census in 1784 and found the population consisted of 26,703 inhabitants, 64.4% of whom were whites and 33.5% of whom were natives. The Diocese of Concepción conducted a census in areas south of the Maule river in 1812, but did not include the indigenous population or the inhabitants of the province of Chiloé. The population was estimated at 210,567, 86.1% of whom were Spanish or of European descent, 10% of whom were indigenous and 3.7% of whom were mestizos, blacks and mulattos .

[ 42 ] A 2021 study by Baten and Llorca-Jaña shows that regions with a relatively high share of North European migrants developed faster in terms of numeracy , even if the overall number of migrants was small. This effect might be related to externalities : the surrounding population adopted a similar behavior as the small non-European immigrant group, and new schools were created. Ironically, there might have been positive spillover effects from the educational investment made by migrants, at the same time numeracy might have been reduced by the greater inequality in these regions. However, the positive effects of immigration were apparently stronger.

[ 43 ] Independence and nation building See also: Chilean War of Independence , War of the Pacific , and Argentine–Chilean naval arms race Generals José de San Martín (left) and Bernardo O'Higgins (right) during the crossing of the Andes In 1808, Napoleon 's enthronement of his brother Joseph as the Spanish King precipitated the drive by Chile for independence from Spain . A national junta in the name of Ferdinand – heir to the deposed king – was formed on 18 September 1810. The Government Junta of Chile proclaimed an autonomous government for Chile within the Spanish monarchy (in memory of this day, Chile celebrates its National Day on 18 September each year).

After these events, a movement for total independence, under the command of José Miguel Carrera (one of the most renowned patriots) and his two brothers Juan José and Luis Carrera , soon gained a wider following. Spanish attempts to re-impose arbitrary rule during what was called the Reconquista led to a prolonged struggle, including infighting from Bernardo O'Higgins , who challenged Carrera's leadership.

Intermittent warfare continued until 1817. With Carrera in prison in Argentina, O'Higgins and anti-Carrera cohort José de San Martín , hero of the Argentine War of Independence , led an army that crossed the Andes into Chile and defeated the royalists. On 12 February 1818, Chile was proclaimed an independent republic . The political revolt brought little social change, however, and 19th-century Chilean society preserved the essence of the stratified colonial social structure, which was greatly influenced by family politics and the Roman Catholic Church . A strong presidency eventually emerged, but wealthy landowners remained powerful.

[ 36 ] Bernardo O'Higgins once planned to expand Chile by liberating the Philippines from Spain and incorporating the islands. In this regard he tasked the Scottish naval officer, Lord Thomas Cochrane, in a letter dated 12 November 1821, expressing his plan to conquer Guayaquil , the Galapagos Islands , and the Philippines . There were preparations, but the plan did not push through because O'Higgins was exiled.

[ 44 ] The Battle of Iquique on 21 May 1879. The victory of Chile in the War of the Pacific allowed its expansion into new territories.

Chile slowly started to expand its influence and to establish its borders. By the Tantauco Treaty, the archipelago of Chiloé was incorporated in 1826. The economy began to boom due to the discovery of silver ore in Chañarcillo, and the growing trade of the port of Valparaíso, which led to conflict with Peru over maritime supremacy in the Pacific. At the same time, attempts were made to strengthen sovereignty in southern Chile intensifying penetration into Araucanía and colonizing Llanquihue with German immigrants in 1848. Through the founding of Fort Bulnes by the Schooner Ancud under the command of John Williams Wilson , the Magallanes Region started to be controlled by country in 1843 , while the Antofagasta Region , at the time in dispute with Bolivia , began to fill with people.

After the Chilean Civil War of 1829–1830 in which the conservatives won, under the Joaquín Prieto Administration, the Chilean Constitution of 1833 was written and put into effect with high influence from the triple minister Diego Portales . Two other civil wars happened in Chile in the 1850s, one in 1851 and the other one in 1859 .

Territorial losses of the Republic of Chile de jure (by law) according to Chilean historiography [ 45 ] Toward the end of the 19th century, the government in Santiago consolidated its position in the south by the Occupation of Araucanía . The Boundary treaty of 1881 between Chile and Argentina confirmed Chilean sovereignty over the Strait of Magellan but also made the country renounce its claims in the rest of East Patagonia after a dispute that started in 1842 .

[ 46 ] As a result of the War of the Pacific with Peru and Bolivia (1879–83), Chile expanded its territory northward by almost one-third, eliminating Bolivia's access to the Pacific, and acquired valuable nitrate deposits, the exploitation of which led to an era of national affluence. Chile had joined the stand as one of the high-income countries in South America by 1870.

[ 47 ] On 9 September 1888, Chile took possession of Easter Island by the signing of a mutual will agreement with the local king, thanks to the efforts of the Bishop of Tahiti, Monsignor José María Verdier since the island was constantly attacked by slave merchants. The naval officer Policarpo Toro represented the Chilean Government and Atamu Tekena was the head of the Council of Rapanui. The Rapa Nui elders ceded sovereignty, without renouncing their titles as chiefs, the ownership of their lands, the validity of their culture and traditions on equal terms. The Rapa Nui sold nothing and were integrated in equal conditions into Chile.

[ 48 ] The 1891 Chilean Civil War brought about a redistribution of power between the President and Congress, and Chile established a parliamentary style democracy. However, the Civil War had also been a contest between those who favored the development of local industries and powerful Chilean banking interests, particularly the House of Edwards which had strong ties to foreign investors. Soon after, the country engaged in a vastly expensive naval arms race with Argentina amid escalating geopolitical competition and the Puna de Atacama dispute .

The War of the Pacific (1879–1883) against Peru and Bolivia resulted in Chile annexing resource-rich territory from both countries and further consolidating its status as a regional power. It subsequently emerged as a leading naval power in the Americas, even sending a ship to protest United States involvement in the Panama crisis of 1885 . Chile potentially threatened U.S. hegemony in the Western Hemisphere, with the two countries almost going to war during the Baltimore crisis in 1891.

[ 49 ] 20th century See also: Parliamentary Era in Chile , 1960 Valdivia earthquake , and South American dreadnought race Chile's Almirante Latorre dreadnought in 1921 The early 20th century saw Chile fully consolidate its territory and resolve long-running diplomatic and territorial disputes. Its current borders with Argentina were finalized through British arbitration in 1902 and a bilateral settlement of the Puna de Atacama dispute the following year. In 1904, Chile and Bolivia signed a Treaty of Peace and Friendship which clarified the border between both countries.

The Chilean economy partially degenerated into a system protecting the interests of a ruling oligarchy . By the 1920s, the emerging middle and working classes were powerful enough to elect a reformist president, Arturo Alessandri , whose program was frustrated by a conservative congress. In the 1920s, Marxist groups with strong popular support arose.

[ 36 ] A military coup led by General Luis Altamirano in 1924 set off a period of political instability that lasted until 1932. Of the ten governments that held power in that period, the longest lasting was that of General Carlos Ibáñez del Campo , who briefly ruled as de facto dictator in 1925 and then again between 1927 and 1931. These authoritarian governments were comparatively less harsh and corrupt than counterparts elsewhere in Latin America.

[ 50 ] [ 51 ] By relinquishing power to a democratically elected successor, Ibáñez del Campo retained the respect of a large enough segment of the population to remain a viable politician for more than thirty years, in spite of the vague and shifting nature of his ideology. When constitutional rule was restored in 1932, a strong middle-class party, the Radicals, emerged. It became the key force in coalition governments for the next 20 years. During the period of Radical Party dominance (1932–52), the state increased its role in the economy. In 1952, voters returned Ibáñez del Campo to office for another six years.

Jorge Alessandri succeeded Ibáñez del Campo in 1958, bringing Chilean conservatism back into power democratically for another term.

The 1964 presidential election of Christian Democrat Eduardo Frei Montalva by an absolute majority initiated a period of major reform. Under the slogan "Revolution in Liberty", the Frei administration embarked on far-reaching social and economic programs, particularly in education, housing, and agrarian reform , including rural unionization of agricultural workers. By 1967, however, Frei encountered increasing opposition from leftists, who charged that his reforms were inadequate, and from conservatives, who found them excessive. At the end of his term, Frei had not fully achieved his party's ambitious goals.

[ 36 ] Salvador Allende In the 1970 election, Senator Salvador Allende of the Socialist Party of Chile (then part of the " Popular Unity " coalition which included the Communists, Radicals, Social-Democrats, dissident Christian Democrats, the Popular Unitary Action Movement, and the Independent Popular Action), [ 36 ] achieved a partial majority in a plurality of votes in a three-way contest, followed by candidates Radomiro Tomic for the Christian Democrat Party and Jorge Alessandri for the Conservative Party. Allende was not elected with an absolute majority, receiving fewer than 35% of the votes.

The Chilean Congress conducted a runoff vote between the leading candidates, Allende and former president Jorge Alessandri, and, keeping with tradition, chose Allende by a vote of 153 to 35. Frei refused to form an alliance with Alessandri to oppose Allende, on the grounds that the Christian Democrats were a workers' party and could not make common cause with the right wing.

[ 52 ] [ 53 ] An economic depression that began in 1972 was exacerbated by capital flight , plummeting private investment, and withdrawal of bank deposits in response to Allende's socialist program. Production fell and unemployment rose. Allende adopted measures including price freezes, wage increases, and tax reforms, to increase consumer spending and redistribute income downward.

[ 54 ] Joint public-private public works projects helped reduce unemployment.

[ 55 ] [ page needed ] Much of the banking sector was nationalized . Many enterprises within the copper , coal, iron, nitrate , and steel industries were expropriated , nationalized, or subjected to state intervention. Industrial output increased sharply and unemployment fell during the Allende administration's first year.

[ 55 ] Allende's program included advancement of workers' interests, [ 55 ] [ 56 ] replacing the judicial system with "socialist legality", [ 57 ] nationalization of banks and forcing others to bankruptcy, [ 57 ] and strengthening "popular militias" known as MIR.

[ 57 ] Started under former President Frei, the Popular Unity platform also called for nationalization of Chile's major copper mines in the form of a constitutional amendment. The measure was passed unanimously by Congress. As a result, [ 58 ] the Richard Nixon administration organized and inserted secret operatives in Chile, in order to swiftly destabilize Allende's government.

[ 59 ] In addition, US financial pressure restricted international economic credit to Chile.

[ 60 ] The economic problems were also exacerbated by Allende's public spending, financed mostly through printing money, and by poor credit ratings given by commercial banks.

[ 61 ] Simultaneously, opposition media, politicians, business guilds and other organizations helped to accelerate a campaign of domestic political and economical destabilization, some of which was backed by the United States.

[ 60 ] [ 62 ] By early 1973, inflation was out of control. On 26 May 1973, Chile's Supreme Court, which was opposed to Allende's government, unanimously denounced Allende's disruption of the legality of the nation . Although illegal under the Chilean constitution, the court supported and strengthened Pinochet's soon-to-be seizure of power.

[ 57 ] [ 63 ] Pinochet era (1973–1990) Main articles: Military government of Chile (1973–90) , Miracle of Chile , and Beagle conflict Fighter jets bombing the Presidential Palace of La Moneda during the Chilean coup of 1973 On 11 September 1973, a military coup overthrew Allende, who apparently committed suicide as the armed forces bombarded the presidential palace .

[ 64 ] [ 65 ] The degree to which the United States was involved in the coup remains debated; after Allende was overthrown, U.S. Secretary of State Henry Kissinger told U.S. president Richard Nixon that the United States had "helped" the coup indirectly.

[ 66 ] Historian Sebastián Hurtado contends there is no documentary evidence to support that the U.S. government was actively involved in the coordination and execution the coup; however, upon Allende's election in 1970, Kissinger had stated "I don't see why we need to stand by and watch a country go Communist due to the irresponsibility of its own people", [ 67 ] [ 68 ] while Nixon had expressed that the Allende government should not be consolidated and acted decisively to destabilize his government.

[ 68 ] [ 69 ] A military junta, led by General Augusto Pinochet , took control of the country. His regime was marked by widespread human rights violations . Chile initiated and actively participated in Operation Condor , a U.S.-backed campaign to suppress leftists and their sympathizers.

[ 70 ] In October 1973, at least 72 people were murdered by the Caravan of Death .

[ 71 ] According to the Rettig Report and Valech Commission , during the Pinochet regime's 15-year rule, at least 2,115 were killed, [ 72 ] and at least 27,265 [ 73 ] were tortured (including 88 children younger than 12 years old); [ 73 ] many were detained, tortured, and executed at the national stadium. In 2011, Chile recognized an additional 9,800 victims, bringing the total number killed, tortured or imprisoned for political reasons to 40,018.

[ 74 ] Among the victims was internationally known poet-singer Víctor Jara .

Augusto Pinochet A new Constitution was approved by a controversial plebiscite on 11 September 1980, and General Pinochet became president of the republic for an eight-year term. After Pinochet obtained rule of the country, several hundred committed Chilean revolutionaries joined the Sandinista army in Nicaragua , guerrilla forces in Argentina or training camps in Cuba , Eastern Europe and Northern Africa.

[ 75 ] In the late 1980s, largely as a result of events such as the 1982 economic collapse [ 76 ] and mass civil resistance in 1983–88, the government gradually permitted greater freedom of assembly, speech , and association, to include trade union and political activity.

[ 77 ] The government launched market-oriented reforms with Hernán Büchi as Minister of Finance. Chile moved toward a free market economy that saw an increase in domestic and foreign private investment, although the copper industry and other important mineral resources were not opened to competition. In a plebiscite on 5 October 1988, Pinochet was denied a second eight-year term as president (56% against 44%). Chileans elected a new president and the majority of members of a bicameral congress on 14 December 1989. Christian Democrat Patricio Aylwin , the candidate of a coalition of 17 political parties called the Concertación , received an absolute majority of votes (55%).

[ 78 ] President Aylwin served from 1990 to 1994, in what was considered a transition period.

21st century See also: 2010 Chile earthquake and 2019–20 Chilean protests The first five presidents of Chile since its Transition to democracy (1990–2022), celebrating the Bicentennial of Chile In December 1993, Christian Democrat Eduardo Frei Ruiz-Tagle , the son of previous president Eduardo Frei Montalva, led the Concertación coalition to victory with an absolute majority of votes (58%).

[ 79 ] Frei Ruiz-Tagle was succeeded in 2000 by Socialist Ricardo Lagos , who won the presidency in an unprecedented runoff election against Joaquín Lavín of the rightist Alliance for Chile .

[ 80 ] In January 2006, Chileans elected their first female president, Michelle Bachelet Jeria , of the Socialist Party, defeating Sebastián Piñera , of the National Renewal party, extending the Concertación governance for another four years.

[ 81 ] [ 82 ] In January 2010, Chileans elected Sebastián Piñera as the first rightist President in 20 years, defeating former President Eduardo Frei Ruiz-Tagle of the Concertación , for a four-year term succeeding Bachelet. Due to term limits, Sebastián Piñera did not stand for re-election in 2013, and his term expired in March 2014 resulting in Michelle Bachelet returning to office.

[ 83 ] Sebastián Piñera succeeded Bachelet again in 2018 as the President of Chile after winning the December 2017 presidential election .

[ 84 ] [ 85 ] On 27 February 2010, Chile was struck by an 8.8 M w earthquake , the fifth largest ever recorded at the time. More than 500 people died (most from the ensuing tsunami ) and over a million people lost their homes. The earthquake was also followed by multiple aftershocks.

[ 86 ] Initial damage estimates were in the range of US$15–30 billion, around 10% to 15% of Chile's real gross domestic product.

[ 87 ] Chile achieved global recognition for the successful rescue of 33 trapped miners in 2010. On 5 August 2010, the access tunnel collapsed at the San José copper and gold mine in the Atacama Desert near Copiapó in northern Chile, trapping 33 men 700 meters (2,300 ft) below ground. A rescue effort organized by the Chilean government located the miners 17 days later. All 33 men were brought to the surface two months later on 13 October 2010 over a period of almost 24 hours, an effort that was carried on live television around the world.

[ 88 ] View of the 2019–2022 Chilean protests towards Plaza Baquedano , Santiago From 2019 to 2022 , Chile endured a series of nationwide protests in response to a rise in the Santiago Metro 's subway fare, the increased cost of living , privatization , and inequality .

[ 89 ] On 15 November, most of the political parties represented in the National Congress signed an agreement to call a national referendum in April 2020 regarding the creation of a new Constitution, later postponed to October due to the COVID-19 pandemic .

[ 90 ] On 25 October 2020, Chileans voted 78.28 percent in favor of a new constitution, while 21.72 percent rejected the change; voter turnout was 51 percent. An election for the members of the Constitutional Convention was held in Chile between 15 and 16 May 2021; [ 91 ] the results saw a complete rearrangement of the political system established since the end of Pinochet's dictatorship in 1990, with various independent and leftist candidates performing strongly relative to conventional center-right and center-left parties.

On 19 December 2021, a leftist candidate, the 35-year-old former student protest leader Gabriel Boric , won Chile's presidential election to become the country's youngest leader.

[ 92 ] On 11 March 2022, Boric was sworn in as president to succeed outgoing President Sebastian Piñera.

[ 93 ] The majority of Boric's Cabinet—14 out of 24—are women, which is a first in the Western Hemisphere.

[ 94 ] On 4 September 2022, voters rejected the new constitution proposal in the constitutional referendum , which was put forward by the left-leaning Constitutional Convention .

[ 95 ] On 17 December 2023, voters rejected a second new constitution proposal in a new constitutional referendum , written by the conservative-led Constitutional Council .

[ 96 ] [ 97 ] [ 98 ] Geography Main article: Geography of Chile See also: Natural regions of Chile and Environmental issues in Chile Norte Grande Norte Chico Central Zone Southern Zone Austral Zone Natural regions of Chile A long and narrow coastal Southern Cone country on the west side of the Andes Mountains , Chile stretches over 4,300 km (2,670 mi) north to south, but only 350 km (217 mi) at its widest point east to west [ 99 ] and 64 km (40 mi) at its narrowest point east to west, with an average width of 175 km (109 mi). This encompasses a large variety of climates and landscapes. It contains 756,950 square kilometers (292,260 sq mi) of land area. It is situated within the Pacific Ring of Fire . Excluding its Pacific islands and Antarctic claim, Chile lies between latitudes 17° and 56°S , and longitudes 66° and 75°W .

Chile is among the longest north–south countries in the world. If one considers only mainland territory, Chile is unique within this group in its narrowness from east to west, with the other long north–south countries (including Brazil, Russia, Canada, and the United States, among others) all being wider from east to west by a factor of more than 10. Chile also claims 1,250,000 km 2 (480,000 sq mi) of Antarctica as part of its territory ( Chilean Antarctic Territory ). However, this latter claim is suspended under the terms of the Antarctic Treaty , of which Chile is a signatory.

[ 100 ] It is the world's southernmost country that is geographically on the mainland.

[ 101 ] Chile controls Easter Island and Sala y Gómez Island, the easternmost islands of Polynesia, which it incorporated to its territory in 1888, and the Juan Fernández Islands , more than 600 km (370 mi) from the mainland. Also controlled but only temporarily inhabited (by some local fishermen) are the small islands of San Ambrosio and San Felix . These islands are notable because they extend Chile's claim to territorial waters out from its coast into the Pacific Ocean.

[ 102 ] The northern Atacama Desert contains great mineral wealth, primarily copper and nitrates . The relatively small Central Valley, which includes Santiago, dominates the country in terms of population and agricultural resources. This area is also the historical center from which Chile expanded in the late 19th century when it integrated the northern and southern regions. Southern Chile is rich in forests, grazing lands, and features a string of volcanoes and lakes. The southern coast is a labyrinth of fjords, inlets, canals, twisting peninsulas, and islands. The Andes Mountains are located on the eastern border.

Topography Topographic map of Chile Chile is located along a highly seismic and volcanic zone, part of the Pacific Ring of Fire, due to the subduction of the Nazca and Antarctic plates in the South American Plate . In the late Paleozoic , 251 million years ago, Chile belonged to the continental block called Gondwana . It was just a depression that accumulated marine sediments began to rise at the end of the Mesozoic, 66 million years ago, due to the collision between the Nazca Plate and South American Plate, resulting in the Andes. The territory would be shaped over millions of years by the folding of the rocks, forming the current relief.

The Chilean relief consists of the central depression, which crosses the country longitudinally, flanked by two mountain ranges that make up about 80% of the territory: the Andes mountains to the east-natural border with Bolivia and Argentina in the region of Atacama and the Coastal Range west-minor height from the Andes. Chile's highest peak is the Nevado Ojos del Salado , at 6891.3 m, which is also the highest volcano in the world. The highest point of the Coastal Range is Vicuña Mackenna, at 3114 meters, located in the Sierra Vicuña Mackenna, the south of Antofagasta . Among the coastal mountains and the Pacific is a series of coastal plains, of variable length, which allow the settlement of coastal towns and big ports. Some areas of the plains territories encompass territory east of the Andes, and the Patagonian steppes and Magellan, or are high plateaus surrounded by high mountain ranges, such as the Altiplano or Puna de Atacama.

The Far North is the area between the northern boundary of the country and the parallel 26° S, covering the first three regions. It is characterized by the presence of the Atacama desert , the most arid in the world. The desert is fragmented by streams that originate in the area known as the pampas Tamarugal . The Andes, split in two and whose eastern arm runs through Bolivia , has a high altitude and volcanic activity, which has allowed the formation of the Andean altiplano and salt structures as the Salar de Atacama , due to the gradual accumulation of sediments over time.

To the south is the Norte Chico , extending to the Aconcagua river . Los Andes begin to decrease its altitude to the south and closer to the coast, reaching 90 km away at the height of Illapel , the narrowest part of the Chilean territory. The two mountain ranges intersect, virtually eliminating the intermediate depression. The existence of rivers flowing through the territory allows the formation of transverse valleys , where agriculture has developed strongly in recent times, while the coastal plains begin to expand.

Amalia Glacier , located in Bernardo O'Higgins National Park The Central area is the most populated region of the country. The coastal plains are wide and allow the establishment of cities and ports along the Pacific. The Andes maintain altitudes above 6000m but descend slowly in height to 4000 meters on average. The intermediate depression reappears becoming a fertile valley that allows agricultural development and human settlement, due to sediment accumulation. To the south, the Cordillera de la Costa reappears in the Cordillera de Nahuelbuta while glacial sediments create a series of lakes in the area of La Frontera .

Patagonia extends from within Reloncavi, at the height of parallel 41°S, to the south. During the last glaciation , this area was covered by ice that strongly eroded Chilean relief structures. As a result, the intermediate depression sinks in the sea, while the coastal mountains rise to a series of archipelagos, such as Chiloé and the Chonos , disappearing in Taitao peninsula, in the parallel 47°S. The Andes mountain range loses height and erosion caused by the action of glaciers has caused fjords . East of the Andes, on the continent, or north of it, on the island of Tierra del Fuego are located relatively flat plains, which in the Strait of Magellan cover large areas. The Andes, as he had done previously Cordillera de la Costa, begins to break in the ocean causing a myriad of islands and islets and disappear into it, sinking and reappearing in the Southern Antilles arc and then the Antarctic Peninsula, where it is called Antartandes, in the Chilean Antarctic Territory, lying between the meridians 53°W and 90°W.

In the middle of the Pacific, the country has sovereignty over several islands of volcanic origin, collectively known as Insular Chile. The archipelago of Juan Fernandez and Easter Island is located in the fracture zone between the Nazca plate and the Pacific plate known as East Pacific Rise.

Climate and hydrography Chile map of Köppen climate classification Main article: Climate of Chile The diverse climate of Chile ranges from the world's driest desert in the north—the Atacama Desert —through a Mediterranean climate in the center, tropical in Easter Island, [ 103 ] to an oceanic climate , including alpine tundra and glaciers in the east and south.

[ 20 ] According to the Köppen system , Chile within its borders hosts at least eighteen major climatic subtypes.

[ 104 ] There are four seasons in most of the country: summer (December to February), autumn (March to May), winter (June to August), and spring (September to November).

Due to the characteristics of the territory, Chile is crossed by numerous rivers generally short in length and with low flow rates. They commonly extend from the Andes to the Pacific Ocean, flowing from East to West. Because of the Atacama desert , in the Norte Grande there are only short endorheic character streams, except for the Loa River , the longest in the country 440 km.

[ 105 ] In the high valleys, wetland areas generate Chungará Lake , located at 4500 meters above sea level. It and the Lauca River are shared with Bolivia , as well as the Lluta River . In the center-north of the country, the number of rivers that form valleys of agricultural importance increases. Noteworthy are the Elqui with 75 km [ 105 ] long, 142 km Aconcagua, Maipo with 250 km [ 105 ] and its tributary, the Mapocho with 110 km, and Maule with 240 km. Their waters mainly flow from Andean snowmelt in the summer and winter rains. The major lakes in this area are the artificial lake Rapel, the Colbun Maule lagoon and the lagoon of La Laja.

Climate change is expected to alter the frequency and severity of various natural hazards in Chile, including wildfires, floods, landslides, droughts and rising sea levels. Key sectors vulnerable to climate change impacts include agriculture, fisheries, agriculture and water security.

[ 106 ] Biodiversity Main article: Wildlife of Chile Araucaria araucana trees in Conguillío National Park The flora and fauna of Chile are characterized by a high degree of endemism, due to its particular geography. In continental Chile, the Atacama Desert in the north and the Andes mountains to the east are barriers that have led to the isolation of flora and fauna. Add to that the enormous length of Chile (over 4,300 km (2,672 mi)) and this results in a wide range of climates and environments that can be divided into three general zones: the desert provinces of the north, central Chile, and the humid regions of the south.

The native flora of Chile consists of relatively fewer species compared to the flora of other South American countries. The northernmost coastal and central region is largely barren of vegetation, approaching the most absolute desert in the world.

[ 107 ] On the slopes of the Andes, in addition to the scattered tola desert brush, grasses are found. The central valley is characterized by several species of cacti, the hardy espinos , the Chilean pine , the southern beeches and the copihue , a red bell-shaped flower that is Chile's national flower.

[ 107 ] In southern Chile, south of the Biobío River, heavy precipitation has produced dense forests of laurels, magnolias, and various species of conifers and beeches, which become smaller and more stunted to the south.

[ 108 ] The cold temperatures and winds of the extreme south preclude heavy forestation. Grassland is found in East Magallanes Province and northern Tierra del Fuego (in Patagonia). Much of the Chilean flora is distinct from that of neighboring Argentina, indicating that the Andean barrier existed during its formation.

[ 108 ] Andean condor ( Vultur gryphus ), the national bird of Chile Some of Chile's flora has an Antarctic origin due to land bridges which formed during the Cretaceous ice ages, allowing plants to migrate from Antarctica to South America.

[ 109 ] Chile had a 2018 Forest Landscape Integrity Index mean score of 7.37/10, ranking it 43rd globally out of 172 countries.

[ 110 ] Just over 3,000 species of fungi are recorded in Chile, [ 111 ] [ 112 ] but this number is far from complete. The true total number of fungal species occurring in Chile is likely to be far higher, given the generally accepted estimate that only about 7 percent of all fungi worldwide have so far been discovered.

[ 113 ] Although the amount of available information is still very small, a first effort has been made to estimate the number of fungal species endemic to Chile, and 1995 species have been tentatively identified as possible endemics of the country.

[ 114 ] Chile's geographical isolation has restricted the immigration of faunal life so that only a few of the many distinctive South American animals are found. Among the larger mammals are the puma or cougar, the llama-like guanaco and the fox-like chilla . In the forest region, several types of marsupials and a small deer known as the pudu are found.

[ 107 ] There are many species of small birds, but most of the larger common Latin American types are absent. Few freshwater fish are native, but North American trout have been successfully introduced into the Andean lakes.

[ 107 ] Owing to the vicinity of the Humboldt Current, ocean waters abound with fish and other forms of marine life, which in turn support a rich variety of waterfowl, including several penguins. Whales are abundant, and some six species of seals are found in the area.

[ 107 ] Government and politics Main articles: Politics of Chile and Law of Chile See also: List of cities in Chile The Colonial Neoclassical Palacio de La Moneda in Santiago , built between 1784 and 1805, is the seat of the President of Chile.

National Congress of Chile in the port city of Valparaíso The Palace of Justice in Santiago The current Constitution of Chile was drafted by Jaime Guzmán in 1980 [ 115 ] and subsequently approved via a national plebiscite —regarded as "highly irregular" by some observers [ 27 ] —in September of that year, under the military dictatorship of Augusto Pinochet . It entered into force in March 1981. After Pinochet's defeat in the 1988 plebiscite , the constitution was amended to ease provisions for future amendments to the Constitution. In September 2005, President Ricardo Lagos signed into law several constitutional amendments passed by Congress. These include eliminating the positions of appointed senators and senators for life , granting the President authority to remove the commanders-in-chief of the armed forces, and reducing the presidential term from six to four years.

[ 116 ] Chile's judiciary is independent and includes a court of appeal, a system of military courts, a constitutional tribunal, and the Supreme Court of Chile . In June 2005, Chile completed a nationwide overhaul of its criminal justice system.

[ 117 ] The reform has replaced inquisitorial proceedings with an adversarial system with greater similarity to that of common law jurisdictions such as the United States.

For parliamentary elections, between 1989 and 2013 the binominal system was used, which promoted the establishment of two majority political blocs - Concertación and Alliance - at the expense of the exclusion of non-majority political groups. The opponents of this system approved in 2015 a moderate proportional electoral system that has been in force since the 2017 parliamentary elections, allowing the entry of new parties and coalitions. The Congress of Chile has a 50-seat Senate and a 155-member Chamber of Deputies . Senators serve for eight years with staggered terms, while deputies are elected every 4 years. The last congressional elections were held on 21 November 2021, concurrently with the presidential election. The Congress is located in the port city of Valparaíso , about 140 kilometers (90 miles) west of the capital, Santiago.

The main existing political coalitions in Chile are: Government : Apruebo Dignidad ( Approve Dignity ) is a left-wing coalition that has its origin in the 2021 Chilean Constitutional Convention election . After the success in that election, it held presidential primaries, in which Gabriel Boric ( CS , FA ) was the winner. It is formed by the coalition Frente Amplio ( Broad Front ) and the coalition Chile Digno ( Worthy Chile ) formed by the Communist Party of Chile and other left-wing parties.

Democratic Socialism is a center-left coalition, successor of the Constituent Unity coalition, itself a successor of the Concertation coalition – which supported the "NO" option in the 1988 plebiscite and subsequently governed the country from 1990 to 2010. This pact is formed by the Socialist , for Democracy , Radical , and Liberal parties.

Opposition: Chile Vamos ( Let's go Chile ) is a center-right coalition with roots of liberal conservatism, formed by the parties Renovación Nacional ( National Renewal ), Unión Demócrata Independiente ( Independent Democratic Union ) and Evópoli . It has its origins in the Alliance coalition, formed by the main parties that supported the "YES" option in the 1988 plebiscite , although it has used different names since then. It was the ruling coalition during the first and second government of Sebastián Piñera , (2010–2014) and (2018–2022).

In the National Congress, Chile Vamos has 52 deputies and 24 senators, while the parliamentary group of Apruebo Dignidad is formed by 37 deputies and 6 senators. Democratic Socialism is the third political force with 30 deputies and 13 senators. The other groups with parliamentary representation are the Republican Party (15 deputies and 1 senator), the Christian Democratic Party (8 deputies and 5 senators), the Party of the People (8 deputies) and the independents outside of a coalition (5 deputies and 1 senator).

Foreign relations Main article: Foreign relations of Chile State of Chile's international relations in the world: Chile Country with diplomatic relations and Chilean embassy in the country.

Country with diplomatic relations and an embassy in Chile, but no Chilean embassy.

Country with diplomatic relations but without ambassadors.

Country with no diplomatic relations currently.

Since the early decades after independence, Chile has always had an active involvement in foreign affairs. In 1837, the country aggressively challenged the dominance of Peru's port of Callao for preeminence in the Pacific trade routes, defeating the short-lived alliance between Peru and Bolivia, the Peru–Bolivian Confederation (1836–39) in the War of the Confederation . The war dissolved the confederation while distributing power in the Pacific. A second international war, the War of the Pacific (1879–83), further increased Chile's regional role, while adding considerably to its territory.

[ 27 ] During the 19th century, Chile's commercial ties were primarily with Britain, which helped shape the Chilean navy. France influenced Chile's legal and educational systems, with French style architecture dominating the capital in the boom years at the turn of the 20th century. German influence came from the organization and training of the army by Prussians .

[ 27 ] Since the late 19th century, Chilean military and foreign policy has been shaped by the maximum neighbor hypothesis , which holds that in the event of a conflict with a neighbor, the other two would join against Chile.

[ 118 ] [ 119 ] [ 120 ] [ 121 ] [ 122 ] [ 123 ] This consideration has led to Chile historically pursuing a strong military deterrence; balanced bilateral relations with neighbors; and strong ties with countries outside the region.

On 26 June 1945, Chile participated as a founding member of the United Nations being among 50 countries that signed the United Nations Charter in San Francisco, California.

[ 124 ] [ 125 ] With the military coup of 1973, Chile became isolated politically as a result of widespread human rights abuses.

[ 27 ] Since its return to democracy in 1990, Chile has been an active participant in the international political arena. Chile completed a two-year non-permanent position on the UN Security Council in January 2005. Jose Miguel Insulza, a Chilean national, was elected Secretary General of the Organization of American States in May 2005 and confirmed in his position, being re-elected in 2009. Chile is currently serving on the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) Board of Governors, and the 2007–2008 chair of the board is Chile's ambassador to the IAEA, Milenko E. Skoknic. The country is an active member of the UN family of agencies and participates in UN peacekeeping activities. It was re-elected as a member of the UN Human Rights Council in 2011 for a three-year term.

[ 126 ] It was also elected to one of five non-permanent seats on the UN Security Council in 2013.

[ 127 ] Chile hosted the Defense Ministerial of the Americas in 2002 and the APEC summit and related meetings in 2004. It also hosted the Community of Democracies ministerial in April 2005 and the Ibero-American Summit in November 2007. An associate member of Mercosur and a full member of APEC, Chile has been a major player in international economic issues and hemispheric free trade.

[ 36 ] Military Main article: Military of Chile Karel Doorman-class frigate of Chilean Navy F-16 Fighting Falcon of Chilean Air Force The Armed Forces of Chile are subject to civilian control exercised by the president through the Minister of Defense. The president has the authority to remove the commanders-in-chief of the armed forces.

[ 36 ] The commander-in-chief of the Chilean Army is Army General Javier Iturriaga del Campo . The Chilean Army is 45,000 strong and is organized with an Army headquarters in Santiago, six divisions throughout its territory, an Air Brigade in Rancagua , and a Special Forces Command in Colina . The Chilean Army is one of the most professional and technologically advanced armies in Latin America.

[ 36 ] Admiral Julio Leiva Molina directs the around 25,000-person Chilean Navy , [ 128 ] including 2,500 Marines. Of the fleet of 29 surface vessels, only eight are operational major combatants (frigates). Those ships are based in Valparaíso .

[ 129 ] The Navy operates its own aircraft for transport and patrol; there are no Navy fighter or bomber aircraft. The Navy also operates four submarines based in Talcahuano .

[ 36 ] [ 130 ] Air Force General (four-star) Jorge Rojas Ávila heads the 12,500-strong Chilean Air Force . Air assets are distributed among five air brigades headquartered in Iquique, Antofagasta, Santiago, Puerto Montt, and Punta Arenas. The Air Force also operates an airbase on King George Island , Antarctica. The Air Force took delivery of the final two of ten F-16s, all purchased from the U.S., in March 2007 after several decades of U.S. debate and previous refusal to sell. Chile also took delivery in 2007 of a number of reconditioned Block 15 F-16s from the Netherlands, bringing to 18 the total of F-16s purchased from the Dutch.

[ 36 ] After the military coup in September 1973, the Chilean national police (Carabineros) were incorporated into the Defense Ministry. With the return of democratic government, the police were placed under the operational control of the Interior Ministry but remained under the nominal control of the Defense Ministry. Gen. Gustavo González Jure is the head of the national police force of 40,964 [ 131 ] men and women who are responsible for law enforcement, traffic management, narcotics suppression, border control, and counter-terrorism throughout Chile.

[ 36 ] In 2017, Chile signed the UN treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons .

[ 132 ] Chile is the 64th most peaceful country in the world, according to the 2024 Global Peace Index .

[ 133 ] Administrative divisions Main article: Administrative divisions of Chile In 1978 Chile was administratively divided into regions , [ 134 ] and in 1979 subdivided into provinces and these into communes.

[ 135 ] [ 136 ] The country has 16 regions , [ 137 ] [ 138 ] 56 provinces and 348 communes .

[ 139 ] Each region was designated by a name and a Roman numeral assigned from north to south, except for the Santiago Metropolitan Region , which did not have a number. The creation of two new regions in 2007, Arica and Parinacota (XV) and Los Ríos (XIV), and a third region in 2018, Ñuble (XVI) made this numbering lose its original order meaning.

Map of Regions of Chile Administrative divisions of Chile Region [ 134 ] [ 137 ] [ 138 ] Population [ 11 ] Area (km 2 ) [ 2 ] Density Capital Arica y Parinacota 224,548 16,873.3 13.40 Arica Tarapacá 324,930 42,225.8 7.83 Iquique Antofagasta 599,335 126,049.1 4.82 Antofagasta Atacama 285,363 75,176.2 3.81 Copiapó Coquimbo 742,178 40,579.9 18.67 La Serena Valparaíso 1,790,219 16,396.1 110.75 Valparaíso Santiago Metropolitan 7,036,792 15,403.2 461.77 Santiago Libertador General Bernardo O'Higgins 908,545 16,387 54.96 Rancagua Maule 1,033,197 30,296.1 34.49 Talca Ñuble 480,609 13,178.5 36.47 Chillán Biobío 1,556,805 23,890.2 112.08 Concepción Araucanía 938,626 31,842.3 30.06 Temuco Los Ríos 380,181 18,429.5 20.88 Valdivia Los Lagos 823,204 48,583.6 17.06 Puerto Montt Aysén del General Carlos Ibáñez del Campo 102,317 108,494.4 0.95 Coyhaique Magallanes and Chilean Antarctica 165,593 132,297.2 (1) 1.26 Punta Arenas Chile 17,373,831 756,102.4 (2) 23.24 Santiago (1) Including the Chilean Antarctic Territory, its surface reaches 1,382,554.8 km 2 (2) Including the Chilean Antarctic Territory, its surface reaches 2,006,360 km 2 National symbols The national flower is the copihue ( Lapageria rosea , Chilean bellflower ), which grows in the woods of southern Chile.

The coat of arms depicts the two national animals: the condor ( Vultur gryphus , a very large bird that lives in the mountains) and the huemul ( Hippocamelus bisulcus, an endangered white tail deer). It also has the legend Por la razón o la fuerza ( By reason or by force ).

The flag of Chile consists of two equal horizontal bands of white (top) and red; there is a blue square the same height as the white band at the hoist-side end of the white band; the square bears a white five-pointed star in the center representing a guide to progress and honor; blue symbolizes the sky, white is for the snow-covered Andes, and red stands for the blood spilled to achieve independence. The flag of Chile is similar to the Flag of Texas , although the Chilean flag is 21 years older. However, like the Texan flag, the flag of Chile is modeled after the flag of the United States .

[ 140 ] Economy This section needs to be updated .

Please help update this article to reflect recent events or newly available information.

( May 2025 ) Main article: Economy of Chile Santiago Stock Exchange The Central Bank of Chile in Santiago serves as the central bank for the country. The Chilean currency is the Chilean peso (CLP). Chile is one of South America's most stable and prosperous nations, [ 20 ] leading Latin American nations in human development , competitiveness, globalization, economic freedom, and low perception of corruption.

[ 21 ] Since July 2013, Chile is considered by the World Bank as a " high-income economy ".

[ 141 ] [ 142 ] [ 143 ] The think tank The Heritage Foundation states that Chile has the highest degree of economic freedom in South America (ranking 22nd worldwide), owing to its independent and efficient judicial system and prudent public finance management.

[ 144 ] In May 2010 Chile became the first South American country to join the OECD .

[ 145 ] In 2006, Chile became the country with the highest nominal GDP per capita in Latin America.

[ 146 ] As of 2020, Chile ranks third in Latin America (behind Uruguay and Panama) in nominal GDP per capita.

Copper mining makes up 20% of Chilean GDP and 60% of exports.

[ 147 ] Escondida is the largest copper mine in the world, producing over 5% of global supplies.

[ 147 ] Overall, Chile produces a third of the world's copper.

[ 147 ] Codelco , the state mining firm, competes with private copper mining companies.

[ 147 ] Sound economic policies, maintained consistently since the 1980s, have contributed to steady economic growth in Chile and have more than halved poverty rates.

[ 148 ] [ 36 ] Chile began to experience a moderate economic downturn in 1999. The economy remained sluggish until 2003, when it began to show clear signs of recovery, achieving 4.0% GDP growth.

[ 149 ] The Chilean economy finished 2004 with growth of 6%. Real GDP growth reached 5.7% in 2005 before falling back to 4% in 2006. GDP expanded by 5% in 2007.

[ 36 ] Faced with the 2008 financial crisis , the government announced an economic stimulus plan to spur employment and growth, and despite the Great Recession , aimed for an expansion of between 2% and 3% of GDP for 2009. Nonetheless, economic analysts disagreed with government estimates and predicted economic growth at a median of 1.5%.

[ 150 ] Real GDP growth in 2012 was 5.5%. Growth slowed to 4.1% in the first quarter of 2013.

[ 151 ] Gran Torre Costanera and Titanium La Portada (background) skyscrapers in Sanhattan The unemployment rate was 7.8% in 2022, according to The World Bank .

[ 152 ] There are reported labor shortages in agriculture, mining, and construction.

[ 151 ] The percentage of Chileans with per capita household incomes below the poverty line—defined as twice the cost of satisfying a person's minimal nutritional needs—fell from 45.1% in 1987 to 11.5% in 2009, according to government surveys.

[ 153 ] [ 154 ] Critics in Chile, however, argue that true poverty figures are considerably higher than those officially published.

[ 155 ] Using the relative yardstick favoured in many European countries, 27% of Chileans would be poor, according to Juan Carlos Feres of the ECLAC .

[ 156 ] As of November 2012 [update] , about 11.1 million people (64% of the population) benefit from government welfare programs, [ 157 ] [ clarification needed ] via the "Social Protection Card", which includes the population living in poverty and those at a risk of falling into poverty.

[ 158 ] The privatized national pension system (AFP) has encouraged domestic investment and contributed to an estimated total domestic savings rate of approximately 21% of GDP.

[ 159 ] Under the compulsory private pension system, most formal sector employees pay 10% of their salaries into privately managed funds.

[ 36 ] Chile has signed free trade agreements (FTAs) with a whole network of countries, including an FTA with the United States that was signed in 2003 and implemented in January 2004.

[ 160 ] Internal Government of Chile figures show that even when factoring out inflation and the recent high price of copper, bilateral trade between the U.S. and Chile has grown over 60% since then.

[ 36 ] Chile's total trade with China reached US$8.8 billion in 2006, representing nearly 66% of the value of its trade relationship with Asia.

[ 36 ] Exports to Asia increased from US$15.2 billion in 2005 to US$19.7 billion in 2006, a 29.9% increase.

[ 36 ] Year-on-year growth of imports was especially strong from a number of countries: Ecuador (123.9%), Thailand (72.1%), South Korea (52.6%), and China (36.9%).

[ 36 ] Chile's approach to foreign direct investment is codified in the country's Foreign Investment Law. Registration is reported to be simple and transparent, and foreign investors are guaranteed access to the official foreign exchange market to repatriate their profits and capital.

[ 36 ] The Chilean Government has formed a Council on Innovation and Competition, hoping to bring in additional FDI to new parts of the economy.

[ 36 ] Standard & Poor's gives Chile a credit rating of A.

[ 161 ] The Government of Chile continues to pay down its foreign debt, with public debt only 3.9% of GDP at the end of 2006.

[ 36 ] The Chilean central government is a net creditor with a net asset position of 7% of GDP at end 2012.

[ 151 ] The current account deficit was 4% in the first quarter of 2013, financed mostly by foreign direct investment.

[ 151 ] 14% of central government revenue came directly from copper in 2012.

[ 151 ] Chile was ranked 1st in the Global Innovation Index in 2024.

[ 162 ] Mineral resources Chuquicamata , the largest open pit copper mine in the world Chile is rich in mineral resources, especially copper and lithium. It is thought that due to the importance of lithium for batteries for electric vehicles and stabilization of electric grids with large proportions of intermittent renewables in the electricity mix, Chile could be strengthened geopolitically. However, this perspective has also been criticized for underestimating the power of economic incentives for expanded production in other parts of the world.

[ 163 ] The country was, in 2019, the world's largest producer of copper , [ 164 ] iodine [ 165 ] and rhenium , [ 166 ] the second largest producer of lithium [ 167 ] and molybdenum , [ 168 ] the sixth largest producer of silver , [ 169 ] the seventh largest producer of salt , [ 170 ] the eighth largest producer of potash , [ 171 ] the thirteenth producer of sulfur [ 172 ] and the thirteenth producer of iron ore [ 173 ] in the world. In 2023, it was fourth largest silver producer globally.

[ 174 ] The country also has considerable gold production: between 2006 and 2017, the country produced annual amounts ranging from 35.9 tonnes in 2017 to 51.3 tonnes in 2013, [ 175 ] where the gold production in 2015 is 43 metric tonnes.

[ 176 ] Agriculture Main article: Agriculture in Chile Vineyard in Puente Alto Agriculture in Chile encompasses a wide range of different activities due to its particular geography , climate and geology and human factors. Historically agriculture is one of the bases of Chile's economy. Now agriculture and allied sectors like forestry , logging and fishing account for only 4.9% of the GDP as of 2007 [update] and employ 13.6% of the country's labor force. Chile is one of the 5 largest world producers of cherry and blueberry , and one of the 10 largest world producers of grape , apple , kiwi , peach , plum and hazelnut , focusing on exporting high-value fruits.

[ 177 ] Some other major agriculture products of Chile include pears , onions , wheat , maize , oats , garlic , asparagus , beans , beef , poultry , wool , fish , timber and hemp . Due to its geographical isolation and strict customs policies Chile is free from diseases and pests such as mad cow disease , fruit fly and Phylloxera . This, its location in the Southern Hemisphere , which has quite different harvesting times from the Northern Hemisphere , and its wide range of agriculture conditions are considered Chile's main comparative advantages. However, Chile's mountainous landscape limits the extent and intensity of agriculture so that arable land corresponds only to 2.62% of the total territory. Chile currently utilizes 14,015 Hectares of agricultural land.

[ 178 ] Chile is the world's second largest producer of salmon , after Norway. In 2019, it was responsible for 26% of the global supply.

[ 179 ] In wine , Chile is usually among the 10 largest producers in the world. In 2018 it was in 6th place.

[ 180 ] Tourism Main article: Tourism in Chile Valparaíso city, a UNESCO World Heritage Site Torres del Paine National Park in Chilean Patagonia Pre-Columbian Moais , human figures dated between 1250 and 1500 in the Easter Island Tourism in Chile has experienced sustained growth over the last few decades. In 2005, tourism grew by 13.6%, generating more than 4.5 billion dollars of which 1.5 billion was attributed to foreign tourists. According to the National Service of Tourism (Sernatur), 2 million people a year visit the country. Most of these visitors come from other countries in the American continent, mainly Argentina ; followed by a growing number from the United States, Europe, and Brazil with a growing number of Asians from South Korea and China.

[ 181 ] The main attractions for tourists are places of natural beauty situated in the extreme zones of the country: San Pedro de Atacama , in the north, is very popular with foreign tourists who arrive to admire the Incaic architecture, the altiplano lakes, and the Valley of the Moon .

[ citation needed ] In Putre , also in the north, there is the Chungará Lake , as well as the Parinacota and the Pomerape volcanoes, with altitudes of 6,348 m and 6,282 m, respectively. Throughout the central Andes there are many ski resorts of international repute, [ citation needed ] including Portillo , Valle Nevado and Termas de Chillán .

The main tourist sites in the south are national parks (the most popular is Conguillío National Park in the Araucanía) [ 182 ] and the coastal area around Tirúa and Cañete with the Isla Mocha and the Nahuelbuta National Park , Chiloé Archipelago and Patagonia , which includes Laguna San Rafael National Park , with its many glaciers, and the Torres del Paine National Park . The central port city of Valparaíso , which is World Heritage with its unique architecture, is also popular.

[ 183 ] Finally, Easter Island in the Pacific Ocean is one of the main Chilean tourist destinations.

For locals, tourism is concentrated mostly in the summer (December to March), and mainly in the coastal beach towns.

[ 184 ] Arica , Iquique , Antofagasta , La Serena and Coquimbo are the main summer centers in the north, and Pucón on the shores of Lake Villarrica is the main center in the south. Because of its proximity to Santiago, the coast of the Valparaíso Region, with its many beach resorts, receives the largest number of tourists.

Viña del Mar , Valparaíso's more affluent northern neighbor, is popular because of its beaches, casino , and its annual song festival , the most important musical event in Latin America.

[ citation needed ] Pichilemu in the O'Higgins Region is widely known as South America's "best surfing spot" according to Fodor's .

[ citation needed ] In November 2005 the government launched a campaign under the brand "Chile: All Ways Surprising" intended to promote the country internationally for both business and tourism.

[ 185 ] Museums in Chile such as the Chilean National Museum of Fine Arts built in 1880, feature works by Chilean artists .

Chile is home to the world-renowned Patagonian Trail that resides on the border between Argentina and Chile. Chile recently launched a massive scenic route for tourism in hopes of encouraging development based on conservation. The Route of Parks covers 1,740 miles (2,800 km) and was designed by Tompkin Conservation (founders Douglas Tompkins and wife Kristine ).

[ 186 ] Transport Main article: Transport in Chile Route 68 at the junction with Route 60 Due to Chile's topography a functioning transport network is vital to its economy. In 2020, Chile had 85,984 km (53,428 mi) of highways , with 21,289 km (13,228 mi) paved.

[ 187 ] In the same year, the country had 3,347 km (2,080 mi) of duplicated highways , the second largest network in South America, after Brazil.

[ 188 ] Since the mid-1990s, there has been a significant improvement in the country's roads, through bidding processes that allowed the construction of an efficient road network, with emphasis on the duplication of continuous 1,950 km (1,212 mi) of the Panamerican Highway ( Chile Route 5 ) between Puerto Montt and Caldera (in addition to the planned duplication in the Atacama Desert area), [ 189 ] the excerpts in between Santiago, Valparaiso and the Central Coast, and the northern access to Concepción and the large project of the Santiago urban highways network, opened between 2004 and 2006.

[ 190 ] Buses are now the main means of long-distance transportation in Chile, following the decline of its railway network.

[ 191 ] The bus system covers the entire country, from Arica to Santiago (a 30-hour journey) and from Santiago to Punta Arenas (about 40 hours, with a change at Osorno ).

Chile has a total of 372 runways (62 paved and 310 unpaved). Important airports in Chile include Chacalluta International Airport ( Arica ), Diego Aracena International Airport ( Iquique ), Andrés Sabella Gálvez International Airport ( Antofagasta ), Carriel Sur International Airport ( Concepción ), El Tepual International Airport ( Puerto Montt ), Presidente Carlos Ibáñez del Campo International Airport ( Punta Arenas ), La Araucanía International Airport ( Temuco ), Mataveri International Airport ( Easter Island ), the most remote airport in the world, as defined by distance to another airport, and the Arturo Merino Benítez International Airport ( Santiago ) with a traffic of 12,105,524 passengers in 2011. Santiago is headquarters of Latin America's largest airline holding company and Chilean flag carrier LATAM Airlines .

Internet and telecommunications Torre Entel in Santiago de Chile , with the Andes mountains in the background Chile has a telecommunication system which covers much of the country, including Chilean insular and Antarctic bases. Privatization of the telephone system began in 1988; Chile has one of the most advanced telecommunications infrastructure in South America with a modern system based on extensive microwave radio relay facilities and a domestic satellite system with 3 earth stations.

[ 148 ] In 2012, there were 3.276 million main lines in use and 24.13 million mobile cellular telephone subscribers.

[ 148 ] According to a 2012 database of the International Telecommunication Union (ITU), 61.42% of the Chilean population uses the internet, making Chile the country with the highest internet penetration in South America.

[ 192 ] The Chilean internet country code is " .cl ".

[ 193 ] In 2017 the government of Chile launched its first cyber security strategy, which receives technical support from the Organization of American States (OAS) Cyber Security Program of the Inter-American Committee against Terrorism (CICTE).

[ 194 ] Energy Main article: Energy in Chile Wind farm near Canela, Chile Chile's total energy supply (TES) was 23.0GJ per capita in 2020.

[ 195 ] Energy in Chile is dominated by fossil fuels, with coal, oil and gas accounting for 73.4% of the total primary energy. Biofuels and waste account for another 20.5% of primary energy supply, with the rest sourced from hydro and other renewables.

[ 195 ] Electricity consumption was 68.90 TWh in 2014. Main sources of electricity in Chile are hydroelectricity , gas , oil and coal .

Renewable energy in the forms of wind and solar energy are also coming into use, encouraged by collaboration since 2009 with the United States Department of Energy . The electricity industry is privatized with ENDESA as the largest company in the field.

In 2021, Chile had, in terms of installed renewable electricity, 6,807 MW in hydropower (28th largest in the world), 3,137 MW in wind power (28th largest in the world), 4,468 MW in solar (22nd largest in the world), and 375 MW in biomass.

[ 196 ] As the Atacama Desert has the highest solar irradiation in the world, and Chile has always had problems obtaining oil, gas and coal (the country basically does not produce them, so it has to import them), renewable energy is seen as the solution for the country's shortcomings in the energy field.

[ 197 ] [ 198 ] In 2023 Chile emitted 107.99 million tonnes of greenhouse gases , equivalent to around 0.2% of the global total.

[ 199 ] In recent years Chile has emerged as a global leader in clean energy, particularly solar and wind.

[ 200 ] and has committed to net zero by 2050. According to Climate Action Tracker, the nation is making "considerable progress" in climate action by expanding renewables and phasing-out coal.

[ 201 ] Demographics Main article: Demographics of Chile Chile's 2017 census reported a population of 17,574,003. Its rate of population growth has been decreasing since 1990, due to a declining birth rate .

[ 202 ] By 2050 the population is expected to reach approximately 20.2 million people.

[ 203 ] Ancestry and ethnicity Main articles: Indigenous peoples in Chile and Immigration to Chile Racial groups in Chile (2024 census) [ 1 ] Undeclared (87.7%) Indigenous (11.4%) Blacks (0.94%) Mapuche women of Tirúa Chileans with flags of Chile Mexican professor Francisco Lizcano, of the National Autonomous University of Mexico , estimated that 52.7% of Chileans were white, 39.3% were mestizo , and 8% were Amerindian .

[ 204 ] According to the Encyclopædia Britannica , as of the year 2002, only 22% of Chileans were white and 72% were mestizo.

[ 205 ] In 1984, a study from the Revista de Pediatría de Chile titled Sociogenetic Reference Framework for Public Health Studies in Chile determined an ancestry of 67.9% European, and 32.1% Native American.

[ 206 ] [ 207 ] In 1994, a biological study determined that the Chilean composition was 64% European and 35% Amerindian.

[ 208 ] The recent study in the Candela Project establishes that the genetic composition of Chile is 52% of European origin, with 44% of the genome coming from Native Americans (Amerindians), and 4% coming from Africa, making Chile a primarily mestizo country with traces of African descent present in half of the population.

[ 209 ] Another genetic study conducted by the University of Brasília in several South American countries shows a similar genetic composition for Chile, with a European contribution of 51.6%, an Amerindian contribution of 42.1%, and an African contribution of 6.3%.

[ 210 ] In 2015, another study established genetic composition in 57% European, 38% Native American, and 2.5% African.

[ 211 ] A public health booklet from the University of Chile states that 30% of the population is of Caucasian origin; "predominantly White" Mestizos are estimated to amount to a total of 65%, while Native Americans (Amerindians) comprise the remaining 5%.

[ 212 ] Despite the genetic considerations, many Chileans, if asked, would self-identify as White. The 2011 Latinobarómetro survey asked respondents in Chile what race they considered themselves to belong to. Most answered "White" (59%), while 25% said "Mestizo" and 8% self-classified as "indigenous".

[ 213 ] A 2002 national poll revealed that a majority of Chileans believed they possessed some (43.4%) or much (8.3%) "indigenous blood", while 40.3% responded that they had none.

[ 214 ] Chile is one of 22 countries to have signed and ratified the only binding international law concerning indigenous peoples, the Indigenous and Tribal Peoples Convention, 1989 .

[ 215 ] It was adopted in 1989 as the International Labour Organization (ILO) Convention 169. Chile ratified it in 2008. A Chilean court decision in November 2009, considered to be a landmark ruling on indigenous rights, made use of the convention. The Supreme Court decision on Aymara water rights upheld rulings by both the Pozo Almonte tribunal and the Iquique Court of Appeals and marks the first judicial application of ILO Convention 169 in Chile.

[ 216 ] The earliest European immigrants were Spanish colonizers who arrived in the 16th century.

[ 217 ] The Amerindian population of central Chile was absorbed into the Spanish settler population in the beginning of the colonial period to form the large mestizo population that exists in Chile today; mestizos create modern middle and lower classes. In the 18th and 19th centuries, many Basques came to Chile where they integrated into the existing elites of Castilian origin. Postcolonial Chile was never a particularly attractive destination for migrants, owing to its remoteness and distance from Europe.

[ 218 ] [ 219 ] Europeans preferred to stay in countries closer to their homelands instead of taking the long journey through the Straits of Magellan or crossing the Andes.

[ 218 ] European migration did not result in a significant change in the ethnic composition of Chile, except in the region of Magellan .

[ 220 ] Spaniards were the only major European migrant group to Chile, [ 218 ] and there was never large-scale immigration such as that to Argentina or Brazil.

[ 219 ] Between 1851 and 1924, Chile only received 0.5% of European immigration to Latin America, compared to 46% to Argentina, 33% to Brazil, 14% to Cuba, and 4% to Uruguay.

[ 218 ] However, it is undeniable that immigrants have played a significant role in Chilean society.

[ 219 ] Immigrants to Chile during the 19th and 20th centuries came from France, [ 221 ] Great Britain , [ 222 ] Germany, [ 223 ] and Croatia , [ 224 ] among others. Descendants of different European ethnic groups often intermarried in Chile. This intermarriage and mixture of cultures and races have helped to shape the present society and culture of the Chilean middle and upper classes.

[ 225 ] Also, roughly 500,000 of Chile's population is of full or partial Palestinian origin , [ 226 ] [ 227 ] and 800,000 Arab descents.

[ 228 ] Chile currently has 1.5 million of Latin American immigrants, mainly from Venezuela , Peru , Haiti , Colombia , Bolivia and Argentina ; 8% of the total population in 2019, without counting descendants.

[ 229 ] [ 230 ] According to the 2002 national census, Chile's foreign-born population has increased by 75% since 1992.

[ 231 ] As of November 2021, numbers of people entering Chile from elsewhere in Latin America have grown swiftly in the last decade, tripling in the last three years to 1.5 million, with arrivals stemming from humanitarian crises in Haiti (ca. 180,000) and Venezuela (ca 460,000).

[ 232 ] Urbanization About 85% of the country's population lives in urban areas, with 40% living in Greater Santiago . The largest agglomerations according to the 2002 census are Greater Santiago with 5.6 million people, Greater Concepción with 861,000
and Greater Valparaíso with 824,000.

[ 233 ] v t e Largest cities or towns in Chile 2002 Census [ 234 ] Rank Name Region Pop.

1 Santiago Metropolis Santiago Metropolitan Region 5,428,590 2 Greater Valparaíso Valparaíso Region 803,683 3 Greater Concepción Biobío Region 666,381 4 Greater La Serena Coquimbo Region 296,253 5 Antofagasta Antofagasta Region 285,255 6 Greater Temuco Araucanía Region 260,878 7 Rancagua conurbation O'Higgins Region 236,363 8 Talca Maule Region 191,154 9 Arica Arica and Parinacota Region 175,441 10 Chillán conurbation Ñuble Region 165,528 Religion Main article: Religion in Chile Religious background in Chile (2024 Census) [ 1 ] [ 235 ] Religion Percent Catholic Church 53.7% No religion 25.7% Protestantism 16.2% Others 3.8% Unspecified 0.6% Santiago Metropolitan Cathedral , built between 1748 and 1906 Church of Santa María de Loreto of Achao , built in the 18th century and now a UNESCO World Heritage site Historically, the indigenous peoples in Chile observed a variety of religions before the Spanish conquest in the 16th century. During Spanish rule and the first century of Chilean independence, the Catholic Church was one of the most powerful institutions in the country. In the late 19th century, liberal policies (the so-called Leyes laicas or "lay laws") started to reduce the influence of the clergy and the promulgation of a new Constitution in 1925 established the separation of church and state .

[ 236 ] As of 2012 [update] , 66.6% [ 237 ] of Chilean population over 15 years of age claimed to adhere to the Catholic Church, a decrease from the 70% [ 238 ] reported in the 2002 census. In the same census of 2012, 17% of Chileans reported adherence to an Evangelical church ("Evangelical" in the census referred to all Christian denominations other than the Catholic and Orthodox —Greek, Persian, Serbian, Ukrainian, and Armenian—churches, the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints , Seventh-day Adventists , and Jehovah's Witnesses : essentially, those denominations generally still termed " Protestant " in most English-speaking lands, although Adventism is often considered an Evangelical denomination as well). Approximately 90% of Evangelical Christians are Pentecostal . but Wesleyan , Lutheran , Anglican , Episcopalian , Presbyterian , other Reformed , Baptist , and Methodist churches also are present amongst Chilean Evangelical churches.

[ 239 ] Irreligious people, atheists, and agnostics account for around 12% of the population.

By 2015, the major religion in Chile remained Christianity (68%), with an estimated 55% of Chileans belonging to the Catholic Church, 13% to various Evangelical churches, and just 7% adhering to any other religion. Agnostics and atheist were estimated at 25% of the population.

[ 240 ] According to the 2024 census, 53.7% of Chileans aged 15 years or older were Catholics, 25.7% had no religion, 16.2% were Protestants, and 3.8% professed another religion.

[ 1 ] Chile has a Baháʼí religious community, and is home to the Baháʼí mother temple, or continental House of Worship , for Latin America. Completed in 2016, it serves as a space for people of all religions and backgrounds to gather, meditate, reflect, and worship.

[ 241 ] It is formed from cast glass and translucent marble and has been described as innovative in its architectural style.

[ 242 ] The Constitution guarantees the right to freedom of religion , and other laws and policies contribute to generally free religious practice. The law at all levels fully protects this right against abuse by either governmental or private actors.

[ 239 ] Church and state are officially separate in Chile. A 1999 law on religion prohibits religious discrimination . 
However, the Roman Catholic church for mostly historical and social reasons enjoys a privileged status and occasionally receives preferential treatment.

[ 243 ] Government officials attend Roman Catholic events as well as major Evangelical and Jewish ceremonies.

[ 239 ] The Chilean government treats the religious holidays of Christmas, Good Friday , the Feast of the Virgin of Carmen , the Feast of Saints Peter and Paul , the Feast of the Assumption , All Saints' Day , and the Feast of the Immaculate Conception as national holidays .

[ 239 ] Recently, the government declared 31 October, Reformation Day , to be an additional national holiday, in honor of the Evangelical churches of the country.

[ 244 ] [ 245 ] The patron saints of Chile are Our Lady of Mount Carmel and Saint James the Greater ( Santiago ).

[ 246 ] In 2005, Pope Benedict XVI canonized Alberto Hurtado , who became the country's second native Roman Catholic saint after Teresa de los Andes .

[ 247 ] Languages Main article: Languages of Chile Chilean proverb written in Mapuche language and Chilean Spanish . The Mapudungun alphabet used here does not reflect an agreed-upon standard. In fact, there are three distinct alphabets currently used to write the Mapuche language.

[ 248 ] The Spanish spoken in Chile is distinctively accented and quite unlike that of neighboring South American countries because final syllables are often dropped, and some consonants have a soft pronunciation.

[ clarification needed ] Accent varies only very slightly from north to south; more noticeable are the differences in accent based on social class or whether one lives in the city or the country. That the Chilean population was largely formed in a small section at the center of the country and then migrated in modest numbers to the north and south helps explain this relative lack of differentiation, which was maintained by the national reach of radio, and now television, which also helps to diffuse and homogenize colloquial expressions.

[ 36 ] There are several indigenous languages spoken in Chile: Mapudungun , Aymara , Rapa Nui , Chilean Sign Language and (barely surviving) Qawasqar and Yaghan , along with non-indigenous German, Italian, English, Greek and Quechua . After the Spanish conquest, Spanish took over as the lingua franca and the indigenous languages have become minority languages, with some now extinct or close to extinction.

[ 249 ] German is still spoken to some extent in southern Chile, [ 250 ] either in small countryside pockets or as a second language among the communities of larger cities.

Through initiatives such as the English Opens Doors Program , the government made English mandatory for students in fifth grade and above in public schools. Most private schools in Chile start teaching English from kindergarten.

[ 251 ] Common English words have been absorbed and appropriated into everyday Spanish speech.

[ 252 ] Health Main article: Healthcare in Chile Card of National Health Fund ( Fonasa ) The Ministry of Health ( Minsal ) is the cabinet-level administrative office in charge of planning, directing, coordinating, executing, controlling and informing the public health policies formulated by the President of Chile. The National Health Fund ( Fonasa ), created in 1979, is the financial entity entrusted to collect, manage and distribute state funds for health in Chile. It is funded by the public. All employees pay 7% of their monthly income to the fund.

[ 253 ] Fonasa is part of the NHSS and has executive power through the Ministry of Health (Chile) . Its headquarters are in Santiago and decentralized public service is conducted by various Regional Offices. More than 12 million beneficiaries benefit from Fonasa. Beneficiaries can also opt for more costly private insurance through Isapre .

In the 2024 Global Hunger Index, Chile is one of 22 countries with a GHI score of less than 5.

[ 254 ] Education Main articles: Education in Chile and List of universities in Chile Casa Central of the University of Chile in Santiago In Chile, education begins with preschool until the age of 5.

Primary school is provided for children between ages 6 and 13. Students then attend secondary school until graduation at age 17.

Secondary education is divided into two parts: During the first two years, students receive a general education. Then, they choose a branch: scientific humanistic education, artistic education, or technical and professional education. Secondary school ends two years later on the acquirement of a certificate (licencia de enseñanza media).

[ 255 ] Chilean education is segregated by wealth in a three-tiered system – the quality of the schools reflects socioeconomic backgrounds: city schools (colegios municipales) that are mostly free and have the worst education results, mostly attended by poor students; subsidized schools that receive some money from the government which can be supplemented by fees paid by the student's family, which are attended by mid-income students and typically get mid-level results; and entirely private schools that consistently get the best results. Many private schools charge attendance fees of 0,5 to 1 median household income.

[ 256 ] Upon successful graduation of secondary school, students may continue into higher education . The higher education schools in Chile consist of Chilean Traditional Universities and are divided into public universities or private universities . There are medical schools and both the Universidad de Chile and Universidad Diego Portales offer law schools in a partnership with Yale University .

[ 257 ] Culture Main articles: Culture of Chile , Music of Chile , and Chilean cuisine La Zamacueca , 1873, by Manuel Antonio Caro From the period between early agricultural settlements and up to the late pre-Columbian period, northern Chile was a region of Andean culture that was influenced by altiplano traditions spreading to the coastal valleys of the north, while southern regions were areas of Mapuche cultural activities. Throughout the colonial period following the conquest, and during the early Republican period, the country's culture was dominated by the Spanish. Other European influences, primarily English, French, and German began in the 19th century and have continued to this day. German migrants influenced the Bavarian style rural architecture and cuisine in the south of Chile in cities such as Valdivia , Frutillar , Puerto Varas , Osorno , Temuco , Puerto Octay , Llanquihue , Faja Maisan , Pitrufquén , Victoria , Pucón and Puerto Montt .

[ 258 ] [ 259 ] [ 260 ] [ 261 ] Music and dance Los Jaivas , one of the most recognized Chilean rock bands Music in Chile ranges from folkloric, popular and classical music. Its large geography generates different musical styles in the north, center and south of the country, including also Easter Island and Mapuche music.

[ 262 ] The national dance is the cueca . Another form of traditional Chilean song, though not a dance, is the tonada . Arising from music imported by the Spanish colonists, it is distinguished from the cueca by an intermediate melodic section and a more prominent melody.

From the 1950s to the 1970s, native folk musical forms were revitalized with the Nueva canción chilena movement led by composers such as Violeta Parra , Raúl de Ramón and Pedro Messone , which was also associated with political activists and reformers such as Víctor Jara , Inti-Illimani , and Quilapayún . Also, many Chilean rock bands like Los Jaivas , Los Prisioneros , La Ley , Los Tres and Los Bunkers have reached international success, some incorporating strong folk influences, such as Los Jaivas. In February, annual music and comedy festivals are held in Viña del Mar .

[ 263 ] Literature Pablo Neruda and Gabriela Mistral , Nobel Prize recipients in literature Chile is a country of poets .

[ 264 ] Gabriela Mistral was the first Latin American to receive a Nobel Prize in Literature (1945). Chile's most famous poet is Pablo Neruda , who received the Nobel Prize for Literature (1971) and is world-renowned for his extensive library of works on romance, nature, and politics. His three highly personalized homes in Isla Negra , Santiago and Valparaíso are popular tourist destinations.

Among the list of other Chilean poets are Carlos Pezoa Véliz , Vicente Huidobro , Gonzalo Rojas , Pablo de Rokha , Nicanor Parra , Ivonne Coñuecar and Raúl Zurita .

Isabel Allende is the best-selling Chilean novelist, with 51 million of her novels sold worldwide.

[ 265 ] Novelist José Donoso 's novel The Obscene Bird of Night is considered by critic Harold Bloom to be one of the canonical works of 20th-century Western literature. Another internationally recognized Chilean novelist and poet is Roberto Bolaño whose translations into English have had an excellent reception from the critics.

[ 266 ] [ 267 ] [ 268 ] Cuisine Chilean asado (barbecue) and marraqueta Chilean cuisine is a reflection of the country's topographical variety, featuring an assortment of seafood, beef, fruits, and vegetables. Traditional recipes include asado , cazuela , empanadas , humitas , pastel de choclo , pastel de papas, curanto , and sopaipillas .

[ 269 ] Crudos is an example of the mixture of culinary contributions from the various ethnic influences in Chile. The raw minced llama , heavy use of shellfish, and rice bread were taken from native Quechua Andean cuisine, (although beef, brought to Chile by Europeans, is also used in place of the llama meat), lemon and onions were brought by the Spanish colonists, and the use of mayonnaise and yogurt was introduced by German immigrants, as was beer .

Folklore Main article: Chilean mythology The folklore of Chile, cultural and demographic characteristics of the country, is the result of the mixture of Spanish and Amerindian elements that occurred during the colonial period. Due to cultural and historical reasons, they are classified and distinguished four major areas in the country: northern areas, central, southern and south. Most of the traditions of the culture of Chile have a festive purpose, but some, such as dances and ceremonies, have religious components.

[ 270 ] Chilean mythology is the mythology and beliefs of the Folklore of Chile. This includes Chilote mythology , Rapa Nui mythology and Mapuche mythology .

Sports Main article: Sport in Chile Estadio Nacional Julio Martínez Prádanos Chile's most popular sport is association football . Chile has appeared in nine FIFA World Cups which includes hosting the 1962 FIFA World Cup where the national football team finished third. Other results achieved by the national football team include two Copa América titles (2015 and 2016 ), two runners-up positions, one silver and two bronze medals at the Pan American Games , a bronze medal at the 2000 Summer Olympics and two third places finishes in the FIFA under-17 and under-20 youth tournaments. The top league in the Chilean football league system is the Chilean Primera División , which is named by the IFFHS as the ninth strongest national football league in the world.

[ 271 ] The main football clubs are Colo-Colo , Universidad de Chile and Universidad Católica . Colo-Colo is the country's most successful football club, having both the most national and international championships, including the coveted Copa Libertadores South American club tournament. Universidad de Chile was the last international champion ( Copa Sudamericana 2011).

Tennis is Chile's most successful sport. Its national team won the World Team Cup clay tournament twice (2003 & 2004), and played the Davis Cup final against Italy in 1976. At the 2004 Summer Olympics the country captured gold and bronze in men's singles and gold in men's doubles ( Nicolás Massú obtained two gold medals).

Marcelo Ríos became the first Latin American man to reach the number one spot in the ATP singles rankings in 1998.

Anita Lizana won the US Open in 1937, becoming the first woman from Latin America to win a Grand Slam tournament.

Luis Ayala was twice a runner-up at the French Open and both Ríos and Fernando González reached the Australian Open men's singles finals. González also won a silver medal in singles at the 2008 Summer Olympics in Beijing.

At the Summer Olympic Games Chile boasts a total of two gold medals (tennis), seven silver medals (athletics, equestrian , boxing , shooting and tennis) and four bronze medals (tennis, boxing and football). In 2012, Chile won its first Paralympic Games medal (gold in Athletics).

The Chilean national polo team with President Michelle Bachelet and the trophy of the 2015 World Polo Championship Rodeo is the country's national sport and is practiced in the more rural areas of the nation. A sport similar to hockey called chueca was played by the Mapuche people during the Spanish conquest.

Skiing and snowboarding are practiced at ski centers located in the Central Andes, and in southern ski centers near to cities as Osorno, Puerto Varas, Temuco and Punta Arenas.

Surfing is popular at some coastal towns.

Polo is professionally practiced within Chile, with the country achieving top prize in the 2008 and 2015 World Polo Championship .

Basketball is a popular sport in which Chile earned a bronze medal in the first men's FIBA World Championship held in 1950 and won a second bronze medal when Chile hosted the 1959 FIBA World Championship . Chile hosted the first FIBA World Championship for Women in 1953 finishing the tournament with the silver medal.

San Pedro de Atacama is host to the annual "Atacama Crossing", a six-stage, 250-kilometer (160 mi) footrace which annually attracts about 150 competitors from 35 countries. The Dakar Rally off-road automobile race has been held in both Chile and Argentina since 2009.

Cultural heritage Sewell Mining Town The cultural heritage of Chile consists, first, of its intangible heritage, composed of various cultural events and activities, such as visual arts, crafts, dances, holidays, cuisine, games, music and traditions. Secondly, its tangible heritage consists of those buildings, objects and sites of archaeological, architectural, traditional, artistic, ethnographic, folkloric, historical, religious or technological significance scattered through Chilean territory. Among them, some are declared World Heritage Sites by UNESCO , in accordance with the provisions of the Convention concerning the Protection of World Cultural and Natural Heritage of 1972, ratified by Chile in 1980. These cultural sites are the Rapa Nui National Park (1995), the Churches of Chiloé (2000), the historical district of the port city of Valparaíso (2003), Humberstone and Santa Laura Saltpeter Works (2005) and the mining city Sewell (2006).

In 1999 Cultural Heritage Day was established as a way to honour and commemorate Chile's cultural heritage. It is an official national event celebrated in May every year.

[ 272 ] See also Chile portal Latin America portal Index of Chile-related articles Outline of Chile References Notes ^ In Chilean Spanish , pronunciation ranges from [ˈʃile] ~ [ˈt͡ʃiːle] on a spectrum from lower to upper classes, respectively, the former being a somewhat-stigmatized basilect . See the " Sample " section for an IPA -transcribed text in a lower-class form of the dialect.

^ Since 1961, all claims to Antarctic land are de jure suspended under the Antarctic Treaty System ^ / ˈ tʃ ɪ l i / ⓘ CHIL -ee or / ˈ tʃ ɪ l eɪ / CHIL -ay , [ 10 ] Spanish: [ˈtʃile] ), [ nb 1 ] ^ Spanish: República de Chile [reˈpuβlika ðe ˈtʃile] ⓘ .

Citations ^ a b c d "Estadísticas" .

National Statistics Institute (in Spanish). 30 June 2025 . Retrieved 2 August 2025 .

^ a b "Compendio estadístico 2006" (PDF) . Instituto Nacional de Estadísticas. October 2006.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022 . Retrieved 29 November 2007 .

^ a b "Chile country profile" .

BBC News . 17 October 2023.

Archived from the original on 11 April 2023 . Retrieved 17 October 2023 .

^ "Surface water and surface water change" .

Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD).

Archived from the original on 24 March 2021 . Retrieved 11 October 2020 .

^ "Our World in Data" .

Archived from the original on 12 January 2024 . Retrieved 11 January 2024 .

^ a b "World Economic Outlook Database, October 2024 Edition. (Chile)" .

International Monetary Fund . 10 October 2024.

Archived from the original on 10 December 2024 . Retrieved 9 November 2024 .

^ a b "Report for Selected Countries and Subjects" .

IMF .

^ "Inequality – Income inequality" .

OECD .

Archived from the original on 1 July 2022 . Retrieved 25 July 2021 .

^ "Human Development Report 2025" (PDF) .

United Nations Development Programme . 6 May 2025.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 6 May 2025 . Retrieved 6 May 2025 .

^ Wells, John C.

(2008).

Longman Pronunciation Dictionary (3rd ed.). Longman.

ISBN 978-1-4058-8118-0 .

^ a b "Resutados Censo 2017" (PDF) .

National Statistics Institute . 1 January 2018.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022 . Retrieved 18 January 2017 .

^ "Elecciones, sufragio y democracia en Chile (1810–2012)" .

Memoria Chilena (in Spanish).

National Library of Chile .

Archived from the original on 6 June 2021 . Retrieved 20 June 2021 .

^ "Sufragio femenino universal" .

Memoria Chilena (in Spanish).

National Library of Chile .

Archived from the original on 27 June 2021 . Retrieved 20 June 2021 .

^ "Desarrollo y dinámica de la población en el siglo XX" .

Memoria Chilena (in Spanish).

National Library of Chile .

Archived from the original on 11 July 2021 . Retrieved 20 June 2021 .

^ Salazar, Gabriel ; Pinto, Julio (2002).

Historia contemporánea de Chile III. La economía: mercados empresarios y trabajadores.

LOM Ediciones .

[ ISBN missing ] . Pages 124–125.

^ Villalobos, Sergio ; Silva, Osvaldo ; Silva, Fernando; Estelle, Patricio (1974).

Historia De Chile (14th ed.).

Editorial Universitaria .

ISBN 956-11-1163-2 . Pages 773–775.

^ "Cómo se construyó la Constitución de 1980" . Pauta. 30 November 2019.

Archived from the original on 12 January 2025 . Retrieved 12 January 2025 .

^ "History of our constitutions" . Government of Chile.

Archived from the original on 24 July 2024 . Retrieved 12 January 2025 .

^ Ffrench-Davis, Ricardo (2002).

Economic reforms in Chile: from dictatorship to democracy . Ann Arbor, Mich: Univ. of Michigan Press.

ISBN 9780472112326 .

^ a b c "Country profile: Chile" .

BBC News . 16 December 2009.

Archived from the original on 14 January 2010 . Retrieved 31 December 2009 .

^ a b "Human and income poverty: developing countries" .

UNDP . Archived from the original on 12 February 2009.

^ "World Development Indicators" . World Bank. 17 April 2012.

Archived from the original on 26 December 2018 . Retrieved 12 May 2012 .

^ "La Incógnita Sobre el Origen de la Palabra Chile" .

Chile.com . 15 June 2000. Archived from the original on 15 April 2009 . Retrieved 17 December 2009 .

^ "Picunche (people)" .

Encyclopædia Britannica .

Archived from the original on 22 November 2009 . Retrieved 17 December 2009 .

^ a b c Encina, Francisco A.; Leopoldo Castedo (1961).

Resumen de la Historia de Chile . Vol. I (4th ed.). Santiago: Zig-Zag. p. 44. Archived from the original on 5 February 2009.

^ "Chile" .

Encyclopedia Americana . Grolier Online. 2005. Archived from the original on 21 July 2002 . Retrieved 2 March 2005 .

The name Chile is of Native American origin, meaning possibly 'ends of the earth' or simply 'sea gulls'.

^ a b c d e f g h Hudson, Rex A., ed. (1995).

"Chile: A Country Study" .

GPO for the Library of Congress . Archived from the original on 25 June 2015 . Retrieved 27 February 2005 .

^ "chiri in English - Quechua-English Dictionary" .

Glosbe .

^ a b This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911). " Chile ".

Encyclopædia Britannica (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press.

derived, it is said, from the Quichua chiri, cold, or tchili, snow ^ "Chile (república)" .

Enciclopedia Microsoft Encarta Online . 2005. Archived from the original on 10 May 2008 . Retrieved 26 February 2005 .

The region was then known to its native population as Tchili, a Native American word meaning 'snow'.

^ Pearson, Neale J. (2004).

"Chile" .

Grolier Multimedia Encyclopedia . Scholastic Library Publishing. Archived from the original on 10 February 1999 . Retrieved 2 March 2005 .

Chile's name comes from an Indian word, Tchili, meaning 'the deepest point of the Earth'.

^ de Olivares, Miguel; González, SJ (1864) [1736]. "Historia de la Compañía de Jesús en Chile".

Colección de historiadores de Chile y documentos relativos a la historia nacional . Vol. 4. Santiago: Imprenta del Ferrocarril.

^ Appletons' annual cyclopaedia and register of noteworthy events of the year: 1900 . New York: Appletons. p. 87.

^ Bower, Bruce (26 December 2015).

"People roamed tip of South America 18,500 years ago" .

Science News . p. 10.

Archived from the original on 10 May 2020 . Retrieved 26 December 2015 .

^ Insight Guides: Chile . Langenscheidt Publishing Group. 2002. p. 27.

ISBN 978-981-234-890-6 .

Archived from the original on 21 February 2024 . Retrieved 14 July 2013 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t u v w x "Development and Breakdown of Democracy, 1830–1973" .

Country Studies . Library of Congress. 31 March 1994.

Archived from the original on 9 July 2011 . Retrieved 21 April 2009 .

^ Eyzaguirre, Jaime (1967).

Breve historia de las fronteras de Chile . Editorial Universitaria.

^ Lagos Carmona, Guillermo (1985).

Los Títulos Históricos: Historia de Las Fronteras de Chile . Andrés Bello.

(p. 197) We note that the Loa river is at 22 degrees and that Baleato, in 1793, indicated 21.5 degrees for the beginning of the Kingdom of Chile, with the Loa at its mouth in the Pacific. (...) (p. 540) According to the Map of Cano y Olmedilla, the limit of the Kingdom of Chile "(...) through the desert of Atacama (...) From here it turns to the S., S.E., S.E., and S., keeping in general this last course until near the 29° parallel, from where it takes a S.E. direction. SE. and S., generally keeping this last course until the vicinity of the 29° parallel, from where it takes a S.E. direction, skirting to the east the 'Province of Cuyo' which, of course, appears to be included in the territory of the Kingdom of Chile. In the latitude of 32°30' the line turns to the S.W. until reaching the Quinto river, which, as the legend says 'communicates by channels with the Saladillo in time of floods'. It follows the river down to the meridian 316°, counting to the E. of Tenerife, where it turns a stretch until it reaches the Hueuque-Leuvu river (or Barrancas river) at 371/2° latitude. From here it runs along the river for a stretch to the S.E., and then turns to the E. and falls into the Atlantic Sea in the vicinity of parallel 37° between Cape Lobos and Cape Corrientes", "a little north of the current Mar del Plata". (...) (p. 543) In this document it is seen that those of the province of Cuyo end to the south at the source of the Diamante River, and that from that point to the east, the dividing line goes to the point where the Quinto River crosses the road that goes from Santiago to Buenos Aires.

^ Amunátegui, Miguel Luis (1985).

Títulos de la República de Chile a la soberanía i dominio de la Estremidad .

Archived from the original on 12 November 2022 . Retrieved 14 November 2022 .

^ Morla Vicuña, Carlos (1903).

Estudio histórico sobre el descubrimiento y conquista de la Patagonia y de la Tierra del Fuego . Leipzig: F. A. Brockhaus.

^ Caivano, Tommaso (1 April 1882).

"Storia della guerra d'America fra Chilì, il Perù e la Bolivia" (in Italian). Torino: Ermanno Loescher – via Internet Archive.

^ Silva Castro, Raúl (1953).

Censo de 1813 . Santiago: Imprenta Chile. p. 370.

Archived from the original on 18 August 2024 . Retrieved 18 August 2024 – via Biblioteca Nacional de Chile.

^ Baten, Joerg; Llorca-Jaña, Manuel (2021).

"Inequality, Low-Intensity Immigration and Human Capital Formation in the Regions of Chile, 1820–1939" (PDF) .

Economics and Human Biology .

43 101030.

doi : 10.1016/j.ehb.2021.101030 .

ISSN 1570-677X .

PMID 34171763 .

S2CID 219382958 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022.

^ Intercolonial Intimacies: Relinking Latin/o America to the Philippines. 1898-1964 By Paula C. Park Archived 1 November 2022 at the Wayback Machine (INTRODUCTION: Residual Intercolonial Intimacies across the "Hispanic" Pacific) ^ Eyzaguirre, Jaime (1967).

Breve historia de las fronteras de Chile (in Spanish). Editorial Universitaria.

^ Mateo Martinic Beros (1971).

Presencia de Chile en la Patagonia austral 1843 – 1879 (in Spanish). Editorial Andrés Bello.

Archived from the original on 31 March 2023 . Retrieved 8 December 2022 .

^ Baten, Jörg (2016).

A History of the Global Economy. From 1500 to the Present . Cambridge University Press. p. 137.

ISBN 9781107507180 .

^ "Historia de la Isla de Pascua: Su Incorporación y Su Conflicto Con La Williamson & Balfour. Daños Patrimoniales, Pretensiones Internacionales e Independentismos" .

Archived from the original on 21 March 2023 . Retrieved 26 January 2024 .

^ William Sater, Chile and the United States: Empires in Conflict , Athens, GA; University of Georgia Press, ISBN 0-8203-1249-5 p.51 ^ Fowler, Will (1996).

Authoritarianism in Latin America since independence . University of Virginia: Greenwood Press. pp.

30– 96.

ISBN 0-313-29843-2 .

^ Frazier, Lessie Jo (17 July 2007).

Salt in the Sand: Memory, Violence, and the Nation-State in Chile, 1890 to the Present . Duke University Press. pp.

163– 184.

ISBN 978-0-8223-4003-4 .

Archived from the original on 29 November 2023 . Retrieved 14 July 2013 .

^ Mares, David; Francisco Rojas Aravena (2001).

The United States and Chile: Coming in from the Cold . Routledge. p. 145.

ISBN 978-0-415-93125-0 .

Archived from the original on 29 November 2023 . Retrieved 14 July 2013 .

^ Trento, Joseph J. (2005).

The Secret History of the CIA . Carroll & Graf Publishers. p. 560.

ISBN 978-0-7867-1500-8 . Archived from the original on 19 March 2015 . Retrieved 14 July 2013 .

^ Lois Hecht Oppenheim (2007).

Politics in Chile: Socialism, Authoritarianism, and Market Democracy . Westview Press. p. 52.

ISBN 978-0-7867-3426-9 .

Archived from the original on 29 November 2023 . Retrieved 14 July 2013 .

^ a b c De Vylder, Stefan (5 March 2009).

Allende's Chile: The Political Economy of the Rise and Fall of the Unidad Popular . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0-521-10757-0 .

^ "Allende wins the elections: first coup attempt" . Grace.evergreen.edu. Archived from the original on 7 January 2008 . Retrieved 17 December 2009 .

^ a b c d Friedman, Norman (1 March 2007).

The Fifty-Year War: Conflict and Strategy in the Cold War . Naval Institute Press. pp.

367– 368.

ISBN 978-1-59114-287-4 .

Archived from the original on 29 November 2023 . Retrieved 14 July 2013 .

^ Qureshi, Lubna Z. (2009).

Nixon, Kissinger, and Allende: U.S. Involvement in the 1973 Coup in Chile . Lexington Books. pp.

86– 97.

ISBN 978-0-7391-2655-4 .

Archived from the original on 29 November 2023 . Retrieved 14 July 2013 .

^ "Report on CIA Chilean Task Force activities" .

Chile and the United States: Declassified Documents relating to the Military Coup, 1970–1976 . The National Security Archive: Electronic Briefing Books (George Washington University).

Archived from the original on 11 February 2010 . Retrieved 11 March 2010 .

^ a b "Covert Action In Chile 1963–1973, Staff Report Of The Select Committee To Study Governmental Operations With Respect To Intelligence Activities" . Federation of American Scientists. Archived from the original on 3 October 2009 . Retrieved 17 December 2009 .

^ "Tightening the Belt" .

Time . 7 August 1972. Archived from the original on 22 October 2010.

^ "Equipo Nizkor – CIA Activities in Chile – September 18, 2000" . Derechos.org.

Archived from the original on 13 May 2008 . Retrieved 17 December 2009 .

^ "Transition to Democracy in Latin America: The Role of the judiciary" (PDF) . Yale University. Archived from the original (PDF) on 19 August 2013.

^ Soto, Óscar (1999).

El último día de Salvador Allende . Aguilar.

ISBN 978-956-239-084-2 .

[ page needed ] ^ Ahumada, Eugeno.

Chile: La memoria prohibida .

[ page needed ] ^ "Kissinger and Chile: the Declassified Record" . The National Security Archive. 16 September 2013.

Archived from the original on 17 September 2013 . Retrieved 16 September 2013 .

^ Lewis, Anthony (27 February 1975).

"The Kissinger Doctrine" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on 12 September 2022 . Retrieved 8 May 2024 .

^ a b Juan Paulo Iglesias (25 August 2023).

"Sebastián Hurtado, historiador: "Estados Unidos no tuvo participación directa en el Golpe, pero sí quería que Allende cayera" " (in Spanish). La Tercera.

Archived from the original on 12 September 2024 . Retrieved 12 January 2025 .

^ Hurtado, Sebastián (10 October 2016).

"Chile y Estados Unidos, 1964-1973. Una nueva mirada" .

Nuevo Mundo Mundos Nuevos (in Spanish).

doi : 10.4000/nuevomundo.69698 .

^ Dinges, John.

"Operation Condor" .

latinamericanstudies.org . Columbia University.

Archived from the original on 22 July 2018 . Retrieved 6 July 2018 .

^ "Flashback: Caravan of Death" .

BBC . 25 July 2000.

Archived from the original on 26 February 2008 . Retrieved 11 March 2008 .

^ Ministerio del Interior (3 August 1999).

"Ministerio del Interior, Programa de Derechos Humanos – ddhh_rettig" . Ddhh.gov.cl. Archived from the original on 23 December 2009 . Retrieved 17 December 2009 .

^ a b "Sintesis Ok" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 27 July 2007 . Retrieved 17 December 2009 .

^ Eva Vergara (18 August 2015).

Chile Recognizes 9,800 More Pinochet Victims Archived 31 December 2015 at the Wayback Machine .

The Associated Press via The Huffington Post.

Retrieved 25 August 2015.

^ Pamela Constable ; Arturo Valenzuela (1993).

A Nation of Enemies: Chile Under Pinochet . W W Norton & Company Incorporated. p. 150.

ISBN 978-0-393-30985-0 .

^ Klein, Naomi (1 April 2010).

The Shock Doctrine: The Rise of Disaster Capitalism . Henry Holt and Company (2007). p. 85.

ISBN 978-1-4299-1948-7 .

Archived from the original on 29 November 2023 . Retrieved 14 July 2013 .

^ Huneeus, Carlos (3 September 2009).

"Political Mass Mobilization against Authoritarian Rule: Pinochet's Chile, 1983–88" . In Adam Roberts; Timothy Garton Ash (eds.).

Civil Resistance and Power Politics:The Experience of Non-violent Action from Gandhi to the Present . Oxford University Press. pp.

197– 212.

ISBN 978-0-19-161917-5 .

Archived from the original on 29 November 2023 . Retrieved 14 July 2013 .

^ Christian, Shirley (16 December 1989).

"Man in the News: Patricio Aylwin; A Moderate Leads Chile" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on 29 July 2018 . Retrieved 28 July 2018 .

^ "Chile elects new leader Late president's son wins big" .

Encyclopedia.com . 12 December 1993. Archived from the original on 26 May 2008 . Retrieved 14 July 2013 .

^ "Moderate socialist Lagos wins Chilean presidential election" .

CNN . 16 January 2000. Archived from the original on 6 May 2008.

^ "Chile elects first woman president" .

NBC News . 12 January 2006.

Archived from the original on 9 November 2013 . Retrieved 10 November 2019 .

^ Reel, Monte (12 March 2006).

"Bachelet Sworn in As Chile's President" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on 1 July 2017 . Retrieved 22 August 2017 .

^ "Michelle Bachelet sworn in as Chile's president" .

BBC News . 11 March 2014.

Archived from the original on 12 March 2014 . Retrieved 12 August 2021 .

^ "Chile election: Conservative Piñera elected president" .

BBC News . 18 December 2017.

Archived from the original on 18 December 2017 . Retrieved 12 August 2021 .

^ "Pinera, a conservative billionaire, is sworn in as president of Chile" .

Yahoo! News . Agence France Presse. 11 March 2018.

Archived from the original on 1 August 2021 . Retrieved 12 August 2021 .

^ "US ready to help Chile: Obama" .

The Australia Times . Archived from the original on 27 April 2011 . Retrieved 3 March 2010 .

^ More Quakes Shake Chile's Infrastructure , Adam Figman, Contract , 1 March 2010 Archived 14 November 2014 at the Wayback Machine ^ "Background Note: Chile" .

Bureau of Western Hemisphere Affairs , United States Department of State . 16 December 2011.

Archived from the original on 21 January 2017 . Retrieved 19 March 2012 .

^ Naomi Larsson (26 October 2019).

"Chile protests: More than one million bring Santiago to a halt" .

Al Jazeera .

Archived from the original on 26 October 2019 . Retrieved 19 November 2019 .

^ Sandra Cuffe (19 November 2019).

"One month on: Protests in Chile persist despite gov't concessions" .

Al Jazeera .

Archived from the original on 17 March 2020 . Retrieved 19 November 2019 .

^ "Presidente Piñera promulga reforma que posterga elecciones al 15 y 16 de mayo" .

El Mostrador (in Spanish). 6 April 2021.

Archived from the original on 5 May 2021 . Retrieved 7 April 2021 .

^ "Leftist Gabriel Boric to become Chile's youngest ever president" .

BBC News . 20 December 2021.

Archived from the original on 20 December 2021 . Retrieved 21 December 2021 .

^ "Gabriel Boric, 36, sworn in as president to herald new era for Chile" .

The Guardian . 11 March 2022.

Archived from the original on 12 March 2022 . Retrieved 15 March 2022 .

^ "Chile's president-elect names progressive, majority-women cabinet" .

The Guardian . 21 January 2022.

Archived from the original on 25 January 2022 . Retrieved 15 March 2022 .

^ "Chile constitution: Voters overwhelmingly reject radical change" .

BBC News . 5 September 2022.

Archived from the original on 5 September 2022 . Retrieved 14 September 2022 .

^ Villegas, A. (18 December 2023).

"Chileans reject conservative constitution to replace dictatorship-era text" .

Reuters . Retrieved 18 December 2023 .

^ "Chilean voters reject conservative constitution, after defeating leftist charter last year" .

AP News . 17 December 2023.

Archived from the original on 18 December 2023 . Retrieved 18 December 2023 .

^ "Chile rejects second attempt to renew constitution" .

dw.com .

Archived from the original on 18 December 2023 . Retrieved 19 December 2023 .

^ "Chile" .

Encyclopædia Britannica .

Archived from the original on 16 June 2013 . Retrieved 7 May 2013 .

^ "Antarctic Treaty: Information about the Antarctic Treaty and how Antarctica is governed" . Polar Conservation Organisation. 1 February 2008. Archived from the original on 10 February 2010 . Retrieved 11 March 2010 .

^ Collin, Robert (2015).

Trash Talk: An Encyclopedia of Garbage and Recycling around the World . p. 121.

^ Blanco, Alejandro Vergara (1998).

Derecho de aguas . Editorial Jurídica de Chile.

ISBN 978-956-10-1241-7 .

Archived from the original on 29 November 2023 . Retrieved 14 July 2013 .

^ K, Ana María Errázuriz (1998).

Manual de geografía de Chile (in Spanish). Andres Bello. p. 74.

ISBN 978-956-13-1523-5 .

Archived from the original on 21 November 2023 . Retrieved 21 November 2023 .

^ Santibáñez, F; Uribe, J. 1997. Atlas Agroclimático de Chile. Santiago, Chile. Fondo 
Nacional de Desarrollo Científico y Tecnológico.

^ a b c Niemeyer, Hans; Cereceda, Pilar (1983). "Hydrography".

Geography of Chile .

8 (1st ed.). Santiago: Military Geographic Institute .

^ World Bank Climate Change Knowledge Portal.

"Chile" .

climateknowledgeportal.worldbank.org . Retrieved 7 February 2025 .

^ a b c d e "Flora y Fauna de Chilena" .

Icarito . Archived from the original on 10 April 2006.

^ a b Smith-Ramírez, Cecilia; Díaz, Iván; Pliscoff, Patricio; Valdovinos, Claudio; Méndez, Marco A.; Larraín, Juan; Samaniego, Horacio (August 2007). "Distribution patterns of flora and fauna in southern Chilean Coastal rain forests: Integrating Natural History and GIS".

Biodiversity and Conservation .

16 (9): 2627– 2648.

Bibcode : 2007BiCon..16.2627S .

doi : 10.1007/s10531-006-9073-2 .

S2CID 6879631 .

^ Posada-Swafford, Ángela.

"Chilean and Antarctic Fossils Reveal the Last "Geologic Minutes" of the Age of Dinosaurs [Slide Show]" .

Scientific American .

Archived from the original on 6 April 2017 . Retrieved 5 April 2017 .

^ Grantham, H. S.; Duncan, A.; Evans, T. D.; Jones, K. R.; Beyer, H. L.; Schuster, R.; Walston, J.; Ray, J. C.; Robinson, J. G.; Callow, M.; Clements, T.; Costa, H. M.; DeGemmis, A.; Elsen, P. R.; Ervin, J.; Franco, P.; Goldman, E.; Goetz, S.; Hansen, A.; Hofsvang, E.; Jantz, P.; Jupiter, S.; Kang, A.; Langhammer, P.; Laurance, W. F.; Lieberman, S.; Linkie, M.; Malhi, Y.; Maxwell, S.; Mendez, M.; Mittermeier, R.; Murray, N. J.; Possingham, H.; Radachowsky, J.; Saatchi, S.; Samper, C.; Silverman, J.; Shapiro, A.; Strassburg, B.; Stevens, T.; Stokes, E.; Taylor, R.; Tear, T.; Tizard, R.; Venter, O.; Visconti, P.; Wang, S.; Watson, J. E. M. (2020).

"Anthropogenic modification of forests means only 40% of remaining forests have high ecosystem integrity – Supplementary Material" .

Nature Communications .

11 (1): 5978.

Bibcode : 2020NatCo..11.5978G .

doi : 10.1038/s41467-020-19493-3 .

ISSN 2041-1723 .

PMC 7723057 .

PMID 33293507 .

^ Oehrens, E.B. "Flora Fungosa Chilena". Universidad de Chile, Santiago de Chile, 1980 ^ "Cybertruffle's Robigalia – Observations of fungi and their associated organisms" . cybertruffle.org.uk. Archived from the original on 29 December 2018 . Retrieved 9 July 2011 .

^ Kirk, P.M., Cannon, P.F., Minter, D.W. and Stalpers, J. "Dictionary of the Fungi". Edn 10. CABI, 2008 ^ "Fungi of Chile – potential endemics" . cybertruffle.org.uk.

Archived from the original on 27 September 2011 . Retrieved 9 July 2011 .

^ Aislinn Laing; Fabian Cambero (25 October 2020).

"Polls open in Chile for historic constitutional plebiscite" . Reuters.

Archived from the original on 30 October 2020 . Retrieved 25 October 2020 .

^ "Chile scraps Pinochet-era system" .

BBC . 16 August 2005.

Archived from the original on 8 May 2020 . Retrieved 31 December 2009 .

^ "President Lagos: We can make a greater effort to make yesterday's and today's trials equally just" .

Chilean Government . Archived from the original on 23 April 2008.

^ Humberto Julio Reyes, General de Brigada (3 November 2022).

"Disuasión y estrategia en la crisis de 1978" .

Unofar . Retrieved 22 March 2025 .

^ Álvaro Nicolás Cuadra Roos (2024).

Breve historia de las fronteras de Chile (PDF) . Universidad de Chile.

^ Cristián Garay Vera (2009).

"Buscando la Certidumbre. Chile, su Seguridad y sus Vecinos" .

UNISCI Discussion Papers .

21 .

ISSN 1696-2206 .

^ González, Javier M. (21 December 2023).

"Diciembre de 1978, una Navidad al borde de la guerra entre Chile y Argentina" .

Nueva Tribuna . Retrieved 22 March 2025 .

^ "1978: el año en que vivimos en peligro" .

Interferencia . 23 December 2018 . Retrieved 22 March 2025 .

^ "Conflicto del Beagle: las inéditas imágenes de un diciembre tenso" .

La Tercera . 1 December 2018 . Retrieved 22 March 2025 .

^ "Founding Member States" . United Nations. Archived from the original on 4 July 2019 . Retrieved 14 September 2019 .

^ "Chile" . United Nations. Archived from the original on 14 September 2019 . Retrieved 14 September 2019 .

^ "Election (13 May 2010) Human Rights Council" .

64th Session .

United Nations General Assembly .

Archived from the original on 30 June 2017 . Retrieved 28 June 2017 .

^ "Chad, Chile, Lithuania, Nigeria and Saudi Arabia were elected to serve on the UN Security Council" . United Nations. 17 October 2013.

Archived from the original on 20 October 2013 . Retrieved 17 October 2013 .

^ "Almirante Julio Leiva Nuevo Comandante en Jefe de la Armada" . Ministry of Defence of Chile. Archived from the original on 24 September 2017 . Retrieved 10 January 2018 .

^ "The National Fleet" . Chilean Navy. Archived from the original on 10 June 2007 . Retrieved 30 May 2014 .

^ "Submarine Force" . Archived from the original on 10 June 2007 . Retrieved 14 July 2013 .

^ "Carabineros de Chile" . 24 October 2007. Archived from the original on 12 March 2012 . Retrieved 13 July 2013 .

^ "Chapter XXVI: Disarmament – No. 9 Treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons" . United Nations Treaty Collection. 7 July 2017.

Archived from the original on 6 August 2019 . Retrieved 19 August 2019 .

^ "2024 Global Peace Index" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 19 August 2024 . Retrieved 16 August 2024 .

^ a b Ministerio del Interior (10 October 1978).

"Decreto ley 2339 de 1978" .

Archived from the original on 29 January 2012 . Retrieved 28 June 2011 .

^ Ministerio del Interior (26 October 1979).

"Decreto ley 2867 de 1979" .

Archived from the original on 10 September 2011 . Retrieved 20 March 2011 .

^ Ministerio del Interior (26 October 1979).

"Decreto ley 2868 de 1979" .

Archived from the original on 10 September 2011 . Retrieved 20 March 2011 .

^ a b Ministerio del Interior (5 April 2007).

"Ley 20174 de 2007" .

Archived from the original on 10 September 2011 . Retrieved 20 March 2011 .

^ a b Ministerio del Interior (11 April 2007).

"Ley 20175 de 2007" .

Archived from the original on 10 September 2011 . Retrieved 20 March 2011 .

^ Instituto Nacional de Estadísticas (18 March 2008).

División político-administrativa y censal, 2007 (PDF) . Instituto Nacional de Estadísticas. p. 12.

ISBN 978-956-7952-68-7 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022 . Retrieved 27 February 2013 .

^ "Chile flag and description" . Worldatlas.com.

Archived from the original on 18 July 2011 . Retrieved 1 August 2011 .

^ "How does the World Bank classify countries?" .

World Bank .

Archived from the original on 22 May 2020 . Retrieved 8 April 2021 .

^ "High-income economies ($12,616 or more)" .

Country and Lending Groups . The World Bank. 1 July 2013.

Archived from the original on 18 March 2011 . Retrieved 14 September 2013 .

^ "GNI per capita, Atlas method (current US$)" . Washington, D.C.: The World Bank. 1 August 2013. Archived from the original (xls) on 21 September 2013 . Retrieved 14 September 2013 .

GNI-WB ^ "Chile Economy: Population, GDP, Inflation, Business, Trade, FDI, Corruption" .

The Heritage Foundation . Archived from the original on 22 June 2019 . Retrieved 13 November 2023 .

^ "Chile's accession to the OECD" .

OECD . 7 May 2010.

Archived from the original on 29 August 2012 . Retrieved 22 July 2016 .

^ Table 4: The Global Competitiveness Index 2009–2010 rankings and 2008–2009 comparisons Archived 30 October 2010 at the Wayback Machine . The Global Competitiveness Index 2009–2010. World Economic Forum ^ a b c d "Mining in Chile: Copper solution" .

The Economist . 27 April 2013.

Archived from the original on 15 July 2013 . Retrieved 13 July 2013 .

^ a b c "Chile" .

The World Factbook (2025 ed.).

Central Intelligence Agency . Retrieved 17 February 2014 .

(Archived 2014 edition.) ^ "Chile GDP – real growth rate" . Indexmundi.com. 21 February 2013.

Archived from the original on 12 June 2019 . Retrieved 13 July 2013 .

^ "Chile finmin says no recession seen in 2009-report" .

Reuters . 10 January 2009.

Archived from the original on 11 January 2009 . Retrieved 17 December 2009 .

^ a b c d e "Chile: 2013 Article IV Consultation; IMF Country Report 13/198" (PDF) . IMF. 14 June 2013.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 17 July 2013 . Retrieved 13 July 2013 .

^ "World Bank Open Data" .

World Bank Open Data .

Archived from the original on 26 May 2023 . Retrieved 11 November 2023 .

^ "Casen 2006 en profundidad" (PDF) .

Libertad y Desarrollo . 22 June 2007. Archived from the original (PDF) on 13 January 2013 . Retrieved 22 October 2007 .

^ "Panorama social de América Latina" (PDF) . ECLAC. 2010. Archived from the original (PDF) on 7 July 2011 . Retrieved 13 July 2013 .

^ "Una muy necesaria corrección: Hay cuatro millones de pobres en Chile" .

El Mercurio . 14 October 2007.

Archived from the original on 15 August 2021 . Retrieved 22 October 2007 .

^ "Destitute no more" .

The Economist . 16 August 2007.

Archived from the original on 16 October 2007 . Retrieved 22 October 2007 .

(subscription required) ^ "Ficha de Protección Social – Ministerio de Desarrollo Social" . Fichaproteccionsocial.gob.cl. 20 November 2012. Archived from the original on 18 May 2016 . Retrieved 12 March 2013 .

^ "Ficha de Protección Social – Ministerio de Desarrollo Social" . Fichaproteccionsocial.gob.cl. Archived from the original on 15 September 2012 . Retrieved 9 November 2012 .

^ "The Chilean pension system" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 12 May 2012 . Retrieved 13 July 2013 .

^ "USA-Chile FTA Final Text" . Ustr.gov. Archived from the original on 28 March 2016 . Retrieved 13 July 2013 .

^ "Rating: Chile Credit Rating" . 2023.

Archived from the original on 12 January 2024.

^ Wunsch-Vincent, Sacha; León, Lorena Rivera; Lanvin, Bruno; Dutta, Soumitra (26 September 2024).

Global Innovation Index 2024: Unlocking the Promise of Social Entrepreneurship (17th ed.). Geneva: World Intellectual Property Organization . p. 18.

doi : 10.34667/tind.50062 .

ISBN 978-92-805-3681-2 .

Archived from the original on 12 December 2024 . Retrieved 6 October 2024 .

^ Overland, Indra (1 March 2019).

"The geopolitics of renewable energy: Debunking four emerging myths" (PDF) .

Energy Research & Social Science .

49 : 36– 40.

Bibcode : 2019ERSS...49...36O .

doi : 10.1016/j.erss.2018.10.018 .

ISSN 2214-6296 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022.

^ "USGS Copper Production Statistics" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022 . Retrieved 11 July 2022 .

^ "USGS Iodine Production Statistics" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 25 June 2021 . Retrieved 11 July 2022 .

^ "USGS Rhenium Production Statistics" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 21 June 2021 . Retrieved 11 July 2022 .

^ "USGS Lithium Production Statistics" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022 . Retrieved 11 July 2022 .

^ "USGS Molybdenum Production Statistics" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022 . Retrieved 11 July 2022 .

^ "USGS Silver Production Statistics" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 15 May 2021 . Retrieved 11 July 2022 .

^ "USGS Salt Production Statistics" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022 . Retrieved 11 July 2022 .

^ "USGS Potash Product ion Statistics" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022 . Retrieved 11 July 2022 .

^ "USGS Sulfur Production Statistics" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022 . Retrieved 11 July 2022 .

^ "USGS Iron Ore Production Statistics" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022 . Retrieved 11 July 2022 .

^ "USGS Silver Production Statistics" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 20 December 2024 . Retrieved 23 December 2024 .

^ "Gold Production in Chile" .

Archived from the original on 18 October 2022 . Retrieved 11 July 2022 .

^ "Gold production" .

Our World in Data .

Archived from the original on 29 November 2023 . Retrieved 17 December 2024 .

^ "Agriculture in Chile, by FAO" .

Archived from the original on 11 May 2017 . Retrieved 11 July 2022 .

^ "Chile – OECD Data" .

theOECD .

Archived from the original on 25 November 2018 . Retrieved 2 November 2018 .

^ "Algas nocivas matam mais de 4,2 mil toneladas de salmão no Chile" .

Archived from the original on 24 October 2022 . Retrieved 4 September 2022 .

^ "2019 Statistical Report on World Vitiviniculture" (PDF) .

International Organisation of Vine and Wine . 2019.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 6 February 2021 . Retrieved 7 March 2021 .

^ Blanco, Hernán et al.

(August 2007) International Trade and Sustainable Tourism in Chile . International Institute for Sustainable Development ^ "Conguillio National Park (Official GANP Park Page)" .

national-parks.org .

Archived from the original on 26 October 2022 . Retrieved 26 October 2022 .

^ Centre, UNESCO World Heritage.

"Historic Quarter of the Seaport City of Valparaíso" .

UNESCO World Heritage Centre .

Archived from the original on 27 January 2024 . Retrieved 22 January 2024 .

^ "Best Beaches in Chile - Sandee" .

sandee.com .

Archived from the original on 4 December 2024 . Retrieved 24 October 2024 .

^ "Pro|Chile – Importadores | Selección idiomas" . Prochile.us.

Archived from the original on 19 July 2014 . Retrieved 22 December 2013 .

^ "Chile unveils huge Patagonia scenic route" .

BBC News . 27 September 2018.

Archived from the original on 24 November 2018 . Retrieved 24 November 2018 .

^ "Data of interest 1 – National Network according to category" .

Archived from the original on 29 May 2022 . Retrieved 11 July 2022 .

^ "Data of interest 3 – Red vial national de dobles calzadas por región año 2020" .

Archived from the original on 29 May 2022 . Retrieved 11 July 2022 .

^ "In 2021 they will bid for roads that unite Antofagasta with Caldera and Iquique" . 13 March 2019.

Archived from the original on 23 October 2022 . Retrieved 11 July 2022 .

^ "115 nuevos km de autopistas" .

Plataforma Urbana .

Archived from the original on 11 July 2022 . Retrieved 11 July 2022 .

^ Omnilineas.

"Omnilineas website" .

Archived from the original on 19 February 2014 . Retrieved 17 February 2014 .

^ "Percentage of Individuals using the Internet 2000" . International Telecommunication Union. June 2013.

Archived from the original on 9 February 2014 . Retrieved 22 June 2013 .

^ Internet Assigned Numbers Authority.

".cl Domain Delegation Data" .

www.iana.org .

Archived from the original on 20 February 2024 . Retrieved 3 April 2024 .

^ Carlos Solar (2023).

Cybersecurity Governance in Latin America: States, Threats, and Alliances . State University of New York Press.

ISBN 9781438491424 .

^ a b "IEA – Report" . Archived from the original on 2 February 2017 . Retrieved 4 November 2020 .

^ IRENA (April 2022).

"Renewable Capacity Statistics 2022" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022 . Retrieved 8 May 2022 .

^ "Energia Renovável para a irigação no Deserto do Atacama" .

Archived from the original on 16 October 2017 . Retrieved 11 July 2022 .

^ "Chile inaugura 1ª planta de energia termossolar da América Latina" .

Archived from the original on 21 March 2022 . Retrieved 11 July 2022 .

^ Olefs, M.; Formayer, H.; Gobiet, A.; Marke, T.; Schöner, W.; Revesz, M. (1 June 2021).

"Past and future changes of the Austrian climate – Importance for tourism" .

Journal of Outdoor Recreation and Tourism . Editorial: Tourism and Climate Change – an integrated look at the Austrian case.

34 100395.

Bibcode : 2021JORT...3400395O .

doi : 10.1016/j.jort.2021.100395 .

ISSN 2213-0780 .

^ "Chile" .

IEA . 1 January 2018.

Archived from the original on 18 February 2025 . Retrieved 7 February 2025 .

^ Climate Action Tracker (7 October 2024).

"Chile" .

climateactiontracker.org .

Archived from the original on 7 February 2025 . Retrieved 7 February 2025 .

^ "Anuario Estadísticas Vitales 2003" . Instituto National de Estadísticas.

Archived from the original on 1 May 2020 . Retrieved 30 May 2008 .

^ "Chile: Proyecciones y Estimaciones de Población. Total País 1950–2050" (PDF) . Instituto National de Estadísticas. Archived from the original (PDF) on 30 December 2009.

^ Lizcano Fernández, Francisco (August 2005).

"Composición Étnica de las Tres Áreas Culturales del Continente Americano al Comienzo del Siglo XXI" [Ethnic Composition of the Three Cultural Areas of the American Continent at the Beginning of the 21st Century].

Convergencia (in Spanish).

12 (38): 185– 232.

Archived from the original on 22 September 2022 . Retrieved 23 November 2020 .

^ "Chile - Indigenous, Mestizo, European | Britannica" .

www.britannica.com . 10 December 2024.

Archived from the original on 4 December 2024 . Retrieved 11 December 2024 .

^ Valenzuela, C. (1984). "Marco de referencia sociogenético para los estudios de Salud Pública en Chile" [Sociogenetic reference limits for public health studies in Chile].

Revista Chilena de Pediatría (in Spanish).

55 (2): 123– 127.

PMID 6473850 .

S2CID 162443939 .

^ Vanegas L, Jairo; Villalón C, Marcelo; Valenzuela Y, Carlos (May 2008).

"Ethnicity and race as variables in epidemiological research about inequity" .

Revista médica de Chile .

136 (5): 637– 644.

doi : 10.4067/S0034-98872008000500014 .

PMID 18769813 .

^ Cruz-Coke, Ricardo (1994).

"Genetic epidemiology of single gene defects in Chile" .

Journal of Medical Genetics .

31 (9): 702– 706.

doi : 10.1136/jmg.31.9.702 .

PMC 1050080 .

PMID 7815439 .

^ "Estudio genético en chilenos muestra desconocida herencia africana | El Dínamo" . Eldinamo.cl. 19 August 2013. Archived from the original on 6 July 2014 . Retrieved 22 December 2013 .

^ Godinho, Neide Maria de Oliveira (2008).

O impacto das migrações na constituição genética de populações latino-americanas [ The impact of migration on the genetic makeup of Latin American populations ] (Thesis) (in Portuguese).

Archived from the original on 12 November 2020 . Retrieved 23 November 2020 .

^ Homburger, Julian; et al. (2015).

"Genomic Insights into the Ancestry and Demographic History of South America" .

PLOS Genetics .

11 (12). 1005602.

doi : 10.1371/journal.pgen.1005602 .

PMC 4670080 .

PMID 26636962 .

^ "5.2.6. Estructura racial" .

La Universidad de Chile . Archived from the original on 16 October 2007 . Retrieved 26 August 2007 .

( Main page Archived 16 September 2009 at the Wayback Machine ) ^ "Informe Latinobarómetro 2011" . Latinobarometro.org.

Archived from the original on 13 January 2016 . Retrieved 13 July 2013 .

^ "Encuesta CEP, Julio 2002" (in Spanish). July 2002. Archived from the original on 29 April 2013 . Retrieved 18 May 2012 .

^ "ILOLEX: submits English query" . Ilo.org. 9 January 2004. Archived from the original on 25 December 2009.

^ "Chile's Supreme Court Upholds Indigenous Water Use Rights" .

The Santiago Times . 30 November 2009. Archived from the original on 3 March 2010 . Retrieved 2 March 2010 .

^ "Osasuna Saila - Eusko Jaurlaritza" .

Euskadi.eus (in Basque).

Archived from the original on 10 April 2021 . Retrieved 1 April 2021 .

^ a b c d Waldo Ayarza Elorza.

"De los Vascos, Oñati y los Elorza" (PDF) . pp. 59, 65, 66. Archived from the original (PDF) on 19 August 2013 . Retrieved 13 July 2013 .

^ a b c Salazar Vergara, Gabriel; Pinto, Julio (1999).

"La Presencia Inmigrante" .

Historia contemporánea de Chile: Actores, identidad y movimiento. II .

Lom Ediciones . pp.

76– 81.

ISBN 978-956-282-174-2 .

Archived from the original on 29 November 2023 . Retrieved 14 July 2013 .

^ "Memoria presentada al Supremo Gobierno por la Comision Central del Censo" (PDF) (in Spanish). 1907. Archived from the original (PDF) on 19 September 2009 . Retrieved 13 February 2013 .

^ Parvex, R. (2014).

"Le Chili et les mouvements migratoires" .

Hommes & Migrations (Nº 1305): 71– 76.

doi : 10.4000/hommesmigrations.2720 .

Archived from the original on 1 August 2020 . Retrieved 21 July 2020 .

^ Jorge Sanhueza Aviléz.

"Historia de Chile: Otros Artículos. Británicos y Anglosajones en Chile durante el siglo XIX" . Biografía de Chile. Archived from the original on 12 November 2020 . Retrieved 16 March 2012 .

^ Victoria Dannemann.

"Alemanes en Chile: entre el pasado colono y el presente empresarial" . Deustche-Welle.

Archived from the original on 1 May 2015 . Retrieved 21 July 2020 .

^ "Inmigración a Chile" . Domivina. Archived from the original on 2 July 2015.

^ "entrevista al Presidente de la Cámara vasca" . Deia.com. 22 May 2008. Archived from the original on 11 May 2009.

^ "Chile: Palestinian refugees arrive to warm welcome" . Adnkronos.com. 7 April 2003. Archived from the original on 24 November 2017 . Retrieved 29 October 2009 .

^ "500,000 descendientes de primera y segunda generación de palestinos en Chile" . Laventana.casa.cult.cu. Archived from the original on 22 July 2009 . Retrieved 13 July 2013 .

^ Ghosh P.

"Arabs in the Andes? Chile, The Unlikely Long-Term Home of a Large Palestinian Community" .

International Business Times .

Archived from the original on 23 April 2021 . Retrieved 29 September 2017 .

^ Estimación de Población Extranjera en Chile, al 31 de diciembre de 2019 Archived 4 May 2022 at the Wayback Machine , del Departamento de Extranjería y Migración (DEM) del Instituto Nacional de Estadísticas de Chile (INE), pp. 21. Retrieved 29 Juny 2020.

^ "Chile: Moving Towards a Migration Policy" . Migrationinformation.org.

Archived from the original on 15 February 2014 . Retrieved 1 August 2011 .

^ Landaburu, Juan (24 June 2007).

"El debate sobre la inmigración ilegal se extiende a la región" .

La Nación . Archived from the original on 13 February 2009 . Retrieved 31 December 2008 .

^ "Chilean Election Unlikely to Halt New Barriers to Immigration" .

Global Risk Insights . 20 November 2021.

Archived from the original on 21 November 2021 . Retrieved 21 November 2021 .

^ "List of Chilean cities" . Observatorio Urbano, Ministerio de Vivienda y Urbanismo de Chile. Archived from the original on 4 March 2016.

^ Chile: Ciudades, Pueblos, Aldeas y Caseríos 2005 , Instituto Nacional de Estadísticas – June 2005.

^ "Chile" .

The World Factbook (2025 ed.).

Central Intelligence Agency . Retrieved 29 January 2017 .

(Archived 2017 edition.) ^ H., Smith, Brian (2014).

The Church and Politics in Chile Challenges to Modern Catholicism . Princeton University Press.

ISBN 978-1-4008-5697-8 .

OCLC 1170509102 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ "Population 15 years of age or older, by religion, region, sex and age groups. (censused population)" (PDF) (in Spanish). 7 September 2015. Archived from the original (.pdf) on 7 February 2017 . Retrieved 23 March 2018 .

^ 7,853,428 out of 11,226,309 people over 15 years of age.

"Population 15 years of age or older, by religion, administrative division, sex and age groups" (PDF) .

Censo 2002 (in Spanish).

Archived (PDF) from the original on 19 May 2006 . Retrieved 1 March 2014 .

^ a b c d "Chile" .

International Religious Freedom Report . United States Department of State. 19 September 2008.

Archived from the original on 4 April 2023 . Retrieved 22 May 2019 .

^ "Track semanal de Opinión Pública" [Weekly Public Opinion Track] (PDF) (in Spanish). 7 September 2015. Archived from the original (PDF) on 7 February 2017 . Retrieved 11 December 2018 .

^ Purushotma, Shastri (6 December 2017).

"Breathtaking Baha'i Temple Rises in Chile" .

HuffPost . HuffPost.

Archived from the original on 5 December 2016 . Retrieved 5 August 2021 .

^ Purushotma, Shastri (6 December 2017).

"Breathtaking Baha'i Temple Rises in Chile" .

HuffPost . HuffPost.

Archived from the original on 5 December 2016 . Retrieved 21 February 2019 .

^ Bill Kte'pi, "Chile", in Robert E. Emery, Cultural Sociology of Divorce: An Encyclopedia, Volume 1 (London: Sage, 2013), 266–68. books.google.com/books?id=wzJdSIfeeTQC&pg=PA266 ISBN 9781412999588 ^ "Hola, Luther" .

The Economist . 6 November 2008. Archived from the original on 10 December 2008.

^ Andrea Henríquez (31 October 2008).

"Los evangélicos tienen su feriado" . BBC Mundo.

Archived from the original on 25 June 2018 . Retrieved 17 December 2009 .

^ "Patron Saints: 'C' " . Catholic Online.

Archived from the original on 9 April 2019 . Retrieved 28 June 2012 .

^ "Las fechas del proceso de Canonización del Padre Hurtado" (in Spanish). Archived from the original on 22 January 2008 . Retrieved 9 January 2008 .

^ Montrul, Silvina. El Bilinguismo En El Mundo Hispanohablante. Hoboken: John Wiley & Sons Inc, 2013. p. 249 ^ "Ethnologue report for Chile" . Ethnologue.com.

Archived from the original on 3 February 2013 . Retrieved 1 August 2011 .

^ Oliver Zoellner.

"Oliver Zoellner | Generating Samples of Ethnic Minorities in Chile" . Research-worldwide.de.

Archived from the original on 2 December 2009 . Retrieved 17 December 2009 .

^ "Repeat after me: Hello, my name is" . Globalpost.com.

Archived from the original on 11 August 2010 . Retrieved 22 February 2010 .

^ Sáez Godoy, Leopoldo (2005).

"Anglicismos en el español de Chile" [Anglicisms in Chilean Spanish].

Atenea (Concepción) (in Spanish) (492): 171– 177.

doi : 10.4067/S0718-04622005000200010 .

^ "¿Cuál es la cotización legal para salud de un trabajador activo y en qué plazo deben ser declaradas y pagadas?" .

supersalud.gob.cl .

Superintendence of Health .

Archived from the original on 26 September 2021 . Retrieved 26 September 2021 .

^ "Global Hunger Index Scores by 2024 GHI Rank" .

Global Hunger Index (GHI) - peer-reviewed annual publication designed to comprehensively measure and track hunger at the global, regional, and country levels .

Archived from the original on 25 February 2022 . Retrieved 13 December 2024 .

^ "Chile" .

UNESCO International Centre for Technical and Vocational Education and Training . TVET Country Profiles.

Archived from the original on 29 April 2014 . Retrieved 29 April 2014 .

^ "Mensualidad de los colegios con los mejores puntajes en la PSU supera los mil" . Emol.com. 30 December 2013.

Archived from the original on 19 July 2014 . Retrieved 18 July 2014 .

^ "Program in Chile | Yale Law School" . Law.yale.edu.

Archived from the original on 24 December 2013 . Retrieved 22 December 2013 .

^ "Valdivia Chile" . Allsouthernchile.com. Archived from the original on 19 September 2009 . Retrieved 1 August 2011 .

^ "Latin America :: Chile" . Global Adrenaline. Archived from the original on 11 July 2011 . Retrieved 1 August 2011 .

^ "Learning About Each Other" . Learnapec.org. Archived from the original on 29 April 2011 . Retrieved 1 August 2011 .

^ "Chile Foreign Relations" . Country-studies.com.

Archived from the original on 8 July 2011 . Retrieved 1 August 2011 .

^ "Memoria Chilena" . Memoriachilena.cl.

Archived from the original on 12 January 2009 . Retrieved 6 December 2008 .

^ Martinez, Jessica.

"Top Cultural Celebrations and Festivals in Chile" .

USA Today .

Archived from the original on 8 May 2020 . Retrieved 27 September 2013 .

^ "Un mapa por completar: la joven poesia chilena – ¿Por qué tanta y tan variada poesía?" . Uchile.cl. Archived from the original on 10 May 2020 . Retrieved 17 December 2009 .

^ "Latin American Herald Tribune – Isabel Allende Named to Council of Cervantes Institute" . Laht.com. Archived from the original on 30 April 2011 . Retrieved 14 November 2010 .

^ Grossman, Lev (10 November 2008).

"Bolaño's 2666: The Best Book of 2008" .

Time . Archived from the original on 15 November 2008 . Retrieved 28 April 2010 .

^ Sarah Kerr (18 December 2008).

"The Triumph of Roberto Bolaño" .

The New York Review of Books .

Archived from the original on 4 March 2010 . Retrieved 20 February 2010 .

^ Wood, James (15 April 2007).

"The Visceral Realist" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on 11 April 2009 . Retrieved 1 April 2010 .

^ Maria Baez Kijac (2003).

The South American Table: The Flavor and Soul of Authentic...

Harvard Common Press.

ISBN 978-1-55832-249-3 .

Archived from the original on 29 November 2023 . Retrieved 14 July 2013 .

^ Whole paragraph same as in Ravi Jyee et al., eds., World Encyclopaedia of American Countries, vol. 1
New Delhi: Afro-Asian-American Chamber of Commerce Occupational Research and Development, 2016. 179–80.

http://164.100.47.193/Ebooks/Writereaddate/52_2017.pdf Archived 3 February 2020 at the Wayback Machine ^ "The strongest National League in the World 2011" .

IFFHS .

Archived from the original on 5 November 2018 . Retrieved 18 April 2012 .

^ "Día del patrimonio cultural" .

chileatiende.gob.cl/ . 14 May 2019.

Archived from the original on 20 June 2020 . Retrieved 13 May 2020 .

Further reading Christian Balteum: The Strip. A Marxist critique of a semicomparador economy , University of Vermont Press, 2018 Simon Collier and William F. Sater, A History of Chile, 1808–1894 , Cambridge University Press, 1996 Paul W. Drake, and others., Chile: A Country Study , Library of Congress, 1994 Luis Galdames, A History of Chile , University of North Carolina Press, 1941 Lamoureux, Andrew Jackson; and three others (1911).

"Chile" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 6 (11th ed.). pp.

142– 160.

Brian Lovemen, Chile: The Legacy of Hispanic Capitalism , 3rd ed., Oxford University Press, 2001 John L. Rector, The History of Chile , Greenwood Press, 2003 External links Chile at Wikipedia's sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Textbooks from Wikibooks Resources from Wikiversity Travel information from Wikivoyage Official Chile Government website ThisIsChile Tourism & Commerce Website Archived 20 December 2019 at the Wayback Machine Chile .

The World Factbook .

Central Intelligence Agency .

Chile from UCB Libraries GovPubs Chile profile from the BBC News Road maps of Chile, interactive World Bank Summary Trade Statistics Chile Wikimedia Atlas of Chile Geographic data related to Chile at OpenStreetMap Key Development Forecasts for Chile from International Futures Chile Cultural Society v t e Chile articles History Timeline Periods Prehispanic ( ACN –1536 AD ) Spanish Discovery (1536–1540) Spanish Conquest (1540–1600) Colonial (1600–1810) Independence (1810–1826) Republic Organization (1823–1831) Conservative Republic (1831–1861) Liberal Republic (1861–1891) Parliamentary Era (1891–1925) Presidential Republic (1925–1973) Pinochet Regime (1973–1990) Democracy Transition (1990–Present) By topic Agriculture Banditry Economic Expansionism Mining Maritime Wars Geography Cities Climate Earthquakes Environment Extreme points Fjords, channels, sounds and straits Geology Islands National parks Natural regions Provinces Regions Rivers Lakes Volcanoes Lighthouses World Heritage Sites Politics National Congress Elections Foreign relations Government Political parties President Ministries Law Civil Code Constitution History Human rights LGBT Intersex Law enforcement Supreme Court Constitutional Court Comptroller General of Chile Public safety Carabineros Gendarmerie Investigations Police Military Air Force Army Navy Ministry of Defence Economy Agriculture Aquaculture Central Bank Companies Energy Forestry Peso (currency) Stock Exchange Mining Copper Gold Iron Telecommunications Tourism Transport Society Crime Illegal mining Demographics Education Healthcare Immigration Illegal Languages People Indigenous Religion Squatting Water supply and sanitation Women Culture Arts Beauty pageants Cinema Cuisine Literature Music Mythology Newspapers Public holidays Sports Television Outline Index Category Portal Links to related articles v t e Countries and dependencies of South America Sovereign states Entire Argentina Bolivia Brazil Chile Colombia Ecuador Guyana Paraguay Peru Suriname Uruguay Venezuela In part France French Guiana Dependencies Falkland Islands / South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands UK v t e Pacific Alliance Members Member states Chile Colombia Mexico Peru Associate members Australia Canada New Zealand Singapore v t e Andean Community of Nations Members Bolivia Colombia Ecuador Peru Associate members Argentina Brazil Chile Paraguay Uruguay Venezuela Observers Mexico Panama v t e Organization of American States (OAS) Members Antigua and Barbuda Argentina Bahamas Barbados Belize Bolivia Brazil Canada Chile Colombia Costa Rica Dominica Dominican Republic Ecuador El Salvador Grenada Guatemala Guyana Haiti Honduras Jamaica Mexico Panama Paraguay Peru Saint Kitts and Nevis Saint Lucia Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Suriname Trinidad and Tobago United States Uruguay Venezuela Organization General Assembly Secretariat for Political Affairs Secretariat for Integral Development Secretariat for Multidimensional Security Inter-American Commission of Women Inter-American Commission on Human Rights Inter-American Telecommunication Commission Inter-American Court of Human Rights Pan American Union Building Politics Charter Inter-American Treaty of Reciprocal Assistance American Declaration of the Rights and Duties of Man American Convention on Human Rights Pan-American Conference Summit of the Americas v t e Union of South American Nations Members Full members Bolivia Guyana Suriname Venezuela Suspended members Argentina Brazil Chile Colombia Ecuador Paraguay Peru Uruguay Summits 2004 2008 2009 Ecuador 2009 Argentina 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 Topics Cusco Declaration Constitutive Treaty President Pro Tempore Secretary General Bank of the South South American Parliament Initiative for Infrastructure Integration of South America Council of South American Defense Related Mercosur Andean Community v t e Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) History Convention on the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development OECD Anti-Bribery Convention Programme for International Student Assessment Programme for the International Assessment of Adult Competencies Guidelines Multinational Enterprises Testing of Chemicals v t e Nations in the Group of 15 (G-15) Summits 1990 1991 1992 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2004 2006 2010 2012 Members Algeria Argentina Brazil Chile Egypt India Indonesia Iran Jamaica Kenya Malaysia Mexico Nigeria Senegal Sri Lanka Venezuela Zimbabwe v t e Mercosur · Mercosul (Southern Common Market) Politics Treaty of Asunción Protocol of Ouro Preto Visa policies Members Full members Argentina Bolivia Brazil Paraguay Uruguay Venezuela (suspended) Associated states Chile Colombia Ecuador Guyana Peru Suriname Observers Mexico New Zealand Institutions President pro tempore Parliament Currencies Argentine peso Brazilian real Paraguayan guaraní Uruguayan peso Venezuelan bolívar Integration Citizenship Vehicle registration plates Relations European Union v t e Non-Aligned Movement Members and the NAM Cyprus ‡ Egypt Ghana India Malta ‡ Sri Lanka Tanzania Yugoslavia ‡ Zimbabwe Structure Bureau Coordinating Bureau of the Non-Aligned Movement Organizations Centre for South-South Technical Cooperation Centre for Science and Technology of the Non-aligned and Other Developing Countries Center for Human Rights and Cultural Diversity NAM Youth NAM News Network ( News Agencies Pool ) "Josip Broz Tito" Art Gallery of the Nonaligned Countries Principles Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence Summits Bandung Conference Brioni Meeting 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th 6th 7th 8th 9th 10th 16th 18th 19th Founders Josip Broz Tito ( Yugoslavia ) Sukarno ( Indonesia ) Jawaharlal Nehru ( India ) Kwame Nkrumah ( Ghana ) Gamal Abdel Nasser ( Egypt ) People Houari Boumédiène Fidel Castro Nelson Mandela Mohamed Morsi Nicolás Maduro Sirimavo Bandaranaike ‡ denotes a former member state of the Non-Aligned Movement Authority control databases International ISNI 2 VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France 2 BnF data 2 Japan Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Norway Vatican Israel Catalonia Geographic MusicBrainz area Academics CiNii Artists KulturNav People UK Parliament Other IdRef 2 Historical Dictionary of Switzerland NARA Yale LUX 34°S 71°W ﻿ / ﻿ 34°S 71°W ﻿ / -34; -71 NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐api‐ext.codfw.main‐77f755c49c‐wzgdr
Cached time: 20250817103805
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 3.138 seconds
Real time usage: 3.661 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 24987/1000000
Revision size: 227800/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 839127/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 98740/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 22/100
Expensive parser function count: 84/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 1084173/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.966/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 22287593/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 3062.536      1 -total
 53.89% 1650.307      2 Template:Reflist
 28.16%  862.432    167 Template:Cite_web
  9.43%  288.787      1 Template:Infobox_country
  6.96%  213.179     37 Template:Cite_book
  4.86%  148.835     26 Template:Cite_news
  4.12%  126.089     15 Template:Cite_journal
  3.56%  109.012      1 Template:Sister_project_links
  3.19%   97.572      1 Template:Chile_topics
  3.11%   95.294      1 Template:Country_topics Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:5489:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817103805 and revision id 1306263188. Rendering was triggered because: api-parse Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Chile&oldid=1306263188 " Categories : Chile G15 nations Former Spanish colonies Republics States and territories established in 1818 Countries and territories where Spanish is an official language Countries in South America Member states of the United Nations 1818 establishments in South America 1818 establishments in Chile OECD members CPTPP Hidden categories: Pages using the Phonos extension Pages with Spanish IPA Pages including recorded pronunciations Articles containing Spanish-language text CS1 Spanish-language sources (es) Pages with missing ISBNs Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica CS1 Italian-language sources (it) Webarchive template wayback links Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from July 2013 CS1: unfit URL Pages containing links to subscription-only content CS1 Portuguese-language sources (pt) CS1 Basque-language sources (eu) CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Wikipedia pages semi-protected against vandalism Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages Use dmy dates from March 2024 Articles containing Mapudungun-language text Articles containing Quechua-language text All pages needing factual verification Wikipedia articles needing factual verification from August 2024 Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from September 2010 Articles using Mw magnitude scale Wikipedia articles in need of updating from May 2025 All Wikipedia articles in need of updating Articles containing potentially dated statements from November 2012 All articles containing potentially dated statements Wikipedia articles needing clarification from May 2014 Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2007 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2014 Pages using largest cities with unknown parameters Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2012 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from April 2018 Pages using multiple image with auto scaled images Pages using Sister project links with hidden wikidata Pages using Sister project links with default search Coordinates on Wikidata This page was last edited on 16 August 2025, at 20:48 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Chile 305 languages Add topic

