Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Facilities 3 Satellites and instruments 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Laboratory for Atmospheric and Space Physics 2 languages Français Norsk bokmål Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 40°00′31″N 105°14′51″W ﻿ / ﻿ 40.00865°N 105.24746°W ﻿ / 40.00865; -105.24746 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Research organization at the University of Colorado Boulder This article relies largely or entirely on a single source .

Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page . Please help improve this article by introducing  citations to additional sources .

Find sources: "Laboratory for Atmospheric and Space Physics" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( March 2014 ) The Laboratory for Atmospheric and Space Physics ( LASP ) is a research organization at the University of Colorado Boulder . LASP is a research institute with over one hundred research scientists ranging in fields from solar influences, to Earth's and other planetary atmospherics processes, space weather, space plasma and dusty plasma physics. LASP has advanced technical capabilities specializing in designing, building, and operating spacecraft and spacecraft instruments.

History [ edit ] Founded after World War II, the first scientific instruments built at LASP were launched into space using captured German V-2 rockets. To this day LASP continues a suborbital rocket program through periodic calibration instrument flights from White Sands Missile Range. It was originally called the Upper Air Laboratory , but changed to its current name in 1965. LASP has historical ties to Ball Aerospace Corporation and the Center for Astrophysics and Space Astronomy (CASA).

Facilities [ edit ] The LASP Space Technology Research Center (LSTR) on campus at CU Boulder LASP has two main facilities located in the University of Colorado Boulder Research Park: the LASP Space Technology Research Center (LSTR) and Space Science (SPSC). Two additional facilities - Astrophysical Research Lab (ARL) and Space Learning Lab (SLL/NPL) - are also part of LASP.

LASP's new facilities allow it to handle almost every aspect of space missions , itself. Hardware facilities allow for the construction of single instruments or entire spacecraft . A Mission Operations Center allows for the control of spacecraft data collection, and a large research staff analyzes the data.

Being part of the University, LASP has heavy student involvement in every aspect of its operations, including science, hardware design / construction and mission operations.

Satellites and instruments [ edit ] LASP supports the following spacecraft and instruments: Galileo ultraviolet spectrometer Cassini-Huygens Ultraviolet Imaging Spectrograph (UVIS) Upper Atmosphere Research Satellite (UARS) Solar/Stellar Irradiance Comparison Experiment (SOLSTICE) Student Nitric Oxide Explorer (SNOE) Solar Radiation and Climate Experiment (SORCE) Ice, Cloud and Land Elevation Satellite (ICESat) Quick Scatterometer Mission (QuikSCAT) TIMED (Thermosphere Ionosphere Mesosphere Energetics and Dynamics) Solar EUV Experiment (SEE) MESSENGER (Mercury: Surface, Space Environment, Geochemistry, Ranging) Mercury Atmospheric and Surface Composition Spectrometer (MASCS) New Horizons Student Dust Counter (SDC) Aeronomy of Ice in the Mesosphere (AIM) Kepler Space Observatory Solar Dynamics Observatory (SDO) EUV Variability Experiment (EVE) Glory Total Irradiance Monitor (TIM) Radiation Belt Storm Probes (RBSP) Relativistic Electron Proton Telescope (REPT) Colorado Student Space Weather Experiment (CSSWE) CubeSat with REPT integrated little experiment (REPTile) Lunar Atmosphere and Dust Environment Explorer (LADEE) Lunar Dust Experiment (LDEX) MAVEN - Mars Atmosphere and Volatile EvolutioN Mission Magnetospheric Multiscale Mission - MMS Miniature X-ray Solar Spectrometer (MinXSS) CubeSat Total Solar Irradiance Calibration Transfer Experiment (TCTE) GOES-R Extreme Ultra Violet and X-Ray Irradiance Sensors [ 1 ] Global-scale Observations of Limb and Disk (GOLD), a hosted payload on the SES-14 TV satellite.

[ 2 ] Hope , Martian orbiter sponsored by the United Arab Emirates Interstellar Mapping and Acceleration Probe (IMAP) Interstellar Dust EXperiment (IDEX) See also [ edit ] Spaceflight portal National Center for Atmospheric Research (NCAR) IDL (programming language) References [ edit ] ^ Thompson, Tabatha; O'Carroll, Cynthia M.; Leslie, John (August 23, 2007).

"NASA Awards NOAA Goes-R Instrument Contract" (press release) .

NASA . Retrieved August 23, 2007 .

^ "SES-14 Integrates NASA Ultraviolet Space Spectrograph" (Press release). SES. May 23, 2017 . Retrieved June 7, 2017 .

External links [ edit ] LASP official website Colorado Center for Lunar Dust and Atmosphere Studies 40°00′31″N 105°14′51″W ﻿ / ﻿ 40.00865°N 105.24746°W ﻿ / 40.00865; -105.24746 v t e University of Colorado Boulder Located in : Boulder, Colorado Academics College of Architecture and Planning College of Arts and Sciences College of Engineering and Applied Science College of Music Graduate School Interdisciplinary Telecommunications Program Leeds School of Business School of Education College of Media, Communication and Information University of Colorado Law School University of Colorado Engineering Management Program Research Colorado Center for Astrodynamics Research Cooperative Institute for Research in Environmental Sciences ( National Snow and Ice Data Center ) Institute of Arctic and Alpine Research JILA Laboratory for Atmospheric and Space Physics Theoretical Advanced Study Institute Campus Fiske Planetarium Norlin Quad Sommers–Bausch Observatory University of Colorado Museum of Natural History Athletics Programs Crew Men's basketball Women's basketball Cross country Football Women's lacrosse Triathlon Women's volleyball Venues Events Center Folsom Field Rivalries Rocky Mountain Showdown Rumble in the Rockies Kansas State Nebraska Culture Fight Song "Golden Buffalo" Marching Band Ralphie the Buffalo Related Pac-12 Conference Big 12 Conference Student life Residential halls ( Cheyenne Arapaho Hall ) The Hill KVCU CU Independent CU Buffoons Colorado Shakespeare Festival Mazal Holocaust Collection Society for the Advancement of Central and East European Cultures University of Colorado Student Government "Crack Baby Athletic Association" Cannibal! The Musical People Alumni Related Los Seis de Boulder Simpson v. University of Colorado Founded : 1876 Students : 32,201 Endowment : $1.09 billion Authority control databases International VIAF National United States Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Laboratory_for_Atmospheric_and_Space_Physics&oldid=1253380720 " Category : University of Colorado Boulder Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from March 2014 All articles needing additional references Use American English from March 2014 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use mdy dates from March 2014 Coordinates on Wikidata This page was last edited on 25 October 2024, at 17:49 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Laboratory for Atmospheric and Space Physics 2 languages Add topic

