Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early years 2 Academic career 3 Research 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Ronald C. Kessler 4 languages فارسی Français עברית Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American sociologist and professor of health care policy For the journalist, see Ronald Kessler .

Ronald C. Kessler Born ( 1947-04-26 ) April 26, 1947 (age 78) Education New York University (Ph.D. Sociology 1975), Temple University (B.A. Sociology 1970) Alma mater New York University Known for psychiatric epidemiology Scientific career Fields psychiatric epidemiology Institutions Syracuse University , University of Pittsburgh , University of Hawaii , Lehigh University , University of California, Irvine Website scholar .harvard .edu /rckessler /faculty-and-staff Ronald C. Kessler (born April 26, 1947) is an American professor at Harvard Medical School . His research focuses on the precision treatment of mental illness to determine the appropriate intervention for specific patients. He ranks among the most highly cited researchers in the world, with an h-index of 349 as of June 2025.

[ 1 ] He developed the Kessler psychological distress scale, which is designed to measure non-specific psychological distress.

[ 2 ] Early years [ edit ] Kessler was born in Bristol, Pennsylvania on April 26, 1947. He graduated with a B.A.

in sociology from Temple University in 1970. He went on to complete his M.A.

in sociology in 1973 and Ph.D.

in sociology in 1975 from New York University .

[ 3 ] Academic career [ edit ] Kessler was a predoctoral Fellow at Health Service Research at Montefiore Hospital in Bronx, New York, from 1972 to 1974. He was a research associate at New York State Psychiatric Institute from 1975 to 1976 and at the Centre for Policy Research from 1976 to 1977.

[ 3 ] He was a postdoctoral Fellow at the Department of Psychiatry, University of Wisconsin–Madison from 1977 to 1979. He then worked on the faculty at the University of Michigan for 17 years. He became a professor of health care policy at Harvard Medical School in 1996.

[ 3 ] In 2008, Kessler was elected a member of American National Academy of Sciences in the categories of Social Sciences and Political Science.

[ 4 ] Research [ edit ] Kessler is the principal investigator of the National Comorbidity Survey (NCS). The NCS was the first nationally representative survey of the prevalence and correlates of psychiatric disorders in the United States. The survey was carried out in 1991 and 1992.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] He co-developed his psychological stress scale in 1992 alongside Dan Mroczek.

[ 2 ] He is also the principal investigator of several NCS extensions, including a 10-year follow-up of the baseline NCS sample and a replication of the NCS in 2001 and 2002 to study changes in mental health and treatment of mental disorders in the U.S.

over the decade of the 1990s.

[ 6 ] He also codirects the World Health Organization ’s World Mental Health (WMH) surveys, a series of nationally representative epidemiological surveys carried out in 28 countries with a combined sample size of over 200,000 respondents. The surveys carried out by World Mental Health are designed to provide information for government planners to help guide investments in mental health care.

[ 7 ] He is involved in the design and implementation of several experimental workplace interventions in the United States, Latin America, and Asia aimed at determining the cost-effectiveness of diverse workplace disease management programs from the employer's perspective. He also is involved in the design, implementation, and evaluation of the long-term effects of intervention programs for youth with emotional problems. He also directs the Hurricane Katrina Community Advisory Group, a panel study of psychological adjustment among people who were residents of the areas affected by Hurricane Katrina at the time of the storm.

[ 8 ] His current research involves carrying out the NCS adolescent (NCS-A) survey, the first nationally representative survey of adolescent mental health ever done in the United States. The participants are more than 10,000 adolescents and their parents and teachers.

[ 6 ] References [ edit ] ^ "Highly Cited Researchers (h>100) according to their Google Scholar Citations public profiles | Ranking Web of Universities: Webometrics ranks 30000 institutions" .

www.webometrics.info . Retrieved 2020-10-21 .

^ a b Yiengprugsawan, Vasoontara; Kelly, Matthew; Tawatsupa, Benjawan (2014), "Kessler Psychological Distress Scale" , in Michalos, Alex C. (ed.), Encyclopedia of Quality of Life and Well-Being Research , Dordrecht: Springer Netherlands, pp.

3469– 3470, doi : 10.1007/978-94-007-0753-5_3663 , ISBN 978-94-007-0752-8 , retrieved 2025-04-01 ^ a b c "CV of Ronald C. Kessler" (PDF) . Retrieved 2019-09-21 .

^ "NAS Member Page" . Retrieved 2019-09-21 .

^ Kessler, Ronald (2013). "National Comorbidity Survey: Reinterview, 2001-2002".

ICPSR Data Holdings .

doi : 10.3886/ICPSR30921.v1 .

^ a b c "National Comorbidity Survey (NCS)" . Retrieved 2019-09-21 .

^ "Mental Health Around the World" . Retrieved 2019-09-21 .

^ Kessler, Ronald.

"Hurricane Katrina Community Advisory Group" . Retrieved 2019-09-21 .

External links [ edit ] Ronald C. Kessler publications indexed by Google Scholar Ronald C. Kessler at Harvard Medical School Interview with Ronald C. Kessler v t e Psychology History Philosophy Portal Psychologist Basic psychology Abnormal Affective neuroscience Affective science Behavioral genetics Behavioral neuroscience Behaviorism Cognitive / Cognitivism Cognitive neuroscience Social Comparative Cross-cultural Cultural Developmental Differential Ecological Evolutionary Experimental Gestalt Intelligence Mathematical Moral Neuropsychology Perception Personality Psycholinguistics Psychophysiology Quantitative Social Theoretical Applied psychology Anomalistic Applied behavior analysis Art Assessment Aviation Biography of famous people Clinical Coaching Color Community Consumer Counseling Critical Educational Ergonomics Fashion Feminist Food Forensic Health History Humanistic Industrial and organizational Legal Media Medical Military Music Occupational health Pastoral Peace and war Political Positive Photography Psychometrics Psychotherapy Religion School Sex differences Space Sport and exercise Suicidology Systems Trading Traffic Methodologies Animal testing Archival research Behavior epigenetics Case study Content analysis Experiments Human subject research Interviews Neuroimaging Observation Psychophysics Qualitative research Quantitative research Self-report inventory Statistical surveys Concepts Behavior Behavioral engineering Behavioral genetics Behavioral neuroscience Cognition Competence Consciousness Consumer behavior Emotions Feelings Human factors and ergonomics Intelligence Maslow's hierarchy of needs Mental state Mind Psychology of religion Psychometrics Sex differences Terror management theory Psychologists Wilhelm Wundt William James Ivan Pavlov Sigmund Freud Edward Thorndike Carl Jung John B. Watson Clark L. Hull Kurt Lewin Jean Piaget Gordon Allport J. P. Guilford Carl Rogers Erik Erikson B. F. Skinner Donald O. Hebb Ernest Hilgard Harry Harlow Raymond Cattell Abraham Maslow Neal E. Miller Jerome Bruner Donald T. Campbell Hans Eysenck Herbert A. Simon David McClelland Leon Festinger George A. Miller Richard Lazarus Stanley Schachter Robert Zajonc Albert Bandura Roger Brown Endel Tulving Lawrence Kohlberg Noam Chomsky Ulric Neisser Jerome Kagan Walter Mischel Elliot Aronson Daniel Kahneman Paul Ekman Michael Posner Amos Tversky Bruce McEwen Larry Squire Richard E. Nisbett Martin Seligman Ed Diener Shelley E. Taylor John Anderson Ronald C. Kessler Joseph E. LeDoux Richard Davidson Susan Fiske Roy Baumeister Lists Counseling topics Disciplines Organizations Outline Psychologists Psychotherapies Research methods Schools of thought Timeline Topics Category Wiktionary definition Wiktionary category Wikisource Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikinews Wikibooks Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Australia Netherlands Norway Israel Academics CiNii Google Scholar People DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ronald_C._Kessler&oldid=1296106253 " Categories : 1947 births Living people People from Bristol, Pennsylvania American sociologists 20th-century American psychologists 21st-century American psychologists Harvard Medical School faculty New York University alumni Temple University alumni University of Michigan faculty Members of the National Academy of Medicine Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with hCards Articles with excerpts This page was last edited on 17 June 2025, at 21:13 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Ronald C. Kessler 4 languages Add topic

