Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Construction methods 3 Sustainable Development of Urban Underground Space (UUS) 4 Structures 5 In fiction 6 See also 7 Notes 8 References 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Underground living 12 languages العربية Eesti Español Esperanto Français Bahasa Indonesia Nederlands 日本語 Română Русский Türkçe Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Living below the ground's surface For figurative senses of living underground, see Underground .

This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .

Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( February 2016 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) An underground house in the Sassi di Matera , Italy An underground jewellery shop in Coober Pedy An example of an excavated house in Brhlovce , Slovakia Underground living refers to living below the ground's surface, whether in natural or manmade caves or structures ( earth shelters ). Underground dwellings are an alternative to above-ground dwellings for some home seekers, including those who are looking to minimize impact on the environment . Factories and office buildings can benefit from underground facilities for many of the same reasons as underground dwellings such as noise abatement, energy use, and security.

Some advantages of underground houses include resistance to severe weather, quiet living space, an unobtrusive presence in the surrounding landscape, and a nearly constant interior temperature due to the natural insulating properties of the surrounding earth. One appeal is the energy efficiency and environmental friendliness of underground dwellings. However, underground living does have certain disadvantages, such as the potential for flooding, which in some cases may require special pumping systems to be installed.

It is the preferred mode of housing to communities in such extreme environments as Italy's Sassi di Matera , Australia's Coober Pedy , Berber caves as those in Matmata, Tunisia , and even Amundsen–Scott South Pole Station .

Often, underground living structures are not entirely underground; typically, they can be exposed on one side when built into a hill. This exposure can significantly improve interior lighting, although at the expense of greater exposure to the elements.

History [ edit ] There is only written documentation of Scythian and German subterranean dwellings. Remnants have been found in Switzerland, Mecklenburg and southern Bavaria, "They had a round shape with a kettle-like widening at the bottom, from eleven to fifteen metres in diameter, and from two to four metres in depth".

[ 1 ] In the final stage of World War II , the Nazis relocated entire armaments factories underground, as the Allies' air supremacy made surface structures vulnerable to daylight strategic bombing raids .

[ 2 ] Construction methods [ edit ] In parts of rural Australia, subterranean houses are built in a manner similar to prairie dog holes. There is a "chimney" placed higher than ground-level and a lower, ground-level, entrance. This orientation causes a continuous breeze throughout the house, reducing or eliminating the need for air conditioning.

Sustainable Development of Urban Underground Space (UUS) [ edit ] As a step towards achieving the United Nations' SDGs (in particular Goal 11: Make cities and human settlements inclusive, safe, resilient and sustainable [ 3 ] ), urban cities in developed economies of the world are increasingly looking "downwards" rather than expanding limited land resources at the surface.

[ 4 ] Helsinki , Singapore , Hong Kong , Minneapolis , Tokyo , Shanghai , Montreal etc. are some of the benchmark cities in this regard.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] Underground space as a valuable land resource can be integrated into a general urban resources management scheme and development policy, by rationalizing resource supply according to economic demand, and by coordinating stakeholders from the public administration, private administration, private developers and users.

[ 6 ] The consideration of the other dimension (underground) in city planning holds a promising future for sustainable underground living, where it can contribute to making cities more liveable, resilient and inclusive.

[ 7 ] Historically planning of subsurface facilities has been subject to an ad-hoc development approach by separate sectors and disciplines.

[ 8 ] Successful integration of Urban Underground Space into city planning however requires a synergy of several disciplines and stakeholders to achieve rational use of space resources.

[ 9 ] Structures [ edit ] There are various ways to develop structures for underground living.

Caves ( natural ) have been used for millennia as shelter.

Caves ( constructed )/ dugouts are a common structure for underground living. Although the tunnelling techniques required to make them have been well developed by the mining industry, they can be considerably more costly and dangerous to make than some of the alternatives. On the plus side, they can be quite deep. Some examples would be the Sassi di Matera in Italy, declared by UNESCO a World Heritage Site , and the town of Coober Pedy in Australia , built underground to avoid the blistering heat of the outback . One of the traditional house types in China is the Yaodong , a cave house. Also, see the Nok and Mamproug Cave Dwellings in Togo, Africa.

Earth berm structures are essentially traditional homes that have then been buried, [ 10 ] typically leaving at least one wall exposed for lighting and ventilation. However, because they are to be buried, the structures must be made of materials capable of surviving the increased weight and moisture of being underground.

Rammed earth structures are not truly underground, in the sense of being below grade or buried beneath a berm. Instead, they are structures made of tightly packed earth, similar to concrete but without the binding properties of cement . These structures share many properties with traditional adobe construction.

Culvert structures are a very simple approach. Large precast concrete pipes and boxes a few metres across are assembled into the desired arrangement of rooms and hallways onsite, either atop the existing ground or below grade in excavated trenches, then buried. This approach can also be referred to as Cut and Cover .

Urban underground living is so common that few even think of it as underground. Many shopping malls are partially or totally underground, in the sense that they are below grade. Though not as exotic as the other underground structures, those working in such urban underground structures are in fact living underground.

Shaft structures. For example, Taisei Corporation proposed to build Alice City in Tokyo Japan . The project would incorporate a very wide and deep shaft, within which would be built levels for habitation, all looking in toward a hollow core topped with a huge skylight.

Tunnels , including storm drains , are used by homeless people as shelter in large cities.

In fiction [ edit ] Underground living has been a feature of fiction, such as the hobbit holes of the Shire as described in the stories of J. R. R. Tolkien and The Underground City by Jules Verne . Some films are almost entirely set underground, such as THX 1138 . The Fallout series also has underground shelters called Vaults.

The majority of the early short science-fiction story " The Machine Stops " by British author E.M. Forster is set in an imagined underground city.

See also [ edit ] Housing portal Parent categories: Rock-cut architecture – Structures and sculptures cut into solid rock Subterranea (geography) – Underground space, natural and man-made underground structures: underground structures Underground city – Series of linked subterranean spaces, umbrella article for underground dwellings and facilities Underground construction – Field of engineering for the design and construction of structures below the ground Types of underground living spaces and people, and related topics: Basement – Floor of a building which is below grade Bunker – Defensive military storage fortification Dugout (shelter) – Hole or depression used as shelter Earth house – House partially or entirely surrounded by earth Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Earth sheltering – House partially or entirely surrounded by earth Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Fallout shelter – Enclosed space designated to protect occupants from radioactive debris from a nuclear explosion Green building – Structures and processes of building structures that are more environmentally responsible Icelandic turf house – House type Kiva – Room used by Puebloans for religious rituals and political meetings Mole people – People who live in tunnels underground Pit-house – Type of earth shelter with ancient origins Souterrain – Underground structure associated mainly with the Atlantic Iron Age Underground base Underwater habitat – Human habitable underwater enclosure filled with breathable gas Walipini – Earth-sheltered structure for growing plants Trench – Excavated channel in ground Quiggly hole – Remains of an earth lodge built by First Nations people Zemlyanka – Type of earth shelter with ancient origins Notes [ edit ] ^ Jochelson 1906, p. 116.

^ Grothe, Solveig (20 October 2015).

"Österreichs unterirdisches Nazi-Erbe: Codename "Bergkristall" " [Austria's Subtterranean Nazi Legacy: Code Name: "Mountain Crystal"].

Der Spiegel (in German) . Retrieved 11 July 2022 .

^ "TRANSFORMING OUR WORLD: THE 2030 AGENDA FOR SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT" (PDF) .

United Nations: Sustainable Development Goals . Retrieved 7 April 2022 .

^ Li, Amy Huanqing (2021-03-01).

"Re-promoting Sustainable Underground Urbanization for Developed and Developing Countries in Our Modern History" .

IOP Conference Series: Earth and Environmental Science .

703 (1): 012019.

Bibcode : 2021E&ES..703a2019H .

doi : 10.1088/1755-1315/703/1/012019 .

ISSN 1755-1307 .

S2CID 235292268 .

^ Vähäaho, Ilkka (2014-10-01).

"Underground space planning in Helsinki" .

Journal of Rock Mechanics and Geotechnical Engineering .

6 (5): 387– 398.

Bibcode : 2014JRMGE...6..387V .

doi : 10.1016/j.jrmge.2014.05.005 .

ISSN 1674-7755 .

^ a b Li, Huanqing; Li, Xiaozhao; Soh, Chee Kiong (2016-05-01).

"An integrated strategy for sustainable development of the urban underground: From strategic, economic and societal aspects" .

Tunnelling and Underground Space Technology . Urban Underground Space: A Growing Imperative Perspectives and Current Research in Planning and Design for Underground Space Use.

55 : 67– 82.

Bibcode : 2016TUSTI..55...67L .

doi : 10.1016/j.tust.2015.12.011 .

ISSN 0886-7798 .

^ Admiraal, Han; Cornaro, Antonia (2016-05-01).

"Why underground space should be included in urban planning policy – And how this will enhance an urban underground future" .

Tunnelling and Underground Space Technology . Urban Underground Space: A Growing Imperative Perspectives and Current Research in Planning and Design for Underground Space Use.

55 : 214– 220.

Bibcode : 2016TUSTI..55..214A .

doi : 10.1016/j.tust.2015.11.013 .

ISSN 0886-7798 .

^ Besner, Jacques (2016-05-01).

"Underground space needs an interdisciplinary approach" .

Tunnelling and Underground Space Technology . Urban Underground Space: A Growing Imperative Perspectives and Current Research in Planning and Design for Underground Space Use.

55 : 224– 228.

Bibcode : 2016TUSTI..55..224B .

doi : 10.1016/j.tust.2015.10.025 .

ISSN 0886-7798 .

^ Bobylev, Nikolai (2016).

"Transitions to a High Density Urban Underground Space" .

Procedia Engineering .

165 : 184– 192.

doi : 10.1016/j.proeng.2016.11.750 .

^ Roy 2006 , p. 22 References [ edit ] Roy, Rob (2006).

Earth-Sheltered Houses: How to Build an Affordable Underground Home .

New Society Publishers .

ISBN 978-0-86571-521-9 .

Jochelson, Waldemar. (1906).

"Past and Present Subterranean Dwellings of the Tribes of North Eastern Asia and North Western America." In Congrès International des Américanistes, XVe session tenue à Québec en 1906 , Vol. 2. Quebec: International Congress of Americanists, 1906, pp. 115–128. Reprinted Nendeln, Liechtenstein: Kraus Reprint, 1968.

External links [ edit ] v t e Subterranea Natural features Types Alcove Ant colony Aquifer Burrow Burrow fossil Communal burrow Paleoburrow Cave Glacier cave Grotto Ice cave Lava cave Lava tube Pit Cave Show cave Solutional cave Talus cave Cenote Karst Lava tree mold Magma chamber Maternity den Nest Bee Pit crater Rock shelter Sinkhole Subterranean fauna Subterranean river Subterranean waterfall Underground lake Volcanic pipe Warren Exemplars Balve Cave Castellana Caves Hang Sơn Đoòng Jewel Cave National Monument Kazumura Cave Lechuguilla Cave Mammoth Cave National Park Reed Flute Cave Subterranean rivers of London Veryovkina Cave Wind Cave National Park Man-made features Types Air raid shelter Basement Burial vault Borehole Bunker Blast shelter Catacombs Casemate Crypt Mausoleum Dungeon Dugout (shelter) Dry well Earth shelter Erdstall Fallout shelter Fogou Foxhole Hypogeum Manhole Mine Missile launch facility Passage grave Quarry Rock-cut tomb Root cellar Tunnel Utility vault Underground city Underground base Underground hangar Well Wine cave Subway system Secret passage Semi-basement Sewerage Septic tank Stepwell Storm cellar Smuggling tunnel Spider hole Ventilation shaft Exemplars 816 Nuclear Military Plant Caves of Maastricht The Caves of Ægissíða Almadén Mercury Mines Coober Pedy Cheyenne Mountain Complex Chicago Tunnel Company Houston tunnel system Kosvinsky Kamen Kőbánya cellar system Kome Caves Underground City (Beijing) Underground City, Montreal Underground Great Wall of China Maginot Line Mines of Paris Mustang Caves Mount Yamantau Mogao Caves Naples underground geothermal zone North American Aerospace Defense Command Raven Rock Mountain Complex Shanghai tunnels Subterranean London Subterranean Toledo Turda Salt Mines Yaodong Fictional features Types Hollow Earth Subterranean fiction Exemplars Allegory of the cave Batcave Greek Underworld Journey to the Center of the Earth Moria (Middle-earth) Nome Kingdom Pellucidar Subterranea (comics) Tunnels in popular culture Underdark Underland (Narnia) Wonderland (fictional country) Organisations American Society of Reclamation Sciences Bergamt Cave Research Foundation History of hard rock miners' organizations National Mine Map Repository National Mining Association National Speleological Society Grotto Institute of Materials, Minerals and Mining Institution of Mining Engineers International Union of Speleology Research Centre for Deep Drilling Society of Economic Geologists Southern African Institute of Mining and Metallurgy Related topics Cave conservation Cave dweller Cave diving Cave gate Cave rescue Cave painting Caving Civil defense Tunnel warfare Tunnel network Trench warfare Underground construction Tunnel construction Underground living Mine rescue Mine exploration Mining engineering Mole people in fiction Speleology Subterranean warfare v t e Man-made and man-related subterranea Natural features Cave Cenote Grotto Sinkhole Civilian features Bank vault Basement Burial vault (tomb) Borehole Catacombs Dungeon Dugout (shelter) Dry well Earth shelter Erdstall Fogou Hypogeum Manhole Rapid transit Rock-cut tomb Root cellar Tunnel Utility vault Underground city Well Wine cave Secret passage Semi-basement Stepwell Storm cellar Smuggling tunnel Ventilation shaft Military features Air raid shelter Bunker Blast shelter Casemate Fallout shelter Missile launch facility (silo) Scallywag bunker Underground base Underground hangar Spider hole Mining , quarrying , and underground construction Rock-cut architecture Subsurface utility engineering Tunnel construction Underground mine ventilation Underground hard-rock mining Underground soft-rock mining Related topics Cave dweller Caves of Maastricht Civil defense Coober Pedy Houston tunnel system Kőbánya cellar system Tunnel warfare Tunnel network Trench warfare Underground living Underground City (Beijing) Underground City, Montreal Mine exploration Mines of Paris Mole people Naples underground geothermal zone Sapping Subterranean London Subterranean Toledo Subterranean warfare Subterranean fiction Earth shelters US Bill Gates' house Forestiere Underground Gardens Underground House Colorado Underground House Las Vegas Underground World Home Earth shelters UK Underhill, Holme Hockerton Housing Project Malator Earth shelters Australia Coober Pedy Lightning Ridge Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Underground_living&oldid=1291887569 " Categories : Underground cities Subterranea (geography) Semi-subterranean structures Underground construction Hidden categories: CS1 German-language sources (de) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles lacking in-text citations from February 2016 All articles lacking in-text citations Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets via Module:Annotated link This page was last edited on 24 May 2025, at 00:16 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Underground living 12 languages Add topic

