Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Corporate power and organization 2 Forms of tech capitalism 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Technocapitalism 9 languages العربية Català Español 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Македонски Português Svenska Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Changes in capitalism associated with the emergence of new technology sectors Part of a series on Capitalism Concepts Austerity Business Business cycle Businessperson Capital Capital accumulation Capital markets Company Corporation Competition Competition law Definitions Economic interventionism Economic liberalism Economic surplus Entrepreneurship Fictitious capital Financial market Free price system Free market Goods and services Investor Invisible hand Visible hand Liberalization Marginalism Money Private property Privatization Profit Rent seeking Supply and demand Surplus value Value Wage labour Economic systems Anglo-Saxon Authoritarian Corporate Dirigist Free-market Humanistic Laissez-faire Liberal Libertarian Market Mercantilist Mixed Monopoly National Neoliberal Nordic Private Raw Regulated market Regulatory Rhine Social Political State State-sponsored Welfare Economic theories American Austrian Chartalism MMT Chicago Classical Institutional Keynesian Neo- New Post- Market monetarism Critique of political economy Critique of work Marxist Monetarist Neoclassical New institutional Supply-side Ideologies Anarcho Authoritarian Classical liberalism Democratic Dirigisme Eco Gladstonian Humanistic Inclusive Liberal Liberalism Libertarian Neo Neoliberalism Objectivism Ordoliberalism Privatism Right-libertarianism Third Way Origins Age of Enlightenment Capitalism and Islam Commercial Revolution Feudalism Industrial Revolution Mercantilism Primitive accumulation Physiocracy Simple commodity production Development Advanced Consumer Community Corporate Crony Finance Global Illiberal Late Marxist Merchant Progressive Rentier State monopoly Technological Intellectuals Smith Bentham Malthus Say Ricardo Mill (James) Bastiat Mill (John Stuart) Marx Walras Marshall Pareto Veblen Weber von Mises Schumpeter Keynes Hayek Rand Weaver Coase Friedman Rothbard Sowell Becker Hoppe Related topics Anti-capitalism Capitalist propaganda Capitalist realism Capitalist state Consumerism Crisis theory Criticism of capitalism Critique of political economy Critique of work Cronyism Culture of capitalism Evergreening Exploitation of labour Globalization History History of theory Market economy Periodizations of capitalism Perspectives on capitalism Post-capitalism Speculation Spontaneous order Venture philanthropy Wage slavery Capitalism portal Business portal Economics portal v t e Technocapitalism refers to a contemporary economic and social system characterized by the dominance of technology-driven capital, where technological innovation becomes a central component of economic growth and wealth accumulation . This term encapsulates the interplay between technology and capitalism , highlighting how advancements in technology influence economic structures, labor markets, and social relations. A significant aspect of technocapitalism is the rise of the intangible economy, which is marked by the increasing importance of non-physical assets such as intellectual property , brand value , and digital services. This shift has led to new forms of economic centralization, where a few tech giants dominate markets due to their ability to scale rapidly and leverage synergies across different sectors.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] Corporate power and organization [ edit ] Luis Suarez-Villa, in his 2009 book Technocapitalism: A Critical Perspective on Technological Innovation and Corporatism argues that it is a new version of capitalism that generates new forms of corporate organization designed to exploit intangibles such as creativity and new knowledge .

[ 7 ] The new organizations, which he refers to as experimentalist organizations are deeply grounded in technological research, as opposed to manufacturing and services production. They are also heavily dependent on the corporate appropriation of research outcomes as intellectual property .

This approach is further developed by Suarez-Villa in his 2012 book Globalization and Technocapitalism: The Political Economy of Corporate Power and Technological Domination , in which he relates the emergence of technocapitalism to globalization and to the growing power of technocapitalist corporations .

[ 8 ] Taking into account the new relations of power introduced by the corporations that control technocapitalism, he considers new forms of accumulation involving intangibles—such as creativity and new knowledge —along with intellectual property and technological infrastructure. This perspective on globalization —and the effect of technocapitalism and its corporations—also takes into account the growing global importance of intangibles, the inequalities created between nations at the vanguard of technocapitalism and those that are not, the increasing importance of brain-drain flows between nations, and the rise of what he refers to as a techno-military-corporate complex that is rapidly replacing the old military-industrial complex of the second half of the 20th century.

The concept behind technocapitalism is part of a line of thought that relates science and technology to the evolution of capitalism . At the core of this idea of the evolution of capitalism is that science and technology are not divorced from society—or that they exist in a vacuum, or in a separate reality of their own—out of reach of social action and human decision. Science and technology are part of society, and they are subject to the priorities of capitalism as much as any other human endeavor, if not more so.  Prominent scientists in the early 20th century, such as John Bernal , posited that science has a social function, and cannot be seen as something apart from society.

[ 9 ] Other scientists at that time, such as John Haldane , related science to social philosophy, and showed how critical approaches to social analysis are very relevant to science, and to our understanding of the need for science.

[ 10 ] In our time, this line of thought has encouraged philosophers such as Andrew Feenberg to adopt and apply a critical theory approach to technology and science, providing many important insights on how scientific and technological decisions—and their outcomes—are shaped by society, and by capitalism and its institutions.

[ 11 ] The term technocapitalism has been used by one author to denote aspects and ideas that diverge sharply from those explained above.

Dinesh D'Souza , writing about Silicon Valley in an article, used the term to describe the corporate environment and venture capital relationships in a high tech-oriented local economy.  His approach to the topic was consonant with that of business journals and the corporate management literature.  Some newspaper articles have also used the term occasionally and in a very general sense, to denote the importance of advanced technologies in the economy.

Forms of tech capitalism [ edit ] Tech capitalism can take many forms such as IP based financing where patents and registered IP of new technology is an instrument for building capitalism, [ 12 ] debt based equity where new and innovative technology is used as the security interest for securing financing or leasing, and ICOs such as Blockchain capital.

[ 13 ] See also [ edit ] " The Californian Ideology " Corporate capitalism Corporatocracy Cyberpunk Innovation Information society Intellectual property Oligopoly Political economy Research and development Surveillance capitalism Technological evolution Technological fix Technological singularity Technological unemployment References [ edit ] ^ Suarez-Villa, Luis (2001).

"The Rise of Technocapitalism" .

Science & Technology Studies .

14 (2): 4– 20.

doi : 10.23987/sts.55133 .

^ Suarez-Villa, Luis (2003). "The E-economy and the Rise of Technocapitalism: Networks, Firms, and Transportation".

Growth and Change .

34 (4): 390– 414.

doi : 10.1046/j.0017-4815.2003.00227.x .

^ Stubbs, Alec (2020). "Technocapitalism, the Intangible Economy, and Economic Centralization".

Perspectives on Global Development and Technology .

19 ( 1– 2): 32– 44.

doi : 10.1163/15691497-12341538 .

^ Haskel, Jonathan (2018).

Capitalism without Capital: The rise of the Intangible Economy . Princeton: Princeton University Press .

ISBN 9780691175034 .

^ Suarez-Villa, Luis (2012).

Technocapitalism: A Critical Perspective on Technological Innovation and Corporatism . Philadelphia: Temple University Press .

ISBN 9781439900437 .

^ Suarez-Villa, Luis (2016).

Globalization and technocapitalism: The Political Economy of Corporate Power and Technological Domination . London: Routledge .

ISBN 9781315585123 .

^ Suarez-Villa, Luis (2012).

Technocapitalism: A Critical Perspective on Technological Innovation and Corporatism . Philadelphia: Temple University Press .

ISBN 9781439900437 .

^ Suarez-Villa, Luis (2016).

Globalization and technocapitalism: The political economy of Corporate Power and Technological Domination . London: Routledge .

ISBN 9781315585123 .

^ John D. Bernal, The Social Function of Science (New York: Macmillan, 1939).

^ John B. S. Haldane, Dialectical Materialism and Modern Science (London: Labour Monthly, 1942).

^ Andrew Feenberg, Critical Theory of Technology (New York: Oxford University Press, 1991).

^ Business Bank, British.

"Using Intellectual Property to secure finance" (PDF) .

UK Govt Publishing Services . British Business Bank . Retrieved 18 February 2019 .

{{ cite web }} : |last1= has generic name ( help ) ^ Popper, Nathaniel (27 October 2017).

"An explanation of ICOs" . No. NY Times Online. NY Times. New York Times . Retrieved 18 February 2019 .

External links [ edit ] Media related to Technocapitalism at Wikimedia Commons www .technocapitalism .com Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Technocapitalism&oldid=1260435653 " Categories : Capitalist systems Technological change Hidden categories: CS1 errors: generic name Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 30 November 2024, at 19:13 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Technocapitalism 9 languages Add topic

