Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Before the 16th century 2 Catholic Church Toggle Catholic Church subsection 2.1 Latin Church 2.1.1 List of Doctors 2.1.2 Proposed Doctors 2.1.3 Other recognised Doctors 2.1.4 Scholastic epithets 2.2 Syro-Malabar Catholic Church 2.3 Chaldean Catholic Church 3 Eastern Orthodox Church Toggle Eastern Orthodox Church subsection 3.1 Russian Orthodox Church 4 Armenian Church 5 Assyrian Church of the East 6 Anglicanism 7 Lutheranism 8 See also 9 References 10 Further reading 11 External links Toggle the table of contents Doctor of the Church 56 languages Alemannisch العربية Azərbaycanca Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto فارسی Français Frysk Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Italiano עברית Jawa Kiswahili Latina Lietuvių Lingua Franca Nova Magyar Malagasy Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Română Русский Shqip Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Title given by the Catholic Church to saints Isidore of Seville , a seventh-century Doctor of the Church, depicted by Murillo ( c.

1628 ) with a book, which is a common iconographical attribute for a doctor Hildegard von Bingen was an eleventh-century Doctor of the Church, depicted here by Marshall with a book, the common iconographical attribute for a doctor Doctor of the Church ( Latin : doctor "teacher"), also referred to as Doctor of the Universal Church (Latin: Doctor Ecclesiae Universalis ), is a title given by the Catholic Church to saints recognized as having made a significant contribution to theology or doctrine through their research, study, or writing.

[ 1 ] As of 2025 [update] , the Catholic Church has named 38 Doctors of the Church. Of these, the 18 who died before the Great Schism of 1054 are also held in high esteem by the Eastern Orthodox Church , although it does not use the formal title Doctor of the Church .

Among the 38 recognised Doctors, 28 are from the West and nine from the East; four are women and thirty-four are men; one is an abbess, three are nuns, and one is a tertiary associated with a religious order; two are popes, 19 are bishops, thirteen are priests, and one is a deacon; and 28 are from Europe, three are from Africa, and seven are from Asia. More Doctors (twelve) lived in the fourth century than any other; eminent Christian writers of the first, second, and third centuries are usually referred to as the Ante-Nicene Fathers . The shortest period between death and nomination was that of Alphonsus Liguori , who died in 1787 and was named a Doctor in 1871 – a period of 84 years; the longest was that of Irenaeus , which took more than eighteen centuries.

Some other churches have similar categories with various names.

Before the 16th century [ edit ] In the Western church four outstanding "Fathers of the Church" attained this honour in the early Middle Ages: Gregory the Great , Ambrose , Augustine of Hippo , and Jerome . The "four Doctors" became a commonplace notion among scholastic theologians, and a decree of Boniface VIII (1298) ordering their feasts to be kept as doubles throughout the Latin Church is contained in his sixth book of Decretals (cap. "Gloriosus", de relique. et vener. sanctorum, in Sexto, III, 22).

[ 2 ] In the Byzantine Church , three Doctors were pre-eminent: John Chrysostom , Basil the Great , and Gregory of Nazianzus . The feasts of these three saints were made obligatory throughout the Eastern Empire by Leo VI the Wise . A common feast was later instituted in their honour on 30 January, called "the feast of the three Hierarchs ". In the Menaea for that day it is related that the three Doctors appeared in a dream to John Mauropous , Bishop of Euchaita , and commanded him to institute a festival in their honour, in order to put a stop to the rivalries of their votaries and panegyrists.

[ 2 ] This was under Alexius Comnenus (1081–1118; see "Acta SS.", 14 June, under St. Basil, c. xxxviii). But sermons for the feast are attributed in manuscripts to Cosmas Vestitor , who flourished in the tenth century. The three are as common in Eastern art as the four are in Western.

Durandus (i, 3) remarks that Doctors should be represented with books in their hands. In the West analogy led to the veneration of four Eastern Doctors, Athanasius of Alexandria being added to the three hierarchs.

[ 2 ] Catholic Church [ edit ] The Four Great Doctors of the Western Church were often depicted in art, here by Pier Francesco Sacchi , c.

1516 . From the left: Saint Augustine , Pope Gregory I , Saint Jerome , and Saint Ambrose , with their attributes .

The details of the title Doctor of the Church vary from one autonomous ritual church to another.

Latin Church [ edit ] In the Latin Church , the four Latin Doctors ( Ambrose , Augustine , Jerome , and Gregory ) had been given a special pre-eminence since the eighth century, but in 1298 Pope Boniface VIII declared them Doctors of the Church.

[ 3 ] Pope Pius V recognized the four Great Doctors of the Eastern Church ( John Chrysostom , Basil the Great , Gregory of Nazianzus , and Athanasius of Alexandria ) in 1568.

[ 4 ] To these names others have subsequently been added. The requisite conditions are enumerated as three: eminens doctrina , insignis vitae sanctitas , Ecclesiae declaratio (i.e. eminent learning, a high degree of sanctity, and proclamation by the church).

Benedict XIV explains the third as a declaration by the supreme pontiff or by a general council .

[ 2 ] The decree is issued by the Dicastery for the Causes of Saints and approved by the pope, after a careful examination, if necessary, of the saint's writings. It is not an ex cathedra decision, nor does it amount to a declaration that no error is to be found in the teaching of the Doctor. Doctors of the Church are not considered wholly immune from error. Previously, no martyrs were on the list, since the Office and the Mass had been for Confessors . Hence, as Benedict XIV pointed out during his pontificate, Ignatius of Antioch , Irenaeus of Lyons , and Cyprian of Carthage were not called Doctors of the Church.

[ 2 ] This changed in 2022 when Pope Francis declared Irenaeus of Lyons the first martyred Doctor.

The Doctors' works vary greatly in subject and form. Augustine of Hippo was one of the most prolific writers in Christian antiquity and wrote in almost every genre. Some, such as Pope Gregory the Great and Ambrose of Milan, were prominent writers of letters. Pope Leo the Great , Pope Gregory the Great, Peter Chrysologus , Bernard of Clairvaux , Anthony of Padua and Lawrence of Brindisi left many homilies.

Catherine of Siena , Teresa of Ávila , John of the Cross and Therese of Lisieux wrote works of mystical theology . Athanasius of Alexandria and Robert Bellarmine defended the church against heresy .

Bede the Venerable wrote biblical commentaries and theological treatises. Systematic theologians include the Scholastic philosophers Anselm of Canterbury , Albert the Great , and Thomas Aquinas .

In the 1920 encyclical Spiritus Paraclitus , Pope Benedict XV refers to Jerome as the church's "Greatest Doctor".

[ 5 ] Until 1970, no woman had been named a Doctor of the Church. Since then four additions to the list have been women: Teresa of Ávila (also known as Saint Teresa of Jesus) and Catherine of Siena by Pope Paul VI ; Therese of Lisieux [ 6 ] by Pope John Paul II ; and Hildegard of Bingen by Benedict XVI . Teresa and Thérèse were both Discalced Carmelites , Catherine was a Dominican , and Hildegard was a Benedictine nun.

Traditionally, in the Liturgy , the Office of Doctors was distinguished from that of Confessors by two changes: the Gospel reading Vos estis sal terrae ("You are the salt of the earth"), Matthew 5:13–19, and the eighth Respond at Matins, from Ecclesiasticus 15:5, In medio Ecclesiae aperuit os ejus, * Et implevit eum Deus spiritu sapientiae et intellectus. * Jucunditatem et exsultationem thesaurizavit super eum.

("In the midst of the Church he opened his mouth, * And God filled him with the spirit of wisdom and understanding. * He heaped upon him a treasure of joy and gladness.") The Nicene Creed was also recited at Mass, which is normally not said except on Sundays and the highest-ranking feast days. The 1962 revisions to the Missal dropped the Creed from feasts of Doctors and abolished the title and the Common of Confessors, instituting a distinct Common of Doctors.

[ citation needed ] On 20 August 2011, Pope Benedict XVI announced that he would soon declare John of Ávila a Doctor of the Church.

[ 7 ] It was also reported in December 2011 that Pope Benedict intended to declare Hildegard of Bingen as a Doctor of the Church, though she had not yet been canonized.

[ 8 ] Pope Benedict XVI declared Hildegard of Bingen a saint on 10 May 2012, clearing the way for her to be named a Doctor of the Church, [ 9 ] then declared both John of Ávila and Hildegard of Bingen Doctors of the Church on 7 October 2012.

[ 10 ] Pope Francis declared the 10th-century Armenian monk Gregory of Narek the 36th Doctor of the Church on 21 February 2015.

[ 11 ] The decision was somewhat controversial, as Gregory was a monk of the Armenian Apostolic Church , a non-Chalcedonian church that was not in communion with the Catholic Church during Gregory's life and has sometimes been described as monophysite . However, the Armenian Apostolic Church does not accept monophysitism, and in 1996, Pope John Paul II and Catholicos Karekin I , patriarch of the Armenian Apostolic Church, signed a joint declaration which said that the division between the two churches was due to historical misunderstandings, not a real difference in Christology. Further, Gregory had been recognized as a saint by the Catholic Church since it received the Armenian Catholic Church into full communion.

[ 12 ] On 31 July 2025, a statement from the Holy See Press Office reported that during an audience granted to Cardinal Marcello Semeraro, Prefect of the Dicastery for the Causes of Saints, Pope Leo XIV had "confirmed the affirmative opinion of the Plenary Session of Cardinals and Bishops, Members of the Dicastery for the Causes of Saints, regarding the title of Doctor of the Universal Church, which will soon be conferred on Saint John Henry Newman ." [ 13 ] In November 2023, the USCCB had voted to support a petition by the Catholic Bishops' Conference of England and Wales for the Vatican to name John Henry Newman a Doctor of the Church.

[ 14 ] The epithet Doctor amicitiae (Doctor of Friendship ) has been suggested for him.

[ 15 ] List of Doctors [ edit ] (For earlier authorities on Christian doctrine, see Church Fathers and Ante-Nicene Fathers ) * indicates a saint who is also held in high esteem by the Eastern Orthodox Church .

No.

Image Name Titles Born Died Promoted Activity Notable writings Pope 1 Gregory the Great* One of the four Great Latin Fathers 540 (c.) 604 1298 Pope , OSB Dialogues Libellus responsionum Pastoral Care Moralia in Job Pope Boniface VIII 2 Ambrose* One of the four Great Latin Fathers 340 (c.) 397 1298 Bishop of Milan Ambrosian hymns Exameron De obitu Theodosii 3 Augustine of Hippo* One of the four Great Latin Fathers Doctor gratiae (Doctor of Grace) 354 430 1298 Bishop of Hippo (now Annaba ) De doctrina Christiana Confessions The City of God On the Trinity 4 Jerome* One of the four Great Latin Fathers 347 (c.) 420 1298 Priest, monk Vulgate De Viris Illustribus 5 Thomas Aquinas Doctor angelicus (Angelic Doctor) Doctor communis (Common Doctor) 1225 1274 1567 Priest, Theologian, OP Summa Theologiae Summa contra Gentiles Pope Pius V 6 John Chrysostom* One of the four Great Greek Fathers 347 407 1568 Archbishop of Constantinople Paschal Homily Adversus Judaeos 7 Basil the Great* One of the four Great Greek Fathers 330 379 1568 Bishop of Caesarea Address to Young Men on Greek Literature On the Holy Spirit 8 Gregory of Nazianzus* One of the four Great Greek Fathers 329 389 1568 Archbishop of Constantinople On God and Christ: The Five Theological Orations and Two Letters to Cledonius 9 Athanasius* One of the four Great Greek Fathers 298 373 1568 Archbishop of Alexandria On the Incarnation The Life of Antony Letters to Serapion 10 Bonaventure Doctor seraphicus (Seraphic Doctor) 1221 1274 1588 Cardinal Bishop of Albano , Theologian, Minister General, OFM Commentary on the Sentences of Lombard The Mind's Road to God Collationes in Hexaemeron Pope Sixtus V 11 Anselm of Canterbury Doctor magnificus (Magnificent Doctor) Doctor Marianus ( Marian Doctor) 1033 or 1034 1109 1720 Archbishop of Canterbury , OSB Proslogion Cur Deus Homo Pope Clement XI 12 Isidore of Seville* 560 636 1722 Archbishop of Seville Etymologiae On the Catholic Faith against the Jews Pope Innocent XIII 13 Peter Chrysologus* 406 450 1729 Bishop of Ravenna Homilies Pope Benedict XIII 14 Leo the Great* [ 16 ] Doctor unitatis Ecclesiae (Doctor of the Church's Unity) 400 461 1754 Pope Leo's Tome Pope Benedict XIV 15 Peter Damian 1007 1072 1828 Cardinal Bishop of Ostia , monk, OSB De Divina Omnipotentia Liber Gomorrhianus Pope Leo XII 16 Bernard of Clairvaux Doctor mellifluus (Mellifluous Doctor) 1090 1153 1830 Priest, OCist Sermones super Cantica Canticorum Apologia ad Guillelmum Liber ad milites templi de laude novae militiae Pope Pius VIII 17 Hilary of Poitiers* 300 367 1851 Bishop of Poitiers Commentarius in Evangelium Matthaei Pope Pius IX 18 Alphonsus Liguori Doctor zelantissimus (Most Zealous Doctor) 1696 1787 1871 Bishop of Sant'Agata de' Goti , CSsR (Founder) The Glories of Mary Dogmatic Works: Moral Theology The Council of Trent The Histories of Heresies and their Refutation Truth of the Faith 19 Francis de Sales Doctor caritatis (Doctor of Charity) 1567 1622 1877 Bishop of Geneva , CO Introduction to the Devout Life Letters of Spiritual Direction 20 Cyril of Alexandria* Doctor Incarnationis (Doctor of the Incarnation ) 376 444 1883 Archbishop of Alexandria Commentaries on the Old Testament Thesaurus Discourse Against Arians Dialogues on the Trinity Pope Leo XIII 21 Cyril of Jerusalem* 315 386 1883 Archbishop of Jerusalem Catechetical Lectures Summa doctrinae christianae 22 John Damascene* 676 749 1890 Priest, monk Fountain of Knowledge Octoechos 23 Bede the Venerable* Anglorum doctor (Doctor of the English) [ 17 ] 672 735 1899 Priest, monk , OSB Ecclesiastical History of the English People The Reckoning of Time Liber epigrammatum Paenitentiale Bedae 24 Ephrem* [ 18 ] 306 373 1920 Deacon Commentary on the Diatessaron Prayer of Saint Ephrem Hymns Against Heresies Pope Benedict XV 25 Peter Canisius 1521 1597 1925 Priest, SJ A Summary of Christian Teachings Pope Pius XI 26 John of the Cross Doctor mysticus (Mystical Doctor) 1542 1591 1926 Priest, mystic , OCD (Reformer) Spiritual Canticle Dark Night of the Soul Ascent of Mount Carmel 27 Robert Bellarmine 1542 1621 1931 Archbishop of Capua , Cardinal , Theologian, SJ Disputationes de Controversiis 28 Albertus Magnus [ 19 ] Doctor universalis (Universal Doctor) 1193 1280 1931 Bishop of Regensburg , Theologian, OP On Cleaving to God On Fate 29 Anthony of Padua Doctor evangelicus (Evangelical Doctor) 1195 1231 1946 Priest, OFM Sermons for Feast Days Pope Pius XII 30 Lawrence of Brindisi Doctor apostolicus (Apostolic Doctor) 1559 1619 1959 Priest, Diplomat, OFMCap Mariale Pope John XXIII 31 Teresa of Ávila [ 20 ] Doctor orationis (Doctor of Prayer) 1515 1582 1970 Mystic , OCD (Reformer) La Vida de la Santa Madre Teresa de Jesús The Way of Perfection The Interior Castle Pope Paul VI 32 Catherine of Siena 1347 1380 1970 Mystic , TOSD The Dialogue of Divine Providence 33 Thérèse of Lisieux Doctor amoris (Doctor of love) Doctor synthesis (Doctor of synthesis) [ 21 ] 1873 1897 1997 OCD The Story of a Soul Letters of Saint Therese Pope John Paul II 34 John of Ávila 1500 1569 2012 Priest, Mystic Audi, filia Spiritual Letters Pope Benedict XVI 35 Hildegard of Bingen 1098 1179 2012 Visionary , theologian, polymath, composer, abbess OSB , physician, philosopher Scivias Liber vitae meritorum Liber divinorum operum Ordo virtutum , 36 Gregory of Narek [ 22 ] 951 1003 2015 Monk, poet, mystical philosopher, theologian Book of Lamentations Pope Francis 37 Irenaeus of Lyon* [ 23 ] Doctor unitatis (Doctor of Unity) [ 24 ] 130 202 2022 Bishop, theologian, Martyr Proof of the Apostolic Preaching Against Heresies 38 John Henry Newman [ 25 ] 1801 1890 2025 Cardinal, theologian, Catholic convert, CO Apologia Pro Vita Sua Tract 90 An Essay on the Development of Christian Doctrine Grammar of Assent Pope Leo XIV Proposed Doctors [ edit ] In October 2018, on the occasion of the canonization of Oscar Romero , martyred Archbishop of San Salvador , José Luis Escobar Alas , the current Archbishop of San Salvador, petitioned Pope Francis to name Romero a Doctor of the Church.

[ 26 ] In October 2019, the Polish Catholic Bishops Conference formally petitioned Pope Francis to consider making Pope John Paul II a Doctor of the Church in an official proclamation, in recognition of his contributions to theology, philosophy, and Catholic literature, as well as the formal documents of his papacy.

[ 27 ] In January 2023, Cardinal Angelo Bagnasco proposed that Pope Benedict XVI be declared a doctor of the Church "as soon as possible", in view of his theological intelligence and contribution to the formation of current doctrine of the Catholic Church , such as the new catechism .

[ 28 ] [ 29 ] In January 2024, Archbishop Georg Gänswein also spoke in favor of the pontiff's canonization and his elevation to the status of doctor of the church.

[ 30 ] In April 2024, during a private audience Pope Francis received a formal request from the superior general of the Discalced Carmelites , Miguel Márquez Calle, to declare Teresa Benedicta of the Cross a Doctor of the Church. The Discalced Carmelites first launched an international commission to gather the necessary documentation required for the declaration in 2022, in commemoration of the 100th anniversary of her conversion to Catholicism and the 80th anniversary of her martyrdom.

[ 31 ] Other recognised Doctors [ edit ] In addition, parts of the Catholic Church have recognised other individuals with this title. In Spain , Fulgentius of Cartagena , [ 32 ] Ildephonsus of Toledo [ 33 ] and Leander of Seville [ 2 ] have been recognized with this title. In 2007 Pope Benedict XVI , in his encyclical Spe Salvi , called Maximus the Confessor "the great Greek Doctor of the Church", [ 34 ] though the Dicastery for the Causes of Saints considers this declaration an informal one.

[ 35 ] Scholastic epithets [ edit ] Main article: Scholastic accolades Though not named Doctors of the Church or even canonized, many of the more celebrated doctors of theology and law of the Middle Ages were given an epithet which expressed the nature of their expertise. Among these are Bl.

John Duns Scotus , Doctor subtilis ("subtle doctor"); Alexander of Hales , Doctor irrefragabilis ("unanswerable doctor"); Roger Bacon , Doctor mirabilis ("wondrous doctor"); William of Ockham , Doctor singularis et invincibilis ("valuable and invincible doctor"); Jean Gerson , Doctor christianissimus ("most Christian doctor"); and Francisco Suárez , Doctor eximius ("exceptional doctor").

[ 36 ] Syro-Malabar Catholic Church [ edit ] The Syro-Malabar Catholic Church recognises Ambrose, Jerome, Gregory, Augustine, Athanasius, Basil, Gregory of Nazianzus and John Chrysostom, as well as Ephrem the Syrian , Pope Leo I , John of Damascus , Cyril of Alexandria , Cyril of Jerusalem , Epiphanius of Salamis and Gregory of Nyssa .

[ 37 ] [ 38 ] [ 39 ] Chaldean Catholic Church [ edit ] The Chaldean Catholic Church honours as doctor Polycarp , Eustathius of Antioch , Meletius, Alexander of Jerusalem , Athanasius , Basil, Cyril of Alexandria , Gregory Nazianzus , Gregory of Nyssa , John Chrysostom , Fravitta of Constantinople , Ephrem the Syrian , Jacob of Nisibis , Jacob of Serugh , Isaac of Armenia , Isaac of Nineveh , and Maruthas of Martyropolis .

[ 40 ] [ 41 ] [ 42 ] [ 43 ] Eastern Orthodox Church [ edit ] The Eastern Orthodox Church honors many of the pre-schism saints as well, but the term Doctor of the Church is not applied in the same way. One consistent use of the category is the trio of Basil the Great , Gregory of Nazianzus and John Chrysostom , recognized as universal teachers and known as the Three Holy Hierarchs .

[ 44 ] The church also recognizes three saints with the title Theologos ( Theologian ): John the Evangelist , Gregory of Nazianzus and Symeon the New Theologian .

[ 45 ] Russian Orthodox Church [ edit ] The Russian Orthodox Church commemorates on 19 July the feast of Three Holy Russian Hierarchs: Demetrius of Rostov , Mitrophan of Voronezh and Tikhon of Zadonsk .

[ 46 ] Armenian Church [ edit ] The Armenian Apostolic Church recognizes the Twelve Holy Teachers ( Vardapets ) of the Church Hierotheus the Thesmothete Dionysius the Areopagite Pope Sylvester I Athanasius of Alexandria Cyril of Alexandria Ephrem the Syrian Basil the Great Gregory Nazianzus Gregory of Nyssa Epiphanius of Salamis John Chrysostom Cyril of Jerusalem .

[ 47 ] [ 48 ] They also recognize their own saints Mesrob , Yeghishe , Movses Khorenatsi , David the Invincible , Gregory of Narek , [ 49 ] Nerses III the Builder , and Nerses of Lambron as "Doctors of the Armenian Church" or the "Armenian Doctors".

[ 50 ] [ 51 ] Assyrian Church of the East [ edit ] The Assyrian Church of the East recognizes Yeghishe , Diodorus of Tarsus , Theodore of Mopsuestia , and Nestorius as Doctors of the Church.

[ 52 ] Anglicanism [ edit ] The churches of the Anglican Communion tend not to use the term Doctor of the Church in their calendars of saints, preferring expressions such as "Teacher of the Faith". Those thus recognized include figures from before and after the Reformation, most of whom are chosen among those already recognized as in the Catholic Church and Eastern Orthodox Church. Those designated as Teachers of the Faith in the Church of England 's calendar of saints are as follows: Basil the Great Gregory of Nazianzus Hilary of Poitiers Francis de Sales Thomas Aquinas Cyril of Jerusalem Frederick Denison Maurice William of Ockham Anselm Catherine of Siena Athanasius Ephrem of Syria Sundar Singh of India Cyril of Alexandria Irenæus Bonaventure Gregory of Nyssa and his sister Macrina Brooke Foss Westcott Jeremy Taylor Bernard of Clairvaux Augustine of Hippo Gregory the Great John Chrysostom Sergius of Radonezh Jerome Teresa of Ávila Therese of Lisieux Richard Hooker William Temple Leo the Great John of Damascus Ambrose John of the Cross Since all of the above appear in the calendar at the level of Lesser Festival or Commemoration , their celebration is optional. Similarly, because "In the Calendar of the Saints, diocesan and other local provision may be made to supplement the national Calendar", [ 53 ] those Doctors of the Church recognized by the Catholic Church may also be celebrated in the Church of England.

Lutheranism [ edit ] The Lutheran calendar of saints generally does not use the term Doctor of the Church . Instead, it uses the term Confessor to commemorate individuals who made important theological contributions to the faith through their writing or teaching, as well as those who publicly defended and promoted the faith. The calendar of the Lutheran Church–Missouri Synod lists the following figures as Confessors: [ 54 ] Basil the Great Gregory of Nazianzus Gregory of Nyssa Philipp Melanchthon Martin Luther Athanasius of Alexandria Cyril of Alexandria Robert Barnes Martin Chemnitz The LCMS calendar of saints also commemorates the following individuals as Theologians : Anselm of Canterbury C.F.W. Walther Bede the Venerable Johann Gerhard Bernard of Clairvaux Augustine of Hippo John of Damascus See also [ edit ] Christianity portal Fathers of the Church References [ edit ] ^ Rice, Fr. Larry (2015).

"Doctors of the Church?" (PDF) .

usccb.org . United States Conference of Catholic Bishops . Retrieved 9 October 2018 .

^ a b c d e f John Chapman (1913).

"Doctors of the Church" . In Herbermann, Charles (ed.).

Catholic Encyclopedia . New York: Robert Appleton Company.

^ Bardenhewer, Otto (1908).

Patrology: The Lives and Works of the Fathers of the Church . Translated by Shahan, Thomas J.

St. Louis, Missouri : B. Herder. p. 3.

ISBN 978-1-4699-8884-9 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ Geanakoplos, Deno (1989).

Constantinople and the West .

Madison, Wisconsin : University of Wisconsin Press . p. 293.

ISBN 978-0-299-11884-6 .

^ "Spiritus Paraclitus (September 15, 1920) | BENEDICT XV" .

www.vatican.va . Retrieved 28 April 2021 .

^ "St. Therese, Doctor of the Universal Church – Saint Therese of Lisieux" .

thereseoflisieux.org .

^ "Pope to proclaim St John of Avila Doctor of the Universal Church" .

News.va . Holy See. 20 August 2011 . Retrieved 21 August 2011 .

^ "Pope to Canonize and Name Hildegard of Bingen as Doctor of the Church" . Archived from the original on 7 January 2012.

^ "ROME REPORTS TV News Agency" .

www.romereports.com . Archived from the original on 12 May 2012.

^ "Pope : Two new Doctors of the Church" .

news.va . Archived from the original on 25 June 2017 . Retrieved 7 October 2012 .

^ "San Gregorio di Narek Dottore della Chiesa Universale, 23.02.2015" (in Italian). Holy See Press Office. 23 February 2015.

^ Movsesian, Mark (26 February 2015).

"The Newest Doctor of the Church" .

First Things . Retrieved 16 January 2024 .

^ De Carolis, Alessandro (31 July 2025).

"St John Henry Newman set to become newest Doctor of the Church" .

Vatican News . Retrieved 31 July 2025 .

^ McKeown, Jonah (16 November 2023).

"U.S. bishops express strong support for proposal to name Newman a doctor of the Church" .

Catholic News Agency . Retrieved 14 January 2024 .

^ Morgan, Stephen (2015). "John Henry Newman and the New Evangelization". In Grogan, Paul; Kim, Kirsteen (eds.).

The New Evangelization: Faith, People, Context and Practice .

Bloomsbury Publishing . p. 227.

ISBN 9780567657381 .

^ St. Leo the Great, pope and doctor of the church vaticannews.va.

^ William of Malmesbury, Gesta pontificum Anglorum 1.29 Hamilton, N.E.S.A. (1870).

Willelmi Malmesbiriensis Monachi De Gestis Pontificum Anglorum libri quinque (in Latin). London: Longman. p. 44.

^ "Encyclical of Pope Benedict XV on St. Ephrem the Syrian" . 5 October 1920 . Retrieved 16 March 2016 .

^ Führer, Markus (20 March 2006).

"Albert the Great (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy)" . Retrieved 16 March 2016 .

^ "Proclamation of Saint Teresa of Avila Doctor of the Church" . 27 September 1970 . Retrieved 15 March 2016 .

^ " "C'est la confiance": Apostolic Exhortation of the Holy Father on confidence in the merciful love of God for the 150th anniversary of the birth of Saint Teresa of the Child Jesus and the Holy Face (15 October 2023) | Francis" .

www.vatican.va . Retrieved 19 May 2024 .

^ McCarthy, Emer.

"Pope Francis declares Armenian saint Doctor of the Church" . Vatican Radio . Retrieved 23 February 2015 .

^ CNA.

"Pope Francis to declare St. Irenaeus a Doctor of the Church" .

Catholic News Agency . Retrieved 7 October 2021 .

^ Francis, Pope (21 January 2022).

"Decree of the Holy Father for the conferral of the title of Doctor of the Church on Saint Irenaeus of Lyon" . The Vatican Press Agency . Retrieved 21 January 2022 .

^ Sala Stampa de la Santa Sede.

"Conferimento del Titolo di Dottore della Chiesa a San John Henry Newman, 31.07.2025" .

Sala Stampa de la Santa Sede (in Italian) . Retrieved 7 October 2021 .

^ Arocho Esteves, Junno; Vida, Melissa (15 October 2018).

"Salvadoran archbishop asks pope to make Romero 'doctor of the church' " .

Angelus . Retrieved 15 January 2024 .

^ "Polish bishops call for John Paul II to be named a doctor of the Church" .

^ "Benedetto XVI, Bagnasco: spero sia proclamato "dottore della Chiesa" " .

Vatican News (in Italian). 5 January 2023 . Retrieved 25 January 2024 .

^ " "Sia dottore della Chiesa". Che titolo può avere ora Benedetto XVI" .

ilGiornale (in Italian). 5 January 2023 . Retrieved 25 January 2024 .

^ "Faccia a faccia tra il papa e Georg Gänswein" .

laRegione (in Italian). 3 January 2024 . Retrieved 25 January 2024 .

^ Mares, Courtney (6 May 2024).

"Could Edith Stein be declared the next doctor of the Church?" .

Catholic News Agency . Retrieved 19 June 2024 .

^ PEPITO, DOMINICK; INTERNATIONAL, CATHOLIC LIFE (10 October 2013).

THROUGH THE HEAVENLY GATES: THE NEW REVISED EDITION: BIOGRAPHIES OF THE SAINTS BOOK 2 OF 3: THE PATH OF SERVICE: CLERGY SAINTS . Catholic Life International.

ISBN 9781618636768 – via Google Books.

^ Bennett, Janice (1 June 2005).

Sacred Blood, Sacred Image: The Sudarium of Oviedo : New Evidence for the Authenticity of the Shroud of Turin . Ignatius Press.

ISBN 9781586171117 – via Google Books.

^ Benedict XVI (2007).

"Spe Salvi" .

The Holy See .

^ Prot. Num. VAR. 7479/14.

^ Edward Aloysius Pace (1913).

"Surnames of Famous Doctors" . In Herbermann, Charles (ed.).

Catholic Encyclopedia . New York: Robert Appleton Company.

^ Major, Tom (12 May 2012).

"Major's Saint of the Day: May 12 – Feast of Saints Epiphanius and Dominic de la Calzada" .

^ Stramara, Daniel F. (1 April 2012).

Praying—with the Saints—to God Our Mother . Wipf and Stock Publishers.

ISBN 9781610974912 – via Google Books.

^ "THE 33 DOCTORS OF THE CHURCH, by Fr Christopher Rengers" .

AD2000 .

^ "Marutha of Maypherqat – ܡܪܘܬܐ ܕܡܝܦܪܩܛ (d. 420 or 421)" .

The Syriac Biographical Dictionary . Retrieved 18 March 2021 .

^ Stramara, Daniel F. (1 April 2012).

Praying—with the Saints—to God Our Mother . Wipf and Stock Publishers.

ISBN 9781621893653 – via Google Books.

^ Filoni, Fernando (7 June 2019).

The Church in Iraq . CUA Press.

ISBN 9780813229652 – via Google Books.

^ Pudichery, A. Sylvester (7 June 1972).

"Ramsa: An Analysis and Interpretation of the Chaldean Vespers" . Dharmaram College – via Google Books.

^ "Feast of the Three Holy Fathers, Great Hierarchs and Ecumenical Teachers, Basil the Great, Gregory the Theologian, and John Chrysostom" .

Greek Orthodox Archiocese of America . Retrieved 20 May 2016 .

^ Casiday, Augustine (2012).

The Orthodox Christian world (PDF) . New York: Routledge. p. 6.

ISBN 978-0-203-11938-9 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 24 September 2016 . Retrieved 20 May 2016 .

^ "СОБОР ТРЕХ РУССКИХ СВЯТИТЕЛЕЙ – Древо" .

drevo-info.ru (in Russian) . Retrieved 19 May 2023 .

^ "Saints and Feasts" .

Armenian Church Catholicosate of Cilicia Antelias – Lebanon . Retrieved 12 November 2015 .

^ "E-Sunday Bulletin of St. Sarkis Armenian Apostolic Church" .

myemail.constantcontact.com .

^ Watkins, Basil (19 November 2015).

The Book of Saints: A Comprehensive Biographical Dictionary . Bloomsbury Publishing.

ISBN 9780567664150 – via Google Books.

^ "Movses Dasxurants'i, History of the Aghuans, Armenian History, Caucasus History, Aghuan History, Iranian History, Atrpatakan, Azerbaijan, Dasxurantsi, Caucasian Albania, Ancient, Medieval, Armenia, Persia, Iran" .

www.attalus.org .

^ Visit to the Armenian Apostolic Patriarchate and meeting with His Beatitude Patriarch Mesrob II, Greeting of the Holy Father Address of Pope Benedict XVI.,30 November 2006, on the website vatican.va (pdf). Access date 18 March 2021.

^ Baumer, Christoph (5 September 2016).

The Church of the East: An Illustrated History of Assyrian Christianity . Bloomsbury Publishing.

ISBN 9781838609344 – via Google Books.

^ Common Worship (Main Volume), p. 530.

^ Lutheran Service Book . Concordia Publishing House. 2006. pp.

xii– xiii.

Further reading [ edit ] Frederick George Holweck , A Biographical Dictionary of the Saints . St. Louis, MO: B. Herder Book Co., 1924.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Doctors of the Church .

Wikisource has original works on the topic: Doctors of the Church "Doctors of the Catholic Church" . Archived from the original on 18 May 2005.

"1917 Catholic Encyclopedia: Doctor of the Church" .

Archived from the original on 2 February 2000.

Connor, Ft. Charles P. (ed.).

"Doctors of the Church" . EWTN. Archived from the original on 15 September 2008.

"Selected writings of the Doctors of the Church" (in English, German, Italian, and Spanish).

Archived from the original on 1 July 2018.

v t e Latin Church Patriarchates (by order of precedence ) Current Rome (' Patriarch of the West '): Pope Leo XIV (with cathedra in Archbasilica of Saint John Lateran ) Jerusalem : Pierbattista Pizzaballa East Indies : Filipe Neri Ferrão Lisbon : Rui Valério Venice : Francesco Moraglia Defunct Carthage (?−1964) Alexandria (1276–1964) Antioch (1098–1964) Constantinople (1204–1964) West Indies (1524–1963) Aquileia (560–1751) Ethiopia (1555–1663) Grado (560–1451) History Apostolic succession History of the papacy Papal primacy Historical development First Martyrs Great Church Early African church Vulgate East–West Schism Scholasticism Crusades Western Schism Age of Discovery Humanism Protestant Reformation Council of Trent Counter-Reformation Vatican I Vatican II 1983 Code of Canon Law Apostolic sees Rome Peter Paul Syracuse Peter Malta Paul Milan Barnabas Santiago de Compostela James Church Fathers Tertullian Cyprian Hilary of Poitiers * Ambrose * Pope Damasus I Jerome * Augustine of Hippo * Pope Gregory I * Isidore of Seville * Language Ecclesiastical Latin Liturgical use of Latin Liturgical rites Liturgical days Current Ambrosian Rite Rite of Braga Mozarabic Rite Rite of Lyon Roman Rite Mass of Paul VI (Ordinary form) Tridentine Mass Extraordinary form Anglican Use Zaire Use Orders Benedictine Rite Carmelite Rite Carthusian Rite Cistercian Rite Dominican Rite Norbertine Rite Defunct African Rite Aquileian Rite British Celtic Rite Durham Rite Hereford Use Sarum Use York Use Gallican Rite Missa Nautica Missa sicca Missa Venatoria Pre-Tridentine Mass See also Latin cross Latin Church in the Middle East Latins Turkey Titular sees Eastern Catholic Churches Conference of the Latin Bishops of the Arab Regions Western Rite Orthodoxy * also Doctors of the Church Category v t e Saints of the Catholic Church Dicastery for the Causes of Saints Stages of canonization : Servant of God → Venerable → Blessed → Saint Virgin Mary Mother of God (Theotokos) Immaculate Conception Perpetual virginity Assumption Marian apparition Titles of Mary Joseph (husband) Apostles Andrew Barnabas Bartholomew James of Alphaeus James the Great John Jude Matthew Matthias Paul Peter Philip Simon Thomas Archangels Gabriel Michael in the Catholic Church Raphael Confessors Anatolius Anthony of Kiev Athanasius the Confessor Chariton the Confessor Dominic Edward the Confessor Francis of Assisi Francis Borgia Homobonus John Henry Newman Lazarus Zographos Louis Bertrand Martin de Porres Martin of Tours Maximus the Confessor Michael of Synnada Paphnutius the Confessor Paul I of Constantinople Peter Claver Salonius Sergius of Radonezh Theophanes the Confessor Pio of Pietrelcina Disciples Apollos Mary of Bethany Mary Magdalene Priscilla and Aquila Silvanus Stephen Timothy Titus Seventy disciples Doctors of the Church Gregory the Great Ambrose Augustine of Hippo Jerome John Chrysostom Basil of Caesarea Gregory of Nazianzus Athanasius of Alexandria Cyril of Alexandria Cyril of Jerusalem John of Damascus Bede the Venerable Ephrem the Syrian Thomas Aquinas Bonaventure Anselm of Canterbury Isidore of Seville Peter Chrysologus Leo the Great Peter Damian Bernard of Clairvaux Hilary of Poitiers Alphonsus Liguori Francis de Sales Peter Canisius John of the Cross Robert Bellarmine Albertus Magnus Anthony of Padua Lawrence of Brindisi Teresa of Ávila Catherine of Siena Thérèse of Lisieux John of Ávila Hildegard of Bingen Gregory of Narek Irenaeus John Henry Newman Evangelists Matthew Mark Luke John Church Fathers Alexander of Alexandria Alexander of Jerusalem Ambrose of Milan Anatolius Athanasius of Alexandria Augustine of Hippo Caesarius of Arles Caius Cappadocian Fathers Clement of Alexandria Clement of Rome Cyprian of Carthage Cyril of Alexandria Cyril of Jerusalem Damasus I Desert Fathers Desert Mothers Dionysius of Alexandria Dionysius of Corinth Dionysius Ephrem the Syrian Epiphanius of Salamis Fulgentius of Ruspe Gregory the Great Gregory of Nazianzus Gregory of Nyssa Hilary of Poitiers Hippolytus of Rome Ignatius of Antioch Irenaeus of Lyons Isidore of Seville Jerome of Stridonium John Chrysostom John of Damascus Maximus the Confessor Melito of Sardis Quadratus of Athens Papias of Hierapolis Peter Chrysologus Polycarp of Smyrna Theophilus of Antioch Victorinus of Pettau Vincent of Lérins Zephyrinus Martyrs Abda and Abdisho Boris and Gleb Charles de Foucauld Canadian Martyrs Carthusian Martyrs Child Martyrs of Tlaxcala Christina of Persia Dominguito del Val Devasahayam Pillai Dismas the Good Thief Forty Martyrs of England and Wales Four Crowned Martyrs Gerard of Csanád Great Martyr The Holy Innocents Irish Martyrs John Fisher Korean Martyrs Lorenzo Ruiz Martyrs of Lübeck Luigi Versiglia Martyrology Martyrs of Albania Martyrs of Algeria Martyrs of Cajonos Martyrs of Compiègne Martyrs of Drina Martyrs of China Martyrs of Gorkum Martyrs of Japan 21 Martyrs of Libya Martyrs of La Rioja Martyrs of Damascus Martyrs of Laos Martyrs of Natal Martyrs of Otranto Martyrs of Prague Martyrs of Sandomierz Martyrs of the Spanish Civil War Martyrs of Zenta Maximilian Kolbe Óscar Romero Pedro Calungsod Perpetua and Felicity Peter Chanel Pietro Parenzo Philomena Saints of the Cristero War Stephen Teresa Benedicta of the Cross Titus Brandsma 17 Thomasian Martyrs Thomas Becket Thomas More Three Martyrs of Chimbote Ulma Family Uganda Martyrs Vietnamese Martyrs Valentine of Rome Victor and Corona Zanitas and Lazarus of Persia Missionaries Ansgar Augustine of Canterbury Boniface Cyril and Methodius Damien of Molokai Evermode of Ratzeburg Francis Xavier François de Laval Gregory the Illuminator Junípero Serra Nino of Georgia Patrick of Ireland Remigius Sava of Serbia Patriarchs Adam Abel Abraham Isaac Jacob Joseph Joseph (father of Jesus) David Noah Solomon Matriarchs Popes Adeodatus I Adeodatus II Adrian III Agapetus I Agatho Alexander I Anacletus Anastasius I Anicetus Anterus Benedict II Boniface I Boniface IV Caius Callixtus I Celestine I Celestine V Clement I Cornelius Damasus I Dionysius Eleuterus Eugene I Eusebius Eutychian Evaristus Fabian Felix I Felix III Felix IV Gelasius I Gregory I Gregory II Gregory III Gregory VII Hilarius Hormisdas Hyginus Innocent I John I John XXIII John Paul II Julius I Leo I Leo II Leo III Leo IV Leo IX Linus Lucius I Marcellinus Marcellus I Mark Martin I Miltiades Nicholas I Paschal I Paul I Paul VI Peter Pius I Pius V Pius X Pontian Sergius I Silverius Simplicius Siricius Sixtus I Sixtus II Sixtus III Soter Stephen I Stephen IV Sylvester I Symmachus Telesphorus Urban I Victor I Vitalian Zachary Zephyrinus Zosimus Prophets Agabus Amos Anna Baruch ben Neriah David Elijah Ezekiel Habakkuk Haggai Hosea Isaiah Jeremiah Job Joel John the Baptist Jonah Judas Barsabbas Malachi Melchizedek Micah Moses Nahum Obadiah Samuel Seven Maccabees and their mother Simeon Zechariah (prophet) Zechariah (NT) Zephaniah Virgins Agatha of Sicily Agnes of Rome Angela of the Cross Æthelthryth Bernadette Soubirous Catherine of Bologna Brigid of Kildare Catherine Labouré Catherine of Siena Cecilia Clare of Assisi Eulalia of Mérida Euphemia Faustina Kowalska Faustina and Liberata of Como Genevieve Hiltrude of Liessies Joan of Arc Josephine Bakhita Kateri Tekakwitha Lucy of Syracuse Maria Goretti María de las Maravillas de Jesús Narcisa de Jesús Patricia of Naples Rosalia Rose of Lima Teresa of the Andes Teresa of Calcutta Trasilla and Emiliana Ubaldesca Taccini See also Calendar of saints Four Holy Marshals Fourteen Holy Helpers Martyr of charity Military saints Athleta Christi Miles Christianus Church Militant Seven Champions Venerated couples Virtuous pagan Catholic Church portal Saints portal v t e Catholic Church Index Outline Glossary Lists of Catholics History Timeline Ecclesiastical Legal Early Church Jesus Christ Ministry Crucifixion Resurrection Great Commission Apostles Succession Petrine primacy Church Fathers Apostolic Fathers History of the papacy Primacy Great Church Ante-Nicene period Constantine First seven ecumenical councils Nicaea I Chalcedon Late antiquity Biblical canon Monasticism Middle Ages Islamic conquests Pope Gregory I Papal States Schism (1054) Investiture Controversy Crusades Schism (1378) Inquisition Universities Scholasticism Age of Discovery Modern era Protestantism Protestant Reformation Catholic Reformation Trent Thirty Years' War Enlightenment French Revolution Nazism Vatican II Communism Sexual abuse scandal Islam COVID-19 pandemic Theology Bible Tradition Catechism General God Trinity Kingdom Body Divine grace Dogma Nicene Creed Original sin Saints Salvation Sermon on the Mount Ten Commandments Vulgate Official Bible Sixtine Vulgate Sixto-Clementine Vulgate Nova Vulgata Worship Ecclesiology Communitas perfecta Councils Ecumenism Four marks One true church Catholic Infallibility Mystici Corporis Christi People of God Three states Subsistit in In canon law Sacraments Baptism Confirmation Eucharist Penance Anointing of the Sick Last rites Holy orders Matrimony Mariology Assumption History Immaculate Conception Mariology of the popes Mariology of the saints Mother of God Perpetual virginity Veneration See also: Josephology Philosophy Natural law Moral theology Personalism Social teaching Philosophers Philosophy of canon law See also: Science Evolution Separation of church and state Relations Politics Saints Holy Family Mary Joseph Patriarchs Prophets Archangels Martyrs Doctors of the Church Evangelists Confessors Disciples Virgins Organisation Hierarchy Canon law Laity Precedence By country Holy See ( List of popes ) Pope Leo XIV Ecumenical councils College of Cardinals List Advisers Roman Curia Dicasteries Synod of Bishops Properties Vatican City Index Outline Apostolic Palace Lateran Treaty Roman Rota St. Peter's Basilica Swiss Guard Vatican Museums Polity ( Holy orders ) Diocese Episcopal conference Eparchy Bishop Patriarch Major Primate Metropolitan Archbishop Diocesan Coadjutor Auxiliary Titular Emeritus Parish Priest Deacon Consecrated life Religious : Superior Abbot , Abbess General Provincial Prior, Prioress Grand master Brother Friar Monk Sister Nun Hermit Novice Master Oblate Postulant Particular churches sui iuris Latin Church Eastern Catholic Churches Albanian Armenian Belarusian Bulgarian Chaldean Coptic Croatian and Serbian Eritrean Ethiopian Georgian Greek Hungarian Italo-Albanian Macedonian Maronite Melkite Romanian Russian Ruthenian Slovak Syriac Syro-Malabar Syro-Malankara Ukrainian Catholic liturgy Eastern Catholic liturgy Alexandrian Antiochian Armenian Byzantine East Syriac West Syriac Malankara Latin Ambrosian Braga Mozarabic Roman Paul VI Tridentine Anglican Zaire Culture Art Marian Artists Writers Church buildings Altarpieces Folk Library Museums Music Distinctions Role in civilisation See also: Criticism of the Catholic Church Anti-Catholicism Media Holy See Press Office Vatican Media Vatican News Vatican Television Center Vatican Radio Vatican Press [ it ] L'Osservatore Romano Acta Apostolicae Sedis Annuario Pontificio Religious orders , institutes , societies Assumptionists Annonciades Augustinians Basilians Benedictines Bethlehemites Blue nuns Camaldoleses Camillians Carmelites Carthusians Cistercians Clarisses Conceptionists Crosiers Dominicans Franciscans Good Shepherd Sisters Hieronymites Jesuits Legionaries Mercedarians Minims Olivetans Oratorians Piarists Premonstratensians Redemptoristines Servites Theatines Trappists Trinitarians Visitandines Associations of the faithful Confraternities Lay Marian Youth Workers Third orders Saint Dominic Lay Carmelites Discalced Saint Francis Secular Military orders Fimcap Catholic Action Charismatic Renewal Communion and Liberation Sant'Egidio Focolare International Alliance of Catholic Knights Scouting Legion of Mary Neocatechumenal Way Opus Dei Schoenstatt Charities Aid to the Church in Need Caritas Catholic Charities USA Home Missions Relief Services CIDSE Pax Christi Society of Saint Vincent de Paul See also: Health care Schools Universities Catholic Church portal Category v t e Catholic philosophy Ethics Cardinal virtues Divine command Just price Just war Probabilism Natural law Personalism Seven virtues Social teaching Option for the poor Social mortgage Theological virtues Virtue ethics Schools Medieval Augustinianism Scholasticism Thomism Scotism Occamism Modern Salamanca Christian humanism Cartesianism Molinism Neo-scholasticism Analytical Thomism Universals Augustinian realism Nominalism Conceptualism Moderate realism Scotistic realism Other Theological intellectualism Theological voluntarism Foundationalism Philosophers Abelard Adler Albertus Alcuin Anscombe Anselm Aquinas Augustine Bacon Boethius Bonaventure Chateaubriand Chesterton Clement Cusa Descartes Dionysius Erasmus Eriugena Ficino Gassendi Isidore Krasicki Llull Lombard MacIntyre Maistre Malebranche Maritain Montaigne More Newman Occam Pascal Pico Rahner Ratzinger Scheler Scotus Stein Suárez Wojtyła Concepts Actus Essendi Actus primus Actus purus Aevum Augustinian values Cardinal virtues Cartesian dualism Cogito, ergo sum Dehellenization Differentia Disputation Divine illumination Double truth Evil demon Formal distinction Guardian angel Haecceity Head of a pin Homo unius libri Infused righteousness Memento mori Occam's razor Ontological argument Pascal's wager Peripatetic axiom Principle of double effect Quiddity Quinque viae Rota Fortunae Seven deadly sins Theodicy Augustinian Irenaean Trademark argument Univocity Utopia Related Catholic theology Platonism Aristotelianism Neoplatonism Islamic philosophy Doctor of the Church Renaissance Rationalism Empiricism Phenomenology Catholicism portal Philosophy portal Authority control databases National Germany United States Czech Republic Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Doctor_of_the_Church&oldid=1306073599 " Categories : Doctors of the Church Groups of Roman Catholic saints Types of saints Christian terminology Hidden categories: Articles incorporating a citation from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference CS1 errors: ISBN date CS1 Italian-language sources (it) CS1 Latin-language sources (la) CS1 Russian-language sources (ru) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from March 2024 Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2025 All articles containing potentially dated statements All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2024 Commons category link is on Wikidata CS1 German-language sources (de) CS1 Spanish-language sources (es) This page was last edited on 15 August 2025, at 19:54 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Doctor of the Church 56 languages Add topic

