Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Selected bibliography 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Morton White 4 languages العربية Deutsch مصرى 日本語 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American philosopher and historian of ideas Morton White (April 29, 1917 – May 27, 2016) was an American philosopher and historian of ideas . He was a proponent of a doctrine he called holistic pragmatism [ 1 ] (a variant of pragmatism ) and also a noted scholar of American intellectual history. He was a professor in the Department of Philosophy at Harvard from 1953 to 1970. He was Professor Emeritus in the School of Historical Studies at the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton, New Jersey, where he served as Professor in the School of Historical Studies from 1970 until he retired in 1987.

Biography [ edit ] White was born Morton Gabriel Weisberger on the Lower East Side of Manhattan in New York City . He attended City College of New York as an undergraduate before doing his postgraduate studies at Columbia University , where he completed his Ph.D. in 1942 under Ernest Nagel, who was himself a student of John Dewey . In 1949 he published Social Thought in America , a critical history of liberal social philosophy as represented by the ideas of Dewey, Oliver Wendell Holmes Jr.

, Thorstein Veblen , Charles A. Beard , and James Harvey Robinson . When the book was republished in 1957 he added a preface in which he softened some of his criticisms, and he added an epilogue in which he attacked the religious liberalism of Reinhold Niebuhr and the conservatism of Walter Lippmann . "Time and recent events," he wrote, "have brought the liberal outlook under a very different kind of attack- an attack with which I have no sympathy- and I fear that my own critical observations might wrongly be associated with arguments, positions, and purposes quite foreign to my own." In his 1956 work, Toward Reunion in Philosophy , White attempted to reconcile the pragmatic and analytic traditions in American philosophy.

At Harvard, White was a colleague of Willard Van Orman Quine , and the philosophical views of the two are closely related, particularly in their rejection of a sharp distinction between a priori and empirical statements. But White rejects Quine's view that "Philosophy of science is philosophy enough." Using the framework of holistic pragmatism , White argues that philosophical inquiry can just as well be applied to cultural institutions beyond science, such as law and art.

White died at the age of 99 on May 27, 2016.

[ 2 ] Selected bibliography [ edit ] The Origin of Dewey's Instrumentalism (Columbia University Press, 1943) Social Thought in America: The Revolt Against Formalism (Viking, 1949) (Ed.) The Mentor Philosophers : The Age of Analysis: 20th Century Philosophers (Houghton Mifflin, 1955) Toward Reunion in Philosophy (Harvard University Press, 1956) (Morton and Lucia White) The Intellectual versus the City : from Thomas Jefferson to Frank Lloyd Wright (Harvard, 1962) ( Arthur Schlesinger Jr.

and Morton White, eds.) Paths of American Thought (Houghton Mifflin, 1963) The Foundations of Historical Knowledge (Harper & Row, 1965) Science and Sentiment in America (Oxford University Press, 1972) The Philosophy of the American Revolution (Oxford University Press, 1978) What Is and What Ought to be Done : an essay on ethics and epistemology (Oxford University Press, 1981) (Morton and Lucia White) Journeys to the Japanese, 1952-1979 (British Columbia University Press, 1986) Philosophy, The Federalist, and the Constitution (Oxford University Press, 1987) The Question of Free Will: A Holistic View (Princeton University Press, 1993) A Philosopher's Story ( Penn State University Press , 1999) (Autobiography) A Philosophy of Culture: The Scope of Holistic Pragmatism (Princeton University Press, 2002) From a Philosophical Point of View: Selected Studies (Princeton University Press, 2004) See also [ edit ] American philosophy List of American philosophers References [ edit ] ^ Morton White, A Philosophy of Culture: The Scope of Holistic Pragmatism , Princeton University Press, 2005.

^ Morton White obituary External links [ edit ] White's profile on the Institute for Advanced Study website Book websites From a Philosophical Point of View A Philosophy of Culture A Philosopher's Story The Question of Free Will Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Latvia Korea Poland Vatican Israel Belgium Academics CiNii People Trove DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Morton_White&oldid=1293641785 " Categories : 1917 births 2016 deaths American historians of philosophy 21st-century American philosophers 20th-century American philosophers Analytic philosophers City College of New York alumni Columbia University alumni Harvard University Department of Philosophy faculty Historians of the United States Institute for Advanced Study faculty People from the Lower East Side Writers from Manhattan Historians from New York (state) Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 2 June 2025, at 22:05 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Morton White 4 languages Add topic

