Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 In the Records of the Grand Historian Toggle In the Records of the Grand Historian subsection 1.1 Confucianism 1.2 Legalism 1.3 Taoism 1.4 Mohism 1.5 School of Naturalists 1.6 School of Names 2 In the Book of Han Toggle In the Book of Han subsection 2.1 School of Diplomacy 2.2 Agriculturalism 2.3 Syncretism 3 Unlisted schools Toggle Unlisted schools subsection 3.1 School of the Military 3.2 Yangism 3.3 School of the Medical Skills 3.4 Five Agents School 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Hundred Schools of Thought 33 languages العربية 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Català Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Français 한국어 हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Kurdî Latina مصرى Nederlands नेपाल भाषा 日本語 Norsk bokmål Português Română Русский Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Chinese philosophy during the Eastern Zhou Hundred Schools of Thought Chinese name Traditional Chinese 諸子百家 Simplified Chinese 诸子百家 Transcriptions Standard Mandarin Hanyu Pinyin Zhūzǐ Bǎijiā Bopomofo ㄓㄨ ㄗˇ ㄅㄞˇ ㄐㄧㄚ Wade–Giles Chu 1 -tzŭ 3 Pai 3 -chia 1 IPA [ʈʂú.tsɹ̩̀ pàɪ.tɕjá] Wu Romanization Tsoe tzy ba' ga Yue: Cantonese Yale Romanization Jyūjí Baakgā Jyutping zyu1 zi2 baak3 gaa1 IPA [tsy˥ tsi˧˥.pak̚˧ ka˥] Southern Min Tâi-lô Tsu-tsú Pah-ka Korean name Hangul 제자백가 Hanja 諸子百家 Transcriptions Revised Romanization Jejabaekga McCune–Reischauer Chejabaekka Japanese name Kanji 諸子百家 Kana しょしひゃっか Transcriptions Romanization Shoshi Hyakka The Hundred Schools of Thought ( Chinese : 諸子百家 ) were philosophies and schools that flourished during the late Spring and Autumn period [ 1 ] and Warring States period ( c.

500 – 221 BC).

[ 2 ] The term was not used to describe these different philosophies until Confucianism , Mohism , and Legalism were created.

[ 3 ] The era in which they flourished was one of turbulence in China, [ 4 ] fraught with chaos and mass militarization, but where Chinese philosophy was developed and patronized by competing bureaucracies. This phenomenon has been called the Contention of a Hundred Schools of Thought.

The philosophies that emerged during this period have profoundly influenced East Asian culture and societies. The intellectual landscape of this era was characterized by itinerant scholars, who were often employed by various state rulers as advisers on the way of government, war, and diplomacy. Often, members and traditions of the same school had little in common other than the same influential figure that their beliefs were based on.

[ 1 ] This period ended with the rise of the imperial Qin dynasty and the subsequent burning of books and burying of scholars as part of an ideological suppression effort by Qin Shi Huang and Li Si .

[ 5 ] In the Records of the Grand Historian [ edit ] The birthplaces of notable Chinese philosophers from the Hundred Schools of Thought during the Zhou dynasty A traditional source for this period is the Records of the Grand Historian by Sima Qian . Its autobiographical section describes several schools of thought.

Confucianism [ edit ] Main article: Confucianism Confucianism is arguably the most enduring body of thought on Chinese life. Its written legacy lies in the Confucian classics , which later became the foundation of traditional society.

Confucius (551–479 BC) looked back to the earlier days of the Xia, Shang, and Zhou dynasties for an ideal sociopolitical order.

He believed that the only effective system of government necessitated prescribed relationships for each individual: "Let the ruler be a ruler and the subject a subject." He contended that a king must be virtuous in order to rule the state properly. To Confucius, the functions of government and social stratification were facts of life to be sustained by ethical values. His ideal human was the junzi , which is translated as 'gentleman' or 'superior person'.

Mencius (371–289 BC) formulated his teachings directly in response to Confucius. The effect of the combined work of Confucius, the codifier and interpreter of a system of relationships based on ethical behavior, and Mencius, the synthesizer and developer of applied Confucianist thought, was to provide traditional Chinese society with a comprehensive framework by which to order virtually every aspect of life.

There were many accretions to the body of Confucian thought, both immediately and over the millennia, from within and without the Confucian school. Interpretations adapted to contemporary society allowed for flexibility within Confucianism, while the fundamental system of modeled behavior from ancient texts formed its philosophical core.

Diametrically opposed to Mencius, in regards to human nature, was the interpretation of Xunzi ( c.

300 – 237 BC), another Confucian follower. Xunzi preached that man is not innately good; he asserted that goodness is attainable only through training one's desires and conduct.

Legalism [ edit ] Main article: Legalism (Chinese philosophy) Legalist doctrine was formulated by Li Kui , Shang Yang ( d.

338 BC ), Han Fei ( d.

233 BC ), and Li Si ( d.

208 BC ), who maintained that human nature was incorrigibly selfish; accordingly, the only way to preserve the social order was to impose discipline from above, and to see to a strict enforcement of laws. The Legalists exalted the state above all, seeking its prosperity and martial prowess over the welfare of the common people.

Legalism greatly influenced the philosophical basis for the imperial form of government.  During the Han dynasty , the most practical elements of Confucianism and Legalism were taken to form a sort of synthesis, marking the creation of a new form of government that would remain largely intact until the late 19th century, with continuing influence into the present.

Taoism [ edit ] Main article: Taoism Taoism developed into the second most significant stream of Chinese thought. Its formulation is often attributed to the legendary sage Laozi . The focus of Taoism is on the individual within the natural realm, rather than the individual within society. Accordingly, the goal of life for each individual is seeking to adjust oneself and adapting to the rhythm of nature (and the Fundamental) world, to follow the Way ( Tao ) of the universe, and to live in harmony.

In many ways the opposite of Confucian morality, Taoism was for many of its adherents a complement to their ordered daily lives. A scholar serving as an official could usually follow Confucian teachings, but in retirement might seek harmony with nature as a Taoist recluse. Politically, Taoism advocates for rule through inaction, and avoiding excessive interference.

Mohism [ edit ] Main article: Mohism Mohism was developed by followers of Mozi ( c.

470 – c.

391 BC ). Though the school did not survive through the Qin dynasty , Mohism was seen as a major rival of Confucianism in the period of the Hundred Schools of Thought. Its philosophy rested on the idea of 'impartial care' ( 兼愛 ; jiānài ): Mozi believed that "everyone is equal before heaven", and that people should seek to imitate heaven by engaging in the practice of collective love.

[ 6 ] This is often translated as 'universal love', which is misleading as Mozi believed that the essential problem of human ethics was an excess of partiality in compassion, not a deficit in compassion as such. His aim was to re-evaluate behavior, not emotions or attitudes.

[ 6 ] His epistemology can be regarded as primitive materialist empiricism . He believed that human cognition ought to be based on one's perceptions – one's sensory experiences, such as sight and hearing – instead of imagination or internal logic , elements founded on the human capacity for abstraction .

Mozi advocated frugality , condemning the Confucian emphasis on ritual and music, which he denounced as extravagant. He regarded offensive warfare as wasteful and advocated pacifism or at the most, defensive fortification. The achievement of social goals, according to Mozi, necessitated the unity of thought and action.  His political philosophy bears a resemblance to divine-rule monarchy: the population ought always to obey its leaders, as its leaders ought always to follow the will of heaven.

Mohism might be argued to have elements of meritocracy : Mozi contended that rulers should appoint officials by virtue of their ability instead of their family connections. Although popular faith in Mohism had declined by the end of the Qin dynasty, its views are said to be strongly echoed in Legalist thought.

School of Naturalists [ edit ] Main article: School of Naturalists The School of Naturalists was a philosophy that synthesized the concepts of yin and yang and the Five Elements ; Zou Yan is considered the founder of this school.

[ 7 ] His theory attempted to explain the universe in terms of basic forces in nature: the complementary agents of yin (dark, cold, wet, passive, contracting, negative) and yang (light, hot, dry, active, expanding, positive) and the Five Elements or Five Phases (water, fire, wood, metal, and earth).

In its early days, this theory was most strongly associated with the states of Yan and Qi . In later periods, these epistemological theories came to hold significance in both philosophy and popular belief.  This school was absorbed into Taoism's alchemic and magical dimensions as well as into the Chinese medical framework. The earliest surviving recordings of this are in the Mawangdui Silk Texts and Huangdi Neijing .

School of Names [ edit ] Main article: School of Names The School of Names grew out of Mohism, and focused on definitions and logic . It is said to have parallels with that of the Ancient Greek sophists or dialecticians . Its most notable member was Gongsun Long .

In the Book of Han [ edit ] In addition to the above six major philosophical schools within the Hundred Schools of Thought, the " Yiwenzhi " of the Book of Han adds four more into the Ten Schools (十家; Shijia ).

School of Diplomacy [ edit ] Main article: School of Diplomacy The School of Diplomacy, also known as the School of Vertical and Horizontal Alliances, refers to a set of military and diplomatic strategies employed during the Warring States period to maintain a balance of power between the dominant Qin state and other mid-sized powers. Adherents of this school travelled between states to lobby rulers to join either the "vertical" or "horizontal" alliances, often motivated by personal gain rather than loyalty to any particular ruler or principle. Their mastery of persuasive techniques is documented in the Annals of the Warring States , which had a lasting influence on subsequent historical writing.

Agriculturalism [ edit ] Main article: Agriculturalism Agriculturalism was an early agrarian social and political philosophy that advocated peasant utopian communalism and egalitarianism .

[ 8 ] The philosophy is founded on the notion that human society originates with the development of agriculture, and societies are based upon "people's natural propensity to farm." [ 9 ] The Agriculturalists believed that the ideal government, modeled after the semi-mythical governance of Shennong , is led by a benevolent king, one who works alongside the people in tilling the fields. The Agriculturalist king is not paid by the government through its treasuries; his livelihood is derived from the profits he earns working in the fields, not his leadership.

[ 10 ] Unlike the Confucians, the Agriculturalists did not believe in the division of labour , arguing instead that the economic policies of a country need to be based upon an egalitarian self sufficiency . The Agriculturalists supported price fixing , in which all similar goods, regardless of differences in quality and demand, are set at exactly the same, unchanging price.

[ 10 ] For example, Mencius once criticized its chief proponent Xu Xing for advocating that rulers should work in the fields with their subjects. One of Xu's students is quoted as having criticized the duke of Teng in a conversation with Mencius by saying: A worthy ruler feeds himself by ploughing side by side with the people, and rules while cooking his own meals. Now Teng on the contrary possesses granaries and treasuries, so the ruler is supporting himself by oppressing the people.

Syncretism [ edit ] Main article: Syncretism (Chinese philosophy) Syncretism integrated teachings from different schools; for instance, Lü Buwei found scholars from different schools to write a book called Lüshi Chunqiu cooperatively. This school tried to integrate the merits of various schools and avoid their perceived flaws. The Shizi ( c.

330 BC ) is the earliest textual example of the Syncretic School.

Unlisted schools [ edit ] These schools were not listed in the Book of Han , but had substantial influence.

School of the Military [ edit ] The School of the Military ( 兵家 ; Bingjia ) that often studied and discussed what westerners called the philosophy of war . Some of them studied warfare and strategy, others focused on kinds and skills of weapons.

Sun Tzu and Sun Bin were influential leaders. Some of their famous works are The Art of War and Sun Bin's Art of War .

The Art of War ascribes supernatural elements to good generalship, such as the intertwining of the four seasons with Tian , which is also yin and yang.

[ 11 ] Their theories later influenced China and East Asia more broadly. These classical texts have received great interest among contemporary interpreters, some of whom have applied it to military strategy, the martial arts, and modern business.

Yangism [ edit ] Yangism was a form of ethical egoism founded by Yang Zhu .  It was once widespread but fell to obscurity before the Han dynasty. Due to its stress on individualism , it influenced later generations of Taoists .

School of the Medical Skills [ edit ] The School of the Medical Skills ( 方技家 ; Fangjijia ) is a school which studied medicine and health.

Bian Que and Qibo were well-known scholars. Two of the earliest and existing Chinese medical works are the Huangdi Neijing and the Han-era Shanghan Lun .

Five Agents School [ edit ] The Five Agents School was another predecessor to the School of Naturalists (or the School of Yin-yang), which incorporated its ideas.

"The Five Agents schooled viewed five primal elements as active cosmic agents engaged in interaction and change." [ 12 ] These five elements were the wuxing , a force that "integrated life and the universe." [ 12 ] See also [ edit ] Philosophy portal China portal Axial Age Hellenistic philosophy Jixia Academy References [ edit ] ^ a b Ivanhoe, Philip J.

; Van Norden, Bryan W.

(2005).

Readings in Classical Chinese Philosophy (2nd ed.). Indianapolis: Hackett. p. 389.

ISBN 0-872-20781-1 .

^ "Chinese philosophy" , Encyclopædia Britannica, Retrieved 4 June 2014 ^ Allen, Tony; Grant, R. G.; Parker, Philip; Celtel, Kay; Kramer, Ann; Weeks, Marcus (2022).

Timelines of World History (1st ed.). New York: DK. p. 29.

ISBN 978-0-744-05627-3 .

^ Graham, A. C., Disputers of the Tao: Philosophical Argument in Ancient China (Open Court 1993).

ISBN 0-8126-9087-7 ^ Allen, Tony; Grant, R. G.; Parker, Philip; Celtel, Kay; Kramer, Ann; Weeks, Marcus (2022).

Timelines of World History (1st ed.). New York: DK. p. 36.

ISBN 978-0-744-05627-3 .

^ a b The Shorter Routledge Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Edited by Edward Craig. Routledge Publishing. 2005.

^ "Zou Yan" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Retrieved 1 March 2011 .

^ Deutsch, Eliot; Ronald Bontekoei (1999).

A companion to world philosophies . Wiley Blackwell. p.

183 .

ISBN 978-0-631-21327-7 .

^ Sellmann, James Daryl (2010).

Timing and rulership in Master Lü's Spring and Autumn annals . State University of New York Press. p. 76.

^ a b Denecke, Wiebke (2011).

The Dynamics of Masters Literature: Early Chinese Thought from Confucius to Han Feizi . Harvard University Press. p. 38.

^ Kelly, Paul; Dacombe, Rod; Farndon, John; Hodson, A. S.; Johnsøn, Jesper; Kishtainy, Niall; Todd, Megan; Meadway, James; Pusca, Anca; et al. (Authors) (2018). Kelly, Paul (ed.).

The Politics Book . New York: DK. p. 30.

ISBN 978-1-465-47390-5 .

^ a b World Religions: Eastern Traditions (2nd ed.). Don Mills, Ontario: Oxford University Press . 2002. p. 169.

ISBN 0-19-541521-3 .

OCLC 46661540 .

v t e Chinese philosophy Schools Agriculturalism Buddhism Confucianism Han learning Neo-Confucianism New Confucianism Huang–Lao Legalism Mohism Marxism School of Diplomacy School of Names Naturalism Taoism Daoxue Xuanxue Yangism Mixed School Nine Schools of Thought Hundred Schools of Thought Philosophers Eastern Zhou Bu Shang Chunyu Kun Confucius Deng Xi Duanmu Ci Gaozi Gongsun Long Guan Zhong Han Fei Hui Shi Laozi Li Kui Li Si Lie Yukou Mencius Mozi Shang Yang Shen Buhai Shen Dao Su Qin Sun Tzu Wu Qi Ximen Bao Xu Xing Xunzi Yang Zhu Yuan Xian Zhang Yi Zhuang Zhou Zichan Zisi Zou Yan Qin Han Ban Zhao Dong Zhongshu Dongfang Shuo Dou Wu Huan Tan Jia Yi Jia Kui Jing Fang Kong Anguo Liu An Lu Jia Liu Xiang Ma Rong Wang Chong Wang Fu Xun Yue Yang Xiong Three Kingdoms Jin Northern and Southern Bao Jingyan Fan Zhen Fan Ye Ge Hong Guo Xiang Fu Xuan He Yan Huiyuan Ji Kang Sengzhao Wang Su Wang Bi Xiahou Xuan Xie Daoyun Xun Can Yan Zhitui Zhi Dun Sui Tang Fu Yi Jizang Wang Tong Zhang Zhihe Han Yu Li Ao Liu Yuxi Liu Zongyuan Linji Yixuan Five Dynasties Ten Kingdoms Song Cheng Hao Cheng Yi Fan Zhongyan Hu Hong Lu Jiuyuan Shao Yong Shen Kuo Su Song Wang Anshi Wang Chongyang Wang Chuyi Ye Shi Zhang Zai Zhou Dunyi Zhu Xi Yuan Ming Chen Jiru Huang Zongxi Hong Zicheng Jiao Hong Jiao Yu Lai Zhide Li Zhi Liu Bowen Liu Zongzhou Luo Rufang Qian Dehong Wang Ji Wang Gen Wang Yangming Wu Cheng Xu Ai Zhan Ruoshui Qing Chen Hongmou Chen Menglei Dai Zhen Fang Bao Fang Lanfen Fang Quan Feng Guifen Gong Zizhen Gu Yanwu Hong Liangji Ji Yun Ma Qixi Lin Zexu Liu Yiming Pan Pingge Tan Sitong Tang Zhen Wang Fuzhi Wei Yuan Yan Yuan Yu Yue Yu Zhengxie Zhang Xuecheng Zhuang Cunyu Zeng Guofan 20th century Cai Yuanpei Carsun Chang P. C. Chang Chen Daqi Chen Duxiu Chung-ying Cheng Ch'ien Mu Chu Anping Fang Keli Feng Youlan Gan Yang Gu Su Gu Zhun He Guanghu Hu Qiaomu Hu Shih Hua Gang Ray Huang Jiang Qing Jin Yuelin Kang Youwei Lee Shui-chuen Li Shicen Li Zehou Liang Qichao Liang Shuming Lin Yutang Liu Xiaofeng Lu Xun Mao Zedong Mou Zongsan Qiu Renzong Sun Yat-sen Tang Chun-i Tang Yijie Tsang Lap Chuen Xiong Shili Xu Fuguan Yang Changji Yin Haiguang Yu Dunkang Zhang Dongsun Zhang Shenfu Zhou Guoping Zhou Zuoren Concepts Tao De Fa Jian'ai Jing Jing zuo Li Confucianism Neo-Confucianism Ming yun Qi Qing Ren Three teachings Shen Si Ti Tian Mandate of Heaven Wu wei Filial piety Xin Human nature Self-cultivation Yi Yin and yang Yong Zhengming Ziran Topics Logic Theology Metaphysics Politics Ethics Role ethics State consequentialism Ink wash Shan shui Society Epistemology Metaphilosophy Legitimacy Authority control databases : National Japan Portals : China Philosophy NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐api‐ext.codfw.main‐77f755c49c‐hppfj
Cached time: 20250817050027
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.647 seconds
Real time usage: 0.806 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 5333/1000000
Revision size: 17655/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 105323/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 1815/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 16/100
Expensive parser function count: 13/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 66819/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.420/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 15861881/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  697.268      1 -total
 32.68%  227.835      1 Template:Infobox_Chinese
 22.13%  154.339      1 Template:Reflist
 18.06%  125.924      8 Template:Cite_book
 13.33%   92.964      2 Template:Navbox
 12.76%   88.980      1 Template:Chinese_philosophy
  9.43%   65.748      1 Template:Short_description
  5.76%   40.129      2 Template:Pagetype
  4.56%   31.775      9 Template:Main
  3.03%   21.148      1 Template:Portal_bar Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:277440:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817050027 and revision id 1305950512. Rendering was triggered because: api-parse Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Hundred_Schools_of_Thought&oldid=1305950512 " Category : Ancient Chinese philosophy Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from May 2024 Articles containing Chinese-language text Articles containing Korean-language text Articles containing Japanese-language text Articles containing traditional Chinese-language text This page was last edited on 15 August 2025, at 01:50 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Hundred Schools of Thought 33 languages Add topic

