Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Nature of greed 2 Views of greed Toggle Views of greed subsection 2.1 In animals 2.2 Ancient views 2.2.1 Aristophanes 2.2.2 Lucretius 2.2.3 Epictetus 2.2.4 St. Ambrose 2.2.5 Ancient China 2.3 Medieval Europe 2.3.1 Augustine 2.3.2 Aquinas 2.3.3 Dante 2.3.4 Chaucer 2.4 Early modern Europe 2.4.1 Luther 2.4.2 Montaigne 2.4.3 Spinoza 2.4.4 Locke 2.4.5 Laurence Sterne 2.4.6 Rousseau 2.4.7 Adam Smith 2.4.8 Edward Gibbon 2.5 Modern period 2.5.1 John Stuart Mill 2.5.2 Goethe 2.5.3 Marx 2.5.4 Meher Baba 2.5.5 Paul VI / John Paul II 2.5.6 Ivan Boesky 2.5.7 David Klemm 3 Inspirations 4 Genetics 5 Art 6 In popular culture 7 See also 8 Further reading 9 References 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Greed 21 languages العربية Deutsch Ελληνικά Esperanto فارسی Français हिन्दी Italiano ಕನ್ನಡ Lingála मराठी Bahasa Melayu Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Português Shqip Simple English Soomaaliga ไทย Українська اردو 粵語 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Insatiable longing for material or immaterial gain; avarice For other uses, see Greed (disambiguation) .

"Avarice" and "Avaritia" redirect here. For other uses, see Avarice (disambiguation) and Avaritia (disambiguation) .

1909 painting The Worship of Mammon , the New Testament representation and personification of material greed , by Evelyn De Morgan Part of a series on Emotions Affect Classification In animals Emotional intelligence Mood Self-regulation Interpersonal Dysregulation Valence Emotions Acceptance Admiration Affection Amusement Anger Angst Anguish Annoyance Anticipation Anxiety Apathy Arousal Awe Belongingness Boredom Confidence Confusion Contempt Contentment Courage Curiosity Depression Desire Determination Disappointment Disgust Distrust Doubt Ecstasy Elevation Embarrassment Emotional detachment Empathy Enthusiasm Envy Euphoria Faith Fear Frustration Gratification Gratitude Greed Grief Guilt Happiness Hatred Hope Horror Hostility Hubris Humiliation Interest Jealousy Joy Kindness Limerence Loneliness Love Lust Nostalgia Outrage Panic Passion Pity Pleasure Pride Rage Regret Rejection Relief Remorse Resentment Sadness Saudade Schadenfreude Self-pity Shame Shock Shyness Social connection Sorrow Suffering Surprise Suspicion Trust Wonder Worry v t e Shakespeare Sacrificed: Or the Offering to Avarice by James Gillray The Father and Mother by Boardman Robinson depicting War as the offspring of Greed and Pride Greed (or avarice , Latin : avaritia ) is an insatiable desire for material gain (be it food, money, land, or animate/inanimate possessions) or social value, such as status or power .

Nature of greed [ edit ] The initial motivation for (or purpose of) greed and actions associated with it may be the promotion of personal or family survival. It may at the same time be an intent to deny or obstruct competitors from potential means (for basic survival and comfort) or future opportunities; therefore being insidious or tyrannical and having a negative connotation. Alternately, the purpose could be defense or counteractive response to such obstructions being threatened by others.

Modern economic thought frequently distinguishes greed from self-interest , even in its earliest works, [ 1 ] [ 2 ] and spends considerable effort distinguishing the line between the two.  By the mid-19th century – affected by the phenomenological ideas of Hegel – economic and political thinkers began to define greed inherent to the structure of society as a negative and inhibitor to the development of societies.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] Keynes wrote, "The world is not so governed from above that private and social interest always coincide. It is not so managed here below that in practice they coincide." [ 5 ] Both views continue to pose fundamental questions in today's economic thinking.

[ 6 ] Weber posited that the spirit of capitalism integrated a philosophy of avarice coloured with utilitarianism .

[ 7 ] Weber also says that, according to Protestant ethic , "Wealth is thus bad ethically only in so far as it is a temptation to idleness and sinful enjoyment of life, and its acquisition is bad only when it is with the purpose of later living merrily and without care." As a secular psychological concept , greed is an inordinate desire to acquire or possess more than one needs. The degree of inordinance is related to the inability to control the reformulation of "wants" once desired "needs" are eliminated. It is characterized by an insatiable desire for more, but also a dissatisfaction with what one currently has.

[ 8 ] Erich Fromm described greed as "a bottomless pit which exhausts the person in an endless effort to satisfy the need without ever reaching satisfaction". An individual's tendency to be greedy can be seen as a personality trait that can be measured.

[ 9 ] With measures like these, greed has been found to be related to financial behavior (both positive in earning and negative in borrowing/saving less), to unethical behavior, and to negatively relate to well-being.

[ 10 ] Views of greed [ edit ] In animals [ edit ] Animal examples of greed in literary observations are frequently the attribution of human motivations to other species. The dog-in-the-manger , or piggish behaviours are typical examples. Characterizations of the wolverine (whose scientific name (Gulo gulo) means "glutton") remark both on its outsized appetite, and its penchant for spoiling food remaining after it has gorged.

[ 11 ] Ancient views [ edit ] Ancient views of greed abound in nearly every culture. In Classical Greek thought; pleonexy (an unjust desire for tangible/intangible worth attaining to others) is discussed in the works of Plato and Aristotle .

[ 12 ] Pan- Hellenic disapprobation of greed is seen by the mythic punishment meted to Tantalus , from whom ever-present food and water is eternally withheld. Late- Republican and Imperial politicians and historical writers fixed blame for the demise of the Roman Republic on greed for wealth and power, from Sallust and Plutarch [ 13 ] to the Gracchi and Cicero . The Persian Empires had the three-headed Zoroastrian demon Aži Dahāka (representing unslaked desire) as a fixed part of their folklore. In the Sanskrit Dharmashastras the "root of all immorality is lobha (greed).", [ 14 ] as stated in the Laws of Manu (7:49) .

[ 15 ] In early China, both the Shai jan jing and the Zuo zhuan texts count the greedy Taotie among the malevolent Four Perils besetting gods and men. North American Indian tales often cast bears as proponents of greed (considered a major threat in a communal society ).

[ 16 ] Greed is also personified by the fox in early allegoric literature of many lands.

[ 17 ] [ 18 ] Greed (as a cultural quality) was often imputed as a racial pejorative by the ancient Greeks and Romans ; as such it was used against Egyptians , Punics , or other Oriental peoples; [ 19 ] and generally to any enemies or people whose customs were considered strange. By the late Middle Ages the insult was widely directed towards Jews.

[ 20 ] In the Books of Moses , the Ten Commandments of the sole deity are written in the book of Exodus (20:2-17), and again in Deuteronomy (5:6-21); two of these particularly deal directly with greed, prohibiting theft and covetousness . These commandments are moral foundations of not only Judaism , but also of Christianity , Islam , Unitarian Universalism , and the Baháʼí Faith among others. The Quran advises do not spend wastefully, indeed, the wasteful are brothers of the devils...

, but it also says do not make your hand [as though] chained to your neck..." [ 21 ] The Christian Gospels quote Jesus as saying, ""Watch out! Be on your guard against all kinds of greed; a man's life does not consist in the abundance of his possessions" , [ 22 ] and "For everything in the world—the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life—comes not from the Father but from the world." .

[ 23 ] Aristophanes [ edit ] In the Aristophanes satire Plutus , an Athenian and his slave say to Plutus , the god of wealth, that while men may become weary of greed for love, music, figs, and other pleasures, they will never tire of greed for wealth: If a man has thirteen talents, he has all the greater ardour to possess sixteen; if that wish is achieved, he will want forty or will complain that he knows not how to make both ends meet.

[ 24 ] Lucretius [ edit ] The Roman poet Lucretius thought that the fear of dying and poverty were major drivers of greed, with dangerous consequences for morality and order: And greed, again, and the blind lust of honours Which force poor wretches past the bounds of law, And, oft allies and ministers of crime, To push through nights and days with hugest toil To rise untrammelled to the peaks of power— These wounds of life in no mean part are kept Festering and open by this fright of death.

[ 25 ] Epictetus [ edit ] The Roman Stoic Epictetus also saw the dangerous moral consequences of greed, and so advised the greedy to instead take pride in letting go of the desire for wealth, rather than be like the man with a fever who cannot drink his fill: Nay, what a price the rich themselves, and those who hold office, and who live with beautiful wives, would give to despise wealth and office and the very women whom they love and win! Do you not know what the thirst of a man in a fever is like, how different from the thirst of a man in health? The healthy man drinks and his thirst is gone: the other is delighted for a moment and then grows giddy, the water turns to gall, and he vomits and has colic, and is more exceeding thirsty. Such is the condition of the man who is haunted by desire in wealth or in office, and in wedlock with a lovely woman: jealousy clings to him, fear of loss, shameful words, shameful thoughts, unseemly deeds.

[ 26 ] Jacques Callot, Greed , probably after 1621 St. Ambrose [ edit ] In his exegesis on Naboth ( De Nabute , 389) Ambrose of Milan writes "omnium est terra, non diuitam, sed pauciores qui non utuntur suo quam qui utuntur", [ 27 ] translated by Pope Paul VI as " The earth belongs to everyone, not only to the rich." [ 28 ] His belief is that our concern for one another is the force which creates society and holds it together; and that avarice destroys this bond.

[ 29 ] " Ancient China [ edit ] Laozi , the semi-legendary founder of Taoism , was critical of the desire for profit over social good. In the Tao Te Ching , Laozi observes that "the more implements to add to their profit that the people have, the greater disorder is there in the state and clan." [ 30 ] Xunzi believed that selfishness and greed were fundamental aspects of human nature and that society must endeavor to suppress these negative tendencies through strict laws.

[ 31 ] This belief was the basis of legalism , a philosophy that would become the prevailing ideology of the Qin dynasty and continues to be influential in China today.

Conversely, the philosopher Yang Zhu was known for his embrace of total self-interest . However, the school of Yangism did not specifically endorse greed; rather, it emphasized a form of hedonism where individual well-being takes precedence over all else.

[ 32 ] Mencius was convinced of the innate goodness of human nature, but nevertheless warned against the excessive drive towards greed. Like Laozi, he was worried about the destabilizing and destructive effects of greed: "In a case where the lord of a state of ten thousand chariots is murdered, it must be by a family with a thousand chariots. In a case where the lord of a state of a thousand chariots is murdered, it must be by a family with a hundred chariots. One thousand out of ten thousand, or one hundred out of a thousand, cannot be considered to not be a lot. But if righteousness is put behind and profit is put ahead, one will not be satisfied without grasping [from others]." [ 33 ] Medieval Europe [ edit ] Augustine [ edit ] In the fifth century, St. Augustine wrote: Greed is not a defect in the gold that is desired but in the man who loves it perversely by falling from justice which he ought to esteem as incomparably superior to gold [...] [ 34 ] Aquinas [ edit ] St.

Thomas Aquinas states greed "is a sin against God, just as all mortal sins, in as much as man condemns things eternal for the sake of temporal things." [ 35 ] : A1 He also wrote that greed can be "a sin directly against one's neighbor, since one man cannot over-abound (superabundare) in external riches, without another man lacking them, for temporal goods cannot be possessed by many at the same time." Dante [ edit ] Dante's 14th century epic poem Inferno assigns those committed to the deadly sin of greed to punishment in the fourth of the nine circles of Hell. The inhabitants are misers , hoarders , and spendthrifts ; they must constantly battle one another. The guiding spirit, Virgil , tells the poet these souls have lost their personality in their disorder, and are no longer recognizable: "That ignoble life, Which made them vile before, now makes them dark, And to all knowledge indiscernible." [ 36 ] In Dante's Purgatory , avaricious penitents were bound and laid face down on the ground for having concentrated too much on earthly thoughts.

Chaucer [ edit ] Dante's near-contemporary, Geoffrey Chaucer , wrote of greed in his Prologue to The Pardoner's Tale these words: "Radix malorum est Cupiditas" (or "the root of all evil is greed"); [ 37 ] however the Pardoner himself serves us as a caricature of churchly greed.

[ 38 ] Early modern Europe [ edit ] Luther [ edit ] Martin Luther especially condemned the greed of the usurer : Therefore, is there, on this earth, no greater enemy of man (after the devil) than a gripe-money, and usurer, for he wants to be God over all men. Turks, soldiers, and tyrants are also bad men, yet must they let the people live, and confess that they are bad, and enemies, and do, nay, must, now and then show pity to some. But a usurer and money-glutton, such a one would have the whole world perish of hunger and thirst, misery and want, so far as in him lies, so that he may have all to himself, and everyone may receive from him as from a God, and be his serf forever. To wear fine cloaks, golden chains, rings, to wipe his mouth, to be deemed and taken for a worthy, pious man ....

Usury is a great huge monster, like a werewolf , who lays waste all, more than any Cacus , Gerion or Antus. And yet decks himself out, and would be thought pious, so that people may not see where the oxen have gone, that he drags backward into his den.

[ 39 ] Montaigne [ edit ] Michel de Montaigne thought that 'it is not want, but rather abundance, that creates avarice ', that 'All moneyed men I conclude to be covetous', and that: 'tis the greatest folly imaginable to expect that fortune should ever sufficiently arm us against herself; 'tis with our own arms that we are to fight her; accidental ones will betray us in the pinch of the business. If I lay up, 'tis for some near and contemplated purpose; not to purchase lands, of which I have no need, but to purchase pleasure: "Non esse cupidum, pecunia est; non esse emacem, vertigal est." ["Not to be covetous, is money; not to be acquisitive, is revenue." —Cicero, Paradox., vi. 3.] I neither am in any great apprehension of wanting, nor in desire of any more: "Divinarum fructus est in copia; copiam declarat satietas." ["The fruit of riches is in abundance; satiety declares abundance." —Idem, ibid., vi. 2.] And I am very well pleased that this reformation in me has fallen out in an age naturally inclined to avarice, and that I see myself cleared of a folly so common to old men, and the most ridiculous of all human follies.

[ 40 ] Spinoza [ edit ] Baruch Spinoza thought that the masses were concerned with money-making more than any other activity, since, he believed, it seemed to them like spending money was prerequisite for enjoying any goods and services.

[ 41 ] Yet he did not consider this preoccupation to be necessarily a form of greed, and felt that the ethics of the situation were nuanced: This result is the fault only of those, who seek money, not from poverty or to supply their necessary wants, but because they have learned the arts of gain, wherewith they bring themselves to great splendour. Certainly, they nourish their bodies, according to custom, but scantily, believing that they lose as much of their wealth as they spend on the preservation of their body. But they who know the true use of money, and who fix the measure of wealth solely with regard to their actual needs, live content with little.

[ 42 ] Locke [ edit ] John Locke claims that unused property is wasteful and an offence against nature, because "as anyone can make use of to any advantage of life before it spoils; so much he may by his labour fix a property in. Whatever is beyond this, is more than his share, and belongs to others." [ 43 ] Laurence Sterne [ edit ] In the Laurence Sterne novel Tristram Shandy , the titular character describes his uncle's greed for knowledge about fortifications , saying that the 'desire of knowledge, like the thirst of riches, increases ever with the acquisition of it', that 'The more my uncle Toby pored over his map, the more he took a liking to it', and that 'The more my uncle Toby drank of this sweet fountain of science, the greater was the heat and impatience of his thirst'.

[ 44 ] Rousseau [ edit ] The Swiss philosophe Jean-Jacques Rousseau compared man in the state of nature , who has no need of greed since he can find food anywhere, with man in the state of society : for whom first necessaries have to be provided, and then superfluities; delicacies follow next, then immense wealth, then subjects, and then slaves. He enjoys not a moment's relaxation; and what is yet stranger, the less natural and pressing his wants, the more headstrong are his passions, and, still worse, the more he has it in his power to gratify them; so that after a long course of prosperity, after having swallowed up treasures and ruined multitudes, the hero ends up by cutting every throat till he finds himself, at last, sole master of the world. Such is in miniature the moral picture, if not of human life, at least of the secret pretensions of the heart of civilised man.

[ 45 ] Adam Smith [ edit ] Political economist Adam Smith thought the greed for food to be limited, but the greed for other goods to be limitless: The rich man consumes no more food than his poor neighbour. In quality it may be very different, and to select and prepare it may require more labour and art; but in quantity it is very nearly the same. But compare the spacious palace and great wardrobe of the one, with the hovel and the few rags of the other, and you will be sensible that the difference between their clothing, lodging, and household furniture, is almost as great in quantity as it is in quality. The desire of food is limited in every man by the narrow capacity of the human stomach; but the desire of the conveniencies and ornaments of building, dress, equipage, and household furniture, seems to have no limit or certain boundary.

[ 46 ] "It is not from the benevolence of the butcher, the brewer, or the baker, that we expect our dinner, but from their regard to their own interest." [ 47 ] Edward Gibbon [ edit ] In his account of the Sack of Rome , historian Edward Gibbon remarks that: avarice is an insatiate and universal passion; since the enjoyment of almost every object that can afford pleasure to the different tastes and tempers of mankind may be procured by the possession of wealth. In the pillage of Rome, a just preference was given to gold and jewels, which contain the greatest value in the smallest compass and weight: but, after these portable riches had been removed by the more diligent robbers, the palaces of Rome were rudely stripped of their splendid and costly furniture.

[ 48 ] Modern period [ edit ] John Stuart Mill [ edit ] In his essay Utilitarianism , John Stuart Mill writes about greed for money that: the love of money is not only one of the strongest moving forces of human life, but money is, in many cases, desired in and for itself; the desire to possess it is often stronger than the desire to use it, and goes on increasing when all the desires which point to ends beyond it, to be compassed by it, are falling off. It may be then said truly, that money is desired not for the sake of an end, but as part of the end. From being a means to happiness, it has come to be itself a principal ingredient of the individual's conception of happiness. The same may be said of the majority of the great objects of human life—power, for example, or fame; except that to each of these there is a certain amount of immediate pleasure annexed, which has at least the semblance of being naturally inherent in them; a thing which cannot be said of money.

[ 49 ] Goethe [ edit ] Frontispiece to a 1620 printing of Doctor Faustus showing Faustus conjuring Mephistophilis In Johann Wolfgang von Goethe 's tragic play Faust , Mephistopheles , disguised as a starving man, comes to Plutus, Faust in disguise, to recite a cautionary tale about avariciously living beyond your means: Starveling.

Away from me, ye odious crew!

Welcome, I know, I never am to you.

When hearth and home were women's zone, As Avaritia I was known.

Then did our household thrive throughout, For much came in and naught went out!

Zealous was I for chest and bin; 'Twas even said my zeal was sin.

But since in years most recent and depraving Woman is wont no longer to be saving And, like each tardy payer, collars Far more desires than she has dollars, The husband now has much to bore him; Wherever he looks, debts loom before him.

Her spinning-money is turned over To grace her body or her lover; Better she feasts and drinks still more With all her wretched lover-corps.

Gold charms me all the more for this: Male's now my gender, I am Avarice!

Leader of the Women.

With dragons be the dragon avaricious, It's naught but lies, deceiving stuff!

To stir up men he comes, malicious, Whereas men now are troublesome enough.

[ 50 ] Near the end of the play, Faust confesses to Mephistopheles: That's the worst suffering can bring, Being rich, to feel we lack something.

[ 51 ] Marx [ edit ] Karl Marx thought that 'avarice and the desire to get rich are the ruling passions' in the heart of every burgeoning capitalist, who later develops a ' Faustian conflict ' in his heart 'between the passion for accumulation, and the desire for enjoyment' of his wealth.

[ 52 ] He also stated that 'With the possibility of holding and storing up exchange-value in the shape of a particular commodity, arises also the greed for gold' and that 'Hard work, saving, and avarice are, therefore, [the hoarder's] three cardinal virtues, and to sell much and buy little the sum of his political economy.' [ 53 ] Marx discussed what he saw as the specific nature of the greed of capitalists thusly: Use-values must therefore never be looked upon as the real aim of the capitalist; neither must the profit on any single transaction. The restless never-ending process of profit-making alone is what he aims at. This boundless greed after riches, this passionate chase after exchange-value, is common to the capitalist and the miser; but while the miser is merely a capitalist gone mad, the capitalist is a rational miser. The never-ending augmentation of exchange value, which the miser strives after, by seeking to save his money from circulation, is attained by the more acute capitalist, by constantly throwing it afresh into circulation.

[ 54 ] Meher Baba [ edit ] Meher Baba dictated that "Greed is a state of restlessness of the heart, and it consists mainly of craving for power and possessions. Possessions and power are sought for the fulfillment of desires. Man is only partially satisfied in his attempt to have the fulfillment of his desires, and this partial satisfaction fans and increases the flame of craving instead of extinguishing it. Thus, greed always finds an endless field of conquest and leaves the man endlessly dissatisfied. The chief expressions of greed are related to the emotional part of man." [ 55 ] Paul VI / John Paul II [ edit ] In 1967, Pope Paul VI issued the encyclical Populorum progressio which called for "a joint effort for the development of the human race as a whole." [ 56 ] He warned that "the exclusive pursuit of material possessions prevents man's growth as a human being and stands in opposition to his true grandeur. Avarice, in individuals and in nations, is the most obvious form of stultified moral development." [ 57 ] Twenty years later, in the last days of 1987, Pope John Paul II published the encyclical Sollicitudo rei socialis . Among the pronouncements was this: "Among the actions and attitudes opposed to God’s will two are very typical: greed and the thirst for power. Not only individuals sin in that way; so do nations and world-blocs." [ 58 ] Ivan Boesky [ edit ] American Ivan Boesky famously defended greed in an 18 May 1986 commencement address at the UC Berkeley 's School of Business Administration, in which he said, "Greed is all right, by the way. I want you to know that. I think greed is healthy. You can be greedy and still feel good about yourself".

[ 59 ] This speech inspired the 1987 film Wall Street , which features the famous line spoken by Gordon Gekko : "Greed, for lack of a better word, is good. Greed is right, greed works. Greed clarifies, cuts through, and captures the essence of the evolutionary spirit. Greed, in all of its forms; greed for life, for money, for love, knowledge has marked the upward surge of mankind." [ 60 ] David Klemm [ edit ] The theologian David Klemm summarized Augustine to stress his view that a need-love for earthly things was dangerous: "Most people... become attached to their objects of desire, and in this way are in fact possessed by them", needing and dependent. It is, Klemm says elsewhere, "a window-shopping of the soul in which I lose myself in desires for shallow and untrue goods". But "those who use their private property for the sake of enjoying God become detached from their goods and thereby possess them well".

[ 61 ] Inspirations [ edit ] Scavenging and hoarding of materials or objects, theft and robbery , especially by means of violence, trickery, or manipulation of authority are all actions that may be inspired by greed. Such misdeeds can include simony , where one profits from soliciting goods within the actual confines of a church.
A well-known example of greed is the pirate Hendrick Lucifer , who fought for hours to acquire Cuban gold, becoming mortally wounded in the process. He died of his wounds in 1627, hours after having transferred the booty to his ship.

[ 62 ] Genetics [ edit ] Some research suggests there is a genetic basis for greed. It is possible people who have a shorter version of the ruthlessness gene (AVPR1a) may behave more selfishly.

[ 63 ] Art [ edit ] In 1558, Pieter van der Heyden personified greed in his engraved image after drawings by Pieter Bruegel the Elder .

[ 64 ] More recently, artists like Umberto Romano (1950), [ 65 ] Michael Craig-Martin (2008) [ 66 ] and Diddo (2012) [ 67 ] have devoted works of art to greed .

In popular culture [ edit ] American Greed , documentary series Greed (1924 film) Greed (2019 film) Greed (game show) Ojukokoro (Greed) , film Greed , novel See also [ edit ] Aristocracy Political corruption Consumer capitalism Conspicuous consumption Consumer culture Consumerism Contempt Corruption Financialization Interest Genoeconomics Greed is good Hyperconsumerism Narcissism Overconsumption (economics) Pleonexia Seven deadly sins Theft Usury Further reading [ edit ] Bossuet, Jacques-Bénigne (1900).

"33rd Day. Of avarice and riches again : we are not to put confidence in possessions" .

The Sermon on the Mount . Longmans, Green, and Co.

Cassian, John (1885).

"Book VII: Of the Spirit of Covetousness" .

Ante-Nicene Christian Library, Volume XI . Translated by Philip Schaff. T. & T. Clark in Edinburgh.

Padua, St. Anthony of (1865).

"Book I: Second Part (Against Avarice)" .

The Moral Concordances of Saint Anthony of Padua . J.T. Hayes.

Vianney, Jean-Marie-Baptiste (1951).

"On Avarice" .

The Blessed Curé of Ars in His Catechetical Instructions . St. Meinrad, Ind.

Seuntjens, Terri; Zeelenberg, Marcel; Breugelmans, Seger; Van de Ven, Niels (2015). "Defining Greed".

British Journal of Psychology .

106 (3): 505– 525.

doi : 10.1111/bjop.12100 .

hdl : 10411/20459 .

PMID 25315060 .

S2CID 25323046 .

References [ edit ] ^ Charles de Montesquieu, The Spirit of the Laws (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1989), p. 338 ^ Adam Smith, The Wealth of Nations (New York: Modern Library, 1965), p.651 ^ Thorstein Veblen, The Theory of the Leisure Class (1934 ed.), p. 36 ^ Karl Marx, The Communist Manifesto, London, 1848 ^ Keynes, The End of Laissez-Faire, http://www.panarchy.org/keynes/laissezfaire.1926.html ^ Wang, Long; Malhotra, Deepak; Murnighan, J. Keith.

"ECONOMICS EDUCATION AND GREED" (PDF) .

piotr-evdokimov.com . Archived from the original on 12 August 2017 . Retrieved 21 September 2023 .

^ Weber, Max.

The protestant ethics and the spirit of capitalism .

^ Seuntjens, Terri; Zeelenberg, Marcel; Breugelmans, Seger; Van de Ven, Niels (2015). "Defining Greed".

British Journal of Psychology .

106 (3): 505– 525.

doi : 10.1111/bjop.12100 .

hdl : 10411/20459 .

PMID 25315060 .

S2CID 25323046 .

^ Seuntjens, Terri; Zeelenberg, Marcel; Van de Ven, Niels; Breugelmans, Seger (2015). "Dispostional Greed".

Journal of Personality and Social Psychology .

108 (6): 917– 933.

doi : 10.1037/pspp0000031 .

PMID 25664899 .

^ Zeelenberg, Marcel; Breugelmans, Seger (2022).

"The good, bad and ugly of dispositional greed" .

Current Opinion in Psychology .

46 (August): 101323.

doi : 10.1016/j.copsyc.2022.101323 .

PMID 35339975 .

^ "Wolverines Give Insight into the Evolution of Greed" .

Visionlearning Blog . 17 December 2014. Archived from the original on 14 June 2023 . Retrieved 14 August 2024 .

^ "The Evolution of Greed - from Aristotle to Gordon Gekko| Countercurrents" . 10 October 2018.

^ "Greed, Power, and Prestige – Explaining the Fall of the Roman Republic – A Really Cool Blog" . Archived from the original on 26 February 2017.

^ "Wealth, interest, and greed: The dharma of doing business in medieval India" . 31 July 2017.

^ "The Laws of Manu VII" .

^ "Native American Stories and Quotes About Greed" .

^ Casal, U. A. (1959).

"The Goblin Fox and Badger and Other Witch Animals of Japan" .

Folklore Studies .

18 : 1– 93.

doi : 10.2307/1177429 .

JSTOR 1177429 .

^ "Foolish and Greedy Fox Hindi Story" . 9 December 2016.

^ The Invention of Racism in Classical Antiquity, Benjamin Isaac, Princeton University Press, 2004; ISBN 0691-11691-1 ^ "Jews and Finance" .

^ "Surah Al-Isra - 26-36" .

^ Luke 12:15 ^ 1 John 2:16 ^ Aristophanes .

Plutus .

The Internet Classics Archive .

^ Lucretius .

Of the Nature of Things , Book III.

Project Gutenberg .

^ Epictetus .

The Discourses of Epictetus , Book IV, Chapter 9 . Translated by Percy Ewing Matheson .

Internet Sacred Text Archive .

^ De Iacob: De Ioseph; de patriarchis; de fuga saeculi; de interpellatione Iob et David; de apologia David; Apologia David altera; de Helia et ieiunio; de Nabuthae; de Tobia . F. Tempsky. 1897.

^ "Populorum Progressio (March 26, 1967) | Paul VI" .

^ Smith, J. Warren (2021). "12: Societas and Misericordia in Ambrose' theology of community". In Gannaway, Ethan; Grant, Robert (eds.). Ambrose of Milan and Community Formation in Late Antiquity. Cambridge Scholars Publishing. ISBN 978-1-5275-6726-9.

^ Andrea & Overfield 2015, p. 92 ^ Zhao 2015, p. 181 ^ Bontekoe, Ronald; Deutsch, Eliot (1999).

A companion to world philosophies .

Wiley-Blackwell . pp.

142 –143.

ISBN 978-0-631-21327-7 .

^ Van Norden 1997 ^ "A quote from City of God" .

^ Thomas Aquinas.

"The Summa Theologica II-II.Q118 (The vices opposed to liberality, and in the first place, of covetousness)" (1920, Second and Revised ed.). New Advent.

^ "Dante's Inferno Full Text - Canto 7 - Owl Eyes" .

^ https://sites.fas.harvard.edu/~chaucer/teachslf/pard-par.htm Archived 12 April 2020 at the Wayback Machine , line 426 ^ "A Philosophical Horror Story: Chaucer's "The Pardoner's Tale" | the Partially Examined Life Philosophy Podcast | A Philosophy Podcast and Blog" . 23 November 2018.

^ In Karl Marx , Capital , Volume 1 , Chapter 24, Footnote 20. Translated by Samuel Moore and Edward Aveling . Edited by Frederick Engels .

Marxists Internet Archive .

^ Michel de Montaigne .

Essays of Michel de Montaigne . Book I, Chapter XL. Translated by Charles Cotton .

Project Gutenberg .

^ Baruch Spinoza .

The Ethics , Book IV, Appendix, XXVIII. 'Now for providing these nourishments the strength of each individual would hardly suffice, if men did not lend one another mutual aid. But money has furnished us with a token for everything: hence it is with the notion of money, that the mind of the multitude is chiefly engrossed: nay, it can hardly conceive any kind of pleasure, which is not accompanied with the idea of money as cause.' Translated by R. H. M. Elwes.

Project Gutenberg .

^ Spinoza.

The Ethics , Book IV, Appendix, XXIX.

^ https://www.earlymoderntexts.com/assets/pdfs/locke1689a.pdf , Chapter 5 ^ Laurence Sterne .

Tristram Shandy , Book II, Chapter III.

Project Gutenberg .

^ Jean-Jacques Rousseau .

On the Origin of Inequality Archived 23 September 2020 at the Wayback Machine . Appendix. Translated by G. D. H. Cole .

American University of Beirut .

^ Adam Smith .

The Wealth of Nations , Book I, Chapter XI, Part II.

Project Gutenberg .

^ Smith, Adam (1 January 1776), Todd, William B (ed.), "An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations" , The Glasgow Edition of the Works and Correspondence of Adam Smith, Vol. 2: An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations, Vol. 1 , Oxford University Press, doi : 10.1093/oseo/instance.00043218 , hdl : 10131/7683 , ISBN 978-0-19-926956-3 , retrieved 21 March 2021 {{ citation }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ Edward Gibbon .

History of the Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire , Volume III, Chapter XXXI, Part IV.

Project Gutenberg .

^ John Stuart Mill .

Utilitarianism , Chapter IV.

Project Gutenberg .

^ Johann Wolfgang von Goethe .

Faust , Part II, Section 4 . Translated by George Madison Priest.

Goethe (Re)Collected .

^ Goethe.

Faust , Part II, Act V , Scene III. Translated by A. S. Kline.

Goethe (Re)Collected .

^ Karl Marx .

Capital , Volume 1 , Part 1, Chapter 24. Translated by Samuel Moore and Edward Aveling . Edited by Frederick Engels .

Marxists Internet Archive .

^ Karl Marx .

Capital , Volume 1 , Part 1, Chapter III. 'In order that gold may be held as money, and made to form a hoard, it must be prevented from circulating, or from transforming itself into a means of enjoyment. The hoarder, therefore, makes a sacrifice of the lusts of the flesh to his gold fetish. He acts in earnest up to the Gospel of abstention. On the other hand, he can withdraw from circulation no more than what he has thrown into it in the shape of commodities. The more he produces, the more he is able to sell. Hard work, saving, and avarice are, therefore, his three cardinal virtues, and to sell much and buy little the sum of his political economy.' ^ Marx.

Capital , Volume 1 , Part 2, Chapter IV.

^ Baba, Meher (1967).

Discourses.

Volume II. San Francisco: Sufism Reoriented. p. 27.

^ "Populorum Progressio (March 26, 1967) | Paul VI" .

^ "Populorum Progressio (March 26, 1967) | Paul VI" .

^ "Sollicitudo Rei Socialis (30 December 1987) | John Paul II" .

^ Gabriel, Satya J (21 November 2001).

"Oliver Stone's Wall Street and the Market for Corporate Control" .

Economics in Popular Film . Mount Holyoke. Archived from the original on 13 July 2015 . Retrieved 10 December 2008 .

^ Ross, Brian (11 November 2005).

"Greed on Wall Street" .

ABC News . Retrieved 18 March 2008 .

^ McCloskey, Deidre N. (2006).

The Burgeois Virtues. Ethics for an age of commerce . Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

^ Dreamtheimpossible (14 September 2011).

"Examples of greed" . Archived from the original on 18 January 2012 . Retrieved 4 October 2011 .

^ 'Ruthlessness gene' discovered ^ "Avarice (Avaritia) from the series The Seven Deadly Sins" . The Met . Retrieved 25 August 2021 .

^ "Greed" . Smithsonian American Art Museum . Retrieved 25 August 2021 .

^ " 'Greed', Michael Craig-Martin, 2008" . Tate . Retrieved 25 August 2021 .

^ Molly Oswaks.

"This Re-Stabilized Pure Dollar-Ink Is Literally the Most Beautiful Waste of Money You'll Ever See" . Gizmodo . Retrieved 5 June 2021 .

External links [ edit ] Quotations related to Greed at Wikiquote The dictionary definition of greed at Wiktionary Media related to Greed at Wikimedia Commons v t e Ethics Normative Consequentialism Deontology Care Particularism Pragmatic Role Suffering-focused Utilitarianism Virtue Applied Animal Artificial intelligence Bio Business Computer Discourse Economic Engineering Environmental Land Legal Machine Marketing Meat eating Media Medical Nursing Professional Programming Research Sexual Technology Terraforming Uncertain sentience Work Meta Absolutism Axiology Cognitivism Realism Naturalism Non-naturalism Subjectivism Ideal observer theory Divine command theory Constructivism Euthyphro dilemma Intuitionism Nihilism Non-cognitivism Emotivism Expressivism Quasi-realism Universal prescriptivism Rationalism Relativism Skepticism Universalism Value monism – Value pluralism Schools Buddhist Christian Protestant Confucian Epicurean Existentialist Feminist Islamic Jewish Kantian Rousseauian Stoic Tao Concepts Accountability Authority Autonomy Blame Common sense Compassion Conscience Consent Culture of life Desert Dignity Double standard Duty Equality Etiquette Eudaimonia Family values Fidelity Free will Good and evil Good Evil Problem of evil Greed Happiness Honour Ideal Immorality Importance Justice Liberty Loyalty Moral agency Moral courage Moral hierarchy Moral imperative Morality Norm Pacifism Political freedom Precept Punishment Rights Self-discipline Suffering Stewardship Sympathy Theodicy Torture Trust Utility Value Instrumental Intrinsic Japan Western Vice Virtue Vow Wrong Ethicists Confucius Mozi Socrates Plato Aristotle Diogenes Mencius Xunzi Cicero Augustine Valluvar Aquinas Spinoza Butler Hume Smith Kant Hegel Schopenhauer Bentham Mill Kierkegaard Sidgwick Nietzsche Moore Barth Tillich Bonhoeffer Foot Rawls Dewey Williams Mackie Anscombe Frankena MacIntyre Hare Singer Parfit Nagel Adams Taylor Azurmendi Korsgaard Nussbaum Works Nicomachean Ethics (c. 322 BC) Tirukkural (c. 450 CE) Ethics (Spinoza) (1677) Fifteen Sermons Preached at the Rolls Chapel (1726) A Treatise of Human Nature (1740) The Theory of Moral Sentiments (1759) An Introduction to the Principles of Morals and Legislation (1780) Groundwork of the Metaphysics of Morals (1785) Critique of Practical Reason (1788) Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1820) Either/Or (1843) Utilitarianism (1861) The Methods of Ethics (1874) On the Genealogy of Morality (1887) Principia Ethica (1903) A Theory of Justice (1971) Practical Ethics (1979) After Virtue (1981) Reasons and Persons (1984) Related Axiology Casuistry Descriptive ethics Ethics in religion Evolutionary ethics History of ethics Human rights Ideology Moral psychology Philosophy of law Political philosophy Population ethics Rehabilitation Secular ethics Social philosophy Category Outline Portal WikiProject v t e Emotions ( list ) Emotions Acceptance Admiration Adoration Aesthetic Affection Agitation Agony Amusement Anger Angst Anguish Annoyance Anticipation Antipathy Anxiety Apathy Arousal Attraction Awe Belongingness Boredom Calmness Comfort Compassion Confidence Confusion Contempt Contentment Courage Cruelty Curiosity Defeat Depression Desire Disappointment Disgust Distrust Doubt Ecstasy Embarrassment vicarious Emotion work Empathy Emptiness Enthrallment Enthusiasm Envy Euphoria Excitement Faith Fear Flow Frustration Fun Gratification Gratitude Greed Grief Guilt Happiness Joie de vivre Hatred self-hatred Hiraeth Homesickness Hope Horror Hostility Humiliation Hygge Hysteria Ikigai (sense of purpose) Indulgence Infatuation Insecurity Insignificance Inspiration Interest Irritation Isolation Jealousy Joy Kindness Loneliness Love at first sight limerence obsessive parental passionate and companionate Lust Mono no aware Neglect Nostalgia Outrage Panic Passion Pity self-pity Pleasure Pride grandiosity hubris insult vanity Rage Regret Rejection Relaxation Relief Remorse Resentment Revenge Sadness melancholy Saudade Schadenfreude Sehnsucht Sentimentality Shame Shock Shyness Solitude Social connection Sorrow Spite Stress chronic Suffering Surprise Suspense Suspicion Sympathy Trust Wonder sense of wonder Worry Zest Worldviews Cynicism Defeatism Fatalism Misanthropy Nihilism Optimism Pessimism Reclusion Weltschmerz Related Affect consciousness in education measures in psychology Affective computing forecasting neuroscience science spectrum Affectivity positive negative Appeal to emotion Amygdala hijack Emotion and art and memory and music and sex and sleep classification circumplex EmojiGrid Lövheim PAD Plutchik evolution expressed functional accounts group homeostatic in animals perception recognition in conversation regulation interpersonal work Emotional aperture bias blackmail competence conflict contagion detachment dysregulation eating exhaustion expression and gender intelligence and bullying Empathy quotient intimacy isolation lability labor lateralization literacy prosody reasoning responsivity security symbiosis thought method well-being Emotionality bounded Emotions and culture history in decision-making in the workplace in virtual communication moral self-conscious social social sharing sociology Feeling Group affective tone Interactions between the emotional and executive brain systems Jealousy in art Mental state Meta-emotion Pathognomy Pathos Social emotional development Stoic passions Theory affect affect as information appraisal Cannon-Bard constructed emotion discrete emotion James-Lange somatic somatic marker two-factor Italics indicate emotion names in foreign languages Category v t e Seven deadly sins The sins Lust Gluttony Envy Greed Sloth Pride Wrath Describing the sins Evagrius Ponticus John Cassian Pope Gregory I Dante Alighieri Peter Binsfeld In art and culture Divine Comedy Inferno Purgatorio The Keys to the Kingdom (book series) The Seven Deadly Sins (1585 play) The Seven Deadly Sins and the Four Last Things (painting) The Seven Deadly Sins (1933 ballet) The Seven Deadly Sins (1952 film) The Seven Deadly Sins (1962 film) The Muppet Show: Sex and Violence (1975) Seven (1995 film) Fullmetal Alchemist (manga series) Fullmetal Alchemist (2003 anime) Fullmetal Alchemist: Brotherhood (2009 anime) The Seven Deadly Sins (manga series) The Seven Deadly Sins of Modern Times (painting) Re:Zero − Starting Life in Another World (light novel series) Re:Zero − Starting Life in Another World (2016 anime) Four Last Things (video game) Graveyard Keeper (2018 video game) Shazam!

(comic book) Seven Deadly Enemies of Man Shazam!

(2019 film) Helluva Boss (2020 animated series) Limbus Company (2023 video game) Hazbin Hotel (2024 animated series) Related Seven Heavenly Virtues Seven Social Sins Sin Christian views on sin Christian views on the Old Covenant Hamartiology Peter Binsfeld Catholicism portal v t e Seven virtues in Christian ethics Four cardinal virtues Prudence ( Prudentia ) Justice ( Iustitia ) Fortitude ( Fortitudo ) Temperance ( Temperantia ) Sources: Plato Republic , Book IV Cicero Ambrose Augustine of Hippo Thomas Aquinas Faith, Hope and Love, as portrayed by Mary Lizzie Macomber (1861–1916) Three theological virtues Faith ( Fides ) Hope ( Spes ) Love ( Caritas ) Sources: Paul the Apostle 1 Corinthians 13 Seven lively virtues versus Seven deadly sins Chastity ( Castitas ) Temperance ( Temperantia ) Charity ( Caritas ) Diligence ( Diligentia ) Kindness ( Humanitas ) Patience ( Patientia ) Humility ( Humilitas ) Lust ( Luxuria ) Gluttony ( Gula ) Greed ( Avaritia ) Sloth ( Acedia ) Wrath ( Ira ) Envy ( Invidia ) Pride ( Superbia ) Source: Prudentius , Psychomachia People: Evagrius Ponticus John Cassian Pope Gregory I Dante Alighieri Peter Binsfeld Related concepts Ten Commandments Great Commandment Eschatology Sin Original sin Old Covenant Hamartiology Christian philosophy Authority control databases : National Germany Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Greed&oldid=1304528861 " Categories : Seven deadly sins Concepts in ethics Hidden categories: CS1: unfit URL Webarchive template wayback links CS1 errors: ISBN date Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from September 2021 Articles containing Latin-language text Commons category link from Wikidata Articles containing Welsh-language text Articles containing Danish-language text Articles containing Japanese-language text Articles containing Portuguese-language text Articles containing German-language text This page was last edited on 6 August 2025, at 15:32 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Greed 21 languages Add topic

